From the Southwest and Northern Mexico
to the Southeast, and the Southern Plains:
American Indian Ceramics in Texas
Timothy K. Perttula and Myles R. Miller

Several articles in this volume of the Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society concern the ori-

manufacture of pottery did not begin until as late
as the 8th

Indian pottery and pottery traditions by cultural areas and temporal periods across the state of Texas,
from prehistoric times to after European contact in
the 17th century (Figure 1). They are a summary of
what is currently know about aboriginal ceramics
in most of what is now the state of Texas, and an
illustration of its cultural diversity both spatially
and temporally.
The manufacture and use of ceramic vessels by

al culture of aboriginal peoples—including mobile
hunter-gatherers as well as sedentary farmers—in
Southeast and coastal Texas, among Caddo and
Jornada Mogollon groups, and among the Plains
Village communities in the Texas Panhandle and
the North Central Texas prairies.
While we have a good working knowledge of
the ages and durations of the various ceramic traditions in Texas, for more detailed considerations

is a common and widespread feature of distinctive
archeological assemblages on sites across much of
Texas (see Figure 1). The variety and diversity of
ceramic forms, decorations, manufacturing techniques, and functions is outstanding among the
native groups, ranging from coastal Goose Creek
and Rockport pottery; the Toyah and Henrietta
ceramics of the buffalo hunters and farmers of the
prairie-plains and Hill Country; the Puebloan and
and buffalo hunters; the impressive Jornada Mogollon ceramics of the El Paso area Puebloan groups;
the Caddo groups that lived in East Texas. Despite
what is known about the distribution of ceramics in
Texas archeological sites, the relationship between
Prehistoric and Historic cultural and technological
ceramic traditions has yet to be fully established
across much of the state, except perhaps for the
clear continuity between prehistoric and historic
Caddo ceramic traditions in East Texas.
Texas began as early as ca. 500 B.C. in parts of
East Texas and Southeast Texas, and then continued to be used until as late as the nineteenth
century among a number of different groups
across the state (Table 1). In much of the state, the

as the rapidity and tempo of ceramic assemblage
establish with precision the absolute age of Native
ceramics. First, this can be done by the application
of modern statistical analyses to radiocarbon dating
associated with ceramics, as well as the direct
dating of the ceramics themselves or the dating of
organic residues adhering to vessels and sherds.
an analysis of 14C dates using a Bayesian modeling
approach. This methodology is now quite widely
used and well accepted and permits one to speak
relationships. Future analyses of large suites of
radiocarbon dates from aboriginal sites in Texas
with ceramics may want to consider Bayesian
methods in calibrating radiocarbon dates from
various archeological contexts, for establishing
duration of different occupations (Bronk Ramsey

ceramics has been applied with some considerable
success in a variety of settings—and on different

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 84 (2013)

Texas Archeological Society

manufacture and use.

Table 1. Chronological information on the adoption and use of ceramics by native groups in Texas.*

Prairie Savanna

ca. 50 B.C.

ca. 50 B.C.-late 17th century
th

Coast

century

Pertulla and Miller—American Indian Ceramics in Texas

REFERENCES CITED
Given the abundance of ceramics of several different kinds and styles at many prehistoric and early
historic sites in Texas, the luminescence dating of
both plain and decorated sherds recovered in situ
from these many sites should be routinely explored
on both testing and data recovery projects in the
region since it is a method “that dates the manufacture and use of…ceramic objects [that] provide
a closer relationship between the target event
[when a site is occupied] and the dated event [the
age determined by the luminescence on a sherd].
Luminescence is particularly well suited for the
dating of ceramics since the method measures the
time elapsed since vessels were last heated, usually
corresponding to manufacture or use” (Lipo et al.
Overall, the ceramic articles included in this
can Indian ceramic traditions help illuminate and
better understand the lives of the Indian peoples
that made these wares. The articles also consider
and examine changes and continuity in stylistic
practices, technology, function, and ideology
as expressed in the sherds and vessels in welldated assemblages from known cultural groups,
are discussions of instrumental neutron activation analysis and other analytical means used to
track pottery vessel movement and trade across
and within different regions. Some of the articles
discuss the extensive record of use of ceramics
by mobile groups, a distinctive aspect of the archeological record in the state, focusing on relevant
technological, functional, or stylistic data in light
of this theme, and also examine the meaning and
vessels from East Texas Caddo sites.

Bronk Ramsey, C.
Radiocarbon

Southeastern Archaeology
Levy, T. E., T. Higham, C. Bronk Ramsey, N. G. Smith, E.
P. Schulze, M. Najjar, and L. Tauxe
biblical archaeology in southern Jordan. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences

and the Resolution of Chronological Structure of
Late Prehistoric Deposits in the Central Mississippi
Valley. American Antiquity
The Prehistory of Texas
Press, College Station.
and C. Lintz
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
Shafer, H. J.

Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
-

Pottery at La Junta: One View of Regional Interaction
along the Rio Grande
Nancy A. Kenmotsu

ABSTRACT
This study presents an initial characterization of regional production centers for ceramics from La Junta sites.
The data from the study are used to suggest patterns of exchange and interaction between the people living in
that region with those in surrounding areas.

INTRODUCTION
Ceramics have long provided archeologists an
avenue to study issues of exchange and interaction
among the people who used them. The use of inpetrography have been particularly important in
advancing these understandings. Mimbres Black and
White vessels, for example, the well-known and distinctive pottery made in southwestern New Mexico

This group is made up exclusively of El Paso
Polychrome sherds. The other distinct geographical
group is from the Presidio and Redford bolsons at
modern Redford and Presidio, Texas, and Ojinaga,
Mexico. The area is known as La Junta de los Rios
(La Junta) because it is where the Conchos River

The compositional groups also separate by time

such analyses to have been manufactured almost
exclusively in the larger villages in the heartland of
the Mimbres culture area (Powell-Marti and James

Junta group appears to have begun production

Mimbres and non-Mimbres sites outside of these
heartland villages, indicating that residents of the
villages where it was manufactured had “some control over its production and distribution.”
In this article, I present an initial characterization of the regional production centers for the
ceramics from La Junta de los Rios (La Junta) for

these ceramics continued into the historic period.
The presence of vessels in sites in La Junta that
were manufactured in the El Paso area is evidence
of long term as well as long distance interaction
between the people living in the two regions although the extent of that interaction appears to
have changed over time. The exchange implications of this interaction for the people living in La
Junta are explored against recent advancements in
our understanding of the interaction of Puebloan
people with the groups around them. Questions
1450 are also addressed.

The data from the studies resulted in the assignment of several compositional groups and two of
them can be sourced to distinct, geographicallyseparate areas of production. One is the area of the
Hueco and Tularosa basins that make up modern
El Paso, Texas, and south-central New Mexico, an
area considered the core of the Jornada Mogollon.

PREVIOUS RESEARCH
Most previous work on Late Prehistoric sites in
historical sequence; (b) establishing the degree
of mobility of the residents; and (c) addressing

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 84 (2013)

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Location of La Junta de los Rios in relation to Texas and Mexico.

the question of whether the ceramics were locally
made or were brought to the valley by residents or

THE CULTURAL-HISTORICAL
SEQUENCE AT LA JUNTA
The culture-historical sequence for the Late
-

cluding the one reported here, none of these issues

with phases, type sites, types of architectural
-

of any of the researchers involved in this interesting region. While each of the issues is important,

pueblos, and pottery document that La Junta is an
ence of these structures here is intriguing as they
are missing across the broad Texas Trans-Pecos but
present in the Jornada Mogollon. Donald Lehmer

made—is the subject of this article.

Kenmotsu—Pottery at La Junta: One View of Regional Interaction along the Rio Grande

the Jornada Branch of the Mogollon for a broad
region around El Paso, spent six months in La Junta

Paso Polychrome occurred in many of the La Junta
Focus [now phase] houses, and a small El Paso
Phase pueblo was also found at the [Millington]
site, indicating the existence of an actual colony
of El Paso Phase people [living in La Junta]”

the Mogollon.
The initial part of the Late Prehistoric period
is known as the Livermore phase and is characterized by the presence of arrow points (Livermore,
Toyah, and Fresno) with a hunter-gatherer lithic
ditional research, it is not further considered here
as it predates the use of pottery and the known
dates of construction of pit houses and pueblos in
the region.
known as the La Junta phase. During this phase,
the architecture in La Junta is dominated by small

a small unit pueblo, excavated by Lehmer at the
Millington site, has been considered evidence that
at least some people from the Jornada Mogollon

7

Concepcion phase sites overlie La Junta phase
components and mixing of the two has been cited
as an ongoing problem. Since there are few radiocarbon dates for this phase, dating it largely relies
on architectural changes, the absence of El Paso
Polychrome in Concepcion phase components,
ture largely consists of the continued construction
of rectangular and circular pit structures, but the
structures were larger than in the La Junta phase.
Pottery wares in this period represent “an… assemblage of plainwares…in association with rare red-

Concepcion phase ceramics are Chinati Plain, Chinati Scored, Chinati Neck-Banded, Capote Plain,
Capote Red-on-brown, Paloma Plain, and Paloma

more intriguing by the presence of an aceramic
manifestation termed the “Cielo Complex” by
Complex sites are found on elevated landforms in
La Junta and extend across much of the Texas Big
Bend area and south for an unknown distance into
northern Mexico. In La Junta, the sites overlook
the terraces of the Rio Grande where the small
villages are located. The sites are characterized by
above-ground stacked stone rings, believed to be
wickiup foundations, with narrow entryways (Mal-

small triangular shell pendants make up most of
tion whether the construction of the pueblo represents an accurate clone of El Paso phase pueblos in
Junta phase components include shell ornaments,
ground stone, and arrow points including Fresno,

the sites to be the remnants of hunter-gatherers who
interacted with the people in the La Junta villages
but retained their more nomadic life styles.
ning of the period they called the Conchos phase
because in that year a Spanish expedition came
to La Junta, traveling from El Paso to visit the
Jumano, hunter-gatherers who lived in the area of

los is El Paso Polychrome. Other ceramic types
Playas Red, Playas Incised, Chupadero Black-onWhite, and Three Rivers Black-on-White) have
been recovered as well, but in small quantities.
-

by two new pottery types—Conchos Plain and
occasional presence of sherds of Spanish majolica;
the pottery from the Concepcion phase is gone.
Lithic artifacts and the pit houses of the earlier
Concepcion phase continued; Spanish documents
also describe the presence of small pueblos in La

Cielo Bravo
(41PS52),
Arroyo de las
Burras (41PS
Millington
(41PS14)

Cielo Complex,
A.D. 1250 –
1684
Rectangular structure, including
structures built side by side

Conchos Plain, Conchos Red-on-brown with
some Spanish majolica; Toyah, Perdiz, Fresno
arrow points; ground stone; shell, Spanish
coins.

El Paso Polychrome with small quantities of
Villa Ahumada Polychrome, Ramos
Polychrome, Playas Red, Playas Incised,
Chupadero Black-on-white, and Three Rivers
Black-on-white; Toyah, Perdiz, Fresno arrow
points; ground stone; shell
Chinati Plain, Chinati Scored, Chinati NeckBanded, Capote Plain, Capote Red-on-brown,
Paloma Plain, and Paloma Red-on-gray;
Toyah, Perdiz, Fresno arrow points; ground
stone; shell.
Perdiz, Fresno, Garza/Soto arrow points;
ground stone; sinker stones; flake drills,
beveled knives; a few Olivella shell beads

Livermore, Toyah, and Fresno arrow points,
double beveled knives, snub-nosed scrapers,
gravers,

Material Culture

Cloud and Piehl 2008:23-24;
Kelley 1986:84-88; Kelley et
al. 1940:163

Cloud and Piehl 2008:25;
Mallouf 1990, 1999.

Cloud and Piehl 2008:20-22;
Kelley 1947, 1986:77-84;
Kelley et al. 1940: 35

Kelley 1986:72-75; Kelley et
al. 1940:33

Kelley et al. 1940:30-31

Reference

intrusive, tree-ring dated ceramics and other cultural traits from other regions, including the Jornada Mogollon. In more recent years, the chronological sequence these

Conchos, A.D.
1684 – 1760

Millington
(41PS14),
Loma Alta
(41PS15)

-

Alpine 2:7 and
Livermore
Cache
(41JD66)
Millington
(41PS14)
Circular pit houses; rectangular
pit houses; a single example of a
five-room pueblo in a shallow
pit; adobe floors, most are jacal
in construction, one is of adobe
bricks.
Continuation of circular and
rectangular pit houses; some
rectangular structures built side
by side; floors of tramped gravel
or refuse.
Stacked-stone circular wickiup
foundations

Architecture

Type Site

Concepcion,
A.D. 1450-1684

La Junta, A.D.
1200-1450

Phase, Age
Interval
Livermore,
A.D. 800-1200

Table 1. Current cultural Table
historical
sequencecultural
for the period
A.D.sequence
1200-1760
Laperiod
Junta.*
1. Current
historical
forinthe
A.D. 1200-1760 in La Junta.*

8
Texas Archeological Society

Kenmotsu—Pottery at La Junta: One View of Regional Interaction along the Rio Grande

a

b

c

d

10

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2. Formal characteristics of El Paso Polychrome and the Concepcion

Table 2. Formal characteristics
ofConchos
El Pasowares
Polychrome
the Concepcion and Conchos wares from La Junta
and
from Laand
Junta.
Type
(after Kelley
1986)
El Paso
Polychrome

Vessel
Form

Temper

Rim Form

Exterior
Treatment

Interior
Treatment

Wall thickness
(in cm)*

Jars;
bowls

Coarse grains
of igneous
rock

Jars have
everted
rims; bowls
are direct

Black and red
painted designs
on upper half of
vessels

0.2-0.8

Chinati Plain
and Scored

Jars;
bowls

Sand

Straight to
slightly
everted

Paloma Redon- Gray

Bowls,
saucers

Sand

Flat to
beveled

Smoothed,
burnished; some
scored with
grass
Burnished;
some with red
parallel lines

Smoothed;
bowls may have
interior black
and red painted
designs
Smoothed

0.53-0.66

Capote Plain
and Red-onBrown

Large
bowls;
globular
ollas; seed
jars
Bowls,
ollas

Sand

Rounded

Burnished;
some with red
lines

Smoothed with
red band near
rim and florallike designs in
broad lines;
burnished; gray
wash
Smoothed &
burnished with
red-brown wash

Sand (but less
and finer
grain than in
earlier
ceramic
styles)

Rounded

Smoothed,
burnished, some
rilling,
unslipped, but
some lines

Conchos
Red-onBrown

Burnished,
some with thin
gray wash

0.48-1.19

0.41-0.74

0.6-1.87

*The characteristics of the El Paso Polychrome are largely taken from Miller 1995. Descriptions of the Concepcion and Concho
taken from Kelley in Cloud (2004); the thickness of these wares is taken from a sample of 150 sherds of these ceramics in the co
TARL.

Junta at this time. The period is largely dated based
on the Spanish majolica and occasional coins with
but recently, two sherds of probable Conchos ware
were recovered from an excavated feature that was

feature contexts recovered from controlled subsurface
excavations of sites in the Tularosa and Hueco basins
and elsewhere in the El Paso area, largely due to the
-

assigned to the three types using that database. The
PREVIOUS RESEARCH ON THE
EL PASO AND LA JUNTA
CERAMIC GROUPS
Previous research on the brownwares of the El
Paso tradition has been extensive. Initial typological
th century (Mera
database of several thousand radiocarbon dates from

El Paso Bichrome, with red or black paint applied to
the upper portions of otherwise undecorated vessels
Paso Polychrome with application of both red and
black paint decorating the upper portions of the vesEl Paso Polychrome is the only one of the three
types in this tradition that will be considered further

Kenmotsu—Pottery at La Junta: One View of Regional Interaction along the Rio Grande
in this article. This type fully replaced the plain and
No plain or corrugated wares were produced in the
region after that date, leaving El Paso Polychrome
vessels to serve “as both utilitarian and non-utilitar1450, “profound social and demographic changes
took place” in the El Paso area as documented by
the abandonment of the nucleated settlements of
these changes, manufacture of El Paso Polychrome
El Paso Polychrome and La Junta ceramics.
The initial date for the manufacture of El Paso
Polychrome predates the current established beginning of the La Junta phase. However, the early forms
of this polychrome style are neckless jars and wide-

11

Over 4,000 ceramic sherds and clay samples recovered from sites in the El Paso and Mimbres areas
-

El Paso brownware tradition. These studies have
established an El Paso Core compositional group
Brown, El Paso Bichrome, El Paso Polychrome, and
Jornada Brown; all the ceramics in the core group
were recovered from sites in the greater El Paso area

style pottery is assigned to this group regardless of
where they were recovered. The core group may one
study from the Hueco Bolson, Miller (in Miller and

which approximates the initial date of the La Junta
phase, the neckless jars were completely replaced
by broad-shouldered jars or ollas with everted rims
and restricted mouths. Shallow, wide-mouth bowls
amined all El Paso Polychrome sherds and vessels
that have been recovered from sites in La Junta at
tions of the Museum of the Big Bend; and others in
the laboratory at the Center for Big Bend Studies,

large to detect the form of the rim had everted rims

the broad Hueco and Tularosa bolsons can be distinguished based on pastes that indicate production in
the basins where ancient weathered clays were used
versus production along the alluvial fans adjacent to
the mountain ranges where higher concentrations of
igneous materials and metals are present.
Petrographic analyses of El Paso brownware
sherds have been a common focus of studies in the

of where they are found, was accomplished in the
greater El Paso area.

El Paso Polychrome has been recovered from
Henderson site, a large pueblo in southeastern New

demonstrate that the El Paso ware recovered in
other regions was produced in the El Paso area.
Paso sherds from sites in the El Paso area and
the Mimbres Valley. In that study, Creel et al.

Polychrome fell into one group [the El Paso Core
group]….On this basis, it is possible to state with
at Late Prehistoric sites in the Casas Grandes re-

mented in small quantities at sites throughout West

in our sample was indeed manufactured in the El
Paso area.” The other study employed El Paso
Polychrome recovered from Casas Grandes. Because of the prominence of El Paso Polychrome in
to test the possibility that the El Paso Polychrome
was produced locally at Casas Grandes. To do so,

Polychrome is also the dominant pottery type at
La Junta phase components.

Polychrome rim sherds recovered at Casas Grandes

Texas Archeological Society
and 41 rim sherds from 10 sites on the Fort Bliss
Military Reservation. She found “in terms of paste
recipe, the Chihuahuan samples are identical to
the Fort Bliss sites….It appears that Paquimé

descriptions incomplete and preliminary.
Distribution of these wares outside of the Pre-

Polychrome from the Jornada Mogollon region”

along the Rio Grande from the head of Canyon Colorado some 10 miles below Redford to Fabens near

undertaken on El Paso ware recovered from La Junta

of sites on the banks of the Conchos River beginning
Conchos with the Rio Florido. During these efforts,

While the sample was quite small, it demonstrated

miles south of Presidio along the Conchos, southeast

of uniform manufacture for trade; the thin sections
also have mineral types indicative of origin outside
the La Junta region…These distinctive qualities and
constituents point toward non-local manufacture
-

miles northwest along the Rio Grande to the vicinity
recovered in very small numbers from a sub-set of
sites across the Trans-Pecos region, but, dwarfed
by the lithic assemblages at these sites, they have
been given little attention. Thus, it is not known if
La Junta wares are represented in those collections.
Even less is known about sites in northeastern Chi-

sherds were assigned to the El Paso Core chemical
cal analysis of El Paso Polychrome samples from the
Millington site indicate that they were manufactured
in the El Paso area to the north and subsequently
imported or brought into the La Junta region.”
In contrast to the many analyses on El Paso
ceramics, the ceramic styles manufactured in
La Junta remain understudied (Cloud and Piehl

names combine geographical places (e.g., Chinati,
Conchos) with descriptive information (e.g.,
Plain, Scored). His descriptions, however, are thin.

full descriptions of the attributes that distinguished
each type from the others, but his service in World
War II, his need to complete his dissertation at
initiate a distinguished career at Southern Illinois

ditional work has been undertaken there.
The general characteristics of El Paso and La
differences among the La Junta styles and between
relatively thin El Paso vessels, La Junta vessels
tend to be thick-walled; some exceed one centimeter in thickness. Tempers differ between El Paso
geology of the two regions. Other differences include the fact that the paste of the La Junta wares
can be crumbly and porous and Chinati wares
included vegetable matter in the paste. Carbon
streaking is quite common in El Paso ceramics,
but not in La Junta vessels. The range of vessel
types among La Junta ceramics increased over the
jars and bowls of El Paso Polychrome to include
jars, bowls, saucers, seed jars, and soup plates;
at least one “platter” of Conchos Plain is known
exhibit coil and scrape techniques, but many of
the Conchos ceramics exhibit manufacture with a
wheel, likely inspired by Spanish missions in the

comprehensive descriptions of the seven wares that
These descriptions are included among his papers

ridges and grooves created around the vessel walls
formed during spinning of the wheel and seen on
some Conchos Red-on-Brown sherds—and some

Chinati
Plain
1

1

41PS21,
Polvo

6

1

2

2

6

2

1

Chinati
Scored

41PS16,
Kopenberger

41PS15,
Loma Alta

13

41PS14,
Millington

2

1

41PS13

3

41PS12

1

1

1

2

3

3

El Paso
Polychrome

41PS11

41PS10

41PS9

41PS8

3

3

41PS5

41PS7

2

El Paso
Plain

41PS3

Site, Name
Capote
Plain
2

6

2

Capote
Red/Brown
2

2

1

3

Paloma
Red/Gray
2

Paloma
Plain
1

Conchos
Plain
1

3

1

2

1

2

Conchos
Red/Brown

Table 3. Sherds from selected sites usedTable
in the3.NAA
study.
Sherds
from selected sites used in the NAA study.

1

1

1

1

Undifferenti
ated
Chihuahuan
Villa
Ahumada
1

3

2

Playas
Incised
2

6

6

7

42

1

6

1

3

3

3

6

11

8

Total
by
Site

Kenmotsu—Pottery at La Junta: One View of Regional Interaction along the Rio Grande

Playas Red

14

Texas Archeological Society

base sherds also exhibit ridges where the vessel
was attached to the wheel.
Finally, some vessel treatments of La Junta
ceramics exhibit similarities with El Paso jars and
bowls. In both, exterior surfaces are smoothed (see
rarely applied. Exterior surfaces have broad lines
close to the rim in both. In La Junta ceramics, however, red is the prominent design color. However,
unlike the careful design elements on El Paso Poly-

sherds are among the collections curated at the Texas

rive from brief investigations in La Junta by others.
th

century. Originally thought to be

the vessel and concluded that it was a possible Chinati Scored vessel.
The sherds were primarily selected to
determine whether the El Paso Polychrome and the
La Junta wares have distinct chemical signatures
mentioned above, also included characterizations
soil samples and one possible tempering agent;
banks of the Rio Grande in the Redford Bolson.
While concerned about the small samples of each
type (Capote, Chinati, and Conchos), Robinson

geology of the La Junta region, and one could not
argue logically for manufacture in another region

However, because some Chihuahuan ceramics
have been recovered from sites in La Junta,
and because little chemical characterizations of
ceramics have been undertaken from sites south
of the Rio Grande, several of these ceramics were
also included in the study.
To these 101 sherds, analysts (Speakman and
sherds and four clay samples from
addition was to address the problematic results in
the earlier study. Those sherds came from the Mil-

(Capote-1 or Mimbres-5) with the Capote-1 group
chemically similar to the Main Playas Red group
but having statistically different compositions. One
interpretation given was that the ceramics were
manufactured in the Mimbres Valley and imported

site (41PS800), located on the left bank of the
Rio Grande at the northwest edge of the Redford
Bolson. The site was excavated by the CBBS in
anticipation of the widening of FM 170 (Cloud

in La Junta from local clays that resemble those
in the Mimbres Valley. Neither explanation was
particularly satisfactory to the analysts and further
research was recommended. This is discussed
again in later sections of this article.

remainder of the article employs the combined data
Most of the samples came from excavated
vations have ever been fully analyzed or reported.
the Millington site, situated in the heart of the

SAMPLE COMPOSITION
One hundred thirty-three sherds and four clays
lected 101 of these from a series of Presidio County
sites stretching from southeast to northwest through
the Presidio Bolson, in addition to a sample taken
ern Jeff Davis County, and samples from two sites
along the Rio Grande in Hudspeth County. These

small pueblo of immigrants from the El Paso area.

the southwestern reaches of the Hueco Bolson (see

2
1

1

5

1

13

12

1

9

2

10

The Sherds

NAA Assignments

Table 4. Composition assignments for El Paso style ceramics by site and ceramic type.

35

11

16

TOTALS

5
1

3

41HZ16

41JD2

2

41HZ12

41PS800,
Arroyo de la
Presa

1

1

1

41PS87

2
1

1

41PS58, San
Antonio de
Padua

41PS56

Continued)

3

5

3

3

5

5

2

133

1

10

4

3

8

1

3

Kenmotsu—Pottery at La Junta: One View of Regional Interaction along the Rio Grande
15

Texas Archeological Society

Hudspeth County
41HZ16
41HZ12

Jeff Davis County
41JD2
41PS8
41PS11

41PS5
41PS13
41PS3

Pre si d i o C ou nty

41PS7

T E X A S

41PS16
41PS56
41PS58

41PS15
41PS87
41PS14

41PS800
41PS21
41PS10

slh/12

41PS9
41PS12

Kenmotsu—Pottery at La Junta: One View of Regional Interaction along the Rio Grande
included in the study because they are outside of
what is considered the heartland of the El Paso
phase but had El Paso wares and architecture
similar to both El Paso and the Presidio Bolson.
because they were thought to be similar to Capote
and Chinati plain wares.
The ceramic styles within the group are dominated by ceramic styles from the Presidio Bolson

17

southern portion of the basin where most of the
pueblos are situated as “diverse, including deposits
and volcanic/clastic sediments.” These clay sources
are certainly adequate to build ceramic vessels as
the clays along the banks of the Rio Grande are still
used today to build large household pots (Mercedes
Volcanic and limestone rocks are also present in the Hueco/Tularosa bolsons of the El Paso
region, but distinctions exist between that region

from the sites nearly seven decades ago. El Paso
part of the group. Sixteen of the El Paso ceramics
are undifferentiated El Paso brownware, the name
assigned to body sherds of these vessels that do not
contain any decoration. While such sherds could
represent portions of El Paso Brown or El Paso
Bichrome from earlier periods, they are thought to
be from the lower portions of El Paso Polychrome
vessels because thus far all vessels from La Junta

miles, these basins are much wider than the Presidio Bolson and have broad areas of Quaternary
neous rocks and Precambrian granite and rhyolite
anticipated that ceramics manufactured in the two
regions would have distinct chemical signatures.

THE RESULTS
all radiocarbon dates from La Junta components
The analysis shows a general correspondence
remaining samples consist of Playas Red or Playas
-

composition. These groups include El Paso ware,

samples taken from both sides of the Rio Grande
in the southern Presidio Bolson.

County reference group (Chinati, Capote, Paloma,
and Conchos wares). El Paso ware has the greatest

GEOLOGICAL SETTING
The Presidio and Redford bolsons are
northwest to southeast-trending geologic basins
stretching ca. 100 miles from Porvenir on the north
to just south of Redford, Texas, within the Mexican
Highlands section of the basin and range province.
Redford Bolson, the smaller of the two, is some
Bolson makes up the remainder of the length
with a width ranging from two to 15 miles (Groat

Grande and Rio Conchos of Mexico (see Figure
Exposed rocks include granites,
weathered rhyolitic tuff, basalt, and Cretaceous
the Rio Grande and Conchos have contributed to
the complex geologic make up of the alluvium

lipse (Figure 4). Similarly, the samples of ceramics
that have long been believed to have been manufactured in the Presidio Bolson evidence a compositional
uniformity distinct from the El Paso wares that date
earlier in time. Comparison of their concentrations
of Thorium and Cesium (see Figure 4) illustrate their
distinct compositions. The Presidio County Reference
Group is also distinct in composition from the various
Mimbres reference groups (Figure 5).
Before reporting on these samples, a few comments should be mentioned about the analysis. In

18 samples of Capote, Chinati, and Conchos sherds
to the Main Playas Red group and the Mimbres-5
subgroup was problematic. That assignment would
have meant they had been imported into La Junta
from the Mimbres valley of New Mexico. Given
that the four clay samples taken from the banks
of the Rio Grande within the Presidio Bolson, and

18

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Bivariate plot of thorium and cesium base-10 logged concentrations showing El Paso sherds from Hudspeth and
Presidio counties relative to the sherds from the pottery types (Chinati, Palomas, Capote, and Conchos) manufactured

submitted with the 18 sherds, were also assigned
to the Main Playas Red group, Rodriguez et al.
of wares from La Junta to “form a statistically defensible subgroup within the Mimbres-5 subgroup.”
Speakman and Glascock concurred and the
portunity to do a re-examination. They felt that
the Main Playas Red group had become so large
and heterogeneous that non-related ceramics
were erroneously assigned to that group and its
subgroup, Mimbres-5 (Speakman and Glascock

for this study and those from the Rodriguez et al.

lier sample of Capote, Chinati, and Conchos sherds

together with similar pottery types analyzed for the curshown to form a group that is both distinct from other
Mimbres/Jornada compositional groups and statistically viable—as we would expect given the distance
between El Paso and Presidio County (Speakman and

EL PASO POLYCHROME
Fifty-one samples of El Paso Polychrome were
Millington site dominate the group, but samples were
taken from nine other sites in La Junta, giving the
sample geographic diversity within the area. Several
samples from the two Hudspeth County sites were
also among the group.
The El Paso Polychrome recovered from sites in
La Junta form a chemically distinct group (Figure 4

Kenmotsu—Pottery at La Junta: One View of Regional Interaction along the Rio Grande

Figure 5. Bivariate plot of calcium and tantalum base-10 logged concentrations showing the separation of the Presidio
county sherds of Chinati, Palomas, Capote, and Conchos wares from the various Mimbres reference groups (after

and Table 4) that closely matches the chemical signature of the El Paso core group. Forty-six of the 51
El Paso style sherds fall within that core group. One
Hudspeth County sample and four of the samples
from the Presidio Bolson fall outside it. Since the El
Paso core group has been well established (Speak-

opinion that these [four] unassigned samples are local
to the El Paso area.”

that the bulk of the El Paso ware in La Junta sites

still places it stylistically as El Paso Polychrome. The

the El Paso area and the Mimbres Valley (Creel et
El Paso Polychrome from Casas Grandes by Burgett

core group has a chemical composition that places it
at considerable distance from that group. It came from
-

had four El Paso style sherds that did not match the
El Paso core group. Because the four were within
the Playas group that included the clay samples from
the Mimbres Valley, Creel and colleagues concluded
they were locally made in the Mimbres Valley. While
a single sherd will only allow speculation about nonlocal manufacture of El Paso Polychrome within the
Presidio Bolson, it suggests a need to pursue additional

reference group, four are quite close to the ellipse.
outside of the El Paso core area.

Texas Archeological Society
Table 4. Composition assignments for El Paso style ceramics by site and ceramic type.
Site

El Paso Plain

El Paso
Polychrome

El Paso Core
Group

41PS3

2

3

5

41PS5

3

3

5

1

2

1

1

41PS7
41PS8

3

3

41PS9

1

1

41PS11

1

1

3

4

1

1

13

14

41PS12

1

41PS13
41PS14,
Millington

2

41PS56

Unassigned

1

1

1

41HZ12

2

2

4

41HZ16

3

5

7

1

Table 5. Composition
group for Playas Red style
by site and
ceramiclevels
type.of arsenic than
PLAYAS RED
butceramics
have dramatically
different

other Mimbres-4 samples (Speakman and Glascock
Seven
Playas
Red
sherds
from
three
sites
were
Site
Name
Playas Red
Mimbres-4
Unassigned
included in the analysis. Four were recovered at
appears toGroup
be outside of any known subgroup. It is
possible that together the three represent a compothe Presidio
Bolson.
The
other
three
were
from
Loma
41PS3
2
2
in the heart of the Presidio Bolson. While this is a
small sample, it provided interesting results showing
several distinct signatures (Table 5). Four samples fall
within the ellipse for Mimbres-4 subgroup, indicating that they were likely produced in or close to the
studies have also demonstrated that Playas Red ceramics were produced in the Mimbres Valley (Creel
western portions of the Jornada Mogollon (Bradley

Given that the sample (n=7) is small, only
trends are suggested here. First, since some or all
La Junta phase pueblos have pottery produced in
El Paso, it is not unexpected that Playas Red would
have been found in La Junta phase sites. The El Paso
Polychrome vessels found in the Mimbres Valley
were almost exclusively vessels manufactured in the
the Mimbres Valley are recovered in small numbers

neatly into the Mimbres-4 subgroup. Two do generally fall within the Mimbres-4 compositional group

Because Playas Red dates to the same approximate

Kenmotsu—Pottery at La Junta: One View of Regional Interaction along the Rio Grande
Table 5. Composition group for Playas Red style ceramics by site and ceramic type.
Table 5. Composition group for Playas Red style ceramics by site and ceramic type.
Site

Name

Playas Red

Mimbres-4
Group

41PS3

2

2

41PS5

2

2

41PS15

Loma Alta

time as El Paso Polychrome, it is possible that the
movement of vessels manufactured in the El Paso
core area to La Junta was accompanied by movement of Playas Red vessels from El Paso to La Junta
as part of the same process.
resent one or more unique compositional types.

3

Unassigned

3

polished red rather than Playas Red may be correct.
While similar to Playas, their chemical signatures
suggest that they differ in some way from that type.
ditional analyses.

Texas Archeological Society
VILLA AHUMADA AND
UNDIFFERENTIATED
CHIHUAHUAN
analyzed in the study were from sites in the Presidio
mada is present in small numbers at La Junta phase

Conchos sherds.
Results of the clay samples, however, are not
is within a one percent probability of membership in this same Presidio County compositional
ing some affiliation with that group. However,
two other clay samples exceed the one percent
probability, and the fourth, gathered from Monte
Marqueno, is quite aberrant. This result is, nonetheless, actually common for clay samples in

45). Three other samples of an undifferentiated
especially in the Jornada (Myles Miller personal
Presa site were also re-analyzed. There is little that
can be drawn from these six other than saying that
lipse of the El Paso reference group. Speakman and

with sherds samples.
The 11 unassigned samples of La Junta wares

handful of analyses of Casas Grandes polychromes

Paloma, Chinati, and Conchos sherds. Two are
from one Hudspeth County site, north of the Bolson, and one is the sample taken from the vessel

huan pottery samples that have been analyzed, we

samples are an indication of the need for additional
“paucity of research…conducted south of the Rio

PRESIDIO COUNTY
REFERENCE GROUP

the Conchos drainage could aid in assigning these

Sixty-seven sherds of wares thought to have
been manufactured in the Presidio Bolson were

Grande, he found a series of small village sites that
contained the same wares that he had recovered

sites within the basin (see Figures 4 and 5). Most
are from the Millington site, but several other sites
exceptions are three samples from adjacent counties. Two came from the two Hudspeth County sites
and one came from the base of a whole vessel from
ley first described so many years ago—Capote,
Chinati, Paloma, and Conchos—clearly form a
compositional group distinct from other samples.

infrequently visited by the Spanish prior to 1750,
a number of Spanish documents refer to the close
relationships of the people in La Junta with the
other small villages residing south along the Con-

lages to the south or conversely, their friends came
to their pueblos. The 11 unassigned samples may,
vessels moving north and south along the Conchos

assigned to the Presidio County reference group
when compared to the composition of both El
Paso and Mimbres groups (see Figure 4). Speakstudy the Presidio County reference group is
now “statistically viable.” Moreover, the find-

IMPLICATIONS FOR EXCHANGE
AND INTERACTION
tions about the social networks of exchange and

Kenmotsu—Pottery at La Junta: One View of Regional Interaction along the Rio Grande
Table Table
6. Composition
group for
Presidio
ceramics
site and ceramic
6. Composition
group
for County
Presidiostyle
County
stylebyceramics
by site type.
and ceramic type.
Site

41PS5

Chinti Wares

Capote
Wares

Paloma
Wares

Presidio
Group

2
2

41PS9
2

41PS12

Unassigned

2

41PS7

41PS10

Conchos
Wares

1

2

2

2

1

3

2

1

1

1

41PS14

10

8

5

21

2

41PS15

2

1

1

3

1

41PS16

2

4

41PS21

2

2

41PS56

6
1

4

2

2

41PS58
41PS87

2

41HZ16

1

41JD2

1

1

interaction operating along the Rio Grande from
dence of sedentism in the Presidio Bolson (Cloud

2

1

1

4

8

1

2
1

northern Mexico, a network that continued until the
upheaval in the El Paso area and other areas of the
-

yet one more region where the El Paso Polychrome
found at these sites was produced in the El Paso
chrome found at Casas Grandes was made in El

at the Henderson and Bloom sites in southeastern
New Mexico were made in that area, another possibility is that these vessels too were made in the
El Paso region.
The scope of this external network for the

El Paso Polychrome sherds from sites in the Mimbres Valley were also manufactured in the El Paso

known that exotic materials are recovered from the
pueblos and villages in northern Mexico and the

in the heartland of the Jornada Mogollon region
had a wide network of trading partners. The present

cur in large quantities. Yet the quantity of El Paso
-

La Junta was linked in to this broad network of
trade and interaction between the potters in the El
Paso area and other regions of the Southwest and

were not locally made, they make up the single

Texas Archeological Society
Junta, the volume of sherds of El Paso ware is not
overwhelming, but they dominate the ceramic inventory. Sherds of Chihuahuan ceramics typically
are very few in number at La Junta sites. Their
presence in other lands in heavy quantities begs
want the El Paso Polychrome vessels? Except in La
Junta, the other regions produced their own pottery.

cans for utilitarian activities. I suggest that their
arrival in quantities that dwarf all other ceramics
indicates that the vessels themselves, and not their
contents, had value to the people who readily acor for some ritual message they embodied. I quickly add that this must be understood as a working
not comprehend about the people living here from

but the volume of these ceramics in regions outside
the Jornada Mogollon proper suggests something
more. Why did other groups want these vessels
when they could make their own? What function
did they serve in these outlying regions? Were they,
as Di Peso opined, just tin cans or the equivalent
of work horses?

have never been analyzed and mixing of deposits
remains a problem.

I should acknowledge that I believe they likely ar-

a group the migrants represented and whether
they were from a single, extended family, or several families, is unknown. Nonetheless, migration

the large quantity of utilitarian gray wares imported
to Chaco Canyon from the Chuska region were
Because of the substantial distances involved,
the bulkiness and fragility of the pottery vessels,
even when empty (e.g., Wilson and Blinman
tainers which would have been far superior [to the
use of pots] for the task of long-distance pedestrian
transport of dry foodstuffs.
The same considerations should apply for the
transport of El Paso Polychrome. It is also important
large size of many of the El Paso jars in a sample
they examined from museum collections. Similarly,
many of the El Paso vessels at Casas Grandes are
sherds from La Junta found that most are too small
to estimate vessel size. However, partial pots and
whole vessels from La Junta, which are admittedly
only a handful, are sizeable vessels, suggesting that
many of the others may have also been large. The
people who lacked vehicles or beasts of burden and
whose mode of transportation was walking. However, carrying several large or medium-sized El Paso
jars with a tump line would have made the journey

Their arrival empty should not, however, per
se indicate that they were mere work horses or tin

at the Millington site represents at least a small
migration of people from El Paso to the region.
When the vessels came, however, the people in
La Junta accepted El Paso ware as their primary

that movement of small groups is the norm when
people migrate from one region to another. Matson

archeological evidence to provide a coherent model

not a simple one-way movement of people but
rather is of small groups moving into areas where
they have established alliances and are familiar
with the landscape and existing peoples (see
mass movement of people. Sometimes the people
traveling remain far from their originals home-

La Junta, the El Paso style pueblo at Millington,
the vessels found at many sites through the La
Junta region, and the continued construction of
pueblos after the dissolution of the pueblos in
the Jornada Mogollon as documented by Spanindicate to me that at least some people from the
Jornada Mogollon region came to and stayed in
La Junta. When they did, their ideas about ways
to live, build homes, and organize food supplies

Kenmotsu—Pottery at La Junta: One View of Regional Interaction along the Rio Grande
influenced local residents, and encouraged them
to adopt some of those ideas.

Barnes, V. E.
Geologic Atlas of Texas Emory Peak—Presidio
Sheet.

named but did not formally describe have a distinct
chemical composition and were manufactured in
La Junta. These styles (Chinati, Capote, Paloma,
and Conchos) begin to appear in the archeological

Beene, D. L.

the El Paso pueblos are being abandoned. Yet, another implication of the study that deserves a great
deal more research is that the villages in La Junta
persisted throughout the period of Spanish colonization of northern Mexico; a few remained viable
after 1750 and new pottery styles were produced
whatever natural or cultural mechanisms causing
abandonment of lifeways based on small-scale
cultivation in the El Paso region were not operating at La Junta.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank Dr. Darrell Creel of
the able assistance of Laura Nightengale and Matt
Peeples, for helping to make the study a reality. The

support is greatly appreciated. I would also like to
thank Robert Speakman and Dr. Michael Glascock

Presidio County, Texas.

Bradley, R. J. and J. M. Hoffer
ability in the Jornada Mogollon. In Proceedings of
the Third Jornada Mogollon Conference, edited by

Burgett, J.
in the Casas Greandes Region, Chihuahua, Mexico.
In Viva la Jornada! Papers from the 14th Biennial
Jornad Mogollon Conference, edited by J. Jurgena,

Clark, J. J.
Tracking Prehistoric Migrations Pueblo Settlers
among the Tonto Basin Hohokam.
Tucson.

Campsite along the Rio Grande, Presidio County,
Trans-Pecos
-

their comments on the outcome of that analysis. I
also want to acknowledge the comments and supArcheological Testing at the Polvo Site (41PS21),
Presidio County, Texas
-

on the subjects presented herein.

REFERENCES CITED

The Millington Site: Archaeological and Human
Osteological Investigations, Presidio County, Texas.
No. 4. Center for Big Bend Studies, Sul Ross State

The
Protohistoric Pueblo World A.D. 1275-1600, edited

The Protohistoric Pueblo World A.D. 12751600.

Creel, D.
Five Archaeological Investigations in the TransPecos Region of Texas,
.
-

Texas Archeological Society
Creel, D., M. Williams, H. Neff, and M. D. Glascock
for Manufacture and Exchange Patterns. In Ceramic
Production and Circulation in the Greater Southwest: Source Determination by INAA and Complementary Mineralogical Investigations, edited by D.

Groat, C. G.
Presidio Bolson, Trans-Pecos, Texas and Adjacent
Mexico: Geology of a Desert Basin Aquifer System.

Hill, D. V.
Ceramics (Phase II). In
Project Fort Bliss Maneuver Area I, El Paso County,
Texas
Brandwine
Sites in the Casas Grandes Region. In Surveying the
Archaeology of Northwest Mexico, edited by G. E.

Interim Report for Phase II Additional Testing and
Recommendations for Phase III Data Recovery,
Texas
Preliminary Inves-

n.d.

Geologic Atlas of Texas Van Horn-El Paso Sheet.

tigations of the Archaic in
New Mexico
tural Resources Management Branch, Directorate

DiPeso, C. C.
Casas Grandes: A Fallen Trading Center of the Gran
Chichimeca.
Ives, J. W.
A Theory of Northern Athapaskan Prehistory. Westview Press, Boulder.

Dykeman, D., and P. Roebuck
rd

house near Presidio Texas. El Palacio

Vancouver, B.C.

Structures in Western Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological S

Pottery. The Arizona Archaeologist
Frose, D., C. E. Buck, J. J. Clague, L. J. McColl, and P. G. Hare

rd

Vancouver, B.C.
bres Black-on-White Pottery. American Antiquity

Peripheral Southwestern Settlements. American
Anthropologist
New Mexico Historical Review
de los Rios. In Proceedings of the Third Jornada
Mogollon Conference, edited by M. S. Foster and
The Artifact
los Rios

Glascock, M. D. and J. R. Ferguson
Columbus Pueblo, New Mexico, Comparison of
New Samples to a Database of Ceramics from New
Mexico and Southwest Texas. In Archaeological

Mexico,

historic Campsite along the Rio Grande, Presidio
County, Trans-Pecos Texas

Kenmotsu—Pottery at La Junta: One View of Regional Interaction along the Rio Grande
Mallouf, R. J.
Presidio, Texas (Presidio County) Water Improvement Project, an Archaeological and Archival Survey
and Appraisal. Blue Mountain Consultants, Fort
Davis, Texas.

ern Chihuahua, the La Junta District, and the Cielo
Complex. Translation of La Prehistoria del noreste
In Historia General de Chihuahua I: Geologia y
Arqueologia

Geological Deposits in the Big Bend Region of
Texas.
Publication

Relations of Small Scale Foragers and Cultivators in
Las Junta de Los Rios Region, Texas and Mexico.

y Gobierno del Estado de Chihuahua, Juarez.
County, Texas. The Artifact
Chihuahua, the La Junta District, and the Cielo
Complex. Journal of Big Bend Studies
Matson, R. G. and M. P. R. Magne
Athapaskan Migrations, The Archaeology of Eagle
Tucson.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

Mera, H. P.
Chupadero Black-on-white. Technical Series Bul-

The Toyah
Miller, M. R.
and Social Processes,
College Station.
The Pottery of Pecos. Vol. 1. Papers of the Southsity Press, New Haven.

Regions of West Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society
west. In Archaeology between the Borders: Papers
ence, edited by M. Thompson, J. Jurgena, and L.

Sandy Terrace Environment. In Arroyo de la Presa
El Paso.
the Rio Grande, Presidio County, Trans-Pecos Texas,

Miller, M. R. and C. Burt
91044/FB 46) Fort Bliss, Doña Ana County, New
Mexico
Paso.

Lehmer, D. J.
The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon. Social Science
Lyons, P. D.
Ancestral Hopi Migrations.

Miller, M. R. and T. Graves
Madera Quemada: Archaeological Investigation of a
Fourteenth Century Jornada Mogollon Pueblo. Fort
Bliss Environmental Division, Cultural Resources
Center and Fort Bliss, Texas, and Report of Investi-

Trans-Pecos Regions of West Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas

Texas Archeological Society
Minnis, P. and M. Whelan
The Artifact

In Surveying the Archaeology of Northwest Mexico,

Sayles, E. B.
Some Southwestern Pottery Types. Medallion Papers
in Northwestern Chihuahua, Mexico. The Artifact
Shafer, H. J.
Mimbres Archaeology at the NAN Ranch Ruin.

-

Powell-Marti, V. S. and W. D. James
Mim-

Shackelford, W. J.

bres Society,
Tucson.
Ravesloot, J. C., J. S. Dean, and M. S. Foster
Ring Dates. In The Gran Chichimeca: Essays on
the Archaeology and Ethnohistory of Nortern Mesoamerica
Robinson, D. G.

American Antiquity

Range. In A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of McGregor Guided Missile Range, Part II:
Special Archaeological Studies
-

cal District, Presidio County, Trans-Pecos Texas. In
Campsite along the Rio Grande, Presidio County,
Trans-Pecos Texas

Three Rivers, New Mexico. In Jornada Mogollon
Archaeology: Proceedings of the First Jornada
Conference, edited by P. H. Beckett and R. N. WiseCruces.

sis of Ceramics, Soil Samples, and a Possible TemTexas. In
Prehistoric Campsite along the Rio Grande, Presidio
County, Trans-Pecos Texas

Speakman, R. J. and M. D. Glascock
Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis of Pottery from Presidio and Hudspeth Counties, Texas.
Missouri.
Speth, J. D. and M. LeDuc
plete Vessels. In Viva la Jornada! Papers from the
14th Biennial Jornada Mogollon Conference, edited
by J. Jurgena, L. Jackson, and M. Thompson, pp.

Rugge, D.
from the Fort Bliss Military Reservation, Texas and

Stallings, W. S., Jr.
El Paso Polychrome

Environment, Fort Bliss, Texas.
The Border Star Survey:
, edited by T.
J. Seaman, W. H. Doleman, and R. C. Chapman, pp.

Stoltman, J. B.
Shepard. In Pottery and People A Dynamic Interaction, edited by J. M. Skibo and G. M. Feinman, pp.

Kenmotsu—Pottery at La Junta: One View of Regional Interaction along the Rio Grande
Whalen, M. E. and P. E. Minnis
Casas Grandes and its hinterland Prehistoric Regional Organization in Northwest Mexico
-

Wiseman, R. N.
Seasons. In
edited

A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer
Ceramics and Its Implications for Mobility, Ethnic
Group Territory, and Interaction
Darrell Creel, Jeffrey R. Ferguson, and Nancy A. Kenmotsu

ABSTRACT
Instrumental neutron activation analysis of 600 ceramic samples from Late Prehistoric/early historic Toyah
phase hunter-gatherer assemblages in Central Texas has resulted in the deﬁnition of several chemically distinct
groups. Many of these groups have primarily west central Texas distributions and may, to some extent, be reﬂecting territories of the Jumano and closely afﬁliated groups documented to have been in that area in the early
historic period. Several other chemical groups are mostly restricted to the area along and below the Balcones
Escarpment and may in part be related to other ethnohistorically documented native groups, possibly including Sanan-speaking peoples. This study has methodological implications for territory and mobility deﬁnition
among hunter-gatherer groups using modest quantities of undecorated pottery.

INTRODUCTION
Chemical analysis of prehistoric ceramics has
generally focused on pottery produced by cultures
with agriculturally-based economies. This is as
true of instrumental neutron activation analysis
(NAA) as it is of petrography or any of the other
less frequently employed techniques. In contrast,
the research presented here explicitly addresses
questions of ceramic production and transport as
they relate to mobility in hunting and gathering
cultural groups, the Late Prehistoric and probably
early historic Toyah phase (sometimes referred as
a horizon or interval) population in Central Texas
(Figure 1). For the most part, archeologists perceive the Toyah population as having an emphasis
on bison and deer hunting, and as a result, the
people are commonly believed to have been highly
mobile. Geographically, the Toyah population
extends over a relatively large area with diverse
physiography, biota, and other natural resources.
The area from which the majority of samples in
this study derive is some 300 miles east-west and
north-south, and it is more or less equivalent to
what Johnson (1994) referred to as the “Classic
Toyah area” (Figure 1). The marked uniformity
of most parts of the material culture throughout
Central Texas has traditionally been interpreted as
reﬂecting large group territories and/or substantial

long-distance interaction. More recently, however,
some researchers have suggested that individual
groups may have had much smaller territories and
that locally-made pottery vessels may not have
been transported very far (Arnn 2012a, 2012b).
The study reported here bears directly on this issue, indicating that chemical analysis of undecorated pottery can, and does, reveal much about
the movement and territory of native people who,
in this study area, bridged the prehistoric/historic
time period in Central Texas.
The research described herein employed a
chemical compositional analysis using NAA on
602 ceramics and 40 clay samples from the central
portion of Texas. There are two speciﬁc objectives
to this research, the ﬁrst being an assessment of the
scale at which ceramic production and movement
within Central Texas are detectable. Assuming that
the ﬁrst objective is accomplished and, secondarily,
that meaningful compositional groups are deﬁned,
the other primary objective is creation of an NAA
database large enough that sets of 5-10 samples
from future cultural resource management (CRM)
projects are worthwhile expenditures even at commercial rates. That is, small numbers of samples will
more likely yield meaningful results if they can be
compared to an existing and large database.
This research began in 2000 with the proposal,
“Compositional Analysis of Prehistoric Ceramics

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 84 (2013)

32

Texas Archeological Society

Shared Toyah Area
Classic Toyah Area

Figure 1. Location of the Toyah phase in Texas. Map after Johnson (1994:Figure 105).

from Central Texas,” submitted by Darrell Creel to
the Archaeometry Laboratory at the Missouri University Research Reactor (MURR). This proposal
was approved and approximately 400 samples were
subsequently submitted for NAA at the National
Science Foundation-subsidized fee. Funding for
this analysis was provided by the Texas Department
of Transportation, the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department, the Lower Colorado River Authority,
the Texas Archeological Society Donors Fund, the
Council of Texas Archeologists, Friends of the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Kerza
and Elton Prewitt, and Lawrence Aten. The resulting data were analyzed by Neff and Glascock
(2005). A few additional samples were added to
the dataset in the next few years, and the larger set
of samples was the basis of a master’s thesis by
Jeffrey Taff (2006). Taff (2007) conducted further

statistical analysis of that dataset in 2007. The current analysis builds on these earlier analyses but
has the advantage of additional ceramic and raw
clay samples.

PREVIOUS HUNTER-GATHERER
CERAMICS RESEARCH
Mobility among hunting and gathering societies
has received a great deal of research attention, and
there is a robust literature on the topic. In recent decades, Binford’s (1980) forager-collector continuum
has inﬂuenced much of our thinking about mobility
(see also Binford 2001); and Kelly’s (1983, 1992,
1995) expansion of, and elaboration on, Binford’s
ideas has been similarly important. Many others
researchers have addressed hunter-gatherer mobility

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics
using a variety of innovative approaches, including
compositional analysis of material culture, primarily lithic tools, which are often the principal or
only artifact type preserved. This is particularly the
case in Paleoindian research, there being a robust
literature (not cited here) addressing lithic material
distinctions and their implications for mobility and
interaction.
No systematic effort has been made here to summarize that extensive literature, but three studies are
noted here for their relevance to the current project.
First is Hard and Katzenberg’s (2011) stable isotope
study of hunter-gatherer-ﬁsher diet and mobility on
the Gulf Coastal Plain in Texas. For the most part,
this study focused on earlier time periods than the
Toyah phase, but there is some geographic overlap
with the data presented herein. Importantly, Hard
and Katzenberg approached the question of mobility
using stable isotopic data from human and faunal
remains. Such an approach would be highly desirable but is precluded for the Toyah horizon/phase
because of the paucity of Toyah human remains. It
is for this reason that Taylor and Creel (2012) did
not have any meaningful data for the Toyah horizon/
phase in their initial study of heritable dental traits
among Native American populations in Texas.
Another important study is Mehalchick and
Kibler’s (2008) analysis of mostly Late Archaic
hunter-gatherer remains in the North Bosque River
valley just west of Waco, Texas, an area from which
some of the ceramic samples included in this study
derive. Like many other researchers around the world,
they used lithic artifacts and other data to address
questions of mobility, seasonality, intensity of site
use, group aggregation and ﬁssioning, and territory.
The third study, Arnn’s (2012a) interdisciplinary analysis of the Toyah horizon/phase is perhaps
the most directly relevant to the current project. In
that study, Arnn addresses what he sees as a large,
political, economic, and social alliance of Late
Prehistoric and early historic native groups that he
refers to as the Tejas alliance. Many of his ideas are
important in the interpretation of the ceramic compositional data presented here. Particularly notable
are the community territories and marriage groups
he discusses for Central Texas, precisely the area of
interest in this study.
Worldwide, there have been numerous studies
of hunter-gatherer use of ceramics, with effort devoted to research topics such as ceramic function
(e.g., Sassaman 1993; Wills 1995), gender relations
(e.g., Crown and Wills 1995; Sassaman 1992), and

33

mobility (Sampson 1988). All of these topics, and
others, are relevant in research on the Late Prehistoric hunter-gatherers of Central Texas; but the
focus here is on two interrelated topics, mobility
and territory size. Most studies of hunter-gatherer
territory size and mobility have used variation in
decorative style, manufacturing technology, vessel form, etc., as the basis for inference. Ridings
and Sampson (1990), for example, analyzed the
distribution of decorative motifs in their effort to
identify group territory size among the historic
Karoo Bushmen in South Africa (see also Bollong
et. al. 1997; Sampson 1988).
In contrast, relatively few researchers have
used chemical compositional analysis to examine
hunter-gatherer mobility. Eerkens et. al. (2002)
and Hildebrand et. al. (2002) have used NAA
to examine Great Basin and southern California
hunter-gatherer ceramics, with results indicating
relatively substantial residential mobility. Boyd
et. al. (2002) conducted both NAA and petrographic analysis of early historic sherds from the
Southern Plains. Although they were unable to
determine conclusively where the ceramics found
in hunter-gatherer sites were made, the evidence
as a whole strongly suggested that all of the pottery was acquired from various eastern Pueblos
in New Mexico where such pottery is known to
have been made. Creel and Clark have used NAA
to determine the sources of Chupadero Blackon-white ceramics found in hunter-gatherer sites
on the southern Plains and adjacent Trans-Pecos
Texas (Clark 2006; Creel et. al. 2002). Chupadero
Black-on-white is a Late Prehistoric pottery type
made in large quantities at a number of pueblos in
central New Mexico, and it occurs widely in sites
on the Southern Plains. Clearly, this pottery type
was acquired, rather than made, by Southern Plains
hunter-gatherers. However, that analysis was not
intended to address questions of mobility and did
not yield data sufﬁcient to do more than pose questions relevant to that issue.

CULTURAL SETTING
The Toyah horizon/phase is a readily recognized Late Prehistoric/ early historic cultural
complex occurring in the central and southern portions of Texas; it is dated at ca. A.D. 1300-1600,
possibly extending as late as 1700. Interestingly,
the Toyah hunter-gatherers bordered and interacted

34

Texas Archeological Society

with agricultural groups to the east (the Caddo),
the north (Plains village), west (Jornada Mogollon
and eastern Ancestral Puebloan), and to the south
more distant (Huastec). Interaction was evidently
most intense with Caddo (Hasinai) and Jornada
Mogollon peoples, particularly the former if the
greater quantities and more widespread occurrence
of Caddo ceramics is any indication (see additional
discussion below). Thus, Toyah folks surely were
familiar with pottery made by other peoples with
whom they interacted and, in some cases, even appear to have used some of the same surface modiﬁcation and decorative techniques (e. g., brushing,
incising, engraving, and painting) as their eastern
and western neighbors.
The Toyah horizon/phase is best known for the
emphasis on bison and deer hunting, and the toolkit
is very much like that of contemporaneous bison
hunting groups through the Great Plains, of which
Central Texas is the most southern portion. Ceramics consistently occur in Toyah sites, though never
in large numbers, at least compared to the sedentary
farming groups in surrounding regions. So far as we
currently know, the largest site inventory would rarely
exceed 20-30 vessels, even in the most extensively
excavated sites, although it is likely that our sampling
has yielded a rather modest representation of actual
vessel numbers at some sites. Similarly, there is little
evidence to date for more than a very few vessels of
any kind in use at any given time in any given site,
perhaps suggesting that pottery containers may not
have been standard utilitarian items for every family.
Certainly, there is some variability in vessel form, with narrow mouth bottles, wide mouth
jars, and bowls of various sizes (most thoroughly
discussed by Johnson [1994]). The issues of vessel
form and function are in need of further study but
are not directly addressed in this study. Quigg and
Peck (1995:146-148) argued that some of the vessels
from the Rush site were used to boil fat from fractured bison bone, but that analysis is so far the only
one of its kind and needs to be repeated with other
assemblages. Whether some, perhaps even most, of
these vessels were used primarily for ritual or other
special purposes, as suggested by Arnn (2012a:78,
2012b:54), is unknown and unaddressed in any
systematic technical analysis so far, including this
compositional analysis.
Most of the pottery is plain bone-tempered
earthenware assigned to the type Leon Plain; and
most is very similar to, if not often indistinguishable
from, native-made ceramics in the early Spanish

missions in south central and southeastern Texas.
Far less common are red-slipped bone-tempered
vessels referred to by J. Charles Kelley as Doss
Redware (Kelley 1947). Also rare are vessels with
brushed exteriors of the Boothe Brushed type
deﬁned on the basis of the assemblage from the
Collins site in Travis County (Suhm 1955). Boothe
Brushed is believed to have been made in that
general area and, though similar in many respects,
is not a Caddo ware.
Leon Plain is a generally well-made, distinctive ware, with many vessels having extremely thin
walls and polished exteriors. The typological issues
with Leon Plain and Doss Red have been discussed
by others, the early descriptions of the former being
by Krieger (1946), Suhm et al. (1954), and Suhm
and Jelks (1962). Shafer (personal communication,
2012) has suggested that the thin-walled narrow
mouth jars/bottles are more often red-slipped and
are perhaps best referred to as Doss Red, whereas
the term Leon Plain is more appropriate for the
bowls and wide mouth jars generally lacking a
red slip or wash. Although a distinction based on
vessel form may have some general validity, it is
not consistent enough to warrant typological differentiation; and in any event, the fugitive nature of
the slip or wash on some vessels renders the overall
distinction somewhat suspect.
The notion of Leon Plain as a valid “type” is in
need of reconsideration despite the fact that most
archeologists readily recognize this distinctive
pottery. Generally, the ceramics typically typed
as Leon Plain are well-made, bone-tempered, and
often thin-walled. Some vessels have additional
materials in the fabric, most notably including
naturally occurring sand as well as sand deliberately added as temper; but they nonetheless ﬁt
comfortably within the type deﬁnition. One of the
concerns with this type deﬁnition is its extensive
area of occurrence and our inability to link the
“type” to a speciﬁc cultural group. Doug Boyd
(personal communication, 2012) has the following useful perspective: “I have come to believe
that Leon Plain isn’t really a “type” in the sense
that most of our other ceramic types are. It cannot be linked to a particular group or place...it is
too widespread. The name now denotes a bonetempered ceramic tradition that cross-cuts cultural
and ethnic boundaries.” The results of the NAA
project reported here provide some data that may
help us resolve the concerns with the validity and
usefulness of the typological deﬁnition.

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics
In addition to this presumably locally-made
ware, occasional sherds/vessels of Caddo pottery
types occur in Toyah horizon/phase sites and are
generally easily linked to various parts of eastern
Texas on the basis of vessel form, paste and temper
attributes, and decoration. For the most part, these
Caddo vessels are believed to have been acquired
through trade by the Central Texas hunter-gatherer
groups (see Perttula et al. 2003); but certain sites
on the eastern edge of Central Texas may have
been occupied for short periods by Caddo people
from eastern Texas (see Shafer [2006] for a useful
perspective on what he calls the Prairie Caddo).
Similarly, in the western and northwestern
portions of Central Texas, assemblages occasionally contain pottery made in the Puebloan area
of New Mexico and/or the Jornada Mogollon
area of far western Texas; this is in addition to
the Leon Plain and Caddo wares. These western
types include various Rio Grande glazewares,
corrugated wares (especially Ochoa Indented Corrugated), Chupadero Black-on-white, and El Paso
Polychrome.
In perhaps the most comprehensive recent
analysis of Leon Plain, Johnson (1994:287) interpreted variation in ceramic attributes, as well as
other items in the assemblages, as indicating that
the Toyah phase consisted of small bands of a few
families with relatively small territories. The variability in clays in the ceramics from individual sites
suggested to Johnson that the small group territories
had diverse clay resources. The inference of small
territory size is based largely on the occurrence of
speciﬁc vessel forms in the different parts of Central Texas. This is consistent with earliest Spanish
explorers’ observations that the Native Americans in
Central Texas lived in small bands, although camps
with one thousand or more inhabitants were also
documented (see Wade 2003:38). Such large camps
were apparently temporary and ﬂuid. This is also
consistent with Arnn’s (2012a, 2012b) view of small
social groups linked into large social ﬁelds.
Although evidence such as that marshaled by
Johnson is suggestive of small territory size, the
apparent widespread uniformity of other parts of
Toyah phase material culture may reﬂect larger territory size and greater mobility. Indeed, long ago,
J. Charles Kelley (1955) argued that the Jumano
were the early historic Toyah phase descendants
and that the extensive travels of at least some of
them were responsible for the consistent occurrence
of many items of Toyah material culture over very

35

large areas. If this were true, one would predict that
any compositional groups identiﬁed through NAA
would be widespread and not mostly restricted to
small areas.
Within Central Texas, the only meaningful tests
of this notion via ceramic research have been the
petrographic analysis of a small number of Leon
Plain specimens by Reese-Taylor (1995). Based on
small samples from two localities in west central
Texas and one in the southeastern part, Reese-Taylor asserted that there is considerable homogeneity
in the bone-tempered pottery in Central Texas.
There is, obviously, diversity in interpretations of
Toyah horizon/phase territory size and mobility
and, thus, the need for a concerted effort to address
the issue. The relatively large-scale research effort
reported herein will hopefully be a step toward
resolving this issue.

GEOLOGIC SETTING
The feasibility of testing Johnson’s model of
small territory size using NAA requires chemical
diversity in usable clay sources over relatively
small distances, and the geologic variability in
most of Central Texas area appears to be sufﬁciently diverse. Much of the landscape is a Cretaceous limestone plateau (the Edwards Plateau),
but many of the streams draining the area have
cut completely through the limestone into much
different underlying formations. This includes,
most notably, the Llano Uplift, an area containing
outcrops of granites, schist, and sandstones. The
Colorado River, for example, heads in the Southern
Plains and ﬂows through the Llano Uplift as well
as the Edwards Plateau and then down through the
Gulf coastal plain. The distance from the Southern
Plains to the eastern edge of Central Texas is some
300 miles. In these miles, the pattern of exposed
geologic formations, many of them containing
signiﬁcant clay deposits, is such that many drainages, or segments of drainages, have very different
potential clay sources (see Garner et al. 1979). It is
also true that some areas, particularly those where
the streams have not cut through the Cretaceous
limestone, have little diversity in geologic exposures and therefore comparatively little diversity in
clay resources. Nonetheless, the overall geologic
setting is such that the prospects are good for identifying chemical compositional groups of ceramics
made in Central Texas.

36

Texas Archeological Society
CERAMIC COMPOSITIONAL
ANALYSIS BACKGROUND

A number of relevant compositional analyses
have been conducted on ceramics from central Texas
or adjacent areas. Among these are the extensive
and on-going analyses of Caddo pottery primarily
by Timothy K. Perttula (see Ferguson 2007; Perttula
and Ferguson 2010) but also including a modest effort targeting the George C. Davis site (Descantes
et. al. 2004), Leonard’s analysis of Rio Grande
glazewares from Southern Plains sites (Leonard
2006), an NAA and petrographic analysis of Chupadero Black-on-white from western Texas and New
Mexico (Creel et al. 2002; Clark 2006), Alvarado’s
NAA project on Ochoa Indented Corrugated from
West Texas and southeast New Mexico (Alvarado
2008), Carlson’s NAA research on Spanish colonial
and native ceramics from missions in Central and
East Texas (Carlson 1994; Carlson et. al. 2007),
Perttula’s (2002) NAA study of native-made Goliad
Plain from Mission Refugio, Neff and Glascock’s
NAA analysis of ceramics from Refugio and Carvajal Crossing (Neff and Glascock 2001), Perttula’s
study of Caddo and Central Texas pottery in the
Fort Hood area (Perttula et al. 2003), Boyd’s NAA
analysis of ceramics from the Lake Alan Henry area
just north of Central Texas (Boyd et al. 2002), and
Neff’s modest NAA of ceramics from the McGuire’s
Garden site (41FT425) in Freestone County just east
of the current project (Neff 2002b).
There have also been several petrographic
analyses of ceramics from Central Texas sites, and
most of these samples have also been subjected to
NAA for this project. As noted previously, these
include Kittleman’s (1994) analysis of Buckhollow site pottery and Reese-Taylor’s analyses of
ceramics from sites at O. H. Ivie Reservoir, from
the middle Onion Creek valley, and from the Rush
site (Reese-Taylor 1993, 1995; Reese-Taylor et
al. 1994). The ceramics from the middle Onion
Creek valley were also subjected to proton induced
X-ray emission analysis and the results compared
with the petrographic analysis (Reese-Taylor et al.
1994). Similarly, Hill (2001) conducted a petrographic analysis of the Carvajal Crossing project
ceramics that paralleled the NAA study by Neff and
Glascock (2001), and the results from both were
evaluated in a comprehensive manner.
More recently, several sites have been partially
excavated in Central Texas for Texas Department
of Transportation highway projects, and all of the

samples from those sites are included in the analysis reported here. More or less coincident with
these were several additional ceramic samples and
a number of raw clay samples submitted for analysis as part of the Central Texas ceramic project.
These add a modest number to the 400+ samples
in the original batch of Central Texas samples that
form the core of the current dataset. In addition,
this analysis has included the samples from Carvajal Crossing and Mission Refugio even though
most of the samples are Goliad Plain.

THE NAA SAMPLE
The NAA samples considered in this study total
640, of which 40 are raw clay (36 localities, some of
which are also archeological sites with NAA samples), one is a ceramic pipe, and the remaining 600
are pottery vessel samples (note that this counts only
three samples from 41KM69 since there were three
pairs of samples, each pair from the same vessel; one
from two duplicate samples from 41CV41, and one
from three duplicate samples from 41CV174). Table
1 presents the basic data on the sites and number of
ceramic samples per site, and Table 2 presents the
data on the clay samples. Figure 2 shows the locations of the sites with ceramic samples, and Figure 3
shows clay sample locales. The data on each sample
will be available digitally at a website URL yet to
be determined.
Of the total, 477 samples were selected and analyzed in 2001-2002 for the Central Texas Ceramic
Project (hereinafter referred to as CTCP), the remaining 165 are from seven separate CRM projects
conducted since the original CTCP analysis. All but
one of these CRM projects were done for the Texas
Department of Transportation (TXDOT), and a few
of the samples in the original CTCP analysis were
from a TXDOT project in Fayette County.
Geographically, the majority of the samples
are from the Edwards Plateau and immediately
adjacent areas, with a large number from the
Blackland Prairie below the Balcones Escarpment,
extending to the Brazos River valley area around
Waco. By far the most disjunct sample locality is
Mission Rosario on the coastal plain in Refugio
County; this large sample (n=106) was analyzed as
part of a highway mitigation effort by the Center
for Archaeological Research at the University of
Texas at San Antonio, and has been included in this
analysis because it focused on Goliad Plain, the

41BC00114
41BL
41BL00018
41BL00022
41BL00023
41BL00104
41BL00323
41BP
41BP00001
41BQ00285
41BR00073
41BR00306
41BR00307
41BT00001
41BT00010
41BX00228
41BX00300
41BX00323
41BX00528
41BX00980
41CC00031
41CC00131
41CC00170
41CC00222
41CC00295
41CK00066
41CK00079
41CK00100
41CK00120
41CM

Site
Number*

Pavo Site
Engle Farm

Sand Creek

Paint Rock

Currie
Dripping Hole Branch

E.B. Sayles Collection
Coleman 2:3
E.B. Sayles Collection
Grelle
W. A. Chisum
Panther Springs Creek
Salado Creek Watershed
Kohnitz Coll.
Pampoa-Talon Crossing
S.W. Ind. School Dist.

H. Shafer Collection
Penny Winkle
Evoe
Gault
Wilson site (old 1C-138)
Goodwin site

Wheatley
Hartrick Bluff; Shafer Coll

Site Name

2

1
1

1

2

1
2
4
1
3
4
4
1
6
2
1
2

1

Untyped
Bonetempered

1

Doss
Red

2

2

1

1
1

3

Leon
Plain

2

4
5

2

1

Untyped
Plain

Boothe
Brushed

Table 1. Archeological sites and ceramics used in the analysis.

1

1

1

5
1

1
2
2

1
1

Goliad
Plain Caddo
Other**

4
1
1
2
2
3
1
1
2
5
1
3
1
5
2
5
1
3
8
9
1
6
2
1
4
1
1
1
1
2

Total

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics
37

41CM00001
41CM00125
41CM00247
41CN00095
41CN
41CN
41CV00041
41CV00048
41CV00101
41CV00174
41CV00344
41CV01512
41CY
41ED00015
41ED
41FS00018
41FS00054
41FS00062
41FY00135
41GL00001
41HI00001
41HI00008
41HI00050
41HI00105
41HI00111
41HI00134
41HI00154
41HI00237
41HI00239
41HI00241

Site
Number*

McDonald Site

Kline Cave (old 1C-26)
Grooms Ranch
E.B. Sayles, Rock Spr. 4:1
E.B. Sayles Collection
Steadman #11
Steadman Collection
Sandbur
Lehman Rockshelter
Kyle Site
Blum Rockshelter

H. Shafer Collection
Fort Hood 41CV174-A

Oblate Rockshelter
M. Kohnitz Collection
M. Kohnitz Collection
Elm Creek
E.B. Sayles; Coleman 1:1
Millard Collection
Fort Hood 41CV41-A

Site Name

1
1

1
1

1

2
2
1
6
2
1

Leon
Plain

1

Doss
Red

Untyped
Bonetempered

7

2
1

1

Untyped
Plain

Table 1. (Continued)
Boothe
Brushed

2
6
1
7
1
1
1
1
2
1

3
1

4
1
1
1

Goliad
Plain Caddo

1

Other**

2
2
1
6
3
5
1
1
1
1
3
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
8
1
2
6
1
7
1
1
1
1
2
1

Total

38
Texas Archeological Society

41HY00014
41HY00163
41HY00202
41HY209-M
41HY209-T
41IR
41IR00028
41IR00031
41IR00038
41IR00050
41IR00054
41JS00072
41KA00001
41KA26-B
41KM00004
41KM00016
41KM00069
41KM00226
41KM
41KN
41KR00521
41KR00526
41LL00004
41LL00076
41LL00078
41LL00380
41LL00413
41ME00019
41ME00102
41ME00103

Site
Number*

E.B. Sayles Collection
E.B. Sayles Collection
Scarbrough Farm site
Carvajal Crossing
J.C. Kelley Collection
Buckhollow
Flatrock Road Site
Little Paint Site
E.B. Sayles, Junction 1:4
E.B. Sayles, Texas Y:8:2
Bryant Saner Collection
Cullum
Fall Creek
Spencer Collection
Slab Site
Long’s Camp
Charlotte Graham Coll.
Natalia
David Calame Collection
David Calame Collection

J. Greer Collection
Zatopec
Barton Site
Mustang Branch
Mustang Branch
Rusty Holt Collection

Site Name

1
2
1
3
1

2
8
3
6
3
1
1
2
9
3

1
1
2

1
1
6

2
1

6

Leon
Plain

2

Doss
Red

1

1
1

1

Untyped
Bonetempered

1

2

3

1

1

2

1

1

Untyped
Plain

Table 1. (Continued)

1

Boothe
Brushed

20

1

3
3

1
1

1

2

1

1

Goliad
Plain Caddo

1

1

Other**

1
9
1
2
6
1
2
3
8
1
1
2
2
21
2
8
3
6
3
1
1
2
16
7
2
1
3
3
3
1

Total

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics
39

41ME00115
41MH00004
41MK00011
41ML00028
41ML00035
41ML00040
41ML00044
41ML00046
41MN1
41MN00023
41MN00033
41MN00055
41MV
41NL00010
41NL00013
41NL00019
41RE00001
41RF00001
41RN00003
41RN00113
41RN00163
41RN00169
41SC00004
41SS00002
41SS00020
41SS00028
41SS00051
41SS00110
41TA00040
41TA00117

Site
Number*

Rocky Branch
E.B. Sayles Collection
Fall Creek No. 2
Finis Frost
Whitley Collection
Texas Tech Field School
Texas Tech Field School
E.B. Sayles Collection
E.B. Sayles Collection

E.B. Sayles, Texas Y:14:4
E.B. Sayles Collection
E.B. Sayles Collection
E.B. Sayles Collection
Mission San Lorenzo
Mission Refugio

David Calame Collection
E.B. Sayles Collection
H. Shafer Collection
Gas Plant Site
Baylor Site
TP&L Site
Chupek
Asa Warner
Presidio San Saba
Mission San Saba
Janee site

Site Name

1
4
3
2
2
1
3

1
3

2

1

4

1

1

1
1
1

Leon
Plain

Doss
Red

5

Untyped
Bonetempered

1

1
1

1

19

2

2

1

Untyped
Plain

Table 1. (Continued)
Boothe
Brushed

87

5
7

1

4
4

1
3

Goliad
Plain Caddo

1

1

1
1

2

Other**

1
1
2
1
3
2
4
4
5
9
1
5
1
1
7
1
1
106
2
1
1
3
1
2
5
4
2
2
1
4

Total

40
Texas Archeological Society

41TA00123
41TA00124
41TA00125
41TA00186
41TA00202
41TG00038
41TG00045
41TG00048
41TG00078
41TG00091
41TG00346
41TG00424
41TG00541
41TV00005
41TV00029
41TV00039
41TV00040
41TV00042
41TV00104
41TV00134
41TV00142
41TV00441
41UV00001
41UV00002
41UV00007
41UV00021
41UV00137
41UV
41VV00011
41VV00188

Site
Number*

Rogers Spring site
Collins Site
Smith Rockshelter
Sneed Site
Polecat Hollow
Hillcrest Bluff
S.E. Metro Park
E. E. Nelson Ranch
Kincaid Rockshelter
Stockley Ranch
La Jita
G. Evans Collection
E.B. Sayles, Texas Y:4:1
Javelina Bluff
Devils Mouth

Ben Cox Collection
Nancy Edwards Collection

Rush site

Ben Cox Collection

E.B. Sayles Collection
E.B. Sayles Collection
E.B. Sayles Collection
Steadman #31
Steadman #65

Site Name

3
1
5
3
1
1
3

1
1
2
1

6
2
1
1
6

3
13
3
1
12
4

2
2

Leon
Plain

Doss
Red

Untyped
Bonetempered

2
1

1
1

1

Untyped
Plain

Table 1. (Continued)

2

Boothe
Brushed

1

1
1

1

1
1
2
2
1

2
2

2
2
2
1
1

Goliad
Plain Caddo

1

1

Other**

5
4
2
1
1
3
15
5
1
12
6
1
8
4
2
1
10
1
2
1
3
4
1
4
1
5
3
1
1
3

Total

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics
41

Loeve
Rowe Valley

J. Fagg Farm (old #1C-259)
Beyer Site
Cedar Park Mound
Barker

Seminole Canyon
Baker #1-2

Site Name

257

2

2
2
1
1
3
2
1

1
1

Leon
Plain

3

Doss
Red

11

Untyped
Bonetempered

80

1

6

Untyped
Plain

4

1

Boothe
Brushed

120

1

113

1
1
5
2

1
3

Goliad
Plain Caddo

12

Other**

600

1
1
6
2
2
1
1
4
5
1
1
1
5
7

Total

*Column has an indication of county even if the site does not have a formally assigned archeological site number.
**Other includes pipe, untyped painted, Goose Creek Plain, Ochoa Indented Corrugated, Chupadero Black-on-White, untyped upper Rio Grande glazeware, and
untyped burnished red ware.

Total

41VV00365
41VV00424
41VV00444
41VV01723
41VV01724
41WM
41WM00006
41WM00008
41WM00071
41WM00108
41WM00118
41WM00124
41WM00133
41WM00437

Site
Number*

Table 1. (Continued)

42
Texas Archeological Society

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics

43

Table 2. Clay, burned daub, and ﬁred clay waster samples used in the analysis.
Site Number*

Site Name

Natural
Clay

41BC00114
41BP
41BT
41BT
41BT
41BX
41BX
41BX00300
41CN
41CN
41FR00034
41FT
41GL
41GL
41GU
41GU4
41GU00005
41KR00600
41LL
41LL00417
41LT
41LT
41ME
41MK
41MK
41MK
41MN00023
41MN00055
41MS
41RF00001
41SS
41TV
41TV00039
41UV00132
41WM00118
41WM00230
41WN

Wheatley
clay source
Double Horn Creek Clay
Camp Creek
Lake Buchanan Clay Sample
San Antonio River alluvium
inactive clay quarry
Salado Creek Watershed
clay source
clay source
Suzanna Calame
Clay #3
Pedernales River Clay
Pedernales River Clay
Acme Brick clay
Wilson, Durham, Chandler
H. Wilson and Company

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Total

Kingsland Clay Sample
Sandy Creek Clay
Clay #1 Kosse Silici
Clay #2
D’Hanis clay
clay source
inactive clay quarry
clay source
Mission San Saba
Clay #4
Mission Refugio
Colorado River Clay
Lake Travis Clay Sample
Rogers Spring site
Smith Site

Burned
Clay or
Daub

Fired
Clay
Waster

1

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1

1

40

2
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1

Loeve Fox
Mission clay quarry
35

4

*Column has an indication of county even if clay source does not have a site number

Total

44

Texas Archeological Society

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

al
ad
Gu
eR
up
ive

Shared Toyah Area

r

e
nd

Classic Toyah Area

a
Gr

107

o
Ri

Number of Sherds per Site
1-3
4 - 10
11 - 21

Figure 2. Locations of 160 sites represented in the NAA ceramic sample.

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

al
ad
Gu
r

e
nd

ive

a
Gr

eR
up

o
Ri

NAA Clay Sample
Classic Toyah Area
Shared Toyah Area

Figure 3. Locations of 36 sites and collection localities represented in the NAA natural clay samples.

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics
historic, Native-made bone-tempered pottery type
typically found in quantity in Central and central
coastal Spanish missions and presumed to have
derived from Leon Plain.
Figure 2 shows that the distribution of archeological sites from which at least one sample was
selected is more or less even within the main project
area. There are, however, signiﬁcant gaps that are
presumed, at this point at least, to reﬂect nothing
more than lack of samples to which we had access.
There is no reason to think that these gaps in our
sample distribution are real gaps in the occurrence
of ceramics archeologically. Indeed, there are collections from several sites that were not included
because the sherds were either too small or there was
only one sherd. In such cases, we did not destroy
the only known ceramics from those sites, but we
assume that the broad patterns in the data have not
been materially affected by this exclusion.
Although most sites are represented by only
one or two samples, many have four or ﬁve samples, and several sites have 10 or more. Other than
the 20 from Carvajal Crossing in Karnes County
and the 106 from Mission Refugio in Refugio
County, the largest site samples are 18 from the
Fall Creek site complex (41LL4 and 41SS2), 15
from 41TG45, 12 from 41TG91, 11 from Mission
San Sabá (41MN23), and 10 from the Collins site
(41TV40). There are more than 30 samples from
a cluster of sites in southern Tom Green County,
and there is a comparably large cluster of samples
(n=27) from the general area of the ConchoColorado river conﬂuence, from Paint Rock to the
modern O. H. Ivie Reservoir.
Figure 3 shows the location of raw clay samples used in this study. Most samples were acquired
speciﬁcally for this effort from clay outcrops, but
a few were from archeological sites. One of the
principal goals of the raw material sampling was
to visit the locations identiﬁed as commercial clay
sources on the map, Mineral Resources of Texas
(Garner et al. 1979). For the most part, these are in
the Wilcox Formation along the Balcones Escarpment and in the Permian/Pennsylvanian formations
in west central Texas, particularly as exposed on
the surface in the Colorado River valley in Brown,
Coleman, and McCulloch counties. Chuck Hixson
generously provided ceramic-quality clays from
several locations in the Llano Uplift area. The
clay sampling effort was not comprehensive and is
weakest in the western and northern portions of the
study area. In particular, we have not yet sampled

45

the important clay sources in the Clear Fork of the
Brazos drainage in the northern part of the study
area or clays in the Concho River drainage in the
northwestern part of the study area.
One important part of this project was the focus on the Edwards Plateau and the ignoring of the
rather substantial occurrence of Leon Plain in the
area south and southeast of San Antonio. In part,
this was a funding issue, but it was also a project
phasing issue, the research plan focusing ﬁrst on
the Edwards Plateau, and then later, as funds became available, to expand the effort to include the
important area south of San Antonio.
For the samples analyzed speciﬁcally for this
project, the specimens were assigned to known
ceramic types if at all possible; this is reﬂected in
the counts presented in Tables 1 and 3. However,
a number of samples included in this analysis were
originally submitted by other researchers, so their
ceramic type identiﬁcations (or descriptive category) are used herein to avoid potential confusion.
The majority of the untyped specimens with bone
temper could be comfortably typed as Leon Plain.
Thus, the total sample of Leon Plain is somewhat
greater than 300. Relatively little attention is herein
given to Goliad Plain since it was a historic period
mission ceramic product and the subject of a separate project. The Ochoa Indented Corrugated, the
Chupadero Black-on-white, and the untyped Rio
Grande glazeware samples are not included in the
discussion since all were imported from areas west
or northwest of Central Texas.

LABORATORY METHODS AND
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Pottery samples were prepared for NAA using
procedures standard at MURR. Fragments of about
1cm2 were removed from each sample and abraded
using a silicon carbide burr in order to remove glaze,
slip, paint, and adhering soil, thereby reducing the
risk of measuring contamination. The samples were
washed in deionized water and allowed to dry in
the laboratory. Once dry, the individual sherds were
ground to powder in an agate mortar to homogenize
the samples. Archival samples were retained from
each sherd (when possible) for future research.
Two analytical samples were prepared from
each source specimen. Portions of approximately
150 mg of powder were weighed into clean highdensity polyethylene vials used for short irradiations

46

Texas Archeological Society
Table 3. Summary of samples by ceramic types.

Ceramic Type

No. of Samples

No. of Sites

Leon Plain
Doss Red
Untyped bone-tempered
(probably Leon Plain)
Untyped Plain
Boothe Brushed
Goliad Plain
Caddo (various types)
Untyped painted*
Goose Creek Plain
Ochoa Indented Corrugated
Chupadero Black-on-white
Untyped Rio Grande
glazeware
Untyped burnished red ware
Pipe

257*
3
11

107
2
6

80
4
120
113
2
1
4
1

34
3
5
62
2
1
4
1

1
2
1

1
1
1

Total

600

230

Note: The ceramic samples are from 160 sites.
* One is a painted Leon Plain sherd.

at MURR. At the same time, 200 mg of each sample
was weighed into high-purity quartz vials used for
long irradiations. Individual sample weights were
recorded to the nearest 0.01 mg using an analytical
balance. Both vials were sealed prior to irradiation.
Along with the unknown samples, Standards made
from National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) certiﬁed standard reference materials
of SRM-1633b (coal ﬂy ash) and SRM-688 (basalt
rock) were similarly prepared, as were quality control samples (e.g., standards treated as unknowns)
of SRM-278 (obsidian rock) and Ohio Red Clay (a
standard developed for in-house applications).
Irradiation and Gamma-Ray
Spectroscopy
Neutron activation analysis of ceramics at
MURR, which consists of two irradiations and
a total of three gamma counts, constitutes a superset of the procedures used at most other NAA
laboratories (Glascock 1992; Neff 1992, 2000).
As discussed in detail by Glascock (1992), a short
irradiation is carried out through the pneumatic

tube irradiation system. Samples in the polyvials
are sequentially irradiated, two at a time, for ﬁve
seconds by a neutron ﬂux of 8 x 1013 n cm-2 s-1 The
720-second count yields gamma spectra containing peaks for nine short-lived elements aluminum
(Al), barium (Ba), calcium (Ca), dysprosium (Dy),
potassium (K), manganese (Mn), sodium (Na),
titanium (Ti), and vanadium (V). The samples are
encapsulated in quartz vials and are subjected to a
24–hour irradiation at a neutron ﬂux of 5 x 1013 n
cm-2 s-1. This long irradiation is analogous to the
single irradiation utilized at most other laboratories. After the long irradiation, samples decay for
seven days, and then are counted for 1,800 seconds
(the “middle count”) on a high-resolution germanium detector coupled to an automatic sample
changer. The middle count yields determinations of
seven medium half-life elements, namely arsenic
(As), lanthanum (La), lutetium (Lu), neodymium
(Nd), samarium (Sm), uranium (U), and ytterbium
(Yb). After an additional three- or four-week decay,
a ﬁnal count of 8,500 seconds is carried out on each
sample. The latter measurement yields the following 17 long half-life elements: cerium (Ce), cobalt

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics
(Co), chromium (Cr), cesium (Cs), europium (Eu),
iron (Fe), hafnium (Hf), nickel (Ni), rubidium (Rb),
antimony (Sb), scandium (Sc), strontium (Sr), tantalum (Ta), terbium (Tb), thorium (Th), zinc (Zn),
and zirconium (Zr). The element concentration
data from the three measurements are tabulated in
parts per million.
Interpreting Chemical Data
The analyses at MURR, described above,
produced elemental concentration values for 33
elements in most of the analyzed samples. Data for
nickel (Ni) in many samples was below detection
limits (as is the norm for most New World ceramics) and was removed from consideration during
the statistical analysis. Calcium levels were found
to be high enough (up to 7.4 percent) in many
specimens to require a calcium correction of the
dataset. Because calcium has the potential to affect (dilute) the concentrations of other elements
in the analysis, all samples were mathematically
corrected to compensate for any possible calciumincluded effects (the data were examined before
and after calcium correction and the results were
similar). The following mathematical correction
was used as it has been proven to be effective
in other calcium-rich datasets (Cogswell et al.
1998:64; Steponaitis et al. 1996):

e' =

106 e
106 2.5c

where e is the corrected concentration of a given
element in parts per million (ppm), e is the measured
concentration of that element in ppm, and c is the
concentration of elemental calcium in ppm. After the
calcium correction, calcium was generally removed
from the statistical analyses. Statistical analysis was
subsequently carried out on base-10 logarithms of
concentrations on the remaining 31 elements.
Use of log concentrations rather than raw data
compensates for differences in magnitude between
the major elements, such as calcium, on one hand
and trace elements, such as the rare earth or lanthanide elements (REEs). Transformation to base-10
logarithms also yields a more normal distribution
for many trace elements.
The interpretation of compositional data
obtained from the analysis of archeological
materials is discussed in detail elsewhere (e.g.,
Baxter and Buck 2000; Bieber et al. 1976; Bishop
and Neff 1989; Glascock 1992; Harbottle 1976;

47

Neff 2000) and will only be summarized here.
The main goal of data analysis is to identify
distinct homogeneous groups within the analytical
database. Based on the provenance postulate of
Weigand et al. (1977), different chemical groups
may be assumed to represent geographically
restricted sources. For lithic materials such as
obsidian, basalt, and cryptocrystalline silicates
(e.g., chert, ﬂint, or jasper), raw material samples
are frequently collected from known outcrops or
secondary deposits and the compositional data
obtained on the samples is used to deﬁne the
source localities or boundaries. The locations
of sources can also be inferred by comparing
unknown specimens (i.e., ceramic artifacts) to
knowns (i.e., clay samples) or by indirect methods
such as the “criterion of abundance” (Bishop et al.
1992) or by arguments based on geological and
sedimentological characteristics (e.g., Steponaitis
et al. 1996). The ubiquity of ceramic raw materials
usually makes it impossible to sample all potential
“sources” intensively enough to create groups of
knowns to which unknowns can be compared.
Lithic sources tend to be more localized and
compositionally homogeneous in the case of
obsidian or compositionally heterogeneous as is
the case for most cherts.
Compositional groups can be viewed as “centers of mass” in the compositional hyperspace described by the measured elemental data. Groups are
characterized by the locations of their centroids and
the unique relationships (i.e., correlations) between
the elements. Decisions about whether to assign a
specimen to a particular compositional group are
based on the overall probability that the measured
concentrations for the specimen could have been
obtained from that group.
Initial hypotheses about source-related subgroups in the compositional data can be derived
from non-compositional information (e.g., archeological context, decorative attributes, etc.) or
from application of various pattern-recognition
techniques to the multivariate chemical data. Some
of the pattern recognition techniques that have
been used to investigate archeological data sets
are cluster analysis (CA), principal components
analysis (PCA), and discriminant analysis (DA).
Each of the techniques has its own advantages and
disadvantages which may depend upon the types
and quantity of data available for interpretation.
The variables (measured elements) in archeological and geological data sets are often correlated

48

Texas Archeological Society

and frequently large in number. This makes handling and interpreting patterns within the data
difﬁcult. Therefore, it is often useful to transform
the original variables into a smaller set of uncorrelated variables in order to make data interpretation
easier. Of the above-mentioned pattern recognition
techniques, PCA is a technique that transforms the
data from the original correlated variables into uncorrelated variables most easily.
PCA creates a new set of reference axes arranged
in decreasing order of variance subsumed. The individual PCs are linear combinations of the original
variables. The data can be displayed on combinations of the new axes, just as they can be displayed
on the original elemental concentration axes. PCA
can be used in a pure pattern-recognition mode (i.e.,
to search for subgroups in an undifferentiated data
set), or in a more evaluative mode (i.e., to assess
the coherence of hypothetical groups suggested by
other criteria). Generally, compositional differences
between specimens can be expected to be larger for
specimens in different groups than for specimens in
the same group, and this implies that groups should
be detectable as distinct areas of high point density
on plots of the ﬁrst few components. It is well known
that PCA of chemical data is scale dependent (Mardia
et al. 1979), and analyses tend to be dominated by
those elements or isotopes for which the concentrations are relatively large. This is yet another reason
for the log transformation of the data.
One frequently exploited strength of PCA, discussed by Baxter (1992), Baxter and Buck (2000),
and Neff (1994, 2002a), is that it can be applied
as a simultaneous R- and Q-mode technique, with
both variables (elements) and objects (individual
analyzed samples) displayed on the same set of
principal component reference axes. A plot using the
ﬁrst two principal components as axes is usually the
best possible two-dimensional representation of the
correlation or variance-covariance structure within
the data set. Small angles between the vectors from
the origin to variable coordinates indicate strong
positive correlation; angles at 90 degrees indicate no
correlation; and angles close to 180 degrees indicate
strong negative correlation. Likewise, a plot of sample coordinates on these same axes will be the best
two-dimensional representation of Euclidean relations among the samples in log-concentration space
(if the PCA was based on the variance-covariance
matrix) or standardized log-concentration space
(if the PCA was based on the correlation matrix).
Displaying both objects and variables on the same

plot makes it possible to observe the contributions
of speciﬁc elements to group separation and to the
distinctive shapes of the various groups. Such a plot
is commonly referred to as a “biplot” in reference to
the simultaneous plotting of objects and variables.
The variable inter-relationships inferred from a biplot can be veriﬁed directly by inspecting bivariate
elemental concentration plots (note that a bivariate
plot of elemental concentrations is not a Biplot).
Whether a group can be discriminated easily
from other groups can be evaluated visually in two
dimensions or statistically in multiple dimensions. A
metric known as the Mahalanobis distance (or generalized distance) makes it possible to describe the
separation between groups or between individual
samples and groups on multiple dimensions. The
Mahalanobis distance of a specimen from a group
centroid (Bieber et al. 1976; Bishop and Neff 1989)
is deﬁned by:

D y2, X = [ y

X ]t I x [ y

X]

where y is the 1 x m array of logged elemental
concentrations for the specimen of interest, X is
the n x m data matrix of logged concentrations for
the group to which the point is being compared
with being its 1 x m centroid, and is the inverse
of the m x m variance-covariance matrix of group
X. Because Mahalanobis distance takes into account variances and covariances in the multivariate
group it is analogous to expressing distance from a
univariate mean in standard deviation units. Like
standard deviation units, Mahalanobis distances
can be converted into probabilities of group membership for individual specimens. For relatively
small sample sizes, it is appropriate to base probabilities on Hotelling’s , which is the multivariate
extension of the univariate Student’s.
When group sizes are small, Mahalanobis distance-based probabilities can ﬂuctuate dramatically
depending upon whether or not each specimen is assumed to be a member of the group to which it is being
compared. Harbottle (1976) calls this phenomenon
“stretchability” in reference to the tendency of an included specimen to stretch the group in the direction of
its own location in elemental concentration space. This
problem can be circumvented by cross-validation; that
is, by removing each specimen from its presumed
group before calculating its own probability of membership (Baxter 1994; Leese and Main 1994). This is
a conservative approach to group evaluation that may
sometimes exclude true group members.

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics
Small sample and group sizes place further
constraints on the use of Mahalanobis distance: with
more elements than samples, the group variancecovariance matrix is singular, thus rendering calculation of (and itself) impossible. Therefore, the
dimensionality of the groups must somehow be reduced. One approach would be to eliminate elements
considered irrelevant or redundant. The problem with
this approach is that the investigator’s preconceptions about which elements should be discriminated
may not be valid. It also squanders the main advantage of multi-element analysis, namely the capability
to measure a large number of elements. An alternative approach is to calculate Mahalanobis distances
with the scores on principal components extracted
from the variance-covariance or correlation matrix
for the complete data set. This approach entails only
the assumption, entirely reasonable in light of the
above discussion of PCA, that most group-separating
differences should be visible on the ﬁrst several PCs.
Unless a data set is extremely complex, containing
numerous distinct groups, using enough components
to subsume at least 90 percent of the total variance
in the data can be generally assumed to yield Mahalanobis distances that approximate Mahalanobis
distances in full elemental concentration space.
Lastly, Mahalanobis distance calculations are
also quite useful for handling missing data (Sayre
1975). When many specimens are analyzed for a
large number of elements, it is almost certain that
a few element concentrations will be missed for
some of the specimens. This occurs most frequently when the concentration for an element is near the
detection limit. Rather than eliminate the specimen
or the element from consideration, it is possible to
substitute a missing value by replacing it with a
value that minimizes the Mahalanobis distance for
the specimen from the group centroid. Thus, those
few specimens which are missing a single concentration value can still be used in group calculations.

STATISTICAL INTERPRETATION
The compositional groups are formed without
regard to any descriptive information. This section
describes the chemical and statistical justiﬁcation
for the compositional groups prior to examining
their spatial and cultural distributions.
The majority of the compositional groups are
composed of small clusters of between two and 11
samples that separate from the other samples in

49

the study in bivariate plots and generally exhibit a
similar chemistry across most or all of the elements
included in this study. Figure 4 is a plot of all of
these small groups. Group 1 (n=6) exhibits elevated
cesium levels. Group 2 (n=2) has relatively high
chromium and tantalum, while Group 3 (n=3) has
low chromium. Group 4 (n=7) separates in plots
of zirconium with both samarium and europium.
Group 5 (n=6) is separated in a plot of cerium and
cobalt and Group 6 (n=6) in a plot of samarium
and rubidium. Group 7 (n=4) exhibits increased
tantalum, and Group 8 (n=4) has comparatively
low samarium. Group 9 (n=6) is separated in a plot
of rubidium and chromium, Group 13 (n=4) in a
plot of chromium and hafnium, Group 14 (n=11)
in a plot of chromium and lutetium, and Group
15 (n=11) in a plot of lutetium and cerium. All 12
of the small groups account for a total of only 68
samples, or approximately 11 percent of the total
data set. Due to their small size, it is difﬁcult to
further statistically evaluate the validity of these
small groups.
The majority of the remaining samples form
a large mass of fairly uniform chemistry that has
created some difﬁculty in previous attempts to
interpret these data. Three groups (Groups 10, 11,
and 12) were initially formed using hierarchical
cluster analysis and reﬁned using a combination of
bivariate plots and group membership probabilities
based on Mahalanobis distance calculations. Figure
5 is a plot showing the decent separation of the
three large groups. Appendix Table A-4 in Creel
et al. (2012) lists group membership probabilities
for the members of the three large groups as well
as the projected membership probabilities for all
other samples in this study.
Two of the three large groups exhibit some
internal patterning that has led to the development
of a number of subgroups. Most of these subgroup
designations have reduced the sample size below
the threshold for robust statistical analysis, thus
the subgroups are generally based mostly on visual
inspection of bivariate plots. Group 10 is divided
into three subgroups based almost entirely on
the terbium concentrations. Figure 6 is a plot of
the Group 10 subgroups. No subgroup structure
has been identiﬁed for Group 11, but Group 12 is
divided into 3 subgroups with a couple of samples
not included in a subgroup (Figure 7).
In addition to the roughly 58 percent of the sample assigned to Groups 1 through 15, there are 15 additional samples removed from the dataset early on

50

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Bivariate plot of chromium and terbium showing the small compositional groups. Ellipses represent 90 percent
conﬁdence intervals for membership in the group.

due to very unique chemistries. These samples have
been classiﬁed as outliers. Some of these samples
may only be unique in the concentration of one or
two elements, but it is enough to skew some of the
multivariate statistics if they were not removed.
While the speciﬁc sources for the outliers’ unique
chemistries are not known, it is not safe to assume
that they represent imported ceramics.
An additional 186 samples remain unassigned.
The vast majority of the unassigned samples are
part of the large mass of samples that was divided
to form Groups 10, 11, and 12. The groups represent very conservative clusters, and thus the groups
exclude many more potential members than other
approaches. Many of the unassigned samples are
either not quite similar enough to any of the large
groups or potentially belong to more than one
group. Figure 8 is a plot of the unassigned samples
relative to the three large groups.

INTERPRETATION OF CHEMICAL
COMPOSITIONAL GROUPS
Statistical analysis of the dataset resulted in
the identiﬁcation of 15 compositional groups, ﬁve
of which contain only historic mission period ceramics and are not discussed further here. Of the
10 groups containing native-made, non-mission
pottery, three (Groups 1, 10, and 12) have been
split into three subgroups each. In effect, this
yields 16 separate groups that include native-made,
non-mission ceramics (Table 4). It is important
to note, however, that 317 (53 percent) of the
ceramic samples are either outliers or, much more
frequently, are currently unassigned to a compositional group. Slightly less than one-third of these
are Caddo pottery samples that have no probability
of membership in any of the Central Texas compositional groups.

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics

51

Figure 5. Bivariate plot of chromium and zinc showing the separation of groups 10, 11, and 12. Ellipses represent 90
percent conﬁdence intervals for membership in the group.

Chemically, the compositional groups deﬁned
above and discussed more fully below separate into
two somewhat loosely deﬁned clusters of similar
groups, hereafter referred to as Clusters A and B,
with Group 11 somewhat intermediate. The two
clusters were identiﬁed by observing bivariate plots
of the ﬁrst few canonical discriminant functions
and, in general, are distinguished by somewhat
lower values for transition metals and rare earths
La, Nd, Sm, Ta, Th, Ce, Eu, and Tb. To some
extent, this is paralleled by lower values for many
of the clay samples from the Wilcox Formation
along and below the Balcones Escarpment (not all
of which have been assigned to a compositional
group in Cluster B) as well as a few of the clay
samples from the Llano Uplift area. Not surprisingly, these clusters have geographically different
concentrations. Cluster A is largely a west central
Texas set of groups whereas Cluster B is focused

on the Balcones Escarpment zone and adjacent
Gulf coastal plain area. The clusters and their
groups are discussed in some detail below, with
the focus being on Leon Plain.
Of the 257 Leon Plain samples, typologically
the largest portion of the dataset and the focus of
this study, 130 (51 percent) are unassigned to a
group. The percentage of unassigned Leon Plain is
about 43 percent in west central Texas samples but
is notably higher at about 57 percent in the areas
along and closer to the Balcones Escarpment. The
reason for this difference is unknown. In any event,
it seems likely that additional samples of Leon Plain
will result in the deﬁnition of new groups.
Cluster A
Cluster A has several compositional groups, all
with member provenience primarily or exclusively in

52

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 6. Bivariate plot of terbium and samarium showing the separation of the three Group 10 subgroups. Ellipses
represent 90 percent conﬁdence intervals for membership in the group.

west central Texas, the Llano Uplift area, and, in some
cases, the Lower Pecos. Most samples are from sites
in the heartland of the Jumano, that is the Concho,
upper Colorado, and San Saba river drainages, and
the vast majority of the samples are Leon Plain. There
are a few Goliad Plain and one Doss Red as well.
Some of the groups are small and occur (in the present
sample) at only one or two sites, whereas others are
larger and occur in more sites over somewhat larger
areas. Then there are the large groups that contain
the bulk of the samples and have larger distributions,
mostly in west central Texas and, in some cases, the
Lower Pecos, and including a very modest number of
samples from Travis, Williamson, and Bell counties,
plus one from Uvalde County.
Group 1
This group has six samples, all bone-tempered with sand. Three of the six are untyped

bone-tempered plain from 41MN55, one is Goliad
Plain from 41MN23, and two are Leon Plain from
41VV1724 (Figure 9). These have been assigned to
three subgroups, 1A, 1B, and 1C.
Group 1A
Subgroup 1A contains three untyped bonetempered plain samples from 41MN55.These are
presumed to have been made somewhere other than
the site area since a clay sample from 41MN55 is
a member of Group 10 (probability of membership
27.35 percent).
Group 1B
Subgroup 1B contains two Leon Plain samples
from 41VV1724; the production area is unknown.
Interestingly, all of the other Val Verde County
samples assigned to compositional group are in

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics

53

Figure 7. Bivariate plot of scandium and rubidium showing the separation of the three Group 10 subgroups. Ellipses
represent 90 percent conﬁdence intervals for membership in the group.

Group 12, most of them Group 12B (eight of nine in
subgroup 12B, and one assigned only to Group 12).

movement of vessels over a limited area.
Group 9

Group 1C
This subgroup has only one member, the distinctive Goliad Plain sample from Mission San
Sabá (41MN23). The production area is currently
undetermined.

There are three paired sets of samples (equal to
three vessels sampled) in this group, all Leon Plain
from 41KM69 (Figure 11). The production locale
presumed to be the Kimble County area.
Group 12

Group 7
There are four samples in this group: two Leon
Plain, one Doss Red, and one untyped plain sherd
with sand, mica, and possibly bone temper inclusions.
Two samples are from 41SS28, and one each from
41CC295 and 41GL1. Distribution in the upper Colorado/Pedernales drainages (Figure 10) is presumed
to reﬂect production somewhere in that region, with

Group 12 is one of the two largest groups
in the entire Central Texas dataset and is overwhelmingly a west central Texas and Lower Pecos
group (Figure 12). For the most part, it has been
divided into three subgroups, A, B, and C; but
a few samples cannot be so assigned. Four clay
samples are members of this group but none can
be confidently assigned to any of the subgroups.

54

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 8. Bivariate plot of chromium and zinc showing the separation of the three large Groups and the unassigned
samples. Ellipses represent 90 percent conﬁdence intervals for membership in the group.

The clays are from Coleman, McCulloch, Kerr,
and Uvalde counties.
Group 12A
Fourteen samples, two from 41TG45, two
from 41TG91, two from 41CN95, one each from
41SS51 and 41SS110, two from 41TV40, and one
each from 41BL104, 41UV21, 41WM437, and
41VV188 are in Group 12A (Figure 13). All are
Leon Plain except for one Boothe Brushed sherd
from the Collins site (41TV40) and one possible
Goliad Plain from 41WM437 (Rowe Valley).
Based on sample provenience, production is inferred to be the upper Concho/Colorado drainage
area. Movement of vessels was widespread, particularly along the Colorado River.

Group 12B
Forty-six samples are in Group 12B, all Leon
Plain (or plain bone-tempered from Lower Pecos
sites and not given a type name) except for a single
painted, bone-tempered sample from 41TV40. One
sample is engraved Leon Plain1 from 41TG45. Most
are from sites in the upper Colorado/Concho drainage,
especially well represented in Tom Green County and
the Ivie Reservoir area (Figure 14). Several samples
are from sites in the Lower Pecos (Val Verde County),
and additional samples occur singly throughout most
of Central Texas to the Balcones Escarpment, mostly in
the Colorado River drainage. A few samples are from
the Abilene area. Based on sample provenience, production is inferred to be the upper Concho/Colorado
drainage area. Movement of vessels was widespread,
particularly along the Colorado River.

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

al
ad
Gu

Group 1
1
2

Shared Toyah Area

r

e
nd

ive

a
Gr

Classic Toyah Area

eR
up

o
Ri

3

Figure 9. Distribution of Group 1A, 1B, and 1C members.

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

al
ad
Gu
ive
r

Figure 10. Distribution of Group 7 members.

eR
up

e
nd

Shared Toyah Area

a
Gr

Classic Toyah Area

o
Ri

Group 7
1
2

55

56

Texas Archeological Society

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

al
ad
Gu
eR
up

o
Ri

Group 9

ive

Shared Toyah Area

r

e
nd

Classic Toyah Area

a
Gr

6

Figure 11. Distribution of Group 9 members.

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

Group 12
1
2-3

al
ad
Gu

4-5

ive
r

Figure 12. Distribution of all Group 12 members (includes Subgroups 12A, 12B, and 12C)

eR
up

e
nd

Shared Toyah Area

a
Gr

Classic Toyah Area

o
Ri

8

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics

57

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

Figure 11. Distribution of Group 9 members.
do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

al
ad
Gu

Shared Toyah Area

r

e
nd

ive

a
Gr

Classic Toyah Area

eR
up

o
Ri

Group 12a
1
2

Figure 13. Distribution of Group 12A members.

Group 12C
Sixteen samples are in Group 12C, all Leon
Plain, including one red-slipped specimen from
41KM226. Most samples are from the Concho River
drainage, with a couple from the Abilene area and
down the Colorado River to the Balcones Escarpment and in Kimble County (Figure 15). Based on
sample provenience, production is inferred to be the
Concho/Colorado drainage area. Movement of vessels was widespread but apparently did not extend
to the Lower Pecos area.
Group 13
Group 13 contains four samples, three Leon
Plain and one untyped sherd containing sand
and mica (no bone noted). Two samples are from
41CN-Coleman 1:12, one Leon Plain and the
untyped sherd. Others are from adjacent Runnels
and San Saba county sites 41RN163 and 41SS20
(Figure 16). The restricted distribution in the upper
Colorado drainage is presumed to reﬂect production somewhere in that area, with movement of
vessels in a limited area.

Group 15
There are 10 samples in Group 15, mostly
Leon Plain or untyped plain sherds with sand and
mica. As shown in Figure 17, all are from sites
along the Colorado River from the Concho conﬂuence to the Balcones Escarpment, except for two
samples from Buckhollow (41KM16). Production
locale is presumably within the area of occurrence
but cannot be more speciﬁcally deﬁned at present.
Movement of vessels seems to be primarily along
the Colorado River.
Cluster B
Cluster B is basically the opposite of Cluster A,
with members from sites primarily along the Balcones Escarpment and onto the coastal plain. Most
of these ceramics were almost certainly made from
Wilcox Formation clays that are available in a narrow zone just below the escarpment. Typologically,
the members are Leon Plain, Goliad Plain, untyped
sandy paste, and Boothe Brushed, the great majority
being the ﬁrst two types. Most samples are in one of

58

Texas Archeological Society

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

al
ad
Gu

Group 12b
1
2
3

Shared Toyah Area

r

e
nd

ive

a
Gr

eR
up

o
Ri

4
Classic Toyah Area

Figure 14. Distribution of Group 12B members.

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

al
ad
Gu
ive
r

Figure 15. Distribution of Group 12C members.

eR
up

e
nd

Shared Toyah Area

a
Gr

Classic Toyah Area

o
Ri

Group 12c
1
2
3

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

al
ad
Gu

Shared Toyah Area

r

e
nd

ive

a
Gr

Classic Toyah Area

eR
up

o
Ri

Group 13
1
2

Figure 16. Distribution of Group 13 members.

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

al
ad
Gu
ive
r

Figure 17. Distribution of Group 15 members.

eR
up

e
nd

Shared Toyah Area

a
Gr

Classic Toyah Area

o
Ri

Group 15
1
2

59

60

Texas Archeological Society

the three subgroups of Group 10, and are from sites
along the escarpment or on the coastal plain (many are
also historic). However, there are scattered samples all
the way out into west central Texas, most of which are
Leon Plain. At this point, we infer that the west central
Texas samples reﬂect movement of pots from the escarpment production zone out west; there are various
potential explanations for this as discussed below.
Group 4
There are seven samples in this group, three
Leon Plain and three untyped plain (one with bone
temper and two with sand, one possibly being
Goose Creek Plain). The samples are from widely
dispersed sites, although two are from 41BX980
and one is from nearby 41ME102 (Figure 18).
This slight concentration in the San Antonio area
is suggestive of production there.
Group 8
This group has four samples, all Leon Plain.
Three are from 41TG45, the other from 41UV137
(Figure 19). Based on the dominance of samples
from southern Tom Green County, speciﬁcally
the 41TG45 area, production could be reasonably
inferred to have been that locale. However, the
members of this group are more similar chemically
to those in other Cluster B groups, and the interpretation currently favored here is that the production
locale is more likely the Balcones Escarpment
zone, possibly in the Uvalde County area.
Group 10
Group 10 is one of the two largest groups in
the entire Central Texas dataset (n=92 exclusive
of 14 clay samples and 22 Caddo pottery samples
with relatively high probabilities of membership
as discussed below). In contrast to the other large
group (Group 12), Group 10 is decidedly concentrated in sites along the Balcones Escarpment
from the San Antonio area northeast to the greater
Austin area but with members scattered all through
Central Texas and on the Gulf Coastal Plain (Figure
20). It has been divided into three subgroups, A,
B, and C, with all archeological ceramic samples
assigned to a subgroup. Fourteen clay samples are
members of this group but none can be conﬁdently
assigned to any of the subgroups. Many of the clays
are from Wilcox Formation sources just below the

Balcones Escarpment, but others are from various
parts of Central Texas, including some from west
central Texas (Coleman and Menard counties). Approximately 40 percent of the members are from
Mission Refugio in Refugio County.
A number of Caddo pottery samples have high
probabilities of membership in Group 10 (n=22 with
probabilities greater than 3 percent), and several more
have lower probabilities. These are not included in the
Group 10 count above because of the considerable
overlap between Group 10 and most of the previously analyzed Caddo pottery samples from Caddo
sites in East Texas (over a thousand of which have
been run to date). This overlap is probably a result of
the fact that the Wilcox formation outcrop extends
from the narrow band along the Balcones Escarpment to a much wider and even dominant exposure in
northeast Texas. While probability of membership in
Group 10 may be quite high, this does not necessarily
imply production of Caddo vessels in Central Texas,
although this cannot be ruled out on compositional
or other grounds. Typologically and technologically,
most, if not all, of these samples seem likely to have
been Caddo area products. However, during this
study, a few samples that have a general appearance
of Caddo pottery were identiﬁed as possibly having
been made in Central Texas due to various attributes.
Some of these may well have been made in Central
Texas, and this is one of the more interesting research
topics to be addressed later in this article.
Group 10A
This subgroup has 24 members, four of them
Leon Plain from four sites along the Balcones
Escarpment, 16 being Goliad Plain from Mission
Refugio, and the other four being untyped sandy
paste plain sherds from Mission Refugio (Figure
21). Production is presumed to have been somewhere along the Balcones Escarpment for the
Leon Plain and perhaps with the Goliad Plain and
untyped sandy paste pottery, although it is also possible that the clay for the Mission Refugio samples
was transported from the source to the mission.
Group 10B
This subgroup has 57 members, 21 of which are
Goliad Plain or untyped sandy paste plain from Mission Refugio, the remainder mostly from a number
of sites along the Balcones Escarpment from the San
Antonio area to around Austin (Figure 22). Others

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

al
ad
Gu

Shared Toyah Area

r

e
nd

ive

a
Gr

Classic Toyah Area

eR
up

o
Ri

Group 4
1
2

Figure 18. Distribution of Group 4 members.

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

al
ad
Gu
ive
r

Figure 19. Distribution of Group 8 members.

eR
up

e
nd

Shared Toyah Area

a
Gr

Classic Toyah Area

o
Ri

Group 8
1
3

61

62

Texas Archeological Society

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

Group 10
1
2-3

al
ad
Gu

4-5

Shared Toyah Area

r

e
nd

ive

a
Gr

Classic Toyah Area

eR
up

o
Ri

43

Figure 20. Distribution of all Group 10 members (includes Subgroups 10A, 10B, and 10C).

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

al
ad
Gu
ive
r

Figure 21. Distribution of Group 10A members.

eR
up

e
nd

Shared Toyah Area

a
Gr

Classic Toyah Area

o
Ri

Group 10a
1
20

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics
occur in sites between the Gulf coast and the escarpment as well as in sites scattered across Central and
west central Texas. Typologically, the members are
Leon Plain (n=15), Goliad Plain (n=26), untyped
bone-tempered plain (n=8), and untyped sandy paste
plain (n=8). All of the Goliad Plain is from the historic components of Carvajal Crossing (41KA26B)
and Mission Refugio. Samples with predominantly
sandy paste are from Sandbur (41FY135) and Mission Refugio, with a very few others from widely
distributed sites. At present, it is impossible to deﬁne
the production area, but it is likely somewhere in
the Wilcox Formation outcropping just below the
Balcones Escarpment. The greatest concentration of
members in the San Antonio area suggests production
there, but the number in the Austin area is comparable. Indeed, production for this group may have
been in the zone from San Antonio to Austin and not
a more speciﬁc locale.
Group 10C
This subgroup has 11 members, six being
Leon Plain, one probable Leon Plain, two Goliad

Plain, one Boothe Brushed, and one untyped sandy
plain. In general, the geographic distribution of the
samples is much like that of Group 10B, and the
production area is presumed to be the same (Figure
23). However, the distribution has an interesting
difference, that being the occurrence of four members, all Leon Plain, in three sites in southern Tom
Green County in west central Texas, well northwest
of the main area of occurrence. There is also an
untyped plain sample from Irion County just west
of the others. It is not clear how this geographically
disjunct group of samples is to be interpreted.
Group 11
With 42 members, Group 11 is one of the three
largest compositional groups in the dataset; overall,
it is much like Group 10 in distribution. As shown in
Figure 24, most of the members are Goliad Plain from
two sites, Carvajal Crossing in Karnes County (n=7)
and Mission Refugio (n=28). The remaining samples
are Leon Plain (n=2), untyped plain (n=3), and untyped sandy paste plain (n=2). While most members
are historic period ceramics from Mission Refugio

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co

al
ad
Gu
ive
r

Figure 22. Distribution of Group 10B members.

eR
up

e
nd

Shared Toyah Area

a
Gr

Classic Toyah Area

o
Ri

21

r
ve
Ri

Group 10b
1
2
4
5

63

64

Texas Archeological Society

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

al
ad
Gu
r

e
nd

Shared Toyah Area

ive

a
Gr

Classic Toyah Area

eR
up

o
Ri

Group 10c
1
2

Figure 23. Distribution of Group 10C members.

and Carvajal Crossing, the prehistoric samples are
from sites along the Balcones Escarpment, like Group
10, in addition to two untyped plain members from
the TP&L site in McLennan County near Waco.
One clay sample from Burnet County has a very
slight probability of membership, but this is likely
coincidental and without signiﬁcance. At present, the
production area for this group is unknown, although
it is possible it was in the Wilcox Formation outcrop
in the San Antonio-Austin area.
Group 14
This group has 11 members, eight of which
are from Mission Refugio (six Goliad Plain and
two untyped sandy paste plain). The remaining
members are one Goose Creek Plain sherd from
the Sandbur site in Fayette County, one Leon Plain
from the Beyer site in Williamson County, and one
untyped plain sherd (with bone and sand temper)
from 41TV441 in Travis County (Figure 25). Were
it not for the members from Mission Refugio, the
occurrence of the other samples in the area of

Travis, Williamson, and Fayette counties could
suggest production somewhere in that vicinity.
Historic Period Compositional Groups
Not included in the preceding discussion of
clusters and compositional groups are four sitespeciﬁc groups of historic ceramics. Two of the
groups have members (in this sample only) from
Mission San Sabá in Menard County (Groups 2 and
6), one group is from Carvajal Crossing in Karnes
County (Group 3), and the other is from Mission
Refugio (Group 5).
There are two groups speciﬁc to Mission San
Sabá in Menard County, one with two burnished
red ware sherds (Group 2), the other with six
Goliad Plain members (Group 6). Both groups
represent ceramics believed to have been brought
to the mission at its founding (see discussion of
Goliad Plain below). Interestingly, there is one
other Goliad Plain sample from Mission San Sabá,
and it is assigned to Group 1, a group with mostly
Leon Plain probably produced in the Mission San

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

Group 11
1
2

al
ad
Gu

7

Shared Toyah Area

r

e
nd

ive

a
Gr

Classic Toyah Area

eR
up

o
Ri

30

Figure 24. Distribution of Group 11 members.

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

al
ad
Gu
ive
r

Figure 25. Distribution of Group 14 members.

eR
up

e
nd

Shared Toyah Area

a
Gr

Classic Toyah Area

o
Ri

Group 14
1
8

65

66

Texas Archeological Society

Sabá area. Surprisingly and inexplicably, two burned
daub samples from Mission San Sabá have high
probabilities of membership in Group 10 as does a
clay sample from nearby 41MN55, suggesting that
the historic ceramics from the mission were made
elsewhere and brought there.
The small groups of Goliad Plain from Carvajal Crossing and Mission Refugio are similarly
interesting because they further indicate the diversity of clay sources used in the production of
historic native-made pottery. At Carvajal Crossing, for example, the 20 Goliad Plain samples fall
into three compositional groups (3, 10B, and 11);
the Goliad Plain from Mission Refugio falls into
six groups. These ceramics and groups are not
discussed further here because they are reported
in detail by Ferguson (2012) and McWilliams and
Boyd (2012:Chapter 15).

CERAMIC PRODUCTION BY TYPE

There is a hint that Leon Plain is more common
in west central Texas (that is, from San Saba County
west and northwest). But regardless of relative
proportions, most of the Leon Plain in the Edwards
Plateau/west central Texas area was presumably
made there, an assessment based on clay members
in Group 12. Not only was most Leon Plain found
there made in this west central Texas production
area, but Leon Plain was, so far as we know, the only
pottery made there. Essentially all pottery made in
this area was plain and bone-tempered, although a
small amount lacked bone temper and the rare piece
was engraved, incised, or painted.
A considerable amount of Leon Plain was
also evidently made at locales along the Balcones
Escarpment, probably from the clay sources in the
Wilcox Formation; this is the Leon Plain in Cluster
B compositional groups. In contrast to Cluster A,
however, nearly two-thirds of the samples from sites
in counties along the Balcones Escarpment could not
be assigned to a compositional group.

Leon Plain
This pottery type represents the largest portion
of the dataset with 257 samples, and it was the focus
of the research effort. Slightly less than half of the
Leon Plain samples were assigned to a compositional group, due in part to the conservative level of
conﬁdence used to deﬁne membership. Thus, many
of the samples unassigned to a compositional group
herein are probably members of the larger groups,
10, 11, and 12; but it is also possible that additional
compositional groups may be deﬁned as the overall
sample increases in size.
One of the more interesting and surprising
results of this project is the fact that most of the
Leon Plain (and many of the plain bone-tempered
samples not assigned to pottery type) is in Cluster
A compositional groups whose members are overwhelmingly from the Edwards Plateau, west central
Texas in particular. In part, this reﬂects the larger
portion of the sample from sites in west central
Texas, but it is difﬁcult to know if this is reﬂecting
only geographic bias in our sample. Approximately
40 percent of the Leon Plain from sites in the area
from about San Saba County west and northwest
could not be assigned to a compositional group.
Membership of Cluster A compositional groups
is wholly or predominantly Leon Plain, the others
being untyped bone-tempered plain (and probably
Leon Plain) except for one plain ware apparently
without bone temper.

Doss Red
Only three samples speciﬁcally typed as Doss
Red by the original analyst were included in this
study, although several others had evidence of
thin, fugitive red slips or washes (as previously
discussed). Only one of the three was assigned to a
group (Group 7, Lehmann Rockshelter), the others
being currently unassigned.
Boothe Brushed
Three samples of Boothe Brushed and one possible Boothe Brushed were analyzed in this study.
Two are from the Collins site (41TV40), one in
Group 10C, the other in Group 12A. The sample
from Mustang Branch (41HY209-T) is unassigned
as is the possible Boothe Brushed from Rowe Valley
(41WM437). The latter is more similar chemically
to Caddo pottery and it is likely that the sample
was actually from a Caddo brushed vessel and not
Boothe Brushed. The very limited information currently available indicates production in different
areas and movement over considerable distance.
Goliad Plain
Goliad Plain, the bone-tempered ceramic considered by some to be the historic period nativemade mission pottery descendent from Leon Plain,

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics
constitutes the second largest typological category in
the dataset with 120 samples (includes one possible
Goliad Plain sherd from Rowe Valley, 41WM437).
These derive from four sites, most from Mission
Refugio. Goliad Plain falls into nine compositional
groups, including all three subgroups of Group 10.
All of the Goliad Plain from Mission San Sabá is in
Group 6, in contrast to the multiple groups represented in the larger samples from Mission Refugio
and Carvajal Crossing. This difference is likely due
in part to the very short existence of Mission San
Sabá, during which all of the pottery present was
evidently brought on the original founding expedition compared to the substantially longer period of
use of Mission Refugio, which allowed for resupplying multiple times. In addition, unlike the situation
at Mission Refugio, there were never any native
neophytes at Mission San Sabá to make Goliad Plain
(McWilliams and Boyd 2012).
Caddo Ceramics
A total of 113 samples of pottery identiﬁed to
speciﬁc type or, due to original sherd size, only as
Caddo based on one or more technological or surface
treatment attributes are in the dataset. Represented
are most of the prehistoric and historic pottery types
from the Hasinai Caddo area of central east Texas.
Caddo pottery occurs widely and consistently in
Central Texas, mostly from brushed vessels. Kelley
reports two sherds of the historic Patton Engraved
type from the Loma Alta site in the La Junta area in
far West Texas (Kelley 1986:83).
A few of the Caddo sherds in the present study
have good probabilities of membership in Central
Texas compositional groups, primarily Group 10;
but the rather considerable chemical similarity
between the clays from the Wilcox formation in
Central Texas though East Texas precludes a deﬁnitive discrimination. The difﬁculty in interpreting
Caddo ceramic NAA data is discussed at length
by Ferguson (2007; see also Perttula and Ferguson 2010). Essentially all Caddo pottery samples
with substantial probabilities of membership in a
Central Texas compositional group (as well as in
Caddo chemical compositional groups) are from
the Waco, Belton, to Austin area, mostly from the
vicinity of Waco, Temple, and Belton. Practically
none of the many Caddo pottery samples from
the Edwards Plateau/west central Texas area has
a meaningful probability of membership in any of
the Central Texas compositional groups. At present

67

it is impossible to know if this has any signiﬁcance.
In general, our data do not permit a conﬁdent determination of whether some Caddo pottery may
have been made in Central Texas, but they do not
preclude this possibility.

NAA AND PETROGRAPHIC
ANALYSIS
As noted previously, several of the samples
used in this analysis had been previously subjected
to petrographic analysis (Kittleman 1994; ReeseTaylor 1995), and an effort was made to correlate
the results of the two different analyses. Unfortunately, in some cases, it was not possible to link
sample numbers, and there is some inconsistency in
the petrographic groups from analysis to analysis.
In addition, because a majority of the NAA samples
could not be assigned to compositional groups, the
results are difﬁcult to interpret. In general, however, vessels that had bone as the principal tempering material and had little or no sand either as a
natural inclusion or as an added tempering agent,
were in NAA Group 12B. In contrast, vessels that
had sand were more likely to be in NAA Group
10B or, in one case, Group 15. Samples with bone
and carbonate temper, all from either the Rush site
(41TG346) or the Rocky Branch site (41RN169),
were unassigned.
Leon Plain and Compositional
Group Distributions
In our effort to assess how the NAA data on
Leon Plain and the other, less numerous, types may
reﬂect on native group mobility and territories, we
have made a number of assumptions. We acknowledge that these assumptions could, in part or all, be
invalid and that there may well be other, potentially
more plausible bases for interpretation of our NAA
data. Nonetheless, we present these assumptions
here as the basis for an initial assessment in large
part because there is either some ethnohistoric,
archeological, or comparative anthropological
basis for them.
First, based on well-known cross cultural
data, we have assumed that the native hunting and
gathering groups of Central Texas in the Late Prehistoric and early historic periods were generally
patrilineal or bilateral in descent system and probably practiced patrilocal post-marital residence.

68

Texas Archeological Society

Second, based on ethnohistoric data, we assume
that prehistorically these native groups had more
or less speciﬁc territories that may have overlapped
that of other contemporaneous, distinct groups.
Third, we have assumed that pottery was made by
women, although to our knowledge there is only one
case of ethnohistoric documentation of pottery making by women. In 1783, Cardenas (quoted in Ricklis
1999) praised the pottery-making skills of the native
women at Mission Espíritu Santo (modern Goliad);
it is here assumed that that skill was part of a longstanding tradition among native groups.
Fourth, vessels are assumed to have been made
for use by the maker and her (and/or, perhaps, his)
group, not for exchange (although this could well
have occurred to some extent). One basis for this
assumption is that, to our knowledge, no Leon
Plain has yet been found in Caddo assemblages
or in the La Junta area. And last, we assume that
pottery vessels were primarily either water containers in the case of the narrow neck jars, or were for
cooking in the case of wide mouth jars and bowls.
Use of some vessels for boiling fat from bones
at the Rush site was argued by Quigg and Peck
(1995:146-148), and one of the typical occurrences
in Toyah phase sites is quantities of much fractured
bison/deer bone that was probably boiled to render
fat. And in fact, there is ethnohistoric documentation of native groups in Central Texas rendering fat
(type of container not noted, see Wade [2003:221]).
Not all Leon Plain vessels, however, would have
been suitable for either of these general uses; the
very small shallow bowls, for example, may have
been serving/eating vessels.
As noted previously, one of the key issues of
interest is the geographic distribution of each compositional group as it may inform on native group
mobility and territory size in Central Texas. The
compositional group distribution maps are highly
informative, although unfortunately, we are forced
to evaluate our data as if all samples were contemporaneous despite the probability of a few centuries being represented by the members in most groups. As
currently deﬁned, the geographic area of individual
compositional groups ranges from a single site to
most of Central Texas. But even in those groups with
large areas, the great majority of samples are within
about 150 km (100 miles) of one another.
The site-specific groups, Group 1A from
41MN55 and Group 9 from 41KM69 being good
examples, indicate that vessels were made from
locally available clays but were not moved from

that locality. Whether the current compositional
group membership reﬂects very limited production and brief vessel life or perhaps reﬂects longer
stays in those localities is unknown. Alternatively,
the present sample may be insufﬁcient to reveal
the existence of additional members in other sites.
Groups 7, 13, and 15 are examples of groups
whose distribution covers an area up to 150 km
or so across. In the present sample, none of these
groups has many members; but they may still be
quite informative about group mobility. The areas
are comparable to, or not much larger than, the
hypothetical Jumano community territories deﬁned
by Arnn (2012a:Figure 8.10) at about 1600 km2 and
are perhaps comparable to the marriage groups also
discussed by Arnn (2012a:213-233). The distribution of compositional group members suggests
that areas over which pottery vessels were made,
transported, and used were something like 100-150
km or so in size, more comparable to Arnn’s marriage/linguistic group territory size. There is some
overlap in the distribution of most groups.
At a larger scale are compositional groups
whose distribution covers most of Central Texas.
Groups 10B, 10C, 12A, 12B, and 12C have such
large geographic distributions. As shown in Figures
13-15, Groups 12A, 12B, and 12C are heavily centered on the Concho-Colorado river area of west
central Texas but with signiﬁcant numbers of members throughout Central Texas as far as the Balcones Escarpment zone, including several members
from the Lower Pecos area in Val Verde County
(although not typed by the original analysts, these
are Leon Plain by all criteria). Group 12A seems
largely a Concho-Colorado river drainage group
well represented as far as the Balcones Escarpment area. Group 12C is similar but is much more
concentrated in the upper Colorado and Concho
River areas. Group 12B is much like 12A and 12C
but has substantial representation at several sites in
the Lower Pecos area. As noted previously, we do
not know if the distribution of Group 12B is more
or less continuous from the upper Colorado and
Concho River areas to the Lower Pecos because we
have no samples from the area in between.
In general, the concentration of Group 12
members in the upper Colorado and Concho River
areas suggests that pottery vessels were made from
clays available there; and in fact, there are a few
clay members in Group 12, two from the Colorado
River valley in Coleman and McCulloch counties.
Evidently, most of these vessels were used and

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics
broken in the general area of production, but some
appear to have been moved considerable distances
to the east and south, as far as the Lower Pecos
and Balcones Escarpment areas. The larger scale
of mobility that these compositional groups suggest
is reﬂective of the mobility patterns of the Jumano
in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries (Kenmotsu and Arnn 2012:27-36). Based on
their own description, the Jumano, accompanied
by the Cíbolo, made what appears to have been a
nearly annual journey from their homelands on the
Concho-Colorado river area to La Junta (modern
Presidio, Texas), then moving back east through
Central Texas to the Caddo, sometimes swinging
south through the Lower Pecos before reaching the
Caddo, and eventually returning home.
By contrast, the non-Goliad Plain members of
Groups 4, 10A, 10B, 10C, and 11 are heavily concentrated along the Balcones Escarpment from the
San Antonio area northeast to the Austin area. Given this distribution and the membership in Group
10 of Wilcox Formation clays, it is likely that these
samples were produced in this region along the escarpment. Along the escarpment, samples are from
sites in canyons of the Edwards Plateau as well as
from the Blackland Prairie and Post Oak Belt. In
a general sense, one can compare this occurrence
with the territory of the historic period Eastern
Sanan linguistic group (Arnn 2012a:Figure 8.5;
Johnson and Campbell 1992:Figure 1), although
the latter may have been somewhat less extensive
than the distribution of Group 4, 10A, 10B, 10C,
and 11 members along the Balcones Escarpment.
Whether the Eastern Sanan-speaking groups were
actually the makers of Leon Plain along the Balcones Escarpment is currently unknown, but the
fact that they were historically documented in that
area toward the end of the period when Leon Plain
was made there suggests that they were in fact the
makers. If so, one might infer that they had been
in that area for several centuries.
The membership of Group 10C is particularly
interesting in that the Leon Plain and other presumably prehistoric plain wares are about equally from
sites in the escarpment zone and the Concho River
drainage in west central Texas, especially on the
South Concho, with no samples from the intervening area. If the statistical deﬁnition of this group
reﬂects prehistoric reality, one could speculate that
pottery made along the Balcones Escarpment was
taken by one or more hunter-gatherer groups who
went to the Concho River area, a distance of some

69

300 km. An alternate interpretation, favored here,
is that groups from the Concho River area traveled
to the Balcones Escarpment as recorded in the
ethnohistoric documents (AGN 1691; Kenmotsu
2001; Terán 1968), taking pots with them and returning with vessels (and other items and perhaps
wives) from that area. If the lack of Group 10C
members from the intervening area is real, this suggests that the trips were reasonably fast, at least fast
enough that no vessel was broken along the way.
Of course, it is also possible that a less conservative assignment of samples to compositional group
might result in some samples from the intervening
area becoming members of Group 10C.
As a set, Groups 4, 10B, and 10C have members scattered across Central Texas, west through
the Concho River drainage and north into the Clear
Fork of the Brazos valley around Abilene. The
distribution of Group 10C members is somewhat
different, as noted previously, but together the
distributions suggest pottery production along the
Balcones Escarpment, with transportation of modest numbers of vessels north and west throughout
the Edwards Plateau, somewhat concentrated in the
Concho River drainage area.
Group 13 is interesting not only in its limited
distribution along the Colorado River in Coleman,
Runnels, and San Saba counties (see Figure 16), but
also as it may relate to a potential boundary zone
between two cultural group territories tentatively
identiﬁed by Arnn (2012a:222). Among a number
of Late Prehistoric sites investigated in west central
Texas, the occurrence of unlined hearths (that is,
hearths without a rock lining) is north of the Colorado River at its conﬂuence with the Concho. To
an extent, the distributions of the unlined hearths
and Group 13 ceramics overlap, and it may well be
that there was a territorial boundary of some sort
along the Colorado River in Late Prehistoric and/
or early historic times. Conversely, most of the
Group 12 members, as well as Groups 7 and 15,
are from sites in this same general area but south
of the Colorado River where hearths are generally
rock-lined. Typologically, however, there is no perceptible difference in the ceramics between Group
13 and the other groups (1, 8, 9, and 12) believed
to have been made in west central Texas.
Is there a reasonable link between compositional group areas and native group territories and
mobility? In a general sense, the answer seems to
be yes. Most notably, as shown in Figure 26, the
distributions of compositional groups in Cluster A

70

Texas Archeological Society

are quite similar to the core territory of the Jumano
and closely afﬁliated native groups; that is, the area
of the Concho River, San Saba, and perhaps Llano
river drainages as it was documented ethnohistorically through the A.D. 1600s (AGI 1688; AGN
1682-1683; Ayer 1965; BN 1631; Posada 1962). All
members of some small Cluster A groups fall in this
general area as do most of the members of the larger
compositional groups (12A, 12B, and 12C), implying that these pottery vessels were made and used in
that region. Chronologically, a link with the Jumano
is plausible because of the occurrence of historic
Caddo pottery (Patton Engraved, Bullard Brushed,
etc.) in sites that also have Leon Plain and comparable radiocarbon dates from the Toyah components
at the Rush site (41TG346) in Tom Green County.
The scattered occurrences of Leon Plain from west
central Texas compositional groups beyond this core
area are consistent with documented extensive travels of the Jumano and other closely afﬁliated native
groups (Arnn 2012a; Wade 1998, 2003).
Interestingly, Cluster B compositional groups
have the opposite distributions: members are heavily concentrated along the Balcones Escarpment
from San Antonio to the Austin area, but some are
scattered throughout the area of the present sample
(Figure 27). As noted earlier, this suggests that
pottery vessels in these compositional groups were
made along the escarpment and were, in limited
numbers, sometimes moved substantial distances
to the west and northwest. The ethnic identity of
the makers of pottery in Cluster B compositional
groups is unknown, although as noted previously,
there is a possible linkage with Eastern Sanan
groups in the eastern escarpment zone.
If women made the pottery, learned how to
do so from their mothers and other women in that
group, and then, upon marriage, moved to the husband’s group and territory, this would be a plausible
explanation for typological homogeneity in Leon
Plain over Central Texas. Occasional capturing of
wives and of young girls who had learned pottery
making is also consistent with the typological homogeneity (capturing was not infrequently reported
to have occurred in the ethnohistoric documents).
Similarly, the chemical variability in clays available in the different geologic formations exposed
in Central Texas could well yield the compositional
groups identiﬁed in this study. Indeed, in the absence of recognized patterned variability in other
attributes of Leon Plain (such as vessel form or red
slipping), chemical differences in clays used for

pottery manufacture are perhaps the most readily
accessible kind of evidence for identifying group
territories. In fact, our compositional group data
may well have revealed at least a muted indication of ethnic group territories, perhaps something
along the lines of Arnn’s proposed Jumano marriage/linguistic groups or even his more restricted
community territories.
If the compositional groups identiﬁed in this
study reﬂect real differences that relate to native
group distinctions at some organizational level,
we can escape the typological constraints that
have long dominated research on Toyah phase sites
and ask new questions. As was noted previously,
some archeologists now believe it more appropriate to consider Leon Plain as a ceramic tradition
rather than a ceramic type. In terms of the Leon
Plain/Doss Red typological distinction, the data
presented here can be interpreted in a number of
different ways; but in our view, analysts are often
unable to consistently detect fugitive red slipping,
or more commonly, red washing, on these bonetempered vessels. Thus, in this analysis, the range
of variation is too great for a type distinction with
meaningful conﬁdence, but we would support an
analysis focusing on the speciﬁc issue of the typological validity of Doss Red.
More generally, our data suggest that there are
at least two major sets of bone-tempered plain ware
(Leon Plain/Doss Red broadly deﬁned) in Central
Texas, one occurring mostly in the Balcones Escarpment zone (our Cluster B), the other mostly to
the northwest and west (our Cluster A). So far as
we currently know, these differ only in chemical
composition, although it is entirely possible that
differences in vessel form and perhaps other attributes may be revealed by an analysis focusing
on such variables. How the chemical variation
relates to the question of Leon Plain being a “type”
versus a ceramic tradition is unclear, but perhaps
any assessment of typological validity should be
tempered (so to speak) by expectations of what
may be a widely variable geographic distribution
of material culture among mobile hunter-gatherers
as opposed to sedentary agriculturalists.

SITES WITH LARGER
NUMBERS OF SAMPLES
If the generally small number of samples per
site, but from a large number of sites in a large

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

1
6
7
9
12
12a
12b
12c
13
15

al
ad
Gu

Classic Toyah Area

r

e
nd

ive

a
Gr

eR
up

o
Ri

Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group

Shared Toyah Area

Figure 26. Geographic distributions of the Cluster A compositional groups.

o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

do
ra
lo
Co
r
ve
Ri

al
ad
Gu
r

Figure 27. Geographic distributions of the Cluster B compositional groups.

ive

e
nd

Shared Toyah Area

eR
up

a
Gr

Classic Toyah Area

o
Ri

3
4
5
8
10a
10b
10c
11
14

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group

71

72

Texas Archeological Society

geographic area, yields some conﬁdence in the
compositional group distributions, a rather different view of ceramic occurrence in Central Texas
comes from sites from which we have larger numbers of NAA samples. It is important to note that
the number of NAA samples per site is likely biased to a signiﬁcant extent on the basis of available
material (in known and accessible collections).
This availability is, in turn, based on the number of
ceramics at a particular site as well as a number of
sampling biases such as surface collection versus
excavation, often the very small size of sherds, the
similarity of the pottery to the soil, ground surface
visibility during surface collection, intensity of
surface collections, extent of excavation, size of
site, whether pot breaks were encountered during
excavations, and the extent to which we could
conﬁdently distinguish vessel batches in collections. Thus, in the present dataset, it is probable
that the number of samples from a given site is, in
most cases, simply a matter of sampling and not
necessarily a reﬂection of actual number of pottery
vessels present.
On the other hand, it is entirely possible that
some of the sites represented in this sample actually had substantially larger numbers of vessels.
This could be due to a number of factors including
intensity of occupation, length of site use, and even
special characteristics of the sites relative to suitability/desirability of occasionally larger population aggregations. The ethnohistoric record reveals
clearly that some sites were the location of large,
interethnic, group aggregations often referred to
as “fairs” (Kenmotsu and Arnn 2012:28-29). It
is reasonable to infer that such sites may have
contained larger numbers and greater diversity of
pottery vessels (as well as other forms of material
culture). Ceramically, we might expect there to be
greater typological variability in such sites, and,
in fact, there are a number of sites with mostly
locally made bone-tempered plain wares as well
as the occasional vessel from the Caddo area, the
Gulf coast, and even the Southwest. It is difﬁcult to
know if any of the sites represented in this sample
was a “fair” location or if the greater numbers of
vessels and/or greater typological variability is
simply a function of sample size.
In any event, in the present sample, the number of chemical compositional groups represented
in a particular site is generally a function of the
number of samples from that site. Table 5 presents
the data on those sites with at least seven samples

(included only if at least one sample is assigned to
a compositional group). This table illustrates the
fact that a site with more samples is likely to have
more compositional groups represented, although
this is clouded by the large number of currently
unassigned samples. What this increased diversity
in compositional groups might mean is uncertain,
although there are various potential factors that
may cause it. These include length of period of occupation (one occupation episode only versus regular and repeated use over four centuries), changes
in ethnic groups occupying the site over time, and
more or less contemporaneous use by different
groups (including the “fair” type of occupation).
These are not necessarily mutually exclusive.
It is also useful to consider the data beyond the
site level of analysis, at clusters of nearby sites, for
example, and perhaps more meaningfully with the
present sample, at the county level. No detailed assessment at this level is presented here except for a
set of contrasts to illustrate the considerable differences across Central Texas. Two particularly interesting pairs are Taylor/Bexar and Tom Green/Travis
counties at opposite sides of the project area (Figure
28); the pertinent data are presented in Table 6.
There are 16 samples from six sites in Taylor
County and 26 samples from ﬁve sites in Bexar
County. Among the interesting differences are the
complete separation of assigned samples by compositional group cluster A versus B. That is, all
assigned samples from Taylor County are in Group
12, 12B, or 12C, primarily 12B. In marked contrast,
all of the assigned samples from Bexar County are
members of cluster B groups, particularly Groups
4, 10B, 10C, and 11. It is, of course, possible that
some of the currently unassigned samples from
both counties may eventually be assigned to groups
in other clusters, but the differences between the
two county areas are signiﬁcant and illustrative of
the general pattern discussed previously.
The data in Table 6 also illustrate the possible
effect of sample bias in the Tom Green and Travis
County pair. Travis has 28 samples, Tom Green, 51,
and with these somewhat larger samples, we see
representation of additional compositional groups.
While this may well be an effect of larger sample
numbers, it is also possible that the Colorado
River may have been an important travel corridor
between the Balcones Escarpment and the mixed
grasslands of the upper Colorado and Concho
river areas in west central Texas, an area for which
there is much ethnohistoric evidence that it was

7
7
12
18
8
8
15
10
7
8
8
9
8
9
Total in
Group

41NL13
41IR38
41TG91
41LL4/41SS2
41TG541
41KM16
41TG45
41TV40
41WM437
41HY209
41BX528
41BX980
41FY135
41HY163
0

9

1

1

7

2
2
1

2

31

15

1
1
3
1
3
1
3
2

4

1

3

0

4

2

2

15

3

2
1

4

3

3

8

1
1

32

16

2
2
4
4
4

6

1
1
2
1
1

1

1

Cluster B Groups
10A 10B 10C 11

* Caddo pottery samples with probability of membership in a central Texas compositional group and herein assigned

Total in
Cluster

Number
of INAA
Samples

Site

Cluster A Groups
12 12A 12B 12C 13

2

1
1

14

2*
2

2

3
2

2

Caddo or
other noncentral
Texas
sample

Table 5. Compositional group representation at sites with seven or more INAA samples.

6
4
4
12
2
2
3
4
1
4
4
2
2
8

Outlier/
Unassigned

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics
73

51
28

8

9

Tom
Green
Travis
-

-

-

-

2

4

-

-

2

11

5

-

-

3

1

-

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

2

4

-

3

-

-

2

-

-

-

3

1

-

7

** One Caddo pottery sherd from Taylor County has a good probability of membership in Group 12

1

-

-

1

1

4

-

2

1

-

-

2

1

-

-

-

Cluster B Groups
8 10 10 10 10 11 14
A B C

* One clay sample from Bexar County has a probability of membership in Group 10

16

6

Taylor

26

5

Bexar*

County Number Number Cluster A Groups
of Sites of INAA 12 12 12 12 15
Ceramic
A B C
Samples

14

26

6

4

8

7**

11

17

3

Total of
Caddo and Unassigned
Sherds
other non- (includes
Assigned
central
outliers)
to Clusters
Texas
A and B
sherds
14
0
12

Table 6. Compositional group and cluster representation of ceramics from Bexar, Taylor, Tom Green, and Travis counties.*

74
Texas Archeological Society

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics

75

6 of 16 sherds assigned to Cluster A groups
TAYLOR

26 of 51 sherds assigned to Cluster A (n=18)
and Cluster B (n=8) groups
TOM
GREEN
o
az
Br
s

s
co
Pe

er

er

v
Ri

v
Ri

TRAVIS

do
ra
lo
Co

13 of 28 sherds assigned to Cluster A (n=5)
and Cluster B (n=8) groups

r
ve
Ri

BEXAR
al
ad
Gu
r

e
nd

14 of 26 sherds assigned to
Cluster B groups
ive

a
Gr

Shared Toyah Area

eR
up

o
Ri

Classic Toyah Area

Figure 28. Locations of four counties—Bexar, Taylor, Tom Green, and Travis—with large ceramic samples and many
specimens assigned to clusters A or B. The total sample is 121 sherds from 28 sites in these four counties. Of these,
sherds from 20 sites are assigned to Cluster A (29 sherds) or Cluster B (30 sherds).

generally, but not always, a major bison hunting
area. The potential importance of the Colorado
River as a major prehistoric/early historic travel
route warrants further research.
In addition, we should consider with some
care the importance of the area where the Concho
joins the Colorado River in west central Texas.
Figures 26 and 27 provide a generalized rendition of compositional group distributions in geographic clusters A and B; note that in Figure 26,
the distributions of Groups 12A, 12B, and 12C
have been reduced somewhat by excluding the
outlying samples most distant from the geographic
concentration of most members. One of the most
interesting observations of these cluster A group
distributions is that most of them overlap at the
Concho/Colorado conﬂuence (this would be the
case even if full distributions were represented).
There are 27 ceramic samples from the conﬂuence area (the Paint Rock site to Ivie Reservoir at
the conﬂuence), a relatively modest count given
the number of compositional groups represented.

Therefore, this concentration of compositional
groups must be real and not likely reﬂective of
any sampling bias. This is the area documented by
the ethnohistoric records as the homeland of the
Jumano in the A.D. 1600s (see Kenmotsu 2001;
Wade 2003:218), and there are chronometric dates
in the 1600s from some sites there (Treece and
Lintz 1993:Table 6.1). At some point, we may want
to build on the interpretations of Treece and Lintz
(1993:442-444) and reevaluate the important data
from the pre-inundation excavations at O. H. Ivie
Reservoir. It may also be worthwhile to reconsider
the rock art at the Paint Rock site in light of the
ﬁndings of this NAA study.
CADDO POTTERY IN
CENTRAL TEXAS
Since quite a few Caddo sherds from Central
Texas sites were included in this study, a few
comments are pertinent. Many years ago, Krieger
mapped out the basic distribution of Caddo pottery

76

Texas Archeological Society

in Central Texas (Krieger 1946:Map). Since then,
we have added substantially to this in terms of
number of sherds and number of sites, but the
overall distribution is little modiﬁed. Early Caddo
pottery occurs in some quantities in the area from
the Brazos River valley around Waco south to the
Georgetown area, and Shafer (2006) has put forth
a plausible explanation for this occurrence in his
Prairie Caddo model. At that time, probably sometime in the period from A.D. 1000-1300 or 1400,
Caddo people, perhaps from the George C. Davis
site, established a substantial presence along the
eastern edge of Central Texas, with the hunting
of deer for meat and hides being a major activity.
The sociopolitical environment then was a difﬁcult
one as is reﬂected in the widespread occurrence
of violent deaths in this area (Baker 2001; Prewitt
1974). Violent deaths were also occurring in the
Abilene area at the same time, and there is evidence
there for the taking of trophy skulls and mandibles
presumably by outsiders. Schambach et al. (2011)
argues that this might have been done by early
Caddo people from the Crenshaw site in the Great
Bend of the Red River, in southwest Arkansas.
By contrast, the occurrence of Caddo pottery
in Central Texas after about A.D. 1400 is much
more widespread and, in our view, reﬂects the new
Caddo interest in hunting bison whose population
had just grown/expanded rather substantially on
the Southern Plains and into greater Central Texas.
Casañas (1968:44), a Spanish priest living among
the Hasinai Caddo in 1690, wrote that many of the
Hasinai men traveled six days west to hunt bison.
The most frequent type of Caddo pottery in Central
Texas is Bullard Brushed, the common utility ware
in central east Texas; but there are a number of
other Caddo pottery types (incised, engraved, etc.)
represented at late sites throughout much of Central
Texas. Although it is difﬁcult to assess, there is
some sense that Late Prehistoric and historic Caddo
pottery, primarily from the Hasinai area in central
east Texas, is considerably more common at sites
along streams in the Blackland Prairie just below
the Balcones Escarpment, from about the Colorado
River (maybe as far as the San Marcos River) north
to the Brazos River valley in the vicinity of Waco.
Many of these sites have hundreds of sherds representing many Caddo vessels, some Leon Plain and
Boothe Brushed sherds, and in some cases, even
types from the Gulf coast.
In this regard, it is important to note that
in 1542 the surviving members of De Soto’s

expedition tried to reach Mexico through Texas.
Leaving the Hasinai Caddo area and moving southwest, Bruseth and Kenmotsu (1993:216) argue they
reached the Guadalupe River, where they turned
back because people on the other side of the river
did not speak the language of the Indian (presumably Caddo) guides. A century and a half later,
Father Masanet accompanied Terán on his 1691
journey to East Texas from what is now northeast
Mexico. As they crossed the Guadalupe River, Mazanet (1968:169) noted that they had moved across
a linguistic boundary and into a region where “they
are all friends and have no wars,” suggesting that
the Caddo had better relations with people living
north of San Marcos.
Perhaps the most interesting aspect of the occurrence of Caddo pottery north of the Guadalupe
River (or San Marcos River) is that some sites may
have been special in the sense of being the location
of recurring occupation by larger numbers of people
and different native groups, probably representing
multiple language groups. If this is true, in a sense,
these sites may have been locations for some of the
“fairs” described in the ethnohistoric literature. As
an example, one such site may be the Collins site
(41TV40) in Travis County, but there are others. We
suggest that a more comprehensive research effort
be focused on the typological and compositional
variability in one or more of these sites.

PROBLEM AREAS AND
SUGGESTIONS FOR
FUTURE SAMPLING
Despite the interesting and presumably valid
inferences from this research effort, there are a
number of problems that must be borne in mind
when assessing the interpretations offered herein.
Among these are geographic sampling biases of
both ceramics and raw clays (the need for more of
the latter being particularly great), the large number of unassigned samples, and the general lack of
chronological separation among the samples. The
large number of samples that cannot be assigned to
a compositional group may be reduced somewhat
as additional samples are analyzed, particularly
in areas currently with few or no samples. The
geographic biases are substantial, with particularly
limited sampling from: (1) what Boyd (2012) refers
to as the northern Toyah area, including the Clear
Fork of the Brazos in Sweetwater/Abilene areas,

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics
extending to the Eastland area, (2) the western
portion of the area in Crockett, Kinney, Schleicher,
and Sutton counties, and (3) the area of Mills,
Lampasas, Coryell, and Hamilton counties. Both
ceramic and raw clay samples are needed from all
these areas. Of course, additional samples from
those parts of Central Texas more substantially
sampled already would be helpful as well.
The problem of temporal differentiation is an
altogether different challenge, and it is likely that
we cannot do much to demonstrate chronological separation among samples within or between
sites with currently available information. Newly
acquired samples may well be more precisely
dated, particularly as we use our chronological
capabilities more effectively. In our opinion,
there is good reason to argue for occupation
of some of the purportedly prehistoric ceramic
sites during the historic period. A good example
is site 41TG45, an extensive site from which a
substantial ceramic sample has been recovered
from fairly modest looting back dirt. The ceramics include much Leon Plain, Patton Engraved
(a historic Caddo type from central east Texas),
Caddo brushed pottery, and even chain mail (this
collection is unpublished). A comparable and even
larger ceramic assemblage comes from the Davis
Hackberry Spring site (Riemenschneider 1996).
At the earlier end of the Toyah phase (or Late Prehistoric 2 period), there are sites with Leon Plain
and non-local pottery types such as Chupadero
Black-on-white and Ochoa Indented Corrugated,
both of which are prehistoric. One sample of
Leon Plain has broad line red painted decoration
reminiscent of El Paso Polychrome, also suggestive of an earlier time (similar pottery is reported
at the Currie site in Concho County). And in any
event, a substantial number of radiocarbon dates
from Toyah phase sites suggest a time period of
a few centuries, extending into the A.D. 1600s,
when the Jumano and associated ethnic groups are
documented to have been in precisely the areas
represented in our sample.
CONCLUDING THOUGHTS
The results of this study are, if anything,
thought-provoking. On many levels, the data relate
to the basic issue of archeological deﬁnition of
the Toyah horizon/phase and its relation to native
groups documented ethnohistorically. It is not our
intention to reassess the Toyah phase concept,

77

particularly since the recently published volume,
The Toyah Phase of Central Texas (Kenmotsu and
Boyd 2012), has many current perspectives on the
issue; but we do have comments that bear on the
topic.
First, we have deﬁned in a generalized way
two major clusters of chemical groups of Leon
Plain pottery, one in Central and west central
Texas, the other along the Balcones Escarpment.
However, as noted previously, we did not include
much Leon Plain pottery from the southern part of
the Toyah phase area, south and southeast of the
escarpment in our sampling, so we do not know
how the ceramics from the numerous Toyah sites
there relate chemically to those we have analyzed.
It is entirely possible that yet another cluster of
chemically similar ceramics may be present in this
southern area.
As was discussed previously, the two general
clusters of chemical compositional groups that we
recognize can be tentatively linked to native groups
documented by various Spanish chroniclers during
the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries
A.D. Cluster A, largely a west central Texas set of
ceramics, seems reasonably linked to the Jumano
and closely afﬁliated native groups, whereas Cluster B may possibly be linked to Sanan-speaking and
perhaps other native groups along and below the
Balcones Escarpment. If so, it is reasonable to infer
that both sets of native groups (or “nations” as per
early Spanish terminology) had some antiquity in
their respective regions, presumably as early as the
beginning of the Toyah phase sometime after about
A.D. 1300. How much earlier, if any, is a topic for
additional research.
More generally, the broad distinction between
the two clusters of compositional groups may reﬂect
to some extent the differences noted by Johnson
(1994:258-263) between Toyah assemblages in the
Balcones Escarpment area and those to the north and
west into the upper drainages of the Colorado River
and its tributaries (as well as the Clear Fork of the
Brazos). It is unclear how much of this difference
relates to landscape and resource variation, but we
cannot ignore the growing body of archeological
data indicative of social boundaries smaller in scale
than the Toyah phase/horizon. This, after all, is the
approach advocated so persuasively by Arnn and
others in recent years.
Despite the distinction between the two loosely
deﬁned clusters of Leon Plain chemical groups and
the possible linkage with different ethnic groups,

78

Texas Archeological Society

the typological similarity of Leon Plain suggests
rather considerable interaction over greater Central Texas in the Late Prehistoric and early historic period. As discussed earlier, this interaction
presumably involved intermarriage, occasional
captive-taking (see Cameron 2008), trading, and
other forms of interaction, most of them noted
commonly in the ethnohistoric literature. How the
people over greater Central Texas may have been
linguistically related is currently unknown, but we
wonder if the makers of Leon Plain spoke related
languages/dialects.
Earlier, we noted that patrilocality might be
a plausible factor in what has been perceived as
the typological homogeneity of Leon Plain. That
is, among what we presume were predominantly
exogamous groups, women would usually have
moved in with their spouse’s group. Presuming
further that women were the potters, this pervasive
dispersal of the potters via marriage could account
for the homogeneity and distribution of Leon Plain.
The capturing of women for wives from time to
time, documented ethnohistorically for the region,
might also be a factor. Fortunately, this issue has
been addressed for many areas of the world in
recent years, including North America.
Among the more provocative discussions is in
DeBoer’s (2008) analysis of captives, particularly
captive wives. One of his comments is pertinent to
the whole Toyah concept (DeBoer 2008:250-251):

in the Blackland Prairie possibly at the Guadalupe/
San Marcos River. Here we wish only to point out
that Johnson’s oft-cited map of his “classic Toyah
culture” has a distinct edge along the Colorado
River in the Blackland Prairie, not far from the
Guadalupe/San Marcos River. Are we looking
at the same boundary, although perhaps one that
changed slightly over time (see Prewitt [2012]
for discussion of the Rowe Valley site)? The occurrence of Late Prehistoric/early historic Caddo
pottery in this part of Central Texas is largely, but
not exclusively, restricted to the area northeast of
the area from the San Marcos River to the Colorado
River. This suggests that the “fairs” attended by the
Hasinai Caddo and other native groups such as the
Jumano were at sites in this area. Perhaps a fresh
review of Spanish documents with the objective of
identifying the locations of such fairs might prove
informative.
As a third issue, several researchers have noted
that perishable forms of social distinction such as
styles of tattooing, hair, clothing, and ornamentation may be far more indicative of social identity
than arrow point or ceramic types (see Arnn 2012a,
2012b; Boyd 2012; Kenmotsu and Arnn 2012). In
a recent volume, Ethnicity in Ancient Amazonia
(Hornborg and Hill 2011), DeBoer presents an informative analysis that is relevant to our study and
to Toyah archeology more generally. As he notes
(DeBoer 2011:96):

The shunting of captives must have
created a vast rhizomatic network of information exchange. How this exchange
differed from the various agencies of conventional diffusion has yet to be understood. Furthermore, if the few estimates
for the frequency of marriage through
capture are generally applicable, then the
dissemination of genetic information, or
gene ﬂow, must have been substantial.
This raises numerous questions about
the reliability of phylogenies based on
DNA samples labeled “Apache” or “Conibo” when such groups were constituted
through the incorporation of others.

Quotidian and utilitarian artifacts readily
diffuse to neighbors, resulting in a large
cluster of contiguous groups sharing the
trait. In contrast to this contagious pattern, ornaments tend to hopscotch across
groups as if striving to maximize perimeters of difference. Such ornaments,
including perishable hairdos and body
painting, are rare in the archaeological
record but are likely to be the most telling
carriers for group identity.

We should be mindful of this caution in analyzing and interpreting any data on human remains,
be it DNA, heritable dental trait data, or other
osteological data.
As a second issue, we noted previously the
early historic documentation of a cultural boundary

It is beyond the scope of this study to explore
this issue in greater detail, but we suggest that the
ethnohistoric record be searched and, to the extent
possible, the distribution of different tattoo styles
and other ways of marking native social identity
in and around the study area be mapped. The issue
of tattoo similarity, for example, has been important in discussions of the Jumano of Central Texas
and their purported interaction with the Humanas
pueblos in central New Mexico.

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics
This brings up a fourth issue, the occurrences
of Leon Plain and other elements of the Toyah
material culture assemblage in sites outside what
Johnson deﬁned as the “classic Toyah area,” particularly in Boyd’s (2102) northern Toyah area. Boyd
has addressed this issue in some detail, pointing out
that the occurrence of Leon Plain with Lott points
in some contexts suggests a different ethnic group
than those making and using Perdiz points. How
this might relate to linguistic/ethnic similarity/
distinction is an issue that merits further research,
but we again note DeBoer’s caution about markers
of group identity. Indeed, this goes to the general
and oft-discussed topic of whether Toyah should
be considered a phase, an interval, a horizon, or
a phenomenon. The authors of most chapters in
The Toyah Phase of Central Texas (Kenmotsu and
Boyd 2012) are keenly aware of this issue and they
present a sophisticated understanding of Toyah that
provides a basis for future research.
END NOTES
1. One of the unresolved issues relating to the type deﬁnition of Leon Plain is the fact that there are rare vessels
that had incised, engraved, or even painted decoration.
Because of their rarity, these have not been referred to
as different types by any of the researchers who have
found them.
2. Several of the samples used in this study are from
the E. B. Sayles collection at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory and have Gila Pueblo site numbers.
Site designations like this one indicate that site location
is known with sufﬁcient accuracy to determine county
even if the location of the site is not known precisely
enough to assign it a trinomial. For example, the Gila
Pueblo site number, Coleman 1:1, is known to be in
Coleman County.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A large number of people have provided samples, data, funding, discussion time, and all manner
of support for this project over its many years of
growth and evolution; we hope that we have remembered them all here. Funding for this effort has
come from the Texas Department of Transportation,
the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, the Lower
Colorado River Authority, the Texas Archeological
Society Donors’ Fund, the Council of Texas Archeologists, the Friends of TARL, Lawrence Aten, and
Elton and Kerza Prewitt. At MURR, Mike Glascock

79

facilitated the project and Hector Neff conducted
the initial statistical analysis. More recently, Jeff
Ferguson reanalyzed the initial set of data as well
as the additional samples from the past few years;
he has suffered through uncounted numbers of
questions with good cheer and has written a key
part of this article.
AT TARL, Susan Dial did the lion’s share of
the sample selection and data recording; Laura
Nightengale provided frequent access to TARL collections for sample acquisition and was very helpful in identifying additional samples. Similarly,
Carolyn Spock provided much help in tracking
down information on the sites, particularly some of
those recorded long ago without much in the way
of more recent documentation.
The Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division (TXDOT), provided
most of the funding for this project and the staff
there has been extremely helpful in many ways,
including much discussion of the results. Particularly helpful during the project were Lain Ellis and
John Arnn. Similarly, the staff at PBS&J ﬁrst (Clell
Bond), and more recently, at Prewitt and Associates,
Inc. (Doug Boyd), have been helpful in arranging
for the analysis via their contracts with TXDOT.
Permission to use samples was provided by
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth
District, the Texas Historical Commission, Texas
Parks and Wildlife Department, TXDOT, and the
Lower Colorado River Authority. More generally,
the following individuals have provided samples,
information, permission to sample, and/or time
for discussion of the project: John Arnn, Steve
Black, David Calame, John Carpenter, Ben Cox,
Aina Dodge, Linda Ellis, Ross Fields, Charlotte
Graham, Grant Hall, Thomas Hester, Karen Harry,
Chuck Hixson, Margaret Howard, Joe Labadie,
Chris Lintz, Jon Lohse, Dan McGregor, Tim Perttula, Elton Prewitt, Dan Prikryl, Mike Quigg, Larry
Riemenschneider, Bryant Saner, Harry Shafer,
Michael Strutt, Steve Tomka, and Solveig Turpin.
We are particularly grateful to John Arnn,
Doug Boyd, Thomas Hester, Elton Prewitt, Harry
Shafer, Jeff Taff, Mariah Wade, and the late Dee
Ann Story for the many prolonged discussions
about Central Texas archeology and all the many
aspects of this project; each of these individuals
very graciously indulged the senior author on
multiple occasions. Special thanks to Harry Shafer
for accompanying the senior author on a clay collecting trip in the San Antonio area, and to Doug

80

Texas Archeological Society

Boyd for his assistance throughout this project,
especially for reviewing and editing the draft and
managing the process of getting the manuscript
published. Sandy Hannum, of Prewitt and Associates, Inc., created all the ﬁgures, and as usual did a
masterful job of putting together the kinds of data
we wanted in the maps.

Ayer, Mrs. E. E. (translator)
1965 The Memorial of Fray Alonso de Benavides, 1630.
Horn and Wallace, Albuquerque.

REFERENCES CITED

Baxter, M. J.
1992 Archaeological uses of the biplot—a neglected technique? In Computer Applications and Quantitative
Methods in Archaeology, 1991, edited by G. Lock
and J. Moffett, pp. 141-148. BAR International Series S577. Tempvs Reparatvm, Archaeological and
Historical Associates, Oxford.

AGI (Archivo General de las Indias)
1688 El General Juan Fernandez de Retana Capitán del
Presidio de San Francisco de Conchos por su Magistad y Justicia Mayor de esta Jurisdicción. Audiencia
de Guadalajara, 66–6-18.
AGN (Archivo General de la Nacíon)
1682-1683
Diario y Derroteo de Juan Dominguez de
Mendoza, Cavo y Caudillo de este Pice de Hexército
que Ba Caminindo al Descubrimiento del Horiente
y Reino de los Texas a Pedimento de Don Juna
Sabeata, Indio de Nación Jumana con los Demás
Capitanes de Dicha Nación. Provincias Internas 37.
Expediente 4. Transcript on ﬁle, Center for American
History, University of Texas at Austin, box 2Q204.
1691 Cartas por Juan de la Fuente y Don Diego de Vargas
Zapata y Luján. Historia 27. Expediente 2. Transcript
on ﬁle, Center for American History, University of
Texas at Austin, box 2Q178.
Alessio Robles, V.
1978 Coahuila y Texas en la Época Colonial. 2nd edition.
Editorial Porrua, México, D.F.
Alvarado, L.
2008 Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis of Corrugated Wares and Brownwares from the Texas
Southern Plains and Southeastern New Mexico.
Masters thesis, Texas State University, San
Marcos.
Arnn, J. W. III
2012a Land of the Tejas: Native American Identity and
Interaction in Texas, AD 1300 to 1700. University
of Texas Press, Austin.
2012b Defining Hunter-gatherer Sociocultural Identity
and Interaction at a Regional Scale: The Toyah/
Tejas Social Field. In The Toyah Phase of Central
Texas: Late Prehistoric Economic and Social Processes, edited by N. A. Kenmotsu and D. K. Boyd,
pp. 44-75. Texas A&M University Press, College
Station.

Baker, J.
2001 No Golden Age of Peace: A Bioarchaeological Investigation of Interpersonal Violence on the West
Gulf Coastal Plain. Ph.D. dissertation, Department
of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College
Station.

1994 Exploratory Multivariate Analysis in Archaeology.
Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh.
Baxter, M. J. and C. E. Buck
2000 Data Handling and Statistical Analysis. In Modern
Analytical Methods in Art and Archaeology, edited
by E. Ciliberto and G. Spoto, pp. 681-746. John
Wiley and Sons, New York.
Bieber, A. M. Jr., D. W. Brooks, G. Harbottle, and E. V. Sayre
1976 Application of multivariate techniques to analytical
data on Aegean ceramics. Archaeometry 18:59–74.
Binford, L.
1980 Willow Smoke and Dogs’ Tails: Hunter-Gatherer
Settlement Systems and Archaeological Site Formation. American Antiquity 45:4-20.
2001 Constructing Frames of Reference: An Analytical Method for Archaeological Theory Building
Using Hunter-Gatherer and Environmental Data
Sets. University of California Press, Berkeley,
California.
Bishop, R. L. and H. Neff
1989 Compositional data analysis in archaeology. In Archaeological Chemistry IV, edited by R. O. Allen,
pp. 576–586.Advances in Chemistry Series 220.
American Chemical Society, Washington, D.C.
Bishop, R. L., R. L. Rands, and G. R. Holley
1992 Ceramic compositional analysis in archaeological
perspective. In Advances in Archaeological Method
and Theory, Vol. 5, edited by M. B. Schiffer, pp.
275–330. Academic Press, New York.
BN (Biblioteca Nacional de Mexico)
1631 Representación del Comisario Rua al Virrey Controversia con el Señor Obispo de Durango. Transcribed
copy on ﬁle, Center for Southwest Research, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque.

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics
Boyd, D. K.
2012 What is Northern Toyah Phase? The Toyah Phenomenon on the Texas Southern Plains. In The Toyah
Phase of Central Texas: Late Prehistoric Economic
and Social Processes, edited by N. A. Kenmotsu and
D. K. Boyd, pp. 128-151. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.
Boyd, D. K. Reese-Taylor, H. Neff, and M. Glascock
2002 Neutron Activation Analysis of Protohistoric Ceramics from the Texas Southern Plains: Documenting
Plains-Pueblo Interactions. In Ceramic Production
and Circulation in the Greater Southwest: Source
Determination by INAA and Complementary Mineralogical Investigations, edited by D. M. Glowacki
and H. Neff, pp. 111-120. Monograph 44. The
Cotsen Institute of Archaeology, University of California, Los Angeles.
Bruseth, J. E. and N. A. Kenmotsu
1993 From Naguatex to the River Daycao: The Route of
the Hernando de Soto Expedition through Texas.
North American Archaeologist 14(3):199-226.
Bullong, C., C. G. Sampson, and A. Smith
1997 Khoikhoi and Bushman Pottery in the Cape Colony:
Ethnohistory and Later Stone Age Ceramics of the
South African Interior. Journal of Anthropological
Archaeology 16:269-299.
Cameron, C. (editor)
2008 Invisible Citizens: Captives and Their Consequences. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Carlson, S.
1994 Texas Beyond the Periphery: An Archaeological
Study of the Spanish Missions During the 18th Century. Ph.D. dissertation. Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Carlson, S., J. Blackman, R. Bishop, and D. Carlson
2007 Cultural Connections: Colonial Ceramics in Texas
and Mexico. Paper presented at the 72th annual
meeting of the Society for American Archaeology,
April 25-29, 2007, Austin, Texas.
Casañas, F.
1968 Relación sobre los indios del este de Texas. In
Primeras Exploraciones y Poblamiento de Tejas
(1686–1694), Notícias Geográﬁcas e Históricas del
Noreste de Mexico, edited by L. Gomez Candeo, pp.
39-69. Instituto Tecnológico y de estudios superiores
de Monterrey, México.
Clark, T.
2006 Production, Exchange, and Social Identity: A Study
of Chupadero Black-on-White Pottery. Ph.D. dissertation, Arizona State University.

81

Cogswell, J. W., H. Neff, and M. D. Glascock
1998 Analysis of shell-tempered pottery replicates: Implications for provenance studies. American Antiquity
63(1):63-72.
Creel, D., T. Clark, and H. Neff
2002 Production and Long Distance Movement of Chupadero Black-on-white Pottery in New Mexico and
Texas. In Geochemical Evidence for Long Distance
Exchange, edited by M. Glascock, pp. 109-132. Bergin and Garvey Publishers, Westport, Connecticut.
Creel, D., J. R. Ferguson, and N. A. Kenmotsu
2012 A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas HunterGatherer Ceramics and its Implications for Mobility,
Ethnic Group Territory, and Interaction. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.
Crown, P. and W. Wills
1995 The Origins of Southwestern Ceramic Containers:
Women’s Time Allocation and Economic Intensiﬁcation. Journal of Anthropological Research 51:173-186.
Deboer, Warren
2008 Wrenched Bodies. In Invisible Citizens: Captives
and Their Consequences, edited by C. Cameron, pp.
233-261. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
2011

Deep Time, Big Space: An Archaeologist Skirts the
Topic at Hand. In Ethnicity in Ancient Amazonia, edited by A. Hornborg and J. Hill, pp. 75-98.University
Press of Colorado, Boulder.

Descantes, C., D. Creel, R. Speakman, S. Wilson, and M. Glascock
2004 Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis of Pottery
from the George C. Davis (41CE19) Site, Texas.
North American Archaeologist 25:121-138.
Eerkens, J. H. Neff, and M. Glascock
2002 Typologies and Classiﬁcation of Great Basin Pottery: A New Look at Death Valley Brownwares. In
Ceramic Production and Circulation in the Greater
Southwest: Source Determination by INAA and
Complementary Mineralogical Investigations, edited by D. M. Glowacki and H. Neff, pp 140-151.
Monograph 44. The Cotsen Institute of Archaeology,
University of California, Los Angeles.
Ferguson, J. R.
2007 Preliminary Report on the Reanalysis of the Texas
Caddo NAA Database. Unpublished report, Missouri
University Research Reactor, Columbia, Missouri.
Ferguson, J. R. and M. D. Glascock
2012 Appendix F: Neutron Activation Analysis of Ceramics from Mission San Sabá and Other Spanish
Colonial Sites in Texas. In Mission Santa Cruz de
San Sabá: Archeological and Historical Investigations of a Portion of the Mission Site (41MN23),
Menard County, Texas, by J. K. McWilliams and
D. K. Boyd. Review draft. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.

82

Texas Archeological Society

Garner, L. E., A. St. Clair, and T. Evans
1979 Mineral Resources of Texas. Bureau of Economic
Geology, University of Texas at Austin.
Glascock, M. D.
1992 Characterization of archaeological ceramics at
MURR by neutron activation analysis and multivariate statistics. In Chemical Characterization of
Ceramic Pastes in Archaeology, edited by H. Neff,
pp. 11–26. Prehistory Press, Madison, Wisconsin.
Harbottle, G.
1976 Activation analysis in archaeology. Radiochemistry
3:33–72.
Hard, R. and M. A. Katzenberg
2011 A Stable Isotope Study of Hunter-Gatherer-Fisher
Diet, Mobility, and Intensiﬁcation on the Texas Gulf
Coastal Plain. American Antiquity 76:709-751.
Hildebrand, J. G., T. Gross, J. Schaefer, and H. Neff
2002 The Signiﬁcance of Patayan Ceramic Variability:
Using Trace Element and Petrographic Analysis
to Study Brownwares and Buffwares in Southern
California. In Ceramic Production and Circulation
in the Greater Southwest: Source Determination by
INAA and Complementary Mineralogical Investigations, edited by D. M. Glowacki and H. Neff,
pp 121-139. Monograph 44. The Cotsen Institute
of Archaeology, University of California, Los
Angeles.
Hill, D.
2001 Appendix VI: Petrographic Analysis of Bone Tempered Ceramics. In Archaeological Investigations
at a Spanish Colonial Site (41KA26-B), Karnes
County, Texas, by C. Tennis. Archaeological Survey
Report No. 302. Center for Archaeological Research,
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hornborg, A. and J. Hill (editors)
2011 Ethnicity in Ancient Amazonia. University Press of
Colorado, Boulder.
Johnson, L.
1994 The Life and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk, The Buckhollow Encampment Site 41KM16, Kimble County,
Texas. Ofﬁce of the State Archeologist Report 38.
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Johnson, L. and T. N. Campbell
1992 Sanan: Traces of a Previously Unknown Aboriginal
Language in Colonial Coahuila and Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 37(140):185-212.

Kelley, J. C.
1947 The Lehmann Rockshelter: A Stratiﬁed Site of the
Toyah, Uvalde, and Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of
The Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 18:115-128.
1955 Juan Sabeata and Diffusion in Aboriginal Texas.
American Anthropologist 57:981-995.
1986 Jumano and Patarabueye Relations at La Junta de
los Rios. Anthropological Papers No. 77. Museum of
Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Kelly, R.
1983 Hunter-Gatherer Mobility Strategies. Journal of
Anthropological Research 39:277-306.
1992 Mobility/Sedentism: Concepts, Archaeological Measures, and Effects. Annual Review of Anthropology
21:43-66.
1995 The Foraging Spectrum. Diversity in HunterGatherer Lifeways. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.
Kenmotsu, N. A.
2001 Seeking Friends, Avoiding Enemies: the Jumano
Response to Spanish Colonization, A.D. 1580-1750.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 72:23-43.
Kenmotsu, N. A. and J. W. Arnn III
2012 The Toyah Phase and the Ethnohistorical Record:
A Case for Population Aggregation. In The Toyah
Phase of Central Texas: Late Prehistoric Economic
and Social Processes, edited by N. A. Kenmotsu and
D. K. Boyd, pp. 19-43. Texas A&M University Press,
College Station.
Kenmotsu, N. A. and D. K. Boyd (editors)
2012 The Toyah Phase of Central Texas: Late Prehistoric
Economic and Social Processes, Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Kittleman, L.
1994 Appendix IV: A Microscopical Analysis of Potsherds
from the Toyah Culture of Texas. In The Life and
Times of Toyah-Culture Folk, The Buckhollow Encampment Site 41KM16, Kimble County, Texas, by
L. Johnson. Ofﬁce of the State Archeologist Report
38. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Krieger, A. D.
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas: With Extension of Puebloan Datings to the
Mississippi Valley. University of Texas Publication
4640, Austin.
Leese, M. N. and P. L. Main
1994 The efﬁcient computation of unbiased Mahalanobis
distances and their interpretation in archaeometry.
Archaeometry36:307–316.

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics
Leonard, K.
2006 Directionality and Exclusivity of Plain-Pueblo Exchange during the Protohistoric Period, AD 14501700. In The Social Life of Pots; Glaze Wares and
Cultural Dynamics in the Southwest, AD 1250-1680,
edited by J. Habicht-Mauche, S. Eckert, and D. Huntley, pp. 232-252. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Mardia, K. V., J. T. Kent, and J. M. Bibby
1979 Probability and Mathematical Statistics. Academic
Press, New York.
Mazanet, D.
1968 Diario del padre Mazanet en su expedición a Texas.
In Primeras Exploraciones y Poblamiento de Tejas
(1686–1694), Notícias Geográﬁcas e Históricas del
Noreste de Mexico, edited by L. Gomez Candeo,
pp. 225-254. Instituto Tecnológico y de estudios
superiores de Monterrey, México.
McWilliams, J. K. and D. K. Boyd
2012 Mission Santa Cruz de San Sabá: Archeological and
Historical Investigations of a Portion of the Mission
Site (41MN23), Menard County, Texas. Review draft.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Mehalchick, G. and K. Kibler
2008 Hunters and Gatherers of the North Bosque River
Valley: Excavations at the Baylor, Britton, McMillan, and Higginbotham Sites, Waco Lake, McLennan
County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 156.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Neff, H.
1992 Introduction. In Chemical Characterization of Ceramic Pastes in Archaeology, edited by H. Neff, pp.
1-10. Prehistory Press, Madison, Wisconsin.
1994 RQ-mode Principal Components Analysis of Ceramic Compositional Data. Archaeometry 36:115-130.
2000 Neutron activation analysis for provenance determination in archaeology. In Modern Analytical Methods in Art and Archaeology, edited by E. Ciliberto
and G. Spoto, pp. 81–134. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.,
New York.
2002a Quantitative Techniques for Analyzing Ceramic
Compositional Data. In Ceramic Production and
Circulation in the Greater Southwest: Source Determination by INAA and Complementary Mineralogical Investigations, edited by D. M. Glowacki
and H. Neff, pp. 15-36. Monograph 44. Cotsen
Institute of Archaeology, University of California
Los Angeles.
2002b Appendix E: Instrumental Neutron Activation
Analysis. In Data Recovery Excavations at the
McGuire’s Garden Site (41FT425), Jewett Mine,
Freestone County, Texas, by E. F. Gadus, J. McWilliams, and R. C. Fields, pp. 239-246. Reports
of Investigations No. 134. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.

83

Neff, H. and M. Glascock
2001 Appendix V: Petrographic Analysis of Bone Tempered Ceramics. In Archaeological Investigations
at a Spanish Colonial Site (41KA26-B), Karnes
County, Texas, by C. Tennis. Archaeological Survey Report, No. 302. Center for Archaeological
Research, University of Texas at San Antonio.
2005 Compositional Variation in Aboriginal Ceramics from Central Texas: Results of Instrumental
Neutron Activation Analysis. In Analysis and
Reporting for 41FY135, The Sandbur Site, Fayette
County, Texas, by A. J. Kalter, R. M. Rogers, and
M. N. Smith, pp. C-5 to C-35. Archeological Studies program Report No. 73. Texas Department of
Transportation, Austin.
Perttula, T. K.
2002 Native American Ceramics. In Archaeological
Investigations at the Last Spanish Colonial Mission Established on the Texas Frontier: Nuestra
Señora del Refugio (41RF1), Refugio County,
Texas, edited by Cynthia Tennis, pp. 233-260. Vol.
I. Archaeological Survey Report, No. 315. Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.
Perttula, T. K. and J. R. Ferguson
2010 The Chemical Variation in Prehistoric and Early
Historic Caddo Ceramics in Eastern Texas. In Studies on the Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis
of Woodland Period and Caddo Tradition Ceramics
from Eastern Texas, compiled by T. K. Perttula, pp.
3-1 to 3-62. Special Publication No. 17. Friends of
Northeast Texas Archaeology, Pittsburg and Austin.
Perttula, T. K., S. Iruegas, and H. Neff
2003 Caddoan Pottery in Central Texas: Geochemical
Analysis of Ceramics from Fort Hood and Vicinity. Archeological Resource Management Series,
Research Report No. 51. United States Army, Fort
Hood.
Posada, Fray Alonso de
1962 Útiles y Curiosas Noticias del Nuevo Mundo Cíbola
y Otras Naciones Conﬁdantes: La Antigua Tradición
de Copala, Cuna, no Solo las Naciones Indianas. In
Documentos para Servir a la História del Nuevo
México 1538–1778, pp. 460–482. Colección Chimalistac, Edición Jose Porrua Turanzas, Madrid.
Prewitt, E. R.
1974 Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site,
Williamson County, Texas. Research Report 49.
University of Texas at Austin, Texas Archeological
Survey, Austin.
2012 Toyah: Reﬂections on Evolving Perceptions. In The
Toyah Phase of Central Texas: Late Prehistoric
Economic and Social Processes, edited by N. A.
Kenmotsu and D. K. Boyd, pp. 181-203. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.

84

Texas Archeological Society

Quigg, J. M. and J. Peck
1995 The Rush Site (41TG346), A Stratiﬁed Late Prehistoric Locale in Tom Green County, Texas. Technical
Report No. 816C. Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.

Sayre, E. V.
1975 Brookhaven Procedures for Statistical Analyses
of Multivariate Archaeometric Data. Brookhaven
National Laboratory Report BNL-23128. New York.

Reese-Taylor, K.
1993 Petrographic Studies of Ceramic Pastes. In Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie
Reservoir, Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas. Volume IV, by A. C. Treece, C. Lintz,
W. N. Trierweiler, J. M. Quigg, and K. A. Miller,
pp. I-1 to I-11. Technical Reports 346-IV. Mariah
Associates, Inc.

Schambach, F., F., M. Zabecki, G. Akridge, and J. Samuelsen
2011 Determining the Cultural Afﬁliation of Detached
Crania and Mandibles at the Crenshaw Site, Miller
County, Arkansas. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

1995 Appendix F: Petrographic Analyses. In The Rush
Site (41TG346), A Stratiﬁed Late Prehistoric Locale
in Tom Green County, Texas, by J. Quigg and J. Peck.
Technical Report No. 816C. Mariah Associates, Inc.
Austin.
Reese-Taylor, K., J. Hageman, and R. A. Ricklis
1994 Preliminary Paste Analyses of Ceramic Samples
from the Mustang Branch Site (41HY209) and Barton Site (41HY202). In Archaic and Late Prehistoric
Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek Valley,
Hays County, Texas, Vol. 2, by R. A. Ricklis and M.
B. Collins, pp. 549–568. Studies in Archeology 19.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin.
Ricklis, R. A.
1999 Testing at Villa de La Bahía. Current Archeology
in Texas 1(1):14-17. Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.
Ridings, R. and C. G. Sampson
1990 There’s No Percentage in It: Intersite Spatial Analysis of Bushman (San) Pottery Decorations. American Antiquity 55:766-780.
Riemenschneider, L.
1996 The Davis Hackberry Spring Site (41ST87), Sterling
County, Texas. In The Cache: Collected Papers on
Texas Archeology, Vol. 3:13-26. A Publication of the
Texas Archeological Stewardship Network, Ofﬁce
of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Sampson, C. G.
1988 Stylistic Boundaries among Mobile Hunter-foragers.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Sassaman, K.
1992 Gender and Technology at the Archaic-Woodland
Transition. In Exploring Gender through Archaeology, edited by C. Claassen, pp. 71-80. Monographs
in World Prehistory 11. Prehistory Press, Madison.
1993 Early Pottery in the Southeast: Tradition and Innovation in Cooking Technology. University of
Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.

Shafer, H. J.
2006 People of the Prairie: A Possible Connection to the
Davis Site Caddo. Prepared for the Archeological
Studies Program, Environmental Affairs Division,
Texas Department of Transportation. Online publication by the Council of Texas Archeologists. Electronic document, www.counciloftexasarcheologist.
org/publications/PrairieCaddoModule.pdf, accessed
November 15, 2012.
Steponaitis, V., M. J. Blackman, and H. Neff
1996 Large-scale Compositional Patterns in the Chemical
Composition of Mississippian Pottery. American
Antiquity 61:555-572.
Suhm, D. A.
1955 Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 26:7-54.
Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jelks (editors)
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
Texas Archeological Society Special Publication
No. 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin No. 4,
Austin.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25:1-562.
Taff, J.
2006 Chemical Analysis of Ceramics from the Toyah
Archaeological Area. Masters thesis, Department of
Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin.
2007 Chemical Analysis of Ceramics from Central Texas:
Implications for Residential Mobility and Exchange.
Paper presented at the 72nd Annual Meeting of the
Society for American Archaeology, April 25-29,
2007, Austin, Texas.
Taylor, M. and D. Creel
2012 Biological Relationships between Foragers and
Farmers of South-central North America: Nonmetric
Dental Traits. American Antiquity 77(1):99-114.

Creel et al.—A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas Hunter-Gatherer Ceramics

85

Terán, Domingo de los Rios
1968 Diario del general Domingo Terán de los Rios en
su expedición a Texas (1691–1692). In Primeras
Exploraciones y Poblamiento de Tejas (1686–1694),
Notícias Geográﬁcas e Históricas del Noreste de
Mexico, edited by L. Gomez Candeo, pp. 216–224.
Instituto Tecnológico y de estudios superiores de
Monterrey, México.

2003 The Native Americans of the Texas Edwards Plateau,
1582-1799. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Treece, A. C. and C. Lintz
1993 Chapter 6 Summary. In Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie Reservoir, Concho, Coleman,
and Runnels Counties, Texas. V. IV: Data Recovery
Results from Ceramic Sites, by A. C. Treece, C.
Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler, J. M. Quigg, and K. Miller,
pp. 387-444. Technical Report No. 346-IV. Mariah
Associates, Inc., Austin.

Wills, W.
1995 Archaic Foraging and the Beginning of Food
Production in the American Southwest. In Last
Hunters, First Farmers, edited by D. Price and
A. Gebauer, pp. 215-242. School of American Research, Santa Fe.

Wade, M. F.
1998 The Native Americans of the Texas Edwards Plateau
and Related Areas: 1582-1799. Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Anthropology, University of Texas
at Austin.

Weigand, P. C., G. Harbottle, and E. V. Sayre
1977 Turquoise sources and source analysis: Mesoamerica
and the southwestern U.S.A. In Exchange Systems in
Prehistory, edited by T. K. Earle and J. E. Ericson,
pp. 15–34. Academic Press, New York.

The Rockport Ware Pottery of the Central Texas Coast:

Robert A. Ricklis

ABSTRACT
Rockport ware pottery is found in abundance on Late Prehistoric archeological sites along the Central Texas

into several recurrent and basic types. Technologically, this pottery is related to the sandy paste Goose Creek

is unique to the Central Coast, particularly in the use of asphaltum as a viscous black paint for decoration as well
as for coating interior and/or exterior vessel surfaces. Incised decoration is present on a minority of Rockport
diffusion of certain stylistic ideas from that area and, ultimately, from the Coles Creek and Plaquemine ceramic
traditions of Louisiana and the Lower Mississippi Valley areas. Rockport ware is readily distinguishable from the
contemporaneous bone-tempered plain ware of the Toyah Horizon of the Texas interior, and the technological
during the Late Prehistoric period. The presence of Rockport pottery at certain Spanish Colonial mission and
presidio sites, in conjunction with ethnohistorical information on the locations of various ethnic/tribal groups,
of the Texas coast in early historic times.

INTRODUCTION
Texas have yielded abundant evidence of a Late
1700) indigenous ceramic tradition practiced by
of the region. Typically, the many thousands of
sherds of Native pottery documented by archeological research in this region are assigned to the

groups who were the indigenous inhabitants of the
central Texas coastal region during the historic
Colonial period (Figure 1).
The aboriginal ceramics of the Central Texas
-

paste ware, often coated and/or decorated with
natural black asphaltum, as a recurrent trait on
archeological sites in the Corpus Christi area. In a
slightly later survey of Texas archeology for Gila
a distinct coastal pottery with a characteristic sandy

key technological, formal, and stylistic attributes,
(b) present an updated assessment of Rockport
pottery typology, (c) discuss this ceramic tradition
in terms of its temporal and geographical distributions, including its probable cultural-geographical
origins, and (d) examine the evidence for Rockport
pottery as a stylistically distinctive material culture marker of the historically well-documented,

Indians of the region. In his reports on certain

sherds, sometimes bearing incised line decorations
and often decorated/coated with asphaltum. Fur-

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 84 (2013)

88

Texas Archeological Society

Figure
group in1.
the 17th and 18th centuries.

Texas coast area, from which ceramic production
diffused southward into the Central coast region.
historic) Rockport Focus of this part of the coast.

blades, bifacial knives (sometimes alternately beveled), small prismatic blades (Hester and Shafer
facts include perforated oyster and/or rangia clam
shells, perforated whelk shells, bi-pointed whelk

pottery made by coil construction in the forms of
jars, bowls, and narrow-mouth bottle-like vessels,
and subdivided Rockport Ware into three formally

sunray venus clam shell cutting/scraping tools, and
whelk body-whorl adzes, all of which have direct

Incised, and Rockport Black-on-Gray.
More recent archeological work in the region
has documented markedly expanded samples of
Rockport ware sherds in association with other
aboriginal artifact traits diagnostic of the regional
Late Prehistoric, Protohistoric, and Early Historic

The co-occurrence of Rockport pottery and
these various lithic and shell artifacts constitutes
the material culture assemblage of the Rockport
phase, the archeological counterpart of the histori-

with Rockport pottery is a suite of lithic artifacts
that includes arrow points (primarily of the Perdiz
type), small unifacial end scrapers, tiny cylindrical

the basis of the presence of Rockport ware pottery
sherds, the Rockport phase has a geographic range

Ricklis—The Rockport Ware Pottery of the Central Texas Coast

Figure 2.
sites mentioned in the text.

DEFINING ROCKPORT WARE IN
TERMS OF ATTRIBUTES AND TYPES
Rockport ware pottery can be most accurately
the Gulf of Mexico inland approximately 40 km, at
which point contemporaneous Late Prehistoric assemblages exhibit a more or less abrupt shift in ceramics to the bone-tempered plain ware (so-called

resent a major Late Prehistoric cultural boundary
populations at the same distance from the mainland
th

Century Mexican government as the

attributes are those aspects of ceramics that most
ing the vessels; formal attributes are the discernible
aspects that are most directly related to the shapes/
forms of ceramic vessels; and stylistic attributes are
non-functional/non-technical dimensions of the
ceramics and that represent the stylistic/aesthetic
choices of the potter. These categorizations are
not necessarily mutually exclusive and they do, in
sented, for example, in the fact that vessel shape

Texas Archeological Society
is both a formal attribute and a stylistic one. For
the purpose of descriptive clarity, however, this
tripartite division is a convenient way of rationally

Coil breaks (broken edges of sherds on which
there is the observable presence of a joint
between two constructional coils of clay).
Colors of sherds, indicative of oxidizing vs.

and recognizable.
Technological Attributes
These are the discernible aspects of sherds

(e.g., sand, crushed bone, particles of shell).

microscopy, the sand inclusions within the
clay body are very similar to those seen in
Formation, and it is likely that such sandy
clays were chosen by aboriginal potters because the natural sand inclusions served as a
tempering agent. Crushed bone is frequently
also present as an added temper, although
typically not in the profuse quantities seen in
the ceramics of the inland Toyah horizon. Indeed, patterned differences in the proportions
of sherds with sparse (<5% of clay body),
per have been effectively used to distinguish
sites of the Rockport phase vs. the Toyah
horizon at the spatial interface of the two traditions at slightly inland locations along the

particles are occasionally present, although
been natural inclusions in lagoonal clays and
do not appear in the profuse quantities seen in
true shell-tempered pottery. Other inclusions,
such as caliche (CaCO ) particles, are likewise
sparsely represented and are probably natural
occurrences within the clay, especially if it was
gathered from Beaumont Formation deposits,
in which caliche is often present. Grog temper

absent in Rockport ware.

the vessel was oxidized by exposure to air,
resulting in a relatively light sherd color (e.g.,
red, orange, white, buff-colored, depending
on amounts of iron in the clay). Conversely,
if the vessel was more or less cut off from
completely covered by fuel), the result was a
reduced, dark color (e.g., dark gray to nearly
black). Incomplete oxidation, wherein the
core of the sherd retains a dark color while
one or both surfaces were oxidized to a
lighter color such as a light buff, yellow, red,
or orange, is common in Rockport ware and
presumably indicates a rapid, or relatively
tion process to fully penetrate the vessel wall.
Occasional mottling of surface colors (e.g.,
patchiness of both dark and light-colored
surface areas) indicates that the vessel was
parts of the vessel were exposed to differing

Formal Attributes
This group of attributes can be subdivided into
several subcategories, all or most of which are
readily observable on individual rim sherds (generally speaking, rim sherds represent that portion of
the pottery vessel on which the maximum number
of attributes is observable). Formal attributes of

Rim shape may be straight, everted, or in-

Sherd/vessel-wall thickness
Vessel shape is generally determinable only
with relatively large sherds or reconstructed
portions of vessels. May be bowl, jar, olla,
neckless olla, or bottle-like (Figure 4).

Ricklis—The Rockport Ware Pottery of the Central Texas Coast
Vessel size (most readily estimated based on
vatures of rim sherds or, if available, reconstructed vessels and/or portions of vessels).
non-pre-mission Toyah horizon sites (e.g.,
Handles, in the form of loops of clay inserted
into two holes in the vessel wall and then
bonded to the wall by pressing the wet clay
of the coil into the still-wet clay of the vessel
wall. These are extremely rare in Rockport
ware, and the only published examples
are a single specimen from the Guadalupe

that all three of these examples are made of
sandy paste clays without any added bone
temper has led to their inclusion within
the Rockport ware series. Loop handles
are fairly common in samples of the bonetempered ceramics commonly found at 18 th
Century Spanish Colonial mission sites
such as the various locations of the Espiritu

a possible aboriginal origin in the inland
bone-tempered plain ware ceramic tradition
and a subsequent incorporation into the descendant tradition of bone-tempered Goliad
Ware found in abundance at Texas coastal

available evidence suggests that both Guadalupe Bay and McGloin Bluff were recurrently occupied through the Late Prehistoric,
Protohistoric, and into the Colonial periods
sible that the technique of producing vessels
with loop handles was acquired by coastal
people through contact with these missions.
sherd samples from both Guadalupe Bay and

Rim Forms

(Vessel exteriors of the right)

Everted

Straight

Inverted

Lip Forms

Flat

Figure 3.

Rounded

Pointed

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4.

D, Jar; E, deep bowl; F, bowl.

Stylistic Attributes
a minimal representation of this very rare
trait. Thus, while handles are not unknown
in Rockport pottery, they were extremely
rare, and are perhaps present only as a result
of acculturative influence from the inland
bone-tempered native ceramic tradition that
was incorporated into the material culture
repertoire of the coastal plain missions of
the post-Contact Colonial period.

as well as added decorative elements. In Rockport

brushed, or burnished. Scoring, generally done with the edge of a ribbed bivalve
shell such as a scallop or cockle (see Cal-

Ricklis—The Rockport Ware Pottery of the Central Texas Coast
technological attribute since the ribbed shell
may have been used to bind and smooth over
coil joints in the still-wet clay. Brushing is
present but extremely rare in large samples
burnishing is seen only on a small minority
of sherds. By far the most common surface
treatment is complete smoothing over of the
Notching of vessel lips. Notched or nicked
lips are found throughout the Rockport
phase area. Close spacing (<5 mm apart) of
the notches frequently gives the rim of the
vessel a crenelated appearance. Similar lip
treatment is seen on examples of the Goose

Incising. This decorative technique was
used on only a minority of Rockport vessels. Its redundant occurrence on various

however, that this technique was an integral
part of the Rockport ceramic tradition. Design motifs commonly consist of multiple
parallel horizontal lines or cross-hatched
lines immediately below the exterior rims
of vessels, frequently highly reminiscent of
the incised motifs on Goose Creek Incised

turn, are reminiscent of design motifs that are
common in the Coles Creek and Plaquemine
ceramic traditions to the east in Louisiana and
the Lower Mississippi Valley area (Ricklis
are incised line decorations on vessel lips,
consisting of short diagonal parallel or crosshatched incised lines traversing more or less
incised lines on exterior surfaces, used in
combination with the squiggly lines applied
as asphaltum paint.

occurring viscous black tar found on Gulf
of Mexico beaches, originates in petroleum
lighter than water, globules of this material

windward shores of barrier islands by wave
coat vessel surfaces, probably as a sealant,
and as a paint to create a number of distinctive decorative motifs on vessel surfaces.
Such coatings and decorations were applied
motifs commonly include straight bands
(usually along the lip and uppermost rim of
the vessel) and sets of vertical squiggly lines
that extend from just below the rim down
vessel exteriors. Less common are clusters or
rows of painted dots, often used in combination with the squiggly line motifs.
Punctations. Rows of small punctations are
occasionally found on the exteriors of Rockto, and in between, the vertical squiggly lines
just mentioned. Typically, punctuations were
not used in combination with incised line
decorations.
Slips were employed as a decorative technique on a small percentage of Rockport vessels. In some cases, the entire exterior surface
was covered with an off-white or light-gray
slip that served as a background for typical
asphaltum decorations, resulting in a fairly
sophisticated and attractive black-on-white
decorated variant. Rarely found, but docu-

combination with black asphaltum to create
a polychrome decoration.
An Example of the Breakdown of Attributes
in a Rockport Ware Assemblage
To give an idea of the representation of these
various attributes within a large sample of Rockport pottery, Table 1 shows their raw numbers and
analyzed rim sherds from the McGloin Bluff site on
mentally graded sizes, based on matching of rim
sherd curvatures against a template of concentric

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Attribute Representations, Sample of
366 Analyzed Rim sherds from the McGloin
Bluff Site (41SP11).
Attribute

Number

Crushed bone temper
Sparse (<5% of clay body)

18
14
4

Percent
100.0

1.1

Color
Light Buff (Oxidized)
Dark gray (Reduced)

10.4

Rim Form
Everted
Straight
Inverted

158

Lip Form
Flat
Rounded
Pointed
Estimated Vessel Form
Jar
Bowl or Jar
Bottle
Bowl
Olla
Neckless Olla

5
15

80.8
1.4
4.1
5.5

18

Surface Treatment
Scored Interior
Scored Exterior
Scored Interior and Exterior
Burnished
Smooth (exterior and interior)
Gray-White Slip
Polychrome Painted
Lip Band
Exterior Coating
Interior Coating
Exterior Vertical Squiggly Lines
Exterior Dots
Diagonal Lines below rim, exterior
Notching on Lip
Lip Incising
Exterior Sub-Rim Incising
Exterior Punctations

15
14

4.1
5.7

1

0.8

100
70

10

Ricklis—The Rockport Ware Pottery of the Central Texas Coast

data indicate that Rockport pots were generally of
small to medium size, with the apparent maximum

Table 2. Numbers of Rim sherds from the
McGloin Bluff Site (41SP11) in Size Groupings
in 2 cm increments.
Estimated Diameter (cm)

No. Specimens

4

8
5
8

8
10

way to convey to the reader the current status of
Rockport ceramic typology.

The recognition of a regionally distinctive
ceramic tradition of sandy paste, asphaltum
coated/decorated pottery began with the already

Based on their observations of collections then

18
14

Rockport Plain. Sherds of this type were
18
48

18
8

ROCKPORT WARE TYPOLOGY
The assignment of pottery sherds representing a distinct ceramic tradition into formal types
allows for ready sorting of sherds and for easy
communication concerning patterned variability
the earliest effort to type Rockport pottery was the
tripartite typology presented a half century ago by
in the course of subsequent archeological research
in the central coast region, this original typology

basic conceptualization has proven highly useful
and fairly resilient.

(i.e., most useful) approach has yet to be reached.

containing more or less profuse amounts of
coil construction in the form of coil breaks
along sherd edges. Surfaces were either
smoothed or scored, and lacked any form of
decoration other than lip notching in a minority of cases. Based on sherd curvatures, vessel forms were variable and included the full
range of forms seen in Rockport ware (i.e.,
jars, bowls, ollas, and bottles). Vessel walls
were relatively thin, and bases were typically
be straight, everted, or inverted.
Rockport Incised. Sherds are composed of
the same sandy paste clay as is the case with
Rockport Plain, and generally represent vessels having the forms of deep bowls or jars.
Ollas and bottle forms are not typically represented by sherds of this type. Decoration
is in the form of geometric patterns of thin
incised lines on vessel exteriors immediately
under the lip. Design motifs are variable, but
commonly take the forms of multiple parallel
horizontal incised lines, often with incised
“pendant” triangles immediately under the
lowermost line, or a band of cross-hatched
faces are plain and smoothed or sometimes
lightly burnished.

Texas Archeological Society
Rockport Black-on-Gray
ware, vessels of this type were either coated
with asphaltum or decorated with painted asphaltum bands, squiggles, and/or dots. Vessel
interiors and/or exteriors are often partially
or completely coated with asphaltum. Vessel
forms are variable and can be of any of the
shapes known for Rockport ware. Surfaces
upon which the asphaltum was applied, always
much less commonly, scored.

In an overview of Central Coast aboriginal
on observations of sizeable sherd samples from a
number of sites in the areas of Corpus Christi, Co-

ware decorative motifs which, because they occur
repeatedly in sherd samples from throughout the
Rockport phase area, were believed to be legitimate
and useful augmentations of the original typology.
The net result of these changes is that there came to

Rockport Plain. This type remained as origiunpainted, un-incised rims with notched lips
were not included, given that lip notching is
clearly a decorative technique. Given this
simple fact, it was reasonable to make the stylistic distinction of notched lip sherds/vessels
as a decorated type, separate from Rockport
amination of sherd edges revealed that sparse
or moderate amounts of crushed-bone temper
was sometimes present, along with profuse
Rockport Crenelated. Since lip notching
commonly gives vessel rims a crenelated appearance, the typological designation Rockport Crenelated was suggested. Sparse-tomoderate quantities of crushed bone temper
is sometimes present along with the usual
Rockport Incised. This type was left unmodi-

observed that sparse-to-moderate amounts
of crushed bone had often been added as
a tempering agent to the usual sandy paste
clay body.
Rockport Black-on-Gray I. Examination of
Rockport sherd samples revealed that asphaltum-painted decorative variants were not
employed randomly, but rather were used in
standard ways, with the result that two distinct
By far the most basic of these is the application
of a narrow painted band of asphaltum along
the vessel lip; often the painted band extends
from the lip proper downward onto the interior
and/or exterior uppermost portion of the rim. In
cases where this band was the sole decorative
element on the vessel, the Rockport Black-onGray I type is represented. Judging from sherd
curvatures, vessels of this type were typically
jars and/or bowls. Microscopic examination of
sherd edges revealed that sparse-to-moderate
amounts of crushed bone temper were present
in some sherds of this type.
Rockport Black-on-Gray II. This type exhibits asphaltum lip banding with the addition
of vertically oriented squiggly lines of asphaltum on the vessel exteriors. These lines
begin at the base of the lip bands and extend
variable distances down the exterior surface
of the vessels. This decorative combination
is commonly found on narrow-mouth vessels
(ollas, bottles) that most often have interiors
ing that such coatings were applied in order
to seal vessel interiors, and considering that
these combined surface treatments are commonly found on narrow-mouth pots with
more or less constricted necks, it was inferred
that this type is often represented by vessels
that functioned as water containers (Ricklis
per was only rarely added to the sandy clays
from which vessels of this type were made,
and it was suggested that non-cooking vessels, such as pots of this type were inferred
to represent, might not have required the additional tempering agent which would have
mitigated the effects of continual expansion
and contraction of the vessel walls to which
cooking vessels would have been subjected.

Ricklis—The Rockport Ware Pottery of the Central Texas Coast

A Type-Variety Approach to Classifying
Rockport Ware (Weinstein and
Hutchins 2002)
(n=

In their detailed analysis of the large sample
-

Guadalupe River, Richard Weinstein and Michelle

account for the observed variability in the ceramics
from that site. Essentially, this approach attempted
to transfer to the Central Texas Coast the way
pottery variability is managed by archeologists
working in Mississippian and pre-Mississippian
contexts in Louisiana and the Lower Mississippi

Texas coast area. The type-variety approach was
developed as a way to formally identify patterned
variability within ceramic types, under the working assumption that recurrent varieties can be de-

an aplastic tempering agent, the presence of more
a natural occurrence in the clay, as suggested by
is likely the result of the natural presence of caliubiquitous Beaumont Formation clays. Likewise,
various organic inclusions are likely to have been
simply the result of the natural presence of such
materials in the clays when they were collected by
potters, and thus they do not necessarily represent
culturally informed choices on the part of the abvarieties on the presence/absence of these various
materials results, in my view, in an unconvincing
and potentially misleading taxonomy.
For the decorated types—Rockport Incised,
Rockport Black, and Rockport Black-on-Gray—

on very small sherds on which only a part of the
supposed complete motif is discernible, and as a result the reconstructed motifs are sometimes unconvincing (see, for example, Weinstein and Hutchins

through time and across space.

varieties based on different aplastic inclusions in
the clay body such as crushed bone, crushed shell,
caliche particles, and/or organic inclusions. Their

Rockport Plain, Rockport Incised, Rockport Blackon-Gray (asphaltum painted designs on a grayishwhite slipped surface) and Rockport Black (essentially the same as the Rockport Black-on-Gray of

(another rare type with combined black asphaltum
and red-slip decoration).
typology are useful and have been incorporated
into more recent analyses of Rockport ware (Rickdeveloped by Weinstein and Hutchins represents a
considerable effort, the results are in some fundamental ways questionable. Many of their varieties
are based on differences in aplastic inclusions that
informed decision making on the part of Rockport
phase potters. While the inclusion of crushed bone
can be assumed to be the intentional addition of

of a vessel of Rockport Black-on-Gray, “Matagorda Island Motif,” along with accompanying photographs of actual sherds upon which this motif
to exist with any sample of Rockport pottery comprised mainly of small sherds, as will generally
be the rule, given the thin and friable nature of
burials) that yield whole or reconstructed vessels.
Thus, the use of a relatively simple, basic typology
would seem to remain the most useful approach to
sorting and providing basic descriptions of samples
of Rockport ware pottery sherds. Should a more
detailed description be desirable, it can easily be
achieved by analyzing sherds in terms of their
technological, formal, and stylistic attributes, and
reporting the results accordingly.
A More Recent Revision of the Rockport
Ware Typology (Ricklis 2010)
Recent data recovery excavations at the
McGloin Bluff site (41SP11), a major Rockport
phase site on the northern shore of Corpus Christi
very large sample of Rockport ware pottery sherds

Texas Archeological Society
numbers of sherds highlights the intensity in the
production and use of pottery by Rockport phase
people to a degree seemingly comparable to the use
of ceramics by relatively sedentary horticulturalists
such as, for example, the Caddo of East Texas, and
to a far greater extent than is generally the case
with aboriginal societies that practiced a mobile
hunting-and-gathering mode of adaptation (e.g.,
even the most extensive investigations of contemporaneous sites of the inland Toyah horizon have
generally yielded less than 1000 potsherds; e.g.,

coastal groups who, as mentioned previously, operated within around 40 km of the mainland shoreline

paste pottery in the form of bowls, jars, ollas, and
bottles. Sparse to moderate amounts of crushed
bone temper may be present in the paste.
Rockport Crenelated (Figure 7E-F, H-K)
This type is also unchanged from Ricklis
notches along vessel lips which give the rim a crenelated appearance. Typically, vessels were in the
form of bowls or jars. Some examples bear a band
of asphaltum painted onto vessel lips. Since the
lip notching had to have been accomplished prior

took priority and such sherds are therefore placed
in the Rockport Crenelated type as opposed to one
of the asphaltum surface-treated types described
temper may be present.

a practice that would have facilitated the transport
of ceramic vessels and other domestic items.
In any event, the large sample from McGloin
Bluff provided a fresh opportunity to test the usedescribing Rockport pottery sherds. Both attribute
and typological analyses were conducted on rim
sherds, since the rim portion of the vessels exhibits
the greatest number of formal and stylistic attributes.
The McGloin Bluff sherd sample contained a total of

were selected, as many aspects of decoration and/

for complete attribute and typological analysis.
Based on recurrent, patterned combinations of
rim sherd sample from McGloin Bluff; these are

Rockport Incised

diagnostic attribute is a zone of geometric incised
designs immediately under the exterior of vessel lips.
Vessels of this type were usually in the form
of bowls or jars. Common design motifs are horizontal incised lines (often underlain by a band of
“pendant triangles”), or sets of opposing (crosshatched) incised lines. The thickness of the incisions varies, but they are usually thin, having been
accomplished with the use of some kind of sharply
pointed tool. Most commonly, vessels of this type
were not otherwise decorated, although occasionally asphaltum lip banding and/or exterior coating
is present. Sparse to moderate amounts of crushed
bone temper may be present in addition to the usual

most of the decorated types are drawn schematically in Figure 5. Individual sherds of the various
Rockport Black-on-Buff I (Figure 10)

Rockport Plain (Figure 6A-D)

new terminology is necessitated by two factors.
First, as noted above, Weinstein and Hutchins

from that presented previously (Suhm and Jelks
Black-on-Gray” exclusively for vessels on which
asphaltum decorations were painted over a light

Ricklis—The Rockport Ware Pottery of the Central Texas Coast

Figure 5.

on-Buff I-B; F, Rockport Black-on-Buff II. The undecorated type, Rockport Plain, and slipped types, Rockport Blackon-Gray and Rockport Polychrome, are not shown here. Vessel forms are those commonly associated with each type,
although a given type is not necessarily restricted to one form.

presence of a light gray to off-white slip on a small
minority of Rockport sherds, and since surfaces
thus treated were further embellished with typical
Rockport asphaltum-painted motifs, I believe this
Weinstein and Hutchins, I believe the old term is
best restricted to sherds/vessels of this description.
Second, an overwhelming majority of asphaltuming atmosphere to a color ranging from buff (light
yellowish-brown) to orange, and thus the term
“black-on-buff” is a more accurate descriptor than
“black-on-gray.” It is not entirely clear why Suhm

it seems reasonable to suppose that it was because
the buff color sometimes grades to gray on sherds/
vessels in which an oxidizing atmosphere was not
it is worth noting that the prevalence of light buffto-orange surfaces strongly suggests that these
colors were preferred as a contrasting backdrop
for the asphaltum designs painted onto vessel surintentionally created for vessels that were to be
subsequently decorated with asphaltum paint.
In the sizeable sample of rim sherds from
McGloin Bluff, it was possible to identify two

100

Texas Archeological Society

Rockport Plain (note smoothed-over scoring on C); E-G, rims with asphaltum lip bands and dots; H-I, Rockport Incised

Figure 6.

recurring decorative themes, on the basis of which
Rockport Black-on-Buff I was divided into two

the several shapes represented by Rockport vessels.
Sparse to moderate amounts of bone temper may
be present in the sandy paste clay body.

Rockport Black-on-Buff I-A

Rockport Black-on-Buff I-B

On rim sherds assigned to this type, the sole
decoration is a thin band of asphaltum painted onto
extend downward onto the interior or exterior rim
portions of the vessel a short distance (i.e., generally no more than a few mm). Vessel forms are
variable, and this decoration can be seen on any of

the addition of exterior asphaltum coating on the
vessel body extending upward to the lower neck
portion of the vessel, creating a horizontal zone lacking asphaltum between the lip band and the coated
portion (see Figure 10G, I-L). Sparse to moderate
amounts of bone temper may be present.

Ricklis—The Rockport Ware Pottery of the Central Texas Coast

101

exteriors to the right.

Figure 7.

Rockport Black-on-Buff II (Figure 11)

band along the lip, underlain by a series of parallel vertical squiggly lines that begin immediately

below the lip band and extend downward along the
vessel exterior. Vessel forms may be bowls, ollas,
or bottles. Commonly, interiors of vessels bear a
more-or-less thick coating of asphaltum, which
probably functioned as a sealant. This, plus the
common narrow-mouth forms (bottles and ollas)
of the vessels suggests a correlation between this

Texas Archeological Society
type and containers for the transport and/or storage
of water. Sherds of this type generally are devoid
of any amount of bone temper; as noted earlier,
require the additional tempering agent as they were
not subjected to repeated heating-cooling, as would
be case if they were used for cooking.
Rockport Black (see Figure 7A-D)
This type is comprised of bowls and jars
with exteriors that were completely coasted with
asphaltum. The term was used quite differently
asphaltum-decorated vessels which are here designated as Rockport Black-on-Buff. Since Weinstein
and Hutchins did not report ceramics having complete exterior coatings of asphaltum, it is possible
restricted to the Corpus Christi Bay area. Future
research will be required to evaluate whether or not
this (and perhaps other) intra-regional geographic

Rockport Black-on-Gray (Figure 12)
Figure 8. Reconstructed jar of the Rockport Incised type

This is the same type as was described by

Figure 8.

used here with permission.

with asphaltum decoration applied over a light
gray to off-white slip on vessel exteriors. The

from the Linn Lake site; right, horizontal incised lines with a continuous band of incised pendant triangles, a jar from the
Guadalupe Bay site. Photos courtesy of TexasBeyondHistory.net and Coastal Environments, Inc., used here with permission.

Figure 9.

Ricklis—The Rockport Ware Pottery of the Central Texas Coast

Figure 10.

104

Texas Archeological Society

sherd
shown
Figure
11.in the middle of the bottom row. Note zig-zag incising and row of punctations on the two specimens at the

as those found in Rockport Black-on-Buff I and
Rockport Black-on-Buff II. It is possible that the
use of black asphaltum decorations on a white
slip was inspired by the black-on-white ceramics
of the Late Post-Classic Huasteca along the Gulf
coastal plain to the south in the Mexican state of
Tamaulipas and northern part of the state of Vera

the McGloin Bluff site on the northern shore of
the mouth of the Guadalupe River (Weinstein and
of an asphaltum band on the vessel lip underlain by
a band of red slip, both applied over a light-colored
cases, a red-slip coating is applied to the vessel
surface and a black band of asphaltum is painted

Rockport Polychrome (Figure 13)
This is a rare but recurrent type in the Rockport
combinations of black asphaltum-painted elements
and contrasting coatings or bands of red slip. Based
on the small sample of known examples that have

known examples appear to be sherds pertaining to
jars and bowls.
The percentages of these various types represented at the McGloin Bluff site give an idea of the
-

Ricklis—The Rockport Ware Pottery of the Central Texas Coast

105

How representative these percentages are
for the larger Rockport phase area remains to be
established. Currently, the lack of consistency in

ceramic sample from the Guadalupe Bay site
McGloin Bluff, shows considerable similarity in
the various formal technological and stylistic atthe markedly divergent approach those authors
Fine sandy pastes, occasional use of crushed bone
temper, asphaltum lip bands, asphaltum vertical
squiggly lines, asphaltum coating, uncommon use
of white slips, and rare polychrome decorations are
recurrent themes in the large samples of Rockport
Figure 12.

discernible differences. For example, Weinstein
decoration on grayish-white slip) from various sites in the

Figure 12. band; B, C, body sherds with vertical asphaltum squiggly
lines; D, neck sherd with partial asphaltum coating.

sherds bearing exterior rim incised designs (i.e.,
assignable to the Rockport Incised type), which
contrasts markedly with a total of only two such

Figure 13.

Figure 13.

and band of red slip below lip; B-C, F, asphaltum lip band and overall red slip below the lip.

Texas Archeological Society
Table 3. Breakdown of Rockport Ware types from the McGloin Bluff site (41SP11).
Type

No. Specimens

Rockport Black-on-Gray
Rockport Polychrome

5
4

specimens from McGloin Bluff (one in the sample

% of Total

1.4
1.1

origins of Rockport ware. In her report on the

one much smaller specimen found among the reent that Rockport Incised is proportionally much
better represented at Guadalupe Bay, a fact which
per Texas coast area where incised rim decoration
is much more common in the Goose Creek Incised
and San Jacinto Incised pottery series. It is possible
that when large samples are available from more
sites, it will be feasible to identify additional patterned geographical variability in Rockport ware

sub-groups of the Central Texas coast. Whether
such comparisons will ultimately involve using
the relatively coarse-grained distinctions afforded
will be found in consistent reporting at the more
detailed level of attributes, remains to be seen.

the co-occurrence of plain, sandy paste, Goose
Creek-like ceramics and an abundance of Scallorn
arrow points. She considered the pottery from
Plain ceramics of the upper coast region and an absence of asphaltum surface treatment distinguished
this material from pottery of the Rockport series.
these materials, the abundance of Scallorn points,
generally known to predate Perdiz points (e.g.,
type in the Rockport phase, suggests a temporal
priority for Goose Creek or Goose Creek-like pottery, at least in this more northerly portion of the
central coast region.
Hutchins attempted to identify changes in ceramics
over time. While this effort met with only limited
success, they did identify 157 sherds of what they
considered to be Goose Creek pottery, which
abundant Rockport pottery on the basis of more
coarse-grained and less well-sorted sand inclusions

ROCKPORT WARE FROM A
DIACHRONIC PERSPECTIVE
The likelihood that ceramic technology was
introduced to the Central Texas coast region via
diffusion of ideas and knowledge from Native
already been mentioned as an idea put forth by

Creek Incised, and further sorted these seven varieties. Notably, Weinstein and Hutchins included
sherds with asphaltum coating (but not decoration)
within certain of their Goose Creek type/variety
groupings. Since asphaltum coating is an key attribute of Rockport Ware, these sherds might well
be regarded as early expressions of the Rockport
ceramic tradition. Larger, well-dated samples of

Ricklis—The Rockport Ware Pottery of the Central Texas Coast
Central coast Goose Creek sherds and early Rockport pottery will need to be subjected to detailed
comparative analyses in order to clarify this issue.
Indeed, Weinstein and Hutchins did note that their
Goose Creek sherds tended to be more abundant
in the lower levels of the site deposits, suggesting
a temporal priority over Rockport ware, observing
that “it seems likely that Goose Creek ceramics
had their highest popularity during the earliest
the percentages [of Goose Creek] drop dramatiIn short, the presently limited data suggest that
coast diffused southward into the Central coast
area at least as early as the Initial Late Prehistoric

107

coastal (Rockport) people and interior (Toyah)
folk. The Rockport sherds were all typically sandy
paste with crushed bone added as a tempering
agent to some of the vessel clay bodies in sparse
or moderate quantities; the Toyah sherds from the
northern part of the site, in contrast, contained
larger proportions of bone temper, frequently in
profuse quantities, and lacked asphaltum coating
or decoration. Interestingly, asphaltum surface
treatment, while commonly present in the Rockport
materials, consisted only of coatings and the lipband decorative motif; the squiggly line designs
found at most Rockport phase sites were absent
(with the exception of a single example on a sherd
from a near-surface context near the margin of the
site, and probably representative of a different and
later occupation of the site).

into Rockport ware. One of the most diagnostic
attributes of Rockport ware, asphaltum coating/
asphaltum to coat basketry containers in the Central coast area, where fragments of asphaltum with
distinct basketry impressions are a recurrent trait

use of asphaltum coating from basketry to pottery
would have been a simple step, once the technology of pottery production was established in the
Central coast area.
a small bison-hunting/processing encampment
on a branch of Copano Creek in Refugio County

became a recurrent decorative motif somewhat
later in the intra-regional evolution of the Rockport ceramic tradition. Perhaps the best chance for
clarifying the stylistic evolution of Rockport ware
will be in the excavation and analysis of pottery
samples from small hunting camps such as the
Melon site, where temporally discrete components

sites such as Guadalupe Bay and McGloin Bluff,
at which long-term, seasonally recurrent occupations resulted in more or less mixed palimpsests of
materials spanning several centuries (see data on
the dating of the deposits at these sites in Weinstein

into the diachronic dimension of the development
for an early Rockport phase occupation, placed on
the basis of radiocarbon dates on bison bones at

across the site indicated that Late Prehistoric materials of both the Rockport phase and the Toyah
horizon were vertically concentrated at a depth
charcoal associated with Toyah artifacts also fell
calibrated age range). The fact that Rockport ware
sherds were concentrated in the southern half of
the site and sherds of bone-tempered plain ware,
typical of the Toyah horizon, were concentrated in
the northern half at the same depth suggested that
the site saw contemporaneous occupation by both

ROCKPORT WARE AND
THE EARLY HISTORIC
KARANKAWA INDIANS
known to have inhabited the same stretch of the
Texas coast that is the setting for the Rockport
phase of the immediately preceding Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods, it has been easily
inferred that the archeological phase is representathe case, it can also be concluded that Rockport
and that its stylistic expressions were, effectively,

108

Texas Archeological Society
sherds of native Rockport asphaltum-decorated
th

th

century
historical documents, most of which were written
by Spanish Colonial personnel linked to coastal
plain missions and/or associated military presidios during the 18th century. From north to south
along the coast, these groups were the Cocos, the
the Coapites, and the Copanes (see Figure 1). Since
Spanish colonial documents repeatedly refer to
these groups as linguistically and socially interre-

stone arrow points of the Colonial-era Guerrero
the Shanklin site is, strictly speaking, outside the

silver coin and the Guerrero points) suggests that
territory which attended native population declines
due to epidemics of introduced Old World diseases
and a resultant breakdown of pre-contact territorial

their custom of freely intermixing with one another, it is not surprising that the combined groups
should be archeologically represented largely, if
not entirely, by the single material culture assem-

Still more telling is the presence of abundant
Rockport ware pottery from the sites of Spanish
Colonial settlement known to have been occupied

diagnostic trait of which is Rockport ware pottery.
Beyond such generalized inferences, there

tensive excavations by the Texas Historical Com-

facts that strongly support the correlation between
on Garcitas Creek upstream from Matagorda Bay,
as well as the somewhat later Spanish Presidio de
artifacts of European origin are documented in
association with typical Rockport phase material
culture assemblages on some aboriginal campsites,
indicating partial contemporaneity of Rockport
phase materials and Colonial-era European/Europersistence of occupation at large shoreline sites
McGloin
era is indicated by the presence of various items

of large samples of both French and Spanish Colonial artifacts as well as an abundance of associ-

found in a horizontal distribution across the site
that was isomorphic with the distributional pattern of Spanish Colonial artifacts (Bruseth et al.
contemporaneity with the Spanish presidio during
could be assigned on the basis of both attributes

at Guadalupe Bay and a copper coin, a piece of
reworked pewter, a hand-wrought iron spike, and
a kaolin pipe bowl fragment at McGloin Bluff
(plus a small blue-glass bead reported by Corbin
several fragments of patinated green glass, along
with numerous sherds of Rockport ware ceramics
(see www.Texasbeyondhistory.net, Coastal Prairies
and Marshlands, Historic Encounters). From the
Shanklin site (41WH8) near the lower Colorado

Common types include Rockport Plain, Rockport
Rockport Crenelated (Figure 14). Most relevant
for the present discussion is the well-documented
historical fact that the local Clamcoehs/Caranrelations with the Spanish presidio and the nearby
earliest location of the Mission of Nuestra Señora
of the analyses of these materials, it has been suggested that the Spanish personnel at the presidio
may have been obtaining and using Rockport pot-

a Spanish piece-of-eight silver coin bearing the
into an arrow point in association with over 8,000

interaction analogous to that documented in later
18th century mission contexts in which non-Indians

Ricklis—The Rockport Ware Pottery of the Central Texas Coast

Figure 14.

lip band (Rockport Crenelated); E, F, rim sherds with asphaltum lip bands and vertical squiggly lines (Rockport Blackon-Buff II); G-H, body sherds with exterior vertical squiggly lines. Photos by the author, made at the Corpus Christi
Museum of Science and History, where these materials are curated.

obtained and used Native ceramics, presumably
Colonial pottery that had to be transported from
distant production centers far to the south in New

of the presidio ordered an attack on the resident
Indians. Espiritu Santo mission, established inito the banks of the Guadalupe River near present-

Spanish mission-presidio complex on Garcitas

110

Texas Archeological Society

River at present-day Goliad, where it housed Indian
theless, to develop viable relations with the coastal
tribes, the Spanish authorities established a new

more frequent and is present in greater quantities
than is typical at non-mission sites (although in
neous Goliad ware from nearby Espiritu Santo Misof bone temper to clay bodies, already practiced in a

miles west of the new location of Espiritu Santo
sion de Nuestra Señora del Rosario de Los Cujanes
(“Cujanes” being the mid-18th Century generic
abundant historical documentation leaves no doubt
that its native residents were primarily, if not exclu-

tive potters at Espiritu Santo who were producing
the heavily bone-tempered Goliad ware that had
been derived from the pre-existing bone-tempered
ceramic tradition of the inland Toyah horizon (see

Excavations at the site of Rosario Mission in
of native-made pottery (see Figure 14). In contrast
during the same project from the nearby location of
Espiritu Santo Mission, and which consisted of the
profusely bone-tempered and generally undecorated
pottery known generically as Goliad Ware (see Rick-

Rosario was clearly very closely related to coastal
Rockport Ware. The key attributes of the Rosario
monly in moderate-to-profuse amounts (as opposed
to little or no sand in the Espiritu Santo pottery); (b)
smooth vessel surfaces; (c) asphaltum coating and/or
decoration on over 40 percent of the sherds (virtually absent in the Espiritu Santo pottery sample); d)
typical Rockport-style asphaltum decorative motifs
such as lip bands and exterior vertical squiggly lines;
and (e) a minority of rims with notched/crenelated
lips. The presence and abundance of these highly diagnostic Rockport ware attributes clearly establishes
the Rosario pottery as an expression of the Rockport
tradition within a Colonial mission setting. In view
of the historically recorded fact that Rosario Mis-

percent of the pottery having either sparse or moderate amounts of bone temper and the remainder
decorated bone-tempered specimens are the most
abundant (n=141), although sandy paste rim sherds
with typical Rockport-style asphaltum decorations such as lip bands alone and lip bands with
vertical exterior squiggly lines are also fairly well

the end of the 18th century and into the early deth century.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Stephen L. Black, editor
of the website TexasBeyondHistory.net for permission to reproduce in this article photographs
of Rockport Incised pottery from the Linn Lake

Black for permission to reproduce a photo, from
the same website, of a Rockport Incised specimen
Late Prehistoric Rockport phase is the archeological
tion of the Central Texas coast region.
The Rosario pottery does diverge in one way
from that found at aboriginal, non-mission Rockport
phase campsites in that crushed bone tempering is

Guadalupe Bay site. Thanks are also due to Robert
Drolet and Elizabeth Martin of the Corpus Christi
Museum of Science and History for providing me
with access to Native pottery from the site of Rosation, and for permission to make the photographs
of the specimens shown in this article.

Ricklis—The Rockport Ware Pottery of the Central Texas Coast
REFERENCES CITED

111

Eckholm, G. F.
Excavations at Tampico and Panuco in the Huasteca,
Mexico

Indians of the Upper Texas Coast
New York.
Black, S. L.
Toyah Horizon Campsite in Southern Texas. Special

Fritz, G.
Matagorda Bay, Texas: A Survey of the Archeological
and Historical Resources. Research Report 45. Texas

Headrick, P. J.
The Archeology of 41NU11, The Kirchmeyer Site,

Bolton, H. E.
History of the Gulf Coast. Quarterly of the Texas
State Historical Association
N. Reese, B. Meissner, and M. Davis
Texas Coast Deterrent to French Incursion. Historical Archaeology
Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society
Bend. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

Coastal Clay Dune

Hester, T. R.
Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for
Amateur Archaeologists. Corona Publishing Co., San

Indians of the Texas-Northeastern Mexico Borderlands. In Columbian Consequences: Archaeological
and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands West, Vol. 1
Hester, T. R. and H. J. Shafer

Campbell, T. N.
Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

Laguna Madre, Texas Coast. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society

and Southern Texas Coast. Plains Anthropologist
Highley, C. L.
Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas Coast, edited by T. R. Hester and C.

Texas Journal of Science
gion of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society

Canyon Reservoir, Southern Texas. Choke Canyon

Corbin, J. E.
of Corpus Christi Bay, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society

Hudgins, J.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
Castañeda, C. E.
.
Our Catholic Heritage in Texas. Von

Johnson, L., Jr.
from the Buckhollow Encampment, Site 41KM16, of
Kimble County, Texas
-

Texas Archeological Society
Martin, G. C.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern
Times.
Handbook of North American Indians, Volume 10
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C.
. In Archeological Investigations at the last Spanish Colonial Mission
Established on the Texas Frontier: Nuestra Senora
del Refugio (41RF1), Refugio County, Texas, by C. L.

Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell Ridge Site,
41GV66, Galveston Island
Research, Inc., Corpus Christi.
Phase as Indicators of Some Basic Sociocultural

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
Human Adaptations on the Nueces Bay Shoreline:
Plant, Nueces County, Texas
Research, Inc. Corpus Christi, Texas.
The Karankawa Indians of Texas: An Ecological
Study of Cultural Tradition and Change

Phillips, P.
Bulletin of the Texas

Mississippi, 1949-1955. Papers of the Peabody
Archeological Society
Potter, W. H.
Tribes. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Archaeological Investigations at the Spanish Colonial Missions of Espiritu Santo (41GD1) and Nuestra Señora del Rosario (41GD2), Goliad County,
Texas
Christi, Texas.
-

Prewitt, E. R.
Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society
Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

41AS16, on Copano Bay, Aransas County, Texas.
-

D. Frederick, and M. C. Cody

ing Economy along the Middle Texas Coast: Data
Recovery Excavations at the McGloin Bluff Site,
41SP11, San Patricio County, Texas. Report No.
Sayles, E. B.
An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Pa-

Archeological Investigations at Two Central Gulf
Coast Sites

site in the Canyonlands of Edwards County, Texas.
110, Texas Department of Transportation, Environ-

and Contextual Interpretations. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society

Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
ciety, and Bulletin No. 4, Texas Memorial Museum,
Turner, E. S., T. R. Hester and R. L. McReynolds
Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Third edition. Taylor Trade Publishing, Lanham, Maryland.

Ricklis—The Rockport Ware Pottery of the Central Texas Coast
Walter, T. L.
Archaeological InvestiFrontier Mission in South Texas

Archaeological Investigations at the Guadalupe
Occupation along the Channel to Victoria, Calhoun
County, Texas. Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton
Rouge, Louisiana.

Archaic through Historic Occupation along the
Channel to Victoria, Calhoun County, Texas, edited
ments, Inc., Baton Rouge, Louisiana.

Aboriginal Ceramics Among Groups Living
in the Prairie Savanna Region of Texas
Timothy K. Perttula and Linda W. Ellis

ABSTRACT
The aboriginal ceramics from sites in the Texas Prairie Savanna region of Texas represent an amalgam of
indicate this was an area of shifting cultural boundaries, and ceramic assemblages are technologically diverse.
th

17th

and
often exhibit regionally distinct technological traditions that are closely related to the Mossy Grove Culture/
Traditions of coastal and inland Southeast Texas, especially the manufacture of mainly plain sandy paste pottery. Ceramic assemblages often exhibit commingled occupations with ties to both the Southeast Texas Mossy
exhibit strong coastal ceramic practices. In particular, sandy paste ceramics with bone inclusions become comwares, they do vary technologically from the later bone-tempered wares described as Leon Plain, primarily a
Central Texas ceramic tradition ware.

INTRODUCTION
ticularly true for the Late Prehistoric period (i.e.,
southern part of the Post Oak or Prairie Savanna
of Texas (Figure 1) are not particularly common,
even on sites that have been subjected to extensive

characterize their nature either spatially or temporally, or establish with any reasonable certainty
other ceramic assemblages in the general region.
logical evidence from numerous sites in the Prairie
Savanna archaeological region indicates an area of
shifting cultural boundaries. Ceramic assemblages
are technologically diverse and understanding
this diversity will require a more comprehensive
approach to ceramic studies than has been accomplished to date.”

marked inter- and intra-regional differences in
settlement patterns, chronology, and artifact assemblages. Ceramic assemblages, in particular,
the indigenous groups occupying and interacting
in this broad environmental zone. The presence of
pottery presents a challenge in terms of understand-

along the east/southeast margins of the Prairie Savanna points to an area of shifting cultural boundaries. Ceramic assemblages are technologically
ences in this region during the Late Prehistoric and
often exhibit regionally distinct technological traditions that are closely related to the “Mossy Grove

a geographic transition zone whose archeology
of Woodland (in East Texas) and Late Prehistoric
cultures located to the east/southeast, wherein
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 84 (2013)

Texas Archeological Society

fragments” in a sandy paste, they
are otherwise undistinguishable
from the sandy pastes of Goose
technologically from the later
bone-tempered wares described
as Leon Plain found in Central

In summary, ceramic assemblages in this geographically
transitional zone are technologiof distinct ceramic traditions. For
example, Caddo ceramics with
bone temper and distinctive design motifs are found in a number
of assemblages in the Prairie Sa-

Figure 1. Counties in the Post Oak or Prairie Savannah superimposed on map
of biotic zones. Green is Post Oak Savannah; light shade is prairie.

sites represent both a general cultural pattern and
a regional cultural tradition that partly parallels the
Caddo tradition/culture to the northeast and encompasses the archeological remains of what were
elsewhere probably different ethnic and linguistic
tions with ties to both the Southeast Texas Mossy
Grove cultures and the Caddo cultures (Moore and

Texas and the Prairie Savanna archeological re-

ceramics with bone inclusions had low frequency
representation in Southeast Texas beginning with
-

scopic and petrographic analyses
of ceramics from other sites located in this zone suggest that many
of the ceramics are the product
of an indigenous population that
developed a ceramic tradition(s)

found at sites in this transitional zone represent a
series of localized regional ceramic assemblages
more comprehensive approach to the study of the
ceramics found in this geographic transition zone
that includes more consistent and detailed analyses
of ceramic technology, well beyond the scope of
this article. With this in mind, however, our discussion of the ceramics found in Prairie-Savannah
sites focuses on the nature of different ceramic assemblages found in the region, primarily through a
sites located within this zone.

did obtain a minor frequency in the early Round

CERAMIC ASSEMBLAGES IN THE
PRAIRIE SAVANNA

especially in the Brazos Delta-West Bay area and
the Conroe-Livingston area. Characterized by the

Our discussions begin in the northern and
eastern part of the Prairie Savanna, with assemblages in the Trinity and Navasota river basins

Perttula and Ellis—Aboriginal Ceramics Among Groups in the Prairie Savanna Region of Texas
(see Figure 1). We then consider selected sites
and assemblages in the western part of the Prairie
Savannah, with assemblages in the Brazos and
Colorado River basins.

117

(>500 sherds) ceramic assemblages, including

River. Over 1010 sherds were analyzed in detail
cal deposits at the site have been well dated to the

Sites on a Western Tributary of the Trinity
River, Leon County
western tributary to the Trinity River contain decorated grog- and bone-tempered pottery with Caddo

The vast majority of the sherds from Mc-

brushed and Maydelle Incised sherds, indicative
or a sandy paste, and are probably from a WoodImpressed, var. Weches and Holly Fine Engraved
sherds. The ceramics from these sites are evidence
of the widespread distribution of prehistoric Caddo
pottery in the Post Oak Savanna and Trinity River
few plain sandy paste sherds at the two sites that

Jewett Mine Sites, Trinity River Drainages
clay paste ceramic sherds were predominant in prehistoric sites at Jewett Mine in Leon County, proportionally speaking, sandy paste sherds were more
Early Ceramic period) contexts. Woodland period
sherds in this area also include a few tempered with
shell and a few others with a kaolin paste (Fields
th

These are from jars of several sizes, bowls, carithe vessels decorated on the rim and/or body.
analyzed assemblage. Jars are decorated with
brushing on the body, or with pinching or punctation, while they were decorated on the rims with
cross-hatched, diagonal, and vertical incised lines
and carinated bowls have engraved design elements, including scrolls on the bodies of bottles
and large hatched pendant triangles, open zones,
zones bordered by curvilinear hatching, and di-

decorative elements are seen in Middle Caddo period ceramic assemblages in the upper Neches and
Sabine River basins in East Texas (see Perttula, this

century sites have primarily grog and bone-tempered
ceramics, with decorations that resemble Caddo

Weches Fingernail Impressed, Maydelle Incised,

suggests that “some, and probably all [of the sherds],
can be related to the Caddoan [sic] ceramic tradition
in one way or another, be they pots made by Caddo
peoples or copies made by local groups.” Gadus et
of pottery use in the Jewett Mine sites dates to the
Prehistoric period.
Only a few of the sites with Late Prehistoric
components at the Jewett Mine have substantial

the Jewett Mine area, and Caddoan [sic] groups
located east and northeast of the Trinity River
basin…[and] suggest some local interpretations of
Caddoan [sic] ceramic traditions.”
Boggy Creek, Leon County,
Trinity River Drainage
Sites on Boggy Creek at Fort Boggy State
Park in the Trinity River basin contain a mixture
of tempered and non-tempered plain and decorated
sandy paste Goose Creek Plain,

rim

118

Texas Archeological Society

small punctated cylindrical jar; d, engraved bottle.

Plain and/or decorated grog and bone-tem-

period times (although it continued to be made by
Late Prehistoric inhabitants of the Texas Post Oak
Savanna). Work at the Gibbons Creek Lignite Mine
in the Navasota River basin (see below) suggests
that this sandy paste ware began to be made and

Creek Plain and Woodland period dart point types
to the notion that these two sites, at least, have preserved Woodland period archaeological deposits.

tempered pottery dating after this time has also
been found in coastal archeological sites, see
-

only the Fern Slope site does not also have plain
sandy paste pottery. Sherds from decorated grog
and bone-tempered vessels have incised, engraved,
brushed-incised, and brushed decorative elements
that may be associated with occupations by Caddo

Perttula and Ellis—Aboriginal Ceramics Among Groups in the Prairie Savanna Region of Texas
brushed jar body sherd. Brushed sherds are present
product of the interaction of non-Caddo peoples in
the Prairie Savannah with the East Texas Caddo;
brushed utility ware jars began to be made by
Caddo peoples in East Texas, particularly in the

Nine aboriginal ceramic sherds, eight body
sherds and one rim, have been recovered at
den deposits at the site range from as early as 1400-

indicate that much of the midden deposits accumulated during the latter half of the Woodland period,
with some use of the midden area in the early part
of the Late Prehistoric period. Two of the sherds,
from midden deposits, are plain sandy paste Goose
Creek Plain,
body sherds from two
different vessels. These are probably from bowls,
based on their body wall thickness (5.1 ±
one has a smoothed exterior, while the other has
been smoothed only on the interior vessel surface.

as contemporaneous sites in East Central Texas
that likely were not occupied by Caddo peoples.
Brushed pottery may have been locally made or
obtained in trade with a Caddo community.
The last three sherds have a clayey to silty
paste and are tempered with either bone or grog.
ing environment, have no surface treatment, and
have thin rim (5.1 mm) and body (mean thickness
± 0.5 mm) walls. The one decorated sherd is
a jar rim with a horizontal incised line encircling
the vessel, and with at least one diagonal incised
line on the rest of the rim; these diagonal lines appear to be widely-spaced on the rim, but no doubt
continue around the rim as part of the motif (cf.
Dunkin Incised).
Based on the depths of the different temperferentiate any that are stratigraphically earlier or
later. The sandy paste sherds are found from 40-50
cm bs; the tempered sandy paste wares occur from

and cooled in a low oxygen environment, while the
in a high oxygen environment.
(n=4) are from vessels tempered with either grog
ronment, and only one sherd (an engraved sherd)
has been smoothed (interior surface only). Vessel
ing some large vessels were in use at the site, and
±
sherds is plain, but the other three are decorated.

midden deposit, as well as in non-midden deposits. It is possible that all three wares comprise
distinct parts of a single ceramic assemblage, one
th

on the few decorated sherds that are present. It is
more probable, based in large measure on the three
radiocarbon dates from the midden, however, that
the few recovered sherds from temporally distinct
ceramic wares have become mixed in the midden
deposits by bioturbation.
The prehistoric ceramic assemblage from the

fragment from a carinated grog-tempered sandy

There are a number of temper and paste classes rep-

zone of cross-hatching next to a zone of opposed
engraved lines. Similar sherds have been noted

grog-bone-tempered-sandy paste (n=1), grog-

Post Oak Savannah in the Trinity River basin, and
pered sandy paste jar with closely-spaced parallel

clayey-silty paste (n=1), grog-tempered-clayeysilty paste (n=4), and bone-tempered-clayey-silty
paste (n=1). Sherds with a sandy paste (with or
semblage, and the sherds with a clayey-silty paste
(with or without temper) account for the remaining
are tempered (n=14) and that have either one or two

the open air. The third decorated sherd is a parallel

Texas Archeological Society
Figure 3a. Engraved ceramic sherd from 41LN308.

Figure 3c. Horizontal incised rim from the Black Finger Tip site.

Figure 3b. Sherd with closely-spaced parallel incised lines from 41LN308.

Figure 3a. Engraved ceramic sherd from 41LN308.

Figure 3c. Horizontal incised rim from the Black Finger Tip site.

Figure 3d. Parallel incised body sherd from the Black Finger Tip site.

incised body sherd from the Black Finger Tip site.

Figure 3b. Sherd with closely-spaced parallel incised lines from 41LN308.

have crushed hematite inclusions. The two sigma
calibrated age ranges of one date from near the top
Figure
incised bodyperiod.
sherd from
the Black
Finger Tip age
site.
part 3d.
of Parallel
the Woodland
These
calibrated

ranges suggest that much of the midden deposits
accumulated during the Woodland period.
The sandy paste sherds from the Black Finger
oxygen environment that have been smoothed on
either one or both vessel surfaces. Body sherds
mean thickness of 5.8 ±
(11.7 mm thick) is from a non-tempered vessel.
in a reducing environment and cooled in the open

air. One of the sherds is a rim (8.4 mm thick) that
appears to have been lip notched, but it is eroded.
Lip-notched sandy paste sherds in the Woodland
period sandy paste pottery assemblages from Lake
Naconiche in East Texas—otherwise dominated by
plain vessels, as are all Mossy Grove sites—come
from archeological deposits dated between cal.

indicates, however, that lip notched sherds also
have been found on Late Prehistoric sites along the
Texas Gulf Coast in southeast Texas, particularly
on sites in the Middle Coast.
Tip site are sandy paste sherds with temper inclusions of either grog, bone, and/or hematite. The
bone-grog-tempered sandy paste sherd is a plain rim

Perttula and Ellis—Aboriginal Ceramics Among Groups in the Prairie Savanna Region of Texas

that has been burnished on its interior surface; the
ment. Rim walls are 8.1 mm in thickness.
The plain bone-tempered sandy paste sherds

been smoothed on both interior and exterior surfaces.
ing environment. The plain grog-hematite-tempered

range from 5.5-7.5 mm in wall thickness, with a
± 0.8 mm.

from a carinated bowl, was engraved with opposed
lines on either side of an excised triangle element
described as a “Late Caddoan [sic] style” engraved
more plausibly on stylistic grounds to be from an

thick; it has been smoothed on its exterior surface.
reducing environment and cooled in the open air. The
second grog-hematite-tempered sandy paste sherd is

The grog-tempered sandy paste sherds are
plain, and 50 percent have interior-exterior surface
ditions, each sherd is from a different vessel. Three
ing environment, with two of them subsequently
cooled in the open air. The other sherd was from an
incompletely oxidized vessel. The grog-tempered
sandy paste sherds have moderately thick vessel
± 0.48 mm
The non-sandy paste and tempered sherds in
the Black Finger Tip site ceramic sherds account for
tempered body sherd (7.0 mm thick) came from a

clayey to silty paste sherds are from decorated vessels. Three have incised decorations on the rim and
upper body, including an opposed line element, a

decorated grog-tempered sherd has faint opposed
brushed marks on the body, while the lower rim appears to have a series of vertical incised lines. The
presence of a brushed sherd in the Black Finger Tip
site ceramic assemblage points to at least some use
Three of the four grog-tempered sherds were
ronment, while the other was from an incompletely
oxidized vessel. Two of the sherds had been either
smoothed or burnished on their interior surfaces.

The diversity in temper-paste classes in the
ceramics at the Black Finger Tip site is impressive,
as is the dominance of Woodland period sandy
paste sherds and non-sandy paste decorated sherds
with resemblances to Caddo decorated pottery
made in East Texas. The spatial and vertical distribution of the different kinds of wares suggests that
there may have been two prehistoric occupations
at the site where the peoples made and used pottery vessels. In the southern part of the site, plain
sandy paste and plain grog- and grog-hematiteand this may be the earliest occupation in this area;
the one radiocarbon date from the upper part of the
midden deposits suggests that these sherds predate
include an incised grog-tempered and plain bonetempered sherd, plain grog-tempered sandy paste
sherds, and plain grog-hematite-tempered sandy
paste sherds, as well as the sandy paste lip notched
Conversely, in the central part of the site, there
are three decorated grog-tempered sherds that
may be part of a component that dates after ca.
decoration). This possible component does have
bone-tempered sandy paste, grog-bone-tempered
sandy paste, grog-bone-tempered sandy paste, and
sandy paste sherds.
The prehistoric archeological components at
were occupied beginning in the Woodland period,
and then continued to be occupied in the Late Pre-

both sandy paste Goose Creek Plain, and later
grog- and bone-tempered decorated ceramic wares

Texas Archeological Society
that share stylistic and technological attributes with
East Texas Caddo ceramic wares.

and engraved design elements that strongly resemble East Texas Caddo decorative styles (Mallouf
a Poynor Engraved vessel that has been found in ca.

41WA185, Trinity River Basin
Several sites in the Trinity River and San Jacinto River basin in the Post Oak Savanna indicate
that the earliest ceramics in this area are plain
sandy paste (Goose Creek Plain,
)
and bone-tempered sandy paste pottery (Gadus and
-

cludes that “[a]ll design elements (engraved and line
and punctate incised) and vessel forms (cylindrical
jars and shallow bowls with straight-sided or slightly
Lake Limestone fall generally within the Caddoan
[sic] ceramic tradition.”

suggest that bone-tempered sandy paste and sandy
ceramic sherds are found in deposits that date (at
bone-tempered and sandy paste ceramic sherds

Later ceramics in this same area are tempered
with grog and bone, and occasionally have decorated sherds from vessels that have Caddo ceramic

Kosse Mine Sites, Navasota River Basin,
Limestone County
Plain sandy paste pottery sherds resembling
Goose Creek Plain,
have been
a tributary to the Navasota River; these sites have
Gary, Scallorn, and Perdiz points (Fischbeck et al.
land and Late Prehistoric periods. These sherds

Five sherds were recovered in investigations
1445 (1 sigma, calibrated). Contemporaneous arthree plain body sherds and two decorated body
Jacinto River basin, however, are dominated by
sandy paste pottery (Goose Creek Plain), with only
a few bone and grog-tempered sherds (Greaves

Lake Limestone Sites, Leon and Limestone
Counties, Navasota River Basin
Both bone and grog-tempered clay paste and
sandy paste ceramics are found on prehistoric sites
at Lake Limestone in the Navasota River basin
-

plain sandy paste (n=17), kaolin and sandy paste

examination of a freshly broken cross section of
sets of tempering agents.
The one sherd assigned to Paste Group 1
was manufactured from silty clay to which grog,
crushed hematite, and larger-sized sand grains
had been added (Figure 4c). Paste texture for this
sherd appears laminated (i.e., a stepped or platy
look, with relatively straight lamina oriented at an
oblique angle) in cross section. This undecorated
body sherd is small, and its exterior and interior
surfaces were too weathered to determine its overmm, and its overall coloration suggests that it was
then cooled in a high oxygen environment.

are decorated, primarily from the tempered wares,
and there are a variety of incised, punctated-incised,

were both manufactured with a silty clay to which
both bone and grog temper had been added. The

Perttula and Ellis—Aboriginal Ceramics Among Groups in the Prairie Savanna Region of Texas

b

a

d

overall matrix of the two sherds differs, in that one
contains only crushed bone and grog and its paste
texture is irregular (i.e., an uneven appearance due
to the large inclusions added to the paste), while
the other has larger-sized sand grains that had been
added to the paste matrix, and its paste texture appears laminated in cross section. This indicates that
these two sherds were part of two different vessels
and that different paste preparation and forming
techniques were used to manufacture them.
Both of these sherds are decorated, exhibiting
one (see Figure 4b) or two (see Figure 4a) short
segments of narrow incised lines that had been
both sherds are too small to determine an overall design motif, rendering them typologically
indistinct. The exterior and interior surfaces of
both sherds had been dry smoothed but left unthickness. The general coloration of both sherds
indicates that they were part of vessels fired in
a reducing environment, then cooled in a high
oxygen environment.

e

c

f

pered sandy pastes (see Figure 4d-e). Both sherds
have a paste matrix that contained sand falling
ing no additional tempering agents. The grains
were fairly well-sorted, and the overall arrangement and orientation of the grains of both sherds
ing small, closely spaced irregularities across the
face of the cross section) in texture.
sherds differ in several respects. One (see Figure 4e)
vature indicates that it was part of a small jar. Both
the exterior and interior surfaces of this sherd had

an oxygen-rich environment. By contrast, the other
sandy paste sherd (see Figure 4d) is much thicker,

sphere, then cooled in a high oxygen environment.

Texas Archeological Society
Based on their overall decorative and

Robertson County Sites, Navasota
River Basin

groups having different temporal and/or regional

The ceramic assemblage from another site

throughout the region. They were recovered from

for the low number of sherds with any temper
added to the naturally sandy paste of the clay

locations.
The two non-tempered sandy paste sherds in
associated with a large pit. Given their observed
technological attributes, the two sherds in this paste
group closely resemble the Bear Creek Plain type
found in deep East Texas and/or the Goose Creek
Plain types found in Mossy Grove Gulf Coastal

a reducing or low oxygen environment, and have
a dark vessel core. The few decorated sherds (one
horizontal incised, one curvilinear incised, and
one brushed) would not be out of place in a Mossy
Grove context, except for the brushed sherd, which
East Texas Caddo sites (see Perttula, this volume).
The dominance of undecorated sandy paste sherds

some point, the site may have had temporal and/

basins in East Texas and/or the Mossy Grove cul-

to the Woodland period Mossy Grove Culture. The
two 1 sigma radiocarbon dates from the assemblage

-

as many as 11 different vessels. The sherds include

graved sherd from a grog-tempered (and a clayey/
silty clay paste) Poynor Engraved carinated

undecorated); seven with no obvious temper but a
silty or clayey paste; two with grog-temper; and one
sherd with a sandy paste that also has grog tempering.
There is a small assemblage of ceramic artifacts
from a Late Prehistoric site (41RT510) along the Na-

Caddo sites in the upper Neches River basin in
East Texas. The partial engraved design on the
sherd (see Figure 4f) is from a motif that has a
series of engraved squares on the rim with sets of
diagonal engraved triangular elements within the
four corners of each square. Every other square
has diagonal engraved triangles on either side
of the vertical lines that define the square. In
addition to this Caddo sherd is a plain and thinwalled (5.4 mm) sandy paste body sherd. Both
interior and exterior surfaces of the sherd have

sherds, and one base sherd. The sherds came from
vessels that were quite thick, and probably relatively
could be obtained on the rims. The mean thickness
of the rims is 8.50 ±
±
The sherds are tempered with grit (or crushed
-

paste ceramics are produced in the Caddo area,
the combination of paste and surface treatment
found on this sherd is more characteristic of the
manufacturing traditions found in the Mossy
Grove Cultures to the south.

quite a bit lower than those with some amount of
not have any obvious temper, but have a distinctive sandy paste. Many of the sherds with temper,

Perttula and Ellis—Aboriginal Ceramics Among Groups in the Prairie Savanna Region of Texas
particularly those with grog, also have a sandy
ably used in the manufacture of the vessels found
at 41RT510.

low oxygen environment, and have a dark vessel core. Many of these same vessels were pulled

Is 41RT510 a prehistoric Caddo site in the Post
Oak Savanna? Perhaps it is related to the south

the age of the site is not known. Nor are there clear
examples in the assemblage of the kinds of artifacts
thought to characterize south Prairie Caddo sites,
namely early Caddo pottery similar to that found
at the George C. Davis site on the Neches River

oxidized zones along the inside and outside cores

the sherds are from vessels that were incompletely

Most of the sherds are from vessels that had
either been smoothed or burnished on their inteof the sherds show evidence of smoothing on the
interior, and these are probably from cooking jars;
44 percent were smoothed on the exterior; and
surface. These sherds most likely come from bowls
and carinated bowls meant to be used for serving

similar thick and undecorated grog-tempered sandy

points and a few pieces of bison bone. Smoothed
sandy paste and bone- and grog-tempered sandy
paste pottery has also been reported on the Little
Brazos and Navasota rivers in Robertson County

Based on the kinds of decorated sherds reported from the site, the overall thickness of the
ceramic vessel walls, which are much thicker than
bone-tempered sherds in Toyah phase assemblages,
and the frequency of grog-tempered vessel sherds
(as well as the rarity of bone-tempered vessel
sherds), 41RT510 does not represent either an
punctated, and red-slipped sherds known to be in
the 41RT510 collection would not be out of place
in an assemblage of decorated and grog-tempered
Caddo pottery found in East Texas on sites dating
Instrumental neutron activation analysis and petrographic analysis of sherds and clay sources need to
be carried out at sites in the Post Oak Savanna to
help establish whether the pottery found on prehistoric sites in this part of the Post Oak Savanna was
made locally by relatively mobile hunter-gatherer
groups, or had been obtained in trade with their
Caddo neighbors.
Navasota River, Madison County Sites
The analysis of a small sample (n=58) of aboriginal ceramic sherds from three archeological
sites along the Navasota River in Madison County,

hematite-rich slip on interior and exterior surfaces.
There are also an undocumented number of horitated sherds in the 41RT510 collection. The use of
red-slipping as a form of decoration is common in
prehistoric Caddo ceramic assemblages (especially
East Texas, particularly in the upper Sabine and
upper Big Cypress River basins. Doss Redware is
sometimes found in Central Texas ceramic assemblages, but this distinctive ware is bone-tempered,
while Goose Creek Red Filmed has a sandy paste

paste ceramic vessels (Goose Creek Plain, var.
) and a few decorated sandy paste vessel sherds are the most common ceramic wares,
accounting for almost 80 percent of the sample.
This ware was likely made and used locally. This is
followed by lesser amounts of plain grog-tempered

cent), and a plain grog-tempered and sandy paste
sherd (1.7 percent). The dominance of sandy paste
sherds in sites in this part of East Central Texas

Texas Archeological Society
suggests that the three sites represent separate
components of the inland Mossy Grove Culture.
The analysis of radiocarbon-dated ceramic assemblages at a number of sites on Gibbons Creek in the
Navasota River basin (see below) suggest that the
plain and decorated sandy paste and bone-tempered
sandy paste ceramic wares recovered from these
Madison County sites are likely the product of

ered to be a trade ware from an East Texas Caddo
we examine these same sites for decorated sandy
paste and bone-tempered sandy paste sherds, 1
sigma calibrated radiocarbon dates from deposits

sandy paste ceramics. The vast majority of sherds
from the three Madison County sites were very
likely made and used locally in this ca. 1150 year
interval of the Woodland period and early part of
the Late Prehistoric period.
The three Madison County sites appear to have
individual components within the same aboriginal
ceramic tradition. This tradition is recognized by a
preponderance of plain sandy paste pottery (Goose
Creek Plain,
), and this plain sandy
paste pottery represents a distinctive aspect of the
material culture remains of the inland Mossy Grove

in an assemblage of decorated and grog-tempered
Caddo pottery found in East Texas on sites dating

GIBBONS CREEK MINE AREA,
GRIMES COUNTY SITES,
NAVASOTA RIVER BASIN
Prehistoric ceramic sherds at sites along Gibbons Creek in the Navasota River basin have been
found regularly associated with dart points (Gary and

pottery found on sites in this area are plain and decorated sandy paste sherds that share characteristics of
the Goose Creek wares, but more extensive work at
a few sites have recovered larger assemblages with
tempered (i.e., bone and/or grog) wares, some of
which are also decorated. Investigations at a series
of sites along Gibbons Creek in the Navasota River
basin have radiocarbon dates from archeological
which permits the recognition of the initial appearance and adoption of ceramics in this area, as well
as changes in this local ceramic tradition.
These calibrated radiocarbon dates from the
Gibbons Creek area indicate that plain sandy paste

These sites are found in the Brazos, Trinity, and
Central, and East Texas. Other ceramic traditions to
the west and southwest, in the Gulf Coastal Plain,
the Balcones Escarpment, and the Edwards Plateau, are dominated by Toyah phase bone-tempered

±

±

±
±

± 80,
±
±

Central and East central Texas, and sandy paste and
grog-tempered wares along the central and upper

±

-

also include a sandy paste punctated rim sherd,

Late Prehistoric use, as well as evidence of the
widespread distribution of prehistoric Caddo pottery in parts of the Post Oak Savanna (see Fields

and may be associated with deposits that date besandy paste sherds from 41GM181, which were

Perttula and Ellis—Aboriginal Ceramics Among Groups in the Prairie Savanna Region of Texas
the lower Navasota River basin in Grimes County.
Floated, are associated with deposits that have
±
±
±
Goose Creek Plain and a punctated sandy paste
and bone-tempered ware (San Jacinto Incised, var.
Jamison
±
bone-tempered body sherd, and several thin (4.0
mm) burnished sandy paste sherds in deposits with
±
±
continued to be made in this area until at least cal
sandy paste pottery are found in archeological
deposits at the Gibbons Creek mine that date as

brushed, brushed-incised, incised, incised-punctated, and punctated sherds (Figure 5) from grogtempered, bone-tempered, and sandy paste sherds
occur in a component that has calibrated (1 sigma)

sandy paste sherds comprised the major paste
group (57 percent), although relatively large numalso found; grog-tempered sherds account for 5
percent of the assemblage. Most of the tempered

plain and decorated bone-tempered sandy paste
ceramic types point to southeastern and eastern
One of the better known sites at Gibbons
Smoothed, and Caddo grog-tempered types such as

b

c
d

a

e

f

g

g

incised decorations; f, Holly Fine Engraved; g-h, incised-punctated decorations.

Texas Archeological Society
Holly Fine Engraved and Dunkin Incised (see Figure 5a, f). One engraved sherd with portions of an

several may have had a red slip), plain sandy paste

ceramic assemblages at Jewett Mine and Lake
Limestone. Petrographic analysis performed on 14

ous decorated sherds. Several sherds are described
as incised with red paint in the lines, but the il-

regard to the percentage of matrix, the ratio of
matrix to pore space, and the average grain size;
all of the analyzed sherds had a sandy paste. Rog-

maintained an identity of its own,” but noting
that the grog-tempered ceramics “were obtained
from trade or other types of contact with adjacent
groups, while sandy paste and bone-tempered
wares were produced locally.”
Similar decorated incised (parallel lines) and
pressed), sandy paste and bone-tempered, have

what must have been a red pigment rubbed in the
engraved lines.
Two of the decorated sherds have a sandy
paste. One has portions of a red slip, while the
other has horizontal and vertical engraved lines
and a red pigment. The other decorated sherds
have a sandy paste, but are tempered with grog
(n=8) and bone (n=8). These sherds have incised
(parallel and opposed lines) and engraved (with
panels and cross-hatched zone) decorative elements, with clear resemblances to East Texas
Caddo decorative styles. None of the decorated
sherds can be identified to specific types, but it
is suspected that the component dates from ca.

of plain sandy paste sherds were found, including a
-

Little River in the Brazos River Drainage,
Milam County

Brazos River, Washington County
Excavations at Washington-on-the Brazos
(41WT5) recovered a small sample (n=10) of

River, recovered ceramics (n=17) from a buried
archeological component or components that dates
Creek Plain,
These include one burnished sandy paste sherd, 14
bone-tempered sherds, one with exterior burnishing, from at least one thick-walled vessel, likely
a jar, and two other sherds tempered with bone
and grog. These sherds are from a carinated bowl
decorated with a single broad horizontal incised
line on the rim.

) with smoothed to

4.0-7.0 mm. The one sandy paste decorated sherd
is from a bowl with parallel incised lines. Brewingtypes of Caddoan [sic] wares.”
Yegua Creek Basin, Lee County, Brazos
River Drainage

Brazos River, Burleson County
the Brazos River are considered to be representative of a local ceramic tradition (Roemer and

Perttula and Ellis—Aboriginal Ceramics Among Groups in the Prairie Savanna Region of Texas
Middle Yegua Creek, Lee County, Brazos
River Drainage
There is an interesting assemblage of sherds
from the Boriack Bog locality in Lee County, Texas
ity of the sherds are from bone-tempered or sandy
paste vessels made using a coiling technique; the
vessel sherds are relatively hard and are from welljoined vessels, probably simple bowls and jars.
sherds have a bone temper (crushed and burned
have either grog (crushed ceramic sherds) and/or
hematite temper inclusions, and in each case, these
aplastics were secondary temper agents in vessels
sherds are from vessels that also have a naturally
sandy paste, being made from naturally sandy or
self-tempered clay, while the others have either a
clay or silty paste.
The majority of the sherds are from vessels that

was probably done to lower the permeability and
increase the heating effectiveness of particular vessels in cooking tasks. In other cases—especially
the interior slipped or red washed vessels—the
well-smoothed or burnished interior surfaces may
have been advantageous in the repeated use of
these wares as food serving vessels. The purpose
of exterior smoothing and burnishing may have
been for stylistic and display purposes, creating a

percent of the vessel sherds from the Boriack
Bog locality have either interior or exterior vessel
burnishing.
-

product, namely the manufacture of durable and
relatively hard vessels.
The Boriack Bog vessels have relatively thin
vessel walls, but a relatively thick base. The rims
±
±
±
thickness of the walls of these vessels, as well as
their relative uniformity in thickness from the rim
to near the base, would have been well suited to
the cooking and heating of foods and liquids and
would have contributed to their ability to withstand

the sequence in which a vessel was constructed.
Vessels constructed from the bottom up, as these
vessels likely were, would tend to have thinner
walls moving up the vessel body towards the rim,
with the lower portion of the vessel—especially the
portions of the vessel.
Of the sherds from the Boriack Bog locality,
body sherds from at least six different vessels with
an interior red slip or red wash, one body sherd
from another vessel (with a sandy paste) with
faint brushing marks on the exterior surface, and a
sherd from an eighth vessel (bone-tempered) with
parallel brushing marks overlain with several broad
incised lines. The few undecorated rims in the assemblage also suggest that some of the vessels in
use at the site were left plain, at least on the rim.
Slipped or washed vessels are not a common feature of aboriginal ceramic assemblages
from 41FY74, described as being bone-tempered

the interior slipped sherds from the Boriack Bog
area. Red slipped sherds are also present in the as-

environment. Most of these vessels in turn were
above). Other sites with bone-tempered pottery
having a “fugitive red” decoration or a “red wash”
and allowed to cool in the open air. The remainder
of the sherds from the Boriack Bog locality are
The consistency in
ters who made these vessels were well-versed in

47) and other sites along the upper Texas coast.
Brushed pottery is also found in East Central
and Central Texas sites, some likely to have been
of East Texas Caddo manufacture and occurring on
vessels with both grog and bone temper, but with
other brushed vessels of local derivation, including

Texas Archeological Society
Boothe Brushed from several Toyah phase sites
in the Brazos and Colorado River basins (Ricklis
petrographic and instrumental neutron activation
analysis of a sample of East Central Texas brushed
sherds would need to be conducted to determine
which kinds of brushed pottery vessels were of
local manufacture and which vessels were likely
to have been obtained in trade with East Texas
Caddo groups.
Despite the similarities between the Boriack
Bog decorated sherds and the range of decorated
sherds in selected Toyah phase sites, the Boriack
Bog ceramics are not considered to be of Toyah
cidence of sandy paste sherds at Boriack Bog and
other sites in the post oak savannah of East Central
Texas. Instead, the bone-tempered, bone-tempered/
sandy paste, and sandy paste sherds from Boriack
Bog are thought likely to be part of a local Late
Prehistoric ceramic tradition that still remains to be

and Toyah phase groups to the west and southwest.
The aboriginal ceramic sherds from the Boriack Bog locality are part of an indigenous East
Central Texas ceramic tradition dating from at least
buried in deposits not stratigraphically far above
those that contained a Perdiz arrow point. This
ceramic tradition is characterized by the manufacture of both well-smoothed bone-tempered and
bone-tempered sandy paste vessels, most of which
are plain, along with non-tempered sandy paste
vessels. Some of the bone-tempered and sandy
paste vessels are decorated, however, including
examples at Boriack Bog with an interior red slip
or red clay wash or faint brushing. Comparable
ceramic assemblages have been reported in the
Navasota, Brazos, and Colorado river basins (see

Fayette County Sites, Colorado River Basin
blage totaled 81 sherds. During analysis, seven

temper/coarse sandy paste; and (7) bone temper/
decorative elements include incised lines and
punctations. One sherd with a drill hole was also
found. Sherd thicknesses vary from 5 mm to 7 mm.
Surfaces are largely smoothed with some evidence
of burnishing. Several sherds exhibited scraping on
their exterior and/or interior surfaces. The oxidization patterns noted on the sherds indicate the use
oxidized to reduced.
Eleven sherds from the Sandbur site were
were submitted for instrumental neutron activa-

during macroscopic examination, with any differences being primarily due to the relative abundance
of sand in the paste matrix and the average size of
assemblage had been tempered with crushed bone
that occurred in varying proportions, representing
sions in the matrix. In general, the petrographic
analysis of the Sandbur site ceramics showed
marked similarities to many of the sandy paste and

-

analogous to the compositional variation of ceramics from East/Southeast Texas. The characteristic
oxidation patterns and scored surfaces observed on
several of the Sandbur site sherds are reminiscent
of ceramics found in assemblages in the Brazos
ceramic assemblage at the Sandbur site suggests
the presence of multiple ceramic traditions that are
closely tied to each other.
The Cedar Bridge site (41FY74) is located
along Cedar Creek in the Colorado River basin
general, the ceramics recovered at the Cedar Bridge
site closely resemble those found in Southeast
Texas coast assemblages. The ceramic assemblage

subgroups that are presumed to be related. Only

Perttula and Ellis—Aboriginal Ceramics Among Groups in the Prairie Savanna Region of Texas
minor color changes separate the four subgroups.
Pastes in this group have non-plastic inclusions
consisting of large amounts of rounded sand
grains, with small proportions of pulverized bone

but they are rarely polished. Nineteen percent are
smudged.
in this group have paste fabrics containing large
that are rarely polished. Six percent are smudged.

or badly eroded. The only decorated sherd in the
assemblage (one exhibiting small linear punctations) is included in this group.
Santa Maria Creek Site (41CW104),
Caldwell County, Texas
The Santa Maria Creek site in Caldwell County
of the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods.

bone used to temper the ceramics occurs as small,
crushed, angular fragments that are relatively
sparsely distributed throughout a sandy paste ma-

contains natural sands with no additional tempering
agents. Only one bone-and-grog tempered sherd
was found. The textural differences between the
were used to manufacture the ceramics found at the
site. Given their overall sandy matrix and general
textural differences, the Santa Maria Creek ceramics closely resemble those found in assemblages

Second, all exterior and interior surfaces on the
surface treatment mode also has a high frequency
occurrence in Mossy Grove assemblages located
surfaces have demonstrated spatial and temporal
variability at a number of inland and coastal sites

surface treatment mode has been inconsistently
recorded, partly due to its tendency to weather
away. Thus, it may be more widespread that presently known.
Third, the presence of sherds with smudged
ing practices. The low percentage of sherds (8
percent) at the site that exhibit smudged interior
surfaces is consistent with research that shows a
distributional disjunction between ceramic traditions located to the north/west and those located

this attribute has been inconsistently recorded or

of different manufacturing traditions and/or broad
scale interactions with neighboring groups with
different ceramic traditions. In particular, when
the Santa Maria Creek ceramic assemblage is
compared with other sites in the region, they seem
to align more closely with the ceramic traditions
to the east/southeast.
This assessment is further supported by the
paste composition (i.e., paste constituency and
paste texture) among the Santa Maria Creek site
ceramics indicates that more than one paste preparation and fabricating technique was used to manufacture the vessels. This could indicate changing
ceramic manufacturing techniques among members
of the same cultural group or it could also indicate
the presence of different ceramic traditions associated with different cultural groups. The results of
the 15 samples, largely due to four samples whose
compositional variability differs from the other 10
shows elevated concentrations of many elements
such as chromium and scandium. Interestingly, this
sherd was the only bone-and-grog-tempered sherd
recovered at the site.
The remaining 10 samples show greater similarity and likely represent the local production of
ceramic vessels. This is suggested by the comparison of the Santa Maria Creek site samples to

Texas Archeological Society
Most of these 15 compositional groups represent
localized production. While the Santa Maria Creek
site samples do not match any of the current small
groups, there is a match with one of the larger
reference groups that points to the regionally local
production of most of the samples. When comparisons were made between the ceramics from the
Santa Maria Creek site and the Sandbur site, there
is evidence of small scale production and localized
exchange between the two sites. This suggests that
the bone-tempered ceramics found at sites in this
transitional zone may indeed represent a series of
localized regional ceramic types.
Summary and Conclusions
sites indicate that ceramic vessels in the Prairie
or Post Oak Savanna of east central Texas began

this volume), as well as Southeast Texas coastal
Much of the ceramics resembling Caddo pottery styles are found in Prairie Savanna sites in the
Trinity and Navasota River basins that date after
vanna, little in the way of Caddo pottery has been
documented from sites in the middle and lower
reaches of the Brazos and Colorado River basins.

been completed on many Prairie Savanna ceramics,
that much of the Caddo pottery found in Prairie
Savanna sites was made in East Texas by Caddo
potters, and the vessels were probably the product
of periodic trade between Caddo and non-Caddo
peoples. In certain circumstances, however, some
of the Caddo pottery found in the region was probably made by Caddo peoples who at certain times

ago, but they were not common and did not beperhaps 1000 years ago, and only then in certain
parts of the region, particularly sites in the Trinity
and Navasota River basins. The earliest ceramics
in the region were non-tempered and plain sandy
surfaces, most likely related to Goose Creek Plain
and Bear Creek Plain sandy paste ceramics found
on sites in inland and coastal settings in Southeast
and East Texas. Plain sandy paste bone-tempered
wares in the region are documented as early as

potters that made these sandy paste wares began
to occasionally decorate them with incised and
punctated design elements, or they applied a thin
red wash or slip to one or both vessel surfaces.
More dramatic changes in the aboriginal

grog, bone, and hematite temper mixtures. Vessels
generally had a sandy paste, but in other instances,
clayey or silty pastes were chosen for use in vessel manufacture. Different vessel forms came into
use alongside jars and bowls of various sizes and
volumes, including bottles and carinated bowls.
grog- and bone-tempered vessels from local sites
had styles/decorative elements closely resembling
Caddo pottery made in East Texas (see Perttula,

established permanent settlements in parts of the
Trinity and Navasota River basins.
These temporal and spatial differences in the
character of aboriginal ceramic assemblages in
the Prairie Savanna indicate the existence of different manufacturing traditions and/or broad scale
interactions with neighboring groups with different ceramic traditions. In some cases, ceramics
on Prairie Savanna sites seem to align with the
ceramic traditions to the east/southeast in East and
Southeast Texas, including coastal groups. When
comparisons were made between the ceramics from
sites in the Prairie Savanna, there is evidence of
small scale production and localized exchange, and
the development of localized ceramic practices.
Bone-tempered wares were present throughout
the region long before bone-tempered Leon Plain
phase groups in Central Texas (see Creel et al., this
volume); plain bone-tempered sandy paste ceramics are found at sites in this region dating as early

Thus, we have two temporally and geographically
distinct technological traditions based on the use of
bone temper, and there are probably several others
yet to be recognized, depending on site locations in
the Post Oak Savanna. It is clear that not all bonetempered sherds in this region are “Leon Plain.”
To enhance our understanding of aboriginal
ceramics, in addition to the basic documentation

Perttula and Ellis—Aboriginal Ceramics Among Groups in the Prairie Savanna Region of Texas
of the character of sherd assemblages, it is important that ceramic studies be done that look at the
technological variability of the sherds in Prairie
Savanna assemblages. This would include the
systematic sorting of key variables such as paste

If the pottery cycle is viewed as a continuous
nology of prehistoric ceramics can be summarized in

attributes, as well as decorative elements (when
present). More extensive radiocarbon dating of
archeological sites in the region is needed to better establish with precision the initial appearance
and age of ceramic-bearing assemblages. The
direct dating of residues on sherds would also
be of chronological utility, but the study of those
residues could also contribute information on the
range of foods that were processed and cooked by
peoples living in the Prairie Savanna.
quires an integrated approach that includes a suite
of studies that used together provide an effective
means of addressing process-oriented research problems, as well as questions addressing spatial/temporal
distributions. Only by expanding our theoretical and
methodological research designs can we begin to discuss the role that ceramics may have played among
native groups living in this part of Texas.
Every study of prehistoric ceramics centers on

an individual and as a member of a particular group,
he/she devises a strategy for meeting that need. In
the pottery production stage, the potter acquires the
raw materials and tools (apparatus/hardware). Then,
using his/her idiosyncratic and/or cultural technological knowledge (technique/software), the potter
constructs and/or decorates a pot by making a set
of choices in a process sequence executed within a
particular organization of production and decorative
choices, either alone or in cooperation with others.

quires a basic understanding of ceramic technology
and its place within a larger technological system

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

third question requires knowledge of the distributraditions. Thus, any comprehensive technological
analysis of ceramics in the Prairie Savanna, or any
other part of what is now Texas, should provide
an understanding of the ways in which pottery use
well as how pots are distributed across space and
through time. Pottery technology involves both the
human activities that made the pot, as well as the
technological activities involved in the use of the
pot. Because ceramic technology encompasses a
number of multi-faceted components that are both
abstract (e.g., the need and the conceptual notion

and its actual use), the study of ceramic technology is best understood if we have some means of
organizing its basic components.

state technology of pottery use. When the pot breaks,
its sherds may become the apparatus/hardware in yet
another technological system (i.e., as spindle whorls,
grog tempering for new pots, or ceramic knives,
etc.) or they may drop out of the system entirely to
become part of refuse. That is where archeologists
begin their attempts to unravel the pottery cycles of
of Texas or elsewhere, at particular times and places.

We thank Lance Trask and Candace Wallace
respectively, for this article. Ellis would also like
to thank the Texas Department of Transportation
for sponsoring research at the Santa Maria Creek
site (41CW104) and for permission to publish the
ceramic data from the site. Ellis would also like
to thank Luminent for their ongoing work in the

REFERENCES CITED

Regions. In Regional Summaries of Prehistoric and
early Historic Ceramics in Texas for the Council of
Texas Archeologists, assembled and edited by L. W.
-

Texas Archeological Society

Indians of the Upper Texas Coast
New York.

In Archeological Data Recovery at Site 41FB255, Fort
Bend County, Texas, by R. Rogers, L. W. Ellis, and

Lake Naconiche. In Archeological Investigations at
Texas
Bement, L.C., W. Bartholomew, G. Goode, S. Hall, and S.
Robinson
Excavations at 41BP19, the Kennedy Bluffs Site,
Bastrop County, Texas
ology, Report No. 5. Texas State Department of

Final Report
National Register Testing Of Site 41BO217, Brazoria
County, Texas, by B. Dixon, D. Latham, L. W. El-

Bowman, B. F.
tory of Burleson County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society
Brewington, R. L.
The Anson
Jones Plantation: Archaeological and Historical
Investigations at 41WT5 and 41WT6, Washington
County, Texas

College Station.
Brown, D.
Archaeological Investigations in the Texas Municipal
Power Agency Gibbons Creek Mine Areas, Grimes
County, Texas
Corbin, J. E., J. M. Williams, V. J. Galan, and R. St. John
Cultural Resource Survey of Fort Boggy State Park,
. Texas Parks and Wildlife De-

A Compositional Analysis of Central Texas HunterGatherer Ceramics and its Implications for Mobility,
Ethnic Group Territory, and Interaction. Prewitt and

Regional
Summaries of Prehistoric and Early Historic Ceramics in Texas for the Council of Texas Archeologists,
-

Ellis, L. W. and G. L. Ellis
In Test Excavations at 41FB199, 41FB200, and
41FB202 in Cullinan Park, Fort Bend County,
Texas, Volume II
sulting, Houston.
Data Recovery Excavations at
H. Cullinan Park, Fort Bend County, Texas, by R. G.
Moore, L. W. Ellis, G. L. Ellis, L. S. Zimmerman,

Consulting, Houston.
Texas Coastal Ceramics. In Data Recovery Excavations at 41HR751, Woodforest Road, Harris County,
, by N.
Hubbard, with contributions by L. W. Ellis, W. McClure, L. Nordt, and L. Zimmerman. Draft, Report
Consulting, Houston.

Ellis, L. W.
Archeological Data Recovery
Excavations at the Kingwood Site, 41HR616, Harris
County, Texas
cal Consulting, Houston.

Ellis, L. W., R. Rogers, J. R. Ferguson, and M. Glascock
Archeological Investigations
at the Santa Maria Creek Site (41CW104), Caldwell
County, Texas, by R. Rogers, B. Harris, L. W. Ellis,
C. Wallace, H. Rush, J. Shipp, M. Shoberg, J. R.

Perttula and Ellis—Aboriginal Ceramics Among Groups in the Prairie Savanna Region of Texas
Fields, R. C.
A Cultural Resource Assessment of the Calvert and
Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas
Texas
College Station, Texas.
Archeological Impact Evaluations and Surveys in
the Texas Department of Transportation’s Bryan,
Corpus Christi, San Antonio, and Yoakum Districts,
2000-2001

Excavations at the Bottoms, Rena Branch, and Moccasin Springs Sites, Jewett Mine Project, Freestone
. Reports of Investigations

Greaves, R. D.
Archaeological Survey of Huntsville State Park
and Excavations in 41WA47, Walker County, Texas.

Hall, G. D.
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory
. Research

Hamilton, D. L.
Fields, R. C., S. V. Lisk, J. M. Jackson, M. D. Freeman, and
G. L. Bailey
National Register Assessments of Archeological
County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 48.

County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society
Jelks, E. B.
-

National Register of Historic Places Eligibility Test-

Jurney, D. H. (editor)
Archeological Survey, Historic Site Evaluations, and

Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth

Counties, Texas

National Register of Historic Places Eligibility TestSite, Fayette County, Texas
Document No.

Gadus, E. F. and R. C. Fields
.
Retrospective. In The Toyah Phase of Central Texas:
,

Data Recovery Excavations at the J. B. White Site
. Reports of InArcheology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas:
A Planning Document. Cultural Resource Manage-

Data Recovery Excavations at the McGuire’s Garden
Site (41FT425), Jewett Mine, Freestone County,
Texas

Final Report of Cultural Resource Investigation at the
Cummins Creek Mine, Fayette County, Texas. Stud-

Texas Archeological Society
Mallouf, M. G.
and Winter 1977. Research Report No. 71. Texas

Neches River Basin Caddo Ceramic Tradition. In

East Texas
Moore, R. G.
Moore W. E. and R. G. Moore
An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Trinity
River Authority Waterline Project, Walker County,
Texas. Report of Investigations No. 171. Moore

In Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document

the Navasota River in Madison County, Texas.
Tierra, in press.
Archaeological Investigations at Fort Boggy State

Prewitt, E. R.
Upper Navasota Reservoir: Archeological Test
.
-

Na,

Prewitt, E. R. and M. G. Mallouf
Upper Navasota Reservoir: Test Excavations at
. Research Report No.

tion of Southeast Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas,
Northeast Texas Pineywoods. In The Prehistory of
Texas
Analysis of Prehistoric Ceramic Sherds from
41RT522, Robertson County, Texas. Letter Report
-

Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas. Stud-

Prehistoric Site (41RT510) in the Post Oak Savanna,
Robertson County, Texas.

Roemer, E., Jr. and S. B. Carlson
Excavations at 41BU16: State Highway 21 at the
Brazos River, Burleson County, Texas. Contract Re-

Savanna, Leon County, Texas.
County, Texas: Results of the Data Recovery Excavations at Five Prehistoric Archeological Sites

Lee County, Texas. Houston Archeological Society
Journal
.

Division, Texas State Department of Highways and
Rogers, R.
National Register Testing of Nine Prehistoric Sites
at the Gibbons Creek Third Five-Year Mine Area,
Grimes County, Texas
National Register Testing of Six Archaeological Sites
Grimes County, Texas

-

Perttula and Ellis—Aboriginal Ceramics Among Groups in the Prairie Savanna Region of Texas
Data Recovery at Three Prehistoric Sites at the
Gibbons Creek Third Five-Year National Register
Assessment of Three Archaeological Sites at the
.
Excavations at Site 41GM224 in the Gibbons Creek

The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas
ogy, Washington, D.C.

Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

Texas
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
ciety, and Bulletin No. 4, Texas Memorial Museum,

Grimes County Texas

Archaeological Investigations at the Chesser Site
.

Turpin, J. and S. M. Carpenter
Continuing Cultural Resource Management at CalCounty

Shafer, H. J.
People of the Prairie: A Possible Connection to
the Davis Site Caddo. Research module published
riecaddomodule.pdf.

-

Van der Leeuw, S. E.
ramic Cycle. In The Many Dimensions of Pottery:
Ceramics in Archaeology and Anthropology, edited

Sherman, D. L., B. Gearhart, and L. W. Ellis
NRHP Eligibility Testing of Seven Prehistoric Sites
Wheat, J. B.
. Document
Skelton, D. W
Archeological Investigations at the Fayette Power
Project, Fayette, Texas

Southeast Texas. In The Addicks Dam Site. River
Basin Surveys Papers No. 4, Pt. 1, Bulletin of the
Smithsonian Institute, Washington, D.C.
Winchell, F. and L. W. Ellis
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Adaptation to the Inland

Skokan, E.
Excavation at Sites 41GM166,
nite Mine, Grimes County Texas, by R. Rogers, pp.

The
Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal
Plain, Vol. 1
nett, M. D. Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B.

Survey, Fayetteville.

Texas, edited by H. B. Ensor and D. L. Carlson, pp.
College Station.

Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study
of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics
Linda W. Ellis

ABSTRACT
East Texas Woodland period ceramic assemblages often exhibit vessels representing one or more of the three
summarizing the general characteristics of these ceramic traditions, this article presents the results of a detailed
comparison of the ceramic assemblages found at four key sites located within the Sabine River drainage in the
portunity to compare early ceramic assemblages from known sites and expand our database of technological
and decorative attributes associated with Woodland period ceramics in East Texas.

INTRODUCTION

period, lithic raw material utilization remained

the Woodland period in East Texas is marked by
points. Excavations at burial mounds sites such
settlement patterns. The archeological evidence
suggests that these changes were characterized by
the gradual addition of new technologies over a

Woodland people living in East Texas were primarily hunter-gatherers or small-scale horticulturists
who lived in increasingly larger groups for longer
periods of time, maintaining longer-term (re)occupations at single sites. Increasing evidence suggests
that drainage basins served as geographically based

While there is some evidence of possible
daubed pole and thatch structures, habitation
features such as midden deposits, the remains of
earth ovens, storage pits, and/or burned rock concentrations are often found in Woodland period
-

panying non-local burial goods such as translucent
quartz, copper beads, ear spools, and marine shells
suggest that Woodland sites were part of a much
broader regional cultural pattern. These broadin the presence of Lower Mississippi Valley (LMV)
Tchefuncte and Marksville ceramics, as well as
Williams Plain pottery, that accompany the introduction of ceramic technology to the region. LMV
ceramics occur with some frequency in early to

pottery becomes more widespread, albeit in rela-

led to the location of sites more closely associsubsistence regimes are indicated by ground stone
tools such as pitted stones, manos, grinding slabs,
mullers, and anvils that appear in assemblages in

processing was facilitated by the increasing use

reasons for these shifts in subsistence, technology,
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 84 (2013)

140

Texas Archeological Society
!

3GA3 (Poole)

!
!

Oklahoma

3GA51 (Cooper)

3GA53 (Means)

Wann

Arkansas
!

Fourche Maline Culture

3LA6 (Johnny Ford)
!

41HP102

41HP137

3MI6 (Crenshaw)

41CS8

! !
!

3LA6 (Shane's)

41TT108
(Tankersley Creek Site)

!

!

41VN6 !
(Yarbrough)

Mill Creek Culture
41SM282
41HS231
!
!
(Holmes Site)
!
!
41SM273
41RK26 !
(Broadway Site) (Folly Site)

!

3LA21 (Red Hill)

41HS16
(Resch Site)

!

16BO4 (Bellevue)

!

41RK222
(Herman Ballew)
41NA236
(Naconiche Creek Site)

41NA285
(Boyette Site)

!!
!

41NA27
(Deshazo Site)
!

!

16DS203
(Haddens Bend)

41SA117
(Wolfshead Site)

Louisiana

41SA101
(Jonas Short Mound)

Texas
!

41PK69
41PK8
(Jones Hill)

!

!

!

41PK21
Mossy Grove Culture

!

Woodland Site
Woodland Culture Areas

I
0

50

Figure 2
Woodland Culture Areas
and Some of the Better Known
Woodland Period Sites

100
Miles

Path: AN:\Clients\S_T\TxDOT\100018032\geo\figs\Woodland_Sites.mxd

Figure 1. Woodland culture areas and some of the better known sites.

Revised: 1/2/2013

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics
and settlement patterns are still the subject of
discussion, the archeological evidence shows that
Woodland period sites in East Texas share certain
similarities to sites from eastern Oklahoma, south-

also certain key differences. Based on these differences, three major Woodland Period traditions,
whose boundaries partially overlap, have been

on current research, these three cultural traditions
appear to be temporally contemporaneous, dating
The most distinctive of these are the Fourche
Maline cultural tradition that encompasses porof Oklahoma, Louisiana, and Texas (Schambach
tion that covers an area extending from southwestern Louisiana, southeastward along the upper
Texas Gulf coast, and inland into the southern part

Creek culture, in an area centered in East Texas,
primarily sites in the Big Cypress and Sabine River

141

Sites are typically relatively large, with deep middens, often containing burials, suggesting possibly
continuous occupation based on horticulture and

include Gary dart points, seed grinding stones,
boatstones, double-bitted axes (probably hoe-like
gardening tools), modeled clay platform pipes, and
Poole clay pipes.
The Fourche Maline ceramic tradition is
known for its plain and minimally decorated ves-

thick walled and tempered with a variety of materials including clay/grog, crushed bone, “grit,”
and/or sand. The most common pottery type is
Williams Plain, followed by Cooper Boneware and
of contact with LMV peoples is represented by
small quantities of Tchefuncte, Marksville, and
Coles Creek pottery types recovered at many of the
larger sites; however, many of these appear to be
locally made, and may or may not be temporally
contemporaneous with these pottery types as they
Some of the earliest evidence of the Fourche
Maline culture comes from sites along Fourche
Maline Creek in eastern Oklahoma and the Ouachiand the Great Bend area of northwestern Louisiana

FOURCHE MALINE
The Fourche Maline culture covers an area
kansas that extends into the Ouachita Mountains of
eastern Oklahoma, and southeast into northwestern
East Texas, it extends to just south of the Red River
and its tributary, the Sulphur River. Schambach
area as being much more extensive, including sites
lower reaches of the Trinity River, but these inclusions are deemed highly conjectural by Black and

was described as poorly mixed, with an unpulverized, granular clay temper. Paste color varies from
gray to dark brown. Rims were normally straight
with predominately rounded, then tapered lip
ent. Thicknesses are highly variable, but average
thick, and circular in outline; however, a small
number of square bases were also recovered. No
complete pots were found, but the primary form
was apparently large bowl-shaped vessels.
The remaining 8 percent of the ceramics in-

The Fourche Maline cultural tradition has its
ants of Williams Plain. They were clay-tempered,

Texas Archeological Society
with sparse amounts of hematite and quartz sand
inclusions evenly distributed in the well-mixed
paste fabric. Paste color was normally black. Surfaces were well smoothed and thicknesses ranged
from 4-7 mm with an average of 5 mm. Rim forms
suggest simple straight walled vessels with lip
74 were decorated. Decorative attributes involved
incised lines with motifs consisting primarily of
chevrons, but parallel straight lines, parallel wavy
lines, bulls eye patterns, and circles enclosed
within connected diamond patterns also occurred.
In most cases, the designs terminate at an incised
straight line, often running parallel to the rim.
tion outside of Oklahoma was W. Raymond Wood
cated on the upper Ouachita River in southwestern
alluvial terrace and found burials in each area, as
well as the remains of a large rectangular house in
one area, but there was no evidence of the typical

or bone- tempered pastes. Late Woodland period
pottery was dominated by jars and simple bowls
and bone-tempered vessels occur, assemblages are
usually dominated by grog-tempered wares and
Sites with discrete Woodland components are
not numerous in the far northeastern part of Texas,
and our knowledge of such sites comes in large part
from salvage excavations in the Sulphur River basin carried out in anticipation of the Texarkana and
per Reservoir area is located in the Middle to South
Sulphur River drainage. In the upper portion of the
basin, sites with Woodland components include

presence of three distinctive groups of ceramic

shaped vessels reminiscent of Williams Plain, and
ceramics with decorative techniques reminiscent
of one or another of the Coles Creek types com-

Texarkana Reservoir area is located in the lower

of sites, one of the most notable being the Snipes
pipes were also recovered.
South of the Poole site, Fourche Maline com-

and Coles Creek Incised vessels.

diagnostic artifacts included Cooper Boneware
Fourche Maline sites in these areas, ceramics are
the artifact assemblage.
In nearby northwestern Louisiana, the earliest
pottery is irregularly distributed and appears to
have been fairly sporadic until the Middle Wood-

evident in the technological similarities observed
in the local wares. While many of the ceramics
recovered here are characterized by crude, poorly
wedged, and non-tempered pastes, the majority of
Middle Woodland period ceramics are relatively
thick, undecorated wares with coarse grog- and/

MOSSY GROVE CULTURE/
TRADITION
The Mossy Grove culture/tradition lies to the
south of the middle Sabine River basin, occupying
an area that extends from the Brazos River Delta up
the Texas coast to the Sabine River Delta and adjacent southwestern Louisiana (see Figure 1). The
earliest ceramics appear in and around the Sabine
Lake and the Galveston Bay area and are technologically related to the Tchefuncte and Marksville
types of the LMV. The archeological evidence
shows that the technological traditions and adaptive strategies evinced during the Woodland period
represent regionally distinct manifestations that
this designation as a heuristic concept to link and
facilitate discussion of a number of similar yet locally distinct cultural manifestations.

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics
Most characteristic of the Mossy Grove culture
is its sandy paste ceramic tradition. In contrast to
wares, Mossy Grove ceramics are typically thinner
and decorated ceramics occur in low frequency.
When decorated, they most often have narrow incised lines and punctations. Mossy Grove ceramic
assemblages are dominated by sandy paste wares
conical-shaped bases. Bone- and/or grog-tempered
wares do not appear until late in the Mossy Grove

Within the Mossy Grove tradition, regional
variations in settlement and subsistence patterns
al margins and the Inland Coastal Plain. Both temporal and spatial differences existed between the

assemblage is in line with similarly aged Mossy
Gove sites given the presence of plain sandy paste

tempered pottery; however, Marksville Stamped
sherds were also recovered.

MILL CREEK CULTURE/
TRADITION
Our knowledge of the Mill Creek culture
comes primarily from sites located in the Big
Cypress and Sabine River basins and the upper

sandy paste ceramics being the most unifying trait.
Mossy Grove culture encompassed Woodland period archeological sites that extended as far inland

point to a people who were primarily “huntinggathering foragers” with relatively mobile settlements and a material culture dominated by plain
sandy paste ceramics and dart points. By about
ment location from the uplands/high ridge tops to

a developing sedentism possibly tied to a shift in

Compared to Fourche Maline assemblages in
the Great Bend region of the Red River (Schambach
riod Mossy Grove sites is much less abundant. Ma-

the Lake Naconiche area, such as the Boyette site
not nearly as rich or the artifacts nearly as varied
posits at inland Mossy Grove sites are marked by
small lithic scatters, small numbers of sandy paste

the Woodland period components from sites in the
Mill Creek culture area show distinct similarities
amongst one another, there are also discernible
contrasts with the neighboring and roughly contemporary Fourche Maline cultures to the north
and the Mossy Grove cultures to the south (see
Figure 1).
The earliest pottery in the Mill Creek culture
area dates to around 500 B.C., and ceramic assemblages at Mill Creek sites are quite small when
compared to Fourche Maline or Mossy Grove sites
They are, however, more technologically variable, exhibiting a mix of plain sandy paste wares,
bone-tempered wares, and thinner grog-tempered
wares. Since thinner grog-tempered wares occur
early in the Mill Creek culture area, they are more
likely to be related to LMV wares than to the lateroccurring grog-tempered Mossy Grove ceramics.
There is also a high representation of ceramics with
laminated and contorted paste textures, reminiscent
of LMV Tchefuncte and Marksville wares (Girard
relatively thick bone-tempered sherds found at several Mill Creek sites may be related to the Fourche

smoothed surface treatments may be analogous
rocks. Several sites in the Livingston Reservoir

144

Texas Archeological Society

pear until late in the sequence in parts of the Mossy

the Goose Creek sandy paste tradition of the Mossy

ernmost extension of the Mossy Grove culture area,
in the Conroe-Livingston Reservoir area, where

the main differences between ceramic-bearing assemblages at sites in this part of the Mossy Grove
cultural area and ceramic assemblages in Middle
Sabine River basin sites such as Folly (Jarvis

are the presence of large quantities of bone-andgrog-tempered ceramics that suggest closer ties to
The same holds true for the locally made
variants of the Tchefuncte-like pottery recovered

its relatively soft, clay-tempered paste (Ford and

are the defining characteristics; however, sherds
from East and Southeast Texas have paste fabrics
that generally contain higher proportions of sand
inclusions and are temper-less. By contrast, Tchefuncte vessels manufactured in the LMV have less

Thus, while the Mill Creek ceramics share
some elements of both the Fourche Maline and
Mossy Grove ceramic traditions, Mill Creek
ceramic assemblages also show conspicuous
variations. In general, Mill Creek sites possess
ceramics in much lower numbers; however, they
exhibit a much wider variety of temper and paste
types. Ceramic assemblages are composed primarily of undecorated wares, but when decorated,
elements reminiscent of LMV decorative motifs.
Interestingly, while ceramics are lower in overall
frequency of occurrence at Mill Creek sites, decorated ceramics occur in higher percentages in Mill
Creek ceramic assemblages than they do in Mossy
Grove ceramic assemblages. The technological
diversity of Mill Creek ceramic assemblages are
one of the more telling contrasts and one that
speaks to the blending of distinct ceramic traditions in this region. Examples from several sites
will illustrate this diversity.

light weight due to the large voids in the paste.
had a rather ephemeral late Woodland occupation.
vegetal material, and/or crushed hematite. Exterior
with stamped designs, incised lines, and/or punctations. The most common vessel forms are simple
“wedge-shaped” basal supports, often occurring
in sets of four.
ceramics are found in Mill Creek assemblages
tive ceramics also occur frequently in Mossy
-

were associated with the Woodland component.
One incised and punctated sherd was tentatively
two Williams Plain vessels were also recovered.
Vessel 1 was a small undecorated, cup-shaped
mm thick. It was a grog-tempered vessel whose
black core, exterior, and interior surfaces indicate

shaped vessel. It has a grog-tempered paste and
the technological attributes of these locally made
variants only loosely fit the standard type descrip-

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics

145

carbon date obtained from charred wood found

that they are from vessels made from local middle
Sabine River clays.

ple of a site that shows the presence of more than
one pottery manufacturing tradition (Walters and
-

marily grog-tempered and relatively thin walled.

but interesting, ceramic assemblage is stylistically
similar to the LMV types Coles Creek Incised, var.
Coles Creek, Chevalier Stamped, var. Chevalier,
and Marksville Stamped, var. Troyville (Walters

bone and hematite inclusions; however, the bonetempered sherds were not as thick or as coarsely
tempered as Cooper Boneware. Very few coarse
sandy paste sherds were recovered, and no obvipercent were decorated, a rather high number when
compared to contemporaneous sites (Perttula and
that the site may have been occupied between ca.

by a Late Woodland period group. The relative
abundance of the Coles Creek Incised ceramics
leaves open the possibility that the Holmes site
may also have been occupied during the Formative
intriguing are the results of Instrumental Neutron
the Coles Creek Incised, var. Coles Creek sherds,
which indicates that at least one of the Coles Creek
Incised sherds from the site was made from a local

The variations in ceramic assemblages and
other site differences suggest that a distinct cultural
pattern existed in the Mill Creek Culture area of
East Texas. Sorting out its spatial and temporal
implications will take consistent and detailed
analyses of ceramic attributes from well excavated
ceramic-bearing Woodland sites. Toward this end,
the remainder of this article presents the results of
a detailed comparison of the ceramic assemblages
found at four key sites located within the Sabine
River drainage and the Mill Creek Culture area

Thus, it appears to be a locally made vessel and
not a trade vessel, leading Walters and Perttula
from this East Texas site represent ceramics whose
stylistic decorative attributes were borrowed by
local potters from other aboriginal groups, probably in Northwest Louisiana rather than the more
distant LMV.”
from the Holmes site, and is located on a small
tributary in the Sabine River basin. The site has
-

the focus of extensive archeological excavations
and their distinctive assemblage variations set
them apart from similarly aged sites in the Fourche

an excellent opportunity to not only compare early
ceramic assemblages from known sites but to expand our database of technological and decorative
attributes associated with Woodland period ceramics in East Texas.

sherds. Most are from grog-tempered vessels (70
percent), 15 percent are grog-hematite-tempered,
half of the sherds have a sandy paste, and two of
these sandy paste sherds are non-tempered. Decorated sherds have straight incised lines, and may
be from Coles Creek Incised vessels (Shafer and

-

Texas Archeological Society
Herman Ballew (41RK222)

ceramic assemblage was small (n=157 sherds).
The primary goal of the work was to assess the
site in terms of Woodland period adaptations in
the middle Sabine River basin, and the analyses
focused on the recovered ceramic and lithic assemblages. Radiocarbon dating of both carbonized
organic material, the carbonized residue found on
sherd indicate multiple occupations of the site. The
artifacts and radiocarbon dates suggest that the
primary occupations occurred during the Early to
Late Woodland periods (between ca. 400 B.C. and

Resch (41HS16)
wind site. It occupies an area of “only a few acres”

Located on a toe slope above Mill Creek in
Rusk County, the Herman Ballew site lies approximately 40 km west-southwest of the Hawkwind site. The site was subjected to data recovery

were found, but the site also had a large Woodland
component, which included the majority of the
features were recorded, including burned rock
scatters, rock-lined hearths, and storage or cookdates the Woodland period occupations at Herman

sherds are of a variety of pastes and tempers, much
more similar to neighboring Mill Creek sites within
the middle Sabine River basin than those found at
sites associated with the Fourche Maline or Mossy

attested to various occupations between the Middle
was particularly well represented. The investigations produced 1,541 sherds with a wide diversity
of mostly Woodland ceramics, as well as ceramics
closely resembling one or more of the LMV ceramic traditions. Radiocarbon dates range from 400

COMPARATIVE ANALYSES OF
FOUR WOODLAND PERIOD
CERAMIC ASSEMBLAGES
gion, the Woodland ceramic assemblages found at
the Hawkwind, Resch, Folly, and Herman Ballew
sites provide an excellent opportunity to compare
the ceramic attributes that characterize Woodland
period ceramics by using technological attributes

Folly (41RK16)
The Folly site occupied two knolls overlooking Dry Creek in northeastern Rusk County (Jar-

characteristics initially recognized by Webb et al.

sherds. Temper was highly variable among the recovered sherds, and Jarvis noted the similarity of
pottery from this site with the ceramics recovered
at the Resch site, with the presence of an unusual
style of rim notching being present at both sites.
bon dating, the small size of the assemblage and
the types of artifacts recovered suggested a brief
Woodland period occupation by a small group

assemblage have remained important to the characterization of Woodland period ceramics.
To speak to a broad range of issues, an analysis
must be comprehensive enough to capture the array
of stylistic and technological diversity found on
any one group of ceramics. In Woodland assemblages where plain wares predominate and in the
absence of whole vessels or vessel sections large
enough to discern typologically distinct decorative
motifs, one way to distinguish subtle differences
between relatively similar ceramics is to look at
the technological variations found on individual

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics

prehistoric potters, variations in key technological
attributes such as temper, surface treatment, and
thickness bear a direct relationship to the desired

Thus, the ceramics considered here were characterized according to a suite of key technological and,
when possible, stylistic attributes. Each of these
attributes provides information about the abstract
(i.e., the technical knowledge) and the concrete
(i.e., the raw materials) components of the potterymaking process, which in turn tells us something
about the different choices made at various stages
in that process. These differences, in turn, provide
a basis for comparing the technological and stylisthe technological and stylistic variability found in
other ceramic assemblages.
-

paste category (i.e., paste constituency and paste

treatment, (4) forming attributes (including morphological class [i.e., body, base, or rim], rim

147

enabling a more accurate comparative analysis of
the ceramics recovered from each site.
Following analysis at the macro-scale of all
sherds, 17 sherds from the Resch site and two
and petrographic analysis. Ceramic petrography
compares the mineral suites, paste characteristics,
useful in further identifying elemental compositions and possible shared clay source areas. With
this in mind, a raw clay sample collected 400 m
southwest of the Resch site was also submitted for
The sherd samples from the Resch and Folly
sites were chosen on the basis of their similarity
to sherds recovered from the Hawkwind and the
Herman Ballew sites (e.g., similarities in paste, rim
site was also submitted for ceramic petrography
sample from these three sites provide a comprehensive baseline database for Woodland ceramics
in East Texas.

Ceramic Assemblage

environment (i.e., oxidizing or non-oxidizing).
and technological distinctions, which in turn allows
a fuller characterization of the assemblage even in
thereby providing a basis for placing the ceramics
within a broader regional ceramic context. This
analysis also draws on supporting evidence from
other Woodland period ceramic-bearing sites in
the region and the results of petrographic analysis

site involved an initial sort of all the sherds in the
assemblage in order to identify those that could be

made on the basis of similarity in paste, decorative

single sherds for purposes of analysis. Treating
conjoined sherds as single sherds avoids skewing
the analysis toward attributes overrepresented by

The analysis began with the systematic
analysis of the ceramic sherds recovered at the
Hawkwind site. Next, employing the same suite
of attributes used to characterize the Hawkwind
ceramics, a sample of the ceramics recovered at
the Resch site and the entire Folly site ceramic
assemblage were reanalyzed, thus enabling comparability of the ceramic attributes associated with all
detailed analysis of the ceramics from the Herman
Ballew site, assured that the ceramic assemblages
from four of the major middle Sabine River basin
sites were examined in a similar manner, therefore

Paste textures and paste constituencies among
the Hawkwind ceramics are highly variable, re-

Resch site. Four categories of paste texture were

148

Texas Archeological Society
-

not the paste fabric contained (1) non-tempered
clay/grog, (4) only bone, (5) both bone and clay/
dominant grain size and any additional tempering
agents observed in the paste fabric.
rangement and orientation of the grains observed
of any intervening pores or voids. Observations

information on the extent to which the clay was
manipulated during paste preparation (e.g., wedging, kneading) and primary forming (e.g., the
fusion of coil joints). In addition, variability of
shape, and size of non-plastic inclusions and the
manufacturing techniques employed by the potter
Some additives are used in their natural state (i.e.,
coarse sand) and others (i.e., sherds, bone, shell)
are ground, crushed, or pulverized. Some materials
break into relatively uniform grain size or natural
planes (i.e., disintegrated sandstone or shell) while
other materials have no natural planes or cleavage
(i.e., sherds or bone) to determine the size of the
particles that will be formed. Thus, paste texture
is directly related to the type of added or naturally
occurring inclusion found in the paste, and the potIn all, four categories of paste texture are represented at the Hawkwind site. Fine pastes have
small, closely spaced irregularities across the face
of the cross-section. The irregularities are generally due to the presence of larger than average sand
grains, small chunks of hematite, or carbonized
pieces of vegetal material; however, the overall
appearance of the paste fabric is still relatively
uniform, and rarely are coil junctures visible. Only

Twenty-three percent of the sherds have paste
textures that appear irregular in cross-section.
Blocky pastes have textures that are similar to
larities are larger and the paste fabric appears even
more uneven. Coil junctures are often visible and
loosely consolidated due to the large inclusions.
Ten sherds (11 percent) have paste textures that
appear blocky in cross section. Laminated pastes
have a stepped or platy look. In cross-section, the
relatively straight lamina are oriented at an oblique
angle rather than being parallel or perpendicular
to the sherd surface. Coil junctures usually appear
beveled. The direction of the lamina, as well as the
alignment of the coil junctures, provides information about forming techniques. For example, when
laminas are angled toward the interior, this suggests that scraping was done in an upward motion
on the exterior of the vessel and in a downward
motion on the interior. By far, the largest number of
laminated in cross-section.
Thus, if the various textural categories represent locations on a continuum that moves from
loosely worked clay (i.e., contorted) to more
ponderance of the Hawkwind sherds fall toward
the loosely worked end of the continuum. These
textural differences also suggest the variable use of

“recipes” require different aplastic inclusions be
added to the paste, which in turn affects the manipulation of the basic clay fabric during primary
forming. In effect, the larger the inclusions, the
more consistent paste fabric. Conversely, silty sand
working of the basic paste fabric, thereby enabling
Paste constituency was obtained by the microscopic examination of a freshly broken cross secpaste fabrics of the Hawkwind ceramics began with

and it occurred on one of the non-tempered sherds.
Irregular paste textures have large, widely-spaced
irregularities such as hematite nodules, occasional coarse-sized sand grains, and small gravels,
crushed charcoal fragments, or burned-out chaffs
of vegetal material. The paste fabric appears uneven, and the coil junctures are sometimes visible.

range of tempering agents had been added. These
tempering agents occurred as single additives or
in combinations of additives that included one
discontinuously larger-sized sand grains, crushed
hematite, and/or crushed charcoal or other organic

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics

with group designation based on whether or not
the paste fabric contained (1) non-tempered sandy

had been added to the basic paste fabric; however,
there are subtle distinctions between the two in
that “clay-tempered” generally implies the mixing

grog, (4) only bone, (5) both bone-and-clay/grog,

“grog-tempered” implies the addition of fragments

nant grain size and any additional tempering agents
observed in the paste fabric.
Paste Group 1 (PG1) includes only 4 percent of
the analyzed sherds. The sherds consist of a relatively heterogeneous blend of untempered sands.
One sherd with a paste fabric consisting primarily

of inclusions were observed. In some sherds, grog
is recognizable as relatively angular fragments
that stand out from the surrounding paste matrix.
The fragments can be recognized by their distinct
texture, lineations, and/or surface variability that are
oriented differently than the overall paste matrix. In
other sherds, the inclusions appear as rounded clay
lumps that often differ in color and texture from the
surrounding paste matrix. Their differential presence
denotes the mixing of multiple clays or the addition
of lumps of dried clay during primary forming,
which points to the “intentional” blending of clays
to achieve a particular consistency. There are, in
fact, ethnographic examples of potters who mix
two parts of relatively coarse clays “tempered” with

sherds whose basic paste fabric consists primarily

had been tempered with crushed hematite. Both
of these sherds stand out from the rest of the collection in that they have decorative elements that
resemble one or another of the LMV types. Speci-

mixing of clays occurs more often in areas where
large deposits of relatively coarse residual clays

texture that resembles the type Marksville Incised,
var. Yokena

researchers suggest that these rounded clay lumps
result from carelessness in grinding and sifting of
the clay during primary forming rather than being

paste textures whose paste fabric is composed of
predominantly silt-sized particles that had been tem-

notes that whether the potter consciously chose to

is a small, untyped decorated body sherd. Specimen

The paste matrix of the sherds assigned to PG
sand inclusions; however, the paste fabric of the
sherds assigned to these four paste groups had been
tempered with a variety of non-plastic inclusions
such as clay/grog, bone, shell, crushed hematite,
charred organic material, and/or larger-sized sand
grains. The presence of clay/grog, bone-and-clay/
grog, bone, or shell served as the main criteria for
group membership.

tempering agents (or in this case mixing different
clays), simply adding them to the overall clay matrix

regardless of how the additives came to be in the
paste matrix, “temper” has a quantitative implication
modify the properties of the clay matrix. Therefore,
given the general characteristics of the ceramics
with clay lump inclusions and the frequency with
which they occur, these ceramics are considered to
be tempered. Since both clay lumps and grog often
occur in the same sherd, the term clay/grog is used
or grog in the paste.

category denotes a paste that includes detectable
amounts of clay/grog (i.e., raw clay/crushed
sherds). Often the terms “clay-tempered” and
“grog-tempered” are used interchangeably to
describe ceramics to which “clay-like” inclusions

to which varying combinations of crushed hematite, discontinuously larger-sized sand grains, and/
or charred organic material had also been added.

150

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

d

c

f

e

h

g

var. Yokena;
var. Yokena;

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics

151

eight different combinations of tempering agents
were noted. Paste textures among the clay/grogmajority have paste fabrics that appear laminated

Six sherds have blocky textures.
PG 4 is bone and clay/grog-tempered. PG4

includes sherds in which the bone temper was embedded in a paste matrix composed predominantly

paste fabric of the sherds assigned to PG4b (n=8)

and PG5c includes two sherds whose paste matrix
contain primarily silt-sized particles. In addition
to the bone inclusions, 47 percent of the sherds
in this paste group also contain discontinuously
larger-sized sand grains or crushed hematite. In all,
eight different combinations of tempering agents
were observed. Paste textures among the bonetempered sherds are overwhelmingly laminated

(n=7) includes sherds whose paste matrices are

paste textures, and one has a blocky paste texture.

both bone and clay/grog. Based on the predominant
grain size observed in the basic paste fabric, three
bone and clay/grog embedded in a paste matrix

1

variety of other tempering agents, such as crushed
hematite, coarse-sized sand grains, and/or charred
organic material, had also been added to the paste
matrix. In all, 11 different combinations of tempering agents were found in PG4. Paste textures
among the clay/grog-tempered sherds were fairly
equally distributed between those with irregular

sherds. In both sherds, the shell is embedded in a
paste matrix of primarily silt-sized particles. No
additional tempering agents had been used. Both
sherds appear laminated in cross section.
tures across paste groups suggests that there are
distributional differences associated with differ-

Three sherds exhibit blocky paste textures.

the sherds in PG5 have laminated paste textures,
irregular and blocky paste textures are proportionately greater among the clay/grog-tempered

sherds tempered with bone. Three subgroups were

Texas Archeological Society
tempered sherds (PG4). The sherds with irregular
paste textures slightly outnumber those with laminated textures.
In summary, paste textures and paste constituencies among the Hawkwind ceramics are highly

having been used to manufacture the vessels found
at the site. The high variability noted in paste
constituencies and paste textures indicate that several different paste preparation and/or fabricating
techniques had been used to manufacture vessels.
-

sherds have dry-smoothed/burnished exteriors.
By contrast, the majority of interior surfaces are
dry-smoothed/unburnished (50 percent), and one
sherd is dry-smoothed/burnished. Twenty-seven

burnishing with a different hard tool (Dietler and

have had was not enough to outweigh the extra effort. Or, it may be that attempts at burnishing were
more cursory. Thus, any surface luster produced
ing process.
surfaces are fairly equally distributed across the
sherd sample, there appear to be distinct preferences for one technique over the other when
looking at particular paste groups (Figure 4). Drysmoothed exterior surfaces are more common to

on the bone-and-clay/grog-tempered sherds (PG4).
on sherds that contain only bone temper. In addition, dry-smoothed burnished surfaces only occur

interior surface.
Overall, burnishing was not a preferred technique at the Hawkwind site as only three sherds had
that requires a great deal of effort and is affected
by factors such as the properties of the clay, the
mechanical operations of the burnishing technique

only occur on those sherds that contain bone (PG5)
and/or clay/grog and bone (PG4) temper. Floated
among the non-tempered sandy paste (PG1) and

Figure 4. Distribution of basic exterior surface treatment modes across paste groups at the Hawkwind site.

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics
sandy paste sherds found at the Resch site. Thus,
this association does hint at some meaningful differences in the distribution of the various surface
treatment modes.
Nine percent of the sherds recovered at the
all involved techniques that displaced or penetrated
ics are body sherds. One body sherd has a series
of narrow lines that intersect a diagonal line (see

None of the three are typologically distinct.
One small body sherd has two opposing curved
lines and what appear to be the remnants of small
punctations along one of the broken edges (see
elements suggest that it may be a local variant of
designs on the remaining three sherds appear to be
local variants of one or another of the Marksville
types. One sherd has four closely spaced lines that
intersect the remnants of a diagonal line (see Figvar. Yokena
executed on a wet paste. Bulk sherd organics in

In general, thicknesses are highly variable both
within the same sherd, as well as among different
sherds in the sample. The body sherds range in
average thickness of 7.5 ± 1.1 mm. Comparing the
average thickness of the plain body sherds (7.5 ±
1.1) to the average thickness of the decorated rims
(7.4 ± 1.4), the decorated body sherds are somewhat thinner and exhibit a higher standard deviation, while the mean thickness of both the plain
and decorated rims is virtually the same at one and
two standard deviations. There are, however, some
noticeable differences in the average thickness of
body sherds associated with particular paste groups
(Table 1). Since the thickness of the vessel wall
is directly related to the intended appearance and
it may be that the bone-and-clay/grog-tempered
wares may have served a different function(s) than
those tempered only with bone or only with clay/
grog. This same pattern was also observed at the
Resch site where sherds having only bone temper
were the thickest and those with clay/grog temper
supports the use of different “paste recipes” and
strengthens the argument that there may be some
functional difference between the vessels associated with these three paste groups.
The base fragments are also highly variable,

nants of two widely spaced curved lines executed
decorated rim recovered from the site exhibits a
design motif that is reminiscent of LMV Marksville
elements observed on the Hawkwind sherds, as

change in contour. The average thickness of the
exhibits a lower standard deviation than the bases.
However, it is not unexpected that the lower body
sherds would be somewhat thinner than the bases,

sherds are both consistent with other Woodland peThe overall rim characters of the 10 rim sherds
indicate that the vessels in use at the Hawkwind

Table 1. Thickness attributes for body sherds in the major paste groups* from the Hawkwind site.
Mean
Thickness (mm)

Maximum
Thickness (mm)

Minimum
Thickness (mm)

Standard
Deviation (mm)

154

Texas Archeological Society

site were fairly simple straight-walled bowls or

Table 2. Morphological classes in the reanalyzed
ceramic sample from the Resch site.
Morphological Class

N

Base
Plain lower body

14
15

variable. None of the lip edges had been decorated.
Since the only distinctive feature of a direct rim is

between the vessels. If the overall vessel shape is
controlled by the need for containers that serve
vessels at the Hawkwind site appear to include a
narrow range of small to medium-sized simple
vessels that given their highly variable lip edges
served a broad range of functions.
color development observed on sherd surfaces and
paste cores clustered more toward the darker end

Table 3. Count and percent of paste
textures at the Resch site.
Paste Texture

N

Percentage

or reduced amounts of oxygen. This could have
-

some combination of all three variables.

RESCH SITE (41HS16) CERAMIC
ASSEMBLAGE
The Resch site ceramic assemblage includes
a total of 1,541 sherds, and roughly 10 percent
covered were reanalyzed. The sample included a
selection of plain rim sherds, bases, and decorated
when choosing the sample of plain body sherds
from the various paste categories. Examination of
ceramic methods outlined above.

percent of the sample being either laminated, curvilinear, or contorted.
Microscopic examination of each sherd also
mined group membership.
The one sherd assigned to Paste Group (PG)1
had been manufactured with a heterogeneous
mixture of sand that is predominantly in the very
fine size range, containing no additional tempering agents. Due to the relatively uneven mixing
of the sands, its paste texture appears irregular in
cross section.

was assigned to a paste category according to the
cludes two sherds whose basic paste fabrics contain
diverse array of textures ranges from loosely
worked (i.e., contorted) to fairly well worked (i.e.,
irregular); however, the majority cluster toward
the loosely worked end of the spectrum, with 71

which had been tempered with crushed hematite.
One has a laminated paste texture, and one has an
six sherds whose paste fabric is composed of

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics

155

predominantly silt-sized particles to which crushed
hematite, coarse-sized sand, and/or charred organic
material had been added. Paste textures varied from

tempered with both bone and clay/grog. Based on
the predominant grain size observed in the basic

The basic paste fabric of this sherd is composed

(n=8) contains bone and clay/grog embedded in
a paste matrix composed predominantly of very

sand. It has a loosely consolidated paste fabric that
appears laminated in cross section.
The paste matrix of the remaining sherds
amounts of natural sand inclusions; however, the
paste fabric of the sherds in these four paste groups
had been tempered with a variety of inclusions
such as clay/grog, bone, shell, crushed hematite,
charred organic material, and/or discontinuously
larger-sized sand grains. The presence of only clay/
grog, only bone-and-clay/grog, or only bone served
as the main criteria for group membership.
This paste category includes detectable amounts
of clay/grog (i.e., clay lumps and/or crushed potsherds). Both types of inclusions were observed in
the paste fabric. In some sherds, grog is recognizable as relatively angular fragments that stand out
from the surrounding paste matrix. The fragments
can be recognized by their distinct texture, lineations, and/or surface variability that are oriented
differently than the overall paste matrix. In other
sherds, the inclusions appear as rounded clay lumps
that often differ in color and texture from the surrounding paste matrix.

embedded in a paste matrix consisting primar-

whose basic paste fabrics are composed primarily
of silt-sized particles. Further subdivisions were
made based on the variety of additional tempering agents (i.e., crushed hematite, discontinuously
larger-sized sand grains, and/or charred organic
material) observed in the paste. In all, 10 different
combinations of tempering agents were noted.
Paste textures among the clay/grog-tempered
sherds also varied considerably. The majority have
paste fabrics that appear laminated in cross section

Four sherds appear curvilinear in cross section, and
three sherds have contorted paste textures.

agents, such as crushed hematite, coarse-sized
sand grains, and/or charred organic material, had
also been added to the paste matrix. In all, eight
different combinations of tempering agents were
observed among the sherds assigned to PG4.
Paste textures among the bone- and clay/grogtempered sherds are quite varied and include all
texture types. Sherds with laminated paste textures
(n=18) are the most prevalent. Sherds with blocky
(n=8) and irregular (n=4) paste textures are the next

PG 5 includes 48 sherds that had been temwith membership in the subgroups again being
observed in the paste fabric. PG5a (n=7) includes
sherds in which the bone temper was embedded in

matrix consists primarily of silt-sized particles.
consisting primarily of silty-clay paste. In addition
to the bone inclusions, 44 percent of the sherds
in this paste group also contain discontinuously
larger-sized sand grains, charred organic matecombinations of tempering agents were observed.
Paste textures among the bone-tempered sherds are
however, all texture types were observed. Four
sherds have irregular paste textures, and two sherds
contorted (n=4) paste textures were also observed.
In summary, both paste textures and paste
constituencies are highly variable. Five major
nations of tempering agents used to manufacture
the vessels at the site. Five different paste textures

Texas Archeological Society
of textures appear laminated in cross section, the
presence of multiple textures indicates that more
than one paste preparation and/or fabricating
technique was used to manufacture the vessels at
the Resch site. Because different paste “recipes”
require different aplastic inclusions be added to
the paste, this affects the manipulation of the basic

percentage of the bone used to temper the sherds in
PG5 had also been crushed, the overwhelming majority of laminated paste textures associated with
bone-tempered sherds suggests a more consistent
manipulation of the clay during primary forming.
related to the size, shape, and position of the pores,
or voids, existing between the solid particles in the

at the distribution of paste textures across paste
groups provides some evidence for this in that there
are proportional differences in the paste textures
associated with different paste groups (Figure 5).

of bone-tempered sherds with laminated paste fabrics may represent vessels manufactured to serve

PG4 have laminated paste textures, irregular and
blocky paste textures have a higher representation

variable paste constituencies and paste textures
found in the reanalyzed sample indicate that several different paste preparation and/or fabricating
techniques were used to manufacture vessels found

two paste groups than they do in PG5. By contrast,
equally distributed across the remaining textures.
bone-and-clay/grog-temper (PG4) are more thoroughly worked than the other paste groups. This
may in part be due to the fact that a large percentage of the bone and/or grog used to temper the
paste had been crushed, making it easier to work
the clay and achieve a more consistent paste fabric.
Different “paste recipes” may also have functional and/or temporal implications. Since a large

ing diversity” of the ceramics found at the site.
Basic surface treatment modes also varied. Visual inspection of sherds in the reanalyzed sample

lyzed sample, 4 percent of the exterior surfaces and
rior surfaces, the majority of surfaces had been

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics

157

on the reanalyzed sample of sherds from the Resch site.
Basic Exterior Surface Finish

N

Percent

Basic Interior Surface Finish

N

Percent

the bone-tempered sherds (PG5), the split between
had been added to the water used to wet the surface

relatively equal. While among the bone-and-clay/
grog-tempered sherds in PG4, dry-smoothed sur-

The majority of interior surfaces had also
overwhelmingly preferred among the sand-teminterior surfaces had been burnished (7 percent).
burnished interior surfaces, and one sherd has a

Just as different “paste recipes” have functional and/or temporal implications, it may be that
particular surface treatment modes offer some
functional advantage. The distribution of sherds

158

Texas Archeological Society

with dry-smoothed/burnished surfaces hints at
this. While dry-smoothed surfaces are differentially distributed across paste groups, so too are
dry-smoothed surfaces that had been burnished.
This is especially true of the sherds in PG5, where
the frequency of sherds with dry-smoothed/burnished surfaces actually outnumbers those whose
dry-smoothed surfaces had been left unburnished.
rectly related to the size, shape, and position of the
pores, or voids, existing between the solid particles
adverse effects created by large inclusions in the
paste fabric is to burnish the surface of the vessel. Because burnishing smoothes and compacts
helps to reduce permeability and porosity, but it
also renders the vessel more serviceable by making
its surface harder and more resistant to abrasion
of sherds in PG5 that have dry-smoothed/burnished
that bone-tempered vessels served. This assumption also seems to support the earlier argument
that the high frequency of bone-tempered sherds
with laminated paste fabrics may represent vesbecause roughly half of the sherds in this category
also have dry-smoothed/burnished surfaces.
modes are associated with different paste groups,
and that these differences may be related to some
functional differences among vessels manufactured
difference in surface treatment modes may have
temporal implications, as has been demonstrated
at several sites in the Mossy Grove culture area
analyzed sample from the Resch site are decorated.
This relatively high percentage is a factor of the
sampling strategy employed for this analysis as
only 5.8 percent of the 1,541 sherds recovered at
The inclusion of such a large percentage of decorated sherds in the reanalyzed sample does, however, provide a more representative sample of the
decorative attributes associated with the Woodland
period sherds found at the site.

(Figure 7a, b, d-e, g, and i). On four sherds, broad
lines had been used in combination with punctations
(Figure 7c, f and Figure 8b). On another six sherds,
punctations (n = 4) (see Figure 7k and Figure 8j) and
decorative elements. Decorative techniques executed
on a wet paste were equally as common as those executed on leather-hard pastes.
Lip decoration was the sole decorative element on three rims. Two bone-tempered rims with
diagonal notches or tick-marked incisions cut into
their lip edge (Figure 8e). The third rim, from a
small bone-and-clay/grog-tempered bowl, has a
crenellated lip edge (Figure 8i). On a fourth rim,
decorative elements occur on both the rim and the
upper body (see Figure 8a). This unusual direct
crosscutting the lip edge, and is framed by a shallow, horizontal, incised line that encircles the rim
immediately below the lip. Similar tick-marked
and crenellated rims were found at the Folly site,
recovered at the Herman Ballew site (Rogers et
frequently found on Mossy Grove ceramics.
Thicknesses are highly variable both within
the same sherd, as well as among different sherds
in the reanalyzed sample, supporting the pattern
analysis of the Resch site ceramic assemblage.
The body sherds in the reanalyzed sample (n=50)
-

compared to the average thickness of the decorated
body sherds (8.0 ± 1.8 mm), there is only a very
slight difference between the two.
the basis of their curvature and their proximity
large vessel sections illustrated and described in
reanalyzed lower body sherds are three that Webb
Tchefuncte Plain. However, examination of these
sherds during reanalysis, their basic paste fabric

sherds all involved techniques that displaced the surresemble the Tchefuncte types found in Mossy

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics

b

c

d

e

a

f

g

j

h

i

k

sherd with intersecting broad line incisions; c, body sherd with incised lines and punctations, cf. Churupa Punctated;
d, body sherd with intersecting broad line incisions; e, body sherd with intersecting broad line incisions, cf. Marksville
Incised
f, body sherd with incised lines and punctations, cf. Churupa Punctated; g, body sherd with broad
curved line incisions; h, shallow incised lines with “drag and jab” punctations; i, body sherd with broad line incisions;

There is one reconstructed lower body section
standard typological description of Tchefuncte. The
sherd was not described or illustrated in Webb et
consists of grog and crushed hematite embedded
in a silty paste, and the large voids in its contorted
paste texture make it extremely light in weight. It

perhaps its most telling attribute is an attached
“teat-shaped” basal support. Thus, the presence
of two technologically different Tchefuncte-like
sherds at this site suggests the presence of two
distinctive early ceramic traditions, each with their
own version of Tchefuncte ceramics.
The 14 reanalyzed bases are highly variable,
ability was due to the range of basal forms present

Texas Archeological Society

a1
a2

c

b

e2

e1
d

h
f

g

j

i1

i2

1, lip edge with diagonal tick marks, and a , interior view of rim
sherd with lip decoration; b, incised lines and punctations, cf. Churupa Punctated; c, broad line below the folded lip
edge; d, narrow incised horizontal lines; e1, lip edge with tick marks, and e , exterior view of rim; f, incised lines, cf.
1, exterior view of rim with crenellated lip edge, and
i

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics

a1

b1
c

b1

b2

d

,
1
exterior view; b1, exterior view of annular base, and b , view of ventral concavity; c, Tchefuncte lower body sherd with
“teat-shaped” node (see arrow); d, cross-section view of Tchefuncte lower body sherd with contorted paste.

(see Figure 8). The rim sherds range in thickness
concave on the interior and gently rounded or con± 1.7 mm; however, the decorated rims are noticeably thicker that the plain rim sherds. The decorated
ferent basal forms were recognized. The majority
10f); however, several interesting other forms were
also observed. One small fragment with a remnant
podal support (see Figure 10e) is a variation of the
“teat-shaped” node observed on the lower body

The average thickness is 7.0 mm, but they exhibit a
slightly higher standard deviation (± 1.7).
The majority of the rims in the reanalyzed sam-

was an annular base with a ventral concavity (see

or change in thickness, are also quite common. When

a

d

1,

e

cross-section of rounded base; and f , exterior view of rounded base.

b

f

g

c

Texas Archeological Society

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics

a

b1

b2

c

d

e
1, exterior view of rim with folded
lip, and b , cross-section view of rim with unusual lip edge and laminated paste texture; c, plain rim; d, plain rim, and
e, reconstructed rim and upper body section.

Texas Archeological Society

b

c

a

d

e

c, interior view of plain rim with drill hole; d, a small cup fragment, and e, exterior view of plain rim with drill hole.

the rim is set off from the wall of the vessel by a curve
or an angle, the rim is expanding and/or contracting.
Seventeen percent of the reanalyzed rims exhibited

-

angle, while a direct rim is straight with no change

in orientation, indicating a large number of simple
fairly straight-walled bowls or open-mouthed jars.
Thirty-six percent of the rims are articulated, with

had been rounded or tapered and then rounded.
Several rims have folded lip edges. On one interesting plain rim (see Figure 11b1-b ), the process
had created a distinct ridge that overlaps both the

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics
exterior and interior margin of the rim.
Two rims have beveled lip edges. On one plain
rim, the beveled edge is angled toward the interior.
Pinched, the beveled edge is angled toward the
exterior (see Figure 8h).
Only four of the rim sherds have decorated lip
edges. Three have diagonal tick marks that crosscut the lip edge (see Figure 8a1, e ). One has a series of closely spaced impressed notches that form
a distinctive crenellated lip edge (see Figure 8i1-i ).
The rim sherd with the smallest diameter (4.5 cm)
appears to be from a small bone-tempered cup (see
eter (15 cm) are both plain wares, one of which is
the reconstructed rim section of a bone-and-clay/
grog-tempered bowl (see Figure 11a). The mean
cm, with diameters randomly scattered along the
continuum. This suggests that the vessels in use
at the Resch site included small to medium-sized
bowls and jars that probably served an array of
purposes (i.e., cooking, serving, etc.).
In summary, the vessels in use at the Resch
site were fairly simple, straight-walled bowls and

some combination of all three variables.

assemblage. Smudging is a distinctive variant of
sel having been packed with some type of vegetal
ing atmosphere wherein carbon is deposited on the
surface and in the pores of the vessel, producing a

the blackened surfaces that result from using clays
containing large amounts of organic material (Hally

FOLLY SITE CERAMIC
ASSEMBLAGE

While the original Folly site report indicates
change in orientation. However, the large number of
suggest vessels that may have been designed for
thereby reducing the total number of recovered
indicate some functional distinctions between vessels. This assumption is also loosely supported by
the large number of plain rims and the fact that only
four of the rims have decorated lip edges (i.e., rims
were designed for functional purposes rather than
for decorative appeal). If we assume that overall vessel shape is controlled by the need for containers that
the vessels at the Hawkwind site appear to include
a fairly narrow range of simple pots that served a
range of functions.
Surface and core coloration of the sherds indialso noted in the analysis conducted by Webb et al.
observed on surfaces and paste cores clustered more
toward the darker end of the color spectrum. This

body sherds, three decorated rim sherds, and one
plain lower body sherd.
ics, the ceramic assemblage from the Folly site
exhibited variable paste textures and paste constituencies. Microscopic examination of a freshly

mining group membership. Both paste textures and
paste constituencies among the Folly site ceramics
are highly variable. There are 11 different combinations of tempering agents having been used to
manufacture vessels found at the site. These highly
variable paste constituencies and paste textures
indicate that several different paste preparation
and/or fabricating techniques had been used to
manufacture the sherds found at the site.

Texas Archeological Society

The three sherds assigned to Paste Group
(PG)1 had been manufactured from non-tempered
sandy to silty clays and contained no additional
tempering agents observed in the paste. Two subnant grain size of the basic paste fabric. PG1a includes two sherds whose basic paste fabrics contain
a heterogeneous mixture of sand predominantly
an irregular paste texture and one has a laminated
paste texture. The one sherd included in PG1b has
in cross section.
is composed predominantly of sands falling within

cross section.

PG4 includes four sherds tempered with both
bone and clay/grog that are embedded in a predominantly silty paste. Two of the sherds contain no
additional tempering agents, while crushed hematite
or charred organic material had been added to the
paste of the other two sherds. The majority appear
paste texture.
PG5 includes one bone-tempered sherd whose
paste fabric consists primarily of silty clay, and has
a loosely consolidated paste fabric that appears curvilinear in cross section. This paste texture is similar
to laminated; however, rather than being straight, the
laminas appear curved or circular in cross section and
the coil junctures appear distended, indicating lessthorough manipulation of the clay during primary
forming. This sherd may be an example of Cooper

to which clay/grog and larger-sized sand grains
had been added. This sherd has an irregular paste
grog inclusions embedded in a paste fabric of predominantly silt-sized particles to which at least one
additional tempering agent (i.e., charred organic
material or crushed hematite) had been added. Paste

surfaces and 41 percent of the interior surfaces are
too weathered to accurately determine their surface
surfaces, dry-smoothed/unburnished surfaces are

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics
surfaces. Since floated surfaces weather more
quickly than dry-smoothed surfaces, it may be that
given the high percentage of sherds with weathered
surfaces. None of the sherds had been burnished.
Twenty-nine percent (n=5) of the sherds are
decorated, and all involve techniques that displace
or penetrate their surfaces. Two are body sherds and
three are rim sherds. One small body sherd exhibits

enough of the design motif is present to assign it to
a particular type. The second decorated body sherd

that runs horizontally across the face of the sherd.
Given its thickness, this clay/grog-tempered sherd
may be from a Williams Incised vessel.
On two rim sherds, the decorative elements
had been impressed rather than cut into the lip edge
(see Figure 14b, e); however, the depth, width, and
spacing between the notches vary. The third rim
has an unusual crenellated decorative element (see
Figure 14c). Rather than cross-cutting the lip edge,
the crenellations are wide, shallow, and angled
downward onto the body as if suspended from

a

c

incised line; and e, interior view of notched rim.

b

d

e

Texas Archeological Society
the lip edge. None of the decorated rims are typo-

lip decoration, and diameter (Table 5).
In general, thicknesses are highly variable both
within the same sherd as well as among different
sherds in the sample. The body sherds range in
thickness from 4.8-10.4 mm, with an average thickness of 7.0 ± 1.4 mm. The one lower body sherd is

timated at 10.5 cm, and the diameter of specimen

development on sherd surfaces includes a range
of dark and light colors; however, paste cores
-

the majority of Woodland period ceramics are
overwhelmingly plain wares, decorative elements,
when present, also display certain similarities.
Thus, the decorative and technological ceramic
data from the Hawkwind, Resch, and Folly sites,
as well as the ceramic data from the Herman
opportunity to compare and expand our database
of technological and decorative attributes associated with Woodland period ceramics in the region.

same highly variable pastes and “disconcerting
Resch site. Reanalysis of a representative sample of
the Resch site ceramics supports this assessment.
Microscopic examination of paste cross sections

were used to manufacture the vessels at the Resch
site. This same diversity can be seen in the Hawkwind ceramic assemblage where six major paste
the maximum temperature not being sustained long
oxygen, or some combination of all three variables.
Based on their overall decorative and technological attributes, the 17 sherds recovered at
the Folly site have a great deal of technological
percent) represented in the assemblage is relatively
high when compared to other Woodland sites in the
region, and the range of decorative elements is considerable given the small size of the collection. The
possible Williams Incised sherd suggests a link to
Fourche Maline ceramics. The three non-tempered
sandy paste sherds, the one sand-tempered sherd,
and the distinctive lip notching found on two of the
rim sherds are attributes closely related to Mossy
Grove ceramics. Similar lip-notched rim sherds
were also recovered at the Resch site.
SUMMARY OF THE COMPARATIVE
ANALYSIS

paste categories and 11 different combinations of
This diversity is also supported by the results
raw clay sample from the Resch, Hawkwind, and
Folly sites. Because there are no temporally comparable samples from Woodland contexts in the
region, comparisons were made to the East Texas
Caddo database. The results show similarities between the Resch, Hawkwind, and Folly samples
and the main Caddo group for Sub-region 7 in
the middle Sabine River basin (see Perttula, this
volume). The submitted raw clay sample could
also be assigned to the Sub-region 7 (Group 1),
and it clusters with a small group from the Hawkwind and Resch sites that show elevated levels of
chromium and zirconium. These new Woodland
period ceramic samples show a slightly greater
compositional variability than do the later Caddo
samples from an ever larger area.

Most of the decorative and technological attridescribes the ceramic assemblage as being low
the analysis of the Resch site ceramic assemblage
remain important in the analysis of Woodland
period ceramics in East Texas. Primary among
these are paste constituency, paste texture, basic

diversity of paste classes was quite impressive,

more closely spaced than

not cut; widely spaced

Table 5. Characteristics of the rim sherds at the Folly site (41RK26).

7.0

10.5

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics

Figure 15. Comparison among paste groups found at the Hawkwind, Resch, Folly, and Herman Ballew sites.

170
Texas Archeological Society

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics

171

the paste matrix of sherds recovered at the Herman
criteria for individual paste classes was somewhat

Folly sites, the following comparisons are based on
roughly equivalent categories that enable overall
comparisons among the various paste groups from
each site. Proportionately speaking, the diversity of
paste groups at the Herman Ballew site is similar
Resch, Folly, and Hawkwind sites, even though
site to site.
The frequency of non-tempered sandy paste
wares is proportionately higher at the Herman
Ballew and Folly sites, while these wares have
only negligible representation at the Resch and
Hawkwind sites (see Figure 15). There are high
proportions of sand present in the paste matrix of
many of the tempered paste groups found at all
four sites, and in a large percentage of these, the
discontinuous size ranges of the sand suggests that
sand had been added to the predominantly silty
clay matrix. This relatively sandy constituency of
pastes is supported by the petrographic analyses
performed on selected sherds from the Hawkwind,
Folly, and Resch sites, where measurable quartz

Bone-tempered wares are fairly well represented at the Resch site and the Hawkwind site,
but occur proportionately less frequently at the
Herman Ballew site, and this paste group has only
minor representation at the Folly site. Conversely,
bone- and-clay/grog-tempered sherds have only
negligible representation at the Herman Ballew
site, but have a proportionately similar representation at the other three sites.
Clay/grog-tempered sherds represent the major
paste group in all four ceramic assemblages. While
this paste group is the most prevalent, there is also
a great deal of internal variability in the clay/groghowever, many of the sherds found in this paste
group also contained large amounts of sand inclusions. This is also true at the Herman Ballew site
have sandy constituencies.
One interesting characteristic of the clay/grogtempered ceramics is the presence of both grog and
“clay-like” inclusions in sherds. Possible “rounded
clay pieces” or grog inclusions were observed in

and Resch sites, these same grog and “clay-like”
inclusions were observed in the basic paste fabric
of many of the sherds. The grog stands out from the
surrounding paste matrix and can be recognized by
its distinct texture, lineations, and/or surface variability that are oriented differently than the overall
paste matrix. In other sherds, the inclusions appear
as rounded clay lumps that often differ in color and
texture from the surrounding paste matrix. In some
instances, both grog and clay lumps occur in the
an additive may introduce multiple clays in a paste

often in areas where large deposits of relatively
coarse residual clays are common (Bishop et al.
To speak to this issue, the raw clay sample was
trographic analysis of the raw clay sample shows
that among its many constituents it also contained
(possibly hematite). If the raw clay itself contains
clay lumps, then it may be that the clay lumps occurring in the paste matrix of many of the Resch
and Hawkwind ceramics result from carelessness
in grinding and sifting of the clay during primary
forming, a hypothesis long ago asserted by Weaver
the clay/grog-tempered sherds from the Resch and
the Hawkwind sites show large numbers of clay
lumps that differ in color and texture from the surrounding paste matrix, which could indicate that
Woodland potters were mixing two types of clays
whose constituents included clay lumps.
The same holds true for the opaque material
(probably hematite) in the raw clay. If hematite
constituents are naturally present in the clay, the
small randomly dispersed hematite (assumed to
matrix of many of the analyzed ceramics may in
fact be natural inclusions rather than added ones.
However, regardless of intentionality, its presence
in the clay may modify its properties. In short, the
presence of naturally occurring clay lumps and
opaque material (probably hematite) in the raw
clay poses some very intriguing questions about
the variability in paste constituency and further
illustrates the need for collecting more raw clay
samples. If, in fact, Woodland settlement patterns

Texas Archeological Society
followed particular drainage basins, then systematically targeting the collection of clay samples
along the various drainages might provide valuable
data for tracking the movement of pots across the
wind, and Folly sites also show some interesting
tures is differentially distributed across paste groups,
which in turn suggests that more than one paste
preparation and/or fabricating technique was used
to manufacture the vessels at each of the three sites.

paste classes at the Herman Ballew site differed
somewhat from those used here. Thus, the only
man Ballew ceramics were those that were either
8 percent). While sherds with laminated and contorted pastes are not proportionately as high at the
Herman Ballew site as they are at the Hawkwind,
Resch, and Folly sites, this is not necessarily unexpected given the large number of non-tempered
sandy paste sherds found at Herman Ballew. If
the various textural categories are viewed as representing locations on a continuum that moves
from loosely worked clay (i.e., contorted) to more
sence of large, irregular inclusions such as bone or
grog allows for better working of the clay during
primary forming, thereby enabling the potter to

other two plain body sherds have irregular paste
textures. The residue from one of these sherds has a

the last use of the pot, then the pots having laminated
pastes were in use throughout much of the Woodland
period. It may be that the continued long-term use
manipulation of the clay during primary forming to
rather than temporally related.
Just as different “paste recipes” have functional implications, it also appears that different
dry-smoothed surfaces are the most common surface treatment modes; however, at the Hawkwind

are differentially associated with particular paste
groups and these differences are likely related to
functional variations among vessels (Figure 17).
but this may simply be a factor of the small sample
the Herman Ballew site, surface treatment modes
dry-smoothed and burnished surfaces were lumped
separate the prevalence of one technique over the

paste matrix of many of the sherds with contorted
and laminated pastes have possible “rounded clay
either smoothed or burnished, which represents

site. If pastes become better worked through time,
then one would expect an increase in irregular textures with a more or less corresponding decrease in
pastes exhibiting laminated textures; however, this
does not necessarily appear to be the case given
the results of the radiocarbon analyses of residue
found on the interior of four clay/grog-tempered
sherds from the site.
Dating of these four sherds yielded date ranges
spanning a 700 year period of time. Two of the four
were plain body sherds with laminated paste textures. The residue on one of these two sherds yielded

suggests that dry-smoothed and burnished surface
treatment modes were not as common at Herman
aside, it may be that many of the surfaces that were
These surfaces, which are quite common on sandy
paste ceramics found in the Mossy Grove culture

that the Herman Ballew sherds with unsmoothed
weathered away.

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics

174

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 17. Summary of exterior surface treatment modes at the Hawkwind, Resch, and Folly sites.

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics
nique that has differential representation at all four
sites. None of the sherds at the Folly site and only
three of the sherds at the Hawkwind site had been
the Herman Ballew site had been burnished, but,
by far, the use of vessels with burnished surfaces
ing technique renders a vessel more serviceable
by making its surface harder, less permeable, and
more resistant to abrasion, then the prevalence
of vessels with burnished surfaces hints at some
functional difference in the use of vessels at the
Resch site. Or, it may simply be that surface luster
was better preserved there than at the other sites.
In summary, similar surface treatment modes were

differentially distributed across paste groups both
within particular sites and among sites. These differences may indicate different groups of people
who had different ceramic-manufacturing tradigroup of people who were manufacturing functionand/or processing of different resources.
Pairing paste and surface treatment attributes
with decorative attributes and other attributes such
as thickness, vessel shape, and rim characteristics
further highlights the overall ceramic variability
within and among sites. The Resch ceramic assemblage, by sheer density and variety of ceramics,
differs from the ceramic assemblages at the other
three sites. The array of ceramic attributes found in
the Resch ceramic assemblage is more technologically variable than those found in the Hawkwind,
Folly, and Herman Ballew ceramic assemblages.
This notable variability could be because Resch
was more intensively occupied and/or excavations
at the site were extensive enough to recover a
larger sample of ceramics. Finally, the variability in
technological and decorative attributes noted on the
ceramics from the Hawkwind, Resch, Folly, and
Herman Ballew sites point to a time of experimentation during which Woodland potters incorporated
aspects of multiple technological traditions.
Decorative treatments at all four sites cluster
around a relatively narrow range of techniques that

175

of decoration is especially prevalent at the Folly site
with notched or crenellated lip edges (see Figure 14).
rated sherds were assigned tentative typological
rim found at the site was a sandy paste sherd with
cent of those found on LMV Marksville types, but
the row of shallow circular depressions just below
two Marksville Incised, var. Yokena body sherds
and one possible Churupa Punctated sherd.
ments included lip-notched rim sherds and a
variety of incised, stamped, and punctated speci-

Marksville Stamped body sherd was found. Eleven
ander Pinched, Coles Creek Incised, French Fork
Incised, and Evansville Punctated. These types all
suggest links to both the Fourche Maline Culture
area and the LMV.
Decorated ceramics at the Resch site included
a broader range of design elements than did the
decorated sherds found at the other three sites.
These sherds included a variety of pinched and
punctated design elements, wide or narrow incised lines, or some combination of incised lines
and punctations. One unusual drag-and-jab motif
as well as a number of rims with lip decoration

ander Pinched, Churupa Punctated, Tchefuncte
Plain and Tchefuncte Stamped, Marksville Incised,
var. Yokena, Marksville Stamped, and Coles Creek
Incised were also found.
Given their close proximity to each other, the
question arises as to whether the Hawkwind site
could have been occupied by the same Woodland
group(s) that occupied Resch, Folly, and Herman
Ballew. By implication, this question must take into
consideration the temporal span of the site. Webb et
radiocarbon dates that yielded dates of 410 B.C.,

punctations. Lip decoration is infrequent, but when
it does occur, it usually involves notches or crenellations cut or impressed into the lip edge. This type

in which the radiocarbon dates were corrected for

Texas Archeological Society
isotopic fractionation and then calibrated. This
yielded calibrated dates ranging between 555 B.C.

of early Fourche Maline and LMV types and Mossy
with this time span. It also suggests that the Resch
site had a wide interaction sphere that included
contacts with groups representing a number of
ceramic-manufacturing traditions.
-

cupied and appears to have only Woodland period

time periods, with the most likely temporal interval
The early Woodland period ceramics could be
differentiated based on the presence of plain ceramics with contorted and laminated pastes, the plain
bone-tempered wares believed to be the Fourche
and the large number of plain, sandy paste wares.
component are the Marksville Stamped and the pos-

thick grog-tempered, probably Williams Plain sherds,
the thinner grog-tempered sandy paste pottery, and
the large number of non-tempered sandy paste wares.
While dominated by plain wares, the presence of possible Evansville Punctated, var. Rhinehart and French
Fork Incised,
sherds also suggests a later
Woodland period component.
obtained for the Folly site; however, the presence of
the one possible Williams Plain sherd and the one
bone-tempered sherd resembling the Cooper Boneat least one occupation during the early Woodland
period. Further, the proportions of relatively thin
sandy paste sherds, the clay/grog-tempered sherds,
and the lip-notched/crenellated rims more closely
resemble the Herman Ballew ceramic assemblage
than the Hawkwind ceramic assemblage.
tained from organic remains (primarily hickory
nuts), sherd residue, and sherd bulk organics

indicate multiple occupations dating from the Late
intriguing are the dates obtained from the residue
found on the interior of four of the sherds. If it is
assumed that these residues actually date the last
use of these four vessels, then the dates suggest
occupations during the early, middle, and late
tempered plain wares, but two have sandier pastes
and two have silty pastes. The two sandier paste
previously discussed, if the laminated vs. irregular
textures are tied more closely to function, then it
may be that sandy paste constituencies are more
closely tied to earlier assemblages than later assemblages, possibly due to shifting social/group
interactions. For example, if Woodland potters in
the Sabine River basin were borrowing from other
ceramic technologies, then it may be that contacts
with the sandy paste potters of the Mossy Grove
sources during the early Woodland period.
In addition to the sherds with dated residues,
ing of the organic material in a Marksville Incised, var. Yokena
obtained. The date on this sherd is consistent with
Herman Ballew site where a probable Marksville
Incised, var. Yokena sherd was also recovered.
Similarly, several Marksville Incised, var. Yokena
sherds were also recovered at the Resch site. If
the corrected and calibrated dates for the Resch

at the Resch site seems to be somewhat earlier
than expected. However, given the date on the
Marksville Incised, var. Yokena sherd recovered at
the Hawkwind site, it may be that this type dates
basin. This is said with some caution because bulk
sherd dating is a relatively new technique that has
often yielded inconsistent dates (Darden Hood,

the radiocarbon dates obtained on both the organic
remains and the sherds.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The archeological evidence from East Texas
sites with Woodland period components point to

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics
a cultural landscape that is marked by changes
in lifestyle occurring in tandem with technological changes, the most notable of these being the
introduction of ceramics. Broad-scale cultural
of Lower Mississippi Valley (LMV) Tchefuncte
and Marksville ceramics that occur with some frequency in early to middle Woodland period sites
In East Texas, Woodland period sites share
certain similarities to sites covering a broad geographic area from eastern Oklahoma, southwestern
Southeast Texas. The evidence of this is seen in
the subtle, and not so subtle, differences among
assemblages associated with each of the three
major cultural traditions recognized in East Texas.
For example, ceramic assemblages at Mill Creek
sites are quite small in number when compared to
Fourche Maline or Mossy Grove sites. They are
also more technologically variable, exhibiting a
mix of plain sandy paste wares, bone-tempered
wares, and thinner grog-tempered wares that are
more likely to be related to LMV wares than to the
later occurring grog-tempered Mossy Grove ceramics. The relatively thick bone-tempered sherds
found at some Mill Creek sites are more likely to
Cooper Boneware, as bone-tempered ceramics
ceramic sequence in much of the Mossy Grove
culture area. Similarly, the sandy paste wares with
smoothed surface treatments may be analogous to
the Ouachita Ironware type; however, the presence

Goose Creek Plain sandy paste tradition of the
Mossy Grove area. There is also a high representation of ceramics with laminated and contorted
paste textures, reminiscent of LMV Tchefuncte
and Marksville wares that date to between ca. 800
period ceramic assemblages often exhibit a blend
of ceramics whose attributes represent multiple
technological traditions. Distinguishing which

require more systematic comparative analyses of
collections that focus on technological attributes.
This study represents just such an approach.
What does this analysis tell us about these four
Woodland period sites located in the middle Sabine

177

River basin? First, analyses of the technological
and decorative attributes at the Hawkwind site
illustrate the same technological variation noted
at the other three sites. Second, reanalysis of the
Resch and Folly site ceramics, as well as the results
ability of ceramic paste characteristics recovered
from both sites. Paste attributes at all four sites
were highly variable. In addition to grog, clay
lumps, and or/bone temper, both sand-tempered
and non-tempered sandy paste wares were also
in the paste matrix of many of the tempered paste
groups found at all four sites, as were various other
additives such as crushed hematite and charcoal.
Proportionately speaking, the diversity of paste
groups in all four assemblages is similar, even
varies from site to site.
ily simple vessels with straight walls and highly
variable lip edges. They vary in thickness from
lip edges are generally much thicker than rims
with rounded or tapered-rounded lip edges, and
rounded, thinner rims may be temporally related.
Bases were incredibly variable, ranging from

broad-scale interactions with neighboring groups.
ed surfaces and burnished surfaces have differential
representation at each site. While primarily undecorated plain wares, when decorated, motifs generally
cluster around a narrow range of techniques that
to have been executed on leather-hard pastes as on
wet pastes. Incised lines are primarily straight, but
curved incisions seem to be more closely associated
with tempered wares resembling LMV types. Fingernail, stylus, and tool punctations were also common. Lip decoration occurs infrequently, but when
it does, it usually involves notches or crenellations
cut or impressed into the lip edge.
Many of the more complicated designs mimic
motifs common to LMV or Fourche Maline ceramics, but the technological attributes of the sherds
suggest they are locally made variants. This is

178

Texas Archeological Society

the Resch, Hawkwind, and Folly sites. The results
show similarities between the Resch, Hawkwind,
and Folly samples and the main Caddo group for
the middle Sabine River basin in East Texas, indicating they were locally manufactured.
Petrographic analysis of the raw clay sample
showed that among its many constituents were clay
lumps and opaque material (possibly hematite).
Since the paste matrix of many of the analyzed
sherds appeared to have been tempered with clay
lumps and/or crushed hematite, the appearance of
both constituents in the raw clay itself suggests that
they may in fact be natural inclusions rather that
added ones. That being said, microscopic analysis of
many of the clay/grog sherds show large numbers of
clay lumps that differ in color and texture from the
surrounding paste matrix which could indicate that
Woodland period potters were mixing two types of
clays whose constituents included clay lumps.
In conclusion, comparisons between the cetechnological similarities, as well as a number of
differences. In many cases, the same sets of ceramic attributes are differentially represented at the
different sites, which suggest that this differential
representation may have functional implications
for the activities carried out at each site. Finally,
the variability in technological and decorative attributes noted on the ceramics from the Hawkwind,
Resch, Folly, and Herman Ballew sites point to a
time of experimentation during which Woodland
potters incorporated aspects of multiple technological traditions. From the thick grog-tempered
the non-tempered sandy paste Mossy Grove wares
with their round bases, to the LMV wares with their
podal supports, Woodland period ceramic assemblages point to a time of innovation during which
potters in this area of East Texas incorporated an
array of technological attributes derived from other
ceramic-bearing groups with whom they interacted.
were the Woodland period populations associated
with the Fourche Maline, the Mill Creek, and
the Mossy Grove traditions? Further, what level
of social interaction existed among the various
the differences we see at various sites simply result
from within-group variability in the adoption of
and excavation of more Woodland period sites to
fully investigate these questions.

END NOTES
1. These two sherds are possibly the only non-Woodland
sherds in the assemblage; however, there is considerable
spatial and temporal diversity in the manufacture and
use of shell tempered vessels in East Texas Caddo sites
not become a ubiquitous part of ceramic assemblages until
the early use of shell-tempered ceramics in the general
region. The Woodland period use of shell-tempered pottery has been documented at two sites in the Trinity River

shell-tempered sherds at the Hawkwind site may simply
be an aberrant Woodland period occurrence.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Several people made this study possible. First,
I would like to thank the Texas Department of
Transportation for their willingness to fund this
level of research. Studies such as this enable us to
more fully characterize Woodland period ceramics
and expand the database of technological and decorative attributes associated with Woodland period
ceramic assemblages in East Texas. Second, thanks
Laboratory for all their assistance during the reanalysis of the Resch and the Folly site collections
and for granting permission to submit samples of
the sherds from both collections for petrographic
for his valuable input during numerous conversations, as well as the loan of several out-of-print
took the artifact photos and produced the ceramic

REFERENCES CITED

Report of Intensive Archeological Survey of Proposed Improvements to FM 2625 at Potter’s Creek
and Potter’s Creek Relief, Harrison County, Texas.
-

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics

Indians of the Upper Texas Coast
New York.

Archeological Research at the proposed Cooper
Research Report
Ellis, G. L. and L. W. Ellis
Archeological Data Recovery Excavations at the Kingwood
Site, 41HR616, Harris County, Texas, edited by R.

Bell, R. E.
in Eastern Oklahoma. In “Caddoan and Poverty
Webb,” edited by J. L. Gibson.
ogy

-

Ellis, L. W.
-

Bishop, R. L., R. L. Rands, and G. R. Holley

-

Perspective. In Advances in Archaeological Method
and Theory, Volume 5, edited by M. B. Schiffer, pp.

Archeological Data Recovery
Excavations at the Kingwood Site, 41HR616, Harris
County, Texas
cal Consulting, Houston.

-

Data Recovery at the
Hawkwind Site (41HS915), Harrison County, Texas,
by L. W. Ellis, R. Rogers, C. Wallace, D. Burden,

Bronitsky, G.
Advances
in Archaeological Method and Theory
Brown, I. W.
A Sorting Manual

-

History, Jackson.

Ellis, L. W. and G. L. Ellis
In Test Excavations at 41FB199, 41FB200, and
41FB202 in Cullinan Park, Fort Bend County, Texas,
Volume II
ing, Houston.
Data Recovery Excavations at

Cliff, M.
Journal of Northeast

H. Cullinan Park, Fort Bend County, Texas, by R. G.
Moore, L. W. Ellis, G. L. Ellis, L. S. Zimmerman,

Texas Archaeology
Corbin, J. E.
Journal
of Northeast Texas Archaeology
Dietler, M. and I. Herbich
World
Archaeology
National Register Testing of Four Sites in the Sabine
Mine’s Area M, Harrison County, Texas. Reports of

Consulting, Houston.
Texas Coastal Ceramics. In Data Recovery Excavations at 41HR751, Woodforest Road, Harris County,
, by N.
Hubbard. Draft, Report of Investigations No. 178.
Ellis, L. W. and H. B. Ensor

edited
Series No. 4. Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano, Texas.

180

Texas Archeological Society

and C. Heiligenstein
Data Recovery at the Hawkwind Site (41HS915),
Harrison County, Texas. Draft, Document No.

Jelks, E. B.
Excavations at Texarkana Reservoir, Sulphur River,
Texas
Institution, Washington D.C.

Ensor, H. B. and D. L. Carlson
The Crawford Site, 41PK69, Central Trinity River
Uplands, Polk County, Texas. Contract Reports in
partment of Highways and Public Transportation,

Synthesis of the Prehistoric and Historic Archeology
Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 104. Prewitt

The Tchefuncte Culture, an Early Occupation of the

.

Jensen, H. P., Jr.
Archeological Investigations in the Toledo Bend Reservoir, 1966-1967
Dallas.
Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society
Lechtman, H.
Material Culture: Styles, Organization, and Dynamics of
Technology, edited by H. Lechtman and R. S. Merrill,
Leith, L.

Gertjejansen, D. J. and J. R. Shenkel
Vessels from the Pontchartrain Basin. Southeastern
Archeology

Livingood, P. C.

Girard, J.

ramic Recipes. In Plaquemine Archaeology, edited

Caddoan Archeology Newsletter
Mound in Northwest Louisiana.
ogy

Eastern Oklahoma. Ph.D. dissertation, Department

McClurkan, B. B.

Hally, D. J.
-

Excavations in Toledo Bend
Reservoir, 1964-1965, by B. B. McClurkan, W. T.

of Vessel Function. North American Archaeologist
Neo-American Occupations.

Hamilton, D. L.
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society

McClurkan, B. B., E. B. Jelks, and H. P. Jenson
-

Archeology of
Jarvis, J. W.
The Folly Site: 41RK26. Texas Department of High-

Essays in Honor of Clarence Hungerford Webb,”
edited by J. L. Gibson.

Ellis—Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics

R. W. Moir, and J. W. Saunders

181

Texas. In Regional Summaries of Prehistoric and
Early Historic Ceramics in Texas for the Council of
Texas Archeologists, assembled and edited by L. W.

1: Chapters 1-10, Cultural Resource Studies for
.
Texas.
Moore, R. G.

-

Texas: Results of the Data Recovery Excavations
at Five Prehistoric Sites
-

-

Woodland and Caddo Archeology at the Broadway

Phillips, P.
Mississippi, 1949-1955.
Massachusetts.
Smith County, Texas. Report of Investigations No.
In Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document
Southeastern
Archaeology

ing of Select Components and Phases. Radiocarbon

National Register Testing at Eight Archaeological
Rusk County, Texas

Caddo Site in Northeast Texas. Midcontinental Journal of Archaeology
Excavations at the Herman
Ballew Site (41RK222), Rusk County, Texas, by R.

Northeastern Texas Pineywoods. In The Prehistory
of Texas,
Data RecovTitus County, Texas

-

Rice, P. M.
Pottery Analysis: A Sourcebook
cago Press, Chicago.

-

tion of Southeast Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas,

toric Ceramics. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society
Rogers, R.

Decorated from the Ear Spool site. In Data Recovery
County, Texas

-

Data Recovery at the
Hawkwind Site (41HS915), Harrison County, Texas,

Texas Archeological Society

Excavations at the Herman Ballew Site (41RK222),
Rusk County, Texas

The
Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal
Plain, Vol. 1
M. D. Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive,

Rye, O. S. and C. Evans
Traditional Pottery Techniques of Pakistan: Field
. Smithsonian Contributions
Washington, D.C.

The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas, Vol.
2: Artifacts of Native Manufacture
-

Schambach, F. F.
Arkansas Archeology in Review, edited
van der Leeuw, S. E.
Survey, Fayetteville.
Pre-Caddoan Cultures in the Trans-Mississippi
South: A Beginning Sequence

on an Important Woodland Period Culture of the
Trans-Mississippi South. The Arkansas Archeologist

the Trans-Mississippi South. In The Woodland
Southeast

ramic Cycle. In The Many Dimensions of Pottery:
Ceramics in Archaeology and Anthropology, edited

with Lower Mississippi Valley Ceramic Sherds.
Weaver, E. C.
American

Tuscaloosa.
Shafer, H. J. and M. Walters
ering Patterns of Identity and Interaction Through
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society
Sharrock, F. W.
Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society

Shafer, H. J.
Archeological Investigations in the San Jacinto River
Basin, Montgomery County, Texas

Antiquity
Webb, C. H., F. E. Murphey, W. G. Ellis, and H. R. Green
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

Science
Wheat, J. B.
An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin,
Southeast Texas. River Basin Surveys Papers No. 4,
Pt. 1, Bulletin of the Bureau of Ethnology Bulletin
ton, D.C.
Winchell, F. and L. W. Ellis
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Adaptation to the Inland

Ceramics for the Archeologist. 8th Printing. PubWashington, D.C.

Texas, edited by H. B. Ensor and D. L. Carlson, pp.
College Station.

Archeological Mitigation At The White Oak Shoals
.

Wood, W. R.
Arkansas Archeologist

Caddo Ceramics in East Texas
Timothy K. Perttula

ABSTRACT
The distinctive Caddo Indian pottery from sites in East Texas developed from local Woodland period ceramic
ago by ancestral Caddo hunter-gatherers. The technological and stylistic practices that came to characterize the
fully developed East Texas Caddo ceramic traditions, namely the styles, vessel forms, and functional character
of the ceramics found in habitation and mortuary features on Caddo sites, can be employed to examine the
importance of ceramics in the cooking and serving of foodstuffs, in the lives of agricultural peoples, as mortuary
offerings, and as a means to establish and maintain the social identity of contemporaneous Caddo groups. I will
also consider how the study of ceramics has been used to establish the chronology and temporal span of the
Caddo occupation of East Texas, and demonstrate the geographic extent and interrelationships of Caddo groups.
Pottery is a complicated and multifaceted technology, whether past or present, and efforts to oversimplify this
“Doing” ceramic analysis has always required of its practioners an enormous tolerance of ambiguity because
there is as yet no unifying theory and there are no easy answers. For most of us, that is what keeps it interesting

INTRODUCTION
Ceramic vessels and vessel sherds are ubiquitous and abundant on ancestral Caddo Indian sites in
East Texas, part of the Southern Caddo area (Figure
th

century. These ceramics are very diverse
in decorative styles, methods of manufacture, surand this has proved useful in the acquisition of information on the stylistic and technological character of
geographically distinctive ancestral Caddo ceramic
assemblages and how they have changed through
time. The study of Caddo ceramics has also provided
crucial insights into chronological and temporal
issues in the archeological record, the character of
social relationships between groups in the region,
different culinary traditions, the context of ceramic
manufacture and production, mortuary practices,
and exchange/interaction between Caddo groups as
well as exchange/interaction with non-Caddo groups

The most distinctive material culture item of
the ancestral Caddo groups living in East Texas

were the ceramics they made primarily for cooking, storage, and serving needs. The decorative
styles and vessels forms of ceramics found on sites
in the region hint at the variety, temporal span,
and geographic extent of a number of ancestral
Caddo groups spread across the landscape. The
diversity in decoration and shape in Caddo ceramics is substantial, both in the utility ware jars and
bowls, and compound vessels. Ceramics are quite
common in domestic contexts on habitation sites
across the region, and also occur as grave goods in
mortuary contexts.
The Caddo made ceramics in a wide variety
of vessel shapes, and with an abundance of wellcrafted and executed body and rim designs and
archeological contexts in which Caddo ceramics
have been found, as well as inferences about their
manufacture and use, it is evident that ceramics
ing and serving of foods and beverages, for the
storage of foodstuffs, as personal possessions, as
works of art and craftsmanship (i.e., some vessels

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 84 (2013)

184

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. The Caddo archeological area at its maximum extent.

Pertulla—Caddo Ceramics in East Texas
were clearly made to never be used in domestic
shared and distinctive stylistic motifs and decorative patterns on ceramic vessels marked closely
related communities and constituent groups.
Recent investigations at the Timber Hill site
ceramic tradition continued in full-force in East
as did traditional culinary practices of the Caddo
people. It appears that the ceramics at Timber Hill
were made and used for cooking, re-heating, serving, and storage of food stuffs, and probably had
the same range in vessel form and size as earlier
Caddo ceramics in East Texas. Even after extensive
contact with Europeans, presumably more than a
century after the introduction of metal cookware
(i.e., iron kettles), the Caddo continued to use and
maintain their long-established ceramic tradition.
This strongly implies that traditional means of food
processing and culinary practices were maintained
by the Caddo living at Timber Hill and that they
held fast to their cultural and social traditions even
in the face of extensive European contact.
The Caddo ceramics found at
the Timber Hill site are an interesting and apparent amalgamation
of the traditions of different but
groups because they are diverse
in terms of tempers used in the
vessel paste (i.e., shell temper
favored by some Caddo groups,
and grog and bone by others), and
in the range of decorations seen on
In another example of Caddo
ceramic manufacture and use/
culinary continuity, several midcollected from Caddo peoples
living in northwestern Louisiana
are similar in vessel shape to 18th
century vessel forms and they
have recognizable Historic Caddo
The discussion of the Caddo
ceramic tradition in this article
emphasizes the acquisition of
information on the stylistic
and technological character of
ancestral ceramic assemblages

185

in Caddo sites in the Pineywoods and Post Oak
Savannah natural regions of East Texas (Figure
traditions, the context of ceramic manufacture and
production, and exchange/interaction between
Caddo groups (and between Caddo groups and
non-Caddo groups in the Southeast, Midwest, and
Southern Plains) are also addressed. I also assess
the place of the Caddo pottery made and used at
region ceramic traditions and practices, and how
the understanding of those may provide insights
into the Caddo peoples that lived in East Texas for
more than a millennium.

CERAMIC WARES
There are basic distinctions that can be recognized in Caddo ceramic assemblages between
same range of forms was made by Caddo potters
and jars. These were forms that were obviously
Legend
Blackland Prairie
Piney w o ods
Post O ak Savannah

0

10

20

40

Miles

Caddo Archaeological
Area in East Texas

Texas Archeological Society
considered appropriate by the Caddo as to the kinds
of vessels being made and used in different parts of
East Texas. The particular shape and form of these
vessels is a hallmark of the technology and style
of Caddo pottery vessels in East Texas, and these

Sabine River basin. Handles and lugs were present
on some of the utility vessels, especially on
Fine wares are engraved and red-slipped vessels that were used for food service and to hold
and other vessel forms that may have held pigments

other Caddo as belonging to those of a particular
social group. Sadie Bedoka, a Caddo-Delaware
Caddo group could tell those of another simply by

storage, and probably other culinary activities;
they tend to have a coarse paste, thick body walls,
smoothed interior surfaces, and are decorated with
wet-paste designs (i.e., decorations were made with
when the vessel had a wet exterior surface). Thicker body walls on utility ware vessels were likely
related to the performance needs of the cooking
pot to withstand thermal shock and cracking during
use. Typical utility vessel shapes included small
to large jars, as well as a variety of conical and
simple bowl and bottle forms, most of the latter in
the earlier Caddo ceramics (and the historic Caddo
ceramics) being plain and unpolished. The utility
vessels have carbon encrustations, food residues,
and soot stains, suggesting they were employed by
these kinds of vessels were used primarily for storvolumes) of foodstuffs and liquids.
Incised and punctated utility vessels were
commonly used by Caddo groups in East Texas,

interior and/or exterior vessel surfaces (except the
bottles, which were burnished on exterior surfaces
only), and have relatively thin body walls compared to the utility wares. There is an impressive
wares. This includes carinated bowls, deep compound bowls, double and triple vessels (conjoined
or fused bowls and bottles, and bottles), ollas,
bottles, ladles, platters, rim-peaked jars, gourd and
box-shaped bowls, and chalices.
Plain wares have technological attributes comthat the plain ware vessels remain undecorated. The
common occurrence of plain bowls and bottles in
East Texas Caddo plain ware assemblages suggests
that they were mainly used for food service and to

wares, and utility wares that were tempered, almost
without exception, with grog (crushed sherds) or
bone, although burned and crushed shells were
the middle Red River Caddo groups (i.e., McCur-

lower and upper Sulphur River basin (Perttula et al.
were also decorated in a variety of other ways.
Brushing of vessel bodies is a form of surface
treatment on utility wares that is notable after ca.

the middle reaches of the Sabine River and on the
lower Sulphur River. Other types of decorations
and/or surface treatments on later Caddo utility
vessels included neck-banding, brushing, ridging,
appliqued, and combinations of zoned and diagonal
incised and punctated designs on the rim and body
of jars. In historic Caddo times, dating after ca.
the rim of everted-rim Emory Punctated-Incised
jars are also a common decorative treatment in
Caddo sites along the Red River and in the upper

clay, the kneaded clay was formed into clay coils
sel, and the coils were apparently smoothed with
form. Decorations and slips were added before, as
the vessels were then burnished and polished; red
ochre and white kaolinite clay pigments were often added to the engraved decorations on bottles,
compound bowls, and carinated bowls.
These kinds of ceramics were designed to
serve different purposes within Caddo communities and family groups—from that of a cooking pot

Pertulla—Caddo Ceramics in East Texas
to the mortuary function of a ceremonial beaker or

187

for Caddo archeological research. Perttula (n.d.)
types have been recognized in East Texas archeo-

ration, and vessel form between the three wares.
known among archeologists that work on Caddo
sites in the region. Some new varieties have also
STYLISTIC DISTINCTIONS
The stylistic analysis of Caddo ceramics from
ognizable decorative elements, patterns, and motifs
wares (i.e., the engraved and red-slipped vessels,
including carinated bowls and bottles) and utility
wares, usually cooking or storage jars and simple
bowls. These decorative distinctions have both
temporal and geographical distributions across East
broader Caddo area, and the recognition and unraveling of those distributions has been key to the
reconstruction of settlement and regional histories
of different Caddo communities as well as their
socio-cultural character.
The stylistic distinctions that have been recognized in East Texas Caddo ceramics are based
primarily on the pioneering typological research

Poynor Engraved, Hume Engraved, Ripley Engraved, and Wilder Engraved, and these varieties
appear to have more discrete temporal and geo-

in the East Texas Caddo area continue to rely, erroneously, on the estimated ages of types offered
of relatively extensive radiocarbon dating of Caddo
the seriation of burials in cemeteries (see Perttula

have been established.

engraved designs, or had a slip added to one or

rectilinear, and horizontal, with dominant geometric patterns as well as scrolls, and frequently cover

the Caddo archeological area up to that time. Suhm

the Caddoan [sic] types, at least those
found in Texas, have changed surprisingly little, more tweaked than substantially altered. Elsewhere in the Caddoan
[sic] area, a relatively modest number
(considering the amount of pottery usually found at the sites) of new types have
existing types have been introduced and
design motifs, even design element categories, have been recognized, especially

simply are placed on the rim, or sometimes on the
interior rim surface. In general, the earlier Caddo
ing across much of the Caddo area itself) are quite
uniform in style and form, suggesting that a broad
and extensive social interaction existed between
Caddo groups across the region, in concert with
an extensive trade and exchange of vessels made
by craftspeople. The use of a red hematite slip on
interior and/or exterior surfaces of carinated bowls
1100-1450 ceramic assemblages in various parts
of the region (particularly in the upper Sabine and
Cypress drainage basins), and in the case of the
distinctive type Maxey Noded Redware, the squat,
long-necked bottles also have appliqued and/or
punctated designs below the neck of the bottle.

Thus, it is fair to say that the ceramic types
with ticked lines, scrolls and circles, negative

188

Texas Archeological Society

ovals and circles, pendant triangles, diagonal lines
and ladders, and S-shaped motifs. These kinds of
decorative elements continued in use in historic

lyknowe Ridge Pinched, Crockett Curvilinear
-

scrolls, ovals, and circles on Hudson Engraved and

East Texas, Northwest Louisiana, and Southwest

bowls among Red River Caddo groups; the scrolls
and tick marks of Patton Engraved among Hasinai
Caddo groups south of the Sabine River in the
Neches River basin; and the pendant triangles and
engraved scrolls on Womack Engraved bowls on
the upper Sabine and the middle Red River basin.
cally diverse across East Texas, there are very

(such as Duren Neck Banded, Bowles Creek
Plain, Smithport Plain, Evansville Punctated,
Wilkinson Punctated, Harrison Bayou Incised,
etc.), but the relative proportions of the different
ceramic types vary from site to site and through
time across the region.

decorative attributes between Caddo ceramics
smaller segments of river and creek basins. This
diversity can be reasonably interpreted to be repgroups across the landscape. In historic Caddo
times, ceramic vessel forms and decorations are
considerably more homogeneous across much of

Caddo sites in East Texas, the most common
decorative methods on vessels, and on sherds
from vessels, are incised (especially horizontal
incised elements), punctated, and incised-punc4a). Crockett Curvilinear Incised and Pennington
Punctated Incised sherds and vessels are present
in considerable frequencies only at the George C.
es from well-dated unit excavations at George C.

contact between contemporaneous Caddo groups.
Assemblage Comparisons
In this section are depictions of ceramic vessel decorations and forms from ancestral Caddo
assemblages of different ages across East Texas.
semblages are diverse in decorative treatment as
well as in the relative abundance of both plain
wares and engraved wares, particularly from east
to west across the area from the Red River to the
Neches River. This diversity in vessel decoration
(and likely also a diversity in vessel forms) suggest
the existence of several different Caddo groups
and their associated ceramic traditions living in

are present in unit excavations that date from cal

with Crockett Curvilinear Incised most common
Punctated Incised most common throughout the
occupation at the site.
Some vessels have horizontal incised lines
above rows of vertically oriented punctations, and
have straight or parallel incised lines adjacent to a
zone of tool punctations. Rows of tool punctations
also occur between the incised lines (see Figure
assemblages at Early Caddo sites in East Texas

developing their own ethnic and stylistic expressions and ceramic practices.
The pottery types identified in the decorated

where it is called band punctated (Figure 4b, see

the engraved fine ware types Hickory Engraved,
Holly Engraved, and Spiro Engraved, and (b)
the utility ware types Coles Creek Incised, Davis Incised, Dunkin Incised, Weches Fingernail

Early Caddo sites in East Texas are characterized by both fine ware and utility ware sherds,
and a considerable number of plain ware vessels.
Fine ware engraved vessels dominate the vessel

Pertulla—Caddo Ceramics in East Texas

a

b

c

d

e

f

rim sherds; e, red-slipped, engraved, and Crockett Curvilinear Incised sherds; f, incised-punctated rim sherds from the
Henry Chapman site.

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

a, horizontal incised sherds; b, Band Punctated sherds. Images courtesy of Jeffrey S. Girard.

Pertulla—Caddo Ceramics in East Texas

b

a

e

f

collections at both Boxed Springs and the George
C. Davis sites, particularly Hickory Engraved and
Holly Engraved (Figure 5a, c-d), as well as Spiro
Engraved (Figure 5b, e-f). In these Early Caddo
sherd assemblages, engraved fine wares comprise

c

g

d

h

Creek Incised vessels and sherds from sites in the
Caddo area are similar “in decorative designs and
sometimes in vessel form, but not usually in details
Lower Mississippi Valley. They do not represent
settlement of the area by Lower Mississippi Val-

Coles Creek Incised sherds and vessels are
present in several Early Caddo sites in East Texas,
albeit at low frequencies in decorated vessel and

there are only nine Coles Creek Incised sherds in
an assemblage of more than 100,000 sherds and 15
mon variety is var. Coles Creek

a period of strong Lower Mississippi Valley Coles

tact) is most notably detected in the character of
the ceramic wares.

ceramic chronology for the period between ca.
1050 in Early Caddo contexts as well as the lower
Ouachita River valley in the Lower Mississippi

Texas Archeological Society

specimens increased in number, but still
constituted only about 10 percent or less
of most assemblages. Horizontal incising
was common, and distinctive elements
associated with Coles Creek Incised,
var. Coles Creek (overhanging lines,
sometimes with underlying triangular
punctations) often occurred. I suspect that
the type Weches Fingernail Punctated is
a regional variant of this Coles Creek
cised) also appeared. This interval might
be the time of initial use of engraved pottery, although percentages were very low.
tial increase in the amount and diversity
of decorated pottery took place, when

types such as Dunkin Incised, Pennington
Punctated Incised, Crockett Curvilinear
Incised, Hollyknowe Pinched began to
constitute substantial percentages of
decorated assemblages. It is likely that
jars with brushed surfaces were made
th century, but did not begin to
dominate assemblages until the Middle

The occurrence and relative proportion of
Coles Creek Incised pottery in ceramic assemblages from Early Caddo sites in Northwest Loui-

(or related horizontal incised sherds) comprise

b

a

c

d

Impressed; d, horizontal incised; e, Hollyknowe Pinched Ridge.

e

Pertulla—Caddo Ceramics in East Texas
are from Coles Creek Incised vessels. These later
James Pace site, with median calibrated ages of
-

800-1000, Coles Creek Incised pottery, including
var. Hardy
var. Coles Creek (n=87), var.
Mott (n=71), and var. Greenhouse or var. Blakely

Coles Creek Incised pottery diminished after
Smithport Landing site, as clearly indicated by
its very high frequencies in sub-mound midden

Hardy Incised, and Hollyknowe Ridge Pinched
utility ware vessels and sherds, as well as moderate amounts of Crockett Curvilinear Incised, Pennington Punctated Incised sherds, and sherds from
vessels decorated with punctated elements.
Early Caddo plain ware vessels include bottles,
bowls, carinated bowls, and jars (Figure 7). The
among all the rim sherds in habitation deposits at
the Early Caddo Boxed Springs site indicate that
plain vessels comprise a substantial part of the
vessels made and used by the Caddo inhabitants
the Boxed Springs cemetery were also plain wares

1450) in East Texas is marked by a considerable
stylistic heterogeneity in the decorated ceramic
wares of aboriginal Caddo groups (Hart and
vessels, and none of the decorated sherds from
other Northwest Louisiana sites, Coles Creek Incised sherds represent about 10% of the decorated

to the fact that Caddo communities at this time
“became economically, as well as socially and
and this autonomy led to innovations in ceramic
traditions, both in new styles of decoration as
well as new vessel forms and attributes (i.e., strap

a

b

c

Texas Archeological Society
There are distinctive engraved motifs in this
East Texas Caddo style zone and ceramic tradition.
These include engraved rattlesnake motifs (see
Walters 2006; Hart and Perttula 2010), hatched or
cross-hatched curvilinear and vertical ladders or
narrow panels (Figure 8c), as well as hatched and
cross-hatched circles and ovals (Figure 8f), triangles, pendant triangles, or rectangular panels with
engraved triangles. The engraved rattlesnake motif
represents a local expression of Beneath World
creatures (Figure 8a-b). In some instances, there
are engraved vessels with vertical and triangular

bowls, compound bowls, and bottles (Figure 8e) is
another distinctive feature of some Middle Caddo
ceramic complexes in East Texas, especially those
of groups living in the upper parts of the Sabine,
Cypress, Sulphur, and Red River basins.
Decorated utility wares in East Texas Middle
Caddo ceramic traditions have a similar broad
range of common elements and motifs. This includes diagonal, diagonal opposed, horizontal, and
cross-hatched incised lines on vessel rims; rows
ware rims and/or bodies; triangular and circular

interlocking, slanting, and vertical scrolls—including negative S-shaped scrolls (Figure 8g)—as
their principal motif. There are also rayed circles/
sun elements (Figure 8d, g) and the swastika
cross-in-circle. The use of red slips to cover one

and design dividers (see Figure 8h); and brushing,
either as the sole decoration on the rim and the
vessel body, or on the rim or body in combination

b
a

e

c

f

g

d

h

Engraved bottle; d, Haley Engraved bottle; e, Maxey Noded Redware bottle; f, Nacogdoches Engraved compound bowl;

Pertulla—Caddo Ceramics in East Texas
elements. Brushed utility wares are more abundant
but only a minor part of ceramic assemblages in the
western part of East Texas (especially the upper
parts of the Sabine and Sulphur River basins, see
Perttula and Ellis [2012:Table 8-24]).
retain their stylistic heterogeneity, but these assem-

are part of and associated with recognizable and
relatively geographically coherent socio-political
entities that arose out of the earlier and distinctive archeological traditions of the Caddo peoples.
Caddo groups of varying sizes, complexity, and
local history were widely distributed across both
Subtle population and territorial readjustments,
coupled with continued mound building in some

Texas Archeological Society
major valleys (including the Sabine, Big Cypress,
and Red River basins), trade activities (salt and
bow wood), and other pursuits suggests these were
prosperous farmers with sustainable social and
political organizations. For want of a better term,
these socio-political entities are recognized as
phases in the regional archeological record, including the McCurtain and Texarkana phases along the
Red River, the Titus phase in the Big Cypress and

myths, maize is commonly described in a “maizeas-a-gift” tradition, as in a gift from a divinity or
their emissary; this is the case among the Caddo,
those emissaries is a bird. Perhaps, then, the bird
ters is a unique symbolic representation of the bird
emissary that brought corn in all its abundance to
these Caddo people.
The utility wares in McCurtain phase sites
primarily include Nash Neck Banded and Emory
Punctated-Incised jars (Figure 11a-c), as well as

deep bowls, and bottles (Figure 10a, d, h), often
times red or black-slipped, with chevron, semicircular, and scroll curvilinear motifs (Skinner et

vertical appliqued strips on the vessel body. These
jars will often have peaked rims and strap handles,
with separate and distinctive design elements on
the rim as opposed to the body.
The incensario form (see Figure 11d) has
been suggested to have been a ritual vessel form
“for tobacco usage among the Caddo in early his-

Engraved carinated bowls (Figure 10c, e). Simms
Engraved, var. Darco
style in late McCurtain phase contexts as well as
other East Texas sites in the lower Red River and
Sabine River basins.
1500) in McCurtain phase sites include Hudson
wares include engraved jars with simple motifs
(see Figure 10f-g), along with horizontal engraved
-

a

b

e

f

Simms Engraved,
Clark site, Red River County, Texas.

examples are known from several Red River valley Caddo sites.
Late Caddo Texarkana phase contexts at the

d

c

g

h

i

Pertulla—Caddo Ceramics in East Texas

a

b

c

d

from Red River sites.

types Simms Engraved, Barkman Engraved, Hatchel Engraved, Hodges Engraved, Taylor Engraved,

vessels account for approximately 50% of the
entire vessel sample, especially carinated bowls

grog-bone-tempered. Shell-tempered ceramics are
from red-slipped vessels or vessels traded from
other Red River Caddo groups.
Foster Trailed Incised is a common utility
ware vessels in Texarkana phase sites, along with

sites include Wilder Engraved bottles (see FigEngraved carinated bowls and bottles (Suhm and

Incised), brushed-appliqued, neck banded, and
appliqued or ridged vessels. The latter may be from
Noded vessels have also been found in burials at
Fine ware ceramic wares in Titus phase sites,
especially in cemeteries where they were placed
as funerary offerings, are dominated by sev-

carinated bowls, compound bowls, simple bowls,
bottles, jars, and ollas. These have a diverse range
of vessel motifs, most of them featuring scrolls,
continuous scrolls, scrolls and circles, and circles
and nested triangles, or pendant triangles on rim
panels, as well as scroll arms with excised brackets,
negative ovals, S or SZ-shaped elements (see Gadus, this volume), and triangles; red and white clay
pigments were commonly applied to the engraved

bowls has pendant triangle and large hatched and
cross-hatched triangle engraved elements, and rim
peaks with ovals, negative ovals, and negative Sshaped elements.
Titus phase utility ware vessels in the same
sample of vessels from Titus phase cemetery con-

the vessel body, Bullard Brushed vessels (Figure

Incised, and utility ware jars decorated with combinations of incised, punctated, and/or brushed eleJars regularly had rim peaks, where the vessels
were divided into quarters, which may be symbolic
held pigments used in grave-side rituals.

Big Cypress Creek basin (Perttula and Sherman

small appliqued nodes that cover the entirety of

Texas Archeological Society

b

a

e

g

c

d

f

h

F
bottle; b, Wilder Engraved, var. Wilder
bottle; c, Wilder Engraved, var. Wilder olla; d, Ripley Engraved, cf. var. McKinney carinated bowl; e, Ripley Engraved,
var. Cash carinated bowl; f, Turner Engraved, var. Horton compound bowl; g, Ripley Engraved,
compound

the vessel surface. They are also common at the
-

Mississippi Valley have been suggested to have

g), and other sites in the Great Bend area of the
Red River valley. Similar knobby or noded vessels

storage and consumption of prepared datura (or
jimson weed), a hallucinogenic plant (Huckell and

Pertulla—Caddo Ceramics in East Texas

b

a

c

(41CP5); e, Shelby Mound (41CP71).

d

e

Texas Archeological Society

Caddo were known to consume datura and peyote

In historic times, Caddo ceramic vessels,
primarily bowls of various forms, jars, bottles,
held liquids and foods. They were also used for
cooking and serving foods, such as corn, atole, a

Caddo peoples living in East Texas.

of Poynor Engraved bowls and carinated bowls
with beans, corn, and pinole, made of powdered
Poynor Engraved bottles of various forms, Pat-

ware vessels, with or without tail riders (Figure
14g), and beaker-shaped Hume Engraved bottles
(Figure 14f).
contexts, the major types include Bullard Brushed
Maydelle Incised (Figure 15b), punctated jars,
Most of the plain wares are simple bowls, carinated
bowls, and several forms of bottles.

b

a

d

Other vessels were reported in historic times to
have held incense, body paints/pigments, and corn
meal offerings.
The historic Caddo ceramic assemblage at the
th to early 18th
century Nasoni Caddo settlement and cemetery
near the headwaters of Black Bayou, a tributary to
the Red River, includes bottles, an olla, jars, bowls,
compound bowls, and carinated bowls. Bottles are
the most common vessel form (44%, including
two unique small and narrow forms), followed

e

f

c

g

c, Poynor Engraved, var. Hood; e, Poynor Engraved, var. Freeman; f, Hume Engraved,
Engraved, var. Allen

;
; g, Hood

Pertulla—Caddo Ceramics in East Texas

a

b

c

Hatinu Engraved have been noted in collections

utility ware jars.
In terms of the ceramic types represented
in the funerary vessels, the principal types are

phase site (Shelby Mound, 41CP71) in the Big
Cypress Creek basin in northeastern Texas. Bonds
Bailey Engraved, and Fatherland Incised, and there
are several narrow beaker-shaped engraved bottles
there are single vessels of Clements Brushed, Pease

One unique bottle form from the Clements site
is a spool-necked and red-slipped engraved bottle
triangular areas in relief across the body and at the
base of the vessel, and red-slipped areas around
the scrolls and triangular areas have been scraped
away (showing the original color of the vessel
before it was slipped) to emphasize the distinctive red scrolls. This form of decorated bottle has

of unprovenienced Hatinu Engraved bottles in the
hands of private collectors. It appears that Hatinu
Engraved is a late 17th-early 18th century Caddo
pottery type that was probably made in the Great
Bend area along the Red River, and traded/exchanged with other contemporaneous Caddo and
non-Caddo groups.
Overall, the range of decorated ceramic vessels from the Clements site compare favorably
recovered from Texarkana, Belcher, and Chakanina
phase Caddo sites on the Red River. This includes

red (Hatinu is the Caddo word for red), raised
of northern Louisiana.

Texas Archeological Society

a

c

b

e

g

f

d

h

carinated bowl; b, Simms Engraved, var. Darco

In historic times, the archaeology of the Havar. Allen vessels with rows of larger (i.e., larger
than tick marks) engraved triangles (but not apparently hatched) that are pendant to a straight
of the Frankston phase, and more importantly, to
have shared the same form of organization, kinds
of inter-group interaction, and settlement patterns”
(see Figure 17e), the most distinctive of the historic
river basins were direct ancestors of the Hasinai
tribes who were living in or near the Spanish missions that had been periodically established and

-

distributed across the southern Caddo area. This is
a ware found most often as carinated bowls (but
also as bottles) with elaborate engraved scrolls,
ticked lines, S-shaped elements, and negative ovals
surrounded by cross-hatching or hatching on vessel bodies, and rectilinear design elements, ticked
lines, and negative ovals on the rim (Figure 18).

bowls and carinated bowls (see Suhm and Jelks
vessels consist primarily of a series of simple
horizontal or curvilinear engraved lines with tick
marks on the vessel rim, either triangular-shaped
tick marks, linear tick marks, or oval-shaped tick
marks (Figure 17a, c-d, f).

Simms Engraved, Hudson Engraved, Womack EnTrailed-Incised and Emory Punctated-Incised, as
well as untyped vessels with various wet paste

Pertulla—Caddo Ceramics in East Texas

b

a

d

e

f

c

g

h

Ebarb Incised, with hachured rims and scrolls, as
well as Constricted Neck Punctated (Gregory and

and height of the vessel. Coiling is a technique
especially suited to the construction of large, sturdy

Caddo utility wares.

the case of Caddo potters, coiling of plastic clays
led to the manufacture of a wide variety of vessel
forms of varying sizes.
Fine ware vessels are consistently made thinner than the decorated utility ware or plain ware
sherds. These variations in vessel wall thickness
are likely related to functional and technological
decisions made by Caddo potters in how these
different wares were intended to be used in local
Caddo households. The less substantial vessel
walls in some of the utility wares would be well
suited to the cooking and heating of foods and liquids and, because heat would have been conducted
tributed to their ability to withstand heat-related

Technological Distinctions
Here, I consider important technological attributes of the domestic ceramics made by Caddo
groups, including the use of different tempers, the
These analyses highlight the essential continuity
in ceramic manufacture and practice during the
course of the Caddo occupation of East Texas.
The principal technique used in the manufacture
of Caddo ceramics was the building of vessels

method, coils of clay, in the form of ropes, rolls,

Texas Archeological Society

a

wall thicknesses greater than 10-11 mm) would
have created stronger and more stable vessels, and
would have been well suited for use as long-term
were probably intended for use in the serving of
foods and liquids, and thinner and less porous
vessel walls would have helped to maintain the
temperature of served food and liquids; thinner and
lighter vessels would have also contributed to the
ease with which serving vessels could be handled,
used, and transported.
vessel body wall thickness would have been
the sequence in which a vessel was constructed
of choices available to potters (cf. van der Leeuw
tom up, as Caddo vessels seem to have been, would
tend to have thinner walls moving up the vessel
body towards the rim, with the lower portion of the
vessel—especially the base, likely made separately,
and thus available to serve as a support during later

b

than the upper portions of the vessel.
Larger jars (with very thick rim and body
term storage, simply because they would be less
easily moved about during cooking, while larger
carinated bowls and compound bowls may have
been employed in communal food serving; serving
liter range, and thus likely intended for individual
household use. Most of the utility ware jars were
used for cooking, based on their form as open
containers, as well as the presence of soot deposits,
either heavy or light, as well as preserved charred
organic remains on one or both vessel surfaces.
Sherds from analyzed Caddo jars tended to have
residues formed on the interior of vessels that are
related directly to cooking, as well as soot deposits
build up from wood combustion, indicating that

serving food, like the carinated bowls, but many of
them lacked surface decorative embellishments.

Pertulla—Caddo Ceramics in East Texas
Bottle sherds, used for storing and carrying liquids,
also were a common utilitarian form made for the
use of site occupants.
uted to the longevity or use-live, of a given Caddo

Hematite may have been added to the paste
of certain vessels strictly as a matter of personal
choice by individual Caddo potters, but it may have
served a useful purpose nonetheless. That is, like
feldspar (often also found in microscopic quantities
the occurrence of crushed grains of hematite in the

and storage practices, (4) opportunity for breakage,
especially due to children and animals, (5) the po-

resulting in a dense, hard body, and a reduced vesof a coarse temper like hematite pieces would have

Smoothed and burnished grog-tempered pottery
combines strength, thermal shock resistance, resistance to breakage, and low permeability, and,
thus, may have lasted for a considerable length
of time, especially if the vessels being used were
by whatever means, nevertheless, occurred with
regularity at Caddo sites because they were used
on a daily basis, particularly the cooking vessels,
and this resulted in a large accumulation of pottery
sherds inside and outside house structures and in
outdoor activity areas at sites.
The high frequency of grog tempering in
East Texas Caddo ceramic assemblages, and in
each ware, represents a specific attempt on the
part of Caddo potters to slow the oxidation process of the ceramic vessels during firing. This
would have created darker-colored vessels in a
reducing (or low oxygen) firing environment (or
lighter tan, orange, and brown colors in oxidizing
environments), while allowing them to be fired
longer, and producing a harder ceramic vessel
grog has expansion coefficients comparable to
the coefficients of the clay paste most commonly
seen in Caddo pottery vessels—especially with
the finely crushed grog pieces regularly used
in the fine wares—this would have contributed
further to the ability of fired vessels to withstand
heat-related stresses, as well as increasing their
than simply a functional choice for potters. Instead,
he interprets the temper choice as ‘the inclusion of
the ancestors in the next generation of pots.” Thus,
following this interpretation of temper use, every
grog-tempered pot made by a Caddo potter can be
construed as a link in an evolving ceramic tradition
and a continued reinforcement of social identity.

Crushed and burned bone may have been
Namely, that crushed and burned bone produces
with little effort an angular particle shape whose
coarseness and size gave vessels tempered with it
the ability to withstand thermal shock (e.g., WhitThe majority of the vessels and sherds from
Caddo sites have a clayey to silty paste. Clays used
for vessel manufacture were probably gathered
from nearby alluvial settings, but certainly within
a short (1-7 km away, at most) distance from the
that an inordinate amount of time and energy was
not expended by potters in hauling clay back to
are likely to select lower quality clays for vessel
manufacture than high quality clays if the latter
are farther away.
I assume that the pottery found at Caddo settlements—at least the vessel sherds from domestic
contexts—was very likely to have been made on
analyses of vessel sherds at more than 170 sites
below) suggests that the analyzed sherds (more
Texas clays. Depending upon the site and the type
and vessel sherds examined in detail have a sandy
paste, suggesting that a naturally sandy clay was
occasionally selected by Caddo potters for use in
making particular kinds of vessels.
sel sherds from East Texas sites show that they are
ing, the desired vessel color, the kind of clays that
were used, and the functional and technological

Texas Archeological Society
requirements of the kinds of vessel forms that were

Most of the sherds from Caddo sites that have
been analyzed in detail are from vessels that were

cool in the open air. This left either one or both vessel
surfaces a lighter reddish-brown to brown oxidized
color, probably a preferred color for plain wares and

In general, recent analyses of Caddo vessels
-

Mortuary vessels on Caddo sites were made in
a wide variety of sizes. Surely these vessels held
liquids and foodstuffs for the deceased to use on
the journey to the House of Death. In most cases,
the vessels included with the deceased by his or
her living relatives easily would have held multiple servings of food and liquids (perhaps enough
very large size of some of the carinated bowls and
compound bowls (food serving vessels) from many
cemeteries—which would have been well-suited
for communal food serving—suggests that the
vessels may have been intended by the Caddo to
serve multiple purposes in mortuary rituals. These
could have included use of the vessels in grave-side
rituals and daily food offerings by the relatives of
the deceased, after which they were placed in the
Day Feast” had been concluded (see Gonzalez

than the utility wares. The Caddo potters exerted
plain ware vessel manufacture than they did with
the utility wares, primarily to produce a harder
ceramic. Firing conditions tended to be more
heterogeneous among the utility wares (including
the incompletely oxidized vessel sherds), likely
the product of the multi-purpose nature of these
vessel forms, as they were used for cooking pots
the utility wares was not excessive, and there was
a good balance between clay plasticity and temper

serviceable vessels without being subject to diminished strength from cumulative thermal fatigue as

for cooking, food service, and the storage of food
stuffs and liquids, can provide some indication of
the scale of food preparation and food serving, in
that vessels ranged in size from those suited for in-

liters) intended to be used by multiple individuals,
probably in the context of feasting activities. That
the vessels from Caddo sites are all hollow wares
(i.e., jars, bowls, and carinated bowls), it seems
likely that the Caddo diet was based almost entirely
on liquid-based foods cooked in jars, including
stews, corn and bean dishes, and gruels.

that individuals, villages, and communities made
different decisions about the placement and kinds
result of widespread personal and social contacts,
these decisions were much the same for Caddo
peoples across East Texas, with the exception of
the social and religious elite who were buried in
shaft tombs at mound centers. It is fair to say that
the character of the ceramic vessels from burials
practices among these East Texas Caddo groups
in what adult males and females, as well as children, needed in life, and “needed in the other life”

TRADE AND EXCHANGE OF
CADDO VESSELS
Caddo ceramics were apparently widely traded
quantities on North Central, East Central, Central,
and inland Southeast Texas archeological sites.

Trinity and Brazos River basins of North Central
Texas, and in inland Southeast Texas, while the
Late Caddo ceramic wares appear to have been
most commonly exchanged with East Central

along the Trinity River in inland Southeast Texas.

Pertulla—Caddo Ceramics in East Texas
sively in parts of the Midwest and Southeastern
-

It also appears to be the case that Caddo groups
in East Texas had an active intra-regional trade
and exchange network where pottery vessels (and
their contents?). For example, Perttula and Ellis
neutron activation analysis and petrographic
sherds from the Hickory Hill site—a small Middle
Caddo settlement—were from non-local sources
from other East Texas Caddo groups. In a summary
of similar analyses done at the Pine Tree Mound
site (41HS15)---a large Late Caddo mound cen-

non-local ceramic vessels.

CHEMICAL AND PETROGRAPHIC
ANALYSIS OF CADDO CERAMICS
One recent advance in the study of Caddo
ceramics is increasing our knowledge about prehistoric stylistic, technological, and functional
changes in this material culture. Compositional
analyses using petrographic and chemical (incharacterizations are now being used with regularity on samples of Caddo ceramics to discern
manufacturing techniques, the source and regional
distributions of particular wares, and the functional
characteristics of different kinds of vessels (Perttupetrographic constituents in the pastes of Caddo
ceramic assemblages across East Texas has shown
that there appear to be consistent paste differences
between the ceramics in each of the river and creek

ceramic vessels from locally available clays, with
some evidence for the exchange of vessels from
one group to another in different basins. This type
of analysis will hopefully continue to be used for
exchange between Caddo and non-Caddo groups,
as well as for discerning manufacturing techniques,

raw material use, source/regional distributions of
istics of different kinds of vessels.
The regional analysis of the chemical compositional make-up of Caddo pottery has the potential
to help with the reconstruction of “how people cre-

vast majority of the Caddo pottery found on sites
was produced at the household or community
level, and then distributed and used locally, with
an unknown quantity of that pottery being made
for trade or exchange with neighbors, both near
of the apparent chemical heterogeneity in locally
abundant clays and the still limited number of sites
East Texas, to establish with certainty the source of
clays used by Caddo potters or to link those clays
with tempered Caddo pottery vessels and vessel
sherds of known styles and temporal ranges. Con-

in establishing production locales and their spatial scope, as well as delimiting both the kinds of
pottery made in each production locale and the
extent to which they made have been traded and
exchanged amongst neighboring Caddo groups.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The Caddo ceramics found in domestic and
mortuary contexts at hundreds, if not thousands,
of ancestral Caddo sites in East Texas include
compound bowls, bowls, and bottles used for food
serving and to hold liquids), utility wares (brushed
and wet-paste decorated jars and an occasional
bowl used primarily for cooking, but also for storage), and plain wares, including bowls, jars, and
bottles. There are technological and stylistic differences between the wares at sites and between
different Caddo groups living in East Texas, and
the Caddo potters that made these vessels clearly
had a considerable range in choices and practices
in how they were made and decorated (cf. van
range of differences were overall rather minor in
technological practices, however, except in the
case of certain decorative and stylistic elements,

Texas Archeological Society

of which there are a great diversity in East Texas
Caddo decorated wares. This stylistic diversity
in the decorated wares on East Texas Caddo sites

has led to the recognition of distinctive stylistic
motifs and types that have unique spatial and temporal distributions (although these are still being

Pertulla—Caddo Ceramics in East Texas

groups, phases, and vessel assemblages in the East
Texas archeological record.
The ubiquity of these wares at sites indicate that
they were available to all the Caddo that lived at
various settlements, and that there was no restricted
These same wares are also found in mortuary vessel
assemblages across the region, but in very different
wares as one of the principal funerary offerings.
Ceramic ethnoarcheological studies (Stark

function as tools. Thematically and theoretically,
these still represent pertinent and viable ceramic
research approaches today.
Certainly a principal research issue of Caddo
logical relationships of the ceramics at a particular
site, starting from any available radiocarbon and
luminescence/TL dates from features or archeological deposits, and investigating differences and
similarities in ceramic decoration and manufacture.

that there is a consistent logic and sequence to the

to establish the occupational history of a particular
site as reconstructed from ceramic stylistic analyses (particularly variation in decorative elements

vessels such as those made and/or used domestically by ancestral Caddo peoples living in sites across
East Texas. These steps would have included, from

and then determining structure and feature relation-

the clay and temper, as well as fuel; (b) preparation
of materials, including the crushing, cleaning, size
sorting, or mixing of clays and tempers to prepare
the paste; (c) construction of the vessel, beginning
with the base, and then building the walls, along
and burnishing; (d) decoration of the vessel (at
least wet-paste utility wares), including occasionally adding a hematite-rich slip; (e) drying and
-

41). Clays used for vessel manufacture were likely
gathered from nearby alluvial settings, particularly
the more easily processed alluvial clay bodies, but
certainly within a short (1-7 km away, at most)
distance from the settlements. Depending upon the
site and the type of ware, clay temper and paste
recipes were diverse, with Caddo potters using
ware, utility ware, and plain ware vessels.
Finally, over the years, archeological interests
in the study of Caddo ceramic artifacts have cen-

for cultural historical purposes; (b) the measurement of time with changes in ceramic styles and
functions; (c) the compositional characterization of
ceramic materials; and (d) the performance of pots
as tools, in conjunction with a study of the social

distinct ceramic assemblages.
There is a general consensus among archeologists that stylistic expressions, and variations in
that expression, in material culture, dress, body
ornamentation, food practices, etc. can be a measure of social identity. However, the recognition of
style in archeological materials is more than “the
material correlate” [emphasis in the original] of

as well as social group membership, and therefore
the existence and pervasiveness of styles in material culture—the concern here being the existence
of local styles of ceramic decoration in East Texas
of interaction between individuals (individual
potters), the form of cultural transmission (i.e.,
from parent to child; from a teacher to a pupil;
from older to younger members of a social group;
or between unrelated individuals, see McClure
ited from one generation to the next. In actual fact,
ceramic practice among Caddo potters would have
dictated the range of acceptable variation (a rather
impressive variation at that, particularly among the
for generations.
Styles of decoration on Caddo pottery vessels
seem to have changed rapidly, more rapidly than
functional forms of tools and pottery vessels (see
tion follows from the idea that stylistic traits have
a relatively rapid turn-over because of their use

Texas Archeological Society
in generating and reinforcing cultural identity,
their selectively neutral character (i.e., stylistic
elements have no differential effect on survival),
and the potential high variation between individushared styles, particularly (in the case of ceramics)
if Caddo potters were producing vessels largely
independent of one another rather than in craft
workshops, that together comprise a ceramic tradition at any one moment in time.
These same stylistic analyses can be employed
to answer broader questions of the social and cul-

Caddo people, through stylistic and vessel morphological comparisons with collections from other
broadly contemporaneous Caddo sites in the local
area. It is important that the stylistic analysis of
Caddo ceramics from sites in East Texas focus on

There is another productive approach to the
analysis of Caddo ceramic vessels and sherds from
East Texas sites that should be pursued, and that is
ceramic practice. By ceramic practice, I mean the
decorative, technological, and formal attributes
of sherds and whole vessels that were chosen and
practiced by a potter or group of potters when
they made pottery vessels within a distinctive
social community or network of socially related

and social positions through daily practice, that
daily practice is structured by basic organizational
principles,” and that daily practice is expressed
through tendencies and trends (habitus) “that develop as a practical solution to a particular demand
within the framework of certain environmental and
These choices and tendencies exhibited in the
manufacture and decoration of ceramics by Caddo
potters indicate that the consideration of ceramic
practice is an ideal medium for the study of technical systems (the tools and technical capabilities),
social interaction, style, and social identity, as well
as the dissemination of relevant behaviors between
particulars of ceramic practice and technical choice

related group of aboriginal Caddo sites are a means
interacted, transmitted “knowledge among india means of social learning, and this knowledge
of manufacture and decoration choices was inherited by other descendant potters in that group.
In this context, then, ceramic practices shared or
not shared by potters (women in the community)
in a Caddo community, and that “patterns in local
pottery styles, both technological and decorative,
result from potters making different decisions
throughout the production process but using a similar set of tools and techniques available to other
Such an approach should help identify the
key choices and trends in the character of the
production of domestic ceramics from a particular
als; temper; methods of manufacture; production
areas; vessel forms and functions; vessel size; and
social identity and changes in culinary traditions
as possible manifestations of changes in ceramic
practice that occurred in a particular site, region,
or sub-region. Mortuary ceramics from Caddo
sites may illustrate broad continuities in ceramic
practice, particularly in terms of vessel decoration
and vessel form, but also they can demonstrate
patterns in technical choices that are very different
than what may be documented in domestic Caddo
ceramic assemblages of the same age and made
by the same social group of potters. Finally, the
disparate and variable ceramic practice data (i.e.,
decorative, technological, and formal)—from both
domestic and mortuary contexts, if possible—may
be employed to posit the existence of previously
unrecognized or distinctive prehistoric and early
historic Caddo ceramic traditions within East Texas
or within the larger Caddo archeological area.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I thank Robert Z. Selden, Jr. for commenting
on an earlier version of this article, and I appreciate
the yeoman efforts of Lance Trask in assembling

Pertulla—Caddo Ceramics in East Texas
REFERENCES CITED

Girard, J. S.
De Soto Parish, Louisiana. Caddoan Archeology
Newsletter

Mean Specialization? Journal of Archaeological
Method and Theory

Regional Archaeology Program Management Unit
I, Twentieth Annual Report. Northwestern State

Culture, Recreation and Tourism, Baton Rouge.
Gamo of Southwest Ethiopia
Press, Salt Lake City.

siana. Journal of Northeast Texas Archaeology

Bonds, J. W. (editor)
Art of the Ancient Caddo. Grove Hill Publishing,
Leonard, Texas.
Rouge.
Caddo Archeolin Northeast Texas. Caddo Archeology Journal
Chapa, J. B. and W. C. Foster (editor)
Deal, M.
Pottery Ethnoarchaeology in the Central Maya
Highlands
Dowd, E.
Identifying Variation: A Stylistic Analysis of Four
Caddo Pottery Assemblages from Southeastern
Oklahoma
Society, Norman.

ogy Journal
A Rediscovering of Caddo Heritage: The W. T. Scott
Collection at the American Museum of Natural History and Other Caddo Collections from Arkansas
. Historic Preservation Program,
Caddo Nation of Oklahoma, Binger.

in North Louisiana. Journal of Northeast Texas Archaeology
Hally, D. J.
of Vessel Function. North American Archaeologist

Design. In The Archaeology of the Caddo, edited by
of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Eckert, S. L.
Pottery and Practice: The Expression of Identity at
Pottery Mound and Hummingbird Pueblo
-

Gadus, E. F. and R. C. Fields
Archeology of the Nadaco
Caddo: The View from the Pine Tree Mound Site
(41HS15), Harrison County, Texas, edited by R. C.

eastern Ceremonial Complex Style Zone among the
Caddo of Northeast Texas. Midcontinental Journal
of Archaeology
Huckell, L. W. and C. S. VanPool
Toloatzin
Ritual Role of Sacred Datura in the Prehistoric
Southwest. In Religion of the Prehispanic Southwest,
edited by T. VanPool, C. S. VanPool, and D. Phillips,
Jackson, J.
Shooting the Sun: cartographic Results of Military

Gamble, C.
Origins and Revolutions: Human Identity in Earliest
Prehistory

Club of Texas, Lubbock.

Texas Archeological Society

-

“The Caddo Nation”: Archaeological and Ethnohistoric Perspectives

Journal of Archaeological Research

in a Late Prehistoric Economic and Social System. In

ing of Select Components and Phases. Radiocarbon

Economic and Social Processes
Caddo Site in Northeast Texas. Midcontinental Journal of Archaeology
Plains Village Archaeology:
Bison-hunting Farmers in the Central and Northern
Plains

Reserve. Journal of Northeast Texas Archaeology

Exchange of Caddo Indian Ceramics in the Southern
Lankford, G. E.

,

ogy, and Iconography.
Tuscaloosa.

Garvey, Westport, Connecticut.
The Arkansas Archeologist
Southeastern Archaeology

La Vere, D.
.
River Basin. Journal of Northeast Texas Archaeology

McClure, S. B.
heritance Theory and Prehistoric Potters in Valencia,
Spain. American Antiquity
.

Neches River Basin Caddo Ceramic Tradition. In

of East Texas

-

Society, Baton Rouge.
Moore, C. B.
Journal of the
Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia 14

Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental

Texas and Northwest Louisiana. MS in preparation.

Journal of
the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia

The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.

Archaeological and Archaeogeophysical Investigations at an Early Caddo Mound Center in the Sabine
River Basin of East Texas. Special Publication No.

Menasha, Wisconsin.

and Pittsburg.

Parsons, M. L., J. E. Bruseth, J. Bagur, S. E. Goldborer, and
C. McCrocklin
lage of the Kadohadacho in the Caddo Homeland.

Cypress Creek Basin in East Texas. Document No.

Pertulla—Caddo Ceramics in East Texas
Phillips, P.
Historic Caddo Ceramics in Eastern Texas. In Studies on the Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis
of Woodland Period and Caddo Tradition Ceramics
from Eastern Texas

Mississippi, 1949-1955. Papers of the Peabody Mu-

Massachusetts.
Beck, P. G. Blackwell, C. Bronk Ramsey, C. E. Buck, G.
S. Burr, R. L. Edwards, M. Friedrich, P. M. Grootes, T.

Archeological Investigations of Village Areas at the
. Report
S. M. Turney, J. van der Plicht, and C. E. Weyhenmeyer
-

-

Caddo
Archeology Journal
Data Recovery Investigations at the Ear Spool Site
. Document No.

and P. S. Marceaux
An Early Historic Caddo Farmstead at the Henry M.
Site (41NA60) in Nacogdoches County, Texas. Ste-

th

to Early
th-Century Nasoni Caddo Settlement and Cemetery
Museum of Natural History, New York.

bration Curves, 0-50,000 cal BP. Radiocarbon
Rice, P. M.
Pottery Analysis: A Sourcebook.
cago Press, Chicago.

-

duction, and Theory. Journal of Archaeological
Research
Rogers, D. S. and P. R. Ehrlich
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences

Archaeological Investigations at the Sam Kaufman
Site, Red River County, Texas. Contributions in

Stark, M. T.
Ceramic Traditions. In Material Meanings: Critical
Approaches to the Interpretation of Material Culture
Jour-

Southeastern

nal of Archaeological Research

Archaeology
Caddo Pottery Vessels and Pipes from Sites in the
Big Cypress, Sulphur, Neches-Angelina, and Middle
Sabine River Basins in the Turner and Johns Collections, Camp, Cass, Cherokee, Harrison, Morris, Titus, and Upshur Counties, Texas and Sabine Parish,
. Special Publication No. 10. Friends of
Caddo Pottery Vessels and Pipes from the Johns
Site (41CP12) in the Big Cypress Creek Basin in the
Turner and Johns Collections, Camp County, Texas.
Special Publication No. 11. Friends of Northeast

and Communities of Practice in the Late Prehistoric
Southwest. In
and Cultural Dynamics in the Southwest, AD 1250-

Press, Tucson.
Steponaitis, V. P.

In The Many Dimensions of Pottery: Ceramics in
Archaeology and Anthropology, edited by S. E. van
-

Texas Archeological Society
Stokes, J. and J. Woodring

Townsend, R. P. and C. P. Walker

Archeological
Investigations at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
, edited

Hero, Hawk,
and Open Hand: American Indian Art of the Ancient
Midwest and South, edited by R. P. Townsend, pp.
sity Press, Chicago and New Haven.
Tschopik, H., Jr.

The
Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal
Plain
D. Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive,

of Navajo Painted Pottery. Papers of the Peabody

Cambridge, Massachusetts.
van der Leeuw, S.

Fayetteville.
Ceramics. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain

pottery technique. In Technological Choices: Transformation in Material Cultures since the Neolithic,
London.
Walters, M.

Survey, Fayetteville.
The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas

Crotalus horridus atricaudatus. Caddoan Archeology Journal
15

nd

Walters, M., with contributions by T. Middlebrook and T.

The Cultural Setting. In The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas, Volume 1

Caddo Ceramics and comparisons with SprocketCaddo Archeology
Journal
Webb, C. H.

Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type
Descriptions
port, Iowa.
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
ciety, and Bulletin No. 4, Texas Memorial Museum,

ponent in DeSoto Parish, Louisiana. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society
siana.
Whittlesey, S. M.

Swanton, J. R.
Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the
Caddo Indians
Ethnology, Washington, D.C.

Pots, Potters, and Models:
the West Branch Site, Tucson, Arizona, Volume 2:
Synthesis and Interpretations, edited by S. M. Whit-

Wobst, H. M.
Missouri. American Antiquity
In Material Meanings: Critical Approaches to the
Interpretation of Material Culture, edited by E. S.
Parish, Louisiana.

Lake City.

Twisted Serpents and Fierce Birds: Structural Variation
in Caddo Engraved Ceramic Bottle Motifs
Eloise Frances Gadus

ABSTRACT
This study builds on recent research that relates motifs on Caddo engraved ceramic vessels to themes evident
in historic Caddo stories and rituals as well as iconography expressed though the Mississippian period artistic

bottles can be associated with the Middle to Late Caddo periods of Northeast Texas. These motifs are then
interpreted by comparing their structures to the more representational depictions of iconographic themes found
on shell gorgets and cups from the Spiro, Sanders, and Roden mound sites of Texas and Oklahoma. By doing
so, this research demonstrates how the rich symbolic tradition of the Caddo found expression on their pottery.

The Caddo bottle is well placed at the apex

in time and it occurs both in and outside of the

technology. These bottles are rightly considered
works of art, and that art has been recently revived by the contemporary Caddo potter Jereldine

three ceramic types and the canebrake rattlesnake
motif can be associated with the Middle to Late
Caddo periods of Northeast Texas, dating from ca.

Caddo bottles from prehistoric contexts also seem
to have much to reveal about those who made and
used them. Because Caddo bottles, which are the
focus of this article, were offerings placed with
care within a burial, it is likely that these vessels

the close structural similarities between the motifs
on these bottles, including the use of the same
motif elements in similar ways, and the uniformity
of placement of motifs on the bottle form. These
similarities suggest that these three ceramic types
and the canebrake rattlesnake motif are part of a

accompanied in death, as well as to the Caddo
society who placed them in the grave. Large
bottles in particular may have had ritual or social
importance. They might have held ritual drink in a
fashion similar to the shell cups so notable from the
Spiro site of Oklahoma. Since the Spiro shell cups
were decorated with iconographic motifs, it is not
a stretch to consider that the motifs on the Caddo

the motif structure and bottle form of the Titus
phase ceramic types Ripley Engraved and Wilder
Johns Engraved bottles and bottles decorated with
sidered a Titus phase ceramic type. However, the
canebrake rattlesnake motif may be slightly earlier

made these vessels and those who used them would
have had an equal understanding of any meaning
encoded within these bottle and motif structures.
The second part of this article focuses specifically on motif meaning by demonstrating
correspondences between the bottle motifs and
the images on shell artifacts from the lower Mississippi valley and Middle South. Once again,
structural similarities are important, as the Caddo
bottle motifs and the more representational images on selected engraved shell gorgets and cups
are compared. The engraved shell gorgets and
cups selected for comparison come from the Spiro
mound site in Oklahoma and from the Sanders and
Roden mound sites, located above the Great Bend
of the Red River in Lamar County, Texas, and in
McCurtain County, Oklahoma, respectively. The

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 84 (2013)

Texas Archeological Society

to be a locus of iconic expression that reached its
carbon dating indicates that ceremonial activities,
which produced a multitude of images, continued

“community” cemetery (44 graves) that is separate
from any habitation or other ceremonial structures.
Tuck Carpenter and other such large cemeteries
are, however, considered to have functioned as
centers of ceremonial activity, as did mound sites

which include birds, serpents, and fantastic beings,
have also been central to the investigations of the
Texas State Mississippian Iconography Conference

the bottles from these two sites can be considered
representative of the range of forms and motifs produced by two different Titus phase communities.

the work and interpretations of this Conference
THE STRUCTURE OF BOTTLES
AND BOTTLE MOTIFS
The Sanders and Roden sites produced only a few
engraved shell artifacts, but the presence of these
artifacts at these mound sites indicates a Caddo
acceptance of a belief system and perhaps participation in the kinds of social agencies that appear
ated with the Ripley, Wilder, and Johns Engraved
bottles and the engraved shell artifacts indicate that
the Caddo of Northeast Texas retained a version
of a Mississippian worldview at least up to the
historic period.
The Ripley Engraved and Wilder Engraved
bottles used in this study were originally burial
offerings from the graves at the Pine Tree Mound
site (41HS15) and the Tuck Carpenter (41CP5)
cemetery site. The bottles from these sites were
selected because I am familiar with the sites and
because there is good information on the range
of variation within the bottle motifs. Both sites
produced similar bottle forms and motifs, but
some interesting differences exist concerning the
frequency of certain motifs and their associations;
that is, in whose grave were certain bottles placed.
These differences in association are not a focus of
this study, because to do the subject justice would
require more depth than this article would allow.
However, it is not surprising that these differences
should exist since these sites represent important
centers in two distinct Titus phase communities
Mound site is a village with small family cemetercomplex; it is located in the middle Sabine River
drainage in Harrison County, Texas (Fields and
75 km to the northwest of Pine Tree, located in
the Big Cypress Creek drainage of Camp County,

bottles and bottle motifs, it is important to explicate
their structure in as systematic a way as possible.

number of vessels and/or design contexts within
tion “design contexts” are considered here to be
the structural levels of the Caddo bottles. These
include the bottle form, how the motif is placed
on the bottle form, and the structure of the motif
of these levels are important to understanding the
“whole” of the vessel and the iconic themes that
the vessels may convey.
Starting with bottle form, it is apparent that the
base, body, neck, and rim are similar for bottles
associated with the Ripley, Wilder, and Johns
Engraved and bottles that display the canebrake
rattlesnake motif. How the engraved motifs are
level of motif structure, the eight Ripley Engraved
assemblage also appear on Ripley bottles from the

Wilder Engraved bottles as well as one motif for
Johns Engraved bottles. The similarity of bottle
form and motif structure between types, and the
Johns Engraved, leads one to suspect that Wilder
-

Figure
1
Gadus—Twisted
Serpents and Fierce Birds

a

b

e

f

i

j

k

c

d

g

h

l

Figure 2

Texas Archeological Society

a

Bottle Structure
graved bottles have a similar bottle structure. That
structure generally consists of a bell-shaped body

body form within the types. For example, only Ripley Engraved also has a square body, and Wilder
bottles can have a more oval body. But whatever
the body form, the engraved motif extends from the
neck-body juncture to the body carination or below
the carination to the base. Two or three horizontal
lines that encircle the neck at the neck-body juncture and a single horizontal line around the body
Figure 1a-d, k-l). The engraved motif commonly
repeats two, three, or four times around the body in
on some Ripley Engraved bottles—accentuate and
There are also bottles with an extraordinary
structure that have been typed as Ripley Engraved
or Wilder Engraved or that remain untyped within

b

c

the Caddo ceramic repertoire. The Ripley Engraved
square bottle may be considered one of these; less
frequent are the double bottles, bottles with pedestals attached to their base, and bottles with eccenemphasize different aspects of the engraved motif
and suggest that the bottle was designed as part of
the motif. For instance, observed from the bottle
rim down and opened out, the four repetitions of
the concentric circles motif on a Ripley Engraved
square bottle reinforces the four-part structure of
the motif and highlights the central axis of the
In this way, the bottle structure reinforces the idea
of a center with a four-part structure surrounding
it. This structure is similar to the circle-with-cross
element that is often itself part of Ripley Engraved
motifs (see Figure 1i-j).
The four-part body structure surrounding a central axis is also repeated on an untyped extraordinary
bottle from a grave at the Joe Justiss site (Figure 4a).
This bottle has four outer columns (only two columns can be seen in the bottle drawing) fashioned
by cutouts made into the central part of the bottle

FigureGadus—Twisted
3
Serpents and Fierce Birds

Figure 4

a

b

c

d

Texas Archeological Society
body. What remains of the cutout areas form the
central shaft of the bottle, which is again accentuated by the extended bottle neck. The columns and
shaft appear to unite the upper and lower parts of
the bottle body, which are variously engraved. The
importance of the central axis of a bottle is also
emphasized by the occurrence of pedestal bottles,
which have a foot and stem added to the base (Figure
4b). The pedestal in effect extends the bottle axis
on bottles is rare, small pedestal bowls are known
from various Titus phase sites, including the Pine
Tree Mound and Tuck Carpenter sites (Fields and
The double bottle is another extraordinary bottle often found as a offering in Titus phase cemeteries. The examples presented in Figure 4c and 4d
were recovered from the Tuck Carpenter site and
has two bodies superimposed below one common
neck, which gives the impression of a single axis
extending though two bottles. Each body generally
carries a different motif. For the two bottles illustrated, a Ripley Engraved motif is situated above
a Wilder Engraved swirl motif. Thus, the double
bottle effectively unites two different engraved
motifs from two different ceramic types around
one center. The positioning of the motifs on these
bottles may be of import and is explored further in
relation to the iconography of the bottle.
Engraved Motif Structure
The motif structure of Ripley, Wilder, and
Johns Engraved bottles are examined here separately, although all three are composed of similar
primary, secondary, and tertiary elements. Primary
elements are those prominent in the motif. One
such primary element is the circle with cross,
which is common to the Ripley scroll motif and
the Wilder swirl motif. Figure 5 shows some of
three types. Secondary elements are those that appear to take on a modifying role within the motif
structure. Examples of modifying elements are the
circles, pendant triangles, and hatching found in
the surrounds of certain primary elements (Figure
that form the skeleton of the motif and on which
the primary and secondary elements are “hung.”
Some elements can also change their position
within the motif. For example, primary elements,

such as the SZ element, can also be used in a secondary position. This interchangeability provides
much of the variation of expression seen in the
Ripley Engraved vessels. Interchangeable elements
may not have affected the overall structure of any
particular motif, but likely did alter the meaning
conveyed by the potter. Thus, a circle used as a
primary element in a scroll motif may convey
something different than the circles that appear
in the scroll surrounds. One element that does not
appear to change positions in this way is the circle
with cross, which is always used as a primary element. In addition, some primary elements such as
the circle with cross and the SZ element can occur
alone on a vessel, suggesting that they have some

RIPLEY ENGRAVED
BOTTLE MOTIFS
Ripley Engraved bottles are decorated with a
greater variety of engraved motifs and motif elegraved bottles from the Pine Tree Mound site, and
most of these hold for Tuck Carpenter as well. The
motifs are the slanted scroll, half scroll, medallions, concentric circles, circles/diamonds, alternating elements, concentric bands, and the crazy
motif
. Thirteen elements are
presented here as associated with these Ripley Engraved motifs. Those most often used as primary
circle (a circle within a circle), half circle, rayed
circle, curl, SZ (or standing scroll), and diamond.
Those most often used as secondary elements include the pendant triangle, circle, bar, SZ, chevron,
hatching, and crosshatching (see Figure 5).
bine elements in similar ways, which suggests that
different motifs may be variations on only a few
themes. For instance, the slanted scroll motif (see
Figure 1a-1b) consists of a set of lines that connect
or run between sets of primary elements. But the
half scroll (see Figure 1c) cuts those connecting
lines in the middle and shows only one primary
element per iteration or half of a scroll. Two iterations of the half scroll motif extend downward
from the neck of the bottle and two extend upward
from the base, effectively connecting the base and
rim, as the half scroll repeats four times around

Figure 5

Gadus—Twisted Serpents and Fierce Birds

Primary

Secondary

Open circle

Circle

Circle with cross

Hatching

Rayed circle

Half circle (open and
closed)

Crosshatching
Bars (orientation
varies)
Pendant triangles

Curl
Chevrons
SZ

Diamond

Hook

Interlocking ends

Bird head

Figure 5. Common primary and secondary motif elements found on Ripley Engraved, Wilder Engraved, and Johns
Engraved bottles.

the bottle. The medallions motif has the same four
iterations, with the exception that it does away
with the scroll arms. Or rather the scroll arms are
it except at the connection to the neck and base.
The concentric circles motif takes this further by
completely encircling the primary element such
that the connecting lines become the primary element (see Figure 1f and g). For the concentric
bands motif, the primary element is the central axis
of the bottle as what would be the connecting lines
of the scroll totally encircle the bottle body. The
motif consists of horizontal bands embellished by
secondary elements (pendant triangles) separated
by and alternating with a plain band, all of which

extend from encircling lines at the neck-body juncture to the base. Viewed from the rim of the vessel
down, the concentric bands motif is identical to
the design of the concentric circles motif (Figure
concentric
bands
central axis of the bottle, there is for this motif a
direct link to the four-part structure seen on some
of the extraordinary bottles discussed above.
There are a couple of Ripley Engraved motifs
that do not seem to use encircling or connecting
lines in the same way as in the motifs discussed
above. One such motif is the circles/diamonds
motif (see Figure 1h-j). Elements of this motif are

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

Figure 6

Gadus—Twisted Serpents and Fierce Birds
linked to the bottle body by two or more concentric
lines that encircle the neck. However, an openedout view of the motif from the perspective of the
bottle rim or neck once again shows the familiar
four-part structure around a center, similar to that
of the concentric circles
down view of the opened-out motif is strikingly
Engraved bottle from the Tuck Carpenter site has
two large SZ elements alternating with a series
of concentric half circles (see Figure 1k). The
motif structure of this bottle is similar to the one
in Figure 1l from the Pine Tree Mound site. This
bottle was original called “untyped with Ripley
and Wilder Engraved primary elements” (Fields
band of
alternating elements, which is a motif recognized
for Ripley Engraved bowls at the Pine Tree Mound
this motif band-like is the tertiary line at the carina-

circles in the band of alternating elements on both
bottles to the concentric circles and concentric
bands motifs. Each half circle, circle, or band is
composed of concentric lines alternating with lines
embellished with secondary elements such as the
pendant triangle or hatching.
bottles during the Pine Tree Mound ceramic analysis
is the crazy
In this motif, connections between elements appear
to be haphazardly structured, but in fact that disconnection or disorder is what is being portrayed (see
the bottle body with a jumble of connecting lines
ration gives a sense that the motif was intentionally deconstructed on the bottle. The crazy motif is
present on only one bottle each from the Pine Tree

Research Laboratory vessel collection suggests that
it may have a wider distribution.
Wilder Engraved Bottle Motifs
bottles is similar to that of Ripley Engraved bottles.

Wilder bottles generally have a bell-shaped body

bottle motifs do not stop at the body carination, as
is the case on some Ripley Engraved bottles, but
extend all the way from the neck/body junction to
the base. Two to three horizontal lines that encircle
the neck and one or more horizontal lines at the
Engraved motif repeats three to four times around
the body.
characteristic motif that is called here the swirl
motif. This swirl culminates in some variation of
a primarily element with interlocking ends. Variations of this primary element include interlocking
ends around an oval, a circle, a dot, a circle with
cross, or empty space (see Figure 7a-b, d, f-g).
Secondary elements associated with the swirl motif
are circles or bars in the motif surrounds, hatching, crosshatching, and pendant triangles. Hatching or crosshatching also occurs within the motif
surrounds and in some cases is used to thicken
interlocking spiral ends. These interlocking ends
of the Wilder Engraved type (Suhm and Jelks
spiral designs, such as Taylor Engraved (Suhm and
the Wilder swirl, if the hatched elements are considered part of the background, the “positive” arms
can be seen as ribbons or bands swirling around a
center point that is often a simple circle or nothing
at all (see Figure 7d-e).
swirl motif is to recognize its structural relationtional image of snakes with entwined or interlocking tails (Figure 8). It is found on Caddo bottles
from 10 sites on the middle and upper reaches of
the Big and Little Cypress Creek drainage; it also
occurs at three sites on the middle Sabine River
drainage; three sites in the Red River drainage;

bon dates and associated artifacts, the rattlesnake
motif, at least in the Big Cypress Creek area,
appears to be associated with both the Middle to

Texas Archeological Society

a

Figure 7

b

d

f

c

e

g

Gadus—Twisted Serpents and Fierce Birds
precursor to Wilder Engraved. Several body sherds
with the motif were recovered from the Oak Hill
village in the middle Sabine River drainage (Pertmotif was recovered from the Washington Square
ington Square Mound site was likely occupied
Given the range in temporal contexts, it seems
that the Wilder Engraved swirl motif, which is
very much a Titus phase phenomenon, could have
developed from and or alongside the canebrake
rattlesnake motif.
motif can be found on a bottle from the Harold Williams site, a habitation and cemetery site in Camp
County, Texas (Figure 8). This bottle shows four
full-bodied snakes with rattle tails and rounded
heads that curl around the bottle body. The bottle
form is similar to that of Wilder and Ripley Engraved, and the motif canvas extends from the neck
to the bottle base. The snakes are arranged in two
sets, with the tails of each set interlocking around
forked tongue and is marked by lines and dots that
are suggestive of eyes and a nose. The body of the
snake is decorated with hachured chevrons that
The interlocking tails on this representational
motif can be considered the primary element.
This interpretation is strengthened by a carinated

canebrake rattlesnake motif, it would appear that
in the Wilder Engraved swirl motif, the snake is
what swirls or twists around the motif axis and the
axis formed by the bottle itself. Wilder Engraved
bottles may therefore be considered snake bottles.
bottles apart from Ripley Engraved bottles, the
similarity of bottle structure between the two types,
and their common use at the same sites during the
same time period, indicate that they are part of the
associated with Wilder Engraved might be seen as
complementary by representing an iconic theme
that may not be commonly expressed by the Ripley
Engraved motifs. Supporting this idea is the fact
that Ripley and Wilder bottle motifs sometimes
occur on the same bottles. For instance, a Ripley
Engraved bottle with a alternating elements motif
recovered from a grave at the Pine Tree Mound site
displays what looks to be a Wilder Engraved swirl
motif with interlocking ends and Ripley Engraved
concentric half circles embellished with pendant
penter site, these same primary motif elements are
joined on a double bottle with the Wilder swirl on
the lower bottle and the Ripley half circle with
pendant triangles on the upper bottle body (see
Engrave circles and diamonds motif positioned
above a Wilder swirl is also known from the Johns
site (see Figure 4d). These double bottles suggest
that the same Caddo potters had both Ripley and
Wilder motifs in their repertoire.

only interlocking rattle tails on the vessel body
Thus, it appears that the tails alone may stand for
are clearly structurally similar to the interlocking
ends of the Wilder Engraved swirl motif, as both
interlock around a circle or a central point. The
examples of Wilder Engraved interlocking ends
thickened by hatching are also suggestive of the
snake rattles and strengthen this interpretation (see
that the Wilder Engraved motif is a nonrepresentational version of what is depicted in the canebrake
rattlesnake motif. Both are depictions of snakes
or snake elements that rotate around a center or
axis, and in that way they are also connected to
the interpretation of the Ripley Engraved scroll
motif. Based on its structural association with the

JOHNS ENGRAVED BOTTLE
MOTIFS
Johns Engraved is a ceramic type proposed
tational bird images found on some bottles and
bowls within Titus phase ceramic collections. The
few known Johns Engraved bottles have a variable
body shape that in most respects is similar to the
bell-shaped body and elongated neck of Ripley
Engraved and Wilder Engraved bottles (Figure
the body of the bottle is also similar to that of
both Ripley and Wilder Engraved, with the motif
positioned between the neck/body juncture and
extending past the body carination to the base.
Comparing the tertiary structures, Johns Engraved

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 8

Figure 8. The structure of the canebrake rattlesnake motif from a bottle recovered from the Harold Williams site (41CP10).

between the bottle drawing and the opened-out drawing in relation to the surrounding elements. This redrawing stays
faithful to what was illustrated by Turner.)

motifs may be considered similar to the half scroll
and medallions motif associated with Ripley Engraved bottles (see Figure 1c-e) as well as the swirl
motif of the Wilder Engraved bottles (see Figure
7). The primary elements consist of a bird head that
sometimes interlocks with a hook element (Figure
). Like a medallion or half scroll, the bird head
hangs down from the horizontal lines that encircle
the neck of the bottle. The head is marked with a
circular eye, banded neck, and curving beak. The
hooked element curves up from a horizontal line
at the bottle base. The hook and bird beak can
interlock around an unmarked center, as do some

secondary circle, or open circle element, may appear at the base of the hook or bird head, or there
may be a triangular hatch element in this position.
the Johns Engraved bottle from the Horton site, the
bird head is prominent, extending up or down from
the neck and base of the bottle, while the hook elethe structure of the bird head is quite similar to that
seen on the bottles from the Johns site.
The Johns site produced three bottles and three
bowls with the bird imagery, and another bottle is

Figure 9

Gadus—Twisted Serpents and Fierce Birds

a

b

c

Texas Archeological Society

known from the Mockingbird site (Perttula et al.
recovered from either Tuck Carpenter or Pine Tree
Mound. However, Tuck Carpenter did produce one
Johns Engraved bowl with the bird head motif,
as did the Caldwell site in Titus County (Turner
reach of the Big Cypress Creek drainage. The tight
distribution of these sites suggests that Johns Engraved may have been a local expression of motif
themes that were common and also expressed on
both Wilder and Ripley Engraved bottles. How
the bird imagery associated with the Johns motifs
is related to Wilder and Ripley Engraved motifs is
explored in the next section.

THE ICONOGRAPHY OF RIPLEY,
WILDER, AND JOHNS
ENGRAVED BOTTLES
The similarities of motif and vessel structure
for the Caddo ceramic bottles described above
suggest that the images on these bottles and
commonly held by the prehistoric Caddo (Fields
groups decorated and used ceramic vessels in

ceramic art of the Lower Mississippi Valley.
were decorated with “highly charged symbolic
and metaphoric images… that reference other
world conceptions.” It is also true to say that
the importance of ceramic vessels as a medium
of symbolic expression changed over time and
ceramic vessels as the main medium of expression
in the Mississippian “Post Southern Cult Period,”
when pottery replaced work done on exotic
use of pottery as a means of symbolic expression
appears to accompany increased variation in ritual
activity on a regional scale. The “Post Southern

themes and images that appear on the shell, stone,
and copper artifacts were continued on pottery.
To discern the meaning of the images on the
Ripley, Wilder, and Johns Engraved bottles under
discussion here, the bottle motifs are compared
to shell engravings, which often afford more
representational and therefore more interpretable
images. One of the largest bodies of engraved images on shell cups and gorgets is from the Spiro
site in Oklahoma. These images, which have been
analyzed and cataloged by Phillips and Brown
narrative of the people who made and/or used

engraved shell gorgets from the Roden and Sanders
mound sites located along the Red River between
Ongoing work concerning the interpretation of the
images on these shell artifacts and their relation to
Mississippian iconography is continuing to clarify
the linkages between the image structure and mythology. Particular useful to this study is the work

It is also important to discern whether Caddo
traditional beliefs support an interpretation of
Ripley, Wilder, and Johns Engraved bottle motifs
based on Mississippian iconography. While much
has been lost, Caddo stories and historic accounts
of ritual practices provide a background against
-

the chronicles of the Spanish and French missionaries and traders who interacted with the Hasinai
th century.
The Hasinai homeland lies within the upper Neches
Caddo who made and/or used bottles under discussion here. However, the Hasinai homeland encompasses the Washington Square Mound site, which
as noted above, produced a canebrake rattlesnake
bottle. The many stories and reminiscences about
Caddo life and belief collected by these authors are
likely applicable to all Caddo groups.

manufacture of Ripley, Wilder, and Johns Engraved
medium of symbolic expression, some of the same

comparisons and Caddo stories, are used here to
explicate the images on Ripley, Wilder, and Johns

Gadus—Twisted Serpents and Fierce Birds
retelling of the reminiscences of Caddo elder Grace
birds, twisted serpents, and the Great Serpent. The
theme of the sacred pole relates to a multi-level
world order composed of a beneath world, upper
world, and lower world. Each world has a four-part
structure with the sacred pole as the center passing though all worlds. Implicit in this world order
is the necessity of movement (dance) around the
center and/or between the world levels as a means
to create and renew the world. The themes of the
beings whose movement or activities can be associated with particular world levels. The theme of the
Great Serpent, a powerful being who incorporates
characteristics of serpents, birds, and even mam-

The Sacred Pole
The form of the Caddo bottle and its corresponding motif structure can be interpreted using
becomes a microcosm of the multi-level world
order, a view that was held by many historic NaExpressed in myth, legend, and art, the sacred pole
in the four directions that extend though each world
Each world level also had particular characteristics
and denizens. The upper world was considered the
day sky that was ruled by the sun and was home
to the thunder beings or other winged beings. The
middle world was generally considered the everyday
world or the plane of human and animal existence.
The lower world was an ambiguous realm that was
manifest in the night sky and was ruled by the Great
world levels was possible because the sacred pole,
also known as the world center or axis mundi, linked
all of the levels.
four-part symmetry of each world may be found
in the Caddo dance ground and the sacred cedar
pole that stood at its center. The prominence of
a sacred pole, or dance ground pole, is recounted

the stories of the Spanish chronicler Casanas, who
lived among the Hasinai tribes. Casanas wrote that
a portion of everything the Caddo offer to God

symbolically by the color of the pole, which she
described as black on the north side and green on
the south when set into the center of the dance
ground. The orientation of the dance leader completed this quartering, as he stood on the west side
addition, Caddo stories that refer to directionality
are added evidence that the historic Caddo did accept the idea of a multi-level world.

Moon), who brought the Caddo up and out of the
“Old Home” in darkness to a world of light. Carter
and a pipe in one hand and a drum in the other.
Next came his wife, bringing corn and pumpkin
westward coming out of the Old Home in Darkness
to another world.”
In another part of that same creation story,
1), there appears a passage with a reference to the
below world from which the people came, and
the directionality of the middle and upper worlds.
“Moon told people the name of the place in the
ground from which they had come. He told them
that the direction to their right-hand side should be
called north, or cold side, and the direction to their
left-hand side should be called south, or warm side.
While Moon was talking the Sun came up out of
the east, passed them, and went down in the west.”
In another story from the Dorsey collection
world as well as the sacred pole, or tree, as the narrative tells how the brothers Lighting and Thunder
He [unknown boy] said, my father has
given me very dangerous power, and so
brother, you must climb up the tree and he
will give you power too. The little brother
climbed the tree, and he went clear up as
far as the other boy had gone. He did not
know where he was, and it seemed like a
dream to him, and when his bones began
to fall he did not know it. The next thing
he heard was “lookout brother the arrow
is coming right down on you. Get out
of the way.” He jumped out of the way
and saw his brother standing there. The
[unknown] boy told his brother to show

Texas Archeological Society
him what kind of power he had, and the
little brother began to make a loud noise
that sounded like thunder when it rains,
and then the [unknown] boy let his tongue

Reference to a multi-level world structure
may also be found in the structure of the motifs
on several prehistoric shell gorgets from the Spiro
sightful interpretation of a Spiro site shell gorget
links this multi-world order once again to the dance
ground. In two examples reproduced here, Spiro
(the outer edge of the gorget) on either side of a
presents a strong case for interpreting these images
as depicting a circular path or dance ground around
pear to be dancing on this path, with the path itself
being the outer shell ring of the gorget. The sacred
pole stands between the dancers. If these scenes are
the pole stands at the center of a circular dance
gorgets is decorated with double diagonal lines or
“bars” alternating with “open circle” elements that
are common elements in many Ripley Engraved
scroll motifs. These open circle elements may recapitulate the pole at the center of a circular path.
be seen on a Caddo long-necked bottle if viewed
from the bottle lip down on the bottle body (see
ters on opposite sides of a central pole is known
from a shaft burial at the Roden site (see Figure
10d). The Roden gorget with human characters
may also be interpreted as dancers standing on an
on either side of a pole and appear to have bird
tails and to be holding feathered fans or shields.
The pole on this gorget is decorated with bars and
circular elements similar to that seen on the Spiro

interest is the fact that the poles on both the Spiro
and Roden gorgets have four circular elements
fer to the four-part structure of the world through
Sanders site and a second gorget from the Roden
site go even further to link the four-part structure

to the sacred center by depicting a large cross as
the focus of the motif as if it represents four poles
(Figure 10c, e). On the Sanders gorget the four
arms of a cross are decorated with bars and circles
as seen on the single pole between the dancers on
the Spiro gorget. The cross arms, so decorated, may
be another reference of the cross on the central pole
as depicted on the Roden gorget. Instead of human
dancers around a central pole, a turkey jake dances
on the circular path (outer shell ring) in front of
this cross representing the four fold structure of
the center. On the second Roden gorget the cross
arms are not decorated, but four birds are pecking
at each arm or pole, and the eye of each of these
birds is made similar to the circles that decorate the
central poles on the other gorgets. (See the discussion below concerning the identity of these birds.)
Thus, both gorgets with a large cross appear to be
another way of expressing the sacred pole theme
by directly relating it to of the four fold structure
of each world level. The Sanders, Roden, and
Spiro gorgets described here may be considered
microcosms of a multi-leveled world order, in
which powerful beings are depicted interacting
Caddo bottles, like the shell gorgets, may
also be considered symbolic representations of a
sion above concerning bottle structure, the potter
ent ways, with the elongated neck being the most
common. The elongated neck may be considered
symbolic of the sacred pole that unites the multileveled world, while the four-part structure of
bottle bodies and the four-part symmetry of the
engraved motifs represent the four-part structure
bottles con be considered as a three-dimensional
representation of that world structure. Extraordinary bottles, such as those with square bodies,
four-column bodies, double bottles, and pedestal
bases, are even more explicit analogs in clay of
bottles and those with four-column bodies emphasized the four-part structure of each world level.
The double bottle may be a reference by the potter
to multiple world levels, while the elongated neck
of the double bottle again emphasizes the center.
The engraved motifs on bottles also help emphasize these world structural themes. For instance,
viewed down from the rim of a bottle and opened
out, a Ripley Engraved circles/diamonds motif has

Figure 10

Gadus—Twisted Serpents and Fierce Birds

a

b

c

d

e

Texas Archeological Society
a cruciform shape around a circle made by the neck
cent of the cross in circle on top of the pole in the
Roden gorget and the cross behind the turkey jake
on the Sanders gorget. There are even four circles
with central dots or “open circles” on this bottle
motif that are again reminiscent of the four circles
that decorate the poles on the Roden and Spiro gorgets and decorate the cross on the Sanders gorget
(see Figure 10a-d). The importance of the engraved
motif found on certain bottles might go further than
that of just a recapitulation of world structure. The
motifs may provide clues to what world level and
powerful being is invoked. Similarly, the accoutreshell gorgets may provide clues to who these actors
are or where they are dancing. The elements that
comprise the bottle motifs are essential to under-

and ceremony. Spanish chroniclers mentioned that

The bird motif known from Johns Engraved bottles
their feathers were symbolically important to the
proposed here that some of the Ripley and Wilder
Engraved motifs also include feathered elements
that work to link the motifs to the upper world or to
particular winged beings.
Winged beings occur commonly on Spiro
shell gorgets and cups. These beings can, for obvious reason, be associated with the upper world
or the ability to move between worlds. One such
being is the Birdman; he is widely seen on Spiro
shell cups and copper plates from Mississippian

in which it was produced.
Fierce Birds
In the Caddo story “The Girl Who Married a
the upper world and the powerful beings who reside there interact with the human world. The story
opens with a beautiful girl receiving her wish to
band, the old North Star, in the sky world. The marriage was not what she had hoped, and the majority

is depicted with a human body and outstretched
wings, bird tail feathers, and hooked nose or beak
(Figure 11a). The hooked beak associates this being with an avian raptor. The stance of this being
is often depicted with raised legs, reminiscent
of the dancers on shell gorgets discussed above.
to a cultural narrative based on the falcon/warrior/
hero who symbolizes rebirth, the defeat of death,
and continuation of social continuity.
The way the feathers on the inner wings of
the Spiro Birdman are depicted is of interest for
the interpretation of Ripley Engraved motifs in

or upper world, she fashions a rope to let herself
girl dangles between the worlds on her short rope,
The bird passed under her feet several times
and when he passed on the fourth time he told her
that he would take her down and carry her home
if she would step on his back. She stepped on the
she said she was; then he told her to let go of the
ward very easily. The bird asked her if she would
let him take her on to her home, and she said she
would. The bird then took her to her home and
when they came near, the bird let her down and told
her that he had to go back to his home; but before
leaving her he told her that he was Black Eagle.
Birds and their symbolic representations, that is
their feathers, were an important part of Caddo ritual

on the upper inside of the wing are shown as a
crenate line or a line with low rounded projections.
which he calls a petaloid motif, represents the
downy feathers found on the inner wing of a raptor. The motif element “pendant triangles” used
extensively in a secondary role on many Ripley
Engraved bottles can also be viewed as forming a
line of low rounded projections on the bottle motifs
(see Figure 1a, c, e-h, j, l). Thus, the crenate line
formed by the pendant triangles may symbolically
represent feathers and may connect many different Ripley Engraved motifs to the upper world
where feathered beings dwell (Fields and Gadus
crenate line alone dominates the motif, and these
bottles may be considered “feathered bottles” with
an exclusive upper-world connection (see Figures

FigureGadus—Twisted
11
Serpents and Fierce Birds

a
b

c

d

Texas Archeological Society

is used in combination with different elements,
suggesting that what the feathering represents is
probably altered by the context. It is interesting to
note, however, that crenate lines are rarely seen on
Wilder Engraved bottle motifs. Only one Wilder
Engraved bottle motif with pendant triangles is
known from the Pine Tree Mound site (see Figure
7g). Nor is feathering depicted on Johns Engraved
bottles, where apparently the bird images alone
makes the necessary symbolic connection.
Ripley Engraved “feathered bottles” generally
display a crenate line alternating with a plain line.
This alternating structure occurs with medallions,
concentric circles, and concentric band motifs
occurs on some bottles with slanted scroll and half
scroll motifs as well as in half circle elements (see
Figure 1a, c, l). One Spiro shell cup displays this
alternating structure as a half circle with four Bird-

cenate line alternating with plain lines or bands as
a path of downy feathers that represents the “Path
of Souls,” or the Milky Way, which in many Native

Figure 11c). This depiction is mentioned because
both the Spiro motif and the Johns Engraved bird
depictions focus on the bird head. However, the
similarity appears to stop there, as the characteristics
of the Johns Engraved bird and the bird with the jagged crest differ dramatically, indicating that they are

found, although infrequently, on Spiro shell cups,
and again with heads only (Phillips and Brown
the “crested bird.” It is recognized, in contrast to
raptors, by its smoothed crest and a straight bill
in Figure 10e may be interpreted as a depiction
of four full-bodied woodpeckers each attached
to or pecking the sacred pole with wing and tail
outstretched. These birds with their smoothed
crest and short straight beak are similar in form
to the woodpeckers depicted on Hixton-style gorgets from the Tennessee River valley (Lankford
the woodpecker to upper world beings that control
thunder and lighting. He makes this connection
because both are often depicted with long tongues
woodpecker was noted for the steely “hammer and
chisel” effect of its beak and the agility of its “ex-

the path of souls. This structural similarity between
the Spiro shell cup “feathered pathway” and Ripley
Engraved feathered bottle motifs suggest that these
Ripley Engraved motifs may also be depictions
of the path of souls in the celestial realm. For a
Ripley bottle with a concentric bands motif, this
feathered pathway clearly proceeds around the sacred center as symbolized by the neck of the bottle
The Thunderers are a group of powerful winged
beings that are associated with the four directions,
weather, and the stability of the upper world (Lankof imbalance and death in their constant struggle
with lower world beings that have snake-like atcups, Thunderers may be depicted as raptors having a curved beak and a jagged head crest (Reilly
these “birds with jagged crests” to the path of souls,
as a guardian or judge along the way. One engraved

The ivory-billed woodpecker is also known for
its striking smoothed red crest. The association of
the woodpecker, and in particular the ivory-billed
woodpecker, to lighting and thunder is certainly
gests it has a strong association with the multi-level
world order. Possibly this association is based on
down a tree, circling around the trunk in a kind
of dance, as it moves from the lower world to the
upper world. However, the characteristics of the
woodpecker, with its smoothed crest and long strait
bill, again do not match the bird depicted in the
Johns Engraved motif.
The Johns Engraved bird motif represents a

the Sanders shell gorget discussed above and on
shell gorgets and cups from Spiro (see Figures
10b-c, and 11d). While the Caddo are known
for their “turkey dance,” which is one of the few

Gadus—Twisted Serpents and Fierce Birds
Caddo ceremonial dances that continues to this day

the four-quartered center pole with raised legs and

wild turkey in Mississippian iconography is not as

shell cup from Spiro displays an image of six birds

discussed here. Set against Birdmen, raptors, and
woodpeckers, the turkey may appear to be a mild
creature. Yet, wild turkeys do possess characteristics that would qualify them for the appellation

the birds have a plain head, a long curved beak, a
barred wing, and most importantly a prominent
beard projecting from their necks. These birds are
also depicted with no legs, which seems odd for a

warriors, since they compete for mating dominance
with prominent displays and intense sparing (Hutto

that surrounds these birds includes three concentric
half-circle elements, two of which have plain bands
next to a band with a crenate edge indicating the
celestial pathway, which appear to be emerging
from star-like bands that encircles the cup. The
interpretation that the turkeys on this cup are in

sparing with large leg spurs. These are large birds
that make their living on the ground, but they are

may represent a connection between both the upper world and the middle world of everyday life.
These birds are also known to confront snakes they
both of which can easily kill a young turkey (Hutto

The characteristics that distinguish turkeys

a long curved beak, a ringed neck and/or a beard
projecting from the neck, barred wing feathers, and
acteristics mark a winged being as a wild turkey
jake. Most of these characteristics can be seen on
the turkey jake depicted on the Sanders gorget and
on the bird attached to the back of the dancer on a
Spiro gorget (see Figure 10b-c). Both birds have a
long curved beak and no head crest. In nature, the
wild turkey has no feathers on its head; rather, the
head skin is blue and changes to a bright red on

feathers that grows from its breast and its curious
in length continuously, it is never shed, and has
been likened by ornithologists to coarse hair (Sibthat these coarse feathers resembled a human scalp
warrior. On the Spiro gorgets, this beard looks very
similar to the sashes worn by the dancers above
their raised legs (see Figure 10b). The turkey jake
on the Sanders gorget may also be dancing around

and places these birds in the same position as the
four Birdmen who are also on that path (see Figure
11b, d).
The representational bird imagery seen on
the Johns Engraved bottles can also be related to
Engraved birds have no head crest of any kind indicating that the bird is not a raptor or a woodpecker.
The beak is long and curved but not a short sharp
curve of a raptor beak. The head has a single eye
and is set off by one or two lines at the neck, while

also be represented by the curious hooked elements
with hatching opposite of and interlocking with
the bird heads on the bottles from the Johns site
similar to those seen on the Sanders and Spiro shell
Johns Engraved bird. No other motif elements on
the Johns bottles place the birds in any particular
world level, so based on the characteristics of the
bird itself, the Johns Engraved turkey bottles may
refer to action in the middle world of every day life.
ages on the Johns Engraved bottles incorporates
the structure of both Ripley and Wilder Engraved
bottle motifs. These motifs are the Wilder Engraved swirl and the Ripley Engraved medallions
motifs. These motifs appear as two different ways a
Caddo potter could represent movement around the
sacred center. By using the structure of these motifs
to represent the turkey jake, the potter shows their
familiarity with both Ripley and Wilder motifs, and

Texas Archeological Society
such, the Johns Engraved representational motif
depicted on the bottle. This bring up the question
of whether there is other imagery on bottles that
may refer to the turkey, just as the Ripley Engraved
pendant triangle element forms a crenate edge that
refers to the downy feathers on a raptor wing.
The depiction of feathers on the Sanders and
Spiro turkey jake images is different then that of the
crenate edge on Ripley Engraved motifs. The inner
wing of the turkey tom bears a stylized representation of feathers as overlapping panels or bars. This
element is clearly seen on the wings of the turkey
on the Sanders gorget and the six birds on the Spiro

dangerous and benevolent. These stories have titles
such as Snake-Woman Distributes Seeds; Evening
Star and Orphan Star; The Dangerous Water Monster; and The Woman Who Turned into a Snake. In
it was she who gave to the people the seeds of all
growing things that the Great Father had given to her.
were ripe and ready for picking, she admonished the
people to take care of the seeds and the plants as they
grew, or suffer a poisonous snakebite.

of a turkey do suggest overlapping bars when the

demonstrated in the story of Evening Star and Or-

none are known from the Pine Tree Mound or Tuck
Carpenter sites, some Caddo bottles display a similar overlapping panels element in a concentric bands

of boy, abandoned and starving on an island, who
is caught in the middle of the struggle between the
upper world and lower world powers, even as the

this motif is opened out and viewed from the bottle

The [serpent] monster came straight toward
him and said “Boy I have come to save you. I saw
the people desert you and I have taken pity on you
and come to rescue you. Get on my back and hold
to my horns and I will carry you to the mainland.”
The boy was no longer afraid and climbed upon

the structure of the shield or fan held by one of the
dancers on a Spiro gorget (see Figure 10a). The fan
or shield also has a crenate edge, suggesting it is
indeed feathered. This juxtaposition of feathering—
that is, overlapping panels or bars relating to the
turkey adjacent to a crenate edge indicating raptor
feathers—suggests that this shield motif may have
multiple world associations.
on possible Ripley Engraved bowls from a grave at
41HS718, a Titus phase habitation site near Pine

motif associated with various Caddo ceramic types.

holds, references to turkeys and middle world associations on Caddo ceramic vessels may be con-

the importance of this kind of bird imagery within
the iconography of the Caddo living in the Big Cypress Creek drainage of Northeast Texas.
Twisted Serpents
Snake imagery for obvious reasons is associated
with the lower world or the synonymous watery

the other shore so badly that he thought he would
keep still and not tell the monster that he saw the
star [Evening Star], for he knew that he [the serpent
monster] would take him back to the island if he
did. He said nothing, and so the monster swam on
until they reached shallow water, when the boy
saw a great black cloud roll in front of the star. He
back and swam to the shore. Just as he jumped
something struck the animal with an awful crash
and he [the serpent monster] rolled over dead...

contends that the Caddo stories concerning serpents
are about power and transformation. The transformations take place as the power moves from the
lower world to the middle world to the above
world, from animal to human agency, from life to
death, and back again. It is the skill of the humans
that interact with the power that determines the
demonstrates the widespread occurrence of serpent
imagery as well as imagery of other ambiguous
creatures (ambiguous because they may dwell in

Figure 12

Gadus—Twisted Serpents and Fierce Birds

motif that may a representation of turkey feathers. Both a general view of the bottle motif and a top-down opened-out
view are presented here.

more then one world) within the Caddo ceramic
repertoire. The canebrake rattlesnake bottle motif
is one such image that attests to the importance
of serpent imagery for the Titus phase Caddo and
earlier Caddo living in Northeast Texas. This importance is also marked by the less representational
images with serpent associations common to Ripley and Wilder Engraved bottle motifs.
Demonstrating what Ripley or Wilder Engraved
motifs or motif elements are associated with serbirds, by comparing representational images to the
less representational imagery. The representational
imagery of the canebrake rattlesnake motif, and the
serpents or serpent beings common to Spiro shell
cups, display a variety of serpent body markings,
with the most common being chevrons, bars, circles,

bottle, while their tails interlock around a central
central element associated with the Wilder Engraved
swirl motif (see Figures 7-8). The similarity extends
to thickened and hachured ends of the canebrake
rattlesnake tails, which are reminiscent of the Wilder
Engraved “interlocking ends” primary element. The
clear connection demonstrated by these structural
similarities suggests that the message presented
by both is similar. The message or theme concerns
snakes, powerful lower world beings, twisting
around a common center, be that a bottle axis or the
center of a Wilder Engraved swirl motif.
The theme of snakes moving or twisting
around a common center also appears in the structure of snake motifs found on Spiro shell cups.
Spiro motifs as the “intertwined serpent-like be-

also Figure 8). These markings are similar to primary and secondary motif elements that appear on both
Ripley and Wilder Engraved bottles (see Figure 5).
similarity exists between the Wilder Engraved
swirl motif and the canebrake rattlesnake motif.
The bodies of canebrake serpents twist around the

around a center, as the structure of the image can
be related back to the dancers on the Spiro and
Roden gorgets (see Figure 10a, c). The center on
the Spiro and Roden gorgets is represented by the

Texas Archeological Society

a

c

Figure 13

b

d

to and seem to be dancing around the entwined snakes instead of a central pole, and their dance ground is around a
coiled horned serpent rather than an open circle, suggesting that this dance occurred in the lower world (reproduced

Gadus—Twisted Serpents and Fierce Birds
sacred pole, around which the two dancers move.
However, entwined bodies of the snake-men have
replaced the center pole and in an unambiguous
way to link the dancers to a center now placed in
the snake pole is a coiled horned serpent, whose
presence leaves little doubt that the dance depicted
on this shell cup takes place in the lower world
The connection of the Wilder Engraved swirl
motif and the canebrake rattlesnake motif to
powerful serpent beings acting in the lower world
seems like a simple association. But sometimes
elements within a motif belie something more.
For instance, serpent markings, such as chevrons
or bars, may be present in the motif along with
feathering, as represented by pendant triangles.
Elements with serpent and bird associations in
the same motif would suggest that a motif could
represent action or actors in multiple world levels.
For example, a Ripley Engraved bottle from the
Pine Tree Mound site displays a half scroll motif
decorated with pendant triangles that suggests
it is a feathered bottle associated with the upper
world (Figure 14). However, a close inspection
of the opened-out motif shows a single iteration
of the half scroll surrounded with chevrons and
hatched areas that are reminiscent of a serpent tail
(Figure 14). The Ripley Engraved half scroll with
a crenate line alternating with a plain line or band,
as discussed above, may indicate the upper world
downy-feathered path. The placement of a serpent
tail on this path may be a reference to a powerful
being that incorporates aspects of all world levels.
The Great Serpent
One being with many aspects is the ostensibly
lower world power variously called the Great Serpent, the Horned Serpent, or the Piasa (Lankford
horned serpent seen in a central position on the
Spiro “intertwined snake-men” cup (see Figure

Serpent in the night sky; the night sky would be the
visible manifestation of the lower world (Lankford
for feathers and serpents are represented within the
same bottle motif, this too may be a reference to the
Great Serpent and its ambiguous power.
Four Piasas with serpent characteristics and
bird wings are depicted on a Spiro shell cup as

circle with cross is reminiscent of the same symbol
on the top of the pole on the Roden gorget, and is
again used here to denote the four-quartered sacred
center (see Figure 10c). The circle with cross element is also recapitulated in the overall structure
of the four Piasas. The tassel hanging from the
necks of these Piasas appears strikingly similar to

four Piasas again alludes to the ambiguous power
of these beings. That power unites various aspects
of the multi-level world order with the wings of
a bird marking the upper world, a rattlesnake tail
and body of a lower world creature, and the tassel
or beard from a middle world bird, while the procession of the Piasas around the sacred center or
pole again demonstrates the primacy of that mythic
Engraved bottles with a circles/diamonds motif.
This motif opened-out again displays a cruciform
image arranged around the neck of the bottle that
The reference to the Great Serpent is based on the
crenated or feathered elements that surround four
diamonds. Diamonds, as noted above, are common
ment that may directly refer to a serpent and/or the
Great Serpent is the SZ element (see Figure 1a-b,
d, k). It is here called the SZ element because it
may occur within a motif as an S or a Z, or it may
occur sideways and appear scroll-like (see Figure
5). The SZ element may be a very old symbol for
the Caddo living in Texas, as Phillips and Brown

monster in the Evening Star and Orphan Star story
the power of the Great Serpent is seen as a mixed
power that can work for ill or good in relation to
humans. When this serpent takes on attributes of
When wings or feathers are placed on a snake-like
creature, this may be indicative of the Piasa or Great

the Davis Rectangle. They give it this appellation
because of a similar motif found on Hickory Fine
Engraved vessels from the George C. Davis site
element embodies serpentine qualities go beyond
its obvious sinuous form. It can be found at Spiro
on the underbelly of the serpent depicted on a shell

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 14

Figure 14. Ripley Engraved bottle with a half-scroll motif that displays feathering (pendant triangle elements) and serpent

Gadus—Twisted Serpents and Fierce Birds

Engraved motifs with other serpent body markings
such as cross-hatching, chevrons, and bars (see
Figure 1d). The SZ element can appear as a primary
element of a scroll, as a secondary element in the
arms of a scroll, it can also occur in a band of elements, or it can occur on its own (see Figure 1d,
k). The SZ element can also occur with the element
“pendant triangles” that represent a crenate line or
feathering, and this suggests that the SZ element,
like the Great Serpent, can have multiple worldlevel associations (see Figure 1a-b).
Two Ripley Engraved bottles, one from the
Pine Tree Mound site and the other from the Tuck
Carpenter site, may best demonstrate how Caddo
potters may have used the SZ element to depicted
the Great Serpent moving along the path of souls.
The bottle from the Pine Tree Mound site is decorated with a slanted scroll motif that repeats twice
around the vessel (Figure 15). The primary element
of the scroll is an open circle, which as discussed
above, is one way to represent the sacred center.
pendant triangles that connect the primary elethey still work to form a crenate or feathered band
that is accompanied by a plain band on the outside
structure of the feathered pathway depicted on the
Spiro shell cups and on other Ripley Engraved
bottles discussed above (see Figures 1c-g and
11b, d). On the outside of the scroll are four SZ
elements, which are surrounded by other serpent
markings consisting of bars and hatching (Figure
15). The juxtaposition of the feathered pathway
and the SZ elements on this bottle suggest that
the SZ elements, representing the Great Serpent,
are following the pathway in the night sky. The
to the imagery of the birdmen, who are following
the feathered pathway on a Spiro shell cup (see
Figure 11b). In this case, however, the Great Serpent, as represented by the SZ element, replaces
the birdmen.
On the Ripley Engraved bottle from the Tuck
Carpenter site, a large SZ element alternates with
two iterations of concentric half circles (see Figure 1k). These half circles are composed of plain
bands alternating not with feathered bands but with
with serpents, these concentric half circles may
represent the pathway of the souls as expressed in

the lower world. The motif on this Tuck Carpenter
bottle motif may be analogous to the motif of the
entwined snake-men dancing on the path around
the Great Serpent or horned serpent on a Spiro shell
from the Tuck Carpenter site demonstrates, as do
all of the Ripley Engraved bottles used to illustrate
this discussion, that less representational motifs
incorporated elements and structures that were
highly infused with meaning, which was based in
a deeply rooted worldview.
Motif Summary
The overall theme used in this study to interpret Caddo bottles and bottle motifs relates both
to the structure of the motifs and the form of the
bottle. The theme is that of a multi-level world
order with the sacred pole, the center, connection
to all worlds. These worlds are occupied by various
powerful beings that symbolically dance or act in
a particular world, and some can take on aspects
of or display powerful activity in multiple worlds.
References to these beings show up within the
motifs engraved on the bottles. The importance of
bottle form to the conveyance of this overall theme
supports the contention that bottle form itself
should be considered a motif. The extraordinary
bottle forms described above support this, as they
appear to accentuate different aspects of the multilevel world structure (see Figure 4). For instance,
base accentuate the center or axis of the bottle,
while the four-corned bottle appears to recapitulate
the four-fold aspect of each world. Double bottles
in particular suggest the superposition of multiple
world levels, and the engraved motifs on these
bottles do appear to correspond to their appropriate
level placement, with lower world imagery below
upper world imagery (see Figure 4c-d). Thus, all
Caddo bottles, engraved or not, may be considered
Lower world imagery marked by serpent elements such as bars, chevrons, diamonds, hatching,
and the SZ element is found on Ripley Engraved
bottle slanted scrolls, medallions, and alternating elements motifs (see Figure 1d, i, and k). The
canebrake rattlesnake motif, which display representational snakes marked by chevrons and hatching, is likewise considered to have an association
with the lower world. The canebrake rattlesnake

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 15

Figure 15. Ripley Engraved bottle with a slanted scroll motif that displays crenate line or feathering (pendant triangles)

swirl motif suggest that both may be expressions
around the sacred center within the lower world
(see Figures 7a-f and 8). Occasionally incorporated
into Wilder Engraved motifs are crenate lines as

a representation of feathers (see Figure 7g). The
combination of snake and bird elements in the same
motif points to the theme of the Great Serpent, who
has the ability to take on aspects of all world levels.
But generally, the Wilder Engraved swirl motif

Gadus—Twisted Serpents and Fierce Birds
had strictly serpent associations and as such lower
world associations. For middle or upper world associations the many Ripley Engraved motifs and
nate edge or pendant triangle element, representing feathering, on Ripley Engraved bottle motifs
such as the medallions, concentric circles, and
concentric bands motifs (see Figures 1e-g and

feathered pathway in the upper world. However, as
noted above, combinations of serpent and feather
elements occur within Ripley Engraved motifs
indicating a Great Serpent association. This associations appears commonly on Ripley bottles and
includes the slanted scroll, the half scroll, and the
circles/diamonds motifs (see Figure 1a-c, h and j).
Combining not just elements but upper and lower
world motifs on a single vessel may represent an
all-world association. This is evident on a bottle
from the Pine Tree Mound site that combines a
Wilder-like swirl motif and a half circle motif with
pendant triangles (see Figure 1l). These multi-level
motifs demonstrate that the potters making these
bottles had both Ripley Engraved and Wilder Engraved motifs in their repertoire.
Middle world imagery is represented by the
Johns Engraved bird motif, which I argue represents a turkey jake. The structural similarity of the
Johns Engraved bird motif to the Wilder Engraved
swirl or the Ripley Engraved medallions motif
indicates that, like the serpent, these middle world
birds also danced or acted at or around the sacred
middle world birds to an overlapping panel motif,
which has been interpreted here as bands of turkey
with the addition of this turkey feather band motif,
middle world imagery seems scarce compared to
the other world levels and the Great Serpent. This
bottles at either Pine Tree or the Tuck Carpenter
site, though it does appear on a bowl from Tuck
the potters at these two sites found other ways to
reference the middle world; one suggestion is that
plain bottles, which are frequent within the graves
at both Pine Tree and Tuck Carpenter, symbolized
the middle world. Still, the presence of the Johns
Engraved representational turkey motif demon-

their bottles.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE
DIRECTIONS
The connections highlighted here between
the Ripley Engraved, Wilder Engraved, and Johns
Engraved bottles and bottle motifs and the imagery
on Spiro, Sanders, and Roden site shell artifacts
help to broaden our perception of a long and rich
Caddo symbolic tradition. The study demonstrates
that vessel form and motif structure convey meaning that can be interpreted in relation to iconic
themes that are pervasive in Mississippian period

themes, such as the sacred pole and the multi-level
world, as a way of relating to and understanding
their world is supported by historic accounts of
their rituals as well as in the retelling of their traditional stories.
This study also demonstrates the close correspondence between some of the classic Titus
phase ceramic types. The bottle form and motifs
associated with Ripley, Wilder, and Johns Engraved display similarities in structure and content
that indicate they all may be considered part of a
single ceramic tradition. These similarities, and the
meaning they may encode, should cause archeoloNortheast Texas. For though it may appear that
bottle motifs are derived from limitless possible
combinations of elements, this close examination
found that potters made consistent choices in how
motif elements were combined to derive particular
Engraved bottles, and these motifs are mainly associated with upper world symbolism or the Great
Serpent. In contrast, the single Wilder Engraved
swirl motif has mainly a lower world association.
which may be a precursor to the Wider Engraved
swirl. Since both Ripley and Wilder Engraved
bottles are found in the graves at the Pine Tree
Mound and Tuck Carpenter sites, and in some
instances single bottles incorporated the motifs
of both types, it is possible to conclude that the
Wilder Engraved swirl motif conveyed a particular
meaning not otherwise represented by the Ripley

Texas Archeological Society
Engraved motifs. The Johns Engraved turkey jake
motif and the overlapping band motif interpreted
in the Ripley Engraved repertoire. Both these turkey related motifs have been interpreting as having
a singularly middle world association that is also
uncommon on Ripley Engraved bottles.
Explicating meaning by applying an iconographic approach to ceramic analysis can also open
new avenues for exploring the social organization and
community differences among the people who used
these vessels. One such study may be based on the use
of these vessels as burial offerings. If it is assumed
that the bottles were placed in the grave by the living
to ease passage of the deceased to the afterlife, then
whom the deceased was in the view of those who did

intra-community associations such as a clan, lineage,
or family. This kind of study was attempted for the
Pine Tree Mound site burials with some interesting
showed that most adult burials, both male and female,
had imagery on their vessel offerings, suggesting that
access to some kinds of imagery was not restricted.
However, bottles with Great Serpent imagery occurred only with adult males, although not every
adult male had this imagery. The apparent status of
an adult male, based on the number and kind of offerings or grave size, did not strictly correspond to which
adult males had this imagery in their graves. These
patterns suggest that social factors other then status
alone affected access to the powerful imagery found
on the Pine Tree bottles. Further research is needed to
explore what these factors may be, and such research
would necessitate comparisons between many Titus
phase burial sites.
ated with burials at the Pine Tree Mound and Tuck
Carpenter sites suggest that these two sites, representing different Titus phase communities, used
imagery in different ways. The Tuck Carpenter
bottles appear to be decorated mostly with lower

the bottles from the Pine Tree Mound graves, there

The iconographic emphasis of the Pine Tree bottles
is with the Great Serpent imagery as opposed to
the lower world imagery for Tuck Carpenter. This
difference in emphasis suggests that iconic association may be another factor archeologists can use
This kind of study just scratches the surface of
possibilities for the explication of meaning associated with Caddo vessels. Ripley, Wilder, and Johns
Engraved bottles were chosen as the focus of this
study, but similar vessel constructions and motifs
are also found on bottles and bowls associated
with other Caddo ceramic types. Motif meaning
associated with types such as Taylor Engraved,
Natchitoches Engraved, Hodges Engraved, Glassell Engraved, and Poynor Engraved, are beginning
ties in motif structure and meaning between these
types may provide an avenue for investigators to
address how the transference or retention of information between groups was achieved.
graphic approach is the exploration of how pottery as a medium of expression continued even as
Caddo groups came under the pressures of Euroresearch would address whether Ripley Engraved,
Wilder Engraved, and Johns Engraved vessels continued to be produced with their particular iconic
associations into the protohistoric period. Just 10
km south of the Pine Tree Mound site are several
The burials at these sites contain Hodges or Natchitoches Engraved vessels as offerings along with
Ripley Engraved vessels are not in those graves.
Motifs associated with Hodges and Natchitoches
vessels do have strong similarities to the Ripley
Engraved motifs. It is possible that though the
pottery may have changed, the message continued.
was used or transformed may provide insight into
how communities worked to maintain their identity
during times of social disruption.
Clearly the application of an iconographic
approach to ceramic vessel studies has great potential to further a variety of research objectives
pertinent to Titus phase ceramics from Northeast
Texas and Caddo ceramic vessels in general. But
before these objectives can be fruitfully pursued, a
foundation based in a correspondence of meaning
and motif needs to be established. It is hoped that

Gadus—Twisted Serpents and Fierce Birds
this study will help to place at least one block in
that foundation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study could not have been attempted without the body of work generated by the Workshop

participants will be pleased at how their ideas are
being applied to other archeological investigations,
especially this study, which had its inception in a
cultural resource management project concerning
investigations at the Pine Tree Mound site. My
great thanks also go to Margaret Howard and Ross
Fields for critically reading this paper, to Elaine
-

Dowd, E. L.
Southeastern Archaeology
Dye, D. H.
Visualizing the
Sacred: Cosmic Visions, Regionalism, and the Art of
the Mississippian World, edited by G. E. Lankford, F.

New Cultural Boundaries in the Protohistoric Southeast. Paper presented in Symposium “Revitalizing

-

Fields, R. C. and E. F. Gadus (editors)
Archeology of the Nadaco Caddo: The View from the
Pine Tree Mound Site (41HS15), Harrison County,
Texas

REFERENCES CITED
Brinkhead, T.
. Walker Publishing Company, Inc., New York.

and M. C. Wilder
National Register Testing of Seven Prehistoric Sites
in the Sabine Mine’s Area Q, Harrison County,
Texas. Reports of Investigation, No. 147. Prewitt and

Ancient Objects and
Sacred Realms: Interpretations of Mississippian Iconography
The Hasinai Indians of East Texas as Seen by Eu. Philological and Documentary
nial Complex from Spiro. Southeastern Archaeology
Hall, R. L.

Plains Anthropologist
Carter, C. E.
Caddo Indians, Where We Come From
of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Corbin, J. E. and J. P. Hart

ism. In The Southeastern Ceremonial Complex: Artifacts and Analysis. The Cottonlandia Conference,
Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Hart, J. P.
Washington Square Mound Site, Nacogdoches
-

Caddo Mound Complex in South Central East Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
Traditions of the Caddo. Caddo stories collected under
Digitized and reprinted through the Bibliolife Network

eastern Ceremonial Complex Style Zone among
the Caddo of Northeastern Texas. Midcontinental
Journal of Archaeology

Texas Archeological Society
Hudson, C.
The Southeastern Indians

Parker Pearson, M.
The Archaeology of Death and Burial

Hutto, J.

Perino, G.
Central States Ar-

Among the Wild Turkey. The Lyons Press, Guilford,
Connecticut.
Jernigan, E. W.
American

chaeological Journal
Archeological Investigations at the Roden Site, (MC215), McCurtain County, Oklahoma. Publication
No. 1. Potsherd Press, Museum of the Red River,
Idabel, Oklahoma.

Antiquity
Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas: With Extensions of Puebloan Datings to the
Mississippi Valley

The Oak Hill Village Site
(41RK214), Rusk County, Texas, by R. Rogers and

A Study of the Buddy Calvin Jones Collection from
Northeast Texas Caddo Sites. Special Publication

Lankford, G. E.
nents of the Southeastern Ceremonial Complex. In
Hero, Hawk, and Open Hand: American Indian Art
of the Ancient Midwest and South, edited by R. F.

Caddo. Journal of Northeast Texas Archaeology

versity Press, New Haven, Connecticut.

Archeological Investigations at the Pilgrim’s Pride

Southeastern Ceremonial Complex. In Ancient Objects and Sacred Realms: Interpretations of Mississippian Iconography

Cypress Creek Basin, Camp County, Texas

ogy, and Iconography
Tuscaloosa.
Visualizing the
Sacred Cosmic Visions, Regionalism, and the Art of
the Mississippian World, edited by G. E. Lankford,
-

Data Recovery Investigations at the Ear Spool
. Document

Glascock, E. Skokan, S. Mulholland, R. Rogers, and B.
Nelson
Analysis of the Titus Phase Mortuary Assemblage
at the Mockingbird Site, “Kahbakayammaahin”
(41TT550)

Visualizing the Sacred: Cosmic Visions, Regionalism,
and the Art of the Mississippian World
Caddo Archaeology at the Henry Spencer Site
Muller, J.
The Southeastern Ceremonial
Complex: Artifacts and Analysis. The Cottonlandia
Conference
versity of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.

East Texas

Caddo Pottery Vessels and Pipes from Sites in the
Big Cypress, Sulphur, Neches-Angelina, and Middle
Sabine River Basins in the Turner and Johns Collections, Camp, Cass, Cherokee, Harrison, Morris, Titus, and Upshur Counties, Texas and Sabine Parish,
. Special Publication No. 10. Friends of

Gadus—Twisted Serpents and Fierce Birds
Caddo Pottery Vessels and Pipes from the Johns
Site (41CP12) in the Big Cypress Creek Basin in the
Turner and Johns Collections, Camp County, Texas.
Special Publication No.11. Friends of Northeast

Thurmond, J. P.
Archeology of the Cypress Creek Drainage Basin,

Pre-Columbian Shell Engravings from the Craig
Mound at Spiro, Oklahoma, Part I. Peabody Muversity, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Townsend, R. F. and C. P. Walker

Pre-Columbian Shell Engravings from the Craig
Mound at Spiro, Oklahoma, Part II. Peabody

Hero, Hawk,
and Open Hand: American Indian Art of the Ancient
Midwest and South, edited by R. F. Townsend and
Haven, Connecticut.
Townsend, R. F. and R. V. Sharp (editors)
Hero, Hawk, and Open Hand: American Indian Art
of the Ancient Midwest and South

sippian Period. In Hero, Hawk, and Open Hand:
American Indian Art of the Ancient Midwest and
South, edited by R. F. Townsend and R. V. Sharp,
Connecticut.

New Haven, Connecticut.
Turner, R. L., Jr.
Sites within the Titus Focus. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society
Prehistoric Mortuary Remains at the Tuck Carpenter
Site, Camp County, Texas

Ancient Objects and
Sacred Realms: Interpretations of Mississippian Iconography

Ancient Objects and Sacred Realms: Interpretation
of Mississippian Iconography.

Northeast Texas. Journal of Northeast Texas Archaeology
Turner, R. L., Jr. and J. E. Smith II, with contributions by T.

Bulletin of the

Schambach, F. F.
Texas Archeological Society
of the Trans-Mississippi South. Caddoan Archeology
Newsletter

tural Perspective. In The Southeastern Ceremonial
Complex: Artifacts and Analysis, The Cottonlandia
Conference

Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.

Walters, M.
Crotalus horridus atricaudatus. Caddo Archeology Journal

Theory and Context. Paper presented in Symposium
-

White, G. H. and M. Boley
Songs of the Caddo, Ceremonial and Social Dance
Music. S. Butler (notes editor), R. Doyle and S.
Butler (executive producers). Canyon Records Productions, Phoenix.

Native-made Historic Ceramics of Texas
Steve A. Tomka, Timothy Perttula, Tom Middlebrook, and Morris K. Jackson

ABSTRACT
This article provides a regional survey of aboriginal-made historic ceramics in three regions of Texas. For the

of the last mission in Texas, Nuestra Señora del Refugio, and the date beyond which few aboriginal groups
remained living in the state. The focus is on the aboriginal ceramic technology of three regions of the state

INTRODUCTION
native ceramic technology.
The timing of the adoption of ceramics in
Texas is highly variable. For instance, in East
Texas, Caddo groups may have adopted ceramics
as early as 500-100 B.C. (see Perttula and Miller,
this volume) In Southeast and East Central Texas,
ceramic manufacture may have been adopted
around 50 B.C., if not earlier. In contrast, ceram-

within which ceramics appear range from highly
mobile hunter-gatherers, to bison-hunting groups,
archaeologists have been pursuing research to
understand under what circumstances ceramics are
adopted and how the technological characteristics
of ceramic assemblages vary to accommodate distinct mobility patterns and subsistence practices
cultural roles and implications of design motifs
also are being pursued (see Gadus, this volume),
as is the search for ceramic manufacture localities and exchange networks through instrumental
neutron activation analysis (see Creel et al., this
volume; Perttula, this volume). This article summarizes the characteristics of the ceramics made
by native peoples during historic times in what is
now Texas. We describe the characteristics of the
ceramics made by native groups after contact, and

THE ABORIGINAL-MADE
CERAMICS OF WEST TEXAS
In the Lower Rio Grande valley, the protohis-

that local hunter-gatherer and incipient agriculturalist populations such as the Mansos and Sumas,
were exposed to Europeans, namely the Spanish,
through entradas into the region. These entradas
began in 1581 with the Rodriguez-Chamuscado

San Elizario. The entrada encountered Mansos

New Mexico during the early seventeenth century,
they were provisioned by caravans that traveled up
the Rio Grande and passed through the El Paso/
San Elizario area on their way to Santa Fe (SchoPiros, Tewas, and Sumas. To serve in part as way
stations on the way to Santa Fe and as centers of
religious conversion, the church began establishing
missions along the lower and middle Rio Grande.
among the Mansos. It was followed by Mission

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 84 (2013)

Texas Archeological Society

at Paso del Norte (Figure 1). Two other missions
evidence that different vessel forms are tempered

centered on the ford of the Rio Grande and focused
primarily on trade and transportation. The native
tribes that were affected by Spanish activities
through this node were the Janos, Julimes, Mansos, and Sumas. Given the geographic proximity,
groups living in New Mexico, including the Piros,
ish colonization.
colonists living in New Mexico, joined by Piros
and Tiwa groups, retreated to the El Paso area. The
Spanish settlers came to view El Paso as a potential
south of the river into northern Mexico. This set into
motion a push to establish a base from which the reconquest could be launched and a more permanent
date also marks the start of the Colonial period in

from Old Socorro, the majority of the sherds are
tempered with sand, although a combination of
cherts and sand temper also is relatively common
tempering agents is seen in the San Elizario Phase

Clinic Valle Bajo Brown wares are tempered with
rhyolite, andesite, and felsite, although sand remains a common aplastic additive (Miller and
While petrographic evidence suggests that the
bulk of the wares were locally made, petrographic
sels may have been made elsewhere and brought
into the district. Basalt-tempered brown wares
have been found in Old Socorro Mission samples
but they are more common at the Ysleta Clinic site
imported to Socorro.

soil. It was followed by the establishment of the
among the Valle Bajo Brown wares of the El Paso
Revolt refugees from New Mexico. The Socorro
Mission was established by Piro, Tano, and Jemez
tribes, while Isleta Mission was established by the
Tigua tribe. Other missions and presidios followed
throughout the eighteenth century.
Preceding the Colonial period, El Paso district
ceramic traditions consisted of the local El Paso
Brown ware tradition that seems to end around

establishment of the Socorro and Isleta missions
brought about the new Ysleta and Socorro Brownreferred to as “Valle Bajo Brownware” (Marshall
milieu that inseparably connected El Paso to New
Mexico as trade and movement of peoples continued between the two regions.
The paste of the wares ranges from bright red
to light gray in color dependent on the degree of
pending on differences in vessel form. Typically
the temper in the sherds recovered from the El

other tested sites in the vicinity. Bowls alone
range from large and small bowls, closed bowls,
are large and deep jars and small jars, and there
are bottles and canisters. In general, among the
ceramic assemblages from the El Paso area sites
the most common vessel form, followed by jars,
and plates and soup bowls are relatively scarce.
The only exception to this pattern is provided by
the Ysleta Clinic site, where jars are more common

by and modeled after European wares, including
soup bowls, candlestick holders, canisters, and
bottles. The European vessel forms typically make
up 5 percent or less of the ceramic assemblage.
of standardization in vessel form and size. This
standardization may also be in response to Spanish

Tomka et al.—Native-made Historic Ceramics of Texas

Figure 1. Spanish colonial missions and presidios of Texas.

Texas Archeological Society

assemblage from the Ysleta Clinic site shows a

This may suggest that pottery manufacture was
tion rather than within the context of specialized
workshops.
Some historic brown wares are decorated,

The Valle Bajo Brown wares that are so common in the Socorro and El Paso District area began
to be manufactured around the late seventeenth
well into the late nineteenth and early twentieth

red-on-brown, red-on-white, and white-on-brown.
their immediate vicinity and consist of curvilin-

the manufacture of the wares declined, and after
that wheel-thrown commercial ceramic products
dominated the wares.

decorative styles, such as those extending onto the
motifs, may be post-Colonial in age (Leach et al.

HISTORIC CERAMIC TRADITIONS
IN EAST TEXAS

exterior vessel surfaces, is present on some vessel

In East Texas, European contact with the
Caddo Indian peoples—the principal, if not exclusive, aboriginal group living in this region up

of a light polish and smoothing of both interior

the DeSoto-Moscoso entrada (Chipman and Joseph

percent of the vessels from Old Socorro and nearby
sites, and smudging occurs on less than ten percent of the vessels. The most common paste color

region. The effects of the entrada on the Caddo
peoples is still being debated, but one possible
consequence of the initial contact between the
Caddo in East Texas and the Spanish was the production of chalice-shaped ceramic vessels (Turner

the sherds exhibiting this color. Gray and black
sherds are the next most common colors noted in
the samples.
The most common rim forms of the Valle Bajo
Brown ware bowls from Old Socorro Mission and
nearby tested sites are direct rims, with nearly 70

of the Big Cypress and Sabine River basins. These
chalice-shaped vessels are known from less than 10
More permanent and extensive EuropeanCaddo contact in East Texas came only after the
eral missions and presidios (Chipman and Joseph

terior surfaces of nearly 70 percent of the sherds,
while red slips are present on about twenty percent.
the samples.
Sherds from the Valle Bajo Brown ware col-

samples of the same type are slightly thicker (mean
-

civilian settlements and administrative centers, and
centers of trade, principally the town of Nacogdoches. There were also several French and Spanish
trading posts operating in East Texas (including
the post of San Luis de Cadohadacho on the Red

Tomka et al.—Native-made Historic Ceramics of Texas
Plaza Principal excavations in Nacogdoches (see
of the sherds. The most recognizable engraved eleproduced ceramic vessels (and sometimes ceramic
pipes) dominate, or are abundant in, the archeological assemblages at these sites.
To date, only three of the Spanish missions
in East Texas have been located, archeologically
investigated, and their large ceramic assemblages

western Louisiana but once the capitol of Spanish Texas—has also been located, and excavations conducted primarily at the Presidio Nuestra
than at the associated Mission San Miguel de los

Nasoni Caddo sites include ticked horizontal and
curvilinear lines from Patton Engraved vessels (see
Perttula, this volume), and later forms of Poynor
Engraved (var. Cook and var. Blackburn) also appear to be present in the mission assemblage.
The aboriginal ceramics from the two Nasoni
Caddo sites are different from the assemblage
of ceramic vessel sherds from the mission. The
Nasoni Caddo sites have overall high proportions
of decorated sherds, particularly engraved and
brushed sherds, as well as more utility ware vessel
sherds, especially brushed-punctated, punctated,
and incised rim sherds. Conversely, at the mission,
wares. The overall percentage of brushed vessel
sherds is at least two times lower at the mission
compared to the Nasoni Caddo sites. The predominance of bone-tempered Caddo wares at the mission, as well as the dominance of brushed utility

is well to be reminded that the Caddo, or other as-

indicate that the Nasoni Caddo potters living

never settled at any of the missions established in

of a spatially broad and temporally long-lasting

Thus, the ceramics found in mission and presidio
contexts were made by the Caddo in their local
communities and villages, and then provided to
the Spanish missionaries, soldiers, and settlers

and middle reaches of the Sabine river basins.
There is a small assemblage of historic Caddo

provide insights into the functional, stylistic, and
technological practices and traditions of the Caddo
potters in historic times who produced the ceramics, as well as insights into the choices and needs of
the European consumers for the kinds of ceramics
from nearby Caddo settlements.

ramics are dominated by brushed sherds from utilware sherds), with a few jars decorated with punctations, incised lines, appliqued elements, grooved

(n=45) are primarily from Patton Engraved vessels
8580 Caddo ceramic sherds are in the collection.
There are also collections from two contemporaneous and nearby non-mission historic Nasoni sites

both bone- and grog-tempered, found at the mission—presumably in areas where they were used
and discarded by missionaries and soldiers—include plain wares, utility wares, and engraved and
vessel sherds, as well as plain sherds from undecorated vessels and from the lower parts of decorated
vessels, dominate the ceramic assemblage at the

graved sherds with indeterminate designs. Jackson

sites in western Nacogdoches County
with low numbers of plain sherds, high
percentage of brushed sherds…Patton
Engraved and Lindsey Grooved. It is

Texas Archeological Society
assumed that the Spanish at Mission

returned to the area near Mission Guadalupe in

from the surrounding Hainai village.

Nacogdoches replaced Natchitoches as the key
trading center between Europeans and Texas Indians

The aboriginal ceramic assemblage from Misory Punctated-Incised and Ebarb Incised (usually
engraved at this site) vessels, and an unnamed plain

near El Camino Real de los Tejas in downtown

These wares are consistent in terms of the paste
and primary tempering agent, which is bone (80
type for the historic Hasinai Caddo groups to the
west (including at Mission Nasoni and Mission

son sites are on the west side of the Plaza Princi-

with either bone or no discernible tempering agent.

at these three sites focused on eight pit features

(Natchitoches Engraved, Emory Punctated-Incised,
a Constricted Neck Punctated type, Ebarb Incised,
and a distinctive plain ware), but the Natchitoches
Engraved paste at the presidio is almost always

Spanish Colonial period through the Republic of
Texas period. The sheet midden surrounding these
pits contain very rare Historic Caddo sherds (e.g.
Patton Engraved and Natchitoches Engraved).
Based on a seriation using the European ceramics
found in the pits, the eight Plaza Principal pits can
de-population following the Magee-Gutierrez ex-

or bone (40 percent). The general view is that the
different common wares were manufactured by the
dent ware; Womack Engraved, a widely distributed

frequency of aboriginal ceramic sherds relative
to European ceramics. In four pits dating prior to
aboriginal, while aboriginal sherds comprised only

occurs in very low numbers such that this ware is
also believed to be non-resident. Brushed jars are
-

separated by differences in the paste of the ceramic

ics is the appearance of plain wares with features
seen otherwise on European-manufactured ceramic
vessels. This includes Colono-ware pitchers with
handles, brimmed plates, and vessels with foot rings

The majority of the aboriginal ceramics
found in these late Spanish Colonial pits are plain
in each pit). Large sections of discarded vessels
have been reconstructed from the pits, several
of which are undecorated (dubbed locally as

consistent in form with hemispherical bowls (or

cal deposits in Nacogdoches (see below).
Following the closure of the Zacatecan missions

Louisiana, respectively. Trade between Spanish
merchants and the Coushatta is well known from

Tomka et al.—Native-made Historic Ceramics of Texas

usually in plate form. Interestingly, none of the reconstructed
vessels from the Plaza Principal
pits suggest any direct connection
to local Historic Hasinai Caddo
ceramics.
In the civilian settlement of
Nacogdoches, in addition to the
extensive collection of aboriginal sherds from the recent Plaza
Principal excavations, a small
assemblage of Caddo sherds came
suggested they may be associated
with the site of the 1804 Guadalupe del Pilar mission church
sherds are from engraved and/or

Texas.

the Coushatta-Nacogdoches Trace. The plain
hemispherical bowls may also be compared to
Womack Plain as described from the ca. 1750s
Gilbert site in the upper Sabine River basin in East

and carinated bowls), wet-paste
decorated utility ware vessels
(jars and simple bowls), and plain
wares (bowls and jars). Vessel
forms and decorations are consistent with East Texas Hasinai
Caddo ceramics, being part of a bone-tempered
vessels are thin-walled forms tempered primarily
reducing environment, and were either burnished

the Morris Jackson site suggests possible contact
between Nacogdoches settlers and Choctaw traders. This simple bowl has an inverted rim with a

case of a number of the utility ware sherds) on one
or both vessel surfaces. These vessels were probably made from local clays, except for a few shelltempered vessel sherds among the utility ware
and plain ware collections. These shell-tempered
vessels may have been obtained from other Caddo

constricted, slightly everted rim that is decorated
with three rows of punctations on a “swollen”

land grant, just outside Nacogdoches, was held

Several of the early pits also had plain wares with

During the course of archeological investigations
conducted at the site over the last few years, a
small sample of aboriginal Caddo ceramic sherds
(Plain or brushed sherds) was found on the rancho
in contexts indicating that Caddo ceramic vessels
were in use during the rancho occupation. These

Texas Archeological Society

rancho through purchase or trade from one of the

indicate that during the last days of the eighteenth
tury, Caddo groups living in the Nacogdoches area
made bone-tempered brushed utility ware ceramic
vessels as well as vessels (of uncertain decoration)
tempered with grog and mussel shell.

tive groups living inland from Fort St. Louis had
expressed interest in maintaining contact with the
Spanish, which made the latter believe they would
turned to East Texas to establish several missions
-

ABORIGINAL-MADE HISTORIC
CERAMICS OF SOUTH TEXAS

East Texas missions were too costly to maintain
and their presence was no longer needed. Three

The initial interest of the Spanish crown in
the area north of the Rio Bravo was precipitated
by rumors that the French also had designs on the

José de los Nazonis, and Nuestro Padre San Fran-

of Coahuila, heard from the captive Jean Géry that
the French had established a colony in Texas, the

where each was renamed.
Two missions had already been established in
before the three East Texas missions were relode Valero, established in 1718. It was followed

arrival to the banks of a small creek along the Texas
coast, Garcitas Creek, they found that the settlement, known as Fort St. Louis, had already been
destroyed by a smallpox epidemic and by hostile

Tomka et al.—Native-made Historic Ceramics of Texas
The padres in charge of the missions drew their
native converts from the aboriginal groups living
rivers, the coastal plains, and coastal strip itself.
While the material culture of these groups may
have been rather distinctive prior to their arrival
into the missions, it quickly achieved a surprising
Goliad bone-tempered native-made pottery found
in Spanish missions and presidios throughout
South Texas.
Goliad Ware
The Goliad ceramic type refers to an undecomoderate to abundant bone temper (Mounger

work carried out at the third location of Mission
Espíritu Santo de Zuñiga (41GD1) on the bank of
recovery context and the presence of bone as an
aplastic tempering agent within the clay fabric.
Typically, all native-made pottery containing bone
tempering in the clay fabric and recovered from

have a dark gray paste with varying quantities
of bone temper. Typically, both the interior and
exterior surfaces of Goliad sherds are smooth and
burnished. Vessel forms include shallow bowls,
hemispherical bowls, small and large jars, and
cal bowls and globular ollas have thick round loop
Goliad-Red-on-Buff vessels are decorated with
designs executed in thin red paint. They typically
constitute small proportions of the bone-tempered
Goliad wares (less than 0.5 percent of the sherds
at 41GD1). The designs consist of horizontal and
vertical lines, diagonal and zig-zag designs, and
dots. The designs are situated on the outside below
the rim, but red painted designs are also known

mm, but sample sizes are small and this may not
be representative of the type. Both at 41GD1 and
Mission Refugio, the red-on-buff type makes up
less than 1 percent of the overall sample of boneGoliad Black-on-Buff sherds also were recovnumber of sherds (n=17) have designs executed
with asphaltum and are similar to the Goliad Black-

Goliad sherds have been recovered from many
of the Spanish missions in Central and South Texas
and on the coastal plains. The largest collections
come from some of the coastal plains missions
that have seen the most extensive excavations. For

plain and asphalt-bearing sherds. Bone-tempered
specimens also dominate the smaller sample
tablished in 1754 and abandoned in 1781, only to
groups for whom the mission was established were
coastal residents including the Cujanes, Copanes,
Three types are commonly recognized within

41GD1 collection, where they constitute 45 percent
sherds from Refugio have minimal temper added
to the ceramic paste.
number of bone-tempered sherds (representing at
least three vessels) that are decorated with brown
or dark brown painted designs in the Refugio collection. The designs consist of bands and squiggly lines, either on the exterior or interior of the
vessels. The sherds have bone-tempered pastes or
sandy pastes with lesser amounts of bone temper.
brush marks on the exterior of the vessel (Perttula
Collections of native-made plain wares from
the second and third locations of Mission Espíritu
Santo de Zuñiga have yielded the largest sample
of Goliad wares to date. The investigations by
bone-tempered specimens at the third location of

Texas Archeological Society
the mission, and the work of Walter at the second
-

de la Bahia site near Presidio de la Bahia (Ricklis

-

native-made ceramics from the Presidio de la Bahia
(41GD7), and it is clear that Goliad wares abound
in that collection as well.
Goliad sherds also have been recovered from

same as the Mariame visited by Cabeza de Vaca

-

the Bexar County missions in only small numbers

Finally, while many projects have taken place

with most of their members being concentrated at
Mission Nuestra Señora del Espíritu Santo de Zuñiga and Mission Nuestra Señora del Refugio (as

overall the collections of native-made ceramics
are dominated by Goliad Plain ware ceramics.
The systematic analyses of these samples are just
now taking place, with prior attention having been
focused on the majolica sherds that also occur in
these collections.

does not mention that the Mariames were pottery
makers, suggesting that they learned pottery making sometime after the early sixteenth century.

made pottery on the central coastal strip of Texas
actually reported in the enthnohistoric accounts
as having been potters during historic times in the
states that “…Goliad ware represents a distinctive
native ceramic tradition associated with the inland

occupants of the mission at its second and third

known to have resided at Espíritu Santo Mission”

historic accounts cited the fact that as late as 1854
Because the origins of the ware are less well
entire town of Goliad with ceramic wares well into
and what bone-tempered sherds are more likely to
Goliad ware were found at all levels in all excavais somewhat of a challenge. For instance, Ricklis
at the site may be accounted for by the historically
documented fact that native women in the Spanish
Colonial community, most especially those living
at the Espíritu Santo mission, manufactured basic
utilitarian pottery for distribution to, and use by, the
Mariano Cardenas, in an appraisal of the state of the
Texas missions, noted that the Native women at Espíritu Santo “…are the ones most dedicated to work
and are almost always busy making ollas, bowls and
other things of clay, for which they have great skill
and with which they trade with the Spaniards of the

site of Ft. Saint Louis (41VT4), occupied between
traditions, namely Caddo and Toyah (Leon Plain),
also represented but in minor quantities.
The small sample of bone-tempered sherds
from 41VT4 consists of ten rim sherds (representThe sherds are made of clay that is either devoid
of sand or contains relatively sparse amounts of

all others are of light colors (buff or reddish) that

Tomka et al.—Native-made Historic Ceramics of Texas
bone accounts for between 10 and 40 percent of the
paste in the clay bodies, as revealed by microscopic
examination of sherd edges.
The ceramic assemblage from the second site
of Mission Espíritu Santo de Zuñiga (41VT11) on
the Guadalupe River contains over 14,700 native-

mission deposits and some of the bone-tempered
pottery may be associated with this component.
However, the bulk of the materials was deposited
signed to the mission occupation.
Goliad sherds also were present at the Presidio
La Bahia (41VT8), the second site of the presidio
after it was relocated to the Guadalupe River. Over
11,000 bone-tempered sherds were recorded, and

Because of the technological continuity with
Late Prehistoric unglazed and bone-tempered Leon
Plain ceramics found primarily in Central Texas
and on the fringes of South Texas, many archeologists assume that the Goliad ware is a historic descendent of the prehistoric Leon Plain type (Hester

of the coastal Rockport wares (see Ricklis, this
of Espíritu Santo de Zuñiga contained crushed
and burnt bone as tempering. Sparse (less than
5 percent) bone was present in 11 percent of the

the samples. Therefore, half of the assemblage
contained profuse amounts of bone temper (more
-

same site (41GD1) showed that sand was present
in the fabric of 81 of the specimens (44 percent),

with bone-tempered sandy paste specimens being
-

tempering (less than 5 percent). It could not be
with a sandy fabric was an aplastic additive or a

unfortunately no direct evidence exists linking the
manufacturers of Leon Plain wares to Colonial or
Mission period sites or contexts. In addition, although some bone-tempered ceramics are found in
prehistoric contexts in parts of South Texas (Hes-

the Native groups inhabiting parts of South Texas
do not mention any pottery-making groups in the

from Refugio has abundant bone tempering, with
wares having either sparse or moderate amounts of
The large collection of Goliad sherds examined
ing the formal variability present within the ware.
pots with handles, shallow and deep bowls, large
and medium jars, and bottles. Figure 4a-b shows

Technological Characteristics
The clay used in the manufacture of Goliad
wares is either devoid of sand or has low percentages of it (10-15 percent). One of the collections that is an exception to this statement is the
native-made assemblage from Rosario (Ricklis
far the most common temper in the Native-made
sherds from this site, the clay fabric does contain
moderate to profuse quantities of sand, and in
this aspect, the collection is more reminiscence

and ollas constituted a very small percentage of
making up the bulk of the rest (11 percent). Vessel
forms from the samples from Mission Espíritu

Texas Archeological Society
Santo de Zuñiga and Mission Rosario, also dominated by bone-tempered ceramics, include wide
mouth everted rim ollas and jars, large serving
bowls, straight rim jars and bottles, shallow and
deep bowls, and inverted rim ollas (Figure 5, after

mm. The thickness of the bone-tempered sherds

Black-on-Buff body sherds from Refugio ranges

consist of small bowls, ollas, and jars (Lakeman
large to identify vessel form in the 41VT8 collec-

curring less frequently. Samples are too small and
sherds too eroded to have a good understanding of
the variation in vessel forms of the red-on-buff or
brown/dark brown-on-buff types. However, Pertbowl and a brown/dark brown-on-buff bowl in the
Refugio assemblage.
Oxidized vessel surfaces and reduced sherd
cores were noted in virtually 100 percent of the
sherds examined from the third location of Mission Espíritu Santo de Zuñiga. In the small 41VT8
interior and exterior surfaces are more common

thickness of the sherds from a smaller sample
4.00-10.54 mm, with the bulk of the sherds falling
between 5.5-8.0 mm. Vessel bases are much
had a mean thickness of 7 mm.
Paste color ranges from grayish-buff to dull

lections, paste color is dominated by gray paste
but it is not unusual within the same collection to
find pieces that are buff, red, or brown in color.
In fact, often on the same vessel and larger sherd
fragments, coloration shifts from gray to red and
black, as the vessel surfaces are affected by variation in heating atmosphere that is typical of open
bonfire settings.

percent, respectively). The bulk of the sample from
varied from thin and sharp to thick and rounded and
reduced cores and either oxidized (45 percent) or
reduced (45 percent) exterior surfaces.
The mean sherd thickness of Goliad specimens
from the third location of Mission Espíritu Santo

-

rounded lips. They are likely from shallow bowls
common within the assemblage derived from the
third location of Espíritu Santo de Zuñiga. Wall

Many pieces retain a slight luster, suggesting
that they were burnished. None of the rim sherds
examined from 41VT8 exhibit highly burnished

of Mission Espíritu Santo de Zuñiga (41VT11; Free

were not noted on this sample. In general, slips and
washes are relatively rare within the sample from

thin outer zone of the clay fabric a reddish color
was examined from 41VT8, Presidio Loreto, the

the aid of petrographic analysis.
The large sample of Goliad sherds from
41GD1 provides a greater chance that specimens

Tomka et al.—Native-made Historic Ceramics of Texas

Texas Archeological Society

that may show the influence of Spanish-made
ceramic forms may also show up in the Nativemade wares. Even so, no evidence of flat-

a conical shape with the larger diameter portion
attaching to the vessel base and the rounded and
smaller end serving as the purchase for the vessel.

conical pointed foot was identified in the colleca sample of native-made ceramics from Mission
at least one candle-holder fragment (Mounger
whistles, and two small bird effigies (Mounger
note the possibility that several flat profiled
and curved-edged specimens from 41VT11 may
represent plate fragments. Two foot sherds were
identified in the Refugio collection (Perttula
appear to be typical of the tripod variety, having

rim sherds that were lipped, and a base sherd with
a foot ring. Finally, among the samples of bonetempered pottery from Rancho de las Cabras, two
flat sherd fragments were identified (Ivey and
of comales. Typically they are made of metal
and the ceramic versions may signal an attempt
by native potters to copy the form for household
use given the new food source (corn meal) that
became available within the missions.

Tomka et al.—Native-made Historic Ceramics of Texas

Perspectives from Instrumental Neutron
Activation (INAA) and Petrographic
Analyses

completed the petrographic analysis of 140 sherds

groups based on the presence or absence and
percentage of bone within the clay fabric and on
the percentage of quartz (sand) noted during the
petrographic analysis. Paste groups 1D, 1B, and
bone in the fabric, respectively. Paste group 1C
less than 10 percent quartz. The percentage of bone

San José, San Juan, and Espada, see Figure 1). In
addition to the petrographic analysis, sub-samples
of the same sherds were also submitted to the
10 percent quartz and no bone. Quartz ranged from

Texas Archeological Society
unknown origin clay source (group 4) and the possible coastal clay source (group 17). The single
having less than 10 percent quartz and more than

the total points.
140 sherds into three likely local groups (groups

addition, several specimens could not be assigned

low, moderate, or high percentages of bone and less
than 8 percent of quartz in the fabric. In contrast,
have low to moderate percentages of bone and
group 4 specimens were assigned to paste group

chemical group.
The three distinct paste groups differentiated
and 1D) made of locally available clays suggests
that these groups represent three technological
traditions and potentially distinct populations of
craftsmen. On the other hand, the variability seen
in the proportion of bone tempering may simply
be normal within populations of craftsmen under
circumstances when clay fabric preparation is left
to the choice of individual potters rather than occurring under strictly regulated conditions such

patterns are similar to those noted for the Mission
ing local manufacture with distinct technological
traditions; two paste groups that may represent
non-local manufacture traditions; one sample made
of local clay but with no temper; and one unassigned sherd.
The Espada sample consists primarily of the
three most common paste groups made of locally
available clays and three other paste groups that
likely represent distinct technological traditions
in part because they are made of likely non-local
clays. One of these three sherds contains no bone
temper.
The San Juan sample is similar to the three
previously discussed samples. The bulk of the

(e.g., locally obtained clays). Several sherds are
gin. These patterns suggest the presence of sherds

The bulk of the ceramics from the four San

representing distinct technological traditions with

other paste group specimens based on their bone
temper content, and as such may represent distinct
technological traditions. The fact that these bonetempered specimens are made of apparently local
clay sources suggests that they were produced by
potters who were familiar with the characteristics
of the locally available clays. This could mean that
the potters were members of bands that inhabited
jecture is supported by the fact that it would be
expected that the largest proportion of the neophyte
population in each mission may have been drawn
from the nearby groups; therefore, these groups
would also have produced the majority of the

The Mission San José sherd sample contains
seven paste groups. The bulk of the samples fall

technological differences between the three paste
groups consist primarily of the varying proportion
of bone temper added to the clay fabric, and this

are not part of the three principal paste groups. One

the presence of shell in addition to bone in the
fabric. The second sherd had no bone temper and it

broad communities of potters (e.g., ethnic groups,

Tomka et al.—Native-made Historic Ceramics of Texas
bands) or perhaps differences between broad
groups of potters and their trainees (i.e., technological traditions passed from craftsmen to pupils).
The remaining paste groups contain sherds
group 17), group 4 clay sources with an unknown
derivation, and specimens that are not assigned
to a clay group. With the exception of clay group
4, these other clay sources are not represented by
sherds (15 percent of the sample), while clay group

the coastal missions such as Mission Refugio and
Mission Rosario. It is somewhat surprising that
only three sherds are associated with this clay
group if indeed clay group 4 is not also of a coastal
derivation. This observation comes from the fact
that a number of accounts describe the padres in
coast to gather neophytes, and a number of the
named groups were known to have had territories
on the coast. Therefore, it is surprising to note
that the number of ceramics made on the coast is
relatively low. The pattern suggests that the coastal
vessels made on the coast or that fewer of them
entered than appears to be the case from the mission records.
In summary, in the absence of resident potters
during the early stages of colonial occupation of
the South Texas region the nearest possible ethnic
group and mission that could produce ceramics
to the numerous missions and presidios in South
Espíritu Santo de Zuñiga. On the other hand, if
members of other ethnic groups that were brought
with ceramic manufacture, it would have simplineophytes.

bone-tempered sherds from Mission Refugio (Hill
classes, with all but one of them (Class 0) containpaste groups represent two principal technological
traditions. Class 1 sherds contained between 10-40

was relatively common in the paste. Fifty-seven
percent of the sample analyzed fell into this class.
quartz sand, and their bone tempering ranged from

5-15 percent quartz sand and 10 percent or more
bone. It constituted seven percent of the sample
analyzed. Group 1 sherds represented between

that make up the two technological traditions are
made of the same locally available clay sources.
specimens fall within the Refugio Reference group

Refugio Reference group. This pattern indicates
that the same clays were used by two distinct traditions, the bone-tempered wares and the sandy paste
wares, some of which contain low amounts of bone

SUMMARY
This summary of ceramics manufactured by napopulations indicates that the impact of the interactions ranged from having little effect on Native
them. For instance, the contact period Valle Bajo
a considerable amount of vessel form borrowing
from Spanish Colonial vessel forms. In contrast, the
East Texas historic ceramic traditions exhibit a great
deal of continuity with prehistoric traditions. The
South Texas and coastal ceramic traditions appear
to fall between these two extremes. The Rockport
ware appears to have solidly established prehistoric
roots and the Goliad ware also has strong technological connections to the prehistoric Leon Plain
wares although a direct link between the two wares
has not yet been demonstrated. Nonetheless, there
are strong technological continuities evident in
both wares. Yet, at the same time, and in particular
with the Goliad wares, there are signs of Spanish

Texas Archeological Society
that are beginning to be manufactured by Native
potters using local clays and traditional pottery
manufacture techniques.
The variability noted in the impact of Spanish
contact on the ceramic technology of native groups
may be best understood in terms of the nature of the
inter-relationship between the Spanish Colonial institutions and the socio-cultural and economic fabric of
the native groups that were engaged with the colonial
forces. In West Texas, there was a lengthy relationship
that had been established between native groups and
Spanish populations beginning with the occupation of
New Mexico and extending approximately 100 years
longer than in East Texas. The fabric of Native society
had been dramatically altered during this period by
a multitude of interactions between native peoples
and Spanish settlers and the church. In contrast, at
the end of the seventeenth century when the Spanish
began interacting with Caddo groups, the Caddo were

manufactured the pottery but primarily for their
own use. The few Spanish residents of the mission
continued to use the majolica wares imported from
Mexico. There was much less dependence of Spanish inhabitants of the mission on the pottery made
by native craftsmen, and that dependence may have
shown up only late in time as the church was seeking
to secularize the missions.

social and religions foundation that lacked for little
that the Spanish could have contributed. Indeed, it
was the Spanish church that found itself reliant on
the Caddo populations that the padres were trying

Bishop, M.
The Odyssey of Cabeza de Vaca. The Century Co.,
New York.

REFERENCES CITED
Bannon, J. F.
Barr, J.
Peace Came in the Form of a Woman: Indians and
Spaniards in the Texas Borderlands
North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.

Bolton, H. E.
Texas in the Middle of the Eighteenth Century. Pub-

from the Caddo populations to the Spanish rather than
Press, Berkeley.

Spanish living in East Texas were the recipients of
Caddo material culture rather than its manipulators.
This reversal of power relations seems to have had

Brain, J. P.
The Tunica Treasure. Papers 71. Peabody Museum
Cambridge.

Caddo ceramic technology.
In contrast to this socio-economic interplay, na-

more inter-dependent relationship with Spanish Colonial institutions, both the Church and the Presidio.
The hundreds of native groups that inhabited the
interior coastal plains and the region between the
mobile hunter-gatherers. These groups appear to
have had some basic intra-group social and religious
institutions to bind them into effectively functioning
entities. However, they do not appear to have had
strong inter-group ties that would have bound them
into strong independent supra-community entities to
tions too became suppliers of the missions and presidios with native-made pottery but in this case the
power relationships were dramatically off-balance in
favor of the Spanish institutions. The native potters

Burke, J. W.
Missions of Old Texas. Bames and Company, Inc.,
London.
Burton, H. S. and F. T. Smith
Colonial Natchitoches: A Creole Community on the
Press, College Station.
Campbell, T. N.
Region of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society
Indian Groups Associated with Spanish Missions of
the San Antonio Missions National Historical Park.

Cardenas, Fr. J.M.

Tomka et al.—Native-made Historic Ceramics of Texas
Carlson, S. and J. Corbin
Bulletin of the Texas

French-Indian Interaction at an Early Eighteenth

Archeological Society
County, Texas
Chipman, D. E.

Girard, J. S.
-

Chipman, D. E. and H. D. Joseph
-

Pottery. Journal of Northeast Texas Archaeology
Corbin, J. E.
Gregory, H. F.
Texas. In Columbian Consequences, Vol. 1, Archaeological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish
Borderlands West

in Models and Interpretation. Ph.D. dissertation,

Journal of Northeast Texas Archaeology
Mission Dolores de los Ais

-

in North Louisiana. Journal of Northeast Texas Archaeology

Nacogdoches.
Mission Dolores de los Ais (41SA25): San Augustine
County, Texas

The Southwestern Historical Quarterly
Fields, R. C.

Interaction on the Northern Frontier. Historical Archaeology

Spanish Texas Pilgrimage: The Old Franciscan
Missions and Other Spanish Settlements of Texas,
. Franciscan Herald Press, Chicago.

Journal of

G. I. Mendez, C. L. Tennis, and J. E. Zapata
Excavations at Mission San José y San Miguel de
Aguayo, San Antonio, Texas

A Multicomponent Historic Site in Bexar County,
Texas

Hester, T. R.
Digging into South Texas Prehistory. Corona Pub-

Northeast Texas Archaeology

de la Bahía del Espíritu Santo. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society
Free, R. and W. Raschkow

Indians of the Texas-Northeastern Mexico Borderlands. In Columbian Consequences: Archaeological
and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands West, Vol. 1, edited by D. H. Thomas, pp.
D.C.
Hester, T. R. and T. C. Hill Jr.

of Montana.
Gerald, R. E.
The Artifact

tion In Southern Texas. Plains Anthropologist

Texas Archeological Society
Hill, D. V.
El Valle Bajo: The
El Paso. Volume I: Culture and Environment in the

Their Relationships with Colonial Governments in
East Texas. In American Indians and the Market
, edited by L. Greene and M.
Tuscaloosa.
Marshall, M. P.

Colonial Mission Established on the Texas Frontier,

The Beginnings of Spanish Settlement in the El Paso
District
versity of California Press, Berkeley.

cal Earthenware Ceramics. In A Presidio Community
on the Rio Grande: Phase III Testing and Historical
Research at San Elizario, Texas. Volume I, edited by
B. J. Vierra, J. Piper, and R. C. Chapman, pp. 155-

Bajo Brownware Ceramics from the Old Socorro
Mission and Other Tested Sites in Socorro del Sur,
El Paso County, Texas. In Searching for Piros near
the Old Socorro Mission: Phase IIB Excavations at
gram, edited by B. J. Vierra. R. C. Chapman, and

Archaeological Survey and Testing at Rancho de
las Cabras, Wilson County, Texas
The Ysleta Clinic Site: A Spanish Colonial Period
El Paso, Texas
B. Meissner
Trade and Cultural Interaction along El Camino
Real de los Tejas During the Spanish Colonial and
Republic Periods in Nacogdoches County, Texas
Vols. Nine Flags Museum, Nacogdoches.

semblages and Culinary Traditions. Southeastern
Archaeology

. Translated with bibliographical introduction and annotation by C.E.
Castañeda. Quivira Society Publications, Vol. VI

-

Lakeman, J. B.
sion Espíritu Santo de Zuñiga (41VT11), Victoria

Neitzel, R. S.
Archeology of the Fatherland Site: The Grand Village of the Natchez

Leach, J. D., M. W. Melton, R. D. Harris, and M. Flowers
Ceramics. In
Archaeological Test Excavations at the Ysleta del
Sur Pueblo, Texas, by J. D. Leach, N. P. Houser, R.

Paso.

Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern
Times

“The Caddo Nation”: Archaeological and Ethnohistoric Perspectives

Tomka et al.—Native-made Historic Ceramics of Texas
Archeological InEstablished on the Texas Frontier: Nuestra Señora
del Refugio (41RF1), Refugio County, Texas. Volume
I, Archaeological Investigations, by C. Tennis, pp.

Groups of Northern Mexico. The Artifact
Solís, G. J.
chivo General de la Nacion, Historia. Barker Texas

-

County, Texas. Journal of Northeast Texas Archaeology
edited by E. B. Jelks. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

Journal of Northeast Texas Archaeology
th

Century Span-

Journal of Northeast Texas

Archeological Testing and Data Recovery at the
Flatrock Road Site, 41KM69, Kimble County, Texas.

Archaeology
-

C. Lintz
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

Timmons, W. H.
El Paso: A Borderland History. Texas Western Press,
El Paso.

El
Grande Valley of El Paso. Volume I: Culture and

El Paso.
Turner, R. L.

Texas

-

Sites within the Titus Focus. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society

Colonial Ceramics from Mission San Juan de CapistArcheological Investigations at the Spanish Colonial
Missions of Santo (41GD1) and Nuestra Senora del
Rosario (41GD2), Goliad County, Texas. Coastal
Studies, Inc. Corpus Christi.

Goliad Ceramics. In Archaeological Investigations
Texas

Scholes, F. V.
the Seventeenth Century, I-III. New Mexico Historical Review

-

Texas Archeological Society
vations at Presidio Nuestra Señora de Loreto de la
Tomka. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
Vierra, B. J., R. C. Chapman, and J-e Piper (editors)
Searching for Piros near the Old Socorro Mission:
II/IIB Monitoring Program

-

Zuñiga (41VT11), Victoria County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society
South Texas
Walter, T. L. and T. R. Hester
Zúñiga. Heritage Magazine
West, E. H.

Walter, T. L.

Spanish Exploration in the Southwest 1542-1706, edited
. Special Publication
-

Inc., New York.

