BULLETIN
OF THE

VOLUMES .7&18
1946-47

TE v~o~
ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY
2009
l~PRINT EDITION

BULLETIN
OF THE

~exa~ Arrhaeologiral a~il
~laleoulologiral ~oriely
VOLUMES 17-18
1946-47

A

ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY
2009
REPRINT EDITION

R eprin ted with p erm iss ion ofTh e Texas A rch eo logica l So ciety, A us tin,
Texas by Gustav’s Library, Davenport, Iowa, 2009. This reprint made
from an original edition provided by The Texas Atvheologieal Society.

www.gustavslibrary.com
1011 E High St, Davenport, IA 52803

BULLETIN
OF THE

Volume Seventeen
Ig46

Published
by the
Society at

Abilene
Texas

COPYRIGHT

t946

BY

THE TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL AND
PALEONTOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ALL

RIGHTS

RESERVED

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES, OF AMERICA

Ar heo ogka!
a eonm og a
OFFICERS
CYRUS N. RAY,

President

R. N. RICHAPmSOH, Vice-President
OTTO O. WATTS, Secretary-Treasurer

DIRECTORS
COL. M. L. CraMMINS
CYRus N. RAY, D.O.
W.C. HOLDEN, Ph. D.
R. N. RICHARDSON, Ph. D.
J~DGE O. L. SIMS
OTTO O. WATTS, Ph. D.
ERNEST WALLACE, Ph. D.
REGIONAL VICE-PRESIDENTS
H. M. KAUTZ .................................................................. Fort Worth
1VIRS. FORREST KmKLAND ......................................................Dallas
MRS. MORGAH JONES
................................... _Abilene
PROF. VICTOR SMITH ........................................................... Alpine
FRANK H. WATT .....................................................................Waco

FLOXD V. STUDER .........................................................Amarillo
Shreveport, La.
C. H. WEBB, M.D.
T. L. HODGES, 1Vii. D .................................................. Bismarck, Ark.

TRUSTEES
JUDGE E. T.

ADAMS

THOIVIAS E.

ELLIS W.

SHULER~

ROBERTS

FRAlVE: GRn~ES

A. T. JACKSON

E. A. UNGREN

Ph. D.

J. G. McAL~ISTER, Ph. D.

PRICE CAMPBELL

EDITOR
CYRus N.

RAY,

D. O.

The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific undertakinq; for the study of the
history, pre-history and the major and
minor artifacts of man and the fossils
representinq the past floras and faunas
of Texas; for the encouraqement of the
proper collection and preservation of
such artifacts and fossils in museums
and their study and classification and
the publication of the results of the
searches incident thereto.

BULLETIN
of the

Arrheologira! ani
lateontologiral oriety
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.

2.
3.

Two Unusual Types of Chipped Stone Artifact
From Northwest Louisiana.
By C. H. Webb ................................................................ 9
Two Buried Multiple Stone Cist Structures.
By Cyrus N. Ray .............. .. ............................................. 18
The Rattlesnake in the Art and Life of the American

Indian.
By M. L. Crimmins ......................................................
4.
5.

6.
7.

8.
9.
10.

11:
12.

Grooved Clubs From a Peat Bog in Texas.
42
By Carl Chelf
Evidence of European Influence in the Pictographs
of West Texas.
By Victor J. Smith ........................................................... 48
Permian Polished Boulders in Texas.
By Cyrus N. Ray
63
Fossil Cycads in Texas with a Description of a New
Specimen.
By Carl Chelf ....................................................................... 84
Additional Archeological Data from North Texas.
By A. H. Witte ..................................................................... 91
Mexican Pottery Head Found in Texas.
By Mr. and Mrs. J. Henry Ray ...................................... 93
News Notes and Editorials
(1) History of the Society. (2) New Trustees and
Director. (3) A Tailor Must Have Cloth. (4) Of °
Manos, Metates and Scrapers. (5) Scientific Visitors. (6) Folsom Blades. (7) Obituary .................. 99
Secretary-Treasurer’s Report 1946 ............................... 116
Membership List .................................................................. 117
Vol. 17, 1946. Price $3.00
Abilene, Texas

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Plate 1

..........Page 11

Two unusual types of Louisiana artifacts.
l~los. 1-6 Albany type bevelled scrapers.
l~los. 7-19 San Patrice type points.
Plate 2 _[’...........................................................................Page 19
1~o. 1--Site of Fisher County buried multiple stone cist structure before excavation.
1~o. 2---Site of Fisher County excavation, first layer.
!~/o. 3--Abalone shell ornament found in grave under bush in
foreground.
Plate 3 ...........................................................Page 21
I~lo. 1--View of first layer of stones in buried multiple stone cist
structure in Taylor County.
No. 2--Second layer of stones in structure.
l~lo. 3--Three skulls lying in row on bottom level of multiple
stone cist structure.
Plate 4 ........................................................Page 25
Artifacts from ~wo buried multiple stone eist structures in
Fisher and Taylor Counties; tqos. 1-2-3, petrified shell and bird
bone ornaments; Nos. 4-5, flint blades.
Plate 5 ............................................................Page 29
Rattlesnake picture at Hueeo Tanks, northeast of E1 Paso, Texas.
Plate 6

Page 85

Picture of two rattlesnakes at Cornudas Del Alamo northeast
of E1 Paso, Texas.
Plate 7 ..................................................................... -iPage 39
Pictograph of plumed rattlesnake, Site 3, E1 Paso CourteD’.
Plate 8 ...................................................................... Page 43
Views of five grooved clubs found buried in a peat bog in
1Vlilam County, Texas.
Plate 9 ................................................................................ Page 49
Pictographs 1Wos. 1-2-3-4-5-6 show cattle, pennants, devil, gun,
stage coach, men with hats, skirted figures.
Plate 10 ............................................................................. Page 51
Pictographs show both whites and Indians on horses.
pean rider with hat, cowboy lasso and horse group.

Euro-

Plate 11 ............................................................... Page 55
Pictographs show Catholic priest and cross, group of horsemen
apparently in armor.

Plate 12 ..................................................................................... Page 57
Pictographs show horsemen and cattle.
Plate 13 .................................................................................. Page 59
Pictographs show mission and priest, skirted figures similar to
European dress.
Plate 14 ...........................................................................Page 65
Three views of large polished boulders at two sites, ]Ft. Chadbourne and Church Peak.
Plate 15 .......................................................Page 67
This shows three views of smaller polished boulders, site north
of .Ft. Chadbourne.
P]ate 16 .................................................................................... Page 71
Three views of very large polished boulders, site north of Ft.
Chadbourne.
Plate 17 ...................................................................................... Page 73
This view shows three more of the larger sizes of polished
boulders near Ft. Chadbourne station.
Plate 18 ....................................................................... Page 77
This shows three views of the polished boulders near Bronte,
Texas.
Plate 19 ........................................................................................ Page 81
This view shows an unusually large polished boulder taken in
winter at sunset. This one is over ten feet thick.
Plate 20 ....................................: ....................................................... Page 85
Three views of a cycad found in Montague County.
Plate 21 ................................................................................... Page 95
Mexican pottery head found in Eastland County, Texas.
front view, No. 2, side view, No. 3, top view.

No. 1,

Plate 22 ....................................................................... Page 101
Two views of the Gibson site showing Dr. Albert E. Jenks
inspecting the midden levels.
Plate 23 ....................................................................................... Page 1{}5
Three views of two deeply buried midden sites, and of embedded flint knife blade in bottom level of one.
Plate 24 ............................................................................. Page 109
Three views of buried middens in river silts and Dr. Kirk
Bryan inspecting Gibson site silts.
Plate 25 .............................................................................. Page 113
Mr. C. W. ttanley.

Two Unusual Types o$ Chipped Stone Ar~ifac$

9

TWO UNUSUAL TYPES OF CHIPPED STONE
ARTIFACT FROM NORTHWEST
LOUISIANA
By C: H. W~B
Two apparently unusual types of chipped stone artifacts
have been noted in our collection of approximately ten
thousand specimens found on the surface of more than one
hundred sites in the northwestern portion of Louisiana.
We have not found either descriptions or illustrations of
similar artifacts in the various articles describing cultures
or chipped stone objects from other areas, although a few
projectile points of the types to be described have been
observed in the collection at the University of Texas, these
points having been found in surface collections from the
contiguous counties of East Texas. Also of interest is the
fact that neither type has been reported in association with
the known pottery containing cultures of Louisiana or East
Texas.
The present description is presented with the request that
others who have found artifacts of either type communicate
"with the author so that a better knowledge of their distribution may be secured.
A. Spokeshaves or Beveled Scrapers (Albany Type)
There are thirty of these chipped stone artifacts which
appear to be hefted spokeshaves or beveled scrapers (Plate
1, Nos. 1-6). They were found on fifteen sites in five parishes of Louisiana, all bordering on Red River, with one
specimen from a site in Harrison County, Texas, just across
the boundary line. Two or more specimens were found at
seven sites, the largest number, five, from Albany Landing
in Caddo Parish, from which the ~ype name is taken.
Two characteristic features of these artifacts are (a) sidenotcMng, usually fairly deep, producing an expanded heft,
the base of which is typically concave or straight, rarely
convex, and (b) a single beveled blade.

10

Texas A~’cheological and PaleontoIogical Society

Two subtypes are to be distinguished. In the first (Plate 1’,
Nos. 1-3) the artifacts are made from flat, waterworn pebbles of tan chert and in most instances much of the original
surface remains unworked, the chipping of the bevel and
the side notches, with some thinning of the base, representing the only alterations. Whenthe first few objects of this
type were found, we considered them to be unfinished
blades or rejects, especially since the chipping was rather
rough, but the consistent appearance of the entire group has
convinced us that this is a distinct type of artifact.
The beveled blade is nearly always concave (Plate 1, Nos.
1-3), sometimes strongly curved, and is diagonally placed
so that the end of the instrument is narrower than the base,
although a definite point is lacking or is very blunt. The
bevel is quite obtuse, the blade rough and dull and the
reverse side seldom has chipping or flaking along the blade.
The cutting or scraping edge, therefore, is formed at the
junction of the bevel and the rough, unworked face. The
lack of a point, the obtuse bevel and the rough, dull edge all
suggest a scraping instead of a cutting tool.
There a~e twenty-two artifacts of this subtype, varying
in length from 3 to 7.5 cm. (1¥4 to 3 in.), in width from 2 to
4 cm. (3~ to 11~ in.), and in thickness from 3 to 12 ram. In
every instance of this subtype, the bevel is in the same relative position, so that if the handle of the tool were held in
the right hand with the blade down, the bevel would face
the user.
The other subtype, represented by eight specimens, shows
considerable refinement of technic in manufacture, with
chipping over the entire surface (Plate 1, Nos. 4-6). Most
of the specimens, in fact, appear to be reworked from projectile points, although demonstrating the same general idea

PLATE

I

Nos. 1-3, Albany type beveled scrapers, subtype 1.
Nos. 4-6, Albany type beveled scrapers, subtype 2.
Nos. 7-19, San Patrice type points. "Nos. 7-10 have the typical
shape, with shoulder near the midpoint. Nos. 11-15 have short basal
segments. Note serrated edge of No. 12 and beveled edge of No. ’15.
Nos. 16-19 are unusual shapes.

I?-.

lq

I~
Plate I

Two Unusual Types o$ Chipped Stone Artifact

13

of a beveled blade which is diagonally placed. In two instances, the opposite edge of the specimen is beveled on the
reverse side, but the diagonal placement of the main bevel
and its convexity place these two specimens in the type of
beveled scrapers (instead of bilaterally beveled projectiles).
Five of the eight specimens in the subtype appear to have
been reworked from projectiles of the type tO be described
later, having concave bases thinned by longitudinal flaking.
Most of the objects in this subtype have more carefully
flaked bevels which are not quite as obtuse as in the first
subtype, nor are they usually as strongly curved, although
generally the blade is convex. With two exceptions, the
points are more acute than in the first subtype, although this
is probably accidental and due to their being reworked from
projectile points which had previously been thinned at the
edge opposite the bevel.
The artifacts of this subtype vary from 3 to 5 cm. in length,
~rom 2 to 3.5 cm. in width and from 5 to 8 ram. in thickness.
Six of the eight have the bevel in the same relative position
as in the first subtype, but the other two are reversed (Plate
1, No. 5) as though adapted for use by a left handed individual.
B.

Concave-base Projecti~e Points (San Patr~ce Type)

Uns~emmed projectile points are comparatively infrequent
in Northwest Louisiana. In our collection, the San Patrice
concave-base point (Plate 1, Nos. 7-19) occurs more often
and has a wider distribution than any other unstemmed
projectile. We have noted this type in other collections
from the area, also in the collection from adjoining counties
of East Texas at the University of Texas, and in collections
from Southwest Arkansas. Brown illustrated several points
of this type from Wilkinson County, Mississippi (1), but
does not give their association.
Fifty-five points of this type in our collection come from
twenty sites in six parishes of Northwest Louisiana and one
site in Harrison County, Texas. Eleven sites are represented
by a single specimen, the remaining sites affording from two

14

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

to nine, the largest number coming from the type site on San
Patrice Creek in DeSoto Parish.
These points are of medium size, between the small arrow
points (commonly termed "bird points") and the large projectiles which are thought to be atlatl lance points.

They

range from 2.5 to 5 cm. (1 to 2 in.) in length, 2 to 3.2 cm.
(13/16 to 1~’4 in.) in width and are typically thin, 4 to 7 ram.
at the thickest section.

They are made from various mate-

rials, nearly half of them from the tan colored chert described in A. In contrast to the beveled scrapers, however,
these points are well made, symmetrical, with carefully executed chipping and flaking.
The typical artifact (Plate 1, Nos. 7-10) is unhafted, with
concave base, the concavity ~usually being deep and occasionally V-shaped. The edges are always concave in the
basal portion, usually straight or convex in the upper portion, producing a well defined shoulder at the level of greatest width. I:f the upper or blade segment of the edge is
convex (Plate 1, Nos. 9, 16), the points are rather obtuse;
if straight or concave (Plate 1, Nos. 8, 12, 14, 15), the points
are acute. The length of the concave basal segment of the
edge varies, the shoulder in the typical specimen (Plate 1,
Nos. 7-10) being near the middle. In other instances the
basal segment is longer (Plate 1, No. 16) or shorter (Plate
1, Nos. 11-15). If very short (Nos. 11-14) this concave portion produces a distinct notch.
Characteristic of these projectile points, in addition to
the concavity of~ the base, is a thinning of the basal segment
by a wide groove on each face, effected by the removal of
one to three longitudinal flakes. This grooving extends from
the basal concavity to or beyond the level of the shoulder,
involving one-third to two-thirds of the total length of each
face. In some instances there is a short groove on one face
and a much longer groove on the reverse. This grooving
produces an inverted Y-shaped ridge on each face, the ridge
seldom being very high because of the thinness of the artifacts~

Two Unusual Types o] Chipped Stone A~ifact

15

The basal portion of each edge is moderately smooth,
while the upper portion is brought to a good blade by
secondary flaking in most instances. Unless the artifact is
quite wide, the primary flaking of the faces extends from
the edge to the inverted Y ridge. Some roughness and irregularities are noted, so that neither in regularity nor
length of flaking do these artifacts equal the fine execution
of the Folsom or Yuma types.
However, the bilateral grooving of the bases, their concavity and the smoothing of the basal margins are suggestive of Folsom traits and undoubtedly served the same purpose, i. e., to facilitate attachment of a deeply notched shaft.
A transverse section through the basal portion of a San
Patrice point is fairly similar to a comparable section of
the Folsom point.
Discussion
There are several facts which suggest that the Albany
type bevelhd scraper and the San Patrice projectile point
belong to the same general culture period. Both are found
on hillside sites bordering the Red River valley in Northwest
Louisiana and contiguous areas, although the San Patrice
point may have a wider distribution. Neither seems to be
related to the known pottery making or mound building
cultures of this area. The sites on which they are found
usually have several varieties of large projectiles and
scrapers, which may be rough or well finished; both celts
and grooved axes, although the latter predominate; occasional large drills and tubular stone beads; pitted stones and
hammerstones. We have designated this as probably a late
Archaic horizon in Northwest Louisiana (2) but as yet the
culture traits have not been carefully worked out, and the
comparative scarcity of the two artifact types~ described
above makes it difficult to place them in an exact cultural
assemblage.
Some of the sites from which these artifacts are found
contain pottery sherds in varying amounts, while other sites
are lacking in pottery. Where present, most of the identifiable sherds belong to the Alto (3) and Bossier (4) Foci,

16

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

which are comparatively recent, extending from a period
contemporaneous with Coles Creek to a proto-historic Caddoan period.

A few of the sites containing Bossier Focus

materials also have occasional sherds and projectile points
of types described by Ford and Willey (5) from the lYlarksville-Troyville sites of Central Louisiana, in addition to the
artifacts which we consider as Archaic. Evidently these
sites have a long habitation history, although apparently
never very thickly populated.
Of the fifteen sites on which the Albany type scrapers
were found and the twenty sites from which the San Patrice
points came, ten sites produced artifacts of both types. These
sites include the type sites, Albany Landing in Caddo Parish
and San Patrice in DeSoto Parish, at each of which a number of artifacts of both types were found. We have already
noted that the second subtype of Albany beveled scraper is
typologically similar to or actually reworked from points of
the San Patrice type.
The similarities between the basal segments of the San
Patrice point and Folsom fluted points is given a flavor of
more than accidental resemblance by the finding of a number of fluted points, also unfluted Clovis and Yuma types
from the hill sections of Northwest Louisiana, to be reported later, l~Ioreover, one specimen each of the fluted
(Folsomoid?) and Yuma types have been found at the San
Patrice site and a fluted point was found at another of the
ten sites from which San Patrice and Albany type artifacts
were secured. This may be an accidental association, and
there is no particular reason to consider the two artifact
types being discussed as having any considerable antiquity,
but neither have we evidence as to how long the trait of
basal thinning of atlatl projectiles persisted. The idea of
making points with thinned concave bases and smooth basal
edges may have been carried over from a late survival of
channel grooving or fluting in this area. Another possibility is that a later Archaic people could have found fluted
points, whole or broken, and reworked them to produce the
first points of San Patrice type, then made others in a similar

Two Unusua~ Types of Chipped Stone Artifact

17

shape. Several of the points illustrated (Plate 1, Nos. 17-19)
suggest this possibility. Completely independent invention
of this method of basal treatment is, of course, a third possibility.
In conclusion, two types of artifacts are reported which,
so far as we can discover, have not been described previously. They are found on sites in the hilly areas of Northwest Louisiana and adjoining regions. They apparently
are not members of the artifact assemblage of the pottery
making and mound building cultures, but rather seem to
fit into an Archaic horizon which may be comparatively
late, despite a similarity of treatment of the basal segment
of the projectile point with that of the Folsom fluted point.
The Children’s Clinic,
Shreveport, Louisiana.
REFERENCES
1. Brown, C. S.: Archaeology of Mississippi~ University,
Miss., 1926, page 141.
2.

Unpublished manuscript.

3. Krieger, Alex: Archaeological Horizons in the Caddo
Area, in E1 Norte de Mexico y el Sur de Estados Unidos,
Sociedad Mexicana de Anthropologia, Mexico, D. F., 1943.
4.

Unpublished manuscript.

5. Ford, J. A., and Willey, Gordon: Crooks Site, a Marksville Period Burial Mound in LaSalle Parish, Louisiana,
Dept. of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey, New
Orleans, La., 1940.

18

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

TWO BURIED MULTIPLE STONE CIST
STRUCTURES
By CYaus .N. RAx
Multiple Burial Cist Complex One
Late in the year 1942 the writer found an arrangement of
stones on a hilltop above Sweetwater Creek in Fisher
County, which had the appearance of having been placed
there by man, and while the conditions for excavation at
that time were unfavorable experience had shown that when
this was long delayed one was likely to find that the site had
been ruined during the interval by either treasure hunters
or arrowhead hunting boys. The mound was excavated in
two days of hard digging with the help of an Abilene lawyer,
Mr. R. W. Haynie. The debris of an old burnt rock mound
covered the hilltop and in the center were embedded a few
larger stones which barely showed on the surface. On digging down, however, a typical complex of stone slab cists
was found, such as those unearthed in previous years in
Jones County and elsewhere (1) (2). This mound extended
down into the earth for a depth of about four feet, ~d contained a great number .of heavy limestone slabs used as
lining for the five separate cists (3) (4). Four of these
cists were composed of separate closely flexed burials of
long headed men, and the fifth one was a cist containing a
completely cremated burial in which the bones were burned

PLATE 2
No. 1. Site of Fisher County buried multiple stone cist structure
before any excavation was done.
No. 2. After first layer of stones was exposed in Fisher County
structure.
No. 3. Abalone shell ornament found in grave under bush in
foreground.
PLATE S
No. 1. View of buried multiple stone cist structure in Taylor
County after earth had been removed from over top layer of stones.
Judge R. B. PIaynie on left and Mr. Willard Vinson on right just
beyond structure.
No. 2. Second layer of stones in Vinson Ranch structure.
No. 3. Three skulls lying in a row in bottom of buried multiple
stone cist structure.

Plate 2

Plate 3

Two Buried Multiple Stone Cist Structures

23

into small fragments, and this was the deepest buried one.
There were some charcoal fragments all through the cist
complex but whether or not these were thrown in with the
earth when the hole was filled, one cannot say. The cremated remains were buried nearly four feet deep and there
were fiat limestones set on ends over a horizontally laid
large flagstone which covered the bottom and under that
the bone and shell cremated materials were found. Only
one intact artifact was found in the cremated materials
and it is the heavily mineralized center of a conch shell, two
and seventh-eighths inches in length, and five-eighths of an
inch in diameter, and nearly cylindrical in shape, and has a
hole dr.illed in one end. This specimen is heavier than
ordinary shell of that size usually is. On the eroded slope
below the mound a bone tube was found which also is heavily mineralized. In the two feet above this cremated burial
cist was another stone cist which contained a poorly preserved flexed burial whose bones were fragmentary. Lying
just above the bones was a large flat stone in the bottom of
which a depression existed and in this had been placed three
round shell ornaments made by cutting a rough circle about
three inches across out of a shell and then cutting a hole
about one-half an inch in diameter out of the center.
These ornaments were badly decayed but were so pressed
against the stone that one could plainly see three of them
in a row lying against the inside of the stone’s hollow, but
when removal was attempted they crumbled away. A fine
square based knife of gray colored patinated flint was found
~vith them and this is three and five-eighths inches in length,
and one and eleven-sixteenths inches across at the straight
or square base. This blade is sharp edged, and fine pointed,
and has considerable limestone incrustation over the chipping on one face and some small patches of it on the other
surface. There were three other flexed burials in this complex of stone cists, each with its surrounding nest of stone
slabs, but there were no artifacts with the others.
Below the mound the steep hillside had been cut into
gullies and one cannot determine how much earth originally
covered the ridges between them. At a place about twenty

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

feet down the slope below the stone cist complex the writer
noticed a few fragments of human bones under the edge of
a small hearth like collection of small stones and on sticking
a pick into the earth above it struck something quite hard
near the surface which on excavation was found to be a
heavily mineralized, caliche encrusted, circular ornament
of the type of the decayed round shell ornaments found in
the mound above. This saucer shaped ornament is three and
one-fourth inches across in one diameter, and three and oneeighths inches in the other, and has a round hole cut out of
the center which is eleven-sixteenths of an inch in diameter.
This ornament is pitted, but is quite hard and heavy for a
shell of that thickness. The position of the much decayed
skeleton indicated that the ornament had been lying on its
chest. All three of the intact ornaments from these six
burials are so hard as to be properly classified as petrified,
but evidently became so after being placed with the burials.
The twisted texture of the she!l artifact with the cremation
has the characteristics of a marine conch shell center and
the saucer shaped ornament probably is of abalone shell,
although all lustre is gone. The tube probably is of bird
bone.
Multiple Burial Cist Complex Two
In 1944 a commercial gravel hauler brought a piece of
what he termed Indian pottery to the writer with the statement that he had dug it up in a rock pile and would show
me where he got it. The specimen was part of a parietal
bone of a very thick human skull and had been burned black.
On visiting the site it was found that two gravel diggers had
dug out the central portion of a stone cist burial complex on
the farm of Mr. Willard Vinson, situated in Taylor County.
Apparently the diggers had opened a cremated burial in the
PLATE 4
Artifacts from two buried multiple stone cist structures.
No. 1. Large round shell ornament with hole in center.
1-2-3 from Fisher County structure.
No. 2. Twisted center of conch she!l drilled at mac end.
No. 3. Bird bone tube, Nos. 1-2-3 petrified after burial.
No. 4. Sma]l almond shaped knife from Taylor County structure.
No. 5. Fine flint knife from Fisher County structure.

Plate 4

Two Buried Multiple Stone Cist Structures

27

center of the complex and on finding human bone fragments
and nothing of intrinsic value left the site. On digging into
this complex we found the typical stone slab cist arrangements, but apparently the bones had been reburied there
by the makers of the cists as they were not arranged in any
order, which would not indicate a proper flexed burial as
three uncremated skulls were arranged on a stone in a row,
very close together in the bottom. Either rats had scattered
fragments of the thick blackened skull of a cremated burial
all through the complex, or the uncremated burials had later
been made in the site of an older cremated burial. Here also
a truck load of heavy flat limestones was removed from the
excavation. Only one artifact was found in this excavation
wa small almond shaped knife which is one and elevensixteenths inches in length and one and three-eighths inches
across and is patinated a gray color.
The circumstances were such as to make it necessary that
this complex, like the other one, be excavated at an unfavorable time, and this required three days of hard digging
by two men and the writer again had the assistance of Mr.
Haynie in this work.
P. O. Box 62,
Abilene, Texas
REFERENCES
1. Cyrus N. Ray, Archeological Research in Central West
Texas, Bulletin of The Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, 1932, pp. 66-67, Plate 14.
2. Cyrus N. Ray, Multiple Burials in Stone Cist Mounds
of the Abilene Region, Bulletin of Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 5, 1933. Plates 4-5-6-7-8.
S. Ernest A. Hooten, Notes on Five Texas Crania, Bulletin
of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol 5,
1933.
4. Cyrus N. Ray, Isate Discoveries in the Abilene Region,
Bulletin of the Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society, Vol. 9, 1937, pp. 193-205, Plates 34 and 35.

~ 28

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

THE RATTLESNAKE IN THE ART AND LIFE
OF THE AMERICAN INDIAN*
By M. L. CRnvnvm~s
The art of the American Indian is often associated with
things connected with his life, his myths, and his religion.
We are fortunate in having many graphic records of the
rattlesnake, the chief of the snake tribe, created from human
beings according to many Indian legends and the cause of
the first death. The rattlesnake was considered supernatural. It could move without legs, wings or fins. It could
cause sudden death without crushing with jaws or tearing
with claws. And their bite burns like fire and killed the
victim. It had the orenda or magic power that made other
animals fear it. Snakes have always been objects of horror
or worship inspired by fear. In the first Book of Moses in
the Bible, they are the first animals named after the creation
of woman. In Genesis 3:1 is stated "The serpent was more
subtle than any beast of the field." And they were the cause
¯ of the first woman going wrong, for in Genesis 3:13 (unlucky 13) Eve said to the Lord, "The serpent beguiled me
and I did eat."
There are many myths recorded but I will tell some to
give an idea how they effected the lives of our Indians. Dr. J.
Walter Fewkes who studied Indians for fifty years liked the
fonowing: The Zunis tell how the first rattlesnake took its
present form, for once they were people even as you and I.
~But one day long ago, some Indian children begged their
mother and grandmother to allow them to take their little
sister for an outing, as they were going to the banks for a
sand slide. Permission was granted, provided they used
every care, which they promised. So carrying the little one
in a blanket, they hurried to the sand slide laughing with
glee, in anticipation.
*This paper was read at the 1946 annual session of the Society held in
Abilene, Texas, on Nov. 2, 1946.

PLATE 5
Rattlesnake at Hueco t~nks thirty miles northeast of E1 Paso,
Texas.

Plate 5

The Rattlesnake in the Art o~ the American Indian

31

They placed their precious little sister on the blanket in
the shade of a bush, near the foot of the slide, where she
would always be in sight and soon the little one was sound
asleep.
So they climbed the bank and slid down the slide shrieking
and laughing with childish joy, but always looking to see if
the baby was safe, when they got to the bottom. Now the
little one woke up and toddled to where she heard the laughter, just as one of the larger girls started down the slide.
Seeing the baby in danger she screamed a warning but the
little one didn’t heed it nor understand. So the big girl
struck the baby and rolled over her and she became very
thin and long. Now the little children gathered around the
victim and started to weep and wail and picked her up in
the blanket and carried her home. The sorrowful parents
and grandparents wept and wailed, rocked and writhed in
their agony of sorrow, casting their hands in the air and fell
in a swoon on the ground. And as one after another villager
arrived, such was their sympathy and sorrow, that they did
likewise and soon all were wriggling and writhing on the
ground and when they became conscious, they could notrise,
but squirmed, for they had become rattlesnakes. Now as
you know rattlesnakes were once people and you must treat
them as such and do not invade their rights nor kill them
without just cause, for all things were created for a purpose
and you must not destroy life you cannot replace.
It was considered bad luck to dream of a rattlesnake by
the Dakotks because they might bite a man’s horse or enter
a man’s ear, nose, or mouth and it is a sure sign of death.
Remember in Psalms 58:4 they tell of "the death adder that
stoppeth the ear."
The Cherokees were the largest and most important Indian
tribe in the United States, having their own national government, civilized code of laws, national press, schools and
seminaries. They originally lived in an area covering 40,000
square miles in Virginia, West Virginia, Tennessee, North
Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia and Alabama. The Cherokees say if you dream a rattlesnake bites you, you must

32

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

take the same treatment as if bitten, for it was the rattlesnake ghost that bit you. Should a rattlesnake be killed accidentally, one must ask pardon from its ghost, otherwise it
will seek vengeance.

In the spring of the year when they

pair off for a month, snake collectors even in these days are
bitten by the mate of one collected, as happened to Snyder,
the retired Chief Attendant at the Bronx zoo who was collecting a rattlesnake near Suffren, New York, in the spring
of the year, when he was bitten by its unseen mate and died.
They have a myth of a rattlesnake’s vengeance. In the
old days when animals spoke to people, a mother heard the
children scream and when she saw it was a rattlesnake that
frightened them, she killed it with a stick. The father was
hunting in the mountains and was coming home through a
gap when he heard a strange wailing sound and found he
was in a large group of rattlesnakes, all of whom had their
mouths wide open and seemed to be crying. He asked the
reason an~ they said his wife had killed their chief yellow
rattlesnake and they were sending black rattlesnake to take
revenge. The hunter said he was sorry and they told him
he must give in satisfaction, his wife, for the life of their
chief. He was so frightened he consented. They said the
black rattlesnake would go home with him and wait outside
the door of his lodge and he was to enter and ask for a
drink of fresh water and say nothing. It was very dark
when he got home and his wife had his supper ready. He
asked for water and she gave him a gourd full and he told
her he only wanted fresh water from the spring, so she went
out to get it. He heard a shriek and rushing out found the
black rattlesnake had bitten his wife and she was already
dying. When she was dead the rattlesnake said his tribe
were now satisfied and he taught the hunter a song and said
"when you meet us sing this song and we will not hurt you
and if by accident one of your tribe is bitten let him sing
this song and he wil! get well." The Cherokees have kept
the song to this day.
The rattlesnake motive controlled the character of Indian
art in many parts of North and Central America. The ser-

The Rattlesnake in the Art of the American Indian

33

pent was seldom reproduced realistically and yet we may
safely infer that the rattlesnake was the prevailing model.
Parts of other creatures were sometimes added to express
a power or attribute. We add halos to saints, wings to angels
and fairies or dragons and the ancient Greeks did to horses
also. Plumes were added as a head ornament or emblem
and so was a single horn. The rattlesnake was idealized
especially among the Mayas and the lines characteristic of
it entered into the delineation of many subjects distinct from
the serpent itself.
The rattlesnake has always taken a leading place in the
mythology and the art of the more cultured American races
and crest-plumes and wings have sometimes been considered
its proper emblems.
I. The first picture I will describe was on the inside of a
Mimbres bowl, found near Fort Stanton, New Mexico. It
shows "a rattlesnake speaking to a mountain sheep" according to Dr. Fewkes.
II. We find two mountain sheep with a conventionalized
snake above them, but with the head and rattle missing,
recorded at the Hueco Tanks 30 miles east, northeast of E1
Paso, Texas, by John Russell Bartlett, 3-29-1851.
III. And nearby in a well sheltered cave close to a per-manent water hole, a twelve-foot white rattlesnake, with
seven Indian warriors and four horses also sketched by
Bartlett.
IV. In the Tusayan co.untry of Northeast Arizona we find
in a bowl a plumed serpent ~vhich is presumed to be a rattlesnake. It represents a serpent with a curved body, the tail
being connected with the head like the ancient symbol of
eternity. The cross hatching of black lines marking the
body are diagonal, except on the tail, which is marked in
segments like rattles. The tongue is a lightning symbol,
for like the ancient Jews, they were told in Numbers 21:6
"The Lord sent fiery serpents among the people and they
bit the people" for poisonous snakes cause a ~burning pain
and our primitive people considered it one of the supernatural qualities of rattlesnakes.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

34

¯ V.

Another example of the plumed serpent found painted

inside a pottery bowl on the ruins of East Mesa in Northeast
Arizona.

It also has plumes and an arrow tipped tongue

and both eyes on the same side of the head, but the body has
a fan-shaped end. The Indians sometimes indicated the
waving rattle that way, as we in our comics show dogs’
tails wagging.
~ VI. Dr. Fewkes shows a Hopi food bowl that had a Hopi
maiden figure with the typical head dress, with a plumed
one-legged rattlesnake with both eyes on the same side of
the head, with an X-ray like picture, showing the alimentary
canal, as if the serpent had swallowed bismuth. It may be,
the picture story of Tcua-Mana, the Corn Mist or Snake
Maid, a sacerdotal society name for the Germ Goddess and
the Snake Hero.
VII. a. Then we show Baho-Li-King-Ya the plumed and
horned rattlesnake god worshipped by living Mold priests,
th,e Genius of Fructification. The mammae symbolizes it
was the source of the blood of all the animals and of all the
waters of the land.
bo Below it are found two rattlesnakes from Harrison
County, West Virginia and they were shown with three
human heads above and two mountain lions, with one mountain lion and a turkey and a bird of prey with wide spread
wings below.
VIII. Then we have some rattlesnakes from Texas. They
are found painted or pecked in rock shelters in many parts
of West Texas, especially from E1 Paso to Real County. The
petroglyphs are more common in West Texas and the pictographs in East Texas.
a. The top figure shows a plumed snake with geometric
designs on the body and a forked tail, which may represent

PLATE

6

Picture of two rattlesnakes at Cornudas Del Alamo sixty-five
miles northeast of E1 Paso, Texas.

Plate 6

The Rattlesnake in the Art o~ the American Indian

37

the movement or vibration of a tail, when a rattlesnake is
rattling. This was found in a cave 20 miles northeast of
E1 Paso.
b. Next we have a snake with a triangular head like a
rattlesnake, with a flattened end of the taft like a rattle.
c. Then we have another plumed serpent with a lump in
its body, showing it had recently eaten, also from E1 Paso
County.
d. Then we have a clear-cut rattlesnake (Crotalus Lepidus) from Culberson County where this rare snake is
found.
IX. Next we have two winged and plumed rattlesnakes
from mounds near Little Rock, Arkansas, engraved on a
small vase encircling the widest part of the vessel, with two
sunflower-like symbols alternating with them. These designs are carefully engraved with needle-point and are adjusted to the form of the vase in a way that suggested forethought and experience and the appreciation of the decorative value of the figures. They are undoubtedly fine examples of design derived from the mythologic art of the
people.
We will now show some Hopi Katcinas connected with
the snake cult. Tcua the snake clan made the heads of
snakes of cottonwood or gourds that are painted and the
protuberan~t goggle-eyes are small buckskin bags tied to the
top: Each head has a medial horn curving forward, sometimes made with joints and sometimes solid. A radiating
crest of feathers is tied vertically to the back of the head.
The teeth are cut in the gourd or wood of which the head
is made and arepainted red. The tongue is a red painted
leather strap protruding some distance from the mouth.
The upper half of the head and body is black or brown and
the under surface white, with white bird tracks and white
parallel lines--the symbol of feathers, on the back and similar black marks on the white under surface. The body
consists of a central stick, called a back bone over which is

38

Texas Archeological a~d Paleontological Society

ex~tended a covering held in place by a series of hoops
graduated in size from head to tail. In the Macibol Katcinas
the hand and forearm is inserted in the snake and holds
the stick forming the back bone to make it "act alive."
X. TATCUKTI is a mudhead clown with the great
plumed and horned snake Palulukon effigy, is made to rise
from a jar on the floor to the ceiling and when it has arisen,
a clown steps up and tackles it and is defeated. Note the
white bird tracks and two~ parallel lines, the symbol for
feathers that is shown in all the paintings of the plumed and
horned rattlesnake.
XI. TCANAU is an instructive personage that appears
in the /knkwanti dances in March. The brown masks are
flat and three eagle feathers radiate from the margin, with
curly brown feathers between and covering the back of the
head. A yellow stuffed rattlesnake is carried in the mouth,
a crooked cane in his right hand and a slat of wood and a
meal bag in the left.
XII. CITULILU is a Zuni name, meaning rattlesnake,
and this has a green rattlesnake painted on the forehead of
his mask, with a fan-shaped crest of turkey tail feather on
top with a bunch of red dyed wool below the crest. The
snout is long and protuberant with a red leather tongue.
The Hopi snake priests wear a similar costume except the
bodies and upper arms are red and not black. The plumed
serpent surrounds the middle of the kilt with a green band
above and below representing rainbows. He carried a Yucca
whip in each hand.
XIII and XIV are both MACIBOLS who take part in the
Palulukonti (Andwanti) festival in March and carry the
great plumed and horned rattlesnake. One Macibol carries
a brown snake and his left arm is inserted in the snake and
his hand holds a limber wand by which he can make the
snake move as if alive. The lefi arm we see is false. There
PLATE 7
Plumed rattlesnake picture, Site 3, E1 Paso County.

Plate 7

The Rattlesnake in the Art o~ the American Indian

41

are long feathers, on the crest of the head, with a black
snake, edged with white, around the crown of the helmet
with green black-tipped horns on each side of the head.
Macibol is another name for Calako the Sun-God and the
episode here figured represents the Sky-God yielding the
lightning symbol.
The Macibol with the black rattlesnake has his right arm
inserted in it, to give it life-like movements and the right
arm we see is false.
XV. This is the Mexican symbol from the Codex Vatcanus, Vol. VI, of Lord Kingsboroughs "Antiques of Mexico," 1831-48. The codex shows a human figure with 20
symbols that represent cures for ills in 20 different parts of
the body and the rattlesnake is the symbol of reproduction
as well as the source of all ills and the most ominous of
signs.
312 Geneseo Road,
San Antonio, Texas.

42

~Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

GROOVt~D CLUBS FROM A Pt~AT BOG IN
MILAM COUNTY, Tt~XAS
By CAm~ CHEnF
In 1942 a complete grooved club or rabbit stick and parts
of several others were found by Mr. Ben Atkinson of Austin,
Texas in a peat bog which he was engaged in mining in
Milam County, Texas.* All of the Texas bogs are similar
in character and not unlike bogs in other parts of North
America.
The literature on Texas shows that true peat bogs have
been recognized by some botanists for many years and the
principal plants have been described. Bogs in~ Texas were
described from a geological point of view by F. B. Plummet
of the University of Texas after Mr. Atkinson called atten-tion to their interesting formational character and commercial possibilities.

His discovery of perishable artifacts

further showed his keen power of observation and called
the attention of archaeologists to a new and potentially rich
field of research in Texas. There are no less than thirty bogs
known at present and many of these are in suitable camp
locations.
Plant life of the bogs is very distinctive and a person who
is o.nly remotely interested in them cannot fail to be mildly
excited by the profusion of unusual types. Plants most common to the Texas bogs include several orchids, sphagnum
¯ Specimens were given to the Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.
I-I. Sellards, Director, kindly gave permission to describe them. The objects
were photographed and treated by Dr. A. J. Sawtn and Glen Evans of the
Bureau of Economic Geology, the University of Texas,
Mr. Atklnson
would kindly permit some worthy institution the opportunity of excavating
this 1 to 2 acre locality.

PLATE 8
Views of five grooved clubs ~ound buried in a peat bog in Niilarn
County, Texas.

Plate 8

Grooved Clubs From a Peat Bog in Milam County

45

moss, sedges, a great v~ariety of beautiful grasses, ferns such
as the giant cinnamon fern, pitcher plants, iris, arrowleaf,
mallow, yaupon, sun-dew plants, cat-tail and many others.
Some of the named plants require an acid soil or water environment.

The pH of bog waters and peat is normally on

the acid side. Indeed, many of these plants are literally
starved by being transplanted to alkaline waters or soils.
Milam County is situated on the Gulf Coastal Plain of
Texas in a belt of comparatively heavy precipitation,, and
like other parts of Texas, perishable objects of wood or fiber
could not be preserved except for unusual conditions such
as the protective environment of bogs or, in the case of the
Trans-Pecos area, in dry shelters.
Five specimens are figured, one is broken but is otherwise
complete. The discoverer reported that pieces of other sticks
were found in the bog but they disintegrated and cracked
upon drying.

The figured specimens were taken from the

bog, placed in water and brought to the laboratory for treatment.

At the suggestion of Dr. Sawin he demonstrated a

method of preservation whereby the water in the woody tissue is first replaced by an organic chemical, dioxane.
dioxane is then replaced by paraffin.

The

In the final state the

object is sufficiently hardened to be studied and appears to
be vermin proof.
The longitudinal grooves on the complete specimen are
rather unusual and the lines are unbroken.

For part of the

distance on one side there are three grooves, and for the
remainder there~ are four.
tinuous grooves.

The opposite side has five con-

The carved handle is another unusual fea-

ture, and a few tiny holes on the handle appear to have bits
of sinew in them. The specirnen shown in Figure 2 has four
grooves on each side and one side shows that the lines were

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

46

broken.

Figure 3 appears to be the mid-portion of a stick

and four grooves are on each side of it. The lines are broken
like those shown in Figure 2 and the breaks are in essentially the same position on each side.

The specimen shown

as Figure 4 has three grooves on each side, extra notches,
three to each side of the. original three, have been added
from the prominent notch to the end.

The specimen shown

in Figure 5 appears to be the end of a stick, it bears three
grooves on each side.
Nvthing is known of the length of the complete sticks from
which these pieces came but the width and thickness corresponds rather closely with other sticks from Texas.

The

complete specimen is 29 inches long, 1~/8 to 1~ inches wide,
about one-half inch thick and is only slightly curved.
The distribution of sticks fitting the general description of
grooved clubs or rabbit sticks, theix decoration, probable
use, and other characteristics, have been described recently
by Robert Heizer.’ He showed that breaking set~ .?f lines
into discontinuous groups is a common practice, the breaks
appearing where a sinew seizing has been attached to prevent splitting. The deeply incised groove located at one end
on many of the sticks is believed to have served as the seat
for the attachment of a cord or thong, perhaps in the form
of a loop for the wrist. Heizer’s tabulation of characteristic
elements shows that three grooves have appeared only on
the Texas specimens.

The New Mexico, Arizona, and Utah

sticks have four grooves only. The bulk of Texas specimens
described have three grooves.
The present known distribution of grooved clubs is in the
Southwest and Texas.

They have been found in Nevada,

Utah, New Mexico, and Texas.

This new discovery in-

creases the known distribution in Texas more than three
hundred miles eastward and suggests the probability of find-

Grooved Clubs From a Peat Bog in Mila~n County

47

ing other types of perishable specimens in conjunction with
stone artifacts.
The Milano bog should by all means be excavated after
war conditions abate and this should be done in the most
careful manner possible.** The discovery of perishable
artifacts in an area in which they had never before been
suspected can by no means be considered unimportant.
3208 HemphiH Pk.,
Austin, Texas.
*JThis paper wa~ submitted for publication early in January, 1946.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Heizer, Robert F., i942. "Ancient Grooved Clubs and
Modern Rabbit Sticks," American Antiquity, Vol. VIII, No. 1.
Jackson, A. T., 1937. "Exploration of Certain Sites in Culo
berson County, Texas," Bulletin of Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 9.
Martin, G. C., 1933. Archaeological Exploration of Shumla
Caves, Big Bend Basket Maker Papers No. 3, Southwest
Texas ArchaeologicaI Society, Witte Memorial Museum, San
Antonio, Texas.
Sayles, E. B., 1935. An Archaeological Survey of Texas,
Medallion Papers, Vo!. 17, Globe, Arizona.

48

Texas ArcheologicaI and paleontological Society

EVIDENCF. OF EUROPF_ikN INFLUENCE IN
THE PICTOGRAPHS OF WEST TEXAS
By VICTOR J. S~r~TH
II.

Human Forms, Horses, and Cathie

In Section I of this paper,,O "Representations of Shelter,"
drawings chiefly representing the old Spanish Missions were
discussed and illustrated. In this report it is not d]~’~icult to
gather together in one short paper all of the important remaining evidences of European influence upon the pictograph and petroglyph art work of the West Texans Indians.
Art is almost always the product of leisure. Once the white
man began to press the Indians w~stward and to the south,
little time was left for the laborious carved or painted recording of events or interests in pictorial form.
In addition to the missions, however, evidence of white
influence is found at many of the pictograph sites in the form
PLATE 9
West Texas Pictographs: A variety of pictographs showing European influence.
!. Cattle and horseshoe tracks. Such symbols are said to picture
the better trails and river crossings. Cabeza de Vaca reported eating pinion pine nuts in this vicinity during his famous expedition
across Texas.
2. Pennants showing possible influence of Fort Bliss and Fort
Hancock or Fort Concho and Fort Chadbourne.
3. Devil figure may ha~e resulted~’from use of chapel by priests
in Mendoza’s Expedition. This unidentified camp was located not
far from Paint Rock where this pictograph was found. Gun and
stage coach show further evidence of European influence.
4. Men with hats. The stockade design is thought to represent
f.he location of a military post. Several reasonably good maps have
been found in West Texas by engineers and archaeologists.
5. Figures of women, one somewhat like a sunbonnet.
6. Additional human figures, women or priests in robes.
PLATE 10

West Texas Pictographs showing horses.
1. Conventional riders.
2. Indian riders.
3. European rider (with hat) and others of undetermined type.
4. Free horses.
5. Free horses, one with suggestion of harness or saddle.
6. Cowboy, lasso, and horse group.

Plate 9

&

5

~’~
6
Plate 10

Evidence of European Influence in West Texas Pictographs

53

of men with hats, women, cattle, horses, and a relatively few
weapons, and flags. The writer knows of no such evidence
among the numerous petroglyph sites visited: Most of the
painted drawings are in the conventional cinnabar red
though in the E1 Paso area quite a number of white drawings
are to be observed. Brewster County, where cinnabar is still
mined profitably, probably was the mining center for red
ores suited to drawing and it is probable that a brisk barter
trade in bits of cinnabar ore was known for centuries past
in West Texas.
A tabulation of counties visited by the writer, over a
period of years, which have Indian drawings reflecting European influence follows. Those who are interested in reading
further should consult the bibliography attached to this
paper.
County
Brewster
Concho
E1 Paso

Hudspeth
Jeff Davis

Man on
WomMisCattle HorseMan Horse Priest an Misc. sions
~
~
---2
-1
~
~
7
--3
4
2
~
1
-3
....

......
1
-1
.......

Presidio
9 (Herd)Reeves
--Terrel!
5
1
Val Verde
1
1
16

3

5

--

!

--

--

1
1

-1
5
2

2
2

1
6

-1,
2
--

14

13

4

11

8

--

1

-3
4
11

The writer has always maintained that the~pictographs of
the Indians were not mere idle scrawls but were either
r.epresentations of important events, as the artist saw them,
or drawings of objects representing symbolism or generally
understood messages. It is evident from a study of the
above table that the European himself was of much interest
since man, priest, woman, or man-on-horse occur with most
frequency and with wide distribution.
It has not been possible for the writer to visit the Panhandle region of Texas. Floyd Studer and Forrest Kirk-

54

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontological Society

land4 have reported, however, cattle and the man-on-horse
pictograph, as well as "numerous pictures of guns" from this
section of West Texas.
In identifying women among the drawings it is sometimes
difficult to make a definite classification, especially when
the crudely drawn skirt is short and might have been a part
of the skin costume of a warrior. Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, however, reports very definite skirted figures7 which are undoubtedly female, though they cannot be classified as definitely historic.
Some discussions have appeared which tend to suggest
that the position of arms akimbo are more likely to represent
white men than other types of arm position. This may be
true but another explanation is mentioned here in order to
suggest a line of study not heretofore approached, that of
correlating the pictographs of all types with a study of the
Indian sign language. This would make an interesting and
possibly important contribution. Jackson records many
arm and hand positions in his extensive studies.I Arm posi-

PLATE

11

West Texas Pictographs:
1. Catholic priest and cross thought to be influenced by Sosa’s
Expedition (see text).
2. Group of horsemen thought to picture Mendoza’s Expedition
through the Big Bend to a point beyond San Angelo.
3. Lone rider. Many pictographs, such as these, show loss of
detail due to weathering of rock.
PLATE 12
Evidence of European influence among the pictographs of West
Texas.
1. Lone horseman and group of horsemen (lower left). Also
note parts of two huge human figures, hand negatives, man with
shield, and the work of vandals. Ajua Frio, Brewster County.
2. A group of cattle. San Estaben, Presidio County. Legend
has it that the Indians stole cattle from the early ranchmen of this
area.

PLATE

13

1. Mission and priest pictograph, Meyer’s Springs. Note many
older pictographs.
2. Skirted figures suggestin~ European dress. Judge Sims calls
this group a wedding with "rejected suitor standing on his head."
More likely a funeral since inverted figures indicate death.

-b

One

Plate 11

Plate 12

Plate

Evidence o:~ European Influence in West Texas Pictographs

61

tions are also strikingly illustrated in the report by Dr.
Cyrus N. Ray~ from a Stephens County Cave.
Possibly the most important item related to European influence among the pictographs, however, lies in the fact that
¯ this is one of the sure indications of the age of the drawings.
In West Texas, for example, the Indians who observed and
recorded pictures of Catholic priests most likely observed
the expedition of Gaspar de Sosa9 and a party of 170, including a number of priests, known to have passed through the
Pecos River country in their northward movement of 1590.
Again, the em:liest possible date for observing horses in the
Big Bend were those of the Mendoza Expedition which
passed through what is now the heart of the Big Bend in the
winter of 1684, traveling into the Concho Country beyond
or near the site of the Paint Rock drawings.9
Horses without riders frequently indicate horse stealing,
according to Mallory.~ In West Texas a number of "runsoff-the-horse" conventionalizations are to be observed. Mendoza~ complains that horses were stolen from his expedition
by Indians, as he passed through the Big Bend in 1683-84.
The figure of the lasso is also associated with horse stealing.
This symbol is also found in West Texas as well as horse
shoe prints which indicate horses, good horse trails, or river
fords in the Big Bend pictographs.
It has been interesting to note a certain change in the
tone of papers which discuss pictographs generally. Early
writers, with a few exceptions, rather discounted the drawings as of little scientific importance. In more recent years
it has been pleasing to note that a more serious consideration
has been given to the car~fu! recording of drawings, warnings against their destruction, and a serious study of their
characteristics. Certainly we may say with safety that those
expressions represented the things in which the artist was
most interested, his conception of events as they happened,
as well as some success in conventionalized drawings which
carried messages or gave directions. In the Hueco Tanks
neighborhood, for example, an Indian painting with dragon
flies and a wavey "water sign" symbol announces the loca-

62

Texas Archeologica~ and I~aleontological Society

tion of a hidden source of water on the edge of the desert as
plainly as the crudely painted sign left by a pioneer traveler
of 1850 who lettered this message addressed to thirsty travelers: "Water in Hear."
Alpine, Texas.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Jackson, A. T., Picture-Writing of Texas Indians, Archaeological Papers, VO1. II, University of Texas, 1938.
2. Kirkland, Forrest, A Study of Indian Pictographs in
Texas, Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 9.
3. A Description of Texas Pictographs, Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10.
4. Indian Pictographs and Petroglyphs in the Panhandle
Region of Texas, Texas Archaeological and Paleontological
Society Bulletin, Vol. 14.
5. Indian Pictures in the Dry Shelters of Val Verde County, Texas, Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 11.
6. Mallery, Garrick, Picture Writing of the American
Indians, Bureau of Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution,
Tenth Annual Report, 1888-89.
7. Ray, Cyrus, Prehistoric Paintings Covered with Stalegmite Deposits, Texas Archaeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 14.
8. Smith, Victor J., Indian Pictographs in the Big Bend
of Texas, Texas Folk-Lore Society of Austin. Publication
No. 11, 1923. West Texas Historical and Scientific Society,
Alpine.
9. Early Spanish Exploration in the Big Bend of Texas,
West Texas Historical and Scientific Society, Alpine, Pub.
No. 2, 1928.
10. Evidence of European Influence in the Pictographs of
West Texas, I. Representations of Shelter, Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol. 14.
11. Archaeological Notes of the Big Bend Region, Texas
Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Abilene, Vol. 3.

Permian Polished Boulders in Texas

63

PERMIAN POLISHED BOULDERS IN TEXAS~
By CYRUS N. RAY

The north facing escarpment of the Edwards Plateau may
be seen in the distance to the south of Highway 80 as it
crosses Taylor and Nolan Counties of Texas, at distances of
twelve to fifteen miles. This elevated area extends for
twenty or more miles to the south where its border is broken
off by a south facing escarpment.
The limestone caprock of this plateau is of Cretaceous age
while the red formations which slope away on the south to
the Colorado River, and on the north to the Clear Fork of
the Brazos River, belong to the red beds of the Permian.
At a distance of twelve miles south of the village of Trent,
Texas, is a hill which rises not far south of an east and west
road and a mile east of the Butman school-house. Glistening
objects on this hil! may be seen from the road which on
closer inspection are found to be boulders of extremely hard
quartzite which occur in colors of tan, brown and red brown.
On one portion of this hill also is an outcrop of brown sandstone which is not so hard and is not polished. Most of the
rather large hill is covered with the hard quartzite boulders
which have had the ang!es rounded off and then polished.
Some of the former angles of the stones have a glassy polish
and all of the surfaces of the boulders usually have enough
polish on them to shine brightly when one looks toward the
sun across a hill covered with them. On the east side the
hill rises highest into two rounded hillocks which are almost
entirely covered with broken-up fist sized quartzite stones
and thousands of flint flakes. Evidently these uniform sized
broken stones were produced by the .heat of one of the ancient ceremonial burnt rock mound fires which for some
reason were maintained by ancient man on top of outstanding landmarks. This hill stands out in an otherwise nearly
level basin about one and one-half rniles north of the high
*This paper was read at the 1946 annual session of the Texas Archeological and I;aleontologic~l Society, held in .&bilene, Texas, on Nov. 2, 1946.

64

Texas Archeological and Paleontologiva~ Society

Edwards Plateau and is almost encircled to the west, north
and east by a ring of mountains at a distance of about five
miles in each direction and all of the nearly level land of the
basin surrounding the hill over to the encircling mountains
miles away lies in full view of any one on top of the hill. So
the primitive inhabitants of the whole basin below also
would be able to see the fires. The two round hillocks on
the hill top where the fires were kept stand out above the
lower land like church pulpits.
At the present time there is no spring nor any permanent
water hole within several miles of the hill. An old resident
of the region when questioned about a water supply, said
that he has also been puzzled by that, as when he came to
the region fifty years ago one could have picked up a tub full
of arrow heads on the hill.
All around the west and south bases of the hill are the
numerous broken-up quartzite stones of an~ent hearths.
Today few whole artifacts may be found but such as have
been are of the ancient Clear Fork Culture and a perfect
Clear Fork gouge was found by the writer where it had
weathered out of a gully in Clear Fork silt, which ran
through a field near the base of the hill. Evidently the formation in which the polished boulders lie runs across under
the Edwards Plateau, which lies to the south of the Butman
site, because the same sort of polished quartzite boulders
are to be found below the base of its southern facing escarpment situated twenty miles or more south of the Butman
site. South of the southern escarpment of the mountain
mass there are a number of large aggregations of these polished boulders extending on southwestward from the vicinPLATE 14
1. One of the smaller polished boulders situated two miles
northeast of Church Peak.

2. Large polished boulders north of Ft. Chadbourne Station
in Coke County. Taken in summer. White areas are polished
stone surfaces reflecting bright sunlight.
3. Showing size of some of polished boulders north of Ft.
Chadbourne Station.

PLATE 15
Nos. 1-2-3 show some of smaller polished boulders in site north
of Ft. Chadbourne Station.

Plate 14

Plate 15

Permian Polished Boulders in Texas

69

ity of the village of Hylton in Nolan County, on through
Coke County to a locality near Bronte in that county. The
various aggregations of polished boulders so far studied
cover an area from north to south of thirty-five to forty
miles.
Near to Highway 158 and close to the corners of Runnels,
Nolan, Taylor and Coke Counties, is a high conical peak
known as Church Mountain, which stands off a considerable
distance southward from the southern escarpment of the
plateau. This peak rises on the north side of the highway
and is visible for many miles. Within a radius of two miles
of Church Mountain are several aggregations of polished
boulders. The polished stone of the Church Mountain aggregations is composed of the same kind of brown to reddish quartzite as that of t!ae Butman site situated on the
north side of the mountain mass. Near the southeast foot
of this mountain an aggregation of polished boulders lie
embedded in gravel. To the northeast of Church Mountain
for a distance of about two miles are a series of lower lying
gently sloping elevations. These ridges are composed of yellowish stained gravel and are covered with oak trees, and
the higher portions are studded with large rounded and
polished boulders.
These polished boulders occur only on the tops of the
gravelly ridges and are not found on the much higher escarpments above them, nor in the lower lying areas below them.
Some of the best polished boulders in that section are to be
seen close beside an eastward bend of a country road a mile
south of Hylton, Texas. The stones there vary in size from
that of a grand piano to stones larger than an automobile,
and are embedded in a layer of yellowish gravel near the
foot of a hill. None of the stones on the hill above them are
polished, but all of the boulders on the gravelly ridge which
stands off several hundred yards below the foot of the hill
have been rounded off on all surfaces and then polished.
This polish is glass-like on some surfaces, and usually is
much greater where the stone’s former corners and fracture
angles have been ground away. On these the stone is highly
polished as though some powerful moving force had broken

7O

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the boulders off from bed-rock and, then rolled them out on
an ice or a water deposited gravel ridge and then moved
between and around them in such manner as to shear off
the angles into rounded corners or surfaces, and then gave
the whole exposed surfaces a glassy polish. At the site south
of Hylton the polished stones evidently attracted the attention of ancient Clear Fork men, because these men built a
large hearth accumulation between the boulders and left
some of their artifacts there. About twelve miles southwest
of Church Mountain is Ft. Chadbourne Station in Coke
County,~ and about one and one-half.miles north of this place
there is a high escarpment which lies in a north and south
direction on the west side of the railroad. In front of the
mountain is a depression three hundred or more yards wide,
and paralleling that and the mountain is a long low elevation
composed of yellowish gravel in which hundreds of very
large polished conglomerate boulders lie partly embedded.
Some of these boulders are as large as an average house
room, and some are larger, and they range in size down to
stones no larger than a grand piano.
Here also are s]l of~the evidences of a force sufficient to
tear away huge boulders from their original settings, grind
down all of their original fracture angles into rounded surfaces and then polish them into a glassy slickness.
Here again ancient Clear Fork Culture man’s artifacts
¯ and hearths are found in the red Clear Fork silts along the
banks of a small, now dry creek branch, which courses beside and immediately below the slickened boulders.
Southwest of Ft. Chadbourne Station, at a distance of two
miles, the country road turns westward and close beside
the road and on the north side of it a steep escarpment rises
PLATE 16
Nos. 1-2-3 are of some o~ the very large sizes of polished boulders
north of Ft. Chadbourne Station which were taken in winter at a
time near sunset. Some of these show the polish better than those
taken in summer.
PLATE 17
Nos. 1-2-3 Show some of the larger sizes of polished boulders
north of Ft. Chadbourne Station.

Plate 16

Plate 17

Permian Polished BouZders in Texas

which runs east and west. Near the southeast foot of this
mountain and for a distance of several hundred yards on
the east foot, where the escarpment turns to the north, lie
many large polished boulders embedded in yellowish gravel.
All around this mountain to the south and east and in the
mountain valleys north of it Clear Fork Culture man lived
and left his hearths and artifacts in the lower Clear Fork
silts and gravels.l At this site also none of the conglomerates
of the escarpment above show the slightest evidence of
either the grinding off or the polish shown by the boulders
embedded in the grave! at the foot of the hill.
About ten miles south of this site and located about one
and one-half miles northeast of the town of Bronte, Coke
County, Texas, a high isolated hill rises south of a country
road, and at its foot is a wide depression and beyond that a
low parallel ridge of yellow gravel in which are embedded
hundreds of ground down and polished rounded boulders.
These polished boulders are of S.an Angelo conglomerate,
a stone composed of rounded quartz pebbles of all colors,
which are firmly joined by a dark red or iron colored
cementing material. The conglomerate pebbles are cemented
so firmly that when the stone is fractured the fracture line
goes straight through the rounded quartz pebbles and not
around any of them.
Below the polished boulders a usually dry stream’s
branches have eroded down into the ancient hearths and
artifacts of a campsite of considerable size. On a fall day,
when the temperature was at about 50°, the writer was
startled on looking up, at seeing the whole low ridge between him and the sun filled with sleet covered boulders
glittering in the sunlight. On closer inspection the glitter
was found to be due to polished stones instead of ice. Pictures are difficult to obtain because the polish shows best
when lool~ing toward the sun.
That the primitive human inhabitants had anything to do
with the production of the polish on the thousands of large
boulders, the writer does not believe, but thinks rather that
their unusual appearance attracted ancient man’s attention.

76

Texas Archeological, and Paleontological Society

From such observation as the writer has been able to make
of boulders buried in the gravel and recently exposed by
gullies, the rounding off and polishing exists equally on all
faces and bears no relation to their nearness to nor their
distance from any escarpments near by, such as Dr. Kirk
Bryan described from farther west.2
That the polished boulders only occur on one surface level,
and that neither below nor above that level is any evidence
shown of such action,-would indicate that some powerful
force, acting only during that phase of the Permian, first
tore them loose from their bedding, rolled them around and
wore off their angles and ~hen left them embedded atop a
long low gravel elevation and then moved around, over and
between them, in such manner as to produce the polished
surfaces.
Most geologists believe that polished boulders were created by a natural wind sand-blast cutting the stone down
but if this were the explanation of the Abilene region polish¯ ing, one wonders why the same sand did not polish any of
the similar stones above and below the particular plane on
which the polished boulders lie. The writer has seen no evidence to support any such theory unless the action occurred
during a Permian cold period.
The lines of stratification in the boulders show that they
lie in various positions, such as upside down, on end, and on
the sides, horizontally and at all angles of tilting, in a helter
skelter arrangement, as though some powerful force had
carried them there and dumped them out onto the gravel at
irregular intervals. Close examination of hundreds of these
boulders has shown no signs of glacial grooves, nor any
striations on their surfaces.
In reference to the cause of the polish of the boulders the
writer is inclined to suggest the possibility that the region
of their distribution might once have been an area of Per-

PLATE

18

This plate shows three views of .the polished boulders near
Bronte, Texas.

Plate 18

Permian Polished Boulders in Texas

~79

mian glaciation; and that strong glacia! winds, using a blast
of sand and hard driven snow, may have polished them
down after moving ice first sheared off their angles, but the
ice was not thick enough over them to produce grooves.3
In between the polished boulders at the site south of Hylton, Texas, is a hearth accumulation containing art£facts of
Clear Fork man and the gullies cut into the mountain side
close by and to the side of the yellow gravel deposit containing the polished boulders are cut through a red silty
material which was deposited in Clear Fork time, and this
occurred at about the close of the Pleistocene Period. This
red Clear Fork deposit covers the mountain valley floors of
the region to a depth of several feet, in two zones, the upper
a red sandy deposit, contains Clear Fork Culture artifacts
and the Lower, a dense darker red zone, contains Abilene
Leaf shaped, and occasional Folsom like points. The Clear
Fork Culture artifacts occur on top of the Lower darker red
zone at the Gibson site on Elm Creek valley at twenty-four
feet below the present valley floor soil surface.4 The lower
darker red zone of Clear Fork silts also contains mammoth
bones at both the Gibson and the McLean sites. At the
McLean site Folsom Points occur in the Lower zone of the
deposit. At the polished boulder site located southwest of
Ft. Chadbourne Station the gullies around and near by the
polished boulders are cut through the zones of ~pper and
lower Clear Fork silts and many artifacts of the Clear Fork
Culture are found there and the writer has found portions of
two Folsom Points in the same gullies. The pelished boulders themselves are always embedded in older yellowish
stained gravel remnants, but the later deposited Clear Fork
silts have in places flowed around and filled up hollows behind and around them. This filling up occurred at about the
close of the Pleistocene and the extinction of the mammoth.
The Clear Fork Culture hearth deposit around and between
the boulders at the ttylton site and the ancient silt accumulation at the site southwest of Ft. Chadbourne Station indicates that these polished boulders were even more. exposed
toward the close of the Pleistocene than now. The middle
section of a finely made large Folsom point was found by

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the writer where it had washed from the same red silt about
one mile north of the Hylton polished boulder site. The polished boulders probably remained covered up until the
floods at the close of the Pleistocene exposed them. The area
of their distribution does not now contain either sand dunes
nor areas of sandy land sufficient to furnish a sand-blast to
wear down such hard stone and the soil is now cove~ed with
grass, shrubs and trees. The theory that animals produced
the polish by rubbing against the stones is untenable. Some
of the best polished specimens are too large for even a mammoth to scratch on.
All of the evidences of human occupation are ancient in
typhology, and while the campsite debris is extensive around
some of the stones, there’ is not any water supply near them
at the present time. That these aggregations of polished
boulders, all apparently in the same stratification plane/are
isolated remnants of some polishing force which operated
over an area of considerable size is evident and it may be that
erosion has removed the polish in the intervening spaces.**
Deeply guttered and polished grooves in Permian limestone have previously been observed in the bed of Paint
Creek, a branch of the Clear Fork of the Brazos River, situated in Shackelford County, Texas. This locality is about
one hundred miles northeast of the most northern aggregation of polish boulders near Butman schoolhouse, and in an
area of much lower altitude.
In addition there are several different localities in the
Edwards Plateau region of Taylor County lying to the east
of the aggregations of large polished boulders where highly
polished small quartzite stones have been found in considerable numbers in ancient gravel accumulations. These
**:t~vidences of Permian glaciation hav~ been found in all of the other
major land musses of the earth und the writer does not think it logical to
assume that North America escuped this world-wide condition.

PLATE 19
This view shows an unusually large polished boulder taken in
winter at about sunset.

Plate 19

Permian Polished Boulders in Texas

83

stones usually are from three to four inches in long diameters and an inch or more in thickness, and usually are rather
flat or curved in shape with all angularities smoothed off
and finely polished. In the polished surfaces-of many of
these stones are fine cuts or scratches as though the polished
stone had been firmly held and some one had scratched it
with a harder stone. Persons who have examined glacial
scratched stones on examination of these note the resemblance.
P. O. Box .62,
Abilene, Texas.
REFERENCES
1. Cyrus N. Ray, "The Clear Fork Culture Complex,"
Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, 1938.
2. Kirk Bryan and Claude C. Albritton, Jr., "WindPolished Rocks in the Trans-Pecos Region," Texas and New
Mexico Bulletin of the Geological Society of America, Vol.
53, pp. 1403-1416, Plate 1, Fig. 1.
3. Cyrus N. Ray, "What Caused These Permian Grooves,"
Bulletin of Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 14, 1942, pp. 147-148, Plate 37.
4. Cyrus N. Ray, "Stream Bank Silts of the Abilene Region," Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and PaleontologicaI Society, Vol. 16, 1945.

84

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleontologica~ Society

FOSSIL CYCADS IN TEXAS WITH A
DESCRIPTION OF A NEW
SPECIMEN
The Trinity age rocks that outcrop in Texas are all of
epicontinental origin and consist of near-ocean or marginal
sediments and of offshore sediments. The marginal sediments consist of sandstone, sandy shales and conglomerates.
The offshore sediments are largely composed of limestone
and marl. The marginal facies is of particular interest because of its widespread distribution, presence of fossil wood,
cycads, dinosaur bones, and fish bones and teeth. The offshore beds contain fossils of equal interest in the form of
ripple marks, raindrop imprints, mud cracks, dinosaur tracks
and coral reefs as well as a variety of minerals such as anhydrite, gypsum, sulphur, celestite, and mineral salts.
The Trinity outcrop in Texas is a broad belt of thirty or
more miles in width along the.inner margih of the Balcones
Fault region and extends for a distance of 300 or more miles
from Red River Valley across Wise, Palo Pinto, Erath,
Comanche, and other counties south-southwesterly to Fred-"
ericksburg in Gillespie County, west to the Rio Grande. The
presence of the beds is most evident to those with but little
acquaintance of the geology of Texas by the great quantities
of petrified or silicified wood that weathers from the siliceous sands. Central Texans know the beds as thick sandstones and sandy soils that form the base of many of the
Cretaceous limestone outliers such as the Santa Anna Mountains of Coleman County; the Callahan Divide with its numerous remnants of a once-continuous sheet of sandstone as
represented in the mountains at Buffalo Gap, Ovalo, Cedar
Gap, Clyde, and numerous other areas.

PLATE

20

la. " Sidle view of specimen of cycad found in ~Iontague, County.
lb. Basal view of Montague County cycad showing relative
thicknesses of distinctive layers.
lc. Enlarged view of a portion of cycad trunk showing numerous
bract areoles, a partially exposed strobulus and a natural cross
section of a fruit.

Plate 20

Fossil Cycad$ in Texas With Description ~] New Specimen

87

The preservation of the petrified wood is not of the best
but the wood is attractive and fairly large quantities are
used in building filling stations, houses, yard fences, and
rock gardens. The town of Glen Rose is a good example of
an area where it is commonplace to see it used for all the
purposes that stone is generally used. A study of the trunks
of these conifers indicates that they were rarely over two
feet in diameter. Many pieces were decayed and cracked
when they were replaced by silica in percolating waters.
Some pieces are also pierced with irregular holes which
represent the bore holes of "worms."
Associated with the conifers are the fossilized cycad stems
or trunks. Although much rarer than the silicified wood,
they occur in such numbers that G. R. Wieland, perhaps the
foremost authority on cycads, both living and fossil, has
classified the Trinity of Texas as one of the five great cycadbearing regions of North America. The other areas being
the Arundel of Maryland, the Lakota of the Black Hills
region, the Como of the Black and Freeze Out Hills, and the
Mesa Verde of the Chuska Mountain region of New Mexico
and Arizona.
Specimens have been found in the following counties in
Texas: Bell, Callahan, Comanche, Erath, Gillespie, Hood,
Maverick, and Montague. A single specimen was reported
by Professor Winton at a locality in Bell County but no
record of its present location is known. The Maverick County trunk was found by Udden and described by Wieland.
It is the only recorded specimen from the Upper Cretaceous
of Texas. The foremost collectors of cycads in Texas are
Ross Wolfe 6f Stephenville (Erath County) and Joe Benton
of Nocona, Texas. The bulk of Texas specimens is now
owned by the above named individuals, Yale University, the
University of Texas, and Texas Memorial Museum.
The Cretaceous of the world might be called an age of
dinosaurs and cycads. It is true, of course, that there were
many other great groups of plants and animals flourishing
equally as well during this period of the earth’s history but
cycads, by their abundance and beauty: were outstanding

88

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

plants. The number of cycads, both living and fossiI~ is not
large but the plants are important because of their primitive
nature and ornamental character. In general, the plants
have tuberous stems usually covered with an armor of petiole
bases. The stem terminates in a crown of large stiff pinnate
leaves. The plants are dioecious, the male and female organs being borne by different individuals as is common
with most of the higher animals. The "hotel palm" so popular many years ago is a living cycad. The fossil distribution of cyca-ds is very different from the present geographic
range of the surviving forms. Today they are confined to
the tropical and subtropical regions of both the eastern and
western hemispheres. The genus Zamia extends from Florida to Chile. Cycas ranges from Japan to Australia. One
genus, Microzamia, is peculiar to Australia. Mexico also
has two genera, Dioon and Ceratozamia, confined to its
southern region. Many of the forms are "palm-like" while
others closely resemble the tree ferns. Smaller species have
been confused with true ferns. Almost all of the living
forms are notable for their longevity. They grow very
slowly and some forms are believed to reach an age of a
thousand years or more. Fertilization in the many forms is
exceedingly interesting but such detailed studies can only
be appreciated by the few who are well acquainted with
specialized plant physiology. The largest sperms known to
the animal or plant world a.re those of the Cycads. Some are
of such size (1/4 millimeter) that they can be seen in ordinary light while still living with the unaided or naked eye.
The following species have been described by Wieland.
Some descriptions are still in manuscript:
Cycadeoidea
C.
C.
C.
Co
C.
C.
C.

bart-johnsoni Wieland
boesiana Wieland
sp.
uddeni Wielandbarti Wieland
wolfei Wieland
dyeri Wieland
johnstoni Wieland

CallahanCounty
Wise County
Gillespie County
Maverick County
Comanche County
Erath County
Erath & Hood Counties
Erath County

Additional Archeological Data From North Texas

89

The new specimen described in this paper was obtained
by 1Vlr. Glen Evans from Joe Benton of Nocona.

It was

donated to the Texas ]YIemorial Museum at Austin.

The

trunk is from Montague County and closely resembles C.
johnstoni Wieland more than any other described type from
Texas but the exact specific determination must be made
by a study of its characters by the few individuals in North
America who have made close studies of the fossil cycads.
The specimen is a large, complete, well-preserved trunk,
ellipsoid or conoid in shape. The total height is 16~/s inches.
The greatest circumference is 44~/8 inches. Axes cutting the
trunk transversely at the greatest circumference measure
15s~ inches and 13s~ inches in diameter, giving a maximum
flattening of 2 inches.

The distortion due to flattening

probably took place before the trunk was replaced with
silica.

The elliptical cross section of the trunk is further

shown in the basal view of the trunk. The lack of preservation of the roots and adjacent portions of the trunk has left
a basal cavity which clearly .shows the armor, cortex, and
other inner structural layers.

The entire trunk, and par°

ticularly the region approaching the apex, is studded with
numerous fructifications.

The bract areoles surrounding

the fruits are very distinct and some are broken away so
deeply as to show the ovulate stroboli.

Several stroboli are

broken and these show natural cross sections.

The fructifi-

cations are ~o numerous that they have disrupted the regular s~iral symmetry displayed so frequently in cycads. An
elliptically shaped cavity in the side of the trunk is similar
to that of a specimen of Cycadeoidea marshiana figured by
Wieland (Yale specimen number 3).

The condition of the

Yale trunk is described by Wieland as having been caused
by the breaking away or non-conservation of a small branch.
The cavity in the Texas trunk is 4½ inches in depth and

90

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

cuts through the armor and passes into other trunk layers
to the inner medullary portion.
Trunk dimensions of the Montague County specimen are
as follows:
Height

16~/8 inches

Circumference (greatest)

44~/8 inches

Diameter (average at circumference)

14~ inches

Armour thickness

2~ inches

Cortex thickness

1

Diameter of Phloem, Xylem, Medulla

63~ inches

inch

(In recent months ~fr. Benton has given his large collection of cycads
to Texas ~Iemo~’lal ~,Iuseum.
]~Its collection, like all really valuabl~ collections, ca~Tles correct inform~tlo~ on the localities where eacl~ specimen
was found.)

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Sellards, E. H., "Fossil Cycad Localities in Texas," PanAm Geologist, 1928.
VCieland, G. R., "American Fossil Cycads," Carnegie Institute, publication 34, v. 2, 1~16.
Wieland, G. R., "Two New-North American Cycadeoids,"
Canada Geological Survey, 1921.
Wieland, G. R., "Land Types of the Trinity Beds," Science
n. s., 1931.

Mexican Pottery Head Found in Texas

91

ADDITIONAL ARCHEOLOGICAL DATA
FROM NORTH TEXAS

By A. H. WrrrE

A Second Stone Pestle
In 1936 a long stone pestle was discovered in situ on the
Little Wichita River, in a non-pottery camp site. The length
of this pestle is 221/~ inches, the width uniformly 2~ inches.
The artifact is oval in cross section.

Surprisingly, the mate-

rial is a beautiful gray green mica schist.
stones do not occur locally.

Metamorphic

Obviously, the artifact has been

used a great deal and appears to be rather old.

The writer

briefly described and illustrated this rare pestle in Volume
8, 1936, Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and l~aleonto!ogical Society.

Within a few months after the above

described pestle was reported a second long specimen was
given to the writer.

.A friend who owns ranch and farm

property adjacent to the Big Wichita River was the donor.
The site was a cultivated field, located at no great distance
from the river channel.

The second pestle is 171~ inches in

length with a maximum width of 3 inches near the middle
portion.
eter.

The ends taper to conical points 2 inches in diam-

The material is a sandy, brown hematite, almost as

hard as steel and quite heavy (8 pounds).

This mineral

does not occur in large nodules or beds of sufficient thickness within the area.
Boat-Shaped Artifacts
The writer has three artifacts of this type in his files.
All were discovered on the surface of different sites.
No. 1.

Unexcavated, width 1 inch, length 2~ inches,

thickness ~ inch.

Material, no definite identification.

The

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

92

color is light gray and the stone is igneous in origin. Found
on surface of pottery site.
No. 2.

Unexcavated, width 1 inch, length 2 inches, thick-

ness 6/16 inch.

Material, hematite.

Found in non-pottery

site.
No. 3.

Excavated with keel groove. Width z~ inch, length

3 inches, thickness 1~/4 inches.

The dimensions given for

No. 3 are only approximate as about one-half of this rare
artifact was not found.
material, hematite.
Henrietta, Texas.

Found in non-pottery site.

The

Mexican Pottery Head Found in Texas

93

MEXICAN POTTERY HEAD FOUND
IN TEXAS
By IV!~. AtOP M~s. J. HE~rR~ RAY
Reports of the finding of Mexican-like objects in Texas
have occurred sporadically over a period of years.* In 1916,
one was found near Cisco, Texas, which we believe will be
of considerable interest to archaeologists. This is a small
pottery representation of a human head, which was discovered by Truva Lisenbee while hunting projectile points
on East Sandy creek in Eastland County west of Cisco. At
this site near the junction of East Sandy with West Sandy
creek, there was a large spring, known to early settlers in
the region as an Indian camp ground. The head was found
about one mile above the site of the old spring, in a spot
long found to contain many Indian artifacts.
The head, which is broken off at the neck, is hollow, and
the inner cavity is an inch and a half in diameter. The
specimen is three and one-half inches in height and was
made of reddish clay with mica and sand used as temper.
The neck contains a clay core which is half an inch in diameter and this apparently is a peg from the body over which
the neck fitted closely. The eyes are of the traditional
coffee-bean shape of Archaic figurines in the Valley of
Mexico, set in well-defined orbits. The nose is platyrrhine
and somewhat worn at the tip. The mouth is wide open, entering into the head cavity, its lips a rather thick roll of clay
extending completely around the mouth area and clearly
everted at the bottom. The chin is rounded and makes a
sharp angle with the neck.
*EDITOR’S NOTE: In September of 1928, a finely sculptured
sandstone piece representing a human head, wearing a conical
shaped cap, was found near a gravel pit located five miles south of
Cross Plaihs, Texas, which is in the same region. This image had
similar shaped eyes but was considerably larger than the one
described above and had also been broken off in the neck region.
The cap was conical in shape with what seemed to be a hat-band
around the base of large beads. The patina and white incrustations
on the image indicated some age.

94

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

On top of the head is what appears to be a five-lobed
turban or five coils of hair, extending across the forehead.
Two of these lobes still stand out clearly as rounded areas
raised slightly above the plane of the forehead.

The other

three have been broken off, but their position remains distinctly outlined on the surface.

Inside the mouth there ap-

pears to be some artificial coloring, denser and darker than
a smoke smudge:

There are also slight traces of black on

the left cheek and on part of the head covering, which may
be accidental
In September, 1946, we attended the Caddoan Archaeological Symposium in Norman, Oklahoma. Among the members there were Drs. Eduardo Noguera, Pedro Armitlas, and
Wilfrido Du Solier, all of the National Museum of Mexico.
We showed the pottery head to Dr. Noguera, who examined
it and passed it to his two co!leagues. They were all of
the opinion that the head was part of a figurine representing
Xipe-Totec, Aztec God of Agriculture, made some time between the tenth and twelfth centuries. They were convinced that it was clearly of Mexican origin.
~
Whether this is to be regarded as simply a fortuitous
occurrence or as an authentic archaeological clue, we cannot say at present. However, the discovery of the figurine
in a known archaeological site and its exact identification
by authorities in the Mexican field certainly argue for its
authenticity.
We are indebted to Mrs. Margey Hayes Krieger for aid
in preparing this manuscript.
Below are copies of some letters concerning the image
from Dr. E. Noguera, University of Mexico, Mexico City,
Mexico, and Dr. James B. Griffin, University Museum, Uni-

PLATE 21

Mexican Pottery Head Found in Eastland County, Texas. No. t,
front view of head, No. 2, side view of pottery head, No. 3, view of
top of pottery head.

Plate 21

News Notes and Editorials

97

versity of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, and copy of our
request for information.
October 8, 1946
Dr. E. Noguera,
University of Mexico,
Mexico City, Mexico.
Dear Sir:
We are writing an article describing the finding and identity of the pottery head, Xipe-Totec, for Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Abilene, Texas.
We wish permission, to quote in this article, your identity
of this head which you kindly furnished us at the Symposium, Norman, Okla., Sept. 12th.
Very little information of value had been received by us
regarding the head before you so generously made its identity for us. We quote the memo you made for us: "XipeTotec, God of Agriculture, Aztec, 1000-1200 A. D."
Your identity of the subject, we feel sure, will be appreciated by the editor of this publication, as well as splendid
archaeological reference for Prof. Alex. D. Krieger, Archaeologist, University of Texas.
Thanks, sincerely,
Mr. and Mrs. J. Henry Ray.
Instituto Nacional de Anthropologia e ttistoria, S.E.P.
Direccion De Monumentos Prehispanicos
Zacatecas No. 218
Mexico, D. F.
October 18, 1946
Mr. and Mrs. J. Henry Ray,
Yamparika and Fannin Stso,
Vernon, Texas.
Dear Mr. and Mrs. Ray:
I am very glad to answer your kind letter in regard to
the interesting figurine you showed me at the Symposium,

98

Texas Archeolog$cal and Paleontological SocieSy

held at Norman, Oklahoma. I shall be delighted for the
quotation about the identity of this head hoping this will
add interest to it.
With my best wishes I am,
Sincerely yours,
(Signed) E. Noguera.
University Museum
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan, U.S.A.
Anthropology.
November 8, 1946
Mr. and Mrs. J. Henry Ray,
Yamparika and Fannin Streets,
Vernon, Texas.
Dear 1Vir. and Mrs. Ray:
Thanks very much for the photographs of the figurine.
I certainly hope that you will obtain permission from Mr.
Noguera to use has statement in the article you plan to
publish. Noguera’s statement will be much more valuable
than mine.
I think it is interesting, however, that even with my short
acquaintance with Mexican archaeology that I was able to
recognize that your figurine was of the type known as "XipeTotec" in the Valley of Mexico.
It was a pleasure to meet you at Norman, and I was sorry
that you were not able to stay for the rest of the conference.
Sincerely yours,
JBG-pmc
Vernon, Texas.

(Signed) James B. Griffin.
Director, Museum of Anthropology

99

News Notes and Editorials

NOTt~S AND I~DITORIALS
HISTORY OF THE SOCIETY
The Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
was founded on the evening of October 2, 1928, in the president’s office in Abilene, Texas, and each year since then he
has been annually elected as its president.

The first publi-

cation chairman appointed was Mr. Frank Grimes of Abilene, Texas, who established the format of the Society’s annual Bulletin, and supervised getting out the first Bulletin.
The Society’s first secretary, E. B. Sayles, arranged the illustrations for the first three volumes. Your president has
edited and given proof reading to all of the text of all of
the preceding seventeen volumes, including this one. Since
1931 he has done all of the art work as well as the previous
editing and two of the four proof readings given ~o each of
the Bulletins. Much of this work has meant the devoting
of countless hours and days to plain drudgery, and that without financial compensation. Each article was critically read
three or more times before being handed to the printer.
Editorial assistance was rendered on Caddoan problems, in
the last few Bulletins, by Dr. C. H. Webb of Shreveport,
Louisiana. Your president now feels that he has done
enough, and that by exercise of a reasonable care of the
Society’s finances, and care in the selection of its officers,
and especially its editor, there is no likelihood that the Society will not continue to carry on under some other person’s management as well or better than in the past.
There never has been any educational institution in Abiiene which has given courses in the subjects studied by the
Society and there is not any large permanently endowed
museum to serve as a background for the Society’s work,
nor is there any one else actively doing such research as an
amateur worker, and the local attendance at the meetings
has been small. Therefore, it is the considered recommendation of your president that the headquarters of the Society
should be removed to some large educational center where

100

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

such research facilities exist, and where a permanent membership background of interested professors and students
can be created which will serve to perpetuate the Society.
The practice of always holding the annual meetings in Abilene probably has been a mistake, due to a misinterpretation
of the governing regulations. Recent study shows that there
is no prohibition of annual meetings in any city in Texas
and the president and directors have therefore voted to
have the 1947 annual meeting sessions in Lubbock, Texas.
Among the president’s duties are the appointment of a
publications chairman or editor for the Society’s Bulletin
and your president has appointed Dr. W. C. Holden of Lub~bock, Texas, to edit and print the 1947 Bulletin of the Society.
In conclusion, your president hopes that the membership
of the Society will elect some one else to succeed him at the
annual meeting to be held during the fall of 1947 at Lubbock,
Texas.

NEW TRUSTEES AND DIRECTOR
By ballot of the Society’s directors two vacancies on the
Board of Trustees and one vacancy on the Board of Directors have been filled. The two trustees elected are Dr. J. G.
McAllister of Austin, Texas, and Judge E. T. Adams of Glen
Rose, Texas- The new director elected is Dr. Ernest Wallace
of Lubbock~ Texas.

A TAILOR MUST HAVE CLOTH
The relatively small size of this Bulletin and of others
within recent years arises from no financial inability to pay
printing and engraving costs, but is entirely due to a shortPLATE

22

No. 1. Entire view of Gibson Site bank where buried midden
levels were inspected" in 1939. Figure on right in black is Dr.
Albert G. Jenks, then head of the Anthropology Department of the
University of Minnesota, who is shown pointing to a hearth.
No, 2. Shows close-up view of Dr, Jenks inspecting man made
flint flake embedded in silt at the Gibson Site.

Plate 22

News Notes and Editorials

age of research articles since World War II.

103

It would seem

that there should have been enough unpublished records
and memories of scientific research of the past to have furnished materials to fill out during the period when such work
ceased, but we have not been able to get them in sufficient
volume ~o get out a Bulletin of the size and quality we
would like. While we have printed about the usual number
of articles, most of them are too briefly told. No matter
what a tailor’s experience may be he cannot make a suit
without sufficient cloth.

OF MANOS, 1VIETATES AND SCRAPERS
Some scientist should write an exhaustive research paper
on the mano and metate and the editor of this Bulletin
would be glad to print a well written article of ten thousand
or more words on that subject. Some research man should
begin in the Lower Clear Fork Silt and trace the mano and
metate up through the thirty to thirty-five feet of river
silts to the recent soil surface hearths which contain the
latest made soap bar shaped grinding tools. There are many
variant form~ of this implement. A study of some of the
early round or bun shaped manos which now lie stratified
below over twenty feet of river silts would be of interest.
This type of mano by reason of a peculiar form of usage was
worn down to a thin edge on one side so that much used
stones became shaped in the form of a wedge of cheese.
Recently the writer found five such round manos embedded
in a ring in the old dark red dense Lower Clear Fork Silt in
a Coke County mountain valley along with Clear Fork Culture artifacts. Three of these were worn down ~o a thin
edge on one side, the wearing down had only begun on one
mano and one had not been used enough to wear the edge
down. Apparently the grinding down to a thin edge on one
side was done in the same manner on both faces and the
edge was gradually worn back until the mano lost its original round form and became an elongated cheese wedge
like shaped stone. However, there were other forrnS of the

104

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

mano stone even as early as the formation of these ancient
silts.
Some person with research ability and technical experience should write an exhaustive paper on all of the multitude of variant forms of the end scraper and the great number of uses of such scrapers and also the placement in time
and space of the different patterns. The editor could use a
ten thousand word article on that subject also. Unfortunately there are very few persons living in any one state with
the background of research and also competent to do justice
to such papers and most of such persons seem to be already
overworked on other projects. There already are on hand
in the laboratories of Texas institutions the many thousands
of specimens necessary for study in preparation of such
papers. Thus far in Texas, as is the case elsewhere, there
has been too much squirrel’like hoarding of stone age specimens and relatively little systematic study given to their
uses and significance in the life of ancient man.
SCIENTISTS INSPECT ANCIENT HEARTS
IN RIVER SILTS
Many leading scholars in the subject of ancient man have
throughout the years made visits to Abilene to inspect the
stratified midden deposits in the stream banks of central
West Texas. In 1929 and again in 1939 Dr. Albert G. Jenks,
then head of the Department of Anthropology of the University of MAnnesota, visited some of the deeply buried sites
of the region in company with the writer and on the last
visit was pictured examining these hearths as is shown on
Plate 22, Nos. 1-2, and Plate 23, No. 1. During the spring
of 1946 Dr. Carl Sauer, head of the Departments of Geology
and Geography of the University of California, spent several

PLATE

23

No. 1. Another close-up view of Dr. Albert G. Senks inspecting
another embedded flint in the Gibson Site.
No. 2. View of creek bank silts in Jones County, smell pick-axe
points to location .of flint knife near bottom of the bank in a layer
of charcoal, grave4 and old Clear Fork silt.
No. 3 Close-up view of same embedded blade shown in bank in
No. 2. Blade is at end of the large blade of the pick-axe.

Plate 23

News Notes and Editorials

107

days with the writer inspecting these deeply buried sites.
In July of 1946, Dr. Kirk Bryan, who is head of Geology and
Geography in Harvard University, came for another inspection of the same sites which he had previously inspected in
1938 and is shown at one of them in Plate 22, No. 2.

One

artifact stratum is just below the men’s shoulders and another midden level lies close to their feet.

On Plate 23,

No. 3, is shown an ancient knife which was found embedded by the writer in Lower Clear Fork Silt down
about one foot above a stratum of Permian limestone on the
bed of a small creek in Jones County in August, 1946.

The

bank above it is shown on Plate 23, No. 2.
Visiting scientists seldom stay more than from three to
five days and never are able to get the complete picture of
an area that the man on the ground has who has examined
a number of sites which exhibit a certain feature while the
casual visitor may only see a few of them.
In this connection a stratum of gravel was pointed out to
one geologist at the Young Site as a remnant of an older
Pleistocene deposit which had been erroneously classified
as belonging to the upper strata of the seven last regularly
deposited river silts, when in reality it probably was at least
one hundred thousand years earlier. His reply was if that
is true where are any others.
(1) Well remnants of the same gravel exist at a place in
the bottom of the stream bank several miles downstream
from the Young Site and just north of the Hodges Site. (2)
Two miles below the Hodges Site on the Roberts farm. (3)
Two miles below the Roberts farm on the Alexander Ranch,
(4) and about five miles downstream from there at the
Lueders dam on the Clear Fork of the Brazos, and at intervals of several miles on down the same stream banks as far
as the writer has examined them. Two pictures of these
are shown in Plate 24, Nos. 2 and 3. The second stratum
from the top contains hearths.
--C. N. R.

108

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

FOLSOM BLADES
During the past years the writer has been frequently
queried by scholars interested in ancient man concerning
the occurrence of Folsom points in Central West Texas.
This type of projectile point seems to have captured the
interest of archaeologists generally more than some other
less beautifully made types which in the writer’s opinion
date back to a far more remote period.
An error first assumed concerning these blades was to the
effect that they predated stemmed and shouldered and
barbed projectile points, but the reverse probably is true.
Whatever led to the making of such a type it was not due to
absence of prior examples of stemmed and shouldered
points. The same old red silts and gravels from which Folsore points erode are also better filled with a great variety
of types of stemmed and shouldered or even barbed projectile points.
In summarizing the results of twenty years of research
in the Central West Texas counties of Jones, Taylor, Callaban, Nolan, Coke, Mitchell, Shackelford, Fisher, Stephens
and Runnels on this subject, only twenty-seven undoubted
Folsom points have been found by the writer, whereas a
great many thousands of f-lint projectile points of many
other types have been found by him in the same area. Of
the twenty-seven all but two were found in the above

PLATE

24

No. 1 View of Gibson Site in August 1946, Dr. Kirk Bryan and
son standing in front of the Upper and Lower Clear Fork Silts
strata. The line at about their shoulders marks the point of contact between the Upper and Lower Clear Fork Silts, and there is a
layer of hearths there, one about midway to the ground, and another
one down near their feet.
No. 2. View shows the Nugent Silts superimposed on a very
anc.ient remnant of Pleistocene gravel at the Roberts Site below
Nugent, Texas. The second zone from the top contains numerous
hearths, flint flakes, and a few artifacts in almost a continuous line.
No. 3. A closer view of the same gravel remnant and Nugent
Silts shown in picture above~

Plate 24

News Notes and Editorials

III

designated area, one of these exceptions was discovered
near Floydada, Texas, and is a long perfect white blade four
and fifteen-sixteenths inches in length and one and oneeighth inches in width, and a section of a pink Folsom point
was found near Amarillo, Texas.
Without exception the Folsom points have eroded from
old Clear Fork silts, and have accumulated on those old
surfaces along with the numerous darts, side scrapers,
gouges, gravers, disks, and hand axes of the ancient Clear
Fork culture.
It is most probable that Clear Fork Culture men lived in
the Central Texas area at the same time as Folsom men
lived further westward along the mountain valleys of New
Mexico and that most of the Texas Folsom points either
represent transitory visits by Folsom men to the domain of
Clear Fork tribes, or represent articles used in prehistoric
trade routes. Of the relatively few Folsom points found,
however, there is a tendency to find them mostly in certain
sites, and hardly at all elsewhere. In one site in southeast
Taylor County eight Folsom blades of the large thick type
were found on the same old surface from which Clear Fork
gouges weathered. In one Clear Fork Culture site of western Taylor County six Folsom points were located and of
these four were of the large so-called generalized thick type,
and two were of as fine workmanship as any found elsewhere and one of the latter type was found almost in contact
with the teeth of a mammoth (see account in Science 1938).
Altogether seventeen Folsom points have been found by
the writer in Taylor County, four in Coke County, two in
Jones County and both of fine type, one in Kent County
and one in Runnels County. Some of the Texas Folsom
blades evidently were quite large, the largest one, a base
fragment, is one and three-fourths inches across, and was
broken off two and one-eighth inches above the base, and
an extension of its symmetrical lines down to the usual
shaped point gives a blade of six inches or more in length
and is something of a size suitable to be used either as a
spear or as a fine knife. The edges were ground down

112

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

smooth or polished up for a space of one and five-eighths
inches from the base, and while it is of large size it is relatively thin, and has a beautiful retouch along the edges.
Another large basal fragment from Taylor County illUstrated in the writer’s article in the 1930 Bulletin is two and
five-eighth inches in length from the base to the fracture
line, and one and one-half inches in width there, and one
and one-eighth inches across the base. This point has polished edges up from the base for a space of one and onefourth inches toward the point, and must have been a blade
of about five inches in length. This blade is thick beyond
the channelling but the workmanship is excellent.
This tabulation has not included five Gibson points, having
the shape but not the channelling, which some assert are
also Folsom types. When one gets into the question of the
various types of blades enumerated as Yuma points these
are much more commonly found. Whether or not many of
these were made by Folsom men one cannot know, but
they are found on the same old eroded silt levels as the
others. If these were to be included the list would be a long
one.
--C. N. R.

OBITUARY
C. W. Han~ey
The members of Texas Archaeological and Paleontological
Society suffered a great loss in the passing on of one of its
most active directors, Mr. C. W. Hanley, late in 1945.
Mr. Hanley not only was a very successful man in business, but was greatly interested in archaeology, paleontology
and history as hobbies, and he personally for many years
donated, and solicited other business men to do so, to a fund
to pay some of the costs of the archaeological excavations
PLATE 25
Mr. C. W. Hanley.

Plate 25

115

Membership List I945-1946

of the officers of the Society, and thus contributed very
valuable services to scientific research.
Mr. Hanley was born at Shamokin, Pennsylvania, on February 16, 1882, resided in Virginia for several years, and came
to Texas in 1917, when he became associated with a business
which later became known as the Gulf Oil Corporation and
with which he remained until his death at Fort Worth, Texas, on December 4, 1945.
Mr. Hanley was a long time member of this Society, also
of the Texas Academy of Science, and the West Texas Historical Society, and for many years prior to his death had
been engaged in collecting data for a book on the different
phases of the oil business, and was greatly interested in
the development of all of the natural resources of Texas.
--C. N.R.

116

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-TREASURER
OF THE TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL AND
PALEONTOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Report for the eighteenth year from the annual meeting,
October 27, 1945, to October 31, 1946
RECEIPTS
Balance on October 27, 1945 .............................................. $1,015.84
Collected on 1945 dues ................................................... 138.00
Collected on 1946 dues ............................................. 117.00
156.00
Bulletin sales
90.00
Collection on Convention and Luncheon ..................
Total ............................................................................... $1,516.84
DISBURSEMENTS
To Abilene Printing & Stationery Co.,
$ 335.00
for printing 1945 Bulletin ...........................
102.44
To News Engraving Co. for 1945 Cuts ................
75.00
To Wooten Hotel for 1945 Luncheon ................................
9.22
To Pender Co. for Stationery ........................................
4.55
To Jessie Watanabe for Typing ...................................
7.75
To Dr. Ray for Convention Expenses .......................
10.00
To Dr. Watts for Office Expenses ............................
Total ............................................................................. $ 543.96
Balance on deposit on November 2, 1946 ..................... $ 972.88
OTTO O. WATTS,
Secretary-Treasurer

Membership List 1945-1946

117

MI~MBt~RSHIP LIST 1945-1945
HONORARY MEMBERSHIP
Albert G. Ingalls, Scientific American Magazine,
.................................................................. New York City, N. Y.
J. S. Bridwell ...................................................Wichita Falls, Texas
MEMBERS
Abilene Printing & Stationery Co ................... Abilene, Texas
E. T. Adams
..... Glen Rose, Texas
H. H. Adams ....................................................... Abilene, Texas
American Museum of Natural History _.New York City, N. Y.
American Philosophical Society ................. Philadelphia 6, Pa.
Max W. Ball, New Interior Bldg ........... Washington 25, D. C.
D. A. Bandeen, West Texas Chamber of Commerce,
............................................................................. Abilene, Texas
Baylor University Library ......................................Waco, Texas
Joe C. Benson ......................................................... Abilene, Texas
Joe Benton .......................................................... Nocona, Texas
W. P. Brennan ....................: ................... Crystal City, Texas
John P. Byram .............................................. Abilene, Texas
Dr. Kirk Bryan, Harvard University .......... Cambridge, Mass.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institute,
............................................................... Washington, D. C.
C. M. Caldwell

............... Abilene, Texas
Price Campbell ................................................... Abilene, Texas
Mrs. Wm. H. Campbell, Box 116, Kings Cany6n Road
........................................................... Carson City, Nevada
Sam Chamberlain ................................................. Refugio, Texas
Cleveland Public Library .................................. Cleveland, Ohio
Columbia University Library ................ New York City, N. Y.
Dr. Stewart Cooper ................................................ Abflene, T~xas
Col. M. L. Crimmins, 312 Geneseo Road...San Antonio, Texas
Dallas Public Library

......... Dallas, Texas

118

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

E. C. de Montel, 1000 City National Bldg.,
................................................................Wichita Falls, Texas
Denver Art Museum .................................Denver, Colo.
Helen S. Farrington, E1 Paso Public Library, E1 Paso, Texas
Field Museum of Natural History ..........................Chicago, Ill.
R. E. Forrester, Box 243, T. C. U. Station,
..........................................................._Fort Worth, Texas
W. S. Fulton ................................................. Dragoon, Arizona
Gila Pueblo ........................................................ Globe, Arizona
Frank Grimes .................................................... Abilene, Texas
C. W. Hanley ............................................................ Deceased
Hardin-Simmons University Library ..............Abilene, Texas
R. K. Harris, 9024 Roanoak ...........................Dallas, Texas
R. W. Haynie ...................................................... Abilene, Texas
Mrs. Dwight B. Heard, Heard Museum ......Phoenix, Arizona
Dr. T. W. Hedrick ................................................. Abilene, Texas
Dr. Frank C. Hibben, 3000 Campus Blvd.
..................................................................... Albuquerque, N. M.
Dr. T. L. Hodges ............................................Bismark, Arkansas
Dr. W. C. Holden, Texas Technological College,
.............................................. : ..................Lubbock, Texas
Dr. Ruth A. Holzapfel, McMurry College ........Abilene, Texas
Houston Public Library ..................................Houston, Texas
J. C. Hunter .......................................................Deceased
Instituto Panamericano de Geografia e Historia
Observatorio, 192 Avenida del Republica Mexicana,
..........................................................~Tacubaya, D. F.
Illinois State Library ....................... Springfield, Illinois
A. T. Jackson, 508 E. 46th St ...............................Austin, Texas
Henry James ..............................................Abflene, Texas
Joint University Libraries .......................... .Nashville 4, Tenn.
Johns Hopkins University Library .............. Baltimore 18, Md.
Morgan Jones ........................................................ Abilene, Texas
Percy Jones ...................................................... Abilene, Texas

Membership Lis~ 1945-1946

119

Roland Jones ......................................................... Dallas, Texas
Harold M. Kautz, 3253 Sondra Drive ........ Fort Worth, Texas
Mrs. Forrest Kirkland, 121 W. Montana ..... Dallas 16, Texas
Laboratory of Anthropology

.Santa Fe, N. Mex.
La Retama Public Library ...................... Corpus Christi, Texas
R. B. Leach .................................................... Abilene, Texas
Judge Harry J. Lemley .....................................Hope, Arkansas
Eli Lilly, 5807 Sunset Lane ........................ Indianapolis, Ind.
Kenneth MacGowan, 10727 LeConte Ave.,
.................................................. Los Angeles 24, Calif.
Dr. J. G. McAllister, Dept. of Anthropology,
University of Texas ........................................... Austin, Texas
A. T. McDannald, Box 2972 ................................. Houston, Texas
E. A. McIlhermy ............................................Avery Island, La.
Metropolitan Museum of Art, Library __New York City, N. Y.
Jack H. Minas ....................................... Sterling City, Texas
Museum of American Indian, Heye Foundation,
Huntington Free Library

.New York City, N. Y.

Newberry Library, 60 W. Walton Place .......... Chicago, Illinois
New York Public Library, Fifth Ave. and 42rid St.,
............................................................... New York City, N. Y.
Northwestern University Library ................. Evanston, Illinois
Oklahoma Agriculture and Mechanical College,
.................................................................. Stillwater, Okla.
Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology,
Harvard University ...................................... Cambridge, Mass.
H. A. Pender ....................................................... Abilene, Texas
Phillips Academy, Dept. of American Archaeology,
............................................................................ Andover, Mass.
Judge Hermon C. Pipkin ................................... Amarillo, Texas
Omar Radford ....................................................... Abilene, Texas
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, Box 62 .................................... Abilene, Texas
J. Henry Ray, 2130 Fannin St ..................................... Vernon, Texas
Rev. Henry Retzek .......................................... Wheaton, Minn.
P. M. Rice .............................................................. Hamilton, Texas

120

Texas ArcheoIogica~ and Paleontological Society

Rice Institute Library .......................................... Houston, Texas
Dr. R. N. Richardson, Hardin-Simmons University,
............................................................................. Abilene, Texas
Thomas E. Roberts ..............................................Abilene, Texas
Rosenberg Library ......................................... Galveston, Texas
San Antonio Public Libral~] ...................... San Antonio, Texas
San Diego Scientific Library, Balboa Park,
......................................................................... San Diego, Calif.
N. A. Sansteby, 535 Hoefner Ave ................. Los Angeles, Calif.
E. B. Sayles, Arizona State Museum ..... = ........Tucson, Arizona
Henry Sayles ...................................................... Abilene, Texas
Dr. Ellis W. Shuler, Southern Methodist University,
...................................................................................... Dallas, Texas
Frank E. Simmons ..................... = ........................... Oglesby, Texas
Judge O. L. Sims ............................................. Paint Roek, Texas
Dr. R. E. Smallwood, 1226 Wilson St ......... Arkadelphia, Ark.
Prof. Victor J. Smith, Sul Ross College ............. Alpine, Texas
Smithsonian Institution ...................................Washington, D. C.
F. J. Soday, 4012 Southern Parkway ................ Louisville, Ky.
Societe des Amerieanistes, 61 Rue de Buffon .... Paris, France
Southern Methodist University Library ............... Dallas, Texas
Southwest Museum Library, I-tighland Park 42,
........................................................................ Los Angeles, Calif.
Stephen F. Austin State College Library,
....................................................................... Naeogdoehes, Texas
Floyd V. Studer, 635 Amarillo Bldg ................. Amarillo, Texas
Dr. Walter W. Taylor, University of Texas ....... Austin, Texas
Texas Agriculture and Mechanical, College Library,
.................................................................... College Station, Texas
Texas College of Mines Library ........................... E1 Paso, Texas
Texas Library and Historica! Commission ........ Austin, Texas
Texas Technological College Library .............. Lubbock, Texas
Dr. Raymond H. Tull ...............................................Abflene, Texas
Tyrrell Public Library ...................................... Beaumont, Texas
E. A. Ungren .......................................................... Abilene, Texas

Membership List I945-1946

121

University of Arizona Library ............................... Tucson, Ariz.
University of Arkansas Library ................ ..Fayetteville, Ark.
University of California Library ....................... Berkeley, Calif.
University of California at Los Angeles .... Los Angeles, Calif.
University of Chicago Library ................................. Chicago, Ill.
University of Denver, Mary Reed Library ......... Denver, Colo.
University of Illinois Library ................................... Urbana, Ill.
University of Kansas Library .......................... Lawrence, Kan.
University of Nebraska Library ........................... Lincoln, Neb.
University of New Mexico Library....... Albuquerque, N. Mex.
University Museum Library, 33rd and Spruce St.,
.......................................................................... Philadelphia 4, Pa.
University of Texas Library .................................. Austin, Texas
Waco Public Library ................................................ Waco, Texas
Dr. Earnest Wallace, Texas Technological College,
........................................................................... Lubbock, Texas
P. H. Walser, 1102 N. 1st St ................................... Temple, Texas
Frank H. Watt, Box 1176 .......................................... Waco, Tex~s
Dr. Otto O. Watts, Hardin-Simmons Univ ....... Abilene, Texas
William C. Watts, 2111 23rd St ......................... Lubbock, Texas
Dr. C. H. Webb, Children’s Clinic ........................ Shreveport, La.
A. H. VCitte ........................................................... Henrietta, Texas
George T. Wright, 190 Bonham St ......................... Paris, Texas
Lestor B. Wood, Phillips Petroleum Co ............ Houston, Texas
Lloyd O. Wolcott, Box 327 ................................ Hereford, Texas
Yale University Library .......................... New Haven, Conn.

BULLETIN
OF THE

Texas Archeolog~cal
and Paleontological
Society

Volume Eighteen
1947

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY AT LUBBOCK~

TEx.~s

COPYRIGHT 1948 BY

THE TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL AND
PALEONTOLOGICAL SOCIETY
ALL RIGHTS RE~3ERVED

PRINTED BY TEXAS TECH PRESS, LUBBOCK, TEXAS

BULLETIN

of the

Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.

10.

11.
12.
13,
14.,

Certain Projectile Points of the Early American Hunters.
By Alex D. Krieger ...................................................................................................... 7
Chemical Alteration of Silicate Artifacts.
By Cyrus N. Ray ........................................................................................................... 28
The Johnson Site: Type Site of the Aransas Focus of the
Texas Coast.
By T. N. Campbell ................................................................................................... 40
Certain Archaeological Notes on the High Plains of Texas.
By Adolph Henry Witte .......................................................................................... 76
The Comanche Eagle Dance.
By Ernest Wallace ...................................................................................................... 83
Notes on the W. A. Myatt Site,
By Joe Ben Wheat ......................................................................................................... 87
Twelve Room House Ruin,,
By Mrs. Glen E. Moore .......................................................................................... 94
The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the
Toyah, Uvalde, and Round Rock Foci,
By J. Charles Kelley ................................................................................................... 115
Archaeological Survey of Whitney Basin:: A Preliminary
Report.
By Robert L. Stephenson ....................................................................................... 129
Archaeological Survey of the Addicks Basin: A Preliminary Report,
By Joe Ben Wheat ................................................................................................... 143
News Notes and Editorials .............................................................................. 146
Book Reviews ..................................................................................................................... 157
Secretary-Treasurer’s Report, 1947 ......................................................... 168
Membership List ............................................................................................................ 169

Vol. 18, 1947. Price $3.00
Lubbock, Texas

The Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society

OFFICERS
CYRUS N. RAY, Abilene, Presiden~
TOl~I N. CAMPBELL, Austin, Active Vice-Pres~denS
ERNEST WALLACE, Lubbock, Secretary-Treasurer
W. C. HOLDEN~ Lubbock, Editor o] Publications

DIRECTORS
In Addition ~o She Above
ALEX KRIEGER, Austin

JOE BEN

RUPERT N. RICHARDSON,
WHEAT,

Tucson,

Abilene

Arizona

REGIONAL VICE-PRESIDENTS

M. L. CRIIvnvn~s, San Antonio
]~RS. FORREST KIRKLAND, Dallas
]~. GLEN E. MOORE, E1 Paso
VICTOR SIVIITH, Alpine

FLOYD

STUDER,

Amarillo

FP~K WA~r, Waco
OTTO O. WATTS, Abilene
B. WORTHINGTON, Houston

TRUSTEES
E. T. /~UAMS, Glen Rose
FRANK GRIMES, Abilene
J. CHARLES KELLEY, Austin
J. G. MCALLISTER, Austin

E. W. SHULER, Dallas
O. L. SIMs, San Angelo
W. C. WATTS, Lubbock
SPENCER WELLS, Lubbock

Foreword
The society was orgarfized and chartered in pursuit o£ a literary and scientific undertaking; for the study o][ the history,
pre-history and the major artifacts of man
and the fossils representing the past floras
and faunas o£ Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in museums and their study and classification and
the publication of the results of the researches incident thereto.
The BvI~i~12Tr~ is published annually for
distribution to members o£ the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the
writers, and do not necessarily represent
views o£ the society or the editorial staff.
The cost o£ publication of this issue has
been supplemented with funds from Texas
Tech Museum.

CERTAIN PROJECTILE POINTS OF THE
EARLY AMERICAN HUNTERS

A_~x D. ILRm¢~R
There is tremendous popular interest in the earliest inhabitants of America, their weapons and implements, mode
of life, the great animals now extinct that they hunted, and,
finally, ~what happened to them". Many learned articles
and popular books have appeared in recent years, especially
since the famous discovery at Folsom, New Mexico, in 1926.
Archaeologists are constantly being asked what they think
about the time of appearance of man in America; about
the ~type" of various artifacts found in circumstances suggesting age; whether the chipped stone points were used
on arrows or spears, and so on.
It is difficult to think clearly about these matters until
the number and variety of stone projectile points used by
early hunters on this continent is well understood. W’e are
still far from understanding this situation fully, for lack
of data, but many of the projectile point types are becoming
clear in their main features. It is amazing that many professional archaeologists are still badly confused over the several distinct types which they loosely call "Folsom points"
and "Yuma points". The amateurs, even. more confused,
cannot be blamed for continuing to use obsolete and incorrect names if the ~rofessionals to whom they look for help
know no better. Even the most recent literature reflects
careless use of type names no lon~er regarded as valid.
The conference held at Santa Fe, New Mexico, in September 1941,’ for the express purpose of straightening out
a Reported by Edgar B. Howard in **The Finley Site", American Antiquity, vol.
VIII, No. 3, 1943, pp. 227-234. The new terminology has been used by H. M. Wormington in Ancient Man i~t North America, The Colorado Museum of Natural History,
Popular Series No. 4 (revised, 1944), pp. 11 if.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

such matters, produced an extremely sensible and workable
terminology which is still largely ignored. This conference
did not establish type names for all ’~early man" projectile
points for the excellent reason that those present admitted
they did not know enough about the circumstances under
which the artifacts had been discovered. It was, however,
established that formal names would be given to projectile
points of consistent character if and when they were ;ound
in lblaae by competent observers. Wisely, the Santa Fe conference made it expressly understood that only the types
with consistent features and sufficient field information
would be given "official" names, while all those specimens
which did not satisfy these requirements would be removed
from the field of ]¢nown types, awaiting further discoveries. For this reason large numbers of artifacts from alt
parts of North America became of un/enown type after the
conference, whereas before it they had been called almost
everything possible. "Folsom-like", "Unfluted Folsom",
’*Yuma-like", "Generalized Folsom", "Generalized Yuma",
even such prize terms as "the well-known Folsom-Yuma
type", and so on.
It cannot be stated too o~ten or too strongly that the
Santa Fe conference paved the way for a clear understanding of the projectile point types of early American
hunters. Only a fraction of the points excavated and found
in private collections were now admitted to be of ]~nown
types. In other words, those who had been obsessed with the
idea that most ’*early" points were either "Folsom" or
"Yuma" (or hopelessly confused with them) should have
revised their whole attitude toward the problem. This has
not happened, except in the case of less than a dozen archaeologists that come to mind. The rest, while recognizing
the famous Sandia points’ as clearly distinct from the ]~luted
forms, continue the habit of calling all projectile points
= Frank C. Hibben, "Evidences of Early Occupation in Sandia Cave, New Mexico,
and Other Sites in the Sandla-Manzano Region", Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections,
Vol. 99, No. 23, 1941.

Certain Projectile Points of ~he Early American Hun$ers

with
term
most
faces

9

a longitudinal groove or flute "Folsom points". The
"Yuma" or ~’Yuma like" continues to be used for alany long, slim artiI~act with fine flaking across the
or meeting along a central ridge.

Despite the confusions that have occurred, it is really
comparatively easy to recognize the present l~nown types,
and, conversely, to recognize a specimen not of a
type. My purpose is to present a few hints on how the projectile points, known and unknown, can be recognized by
anyone interested, whether or not he has much knowledge
of the literature. I do not expect all professional archaeologists to agree with what is set forth. If a defense is needed
it can be put briefly: (1) One who doubts the validity of
certain types should attempt, if possible, to handle them
personally; (2) One cannot procrastinate forever about individual specimens, for humans, being what they are, no
two of them with primitive tools can ever turn out identical
products, and normally, even though they bear in mind the
same pattern, their results will be good, fair, and poor; and
(3) no one can ever determine the "type" o£ every specimen, but this does not detract from the reality of a typology
which works well for the great majority of artifacts.’
To repeat, there is nothing particularly original in the
remarks below about the Fluted and Yuma types, for this
was worked out in 1941 at Santa Fe. I merely wish to make
these results easy to understand and therefore attain more
general use among professional and amateur workers alike.
The Plainview point type, however, is a new one, and had
it been known in 1941 it would have been a great aid then
in formulating types. Finally, this is not an attempt to discuss all projectile points for which claims of antiquity have
been made. The interest is primarily on the "Folsom-Yuma"
situation.
~ My opinions on the purposes of a typology and means oil determining valid types
with historical meaning have been expressed in "The Typologica! Concept", American
Antiquity, Vol. IX, No. 3, I944, pp. 271-288.

10

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Fluted Points

The Santa Fe conference recognized three types of fluted
points: Folsom Fluted (or Classic Folsom), Clovis fluted,
and Ohio Fluted. This appears to account for most, if not
all, fluted points so far found in North America. Specimens with flutes may turn up now and then which cannot
easily be placed within any of the three types, but this is
often considered to mean that their ranges of variation are
still imperfectly known. Still, the Folsom and Clovis Fluted
types are generally of quite definite form. Unlike the other
types, "Ohio Fluted" points show many variations and have
not so far been reported in association with extinct animal
skeletons. Clovis Fluted points also occur in the eastern
United States, usually clearly distinct in form from Ohio
Fluted, and agreeing with specimens from the High Plains.
It is absolutely necessary that Clovis Fluted be distinguished from Folsom Fluted, for not only is the form
easily recognized, but so far the few direct associations with
extinct animals show that Clovis Fluted is generally found
with mammoth remains. Folsom Fluted, on the other hand,
has so far been found directly associated only with large
extinct’ bison. Of course I realize that numerous publications have mentioned "Folsom" or "Folsom-like" points discovered with mammoth remains in North America, but
these names were used either before~ the Santa Fe confer4The term "extinct" can be taken literally for the mammoth, camel, American
horses, and many other Late Pleistocene animals which had no living descendants wherz
Europeans reached America. This may nor be the case for the bison, however, for the
modern anima!, B. bison, is said to be the direct descendant of the Late Pleistocene B.
o¢cidentalis, the chief difference being in the somewhat sma!ler over-all size of the body
and horns of modern bison. B. antiquus, which co-existed in part with B. occidentalis
in the Late Pleistocene, left no modern descendants. S~e: Morris F. Skinner and Ore
Kaisen, "The Fossil Bison o:~ Alaska and Preliminary Revision of The Genus",
American Museum Of National History, Vol. 89, Article 3, 1947, esp. pp. 171, 242, 244.
The authors regard B. taylori, often identified as a "species" associated with artifacts, as
inclusive in B. occidentalis.

PLATE 1
Type forms of some early projectile points.

b
UNNAMED
UNNAMED

UNNAMED" "OBLIQUE

YUMAN

EDEN

¯
YUMA

f
SCOTTSBLUFF
YUMA

FOLSOM FLUTED

FOLSOM FLUTED

GLOVIS FLUTED
BROWNS VALLEY

o
CLOVIS

FLUTED

PLAINVIEW

q

p

"OHIO FLUTED~

Plate 1

r
SANDIA

s
I

SANDIA

2

Certain Projectile Points of the Early American Hunters

ence made Clovis Fluted an %fficially’" accepted type, or
afterwards in disregard for the conference agreement. Obviously, if Clovis Fluted is not only distinct from Folsom
Fluted in form, but is also the type to be found with the
mammoth while Folsom is not, it is important for all of us
to become accustomed to using the right names for these
types. One interpretation is that the mammoth disappeared
first, while the camel, horses, sloth, Bison occidentalis, and
perhaps other animals fingered in favorable areas for some
thousands of years longer. In this case Clovis Fluted would
be the oldest fluted point on the continent, and, with the
0ossible exception of the Sandia types, the oldest of any
known tyoe in America. Another interpretation is that the
Clovis type, notably the largest and heaviest fluted point,
was used for the largest game, the mammoth:, by the same
people who made lighter points for other game. Thirdly,
many regard Clovis Fluted .as nothing more than crudely
made variations of ~Folsom points". However, I believe the.
differences in form, size, and occurrence amply demon-~
strate that they are distinct types, and it is ~erhat~s more
likely th:at Folsom Fluted is a somewhat late[ and°soeeiaIized type of fluted projectile point which developed from
the widespread Clovis type.
The accompanying plate presents a few examples of
these types which may be taken as ideals. The best Folsom
Fluted points are usually rather small, 2 to 2 ½ inches long,
and two to three times as long as wide. The broadest part
is characteristically well forward, as much as three-quarters
of the distance toward the tip. Less often, the edges are
quite parallel instead of expanded, then rounded into the
tip. While the part of greatest width and the straigh.tness
or convexity of the edges may vary somewhat, true Folsom
Fluted points are readily recognized by the full fluting and
deeply concave base. The fluting technique reached perfection in this type, a long flake being skilfully removed
from each face from the base forward at least half waym
sometimes nearly all the waymto the tip. The basal con-

12

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

cavity is characteristically quite deep and U-shaped, sometimes squared across the bottom. A tiny point may often
be seen in the center of the basal concavity and is thought
to have served as a pressure platform from wMch the long
central flake was pried off. The deep base resulted in two
long, sharp tips or ’tears" at the corners, sometimes of extreme delicacy. From the base to the point of greatest width,
the edges are almost always smooth. It is believed that these
edges were purposely ground down to prevent their cutting
~he sin.ews or thongs which bound the point to its shaft.
With this combination of featuresmparallel edges or
widest part well forward of the midsection, full fluting,
deep base, !ong ~ears" at the corners, and tiny protusion
in the base center--there is no need to confuse the Folsom
Fluted type with any other projectile point whatever. These
features are unmistakable, separately and in combination.
Naturally, when the workmanship is not of the best, some
doubt begins to enter the identification, but a knowledge
of other recognized types will sometimes enable one to decide that, since the specimen does not belong to another
type, it can be considered an imperfect Folsom Fluted, or
one that lacks one or more of the typical features. Such difficulties will be met in any identification work.
The Clovis Fluted can ordinarily be readily distinguished
from Folsom by its greater size, ranging from about three
to six inches in length with length three to five times the
width, by the rudeness of its flutes, and the gentle curvature
of its base. The edges may be quite parallel from half to twothirds the distance forward, but in other cases the midpoint
is distinctly wider than the base, so that t~he specimen presents a long and narrow leaf shape with slightly convex
edges. In some cases they are not much longer than Folsom
Fluted, but they seemingly never present the most common
Folsom outline, that wieh the widest part forward of the
midsection. The fluting is inferior by comparison, that on
the Clovis points seldom extending as much as half way forward, the flute scar often being ragged and longer on one

Certain Projectile Points o] the Early American Hunters

13

face than the other. The flute may be absent from one face.
It was perhaps realized that too much fluting would weaken the point, a common defect of Folsom Fluted. The basal
concavity, rather than a deep U, is shallow and gently curving. It is often in fact, not a single curve, but a compound
one, concave in the middle and rounding in the opposite
direction into the corners.

The type provisionally termed "Ohio Fluted" (for lack
of a type site) is definitely more similar to Clovis Fluted
than to Folsom. The shape varies more, the edges sometimes
tapering forward rather than parallel or widening at the
middle, or strongly recurred so that the blade is much narrower between the base and midsection. Again the fluting
is crude and may occur on but one face. The smoothed
edges, however, are probably fully as common on both Clovis
and "Ohio" Fluted as on Folsom Fluted.
It is urged that archaeologists use these names wherever
it is possible to identify the specimen. If it cannot be placed
in one of these types, but bears a flute, or if it is too incomplete to reveal the key features, it should be called simply
a "fluted point". The common tendency to regard all fluted
projectile points as °°Folsom" should be abando~zed, for it
clearly ignores matters of considerable significance. One
may, however, speak of individual specimens as "Folsom
like" or "Clovis like" when they are fluted and resemble
one of these types, but cannot definitely be assigned to it.
However, these expressions should never be used as though
they were type names. Thus there can be a "Folsom like"
specimen but never a "Folsom-!ike type".
No unfluted projectile point should ever be called "Folsom like", no matter how closely it may resemble a fluted
point in other respects. Many such specimens may now be
identified as Plainview points (see below). The former
"Generalized Folsom" points almost always prove to be
Clovis Fluted or "Ohio Fluted".

14

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Yuma Points
The recognition of definite Yuma projectile points
seems to have been more difficult than that of fluted points,
principally because the absence of a flute on many long
and narrow points enabled some archaeologists to consider
a great range of artifacts as closely related within a "Yuma"
category. To cite the history of developments in naming
"Yuma" types would result only in such conflicts ~hat the
general reader would give up in despair. However, it may
be said that such terms as "Collateral Yuma", "Oblique
Yuma", ’~Generalized Yuma", "Indeterminate Yuma",
"’Yuma-like", and ~’Folsom-Yuma" have all been used frequently. Some authors have held that special forms of chipping distinguish Yuma from all other points, while others
claim that special shapes of the blade, stem, and base are
more important. To the reader interested in how these arguments developed, the excellent pamphlets of Miss Wormington are recommended.~
One of the most difficult matters to understand, in
view of the present terminology, is how Yuma points could
ever have been confused with Folsom. Yet many attempts
to draw lines of distinction between them have been made
in the belief t~hat they overlap. It is quite clear, however,
that it is not the Yuma types as we now understand them
that have been confused with Polsom, but a number of
other types which are neither Folsom nor Yuma and should
be given entirely different names. The Plainview type is one
of l~hese, and there are others not yet named (see below).
The insistence of J. D. Figgins many years ago that true
Folsom and Yuma points need never be confused is therefore fully borne out today.
Three Yuma types are now recognized which, with a
little practice, can be distinguished from one another readily. Probably the most spectacular is the Eden Yuma, a long
~H, M. Wo~mington, op. cir., and earlier (1939) edition of the same booklet,

Certain Projectile Points of the Early American Hunters

15

and narrow object with a pronounced ridge running the
length o£ the blade. This technique is called collateral flaking (or chipping), but the term Collateral Yuma point is
no longer used because ot? the Santa Fe agreement to name
definite types after sites in which they were found in place.
Hence the name Eden Yuma after the Eden valley in southwestern Wyoming.’
An idealized Eden Yuma is shown in the accompanying
plate. The most striking feature, next to the regular chipping with opposed scars, is the extreme narrowness with
parallel edges. Examples are known with the width as little
as one-seventh, or even one-eighth, of the length, q~e edges
are parallel for two-thirds or even three-quarters of the
total length. An Eden Yuma probably never widens above
the base. They also have notched-in stems, unlike any known
fluted type. These notches are sometimes extremely shallow
and seen only with close inspection, but there is no question
that a stem was intended in most cases. The stem is thus
only slightly narrower than the blade, its edges parallel and
smoothed. The base is straight or slightly convex.
The second type now recognAzed is ~he Scottsbluff Yuma. Unlike the Eden type it does not bear collateral flaking, the flake scars being roughly parallel across the blade,
or irregular. A peculiar feature, which one feels in handling
these specimens, is the "fatness" of the blade. Though it is
rather thick in cross-section, the faces are well rounded and
often very well chipped. These specimens also lack the long
parallel edges of Eden Yuma, the whole artifact being notably wider, with the blade edges parallel only a fourth or a
third of the distance forward before they begin to curve
toward the tip. The stem is also muc’h more prominent than
on Eden Yumas, the right-angular notches being cut inward
strongly one-half to three-quarters inch above the base. The
base line itself is typically quite straight, although I believe
vhere are instances of a shallow concave line meeting the
’E. B.

Howard, "The Finley Site"

(see

note.

1)

16

Texas Archeological ~nd Paleon$ologicaI Society

corners sharply. The stem edges are not so well or so often
smoothed as in the other types mentioned so far, probably
because of the more prominent shoulders. (Most projectile
points with strong shoulders do not reveal much smoothing,
and when barbs are present the stems are not smoot~hed).
The Scottsbluff Yuma, named after the Scottsbluff bison quarry in Nebraska, seems to be much more widely spread
than the Eden, although both occur in the High Plains in
general and western Wyoming. Scottsbluff specimens, for
example, are found in various parts of Texas and are well
represented in northern Louisiana,’ vc1~ere Eden Yumas are
quite unknown. Association with particular animals is very
imperfectly known, the only definite cases being with large
bison, probably Bison o~ciclentalis. They have never been
found w~th the mammoth, and most students of the subject feel that Eden and Scottsbluff Yumas were used more
recently than fluted points.

The third type is called "Oblique Yuma", referring to
a characteristic chipping technique of parallel scars crossing the blade at an angle. This type has not been found in
any definite association, hence the name is temporary until
a site is discovered with such artifacts in place. The accompanying sketch Shows a typical specimen with the sides expanding toward the middle as in some examples of Clovis
Fluted. In other cases the edges are quite parallel for a considerable distance forward, as on the Eden type. However,
the extreme narrowness of Eden points and the longitudinal
ridge with collateral chipping do not occur on it. A stem
is seen faintly on some specimens, on others it is notched
from one edge only (see plate), and on others it may be
absent. It will be best not to attempt to describe the tyt~e
definitely until more is known about it, but it s1~ould be
clear that it can hardly be confused with the other Yumas.
’ Clarence H. Webb, article in preparation. I have been able to examine the specimens described and feel no doubt that they belong to the Seottsbluff type. A few examples have also been found in adjacent northeastern Texas.

Certain Projectile Points of the Ecrly American Hunters

17

PIainview Points
The discovery, by Glen L. Evans and Grayson E. Meade
of the Texas Memorial Museum, of 27 artifacts in direct
association with a mass of bison skeletons at Plainview, Texas, in the summer of 1945, is of considerable importance to
the problem of defining projectile point types. It is estimated that at least 100 bison were killed at the edge of an
old valley of Running Water Creek, one of the headwaters
of Brazos River on the High Plains of Texas, and after some,
at least, had been butchered, the skeletons were covered by
a mantle of valley fill at least eleven feet thick. The circumstances of this discovery, the bone bed, geological situation, and the artifacts have just appeared in print.’
The projectile points, 19 in all, belong to one type which
might have been called "unfluted Folsom" at one time, but
has now been given a distinct name.

Since the artifacts from Plainview have been described
in detail in the publication mentioned, I shall repeat only
the main features here. Two examples are shown in the
present figure. One has a well-defined ridge in the center
of each face, with rather crude but nevertheless definite
collateral chipping. Several other specimens from the site
show similar chipping. The other example shown .here has
the irregular chipping which is most common in the Plainview series. The edges of most specimens are parallel but
some expand very slightly at about the midpoint. None are
widest beyond the midpoint in the typical Folsom Fluted
fashion. In length they vary from about 2 ½ to 3 ½ inches,
longer than most Folsoms and more llke Clovis Fluted. The
basal concavity is shallow and compound, rounding into the
basal corners exactly as in Clovis Fluted, and hence different from Folsom. Generally soeaking, the Plainview points
strongly suggest Clovis Fluted in most respects, exceot of
s E. H. Sellards, Glen L. Evans, and Grayson E. Meade, "Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Plainvlew, Texas", and Alex D. Krleger, "Description of the
tlfacts", Btdletin of /he Geological Society of America, October, 1947.

18

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

course for the absence of fluting. The collateral chipping,
on the other hand, suggests some relationship with the Eden
Yuma, even though there is great difference in the shape
and proportions. The basal edges of Plainview points, in all
but one case, are well smoothed.
Like the fluted points and Scottsbluff Yuma, the Plainview type had an immense distribution. Many specimens
once called "Folsom like", "unfluted Folsom", or "FolsomYuma" can now rather safely be called Plainview, and are
found in various collections from central Alaska to southern Texas? The western and eastern limits are unknown, but
from personal experience I believe that numerous examples
will be recognized from the eastern United States also, and
possibly from far to the west.
The numerous bison at the Plainview quarry included
at least two male skulls identified as Bison taylori?° The
teeth of a Heistocene wolf represent the only other animal
in this bone bed, but mammoth remains have been found
in the same valley fill nearby. This suggests that Plainview
points may also be found with other extinct animals. This
is particularly interesting in view of the known occurrence
of Clovis Fluted points with the mammoth, and the resemblance of Plainview points to Clovis Fluted.
Both the Plainview and the Folsom Fluted type have
been found in unquestionable association with remains of
large bison, such as B. occidentalis (or "B. taylori"), and
for this reason alone they would appear to be of about the
same age. However, the two types, one unfluted and the
other fluted, are not often found together. When they are,
the unfluted Plainview form is represented in much smaller

~Some of the most definite occurrences are tabulated in the publicatlon cited in
note g.
~ Note that this "species" is now included in B. o¢¢idenlalis by Skinner and Kaisen (see note 4).

Cerbain Projectile Points of the Early American Hunters

19

numbers than the true Folsom.~ In other sites, Folsom Fluted
occurs alone): As we have mentioned, the Plainview form
also shows a tendency toward the collateral chipping of
Eden Yuma, while Folsom does not (unless such chipping
was done on some of them before the central flake was removed). It therefore appears that either (1) there was a
time difference between Folsom and Hainview points even
though the same kind of bison was hunted over a considerable period, or (2) the two styles were used during the
same time period by different groups of people. If both types
had been used by the same group of hunters we would expect both to be well represented in the same sites, but this is
not the case.
It should be plain to everyone that more discoveries,
¯ carefully studied by competent observers, can be expected
to yield information of great interest to science and the
public alike. When archaeologists understand the true typological nature of the many projectile points already present
in various collections, and the paleontologists can determine
some sequence in which the various Late Pleistocene mammals became extinct, it is quite probable that these discoveries can be correlated to show a Iong history of hunting
peoples on this continent, different styles of projectile points
being favored at different times, and various species of animals dying out during this long history. In the past, amateur archaeologists have made many more discoveries than
have professionals, because they become acquainted with the
country about their homes and come to know where to look
for buried artifacts. In the cases where they have taken the
m An example may be seen in the case of Sandia Cave, New Mexico, where Hibben (see note 2) recognized two projectile points "regarded as Folsom points lacking
the channel on either face" from the Folsom level in the cave (p.20). These are surely
Plainview points (see his Plate Y, fig. 2) and he says of them that this form "possibly
shouId be regarded as indicative of a group of peoples contemporaneous with, but possibly distinct from, the Folsom".
~For example, the Folsom site itself, and the Lipscomb bison quarry in the
Texas Panhandle (C. Bertrand Schultz, "Some Artifact Sites of Early Man in The Great
Plains and Adjacent Areas", American Antiquity, Vol. VIII, No. 3, 1943, pp. 244-248).

20

Texas A,rcheological and Paleontological Society

trouble to inform trained observers of their discoveries before removing them, the questionable matters of direct association with a particular animal or geological formation
have often been answered in so far as it is possible to do so.
Browns Valley Points

We shall dwell only briefly on these artifacts. Although
originally described by Jenks~ as "Minnesota Folsom-Yuma
artifacts", the leaf-shaped projectile points found with the
"Minnesota Man" burial cannot possibly be co~fused with
either Folsom or Yuma points as we now regard them. Rober&’ has already suggested that they are a distinct type, and
I have included two examples in the accompanying figure.
In some ways, principally the size and collateral chipping,
Jenks’ points remind me of Plainview, and indeed certain
other Minnesota points seem to be quite definitely of this
type?’ However, while it may be said that Browns Valley
points resemble Plainview more closely than any other type
discussed so far, they are wider, expand more into a leaf
shape, and the base is straight or only very slightly concave.
Sandia Points
Two types of Sandia point have been described by Hibben, but are believed to be so distinct from other known
types that they present no particular problem in the present
paper. One example of each type is shown in the accompanying plate. Since they occurred below the Folsom level
in Sandia Cave, these points are now commonly accepted
as the oldest known in America. On the other hand, it has
~aAlbert Ernest Jenks, *’Minnesota’s Browns Valley Man and Associated Burial
Artifacts", M~moir 49, American Antb.rol~ological Association, 1937.
The artifact
shown in Fig. 2 a-b is surely a projectile point and considered here to be a typica!
Browns Valley point, while Fig. 2 c is probably a knife.
a, Frank H. H. Roberts, Jr., "Developments in the Problem of the North American Paleo-Indian", Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 100, 1940.
See p. 65.
His alternative suggestion of "Browns Valley Yuma" would only be confusing and
appears to be unjustified by the shape of these points.

~Jenks (see note 13), specimens shown in plate 7 c and plate 8 a.

Certain Projectile Points o] the Early American Hunters

21

been hinted above that the true Folsom Fluted, which positively occurred in the Sandia Cave Folsom level, may not
rank quite as high in the scale of antiquity as many believe.
In Sandia Cave, animal bones from the Folsom level included
horse, camel, mammoth, ground sloth, a species of wolf,
and bison said to be "near Bison taylori but smaller". We
cannot be sure, however, that Folsom Fluted points were
used to kill all of these animals, including the mammoth.
Be that as it may, an hateresting feature of both Sandia
types is that they have stems notched in from one edge only,
with the stem edges ground smooth. I have placed them at
the bottom of the plate to show how the occurrence Of
stems in Sandia types is rather out of keeping with the lack
of notched-in stems on the fluted, Plainview, and Browns
Valley points, while they occur again on the Yuma types,
which most authorities regard as considerably later. The
"Oblique Yuma" may be notched from one edge only, although it is a very different artifact on the whole from the
Sandia points. If it were not for the stems on Sandia points,
one might set up a hypothetical progression in North America in general, beginning with fluted styles and others completely lacking in-cut stems or Shoulders, proceeding to the
Yuma types with slight but definite shoulders, then later
still to the tens of thousands of heavy dart points with good
shoulders and notches cut obliquely into the corners, and
finally arriving at the myriads of small arrow points notched
from the corners in some styles, directly in from the side
in others. In a very general sense such a progression can be
seen rather clearly from the oldest known cultures to the
latest ones, except for the two Sandia types. This affords
us with another problem which may lead somewhere, or
may not.

Unnamed Types
It seems not to be generally appreciated that, in addition
to the projectile points discussed above, there are still other
styles, distinct from one another and distinct from all fluted

22

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

and true Yuma types, which nevertheless have been thoroughly confused with them. I have seen some hundreds of
these in collections from all parts of Texas, and in excavated
material from the burnt-rock middens of central Texas.
Always there is the same question: do you think these are
"Folsom" or "’Yuma" points?
By this time, I hope it has been impressed on the reader
that the socalled "Folsom-Yuma" projectile point problem
has suffered greatly at the hands of those who seem to insist
that all projectile points without good shoulders, but with
smoothed edges, must be either ’~Folsom" or "Yuma". The
key to this problem is to admit that there are styles which
do not need to be thrown into either the fluted or the
"Yuma" category.
Specimens a and b in the plate show two styles of this
nature, found quite regularly in the burnt-rock middens of
central Texas. They are never common in any one site, but
quite consistently appear in a ratio of about one in every
one or two hundred projectile points of all kinds. When
time permits further work on these points, they should be
described, their ranges of variation and comparative ages
determined. For the present, it can be said that a is characterized by a long and narrow lanceolate form, the stem end
tapering to a narrow, concave base. The lower edges are
well smoothed in all cases, and may vary from straight (as
shown) to concave between the base and widest part. Specimen b generally has a short blade and long stem curving
out to the small shoulders, as shown. The base is straight or
s!ightly convex, never concave, and the whole artifact often
has the *’fat" feel of a Scottsbluff Yuma. Its basa! edges
are smooth.
The age of these styles is hard to determine, but due to
the fact that neither, so far as I know, has been found with.
an extinct animal species, we cannot set them back as far
as those projectiles which have. They may provide one of
those long-sought links between early hunters and the relatively recent hunters and gatherers.

Certain Projectile Points oy the Early American Hunters

23

The third unnamed type, shown as c in the plate, also
occurs in small numbers in the burnt-rock middens of central Texas, and miscellaneous collections in other parts of
the state. Messrs. F. M. and Charlie Parks of Plainview in
the Panhandle have found several dozen such specimens in
erosion exposures on the High Hain. They occur in the
same general circumstances as Plainview, Clovis and Folsom
Fluted, and perhaps also Scottsbtuff Yuma points, all of
which are represented in the Parks collections. The Parks
are unusually keen observers, and if any of their specimens
had been in association with animal remains, they would
have been the first to note this fact. There is every reason
to expect that such discoveries will be made in this vicinity
at stations similar to the Plainview bison-bone bed.
The type in question (c) is similar to (a) in its lanceolate shape, but in general ranges to considerably greater
length, up to five inches and possibly more; it is a thick oval
in cross-section, the lower end tapers evenly with straight
edges to the narrow base, which is commonly, if not always,
convex. The edges are well smoothed from the widest part
to the base, and many specimens are deeply patlnated on
both faces. The leaf or lanceolate shape, widest atthe middle, the long, tapered proximal end with smooth edges~ the
thickness, and convex base form an unmistakable combination.
There remains some possibility that a, b, and c will work
out into one type with several variations, but it is my opinion
at present that such is not the case. While we do not know
their age, anyone familiar with them can hardly escape the
impression that many belong to the same general horizon
as the other points discussed, namely, a long period during
which the large Pleistocene animals were becoming extinct.
Some examples of al! three of these unnamed types are obviously re-chipoed, at times showing fresh scars tbrougl~ the
patina, and these may be regarded as re-used by later, perb.a,s even near-historic peoples. However, this is not true
o~ such examples as those in the Parks collections.

24

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The three unnamed types just mentioned do not exhaust
our problem of unraveling the "Folsom-Yuma" projectile
point conflicts by far. There is little doubt that still others
will be recognized over North America, once the student becomes accustomed to the idea that the fiield is wide open for
new suggestions, and a very considerable range of types can
already be seen.
CONCLUSIONS

It has, of course, been impossible to treat adequately the
subject of projectile points of "early man" in North America
in a short paper. The statements are not fully explained or
documented, for this would require a volume. We have
also confined the study in the main to the so-called i’FolsomYuma" series. This article was prompted in the first place
by the writer’s experiences with professional and amateur
archaeologists on the subject of how to recognize certain
types of projectile points. Many persons far better qualified, ’and with much longer experience in this field, have
written on various aspects of "early man" and his artifiacts,
but it is clear that the type names agreed upon at Santa Fe
in 1941 have not "caught on" very widely. I shall be satisfied if this article serves to stimulate others to using these
type names, and to appreciate the fact that many actually
distinct types have been loosely lumped in most persons’
minds as some kind of "Folsom", some kind of "Yuma", or
something vaguely in between. The plate is intended to
show how these forms tend to break up, and the several types
readily recognized in most cases. It is also stressed that still
other distinct types will be revealed by more work. In the
meantime, the following conclusions are offered:
1. Identification of the three known fluted types, the
three Yuma types, Plainview, Browns Valley, two Sandia
types, and at least three others not yet named, is a relatively
easy problem in the field of oroiectile points. The many
cases of "overlappln~ features" prove not to be so formidable
once one realizes that they resulted from trying to force

Certain Projectile Points o] the Early American Hun$~rs

25

several really distinct types into two categories, ~’Folsom"
and "Yuma".
2. The term "Folsom point" should be restricted to one
single type, the true or classic Folsom Fluted (see g’~nd h
in the plate), and completely abandoned for any other
type. Clovis Fluted is distinct and should .be called so.
’Ohio Fluted" is not yet well defined, but the name will do
for many specimens in the eastern United States until examples discovered in place permit a better knowledge of its
variations. At any rate, "fluted point" is not synonymous
with "Folsom point"!
3. Little is known of the precise association of the types
discussed here with p~rticular animal species. The problem
is difticult because of the scarcity of such finds, and because
we cannot expect the hunters to have slaughtered more than
one or two kinds of game in one spot. However, correct
terminology will help, and cave sites may show where different animals were consumed. At least the general tendencies of association between projectile types and animal species
(as Clovis Fluted with mammoth) should appear eventually.
4. It is unreasonable to think ~that there was a sudden"
extinction of Late Pleistocene mammals, that all species became extinct at about the same time for some mysterious
reason, or that each species became extinct at about the same
time over vast areas. Some archaeologists tend to assume
that "extinction" marks a point in time, such as 10,000 or
15,000 years ago, promptly following the retreat of Wisconsin glacial fronts. On the other hand, the paleontologist is
accustomed to thinking of faunal changes proceeding over
periods of time; thus Pliocene fauna gradually shifted to
Early Pleistocene over some 100,000 or 200,000 years, and
similarly from Middle to Late Pleistocene the faunal changes
must have taken equally long. Although the disappearance
of Late Pleistocene fauna must have occurred in a much
shorter time, geologically speaking, it still must ’have taken
many thousands of years. The Recent therefore did not

26

Texas Archeological ~nd Paleontological Society

begin at any particular point in time, this being only a term
of convenience to indicate geological deposits too late to conrain the remains of extinct animals (unless deposited through
re-working of the material from an original source). An
association of artifacts and extinct animals does not therefore give us any set number of years. Rough guesses can
and have been made by geologists, but the archaeologist
should not accept them as "dates" on their face value. The
time is not far off when archaeologists will be able to help
geologists date these deposits in favorable circumstances, in
which case one science might have to give somewhat to the
other on datings.
5. There is also a strong tendency in archaeology to regard such a term as "FoI~om culture" or even a single "’Folsom point" as an indicator of a "’date" like 10,000 years.
Since we know that many distinct styles of projectile point
were used by early hunters over a very considerable time in
America, and there must be thousands of such artifacts still
buried for every one found so far, it would seem undeniable
that the occupation of this continent by early hunters continued for many thousands of years. Thus, while one example of a projectile point type such as Folsom Fluted may be
as old as 10,000 years, this is far from meaning that they
all are, or even most of them. One of our great problems
today is to determine so far as possible which discoveries
really demonstrate great antiquity and which do not. We
can keep our minds flexible and critical, not insisting on the
static interpretations which hold sway at present. The idea
of great age does have an inherent attraction, but the impartial mind will not be drugged by it.
6. Since our problem involves far more than "Folsom"
and ’~Yuma" points, it can be urged that these terms be
abandoned for general purposes. The term "early man"
has widespread use, and lately much abuse. Roberts has used
the term "Paleo-Indian" but objections have been raised
that we know nothing about the appearance of the earliest

Certain Projectile Points o5 the Early American Hunters

2’/

American inhabitants, only their weapons and general mode
of life. It may be offered that "early American hunters" better describes their economic life and serves as a convenient
and accurate phrase.

CHEMICAL ALTERATION OF SILICATE ARTIFACTS
B. C’wvs N. RAY
Flint Patination

When one studies a collection of stone artifacts from a
region which has been occupied throughout a long period
of time, he soon notices a great color variation in such flint
tools, and also that specimens recently dug out of the flint
mines of the same region do not show all of the same types
of color variations.*
The natural unaltered colors of Central West Texas
flints are of translucent gray-blue, pink, and beeswax tan;
there is one which is almost transparent, and one of opaque
glossy black. Technical minerologlsts probably have different names for all of these, but they all seem to be alike in
being easily subjected to smooth conchoidal fracture. When
either percussion or localized pressure was applied to their
edges tools were easily fashioned, and they were recognized
by the primitive inhabitants as materials of similar characteristics. The manos, and some of the heavy hand axes,
disks, and gouges, and a ]~ew blades, and early dart heads,
were made of quartzite which varied in color as follows:
brown, tan, gray and black.
The favorite color of flint used was one of a blue-gray,
which seems identical in color and texture with that of English flint. This blue flint was extensively mined and used
during several periods of the past; the mines were located
on top of the Edwards Plateau, in Nolan and Taylor Counties of Texas. The pink flint, which seems identical in color
and texture with that used in many of the original Folsom
points found near Folsom, New Mexico, was mined on top
of a single mountain in western Taylor County, and it is
This paper was done as part of a research problem for Texas Technological College.

Chemical Alteration o~ Silicate Artifacts

29

interesting to observe that ancient Clear Fork campsites,
containing more Folsom points than were found elsewhere
in the region, are located in the vicinity. The glossy black"
flint was mined on top of the mountain mass which is located
east of Cedar Gap in Taylor County.
It seems that if an ordinary blue blade of unpatinated
flint is held between one and a strong light that some light
will be transmitted through it, but that after a film of patination has formed over its surface it ceases to transmit light.
When a patinated flint is broken, the center is found to
be of different color from that of the surface. After a flint
blade has lain in or on the surface of the earth for an undetermined period of time the chemicals of the air and wa~:er,
and the heat and light rays of the sun, begin to affect its
surface color by chemical alteration of its texture, so that it
eventually loses its translucence. Certain conditions sometimes exist which serve to postpone this action indefinitely.
An artifact may have been deposited in a dark cave soon
after being made, and in such a location, as to be permanently protected from any corrosive chemical solutions and
light rays, and has remained in the same condition and color
throughout many thousands of Years of time. In correspondence with a visitor to French caves this reliable scientist reported that he had seen unaltered flint artifacts in a
French cave which were estimated to have been placed there
fifty thousand years ago. The writer also has found some
unaltered flint tools and flakes in the deeper levels of the
Lower Clear Fork silt of the Gibson and McLean sites, which
were deposited while the mammoth still lived in the region.
However nearly all of the other artifacts of those ancient
middet~ deposits were heavily patinated. Based on this fact,
which is well known to students of archeology, there has
grown up an erroneous idea that patination means nothing
as an age indicator of stone artifacts. To be effective, patination, like any other type of evidence, requires much study
of the exceptions, and the reasons for their occurence. The

30

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

main value in a study of patination and other forms of surface alteration, such as caliche incrustation covering man
fractured flint surfaces, is obtained by a tabulation of the
frequency of occurrence of either or both forms Of alteration in an accumulation of several thousands of artifacts,
of different culture types, collected in the same region.
When these are spread out on tables and separated as to degree of, or absense of patination, then what the jurists term
the weight of the evidence then begins to point inevitably
to those classes which have attained ancientness of days.

A table full of Clear Fork disks, gouges, knives, darts, and
side scrapers will show very few unpatinated flints, and also
a considerable number will be found to have caliche incrustations on them. A similar condition is found concerning
Folsom points, but unpatinated flints have been noted more
frequently among Folsom blades than is the case with Clear
Fork Culture dart heads, however, the twenty-seven specimens of Folsom blades found by the writer are too smal! in
number to draw many conclusions from. A much greater
number of the Yuma types of blades have been found, and
these also seem to show a larger proportionate number which
are heavily patinated than the Folsom blades do.
If one table is filled only with Late Phase Valley Creek
Culture components, and another table with all of the Clear
Fork Culture flint components, the sum total of the age evidence is very striking at a single glance.

If one fills a table with flints of the latest culture phase
Of the region, the Late Phase Valley Creek, and another one
with the next or Early Phase Valley Creek artifacts, he can
easily see what the progress in patination has been during
those comparitively late culture phases. The flints of the
Early Phase of the Valley Creek culture are found buried
about four feet beneath the soil surface in Nugent Silt 5 of
the silts of the Brazos River banks. About half of these artifacts are either white or gray patinated and half not patinated or very slightly so.

Chemical Alteration of Silicate Artifacts

31

If one estimates that it took one thousand years to deposit a t~oot of river silt in regular sequence, then this culture would be four thousand years old. The Latest Phase
Valley Creek culture is plowed up in river and creek bottom
fields from just beneath the soil surface, and many bones
and shells are found in these sites along with some Rio Grande
sherds, and obsidian. The Pueblo sherds would indicate that
a trade route with the New Mexico Pueblos was open from
three to six hundred years ago. However, the site could
have been used a couple of thousand years before the New
Mexico trade route was opened and still not be covered very
deeply. Some Roman house foundations in England are so
thinly covered today that they can be seen from an airplane.
In any event, most of the hundreds of scrapers found
there are of nearly unaltered blue-gray flint. Some scrapers
have gray opaque spots of beginning patination on them,
some are half patinated, and a few have an all gray patination.
Patination of blue flint begins by the formation of spots
on the surface, which turn gray while the remainder apparently is unaltered in color, in some cases one whole face of
a blade has turned gray while the other still remains entirely
blue. Whether this has been due tO the action of sunshine
on an upper face lying in the sun, or is the result of soil
chemicals acting on the lower face of an artifact lying for
considerable time on the surface, one cannot know. Ancient
flint knives have been found occasionally by the writer
which had acquired a heavy white shel! of patina all over
the ancient fractured surface, and then some later occupant
of the site had found the knife and retouched the edge to
make it sharper, and then his work in turn had been done
so long ago that a lighter gray haze of patina had covered
it also In some instances there has been no alteration since
a tater occupant of a site cut a spokeshave edge into an old
white patinated scraper and exposed its blue central core.
Patination of flint begins either as a gray haze all over
the tranh~cent flint or as patches here and there scattered

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

over its surface. The translucence of the artifact decreases
with the thickness of the chemical alteration, until complete
opacity occurs, when it becomes white in color. Complete
patination is always white, and is due to a softening or
chemical change which in very advanced cases may cause
solution of portions of an artifact and erode deep pits into
its surface, or produce a chalky cracking off of portions of
the surface. A certain proportion of Clear Fork gouges
have strong horn shaped borers made at one or both ends of
the cutting edge. In one case the corner on the right and
about one third of the edge had been dissolved and the blade
was deeply pitted all over its surface.
After flint artifacts have become white and porous from
chemical alteration of their surfaces they will take on various colors from the earth minerals in which they lie. In
the Clear Fork silts they are often colored red, tan and dull
brown, in sandy terraces of Jones County very old flints
sometimes take on a bright butter yellow color. In very
limey soils the flints seem to retain their white color, even
where extra thick patination has occurred. Very heavy
shells of patina occur in the Abilene region in all colors.
Measurement of the thickness of patination of enough specimens of flints out of a series of flint cultures should be an interesting research project for some person with the requisite
knowledge, and facilities to do the job thoroughly.
Whether or not patination of similar flint in northern
regions progresses more slowly than in Texas, or otherwise,
one cannot know, but an English writer, Reginald A. Smith
of the British Museum, in discussing patination says that,
"It may be laid down as a rule (to which some Bronze Ag.e
arrowheads are exceptions) that if a human flint is patlnated, it is certainly old (at least 4000 years, if metal was
introduced here about 2000 B. C.) but if it is not patinated,
it may have been chipped at any time; and most of the series from one of the French caves chipped during the Ice Age
many thousands of years ago, have no patination whatever."
In the same booklet concerning flints he states, ~many are

Chemical Alteration of Silicate Arti~acts

33

now smooth and lustrous with surfaces of many colors,
sometimes of great beauty; and some idea of the time required for these changes may be obtained by examining the
flint-walling of East Anglian churches, which still show
black surfaces with little lustre, and sharp edges, after exposure to the weather for about six hundred years.’’~
Many ancient heavily patinated flints of Texas show
worn down dull fracture edges ,as though they had been
rolled around by water enough to wear them off:, and some
of these have been found too high above present day streams
to have acquired the wear within recent times. Some flints
from gravel beds not only have a thick patina, but in addition a greenish polish over the patina. Frost pitted fracture
has been seen also in a few ancient patinated flints from old
gravel beds, but it is not very common. This probably has
been produced by intense cold freezing the water absorbed
by patinated, porous flints, and it produces shallow cup
shaped depressions in the flint faces.

The writer has questioned very old men who came to
this region as children, eighty years ago, and none ever saw
an Indian use a flint arrowhead. If artifacts from authentic association of flints and glass beads could be studied
enough one might determine whether or not flints will patihate within a few hundreds of years in Texas.
Glass Patination
Most of the glass beads found in Indian graves in Texas
are covered with white coatings of pearl shell like patina,
which scales off to some extent when the beads are handled.
These graves usually were made back in caves, in overhanging rock shelters, or in wide crevices between thick rock
layers. The rock crevice burials were nearly always made
in north facing limestone escarpments where direct sunshine
REFERENCE
~ Smith, Reginald A., "Flints, An Illustrated Manual of the Stone Age ~or Beginners, The British Museum, 1928, pp. 19 to 21, Figures 14 and 15. Price sixpence.
P. O. Box 62
Abitene, Texas

84

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

was excluded. A few historic Indian burials in Jones County
were made in sand dune fields north of the Brazos River,
and had no stone coverings over them.

The amount of patination varies to some extent even in
beads of the same type from different graves, and this may
indicate some age differences or it may only be evidence of
different chemical conditions at different sites. The very
small glass beads which most Indians were accustomed to
sew in patterns on their clothing in the past are found in
graves with metal artifacts and the common colors are of
blue and white, but occasionally one finds red and other
colors. There are some graves where ova! glass beads of about
the size of a navy bean, and of different colors, are found.
Beads of all colors have been found covered with white
patina. Some of the bean sized variously colored beads from
a large hole in a north facing boulder near Colorado, Texas,
were so heavily patinated white that the true color was only
dimly seen where some of the pearly patina had scaled off.
The least patinated glass bead specimens found were from
two open graves in the sand dunes of Jones County, and
some from a rock crevice on a creek bank in Calla/ban
County.
Study of the old glass sherds which are so abundant
around the chain of forts built across the Texas frontier
eighty to ninety years ago shows that nearly all of these are
heavily coated with a white iridescent coating of patina.
Some of these thick wine bottles are so heavily coated
inside and out, and so opaque, that one can only see the real
color by wetting the glass and holding it against a light.
What the agency is that produces patina in silicate materials is a difficult problem to determine, but that it acts
slowly on flint and quartzite artifacts, and in a comparatively short time on man-made glass is evident.
Most of the flint scrapers found in late Valley Creek
sites are still unpatinated, but no metal or other artifacts

Chemical Alteration of Silicate Artifacts

35

are found in these sites to show any contact with white men,
and such flints must have been made at least hundreds of
years ago.
Apparently most glass patinates within a comparatively
short time in Texas. Most of the glass objects to be found
around the ruins of the o!d forts of the region are covered
with white patina. However, some glass resisted this action,
a Venetian blue glass bead said to be three hundred years
old, is still bright blue in color and unaltered. Most of the
very small beads, made much later, have deteriorated badly.
A heavy glass pickle jar of six sided Gothic design, which
held over a gallon, was found under the shade of a clump
of oaks across the Brazos River from old Ft. Phantom Hill,
and probably dates from its occupation. This type of pickle
jar was last seen in grocery stores about the year 1889. The
body of this glass has a light bluish cast, and the surface has
a thin iridescent patina on it, but one still can easily see
through it. This thick glass resisted patination far better
than the wine bottles of that period.
The writer has an old iron roofed barn at his home, the
loft of which has long been used as a storeroom, and during
World War I some glass fruit jars used then were stored in
the loft along with a box of various other glass objects. When
this store room was cleaned out recently, it was found that
many of the stored glass objects had distinctly visible, thin,
and irremovable films of iridescent patina over the surfaces,
and in addition most of the fruit jars had acquired an attractive light blue tinting of the body of the glass.
There are thirteen quart-sized jars and all but two of
these have changed from their original clear state to various
color tints; one is tinted green, one is lavender colored, three
are blue-green, and six are light blue. Five of these jars have,
in addition to the tinting or change in color of the body of
the glass, a surface coating or irremovable patination of iridescent type, both inside and out. Two of these are marked
Bail Mason, one Ball and one Drey Perfect Mason; all of

36

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

these are light blue in tint, one has no makers’ name and is
of a light lavender color. The two clear jars are marked
as "Drey Perfect Mason Jars" like one of the patinated and
tinted jars.
There are three pint jars, and of these one has a faint
leaden tint--a "Kerr Mason" jar, and this one probably is
not so old as the others. Two jars are marked "Mason" and
are blue green tinted, and one of these has a heavy iridescent
patina; this one is marked "Mason’s Patent No. 30th, 1858".
A ’~Quick Seal" jar is dark blue green in color, but its glass
disk top is still clear and unchanged. Three fourteen ounce
empty druggists nitric acid bottles with ground glass stoppers have turned a beautiful sea green color in thirty year’s
time, and one has a strongly developed patination, both inside and outside, and that on the outside, if any difference,
is the thickest. In January, 1930, the writer placed two
samples of dry soil in half gal!on sealed glass jars in the
same iron roofed barn loft, and one of these now has an irremovable thin film on the inside which covers two-thirds
of its surface.
Until these observations were made, the writer had
thought that the brilliant sunshine and intense summer heat
of the earth in Texas, together with soil alkalies, were responsible for patination of silicate materials; but the finding
of patinated glass beads beneath north facing sunless ledges,
and the patination of glass fruit jars in thirty years in a
windowless barn loft where the only direct sun came
through narrow cracks between the boards in early morning
and late afternoon would seem to indicate that visible light
rays may not be altogether responsible, and that heat and
other invisible rays capable of going through the iron probably did most of the patination.
Some of the alteration of beads in Indian graves in caves
may be due to chemical effects of body decomposition.
Window glass installed in 1908 in the wooden-roofed house
on the same lot with the barn has not been perceptibly altered. Window glass in the soil around all old house sites is

Chemical Alteration o] Silicate Artifacts

37

heavily patinated. Some factor in bright sunshine tints
glass within an even shorter period in Texas when placed
outside. Mrs. Glenn E. Dugan of Abilene tied a number of
clear glass objects on a fence and left them for three years;
and at the end of that period all had turned quite dark colored. One of these, before me as I write, formerly was a
clear jelly glass, and now is of a dark amethyst color. This
is a color tinting of the body of the glass and not patination
or surface alteration.
Whether or not glass patination usually progresses so far
in thirty years when not under a metal roof the writer does
not know, nor whether at an altitude of above 1700 feet
cosmic rays might have done it. Data on glass stored under
other conditions should show whether or not it usually patihates at that rapid rate.
Quartzite Patination
It is evident that quartzite does eventually patinate, because patination is found on quartzite which has at some
time been subjected to natural fracture, but it is equally evident that this is a very slow process, and proceeds at a far
slower rate than flint patination, which also forms at a much
slower rate than that of glass. The men of the stone age culture who most used quartzite for cutting and piercing implements in the Abilene region were the Clear Fork men, one of
the older culture sequences of the region. Hand-axes, gouges,
and occasional darts, knives and drills were made of this materia!, although the preponderance of all types of artifacts
of the same types of artifacts, of the same culture, made of
flint artifacts are thickly coated with patina while nearly all
of the same types of artifacs, of the same culture, made of
quartzite are either not patinated or are only slightly so; Very
few humanly fractured quartzite implements have ever been
found which are completely patinated. One quartzite Yuma
blade of beautiful workmanship was found in Jones County
which had a heavy coating of light gray patina over a coal
black quartzite matrix, which was exposed by two recently

38

Te~,as Archeological and Paleontological Society

made nicks in the blades’ edge. This material is refractory
and usually the best of the implements made of it seem rough
in comparison with flint tools, but this beautiful specimen
seemed to have had the fracture scars all over both faces
ground down either by the maker, or by subsequent stream
rolling, for they had been almost obliterated. A beautiful
flint Yuma blade of similar shape was found which evidently
had been ground down over the whole surface of both faces
to remove fracture marks.
Caliche Incrustation

Caliche incrustation is only found on the flints of the
oldest cultures of the region, and is to be seen on Clear Fork,
Yuma, Abilene, anad Folsom artifacts, but it has never been
found by the writer on flints of much later cultures. Caliche incrustation is characteristic of a certain proportion of
the artifacts from the Lower Clear Fork silt, and to a lesser
degree from those of the Upper Clear Fork silt. Caliche incrustation of artifacts is a much more reliable indication of
great age than patination. Some Folsom and Clear Fork
artifacts are entirely free from patinatlon, but close examination will frequently show some signs o~f spots of incrustation on them. In some extreme cases from one fourth to
one half of an artifact’s fractured surface has been plastered
over with mineral incrustation, and in others only small dots
and patches occur. Incrustation occurs in flints lying in
old river bank gravels and silts for a long period of time.
The increased deposit is usually thin, and of tan to pinkish
color, and usually is thought to be silt until the artifact is
scrubbed, when it is seen to be tightly adherent to the flint.
The incrustation has a color and texture similar to cave staligmitic dep.sit, and small patches of it can be removed
from a flint artifact with a few drops of hydrochloric acid,
which indicates calciurri composition.
Generally the finding of mineral incrustation of the type
of caliche or desert limestone on man fractured flints of the
Abilene region means that they belong among the oldest

Chemical Alteration o~ Silicate A~tifacts

39

flint cultures of the region. Flint patination is found to
some extent in deeper levels of the top stratum or Nugent
Silt 5, and increasingly so £rom there on downward, but
mineral incrustation over man fractured flint surfaces is
commonly found only in the lower two strata of the river
bank silts of the region.

THE JOHNSON SITE: TYPE SITE OF THE ARANSAS
FOCUS OF THE TEXAS COAST~

Introduction

The purpose of this paper is two-fold: (1) to record
the data from one completely excavated small site which has
been placed in the Aransas focus of the Texas coast; (2) to
present a general outline of the Aransas focus culture and
indicate present opinion concerning its place in both space
and time.
Thus far no excavated site on the Texas coast has been
reported with full descriptive details." Various individuals
have briefly described archaeological materials from numerous points along the 400 miles of Texas coast,s Others have
referred to the significance of Texas coastal archaeology in
connection with the problems of cultural relationships between Mexico and the Mississippi Valley.’ Only one archaeologist, E. B. S~iyles, has attempted to synthesize the rather
heterogeneous data on the archaeology of the coastal strip,
*Portions of this paper are drawn from a thesis submitted in partial fulfillment
of requirements for the Ph. D. degree at Harvard University in 1947.
= One exception to this statement should be noted, the Bee County terrace sites
reported by Sellards (1940)o
However, these sites are located 30 to 50 miles inland
£rom the nearest salt water (Copano Bay).
~Anderson, 1932; Douglas, 1903; Duffen, 1940; Ekholm, 1944, p. 443; Gatschet,
1891, p. 55; Jackson, 1940, pp. 99-107, 115-119L 128-130; Krieger, 1945a, pp. 41-43;
MacNeish, 1947, pp. 6-8; Martin, n. d, 1929, 1930a, 1930b, 1931, 1936; Mason, J.
,Alden, 1935; Mason, Otis T., 1880, p. 442; Patterson, 1936, pp. 19-20, 1937a, pp.
38-39, 56, 1937b, p. 38; Pearce, 1919, pp. 227-228~ 1932a, pp. 670-672, 1932b, pp.
4~, 46-47, 49-51, 54, 1932c, 1935, pp. 4, 97, 1938, pp. 1, 6-8, 14; Potter, 1930; Reed,
Clyde T., 1937; Reed, Erik K., 1938; Roberts, 1940, p. 80; Smith, 1936, pp. 98-I02,
105-110, 194t, pp. 1, 6-7; Thomas, 1891, p. 217; "Woodbury, George, 1937; Woodbury, George and Edna, 1935; Wright, 1940, pp. 38, 40, 41, 42, 44o4L
4Fewkas~ 1907, pp. 272-2?3; Krieger, 1943, p, 156, 1945a, pp. 41-43, 194~b, pp.
510-511, 1947, pp. 202-207; MacNeish, 1947, pp. 9-14; Mason, J. Alden, 1935, 1937,
1938, p. 214, 1943; Pearce, 1919, p. 234, 1932b, pp. 146-147; Phillips, 1940, p. 365;
Waring and Holder, 1945, p. 30.

The Johnson Si$e

41

but this synthesis involved very little data derived from excavation. Sayles described in outline form four cultural
units in the Texas coastal area: an Attacapan Phase in the
eastern section; an early pre-ceramic Oso Phase and a later
Rockport Phase (with pottery) in the central section; and
a Brownsville Phase in the southern section?

This paper is concerned only with a portion of the central section of the Texas coast, the area where Sayles locates
his Oso and Rockport Phases. In this area another preceramic cultural unit, the Aransas focus, must now be recognized. The Aransas focus, which cannot be identified
with the Oso Phase of Sayles, is based on three excavated
sites in the Aransas Bay area: the Johnson site, the KentCrane site, and the Live Oak Point site .(see Plate 2). In
each of these sites a Rockport component overlies an -&ransas component. In this section of the coast scattered materials attributable to the Aransas focus have also been
found. This report is concerned with the Johnson site,
where the Aransas focus was first recognized. It is hoped
thereby to establish at least one reference point in the archaeology of the Texas coast.
The Natural Setting
The Johnson site is a small shell midden that was discovered by George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter during
their site survey of the Aransas Bay area in the years 19271929.~ Aransas Bay is located in the central section of the
~Sa~les, 1935.
The scattered data on these cultural units are to be found as
follows. Attacapan Phase: p. 41; Table !3, p. 124; Map E, p. 136. O$o Phase: pp.
40, 117; Table $, p. 102; Table 9, p. 110; Table 13, p. 124; Map A, p. 128; Plate
III, B, p. I0; Plate X, d-f, p. 42; Plate XXV, [, b, p. 88; see also Gladwin, 1937, pp.
32, 36, 39, Plates III, VIII, IX.
Rockport Phase: pp. 35, 40, 117; Table I, p. 102;
Table 9, p. 110; Table 13, p. 124; Map Co p. 132; Plate X, d-f, p. 42. Brownsville
Phase: pp. "40, 117; Table $, p. 102; Table 13, p. 124; Plate X, d-f, p. 42; Map (2.
p. 132.
a In this paper the term "Rockport focus" is used instead of Sayles’ ’*Roekport
phase". These terms are roughly equivalent and refer to the late lmttery horizon of
the central section of the Texas coast.
~Martin, n. d., Site I2, p. 7.

42

Texas Archeolog~cal and Paleon~olog~ca~ Society

Texas coast. The Johnson site is on the west side of Live
Oak Peninsula some four miles west of the town of Rockport (Aransas County) and lies on the flat, muddy beach
of a small inlet of Copano Bay (Plate 2). Today the site
is approximately 350 meters from the shore line.
This locality is a part of what is known to physiographers as the Coastal Prairie.’ The terrain o/~ the Coastal Prairie
is very flat and in places marshy. As the name implies, it
is predominantly grassland; but there are local areas of woodland, notably along stream courses and on sandy ridges. Live
Oak Peninsula is a sandy wooded area, being covered with
a chaparral or thorny brush vegetation, but there is evidence
which indicates that in aboriginal times Live Oak Peninsula
was a grass-covered prairie. Within the last hundred years
chaparral vegetation has moved northward and eastward
along the Texas coast,* and Price and Gunter~° have presented historical evidence showing that as late as 1870 the
entire Aransas Bay coast line was truly a prairie.
The climate of the Aransas Bay area has certain unfavorable aspects from the point of view of human occupation
under aborigina! conditions. Temperatures are mesothermal,
but precipitation is unreliable. Little rainfall occurs in the
winter, limiting the surface water supply during that season. In some years rainfall is so deficient that such years
may be classified by climatologists as desert years?* Even
today agriculture is not profitable in this area, unfavorable
climate and poor soil being the principal factors. It is therefore not surprising to find in this area the archaeological
remains of a prehistoric people who lived by hunting along
the shore and by fishing and shellI:ish collecting in the shallow coastal waters.
’Fenneraaa, 1938, pp. 100-120.
*Tharp, 1939, p. 8.
*°Prlce and Gunter, 1942, pp.
a~Rumell, 1945, pp. 43, 46-47.

12-13.

The Jo}~nson Site

43

Excavation
The Johnson site was excavated on three separate occasions. Sometime during the years 1927-~929 Martin and
Potter’" dug a small test pit in the central part of the shell
heap. Later, in the summer of 1930, A. M. Wilson did further testing for the University of Texas. Wilson ran a trench
~rom one edge of the midden to its center and then dxtg a
large circular area in the center, removing about thirty per
cent of the total area of the midden. The peripheral remnant was completely excavated by a University of TexasWorks Progress Administration expedition," under the direction of William A. Duffen, during the period of October 9 to November 6, 1940. Of the three excavations,
only the last was adequately controlled."
Site Description
In his survey report Martln’~ describes the Johnson site
t~ Martin, n. d., p. 7.

as being circular in plan, with a diameter of about 20 meters, and rising approximately 75 centimeters above the surrounding land. He believes that the original diameter must
have been about 15 meters and its height not less than 1.8
meters. To explain this presumed loss of elevation he cites

two factors: first, the heavy weight of the shell accumulation has led to settling; second, the area has been plowed
several times, and this has not only lowered the height by
spreading the shell debris but it has also loosened it and
thereby hastened erosion. The latter seems to be the more

importani factor, if not the only one.
Wilson’s field notes quote Martin’s description without
adding further details concerning the size and shape of the
Ks Martin, n. d., p. 7.
~*Work Project No. 16770.
In the records at the University of Texas this site
is known as 72D9-19. Permission to excavate was given by the land-owner, Mr. Bert
Johnson, of the nearby town of Fulton.
**A brief reference to the work of Dut~en at this site is to be found in a newspaper feature article by Brlster (1940).

44

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

shell midden. Duffen’s excavation data, however, indicate
that the shell midden was elliptical rather than circular in
plan, having a maximum width of 27.5 meters and a maximum length of 35 meters. The earlier excavations had removed the point of highest elevation, making it impossible
for Duf£e~ to measure the height of the original heap above
the surrounding plain.
As for the maximum thickness of the shell deposit, Martin states that his test pit "was dug to a depth of over four
feet (1.2 meters), and the lowest strata of shell was.~:not
reached.’’~° Wilson’s field notes mention that the greatest
thickness measured about 1.5 meters and that this was near
the center of the midden. Duffen, who excavated the thinner marginal area, records a maximum depth of 67 centimeters. We may therefore picture the shell midden as resembling a piano-convex lens with a maximum thickness
of approximately 1.5 meters and an average diameter of
some 30 meters.
Scattered around the shell midden, at distances varying from 90 to 250 meters, are small circular deposits of
shell. These are miniatures of the main shell midden. One
such deposit, which is located about 180 meters northeast
of the large heap, seems to represent the average shape and
size. It is quite round and has a diameter of 1.5 meters. Another, situated some 90 meters east of the large heap, is
somewhat elongated, being 1.5 meters long and 1.2 meters
wide. Excavation showed that its maximum thickness was
15 centimeters.
The area surrounding the site has little relief, and there
are no streams in the immediate vicinity. The slope from
the shell midden to the bay shore is so gradual that it is
scarcely perceptible. According to local inhabitants the shell
heap is far enough away from the bay to escape inundation
during most storms. Only during the most severe hurri-

The Johnson Site

4~

canes does water reach it. That water does reach the shell
heap is attested by Wilson’s report that he found driftwood
lodged in bushes which grew in the center.
Contents of the Shell Midden
The Johnson site is a typical maritime midden. The bulk
of its contents, as revealed by excavation, consists of shells
and dark soil. The shells represented are principally oyster,
conch or whelk, clam, scallop, and moon shell, with oyster
predominating and the others occurring in about the same
order of frequency as they are named. Duffen made a representative collection of the shells which occurred in the
Johnson site and these have been identified as follows:1’
SCIENTIFIC NAME
Ostrea virginica Gmelin
Ostrea sp?
Busycon perversum Say
Busycon perversum Kieneri Phil.
Busycon pym~m Dillwyn
Fasciolaria papillosa Sowerby
(-- gigantea of author’s no.n Kiener)
Fasciolaria distans Lamarck
Macrocallista nimbosa Solander
Vemts campectoinensis Gmelin
Dinocardium, rolmstum Solander
Area ponderosa Say
Area transversa Say
Chione eancellata Linne
Pecten gtT~bus amplicostatus Dall
Polinices duplicata Say
Brachidontes recurvus Rafinesque
Lucina floridana Conrad
Diodora cayenensis Lamarck
Oliva sayana Ravenel
Murex pomum Gmelin
Littorina irrorata Say
Praticolella berlandieriana Moricaud

COMMON NAME
Common oyster
Oyster
Left-handed conch or whelk
Kiener’s conch or whelk
Pear conch or whelk
Conch or whelk
Conch or whelk
Sunset clam
Yucatan little-neck clam
Heart clam
Heavy ark shell
Transverse ark shell
Chione
\Vide-ribbed scallop
Moon shell or shark-eye
Curved mussel
((Has no common name)
Limpet
Panama shell
Apple snail
Periwinkle
Land snail

~:The marine forms were identified by Messrs. William J. Clench and Richard
W. Foster, respectively Curator and Assistar~t Curator of Mollusks, Museum of Comparative Zoo!ogy, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts. The one land form
(last on the list) was identified by Mr. Merrill Champion, Research Assistant, of the

46

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

All of these mollusks except the last one on the list are
marine forms, and presumably all were brought to the site
by its occupants. The exception is the land snail, which
probably got there on its own. It should be stated that all
of these forms are living on the Texas coast today. It is probably fair to assume that most, if not all, of these mollusks
were collected for food by the inhabitants of the site. All
of the various forms listed are edible.
Scattered throughout the midden were the bones of mammals, turtles, fish, and birds. Forms that have been identified
are listed below." These forms suggest the range of animal
life that was hunted and whose flesh supplemented the shellfish diet. The bones of some of these forms, as will be noted
later, were used for making tools and ornaments.
SCIENTIFIC NAME
Odocoileus
Procyon
Tayassu
Cauls
Lepus caIifornicus
Thoonomys
Bison
Terrapene
CheIydra (?)
Balistes
Chaetodipterus
Gavin immer
Anatidae
Anas platyrbynchos
Anas ac~uta
Anas americana
Spatula clypeata
Buteo sp.

COMMON NAME
Deer
Porpoise or mantee
Raccoon
Peccary
Probably coyote
Jack rabbit
Pocket gopher
Bison
Turtle
Snapper turtle
Triggerfish
Fish
Common loon
Duck
Mallard
Pintail
Widgeon
Shoveller
Hawk

~s The bird bones were identified by Dr. A. Wetmore, Secretary of the U. S. National Museum; the rabbit bones by Dr. David H. Johnson, Associate Curator ol[ Mammals, U. S. National Museum; and the remainder of the bo~:es by Dr. T. E. White,
Assistant Curator of Vertebrate Paleontology, Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard
University.

The Johnson Site

Less common than shell or bone were flint chips, lumps
of burned clay, small pieces of asphalt, artifacts of shell,
bone, stone, and clay. Traces of fire were found in the form
of ash and charred bone. Included in the midden were six
human burials.
No stratigraphic divisions were discernible, although
Wilson states that the deposit gradually grew lighter in tone
as he worked downward toward the bottom of the midden.
The surface of the dark soil at the base of the midden was
quite irregular, and in the central portion Wilson noted
shallow trenches, one of which was about 2.5 meters long,
45 centimeters wide, and 6 to 8 centimeters deep. These
trenches seemed to parallel each other and to be oriented
northwest-southeast. The scanty descriptive data available
do not permit fruitful interpretation of these trenches.
One important question concerning the contents of the
Johnson shell midden has to do with the location of the
potsherds. Martin’s survey report mentions finding projectile points, but nothing is said about pottery. Wilson says
that a few potsherds were found, but he neglects to indicate just where they were found. Duffen’s excavation failed
to turn up a single potsherd in the midden deposit, and no
trace of pottery was found in the area adjacent to the site.
Recalling the location of the area excavated by Wilson, it
is probably safe to conclude that the potsherds occurred
in the uppermost part of the midden, somewhere near the
center. This conclusion is supported by the fact that at the
nearby Kent-Crane site, which also belongs to the Aransas
focus, pottery is confined to the uppermost levels of the
shell midden deposit.
Burials

Six burials were encountered during the excavation o/~
the Johnson site, one by Wilson in 1930, and five by Duffen
in 1940. All of these burials had presumably been placed in
pits that were dug into the shell midden deposit, but excavation failed to reveal evidences o£ pit outlines. The burials

48

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

were fairly well scattered over the shell midden area, one
(No. 1) in the center, two (No. 5 and No. 6) in the northeast quadrant, two (No. 2 and No. 3) in the southwest
quadrant, and one (No. 5) in the northwest quadrant. Only the two in the southwest quadrant were definitely assoc.iated with each other in any way, Burial 2 having been
disturbed by the interment of Burial 3.
Burial 1. This burial, found by Wilson in 1930, was
located somewhere near the center of the shell midden and
at a depth of approximately 60 centimeters below the surface. An adult male (?)" lay on the back in an extended
position, the body having a north-south alignment. The
field notes do not record whether the head pointed north
or south. It may have pointed north, as in the case of the
only other extended burial at this site (No. 3). A small projectile point was found in the thoracic cavity just above the
vertebral column, and near the pelvis were small bits of
red ochre.
Burial 2. This burial evidently had. been disturbed by
digging the pit for Burial 3, with which it was in close contact. The bones, which consisted of a skull with most of
the face missing, a humerus, and an ulna, did not occur in
any semblance of anatomical order. They belonged to an
adult male. Data on position and orientation could not be
obtained. These bones were located at a depth varying from
22 to 37 centimeters below the surface of the midden and
44 centimeters above its base.
Burial 3. As stated above, Burial 3 explains the disturbed condition of Burial 1. Burial 3 is that of an adult
fully extended on the back, the head pointing north. This
a Data on sex and age were taken from the osteometric records of Dr. Marcus S.
Goldstein.
These records are on file in the Department of Anthropology at the University of Texas.

PLATE 2
Map showing location of three Aransas focus sites on the Texas coast.

Plate 2

The Johnson Site

49

burial lay 30 centimeters below the surface of the shell midden and 35 centimeters above the soil surface at the base
of the deposit.
Burial 4. Again we find a disturbed condition. Only
the pelvic bones and the lower extremities of an adult were
found, but they remained in anatomical order. No trace
of the upper part of the body could be discerned, and there
was no evidence which would help to explain the disturbed
condition. From the arrangement of the remaining bones
it might be inferred that the head was pointing toward the
south and that the body lay on the back with the legs semiflexed. This~ burial lay directly on the dark earth at the
base of the shell heap and at a depth of 62 centimeters below the surface at that point.

Bu~al 5. This was a child burial, semi-flexed, lying on
the right side, with the hands placed beneath the face, th~
head pointing northeast. It lay at the base of the midden
under 35 centimeters of shell deposit.
Burial 6. This was an adult that had been placed in a
fully flexed prone position, with the hands near the face.
The head pointed north. The skeletal remains lay only 15
centimeters above the base of the midden and under 42 centimeters of shell deposit.
Analysis of these burial data shows that two different
types of burial are represented, extended and flexed. Disregarding Burial 2, which was too badly disturbed to yield
useful information, there are two extended burials and three
flexed burials. The two extended burials are identical in all
significant details, but there is a certain amount of variation in the position and orientation of the flexed burials.
Of these flexed burials two are semi-flexed and one fully
flexed; .and the body attitude is different in each case--prone, right side, and supine, but the last is doubtful. In
the extended burials orientation appears to be north in both
cases, but in the flexed burials two are south and one northeast.

50

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The burial evidence suggests the possibility that two different groups of people may be involved. In additional support of this evidence, there is the fact that the flexed burials are segregated in the northern part of the midden,
whereas the extended burials occur near the center and in
the southwest quadrant. The field records indicate that the
flexed buria!s were in a much poorer state of preservation,
which may or may not be meaningful. The vertical distribution of the burials in the mound also supports this interpretation, the flexed burials all lying at or very near the
base of the mound. Unfortunately, there is no burial furniture to aid in cultural identification, and the skeletal material is so poorly preserved that osteometric measurements
and morphological observations were not feasible. This situation will have to be checked against clearly established
burial sequences when and if these are developed in the
area. For the present, sinc~ practically all of the site seems
to represent occupation by only one cultural group, we
will assume that this group showed some variety in burial
cusEom.

Description of the Artifacts
The artifacts from the Johnson site, as indicated in the
preceding section, were acquired by three individuals on
three separate occasions. Those from Duffen’s excavation
are by far the most numerous and are described below. The
nine projectile points reported by Martin have not been
examined and are not included in the descriptions. As for
the artifacts from Wilson’s test excavation, two very small
collections survive at the University of Texas which probably, but not certainly, contain the objects excavated by
Wilson. Artifacts from these two small collections are not
illustrated in this paper, but reference is made to them in
a few places for the sake of completing the record. In each
instance a specific statement points out the uncertain provenience.
The objects from Duffen’s excavation are not numerous, numbering only 127, and of these 20 are unclassifiable

The ~oh~o~ S~te

51

fragments. All of these objects are fashioned from three
kinds of raw materials, namely, shell, bone, and stone. Approximate percentages of these materials run as follows:
shell 55 ~:, bone 30 %, and stone 15 %.
SHELL OBJECTS.
These number 71 and are made from
only two kinds of shell, conch (Busycon perversum Say and
Fasciolaria papillosa Sowerby) and oyster (Ostrea virginica
Gmelin). Only one object is made of oyster shell. The conch
shell objects are chiefly tools which are adapted for hammering, cutting, piercing, and scraping purposes.

Conch Shell Hammers. One of the most characteristic
tools is a hammer made from the conch. Twenty-two of
these were well distributed both horizontally and vertically
over the area excavated in 1940, but none is reported from
the excavation of 1930, doubtless because such tools were
overlooked.
This hammer was formed by selecting a large conch
shell and removing all or nearly all of the larger outer whorl,
leaving the columella and most of the spire (Plate 3, a). It
is possible that many such hammers were made from shells
whose outer whorls had already been removed for use in
making adzes or other tools. All of these hammers show battering on the outermost whorl margin remaining on the
spire. The battered area is invariably opposite the shell aperture, evidently the strongest and most convenient area. The
amount of battering varies from light to very heavy, and
in the latter cases the original angular whorl margin of the
spire has been reduced to a rounded eminence. In five specimens the battered area has been broken through, leaving irregular holes of varying sizes. As a rule the innermost whorls
of the spire are intact, but in three hammers this apical part
of the spire is missing.
In fourteen specimens the ~’handle’" or columella part
of the hammer shows clear evidences of purposeful smooth~
ing along the irregularly broken edges of the whorl. The
whorl was removed as closely as possible to the columella,

52

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

and the more ragged parts of the edge were slightly ground.
The "handle" in these specimens has a smooth feel to the
hand. The anterior or cana! end of the columella shows no
traces of having been abraded to form a gouge or chisel
edge. However,. the tip at this end has been damaged in
fifteen of the twenty-two hammers. Only one of these has
been broken at any appreciable distance toward the spire
or "head" of the hammer. Apparently the handle was not
the weaker of the two component parts of this tool.
These hammers range in length from 14.4 to 19.5 centimeters in specimens whose ends are undamaged or only
slightly damaged. The average length of this undamaged
series is 17.6 centimeters. Maximum spire diameters range
from 5.6 to 10 centimeters and average 7.2 centimeters.

That these tools saw heavy duty is shown by the amount
of battering on the outer whorl margins of the spires. It
is perhaps gratuitous to speculate on their actual use, but
they could have been used to rough out other shell tools, to
break mammal long bones or skulls, and possibly to open
mollusk shells.
Conch Shell Adzes. Five shell adzes occur in the Johnson site tool assemblage. All are made from the large outer
whorl of a heavy conch shell. The longitudinal axis of each
adze corresponds to the longtitudinal axis of the original
conch shell. Four of these adzes include that portion of the
outer whorl which reverses the direction of its curve to
f6rm the canal of the shell They thus have a sinuous longitudinal profile (Plate 3, c), whereas the fifth adze has only
a simple curved profile (Plate 3, b). Four of the adzes are
rectanguloid in outline (Plate 3, b), with the cutting edge

PLATE
Artifacts from the Johnson site, Texas coast. A, conch shell hammer; B-C conch
shell adzes; D, conch shell scraper; E, oyster shell digging tool; F columella gouge; G,
tubular sandstone pipe with bone stem; H, conch columella awl; I, hand stone; J-K,
deer ulna awls; L, deer metapodial awl.

Plate 3

The Johnson Site

53

somewhat wider than the poll; the fifth is definitely ovoid,
and the cutting edge comes to a rounded point (Hate 3, c).
The cutting edge, which is broadly convex in outline
in all but one of the adzes, is made by beveling from the
concave face of the shell. In only one specimen is there
any evidence of grinding on the convex face side of the
cutting edge. In two of the adzes it is possible to determine
that the cutting edge is ground on the posterior or spire
end of the shell fragment. If the cutting edge is made on
the posterior end, all traces of the spire margin are ground
away; but if the cutting edge is made on the opposite end,
the thickened spire margin is us~ally left on the poll.
These adzes appear to have been roughly chipped into
shape. There is no evidence of sawing and then breaking.
The lateral edges appear to be lightly smoothed by purposeful abrasion, or, even conceivably, by abrasion incidental
to halting and use. The length ranges from 9.5 to 11.3 centimeters and the maximum width from 5.7 to 7.4 centimeters. The average thickness is approximately 5 millimeters.
In addition to the five adzes described above, there are
also twelve worked fragments of conch whorl. One of these
may be an unfinished adze. It has been worked into a rectangular shape and looks very much like the adzes, but
there is no trace of a beveled cutting edge. Then there are
three fragments that have the appropriate size and outline
for the poll portions of adzes. Seven additional large conch
whorl fragments seem to represent the process of making
adzes. Two of these are large and triangular in outline, having been removed from the parent shell and roughly shaped.
The remaining five are more or less rectangular in outline
and show varying amounts of chipping and smoothing along
the side. Beyond this there is no indication of their intended
use, but only a little more work and a ground cutting edge
would have produced an adze.

Concbo Columella Gouges. Three large conch columellae
(Fasciolaria papillosa Sowerby) have been fashioned into

54

Texas Archeological an~ Paleontological Society

gouges. In each tool the anterior or canal end of the columella has been ground diagonally on one side to give a narrow,
convex, chisel-like cutting edge (Hate 3, f). The ground
area actually represents a diagonal section of the canal, for
the deep natural groove may be seen separating the two
sides of the canal. Light grinding is evident on the opposite
side of the bit. These adzes range from 10.5 to 12.5 centimeters in length and seem to represent about half of the
original columella. The end opposite the cutting edge is
roughly broken, either transversely or diagonally, with no
indication of having been ground. Maximum diameters
range from 2.2 to 2.9 centimeters.
Three additional large conch columellae show signs of
having been worked. The whorl fracture edges have been
smoothed, but there is no further evidence of shaping.
Conch Columella Awls. One of the most common types
of shell objects in the Johnson site is an awl made from the
columella of the conch. Sixteen of these came from the shell
midden itself, and seven others came from the surface of a
small shell-covered area about 180 meters northeast of the
midden. The latter duplicate in all respects those from the
main shell midden.
These awls are made from columellae of all sizes, varying from tiny to fairly large and heavy (Plate 4, a-b, e;
Hate 3, h). In length they range from 3.4 to 12.2 centimeters and average about 6.5 centimeters. The whorl fracture edges are smooth in all cases, and one end of the colume[la has been shaped to a point. In the majority of cases
it is the canal end of the columella which has received this
treatment. Only in the smaller columellae does the spire
end serve as the point. In the larger awls the point is flattened (Plate 3, h), but in the smaller it is conical (Plate 4,
a-b, e).
It is quite likely that some of these columella awls were
formed by wave action on the beach and were collected for
use by the occupants of the site. On a sloping sandy beach

The Johnson Site

55

today one can see columellae being rolled back and forth
by the waves. Inasmuch as one end is heavier than the other,
differential wear will eventually form a pointed end. Even
if formed in this natural mamaer, their presence in such
numbers in the shell midden indicates that they were transported there by human agency.

Conch Shell Scrapers. Two quadrangular sections of
the outer whorl of the conch appear to have been used as
scrapers (Plate 3, d). In each specimen the slightly convex
lip of the whor! forms a sharp edge which shows minute
chipping and abrasion on both sides, though the convex face
side of the shell shows more than the concave. The edge
feels smooth to the touch. Such a tool could have served
equally well as a scraper or as a knife. Both of these objects
are approximately the same shape and size, the larger having
a maximum length of 10.7 centimeters.

Perforated Oyster Shells. In that part of the midden
excavated by Duffen only one perforated oyster shell was
recovered, but Wilson mentions finding six or eight such
shells. The latter are not now represented in the collections
from the Johnson site. The shell from Duffen’s excavation is a large one (Plate 3, e), having a length of 14.8 centimeters and a width of 8 centimeters, and it has a roughly
rectangular perforation about 3 centimeters from the umbo.
This hole is 2.8 by 3.5 centimeters, and its edges have been"
roughly rounded but they are not smooth. The margins of
the shell show no signs of abrasion or battering. Presumably
this specimen was some sort of digging implement.
BoNE .’,~’~D AN’rLrR OBjrc-rs. The bone and antler objects from the Johnson site number 37, of which five are unclassifiable artifact fragments and bits of worked bone o~
antler. These objects were made from mammal and bird
bones and consist of perforating and flint~knapping tools
and a few ornaments in the form of beads.
Awls. Eleven complete or nearly complete deer ulna
awls are represented. Ten additional deer ulna tools are dam-

56

Texas ArcheoIogicaI ~nd Paleontological Society

aged in such a way that it is not possible to distinguish them
from flakers. Inasmuch as no flakers are present in the Johnson bone tool series, it is assumed that all twenty-one specimens are ulna awls. Of the twenty-one, five came from the
excavation of a small shell-covered area some 90 meters east
of the shell heap. Three of the eleven definitely identifiable
awls have short, stubby points (Plate 3, k) ;.the remainder
have longer and more slender points, and one of these has
been sharpened to a very fine point (Plate 3, j). The longest
complete ulna awl is 12.7 centimeters in length, the shortest
g centimeters.
Two deer metapodial awls were found, one complete
(Plate 3, 1) and one a fragment. In each the rear portion
of the shaft below the articular head has been cut away, the
part remaining being ground to a long sharp point.
Splinter awls are represented by only one specimen
(Plate 4, g). It consists of a short section of the shaft of
a mammal long bone.
One ander tine, represented by the tip only, has been
ground down to a very sharp conical point (Plate 4, h).
An.tler Flak.ers. Four antler tips with bluntly ground
points apparently represent flakers (Plate 4, f). These fragments range from 3.2 to 7.9 centimeters in length.
Beads. The only beads of any kind that occur in the
Johnson series are three short sections of bird long bones.
One of these is unfinished, for the ends are not neatly ground
as they are in the remaining two beads. This unfinished bead
shows how such bones were cut. A shallow encircling groove
was formed and then the bone was snapped in two at the
weakened place. The two finished beads are shown in Plate
PLATE 4
Artifacts from the Johnson site, Texas coast. A-B, E, conch columdla awls; C-D,
bone beads; F antler flaker; G, bone splinter awl; H, antler awl; l-Q, flint projectile
points.

The Johnson Site

4, c-d. The larger (d) is 2.9 centimeters long and 8 millimeters in diameter; the smaller (c) is 2.4 centimeters long
and 4 millimeters in diameter. Neither bead shows any trace
of the incised decoration which occurred in some tubular
bone beads from the Kent-Crane site, which has a large
Aransas component.
Miscellaneous Bone Obiects. Three bone fragments present further evidence of cutting by the method of encircling
with a groove and then breaking. One is a deer ulna fragment, one the articular head of a small bone, and the third
a section of a bird bone.
Quite a number of antler fragments were scattered
through the midden deposit. Only one of these is of any
special interest, for it shows the method of removing tines.
This was done in precisely the same manner as bird and mammal long bones were cut.
STONU OBoV~aTS. Objects of stone are in a minority at
the Johnson site, the total nurnber being twenty, and some of
these are unidentifiable fragments. They include tools for
purposes of piercing, cutting, hammering, abrading, and
food grinding. One large tubular stone pipe was found, the
first on the Texas coast to be encountered in cultural context.

Projectile Points. Martins mentions that he found nine
projectile points at the Johnson site, seven coming from the
surface and two from his test pit. Their form is not described, and it is not possible to determine if any of them
are shown in the plates which illustrate his report.
Twelve projectile points were obtained during the course
of Duffen’s excavation, and a thirteenth was collected from
the beach northwest of the shell midden. Three of these
points have their stems broken away and are unclassifiable.
None of the projectile points can be regarded as arrowpoints.
~°Martin, n. d., p. 7.

58

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

The material is flint and quartzite, with only one specimen
being fashioned from the latter material. The flint occurs
in colors ranging from gray through buff and yellow to
light brown.
Nine projectile points are illustrated in Plate 4, i-q. They
show considerable variation for so small a sample, including
triangular, leaf-shaped, side-notched, and plain-stemmed
forms. One is almost equilaterally triangular with a straight
base (Plate 4, i), and the base has been thinned, leaving the
thickest area up near the apex of the triangle. Two are leafshaped (Plate 4, j-k) and have convex bases. They differ
only in cross section, one having a rhomboidal cross section
(Plate 4, j), the other a lenticular cross section (Plate 4, k).
The plain-stemmed points vary in size and shoulder development. The largest is shown at Plate 4, 1, which is virtually
identical in size and shape with the point collected from the
beach northwest of the midden. The point at Plate 4, m, is
similar to the preceding in form but is smaller, and the
broad-stemmed point at Plate 4, n, appears to have been reworked from a previously damaged specimen. The fragment at Plate 4, o, is notably thick. The side-notched points
include one with a very broad, convex base (Plate 4, p) and
a smaller specimen with a concave base (Plate 4, q).
In the collections previously referred to, which are
doubtfully attributable to this site, are two projectile points
which duplicate two of the ~orms derived from Duffen’s
excavation. One is a small triangular point similar to that
shown in Plate 4, i, except that it is a little broader at the
base. The other is almost a duplicate of the point shown in
Plate 4, m.
Knives. Only one medial fragment of what appears to
be a knife was found at the Johnson site. Another knife
fragment is present in one of the collections tentatively
identified as having been derived from Wilson’s excavation.
In this same collection is a small triangular blade or knife
with a very thick point and a base consisting of the original
weathered cortex of the parent stone.

The Johnson Site

Miscellaneous Chipped Stone Objects.

59

One small oval

flint flake shows minute chipping at its narrower end, the
retouched edges being very thin and sharp. One fragment
looks somewhat like the expanded stem of a T-shaped drill,
the only suggestion of the presence of a chipped stone drill
in the Johnson site tool assemblage.
Tubular Stone Pipe. One of the most interesting objects found at the Johnson site is a tubular sandstone pipe
with a stem made from the shaft of a bird bone (Plate 3, g).
Although similar pipes have been reported from the Texas
coastal region,~’ this is the first occurrence in cultural context. This pipe was found in four large fragments, and
these fragments were associated with a bird long-bone tub~
which fits the smaller of the two end openings. In cross
section (Plate 3, g) the pipe is roughly rectangular, but
only one side is really flat, the remaining three being convex. The two ends are rounded. The longitudinal section
shown in Plate 4, g, indicates that an elongated conical
"bowl" was made and that this was joined by a small cylindrical hole at the stem end. The bone stem fits rather
snugly into the latter and was apparently cemented to it
with asphalt or some other adhesive substance.
The pipe is large and heavy. With the stem fitted into
its probable original position, the pipe has an over-all length
of 19.1 centimeters, but the length of the stone portion is
15.8 centimeters. The total length of the bone tube is 5.1
centimeters, its diameter 7 millimeters. The aperture at
the ’~bowl" end is oval in outline, with maximum and minimum diameters of 4.2 and 2.9 centimeters respectively; and
the small aperture at the stem end is approximately 1.2
centimeters in diameter.
Hand Stones for Grinding. This type of tool is represented by only one example. This is oval in outline (Plate 3, i)
~’*Jackson, 1940, pp. 99-107, 115-I19, 128-130; Martin, 1929, p. $1, 1930b, p.
!1; Pearce, 1932a, p. 672, 1932b, p. $0, 1938, p. 9; Reed, Clyde T., 1937.

6O

Tewas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

and shows evidences of abrasion on only one face. This
abraded area is slightly convex and covers nearly all of the
face. This tool was made from a flat slab of sandstone, its
edges having been pecked into shap.e. It has a length of 11
centimeters, a width of 7.2 centimeters, and an average
thickness of 1.7 centimeters.
Grinding Slabs. One thin sandstone fragment has a shallow basin covering one side and appears to be part of a grinding slab, the companion piece to the hand stone described
above. This fragment has a length of 16.3 centimeters.
Abrading Stones. One flat, irregular fragment of sandstone has a smoothly abraded depression in the center of one
flat face. The opposite face is smoothly convex, exhibiting
wear over the whole area. Evidently this stone is a fragment of what was once a hand stone, and this is supported
by the fact tha~ a small pot portion of the margin shows evidence of pecking to give a rounded edge.
Hammerstones. One small core of a poor grade flint
shows evidences of battering along its more prominent edges.
It has a maximum diameter of 4.1 centimeters. In one of
the doubtful Wilson collections is an oval water-worn pebble which shows heavy battering along its circumference.
ASVH^Lnr. Small lumps of asphalt are reported to have
been found throughout the midden deposit. None of these
was brought into the laboratory, so that it is not possible to
say if any of them had textile impressions like the lumps
of asphalt fro rathe Kent-Crane site.
B.~r~D C~.AY. Scattered throughout the midden deposit,
and especially near the base of the central portion, were
amorphous lumps of baked c!ay. Of thirty samples bought
to the laboratory, the range of maximum diameters runs
from 2.2 to 7.9 centimeters. The color varies from light
gray to buff. These lumps are rather hard and somewhat
diiticult to break, and may be the remains of hearths.
PotteRY. The few potsherds derived from Wilson’s excavation have not survived, but his description of them

The Johnson Site

61

leaves no doubt as to their identity. He states that some of
them have asphalt-coated interior surfaces, which is a distinctive trait of Rockport focus pottery.~ This is the only
clear evidence of a Rockport focus occupation at this site,
and from its scanty representation we can postulate only a
very brief occupation by that group. The apparent location
of the potsherds in the o.pper part of the shell midden has
already been discussed.
Discussion of the Johnson Site
The Johnson site is regarded as a relatively pure Aransas
occupation, the few potsherds reported from the upper part
of the midden being the only clear jndicati0n of Rockport
focus occupation. There is no way of knowing how long
the Johnson site was occupied, but the occupation was more
than likely of a seasonal nature. The fact that today the
site is inundated during hurricanes may help to explain its
small size. It was probably a good place to get shellfish,
but not too favorable a location otherwise. The midden deposit did not exhibit any striking stratigraphic breaks, which
indicates that there were no long interruptions in occupation.
The homogeneity of the culture, as we!l as the small size of
the midden, argues for a relatively short occupation. The
absence of European objects may be noted, and the presence
of pottery in the upper part of the midden should be emphasized.
The Johnson site presents the first specific information
on the various types of animals, fish, birds, and shellfish that
were used for food by the peoples of the Aransas focus. It
also shows that some sort of vegetable food was ground by
means of hand stone and grinding slab. The rarity of these
milling stones, however, would appear to indicate that this
type of food was of minor importance in their diet.
mMartin, n. d., pp. 1-11, 1929, p. 52, 1930b, pp. 7, 11, 1931; Potter, 1930;
Sayles. 1935, Table ~, p. 102. Martin and Potter have reported sixty-two sites and
localities which have yielded Rockport focus pottery. These are located in the central
section otr the coast, extending from Matagorda Bay wes:ward and-southward to Baffin
Bay.

Texas Archeological ~nd Paleontological Society

62

Additional information is obtained on the circular areas
of shell which Martin= has interpreted as debris floorings
in a temporary form of shelter. The site provides the first
quantit.ative data on the size, shape, and thickness of these
circular shell areas. They seem to be round or oval and have
a diameter of about 1.5 meters. This information supports
Martin’s theory of their origin. It is not possible to determine the relationship of these shell areas to the main midden
deposit at this site. They are probably not earlier than the
midden, but they could well be either contemporary or
later. The excavation of one circular shell area yielded ulna
awls identical in form with those found in the midden. This
suggests that it belongs to the same culture as the midden
and that the two are of about the same age. However, ulna
awls are very common tools and are not distinctive enough
to give much weight to the argument. We can only tentatively include the circular shell areas as elements of Aransas
culture.
The Johnson site furnishes most of the information about
burial types of the Aransas horizon. There is some variation in burial custom. We have suggested the possibility
that the extended burials may belong to the Rockport horizon, but of this there is no clear proof. For the present we
record both flexed and extended burials for the Aransas
~OCUS.

The presence of baked clay at this site calls for comment.
Here it does not seem to be associated with pottery, as Martins has suggested, but appears to antedate the pottery horizon. This adds to the argument against Martin’s theory~ of
this baked clay being the by-product of firing pottery. That
cannot be the whole explanation.
Finally, attention is. again called to the fact that the tubular stone pipe from the Johnson site is the first to be found
=Martin, n. d., pp. 2-3, 7-11; !929, p. 52; 1930b, p. 7.
"~4Martin,
~z IbM.

1931,

pp.

53-55.

The Johnson Site

63

in unmistakable cultural context. We can now be reasonably certain that it belongs to the pre-pottery horizon on
the Texas coast. It probably survived into Rockport times,
but this needs confirmation.
The Aransas Focus’*
The name o£ the Aransas/?ocus is derived £rom Aransas
Bay, /?or it was in this area that the/?irst sites assigned to it
were excavated. The Johnson site is considered to be the
type site. This was the first site where the Aransas culture
was recognized as something separate and apart/?tom other
cultures on the Texas coast. Three sites/?urnish all the trustworthy data available on this /?ocus at the present time.
These sites are the Johnson site, the Kent-Crane site, and
the Live Oak Point site. Other sites have shown Aransas
types o/? arti/?acts mixed with typical materials o/? the Rockport horizon, but their status is not clear because o/? the lack
o/? stratigraphic data /?or those sites. Thus the geographic
distribution o/? the Aransas/?ocus is very limited at the present time, being con/?ined to the Live Oak Peninsula lying between Aransas Bay and Copano Bay.
The principal basis /?or distinguishing an Aransas /?ocus
is the absence o/? pottery/?tom the lower levels o/? some shell
midden sites. In the three sites re/?erred to above pottery
was/?ound only in the upper parts o/? the midden deposits.
On the positive side the Aransas /?ocus is based on a special
complex o/? shell, bone, and stone arti£acts. Undoubtedly
some o/? these Aransas types survived into the Rockport horizon, but there is no evidence which indicates that they survived in quantity. Under these circumstances it is not possible to segregate the Aransas materials in surface collections
showing both Aransas and Rockport occupation.
The known Aransas sites are all shell middens and are located on the shores o/? bays, not on the open Gul/? shores o/?
"~ This preliminary outline of Aransas t~ocus culture is based on all the data which
have been analyzed up to the time of writing (November, 1937).
It includes information derived from excavation at both the Kent-Crane and Live Oak Point sites.

64

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society

the offshore islands which characterize the central section of
the Texas coast. The occupants of these sites were principally food collectors and hunters. The sea furnished a large
part of their food. The fairly extensive shell middens show
how important shellfish were in their diet, the principal
forms collected being oyster, clam, and conch. From the sea
they must have taken more fish than the midden refuse now
indicates. From the sea they also took various forms of turtle, and there is some evidence that they hunted one sea
mammal, either the manatee or the porpoise. They were
also effective hunters, for the middens contain bones of such
large mammals as bison and deer. They also hunted the peccary, the raccoon, and the rabbit. Aquatic birds were taken
in considerable numbers, judging from the frequency of
their bones. These include the loon and several forms of
duck, as mallard, pintail, widgeon, and shoveler. The hawk
was also taken. The rare occurrence of milling stones suggests that wild seeds and grains were not an outstanding element of their diet. There is no evidence that agriculture
was practiced.
No definite traces of house remains have yet been found.
It is not even certain that any of the circular shell areas,
commonly reported in this section of the coast, belong to the
Aransas focus. These areas have been interpreted as debris
floorings of temporary shelters. It is possible that some of
these may prove to be of Aransas origin, for one at the Johnson site yielded bone awls similar to those of the nearby
Aransas shell midden. This is the ful! extent of the evidence
to date. However, the mode of living strongly indicates a
form of coastal nomadism, and it is very likely that some
type of temporary shelter was the only habitation in use.
Very litde is known about Aransas burial customs, for
few burials have been found that can be assigned definitely
to this focus. It can be said that the dead were buried in
the shell middens, in either a flexed or an extended position,
unaccompanied by ornaments or mortuary offerings of a

The Johnson Site

durable material.~ As yet there is no information on the
physical type of the Aransas population.
Materials provided by the coastal environment were extensively used for making tools and utensils. Conch shell,
because of its large size and toughness, was the favored material. From it hammers, adzes, gouges, scrapers, and awls
were made, and these tool types occur in considerable numbers. There is some evidence that conch shell containers
were used. Large oyster shells were centrally perforated,
possibly for halting and use as some sort of digging tool;
and clam shells were occasionally chipped along one edge
to form knives or scrapers.
Bone from the animals taken in hunting was also a commonly utilized raw material, though the types of objects
made from it are not numerous. Most common are cylindrical beads of bird bone and awls and pin-like objects of
mammal bone. The beads, pins, and certain split-bone awls
often bear incised and drilled geometric designs of a simple
sort--triangles, diamonds, and zigzag lines, crosshatched
bands, or all-over crosshatching.~ Antler was used for making awls and flint-knapping tools, but these are comparatively rare.
Although stone of any sort is very rare on the Texas
coast, a fairly large number of stone tools occur in Aransas
sites. This stone must have been obtained from inland localities, either through trade or travel. Large forms of projectile points are numerous, the leading types having plain
stems or side notches.’~ A less common but easily recognized
mat a site on Bafl~n Bay, Clyde T. Reed (!937, pp. 218-221) removed a number of burials from an area adjacent to a shell midden deposit. Two burials contained
~emale skeletons associated with tubular stone pipes.
Reed states that no pottery was
£ound at ,this site, and it may therefore be an Aransas site. If so, we can tentatively
record burials containing tubular stone pipes as an Aransas trait. In this report Reed’s
interest is in the pipes, and he does not give £urther details on burial custom.
"~ This decoration of bone objects is found only at the Kent-Crane site.
~The Kent-Crane site provides the largest sample of projectile points l%om the
Aransas foe.s.

66

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

form is triangular; it is short and thick, with a thinned base,
and the lateral edges are often alternately beveled. No small,
thin projectile points occur, which is the basis for the conclusion that the bow was not in use. The large projectile
points which occur in Aransas sites are thus interpreted as
tips for darts or spears, but there is no direct evidence suggesting the use of the spear-thrower. Knives of chipped
stone occur but are not common, and the same may be said
for gravers and scrapers. The small end-scrapers, characteristic of the later Rockport focus, are entirely lacking. Abrading stones, usually irregular pieces of sandston_e, are rather
common and were probably used in shaping and sharpening
the various shelI and bone tools. Hammerstones, hand
stones, and grinding slabs are rare, the last being represented
principally by fragments., The large tubular stone pipe with
bone mouthpiece is rare in the known Aransas sites, but isolated finds have been reported in the central section of the
Texas coast and may belong to the Aransas focus.
Basketry containers were used, as is shown by impressions preserved in asphalt, and only twined techniques are
indicated. It seems likeIy that baskets were sometimes waterproofed with asphalt. Matting is also indicated by a few
asphalt impressions, but no precise data on techniques have
been obtained. In addition to its probable use for waterproofing baskets, asphalt was also used as an adhesive substance for attaching projectile points to their shafts."
Baked clay fragments, so commonly reported in sites of
this area, are definitely associated with the Aransas focus.
An adequate explanation of their origin has yet to be advanced. No pottery has been found in the Aransas levels
of any known site.
On the basis of the factual data presented above, certain
inferences may be made. These inferences must be regarded
as attempts to translate inert artifacts into industrial proThis data on asphalt comes from the Kent-Crane site.

The Johnson Site

cesses and social activities. For example, the presence of heavy cutting tools of conch shell, especially adzes and gouges,
suggests that woodworking was o1~ some importance. It is
difficult to conceive of a people so closely associated with the
sea not having boats, and it seems likely that these shell cutting tools were used principally for the manufacture of dugout boats. There is no trace of any special fishing apparatus,
but we know that baskets were made; nets and basketry
traps for taking fish are definite possibilities. The scrapers
of chipped stone and of shell suggests skin processing, and
it is unlikely that the skins of such large mammals as the bison and deer went unused. Perforating tools of bone and
shell may well have been employed in making articles from
dressed skin. Trade with the interior is suggested by the
tools of chipped stone, flint being foreign to the coastal region. Marine shell objects have been occasionally reported
from the Central Texas area, and there may have been some
sort of trade involving the exchange of flint and shell. Finally, pigment and the tubular stone stone pipe suggest ceremonial activity.

As stated earlier in this paper, the Aransas focus cannot
be identified with the Oso Phase of Sayles, which is also a
pre-ceramic culture of the same area. When we compare the
types of artifacts from the Aransas and Oso complexes, a
number of striking differences immediately become evident.
The Aransas is characterized by a much larger number of
different types than the Oso, and there is much greater emphasis on shell and bone. Important Aransas types not listed
for the Oso include hammers, adzes, gouges, scrapers, and
awls of conch shell; oyster shell digging tools; clam shell
knives or scrapers; awls, pins, and beads of bone, some decorated with incised and drilled designs; antler tools; tubular
stone pipe with bone stem; hand stones and grinding slabs;
and lumps of asphalt bearing impressions of basketry and
matting. Among the Oso traits not appearing in Aransas
sites are hand axes; small core scrapers; small, carefully
chipped end-scrapers; certain projectile point types, espe-

68

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

cially small, finely made arrowpoints; pendants of freshwater shell; beads of human bone; and one negative trait-the absence of mane and metate. These differences between
the Aransas and Oso seem to outweigh the similarities, for
only the following traits are shared: absence of pottery, leafshaped knives and blades; side-scrapers; triangular, stemmed,
and side-notched dart points; and hammerstones. The Aransas focus thus has a flavor all its own, and its separation from
the Oso can be justified, certainly until we have a better
sampling of the Oso. The relationship between the two cultures cannot be determined at the present time.
In attempting to determine the approximate age of the
Aransas focus only two approaches appear to be feasible at
the present time. One of these is the direct historical approach, by which an attempt is made to work backward
from the known oeriod of the historic Rockport focus. The
other involves co-nsideration of cultural relationships with
the pre-pottery cultures of the adjacent Central Texas area.
We have no evidence, or even a suggestion of it, that
European materi.als are associated with the Aransas focus.
From this we can assume that it is prehistoric in date, which
would mean at least prior to Pineda, Garay, and Cabeza de
Vaca or roughly before 1500 A. D. This date is safely behind the earliest possibility of any European objects having
been introduced on the Texas coast, even by way of eastern
Mexico. This date is also supported by the stratigraphic position of the Aransas focus beneath the Rockport focus,
which is unquestionably associated with European materials
at Another promising approach to dating the Aransas focus is through study of
the clay dunes which occur on the Texas coast southward from Corpus Christi Bay
(Price, 1933, pp. 932-935). Dr. W. Armstrong Price of Corpus Christi has recently
demonstrated that a large number of clay dunes contain archaeological materials. Combined geological and archaeological investigation of this situation may very well develop a
sequence that will be useful £or dating purposes. This situation is undoubtedly the key
to the "buried sites" of Sayles’ Oso Phase (Sayles, 1935; see footnote 5, this paper).
a2In the upper horizon at the Live Oak Point site, ;for instance, two types of
small arrowpoints were made of both fli1~t and glass.

The Johnson Si$e

69

in a number of sites,s: The account of Cabeza de
Vaca,~ who appears to have been in the central section of
the Texas coast in 1533-1534, indicates that pottery and
the bow (characteristic of the Rockport focus) were known
at that time, and there is also some evidence in the Cabeza
de Vaca account that the bow had not been known very
long." Identities in certain chipped stone artifacts between
the Rockport focus and the Austin focus of Central Texas
help to substantiate the historic dating of the Rockport, for
Kelley has dated the Austin focus as after 1500 A. D.~
The projectile points of the Aransas focus show similarities to those of the pre-pottery cultures of Central Texas
which Kelley has grouped into an Edwards Plateau aspect.~
A few Aransas projectile points appear to be intrusive from
the Central Texas area. We are thus able to suggest at least
partial contemporaneity of the Aransas focus with the Edwards Plateau cultures. Further study will doubtless make
the nature of this time relationship more precise.~ Attention has already been called to evidences of trade between
coastal and inland peoples.
Some of the characteristic shell artifact types of the
Aransas focus have counterparts in other cultures along the.
Gulf Coast, both in northeastern Mexico and the southeastern United States. In the Huasteca Ekholm~ describes and
illustrates one conch columella gouge which he interprets as
a polishing tool. This comes from the Las Flores site, which is
Period V in date. In the Rio Grande delta area Anderson~

~aHodge, 1907, pp. 87-88.
~ Ibid., p. 73.
~Kelley, 1947; see also Krieger, 1946, pp. !65-168.
:~ Kelley, 1947.
a~At the Morhiss site, near Victoria, Texas, there appears to be a mixture of
Aransas focus materials with a local facies of the Edwards Plateau culture. Analysis
of the materials from this site will doubtless provide precise data for correlation purposes.
:s Ekholm, 1944, p. 482 and Fig. $2, d’.
~Anderson, 1932, p. 30.

70

Texas Archeological ~nd Paleontological Society

reports the occurence of both conch shell gouges and adzes..
These appear to belong to the Brownsville culture‘° and are
identical with the Aransas types. One conch shell adze has
been collected from the surface of a pottery site in Orange
County, Texas, very near the Louisiana-Texas boundary.’~ In
the Tchefuncte culture of the Lower Mississippi Valley
gouges, adzes, and conch shell containers are present,~ and
some of these are remarkably similar to types from the Aransas focus. Likewise in the St. John’s River area of northeastern Florida Wyman" and Moore" report considerable
numbers of shell adzes, gouges, and containers of conch
shell. Some of these are in shell heaps that contain no pottery, and others are in shell heaps that contain early types
of pottery.
These occurrences of similar types of shell objects along
the northwestern and northern coasts of the Gulf of Mexico, and along the southern Atlantic coast, are of special
interest. The most striking feature is the general early date
indicated, especially when the tools are present in such numbers as to have meaning. These tools seem to occur princi-.
pally in pre-pottery cultures or in cultures which only recently have acquired pottery. This evidence suggests that
such shell too!s may have been among the traits belonging
to a widely distributed phase of the Eastern Archaic along
the Gulf and southern Atlantic coasts. If such be the case,
then a part of the Aransas culture may be derived from this
early sub-stratum of culture in the Southeast. This hypothesis cannot be confirmed, however, until more field in*"IBM., pp. 29-31; MacNelsh, 1947, pp. 6-8; Sayles, 1935, pp. 40, 117, Table
p. 102, Table 13,’p. 124, Plate X, d-f, p. 42, Map C, p. 132.
’aSite ET-839, Arnold Reconnaissance Survey; data on file at the University
Texas.
*:Ford and Quimby, 1945, pp. 49-51 and Fig. 15, d-g.
’* Wyman, 1869, p. 454 and Plate 10, Fig 4.
~Moore, 1892-1894, Vol. 27, pp. 12-13, 113-115 (Mt. Taylor); Vol. 27,
615-623 (Orange Mound); Vol. 27, pp. 623-624 (Long Bluff); Vol. 27, pp. 708-72~
(Mulberry Mound).

The Johnson Site

71

vestigation has been done along the Gulf and southern Atlantic coasts of the United States. The shell midden sites of
this long coast line have not received sufficient attention in
recent years. From the evidence cited above, we believe that
a systematic sampling of shell heaps would throw additiona!
light on the Eastern Archaic stage of culture.

Concl~sion
This paper has described the data derived from excavation of the Johnson site, type site of the Aransas focus of
the Texas coast. The Aransas focus represents the culture
of a nomadic group of food collectors, fishers, and hunters
who camped along the shores of the bays and left midden
deposits consisting principally of shell, bone, and earth. They
made extensive use of shell and bone for tools, but ornaments were chiefly made of bone. Pottery and the bow were
not known. The Aransas focus cannot be identified with
the Oso Phase of Sayles, but it does show similarities in projectile point types to the pre-pottery cultures of the Edwards Plateau. In shell tools it shows some sort of vague relationship with early horizons along the Gulf coast of the
southern United States and northeastern Mexico.
A date for the beginning of the Aransas culture cannot
be supplied at the present time, but there is evidence which
shows that around 1500 A. D. it was supplanted by the
Rockport focus, which is identified with the historic Indians of the central section of the Texas coast, among them
almost certainly the Karankawa. The Aransas focus may be
ranked with other pre-pottery cultures of the eastern United
States in what has come to be known as the Eastern Archaic
stage of culture. Its position in a marginal area, however,
led to its persistence until a relatively late date.
Attention is called to the fact that the Aransas focus
offers no indication of human migration or diffusion of
culture from Mexico to the southeastern United States by
way o£ the Texas coast.

Texas Archeological and Paleont~ologioal Society

"t2

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anderson, A. E.
1932. Artifacts of the Rio Grande ddta region. Bnllelitt o[ the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, pp. 29-31.
Brister, Bernard
1940. Anthropologist uncovers new phase o~ culture of coastal Indians i~ sands
Aransas County. Corlms Christi Caller, November 26, p. lB.

]:~nglas, J~mes
1903.

Human bones found near Galveston, a letter communicated by Mr. James
Douglas. Bulletin of the American Geographical Society of New Yorl~ Vot.
~$, ]qo. f, pp. $48-$49.

Duffen, William A.
1940. Morhiss site.
Ekholm, Gordon F.
1944. Excavations

Texas Archaeo!ogical News, No. 2, pp. 16-18.

and

at Tampico

Panuco

in ’the Huasteca,

Mexico.

American

M~eum o[ Natural History, Anthropological Pa$ers, Vol. ~8, pt.
Fenneman, Ncvla M.
19~8. Physiography of eastern United Stat~.
~ewk~, J~s¢ Walter
1907. Certain antiquities o~ eastern Mexico.
A.nnaal Re~ort~ pp. 221-284.

New York and ~ndon.
Bureau o[ American Etbnolo~,

Ford, Jam~ A., ~d Qu~by, G~rge I., Jr.
The Tchefuncte culture, an e~ly ~cupatlon of the Lower M~ippl
Memoirs o[ the ~ciely ]or A~ican Archaeology, No. 2.
Gasher, Albert S.
189I. The Karan~wa Indians, the coast~ ~ple of Texas.

Peabody M~eum,

pers, Vol. 1, No. 2.
Gladwin~ Harold S.
1937. Excavations at Snaketowa, II, compar~on and th~ries.

Gila P¢~b!o, Medal-

lion Papers, No. 26.
Hodge, Frederick W.
1907. The narrative of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca.
the Southern United Stat~, I$28-I~43," pp. 3-126.
Jackson, A. T.
1940. Tubular pipes and other tubes in Texas.

In: "Spanish Explorers
New York.

Bulletin o] lhe Texas Arcbeological

and Paleontological Sociely, Vol. 12, pp. 99-137.
Kelley, ~. Charles
1947. The cultural affiliations and chronological position of the Clear Fock foc~.
American

Antiquity

(in

~ress.)

Krieger, Alex D.
1943. Archeologicat horizons in the Caddo area.

In: "El N-:te de Mexico g

1 Sur

de Estados Unidos," Tercera Reunion de Mesa Redonaa de la ~eledad Mexicana de Antropologla, pp. 154-1~6.
1945a. Some sugg~tions on archaeological terms. B:tllc/ht of the Texas Arebeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 16, pp. 41-~ 1.
!945b. An inquiry into supposed Mexican influences on a prehistoric "cult" in the
southern United States.
American Anlbro~ologis~, VoL 47, No.
1946.

Culture complexes and

chronology

Texa~ Publical&n, No. 4640.

in

northern Texas.

The Un~ersily

The Johnson Site
1947.

The first symposium on the Caddoan archaeological area.
Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 198-207.

MacNeish, Richard S.
1947. A preliminary report on coastal Tamaulipas, Mexico.
Vol. 13, No. I, pp. 1-15.

73
American Antiquity,

American Antiquity,

Martin, George C.
n.d.
Preliminary archaeological survey o£ a portion o~ the Texas coast made by
George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in 1927-1928-1929.
Privately
printed.
Bulletin of the
1929. Notes on some Texas coast campsites and other remains.
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 1, pp.
1930a. A vase and some carved stones and pebbles ~rom Nueces County, Texas, .Bul-

letin of the Texas Archeologlcal and Paleontological Society, Vol. 2, pp. 18-20.
1930b. Two sites on the Callo del Oso, Nueces County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeotogical and Paleontological Society, Vo!. 2, pp. 7-17.
1931. Texas coastaI pottery. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, VoL 3, pp. $3-56.
!936. The Indian tribes of the Mission Nuestra Senora del Rei’ugio.
San Antonio.
Mason, J. Alden
1935. The place of Texas in pre-Columbian relationships between the United States
and Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vo]. 7, pp. 29-46.
1937. Further remarks on the precolumbian relationships between the United States
and Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 9, pp. 120-129.
193$. Observations on the present status and problems ot~ Middle American archaeology. American Antiquit3,, Vol. 3, No. 3, pp. 206-223; No. 4, pp.
1943. Summary of Section on Cultural Relations between Northern Mexico and
the Southern United States.
In: "El Notre de Mexico y el Sur de Eatados
Unidos," Tercera Reunion de Mesa Redonda de la Sociedad Mexicana de
tropologia, pp. 348-351.
Mason, Otis T.
1880. Summary of correspondence of the Smithsonian Institution previous to January I, 1880, in answer to Circular No. 316. Smithsonian Institution, Annual
Report for tI~e Year 1879, pp. 428-44g.
Moore, Clarence Bloomfleld
Ig92-94. Certain shell heaps o~ the St. John’s River, Florida.
Hitherto unexplored.
The Amerh’a~ Naturalist, "Col. 26, pp. 912-922; Vol. 27, pp. 8-13, 113-117~
605-624, 708-723; Wol. 2g~ pp.
Patterson, J. T.
1936. The corner-tang flint artifacts of Texas. University of Texas, Anthropological Papers, Vo!. 1, No. 4.
1937a. Boat-shaped artifacts of the Gulf southwest states.
University of Texas,
thropotogical Papers, Vol. l, No. 2.
1937b. Supplementary notes on the corner-tang artifacts.
University of Texas, Anthroi~ological Papers, Vot. 1, No. 5, pp.
Pearce, J. E.
1919. Indian mounds and other relics of Indian life in Texas.
American Anthropologlst, Vol. 21, No. :~, pp. 223-2:}4,
1932a. The archaeology of East Texas.
American Anthropologist, Vol. 34, No. 4,
pp. 6~0-687.
Bulletin of the Texas Arch¢ologi19)2b. The present status ox Texas archeology.
cal and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, pp. 44-54.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

74

1932c. Significance of the East Texas archaeological field. In: "Conference on Southern Prehistory, Birmingham, Alabama, December 18-20, 1932," National
Research Council, Washington, D. C., pp. $3-58.
1935.
1938.

Tales that dead men tell. University o] Texas, Anthropological Papers, Vol.
1, No, 1.
Geographic influence and civilization, with especial reference to Indian Texas.
The Texas Geographic Magazine, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp.

Phillips, Phillip.
1940. Middle American influences on the archaeology of the southeastern United
States. In: "’The Maya and Their Neighbors," New York and London, pp.
349-367.
Potter, Wendell H.
1930. Ornamentation on the pottery of the Texas coastal tribes.

Bulletin of

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 2, pp. 41-44.
Price, W. Armstrong
1933.

Role o£ disastrophism in topography of Corpus Christi area, South Texas.
Bulletin of the American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Vol.
pp. 907-962.

Price, W. Armstrong, and Gunter, Gordon.
1942. Certain recent geological ~nd biological changes in South Texa~, with consideration of probable causes.
Proceedings and Transactions of the Texas
Academy of Science for 1942, pp. 3-21.
R~I, Clyde T.
1937. A Carankawa fire implement. Bulletin of the Texas Arcbeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 9, pp. 218-221.
Reed, Erik K.
1939. Burials at Mission Espiritu Santo.

Central Texas Archeologist, No. 4, pp.

85-95.
Roberts, l:rank H. H., Jr.
1940. Developments in the problem of the North American Paleo-Indian.
In:
"Essays in Historical Anthropology of North America~" Smlthsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 100, pp. $1-116.
Russell, Richard Joel
Annals of
1945. Climates o£ Texas.
Vol. 35, No. 2, pp. 37-$2.

the Association

Sayles, E. B.
1935. An archaeologica! survey of Texas.

of

American Geographers,

Gila Pueblo, Medallion Papers, No. 17.

Sdlards, E. H.
1940. Pleistocene artifacts and asmelated fossils from Bee County, Texas.
of the Geological Socitty of America, Vol.

Smith, Victor J.
193~. The pottery horizons of Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas
Paleon~ological Society, VoL 8, pp. 94-112.
1941.

A survey of Indhn life in Texas.
Circular No. $.

Tharp, Benjamin Carroll
1939. The vegetation of Texas.

Bulletin

$I~ pp. 1627-1658.
Archeological and

West Texas Historical and Scientific Society,

Texas Academy Publications in Natural History,

Non-Technical Series, No. 1.
Thomas, Cyrus
1891. Catalogue of prehistoric works east of the Rocky Mountains.
American Ethnology, Bulletin 12.

Bureau

The Johnson Site
Warlng, A. J., and Holder, Preston
194L

A prehistoric ceremonial complex in the southeastern United States.
cat~ Anthropologist, Vol. 47, No. 1, pp. 1-34.

Ameri-

Woodbury, George
1937.

Notes on some skeletal remains of Texas.
cal Pa~ers, Vol. I, No. $, pp. 7-16.

University of Texas, Anthropologi-

Woodbury, George zad Edna
193L

Prehistoric skeletal remains from
Papers, No. 18.

the Texas coast.

Gila Pueblo, Medallion

Wright, Welty
1940.

The type, distribution, and occurrence of ttbat gravers ~n Texas. Bulletin of
~he Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, VoL 12, :pp. 31-48.

Wyman, Jeftrles
1869. On the fresh-water shell-heaps of the St. John’s River, east Florida.
American Naturalls~, Vol. 2, No. 8, pp. 393-403; No. 9, pp. 447-46~.

The

CERTAIN ARCHAEOLOGICAL NOTES ON
THE HIGH PLAINS OF TEXAS

BY AI)OLI~H HENRY

WITTE

During the summer of 1946, the writer spent several
weeks on the High Plains of Texas on a field trip sponsored
by Dr. E. H. Sellards, Director, Texas Memorial Museum,
Austin, Texas. The Gray County burial was investigated in
1938 while a Mineral Resource Survey, sponsored by the
Bureau of Economic Geology, was in progress.
Alkali Lakes and Dunes

A number of alkali lakes northwest of Lubbock ~were
examined in some detail for archeological data concerning
early man. Silver, Yellow, Illusion, Bull, Soda, Coyote, Government, and other lakes were explored. A considerable number of Indian stone artifacts were noted around and in the
vicinity of the lakes mentioned. Where sand dunes were
observed, these usually displayed evidences of occupation
by Indians. Several burials were noticed but none were excavated because of limited time available. Pueblo sherds,
small points, small scrapers, four-edged and oval knives likely fal! within the presumed heavy Pueblo occupation of the
area during late prehistoric times. The few large shouldered
points and heavy choppers discovered in the same sites possibly point to other culture complexes.
Large Basin Artifacts

Due to t.he prolonged drouth some of the lakes explored
were almost without water. An examination of the dry surface of the lake basins disclosed a number of stone artifacts
in an area usually submerged by lake waters. Silver Lake
basin yielded a brown four-edged knife, points of various
sizes, manos, and obsidian chips. In Illusion Lake basin we

The High Plains o] Texas

77

found burnt rocks, a gray flint knife and an obsidian point.
Surprisingly, two small notched stones of white quartzite
were discovered. (See Plate 5).
In Bull Lake basin, Indian stone artifacts were fairly
common. Three bases of large projectile points with parallel
sides were discovered eroding out of a low stratified beach.
These points were somewhat suggestive of certain Yuma
forms. A small amount of digging in the same beach uncovered several worked spalls in silu only a few inches below
the surface. Several small triangular points with side notches,
one Olivella shell bead, an incomplete four-edge knife, hammer stones, and so on were observed. Here also were found
five additional notched stones, or sinkers, somewhat similar
to the two previously discovered, in Illusion Lake which is
located a few miles away. (See Plate 5). Three of these
crudely notched stones were of a coarse, reddish quartzite,
found locally and used commonly all over the High Plains
area and eastward and south down the Brazos River drain=
age to Baylor and Archer Counties. The other two notched
stones are igneous in origin, one a brown rhyolite, the seconda light gray granite. Similar igneous stones were observed in local gravel deposits. No additional notched stones
were discovered, and culture complex affiliations are not

known.
The Waco sinker, described in 1938 by Mr. Frank H.
Watt,~ apparently does not resemble except in a general way,
the Alkali Lake sinker reported in this paper. In addition,
as far as it is known, the Waco sinker is largely restricted
in distribution to the eastern half of Texas.
Some flint sources in the Texas High Plains
Contrary ~-o a somewhat general belief, rocks suitable
for modification into artifacts are not rare, and occur in and
around the High Plains in many, many places. Quartzite,

*Watt, Frank H., Cettlral Texas Archeologist, Number Four, 1938.

78

Texas Archeological and Pa~eontological Society

chalcedony, silicified woods, cherts, and various hard igneous stones are common in many outcrops around Yellow
and Illusion Lakes. This condition is also true in Bull Lake.
Worked slabs and nodules of chalcedony were observed on
the north side of Bull Lake where the rough material is
weathering out of the limestone escarpment.
Quartzites, cherts, and other flintlike rocks in the form
of large pebbles were observed in the vicinity of Monument
Lake. Gravels and boulders outcrop in many, many places
below the great east and south facing escarpment at the
edge of the High Plains. Gravel strata with suitable stones
are especially common along McClellan Creek, Salt Fork,
Mulberry Canyon, Garcia Lake and in the vast bad lands of
the Palo Duro Canyon. Other sources of artifact materials
were the widespread gravel strata bordering the Canadian
River.

The writer was greatly interested in the discovery in the
Canadian River terrace deposits of large numbers of smal],
flattish boulders of schistose fibrolite. These stones consist
of sillimanite fibres arranged in fans and rosettes. Occasional specimens show black ilmenite crystals interwoven with
the bunches of sillimanite and are exceptionally heavy. It
is recalled that Kidder: in his classic report on the Pecos
Pueblo excavations, described and illustrated a number of
very fine fibrolite ax heads. Fibrolite was a common and
satisfactory ax material in the Pecos Pueblo. They appear
to have been especially prized for beauty and utility. Kidder
further states that fibrolite does not seem to occur in the
Pecos.valley and that the source where the Pueblos obtained
them is unknown. In addition, it is a well established fact
that considerable trade relations existed between Pecos Pueblo
and the Canadian River tribes, perhaps almost during the
entire existence of the Pueblo. In conclusion, the writer believes that the many distinctive fibrolite axes found in Pecos

Kidder, A. V. The Arti[acts of Pecos, The Yale University Press, 1932.

The High Plains of Texas

Pueblo were, more than likely, trade items from the Texas
Panhandle along with varigated flints, bison hides, et cetera.
Alibates agatized dolomite

Many of the projectile points, scrapers, spalls and knives
found in the alkali lake region are fashioned from a beautiful red, or brown, banded, or variagated flint. This fact is
also true all over the Texas Panhandle and to an unknown
distance northward, also eastward and southward almost
to Dallas and down along the Red River drainage. The material is well known in eastern New Mexico, and was a common trade item in the Pecos Pueblo and others on the Rio
Grande. Many of the fluted points from such famous sites
as Folsom, Clovis, and Plainview are of the same banded or
varigated flint.
As far back as 1906, C. N. Gould’ mentioned white, massive dolomite ledges, more or less flinty, along Alibates Creek
and the Canadian River in Pottery County, Texas. This dolomite belongs to the Quartermaster formation of the Double
Mountain Group, upper Permian. Flint ledges also outcrop
across the Canadian River on the north side. Other flint
ledges were observed by the writer east and southeast of
Amarillo, also east of Silverton in Briscoe County below the
escarpment. Since these variegated flints were obtained by
Indians from so-many different outcropplngs, the entire
Alibates flint situation should be reexamined. One fact is
highly obvious at this time; definitely, all the variegated flint
artifacts discovered in this vast region did not originate in
the Alibates quarries in Potter County. The author suggests
extreme caution in classifying as to definite source any of
the flint artifacts in the High Plains, or in North Texas,
for that matter.

The matter of flint sources is complex and far from
being satisfactorily settled in the Wichita Falls area where
3Gould, C. N., U. S. Geol. Survey, Paper 181,1907.

8O

Texas Archeo~ogical ~nd Paleontological Society

the writer has lived for a number of years. In the vicinity of
Wichita Falls, flint artifacts of red, brown, and variegated
colors are common. In certain sites the colored flints equal
at least one tenth of the total collected. For the past several
years the best available information definitely has indicated
that these were trade items from the Alibates quarries. At
the present time additional data is at hand. This information does not strengthen the trade item theory. In north
central Texas remnants of Pleistocene gravel strata extend
along most of the rivers. In many places these strata cap
high old stream terraces. The writer has carefully explored
a number of these spots within the last few months. On the
north side of Red River in a gravel deposit near Terrel, Oklahoma, rough, angular flint nodules were found. Some specimens were more than four inches in diameter, and the colors were red, brown, and various shades of red and yellow.
Similar rough flint nodules were gathered from the gravel
terraces bordering Big Wichita River and at no great distance from the city of Wichita Falls.
It appears to the writer that it would be very difficult
to distinguish these local river terrace specimens from Texas
Panhandle flint materials. Many of the colors and textures
overlap. Obviously, a lot of field work remains to be done
in order to trace out the distribution of certain rough flint
nodules along our Texas rivers.
A sitti~g burial in Gray County, Texas
Gray County is drained largely by North Fork of Red
River. The western and northern parts are on the High
Plains; the central and eastern parts are in the breaks and
slopes that mark the descent from the high to the low plains
of the eastern Texas Panhandle. The altitude ranges from
PLATE

Top: notched stones ~rom Illusion and Bull Lakes.
Middle: Gray County burial, rear view.
Bottom: some burial, front view.

Plate

The High Plains o] Texas

81

2800 to 3250 feet above sea level. Brief explorations along
North Fork and the larger tributaries disclosed many campsites, middens, workshops, burnt rock hearths and traces of
prehistoric occupation. Stone elbow pipes, large and small
points, mostly the small triangular type with side notches,
small scrapers, bone .tools, stone beads, fine long flint drills
and four-edged knives were collected. Somewhat in variance
With Hains pottery types, a number of thick shell-tempered
pot sherds were discovered in certain of the middens. Heavy,
grooved quartzite malls were observed in several local collections. Mr. Lloyd Erwin of McLean assisted the author
with accurate information. Mr. Erwin’s own private collection contained many fine chipped artifacts, elbow pipes,
and a complete pot or two. He presented Dr. E. H. Sellards
with a finely fluted Folsom type point from a high stream
terrace locality on the south side of McClellan Creek and
north of the town of Allenreed.
One day during the survey, the writer was shown a few
human skull fragments and a portion of the lower jaw with
a few teeth intact. The source was a small dry gulch leading
down from the high escarpment on the north side of North
Fork and not far from Le Fors. A search soon located the
burial up near the level of the tableland and at the beginning of the ravine.

Our excavation uncovered the articulated skeleton of a
rather small male. The skull was missing, and this had largely been destroyed by recent erosion when the top of the burial became exposed. The placement of the skeleton indicated a sitting position, facing eastward. The left humerus
extended down the left side of the pelvis. The left ulna and
radius extended horizontally across to the right, just back
of left and right calcaneum. The right arm rested on the
right femur and the hand was near the right knee. A view
from the back of the burial indicated some torsion towards
the right involving the upper part of the skeleton. No clue
as to the cause of death was discernable. The age of the person, judging from the few teeth discovered, was apparently

82

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

about twenty-five. A careful search failed to disclose artifacts of any sort within the burial. However, the adjacent
tableland is mantled in burnt and broken stone, flint chipper’s debris, and other evidences of prehistoric occupation.
(See Hate 5).

THE COMANCHE EAGLE DANCE*

Bli" ERI~EST WALLAC~

Religious practice or ritual among the Comanches consisted primarily of socially recognized patterns for obtaining supernatural favor or power, generally called medicine.
Although there were ceremonial patterns for both individual
and group participation, the latter were extremely limited in
extent and importance. In most every instance, it must be
emphasized, the observance was a matter of individual concern. There was no religious organization; no theocracy; no
priestly class. Every man was his own priest and his own
prophet--the individual interpreter of the wills and ways of
the spirits. A direct revelation without priestly go-between
was the panacea for all human problems. To the Comanche
it was an unquestionable means of obtaining power. To any
major catastrophe, to any overwhelming urge, there was an
automatic response: :. revelation was sought. Power came
in a mystic visitation, a dream phenomena or hallucinatory
experience. Its authority was absolute; psychic experiences
were socially recognized and regarded as the very cornerstone
of Comanche cultural life.
The Comanches also gave social recognition to the transfer of power, but the owner of strong medicine was careful
not to spread his medicine too thin lestit become impotent.
The transfer might be made either to an individual or to a
group if the medicine was strong.
The Eagle Dance was a search for war power by one or
more youths turning warriors. The power-seeker could not
* In his study of the culture of the Comanche Indians, the author spent the summer of 1945 in the field among them. Although a number of older Comanches were
aware of the existence of the Eagle Dance, very few remembered any details. Wiley
Yellowfish of Apache, Oklahoma, who danced it possibly about 1885 or 1886 was my
best informant. Wiley’s father was a Comanche warrior of the Kwahadi band who
danced with I’satai each night while enroute to attack Adobe Walls.

84

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

merely call upon a medicine man and ask to share his power.
He might wait for a vision that would give him permission
to ask or for the owner of strong war medicine to tell him
that "My power wants you to take part of it." Possibly
more often the Eagle Dance was sponsored by some prominent member of the band, usually the father or uncle of an
ambitious youth.
The sponsor sought out a medcine man with strong
eagle or war power and offered a smoke. If the medicine
man accepted, he assumed complete charge of the ceremony.
The decision was a ~erious one for him. If he accepted, his
own power would be diminished since some of it would be
spread among the dancers. On the other hand, refusal might
be interpreted as a lack of the warriors confidence in his own
powers to risk spreading it out. In such a case, he would
suffer loss of prestige among his own peOple. Furthermore,
there was the factor of renumeration. Relatives and friends
of participants contributed gifts. The medicine leader could
keep what he preferred for himself, leaving the remainder
for the dancers.
After the medicine man accepted the request, he announced the time and place of the ceremony. He and the
dancers arose before daylight, went to the creek, bathed,
stripped to the breechc!out, put on war paint, let their hair
down and put eagle feathers in it, and rubbed themselves
with sage. After that they sat in a semi-circle with the
opening toward the east and smoked ceremoniously.

When the smoking was over, the leader arose, and followed closely by the dancers, sneaked silently to a nearby
camp to "capture" a girl. Spectators remained some distance
apart. In the old days the girl had to be a captive. The
girl’s family made z pretense of defending their camp
against the attacking party. The "victorious raiders" carried the ~captured" girl to their own camp where preparations had been made for the remainder of the ceremony.

The Comanche Eagle Dance

85

A tipi was used. The medicine leader provided two,
four, or six drummers and singers to help---never an odd
number. They sat close together facing the east. The girl
sat beside the leader. The dancers first assumed a position
directly in front facing east, but when the music began they
formed a circle around the musicians. Each dancer carried
in his right hand a ratde, decorated with feathers, paint, and
beads, and in his left hand carried a wand or fan prepared
from the wing feathers of an eagle. The dancers were young
eagles attempting to leave their nest and parental care in
order to soar away, masters of the sky. The symbolism is
obvious. The dancers did not sing, but attempted from
time to time to imitate the cry of the young eagle. When
a dancer lagged or wearied, the leader either blew his eagle
bone whistle as a warning for him to speed up or reinvigorated him with new power by waving the eagle fan above
him. When the music ceased, the dancers dropped on their
knees and sat back against their legs to rest, but the moment
the music resumed they sprang to their feet and were dancing again. Between the dances some warrior would rush
into the circle and recite some outstanding coup or deed
which he had performed. At the close of his recital a deafening applause went up, yells, drum beats, goard rattles,
and the stamping of feet. These speeches were pep talks
to encourage the young dancers to acts of bravery. During
the dance, the warriors of the girls’ people theoretically rushed up and attempted to recapture her. In actual practice
they rushed in and recited some coups of their own. Their
recital had to be true because the power of eagle medicine
was so strong, that misfortune would result to any who on
this solemn occasion falsified the facts. Spectators looked
on in reverential silence.

About mid-morning, the mother of one of the dancers
brought water for the participants and sat it down near the
circle. The leader drank and offered it to the dancers, each
drinking in turn and passing it to the one on his left. After
the failure of the girl’s relatives to recapture her, they

86

Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontologica~ Society

brought in presents and deposited them in the circle before
her. Relatives and friends of the dancers might provide
some of the gifts.
The medicine man retained a portion and gave the others
to the dancers. One informant received a horse when he
danced. Not infrequently a dancer went through the ceremony without gaining power. "There had to be something
inside stretching and pleading, reaching and grasping for
power if it were to be obtained."
The dance ended shortly before mid-day. No ceremonial
departure was remembered, but the feather wands and rattles used by the dancers were given to the girl and the
dancers rushed to the creek to bathe. They dived into the
water upstream four times, then dressed in their best attire
and returned to camp to partake of a feast prepared by the
women.

NOTES ON THE W. A. MYATT SITE

By Jo~ B~ W~u~r

The Myatt Site is a buried middensite on the home ranch
of Mr. W. A. Myatt in the east-central part of Jones County,
Texas, some twenty mi!es east of Anson, Texas, and approximately the same distance north of Abilene, Texas. It
lies on the east bank of the Clear Fork of the Brazes River
~nd is at present being eroded by that stream.
Excavation of the Myatt Site was made by Texas Technological College-W.P.A. Archeological Project, during the
early summer months of 1940. The work was begun by
the writer and during a leave o£ absence Mr. Arden King
acted as archeologist through most of the later part of the
excavation. I am indebted to Mr. King for the basic field
records concerning the stratigraphy of the site. Thanks
are due also to Mr. W. A. Myatt who kindly permitted excavation on his land and to Dr. Cyrus N. Ray who located
the site.
The site lies alongside the river (Plate 6,A). A short
contributary arroyo formed by intermittent run-off rain
water has cut across the southern end of the site. To the
east and northeast there is a gentle slope to this arroyo and
lateral erosion has carried away much of the top soil dropping and exposing camp debris once contained in the stratified deposits. To the north the river banks exhibit further
cultural debris eroding from the silts.
The area chosen for excavation lies on the highest portion of the land remaining between the river and the arroyo.
A datum point (Datum A) was established approximately
midway between the river and the creek. An east-west base

* Assistance in the preparation of these materials was furnished by the personnel
of the Works Project Admi.nistration, official Project No. 13,543.

88

Texas Archeolog~cal and Pa~eontological Society

line was established through Datum A and the site staked
off in five foot squares. The deposit was removed in arbitrary levels of one foot. Specimens were individually measured and all vertical and horizontal measurements were
made from Datum A.

Excavation was initiated in three pits. Pit A was completed during the course of the work from 0 to 15 feet
south, from 75 feet east to 65 feet west from Datum A. Pit
B and Pit C were begun to check the stratigraphy revealed
in Pit A. These were joined together and completed from
40 tO 50 feet South and 0 to 25 feet East from Datum A.
Five strata (Plate 6, B) were revealed in both Pit A
and Pit B-C. Stratum 1 is primarily of aeolian deposition,
but with some indications of increments by heavy silted
floodwaters during occasional periods of river overflow. It
has largely been deposited since the abandonment of the site
as a permanent camp and very few indications of cultural
material were recovered in this stratum. It is at present
undergoing some erosion.
Stratum 2 is midden deposit and the earth is heavily impregnated with charcoal, humic material, and mussel shells.
Scattered concentration of tabular limestone fragments are
probably the remains of hearths, the broken pieces being discarded as soon as they became too small for further use
around the fire. Quantities of flint chips, mussel shells, and
small amounts of badly decayed animal bone as well as the
majority of the artifacts demonstrate that this stratum was
the zone of heaviest occupation. The greater percentage
of artifacts within the midden stratum was in the lower
portion.
Stratum 3 consists of a silt deposit of reddish-brown
sandy clay. A few artifacts, flint nodules, and chips, a
PLATE 6
A. Map of Myatt site.
B. South profile of Myatt site.

Shetch M~p of

MYATT SITE

~

house

A

LEGEND
~

~,.or~~

SOUT. 40-~,~s’r o’~

STRATUM

~

STRATUM

r---J

STRATUM

~

STRATUM

~

STRAT UM

~

U NEXCAVATED
scale in ~eet

B
Plate 6

Notes on the W. A. Myatt Site

89

small amount of charcoal and animal bone fragments were
found, for the most part concentrated in the upper six
inches o£ the stratum.

A culturally barren layer of light brown sand which in
no place exceeded three or four inches comprised Stratum 4.
Stratum 5 is a red sandy loam deposit of variable thickness which overlies the Permian limestone bedrock unconformably. The only signs of occupation from this layer
were a few bits of charcoal and some flint chips recovered
at a depth of thirteen feet.
At the west side of the site and forming the stream bank
is a small flat bench-like terrace of redeposited material. It
is of recent origin and contained no cultural material.
Although the absolute elevation of the site increases
slightly southward from Datum A the thickness of the
strata diminish and it appears that the original concentration of occupation was near the Datum and perhaps to the
north and east where erosion has deposited all cultural material on a common exposed surface.
The artifact yield of the site Was quite low. This appears robe a commonplace of the sites in the region. Ten
whole and fragmentary projectile points were found in the
excavation. Five of these (Plate 7,a-e inclusive) are of
one type an da sixth (Plate 7,f) probably belongs to the
group, although the extreme proximal end of the base is
broken, and its shape cannot be precisely determined. The
one whole point of this type is 64mm in length, 25mm in
width, and 7ram thick. These measurements seem about
typical for the speciments from this site as nearly as can be
determined. The bases are slightly concave and are usually
somewhat thinned by a short longitudinal flake. The lateral edges of the stems are mostly parallel, but occasionally
are slightly expanding. The blades are long with straight
to slightly convex lateral edges and are usually beveled and
frequently serrated. Shoulders are usually square but may
vary from sloping to slightly barbed. These points are all

90

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

from Stratum 2 or the upper portion of Stratum 3 and appear to be the most common type for the period at least in
this site.
One point (Plate 7, g) is of crude workmanship with
irregular edges and with the base unaltered from the nodule
surface on one face and from the original flake face on the
other. It is 57mm long, circa 28mm wide, and 7mm thick.
It came from a relatively deep stratigraphic position in
Stratum 3.
Plate 2h, shows a roughly chipped projectile point with
a slightly concave base, small lateral notches immediately
above the base. Above these notches one edge is straight
while the other is slightly convex and together give the
point a somewhat assymetric appearance. Its dimensions
are length 40mm, width 20mm and thickness 5mm. This
piece is from Stratum 2.
A slender, serrated projectile point (Plate 7,i) has a long
narrow stem with ~lightly expanding edges and a straight
base. It is thin and relatively well worked. Its length is
39mm, width 15mm, and thickness 4mm. This point was
found stratified close to the top of Stratum 2 in Pit B-C.
The remaining point (Plate 7,j) is a small, relatively
broad piece with a short expanding stem concave base and
slightly convex blade edges. The length is 24mm, width
16mm, and thickness 4mm. It is well worked. This specimen is from the upper part of Stratum 2.
There are 9 while and 13 fragmentary blades of varying
sizes which have been classified as knives. Of the whole
specimens, 6 have square to slightly convex bases (Plate 7,1-o
inclusive) and one each is double pointed (Plate 7,~),
round base or leaf shape (Plate 7,p) and ovoid (Plate 7,q).
Specimen 7,1 is a large crude blade broken across the center where it has a piano-convex cross section. The base is
straight, the lateral edges convex. Its length is 102mm,
width 46mm, and thickness 11mm. It is from Stratum 3.

Notes on the W. A. Myatt Site

91

Specimen 7,m has a slightly convex base, one edge nearly
straight and at a right angle to the base. The other edge is
convex and curves up to the point to form an assymetric
blade. It was found in the lowest part of Stratum 2.
A large leaf shaped blade (Plate 7,n) with slightly convex base has convex lateral edges. It was found in the lower
part of Stratum 3.
One smaller specimen (Hate 7,0) is an assymetric roughly percussion flaked blade with a square base, one straight
edge, and a convex edge curving up to the point. This
specimen is from Stratum 3.
The leaf shaped specimen (Plate 7,p) is from Stratum 1,
six inches from the surface. The base is round and the lateral edges straight.

Specimen 7,q is a roughly percussion flaked blade, thick
and ovoid in outline. It was found in Stratum 3.
The double pointed piece (Plate 7,$) was made from
a long curved flake. The piece is relatively well made, the
percussion flaking being largely obliterated along the edges
by pressure retouch. The lateral edges of the longest end
are slightly beveled. Its length is 129mm, width 39mm
and thickness 8mm. This piece was found in the contact
zone between Strata 1 and 2.
Three side and three end scrapers domprise the implements in this category.
Specimen 7,r is the finely retouched edge of a narrow
flake. It is from Stratum 3, as is specimen 7,s. This piece is
from a large flake and has a minimum of retouching along
the cutting edge. The rest of the specimen is unaltered.
The specimen in Plate 7,t is a thick, tapering flake struck
from a flint boulder. Retouching was done along the thin
edge to form a scraping edge. This piece was found in
Stratum 2.

92

Texas Archeological and Pal~ontologica~ Society

Two of the end scrapers (Plates 7,u and 7,v) are from
Stratum 3. They are both made of thick flakes worked to a
rounded end, scraping edges beveled at an acute angle. One
of the pieces (Plate 7,u) has what may have been used as a
graver worked along the scraping edge.
The specimen shown in Plate 7,w has a thick beveled
scraping edge much polished by usage. It was found in
Stratum 2.
A single graver was found (Plate 7,x).
was not recorded on this specimen.

The location

Animal bones were present in very small quantity, but
were badly decomposed and for the most part were not salvagable. The distal end of the cannon bone of a young buffalo was found, and the right mandile of a beaver (Castorides sO.)
Basically the site is a one-phase occupation site. As
has been noted in the d,~scussion of the physical stratigraphy
of the site, the majority of the artifacts came from the upper
part of Stratum 3, the red sandy layer and the midden,
Stratum 2, which was built on the exposed surface of Stratum 3. Seven of ten projectile points found (Plate 7,
and i) are typical of the Brazos Culture,’ as agreed upon
by Ray and Sayles. Although, because of the smallness of
the series the result may be a happenstance of associatipn, all
the larger, square stemmed, concave based, and bevel bladed
points, were found in the upper part of Stratum 3 and in
the lower portion of the midden level, while the s!ender long
stemmed type was stratified above them nearly in the top of
the midden. Also, in the upper levels of the midden were
found two other projectile points. One of these (Plate 7,n)
21~ay and

Sayles,

1941.

PLATE 7
Artifacts from the Myatt site.

o

b

c

d

¯

h

v
,o
o
r

s

t

Plate 7

~

w
~

~
i

~

,~cm.
~ ioche ~;

i

j

Notes on $he W. A. Myat~ Site

is like the type projectile points for the late Edwards Plateau.’ The other (Plate 7, j) is very small and more typical
of the late projectile points found in the sand dune area
camp sites to the west and south. The remaining projectile
point (Plate 7, g) was stratigraphi~ally the earliest in the
site and is the least diagnostic. Because of its crudity and
the possibility of its having been unfinished it tells us little.
The knife forms are diagnostic of the Brazos Culture as
agreed upon by Ray and Sayles. They include the square
based types and the double pointed form. Here, however,
the double pointed knife was stratified at the extreme top
of the midden level. Moreover, one end was slightly beveled.
It was not a typical four bladed knife, however, and it probably is Brazos rather than Valley Creek Culture.
Scrapers are of both the end and side scraping varieties,
and are not particularly diagnostic.
The graver was unlocated within the site.
The paucity of artifacts makes cultural placement somewhat doubtful. The maiority of the artifacts, particularly
those of Stratum 3 and the lower t~art of the midden are diagnostic of the Brazos Culture, however, and so the major
part of the occupation is tentatively assigned to the Brazos
Culture. The upper part of Stratum 5 is not assignable because no recognizable artifacts were found associated.
It appears that a considerable amount of excavation in
both stratified and pure sites will be necessary before the
archaeology of the Abilene area ;s fully known.
~Sayles, 1935

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Sayles, E. B., "An Areheological Survey of Texas," Gila Pueblo, 193L Medallion
Papers, XVII.
Ray, C. N., and Sayles, E. B. "An Agreement on Abilene Region Terminology,"
Bulletin of The Texas Arcbeological and Paleonlological Society, Vol. 13, 1941.

TWELVE ROOM HOUSE RUIN

Bx~ M_~s. GLEI’,I E. MOORE

The investigations and excavations which furnished the
data for the following report were made by Mr. and Mrs.
Glenn E. Moore of El Paso, Texas, starting January 25, 1941,
and continuing through January, 1942. The discovery of
the ruin ended for the time being a survey of this area, which
began in the spring of 1937. The ruin is located on the old
Tobin Ranch property, and is about eight miles northeast
of the city limits. The work of excavating was limited
principally to Sundays and holidays, hence the length of
time consumed.
The writer wishes to acknowledge, and express gratitude
and appreciation to Mr. Joe Ben Wheat, Department of Anthropology, University of Arizona, for the help and encouragement given throughout the writing of this paper, also to
Mr. W. S. Strain of the Department of Geology, College of
Mines and Metallurgy, E1 Paso, Texas, for his assistance in
classification of materials of various artifacts.
Twelve Room House Ruin is located in the Hueco Bolson,: one of the largest of the inter-montane waste filled
plains of tbe Trans-Pecos region. Together with its northward and southward continuations, it is somewhat over 200
miles in length, about half of it lying each side of the TexasNew Mexico boundary. It varies in width, averaging possibly 25 miles. The greater part of the bolsom has an elevation of approximately 4000 feet, and it is bordered by mountains which rise from 2000 to 5000 feet higher. On the west
are the San Andrea, Organ and Franklin Mountains, and
others in Mexico. On the east are the Sacramento, Hueco,
Finlay, and Quitman ranges.
~ Richardson, G. B., Geologic Alias of U. $., El Paso Folio, p. 166, Washington,
1902.

Twelve Room House Ruin

95

In the E1 Paso Quadrangle, the Hueco Bolsom, which is
known locally as the "~Mesa", is a structural trough, deeply
filled with detritus.= This is a semi-arid region, with an annual rainfall of slightly less than ten inches, and a recorded
range from 2.22 inches to 18 inches. Most of the rains fall
in heavy local showers and more than half of the annual
rainfall comes in July, August, and September. The mean
annual temperature is 63.5 degrees, and the mean monthly
minimum about 31 degrees in January. The temperature is
rarely below 20 degrees.=
The country surrounding and including the ruins, has
been built up largely from matefals which have been washed
down from the I-Iueco and Franklin Mountains and ranges
north. The sand has a maximum thickness of approximately
5000 feet. The material is not consolidated and shifts with
varying winds. It is piled into hummocks which are not
true sand dunes, but which are formed by mesquite and other
vegetation trapping the sand.’ There are numerous depressions in the area, some due to wind scour. Some of these are
quite large, and apparently have held water from surface
runoffs for quite a time.
The vegetation is characteristic of an arid climate. Trees
are rare even on the mountains, but there is a scattered
growth of mesquite and creosote bush (Covillea). Yucca,
lechuguilla, sotol, bear-grass, ocotillo and several species of
cactus are abundant on the slopes.°
While large communal houses apparendy are absent from
this area, there are many small house ruins, varying from one
to twelve known rooms, scattered over a considerable area.
Due to large sand hummocks and heavy mesquite growth
over them, many of the house ruins have not been disturbed.

Ibid.
~Darton, i~l. H., Geologic Survey, Bull¢lin 845, Washington, 1933.
Strain, W. S., to Moore.
a Darton, N. H., Geologic Survey, Butletht 845, Washington, 1933.

96

Texas Archeological and Paleontologioal Society

About twenty miles to the northeast, in the Hueco Mountains, are the Cave Dweller sites.
While there are pottery sherds scattered over the adjoining ground, there was practically no evidence of a dwelling
on the small mound forming the ruin. A small pile of
broken manos and pieces of metates led to the trenching
and discovery of the north wall of Room 1, sixteen inches
below the surface. The !ocation of the site is somewhat
higher than the surrounding country, probably due to the
growth of mesquite in the sand-filled rooms and a slight
general elevation. Test pits applied to a small area about
twelve feet south of the dwelling revealed a large refuse
heap to a depth of three feet. A second refuse heap approximately ten feet to the west is much smaller. The refuse
heaps are of the sheet variety and due to occasionally heavy
rains and frequent sandstorms it is difficult to determine
their exact extent.
There were no indications of doorways in any of the
rooms. Wind and rain have done their work to such an extent that it was impossible to determine how entrance was
effected. If entrance was by doors in the walls, all evidence
of them has been destroyed as the walls were caved in and
eroded too far to show signs of any sill. Floors in several
of the rooms were covered with burnt poles and brush of
the roof, the hard baked adobe showing the impression of the
poles. Roof entrance was an alternative possibility.
The walls were all of adobe, averaging eight inches in
thickness, and extending from six to eight inches below the
floors. Apparently they were not set in trenches. There
had been no attempt to form bricks, or use stone in the walls.
All walls were plastered with a coating of adobe, one-half
to three-fourths of an inch thick. Room 1 had two coats
of plaster.
The floors were of adobe, well packed and smoothed to
the walls. The average thickness of the floors was about
three inches. In Room 1, two floors were encountered, the

T~e~e

Roo~r~ ~ouse R~

97

lower floor about three and a half inches below the first.
No sherds or other artifacts were found between the floors.
This is a rectangular dwelling, oriented northeast by
southeast and containing twelve rooms. The overall measurement is 116 feet and ten inches by twenty-seven feet.
The central part of the house contains seven rooms arranged
in a double row. One large room adjoins the northeast and
on the zouthwest a row of three rooms extends from the approximate mid-section of the central unit. A single room
to the west and north is adjoined to the central unit and the
adjacent wing-room.
Eight rooms had firepits. They were of circular type
and of hard baked adobe. A rim of the inverted saucer type
extended possibly an inch above floor leve! and around the
pit, blending into the floor at the outer edge. Average width
of this encircling collar was six inches. All firepits were
filled with ashes, and in most cases ashes, apparently raked
from them, formed a deposit on the floor. The firepits were
slightly smaller at the bottom. The diameter of these pits
varied from eight to ten inches, and the average depth was
eight inches. They were usually placed midway between
the east and west walls, about twenty-two inches from the
south wall.
Room 1

The dimensions of Room 1 are 16 by 19 feet. The north
wall is 24 inches and the south wall 20 inches in height from
the floor. The east and west walls are approximately the
same height as the south. The north wall showed two coats
of plaster, in very good condition, in spite of having been
badly burned. The other walls were plastered in a like
manner, but were not so badly burned. The floor was of
hardpacked adobe, almost polished in sections and completely, covered with a one and a hal]~ inch layer of charred
roofing material consisting of brush, small poles, and adobe.
The firepit was located midway between east and west
walls and approximately twenty-two inches from the south

98

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

wall. It was slightly smaller at the bottom and had a depth
of seven and a half inches. Ashes filled the pit and formed
a concentration around the pit.
There were three post holes in this room, located twelve
inches in from the api~roximate midpoint of the north, east,
and west walls. No burned posts were found in the room
fill. Room fill consisted of the caved in adobe walls and
sand. On the floor i~i the southeast corner a large trough
type metate and three manos were found. Two manos were
found on the floor in the west side of the room. Two small
pieces of polished turquoise and three small polishing stones
were found in the southwest corner about two feet from
the south wall. Pottery sherds were scattered over the entire
Room 2

The room is 21 ~ by 16 feet, and presents a problem, for
it is divided into four compartments of unequal size. In the
east a compartment four feet wide extends the entire width
of the main room. A wall four feet in and parallel to the
west segment of the north wall provided a north compartment 18 feet long. The remaining section of the main room
was cut by a north-south wall four feet from the west wall
of the east compartment, dividing the space into an inner
compartment 4 by 12 feet and a southwest corner compartment 13 feet 2 inches in length by 11 feet 4 inches in width.
The inner walls were laid on the floor of the main room and
were continuous, with the exception of a distance of about
three feet of the inner north-south compartment. This
either had been left open intentionally or had been broken
down at some previous time. The average height from the
floor of both inner and outer walls is twenty-two inches.
The adobe floor was hard packed and smooth, and was
covered with 2~ inches of burned roofing material. Room
PLATE 8
Plan of Twelve Room House.

~oi

-e

o
--

~o

-+

o

Plate 8

Twelve Room House Ruin

fill above the burned layer consisted of adobe walls and sand.
In the outer north-south compartment there was a much
heavier layer of burned brush and part of a post about a
foot long and having a diameter of 1 ½ inches.
The firepit, having a depth of nine inches and filled with
ashes, was located about the center of the main room. A
large trough type metoote was found about two feet northeast of the firepit. Pottery sherds were found under the
charred roofing material directly under the east wall of the
east-west compartment. On the floor of the main room
lay about half of a thin, flat type metate. No artifacts
were found in the inner north-south compartment. Under
the layer of burned materials in the outer compartment were
the follwing badly broken artifacts:
3 large ollas, broken
8 simple bowls, varying in diameter from 10 to 1 ½ inches, three
not broken
2 jug form vessels, one not broken
3 bowls with ornaments
1 simple bowl of black polished ware
1 small metate, tough type, having yellow ochre (limonite) adhering to grinding surface
1 round mano and several poorly shaped and broken
2 round stone balls
I round stone object, 3 ~ inches in diameter and ½ inch thick
6 large pieces of yellow ochre "
2 pieces of calcium carbonate (travertine)
62 olivella shell beads, spire ground down
34 small discoid beads, shell badly burned
4 turquoise beads, burned
15 alectrion shell beads
1 tubular bead, shell
1 small charred corn cob
Small part of woven basket
A large quantity of gourds, broken and completely charred

Room 3
This room was 22 feet wide by 24 feet long. It contained
very little evidence of value in determining its use. The artifacts found in the other rooms indicated domiciliary oc-

IO0

Texas Archeological ~nd Paleontological Society

cupation and use. The firepit, which was located in .the
usual place, did not show signs of having been used as much
as the others. The floor was rough and showed no signs of
having been packed or polished. The average height of the
walls from the floor was 14 inches.

Room fill was of adobe walls and sand. A few pottery
sherds found on the floor near the west wall were used in restoring the large ornamental bowl shown on Plate 10, i. A
flat rock 10 by 12 inches by three-fourths of an inch and a
piece of crystal were in the southwest corner.
Room 4

Room 4 was a very shallow room, 9 feet wide by 19 feet
long. The floor level was 12 inches above that of the other
rooms. A continuous wall from the south (front of the
dwelling), forming the east wall of the outer compartment
of Room 2 and the east wall of Room 4, extended below
the floor of Room 4, indicating the possibility of a room
beneath the first floor. Trenches, however, revealed that the
wall extended to a depth of only two feet, and that beyond
the usual room fill of ~.and and a few small particles of charcoal there was no evider,ce of another room.
There was no firepit in the room. The adobe floor was
very hard, smooth, and about three inches thick, and was
covered with a layer of burned material on the floor, consisting of brush, small poles, and adobe. On the floor were
a few pottery sherds, the bottom of a jug type vessel, and
a round flat top stone object with a depression in the top
center and a convex bottom. The vessel had been ground
down, edges smooth, and had a lump of iron oxide (hematite) in it.
Room 5
Room 5 measured 1 ! feet in width and 14 feet in length.
The walls were plastered with a coating of adobe, and aver-

Twelve Room House Ruin

10i

aged in height 20 inches from the floor. The floor was in
good condition and the firepit was located in the customary
place.
A large, trough type metate, propped on three stones,
was found about two and one-half feet northeast of the
firepit. The metate was lying at about a 30 degree angle.
The irregular shaped stones which were used to raise the
closed end of the metate apparently had been used as manos.
Two other manos lay near the metate. One of scoria was
oblong in shape., and measured 12 inches in length, four
and one-half inches in width, and one inch in thickness.
With the exception of one flat side, the other was round,
measuring five inches in diameter. A stone measuring 12
inches in length, eight inches in width, and one inch in thickness was incorporated in the south wall of Room 5. Pottery
sherds were scattered over the floor.

Room 6

The dimensions of Room 6 were 10 by 11 feet. The
height of the walls from the floor were 12 inches on the south
side and six inches on the west. The floor was in good condition, and was c~overed with very little burned material.
Two projectile points lay on the floor near the west wall
and to the south. Two rectangular objects of scoria, each
having a longtitudinal groove, were found in the southwest
corner of the room. A few sherds of pottery were scattered
over the floor.
Room 7

Room 7 was 8 feet wide by 14 feet long. The walls,
which were plastered, averaged 22 inches in height from the
floor. The floor was in excellent condition, and there were
no signs of burned roofing material.
In the southwest corner a trough type metate, one small,
round mano, two small pieces of scoria, and a pebble polishing stone were found. Another object of scoria, this one
containing a longitudina! groove, lay about midway of the

102

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

room near the north wall. Sherds of two kinds of pottery,
which is discussed in another part of this report, were scattered over the floor.

Room 8
It was not possible to obtain measurements for Room 8,
since there was no north or west wall standing. However,
there was a good floor covering a distance of about four feet
adjacent to the south wal! and about six feet adjacent to the
west wall.
There was no firepit, and the room fill consisted of adobe
walls, sand, and many pottery sherds. This room was used
for refuse apparently, for many pieces of broken manos and
fragments of broken metates were in the fill. A smal!.stone
maul was recovered from the refuse.
Room 9
Room 9 was 11 feet wide by 11 feet long. The firepit
was in very good condition and filled with ashes. Average
height of walls from the floor was 12 inches. The usual room
fill of adobe walls and sand was present and a small amount
of burned roofing material was scattered over the floor, but
by no means forming a covering. The floor was in fair condition.
Near the east wall, to the south, two broken trough type
metates and two round manos were found. A fan-shaped
rock, found near the west wall, with a slightly outcurving
top, measured nine and one-half inches on two sides, by
eleven and one-half inches in width at the widest part. One
rectangular mano of scoria and part of a stone pestle lay
nearby. A stone pendant was found near the west wall. It
was perforated .;n the widest part and measured one and onehalf inches in length, and one-eighth of an inch in thickness.
It was one inch wide at the top, tapering gently to less than
one-half an inch at the bottom. It was not polished, but
well worked and has .~ dull reddish color. The usual room
fill of adobe walls and sand was present.

Twelve Room House Ruin

103

Room 10

It was impossible to obtain accurate measurements of
Room 10, but there is doubt that the space had been used as
a room. The south and west walls were practically gone and
the north wall measured no more than two inches from the
floor at any point, but the east wall was twelve inches. The
floor was in fairly good condition. There was no firepit. A
number of pottery sherds lay on the floor.
Room 11

Room 11 was 9 feet wide by 19 feet long. The average
height of the walls from the floor was 15 inches. The room
contained a very good firepit, in the usual location, filled
with ashes. The floor was in good condition, showing no
signs of having been blackened by burning roof materials.
One large, trough type metate and two oval stones, each
having a groove, were found lengthwise in the southwest
corner of the room. A few scattered pottery sherds were
on the floor.
Room 12

Room 12, located between rooms 5 and 7, was a rather
narrow room, being only 6 feet in width and 14 feet in
length. The average height of th~ wal!s from tJ~e floor was
14 inches. Walls were plastered .~s were the walls throughout the dwelling. The floor was in good condition, but the
firepit was absent. Room fill was predominantly gravel and
sand, with some adobe.
There were two large, trough type metates in the "room,
one in the northeast co~’ner, the other on the east side of the
room near the south wall. While breaking through the
floor in the extreme southeast corner, the excavator encountered a very soft spot, and at a depth of 12 inches below
the floor found three pottery sherds, each approximately
four by eight or nine inches. They were presumably taken
from the walls of an olla type vessel and used to protect

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

104

and cover a rectangular shaped lump of soft, very light
green substance. Sampies of the substance were identified
through analysis by Mr. W. S. Strain of the Department of
Geology, College of MSnes, E1 Paso, as iron potassium. A
perfectly round pottery sherd about the size of a quarter
with a curved linear design in black on gray background was
found on the west side of the room about three inches above
the floor in the fill. A few scattereed sherds were on the
floor.

Pottery
The largest percentage of the pottery found over an
area of several miles in a north-south and east-west direction
from El Paso and in the Hueco Basin is classified as E1 Paso
Polychrome, and has a possible dating of Pueblo III and early
Pueblo IV.’ Because of certain apparent relationships between the last stages of the great period to the south in Old
Mexico, phase B, Pueblo III may be given the approximate
date of 1100 to 1300 A.D. These dates must not be considered as absolutely accurate, but they are based on evidence
which makes them a fairly close approximation.’ About 90
percent of the sherds found on the floor of the ruin were
E1 Paso Polychrome. Chupedaro Black on White, Chihuahua Polychrome, and an unknown corrugated ware having
a black polished interior made up the rest. There were no
sherds of the E1 Paso Plain Brown Ware, a type used for
culinary purposes.
The jars, or "ollas" as they are known locally, found in
the ruin ranged in size from one and one-half inches to two
feet in depth. Some .~f the moderate size jars with an encrustation of ashes and residue on the exterior possibly had
been used for culinary purposes, while the larger were probably used extensively for storage purposes.

*Hawley, F. M., Bulletin, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, 1936.
Roberts, F. H. H., Bulletht 92, Sralthsonlan Institute, x,Vashington, 1929.

Twelve Room House Ruin

105

The ~ollas" are rounded at the base. They are thinnest
near the middle, tapering gradually in thickness to one-third
of an inch at the base, shoulder, neck, and rim. They vary
in color from brown to reddish brown, and usually have a
red rim with a black band encircling the exterior of the lip.
The decoration, extending about half-way downward from
the neck, cons;sts of ,]ternating lines of black and red,
massed colors, and stepped designs."
The jar, or olla, shown on Plate 9, a, has a globular body
with high shoulder, constricted neck, and a flattened rim.
Irregularities in the rim may have been intentional to facilitate pouring. It is El Paso Polyehrome, having the common decoration consisting of alternating lines of black and
red, with massed colors, but no stepped designs. The depth
of this olla was !4 inches; the diameter at the largest part
of the body, slightly below the shoulder, was fifteen and
one-half inches, at the constricted part of the neck nine
inches, and at the mouth 10 inches.
Plate 9, b, shows a larger olla of E1 Paso Polychrome. Its
depth was seventeen and one-half inches; diameter at widest
part was eighteen and one-ha!~ inches, at the constricted
part o~ the neck eleven 0nd one-half inches, and at the mouth
twelve and one-hal~ inches. The rim was rounded and the
walls were somewhat thicker than usual, having a thickness
of three-sixteenths of an inch. It had been broken when it
was put in the compartment £or the base and about half o~
Plate 9, a, rested in the bottom. There were small discoidal
beads in the bottoms of both ollas, but it was impossible to
determine in which vessel they .had been originally, as both
ollas were badly broken.
A third olla, larger than either of the two described, has
not been completely restored. It, also, is an E1 Paso Polychrome vessel and has the usual black lines and massed color
decoration, but no stepped designs. The background color
SHawley, F. M., Bulletin, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, 1936.

1{}6

Texas A~’cheological and Paleontological Society

is brown, very little red showing over the entire vessel. It
is unusual because of the size and the extreme thinness of
the walls.
The simple bowls represented a second form found.
They have rounded bottoms and usually have a red, flat rim
with black exterior lines of varied widths slightly be!ow or
sometimes touching the rim. The interior is usually decorated with alternating lines of black and red, with some
massed color stepped designs. Plate 9, a, is an El Paso Polychrome simple bowl, ten and three-fourths inches in diameter at the rim and four and one-half inches in depth., with
a slightly flattened rim. The interior decoration consists of
alternating lines of black and red, with massed color designs
on opposite sides of the bowl.
Hate 9, d, e, f, g, and h, are all E1 Paso Polychrome bowls,
ranging in size from eight and seven-eighth inches in diameter at the rim by four and one-half inches in depth (Plate
9, e,) to two and one-fourth inches in diameter at the rim
by three-fourths of an inch in depth (Plate 9, [). Al! of
these bowls have the flattened rim except e which has a
rounded rim. The black exterior line is present on all the
bowls. On Plate 9, d, e, and h, most of the decoration has
been obliterated by fire. Plate 9, g, has an interior black
line one-half inch in width near the top of the bowl, and
another one-eighth of an inch width, near the base. Plate
9, f, has an interior black line around the top one-fourth of
an inch in width, and another in the lower part of the bowl
five-eighths of an inch wide.
The collection contains two simple bowls not in possession of the writer nor pictured in this report. The decoration in the larger is very unusual in E1 Paso Polychrome, and
appears entirely different from any of the others. It measures nine inches in diameter and about four inches in depth.
PLATE 9
Pottery from Twelve Room House.

Plate 9

T~oe~e Roo~ Ho~e R~i~

107

It has a flattened rim, with a narrow black line encircling
the exterior but not reaching the rim. The background
color is black with red designs. An irregular circular-shaped
line of red in the base of the bowl was broken by a very
smal! perpendicular line of black. The break was probably
intentional, for similar breaks occur in the half circles above.
Plate 9, i and ~, are E1 Paso Polychrome bowls with irregular, scalloped rims. Plate 9, i, is seven and seven-eighths
inches in diameter at the rim, and is six ,and five-eighths
inches high. Plate 9, ~, is six and one-half inches in diameter at the rim and is three and three-eighths inches high,
Both bowls have designs of black and red.
The bowl represented by Plate 9,/¢, is much smaller than
either i or ~. It is only four and seven-eighths inches in diameter, three and seven-eighths inches in height, and the
ornaments extend one and one-fourth inches above the
slightly flattened rim. The steps in the ornaments are not
weI! defined, apparently having been made with a stick while
the paste was soft. Although the colors and design have
been obliterated by fire, the bowl is easily recognized as El
Paso Polychrome. There are perforations in the dip of each
step, but only in the top of one ornament.
Plate 9, 1, is a sm~ll bowl with a slightly constricted
mouth. The diameter at the widest part below the rim is
five and th.ree-eighths inches, four and five-eighths inches
at the mouth, and a depth of two and three-eighths inches.
Due to having been badly burned, it has not been classified,
but has an appearance very similar to a black burnished
bowl. It is not El Paso Polychrome, as far as paste and temper are concerned. It is much finer in texture, is not friable,
and the shape is not common to E1 Paso pottery. In thinness and texture it resembles the Chihuahua pottery.
Plate 9, m, is a small unbroken Chupedaro pitcher.’ From
a flat base the walls curve outward to the point of greatest
~Hawley, F. M., Bulletb~, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, 1936.

108

Tea~as Archeologica~ and Pa~eontoIogica~ Society

diameter which is relatively low and is four inches across
the bowl. Above this point the walls slope gently to the
base of the neck where the diameter is one and one-half
inches. The diameter o~" the mouth is one and three-fourths
inches. The depth of ~he vessel is four inches. The rim is
slightly outcurving and irregular as though it had been rubbed down. The handle is formed of two very small coils of
pottery clay, blended together at the rim joint and at the
body joint slightly below the base of the neck. Beginning
one inch below the handle, five black lines, each approximately one-half inch apart, encircle the body of the pitcher.
One black line encircle~ the base of the neck. The lines,
other than the bottom, ~re a dull brownish color due to poor
firing or to the heat from the burning roofing material.
Although the interior does not show the striations usually
found in Chupedaro pottery, it conforms in other ways.
Plate 9, n, is a larger Chupedaro pitcher, with a slightly
flattened base, a globular body, and a flattened top where it
merges with a slightly flaring neck. The height of the neck
is two inches. It is two and one-eighth inches in diameter
at the base, three inches at the mouth, six and five-eighths
inches at the widest point, and has a depth of six and seveneighths inches. Two joined coils of clay are attached to thee
neck slightly below the rim and to the flattened shoulder to
form the handle. The background color is dull gray, and
the decorations are all clear black with the exception of a
section of the back of the pitcher where they had been obliterated by burning.
The neck has three encircling black lines beginning threefourths of an inch below the black rim and extending to the
base of the neck. About one and one-fourth inches below
the base of the neck and on the flattened shoulder is another
black line about one-third of an inch wide, and one-half
inch lower a very narrow black line forms the top of the
encircling band of decoration. One-half inch below the
bottom of the band of decoration is yet another black line

Twelve Room House Ruin

one-third of an inch wide.
roughly striated.

109

The interior of the vessel was

Plate 10, m, is the ground down base of a Chupedaro
pitcher with a diameter of, four and one-half inches. Striations had been worn down by rubbing. The base contained
a lump of iron oxide (hematite), two and one-half inches
long by two inches wide by one and one-half inches thick.
Stone Objects
The objects of stone from this ruin seem to have been
made principally for utilitarian purposes. They consist of
metates, manos, arrow shaft polishers, and one small maul.
In the apparently less useful group are two stone balls, a fan
shaped stone, small pebbles, used probably as polishing stones,
pieces of unworked scoria, two discoidal objects, four disk
beads of turquoise, and one stone pendant. In the chipped
stone class only two projectile points were found.
Metates

Eight metates, fashioned from andesite by the pecking
and grinding method ~nd all of the same general shallow
trough, open end type, were found in the ruin. In shape
they range from slightly ovoid to sub-rectangular. Apparently it was not deemed necessary to do more than roughly
shape the outside and peck out the groove for the milling
surface. The material from which these metates and manos
were made may have been obtained from the Franklin Mountains, a distance of three to five miles from the ruin. They
do not vary greatly in size, ranging from twenty to twentythree inches in length, eleven to fourteen inches in widths,
two and one-half to ~ix inches in thickness, with an average
depth of the milling depression of one and one-half inches.
The milling groove is between nine and eleven inches in
width.

The smallest metate (Plate 10. a) was taken from the
outer north-south compartment in Room 2, with other

110

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

artifacts. It measures fourteen inches in length, nine inches
in width, and the milling depression sloped gently from the
sides to a depth of one inch in the center. The average thickness is two inches.
Plate 10, b, pictures the metate found in situ in Room 5.
It is twenty-one and one-half inches in length, thirteen
inches at the point of greatest width, and three to five
inches in thickness, with the milling depression measuring
two inches in the center and deepest part.
M~os

Fifteen manos were taken from the ruin. Thirteen were
of andesite and were the round, single hand type with one
flat and one convex face. None of them measured more
than five inches in diameter nor one and one-half inches in
thickness. The other two were of scoria and rectangular.
One measured twelve inches in length, four and one-half
inches in width, and one inch in thickness; the other five
by four by one.
Shaft Polishers
Shaft polishers found in the ruin are sub-rectangular
objects made of limestone, andesite, and scoria. They vary
only slightly in size and shape. The polisher depicted in
Plate 10, c, measures three and one-eighth inches in length,
two and three-fourths inches in width, and one and threefourths inches in thickness. It is made from scoria and, in
common with other artifacts of this class, has the longitudinal groove in the approximate center of one face. The groove
is one-fourth inch deep and one-half inch wide.
Plate 10, d, shows a polisher of andesite, three inches in
length, two and one-half inches in width, and one and onePLATE 10
Artifacts from Twelve Room House.

Pla~e 10

Twelve Roo~ Ho~.~e R~i~

111

half inches in thickness. The groove is one-eighth of an inch
in depth, three-eighths cf an inch wide, and retains a polished surface.
Plate 10, e, pictures a polisher fashioned from grayish)
white limestone, measuring three and three-fourths inches
in length, three and seven-eighth inches in width, and one
and one-half inches thick. The groove, which is one-eighth
of an inch in depth and one-half inch wide, is well polished.
Plate 10, f, g, and h, are scoria polishers. F is three and
one-half inches in length, three and one-eighth inches in
width, three-fourths of an inch in thickness. The groove,
which is one-eighth of an inch in depth and nine-sixteenths
of an inch iu width, is coated with a black substance, easily
removable by slight pressure. G is two and seven-eights
inches in length, two and three-fourths inches in width, and
one and three-fourths inches thick. The groove is onefourth of an inch in depth and five:eighths of an inch in
width. H is not as welt made as the others. It is two and
one-half inches in length, two and three-eighths inches in
width, seven-eighths of an inch thick. The groove is very
shallow.
Stone Maul

Plate 10, i, is of a small, andesite maul, slightly squared.
One end is rounded; the other is slightly flattened. This
maul is two and One-ha.If inches in length by one and seveneighths inches in widths. The three-fourths groove is more
shallow on one face than on the other faces. It has a maximum depth of one-sixteenth of an inch and is sevensixteenths of an inch wide)
Plate !0, i, shows a discoidal object of andesite, with a
shallow circular depression in the center of a flat top face.
The base is rounded. The stone measures four and onefourth inches in diameter and is one and three-fourths inches
thick. The diameter of the depression is one and oneeighths inches and it has a depth of three-sixteenths of an
inch.

112

Texas Archeologieal and Paleontological Society

Hate 10, k, pictures a highly polished discoidal object of
black limestone. The f~ces of the stone are flat, and in the
center of one is a conically drilled pit one-eighth of an inch
in depth and one-eighth inch in width. The diameter is
three and five-eighths inches and it is one-half inch thick.
Plate 10, l, shows one of the two ground stone balls recovered from the ruin. Both balls measured two inches in
diameter. One is made of diorite, the other of rhyolite.
Shell Beads
Only a very few shell beads were found in the ruin. They
were in the ollas pictured on Plate 9, a and b. Sixty-two
spire ground Olivella shells, fifteen Alectrion shells, a small
quantity of disk shaped shell beads, fused by heat, interspersed in the dirt and burned roofing material, one tubular bead of shell one-half inch in length and about threeeighths inch in width, and one crinoid stem without perforation were counted. The alectrions are twice the size of
those usually found in this area. The hole for suspension
was ground in the lip.
Miscellaneous
Six pieces of yellow ochre (limonite), two pieces of calcium carbonate (travertine), and a section of a hollow reed
about three-fourths of an inch long and filled with a pale
green material were found in the north-south compartment
of Room 2. There was not enough of the green material to
analyze, but it resembled the large lump of material found
beneath the floor of Room 12. Additional material taken
from this same compartment included a charred portion
of a corn cob about one inch long, without seeds, a very
small section of a woven basket, and a large quantity of
broken and charred gourds scattered on the floor.
In Room 4 one lump of reddish mineral paint (hematite)
was found in the base of a small pottery vessel which had
been broken and the edges rounded. Paint had been rubbed

Twelve Room House Ruin

113

on the jug. A sub-rectangular lump of green, powdery material, covered by large pottery sherds, was found beneath
the floor of Room 12. It had pulverized and reformed into
a cake. One face is slightly concave, the other flat; the
edges of three sides are convex, the other slightly concave.
It measures four and one-half inches in length, three and
one-fourth inches in width, and one and five-eighths inches
in thickness. Samples were identified by Mr. W. S. Strain
of the College of Mines, Department of Geology, as iron
potassium.
Summary and Conclusion

One small fragment of basketry and numerous charred
fragments of gourds were the only surviving perishable material used by the occupants of this dwelling. The articles
of more lasting quality are represented by pottery, stone implements, a few fragments of bone, and a small number of
shell beads.
Most of the pottery is of the class most common to the
area. No vessels, definitely classified as culinary, were present. With one exception all bowls and ollas were decorated.
The size of the ollas indicates that they were used for storage
purposes. The paste of both bowls and ollas is rather coarse,
very friable, has sand for temper, and is porous.

Stone implements which consist of metates, manos, and
arrow shaft polishers, were made by the pecking and grinding method. The open end, shallow trough type being the
only kind found. Seven rooms of the ruins contained merates. None were in bins, and only one was elevated. Two
or three manos usually lay near each metate. One small
maul, three chipped stone implements, two projectile points,
and one knife, completed the list of stone artifacts recovered.
The scarcity of projectile points in the dwelling and the surrounding area may indicate that the inhabitants were inclined to a peaceful, sedentary life.

114

Texas Archeolog~caI and PaleontoIogical Society

Shells obtained from the Gulf of California and the western ocean provided many strings of ornamental beads.
No burials were encountered; consequently, no information on skeleton material or burial customs was obtained.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Richardson, G. B.
1909. Geologic Atlas oJ United Slates, El Paso Folio 166, Washington.

Darton, N. H.
1933. Geologic Survey Bulletin, 84L Washington.
Hawley, F. M.
1936. Field Manuel o.1 Prehistoric Southwestern Pottery Tyl~es.
versity o~ New Mexico.

Bulletin of Uni-

Roberts, F. H. H.
1929. ShabiA’s eshchee Village, A Late Bas~et Maher in the Chaco Canyon,
Mexico, Smithsonian Institute Bulletin, 92, Washington.

THE LEHMANN ROCK SHELTER: A STRATIFIED
SITE OF THE TOYAH, UVALDE, AND
ROUND ROCK FOCI*

BY J.

CHARLES KELLEY

Introduction

The Lehmann Rock Shelter, located in the Llano River
drainage, near Doss, Gi~lespie County, Texas, was excavated
in January, 1936, by the Department of Anthropology of
The University of Texas. Excavations were supervised by
A. M. Woolsey, who likewise prepared the field notes used
in writing this report.

Since completion of the excavations, the artifacts and
field notes have remained on file at the Anthropology Museum in Austin. The present study of the artifacts and
analysis of the stratigraphy of the site was made as part of
a coi,tinuing program which has as its aim the publishing
of r~ ports on many such almost forgotten excavations of
former years. Although the Lehmann Rock Shelter provides little new archaeological information, it does furnish
verifi cation of previous concepts of the sequence and composition of Texas cultures.
I. The Shelter

The shelter is located on the Charlie Lehmann’ ranch
about three miles northeast of Doss, Texas. It lies in the
bluffs along the north side of Onion Creek, just above its
* Much of the material in this paper, including the illustrations, is being used as
part of a thesis offered in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Ph.D. degree
in Anthro~logy at Harvard University.
~ At this late date, the author wishes to express the gratitude of the Department
of Anthropology for the generosity of Mr. Charlie Lehmann in permitting the excavation of the site, and for the assistance he gave the excavating crew.

116

Texas A~cheological and Paleontological Society

junction with Threadgill Creek. (]Plate 11,A). The shelter
is open to the southwest but is well protected by nearby
hillsides. The surrounding region is rough hilly terrain,
covered with a thick growth of juniper, post-oak, liveoak, mesquite, and other vegetation, including stands of
lush grass in the clearings. Many pools of water stand
against the tilted strata that form the floor of Onion and
Threadgill Creeks, and the flow of these small streams is seldom interrupted. Deer and turkey are still abundant in
the region. Many burned rock middens and camp sites,
largely attributable to the Round Rock and Uvalde
occur in the vicinity.
The rock shelter itself is roughly crescentic in form
(]plate 12; A), measuring approximately 240 feet in length
and ranging in depth from four feet to 60 feet. Most of the
area beneath the overhang, however, is covered by a heavy
rock fall, leaving an area about 145 feet long and nine to
20 feet wide along the back wall which contains alluvial
and cultural deposits. The over-hanging roof averages about
eight to 12 feet in height (]plate 11, B), and the surface of
the deposits lies about ten feet above normal stream level,
sloping some seven feet from western to eastern end (]Plate
12, B). The maximum depth of deposits in the excavated
area was 85 inches.
Along 138 feet of the rear wall and ceiling (Plate 11, B),
pictographs are visible. These include conventionalized human figures, deer, bird:.’., parallel lines, circles, circles with
~The Round Rock Focus was first described by Sayles (1935, p. $3, Plate XIV,
and Table 4) and a revised account was given by Kelley (1947). The Uvalde Focus
was first described, though not under that name, by Huskey (1935, p. 108, Plate 14,
161-162, "upper .... middle level", "Mound A" culture), and apparently is the complex termed *’Late Edwards Plateau" culture by Sayles (1935, Plate XII). Revised descriptions of the focus are now under preparation by the present author.

PLATE 11
The Lehmann Rock Shelter.
A, view of shelter from the Southwest; B, interior
of shelter, showing deposits, rear wall at left, and fallen "table rocks" at right.

Plate 11

The Lehmann Rock Shelter

117

dots, long wavy or zigzag lines, dot designs (Plate 11, C),
and design elements resembling the stacked rain cloud designs of the Southwest. Most of the pictographs are in red,
although black and white are represented.’
Shallow circular mortar holes are present in the fallen
~’table rocks" at the front of the occupied area of the shelter. (Hate 12, A). At the southeastern end of the shelter,
Onion Creek runs beneath the overhanging roof, thus providing a readily available and protected source of water.
II. Exc,~vations
Excavations were made between December 31, 1935,
and January 15, 1936, by a small crew of laborers under
the supervision of A. M. Woolsey. Work was begun at the
southeastern edge of the deposits (Plate 12, A, [c] ) and
progressed toward the northwest . Where possible, a vertical exposure of the deposits was maintained across the entire width of the excavated area. Toward the close of the
investigations work shifted to the northwestern edge of the
deposits, and a second crew worked eastward to meet the
first crew. All alluvial deposits of promise were excavated
and the dump pile was leveled to the satisfaction of the
owners.

A contour map of the site with a one foot interval was
made prior to excavation. The provenience of all artifacts
was recorded by (a) depth from surface, (b) the day o£
work on which the specimen was discovered, and hence the
approximate horizontal location (Plate 16, A and B), and
(c) very rarely by the strata in which they were found.
Single-point cross-sections of the stratigraphy were made at
irregular intervals, but no effort was made to relate these
~jackson (1938, pp. 254-259, Plates CXC, CXCI, CXCII, and Fig. 218) has described the pictographs of the Lehmann Rock Shelter ("Site 140, Gillespie County"),
and illustrated several of the paintings. An earlier paper by Julia Estill likewise deals
with this site and reproduces most of the pictographs.
(Estill, 1925, pp. 103-114,
Plates I- VII).
The account itself, unfortunately, is fanciful, rather than factual;
the postulated Comanche authorship of the pictographs is without foundation in fact.

118

Texas Archeological and Paleon~ologioal Society

isolated cross-sections to each other or to the general stratigraphy of the shelter. Nevertheless, a fairly clear picture
of the stratigraphy of the site emerges from a close inspection
of the isolated cross-sections, the general field notes and the
numerous photographs. A reconstruction of this stratigraphy is presented in Plates 12, B; 15 and 16.
A total of 395 specimens was brought in from the field
but stratigraphic data of any sort were available on only
261 o1~ these artifacts, full data on even fewer. Many flint
chips, and many fragments of animal bone, "apparently
those o/~ the buffalo", were recovered in addition to the
specimens listed, and one human burial was excavated. (Plate
11, D).
Outline drawings of projectile points and some other
artifacts were made in the field notes at the time of discovery, and pertinent data were entered on these drawings.
Depths were also recorded, in the field, in pencil on most
of the specimens. In the laboratory, a new system of specimen numbers was empIoyed, and as the specimens were
cata!ogued the new numbers were placed on them and appropriate information entered ":n the catalogue. In some
instances the information in the field catalogue does not
agree with that given in the laboratory, catalogue and on
the specimens. In such instances the spectmen has been compared with the appropriate outline drawing in the field notes
and the corresponding data as to provenience used. It was
necessary to discard some specimens as a result of conflicting
data, always in cases where outline drawings were not avai!ab!e in the field notes.
IlL Stratigraphy
Three maior stratigraphic units were apparent in the
alluvial devosirs of the shelter, as well as many minor strata, ¯
some of them localized and paper-thin. (Plate I2, B).
PLATE 12
~k, plan of sbelter~ B, composite profile o~ stratigraphy; C, cultural composition of
the Toyah Focus and the Edwards Plateau Aspect.

21

I0

S

I

2’

l

2

S

6

4

13

6

I0

,~

Pla~e 12

7

2

I

7

7"

3

2

I

2

2

2

The Lehmcznn Rock Shel$er

119

The uppermost of these stratigraphic units (III) consisted of loose sand containing much of the dung of modern
domesticated animals. No artifacts were found in this stratum. The second stratigraphic unit (II), lying directly
below the first, was a composite stratum of stratified sands,
silts, and gravels containing much ash and charcoal, flint
chips, artifacts, and broken animal bone. The human burial
was found in the upper part of this stratum toward the
northwestern edge of the deposits (Plate 12, A) and Plate
16, A). A concentration of cultural debris, apparently representing the last aboriginal occupation of the site, here attributed primarily to the Toyah Focus, was noted at the
very surface of this stratum. Lying directly on the bedrock floor of the shelter was the oldest stratigraphic unit (I),
comprising strata of red sand "~nd gravel with beds of silt
represented locally. No artifacts or other indications of
human occupation, with the possible exceotion of a few
fragments of charcoal, were found in this stratum. Maximum and minimum depths of the various strata are indicated diagramatically in Plate 15, and a reconstruction of
the stratigraphic profiile along section A-B-C-D (Plate 12,
A) is presented in Plate 12 B.

IV.

C,dtural Composition and Stratigraphy

Two of the artifacts recovered were pOtsherds, five were
made of bone, and all others were of stone, principally flint
or chert. Out of the total of 261 artifacts studied, 93 were
classed as projectile po.i~ts. Large rather roughly chipped
projectile points, here called "da~t points" comprised 46 of
the total, while the remaining 47 specimens were small thin
points, often delicately chipped, made from thin flint flakes.
These specimens are termed "arrow points". Because of
their numbers and variability, and with dl~e re~ard to the
fact that most of the specimens in quest;on be!onged to
"types" or sty!es identified in previous work in Texas, projectile ooints were used as "index fossils" in ,~.nalv.~ing the
cultura! composition and cultura! stratigraphy of the Si~e.

120

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

The methodological procedure was as follows:
a. All artifacts were divided into broad classes or categories, based on materials, and on general form and assumed
function (i. e., projectile points, scrapers, blades, metates,
pottery, etc.).
b. In each class of specimens, where sufficient numbers
were available, a further subdivision into stylistic groups or
"types" was made.’
c. A composite profile of the shelter deposits was constructed and on it the location of all specimens in each
stylistic group was plotted. Depth and approximate horizontal position, together with available stratigraphic data,
were used in plotting specimen location. Certain conclusions were at once evident:
(1) All arrow points, with one exception, occurred in
the upper part of Stratum II at depths of less than 20 inches,
and only five of the 47 specimens were found below 12
inches in depth (Plate 15). Most of them appeared to
cluster about the surface of Stratum II, primarily in the
northwestern portion of the excavated area (Plate 16, A),
a conclusion borne out by such stratigraphic notes as are
available.
(2) Conversely, dart points were more evenly distributed throughout the upper two thirds of Stratum II (Plate
15 and Plate 16, B) and occurred at absolutely greater
depths than the arrow points.

~ Mast of the projectile points in this site fell into easily recognizable types identified in previous work. Space and time do not permit detailed descriptions of artifact
classes or types in this paper. The method followed in establishL~g the projectile point
types here used was essentially that described by Krieger (1944).

PLATE 13
Artifacts from the Lehmann Rock Shelter attributed to the Toyah Focns.

Plate 1 3

The Lehmann Rock Shelter

121

(3) The stratigraphic position of the human burial indicated that it probably belonged with the late camp marked
by the concentration of arrow points (Plate 16, A).

(4) Apparently, at least two cultural complexes were
represented; a dart point complex present throughout the
occupation of the site, and an arrow point complex present
only during the more recent period of occupation. There
was apparently, but not indisputably, an overlap in the
occupation of the cave by peoples possessing the two complexes. People using arrow points first appeared in the shelter while others using dart points still inhabited the site or
the region, or at best very little time separated the two occupations.

These tentative conclusions indicated further methodological procedure.
d. Inasmuch as arrow points were restricted to the upper
12 to 18 inches of the deposits, other artifact types found
only in this stratigraphic position would probably represent
additional elements of the arrow point complex. Such artifacts were segregated, and to them were added artifacts of
types found almost entirely in the ~ame stratigraphic position
and typologically slm,_’lar to specimens of the first group.
The combination of types thus represented was immediately recognizable as a wide spread cultural complex attributed to the Jumano Indians of the late prehistoric and early
historic period, the Toyah Focus. In those instances where
the stratigraphic position of artifacts of this complex was
given in the notes, the specimens were found to occur in the
upper few inches of Stratum II or at its surface, confirming
the position of the Toyah Focus in the deposits.

e. Conversely, artifact types found throughout the occupational strata would probably represent other elements
in the dart point complex. Artifacts of these types therefore were grouped into ~ second complex, one recognizable
as the Edwards Plateau Aspect of the Balcones Phase, an

122

Texa~ A¢cheologica~ and Paleon~ologica~ Society

archaic food gathering culture widely distributed in Texas.’
Diagnostic artifacts, principally dart point types, of two
complexes of this culture, the Round Rock and the Uvalde
Foci, previously noted, were present in some numbers, and
three artifacts of type~ attributed to the Clear Fork Focus
of the aspect were noted. Still other types present cannot
as yet be referred to any focus with certainty.
V. The Toyah Focus

Artifacts attributable to the Toyah Focus in the Lehmann Rock Shelter (Plate 13) include arrow points of the
types Perdiz Pointed Stem (a), Clinton Contracting Stem
(b), "Form 63" (c), and Fresno Triangular Blade (g).
Other arrow point types represented are Scallorn Stemmed
(j~) of the Austin Focus, thought to represent the archaeological remnant of Tonkawa Indian culture bf the late prehistoric period,’ and Piedras Triple Notched (d) and Saucia
Split Base (e) of the Bravo Valley Aspect, the prehistoric
and historic culture of the Patarabueye Indians of the Rio
Grande area to the west’ Other arrow point types, such as
those shown in Plate 13, h and g are of uncertain cultural
provenience.
Additional artifacts of the Toyah Focus in the Lehmann
Shelter (Plate 13), and represented in other Toyah Focus
collections, are snubnose scrapers (j,/¢, I), small flake awls
or drills with discoidaI bases (m), small flake side scrapers
~ Kelley, 1947.
Described briefly in Krieger, 1946, pp. 16~-Ig8.
’ The Jumano Indians are known to have spent their winter months, at least in
part, in the Patarabueye settlements on the Rio Grande, near modern Presidio, Texas.
Discovery o~ paint types attributed to the Patarabueye in the Lehmann Rock Shdter,
therefore, merely provides substantiation for the identification o~ the Toyah Focus
with the Jumano Indians.

PLATE 14
Artifacts ~rom the Lehmann Rock Shelter attributed to the Edwards Plateau
Aspect.

Plate 14

The Leh~nann Rock Shelter

123

or knives (o), double pointed blades, or knives, with a suggestion of the alternating bevelled edges of the common fouredged, double pointed knives of common occurrence in the
late Texas cultures, especially those of Plains attiliations (r),
many lanceolate, squat-and elongated- triangular, and small
triangular blades, usually well chipped (ib, q, and s-u), and
tubular bone beads (n). Other elements of the complex
(not illustrated) are thin potsherds with sand and bone
temper, and a red washed semi-polished surface (~Doss Red
Ware"), large crudely chipped choppers, hammerstones,
*’spokeshaves" (side scrapers with small crescentic concave
scraping edges), and bone awls, together with one eyeless
needle, apparently made of fish bone. In Plate 12, C, "Toyah
Focus", the numbers of each specimen type listed are shown
diagramatically and their actual frequency is indicated.
The stratigraphic position of the human burial indicates
that it probably belongs with the Toyah Focus occupation
of the site (Plate 16, A). The skeleton itself did not survive
removal intact and no significant data are available regarding the physical type. According to the field notes the
skeleton was that of a young adult female. The body had
been placed in the grave in a loosely flexed position, lying
on the right side with head supported by a small boulder,
knees drawn up and flexed, arms folded loosely ~n the chest,
and the face turned to the north. The axis of the body extended in a general ease-west direction with the head placed
at the east. The tubular bone bead shown in Plate 13, n,
lay on the left foot or ankle. No other mortuary furniture
was discovered.

The floor of the grave in the upper part of Stratum II
was 30 inches beneath the surface. Large stones had been
placed on edge around the head and at the feet of the burial,
in the grave. A large stone slab lay over the body, and over
this were tilted two other large slabs. The upper ends of
these ,labs must have projected from the top of Stratum II,
although there are no substantiating drawings or photographs.

124

Texas A~’cheological and PaIeontologica~ Society

It is indeed unfortu-_ate that no data as to the physical
type of the individual could be obtained from this burial.
No other burials identifiable as of Toyah Focus origin have
been located and the Jumano physical type is unknown.
The custom of flexed burial in or near the camp site with
little or no mortuary furniture and with a protective covering of stone slabs is also characteristic of the earlier Edwards Plateau Aspect, and of the Austin Focus and other
late arrow point complexes as well.
VI. The Edwards Plateau Aspect
Dart points from Stratum II belong to types thought
to be diagnostic of at least three complexes of the Edwards
Plateau Aspect, the Round Rock, Uvalde, and Clear Fork
loci. Other dart points perhaps belong with one or more
of these loci, but cannot be definitely placed at the present
time. The latter types include Yarbrough Stemmed, Bluffton Barbed, and Bulverde Barbed (Plate 14, b, i~ j), and unidentified types not shown. One fragmentary specimen is
classed as either Bracken Broad Base, assigned to the Morhiss
Focus of the lower Guadalupe River region, or Juno Broad
Base of the Pecos River Focus.
Round Rock. Focus. Dart points characteristic of the
Round Rock Focus include Pedernales Indented Base, Strawn
Stemmed, Fairland Flared Stem (Plate 14, a, e, c, respectively), and Castroville Convex Base (not shown). No other
artifacts especially diagnostic of the focus were found.
Uvalde Focus. Dart points characteristic of the Uvalde
Focus include Smithwick Small Stem, Frio Flared Stem, and
Montell Split Stem (Hate 14, b, d, and f, respectively). No
other diagnostic artifacts of the Uvalde Focus were discovered.

PLATE 1 ~
Frequency distribution of arrow and dart points by one-inch levels below surface
in the Lehmann Rock Shelter.

~

Plate 15

Uvo/de Focus

Type=

The Lehmann Rock Shel$er

Clear Fort~ Focus." Two specimens of Nolan Beveled
Stem dart point, and one example of a "Clear Fork gouge"
were discovered (Plate 14, g, and l-m--obverse-reverse views
of gouge).
Edwards Plateau Aspect. Artifacts associated with the
dart points are characteristic of the Edwards Plateau Aspect
in general (Plate 14). These include large and irregularly
shaped blades with crude chipping (o), crudely chipped
spike-like blades (1~), fairly well chipped triangular blades
(n), heavy flaked side scrapers, (q), sma!l percussion-chipped choppers made from cores (ranging into rejects and
modified nodules) (s), and one-hand unshaped manos, either
single or double faced (t). One specimen best described as
a "chipped celt" (r) was found, aild other specimens belonging to this complex but not here illustrated include fragments of oval bowl metntes, or seed slabs, large flakes with
small drill points or "gravers," heavy pick-like blades,
crudely chipped from nodules, and one large stemmed knife.
The numbers of each of the classes of specimens listed
above for the Edwards Plateau Aspect, and its £oci, found
in the Lehmann Shelter are shown diagramatically in Plate
12, C, together with the actual £requency of specimens of
each class. The approximate distribution in the shelter deposits o~ specimens attributed to the Edwards Plateau Aspect
is shown in Plate 16, B.

VII.

Chronology

As to the relative chronology of the Toyah Focus and the
Edwards Plateau Aspect in the Lehmann Shelter there can
be no doubt. As previously indicated the Edwards Plateau
Aspect was present throughout the upper two-thirds of
Stratum II, while the Toyah Focus appeared in the shelter
S The basic description of the Clear Fork Focus is that given by Ray, its discoverer.
(Ray, 1938). For a review of the evidence regarding the cultural a~liations
and chronological positiou of the Clear Fork Focus, see Kelley, I947. The ~ ocus is
an early an~! long lived archaic gathering complex centering along the Brazos and Colorado Rivers, especially in the Abilene region.

126

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

only at the very close of the same deposition. If the one:
Perdiz Pointed Stem point recorded at a depth of 32 inches
actually came from that depth, there may have been contact
with the Toyah Focus at 2 much earlier period in the shelter’s
occupation. In view of the inadequate stratigraphic data
given for individual specimens it does not seem wise to place
too much emphasis on the evidence of one artifact.
There was apparently an overlap between the late Toyah
Focus and the earlier Edward Plateau Aspect occupations,
as shown in Plate 15. However, much of the apparent overlap probably results from lack of sufficient stratigraphic
data. It is known that the surface of Stratum II varied
greatly in depth from front to back of the shelter, yet with
rare exceptions the ~trarigraphic sections are given for the
center of the exposures only. This accounts for apparent
locatio nor specimens in Stratum III, where as a matter of
fact none were found. It may also account for the overlap,
but there is no way of verifying or disproving this supposition.
Dart point types of the various loci of the aspect are represented in such small numbers that it is impossible to speak
with assurance of their relative positions in the strata. Such
evidence as is available indicates that the Clear Fork, Uvalde,
and Round Rock loci are all of approximately the same age
in this site. It is known from previous work that the Round
Rock Focus and the Clear Fork Focus existed side by side
in the Colorado River drainage over a very long span of time.
It is also known that in the Nueces River region to the south
and west there was an early occupation by the Round Rock
Focus followed by the Uvalde Focus occupation. While the
Round Rock Focus gave way to the Uvalde Focus in the
west, it survived until late prehistoric times in the Colorado
River drainage. This chronological picture is apparently rePLATE 16
Approximate horizontal and vertical distribution of artifacts in the Lehman Rock
Shelter. A, artifacts attributed to the Toyah focus; B, artifacts attributed to the
Edwards Plateau Aspect.

A

Plate 16

T~e Lehmann Rock Shelter

’127

flected in the Edwards Plateau Aspect levels of the Lehmann
Shelter, which is located in a geographically intermediate
position between the Colorado and Nueces River drainages.
The presence of Uvalde Focus artifacts in the lower occupation levels at this site indicates that the older occupation itself is comparatively recent. The site itself provides
no basis for actual dating. There is archeological evidence
elsewhere for assigning a minimum data of circa 1500 A. D.
for the appearance of ~the Toyah Focus in central Texas.
Certainly, by the time Cabeza de Vaca travelled through
southern and western Texas in the early 1530’s all tribes
mentioned appear to have been using the bow and arrow.’
If A. D. 1500 is accepted as the earliest probable date for
the Toyah Focus occupation of the shelter at the top of
Stratum II, then the underlying Edwards Hateau occupation
probably took place during the 14th and 15th centuries, perhaps somewhat earlier. Tbfis would fit fairly well with other
evidence, which cannot be cited here, for the date of the
Uvalde Focus, and of the latter period of the Round Rock
Focus occupation of central Texas.

As a final point, it might be noted that the deposition of
alluvium in the Lehmann Shelter therefore probably took
place largely in the 13th, 14th, and 15th centuries. This
was likewise a time wher~ the streams of western and central
Teaxs in general were aggrading their beds. During this period the Kokernot Formation was deposited in the Big Bend
region, the 20 foot terrace of the Colorado River was formed
in central Texas, and probably similar formations developed
along other Texas streams)° Indirectly this confirms the
dates suggested above.
Department of Anthropology
The University of Texas
Austin, November, 1947
~Bandetier, !905; Hodge, 1907.
~°See Albrltton and Bryan,
1947.

1939; Kelley, campbell and Lehrner, 1940; Kelley,

128

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
REFERENCES CITED

Albritton, Claude C., Jr., and Kirk Bryan.
1939. "Quaternary Stratigraphy in the Davis Mountains, Trans-Pecos Texas." Bulletin of the Geological Society o/ America, Vo!. $0, pp. 1423- 1474. New
York.
Bandelier, Fanny (translator and editor).
1905. The Journal of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca.

New York.

Estill, Julia.
’~Indian Pictographs Near Lange’s Mill, Gillespie Couuty, Texas."
1925
tions of the Texas Folk-Lore Society, Vot. IV, pp. 103-114.

Austin.

/-lodge, Frederick Webb (editor).
1907. ’~The Narrative of Ah.’ar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca" in Sibanisb Ex#lorers in the
Southern Uni/ed Stales, 1528-1543. pp. 3-126.
New York.
Huskey,
1935.

Vane.
"An Archaeological Survey of the Nueces Canyon of Texas."
Bulletin of
the Texas Arcbeologlcal and Paleontological Society, Vol. 7, pp. !05- !14.
Abilene.

Jackson, A. T.
1938. "Picture-Writing o~ Texas
No.

Indians,"

The University of

3809, Antbro~o!ogica~ Patters, Vol. II.

Texas Publication,

Austin.

Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell, and Donald J. Lehmer.
1940. "The Association ox¢ Archaeological Materials With Geological Deposits in the
Big Bend Region o~ Texas," Sul Ross Slate Teachers College Bulletin, Vol. XXI.
No. 3 West Texas Historical and Scientific Society Publication Number Ten.
Alpine.
Kelley, J, Charles.
1947. "The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clear Fork Focus," American Antiquity, Vol. XIII, No. 2, pp. 97-109.
Krieger, Alex D.
1944. *’The Typological Concept," American Antiquity, Vol. IX, No. 3, pp. 271288.
1946. "Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas," The University
o~ Texas Publication, No. 4640. Austin.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1938, "The Clear Fork Culture Complex," Bulletin of /be Texas Archeo!ogical and
Paleontological Society, Vol.

10, pp.

193- 207.

Abilene.

Sayles, E. B.
193L "An Archaeological Survey of Texas," Medallion Pa~ers, No. XVII.

Globe.

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF WHITNEY BASIN:
A PRELIMINARY REPORT1

BY

ROBERT L. STEI~HE~TSOI~

Location and Character of the Reservoir
In the spring of 1947 work was begun by the Corps of
Engineers, Dept of the Army, and the U. S. Bureau of Reclamation, Brazos River Conservation and Reclamation District on the concrete and earth fill dam on the central
Brazos River. This dam is located five miles southwest of
the town of Whitney, Hill County, Texas, at 92°27"45"’W.
longitude, 31°52"05’’ N. latitude. The Brazos in this area
forms the entire boundary between Hill and Bosque Counties. When completed, the dam will be 163 ft. high, with
1,673 ft. of concrete section and 8,258 ft. of earth embankment, forming a reservoir, to be used primarily for power,
flood control, and irrigation of the central Brazos River
Basin. The maximum flood stage surface of this reservoir is
designed to reach an elevation above sea level of 573.0 ft.
This will affect the present river level as far upstream as the
eastern boundary of Somervell County, a distance of some
58 river miles, and form a pool with a maximum depth of
150 ft. and a maximum width of 9 miles. The normal pool
of the reservoir is designed to reach an elevation of 520.0 ft.
This normal pool will have a maximum depth of 100 feet
and a maximum width of 3.5 miles, affecting the present
river level as far upstream as 45 miles. However, the river
at this level will overflow its present banks only as far upstream as the mouth of the Nolans River.
The Corps of Engineers in cooperation with the U. S.
Bureau of Reclamation and the National Park Service has
* This report is preliminary and time has not yet been available to coordinate
the findings with the literature covering this area. A careful study of such literature
as is available will be made for a later final report.

130

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

helped to provide funds for the Bureau of American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution to conduct an archaelogical
survey of the area to be inundated by this reservoir. This
work was accomplished under the direction of Dr. ~Frank
H. H. Roberts, Jr., Associate Chief, Bureau of American
Ethnology.’ The survey was begun by the author on May
18, 1947, and carried to completion by him on October I,
1947, a total of 136 days being expended. The Corps of
Engineers, further, loaned two laborers for a period of 30
days.
The survey began at the damsite and continued upstream to the maximum limits of the flood area, and extended laterally into Hill and Bosque counties to a distance
of approximately one-half mile beyond the proposed limits
of the maximum flood pool.
Sixty one archaeological sites were located in this area,
23 of which are in Bosque County, and 38 in Hill county.
Prior to the survey recorded data were available on only 3
sites in Whitney Basin. These sites were the first three visited by the author and are listed as: (1) the Towash site
(42-39B1-1)’; (2) the L. D. Odom site (42-39B1-2); and
(3) the J. W. Greenwade shelter (42-39B1-3). Surface collections were made by Watt at all three of these sites in 1936
and 1937, but no excavation was carried on.
Acl~nowledgments
To the Corps of Engineers, Dept. of the Army, the U.
S. Bureau of Reclamation, and to the National Park Service, is due sincere gratitude ~or providing funds to make
this survey possible. During the course of the survey, the
district office of the Corps of Engineers, under direction
of Col. D. W. Griffiths, was very cooperative and helpful.
The Resident Engineer at Whitney, Mr. Mark Haima, and
~Approval for submitting tbis article has been kindly granted the author by Dr.
Roberts.
*Watt, Frank H., 1937.

Survey of Whitney Basin

131

his entire staff were extremely helpful in furnishing not
only maps and information regarding the area but also in
lending laborers for use on the survey. Grateful acknowledgment is made to these two organizations and to their individual members.
Also, during and subsequent to the survey, the Dept.
of Anthropology of the University of Texas, under the
chairmanship of Dr. J. Gilbert McAllister and, later, Dr.
Thomas N. Campbel!, extended its complete facilities to
the survey. The Dept. provided file information and laboratory and storage space. Mr. Alex D. Krieger and Mr. J.
Charles Kelley, of that department, gave unstintingly of
their time and valuable technical advice and criticism. Sincere thanks is expressed to this department and its members.
Grateful acknowledgment is also made to all of the informants and land-owners in the area of the x~hitney Basin.
Mr. Geo. ’Benson of Whitney, Mr. J. T. Parks and Mr. Walter J. Parks of Morgan, and Miss Gertrude Hill of Whitney
conducted the author personally to many sites and provided valuable information relative to these sites. Mrs. A.
Greenwade, Mr. Geo. Counts, Mr. A. L. Richards, Mrs.
Claude Parks, and others, all of Whitney, provided useful
historical information. Besides these people, Mr. J. L. Stansbury, Mr. Isaac Pollard, Mr. Albert Kyle and many others
generously granted permission to investigate and excavate
on their lands; and deep and sincere thanks is due them.
To Mr. Adolph Henry Witte of Henrietta, Texas, and
to Mr. Frank H. Watt of Waco, Texas, is extended grateful
acknowledgment for their visits to the survey. When the
author visited them to examine sites and study collections
~rom their respective geographical areas, their hospitality
was most generous. Finally, to Mr. Jack Colligan, geologist,
Corps of Engineers, thanks is due for use of his time and
private airplane in providing an aerial investigation of the
entire Whitney Basin.

132

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Historical Information
At this writing, time has not been sufficient to permit
a study of the early French and Spanish history of this area.
Such a study will undoubtedly prove very helpful in establishing temporal and cultural identities in the archaeological sites located. Quite extensive accounts of the early Spanish and French expeditions into Texas in the 16th, 17th,
and 18th centuries are available and, when time permits,
will be reviewed and incorporated into the final report on
this survey.

The following brief report on the American history of
the area from 1836 to 1870 is deduced only from the accounts of local informants. A careful study of the literature
pertaining to this area will later be made. The accounts of
local informants have been checked against each other insofar as possible, but no attempt has been made to check
them against the literature covering the period. Consequently, the following historical statement may be accepted only
with reservations until such time as a final review of the
literature is made.
According to one informant, the Greenwade and Walling families were among the first permanent settlers in the
Whitney Basin. They arrived in 1836, and established homes
in Walling Bend, Bosque County, near the present site of
the Whitney Dam. A few other families settled in this area
the same year, and occasional families moved in in succeeding
years. The majority of these people, however, settled on the
Hill County side of the river. At that time the Brazos River
formed a sort of defensive barrier against the "wild" Indians to the southwest. The Indians living northeast of the
river were regarded as ~’tame" Indians. The "wild" Indians
were described as nomadic raiders, who traveled in small
parties and stole or robbed whenever convenient for them.
Their raids seldom resulted in a settler’s death, but sometimes white captives were taken. These "wild" Indians were
identified as "Comanches". At that time (perhaps a little

Survey of Whitney Basin

133

later than 1836) a trading house was operating in the vicinity of what is now Waco, some 35 miles further down
the Brazos. The "wild" Indians often went to that trading
house.

This informant knew of two camps of ~tame" Indians
in the vicinity. One was located on the northeast bank of
the Brazos. One-half mile above the present highway bridge
on State Highway No. 22. (This is the Towash Site, 4239B1-1 of this report). It was a large camp of Towash Indians and consisted of many small ~wigwams". It was inhabited for many years and was here when her grandfather
arrived in 1836. They had a burying ground somewhere
near the camp. The other was a large camp of Choctaw Indians on the east bank of the Brazos in Lofer’s Bend. (This
is the Ed Mixon site, 42-39B1-4 of this report). Both groups
enjoyed mutual friendship traveling between the two villages by a regular trail. They also were friendly to the settlers and known to them as beggars but were seldom known
to steal.

In 1854, Mrs. Greenwade’s grandfather built a long
house on the southeastern edge of the Towash camp. The
house is still in use and has been continually occupied since
that date. The informant lived here many years and in her
youth has been in both the Towash and Choctaw camps
many times (1867-1870). Around 1868 "when I was about
9 or 10 years old" an epidemic of measles killed many people
in both the Towash and Choctaw camps. These Indians
gradually left the area sometimes shortly after t870.
Another informant who lives at the site of the Towash
store was interviewed. He told of a colony of 16 settlers
from Mississippi settling some 200 yards north of his present home. They remained there to establish the town known
as Towash. In 1846~ enough settlers were living there to

4This date is variously reported as 1846 to 1854.

Probably 1853-4 is more nearly

134

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

establish a trading house, and a permanent church was built.
Also a dam was built across the Brazes here, and a grist mill
was built to grind corn for the settlers who "came for many
miles to get their corn milled". Some 25 or 30 buildings had
been erected by 1853, and this was the largest town in Hill
County when that county was established as such in 1853.
Ruins of the mill, the bridge and the trading house or store
are still standing. The church is still in use at the present
time.
The village established by this colony of settlers is only
a half mile northwest of the Towash Indian camp. Counts
corroborated the Greenwade statements about the Indians
in the area at that time, but denied any knowledge of the
"depredations of the ’wild’ Indians". The only case he knew
of was the theft of an ox which was later returned to the
owner.
Eleven miles further up the Brazos is the locality known
as Fort Graham. This was "A frontier military post established on the site of a Waco Indian village by Brevet Major
R. A. Arnold, Second United States Dragoons, on March
27, 1849. Named in honor of Lt. Col. William M. Graham
who died at Mona Del Rey, September 6, 1847. Abandoned
November 9, 1853, after settlements had been made further
west".° Informants stated that a large Indian camp had
existed at this place prior to establishment of the fort, and
after the fort was abandoned a smaller Indian village stil!
remained. This smaller village was abandoned somewhere
around 1870. It was inhabited by a group of Anadarka Ind~.~s under the leadershlo of Jose Maria, and was know., .qs
the Jose Maria village. These Indians hunted and fished some
a..d raised small patches of corn. However, their main dependence for food was upon begging from the whites. This
latter vrait they were notorious for.
In 1847, Dr. Ferdinand Roemer° made a trip by muleback from Torrey’s Trading House (near the present site
Plaque set up on the site by the State Historica! Society of Texas, 1936.
~goemer, Ferdinand, Texas, 1849.

Survey of Whitney Basin

135

of Waco) to a "Caddoe village" which was 30 miles journey
up the Brazos. Roemer’s description of the geographical location of the village fits this locality and the distance from
Torrey’s Trading House would bring him very near here.
The archaeological sites 42-26D7-1, 42-26D7-3, and 4226D7-4 were located in the present survey in this vicinity
and it is believed that all three are sections of a single site,
representing the "Caddoe village" of Roemer’s account. Later, Fort Graham was established on this village site and the
Indians, being friendly, lived around the fringes of the fort.
After the fort was abandoned, the Anadarka group under
Jose Maria were the only remaining Indians and they abandoned the village around 1870.

Other historical information relating to the Indian occupation of the Whitney Basin in this period is very meager.
Mr. Ed Nichols relates that the "last bunch of Comanches
that camped all night in Bosque County" was in 1869. A
group of-four Comanches wearing "tall feathers on their
heads" met and chased him. This occurred some four miles
up Steele’s Creek from the present town of Morgan, in
Bosque County.
Nichols locates at least two Indian camps that he has
seen and visited. They were camps of friendly Tonkawas.
One camp was within 50 yards of the present Santa Fe R. R.
bridge across Steele’s Creek. (This is site 42-26D7-34 of this
report.) This camp was occupied in the middle 1860’s. Another camp of friendly Tonkawas was built on Steele’s Creek
in front of the Nichols’ house. This would be in the vicinity
of the business district of the present town of Morgan. These
Tonkawas came there in 1865 and stayed until "The Comanches quit raiding" or about 1869.
Thus, at least six of the sites located in this survey (4239B1-1 and 4 and 42-26D7-1, 3, 4, and 34) are known to
have been inhabited at various times between 1836 and 1870.
The Choctaw, Towash, Anadarka, and Tonkawa are reported by informants with first hand knowledge to have

136

Texas ArcheoIogieal and Paleontological Society

been k~cated at these sites. Who occupied the sites prior to
that time and for how long is unknown. All informants
agree that by 1869 or 1870 all Indians, both ¢~wild" and
’¢tame" had left the Whitney Basin. For what reason or
where they went is not known.
Historic Sites
42-39B1-1, Towash site is an important historic Indian
village, in Hill County, inhabited by Towash Indians who
appear to be related to the Taovayas and/or Tauhuaconi
Wichita-speaking) tribes. The village is known to have
been abandoned in the early 1870’s and to have been occupied prior to 1836, probably a long time prior to that date.
Culturally, the camp bears a great resemblance to the Taovayas village of Spanish Fort on the Red River, which is
thought to have been occupied from the middle 18th century to the late 1840’s.
42-39B1-4, Mixon site, is reported to be a Choctaw camp
in Hill County, but its exact !ocation was not found.
42-39B1-7, McCown site is probably a marginal area
of site 42-39B1-1.
42-26D7-1,3,4, are together referred to as the Fort Graham sites. These three are probably separate parts of a single
site in Hill County covering some 30 acres or more and representing the "Caddoe Village" visited by Roemer in 1847.’
In 1849 Fort Graham was established here and some of the
Indians, being friendly, remained around the fringes of the
Fort. When this fort was abandoned in 1853 the Anadarka
group under Jose Maria were the only remaining Indians.
About 1870 the site was abandoned.
42-26D7-34, & 35, Yates site and J. Benson site respectively, in Bosque County, were occupied by the Tonkawas
in the 1860’s.
~Roemer,

Dr.

Ferdinand,

1849.

Survey of Whitney Basin

137

Rocl¢ Shelter Sites
42-39B1-3 & 20, Greenwade shelters in Bosque County
are small, culturally poor sites inhabited sporadically by
small groups of Indians. Arti£acts imply some aspect of the
Balcones Phase is represented here.
42-26D7-5, Pictograph cave, in Hill County. This rock
shelter seems to represent one of the late pre-pottery or nonpottery cultures of the general Balcones phase, extending
into, or in contact with, the early pottery cultures of east
Texas. It was apparently a rather poor culture, depending
on gathering and hunting of deer and small animals, but not
Bison, for food. As the type of shelter requires considerable
time for deposition of the six feet of fill, a fairly long, but
probably sporadic occupation is implied. On the basis of two
sherds of Sanders Focus pottery found here, a possible beginning date for occupation might be placed at somewhere
prior to 1300 A.D.~ and extending some two or three hundred years, perhaps longer. Extensive trenching was carried
on in this shelter, and three distinct strata were noted. The
top 4" was compacted sterile animal manure. Stratum II
containing all the cultural material, extended to a depth of
some 42" and was composed o~ a grey to brown ash mixed
with some windblown soil and rubbish and tremendous numbers of snail and mussel shells. In the bottom o~ this stratum
was a fairly large rectangular fire hearth filled with concentrated ash and charcoal and many fire-broken limestone
rocks. At this same level was a circular slab-lined cist. This
cist contained nothing other than the same material as filled
the rest of the stratum. Stratum III consisted of sterile, decomposed roof material. Six pictographs, painted with red
hematite pigment occurred on the shelter walls.
42-26D7-12, Buzzard cave, in Hill County. This rock
shelter was extensively trenched and two occupational zones
were noted. The lower zone, at a depth of 22" to 24" conSKricger,

A.

D.,

1946.

138

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

sisted of only a few artifacts but these were quite distinct
from the artifacts o£ the upper zone. Pitted stones, ~manos,
smoothed stones, miscellaneous scrapers (none of the snubnose type), hammerstones and mussel shell fleshing tools
occurred in this zone. Above this lower zone was a comparatively sterile area of some 10" in depth. The upper zone
produced an artifact complex represented by small arrow
points, (over 50% of which were Perdiz Pointed Stem type),
small snub-nose scrapers, small flint drills, a beveled fourbladed knife, an obsidian projectile point, and 5 potsherds of
Doss Redware (?)°. Snail and mussel shells also occurred in
great numbers, some of the latter showing perforation
and/or roughened edges. On the basis of this artifact complex, the culture found in the upper zone seems to represent a camp of the Toyah Focus. This focus has been identified by Kelley,1° on the basis of the above named types of
artifacts, as a manifestation of one group of the Jumano
Indians. These Indians were nomadic traders embracing an
area from southeastern New Mexico to east Texas in their
seasonal migrations /?or trading purposes. They have been
traced both historically and archaeologically from circa 1450
to 1750 A. D. Kelley is of the belief that this site represents
a rather early appearance of this group. If so, the culture
represented in the upper zone of this shelter can be tentatively dated somewhere around the late 15th or early 16th
centuries. The older culture manifestation, appearing at a
lower stratigraphic depth and separated from the upper
zone by a compar~atively large depth of shelter fill would
seem to be linked to the pre-pottery cultures of the Balcones
Phase. It would date perhaps one or two centuries earlier
than the Toyah Focus appearance or circa 1250 A. D. or
earlier.
°These sherds were sent to Mr. Stanley Stubbs, Laboratory of Anthropology,
Santa Fe, New Mexico, for comment.
Stubbs states they are definitely not Puebloan.
Krleger is equally certain they are not east Texas types.
Their identity is probably
with the central and southwest Texas types found by Kelley at Presidio, Texas, and
other localities.
1°Kelley, J. Charles, manuscript on ]uraano and Patarabuey~ Relations at La
Junta Los Rios in preparation.
(Title subject to change.)

Survey o] Whitney B~zsin

139

42-26D7-20, Sheep Cave, Hill County. This shelter was
extensively trenched and a stratigraphic profile noted. However only one culture complex appeared and that in the second stratum at a depth of 4" to 24". Artifacts here were
few but mainly of the dart point types. Scrapers were few.
Blades, hammerstones, unshaped manos, hematite pigment,
used mussel shells, bone awls, and antler flakers comprised
the remainder of the artifact. Eight potsherds apparently
of Sanders Focus types~ were found. In the floor of stratum
III and apparently intrusive from stratum II was a slablined cist similar to the one in pictograph cave. At this same
level and one foot toward the shelter wall a burial occurred.
It was tightly flexed, on the left side, facing south with the
head toward the east. A large rock rests on the right shoulder and side, partly crushing the skeleton. Bone preservation was good and nearly all bones were present. However,
the skull is missing but the mandible is present and in place.
All bones showed good articulation and no evidence of post
burial disturbance could be found. The rami were examined
closely and no evidence of cutting was apparent. The method of removing the skull without the mandible is unknown.
This site seems to represent a camp of one of the groups
who were at least in contact with the early pottery making
cultures o feast Texas. The buria!, with mandible and no
skull, is similar to burials of the Henrietta Focus" to the
north, but lack of Henrietta Focus pottery and projectile
points implies a different cultural group. The shelter was
apparently occupied by a single group of primarily gathering and hunting people for a moderately long period circa
the 14th and 15th centuries A. D.
Nine other rock shelter sites were located but none produced any informative data.
Open Occupatio~ml Areas
During the course of the survey, some 40 other sites were
located. These consisted of open occupational areas, sixteen
Tentative identification by Krieger, A. D.
~*Krleger, A. D., 1946.

140

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

o£ which are located in the upper terrace of the Brazes River
and twenty-four on the lower terrace. Brief examination of
these sites and minor test trenching showed little or no difference between the sites of the upper terrace and those of
the lower terrace. All of these sites appear to represent camps
o~ nomadic hunting groups in the pre-pottery, pre-bow and
arrow horizons. Except as previously noted, pottery and
small arrow points are lacking from all sites in this area,
with three possible exceptions. These are three open sites,
from each o£ which one arrow point was recovered.
S~n~nary and Conclusions

It is apparent from the large number o£ sites located in
this area that the central Brazes Valley provided an important occupational area for large numbers of people over an
extensive period of time. Just how long this time span covers
is impossible to say now. It is possible that some o£ the sites
south of Whitney Basin in McLennan County are very old.=
No evidence of these old sites has come to light in the Whitney area, however. The earliest culture manifestation in the
Whitney Basin seems to represent a late aspect o£ the Balcones Hiase in the Archaic Horizon. This aspect is evident
in many small, open, occupational areas, producing an artiJ~act complex differing somewhat from the complexes represented by the known aspects of the Balcones Phase. It is
more similar to the Edwards Plateau Aspect than any of
the others of the Phase, but projectile points are very different, and antler handles, stone cist burials, heavy choppers, and other characteristics ox¢ this aspect have not been
found here. The general artifact complex seems to represent an, as yet undescribed, aspect, or possibly one or more
loci of such an aspect, of the Balcones Phase?" Further excavation in Whitney Basin, should bring this aspect and/or

aaWatt, Frank H., 1938.
*~ Difficulty is encountered in central Texas in assigning focus and aspect status
to the culture complexes, due to the relatively few elements appearing in each complex
upon which such assignment may be made.

Survey o] Whitney Basin

141

its loci into full view. The description of this is, consequently, left for a later report and not attempted here. It may
be said that an archaic, pre-pottery, pre-bow-and-arrow horizon does appear in this area and is represented in a large
number of sites. This horizon is not confined alone to the
Whitney Basin, but extends down the Brazos River at least
through McLennan County and probably upstream at least
through Johnson, Somerville and Hood Counties.
The later bow-and-arrow horizon is represented in Whitney Basin by at least one known focus of the central Texas
aspect and perhaps other loci of this aspect. The Toyah
Focus, representing a group of Jumano Indians living normally in southwest central Texas, but whose trading territory extended from southeastern New Mexico to east Texas,~° is identified in a single rock shelter site, (42-26D7-12).
In this site it overlies an older, archaic culture complex. A
second focus is identified in two other rock shelter sites
(42-26D7-5 and 20) and probably in three open sites. This
may represent a marginal extension of the Austin Focus, or
possibly a mixture of peoples from north and east Texas and
Austin Focus. At least, it is certain that tb.ese people had
some contact with east and north Texas peoples. Further
excavation will determine the nature of th~s foc~.~s or loci.
It is cert,~in, a!so, that the late pre-hlstoric pottery-using
peoples, while occupying intensively the Brazos Valley in
McLennan County, only 15 miles downstream, extended
their range into the Whitney Basin only rarely, if at all.
Finally, sites known in recent historic times were located. These are camps of the Tonkawa, Towash, Anadarka,
and Choctaw (?).
Age ~ssignment for the sites in the Whitney Basin must
at present remain only relative in all but the historic sites.
The end of Indian occupation in the area came circa 1870.

I~ Kelley,

J.

Ch=rles,

maauscript

~nnl~t Los Rios i~ prep~ratio*~.

on

]~:mano and

(Tiile subiect to change.)

Palarabueye

Relations at

La

142

Texas Archeolog~cal and PaIeon$ologioal Society

The Tonkawa sites are reported to have been inhabited for
only a short time in the 1850’s and 1860’s. The Towash site
began sometime before 1836 and extended up to the early
1870’s, as did the Anadarka site at Fort Graham. The prehistoric Toyah Focus site may be tentatively assigned to the
late 15th or early 16th century. Other late loci (if more
than one is represented) may be assigned a date no earlier
than the i4th century and probably later, extending into
the 16th or 17th centuries. The archaic horizon certainly
overlaps the later one and may extend back some two or
three centuries prior to it.

It is contemplated that, as a result of the recommendations made in the report of this survey, a program of excavation will be carried on, in the near future, in this area.
Such excavation will also be under the direction of the Bureau o£ American Ethnology.
REFERENCE CITED
Cutbirth, R. N.
1943. Ed Nichols Rode a Horse, Texas Folklore Society and
Dallas.

University Press in

Kelley, J. C.
Excavation & Interpretation of 5 Central Texas Archaeological Sites.
script.
Kelley, J. C.
]umano and Patarabueya Relations at La Junta Los Rios.
subject to change).
Krieger, A. D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas.

Manuscript.

Manu-

(Title

University of Texas

Publication No. 4640.
Roemer, F.
I849. Texas Bonn, Germany.
Watt, E. H.
1937. Glass Indian Trade Beads in Central Texas.
Archaeological Society.
Bul. No. 3.
Watt, F. H.
1938. The Waco Sin]~er,
Bul. No. 4.

Bulletin

of

Witte, A. H.
1938. Spanish Fort, an Historic Site.
PaIeontological Society. Vol. 10.

the

Central

Bulletin

of

Bulletin of the Central Texas

Texas

Archaeological

the Texas

Society,

Archeological

and

ARCI-IAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE ADDICKS
BASIN: A PRELIMINARY REPORT

BY Jo~ B~.N W’H~T

This note constitutes a summary report on field work
conducted for the Smithsonian Institution River Basin Surveys in the Addicks Dam Basin in the vicinity of Houston,
Texas, by the writer, during the spring and summer of 1947.

During the course of the work a total of nine sites was
recorded. Two of these had been destroyed by construction
work. Two more were scattered, sparse accumulation of
habitation debris. The remaining five were midden accumulations of varying extent and thickness. Three of these five
were tested to obtain comparative stratigraphy, while the
remaining two (the Kobs and Doering Sites) were excavated because of the danger of destruction by physical damage or of pillage by vandals.
Seven burials were recovered; four from the Doering
Site, and three from the Kobs Site. One of these can be
tentatively correlated with the middle zone of occupation.
This burial was semi-flexed, but was so disturbed by ground
pressure that no further deductions concerning it may be
made. The remaining six burials are probably to be correlated with the late phases of occupation. Five of these were
flexed and one semi-flexed. Burial pits could be positively
identified in two cases where soil differences made them readily discernible, and in a third instance because a previous
burial had been cut through in excavating the burial pit
for the later inhumation. There was no definite association
of burial furniture of diagnostic value.
Indigenous pottery is represented by a single highly variable ware tentatively termed Goose Creek ware by Dr.
Thomas N. Campbell, who established the type. This is

144

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

sub-divided into Goose Creek Plain and Goose Creek Incised, the decoration consisting of incised parallel banding
lines, pendant triangles, ladder-like elements, hatching, and
occasional punctuations, serving as the criterion for the division into sub-types. The color ranges from a bright
orange through browns to grays. Fire clouding is common,
and smudging is occasionally found. Variations in surface
color and in paste color, which ranges from red to dense
black, appear to be the result of firing differentials. Temper
is primarily of sand, the percentage varying from vessel to
vessel. Two vessel £orms have identified; one a deep bowl
with direct rim and round bottom, the second a deep, widemouthed, almost cylindrical jar with a round or pointed
bottom. At the present stage of analysis no differences of
chronological significance have been found. Fragments of
two intrusive wares were found. One of these has been tentatively identified as Tchefuncte Rocker Stamped, and the
other as Chinchuba Brushed ware.
Projectile points may be divided into three main groups.
During the initial occupation the expanding stemmed types
of points predominated. These were replaced by a type
termed Cary Contracting Stem, which in the upper middle
level of occupation formed 86 percent o£ the projectile
points in use. In relatively late times these were almost completely replaced by the small, light projectile points, Perdiz
Pointed Stem, Alba Barbed, Scalhorn, and Eddy Stemmed.
Knives were represented by several types: stemmed, leafshaped, oval, and round forms predominating. Two intrusive beveled-edge knives are significant in dating the upper
level of occupation at the Kob Site, since they are known
from historic sites in north-eastern Texas and probably date
somewhat later than 1450.
End scrapers, side scrapers, flake scrapers, gravers, drills,
choppers, etc., were found in all levels.
Two fragmentary banner stones were found unassociated.
Other artifacts of ground stone comprised sandstone abraders, a fragmentary handstone or mano, and a fragmentary

Survey o:f the Addricks Basin

145

milling stone. Miscellaneous objects include paint, hematite
(?), and limonite (?) ; and two artifacts of shell.
Animal bone (deer, turtle, etc.,) was present in considerable quantitites, but very little was utilized as a raw material for the manufacture of artifacts. A few fragmentary
awls made of bone, and a few antler projectile points and
other artifacts made of antler, comprise all the finds in this
category.
Although complete analysis may well change certain
parts in the reconstruction of the history of occupation at
these sites, enough information is at hand to construct a
tentative chronology.
It was noted that there is no development in the native
pottery diagnostic as a time marker. However, the lowest
levels contain little or no pottery. The amount of pottery
in use increases from the bottom level up and becomes
common in the upper levels. It is the pottery tentatively
identified as Tchefuncte Rocker Stamped and Chinchuba
Brushed trade ware that offers the first chronological tie.
Ford and Quimby assign dates from 500 to 900 A. D. to
this culture. Since these sherds were found in the top level
of the hnoll underlying the midden deposit at the Kobs
Site, a tentative date of circa 900 A. D. may be assigned
that level of occupation.
The occurrence of the beveled knives in the uppermost
level at the Kobs Site points to a date of not earlier than
1450. This occurrence, together with the small projectile
points, probably places the date for final abandonment at
circa 1700 A. D.
Thus, it seems likely that the material represents a cultural continuum from pre-pottery times, somewhat prior
to 900 A. D., to abandonment of the sites in proto-historic
times.
Ford, James A., and Quimby, George I., Jr.: "The Tchefuncte Culture, An Early
Occupation of the Lower Mississippi Valley," Memoir No. 2. The Society for American Archaeology, 194L

NEWS NOTES AND EDITORIALS
P~es~dent’s Address at the Annual Meeting of the Society,
Lubbock, Texas, October 25, 1947
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society was organized on the evening of October 2, 1928, in the President’s Office
in Abilene, Texas, by a small group of ten Abilene citizens. Six
of the ten then present have subsequently been listed in "Who’s
Who in America", and one of the first year’s members has been
on the Staff of Carnegie Institute for many years.
The Society has issued seventeen volumes of research articles,
which volumes are on file in most of the great University and
Museum libraries in America, and in some foreign countries.
The theory of the ancientness of man in. America, which your
president believed along with only a few others twenty years ago,
is now accepted as a fact by all except a few jealous die-hards
capable of ignoring all of the facts.
The Society owes no debts, and now has on deposit in the
bank the sum of $782.00. In addition, the Society owns six large
modern museum cases, now installed in the Museum of the West
Texas Chamber of Commerce in Abilene, Texas. The cases are
now filled with about three thousand specimens collected by your
president. These specimens, along with about twelve thousand
more, have been transferred to the ownership of The Museum of
Texas Technological College at Lubbock.
There are now on hand 906 back copies of the Society’s Bulletin, all of which can eventually be sold. The Society has thus
far issued five thousand full copies of the Bulletin, and probably
several thousand reprints of individual articles. Only three hundred copies were printed of most bulletin issues, and four hundred
copies are the most issued in any one year. These Bulletin back
copies are still sold for three dollars a copy. Naturally, on account
of the expensive printing and small issues, few copies have been
exchanged. As time goes on, and files become scarce and more desirable, all of these probably can be sold and this will contribute
materially to the Society’s publication funds.
All of the engravings of past issues have been preserved, and
storage furnished for them by your president, except a few which
were loaned to the Society by other institutions and had to be
returned. In the event of making reprints of early issues, these
will be indispensable.

News Notes and Editorials

147

The general policy of the editor has been to publish only original research articles so long as they could be obtained in sufficient numbers to fill the Bulletin. Very few compilations have
been printed; and here perhaps has been one of the secrets of the
success of the publication. In a region such as Texas, abounding
in opportunities on every side for original reseearch, it seems in
general to be a waste of effort to publish the results of the tabulators and the rechewers of the work of others.
The Society has had only three Secretaries, and the first two
served during the first four years; and the last one, Dr. Watts,
has served for the past fifteen years. Dr. Otto O. Watts has been
a faithful and hard-working Secretary for fifteen years, and for
it he has been paid nothing. Dr. Watts has been as careful as any
frugal person who guards his own pocket-book, to keep down expenses, and to build up the Society’s resources, and for this deserves a rising vote of thanks from this Society.
The Society began to function the year before the great depression, and survived both that and World War II, in a solvent
condition.
The work of nineteen years is now ready to be laid on the
shoulders of someone else, and your president needs the time to
complete some writing of his own. Consider carefully the kind of
man you will here choose to further carry on this important work;
he should first be interested in scholarship and research and industrious and energetic enough to do this job without pay as well as
the one he is paid to do. Do not elect a man because he is the
most "popular". Most very popular persons are incompetent and
spend all of their energies trying to please everybody. The scientist is a seeker of truth, and truthful or scientific-minded persons are not generally popular, but usually are efficient.
The
headquarters of the Society should be located in some place where
there is either a large State College, or a University with departments of anthropology, paleontology, and geology to furnish a
background of science professors and students of sufficient size
to form a local group to carry on its functions.
Your president further recommends that in the future the
meetings of this Society be held in the different cultural and educational centers of Texas where sufficient members may be secured.
Cyrus N. Ray
Abilene, Texas

148

Texas A~cheologioal and Paleontological Society
Letter from F,. B. Sayles

Any paper that I might prepare for the Lubbock meeting
would be of so little importance, in comparison with those of active
workers in the Texas field, that I am sure the time available for
the program can best be spent without it. But if time permits,
I would appreciate your reading this letter as I am keenly interested in Texas archaeology and from my present viewpoint realize more than ever before its significance; the importance of Texas
archaeology is generally accepted by others working in the Southwest.
This importance covers two major fields of investigation of
foremost interest, at present, in the Southwest: that of the older,
underlying cultures preceeding the better known and more highly
developed pottery horizons; and, the early stages of the pottery
making cultures themselves. The better to understand both of
these, it has become increasingly urgent to know more of widespread manifestations whether they be comparable pattern and
age, or different in these respects. Texas seems to hold many of
the answers concerning the stone cultures, for it is unique in possessing a greater variety of these, over a wider area, than any
known region of the country.
That pottery is likewise found throughout the state, though
in comparatively late times, is of no less significance.
Concerning the stone cultures, no one can deny Dr. Ray full
credit for his discoveries and persistence in calling attention to
the archaeology of central Texas. This problem, however, is of
far too great magnitude for any one individual to unravel, particularly since the occurrence of certain diagnostic traits found in
central Texas is well known, over a large part of the state, and
not uncommonly in associations of different ages. Such occurrence is expected by most investigators who do not feel that this
invalidates the age of any type when it is found in other associations of established geological context. But such determinations
can only be made by the archaeologist working in cooperation
with others, specializing in different fields.
The work of Kelley and Campbell, and their associates, in the
Big Bend area has shown the nature of the older stone cultures
and their relationships, not only in that area, but in a manner
whereby the knowledge is useful to those working elsewhere. I
am sure every one interested in the problem of man’s antiquity
in America will welcome similar studies from other parts of Texas.
This is especially so here in the Southwest, since the present known

News Notes and Editorials

149

stone cultures, underlying pottery and traceable into these later
horizons, are comparable in many respects to some of those found
in Texas.
While the occurrence of pottery in Texas appears much later
than its first appearance to the west, actually the duration of certain pottery manifestations in Texas may be long. These possibilities have been pointed out in the recent publication by Krieger. There are many workers interested in the questions that
Krieger has raised. The answer to some of them, at least, must
come from the Southwest, rather than Texas. The long time program already started by the University of Arizona, that of the
Chicago Museum in southwestern New Mexico, and that proposed
by Peabody Museum in west central New Mexico, in particular,
may result in much information that will provide more exact information covering this part of the Southwest. More exact tree
ring dates and the definition of pottery types in this region will
be of direct benefit to those Texas archaeologists who, like Krieger, have found that the principal trade between Texas and the
Southwest was in this direction.
I am sure~I express the feelings of most Southwesterners in.
expressing keen interest in the work done in Texas, and hope
that the publication of the work already done by the University
of Texas in particular, will be accomplished as early as possible.
It is also to be hoped that the many investigators who have done
such worthwhile work in the past will continue to carry on.
Best wishes for the meeting and the future of the Society.
Sincerely
E. B. Sayles

West Texas Historical and Scientific Society, Alpine
During World’War II the Museum Building of the West Texas
Historical and Scientific Society, Alpine, greatly condensed its exhibits in order to make possible the use of room areas for the
training of Army WAC units. The director was absent on leave
in order to serve as instructor trainer in the Tank Department,
Fort Knox, Kentucky.
Resumption of the pre-war program and Museum service
has been slowed up due to the influx of Veterans. At this writing,
however, the program has been expanded to include a Geology
workshop’ and the services of a custodian makes it possible for
the building to be open daily to visitors.

150

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Some studies are being made in the field, principally related
to the use of stone walls and fortifications in the Big Bend° Preparations are under way looking forward to the Convention of the
Southwestern Division of the A.A.A.S., which is scheduled to meet
in Alpine during the spring of 1949, the l~IcDonald Observatory
being joint host to the group.
Victor J. Smith
Alpine, Texas
Panhandle-Plains Museum, Canyon

Only limited field work has been done by the PanhandlePlains l~Iuseum since the beginning of the war. Our first field
project will likely be the complete excavation and study of a Rock
Shelter Cave near Canyon, Texas, in the Palo Duro Canyon. Some
one hundred items found on the edges of the cave have been definitely established as Basket Maker material. Our efforts since
the war have been directed toward the completion of Unit III of
the Museum at Canyon and the arrangement of cases in our greatly
added floor space.
Floyd V. Studer
Panhandle-Plains Museum

Canyon, Texas
Paso Archaeological Society
The E1 Paso Archaeological Society was first organized in
1922 and functioned until 1934 when it disbanded. The Society
was re-organized in 1939 and now has a membership of forty.
Our project for the coming year is to survey, map, and excavate
a site near the Texas-New Mexico line known locally as "The
Village."
Mrs. Glen E. Moore
Route 1, Box 284
E1 Paso, Texas
Progress Report of the Division of Vertebrate P~leontology in the
West Texas Museum, Lubbock
Paleontology, being a luxury that may be easily discarded
in time of world crisis, has suffered tremendously during the war
years just past. Even in the United States, unscarred by the ravages of conflict and with its magnificent fossil collections still intact, the science has deferred to the more immediate and pressing

News Notes aml Edit,or~al~

151

pursuits of destruction and mayhem The curtailment of operations has nowhere been more apparent than in the small university museums throughout the land. The West Texas Museum on
~ campus of the Texas Technological College is no exception.
Since 1944 no serious effort has been made toward furthering
the work of the Division of Vertebrate Paleontology. Activity
was greatly curtailed in the early part of that year and all functions of the Division were discontinued in the summer of 1946.
Not until September, 1946, did conditions permit the necessary
reorganSzation of the Division. At the present time the writer
is able to report that this reorganization is nearing completion,
with only the tedious but vital task of cataloguing remaining to
be accomplished.
For purposes of disucssion, the progress of the Division during
the past year may be divided into two general ptmses: acquisitions
and exhibitions. No serious research was undertaken, it being
decided that in reviving the department the greatest possible
emphasis should be concentrated upon stimulating the interest
of the public--interest which doubtless had become indifferent
to the collections which had been occupying the exhibition cases
without change since 1943.
Acqui~tions

Many

new and important specimens have been added to the
collections of the Division of Vertebrate Paleontology during the
past year. The most notable and spectacular of these is the remarkably well preserved skeleton of a large mammoth discovered
on the south bank of Yellow House Canyon, north of Levelland,
Hockley County, Texas. Indeed, so complete is this specimen that
only a few ribs, the tail, the lower jaw, the "dome" of the skull,
and both fore feet will ha~e to be restored when the skeleton is
mounted. The skeleton which is now only partially prepared for
ex~dbition will be kept in storage until such time as the necessary
exhibition space and ceiling clearance can be added to the present
museum building.
A modest, but highly interesting collection of Upper Cretaceous dinosaurs and turtles was made in the Big Bend National
Park area, Brewster County, Texas, during July and August.
Only separate and isolated elements were found~ but at least two
of these occurrences yielded specimens of g~eat scientific importance. In addition to these, bones of both hadrosaurians (duckbill dinosaurs) and ceratopsians (horned dinosaurs) were collected. Due to the tenacious character of the enclosing matrix, preparation of the Big Bend material is proceeding slowly. It is hoped,

152

Texas Archeological and Paleonto~ogica~ Society

however, that at least the most important of the specimens may
be available for study and exhibition within the next few months.
The writer wishes to thank the United States Department of
the Interior and the National Park Service, and the staff of the
Big Bend National Park under the direction of Dr. Ross A. Maxwell--the former for issuance of the permit to collect vertebrate
fossils within the Park area and the latter for their cooperation
while the l~Iuseum party was in the field.
Within the past few weeks the writer has had the good fortune to locate a previously unreported deposit of Triassic vertebrate fossils. A number of bones have been removed from this
location, the majority of which pertain to the rare crocodile-like
l~seudosuchian reptile Typothorax. Although all of the bones
thus far encountered have been dissarticulated, they are in an excellent state of preservation. It appears probable that a number
of individuals representing several genera of both amphibians and
reptiles may have been entombed at this location and the prospects for the development of a veritable fossil "quarry" appear
excellent.
Fragmentary remains of the large crocodile-like phytosaurs,
Buettneria (the largest of all amphibians), and the primitive little
dinosaur Ceolophysis have also been recognized in the same area.
A collecting party sponsored jointly by the West Texas
seum Association and the Department of Geology in Texas Technological College (1937), collected a number of excellent specimens in the Oligocene deposits in the Big Badlands of South Dakota. Most of these specimens were subsequently transferred to
the Carnegie Museum, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Under the terms
of the exchange the Carnegie Museum was to prepare certain of
these specimens and return them to the West Texas Museum. One
of these, the excellently preserved skeleton of a very large oreodont, M~rycoidodon culbertsoni, has been received. It is hoped
that this magnificent specimen can be mounted for exhibition in
the near future.
Exhibitions
The writer, with the gratuitous assistance of a limited number of students, has been able to increase the exhibition materials
in the Museum through the addition of several interesting specimens.
Most spectacular of these is a large block containing a great
mass of fossil bones of the large extinct Bison antiquus figginsi

News Notes and Editorials

153

and an included flint projectile (Plainview) point. The specimen.
was mounted in bold relief, but neither the bones nor the projectile point has been disturbed during the preparation of the
block. This block of bones with its included Plainview point is
one of eight collected by the University of Texas in the vicinity
of Plainview, Texas, in 1945. It was presented to the West Texas Museum through the courtesy of Dr. E. H. Sellards and the
Texas Memorial Museum.
An. excellent skull tentatively referred to the same species
of Bi~or~ has also been placed on exhibit. This specimen was collected from a Pleistocene lake deposit near Weatherly Lake, New
Mexico, and was skillfully prepared by Mrs. William Quinn of
the Museum staff.
Three Odeodont skulls collected by the Museum field expedition to South Dakota in 1937 may now be seen. These skulls, one of
which belongs to the highly aberrant genus Leptauchenia are in
addition to the skeleton mentioned above.
A welcome addition to the collection of Triassic vertebrates
is a series of armor plates and spines of the rare Pseudosuchian
Episcoposau~us (Desmatosuchus).
This beast, some fifteen to
twenty feet in length, presented an appearance similar to that
of the living alligator, although the actual relationship between
the two forms is most remote. In Episcoposaurus the head was
relatively short and a solid but movable mass of bony armor plates
protected the broad upper surface of the back and tail. A series
of backwardly curved spikes, the longest of which were situated
in the shoulder region, projected along either side of the body.
This strange form is best represented by a partial skeleton
from Crosby County, Texas, and now in the University of Michigan Museum of Paleontology, although fragmentary remains can
be seen in various other North American museums. The material
pertaining to Episcoposau~us in the West Texas Museum consists
of a number of disconnected armor plates including several excellently preserved lateral spikes from the shoulder region. The
specimens represent a number of separate "finds" all within
Crosby County, Texas.
A poorly preserved skull and lower jaw of the giant camel,
Gigantocamelus spatula, was prepared by the winter i~ August
and September. This camel, whose remains are found only in
the states of Texas and Nebraska, represents the largest genus
of that group which ever lived. The West Texas Museum is fortunate in possessing a nearly complete, though poorly preserved
skeleton of this animal, from Hartley County, Texas. The camel,

154

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

like the Levelland mammoth, is too large to be completely mounted under the present low ceilings of the Museum building and
consequently, only the skull and jaws together with a few limb
bones, are on exhibit at the present time.
At the present time, the writer is completing work on a mounted cast of the skeleton of the giant Argentinan carnivorous bird,
Mese~nbriornis incertis.
This cast, which will stand approximately five feet high at the head, was obtained several years ago
through an exchange with the Chicago Museum of Natural History.
During the coming year additional exhibition pieces will
doubtless appear in the West Texas Museum, but as the present
building space becomes more crowded, the interest of the staff
must necessarily turn to research problems, some of which, it is
hoped, may ultimately represent important contributions to the
science of vertebrate paleontology.
Warm Langston, Jr.
Texas Technological College
Lubbock, Texas
Houston Anthropological Society
The Houston Anthropological Society was organized in 1947
under the auspices of the Houston Museum of Natural History.
The organization of the society was the result of local interest
aroused by Joe Ben Wheat’s work at the Addicks site. The Society plans to further explore the Addicks region and make a collection of its materials.
Regular meetings are held at which
archeological subjects are discussed by members.
R. B. Worthington
4216 Walker Avenue
Houston 3, Texas
The 1948 Annual Meeting
The annual meeting of the society for 1948 will be held in
Austin, October 29-30. The first session will be a business dinner
at 6:00 P. M., Friday, October 29, at a place to be announced later.
The dinner will be followed with an evening session at 8:00 P. M.
in Rooms 315-316, Union Building on the University campus. The
third session will be at 9:00 A. M., Saturday, October 30, in Rooms
315-316, Union Building. Dr. Tom N. Campbell, Department of
Anthropology, University of Texas, is chairman of a committee

News Notes and Editorials

155

on program and arrangements. Members of the society are invited to communicate with Dr. Campbell in regard to suggestions
relative to the program and for reservations.

The 1948 Bulletin
On account of delay in the printing of this issue of the
Bulletin, due to mechanical difficulties, we are carrying forward
for the 1948 Bulletin two excellent papers: Alex D. Krieger’s "Importance of the ’Gilmore Corridor, in Culture Contacts between
Middle America and the Eastern United States," and Tom N.
Campbell’s "The Merrell Site: Archaeological Remains Associated with Alluvial Terrace Deposits in Eastern. Texas."
The 1948 Bulletin will be published as soon as possible after
the annual meeting of the Society in Austin, October 29~30, and
will contain in part articles presented at the meeting.

In Regard to the Spelling o] A~’chaeo~ogy
The reader may wonder at the inconsistency in the spelling
of archaeology in this issue of the Bulletin. For this the editor is
to blame and accepts full responsibility. However, he feels that
the reader is entitled to an explanation.
The only way the editor is able to function at all, due to his
numerous other duties, is to utilize the services of other qualified
persons for editing and proof reading. The editor has always
spelled archeology with an a, so it just did not occur to us to call
the attention of our colleagues to the necessity of consistency.
Naturally, each assistant with whom we had "farmed out" articles
for editing, used the method of spelling he was accustomed to use.
It was not until the type was all set and the galley proof read
that we became aware that both spellings had been used. To
get consistency now would mean considerable further delay and
expense,--hence, our decision to let this issue go to press with each
writer spelling archaeology his own way.
We have made some investigation as to what is a general
custom. We find Webster gives both methods with preference
the a. The editorial staffs of American Antiquity and of the
erican Anthropologis~ use the a. The first two Bulletins issued
by this society used the a. Beginning with Volume Three the a
was dropped, and there seems to have been a consistent editorial
policy of omitting the a until this issue. As mentioned above, this
we overlooked until the copy was all in print.

156

Texas Archeological and Paleontologica~ Society

We suggest that the society adopt an official spelling of archaeology at the next meeting, and in the future we will undertake
to be consistent.

BOOK REVIE\VS
EDITOR’S NOTE: Two rev|ews of the s~me item seem justiiled by
the fact that Dr. Erlk K. Reed’s treatment is general and objective, while
that of Dr, Cyrus N. Ray is a critical reaction to only one aspect of Fir.
Krieger’s treatise.

Culture Complexes in Northern Texas. By Alex D. Krieger.
Austin (University of Texas) Press, 1946. Pp. 366. Illustrations.

$2.50.
Mr. Krieger’s book is an outstanding piece of work and a major contribution to North American archeology. I should say it
is the equivalent of at least two doctorial dissertations. A thorough
and detailed analysis and bold synthesis of past findings and present knowledge of archeological materials in northern Texas, it
will be basic to all future work in that area.
In order to approach his objective of establishing cultural
connections and time relationships between northern Texas and
the Pueblo Southwest on the one hand and the Caddoan area of
the Mississippi on the other, Krieger first reviews the known material of northwestern, north-central and northeastern Texas in
considerable detail, analyzing and reinterpreting findings with
particular attention to resemblances and relationships to Puebloan
and Caddoan groups and to problems of dating.
The pueblo-!~ke villages of the Canadian Valley, the "Panhandle Culture," are taken up first, under the more specific designation of "Antelope Creek focus." Data and objects obtained
through the excavations of Mr. Studer, Dr. Holden, and others
are reviewed in detail and brought together into the first systematic description of the complex. The time of occupation, indicated by Pueblo pottery to fall between 1300 and 1450 A. D., is
discussed. That the abar~donment of these sites and disappearance of the culture was due to both droughts between 1440 and
1470 and attacks by the "Queechos" and "Teyas" (who were
Plains Apaches) is suggested, reasonably enough.
Related materials in adjacent areas and affiliations with the
Upper Republican culture of Kansas and Nebraska and with the
Pueblo dulture of New Mexico are discussed. Connections with
the Southwest involve both exchange of specific artifacts--glazepaint pottery and obsidian and turquoise from the Pueblos in the
Panhandle sites, instruments of Alibates dolomite and of antler
and bison-bone found at Pecos~-and spread of ideas, particularly

158

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

shown in Panhandle architecture.
Krieger points out that the
"Antelope Creek focus" cannot be considered a peripl~eral Puebloan development, but instead is basically Plains with much
Pueblo influence, especially in architectm’e.
Instead of stopping there and being satisfied with the phrase
"Pueblo influence" or "Pueblo contacts," he goes on to wonder
just how it worked, and why, for example, there is so little Pueblo
pottery when there is so much Pueblo influence manifested in
architecture.
The suggestion, which is credited to J. Charles
I4elley~ that the explanation might be occasional intermarriage
with Pueblo women, who are the house-owners in many pueblos,
is penetrating but unacceptable: if there is any one activity primarily associated with women, other than childbirth, it is potterymaking.
The fact that, as pointed out by Krieger and Kelley, the Plains
traits found adopted at Pecos are ideas connected with men’s activities such as hunting, leads to the opposite conclusion--that
parties of men from the Panhandle visited Pecos to trade, and
did not bring back any Pueblo wives. Instead, they were greatly
impressed by Pueblo architecture and on their return started
building stone houses, with specific Southwestern features, while
their women kept on making the same kind of cord-marked
"Plains" pottery as before; the men not having been especially
interested in cermatic types.
Pueblo pottery and metates in the Llano Estacado, discussed
next, are thought by Krieger to represent Puebloan occupation-at least by seasonal bison-hunting parties--rather than merely
"influence," as far east as the Break of the Plains. The interesting point is brought out that "primitive" man would have been
unable ~.o farm in the short-grass plains, unable to break the sod
without machinery, but could have raised corn successfully in the
sand dune areas of the Llano. The Pueblo pottery of this area
includes types which can be dated in the fourteenth through sixteenth centuries. That the spread of Pueblo pottery in TransPecos Texas occurred mainly between 1300 and 1450 is pointed
out. The halting of this activity by about I500, evidently, may
have been due to the arrival of Lipanan Apaches.
Next, the materials associated with and including pottery in
north-central Texas are taken up, under the designation "Henrietta focus."
The discussion is based primarily on the Harre~
site in Young County as a type and a controlled excavation. Data
and artifacts from other sources are then compared to the Hartell site findings, and the Henrietta focus is defined in a tentative

Book Reviews

159

or preliminary manner by a list of traits which are consistently
found together, with plain shell-tempered pottery as a guide or
a sort of "index fossil." Other major features of the complex include--subsistence on both hunting of bison and other animals
and on corn-raising, with considerable fishing; no remains of
houses; snub-nosed scrapers and side-scrapers, flint drills and
knives, bone awls, small triangular arrowpoints; sandstone elbow
pipes; flexed burials with stone slaps. This culture is found in
the middle Red River-Wichita River and in upper drainages Of
the Trinity and Brazos; within the area between Abilene and Dallas and the Red River. How far it may extend into Oklahoma is
unknown.
As to the date of the "Henrietta focus," a period between 1400
or 1450 and as late as 1600 is suggesteed by the few fragments
of Puebloan pottery which have been found, mainly of the longlived type, Chupadero Black-on-White, and by other considerations. That the people of thisculture cannot have been Wichita~
Krieger demonstrates by careful comparison with ethnological
data on the Wichita and to archeological data from the Paint Creek
sites in Kansas, which are identified with the protohistoric Wichita
(Quivira). There is a very general resemblance, and Henriett~
materials are to be classified broadly as Plains.
That the historic site at Spanish Fort is, however, Wichita,
and in fact is specifically the Taovaya village of the 18th c~ntury, as previously pointed out by Adolph Wire, is agreed to by
Krieger. The southward movement of the Wichita into northern
Texas evidently did not occur until the historic period.
Another archeological complex pertinent to this whole problem is that of the late horizon in central Texas, which Krieger,
following Kelley, refers to as the Austin focus and identifies with
the historic Tonkawa.
Characteristics of this cultural division
include small, light, barbed arrowpoints; beveled knives and snubnosed scrapers; plain smooth bone-tempered pottery; ~exed burials in stone lined pits; shell ornaments and European glass trade
beads. Trade pottery from the Hasinai (Tejas) of the Neches
Valley appears. There are a few similarities between this Austin
focus and the earlier Henrietta focus to the north, and in the Abilene-Upper Brazos region are found mixtures of Austin and Henrietta types.
Finally, the Caddoan area is reached in northeastern
and the focus represented at, and named for, the Sanders
Lamar County is exhaustively reviewed and is found to
in the general period between 1300 and 1450, and to be

Texas,
site in
belong
related

160

Texas ArcheoIogieal and Paleontological Society

to the famous Spiro mound site in eastern Oklahoma and to the
Crenshaw site in southwestern Arkansas.
After thus establishing a series of foci, or archeological complexes, clear across northern Texas for the late, pottery-producing
horizons, Krieger takes up the problem of direct and indirect contacts between the Caddoans on the east and the New Mexico
Pueblos to the west, and of relationships between those two advanced cultures.
The suggestion is made, new and at first startling but wellsupported and reasonable, that certain bowl-forms of late glazes
at Pecos represent a Caddoan influence from northeastern Texas.
Conversely, certain shapes and also the technique of neck-banding in sixteenth-century material in northeastern TexaS, ~f Caddoan affiliation, are thought to be of possible Southwestern derivation.
Krieger then summarizes the evidences of cultural contact
across north Texas between the Pueblo Southwest and Caddoan
East Texas, and brings out the untenability, already widely recognized, of the concept of a "Caddoan Root" in the Southwest,
which was advanced by certain workers several years ago and
has since been dropped.
In concluding sections, the cultural units which have been
discussed are reviewed in relation to one another and correlations
between them established,
Krieger has done a very fine job on a most important line.
The thorough presentation and analysis of data and the clear and
significant interpretation of them has only been hinted at .in this
review. Of special Value to "outsiders" is the fact that the extensive and very important findings of archeologists in north Texas, which~have not been widely enough L~own, are here brought
together in a readily accessible and understandable form.
Erik K. Reed
Santa Fe, N.

Culture Complexes in Northern Texas. By Alex D. Krieger.
Austin (University of Texas) Press, 1946. Pp. 366. Illustrations.
$2.50.
The Harrell Site
This work describes some of the later pottery sites of northern
Texas, and seems to be an attempt to separate the pottery culture

Book Reviews

16I

complexes of this vast area into something resembling a beginning
of systematic study of the subject. What Professor Krieger writes
on the late or pottery culture components of Texas and adjacent
regions will be of interest because he is one of the few authorities
in that field, but there are erroneous statements and implications
in some of it which arise when he begins to make deductions in
the field of ancient man of the Abilene Region where the University of Texas has done very little work. His theory that the
Clear Fork Culture may have pesisted up into the late pottery
horizons because a few stray Clear Fork gouges have been found
in sites with pottery is at variance with all of the weight of the
evidence of twenty years of research.
On page 261 Krieger
states, "It may come as a surprise to many archeologists that the
Clear Fork Culture discovered and described in many papers by
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray of Abilene, Texas, can be said to have continued
in existence until as late as the time of Henrietta Focus or until
about 1450 A. D."
Apparently the basis for this statement was the finding of
seven gouges in the Harrell site mentioned on page 114. Table
(1) of Krieger’s Report listed five gouges as to depth below the
surface, one was found at a depth of one foot, one at two feet, one
at three feet, one at four feet, and one at six feet. An area 135 by
85 feet was excavated to depths of five to ten feet. When we
consider that some time elapsed between the deposition of each
foot of silt and the finding of one gouge to a campsite area of that
size and of one foot depth, means too scanty a distribution to indicate that the dwellers on the site made them. Their thin distribution of one to a foot of soil might indicate that it was the work
of Indian curio collectors off of some eroding Clear Fork site of
the vicinity. River banks that high occasionally are topped by
extra high floods in the upper Brazos, and it could be possible for
one gouge to the foot of silt to have been borne in by a high t~ood.
At the Hodges site near Nugent, Texas, Clear Fork gouges occur
in hearths which lie at the foot of the high Brazos River bank in
a gravel deposit which lies just above the Permian limestone valley floor. Fragments of Permian ship lizard bones were found
by the writer in the Gibson Site buried in the same stratum with
charcoal f!lled hearths, man made flint flakes ,an Abilene, and a
Folsom Point, but the writer does not believe that the ship lizard
was cooked on one of the hearths in the same stratum of Lower
Clear Fork Silt.
Several years ago the writer conducted Professor Krieger to
a small Clear Fork Culture burnt rock mound, located in an eroded
area, south of .Buffalo Gap, which contained a mammoth’s tooth

162

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

embedded amongst the burnt hearth stones, but we do not recall
that Professor Krieger then expressed any opinions as to how
the tooth came to be there, or as to its relationship to the burnt
rocks.
However, that mound contained no potsherds, nor is it of record that any have ever been found in any pure Clear Fork Culture site. As we have before pointed out if one finds a tomato
can fastened onto the end of a mammoth’s tusk in a present day
river bed he does not necessarily conclude that the mammoth’s
human contemporaries ate tomatoes. There are various ways in
which Yuma, Folsom, Abilene, and Clear Fork artifacts could have
been transported into any pottery site, or any other archeological
site formed after the time of their making. Indians picked up and
brought into their camps ar~ything which interested them, the
same as we do today. In some sites Clear Fork and Folsom men
lived on a site and left artifacts, and then men of intermediate
aged cultures succeeded one another there and left artifacts, and
at last pottery making men came and left their pottery, and all
between then the forces which aggrade and those which erode
shuffled the artifacts around and finally a mixture resulted which
required for its separation many years of study of pure culture
stratified superimposed sites. This study has been done in Folsom,
Abilene, and Clear Fork cultures, 1-2-3-4-5-6, and a relative
placement in time made, and this positive evidence will require
more than the negative evidence of finding a few specimens out
of place in pottery sites to break it down. In the Pottery Site
17 of mine referred to on page 124 by Professor Krieger the same
difficulty was at first encountered in that an early hill top horizon
of Folsom and Clear Fork artifacts in the Clear Fork silts had
eroded down, and flints of the middle cultures were then deposited on the site, and then later flints of the earliest phase of
the Valley Creek culture with plain pottery were deposited in
the same field. The culture types were separated at first on typhology and patination and then later positively when they were
found stratified in river bank silts in pure cultures. In site 17
referred to above the early phase of Valley Creek culture lies
mixed on the surface with several ancient flint cultures, but the
same early Valley Creek lies buried four feet deep on the Brazos
River banks near Nugent, Texas, in the top stratum or Nugent
Silt 5. In Site 17 the writer found five Folsom blades and six
Clear Fork gouges in the same site with pottery, this was confusing at first but after the stratified river bank silts were studied
it was found that the Clear Fork and Folsom flints were eroding
from an old reddish deposit of Clear Fork age lying on the highest portion of Site 17. In the illustrations used in Professor Krie-

Book Reviews

163

ger’s text there are no Clear Fork artifacts shown except a gouge
marked K on page 301. Some of the flints resemble Valley
Creek culture scrapers and arrow points.
Exception must be taken to a statement on page 95 of Prolessor Krieger’s article. In Footnote 2 we find this announcement.
"This statement holds for all known human remains in the Edwards Plateau. No associations with extinct mammals have been
recognized in this region, although a number of such discoveries
are on record for other parts of Texas (See Sellards, E. H., Early
Man in America. Index to Localities and Selected Bibliography,
pp. 402-404)."
Other geologists and geographers (some of whom have been
present when discoveries were made) are not in accordance
with this opinion as the following quotations will show. In Science
of September 16, 1938, Dr. Kirk Bryan, professor of Geology and
Geography of Harvard University, made the following joint statement concerning the McLean site. "The site was discovered by
Cyrus N. Ray in July 1929~ and reported by him in 1930 as a 16cality where he had found channelled points . . . In this site in
1935 Ray found a mammoth’s skeleton embedded in a hummock
of gravelly earth over-lying bedrock, and with the assistance of
Dr. E. H. Sellards and Dr. Otto O. Watts, the mammoth’s teetI~
were removed. At that time only a small excavation was made
in the bank, of sufficient size to remove the teeth. On July ~,
1938, while on an inspection tour of the deeply buried sites discovered by Cyrus N. Ray, Kirk Bryan and Samuel Vaughan were
conducted to the site, and while Bryan and Ray were inspecting
the outcropping bones, Vaughan noticed about an inch of the
exposed base of a flint dart head firmly embedded in the red earth
of the bank, on the same level as th bones, and on the north edge
of the small hole excavated by Dr. Sellards, Ray and Watts in
1935 ... It is, however, fair to conclude that the Folsomoid point
is as old as the mammoth bearing alluvium, which also contains
remains of other, as yet unidentified, animals.’"
In the September 1938 Bulletin of Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society Dr. Kirk Bryan made the following statement concerning another local site, the Gibson site, which is situated on another creek twenty-five miles from the McLean site.
"On July 2 to 4 I had the privilege of visiting some of the localities Of archeological interest near Abilene through the courtesy
of and accompanied by Dr. Cyrus N. Ray. I inspected the Gibson site on Elm Creek described by Ray, and confirmed the geological description by Leighton (Station 5) . . . Led by Ray to a
place about 1500 feet upstream (Part of Gibson Site Ray 1930 or

164

Texas ArcheoIogical and Paleontological Society

Station 6 Leighton 1936). I helped him excavate a mammoth
bone, previously discovered and partly excavated by Him. The
bone lay at the base of the bank almost at creek level. Although
no artifacts have been found at this place, the material is red,
compact, and contains plates of alluvial clay. It is obviously tl~e
same formation as at the locality originally described by Ray
downstream.’’~ At the latter locality downstream the reviewer
found Folsom, Abilene, and Clear Fork points, embedded at depths
of twenty-four to twenty-five feet below the top of the bank, in
ancient reddish Clear Fork silts°
In the January issue of Geographical Review, Dr. Carl O.
Sauer, Professor of Geography of the University of California made the following comments on the Abilene sites. "I had
the opportunity in the spring of 1946 to visit the area round Abilene, Texas, under the guidance of its acute local student Dr. Cyrus N. Ray. Although not involving the earliest sites of man in
TeXas, this area may be critical for part of the history of Ice Age
man. Ray has identified seven consecutive horizons, of wide distribution in the valley fill on the affluents of the Brazos River.
All but the first horizon are deposits laid down in slack or slowly
moving water.
The lowest horizon (Lower Clear Fork) is of
greatest interest, for the hearths and artifacts it bears in situ, as
well as for bones of extinct mammals. The occupants of this earliest level were both food grinders and hunters. Several kinds
of primitive points have been found at this level which impressed
me as having been an old land surface probably exposed and occupied by man for a considerable length of time . . . Thus the
Lower Clear Fork may have been a surface of human occupation
about thirty-five thousand years ago when men were experimenting with projectile points of stone.’"
In locations at intervals down the course of the Clear Fork
of the Brazos the evidence indicates that the whole regularly deposited series of seven river silts, the five Nugent, and the Upper
and Lower Clear Fork silts, have been entirely washed away down
to the present river bed and were replaced during a late period
by a homogenous or unstratified deposit of silt. This silt contains
recent animal bones all the way down, and a mixture of flints
of some previous periods, along with the late hearths, burials,
and midden refuse which accumulated during the time when the
bank was being built up.
This late filling in of deeply eroded holes in the valley floors
probably took place during Nugent Silt 5 time, and is of approximately the same time period from top to bottom.~

Book Reviews

165

The writer visited the HarreLl site during its excavation,
and his memory of the deposit was that it had the amorphous appearance of a late refill down as low as the bank could be inspected. There was no distinct banding or stratification apparent,
such as occurs when geological deposits are laid down regularly
according to age sequencee, where the top or latest deposit covers
a different textured and colored stratum below it. Many of the
Harrell camp site artifacts resemble those found at a depth of
four feet on the Brazos River banks, buried in Nugent Silt 5 near
the town of Nugent, Texas, but in that region the ancient hearth
layers of the Hodges Site exist on down in the strata to low water
level, where Clear Fork gouges have been found embedded.
Conclusions
The Harrell Site seems to have been excavated a little more
carefully than most W.P.A. projects, but some of the characteristics of most other such undertakings also show up in its report;
in most sites a quantity of earth was moved, some artifacts were
found, the records were not very good, and few prepared ve~
thorough reports for publication on the work they did. Considering the amount of earth removed, the results were disappointing.
¯ The archeeologists who dug the sites out are the ones who
should have been required to interpret their findings shortly after the work was done. It seems that long afterwards Professor Krieger and associates have attempted to assay a heterogenous complex of artifacts and make out something definite on the
basis of typology.
The whole Harrell site bank seems to be composed of an
atypical amorphous accumulation of silt of late deposition which
was lived on while it was being deposited. The artifacts seem
to be mainly of late pottery cultures. The findings of shell tempered instead of bone tempered pottery shows wide differences
from both phases of the Abilene region Valley Creek culture. The
arrowheads however shown in Figure 7 are all quite similar to
Valley Creek artifacts.
Of the darts shown on Figure 8 only
two on the bottom row resemble the early phase bevelled Valley
Creek form of dart which occurs abundantly in early Valley
Creek, but not at all in the late Valley Creek phase.
The concentration of the bulk of the artifacts in the top
five feet might indicate that there is where they were made, and

* For descriptive purposes the writer has recently named this latest type of silt deposit, the Ft. Grilfia Silt,

166

Texas Archeological and PaleontoIogioal Society

that the occasional potsherds and artifacts found in the lowest
levels may have fallen down to lower levels through animal holes
or through dry weather soil cracks.
Pottery certainly does not occur that deeply buried in the
regularly deposited silts higher up on the Brazos River. The stone
lined graves of the area of the Clear Fork of the Brazos above
there in Jones, Taylor, and Throckmorton counties, are on hill
tops high above chance of river silts covering them, and may belong to several different periods, however, the deepest definitely
stone slab lined grave buried in the river banks was between six
and seven feet in depth in Nugent Silt (5). A river bank grave
ten feet deep in the same region buried in Nugent Silt (4) only
had a covering above it of hearthstone size, and no lining of stone
slabs.
The burials at the Harrell site had all of the characteristics
of most of the hill top burials of~ Jones County previously described
by the writer in early Bulletins of the Society.
Pueblo Rio Grande Glaze-paint pottery has only been found
in sites of the latest phase of the Valley Creek culture in the Abilene region.
A site situated in a favorable location could have been occupied throughout a period of several thousands of years, during
which the land surface could have been built up several feet and
the inhabitants during all that time could have had no knowledge
of Puebloan culture, then toward the close of this long occupation
a trade route could have been opened to that area.
If then an archeologist now finds Puebloan sherds of date of
1450 in that site all that he can safely deduce is that the site was
still, occupied up to 1450, and very little else. We note from Table
1 that of a total of 453 potsherds of known depth, that 339 were
found in the top two feet, 99 sherds in the next two feet below,
and only 25 sherds in the depth from four to eight feet.
Some data in different portions of the book is confusing. Figure 4 Stratigraphic Profiles p. 93 numbers strata from below upward and that on pp. 101 to 105, Table 2, "occurrence by stratum"
seems to have the numbering of strata from the top downward as
Level 1 contains the most artifacts while Stratum 2 on page 93
is named as containing the greater number of artifacts. The one
sherd of New ~¢fexico "brown ware" is listed as from Level II in
Table 2.
Elsewhere, however, on page 112 Professor Krieger
stated that the notes show the New Mexican sherd came from a
depth of fifty-three inches, and he seemed uncertain in which
stratum to include it.

Book Reviews

167

Throughout the text one notes the use of unfamiliar names
for some Valley Creek pottery flints and among such references
is one on page 124 as follows: "Rays P. At.row B with long pointed
barbs and pointed stem chipped on both faces as well as shaped
agrees with the type l~erdiz Pointed Stem Kelley and was the most
common form at Site 17 (37 specimens.)" There has been too
strong a tendency in archeology for each regional excavator to
give new names to the same forms or culture types of stone artifacts, and this adds further confusion to an already muddled situation. If one is certain that an artifact or flint culture has not been
previously described in publication no one should object to a name
being given it.
A number of other sites besides the Harrell ~ite are described
in this report, but the writer does not have enough information
concerning these regions to comment on them.
Cyrus N. Ray
P. O. Box 62
Abilene, Texas

REFERENCES
~ Bryan, Kirk and Cyrus N. Ray, "Long Channeled Point Found in Alluvium Beside Bones oi Elephas Columbi," Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 10, 1938.
S Ray, Cyrus N., "New Evidences of Ancient Man in Texas Found during Prolessor Kirk Bryan’s visit," Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 10, 1938.
s Ray, Cyrus N., ’*Was the American Mano and Metate an Invention Made During
Pleistocene Time?" Science, February 23,

1938.

*Leighton, N. M., Geological Aspects of the Findings of Primitive Man Near Abilne, Texas, Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona, !936.
~ Robe*r*, Frank H. H. Jr., "A Deep Buria! on the Clear Fork of the Brazos
River," Bulletin o~ ~he Texas Arcbeological and Paleontological Society, Vo!. 16, 1944-4L

~ Ray, Cyrus N., *’Stream Bank Silts of the Abilene Region," Bullelln of the Texas Areh¢ological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 16, 1944-45.
Ray, Cyrus N. and Kirk Bryan, "Folsomoid Point Found in Alluvium Beside a
Mammoth’s Bones, Science, September 16, 1938.
~ Bryan, Kirk, "Deep Sites Near Abilene, Texas," Bulletin of Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, VoL 10, 1938.
~ Sauer, Car! O., "Early Relations of Man to Plants," Geographical Review, The
American Geographical Society of ]New York, January, 1947.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

168

REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-TREASURER OF
THE TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL AND
PALEONTOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Report for the nineteenth year from the annual meeting, October
31, 1946, to October 25, 1947
RECEIPTS
Balance on October 31, 1946 ................................................................................. $972.88
Collected on 1946 dues ................................................................................................ 159.00
Collected on 1947 dues ................................................................................................ 177.00
Bulletin sales ........................................................................................................................ 57.00
Collection on Convention and Luncheon ................................................... 11.50
Total ........................................................................................................................ $1377.38
DISBURSES
To Abilene Printing & Stationery Co., for
printing of 1946 Bulletin .............................................................................. $297.00
To News Engraving Co. for 1946 cuts ......................................................
To Wooten Hotel for 1946 Luncheon ............................................................
To Dr. Watts for Office Expense .......................................................................
To Secretary-Treasurer for clerical work ................................................
To Dr. Ray for Convention Expenses .........................................................
Drayage of Books ...............................................................................................................

96.25
76.70
15.50
27.00
10.00
3.86

Total .......................................................................................................................... $532.31
Balance on deposit on October 25, 1947 ................................................ $845.07
OTTO O. WATTS,
Secretary-Treasurer

MEMBERSHIP LIST 1946-1947
HONORARY MEMBERS
Albert G. Ingalls, Scientific American Magazine .............. New York City, N. Y.
J. S. Bridwe!l ............................................ Wichita Falls, Texas
MEMBERS

.....

Abilene Printing & Stationery Co .................................. Abilene, Texas
E. T. Adams ................................................ Glen Ro*e, Texa~
I4_. H. Adams ................................................... Abihne, Texas
American Museum o£ Natural History ..................... New York City, N. Y
American Philosophical Society ................................ Philadelphia 6, Pa.
Max W. Ball, New Interior Bldg ........................... Washington 29, D. C.
D. A. Bandee,,, West Texas Chamber of Commerce .................. Abilene, Texas
Baylor University Library ......................................... Waco, Texas
G. C. Beuson, Box 381 ......................................... XVhitney, Texas
Jo~ Benton ................................................... Noeona,
W. P. Brennan ............................................. Crystal City,
Mrs. Charles Brower (Hall Ranch) ........................ Richland Spring*,
Bureau oi" American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institute ............ Waslxlngton,

T*xa~
Texas
Texas

D. C.
C. M. Caldw©ll ............................................... Abilene, Texas
Tom N. Campbell, University o~ Texas ............................. Austin, Texas
Mrs. Win. H. Campbell, Box 116, Kings Canyon Road ........ Carson City, Nevada
Sam Chamberlain ............................................... Refngio, Texas
Cleveland Public Library ....................................... Cleveland, Ohio
Columbia University Library ............................. New York City, N. Y.
COl. M. L. Crimmins, 312 Geneseo Road ...................... San Antonio, Texas
Dallas Public Library ........................................... Dallas, Texas
E. C. de Montel, 1000 City National Bldg. ..................... Wichita Falls, Texas
Frederic H. Douglas, Denver Art Museum, 1300 Logan St. .......... Denver 3, Colo.
Dr C. D. Eaves, Texas Technological College ...................... Lubbock, Texas
Helen S. Farrington, El Paso Public Library ......................... El Paso, Texas
Field Museum of Natural History ................................... Chicago, I11.
R. E. Forrester, Box 24~, T. C. U. Station ....................... Fort Worth, Texas
W. S. Fulton ................................................ Dragoon~ Arizona
Gila Pueblo .................................................... Globe Arizona
Frank Grimes .................................................. Abilene, Texa~
Hardin-Simmons University Library .............................. Abil~ne, Texas
Frank H. Hayne, Texas Technological College ...................... Lubbock, Texas
Dr. T. W. Hedrick .............................................. Abilene, Texas
Dr. Frank C. Hibben, 3000 Campus Blvd ....................... Albuquerque, N. M.
Dr. T. L. Hodg*s ............................................ Bismark, Arkamas
Dr. W. C. Holden, Texas Technological Colleg¢ .................... Lubbock, Texas

Texas ArcheoIogicat and Paleontological Society

170

Dr. Ruth A. Holzapfel, McMurry College .......................... Abilene, Texas
Houston Public Library .......................................... Houston, Texas
Instituto Panamericano de Geografia e Historia, 192 Avenida del Observatorio ......
.............. Tacubaya, D. F., Republica Mexicaha
Illinois

Museum ...................................... Springfield,

State

Illinois

A. T. Jackson, 508 E. 46th St .................................. Austin, Texas
Henry James .................................................... Austin, Texas
Joint University

Libraries .................................... Nashville

4,

Tenn.

Johns Hopkins University Library .............................. Baltimore 18, Md.
Percy
Roland

Jones ................................................... SAbilene,

Texas

Jones .................................................... Dallas,

Texas

L. G. Kammerdiener, Texas Technological College .................... Lubbock, Texas
Harold M. Kantz, 3253 Sondra Drive ............................ Fort Worth, Texas
J. Charles Kelley, University of Texas ............................. Austin, Texas
Dr. Oscar Kinchen, Texas Technologleal College .................... Lubbock, Texas
Mrs. Forrest Kirkland, 121 .W. Montana .............................. Dallas, Texas
Alex D. Krieger, University of Texas ................................ Austin, Texas
Laboratory of Anthropology ................ ...................... Santa Fe, N. M.
Warm Langston, Jr., Texas Technological College .................... Lubbock, Texas
La Retama Public Library .................................. Corpus Christi, Texas
Judge Harry J. Lemley ......................................... Hope, Arkansas
Ell Lilly, $807 Sunset Lane .................................... Indianapolis, In&
Kenneth MacGowan, 10727 LeConte Ave ..................... Los Angeles 24, CalLf.
Dr. J. G. McAllister, Dept. of Anthropology, University of Texas ..... Austin, Texas
A. T. McDannald, Box 2972 ..................................... Houston, Texas
E.

A.

MeIlhenny ............................................ Avery

Island,

La.

Dr. S. S. McKay, Texas Technological College ...................... Lubbock, Texas
Metropolitan Museum of Art, Library ........................ New York City, N. Y.
Mrs. Glen E. Moore, Rt. I, Box 284 ................................ El Paso, Texas
Museum of American Indian, Heye l:oundation, Huntington Free Library ..........
.......................... New York City, N. Y.
blewberty Library, 60 W. Walton P!ace .......................... Chicago, Illinois
New York Public Library, Fifth Ave. and 42nd. St ............. New York City, N. Y.
Northwestern

University

Library ............................... Evanston,

Illinois

Oklahoma Agriculture and Mechanical Colleg~ ...................... Stillwater, Okla.
Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University..Cambridge, Mass,
H.

A.

Phillips
Judge

Pender .................................................. Abilene,
Academy,
Hermon

C.

Texas

Archaeology ................ Andover,

Mass.

Pipkin ...................................... Amarillo,

Texas

Dept.

of American

Omar Radford .................................................. Abilene, Texas
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, Box 62 ...................................... Abitene, Texas
J. Henry Ray, 2130 Fannin St. .................................... Vernon, Texas
Rev. Henry Retzek ............................................ Wheaton, Minn.
P. M. Rice .................................................... Hamilton, Texas
Rice

Institute

Library .......................................... Houston,

Texas

Membership List 1946-1947

171

Dr. R. N. Richardson, Hardin-Simmons University .................. Abilene, Texas
Thomas
Rosenberg

E.

Roberts ............................................ Abilene,

Texas

Library ........................................... Galveston,

Texas
San Antonio Public Library .................................. San Antonio, Texas
San Diego Scientific Library, Balboa Park .......................... San Diego, Calif
E. B. Sayles, Arizona State Museum ............................... Tucson, Arizona
Henry Sayles, Jr ................................................. Abilene, Texas
Dr. Ellis W. Shuler, Southern Methodist University .................... Dallas, Texas
Judge O. L. Sims ............................................ Paint Rock, Texas
Dr. R. E. Smallwood, 1226 Wilson St ........................... Arkadelphia, Ark.
Prof. Victor J. Smith, Sul Ross College ............................ Alpine, Texas
Smithsonian Institution ...................................... Washington, D. C.
Soeiete des Amerieanistes, 61 Rue de Buffon .......................... Paris, France
P. J. Soday, 4012 Southern Parkway ................................ Louisville, Ky.
Southern Methodist University Library ............................ Dallas, Texas
Southwest Museum Library, Highland Park 42 ................ Los Angeles, Calif.
Floyd
Texas
Texas
Texas

V. Studer, 63S Amarillo Bldg ............................... Amarillo,
Agriculture and Mechanical, College Library ............ College Station,
College of Mines Library .................................. El Paso,
Library and Historical Commission .......................... Austin,

Texas
Texas

Texas
Texas
Texas Technological College Library .............................. Lubbock, Texas
Dr. Raymond H. Tull .......................................... Abilene, Texas
Tyrre!l Public Library .......................................... Beaumont, Texas
E. A. Ungren .................................................. Abilene, Texas
University Museum Library, 33rd and Spruce St ................... Philadelphia 4, Pa.
University of Arizona Library .................................... Tucson, Ariz.
University of Arkansas Library.. .............................. Fayetteville, Ark.
University of California Library ................................ Berkeley, Calif.
University of California at Los Angele~ ........................ Lo~ Angeles, Calif.
University of Chicago Library .................................... Chicago, Ill.
University of Denver, Mary Reed Library ........................... Denver, Colo.
University of Illinois Library ........................................ Urbana, I11.
University of Kansas Library ...................................... Lawrence, Kan.
University of Michigan Library ................................. Ann Arbor, Mich.
University of Nebraska Library .................................. Lincoln, Neb.
University of New Me~xico Library .......................... Albuquerque, N. M.
University of Texas Library ...................................... Austin, Texas
Mrs. W. C. Vernon, Texas Technological College ................... Lubbock, Texas
Waco Public Library ............................................ Waco, Texa~
Dr. Ernest Wallace, Texas Technological College ................... Lubbock, Texas
P. H. Walser, 1102 N. 1st. St ..................................... Temple, Texas
Frank H. Watt, Box 117~; .......................................... Waco, Texas
Dr. Otto O. Watts, Hardin-Simmons Univ. ........................ Abilene, Texas
Wi[liam C. Watts, 2111 2:~rd. St .................................. Lubbock, Texas

172

Texas Archeologi~al and Paleontological Society

Dr.C.H. Webb, Children’s ~CAinlc .............................. Shreveport, La.
Spencer Wells .................................................. Lnbbock, Texas
Joe Ben Wheat, University o£ Arizona .............................. Tucson, Ariz.
A. I-L Witte .................................................. Henri~a, Texas
IL B. Worthington ............................................ Homton, T~xas
Yat~ University Library ...................................... N~ Haven, Conn.

TE
ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY
Texas Archeological Society (TAS)
The Texas Archeological Society (TAS) offers a wide range of opportunities for
those interested in Texas heritage. The mission of the Society is to promote study,
preservation and awareness of Texas archeology.

A recent strategic plan calls for the

Society to create training opportunities for students, enhance and expand programs,
increase and diversify membership, inform the community of their archeological heritage
and cultivate and preserve resources. The membership generally numbers around 1400.
The Society calendar begins in October with the Annual Meeting, an event that
has taken place since 1929. Archeologists, professional and avocational, get together to
share information in research sessions and to hear from nationally renowned luncheon and
banquet speakers. Friday is a popular evening for the public forum with high profile
speakers and artifact identification. Meetings will be held in Lubbock (08) and Del Rio (09).
Each spring TAS offers sessions of the Texas Archeology Academy. Topics in
this series of workshops include Archeology 101 (including a field day), Ceramics: The
Stories Pottery Tells, Lithics: Reading Stone Tools, Historic Archeology and Rock Art of
Texas. Each Academy features power point presentations, a manual and hands-on
activities to reinforce concepts presented. In 2009 sessions will be held in Georgetown,
Study Butte, and Lake Jackson. Surveys at the close of sessions reveal that participants
greatly value the information imparted during the workshop and the camaraderie of fellow
students.
The summer brings a field school that offers an opportunity for folks to
contribute to research about Texas archeology. The principal investigator is supported
by staff and experienced volunteers. Usually around 300 people participate. Newcomers
appreciate an orientation session before joining crews in the field.

Survey and lab

sessions provide other venues for people who want to learn more about the archeological
process.

The field school in 2009 will be in the Panhandle near Perryton.

We offer

scholarships to college students and Native Americans. A youth program instructs around
60 students each year.
Publications of the Society include a journal, the Bulletin of the TAS, a quarterly
newsletter and two web sites,

is the organizational web site that relates

current programs and opportunities, The other web site i~ www,texasbe~vondhistoryj~et, a
venue that offers information in the form of multMevel exhibits.

TAS has been a

supporting partner of Texas Beyond History since its inception.
For more information about TAS see www.t×arch.org or call 800 377-7240.

Facsimile Reprint
~::
vvvvvv.gu stavslib ra ry.co m

$24.95

