Bulletin of the

TEXAS
SOCIETY Volume 66/1995

Timothy K. Perttula, Editor
Nancy Reese, Associate Editor

Published by the Society at Austin
1995

CONTENTS

J. C. Harrington Medal in Historical Archaeology: Kathleen Kirk Gilmore, 1995
Edward B. Jelks ............................................................ v

Foreword
Edward B. Jelks ............................................................ 1

PART
The Present and Future of Texas Prehistoric Archeology: An Introduction to the 1995 BTAS
Timothy K. Perttula .......................................................... 7
(Texas) Archeology 1995
Stephen L. Black ........................................................... 17
Paleoindians of Texas: An Update on the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey
David J. Meltzer and Michael R. Bever ......................................... 47
Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas
Elton R. Prewitt ............................................................ 83
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas
Timothy K. Perttula, Myles R. Miller, Robert A. Ricklis,
Daniel J. Prikryl, and Christopher Lintz ....................................... 175

PART
The Archeology of Southeast Texas
Leland W. Patterson ....................................................... 239

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview
Robert A. Ricklis .......................................................... 265
The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas
Ross C. Fields ............................................................ 301
The Archeology of the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas
Timothy K. Perttula ........................................................ 331

Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas
Michael B. Collins

........................................................ 361

Implications of Environmental Diversity in the Central Texas Archeological Region
Linda Wootan Ellis, G. Lain Ellis, and Charles D. Frederick ....................... 401
The Prehistory of South Texas
Thomas R. Hester ......................................................... 427
The Palo Duro Complex: Redefining the Early Ceramic Period in the Caprock Canyonlands
Douglas K. Boyd .......................................................... 461
Archeology and Late Quaternary Environments
of the Southern High Plains
Eileen Johnson and Vance T. Holliday ......................................... 519
The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico
Solveig A. Turpin

......................................................... 541

COMMENTS

Many a Slip ’twixt Cup and Lip: Correcting Perdiz Statistics
from the Buckhollow Site Report
LeRoy Johnson ........................................................... 561

BOOK REVIEWS

Disease and Demography in the Americas,
edited by John W. Verano and Douglas H. Ubelaker
Maynard B. Cliff .......................................................... 563

Authors ........................................................................ 67

J. C. Harrington Medal
Historical Archaeology:
Kathleen Kirk Gilmore, 1995
Edward B. Jelks

ABSTRACT
In January 1995 at the annual meeting of the Society for Historical Archaeology, held in Washington,
D.C., former Texas Archeological Society president Kathleen Gilmore was awarded the J. C. Harrington
Medal for Significant Contributions to Historical Archaeology, the Society for Historical Archaeology’s
most prestigious award. The presentation of the Harrington Medal was made by Edward B. Jelks, also a
former Texas Archeological Society president and a Harrington Medalist.
Ed’s presentation contained some vignettes that deserved being recorded in the annals of Texas
archeology, but which were deleted from the published version of the award that appeared in the Society
for Historical Archaeology’s journal, Historical Archaeology. So the entire presentation is printed here,
with the permission of the Society for Historical Archaeology.

June 1962 was unusually hot and stifling, even
for Texas, in the densely wooded valley of the
upper Sabine River, where I was directing excavations at the Gilbert site, an eighteenth century village of the Tawakoni, one of the southern Wichita
tribes. Labor for the project was contributed voluntarily by members of the Texas Archeologica! Society, who received training in field methods and
techniques in exchange for providing the muscle to
excavate an important site.
One morning a Cadillac about a block long
came weaving through the trees, stopped at the
edge of the site, and disgorged three women of
youngish middle-age appearance, all togged out in
what looked like Neiman-Marcus field garb.
"Heaven protect me," I thought. "A bunch of bored
Dallas socialites out to get their hands dirty in the
name of science." They introduced themselves as
Kathleen Gilmore, Norma Hoffrichter, and
Dessamae Lorrain, and said that they all were interested in archeology and had come out to help on
our dig. I assigned each of them to one of the crews
that were working on various features.
It was not more than 15 minutes before
Kathleen appeared with her very first find: a beautifully engraved brass butt plate from a French
trade gun. She asked me what it was. I replied in a
matter-of-fact tone of voice that it was a butt plate.
I could see the wheels turning in Kathleen’s
head as, transparently, she was weighing the

possibility that it really was a butt plate (whatever
that might be) against the possibility that I was
pulling her leg with the archeological equivalent of
sending a novice on a snipe hunt. Skepticism won
the day, and with flashing eyes she retoi~ed, "Like
hell it is," with heavy accent on the "hell."
I did not know it then, but I was fated to hear
her utter the same expression many times in the
future. I then described what a trade gun !ooked
like, with the brass plate at the butt end of its stock.
But she still was not convinced until she had confirmed that the thing really was a butt plate by
showing it to R. King Harris, the other person on
the site familiar with trade gun hardware.
The fierce skepticism that Kathleen showed in
the butt plate incident is one of the qualities that
has served her well over the years. It underlies her
refusal to make premature judgments without sufficient data in hand--a hallmark of her research.
Kathleen Kirk Gilmore was born in Altus,
Oklahoma, moved to Tulsa as a child, and graduated from high school there. She got her first job
while a junior in high schoo! as switchboard operator at the Tulsa Bone and Joint Clinic, where she
received the munificent salary, by Great Depression standards, of 25 cents an hour. Saving her
money for a couple of years, she was barely able to
finance her freshman year at the University of Tulsa.
But she needed to find a part-time job if she
was going to continue at the university after that

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

vi

Texas Archeological Society

first year, and all the campus jobs at that time
normally went to male students. Never one to be
intimidated by protocol, Kathleen showed her
feminist tendencies for the first time--but by no
means for the last time--when she badgered the
university library into giving her a job.
She had had a long-standing interest in archeology, sparked by reading about the "lost cities of
the Maya" at the age of 13; when she discovered a
collection of ethnographic artifacts on the library’s
fourth floor she was strongly tempted to major in
archeology. However, upon reflection, she decided
that such a course was impractical because the cost
was beyond her means. Besides, her main interest
was American prehistory, and the only brand of
archeology available at most universities at the time
was classical. Furthermore, most jobs for female
archeologists were in museums and Kathleen
wanted to get out and DIG.
So she followed a more practical course. With
a $250 loan from the Tulsa Town Club she transferred to the University of Oklahoma where she
earned a B.S. degree in the university’s prestigious
geology department.
But who would hire a female geologist with a
B.S. degree when all the jobs for geologists were in
the field, prospecting for likely formations, drilling
wells, and the like? This was considered man’s
work where women would be out of place, and
superstitious oilworkers considered it very bad luck
for a female even to step on a derrick floor.
Stifling her feminist resentment, Kathleen
learned to type and take shorthand, after which she
landed a job in Tulsa with a small independent oil
operator. There she got to do a bit of geology, drew
maps, plotted welt togs, and even was permitted to
visit a drilling rig or two.
But her employer soon went broke, after which
Kathleen found a job with the American Association of Petroleum Geologists as editorial assistant
for their Bulletin. This was too tame for her, however, so she quit her job and moved to Houston-center of the oil business--to seek something better.
After a month or so of pounding the pavement, she
got several offers, mainly because she could type,
the degree in geology being only of incidental importance. Still, it was nice to have options to choose
from, so she decided to accept an offer from the
Superior Oil Company of California to type field
reports in their Corpus Christi office.
After nine months in Corpus Christi, she was
offered, and took, a job back in Houston with the

Standard Oil Company of Kansas. In 1940 she
married Bob Gilmore, a former classmate at the
University of Tulsa, and a year later they moved to
Dallas where Bob was hired as a petroleum engineer
with DeGoyler and MacNaughton.
During World War II there was a demand for
women to replace male geologists who were called
to the war effort, so Kathleen went to work for
Atlantic Oil Company, doing well log analysis and
running the sample lab. With the end of the war, and
the birth of the first of four girls, she quit her job and
devoted her energies to raising her daughters.
When I joined the faculty at Southern Methodist University (SMU) in 1965, guess who showed
up in my seminar in historical archeology?:
Kathleen, Norma, and Dessamae. When an archeology curriculum had been initiated at SMU the
previous year, they were first in line to register.
I could not have been more wrong in my first
impression of this dynamic trio: they all worked
like Trojans at the Gilbert site, and all three went
on to earn graduate degrees in archeology and to
make substantial contributions to the field. Kathleen
stayed on at SMU to earn her doctorate in anthropology in 1973.
A major field project of my historical archeology seminar at SMU in 1967 was an effort to locate
the sites of the three San Xavier missions, established and operated for a few years in the mideighteenth century by Spanish missionaries in East
Central Texas. After abandonment, their exact locations had become lost to memory, but surviving
documents indicated with virtual certainty that they
were located a short distance from one another along
the modern-day San Gabriel River.
After putting together a model of what we
should expect to find at the mission sites (eighteenth century Hispanic ceramics, etc.), we sallied
forth to the San Gabriel and broke up into teams,
each of which was assigned to examine likely
places. When the teams regrouped several hours
later, Kathleen produced a sack of sherds her team
had found in a vegetable garden behind a farmhouse. Most of the sherds were recent, but among
them were several good eighteenth century Puebla
Blue-on-white majolica sherds--precisely the kind
of indicators we were looking for.
Thinking that I would test her to see how well
she had learned the ceramic types we had examined in class, I said as matter-of-factly as I could,
"This is just a bunch of recent Woolworth stuff."
Kathleen picked the majolica out of the lot and

J.C. Harrington Medal in Historical Archaeology ~ Edward B. Jelks

replied, "But what about these?" I said they were
modern too. But she knew better this time and retorted indignantly, "Like HELL they are."
In 1969, with funding from the Texas State
Historical Commission (now the Texas Historical
Commission), she got down to serious fieldwork
and returned to the San Xavier missions. There she
found archeological evidence to verify the locations of all three missions and the associated military garrison. This project became the topic of her
M.A. thesis.
San Xavier was representative of an abiding
passion that Kathleen pursued over the years: establishing the locations of "lost" historic sites by
discovering their archeological remains. In addition to the San Xavier complex, she has worked
with colleagues in their successful search for the
Santa Cruz de San Sabfi mission. Other Spanish
Colonial sites in Texas where she has conducted
fieldwork include Rosario Mission, Nasoni Mission, Amarillas Presidio, and Loreto Presidio, the
latter built on the ruins of La Satle’s ill-fated Fort
St. Louis of 1685.
Talk about your late bloomers! It would be
hard to find anyone who has blossomed more spectacularly than Kathleen. In 1974, she became a research archeologist and adjunct professor in the
Institute of Applied Sciences at the University of
North Texas in Denton, Texas, embarked on two
decades of research and teaching, and earned national recognition as an authority on Spanish Colonial archeology, as well as a leading light in
Texas archeology, both historical and prehistorical.
During her 16 years at the University of North
Texas (she took early retirement in 1990), Kathleen
trained a generation of students, both in the classroom and in the field. Her feminist instincts bore
fruit during this time and she became a greatly
admired role model to her female students, a number of whom were inspired to follow her example
to successful careers in archeology.
Kathleen has published extensively on her
Spanish Colonial fieldwork and documentary research, including site reports on the San Xavier,
Rosario, Santa Cruz de San Sabfi, and Dolores de
los Ais missions; also on the Presidio San Luis de
las Amarillas and Fort St. Leon. Her synthetic publications on French-Spanish-Indian interactions,
and on Caddoan prehistory, are widely recognized
as major contributions to the discipline.
In addition to her research and teaching,
Kathleen has made substantial contributions to her

vii

profession through service to archeological and historical associations. She has been president of the
Society for Historical Archaeology (SHA), president of the Texas Archeological Society, and president of the Council of Texas Archeologists. She has
served on the Texas Board of Review (which reviews and recommends nominations to the National
Register of Historic Places), and on the board of
directors of the Texas Historical Foundation. She
has been on too many committees to mention here.
Kathleen played an important role in the birth
of the SHA. This happened in January 1967, when
Arnold Pilling and I organized a meeting of 15
people we considered to be among the leading historical archeologists to consider the possibility of
establishing a society devoted to historical archeology. SMU sponsored the meeting, and Kathleen, a
graduate student at the time, made most of the local
arrangements for the meeting, as well as for a concurrent conference at which two days of formal
papers on historical archeol6gy were presented. It
was at this conference that the SHA was founded.
Especially memorable was a party that she and Bob
hosted at a private club atop a Dallas skyscraper.
After retirement, Kathleen and Bob have divided their time between their homes in Dallas and
Santa Fe, and in traveling the world. Kathleen also
finds time to continue her research interests in Spanish Colonial archeology.
An incident that captures the essence of
Kathleen’s more charming qualities took place one
evening about 20 years ago at a Caddoan Conference in Natchitoches, Louisiana. A small group in
someone’s hotel room were engaged in fierce debate about matters archeological--and prudently
refueling their wits from time to time by imbibing
invigorating stimulants.
About 2:00 a.m., during a brief pause in the
interminable arguments, Kathleen captured
everyone’s attention by announcing, "De M~zi~res
died in Natchitoches." After we had puzzled over
this startling news for a moment, someone asked,
"So what? .... Well," replied Kathleen, "if he died
here he must be buried here; so let’s go out to the
cemetery, find his grave, and pay him our respects."
All agreed that this was a capital idea, so without
further ado we climbed into Kathleen’s car and
headed for the cemetery. (In case someone doesn’t
know, Athanase De M~zi~res was an eighteenth
century French explorer and French and Spanish
government officia! whose records Kathleen and
colleagues had frequently used in trying to locate

viii

Texas Archeological Society

the sites of early Spanish and French settlements
and Indian villages in Texas.)
We found the cemetery, and Kathleen fished a
flashlight out of the glove compartment. We were
in the middle of a systematic search for De
M~zi~res’ gravestone when, without warning, we
suddenly were caught in the beam of a searchlight.
Peering against the glare, we saw that the searchlight was mounted on a police car, from which two
huge policemen emerged.
Approaching and playing their flashlights over
our faces, they asked suspiciously what we were
doing. Without hesitation, Kathleen explained, "We
are looking for De M~zi~res’ grave."
The policemen looked at each other and
shrugged their shoulders. One said, "We never heard
of him. Anyway, don’t you know there is a curfew
on, and no one is supposed to be on the streets after
11:00 p.m.?"
Kathleen turned on her sweetest smile and replied in a dulcet Texas drawl, "We are from out of

town and didn’t know about the curfew. But if you
will let us keep looking for another 30 minutes, we
promise to go back to our hotel and stay there until
daylight."
The policemen whispered together for a while,
looking at us out of the corners of their eyes from
time to time, while Kathleen kept smiling and the
rest of us shuffled from one foot to the other, hoping we would not have to take sobriety tests or be
arrested. Finally, one of the policemen decided:
"Well if De Mezi --what’s his name?-- was a
friend of yours, we guess it’s O.K., but be sure to
be off the streets in half an hour." Then they left,
shaking their heads.
It is altogether fitting that the signal honor of
being the first woman to receive the prestigious
Harrington Medal falls to an outstanding researcher, teacher, and mentor, a staunch supporter
of feminine rights, truly a lady and a scholar: Dr.
Kathleen Gilmore.

Foreword
Edward B. Jelks

The papers in this volume of the Bulletin of the
Texas ArcheoIogical Society constitute an excellent
overview of current knowledge about Texas prehistory. They also evoke many personal memories
about the growth of Texas archeology over the past
half century and about some of the archeologists
who contributed to that growth. I beg your indulgence while I reminisce.
After almost four years in the Navy, I returned
to Austin at the end of World War II in 1945 and
re-entered The University of Texas (UT), where I
had dropped out in the middle of my junior year to
go to war. Casting about for a suitable major, I
became hooked on anthropology--especially archeology-after taking courses from Tom
Campbell, Charles Kelley, George Engerrand, and
Gilbert McAllister.
At that time there were four archeologists in
Texas who could be termed professionals by virtue
of job title and advanced degrees in archeology/
anthropology: Tom Campbell and Charles Kelley,
both on the teaching faculty of the Department of
Anthropology at UT; Alex Krieger, a non-teaching
research scientist at UT; and Bob Stephenson, director of the Texas division of the Smithsonian’s
River Basin Surveys (RBS) program. Several geologists had been doing scientific field archeology
for years, especially at Paleoindian sites: notably E.
H. Sellards and Glen Evans at the Texas Memorial
Museum, and Grayson Meade at Texas Tech. Historians Curry Holden at Texas Tech and Victor
Smith at Sul Ross also were competent archeologists. To the best of my knowledge, the only university in Texas offering a degree in archeology
was UT.
We archeology students at UT became aware
that in the minds of at least some of the
professionals, Texas had been divided, like ancient
Gaul, into three parts, with one archeologist having
proprietary rights to each part. Krieger’s primary
domain was East Texas, and he also held rights in
the Panhandle because of his publications on the

Antelope Creek phase; Campbell focused on the
coastal region; Kelley claimed a broad area
encompassing Central Texas and the Trans-Pecos
region. I recall an occasion when one proprietor
was outraged because another professional was
alleged to have trespassed on his territory.
Paleoindian sites, few and far between, were
viewed as a special case and were pretty much up
for grabs for whomever could find one. However,
it was generally recognized that the team of
Sellards and Evans had some priority on Paleoindian sites because of their previous work at
Plainview, Miami, Berclair Terrace, and other early
sites. Krieger also had a long-standing involvement
in Paleoindian research.
In addition to these professional scholars, there
were a number of avocational archeologists with
various backgrounds who had made important
contributions to knowledge of Texas archeology by
publishing descriptions of their fieldwork and,
sometimes, synthetic interpretations. Osteopath
Cyrus Ray, was the best known of these. A founder
of the Texas Archeological Society, he served as
the society’s president for its first 20 years, during
which time he published extensively about the
prehistory of the Abilene region. Other prominent
avocational archeologists included printer Frank
Watt of Waco, leading light of the Central Texas
Archeological Society; railroad engineer R. K.
Harris of the Dallas Archeological Society;
businessman Richard Worthington of the Houston
Archeological Society; and attorney O. L. Sims of
Paint Rock, who was instrumental in protecting the
nearby spectacular pictographs. They, along with
many others all over the state, maintained a close
working relationship with professionals.
By the fall of 1949, having completed the
classroom requirements for an M.A., I was hired by
Bob Stephenson as his assistant at the RBS office
and laboratory, then housed in the old "nut lab" on
the southeast corner of Red River and 19th (now
Martin Luther King Drive) in UT’s Little Campus

Bulletin of the Texas Archeologieal Society 66 (1995)

2

Texas Archeological Society

complex. A large collection of artifacts and
fieldnotes--largely from WPA archeology projects
in Central and eastern Texas, but including eclectic
accumulations from various sources--were housed
in the nut lab. When Bob left in 1951 for graduate
work at the University of Michigan, I inherited the
directorship of the Texas RBS program.
By the mid-1950s, the tripartite archeological
segmentation of Texas had disintegrated, largely
because RBS archeologists were working pretty
much all over the state. Also, two of the proprietors
pulled up stakes: Kelley joined the faculty at Southern Illinois University about 1950, and Krieger
moved to California to become director of the Riverside Museum about 1956.
As of the early 1950s, regional chronologies
and definitions of culture units had been advanced
by several researchers. Krieger had organized postArchaic East Texas cultures into a number of foci,
grouped into two aspects, following the Midwestern, or McKern, nomenclature of cultural classification. But Krieger arranged his aspects in
chronological sequence, in contrast to the assumption underlying the Midwestern system that cultural units in the system were atemporal.
Campbell also had used Midwestern nomenclature in defining Archaic and post-Archaic foci
and aspects for the Texas coastal area, again ascribing them temporal values within a regional chronology. Kelley had followed the same plan in identifying
foci, aspects, and phases for the Central Texas region, arranging them in chronological sequence.
Since those days, new types have been recognized and new phases have been defined, of course;
and the old types and phases have been redefined.
But it is noteworthy that many elements of the
archeological classifications developed and promulgated by Campbell, Kelley, and Krieger are still
current, including names for important types and
culture units (generally phases now instead of foci).
These three pioneers are due a lot of credit for
limning the broad outlines of several major prehistoric cultural patterns in Texas that have served
archeologists well over the years.
Between the mid-1950s and the time I left
Texas for Illinois in 1968, the amount of archeological fieldwork expanded dramatically. This was
primarily due to the RBS program and the contract
programs that it spawned at Texas universities and
museums, fueled by ever-increasing funding for
archeological fieldwork by federal and state

agencies as a series of conservation bills was passed
by Congress and state legislatures. As a result, a
great need for skilled field and laboratory
archeologists arose, which led to the establishment
of archeology curricula in a number of Texas
universities, including Southern Methodist
University, The University of Texas at San Antonio,
Rice University, and Texas A&M University, and
to the expansion of existing programs at UT and
Texas Tech.
By the 1970s, each field season saw scores of
field crews from a dozen or more institutions and
private firms conducting contract archeology in
Texas. In contrast to the four professional archeologists in Texas in 1950, the Council of Texas
Archeologists currently lists some 200 members,
all with professional credentials. The largely
avocational membership of the Texas Archeological Society, about 200 in 1950, now numbers well
over 1,400.
The way that archeological research is done
has changed significantly since the late 1940s. New
methods (radiocarbon, thermoluminescence,
archeomagnetic alignment, etc.) have made it possible to date field data with confidence in many
cases. Computers have made it simple for archeologists to perform statistical computations, make
neat and accurate maps and drawings, store vast
quantities of readily accessible data, and produce
prettily printed papers with few misspellings and
typographical errors. Advanced collecting methods
(for example, flotation and statistically based sampling) have added new dimensions to the study of
the archeological record.
Until the 1960s, almost every American archeologists collected only artifacts, discarding the byproducts of the artifacts’ manufacture. But then
experiments in stone working techniques opened
the door to the study of flakes, cores, and other
residue of flintknapping. The Texas Archeological
Society can be proud that one of their members, J.
B. Sollberger, is widely recognized as a pioneer
and leading authority on knapping.
I recall a time about 35 years ago when Jerry
Epstein announced that he had found burins in Centipede and Damp Caves at Amistad Reservoir. No
one had ever recognized burins in Texas before,
and Jerry had to do some tall talking to convince
us. But eventually he did, and now every field archeologist looks for burins along with other chipped
stone artifacts. Such examples point up the many

Foreword m Edward B. Jelks

changes in how archeology is done in Texas and
elsewhere, almost all of them for the better.
Looking back to a time several decades ago
when a few underfunded archeologists--flying
pretty much by the seats of their pants--scrambled
to salvage a tiny fraction of the archeological
record that was about to be destroyed by construction projects, I am tempted to contend that those
were better times: that things were simpler then,
and we could devote our energies to doing archeology, without the frustrations and distractions
imposed on today’s researchers by layers of bureaucracy and tangles of red tape. And it can reasonably be argued that some desirable skills
practiced by the typical dirt archeologist of yesteryear now are rarely seen in the high-tech enterprise
that it is today.
But upon full reflection, nostalgia succumbs to
reason, and the superiority of today’s archeology-with its advanced scientific techniques, rigorous
methodology, political support, large body of
practitioners, and reasonably ample funding--is
evident.
This volume of the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society is the third comprehensive effort to summarize knowledge of Texas archeology

3

on a state-wide basis under a single cover. E. B.
Sayles’s An Archaeological Survey of Texas, published in 1935 was first; second was the 1954 Handbook of Texas Archeology, largely the work of Dee
Ann Suhm (Story), with help from Alex Krieger
and myself. The demographics of the archeological
community noted above are reflected in the respective authorship’s of the three summaries: one author in 1935, three authors in 1954, and more than
20 in 1995.
The phenomenal growth of Texas archeology,
along with archeology all over the United States,
since the late 1940s bodes well for the discipline’s
future. Some problems have accompanied this phenomenal growth: for example, the current Native
American repatriation issue, and temporary aberrations that flowed from over zealously scientistic
applications of the "New Archeology" by some
archeologists in the 1970s and 1980s. However,
despite such problems and vagaries, the trend toward better archeology, conservation of archeological resources, and wide appreciation of archeology
by the public continue on a progressive track.
The papers in this volume constitute clear proof
that Texas archeology is alive and well and continuing to move ahead.

PART

THE PRESENT AND FUTURE,
AND
THE "NUTS AND BOLTS"

The Present and Future of Texas Prehistoric Archeology:
An Introduction to the 1995 BTAS
Timothy K. Perttula

ABSTRACT
The structure and content of this special collection of papers on the prehistoric archeology of Texas is
summarized. The purpose of the 1995 Bulletin of the TexasArcheological Society is to communicate to interested
members of the public, Native Americans, and professional and avocational archeologists what has been learned
about Texas’ prehistoric archeological heritage from 1950 to today, and discuss trends for the future study of the
state’s rich store of archeological resources.

INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE
OF THE VOLUME
Our understanding of the prehistoric archeology of Texas has come a long way since Dee Ann
Suhm (now Story), Alex D. Krieger, and Edward
B. Jelks (1954) published the now classic "An Introductory Handbook to Texas Archeology" as Volume 25 of the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society. This book presented current knowledge of
the archeology of Texas, as well as an illustrated
compendium of the known pottery and projectile
point types in the state (the latter compendium was
separately republished by the Texas Archeological
Society and the Texas Memorial Museum in Suhm
and Jelks [1962]).
Since that time, a multitude of archeological
investigations have occurred in Texas--by both
avocational and professional archeologist alike-and the pace of archeological work has especially
quickened in the last 15-25 years with the passage of
Federal (principally the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, and most recently amended in
1992) and State (the 1969 Antiquities Code of Texas,
as amended in 1995) laws and regulations concerning historic preservation and the conduct of archeological projects when important sites are to be
impacted by development projects. Recent archeological overview volumes commissioned by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, Southwest Division
(COE-SWD), provide a good sense of the scope of
the archeological data base in Texas (with more
than 50,000 sites recorded to date) and surrounding

states, the types of investigations conducted across
the state, and the kinds of research problems and
questions that have been, and continue to be, the
subject of inquiry (Hester et al. 1989; Hofman et al.
1989; Jeter et al. 1989; Sabo et al. 1988; Simmons et
al. 1989; Story et al. 1990). While these volumes are
extremely valuable research documents, they are
not broadly accessible to all those interested in the
prehistoric archeology of Texas. Nor are the many
hundreds, if not thousands, of cultural resource management technical documents of surveys and excavations prepared by contract archeological firms for
clients, permit applicants, regulatory agencies, and
other government consumers; few copies are produced, few see the light of day, and few are written
to be read by more than the jargon-bound professional archeologist and cultural resource manager
(Fagan 1995; see also commentary in Bruseth and
Perttula [1995:1-2] about Texas archeology). Nevertheless, truly exciting and interesting archeologicat research is being conducted in this sometimes
bleak forum, and innovative ways must be found to
share this knowledge with the public and the interested avocational archeologist!
The Texas Archeologicat Society (TAS) has
contributed more than its fair share to the stock of
archeological knowledge by conducting annual
Field Schools across the state (see Richmond et al.
1985), with the results of the field school investigations being published on a regular basis in the Bulletin of the Texas ArcheologicaI Society (see
Mueggenborg 1994; Smith 1993; Turpin and Davis
1993; Houk and Lohse 1993 for recent publications

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

8

Texas Archeological Society

of the results of TAS field schools). The TAS also
has helped sponsor regional field schools held by

ogy, and how archeologists over the last 40 odd

affiliated avocational archeological societies in

years have attempted to learn about the prehistoric

players, while also looking at the aims of archeol-

Texas (such as the South Texas Archaeological

archeological record in the state, Steve Black, well-

Association’s annual September field school).

known of late for casting a critical eye on the state of

Foremost, though, among the important roles

Texas archeology (e.g., Black 1993; Black and Shafer

of the TAS in communicating the results of archeo-

1994), takes a hard look at the political realities of

logical research to those interested in the prehistory

archeology, as well as the approaches, assumptions,

and early history of Texas, has been the compila-

and methodological and theoretical underpinnings

tion and publication of some 65 years of archeo-

of the discipline, and offers a vision concerning the

logical research in Texas that documents man’s

future of Texas archeology.

past in the state (Perttula 1994). In particular, from

The next two papers concern the "nuts and

time to time, the BTAS has taken stock of our un-

bolts" of Texas prehistoric archeology: the material

derstanding of the archeology of particular parts of

culture record as seen in the documentation of pro-

Texas by publishing in a single volume a number

jectile point and ceramic types and styles, ages, and

of important articles that focus on one of the pre-

spatial distributions. Elton Prewitt presents a unique

historic cultural regions of Texas. Since 1958, pa-

data set compiled over many years on the distribu-

pers sumnaarizing the regional archeology of Texas
have been published in the BTAS: East Texas, Cen-

tions of some 160 projectile point styles and types

tral Texas, Trans-Pecos Texas, and the central and
southern parts of the Gulf Coast (Volume 29); the

and Lintz discuss the character of the distinctive

southern Texas Coast (Volume 58, 1987); the Lower

that have been defined across the state, focusing on

Pecos and Eastern Trans-Pecos (Volume 59, 1988);

temporal frameworks, ceramic styles, and changes

Texas Panhandle and Southern Plains (Volume 60,

in ceramic technology and function.

in Texas, while Perttula, Miller, Ricklis, Prikryl
regionally-based prehistoric ceramic assemblages

1989); North Central Texas (Volume 64, 1993);

Next is David Meltzer and Michael Bever’s

and Northeast Texas (Volume 65, 1994).
The time seems propitious to again take stock

final summary of the results of the Texas Clovis

of current knowledge of Texas archeology. Thus,

Much of the archeological data on the distribution

Fluted Point Survey project (cf. Meltzer 1987).

the 1995 BTAS provides a summary collection of

of Clovis points in this paper was provided by Texas

papers on the archeology of many different cultural

Archeological Society members who have docu-

regions of Texas--from the Caddo mounds of

mented and/or collected these distinctive lanceolate

Northeast Texas, the shell middens of the Gulf

points across the state.

Coast, the burned rock middens of Central Texas,

The remaining papers in this BTAS volume are

the slab houses of Plains farmers and bison hunters,

summaries of the current state of archeological

to the Puebloan villages of the Hueco Bolson and

knowledge in different cultural-ecological regions

the Rio Grande (for various reasons, not all regions

of Texas (Figure 1); the regions are broadly defined

of the state are discussed in volume 66 of the BTAS).
The goal of this publication is to communicate to

overviews, and there are inevitable overlaps in cov-

interested members of the public, Native Ameri-

erage and presentation. The papers, for the most

cans, and professional and avocational archeolo-

part, are cultural-historical in nature, but stay

following the divisions recognized in the COE-SWD

gists alike what has been learned (and what we still

strongly focused on which of the important and

do not know) about Texas archeology from 1950 to

current research problems recognized in each of the

today. In taking a broad and synthetic view of the

regions hold particular promise for achieving a bet-

prehistoric archeology of the state of Texas, the

ter understanding and explanation of Native Ameri-

1995 BTAS is a long overdue followup to the clas-

can adaptations in Texas. Of course, the emphases

sic 1954 BTAS.

of the papers vary depending upon the state of archeological knowledge in a particular region of the

ORGANIZATION OF THE VOLUME

state--ranging from the discussion of one or a few
particular research problems and perspectives, tem-

The first paper in the volume explicitly considers the present status of Texas archeology and its

poral periods, and cultural manifestations to broad
syntheses --and our current understanding of long

Perttula -- The Present and Future of Texas Prehistoric Archeology

0

40

80

120

9

160

Figure 1. Archeological Regions in the State of Texas: (1) Red River; (2) Northeast Texas; (3) Deep
East Texas; (4) Savannah and Prairie; (5) Southeast Texas; (6) Coastal Texas; (7) North Central Texas;
(8) Central Texas; (9) South Texas; (10) West Central Texas; (11) Caprock Canyonlands; (12)
Southern High Plains; (13) Panhandle; (14) Lower Pecos; (15) Trans-Pecos; and (16) E1Paso/Hueco
Bolson. Base Map drawn by Kathy Roemer, and redrawn by Sergio Iruegas.

and short-term cultural change across the state. Thus,
the various papers promise to present through the
careful consideration of the Texas archeological (and
paleoenvironmental) record, a new, vital, and innovative means of understanding the past.
While all regions of the state are not considered in this volume, important and innovative archeological research is producing exciting and
interesting results about prehistoric lifeways and
paleoenvironmental conditions throughout Texas.
Therefore, a short bibliography of some of the more
significant recent published reports for those regions is also included in this paper.

committing their time and resources to see it come
to fruition. Thanks also to the people at Morgan
Printing of Austin, Texas (especially Terry, Mark,
and Michael), for the innumerable tasks they
completed in a timely and professional manner, as
well as their efforts to make the publication look as
good as it does. Associate Editor Nancy G. Reese
(now in New Mexico!) also contributed her editorial
and proof-reading skills to the monumental editing
process. Finally, I thank Sergio Iruegas for his
assistance in redrafting Figure 1 in this introduction.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

REFERENCES CITED

This has been a fun and gratifying publication
project to work on, and one I hope the Texas
Archeological Society membership can be proud
of. I want to thank all the authors of this BTAS for

Black, S. L.
1993

Nailing the Coffin Shut on the Traditional Approach
to Prehistoric Archeology in Texas: An Epitaph and
Inquiry into the Afterlife. CRM News & Views
5(1):16-19.

10

Texas Archeological Society

Black, S. L. and H. J. Shafer
1994

Archeology by the Numbers? A Dissenting and
Trenchant Viewpoint on DAP Survey Guidelines.
CRM News & Views 6(2): 16-18.

Bruseth, J. E. and T. K. Perttula (editors)
1995

Advances in Texas Archeology: Contributions from
Cultural Resource Management, Volume I. Cultural
Resource Management Report 5. Department of
Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commis-

Richmond, J. A., W. L. Richmond, and J. W. Greer
1985 Texas Archeological Society Field Schools, 19621982. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
54:105-184.
Sabo, G. III, A. M. Early, J. C. Rose, B. A. Burnett, L. Vogele,
Jr., and J. P. Harcourt
1988 Human Adaptation in the Ozark and Ouachita
Mountains. Research Series No. 31. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

sion, Austin.
Simmons, A. H., A. L. W. Stodder, D. D. Dykeman, and P. A.
Fagan, B. M.
1995

Perhaps We May Hear Voices .... In Save the Past

Hicks
1989

Human Adaptations and Cultural Change in the

for the Future I1: Report of the Working Confer-

Greater Southwest. Research Series No. 32. Arkan-

ence, pp. 25-30. Special Report, Society for Ameri-

sas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

can Archaeology, Washington, D.C.
Hester, T. R., S. L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox,

Smith, J, E., II
1993 The Vinson Site: A Nortefio Focus Village in Lime-

K. J. Reinhard, and L. C. Bement
1989 From the Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human Adapta-

stone County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:65-162.

tion in Central, South, and Lower Pecos, Texas.
Research Series No. 33. Arkansas Archeological
Survey, Fayetteville.

Story, D. A., J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D. Freeman, J. C.
Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard
1990

The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf

Hofman, J. L., R. L. Brooks, J. S. Hays, D. Wo Owsley, R. L.

Coastal Plain. Research Series No. 38. Arkansas

Jantz, M. K. Marks, and M. H. Manheim
1989 From Clovis to Comanchero: Archeological Over-

Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

view of the Southern Great Plains. Research Series
No. 35. Arkansas Archeological Survey,

Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jelks
1962

Fayetteville.
Houk, B. A. and J. C. Lohse
1993

Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
Texas Archeological Society Special Publication No.
1 and Texas Memorial Museum Special Publication
No. 4. Austin.

Archeo!ogical Investigations at the Mingo Site,
Bandera County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 61 : 193-247.

Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25

Jeter, M. D., J. C. Rose, G. I. Williams, Jr., and A. M. Harmon
1989

(whole volume).

Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Trans-Mississippi South in Ar-

Turpin, S. A. and M. W. Davis

kansas and Louisiana. Research Series No. 37. Ar-

1993

The 1989 TAS Field School: Devils River State
Natural Area. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological

kansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Society 61:1-58.
Meltzer, D. J.
1987 The Clovis Paleoindian Occupation of Texas: Results of the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey. Bul-

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF RECENT
REGIONAL LITERATURE

letin of the Texas Archeological Survey 57:27-68.
Mueggenborg, H. E.
1994

Excavations at the Blue Hole Site, Uvalde County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
62:1-74.

Ackerly, N. W.
1990

Playa Margin Adaptation in the Southern Jornada
del Muerto. Center for Anthropological Research,
New Mexico State University, Las Cruces.

Perttula, T. K.
1994

65 Years of Publishing Excellence: The Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society. Heritage 12(4):2022. Texas Historical Foundation, Austin.

Amick, D. S.
1995

Patterns of Technological Variation among Folsom
and Midland Projectile Points in the American
Southwest. Plains Anthropologist 40( 151):23-38.

Perttula m The Present and Future of Texas Prehistoric Archeology

Anthony, D. and D. O. Brown (editors)
1994

Archeological Investigations in the Denton Creek
Floodplain:

11

Camilli, E. L. Wandsnider, and J. I. Ebert
1988 Distributional Survey and Excavation of Archaeo-

Data Recovery Excavations at

logical Landscapes in the Vicinity of El Paso, Texas.

41DL270, Denton and Dallas Counties, Texas. Ar-

Bureau of Land Management, Las Cruces.

cheology Series 37. Hicks & Company, Austin.

Baugh, T. G.
1994 Holocene Adaptations in
In Plains Indians, A.D.
logical Past of Historic
Schlesier, pp. 264-289.
Press, Norman.

the Southern High Plains.
500-1500: The ArchaeoGroups, edited by K. H.
University of Oklahoma

Carmichael, D. L.
1990 Patterns of Residential Mobility and Sedentism in
the Jornada Mogollon Area. In Perspectives on
Southwestern Prehistory, edited by P. E. Minnis
and C. L. Redman, pp. 122-134. Westview Press,
Boulder.
Cloud, W. A., R. J. Mallouf, P. A. Mercado-Allinger, C. A.

Bement, L. C.
1991

1994

The Thunder Valley Burial Cache: Group Invest-

Hoyt, N. A. Kenmotsu, J. M. Sanchez, and E. R. Madrid
1994

Archeological Testing at the Polvo Site, Presidio

ment in a Central Texas Sinkhole Cemetery. Plains

County, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist Re-

Anthropologist 36(135):97-109.

port 39. Texas Historical Commission and U.S. De-

Hunter-Gatherer Mortuary Practices during the

partment of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,

Central Texas Archaic. University of Texas Press,

Austin.

Austin.
Bentley, M. T.
1993

Creel, D.
1991 Bison Hides in Late Prehistoric Exchange in the
Southern Plains. American Antiquity 56:40-49.

Hot Well Village and Reservoir: A Preliminary
Overview. The Artifact 32( 1 ): 1-32.

Dean, J. S., W. H. Doelle, and J. D. Orcutt
Brooks, R. L.

1994

Adaptive Stress, Environment, and Demography. In

1994a Southern Plains Cultural Complexes. In Skeletal Bi-

Themes in Southwest Prehistory, edited by G. J.

ology in the Great Plains: Migration, Warfare,

Gumerman, pp. 53-86. School of American Research

Health, and Subsistence, edited by D. W. Owsley

Press, Santa Fe.

and R. L. Jantz, pp. 33-50. Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington, D.C.
!994b Warfare on the Southern Plains. In Skeletal Biology
in the Great Plains: Migration, Warfare, Health,
and Subsistence, edited by D. W. Owsley and R. L.
Jantz, pp. 317-323. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.

Ferring, C. R.
1990

Archaeological Geology of the Southern Plains. In
Archaeological Geology of North America, edited
by J. Donahue and N. Lasca, pp. 253-266. Geological Society of America, Centennial Special Volume, Boulder, Colorado.

1995a The Late Quaternary Geology and Archaeology of
Brown, D. O. and J. A. Peterson (editors)

the Aubrey Clovis Site, Texas. In Ancient Peoples

1992

and Landscapes, edited by E. Johnson, pp. 273-281.

El Valle Bajo: The Culture History of the Lower
Rio Grande Valley of El Paso, Volume I: The Prehistory of the Lower Valley of El Paso. Archaeo-

Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
1995b Middle Holocene environments, geology, and ar-

logical Research, Inc. and Hicks and Company, E1

chaeology in the Southern Plains. In Archaeologi-

Paso and Austin.

cal Geology of the Archaic Period in North America,
edited by E. A. Bettis, pp. 21-35. Special Paper 297.

Bruseth, J. E., D. E. McGregor, and W. A. Martin
1995

Geological Society of America, Boulder.

Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations along Richland Creek,
North-Central Texas. In Advances in Texas Archeology: Contributions from Cultural Resource Management, edited by J. E. Bruseth and T. K. Perttula,
pp. 5-50. Cultural Resourc Management Report 5.

Fish, P. R. and S. K. Fish
1994 Southwest and Northwest: Recent Research at the
Juncture of the United States and Mexico. Journal
of Archaeological Research 2(1):3-44.

Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Bruseth, J. E., D. E. Wilson, and T. K. Perttula
1995

The Sanders Site: A Spiroan Entrepot in Texas?
Plains Anthropologist 40(153):223-236.

Fish, P. R., S. K. Fish, G. J. Gumerman, and J. J. Reid
1994 Toward an Explanation for Southwestern "Abandonments." In Themes in Southwest Prehistory, edited by G. J. Gumerman, pp. 135-163. School of
American Research Press, Santa Fe.

12

Texas Archeological Society

Frederick, C. D., M. D. Glascock, H. Neff; and C. M. Stevenson
1994 Evaluation of Chert Patination as a Dating Technique: A Case Study from Fort Hood, Texas. Research Report No. 32, Archeological Resource Management Series. United States Army, Fort Hood.
Gerald, R. E.
1990

Collected Papers. The Artifact 28(3). El Paso Archaeological Society, E1 Paso.

Hofinan, J. L., L. C. Todd, and M. B. Collins
1991 Identification of Central Texas Edwards Chert at
the Folsom and Lindenmeier Sites. Plains Anthropologist 36( 137):297-308.
Huebner, J. A.
1991 Late Prehistoric Bison Populations in Central and
Southern Texas. Plains Anthropologist 36( 137):343358.

Habicht-Mauche, J.A.

Ing, J. D., W. A. Cloud, S. Smith-Savage, and R. J. Mallouf

1991

1995

Evidence for the Manufacture of Southwestern-Style
Culinary Ceramics on the Southern Plains. In Farm-

Archeological Reconnaissance on Big Bend Ranch
State Park, Presidio and Brewster Counties, Texas:

ers, Hunters, and Colonists: Interaction between

1988-1994. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department

the Southwest and the Southern Plains, edited by K.

and Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Histori-

A. Spiehnann, pp. 51-70. University of Arizona

cal Commission, Austin.

Press, Tucson.
1992

Coronado’s Querechos and Teyas in the Archaeological Record of the Texas Panhandle. Plains An-

Jelks,
1993

Observations on the Distributions of Certain Arrow-Point Types in Texas and Adjoining Regions.

thropologist 37( 140):247-259.

Lithic Technology 18 (no. 1&2):9-15.
Habicht-Mauche, J. A., A. A. Levendosky, and M. J.
Schoeninger
1994

Antelope Creek Phase Subsistence: The Bone Chem-

Johnson, L.
1995

tence, edited by D. W. Owsley and R. L. Jantz, pp.
291-304. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Past Cultures and Climates at the Jonas Terrace
Site, 41ME29, of Medina Count),, Texas. Texas Department of Transportation, in press.

istry Evidence. In Skeletal Biology in the Great
Plains: Migration, Wao~’are, Health, and Subsis-

Kelley, J. C.
1990

The Rio Conchos Drainage: History, Archaeology,
Significance. Journal of Big Bend Studies 2:29-41.

Hindes, V. K., M. R. Wolf, G. D. Hall, and K. K. Gilmore
1995

The Rediscovery of Santa Cruz de San Sabd, a Mission for the Apache in Spanish Texas. San Saba

Largent, F. B., Jr., M. R. Waters, and D. L. Carlson

Regional Survey Report 1, Archaeology Laboratory, Texas Tech University. Texas Historical Foun-

1991

The Spatiotemporal Distribution of Folsom Projectile Points in the State of Texas. Plains Anthropologist 36(137):323-341.

dation and Texas Tech University, Austin and Lubbock.
Lintz,

Hines, M. H., S. A. Tomka, and K. 3¢V. Kibler
1994 Data Recover), Excavations at the Wind Canyon

1991

Texas Panhandle-Pueblo Interactions from the Thirteenth Through the Sixteenth Century. In Farmers,

Site, 41HZl19, Hudspeth County, Texas. Reports of

Hunters’, and Colonsits: Interaction between the

Investigations, Number 99. Prewitt and Associates,

Southwest and the Southern Plains, edited by K. A.

Inc., Austin.

Spielmann, pp. 89-106. University of Arizona Press,
Tucson.

Hofman, J. L.
!992 Recognition and Interpretation of Folsom Technological Variability on the Southern Plains. In Ice
Age Hunters of the Rockies, edited by D. J. Stanford
and J. S. Day, pp. 193-224. Denver Museum of
Natural History and University Press of Colorado,
Niwot.
Hofman, J. L., D. S. Amick, and R. O. Rose
1990 Shifting Sands: A Folsom-Midland Assemblage
from a Campsite in Western Texas. Plains Anthropologist 35( 129):221-254.

Lintz, C., A. C. Treece, F. M. Oglesby, K. Kibler, P. O’Neill,
W. N. Trierweiler, C. Frederick, J. M. Quigg, and A. J.
Taylor
1993 Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie
Reservoir, Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas, Volume II: Test Excavations at Prehistoric Sites and Assessment of Rock Cairn Features.
Technical Report 346-II. Mariah Associates, Inc.,
Austin.

Perttula ~ The Present and Future of Texas Prehistoric Archeology

Lintz, C., W. N. Trierweiler, A. C. Earls, F. M. Oglesby, M.
Blum, P. O’Neill, J. Kuhl, R. Holloway, L. Scott-Cummings,
and D. Scurlock
1993

Cultural Resource investigations in the O. H. ivie
Reservoir, Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas, Volume I: Project Introduction, Setting

13

McGuire, R. H., E. C. Adams, B. A. Nelson, and K. A.
Spielmann
1994 Perspectives on Macroregional Relations. In Themes
in Southwest Prehistory, edited by G. J. Gumerman,
pp. 239-265. School of American Research Press,
Santa Fe.

and Methods. Technical Report 346-I. Mariah AsMeltzer, D. J.

sociates, Inc., Austin.

1991

MacNeish, R. S. (editor)
1993 Preliminao~ Investigations of the Archaic in the Region of Las Cruces, New Mexico. Historic and Natural Resources Report No. 9. Cultural Resources
Management Program, Directorate of Environment,
United States Army Air Defense Artillery Center,
Fort Bliss, Texas.
Mallouf, R. J.
1992

Altithermal Archaeology and Paleoecology at Mustang Springs, on the Southern High Plains of Texas.
American Antiquity 56(2):236-267.

1995

Modelling the Prehistoric Response to Altithermal
Climates on the Southern High Plains. In Ancient
Peoples and Ancient Landscapes, edited by E.
Johnson, pp. 349-368. Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

Middlebrook, T.

A Commentary on the Prehistory of Far Northeast-

1994

An Update of Archaeological Investigations at the

ern Chihuahua, the La Junta District, and the Cielo

Tyson Site (41SY92). Journal of Northeast Texas

Complex. English translation of La Prehistoria del

Archaeology, No. 3:1-36.

Noreste de Chihuahua: Complejo Cielo y Distrito
La Junta. In Historia General de Chihuahua 1:

Miller, M. R. and B. L. O’Leary .

Geologia Geografia y Arqueologia, edited by A.

1992

Marquez-Alameda, pp.

1993

The Ysleta Clinic Site: A Spanish Colonial Period

137-162. Universidad

Native American Settlement in the Lower Valley of

Autonoma de Ciudad Juarez, Gobierno del Estado

El Paso, Texas. Cultural Resources Research Re-

de Chihuahua, Juarez, Mexico.

port Number 2. Batcho & Kauffman Associates, El

Archaeology in the Cienega Mountains of Presidio

Paso.

County, Texas. The Artifact 31(1):1-44. E1 Paso
Archaeological Society, E1 Paso.
1995

Arroyo de las Burras: Preliminary Findings from
the 1992 SRSU Archeological Field School. Jour-

Nash, M. A., E. Roemer, Jr., E. R. Foster, S. C. Caran, and E.
A. Skokan
1995

net County, Texas. Cultural Resources Report No.

nal of Big Bend Studies 7.

2. Environmental Protection Division, Lower Colorado River Authority, Austin.

Martin, W. A.
1995

Prehistoric Subsistence Strategies in North-Central
Texas: Evidence from Joe Pool Lake and Richland/
Chambers Reservoir. In Advances in Texas Archeology: Contributions from Cultural Resource Management, edited by J. E. Bruseth and T. K. Perttula,
pp. 203-256. Cultural Resource Management Report 5. Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.

Mauldin, R. P.
1993

The Divad Archaeological Project. Historic and
Natural Resources Report No. 8. Directorate of Environment, Fort Bliss, Texas.

McGregor, D. E.
1995

Lithic Resource Availability in the Upper Trinity
River Region: The Evidence from Joe Pool Lake. In
Advances in Texas Archeology: Contributions from
Cultural Resource Management, edited by J. E.
Bruseth and T. K. Perttula, pp. 187-202. Cultural
Resource Management Report 5. Department of
Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Excavations at the Kingsland Site, 41BT215, Bur-

O’Laughlin, T. C. and D. L. Martin
1990

Loop 375 Archaeological Project, El Paso County,
Texas: An Interbn Report for Phase IH Data Recovery. Archaeological Studies Program, The University of Texas at E1 Paso.

Perino, G.
1994 Archaeological Research at the Rowland Clark Site
(41RR77), Red River County, Texas. Journal of
Northeast Texas Archaeology, No. 4:3-42.

Perttula, T. K.
1993 Kee-Oh-Na-Wah’-Wah: The Effects of European
Contact on the Caddoan Indians of Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas, and Oklahoma. In Ethnohistory and
Archaeology: Approaches to Postcontact Change
in the Americas, edited by J. D. Rogers and S. M.
Wilson, pp. 89-109. Plenum Press, New York.

14

1995

Texas Archeological Society

Early Ceramic Settlement in Northeast Texas:
Archeological Investigations of the Hurricane Hill
Site (41HP 106), Cooper Lake. In Advances in Texas
Archeology: Contributions from Cultural Resource
Management, edited by J. E. Bruseth and T. K.
Perttula, pp. 131-154. Cultural Resource Management Report 5. Department of Antiquities Protection,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Powell, Jo F. and D. G. Steele
1994 Diet and Health of Paleoindians: An Examination
of Early Holocene Human Dental Remains. In
Paleonutrition: The Diet and Health of Prehistoric
Americans, edited by K. D. Sobolik, pp. 178-194.
Occasional Paper No. 22. Center for Archaeological Investigations, Southern Illinois University,
Carbondale.

Sobolik, K. D.
1994

Paleonutrition of the Lower Pecos Region of the
Chihuahuan Desert. In Paleonutrition: The Diet and
Health of Prehistoric Americans, edited by K. D.
Sobolik, pp. 247-264. Occasional Paper No. 22. Center for Archaeological Investigations, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale.

Staley, D. P. and C. A. Turnbow
1995 Archaeological Test Excavations at Eight Sites on
the Proposed Samalayuca Natural Gas Pipeline, El
Paso and Hudspeth Counties, Texas. Technical Report 1163. Mariah Associates, Inc., Albuquerque.
Thoms, A. V.
1993

Knocking Sense from Old Rocks: Typologies and
the Narrow Perspective of the Angostura Point Type.
Lithic Technology 18 (no. 1&2):16-27.

Prikryl, D. J.
1990

Lower Ehn Fork Prehistory: A Redefinition of Cultural Concepts and Chronologies along the Trinity

Thoms, A. V. (editor)
1994 The Valley Branch Archaeological Project:

River, North-Central Texas. Office of the State Archeologist Report No. 37. Texas Historical Com-

Excavations at an Archaic Site (41MU55) in the
Cross Timbers Uplands, North-Central Texas.

mission, Austin.

Reports of Investigations No. 15. Archaeological
Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University,

Quigg, J. M., C. Lintz, F. M. Oglesby, A. C. Earls, C. Do

College Station.

Frederick, W. N. Trierweiler, D. Owsley, and K. W. Kibler
1993

Historic and Prehistoric Data Recovery at Palo
Duro Reservoir, Hansford County, Texas. Technical
Report No. 485. Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.

Scarborough, V. L.
1992

Thorns, A. V. and S. W. Ahr
1995 The Pampopa-Talon Crossings and Heermann Ranch
Sites: Preliminary Results of the 1994 Southern
Texas Archaeological Association Field School. La
Tierra 22(2):34-67.

Ceramics, Sedentism, and Agricultural Dependency
at a Late Pithouse/Early Pueblo Period Village. tn

Tomka, S. A. and E. R. Prewitt

Long-Term Subsistence Change in Prehistoric North

1993

"What Do I Call Thee?" Projectile Point Types and

America, edited by D. R. Croes, pp. 307-333. Re-

Archaeological Interpretations: Perspectives from

search in Economic Anthropology, Supplement 6.

Texas. Lithic Technology 18 (no. 1&2):49-58.

JAI Press, Greenwich, Connecticut.
Schambach, F. F.
1993a Some New Interpretations of Spiroan Culture History. tn Archaeology of Eastern North America:
Papers in Honor of Stephen Williams, edited by J.
B. Stoltman, pp. 187-230. Archaeological Report
No. 25. Mississippi Department of Archives and
History, Jackson.
1993b Spiroan Entrepots at and Beyond the Western Border of the Trans-Mississippi South. Caddoan Archeology Newsletter IV(2): 11-26.
1995

A Probable Spiroan Entrepot in the Red River Valley in Northeast Texas. Caddoan Archeology Newsletter 6( 1):9-25.

Schroeder, A. H.
1994 Development in the Southwest and Relations with
the Plains. In Plains Indians, A.D. 500-1500: The
Archaeological Past of Historic Groups, edited by
K. H. Schlesier, pp. 290-307. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

Treece, A. C., C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler, J. M. Quigg, and
K. A. Miller
1993a Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie
Reservoir, Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas, Volume III: Data Recovet~y Results from
Non-Ceramic Sites. Technical Report 346-III.
Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.
1993b Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie
Reservoir, Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas, Volume IV Data Recovery Results from
Ceramic Sites. Technical Report 346-IV. Mariah
Associates, Inc., Austin.
Trierweiler, W. N. (editor)
1994

Archeological Investigations on 571 Prehistoric
Sites at Fort Hood, Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas.
Research Report No. 31, Archeological Resource
Management Series. United States Army, Fort Hood.

Perttula ~ The Present and Future of Texas Prehistoric Archeology

Vehik, S. C.
1992 Wichita Culture History. Plains Anthropologist
37:311-332.
1994

Cultural Continuity and Discontinuity in the Southern Prairies and Cross Timbers. In Plains Indians,
A.D. 500-1500: The Archaeological Past of Historic Groups, edited by K. H. Schlesier, pp. 239263. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

Whalen, M. E.
1990 Sampling Versus Full-Coverage Survey: An Example from Western Texas. In The Archaeology of
Regions: A Case for Full-Coverage Survey, edited
by S. K. Fish and S. A. Kowalewski, pp. 2!9-236.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Whalen, M. E. (Continued)
1993

E1 Paso Plain Brown Rims as Chronological Markers? New data on an Old Question. Kiva 58(4):475486.

1994

Turquoise Ridge and Late Prehistoric Residential
Mobility in the Desert Mogollon Region. Anthropological Papers Number 118. University of Utah
Press, Salt Lake City.

Wilson, D. E.
1995 Dental Paleopathology in the Sanders Site (41LR2)
Population from Lamar County, Texas. Journal of
Northeast Texas Archaeology, No. 5:29-59.

(Texas) Archeology 1995
Stephen L. Black

INTRODUCTION

end, the reader will find specific notions about
needed changes and the expected evolution of Texas

As the 20th century comes to a close, it is
appropriate that archeologists find time to take stock
of our discipline and begin to think long and hard
about its future. Ideally, archeology of the 21st
century should be structured so that it combines the
best of our present traditions with new ideas, methods, and technologies. However, before the headlong course of any discipline such as archeology
can be (re)directed, the intimate workings of that
field of research need to be revealed. The
discipline’s organization and formal nature have to
be explained, as well as its methods of financing.
The nature of the relationships among the players
must be understood and the human behavior that
transpires has to be disclosed.
In this essay I advocate and attempt to stimulate positive improvement by contrasting the good
things about Texas archeology 1995 with the bad.
When I look at Texas archeology, I see great promise along with grievous problems, colored black,
white, and a thousand shades of gray. I see more
money and time being spent in the name of archeology than ever before. I see ethical and capable
individuals and organizations that are devoted to
realizing the wonderful archeo!ogical opportunities
afforded by the in-the-ground archeological record
that yet survives in this state. Yet, I also see the
very same opportunities being dashed by greed,
incompetence, and malfeasance. I wonder if this
perplexing mismatch is inevitable or if the (Texas)
archeology of the future will be a marked improvement on what we have today.
I will begin by explaining my motivation and
reviewing certain general aspects of the discipline
of archeology in North America, and then go on to
treat the practices of Texas archeo!ogy in particular.
Wishing to avoid the hemlock proffered Socrates,
criticisms and faults are accompanied by possible
remedies, and are usually not personalized. In fact,
a number of recommendations for improvement
appear throughout this essay and, near the paper’s

archeology. Beyond the turn of the century, (Texas)
archeology will surely differ from what it is today.
Changing technology, improvements in datarecording and information-sharing methods, shifts
in social values, and perhaps major changes in
governmental support and regulation (control) are
all to be expected.
Many changes will occur automatically in the
new milieu, as American social structure, educational systems, and bureaucracies, as well as world
technologies, evolve (and occasionally devolve).
However that might be, Texas arche-ologists of all
stripes will not be trapped in an evolutionary cycle
entirely beyond our control. Techniques of research
can be chosen or rejected, and used wisely or foolishly. Organizational formats of a bureaucratic nature can be altered and redirected, and ethical
professional and personal values can be inculcated.
As we approach the 21st century, Texas archeologists, professional and avocational alike, will need
to reaffirm our commitment to basic principles and
responsibilities.

THE AUTHOR

The reader may wonder, rightly, about my
background and motivation as author of an article
that presumes to assess the state of the archeology
of the "great state." I offer a somewhat lengthy
accounting of my "archeological lineage" because
I am convinced that the historical connections
(mentors, colleagues, education, field experiences,
etc.) that form one’s archeological background
largely determine one’s contributions, for better or
worse, to the discipline (see Black 1990a). I first
deve!oped an uninformed interest in archeology as
a suburban teenager who loved reading adventure
and historical novels; these fostered an unabidding
curiosity about the cultural world and the human
past. The first site I knowingly saw was a burned

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

18

Texas Archeological Society

rock midden a few miles from my north Austin
home that was in the process of being obliterated
by relic collectors in advance of urban
development. Later, as a student at the University
of Texas at Austin, I decided to major in
Archeological Studies after taking my first courses
from Professors E. Mott Davis, T. N. Campbell,
and Dee Ann Story. My undergraduate education
and some minor field experience gave me a decent
appreciation of basic archeological principles.
However, upon graduation in 1976 I could not
write competently and truly did not appreciate the
difficulties involved in meaningfully relating the
static past (what archeologists find) to the onceliving people who created that human past. I also
had little clue as to how I might make a career out
of archeology.
On the verge of reading employment ads, a
phone call from Thomas R. Hester, Director of the
Center for Archaeological Research (CAR) at the
University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA) led to
a one-week job surveying in Karnes County with
the inimitable Co!. Thomas C. Kelly. My one week
evolved into a nine-year stint doing "contract"
archeology at UTSA, during which I climbed the
ladder of archeological responsibility from crew
member, to crew chief, to assistant project director,
to project director. I worked on surveys, testing
programs, and excavations at many prehistoric and
a few historic sites from the Balcones Escarpment
southward. This experience, particularly the endless
year spent working under Grant D. Hall in what
would become Choke Canyon Reservoir, gave me
a more solid connection to the natural landscape
than city life ever had. From my first real mentor,
Tom Hester, I learned to view contract archeology
as an opportunity to do basic research while
performing a needed service for federal agencies,
small town governments, and mining companies.
As I assumed greater responsibility, I gradually
learned to organize archeological data and express
my understandings in writing, especially while
following through with the excavations at the
Panther Springs Creek site (Black and McGraw
1985) and the Hinojosa site (Black 1986). Most
importantly, however, I made many friends among
the fluid ranks of contract archeology crews and
the earnest members of the Southern Texas
Archaeological Association (STAA). Along the way
I earned a Master of arts degree in anthropology
from UTSA and was introduced to archeology in

the land of the Maya, which seemed far more
appealing than digging test pits in Live Oak County.
I left Texas and went to Harvard University in
1984, to study Middle American archeology under
Gordon R. Willey, and to continue fieldwork near
the Maya center of Rfo Azul in northern Pet~n,
Guatemala under Richard E. W. Adams of UTSA
(himself a former student of Willey). However, I
soon found myself learning more about sociocultural and biological (physical) anthropology and archeology, as it is conceived and practiced across
the wide human world beyond and before North
America. Surprisingly, I learned more while
"teaching" discussion sections than I did from most
of my professors. The students asked the most
obvious and the most obscure questions--the
former by far the more challenging to address. This
training combined with the vivid cultural experience of living in Cambridge, Massachusetts, convinced me of two "big" ideas that I had not
adequately appreciated. One was that modern human cultures were so vastly varied and complex
that even trained observers-in-the-flesh were often
reduced to gross abstractions or trivial pursuits.
Social anthropologists, I learned, were almost inescapably ethnocentric despite genuine effort to be
otherwise, forcing me to understand that the same
had to be true of archeologists as well. The other
big idea was that for any archeological region or
topic there were many alternative approaches and
radically different ideas to be considered when
planning archeological strategies (such as how and
what to dig). In this regard, being one of the last
two of Gordon Willey’s long line of students
(Grant Hall was the other) was instrumental. The
Bowditch Professor Emeritus of Central American
Archaeology and Ethnology was very reflective
about roads he had taken and those he had not. Also
thought-provoking were conversations with Rosemary A. Joyce, an untenured faculty member who
challenged many of my favorite ideas. For my doctoral thesis I studied the historical development of
field methods and methodologies in lowland Maya
archeology (Black 1990b). Mayanists, I discovered, tended to follow the tracks of their predecessors rather nan’owly, walking right by, so to speak,
unimagined temples of the past hidden not by forest veil, but by archeological tradition.
After my final graduation, I taught and advised students at Harvard for a year while seeking
the tenure-track teaching job I trained for. Such

Black m (Texas) Archeology 1995

jobs are scarce and highly competitive (200 or
more applicants for every solid position). Happily,
in 1991 I moved back to Austin and began working as a Research Associate at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL). There,
working once again under Tom Hester, I have been
directing and administering CRM projects sponsored by the Texas Department of Transportation.
Beyond the need for employment, I came back to
Texas because of family, archeological friends, and
my love for the land and its waters, but I came back
with a different outlook on archeology as it is practiced in the 28th state.
My break from contract archeology, time spent
doing archeology in Mesoamerica and studying and
teaching anthropology in Cambridge, gave me a
perspective on Texas archeology that I would not
possibly have gained ifI had stayed put. Back home,
the change from the archeological frontier of San
Antonio to the longtime hotbed of Austin opened
my eyes on Texas archeology as I had never seen it
before. For self-serving reasons, I developed an
intense interest in the workings of CRM archeology as I realized my career would be centered in
Texas instead of Mesoamerica. I asked questions,
developed and renewed contacts, and paid more
attention to what people did than to what they said.
I was able to see more clearly the opportunities and
the limitations, as well as the admirable and the
senseless aspects of archeology. I now feel compelled to speak out (Black 1993; Black and Shafer
1994), try different approaches (Black et al. 1993),
and participate more actively in community-wide
organizations such as the Texas Archeological Society and the Council of Texas Archeologists.
This essay, then, reflects my archeological
path, and those of my mentors and colleagues, as I
seek to describe how I think (Texas) archeology
works, for better and for worse, and where I hope
the discipline might go. Throughout, I try to
personify archeo!ogy by mentioning positive
examples of the colleagues and organizations that
I know best, knowing that I must omit mention of
many who should be lauded, particularly those who
work in areas of the state where I have not. As the
reader will have guessed, I put Texas in
parentheses from time to time to reinforce the point
that much of (North American) archeology knows
no political boundaries. I begin by explaining my
understanding of what archeology the discipline is
all about.

19

THE ARCHEOLOGISTS
Today as never before, archeology means many
different things to the many different individuals
who consider themselves archeologists. Most
American archeologists fall into one of three broad
groups: academic archeo!ogists, cultural resource
management (CRM) archeologists, and avocational
archeologists. Keep in mind that many individuals
participate in more than one group during their
archeological careers, and that finer distinctions can
and will be made.
Academic archeologists are the formally
trained holders of advanced degrees who teach,
theorize, and conduct scholarly research from the
bastions of the University. Academic faculty are
paid on a long-term basis (through the tenure system) to teach and to do scholarly research, although
most research funds except salary and basic infrastructure are obtained from outside sources (mostly
federal granting agencies, private foundations, and
private benefactors). Historically, it has been the
academic archeologists in North America who have
held the scholarly high road, written most of the
books and articles, trained the next generation of
archeologists, and done (or at least supervised) most
of the excavations. While at the present time there
are perhaps 30 to 40 tenured archeologists teaching
in universities and colleges in Texas, fewer than 10
are active in Texas archeology, as most have research interests elsewhere in the world. Academic
archeologists have contributed greatly (and not-sogreatly) to the development of Texas archeology.
In my view, the late Alex D. Krieger was one of the
finest scholars that has yet concentrated on the state,
although he did not hold a faculty position and left
Texas precipitously in 1956 because of wi~at he felt
was a lack of support from UT-Austin (Story 1993).
There are also smaller numbers of academically
trained archeologists who have research and
curatorial duties at regional and local museums.
The holders of such positions often operate in
isolation, preoccupied with the survival of the
professional niches they have found and the
direction of their institutions, more than research.
For example, Anna J. Taylor (of Quitaque, Texas)
has returned to her geographic roots at the
Panhandle-Plains Museum at Canyon. As Curator
of Archeological Collections, A. J. is helping the
museum deal with repatriation issues (see below)
and hoping to win a permanent position. Others,

20

Texas Archeological Society

such as Alex Barker, Curator of Archaeology at the
Dallas Museum of Natural History, are less isolated
and are able to interact with academics at major
schools (SMU, in Alex’s case). The premier
example of a museum-based academic position in
Texas archeology is the one Eileen Johnson has
carved out at the Lubbock Lake Landmark.
Since the early 1970s, the balance of archeological power (as reflected by funding) in North
America has increasingly shifted to the burgeoning
CRM subfield. Cultural Resource Management is
the preferred term today for what I previously labeled as contract archeology and which earlier generations called salvage archeology. The term CRM
comes from the 1960s and 1970s federal laws and
regulations which strengthened government commitments to the preservation of cultural resources
(including prehistoric and historic sites). The profound change in emphasis from salvaging information to "complying" with government regulation is
one that American archeology is still struggling to
come to grips with. Paradoxically, CRM funding
has been both boon and boondoggle.
CRM archeologists include researchers, bureaucrats, businessmen, and technicians that collectively comprise a majority of the membership of
the Society for American Archaeology (SAA), the
major national organization of professional archeologists. A much smaller number of these also belong to the Society of Professional Archeologists
(SOPA), an organization whose members are sworn
to uphold an ethical code and standards of performance. Today, almost all CRM archeologists, except for a few technicians, hold at least a B.A., with
many having a master’s degree, and some a Ph.D.
Broadly, the CRM archeologists can be sorted into
two piles, government and non-government.
The first includes those employed by the
federal and state governments or, less commonly,
local and regional governments and quasigovernmental entities (like the Lower Colorado
River Authority, or LCRA). Most CRM
archeologists employed in government are paid on
a long-term basis to regulate and administer CRM
archeology and, to a lesser extent, to actually do
archeological research. For example, Erwin Roemer
(of Elgin, Texas) works for the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers in Vicksburg, Mississippi. His job is to
make sure that the Corps complies with federal and
state archeo!ogical regulations as it builds and
maintains the nation’s reservoirs and waterways.

He travels often and coordinates research, but rarely
gets to participate directly in fieldwork. At the state
leve!, Margaret Howard Hines of Austin works for
the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, planning
and conducting archeological surveys to help
individual state parks protect and manage the many
obvious and not-so-obvious archeologica! sites they
contain. She spends more time than most state
government archeologists doing fieldwork, but her
work is limited to survey and testing projects.
Erwin and Margaret are two of many fine archeologists who have joined the governmental
branch of CRM archeology and have continued to
contribute to archeological research. However, as
is typical of all bureaucracies, there are many government archeologists who do not advance archeological research in any demonstrable way.
Regardless, over the last thirty years or so government has been a steadily growing and secure source
of employment, although this may soon be changing, especially at the federal level.
The growth in the number of non-government
CRM archeologists has been even more explosive,
and the highs and lows even more profound. In the
history of Texas archeology, most organized research was connected with the University of Texas
at Austin until the early 1970s. The establishment
of anthropology departments at other universities
in Texas, coupled with strengthened CRM laws,
led to the creation of organized archeological research units at Texas A&M University (TAMU),
Texas Tech University, Southern Methodist University (SMU), the University of North Texas
(UNT), UTSA, the University of Texas at E1 Paso,
and Stephen F. Austin University. While many of
these organized research units have operated mainly
within the regions in which they are located, others
sought contracts wherever opportunity has arisen.
However, the demand for CRM archeology has
been more than the universities could effectively
handle, and by the 1980s private consulting firms
brought American archeology into the free enterprise system both for better and for worse.
Firms such as Prewitt and Associates, Inc., of
Austin have been able to make a viable business of
complying with archeological regulations while accomplishing quality research, at the same time providing many up and coming archeologists with
training and research opportunities (Margaret, for
one). With such firms, the archeology seems to
come before profit. However, there are competing

Black ~ (Texas) Archeology 1995

organizations where the driving motive is clearly
profit and, as I perceive it, the quality of archeological research has often suffered as a direct consequence. One could cite unfavorable examples of
small firms run by Texas-bred archeologists, as well
as larger corporations in which Texas archeology is
only a convenient aspect of a wider portfolio of
endeavors intended strictly to garner profit. Despite
the setting, the quality of CRM archeology depends
on the integrity of the individual archeologists and
managers as much or more than that of the organization; if the archeological integrity of either is compromised, the quality of research suffers.
Today, private firms compete with the universities that still have contract programs, such as the
one at TARL. Some organized research units that
were active in the 1970s and 1980s, such as those
at SMU and Texas Tech, no longer exist. While as
a university-affiliated archeologist, I wish I were
able to assure the reader that the quasi-academic
setting always insures that quality research is the
top priority; any archeological organization, however, is only as good as its people. I use the term
"quasi-academic" because, as organized research
units, university CRM operations are typically
housed separately from, and are not effectively
integrated with, the teaching faculty. The Center
for Environmental Archaeology (CEA) at TAMU
is an important exception to this characterization,
as it is reasonably well-integrated with TAMU’s
Department of Anthropology. While I can point to
many examples of excellent research projects that
have been conducted by university CRM organizations, it is also the case that some of the most
egregious examples of wasted archeologicat oppor2
tunities in Texas can be laid at the feet of organized
research units connected with public and private
universities. Thankfully, not many of these horror
stories are recent ones. The history of CRM archeology, on whatever level one wishes to discuss, is
replete with examples of the good, the bad, and the
downright ugly.
Part of the difficulty is the uncertainty of funding, which for any given organization can vary
widely from one year to the next. Almost all nongovernmental CRM positions are only as "permanent" as the funding. This means there is often a
high turnover rate, especially at the positions of
lower responsibility. Most private firms employ a
relatively small number of archeologists who hold
"permanent" staff positions. These serve as admin-

21

istrators, principal investigators, and project directors, and fill other positions of primary responsibility. Most field and laboratory workers are hired and
laid off seasonally as business comes and goes, and
they are seldom offered fringe benefits. Many
would-be archeologists, including some of the
brightest and most promising I have known, leave
archeology because of the uncertainties and difficulties of CRM employment. For those that survive
the initial years and are capable of, and interested
in, assuming greater levels of responsibility, the
employment picture improves, although it is still
subject to irregular cycles of feast and famine. Many
CRM archeologists migrate back and forth across
the country as regional economies and megaprojects boom and bust.
The final group, the avocational archeologists,
includes those from many walks of life who participate in archeology without earning a salary from it.
Texas has a long and justifi.ably proud tradition of
public participation in archeology, a tradition that
is exemplified by the history of the Texas Archeological Society (see Davis t979). The Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society was
founded in 1929 with the idea that anyone with an
abiding interest in past peoples, things, and fossils
could participate. Among its founding members
were the few professional archeologists of the day
and the somewhat more numerous serious
avocationals. As time went on the paleonto!ogists
went their separate way, and the members of the
Society agreed to adhere to a code of ethics that
said among other things that members would not
buy and sell artifacts and would not dig irresponsibly. As the profession of archeology grew so did
the TAS, as well as regional and loca! societies and
associations such as the STAA and the Travis
County Archeological Society, the two that I belong to. It is interesting to note that the TAS and the
regional and loca! societies have only partially overlapping memberships; more people, it seems, will
participate in regional and local societies than in
the statewide society.
Initially, most avocational archeologists do not
have any formal education in archeology. They usually gain field experience and training by participating in field schools and digs sponsored by societies,
and by working on volunteer projects in the field
and laboratory. Many go on to take college courses
in archeology and to participate in university field
schools and research projects. In the earlier years of

22

Texas Archeological Society

Texas archeology it was common for professional
archeologists to invite avocational archeologists to
participate in digs. Unfortunately, because of the
growing professionalization of archeology and, in
part, because of liability laws and other restrictions
placed on archeological organizations by governmental and private sponsors, this practice is generally uncommon today. In fact, some CRM
archeologists complain when a competing CRM firm
uses volunteers in lieu of paid help, out of a belief
that the practice confers an unfair competitive advantage. This situation is one of many highly regrettable aspects of compliance archeology.
Avocational archeologists present the discipline with much enthusiasm and varying levels of
archeological expertise. Some of the very best excavators that ! have been privileged to dig with
have been avocational archeologists. For instance,
E. Thomas Miller of Kerrville, Texas, is retired and
has gone on to make archeo!ogy a part-time occupation and serious avocation. Tom worked with me
at the Panther Springs Creek and Hinojosa sites,
and on the Higgins Experiment, and is an active
member of the STAA and TAS. As I write this, the
archeological grapevine reports that, while participating in the fall 1995 STAA field school, Tom has
excavated the first complete Angostura point found
at the deeply-stratified Richard Beene site in southern Bexar County. Knowing the man, I am certain
that he carefully exposed the artifact in place and
documented his find as skillfully as any professional archeologist. Tom is one of many avocational
archeologists of the first water.
Avocationals often bring-to archeo!ogy skills
and specialized knowledge that most archeologists
do not have. For instance, Donald Lewis of San
Antonio, a retired research chemist, has taught at
UTSA and made many contributions to South Texas
archeology, as well as to the field of archeometry,
the application of hard science methods to
archeological problems (e.g., Lewis 1978). Lewis
has trained several students, such as Jeff Huebner,
who have gone on to put archeometric techniques
to good use in Texas archeology (e.g., Huebner
1991). Pam Wheat, formerly of Houston, was a
school teacher who melded her profession with her
avocational interest in archeology to great effect
(e.g., Wheat and Wharton 1990). Pam is currently
the educational coordinator for the Crow Canyon
Archeological Center in Colorado. Many other
avocationals develop specialized skills out of their

interest in archeology, although I’ll cite only three.
The late R. King Harris of Dallas was a world
authority on glass trade beads (e.g., Harris and
Harris 1967). Jay C. Blaine of Dallas has become
an expert in early historic weaponry and metal
artifact conservation (e.g., Blaine 1993). Bill
McClure of Houston is an acknowledged expert
zooarcheologist, one who analyses animal bones
from archeological sites (e.g., McClure 1990).

INVESTIGATING THE
HUMAN PAST
Archaeo: from Greek arkhaio, meaning ancient
-Logy: from Greek logos, meaning word/speech/
discourse
Archaeology (Archeology): discourse about the
human past as informed by the systematic
study of ancient material remains.
What is it about archeology that the members
of the three groups of archeologists, academic,
CRM, and avocational, have in common? What is
the central goal of archeology? We will not find a
consensus answer from the scholarly discipline of
archeology, which over the past half century increasingly has become a field of inquiry that lacks
a unifying theoretical vision (Dunnell 1986). Today among the "hothouse theoretical elite" (Watson
1991:273), there are literally dozens of label-bearing brands of archeology: processualism, postprocessualism, Marxism, realism, feminism,
evolutionism, and so on (see Preucel 1991). While
each has its proponents, adherents, and critics, most
academic archeologists tread the abstract waters
without wholly subscribing to any one theoretical
pathway. And as Watson (1991:272) points out,
"beyond the brightly lit arena of theory in North
America, there are thousands of people doing archaeology every day who do not participate in the
debates or even follow them very closely." She
sees the very large CRM group as "almost an archaeological proletariat" who do "most of [the] field
and laboratory work carried out in this country."
Like many members of the "dirt" archeology
proletariat, I see the nature and aims of archeology
in more concrete terms. To me, archeology is about
trying to understand what it means to be the only
ape (member of the superfamily Hominoidea) that
can reach in his pocket, pull out the key to a Toyota,

Black ~ (Texas) Archeology 1995

and drive to the store for a bunch of bananas. Put
differently, the archeologist’s fascination with the
human past is part of mankind’s never ending efforts to understand the nature and history of our
own species, Homo sapiens sapiens, "doubly-wise
man." We archeologists study the material remains
of the human past, a past that is dimly and not-sodimly reflected by ancient things, artifacts and site
deposits: ancient remains that, when carefully and
cleverly studied, can reveal something of mankind’s
past, which is to say something of our present and
future selves as well. To me, archeology is both
history and science; by using the diverse methods
and tools of both the historian and the scientist, we
can help tell the unfolding narrative of humankind’ s
unique history on earth as well as help identify and
explain the processes and mechanisms by which
our species and its cultures have evolved since our
distant ancestors began to use tools some two to
three million years ago.
Like most, I chose to become an archeologist
because it seemed fascinating and fun. While in the
field as an archeologist, I have the opportunity to
sweat and shiver, ache and chaff, swat and stumble,
and otherwise savor the pleasures and pains of working with my hands in the dirt searching for ancient
things connected to the human past. The thrill of
archeological discovery is a powerful shared human experience. When a remarkable artifact, for
instance a Guadalupe gouge (Brown t985), comes
back from the past to make itself known to us in the
present, the feeling of connectedness is hard to
shake. As my hand grasps the curiously shaped
object and pulls it to my eyes, my mind’s eye flashes
with the realization that this very artifact was last
held by another human in this very place some
5500 years ago, a veritable warp in the time-space
continuum. And naturally, my second impulse is to
holler out to my field companions of the moment:
"come look at this." We gather around trying to
find a name for it, a time for it, an action for it. We
want to understand who made this thing, what was
it used for, how it looked in life, where was it
created, when was it left behind, and why was it
abandoned. We try to imagine the faces of its maker
and her (his?) companions. We recognize larger
patterns that this thing fits and fits not; what do
these patterns mean? What was life in the past like?
Why was it that earlier humans came to this very
spot? These questions, and the discoveries that bring
them to mind, are the timeless and universal es-

23

sence and excitement of archeology. Yet, definitive
answers can be exceedingly difficult to come by
and we archeologists often become dissatisfied with
those that we do propose.
Throughout the 20th century, archeologists
have come to realize that the human past is infinitely more complex and less accessible than was
previously imagined. The Tales that Dead Men Tell
through the "father of Texas archeology," James E.
Pearce, in 1935 seem quaint and narrow-minded
today. Similarly, site reports written in archeology’s
recent youth often seem painfully naive as the archeologist of the day reads with what she/he regards as a more sophisticated understanding of the
nature of the archeological record. The past is a
distant place inhabited by people we can never meet,
whose tongues are forever silent, whose thoughts
we can never directly fathom, and whose mundane
habits remain quite a challenge to comprehend. Today the materials remains of the human past are
static, lifeless things; the past will never exist again
and cannot possibly be recreated (Binford 1986).
We archeologists study the archeological record
and create present day understandings of the past.
Yet, despite the abundant evidence of our inevitable failings as interpreters, we continue to gain
understandings of the human past. In doing so, we
are coming to appreciate a bit more about what it
means to be the members of the only species with
pockets containing car keys.
The material record of mankind’s past is
entombed skin-deep within the ever-changing face
of the planet Earth. To develop improved understandings of our unwritten cultural past, we
archeologists must also study the earth’s natural
history. Archeology is inescapably linked to the
earth and natural sciences, geology, geography,
biology, botany, zoology, and so forth. Those who
study the archeological record must also tread some
of the same intellectual and methodological turf as
certain of the social sciences and humanities,
including sociocultural anthropology, history,
architecture, art history, linguistics, sociology,
psychology, and even philosophy, among others.
Archeologists look to these many interrelated
disciplines to borrow ideas, methods, and knowledge; occasionally we reciprocate.
To be an archeologist, then, is to be engaged
in an ongoing discussion about the human and
natural past as informed by the systematic study of
ancient material remains and many other avenues

24

Texas Archeological Society

of learning. This discourse is potentially carried on
at many levels with many other humans. For each
of us there is first the internal dialogue; trying to
convince yourself that some observation is of potential relevance for understanding the human past.
Outwardly, we communicate our understandings
and questions by the written and spoken word, as
well as by images, that find expression in excavation records, informal discussions, site reports,
journal articles, presentations at archeological
meetings, visits to public schools, public lectures,
and, increasingly, through the electronic media.
Today, our audience can be as narrow as our immediate colleagues, or as wide as interest in the
human past and our own skills as communicators
will allow.
In communicating what we think about the
past we archeologists hope to strike a cord in
another’s mind, for unless we can provoke response
we have failed to communicate. The main lure of
the discipline for the serious archeologist lies not in
the discovery of some great or perfect thing, but in
the intellectual and emotional interaction that follows. We attempt to learn about the human past so
that we can share our discoveries, our ideas, our
words, with each other and, perhaps, with a few of
those who will follow. Archeology is creative human interaction or it is nothing. As detectivistichistorians we try to weave the bits and clues into
narrative accounts of the behaviors, events, and
relations of human prehistory. As scientists, we try
to link the patterns we detect in the archeological
record to convincing explanations of the long-term
processes of cultural transformation. Archeologists
create ideas based on our preconceived notions tempered with our systematic observations about ancient remains, so that informed dialogue about the
human past and about the human present can thrive
among present and future humans.
At the heart of the archeologist’s responsibility
is the ethical principle that we share what we learn.
To do this, one’s field data must be inventoried and
organized coherently in the process of analyzing
one’s findings and writing down an honest
(methodological warts and all) and adequate
accounting of what one did and found. Once these
steps are properly done and the materials turned
over to a proper curation facility, then any
archeological researcher wishing to use the data or
examine the collections will be able to do so toward
whatever research goals they might have.

Unfortunately, the process of analysis and reporting
is often long delayed, sometimes for good reason.
A regrettable (and all too common) cost of
delay between field work and publication is that
often the latter never happens and the artifacts,
records, and other random data languish in messy
boxes. Untold hundreds of boxes have been dumped
at TARL and other repositories, places where the
tiny, overworked records and curation staffs never
have time to properly sort out most of the messes.
Every ethical archeo!ogist fully intends to publish
the backlog of reports and sites that often accrue
during a career, but being opportunistic, we often
take on much more than we can successfully bring
to publication. Yet we know we have the
responsibility, so we maintain the illusion that some
day we will make things right. All the while, the
data we collected is sitting, often in an incoherent
and unusable condition, sometimes hidden and
forgotten. This problem is even worse among
unethical archeologists and organizations that do
not even intend to carry through with their
obligations to finish projects and properly curate
data and collections. A better solution, in my
opinion, would be to take the interim step of
properly preparing a coherent data set and brief
accounting of what was done, as well as properly
curating the materials. This step done, the data and
artifacts would be available for other researchers to
access. If the original researcher found time to
publish the information, so much the better, but if
not, the primary ethical responsibility (to make one’s
data accessible) has been accomplished.
I think that the failure to publish one’s research
also points to a very harmful misunderstanding held
by many about archeology: the perception that a
single correct interpretation of any artifact, feature,
or site can (or should) exist. No interesting idea or
understanding about the human past is complete or
beyond dispute and improvement, no matter what
the credentials of its author. We do not dig up facts,
we dig up things and groups of things about which,
potentially, a great many observations and
explanations can be advanced, many different
questions posed, and many stories told. Ultimately,
most published archeological explanations are either
ignored or are shown to be flawed or otherwise
incomplete. While some explanations are ignored
because they are set forth in obscure sources or
because they are not understood, most simply fail
to capture the reader’s mind as an interesting notion.

Black-- (Texas) Archeology 1995

(A cynic might also add that many fine ideas are
ignored simply because few archeologists actually
bother to read the CRM reports lining their shelves.)
Our best interpretations are carefully structured
arguments that account for as many of the relevant
facts and observations as we can muster, given our
preconceptions at the time. Since we are constantly
enlarging the written archeological record,
continually finding ways to apply new (or borrowed)
analytical techniques, and even occasionally able
to come up with improved explanatory frameworks,
most interpretations are destined to be revisited.
That so little about the human past can be
definitively known is, depending on one’s
perspective, either the greatest frustration about
archeology or its greatest opportunity.
Perhaps it is the frustration with the uncertainties of archeological inquiry that causes many of us
to cling to previously expressed notions so tightly
that we close our minds to new ideas. Sometimes
we become so afraid of being wrong that we are
unwilling (or unable) to commit our ideas and our
data to the printed word. Maybe it is just a lack of
imagination? Whatever the motive, archeologists
often mimic and recycle prevailing notions as if
reiteration strengthens veracity. In my view, the
idea that ’what is written must be right’ is absurd,
especially in a revisionistic field like archeology.
Archeological interpretations and presentations
should live for their moment. I see the most successful archeological idea as one that inspires others to challenge it and, in so doing, push
archeological understanding to the next level or in
a new direction. Similarly, the successful presentation of archeological data provides reliable information that others find useful or stimulating. Truly
unsuccessful archeological ideas and data presentations are not those that fai! to provide the end all
and be all; they are the ones that are ignored.

(TEXAS) ARCHEOLOGY
The political entity we call Texas (from the
Caddo word taysha, meaning friend) has existed
for !ess than two centuries, a blink in humankind’s
past. Most of the boundaries of the oddly-shaped
28th state are completely meaningless in the context of the past. The straight lines that separate
Texas from other states are transparently artificial.
Our rivers have been effective cultural barriers but

25

for brief moments of their existence. Only the Gulf
of Mexico served as a natural barrier, and even it
seems to have been penetrated by water-borne visitors from Mesoamerica and Mississippian America
long before Alvar Nffiez Cabeza de Vaca washed
up on Galveston Island in 1528.
The landforms, plants, and animals that make up
Texas are aspects of geographic patterns that dwarf
the "everything is bigger" state. The oak and juniper
savanna in the central part of the state form the tale
end of vast forests that stretch eastward for thousands
of miles as well as the tail end of easterly critters like
the pine vole and the swamp rabbit. Likewise the
grassy prairies that meet their salty demise on the
beaches of South Texas can be followed for an even
greater distance to the north. And the parched, thorny
evergreen woodlands and brushlands of southwest
Texas can be tracked southward for hundreds of
miles up, down, and over the parched and rocky
Sierra Madre of northern Mexico. And so on.
The wider natural landscape provided the stage
upon which the dramas of the human past played
themselves out. The Native American cultures that
left their dim and unmistakable marks upon the
stage we call Texas often can be traced far beyond
the confines of our provincial state. Paleoindian
hunters carried distinctive spear tips and knives
made from Texas Panhandle (Alibates) flint hundreds of miles northward, following the migrations
of the Pleistocene beasts to and fro across the inland grassy sea. Archaic plant gatherers and deer
hunters performed hallucinogen-induced shamanistic rituals and depicted these on the walls of
rockshelters on both sides of the Rio Grande. The
dryland farming Mogollon villagers of the Hueco
Bolson shared culture and bloodlines with their relatives further west, and turquoise, pottery, and ideas
with Chichimecs far to the south. The forest farming ancient Caddo participated in far-flung interaction spheres which moved cultigens, cult items, and
social ideals back and forth across the Red River.
These examples are evoked to drive home the point
that modern political bounds of Texas need not
confine the minds of its archeologists.
The impressive archeological record of ancient
and not-so-ancient Texas exists in two great bodies
of potential and realized information, in-the-ground
and on-the-shelf. The buried archeological record
includes all that remains in context of the 54,000
officially recorded sites, as well as the hundreds of
thousands of other localities bearing cultural

26

Texas Archeological Society

remains that have not yet been added to the list. All
of us know that with each passing day this
archeological record suffers depredation and
attrition as the human (and natural) remodeling of
the planet continues apace. A relentlessly expanding
human population begets more concrete and less
unaltered terrain. More and more people find the
lure of ancient human artifacts irresistible. And who
can blame them?
Serious archeologists have as our credo that
things from the past are important and interesting
because of their informational content. While most
of us will certainly pause to appreciate the beauty
and craftsmanship of a well made dart point or
pottery vessel, we recognize that without good provenience (where something comes from) and lull
context (the circumstances within which something
occurs), artifacts lose most of their archeological
meaning. Therefore, it is hardly surprising that we
archeo!ogists often condemn pothunters and relic
collectors who seek things for things sake.
We who call ourselves archeologists need to
realize that we do not have an exclusive right to
study or possess archeological remains. As much
as we might desire control, the fact is that many
people other than archeologists are interested in the
past and purposefully (and not-so-purposefully) go
about finding artifacts. Landowners and their guests
ordinarily have every right under current Texas law
to do what they please with artifacts and entire sites
found on private property. In the near future, both
archeologists and collectors will probably have less
say-so regarding the ownership of certain archeological remains. For many Native Americans, whose
direct and not-so-direct ancestors created much of
the in-the-ground archeological record in Texas (as
elsewhere in North America), the ownership and
disposition of human remains, grave goods, and
other cultural items represents civil and political
rights issues.
Under the 1990 Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA), federal
agencies and all museums and repositories that receive federal funds must create inventories of all
Native American human remains and associated
funerary objects. Currently, these institutions are in
the process of providing inventories to the appropriate "culturally-affiliated" tribes, after which
time the tribes can demand the return of human
remains and associated grave goods. There are
many circumstances where tribal groups have de-

monstrable and direct cultural links to the bones of
their ancestors; in these cases, few conscientious
archeologists would deny their rights to demand
repatriation. However, political and bureaucratic
decisions already have been made that will almost
certainly result in the reburial of much more than
the bones and grave goods that can reasonably be
linked to specific tribes. Prehistoric burials and
grave goods that cannot be confidently attributed
to the direct ancestors of any modern tribe are being assigned to designated tribal groups. For instance, in Texas this could conceivably result in all
unmarked burials from the Southern Plains being
assigned either to the Comanches or one of the
Apache groups. Ironically, archeological repositories soon may be turning over the last direct remains of the Late Prehistoric Southern Plains
peoples (and their likely Archaic ancestors) to the
descendants of the very peoples who drove them
from their homeland.
I suspect that many may not be aware that this
process is already well underway here in Texas. In
most of the museums and other repositories like
TARL, NAGPRA inventories (accounting for and
assessing the cultural affiliation of all human remains and grave goods) are nearing completion.
Repatriations already have begun. For instance, in
the Federal Register issued on Monday, August 14,
1995 (60(156):41898-41899), the National Park
Service posted a "Notice of Inventory Completion"
in compliance with NAGPRA involving human remains recovered from five sites in Bell County,
from within or near Fort Hood. This brief notice
also summarizes actions already taken since 1991
by Jack Jackson, staff archeologist at Fort Hood
whose expertise is primarily in the realm of historic
archeology (e.g., Jackson 1986). Jackson appears
to be operating on his own as his actions did not
follow the federal government’s stated NAGPRA
policy. Among other things, the policy specifies
that formal notice of intent to repatriate will appear
prior to an action, not after-the-fact. Far worse from
my perspective is the way alleged tribal affiliations
were justified.
As stated in the notice, Jackson repatriated the
bones of 48 individuals vandalized from Javalina
Shelter to the Comanches. The determination of the
affiliated tribal group was based on the "abnormal
number of juvenile remains, suggesting a historical
disease epidemic" and "evidence of access to obsidian." A single obsidian flake was found in pothunter’s

Black ~ (Texas) Archeology 1995

backdirt (along with most of the bones), and may or
may not have been interred with the burials. It does
not take much archeological knowledge to realize
that these constitute precariously thin grounds for
linking the bones to the Comanche (or any other
modem group). Obsidian artifacts, although generally rare, are known from Paleoindian times onward
in the prehistoric archeologica! record in Texas (see
Hester 1991). Apparently, Jackson did not employ
the routine archeological method of obtaining radiocarbon dates from the archeological deposits containing the bones or directly from a small sample of
the bones, to find out if indeed these remains could
plausibly be those of the Comanche.
The notice says that on another occasion, Jackson turned over human remains from three other
sites to the Tonkawa of Oklahoma because they
were recovered from sites "occupied by peoples of
the Toyah and Austin Foci, acknowledged as ancestral to the Tonkawa Tribe." The knowledgeable
reader will know that this assertion flies in the face
of recent archeological and historical thinking and
abundant contrary evidence (see Johnson 1994:271281; Newcomb 1993:26-29; Newcomb and
Campbell 1982; Ricklis 1992). The Tonkawa were
latecomers to Texas who did not arrive until the
17th century, and could not possibly have been
responsible for the vast majority of the archeological manifestations known as the Austin and Toyah
foci or phases (cf. Jelks 1962; Prewitt 1981, 1985).
I consider it extremely unlikely that the bones
from Fort Hood that were returned to the Comanche
and Tonkawa were, in fact, those of their ancestors.
Sadly, the hasty and, in my opinion, ill-considered
actions in these cases will probably be used to establish legal precedent. Within a very few years
(months?), it is likely that human remains, grave
goods, and possibly even obsidian flakes and other
artifacts from the Waco area wil! be turned over to
the Comanche, Tonkawa, and other tribes based on
equally dubious evidence of ancestral connection. I
doubt that knowledgeable archeological researchers will be allowed any say in the matter.
If NAGPRA and the Archeological Resources
Protection Act of 1979, an oddly-written law which
contains sweeping provisions that partially belie its
apparent benign intent, are any indication, the federal government will continue to attempt to exert
greater control over archeological remains in Texas,
as elsewhere. Although there are indications that
some Native American groups, such as the Caddo,

27

appreciate the information that can be gained from
responsible archeological research (Carter 1995:1019), the archeological community can expect years
of turmoil during which archeological repositories
will lose significant portions of their collections.
While some tribes may elect to maintain their own
curatorial facilities, most grave goods will probably be reinterred along with the human remains. I
predict that future generations of archeological researchers will wonder why the archeologists of the
20th century were so slow to acknowledge and to
take into consideration Native American interests.
Future Texas archeologists will also wonder why
the archeological community did not take a strong
stance to oppose repatriation to inappropriate
groups, and why more analyses were not done before archeological collections were repatriated. Our
answers will seem hollow.
My view is that, in principle, the human past
belongs to all humankind. Since ultimately all living humans are genetically related to one another,
often much less distantly than most realize, on some
level we can all claim past remains as part of our
cultural heritage. Human remains from whatever
time period or cultural affiliation should be treated
with care and dignity. When our archeological work
intrudes on the human remains and sacred places
that are historically linked to specific living peoples
(i.e, lineal descendants), archeologists should take
into consideration their wishes. However, the idea
that all present-day Americans with Native blood
should determine the fate of all prehistoric remains
in North America is as preposterous as the notion
that I, Stephen Louis Black, as an individual of
Anglo-Saxon descent, should have a say so concerning what might be dug up on the grounds of
Buckingham Palace, much less what is excavated
in the Caucasus Mountains. Cultural heritage has
many competing interests, and we archeologists
should make sure that the right to investigate the
archeological record scientifically is not dealt away
by politicians, bureaucrats, lawyers, and our own
politically correct colleagues.
We North American archeologists need to realize that we must accord extraordinary respect and
sensitivity to Native American peoples and groups,
out of appreciation for the prehistoric archeological
record, which is the historical record of Native
American life. We must also acknowledge that
among earlier and present generations of archeologists there are many who have shown little respect

28

Texas Archeological Society

for living Native Americans. These realizations and
acknowledgments are not, however, grounds for
accepting without question any statement or claim
by a person who identifies himself as a Native
American. Last year, I listened respectfully while
an older Hispanic man from San Antonio who considers himself a Coahuiltecan intently described how
his ancestors made stone tools by trickling hot water onto flint rocks. I said nothing, but I recognized
his explanation as a bit of popular folklore that has
no basis in reality. Perhaps he has a trace of
Coahuiltecan blood coursing through his veins, but
Coahuilteco-speaking cultures have long since gone
to ground. Is tribal identity acquired by biological
ancestry or through the generation to generation
sharing of history, place, language, and custom?
Should newly formed groups such as "The
Coahuiltecan Nation" be given control of the archeological collections they are now coming forth
to claim? What happens when more than one group
of reborn "Coahuittecans" emerge? These issues
will be revisited many times in the next few years
as bones and grave goods are pulled in many directions, and as more and more urban Texans acknowledge and celebrate their Native American ancestors
(England !995).
We archeologists must also acknowledge that
Native Americans, casual and serious collectors,
and other members of society have understandable
and often legitimate interests in the past, even in
cases where these competing interests are antithetical to the goals of archeology. I advocate this position, not out of any desire whatsoever to encourage
collecting, site destruction, and wholesale repatriation, but simply because I think it foolish to deny
reality. Rather than react to the many challenges to
the in-the-ground and on-the-shelf archeological
record with condemnation, condescension, and denial, we must make better use of our most effective
tools: education, negotiated science-based compromise, and the dissemination of what we have learned
from the archeological record.
The on-the-shelf archeological record is the
sum total of the archeological data that has been
salvaged from the ground and preserved for posterity. This data exists as site notes, photographs, maps,
drawings, data bases, manuscripts, and published
reports, much of it stored at a relatively small number of permanent curation facilities like the one
where I work. The things (artifacts) themselves, are
not, to my way of thinking, archeological data, per

se. This is because the actual items have little meaning until and unless meaningful observations are
made about them. A meaningful observation might
be as simple as a basic description, but without
such a record the artifacts might as well not exist.
Without provenience and proper archeological documentation, the artifacts collected by the archeologist are just plain old things that have comparatively
little to say about the past.
All archeological pathways share at least one
common set of needs: to establish when, where,
and how ancient human traces came to rest in the
places we call sites. The universal need for establishing context is critical to all but the artifact idolaters among us, and even they would like to hang a
time and place on their goodies now and again.
This means that all archeologists (and even nonarcheologists interested in relics of the past) share a
common need. The contextual pieces that allow
each archeological puzzle-solver to gain an understanding of how his/her site or artifact fits into the
human past are virtually meaningless in and of
themselves. In archeological research, as in the assembly of a jigsaw puzzle or a detective’s chain of
evidence, each fitted piece (say an archeological
deposit linked to a time period) opens a larger picture. The chances of finding the fit(s) for any particular piece are proportional to the number of
well-fitted pieces. In other words, the more that is
known about the archeological record, the more
likely it is that any single site or deposit or artifact
can be linked to another, and wider cultural patterns can be discerned. Let’s take a concrete example involving the two archeological
manifestations I mentioned earlier, the Austin and
Toyah foci.
In 1959 and 1960, the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project (as TARL was then known) undertook the excavation of the Kyle Rockshelter in
what is now Whitney Reservoir, about 35 miles
northeast of Waco. Members of the Dallas Archeological Society (many of whom were TAS members as well) assisted in the work. Edward B. Jelks,
then a professional salvage archeologist (see Jelks’
Foreword, this volume), directed the excavations
and wrote a fine report (Jelks 1962) which many
subsequent archeological researchers, including
me, have found very useful. The study’s main contribution was to begin to flesh out the definition of
that portion of the archeological record in the central part of the state that dates to the latter part of

Black n (Texas) Archeology 1995

the prehistoric sequence, now known to date from
about A.D. 800 to A.D. 1500, or perhaps a bit later.
Jelks found that the shelter’s earlier cultural deposits formed during what was called the Austin focus
(with Scallorn arrow points as its main marker) and
that these deposits were overlain by those attributed to the Toyah focus (with Perdiz points). In
doing so, he succeeded in finally putting to rest J.
Charles Kelly’s long-lingering notion that Scallorn
and Perdiz arrow points were contemporaneous,
and showed that their periods of use of the Kyle
rockshelter were characterized by different artifact
assemblages and peculiar human behaviors.
However, lacking adequate comparative data,
Jelks could not fully evaluate his findings. For instance, when he assembled what would be one of
the first published sets of radiocarbon dates in
Texas archeology, he mistakenly concluded that
the Austin and Toyah loci were separated in time
by a gap of several hundred years. Subsequent researchers have shown that the makers of Perdiz
points (i.e., Toyah peoples) followed directly on
the heels of those who made Scallorn points (i.e.,
Austin peoples) and probably even partially overlapped in time (Prewitt 1985). Today, as archeologists are continuing to try to understand the timing
and nature of the cultural relationships among Late
Prehistoric cultural manifestations, the archeological data excavated and presented by Jelks over 30
years ago are used time and again as comparative
points of reference (Black 1986:249; Johnson
1994:246-248; Prewitt 1981:82-84; Quigg and
Peck 1995:176; Ricklis and Collins 1994:298-304).
While it is likely that Toyah culture was in part
shared by peoples who were present in earliest historic times, such as the Mayeye (Newcomb t993)
and perhaps the Sanans (Johnson and Campbell
1992), these were the very groups that were displaced by the mounted aboriginal raiders who
moved into the region in the 17th and 18th centuries (see Newcomb t993).
As this example shows, the written archeological record of prehistoric Texas is a dynamic
and constantly changing set of documents in which
archeologists attempt to record and preserve the
results of our research. As research opportunities
arise, we go back to the field and sample more of
the in-the-ground record, giving rise to new, improved, but never perfect understandings as archeologists fulfill their ethica! obligation to publish
and make available the results of their research.

29

Academic scholars have traditionally published in
peer-reviewed academic journals, such as American Antiquity, in scholarly volumes published by
university presses, and in regional journals such as
the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society.
Effective scholarly publication is a time-consuming, expensive task because the intended result is a
polished, carefully reasoned, tightly edited, wellillustrated, well-produced volume.
CRM archeology generally moves at a much
faster pace and, unfortunately, generally has much
lower standards. In Texas, the growth of CRM archeology has led to an overwhelming quantity of
printed information: letter reports, survey reports,
testing reports, and mitigation volumes. While there
are fine studies among these, the average report is
hastily produced, minimally edited, poorly illustrated, and crudely printed. Further, there is much
duplication of effort, because CRM archeologists
feel obligated to provide the background and basic
explanations that the sponsors of research often do
not have (but rarely care to learn). The cost of
producing badly done reports is one of the major
ones associated with CRM archeology. The problem is well known to anyone who has actually
looked at the stacks and stacks of reports that CRM
archeology generates. Aside the relatively small,
but crucially important, fraction of substantive reports, most CRM reports are, in my opinion, remarkably free of meaningful content. In fact, most
ordinary reports look and sound alike, because they
basically contain the same things written in the
same dull, technical style. If the common claim is
true, that we CRM archeologists write only for
each other, much of our published record would
seem to suggest that we hold each other in exceptionally low regard.
I often find more interesting reading in the
journals produced by the most dedicated of the
volunteers who comprise the regional and local societies. There, one finds timely articles by professional, avocational, and student archeologists on a
range of archeological and historical subjects. The
one I regularly receive and enjoy is La Tierra, the
quarterly journal of the STAA, now in its 22nd
year. Even !onger traditions are maintained by the
E1 Paso Archaeological Society (The Artifact) and
the Dallas Archeological Society (The Record). Although the quality of articles and the production of
the regional journals is highly varied, much good
data are reported nowhere else.

30

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

HOW TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY
1995 WORKS
To explain more clearly how archeology works
today, I need to discuss the roles of key groups of
"players," some of whom have already been mentioned. The many individuals and organizations that
play a role in current Texas archeology have diverse interests and involvements, roles which are
sometimes adversarial to one another. Some players do archeology, while others sponsor, regulate,
manage, legislate, consume, preserve, encourage,
allow, protect, destroy, or do their best to avoid
archeology. This sketch is of necessity incomplete
and perhaps not entirely objective, as I am sometimes in the thick of things. Like most attempts to
fit people or archeological things into neat piles,
there are gaps and overlaps. I shall begin by taking
a closer look at how each of three groups of North
American archeologists--academic, CRM, and
avocational--are involved in Texas archeology.
There are academic archeologists at all of the
major public and private universities in the state
and some of the smaller colleges as well. Many
academics have little direct involvement in Texas
archeology, but may have considerable impact
through their scholarly contributions. For example,
the man many consider the most influential modern
archeological thinker in North America, Lewis D.
Binford, is presently on the faculty of SMU. Binford
was the acknowledged intellectual leader of the
New Archeology, a reactionary movement in North
American archeology in the 1960s and 1970s. The
New Archeologists, most of whom were among the
younger academic archeologists of the day,
wrenched the prevailing research agenda of North
American archeologists away from its traditional
concentration on chronology and culture history
and toward what they considered more explicitly
scientific approaches and a primary concern with
cultural processes (see Dunnell 1986; Trigger 1989).
While Texas archeology remained on the sidelines
during much of the upheaval and debate, its research goals and methods have changed somewhat
in response to wider intellectual trends, as many of
the articles in this volume attest.
Resident academic archeologists also contribute to Texas archeology by training undergraduate
and graduate students and by participating directly
in archeological research. With the exception of a
small number of mostly Old World archeologists

who are connected with Classics, Art History, and
Middle Eastern Studies, academic archeologists in
Texas are faculty members in anthropology (or
sometimes geography) departments. They teach
courses on many aspects of archeology and often
involve graduate students (and sometimes undergraduates) in their research projects. This is directly reflected in the comparatively small number
of Ph.D. dissertations that have been written on
Texas archeology. Most advanced students are encouraged to work toward their mentor’s goals in
other areas of the world. From the present perspective, this is highly regrettable, because doctoral research often contributes very importantly to the
archeology of any region. Interesting, among the
small number of examples that can be cited of such
energizing studies, about as many were accomplished by Texas archeologists who left the state to
study elsewhere (e.g., Weir 1976; Creel 1986) as
were done locally (e.g., Shafer 1973; Ricklis 1990).
Most of the academics who actively participate
in Texas archeology periodically teach summer field
schools. In any given summer there may be as
many as 4-5 field schools going on in different
places in Texas. For instance, in late June of each
of the last four years I have enjoyed visiting the
Texas Tech University (TTU) field school near San
Saba in Central Texas that is directed by my longtime friend and colleague, Grant Hall. As is typical
of university field schools, most of the students are
undergraduates getting their first exposure to handson archeology. While relatively few will make a
career of archeology, many will remember the
experience fondly and may participate in archeology
again on an avocational basis. I know of a half
dozen of Grant’s former field school students who
are employed in CRM archeology in Texas and
elsewhere, as well as several who are now in
graduate school. As the students at the TTU field
school learn about the basics and logistics of survey
and test excavation, they contribute to long-term
regional research. Hall has identified the San Saba
area as one that, because of its concentration of
native pecan trees and permanent springs, would
have been an important resource area for Archaic
hunter-gatherers. Over the next several decades,
Hall hopes to continue working in the area (with
anyone who will join him) to gain the kind of indepth understanding of the cultural and natural
history of the region that can only come from
experience. As I see it, most archeological research

Black m (Texas) Archeology 1995

efforts in Texas would be more effective if they
were conceived and coordinated on a regional basis.
For me the most disheartening aspect of academic archeology in Texas is the present gulf between theoretical/methodological ideals and the
realities of CRM archeology. Most academic programs continue to prepare more and more students
to become academic archeologists despite the fact
that only a small fraction of those graduating with
advanced degrees will obtain academic positions
(see Schuldenrein 1995). In the real world of archeological employment, the vast majority of all
the jobs are CRM-related. To succeed in the CRM
world, archeological students need training and exposure to such aspects of modern archeology as
situational ethics, CRM law and the regulatory process, government- and private-sector employment
opportunities, and even business administration. To
my knowledge, the only academic program in Texas
archeology that regularly offers formal courses in
CRM or "applied" archeology is TAMU. Other
anthropology departments, such as the largest one
in the state at UT-Austin, continue to act as though
an academically-oriented education will best serve
their students. While UT-Austin and other universities have organized research branches (such as
TARL) that provide some students with employment opportunities and firsthand experience in CRM
archeology, far less integration exists than should
and could (Blanton 1995).
I find it fascinating and encouraging that so
many undergraduate and graduate students take an
interest in Texas archeology. While many of these
students are young, a surprising number are older
people who have followed other paths through life
and have returned to school to pursue an interest in
the human past. They do not study, knowingly, to
prepare themselves to be management or business
types; they study to become archeo!ogical researchers. Longtime readers of the Bulletin and the regional journals have seen many examples of the
potential revealed by student research articles, but
must wonder what happens to all those whose names
never surface again. As they progress through the
educational system, students encounter many of the
same promises and problems that I describe in this
article and they, too, wonder if they will find employment that satisfies both their need for a steady
income and their desire to contribute to meaningful
research. While some find that they have no real
aptitude for painstaking research, many become dis-

31

heartened because of the mismatch they encounter
between academic promise and CRM reality, and
they leave archeology never to return. However,
others persist. Some go on to make significant contributions to archeology in Texas or elsewhere, but
others seem to bow their once-promising heads to
what I see as the darker side of CRM reality and
become part of the problem.
I have made the basic distinctions among private-sector, university-affiliated, and government
archeologists. About a third of the 300-400 CRM
archeologists in the state belong to the Council of
Texas Archeologists (CTA), a professional organization that meets twice a year to discuss shared
issues. The CTA also provides a listing of archeological contractors. The May 1995 list reveals that
in the private-sector there are at least 40 firms that
periodically employ archeologists in Texas, although at least a third of these are essentially oneperson operations. The priv.ate firms include those
like Prewitt and Associates, Inc. of Austin and
Moore Archaeological Consulting of Houston that
focus exclusively on archeology, as well as larger
consulting companies like Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc. of Austin, Sandra Hicks and Company of Austin, and Geo-Marine, Inc. of Plano that
provide a variety of environmental and cultural services. Among the multi-service companies, there
are still larger consulting firms like TRC Mariah
Associates Inc. and SWCA Environmental Consultants that have offices in Austin, but are headquartered in other states. Further, consulting firms
in adjacent states and elsewhere in the country sometimes do archeological work in Texas. The private
archeological consulting business is fluid and difficult to track as companies expand and contract in
step with business.
I have mentioned the larger university-affiliated research organizations, TARL at UT-Austin,
CEA at TAMU, and CAR at UTSA. There are
smaller contract programs at the University of Texas
at E1 Paso, Stephen F. Austin University
(Nacogdoches), and UNT (Denton). The major federal agencies that have archeo!ogists in Texas include the Corps of Engineers with offices in Ft.
Worth and Galveston, the U.S. Forest Service, and
the U.S. Army at Ft. Hood and Ft. Bliss. Other
federal archeologists in the state work for the U.S.
Air Force and the National Park Service (NPS). At
the state level, the largest archeological employer
is the Texas Historical Commission, followed by

32

Texas Archeological Society

the Texas Department of Transportation, the Texas
Parks and Wildlife Department, the Texas Water
Development Board, the Adjutant General’s Office
(Army National Guard of Texas) and, finally, the
Texas General Land Office (GLO) who has a single
archeologist, Bob Skiles. Bob’s career is an interesting example of how CRM archeologists often
move from one group to the next. He got his start
with university contract outfits at SMU and UNT,
then worked for the U.S. Forest Service in East
Texas, and now works for the GLO in Austin.
Among the CRM archeologists and organizations that actually do compliance fieldwork, I see a
basic distinction between those which I will call
"reactive" and others who may be said to be
"proactive" with regard to archeological research.
While there are many shades of gray, the end members, at least, are accurately described by my caricatures. Proactive archeologists attempt to carry
out compliance work in a conscientious way, generally doing average or above-average work with
whatever archeological task falls their way. When
given a choice, these individuals generally do the
archeologically ethical thing to the best of their
training and ability, within the constraints of the
situation. In contrast, reactive "archeologists" seem
to care about archeology only when it is particularly exciting or falls within their favored area of
the state, or when forced to. Many are just lazy, but
some are downright dishonest. They cut corners
whenever possible. Ironically, reactive archeologists sometimes piously claim the high road of archeological righteousness and justify their
professional irresponsibility on the nature of the
archeological record. Only "good" sites deserve
good work, they say (thereby acknowledging that
they ordinarily do bad or cursory work). Unfortunately, despite not having the respect of most of
their colleagues, a fair number of these individuals
end up in positions of authority and responsibility,
often undermining or thwarting the efforts of the
proactive archeologists who work under them. Since
the principals of any organization usually determine the nature of its contributions to, and attitudes
about, archeological research, one can ordinarily
distinguish between reactive and proactive organizations. I will use this admittedly overdrawn
proactive vs. reactive distinction to help illustrate
certain tensions in Texas archeology.
CRM archeology is driven by federal and state
laws, regulations, and rules. These include laws

such as the National Historic Preservation Act of
1966 and the Antiquities Code of Texas (written in
1969 and amended several times since, most
recently in 1995), as well as regulations such 36
CFR 60, Department of the Interior Regulations
concerning the National Register of Historic Places.
Leaving aside the many technicalities, the obvious
intent of this extensive body of laws and regulations
is to offer some protection to cultural resources
(such as archeological sites) by insuring that when
federal- or state-funded, permitted, or approved
land-altering actions take place, steps are taken to
avoid or mitigate the impact of these actions on the
resources. All Federally permitted, funded, or
approved "undertakings" (land-altering actions)
must follow what is known as the Section 106
process (of the National Historic Preservation Act
of 1966). Examples of such undertakings include
the state’s building of interstate and state highways
with federal moneys, the building of recreational
facilities on NPS land at Lake Amistad, and the
issuing of discharge permits by the Environmental
Protection Agency for lignite mines in East Texas.
The Section 106 process involves the determination
of whether affected archeological sites are eligible
for inclusion in the National Register of Historic
Places (i.e., are important), and, if so, what actions
should be taken to protect the sites or salvage a
reasonable part of the information that they contain.
The complex federal process is administered and
enforced through the State Historic Preservation
Office, the Texas Historical Commission (THC).
The THC also administers and enforces the
Antiquities Code, which requires permits (under
certain conditions) when land-altering actions are
carried out on property that is owned or controlled
by a state agency or any of the state’s political
subdivision (counties, municipalities, etc.). While
there are important differences, the federal and state
processes are broadly equivalent.
Like most areas of government, what began as
a well-intentioned and straightforward aim--to protect archeological sites and preserve the information that they contain--has become a complex,
time-consuming, and very expensive process. Simplified, it works more or less as follows. The archeological regulators at the THC and among
various federal agencies attempt to encourage, cajole, and coerce "sponsors," governmental agencies, political subdivisions, and private concerns
who need governmental approval, to determine if

Black ~ (Texas) Archeology 1995

they have responsibilities under these laws and if
their actions will have an adverse impact on "culturally or scientifically-significant" archeological
sites. Sponsors do this by hiring or employing CRM
archeologists to survey a given property and evaluate the encountered sites, usually by probing or
testing with hand and mechanized methods. CRM
archeologists usually find sites for the simple reason that prehistoric and historic sites abound in the
state. While the proactive archeologists generally
find more sites and answer "yes" or "maybe" more
often to the question of site significance than reactive archeologists, initial work rarely suffices when
the area to be affected is sizable and/or situated
along permanent water. This is because little is
actually known about the hundreds of thousands of
archeological sites present in Texas; hence most
sites have some theoretical (or actual) potential to
yield scientifically useful information. A "yes" or
"maybe" answer means, of course, that more investigation time (which means money) is needed to
further test to determine if a site is important enough
to be excavated. If it is, and the site cannot be
avoided or protected from the action, even more
time/money will be needed.
CRM archeology, like purely academic
research, is costly for many reasons, such as the
not-unreasonable desire for profitability among
private contractors. Most reasons, however, have to
do with the changing nature of archeological
research and the cost of life in late 20th century
America. Sticking to the former, modern
archeological research is expensive for two reasons,
time and technicality. The process of intelligently
and thoroughly investigating informative
archeological sites is extremely time consuming
(and in professional life, time equals money). While
there are ways to speed things up, to focus more
narrowly, and to extrapolate from smallish samples,
thorough field archeology requires a great deal of
human effort. While earlier generations of Texas
archeologists dug fast and saved only the "goodies"
(intact or well-shaped artifacts), today we recognize
that the answers to much of what we want to know
about aboriginal life can only corne from recording
the crucial observations that document the
patterning of artifacts, features, and natural deposits
before the archeological context is shoveled away.
We also understand that often we must closely
scrutinize the minutiae, the fragments as well as the
good stuff, the tiny charred pieces of animal bone

33

and plants, the very grains of the soil which envelop
archeological deposits. Increasingly important and
informative are technical studies such as the
identification of animal bones and plants,
radiocarbon dating, pollen and phytolith (plant
crystals) identification, soil chemistry, petrographic
examination of pottery thin sections, and forensic
studies of human bone. These specialized studies
are part and parcel of modem archeological research
and the developing subfields such as archeometry,
zooarcheology, paleobotany, and geomorphology.
Many millions of dollars are spent each year
in Texas as part of CRM work. No one really
knows how much is spent because the funds are
dispersed by many different public and private organizations. My educated guess is that at least 10
million dollars will be expended in 1995 on contracted CRM archeological research in Texas.
Since this does not include the cost of work done
by the 60-70 archeologists who are on government
payrolls, add another roughly 2 million for federal
and state archeologists headquartered in Texas.
Conservatively, then, I estimate that at least 12
million dollars will be spent on archeology in
Texas during 1995, although the true figure could
be twice that. The reader might find this figure
astonishing and might wonder what is being
learned for all this money; so do I. (Many of the
data summarized and presented in the other articles
in this Bulletin were gathered during CRM work,
and provide a partial answer.)
The sponsoring organizations who distribute
these monies include state and federal agencies,
regional and local utilities, land developers, and
other private businesses. In Texas, the federal agencies who directly sponsor research include all those
previously listed as employers of archeologists, as
well as the Bureau of Reclamation, the Department
of Energy, and various others. Certain state organizations, such as the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) sponsor or administer archeology
on behalf of federa! agencies, in this case the Federal Highways Administration, as well as for the
state. In addition to TxDOT, the sponsoring agencies at the state level include the Texas Water Development Board and the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department. As mentioned, some of these federal
and state agencies have archeologists on their staffs
who carry out or contract out archeological research
work. Beyond the strictly governmental realm, regional quasi-governmental agencies such as the

34

Texas Archeological Society

LCRA sponsor archeology, as do many municipalities and towns. The other major group of sponsors
are private land developers, such as mining companies, who contract archeological services as part of
the federal and state environmental review and permitting process.
Few of these sponsoring agencies and organizations are motivated to become seriously involved
in archeology because of a primary concern with
the impact their activities might have on archeological sites and other types of cultural resources.
They sponsor research and contract archeological
services because federal and state regulations require them to do so and because archeologists working for federal and state agencies force them to
meet these requirements. In Texas, most of this
responsibility falls to (or involves) the Texas Historical Commission, a small state agency that has
the unenviable burden of attempting to balance the
many conflicting interests involved in archeology.
The daily workings of the THC are in the hands
of its Executive Director, Curtis D. Tunnell (himself
an archeologist), who runs the agency on behalf of
18 commissioners who are private citizens (usually
politically connected) appointed for 3-year terms by
the Governor. Rose Trevifio, historic preservationist, TAS member, and avocational from Laredo,
Texas, is the only archeologist who has ever served
as a commissioner. Fortunately, due to recent changes
mandated by the 74th Legislature, in the future, one
of the commissioners will always be a professional
archeologist. Also new is a seven-person Antiquities Advisory Board (which includes five archeologists) which will advise the Commissioners on
archeological matters related to the Antiquities Code.
The Commission meets four times a year, and rules
on certain preservation issues such as the occasionally hotly contested designation of State Archeological Landmarks (a protective designation that is
somewhat confusingly applied more often to historic buildings than archeological sites). However,
the day-to-day decisions are made by agency staff,
who have a mission to encourage the preservation
and protection of historically important cultural resources, including buildings and other types of historical properties, as well as archeological sites.
Two THC departments deal with archeology, the
Department of Antiquities Protection (DAP), headed
currently by Dr. James Bruseth, and the Office of
the State Archeologist (OSA), headed by Pat
Mercado-Allinger, the acting State Archeologist.

The Office of the State Archeologist is funded
primarily by the state, and is charged with working with private landowners and citizens to protect
and preserve archeological sites on private land.
They havea staff of four archeologists (including
Mercado-Allinger) and several support people, including a publications editor. OSA does some research, particularly in rescue situations when
private funds can be raised, but focuses its efforts
on education and on working with avocational archeologists. Since 1984, one of the most important
projects of the OSA has been its Archeological
Stewardship Network, composed of about 50
avocational archeologists across the state who
serve as the eyes and ears of the THC. Among their
duties, the stewards try to monitor land-altering
activities in their corners of the state, and to alert
OSA and DAP when archeological opportunities
and problems come to their attention. Stewards
record sites, salvage important finds and document
collections, and generally try to stay on top of the
archeology in their local areas, tasks that the small
Austin-based staff of the THC cannot possibly do.
Along with the TAS and CTA, the OSA also cosponsors Texas Archeology Awareness week (now
month) in April of each year. This highly successful program provides archeological speakers and
literature to public groups and schools around the
state. The OSA also publishes well-produced archeological reports and educational brochures.
While OSA gets drawn into various archeologically
related conflicts, these generally pale by comparison to those facing DAP.
The Department of Antiquities Protection is
charged with making sure that the federal Section
106 process is followed by federal agencies and
project sponsors, as well as overseeing the
provisions of the Antiquities Code of Texas that
deal with archeological sites. Because DAP
administers, on behalf of the state of Texas, the
Section 106 review process, it receives a
substantial portion of its funding from federal
sources. DAP has a regular staff of eight
archeologists (including Bruseth) and three support
people. In addition, four other staff members (two
of whom are also archeologists) are working on the
Texas Historic Sites Atlas Project, a sizable,
federally funded project to create a statewide
electronic database of historic and prehistoric site
information. The regular staff archeologists spend
most of their time reviewing the small mountains

Black ~ (Texas) Archeology 1995
of paperwork that flow through DAP week-in,
week-out. Their task is to sort through the notices
of federal, state, and local actions to find the
relatively small number of activities that may
adversely affect (impact) archeological sites.
Project reviewing is a difficult and largely
thankless task even in the best of times, a process
that virtually the entire CRM community in Texas
depends on for its livelihood. In spite of this, or
perhaps because of it, DAP is the lightning rod for
criticism and controversy concerning archeological
problems in the state of Texas.
The Department of Antiquities Protection lies
at the nexus of sponsors, CRM archeologists, Texas
politicians, and federal regulatory agencies, groups
which often have competing and conflicting interests and priorities. Understandably, most of the
sponsors want to be done with archeology as
quickly and as cheaply as possible so they can accomplish their larger construction goal. However,
relatively few sponsors understand how CRM archeology works. Sometimes out of ignorance,
sponsors at times contract with the more reactive
CRM organizations and archeologists, who care
more about serving their business client, the sponsor, than they do about doing good archeology.
While keeping the sponsors happy and doing good
archeology need not be an either-or situation, it all
too often is. With profit as their primary motive,
reactive CRM firms bid as high as they can (but as
low as needed to get the work), and then do as little
archeology as they think they can get away with.
Naturally, DAP should deal with reactive CRM
archeologists with a heavy hand, double-checking
their claims and often demanding that a more thorough job be done. Yet, what would be judged
"shoddy" or substandard work by most competent
archeologists regularly goes unchallenged because
DAP reviewers do not have the resources, the
motivation, and/or the mandate to investigate every suspect case. However, sometimes the reported
work is blatantly inadequate or misrepresented
(such as one archeologist’s claim that he had
single-handedly dug, screened, and recorded some
90-100 shovel tests in a single day!). On other
occasions, an OSA Steward or other archeologist
b!ows the whistle on problems by alerting DAP to
the existence of additional sites within the affected
area or to the potential significance of sites that a
CRM firm (or governmental agency) has judged
insignificant.

35

When shoddy work is called into question, the
reactionary archeologist always blames the need
for more work on DAP, sometimes causing the
sponsor to complain to DAP. In extreme cases,
usually involving large tracts and costly archeological investigations, sponsors have been known
to call friendly politicians who themselves do not
understand archeology. "We have already spent
nearly a million dollars" they might say (omitting
mention that the costs often reflect the incompetence and greed of their archeological contractor
more than the amount of archeology done), "we
just can’t afford any more." The sponsors or their
politicians demand explanation and reprieve from
DAP (or from the THC’s Executive Director). In
Section 106 cases, the THC truthfully responds that
they are merely insuring that federal laws and regulations relating to archeology are met by project
sponsors and federal agencies. Still, the THC is
vulnerable to political pressure because its state
funding and the Antiquities Code is in the powerful
and capricious hands of the Texas Legislature.
While many such calls can be handled by calm
explanations of the process, the political pressure
results, more often than DAP admits, in a decision
to "back off’’ from its demands that reactive CRM
archeologists do a competent job. Regrettably, it is
the archeological record that suffers, not the unethical archeologists.
With most proactive CRM archeologists, DAP
does not need a heavy hand because they know that
conscientious archeologists make good-faith archeological evaluations and attempt to do an adequate
amount of work. Even so, differences can arise
between the sponsor, the CRM contractor, and DAP
as archeological significance, costs, and timing, are
weighed and debated. Project sponsors often find
the costs of archeology more than what they had
initially budgeted (usually without benefit of consultation with archeologically knowledgeable individuals), especially when they delay archeological
decisions until late in the process. Zealous contractors are sometimes unwilling to do less than what
they see as the archeologically correct thing to do,
irrespective of costs and political realities. DAP
tries to steer a neutral road by seeming to side with
both, and often ends up making everybody unhappy
and suspicious. Further, in their usual attempt to be
impartial, DAP reviewers have been known to scrutinize proactive work more carefully than reactive
work (i.e., trivial problems are pointed out and small

36

Texas Archeological Society

decisions are questioned). Although such actions
and differences cause resentment and sometimes
delay, the proactive archeologists usually take their
complaints directly to DAP and ultimately achieve
some kind of workable compromise.
In sum, sponsors perceive themselves to be at
the mercy of archeologists, who always blame the
problems on DAP, who blame the federal agencies
and regulations. Few sponsors have the knowledge
of the CRM archeological world to be able to realize that a higher initial bid from a competent,
proactive firm may end up costing them less in the
long run, especially if they use the occasion to gain
the positive publicity that can be garnered by sponsoring important research. The reactive firms often
submit unrealistic initial bids, knowing that DAP
will force them to do more work, which they can
bill the client for, blaming added costs on DAP.
The proactive archeologists get upset when they
see DAP caving in to real and perceived political
pressures and letting reactive archeologists (their
competitors) get away with inadequate work. The
result is a vicious circle that, at times, has all sides
distrusting and resenting DAP.
Doubtlessly, many sponsors and CRM archeologists do not see the CRM world the way I do.
Having served on DAP’s 1992-1994 CRM Advisory Board, a small, diverse group of CRM and
avocational archeologists, i appreciate the extremely important and unavoidably difficult nature
of DAP’s role. On the balance, I think that DAP
usually does a commendable job. However, I do
not agree with the way political pressure is often
handled. As I perceive it, DAP makes
archeologically unfavorable deals and caves in to
perceived and real political pressure out of a belief
that this will stave off the powerful sponsors, business groups, and bought politicians who want to
see archeological laws and rules weakened (e.g.,
Ivanovich 1995). ! think that just the opposite happens: When the power players see that DAP will
bend to pressure, they are encouraged to lean even
more heavily. DAP claims that this behind-thescenes political bargaining saves the archeological
day by "keeping the preservation tools intact" (a
euphemism which apparently means "preserve the
bureaucracy at any cost"). I think the only right
thing for DAP to do is to address such matters
openly, and to consistently argue in favor of doing
what is best for the archeological record (i.e., to
protect the state’s antiquities).

The reader may find this seamy underside of
CRM archeology disturbing; so do I and so do most
conscientious professional archeologists. Many of
my colleagues feel powerless to do anything about
the situation and some fear, not without reason, that
speaking up might make their professional lives
more difficult. Others fear that if we draw attention
to our problems, we will provide ammunition for
archeology’s foes. I feel strongly that cleaning up
the CRM process is a responsibility that we cannot
postpone or conceal, although ! realize all too well
that the road to a better CRM tomorrow will not be
an easy one.
Let me now turn to the more pleasant task of
mentioning recent examples of some of the quality
research that CRM archeologists in Texas are producing before I discuss the roles of other players in
Texas archeology. By focusing attention on the
troubles of CRM archeology, I run the risk of making it seem as though nothing good ever happens.
This is far from the case, as demonstrated by four
recent studies that have provided outstanding data,
as well as stimulating ideas. The need for a large
water pipeline in Tom Green County brought about
the 1993 discovery and partial excavation of an
unusually well-stratified and preserved Toyah campsite (Quigg and Peck 1995). This important report’s
major strengths are its data presentation and timely
publication. Many years earlier, the construction of
IH 10 in Kimble County occasioned the excavation
of an interestingly different Toyah campsite. After
long delay, the results were studied and a lively
comparative study was published in a volume that is
quite welt-produced by CRM standards (Johnson
1994). At about the same time far to the south in
Live Oak County, the building of IH 37 was scheduled to obliterate a large prehistoric cemetery containing the bones and grave goods of Archaic peoples
who lived in the region some 2,500 years ago. Fortunately, TxDOT archeologists were able to carry
out a major excavation, and eventually the results
were analyzed and a fine report produced that is
jam-packed with very useful and well-presented data
(Taylor and Highley 1995). My final recent example is a project done on Galveston Island, where
a civic-minded developer funded the study of a
cemetery and campsite that dates to the latest prehistoric era and early historic period (Ricklis 1994).
This report is exemplary because of its data presentation and the skillful integration of archeological
and ethnohistorical data. These are but a few of

Black ~ (Texas) Archeology 1995
many examples that could be cited where CRM
monies result in the salvaging of important information in advance of land-altering activities.
Having taken Jack Jackson to task for how he
has handled reburial issues, it is only fair that I
acknowledge his contributions as a manager of cultural resources. Since the late 1980s, Jackson has
overseen the archeological resources at Fort Hood, a
huge expanse of land in Bell and Coryell counties
controlled by the U.S. Army. Jackson and his predecessor, Frederick Briuer, have managed the Army’s
efforts for almost 20 years to fulfill its obligations
under the National Historic Preservation Act. Work
by TAMU, TRC Mariah Associates, and now Prewitt
and Associates, has been aimed at inventorying and
evaluating the archeological record that the Army
manages. While this work has been time consuming
and costly, over 30 published studies have documented a huge research base of dated site deposits,
many of which are not immediately threatened. In
the 21st century, this data base may prove very
important to archeologists as a conserved, welldocumented archeological record that may be made
available for focused research efforts.
The many avocational archeologists in the state
contribute in diverse ways, many of which I have
mentioned. The regional and local societies regularly undertake survey and excavation work, sometimes assisting professional archeologists. Although
avocational archeologists usually do not receive
much recognition, the Society for American
Archaeology’s Crabtree Award for lifelong
avocational contributions has been awarded to three
individuals who have worked in Texas since the
award was established in 1985. In that year, the
first recipient was the late Clarence Webb, who
was recognized for his contributions to Caddo archeology in Texas and Louisiana. In !989, the late
J. B. Sollberger (formerly of Dallas) was acknowledged for his experimental lithic research. Most
recently in 1994, Leland W. Patterson of Houston
was recognized for his prolific and wide-ranging
contributions to archeology.
I have cited other examples of particularly
dedicated avocationals who specialize, like many
professionals do, on some topic or area and, over
time, become respected experts. Other avocationals
work with relic collectors and landowners to
document sites and artifact collections. For instance,
longtime STAA and TAS member and Steward C.
K. Chandler of San Antonio has labored tirelessly

37

for many years to record sites and bring important
collections and finds to printed light (e.g., Chandler
1995). Some professional archeologists are opposed
to having anything to do with poorly provenienced
and improperly excavated artifacts, reasoning that
by cooperating, archeologists will lend an air of
legitimacy to collecting and looting. While I agree
in cases that involve antiquities buying, selling, or
trading, I believe that there is much more to be
gained by documenting the collections of recreational collectors than by chastising these people.
Most collectors are ordinary citizens motivated by
a genuine, if uninformed, interest in the human
past. I know of many examples where such
collectors have become involved in archeology
through avocational societies, and then have
contributed to archeology. In fact, many of the
leading professional archeologists in this state were
first introduced to archeology through collecting. It
is usually through contact with avocational and
professional archeologists that collectors become
more informed and responsible about archeology.
The final two players, private landowners and
the general public, are potentially the most important players of all. Since most land in Texas is held
in private hands, and since the state’s laws allow
most private landowners to do what they please
with archeological sites, landowners hold one of
the most important keys to archeology’s future. I
have found that most ranchers, farmers, and other
landowners (including some developers), have a
genuine interest in the natural and cultural history
of their land. Some of archeology’s most tireless
and effective workers have come from the ranks of
rural landowners; historian and avocational archeologist Kay D. Hindes of Charlotte, springs immediately to mind (e.g., Hindes et al. 1995) as does
Wharton County rancher and avocational Joe D.
Hudgins (e.g., Hudgins 1993). When archeologists
earn landowners’ respect, we often find them willing and interested in protecting important archeo!ogical sites. However, developing such
relationships takes a commitment on the part of the
archeologist to respect the rights and wishes of the
landowner. Obtaining permission to enter private
land, leaving gates as you find them, crossing fences
through gates, obeying landowner rules, and keeping one’s promises are essential behaviors for the
responsible archeologist.
Recently, though, I have become troubled by
the more reactionary forces involved in the

38

Texas Archeological Society

property rights movement, as I have encountered
several landowners who have refused me access,
when only a few years before they were willing and
cooperative. "Why," I ask, "did I break my word?"
"No, it’s just that this ’environmental’ thing has me
upset," one banker in West Central Texas told me.
Apparently he had been persuaded that unnamed
"environmentalists" would use any excuse
(including archeology) to obtain access to private
land for untoward purposes. I think such scare
tactics are ludicrous, but the banker was quite
sincere and unmoved by my lengthy letter
explaining exactly what I wanted to do (a minor
reconnaissance while collecting ochre and chert
samples for comparative analyses). I mention this
in hopes that archeologists will be aware of the
heightened sensitivity of landowners and will keep
archeological issues separate from environmental
issues and property rights. We archeologists
already have our hands full in educating
landowners and other members of the public about
the value and long-term potential of important
archeological sites.
Archeology’s biggest potential audience is the
general public. I cannot count the times that, when
introduced to a stranger as an archeologist, I have
heard "I always wanted to be an archeologist" or
"archeology is so-o-o fascinating." Average people
are interested in archeology because they understand, often more clearly than archeologists, that
we all have a share in the human past. They want to
know many of the same things that archeologists
want to know, although most are uninterested in
technicalities and the painstaking research process.
They want to know who did what in the past and
why. Unthinkingly, we archeologists often reply in
our normal dry, jargon-laden, and overly qualified
archeo-speak. As my wife put it, after sitting through
what I had thought was a very public-oriented, wellillustrated talk, "most people are not as interested
in [burned] rocks as you are." I believe that to
insure a bright future for (Texas) archeology, we
must concentrate on building and maintaining "audience share." We need to give back to the public
that directly and indirectly supports archeological
work more of what they want to learn (Lintz 1994).
Through education and increased public participation, I am convinced that more people will want to
hear about the fascinating implications of the lowly
burned rock and other sorts of mundane, but potentially revealing archeological evidence.

(TEXAS) ARCHEOLOGY IN
THE 21ST CENTURY?
While earlier generations of archeologists in
Texas and elsewhere in North America shared a
world view of how archeology was to be done and
what archeology was after (Dunnell 1986), 21st
century archeologists will continue to diversify. Interest will proliferate in different: periods of the
past, cultures, theoretical perspectives, methods, research specialties, and motivations for doing archeology. This diversification will continue simply
because of the growing numbers of people who live
in the state and take part in archeological research,
because there are so many ways that the past can be
explored, and because there are many uses to which
the past can be put. As we increasingly recognize
the complexities of the past, we realize that there is
no one true path to knowledge, but many pathways
which can and should be explored.
It is equally apparent that certain unproductive
trails should be avoided. An obvious example is the
one that led archeologists to excavate Caddo cemetery sites as recently as two years ago in Northeast
Texas without taking into consideration the views
of the modern Caddo people. Other unproductive
pathways are commingled with productive ones in
the tangled mess of laws, bureaucracy, "research"
by low-bid, and good archeology that is subsumed
under the shingle of CRM. Where is (Texas) archeology to go?
The shape of the archeological future in Texas
will be closely tied to social, technological, and
political changes. We are witnessing a period during
which politicians and the public are struggling with
social issues and the nature of government
involvement. Those who are taking aim at the
enormous federal government and its seemingly
voracious spending have gone after historic
preservation funding and the budgets of many
agencies (such as the Corps of Engineers) that play
important roles in Texas archeology. So far, the
cuts in most of the areas that affect CRM funding
seem to be relatively minor, but these decreases
may very well constitute the first wave of many to
come, I suspect. Perhaps this is because I see up
close plenty of examples of needless waste, wellintentioned but hopelessly cumbersome regulations,
and misdirected effort in the federal and state CRM
process. However, all things are relative, and the
magnitude of archeological spending pales by

Black ~ (Texas) Archeology 1995
comparison with that of many other areas of
government. Some of my colleagues believe that
the federal and state CRM processes are too firmly
ingrained to be done away with, and point to
continued public support for historic preservation.
The problems of CRM archeology are certainly not unique to Texas (or to archeology) and
are currently being chronicled and debated elsewhere in the country (e.g., Pape 1995). While I
think it is increasingly clear that the whole process
needs to be reconsidered, few participant observers
see a safe path to achieving meaningful reform. In
cynical moments, I am convinced that major improvements will not come about until the regulations are gutted and the present system collapses.
However it happens, catastrophically or gradually,
CRM archeology must change. Too much power
and control is concentrated in the hands of too few
well-intentioned, but entrenched bureaucrats in Austin and Washington. Those of us on the contractor
side of the CRM coin, proactive and reactive alike,
have vested interests in that our own needs and
goals often take priority over objective assessments
of archeological significance. To keep our organizations and careers afloat, we play the system to
our own advantage, justifying our own excesses
more easily than we do those of our competitors.
Texas archeologists of good heart and thick
hide need to push the state’s CRM agencies toward
profound reform. Archeological bureaucrats, like
academics, tend to stay put for too long, becoming
inured to shortcomings, and well-practiced at rationalizing the status quo. Experience needs to be
tempered with the idealism borne by fresh faces
who do not yet conceive most problems as intractable. To effectively manage the cultural resources
of our vast and geographically diverse state, we
need to move toward regionally based systems of
planning, review, and research where the important
decisions are shared by a broader spectrum of
archeologically knowledgeable individuals. Our
vested interests need to be openly disclosed and
balanced against objective measures of research significance, need, and value. And we CRM archeologists need to consistently serve the needs of the
archeological record at least as well as we do those
of our sponsors, and ourselves.
During the CRM boom of recent decades, the
traditional bonds among the relatively few professional archeologists and the relatively many
avocational archeologists have weakened. Today

39

many of the professional archeologists in the state
do their work with comparatively little interaction
with avocationals. This trend is one that I think is
particularly harmful, though perhaps understandable. Archeology as a business operates at a hurried
pace that often does not allow time for developing
and cultivating relationships between paid and unpaid archeologist. The increasingly technical nature of archeological research and writing is also to
blame as fewer and fewer people find archeological
reports interesting and readable.
However, from my perspective it will be absolutely crucial to the survival of archeology in the
21st century that professional and avocational archeology be reunited. Here is why. The archeological record is disappearing at an ever-increasing pace.
There will never be enough money and time for
professionals to salvage or investigate the disappearing record fully. The efforts, skills, and enthusiasm of avocational archeologists can help increase
the odds that any single site or deposit is at least
partially sampled before it is gone. Besides, the fun
of archeology is the process of discovery, and sharing that discovery with people who care. What is
the point of spending great chunks of archeological
research time and effort in our all-too-short lives to
learn things that nobody gives a tinker’s spring
about? For me, more good archeological data and
more good archeological participants means more
fun, more stimulation, and more meaningful interaction about the archeological record.
How do we achieve this reunification, or rather,
improved integration? I think the lion’ s share of the
responsibility here falls to the professional archeologists. Too many paid archeologists do not participate in the societies, Archeology Awareness
Week, or any after-hours activities in archeology.
Professionals need to realize that we are part of a
wider archeological community and that cooperation with avocational archeologists and the
archeologically interested public is part of our responsibilities as members of the discipline. All CRM
organizations and agencies should encourage staff
members to participate in the events of archeo!ogical societies and organizations as part of their professional obligation to share knowledge.
Texas archeology of the next century will operate in an increasingly different technological and
social environment from what we have now. On the
social side, more and more people will live in the
state and they will have more and more diverse

40

Texas Archeological Society

interests, if less and less free time. Thus, there will
be an ever larger pool of possible participants and
consumers of Texas archeology. Clever archeologists among us will harness this potential by devising imaginative ways of involving avocationals and
non-archeologists more meaningfully in the potentially creative human interaction that is archeology.
I think the primary means for involving more people
in archeology will come from the rapidly changing
technological world.
It is estimated that by the end of 1995, 40
percent of American households will have personal
computers. I would guess that this percentage is
much higher among most professional archeologists in Texas and probably among avocationals as
well. I bought my first one in 1982, and have relied
on computers ever since, primarily as writing tools,
but increasingly as the means of organizing, collecting, and analyzing data, as well as a communication device. From my house in Austin I can
participate nightly in debates and exchanges with
archeologists across North America and the world.
Information, trivial and substantive, travels almost
instantaneously. For instance, last July I sent a message to A1 Wesolowsky, former Texan archeologist
who is the managing editor of the Journal for Field
Archaeology at Boston University, telling him of
the news that underwater archeologist J. Barto
Arnold of the THC had apparently discovered one
of La Salle’s ships in Matagorda Bay. Not surprisingly, A1 had already seen digital rumor of this asyet-unannounced discovery, and was keen to know
details. The world is truly becoming a global village for those of us with access to technology.
In the early 2 t st century, the computer will be
integrated with the television and telephone to fundamentally change communication and information
exchange. While late 20th century archeologists
have been generally slow to harness the technology, computers offer us the very means we have
long lacked to effectively manage, store, compare,
and exchange the astonishingly voluminous amount
of archeological data that has been pried from the
in-the-ground archeological record. Resistance to
doing this has come from the cost of techno!ogy
and the technological phobias that some archeologists seem to have. Ironically, archeological tradition is sometimes seen as threatened by the very
thing, technological change, that archeologists often study. The considerable costs of adopting technology must be weighed against the considerable

cost of doing things by hand. Computers will not
replace archeologists; they are simply tools that,
when used effectively, will allow us to concentrate
more on the fun parts of archeology: investigation,
analysis, and communication. In the 21st century,
new generations of computer-literate archeologists
will be able to help transform and convert data
collected by traditional methods to the newer technologies. The information age will offer many challenges and opportunities to Texas archeologists.
Those interested in archeology in the 21 st century should, I think, take a keen interest in where
the professional archeological money goes and how
it is spent. Since most professional archeologists
are being paid directly or indirectly to serve the
public, to educate the public, to preserve cultural
resources for the public future, or to fulfill public
(governmental) regulations and responsibilities, the
public has the right to demand accountability and
participation. Taxpayers and citizens ultimately pay
for most of the archeology that is done in Texas as
elsewhere in this country. The archeologically motivated citizenry can and should demand accountability and participation.
What is being learned by public-sponsored
digs? Why are taxpayers paying millions of dollars
for what amounts to, in some cases, shoddy research and abysmal archeological records? Why
can’t taxpayers go to public libraries and find readable accounts of every major archeological research
project? Why can’t taxpayers see and even handle
the artifacts that are collected by public servants
and housed by public institutions? Why can’t they
visit digs on public lands and lend a hand? Why
aren’t the laws and regulations written to insure
that public moneys are wisely spent (in archeology)? Why don’t more local and regional museums
hire an archeologist? Why don’t state-funded universities train archeotogical students to do publicsponsored archeology? Ask and ask again.
I am encouraged by the positive steps currently being taken to keep building on the successes of the Archeological Stewards Network.
However, we other archeologists need to recognize
that such stewardship is within our power. That is,
each of us can and should serve as archeological
stewards by working locally to do what we can to
rescue the rapidly vanishing in-the-ground archeological record. We need to put greater emphasis on
what earlier generations called "salvage" archeology; it is hard to "manage" cultural resources that

Black ~ (Texas) Archeology 1995
are being destroyed at ever-faster rates. The crisis
of a disappearing archeological record is one that
every introductory text emphasizes and one that
every conscientious archeologist calls attention to
whenever opportunity presents itself, but I’ll make
it real and recent.
In Corps of Engineers lakes in Northeast Texas,
Caddo villages, graves, and houses are being relentlessly destroyed, day-in, day-out, by the actions
of winds and artificial waters and by the artifactseeking collectors and pothunters. Far to the south
and west the same is happening to the remains of
Coahuilteco speakers (and other ethnic groups who
passed without leaving their name): cemeteries,
camps, and rockshelters along both sides of the
Mexican border in Falcon and Amistad reservoirs.
Near E1 Paso, all-terrain vehicles wreck much havoc
and provide ready access to Mogollon villages,
houses, and graves, things that lay scarcely buried
beneath the shifting sands. In the Pandhandle, collectors with metal detectors are striping away the
meager traces of early Spanish visitors and potting
some of the few documented historic Indian village
locations. Meanwhile honest farmers pl0w through
the playas ringed with habitation traces dating back
to Clovis times, year by year.
As more and more people populate Texas and
the world at large, the traces of past humans are
progressively destroyed by intent, by accident, by
neglect, and by the passage of time. Here in Texas,
the buried archeological record is continuously and
rapidly dwindling, and it is our responsibility as
conscientious archeologists to act wherever and
whenever we can to rescue (a term preferred by the
British) what we can. Of course many of us are
doing just that, but we can do more if we would
coordinate and focus our actions more effectively.
In my view, one of the most important missions
any archeological society can aspire to is that of
rescue archeology. While there are countless sites,
features, and artifacts in need of rescue, we should,
I think, marshall our efforts where it can be best put
to use. For urban and suburban archeologists the
major battlefields should be on the edges of the
metropolis. As the cities relentlessly sprawl, it is in
those places that the largest number of sites are
threatened by construction and by the wave of
uncontrolled digging that accompanies the urban
expansion. The most recent session of the Texas
Legislature has provided a special incentive
(through a brokered deal of the sort I mentioned

41

earlier) by exempting municipalities from following
the Antiquities Code when their actions involve
less than 5 acres and no sites are known before
construction. Thus, by making sure that the cultural
resources within and around municipalities are
known and properly recorded, we can prevent undue
harm to the archeological record.
I conclude this article by sketching a vision of
a Texas archeology of the 21 st century, an idealistic blend of the best of what we have now and what
might and could be. As you read it, try not to think
about the reasons why such a Texas archeology can
never exist, or even the many difficult steps that
achieving such a vision would require. Instead, join
me in imagining (Texas) archeology as it could be
in the tomorrow of the next century. The sketch
touches on many elements that I think we, who are
sincerely and even passionately interested in archeological scholarship, research, and interaction,
should work to achieve. As I have tried to indicate
throughout this essay, there are already many encouraging recent examples of the kinds of positive
archeological effort and common-sense integration
that I seek. The seeds of a productive archeological
future for Texas are already sown, but our seedlings need coddling and protection from the tenaciously weedy and often harsh climate that is Texas
archeology in 1995. Doubtlessly, my fellow archeologists present and future will create a 21st century different from what I envision, but perhaps
some ideals will be shared and realized.

A Vision of (Texas) Archeology
of Tomorrow

For I dipt into the future, far as human eye
could see,
Saw the Vision of the world, and all the wonder
that would be;
Alfred, Lord Tennyson, 1842

Texas archeology could be a place where
academic, avocational, and CRM archeologists
work cooperatively: sharing mutual goals whenever
feasible, sharing ideas, data, and scholarly
arguments freely, and taking advantage of diverse
skills and interests by channeling opportunity
toward the peoples and organizations that can best
accomplish individual pieces of the archeological
pie. Academic and contract branches of a single

42

Texas Archeological Society

university would be effectively integrated, with
students and teachers moving back and forth from
classroom to apply method and theory hands-on.
University-based researchers and specialists would
also work with private compliance-oriented firms
that offered efficient, competent service tailored to
meet the needs of both sponsors and archeological
research. CRM archeologists would have a
professional guild whose members were sworn to
promote ethical, competent research.
CRM funds would be generated based on fair
appraisals of land-altering project impacts. These
moneys would be distributed according to research
and development priorities, as well as scientific
and educational potential. Regionally based funding and compliance approval boards made up of
rotating groups of regional experts (including CRM
researchers, avocationals and academics, as well as
archeologically-educated private citizens and government managers), would set reasonable standards,
research priorities, and effectively administer the
money. University-based archeologists and private
firms would compete to win contracts to carry out
specific archeolological rescue tasks and basic research, based on the quality of research designs,
innovation, and delivery efficiency. Professional
research organizations would be expected to accommodate capable avocational volunteers and the
interested public whenever possible.
Professional and avocational archeologists
would work within loosely organized research
groups to monitor and steward the archeological
resources of a region, and work cooperatively to
share in the process and results of archeological
interaction. They would also help channel and encourage citizen involvement through educational
programs, field and laboratory participation, archeological experiments, and public museums. Local
and regional museums would employ archeologists
that helped coordinate and focus avocational and
public participation. Community colleges would
offer courses and training in archeology to extend
that provided in the universities to a wider segment
of the citizenry. Landowners would receive recognition and tax incentives for protecting and preserving important archeological resources.
The Texas Archeological Society and its
regional and local counterparts would work with
professional research organizations to accomplish
long-term research. The annual field school would
be one component of a year-around commitment to

follow research through to completion. TAS
members, guided by professional principal
investigators, would participate in the planning of
research, the execution of field research (the field
school), laboratory processing, analyses, and
publications. The data generated from the Society’s
research efforts would be quickly made available
for all interested members to ponder and work with.
This would be accomplished through widelyavailable digital technologies, technologies that
would allow TAS members to communicate at any
time from any spot in the state, sharing ideas,
rumors, finds, and bad puns. The Society would
foster many new archeological activities. The annual
meeting would include sessions geared toward the
general public, hands-on work, and regional
problems, as well as conventional talks.
State and Federal agencies would coordinate
their planning and development programs with the
regional research groups and funding boards. Research would be scheduled to mutual advantage,
usually well in advance of land-altering activities.
Business and government would pay their fair share,
but would be assured that their monies were wisely
spent. The physical remains of our past would be
treated with respect and concern for both cultural
and scientific needs. When land-altered activities
and archeological investigations encountered human remains of any time or culture, these would be
handled according to protocols worked out by agreements negotiated in advance by living ethnic descendants, if such can be accurately traced, and
with scientific and cultural advisors.
Information about the basic archeological
record would be filed, stored, and retrieved
electronically from any location in the state (and
world), with proper safeguards for locationally and
personally sensitive information. Routine reports
of most investigations would appear only in
electronic form, retrievable from any home or office.
These would competently describe what was done
and what was found, and furnish an overview (and
locational guide) of properly archived and
safeguarded data. Much comparative research could
be done remotely by accessing data from regional
clearing houses and repositories. When necessary,
researchers would be able to examine artifacts,
ecofacts, and records first hand, by scheduling visits
with curation facilities jointly supported by
universities and government funds. Major research
efforts, general and technological syntheses, and

Black m (Texas) Archeology 1995
special studies would be published both
electronically and conventionally to high standards
of scholarship and production.
Technological advances would permit "virtual
digs," where excavations in remote areas of Texas,
such as the canyons of the Lower Pecos, would be
linked via satellite communication and the Internet
to the wider world. These interactive demonstration
projects would feature rotating teams of professional, student, and volunteer archeologists working together to close the loop between discovery
and dissemination of the archeological findings.
Specialists and analysts would attempt to stay current with the excavation, providing immediate
feedback to the excavators and to the watching
world. Links to schools would allow 7th grade
Texas history classes to follow the dig, ask questions, and actually examine and work with the archeological data. The project’s corporate sponsors
might fund a contest enabling school kids, who
come up with winning solutions to real archeological problems, to visit the dig first hand. Through
such virtual digs, Texas archeology could move to
the forefront of innovation and public participation
in the 21st century.
Blink, blink. Back to the Texas archeology of
1995, where darker professional moments send
nightmarishly pessimistic visions flickering through
my mind’s eye. The great promise and the grievous
problems compel me to see the end of this century
as a major turning point and a time for action.
Although certain changes in 21st century archeology will be automatic (and a consequence of social
change), the members of the Texas Archeological
Society and all other archeologists in the state will
have many opportunities to use our voices, talents,
and resources to help shape the archeological future. Whether and how we make use of these opportunities is up to each one of us. Think of
tomorrow, do it today.

43

Black, S. L.
1986 The Clemente and Herminia Hinojosa Site, 41JW8:
A Toyah Horizon Campsite in Southern Texas. Special Report 18. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio.
1990a The Carnegie Uaxactun Project and the Development of Maya Archaeology. Ancient Mesoamerica
1:257-276.

1990b Unearthing the Ancient Maya: Field Methods and
Methodologies in Lowland Maya Archaeology.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
1993

Nailing the Coffin Shut on the Traditional Approach
to Prehistoric Archeology in Texas: An Epitaph and
Inquiry into the Afterlife. CRM News and Views
5(1):16-19.

Black, S. L., K. Jolly, and D. R. Potter
1993

The Higgins Experiment Field Report. Wurzbach
Project Working Papers. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Black, S. L. and A. J. McGraw
1985 The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change
and Continuity within the Upper Salado Creek Watershed, South-Central Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 100. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Black, S. L. and H. J. Shafer
1994

Archeology by the Numbers? A Dissenting and
Trenchant Viewpoint on DAP Survey Guidelines.
CRM News and Views 6(2): 16-18.

Blaine, J. C.
1993 Firearms and Related Artifacts from the Vinson Site.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:163186.
Blanton, D. B.
1995

The Case for CRM Training in Academic Institutions. SAA Bulletin 13(4):40-41.

Brown, K. M.
1985 Three Caches of Guadalupe Tools from South Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56:75125.

REFERENCES CITED
Carter, C. E.

Binford, L. R.
1986 In Pursuit of the Future. In American Archaeology
Past and Future, edited by D. J. Meltzer, D. D.
Fowler, and J. A. Sabloff, pp. 459-479. Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, D.C..

1995

Caddo Indians: Where We Come From. University
of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

Chandler, C.K.
1995 Stone Pipes from Bexar County, Texas. La Tierra
22(1):6-11.

44

Texas Archeological Society

Creel, D. G.
1986 A Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in
West Central Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of
Arizona, Tucson.

Johnson, L.
1994 The Life and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk: The
Buckhollow Encampment, Site 41KM16, Kimble
County, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist Report .38. Texas Department of Transportation and
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Davis, E.M.
1979

The First Quarter Century of the Texas Archeologi-

Johnson, L. and T.N. Campbell

cal Society. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological So-

1992

Sanan: Traces of a Previously Unknown Aboriginal
Language in Colonial Coahuila and Texas. Plains

ciety 50:159-194.

Anthropologist 37( 140): 185-212.
Dunnell, R. C
1986

Five Decades of American Archaeology. In American Archaeology Past and Future, edited by D. J.
Meltzer, D. D. Fowler, and J. A. Sabloff, pp. 23-49.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Lewis, D. R.
1978 Use of Phosphate Analysis for Determining Land
Use Patterns. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 49:309-317.

England, N.

Lintz, C.

1995

1994

Urban Indians: Trails of Hope. Texas Highways,
October, pp. 32-41.

Harris, R. K. and I. M. Harris
1967

Trade Beads, Projectile Points, and Knives. In A
Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and

What Are We Giving Back to the Public? CRM
News and Views 6(2): 19-21

McClure W. L.
1990 A Snake "Necklace" from the Morhiss Site. La
Tierra 17(1):9-12.

Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks,
and W. W. Newcomb, pp. 129-162. Final Report

Newcomb, W.W., Jr.

for Grant GS-964. National Science Foundation,

1993

Washington, D.C.
Hester, T. R.
1991 Notes on South Texas Archeology: 1991-1, An

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 64:1-63.

Newcomb, W.W., Jr. and T.N. Campbell
1982

Southern Plains Ethnohistory: A Re-Examination
of the Escanjaques, Ahijados, and Cuitoas. In Path-

Overview of the Results of the Texas Obsidian

ways to Plains Prehistory: Anthropological Per-

Project. La Tierra 18(1):4-7.

spectives of Plains Natives and their Pasts, edited
Hindes, V. K., M. R. Wolf, G. D. Hall, and K. K. Gilmore

by D. G. Wyckoff and J. L. Hofman, pp. 29-43.

1995

Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Memoir 3.

The Rediscover), of Santa Cruz de San Sabd, A
Mission for the Apache in Spanish Texas. San Saba

Duncan, Oklahoma.

Regional Survey Report 1. Archeology Laboratory,
Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

Pape, W. K.
1995

Hudgins, J. D.
1993

Emerging Crises in CRM Archaeology. SAA Bulletin 13(2):24-26.

Cooking with Clay Balls. The Cache 1:47-52.
Pearce, J. E.

Huebner, J. A.
1991

1935

Tales That Dead Men Tell. Bulletin No. 3537, An-

Late Prehistoric Bison Populations in Central and

thropological Papers 1 (1). The University of Texas

Southern Texas. Plains Anthropologist 36(137):343-

at Austin.

358.
Prewitt, E. R.
tvanovich, D.
1995

1981

Chronicle, June 25th, Section D: 1-3.

Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89.

When Oil Firms Drill into the Past. Houston
1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central
Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo-

Jackson, J. M.
1986 Archeological Investigations at the Little Campus
Restoration Project, Austin, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 55:1-27.

logical Society 54:201-238.
Preucel, R. W. (editor)
1991 Processual and Postprocessual Archaeologies. Occasional Paper No. 10. Center for Archaeological

Jelks, E. B.
1962

The Kyle Site. Archeology Series 5. Department of
Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin.

Investigations, Southern Illinois University at
Carbondale.

Black m (Texas) Archeology 1995
Ricklis, R. A.
1990 A Historical Cultural Ecology of the Karankawan
Indians of the Central Texas Coast: A Case Study in
the Roots of Adaptive Change. Unpublished Ph.D.
Dissertation, Department of Geography, the University of Texas at Austin.
1992

1994

45

Story, D. A.
1993

Alex D. Krieger: 1911-1991. American Antiquity
58(4):614-621.

Taylor, A. J. and C. L. Highley
1995

Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia
Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric Cemetery and Camp-

The Spread of a Late Prehistoric Bison Hunting
Complex: Evidence from the South-Central Coastal
Prairie of Texas. Plains Anthropologist 37(140):261 273.

site in Live Oak County, Texas. Studies in Archeology 20. 2 Vols. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas

Trigger, B. G.

Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell Ridge Site,

1989

41GV66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological

A History of Archaeological Thought. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

Research, Inc., Corpus Christi.
Watson, P. J.
Ricklis, R. A. and M. B. Collins
1994

1991

Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in

A Parochial Primer: The New Dissonance As Seen
from the Midcontinental

The Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County,

United States.

In

Processual and Postprocessual Archaeologies, ed-

Texas. Studies in Archeology 19. Texas Archeo-

ited by R. W. Preucel, pp. 265-274. Occasional Pa-

logical Research Laboratory, The University of

per No. 10. Center for Archaeological Investigations,

Texas at Austin.

Southern Illinois University at Carbondale.

Quigg, J. M. and J. Peck

Weir, F. A.

!995

1976

The Rush Site (41TG346): A Stratified Late Prehis-

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D dis-

toric Locale in Tom Green County, Texas. Techni-

sertation, Department of Anthropology, Washing-

cal Report No. 816C. Mariah Associates, Inc.,

ton State University, Pullman.

Austin.
Wheat, P. and B. Whorton (editors)
Schuldenrein, J.
1995

The Care and Feeding of Archaeologists: A Plea for
Pragmatic Training in the 21st Century. SAA Bulletin 13(3):22-24.

Shafer, H. J.
1973

Lithic Technology at the George C. Davis Site,
Cherokee County, Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, the University of Texas at Austin.

1990

Clues from the Past. Hendrick-Long Publishing Co.,
Dallas.

Paleoindians of Texas:
An Update on the Texas Clovis
Fluted Point Survey
David J. Meltzer and Michael R. Bever

ABSTRACT
Since the initial report of a statewide survey of 205 Texas Clovis fluted points (Meltzer 1986, 1987), an
additional 201 Clovis points have been recorded. These additional records come from 33 counties not previously
represented in the survey; they enhance, but do not appreciably change, the spatial distributional patterns
observed earlier with the smaller sample. The density of these points vary across the state and by region. Most
of these Clovis points occur in surface scatters with archeological materials of later age; many are otherwise
Clovis isolates; a relatively few occur in sites. These contextual patterns vary by region, and suggest differences
in land use. The majority of the points are made of Edwards formation chert; the minority are fashioned of
Alibates agatized dolomite and Tecovas jasper; rare specimens occur made of Dakota quartzite, and a few other
materials. Raw material use varies by region as well. Texas Clovis fluted points vary in their morphology and
along certain dimensions--notably length and width--but that variation is attributable to reworking and
breakage. Other dimensions (basal width and fluting thickness) in contrast are tightly constrained, indicating
considerable standardization in the manufacture of these points, perhaps to fit pre-existing hafts. These and other
morphometric data shed some light on the technology of fluted point manufacture. Most of the Clovis points in
the sample are whole, but over 100 show distinct breakage or reworking patterns, which cluster to a degree by
region, and provide clues to point function and life histories. Data on Texas Clovis fluted points continue to yield
insight into Clovis adaptations.

INTRODUCTION
Some 15 years ago, Story (1981:142) observed
that our views of the Clovis occupation of Texas
were based more on speculation than substance. It
was partly in an effort to put our understanding of
Clovis on firmer ground that Meltzer (1986, 1987,
1989a) subsequently undertook the Texas Clovis
Fluted Point Survey (hereafter, TCFPS), a systematic survey aimed at determining the number, density, distribution, and variability of Clovis fluted
points across the state.
That survey was not the first of its kind. In the
1960s Thomas Hester and in the early 1980s, Elton
Prewitt, each initiated similar efforts; their examination of published and unpublished reports and
collections netted information on some 50 Clovis
points scattered in 31 counties (Meltzer 1987:34),
but unfortunately neither study was published. However, both Hester and Prewitt graciously provided
their results to Meltzer, and his TCFPS built on
their foundation by updating records on all known

and published Clovis fluted point occurrences, and
then by actively seeking data from individuals and
collections (public and private) across the state-much of which came as a result of a questionnaire
sent to the membership of the Texas Archeological
Society (Meltzer 1987:29).
The initial results of the TCFPS were
considerable: 205 Clovis fluted points were recorded
from 95 counties across the state. Those data
provided a measure of the density and distribution
of Clovis points across the state, insight into Clovis
land use, fluted point technology and function, and
some measure of Clovis subsistence, settlement,
and adaptation.
After the initia! results of the TCFPS were
published (Meltzer 1986, 1987), more records of
Texas Clovis fluted points accumulated. A very
brief update was published a few years later (Meltzer
1989a), but nothing has appeared since then, despite the fact that the sample is nearly double what
it was in 1986 (Table t), thanks to the continued
interest and cooperation of individuals across the

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

48

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1. Tally of Texas Clovis fluted points by county, original tally, points added,
and current tally (TCFPS indicates the source of the data was the
Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey. Data from
other sources is listed by reference).
Original
tally

Points
added

Anderson

0

1

1

TCFPS

Andrews

2

1

3

TCFPS

Angelina

1

6

7

Brown 1994; TCFPS

Armstrong

1

0

1

TCFPS

Atascosa

1

7

8

Hester 1974:Figure l j; TCFPS

Bailey

1

0

1

TCFPS

Bandera

1

0

1

TCFPS

Bee

1

0

1

Sellards 1940

County

Bell

(Site[s])

(Gault)

Bexar (41BX52)
Blanco
Borden
Bosque
Bowie
Brazos
Brazoria
Brewster
Briscoe
Brown
Burnet
Calhoun
Callahan
Cameron
Camp
Cass
Cherokee
Coke
Comal
Comanche
Concho
Cooke
Coryell
Crosby
Da!lam
Dallas
Dawson
Deaf Smith
Denton (Lewisville,
Aubrey)
DeWitt
Dimmit
Donley

Current
tally

Reference

1

2

3

Collins et al. 1991, 1992; TCFPS

2

1

1
1

0

3
1

Henderson and Goode 1991; TCFPS
Orchard & Campbell 1954; TCFPS

0

1

TCFPS

1
0
1
0

0
1
1
1
1
8
1
1
1
0
0
0

1
1
2
1
3
8
5
1
3
1
1
1
1
1
4
1
7
1
1
4
12
3

TCFPS
Story 1990:Table 44:8
TCFPS
Chandler and Rogers 1995
Enlow & Campbell 1955; Hester n.d.; TCFPS

6

Crook & Harris 1955; Suhm and Jelks 1962:Plate

2
0
4
0
2
1
1
1
0
1
2
0
2
1
1
0
12
3
3
0
1
1
1
6
0

1
0
2
1
5
0
0
4
0
0
3

6
0
3

4

0
0
1

6
1

6
1

1

TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
Suhm and Jelks 1962:Plate 89A, G; Hester 1988
TCFPS
Hester n.d.
TCFPS
TCFPS
Hester n.d.; TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
EHA 1981
Jensen 1968
TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
89C; TCFPS
TCFPS
Suhm and Jelks 1962:Plate 89C
Crook and Harris 1957; Ferring 1990; TCFPS
Prewitt unpublished
Hester n.d., 1974:Figure la, c, f, g
TCFPS

Meltzer and Bever u Paleoindians of Texas
Table 1 (Continued)

Original
tally

Points
added

Current
tally

Duval
Ellis
E1 Paso
Erath
Fails
Fayette
Floyd
Foard
Gaines
Galveston
Garza
Gonzales
Gray
Grayson
Hall
Hamilton
Harris

1
2
0
3
0
3
1
1
16
0
1
1
2
1
0
1
2

0

1
3

Hester n.d., 1974:Figure lb
TCFPS

1
5
2

TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS

3
1

Meier and Hester 1972, 1976; Wilson 1979
TCFPS
Etchieson et al. t979
TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
Hester n.d.

Harrison
Hartley
Hays
Henderson
Hill
Hockley (Poverty Hill)
Hood
Howard
Hunt
Jasper
Jefferson
Johnson
Jones
Kaufman
Kendall
Kerr
Kimble
Lamar
Lampasas
Live Oak
Lubbock (Lubbock Lake)
Marion
Martin
McLennan
McMullen
Medina
Midland
Milam
Mills

5
0
4
1
2
1
1
3
0
2
10
2
1
0
1
1
0
2
0
0
1
4
2
3
2
1
5
0
0

County (Site[s])

1
1
2
2
0
0
0
7
1
0
0
0
0
1
2
4

1
1
1
3
4
1
0
1
1
0
60
0
0
1
2
!
!
2
1
1
1
0
0

1
23
1
1
1
2
1
1
3
6

6
1
5
4
6
2
1
4
1
2
70
2
1
1
3
2
1
4
1
1
2
4
2

Reference

TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS; Hester 1980; Patterson 1986; Patterson
etal. 1992a, 1992b; Suhm & Jelks 1962:Plate 89B;
Wheat !953
Hayner 1955, Hester n.d.; TCFPS
TCFPS
Hester n.d.; Takac 1991; TCFPS
Story 1990:Table 44:29; TCFPS
TCFPS
Walter 1990; TCFPS
Skinner and Rash 1969
TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
Long 1977; Turner and Tanner 1994; TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
Chandler 1983; TCFPS
TCFPS; Saner 1995
TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
House 1974
Johnson 1983; TCFPS
Hayner 1955; Story 1990:Table 44:20; TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
Cooper 1974; Kelly 1983; TCFPS

0
1
2

3
3
3

TCFPS

0

5
1
1

TCFPS
TCFPS

1
1

TCFPS

49

50

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1 (Continued)

County

(Site[s])

Original
tally

Points
added

1
0

0

1

4

4

6
1
2

0
2
0

6
3
2

2

0
0
0
0

2

Montague
Montgomery
Moore
Navarro
Nolan
Oldham
Panola
Parker
Pecos
Polk
Potter
Red River
Roberts (Miami)
Robertson
Runnels
San Augustine
San Patricio
San Saba
Schleicher
Shackleford
Starr
Swisher
Taylor
(McLean, Yellow Hawk)
Terry
Titus
Tom Green
Travis
Tyler
Uvalde (Kincaid)
Val Verde
Van Zandt
Victoria
Ward
Webb
Williamson
(Wilson-Leonard)
Wilson
Winkler
Wise
Wood
Yoakum
Zavala
Unknown
Totals

1
1
1
0
0

Current
tally

Reference
TCFPS
Chandler and Rogers 1995
TCFPS
Story 1990:Table 44:33; TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS

1
1
1
1
3
1
3
1
3
2
2
1
2
1
1
1
6

Scurlock and Davis 1962
TCFPS
Hester n.d.
TCFPS

4
1
1
0
0
6
0
0
0
0

4
2
1
4
1
7
1
2

1
0

1
2

TCFPS
Story 1990:Table 44:33; TCFPS
TCFPS
Alexander 1963; Hester n.d.
Suhm and Jelks 1962:Plate 89E
Hester n.d.; Collins et al. 1989
Greer 1968
Johnson 1961
Hester 1974:Figure li
TCFPS
Mitchell and Winsch 1974
Collins et al. 1993; Hays 1982; TCFPS

0

1

2
0
0

0
1
2

1
2

1
0

1
2
1
2
2

1

0

1

205

201

406

0
3
1
2
1
2
0
2
1
1
1
5
0
1
0
4
1
1
1
2
1
3
0
2

1
3
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1

1
3

2

TCFPS
Skinner and Rash 1969
Sellards 1952; Holliday et al. 1994
TCFPS
EHA 1981; TCFPS
Brown 1994; TCFPS
Chandler 1982; Hester 1980
TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
Weir 1956
TCFPS
Mallouf 1989; Ray 1930; Sellards 1952; TCFPS

TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
Story 1990:Table 44:19
TCFPS
Hester 1974:Figure ld, e
TCFPS

Note: The designation of a site does not indicate all points in that county were found at that site.

Meltzer and Bever n Paleoindians of Texas
state. Now, as nearly a decade has passed since the
initial report was published, it is time to present a
detailed update of the TCFPS.
As before, this discussion will cover several
areas: the spatial distribution of Texas Clovis fluted
points; patterns in raw material use; their technology, form, and function; and what these data reveal
of Clovis adaptations and land use patterns. In addition, now that a survey of Texas Folsom points
has appeared (Largent et al. 1991; Largent 1995),
we will take the opportunity to examine to what
degree, if any, the distribution and patterning of
Clovis and Folsom differed, and what changes that
might reveal in Paleoindian adaptive strategies.

PARAMETERS OF THE TCFPS DATA
Boundaries, sources, and analytical units
We open with the caveat--the reminder, really--that there is an element of arbitrariness in
examining the distribution of fluted points within
the state of Texas. The state’s borders are not entirely "natural." And even those portions that are
(the Red River on the north, the Sabine River on the
east, and the Rio Grande on the south) were unlikely
to have been significant barriers to Clovis huntergatherers, wide-ranging and mobile as they were.
Complicating the picture further is the great
diversity of environments across the state, not all of
which are contained within the state (in effect, several ecological zones intersect, but are not isomorphic with, the boundaries of Texas). We now know
not all Clovis was alike: it varied, and not just on a
continental scale, but regionally as well (Meltzer
1993a). Moreover, because Clovis land use was
likely tied to particular ecological niches (and not,
obviously, to modern state lines), groups occupying those niches might on the face of it be expected
to have very different adaptive strategies than those
in other niches.
In effect, we must anticipate the possibility that
not all Texas Clovis points in all regions of the state
!ook alike or were alike. The Clovis record on, say,
the High Plains of Texas almost surely had more in
common with Clovis on the High Plains generally,
than with Clovis in the East Texas forests. Such
would be true of any state in North America, but
seems especially true of one as large and varied as
Texas. A pan-regional approach is clearly needed to
truly understand the potential Clovis Paleoindian
occupations of Texas, but so far comparable data

51

are not readily available for the adjoining states and
regions (they are starting to become available
[Faught et al. 1994; Hofman and Wyckoff 1991]).
So we start with Texas, but within the state also
recognize, and use, the major geographical provinces of the state: the Plains/Panhandle, North Central, East, Coast, Southwest, Trans-Pecos, and
Central Texas regions. This partitioning follows
Suhm et al. (1954), with modifications from
Arbingast et al. (1976) and Brown et al. (1982), and
is in keeping with the divisions used in the original
report and with other studies (e.g., Largent et al.
1991; Largent 1995). However, in order to incorporate site distributional data from Biesaart et al.
(1985), their finer-scale regional divisions will also
on occasion be used (as noted below).
The bulk of the data in the TCFPS comes
from individual and institutional collections; the
remainder is from published sources. In all
instances, a form (Appendix A) was used to record
information on fluted point size and shape and
other attributes that might inform on point function,
technology, and style (Figure 1). Data was also
recorded on point location, the context in which it
was found (and what kinds of archeological
material of what ages was found with it), and the
raw material of which it was made. As before,
many of those forms were completed with the help
and cooperation of scores of interested individuals
(see Acknowledgments).
In some cases, particularly among the published sources, the morphological, metrical, and
technological data sought for this analysis were not
available, and hence it might have only been possible to record, for instance, that a fluted point was
present in a particular county, and little beyond
that. Still, even knowing fluted points were present
in a county is very useful for helping fill in the
statewide distribution map. It means, of course, we
know of more fluted point occurrences than we
have specific attribute data for those points.
The study of Clovis point distribution is based
largely on the presence and/or number of points by
county. The county serves as the basic mapping
unit since it is almost always known and recorded;
often, more precise location information is unavailable or unknown. Because the county is the most
common spatial denominator used in recording
Clovis finds, using it ensures that uneven details in
available locational data do not unduly influence
the analysis (Mettzer 1987:31). Counties also have
the virtue of being easily mapped, clustered into

52

Texas Archeological Society

largely unchanged (as we discuss in detail
below). Such congruence would be unlikely
were this sample unrepresentative of the
underlying population of Texas Clovis
points.
We would hasten to add, however, there
is one obvious bias in the sample, in that it
has disproportionately more complete
points and point bases than point tips. This
comes as little surprise: Clovis point tips,
as well as medial blade fragments or other
broken point sections lacking the diagnostic flute scars or the other distinctive Clovis
attributes (Bradley 1993:253-254), will not
~
always be recognized as having come from
Clovis fluted points. While this bias may
~
~
reduce the overall total of recorded Clovis
points, and give a somewhat skewed pic~
ture of morphometric and breakage pat¯~
terns in those points, it should not otherwise
unduly influence the analysis. Except, perBasal deplh
haps, in one regard: if it appears that point
attrition and breakage is more frequent in
certain regions of the state, it may be that
Basal width
the tendency to collect and record whole
points could underestimate the number of
points from that region.
Figure 1. Schematic diagram showing attributes recorded on Texas
Another matter of potential bias is
Clovis fluted points.
whether the spatial distribution of these
points provides a reliable glimpse into
larger geographic regions, and, given the statewide
Clovis land use, as opposed to revealing modern
scale of this study, can be used without sacrificing
surveying and collecting patterns. In effect, were
much information. Obviously, were this a study of
areas well represented by Clovis points intensively
a smaller area (the distribution of fluted points along
occupied by Clovis groups or have they just been
Blackwater Draw, say, or in the Pedernales River
more intensively surveyed by archeologists (and
valley), knowing only that points were found in a
the reverse: does Clovis point scarcity indicate a
particular county would not be as informative as
scarcity of Clovis activity or a lack of archeological
knowing where within that county they occurred.
survey)? Certainly archeological visibility varies
But since we are interested in the distribution of
across the state, as does the degree of archeological
fluted points across the state, the county is a useful
scrutiny of the various regions (Meltzer 1987:30).
spatial unit.
Obviously, such matters will have to be considered
(and will be considered below) in discussing spePotential biases
cific regions, especially where Clovis points are
rare or altogether absent.
There are several potential biases regarding
Even so, it seems reasonable to suppose that,
this data set (see also Meltzer 1987:29-31, 36-40).
in general, the presence of Clovis points across the
For one, to what degree do these data accurately
reflect the range and variation of Texas Clovis
state is not simply a function of the distribution of
points? In general, quite accurately. We infer this is
collectors, either TAS members or the general populace. Previously, it was shown there was no statistiso because, despite the near-doubling of the numcally significant correlation between numbers of
ber of points in the TCFPS sample, the overall
Clovis points and TAS members per county: there
statistical patterns in size, shape, and other characwere counties with large numbers of fluted points
teristics evident in the original TCFPS data remain
Maximum width

Maximum
lhickness

Meltzer and Bever w Paleoindians of Texas

but few TAS members and vice versa (Meltzer
1987:37-38). Since then, new Clovis finds and
changes in TAS membership have produced different tallies of each category, but not enough to bring
about a correlation between the two. Moreover,
there is not a significant correlation between numbers of Clovis points and people per county. 1 Whatever the distribution of Clovis points may reflect, it
is not merely an artifact of the present distribution
of people in Texas. We will comment on other
matters of potential bias below.

SPATIAL PATTERNS IN TEXAS CLOVIS
FLUTED POINT DISTRIBUTIONS

Current Totals and Changes since 1986
by County and Region
We have now recorded 406 Clovis fluted points
for the state of Texas (see Table 1), representing
nearly a two-fold increase over the 205 points reported in the original TCFPS (Meltzer 1987:Table
1). The additional 201 Clovis points come from 70
counties, 33 of which were not represented in the
original survey. Presently, Clovis points are known
from 128 of Texas’ 254 counties (Figure 2; previously, only 95 counties were represented).

Figure 2. Occurrence of Texas Clovis fluted points by
county.

53

Almost 30 percent (60/201) of the increase in
the number of fluted points between 1986 and 1995
comes from the McFaddin Beach locality in Jefferson
County on the central Gulf Coast. McFaddin Beach
is a lengthy (ca. 35 km) stretch of the central Gulf
Coast regularly littered by Clovis points and Pleistocene fossils that have washed ashore over decades
from a source or sources apparently near the present
coastline (but which during the Pleistocene were
inland areas some 80 km from the coast [Long 1977;
Turner and Tanner 1994:323]). This locality has
lately been the subject of considerable interest and
yield (Hester et al. 1992), and at present 70 Clovis
points are known from it (Turner and Tanner
1994:324). This is a seven-fold increase over the
previous total of 10 (Meltzer 1987:Table 1), and an
increase far larger in relative and absolute terms
than in any other county.
Atascosa, Briscoe, and Dawson counties had
comparable relative increases, however. In fact, excluding the Jefferson County total, the average gain
per county between 1986 and 1995 was 1.11; including Jefferson County, the average gain per
county over that same period is 1.57.
In the current TCFPS sample, the average number of points per county is 3.16 (data from Table 1).
For reasons just noted, and as was evident in the
original TCFPS report (Meltzer 1987:36), using an
average value is somewhat misleading, inflated as
it is by the high numbers of points in just a few
counties. As can be seen in Table 2, the modal
distribution--the number of Clovis fluted points by
county--is more meaningful, revealing as it does
that the majority of Texas counties have just one or
two Clovis points.
The changes in county tallies between the 1986
and 1995 TCFPS samples are mirrored in changes
in point frequencies in the larger geographical regions (Table 3). All seven of those regions showed
an increase in the number of Clovis points between
1986 and 1995. However, in most regions the increase, although substantial, generally resulted in
no more than a doubling of the recorded occurrences of Clovis points.
Naturally, in the Coast region the increase from
1986 to 1995 was considerably greater (over three
times larger than in any other region). Again, this
spike is attributable to the singular contribution of

IThe analysis used ! 990 county population data provided in Kingston ( 1993:331-336). Because these data are on a ratio scale
it was possible to derive a Pearson’s correlation coefficient between the numbers of Clovis points and Log ~o population, and the
resulting value was. 1648, with a significance of .051.

54

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2. Modal distribution of Clovis fluted points by county, 1995
(total number of counties with occurrences = 124)
Number of occurrences of Clovis points

Number of counties

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

>10

59

21

18

10

4

8

3

2

3

McFaddin Beach, which makes it appear there was
a more extensive Clovis record in this region than
actually exists.
The Regional Density of Clovis Points
Just how extensive that effect is can be seen
more clearly in the density of points in this and the
other regions. The overall density of Clovis fluted
points across the state is just over 15 per 10,000
square miles (Table 4). In four of the separate regions of the state, the Plains/Panhandle, East
Texas, Southwest Texas, and Central Texas, density values are roughly comparable, ranging from
12-17 points per 10,000 mi2 (Table 4). In two regions-North Central Texas and the Trans-Pecos-the densities of Clovis materials are considerably
lower, while in the Texas Coast densities are con-

siderably higher (39 points per 10,000 mi2), for
reasons already detailed.
To assess whether Clovis points are distributed evenly among the regions, we can calculate
the degree of difference between the actual number
of points in a given region and the number of points
expected in that region were that number proportional to the region’s area (that is, test the proposition that larger regions have more points, and
smaller regions, fewer points [see Largent et al.
1991:Table 4]). Expected frequencies are derived
by multiplying each region’s percentage of the
state’s total area with the total number of points.
Thus, as the Plains/Panhandle represents 25 percent of the total area of the state of Texas, it is
expected to have 25 percent of the total number of
the state’s Clovis fluted points (in this case, roughly
100 points [0.25 x 406 points]).

Table 3. Tally of Texas Clovis fluted points by region, 1986 and 1995
Number of Clovis points
Region

Original (1986) tally

Current (1995) tally

Percent increase
1986 to 1995

1

Plains/Panhandle

73

109

49.3%

2

North Central

12

21

75.0%

3

East

22

47

113.6%

4

Coast

19

86

352.6%

5

Southwest

13

27

107.7%

6

Trans-Pecos

4

6

50.0%

7

Central

61

109

78.6%

1

1

205

406

Unknown

-0-

98.0%

Meltzer and Bever ~ Paleoindians of Texas

55

Table 4. Distribution and density of Clovis fluted points by region against model of expected
point frequency by area (data on area from Arbingast et al. 1976:78-79)

Region

1 Plains/Panhandle

No. of
points

Area in
mi2

Density

% total

10,000mi2

area

16.67

.249

100.84

1.054

Expected
no. points~

Standard
residuals

109

65,388

2 North Central

21

24,719

8.49

.094

38.07

-2.662

3 East

47

26,765

17.56

.102

41.31

0.105

4 Coast

86

21,527

39.94

.082

33.21

9.052

5 Southwest

27

21,683

12.45

.083

33.62

-0.991

6 Trans-Pecos
7 Central

Tota!

6

34,797

1.72

.133

53.87

-6.412

109

67,235

16.21

.256

103.68

0.564

405

262,114

15.45

.999

404.60

Chi square = 132.5665, df = 6, significant at 0.0000
Obtained by multiplying the regional percent-of the total area by the total number of points (405) from all the known regions

The calculated chi-square2 statistic in Table 4
indicates the expected and observed values are
significantly different, showing that indeed fluted
point densities across the state are not uniform. The
standardized residuals provide a measure of just
how far the observed and expected values diverge
from each other. In some regions of the state, most
especially the Coast, the density of fluted points is
far higher than expected for a region of that size.

Statewide Frequency Distribution
of Clovis Fluted Points
Not surprisingly, then, the statewide map of
the frequency of Clovis fluted points by county
(Figure 3) is rather uneven: just as it was in 1986
(compare Figure 3 here with Figure 2 in Meltzer
[1987]). The 1986 and 1995 maps are also somewhat alike, largely because, as noted, Clovis points

added to the TCFPS since 1986 were distributed
across the state roughly proportional to their abundance in the original sample (with the exceptions
noted). Given this, it is appropriate to frame our
discussion in terms of the six broad spatial patterns
noted previously (Meltzer 1987:41-42), to assess
whether and how those have changed, remained the
same, or been enhanced by the additional data.
(1) There is an apparent concentration of
Clovis points in the Plains/Panhandle region,
and specifically in the High Plains region
(Meltzer 1987:41). In the current TCFPS map,
there is still a high frequency of Clovis points on
the High Plains. Indeed, eight of the High Plains
counties that did not previously have records of
Clovis points have them now. Overall, adjusting for
the McFaddin Beach Effect, the Plains has the
greatest density of Clovis material of any area of

z The chi-square statistic measures the degree of difference between an observed and an expected value. In the case of this 1
x 7 cell table, the expected values are derived from data beyond that contained in the table itself (as noted in the text). More
typically, and this is true of the 2 x 2 and larger (r x c) tables below, expected values are derived by multiplying row and column
totals, then dividing the product by the overall total. This provides a probabilistic "best estimate" of the number that ought to be
in that particular cell, based on the data within the table. The chi-square statistic then measures the magnitude of the difference
between the observed and expected values, and whether that difference is more than would be expected by chance (Everitt
1977:7).

56

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Frequency map of Texas Clovis fluted points by county. The spikes on the map
represent the number of points recorded per county, except in the case of Jefferson County (the
high spike on the Texas Gulf Coast). Were the 70 Clovis points from Jefferson County plotted,
the resulting peak would proportionately reduce all the other county peaks, thus making the
statewide patterns difficult to discern. For this figure, then, the Jefferson County total was
arbitrarily set at 25. All other values represent the actual recorded totals.

the state (see Table 4).
The high frequency of Clovis material on the
Plains was earlier attributed to brisk archeological
attention (owing to the early recognition of several
important Clovis sites on this landscape), and to the
high surface visibility of archeological remains
(owing to this being a largely treeless landscape
where current land use practices regularly expose
subsurface archeological material). It seems just as
likely, however, that the abundance of Clovis age
material here is no sampling fluke: this area was
intensely occupied by Clovis groups. The Plains in
Late Pleistocene times overall was wetter and cooler
than today (effective precipitation was higher,
whether because of increased precipitation,
decreased evaporation, changes in seasonality or

some combination thereof is unknown), and mantled
by grasses, composites, chenopods, as well as some
artemisia (sage) and Ephedra (Mormon tea) in the
uplands, and open forest or wooded parkland in
low-lying and wetter areas (Bryant and Holloway
1985). Antelope and bison grazed the landscape
alongside the occasional mammoth. The abundant
freshwater lakes that dotted the landscape (Sabin
and Holliday 1995), and the spring-fed ponds (like
the Clovis type site and Lubbock Lake), would
have been a prime attraction to human foragers,
and many Clovis points are found alongside these
now dry features (Meltzer, unpublished). Haynes
(1991) raises the possibility these features may also
have been dry in Clovis times--that there was a
Clovis-age drought. However, Holliday’ s extensive

Meltzer and Bever ~ Paleoindians of Texas
sediment coting and stratigraphic study on the High
Plains of West Texas and eastern New Mexico has
not found evidence to support the hypothesis of a
Clovis drought (Holliday 1995). Regardless, the
conclusion that Clovis groups more intensely
occupied this area, as opposed to other regions of
the state, must remain tentative until such time as
those other regions have been as thoroughly
searched for Clovis remains.
2) There is a relative absence of Clovis
points on the Lower or Rolling Plains (Brown
et al. 1982), with Clovis points scarce in a 60
mile wide and nearly 400 mile long north-south
swath just to the east and down off of the Llano
Estacado or High Plains (Meltzer 1987:41). Despite the large increase in the TCFPS sample since
the original survey, the Rolling Plains remains an
archeological "empty corridor," at least in regard
to Clovis remains (for that matter, Folsom points
occur in relatively fewer numbers in this region as
well [Largent et al. 1991:324]). There may be several reasons for this. As earlier suggested (Meltzer
1987:43), aeolian and fluvial deposition off the
High Plains deeply buried, and thus rendered invisible, any Late Pleistocene surfaces and associated archeological records in this region, though
further work was needed on surface ages and the
amount of deposition in this region. Several papers
have since appeared that corroborate this suggestion (Blum et al. 1992; Blum and Valastro 1992;
Ferring 1995a). A particularly striking illustration
of the phenomenon is Baumgardner’s report of a
surface just 2000 years old buried beneath seven
meters of sediment on the Rolling Plains
(Baumgardner 1986:20). Any Paleoindian-age occupational surfaces below such thick deposits will
not be readily visible archeologically (Meltzer
1987:43), assuming, that is, Paleoindian occupations preserve. The uplands and drainages of the
Rolling Plains have also been subject (especially
in certain settings) to high erosion and geomolphic
removal (Blum et al. 1992:362), which, with the
deep burial of preserved Clovis age surfaces, conspire to obscure if not destroy the archeological
record (Ferring 1995a; Holliday, 1995 personal
communication).
But the scarcity of Paleoindian material in this
region may not be wholly attributable to natural
formation processes preventing our access to the
archeological record. As Gustavson has observed,
the water in this region is only marginally potable:

57

the rivers that traverse the area carry large amounts
of salt (dissolved from Permian halite beds), and
have since long before Clovis groups arrived
(Gustavson et al. 1980:3-9, 33-35). The extremely
poor quality of the water may have influenced, if
not discouraged Clovis occupation in so far as good
water, and animals, may have been more accessible
elsewhere.
Still, current land use practices in the Rolling
Plains (large and relatively inaccessible ranches covered with plains and mesquite savanna) do not provide good exposures of Late Pleistocene surfaces
or opportunities for survey. Hence, it would be
premature to conclude Clovis groups did not occupy this area. Until such time as deep testing shows
the deeply buffed Pleistocene surfaces lack Clovis
remains, it is better to conclude on the side of
cautzion that this empty corridor in the Clovis record
results from inadequate exposures or insufficient
samples of surfaces of the proper age.
3) The Trans-Pecos region has the lowest
abundance and density of Clovis points in the
state (Meltzer 1987:42). That was true in 1986, and
it remains so today. Indeed, as evident in Table 4,
the density of fluted points in the Trans-Pecos is far
lower than would be expected for a region that size.
Again, the question of sampling adequacy arises:
will the region appear to have been peopled by
Clovis groups, once it has been thoroughly peopled
by archeologists? That’s a reasonable possibility,
in part because the Big Bend National Park and the
large size of ranches in the area have tended to
restrict access to the area.
Even so, there was an extensive surface survey of a 3500 km2 area of the Trans-Pecos around
Van Horn by Hedrick, which included an examination of several private projectile point collections, and the only Paleoindian material recorded
was a single Folsom point (Hedrick 1989:149). No
Clovis remains were noted (see also Collins 1976;
Mallouf 1981, 1985); later Paleoindian occupations are also only "scattered thinly" throughout
the region (Mallouf 1985:100). For that matter,
Clovis remains are equally rare in the Mexican
states of Chihuahua and Coahuila south of the international border (MacNeish and Nelken-Terner
1983). Thus, it may be the scarcity of Clovis remains in the Trans-Pecos is real, possibly a result
of harsh environmental circumstances (Mallouf
1985; Meltzer 1987:44). In this regard, it would be
useful to know whether there is evidence in this

58

Texas Archeological Society

region for Haynes’ posited Clovis-age drought
(Haynes 1991).
4) Clovis points occur with some frequency
and are rather evenly distributed in a slightly
elliptical trend of contiguous counties through
Central Texas, beginning in Uvalde County in
the southwest, and extending up to Bell county
in Central Texas (Meltzer 1987:42). This distributional pattern remains largely unchanged with the
presently available data. If anything, the arc now
extends farther to the north. For most of its length,
that elliptical distribution conforms to the eastern
edge of the Edwards Plateau (the Balcones Fault
line), along which were freshwater springs and extensive outcrops of Cretaceous age, chert-bearing,
limestone of the Fredericksburg (Edwards) Group.
These resources were likely a prime attraction to
Clovis groups and, as important, the exploitation of
the chert sources resulted in a dense and wellmarked archeological record (Meltzer 1987:44).
5) Clovis points appear, at first glance, to be
relatively scarce in the Coastal region; however,
there are concentrations of this material, and
some apparent areas of high versus low densities
of point materials (Meltzer 1987:42). That observation is cola’oborated statistically: analysis of residuals in a plot of Clovis points by Paleoindian
sites indicates there are significantly more isolates
in this region than would be expected.
The Clovis points from Southeast Texas
nearly all occur as surface finds along the Gulf
Coast shoreline (but mostly on McFaddin Beach).
At the time of the Clovis occupation, sea levels
were still lower than at present (although by then,
post-Pleistocene sea level rise had begun), the coast
was under what is now Gulf waters, and McFaddin
Beach was well inland. The materials that wash
ashore on McFaddin Beach today are from nowsubmerged source(s) on the continental shelf,
which in Clovis times were coastal plain or downstream river drainages (Meltzer 1987:35; Hester et
al. 1992; Turner and Tanner 1994). Since
McFaddin Beach is a secondary deposit of material washing ashore, and not the primary source of
the material, its point tally may underrepresent the
offshore record, in so far as some of the Clovis
points from the offshore source(s) almost certainly
have failed to make it to shore.
It may be the extraordinarily high numbers of
Clovis points from McFaddin Beach derive from
no more than a single, rich Clovis site or cache

offshore. On the face of it, however, several sources
would seem more likely, given the variation evident
in the morphology of these points; perhaps some of
the apparent clusters of a few, highly similar points
found close to one another (Turner and Tanner
1994:324) represent a single source. As to the nature
of the source, whether a camp site, kill site, or
cache, little can be said. It is perhaps worth noting
that the few known Clovis caches tend to comprise
not just finished points, but a wide technological
range of forms from large preforms down to points
(e.g., Frison 1991). Ultimately, determining the
extent and nature of the McFaddin Beach source
will have to wait more extensive work, possibly
including underwater survey (geophysical sounding
techniques might prove useful here). McFaddin
Beach aside, Patterson (1993:262) notes that Clovis
materials are relatively rare in this region.
6) There is an apparent abundance of Clovis
points recorded from East Texas (Meltzer
1987:42). In the earlier TCFPS, the abundance of
Clovis points from East and Northeast Texas was
referred to as "apparent" in light of the fact that
two-thirds of the recorded points had only minimal
documentation, and there seemed reason to doubt
that all the forms said to be Clovis were Clovis
(Meltzer 1987:46). It was suggested then the data
ought to be used with caution, until such time as
further work in the region corroborated the apparently high numbers of Clovis points.
That has now happened: several reports (Brown
1994; Perttula 1989; Story 1990) document in detail the presence and distribution of Clovis groups
in the region. That distribution is concentrated along
and near the Red River and in the Upper Trinity
drainage, as well as the North and South Sulphur
drainages (Perttula 1989:20; Story 1990:Figure 26).
The distribution may in part be attributable to the
active collecting of avocational groups (Perttula
1989:19; Story 1990:178), and to deep incision of
(and exposure of Pleistocene age deposits in) the
Sulphur River channel since the 1930s (Ferring,
personal communication, 1995). Because Clovisage surfaces in these large river valleys are now
deeply buried or removed by erosion, the Clovis
material tends to occur as isolates (rather than sites)
in upland and tributary settings (Perttula 1989:20;
Story 1990:182).
Both Story (1990:182) and Perttula (1989:21)
see Clovis groups in this region as having a broadbased diet, and foraging widely over this forested

MeItzer and Bever M Paleoindians of Texas

area. There is tantalizing, but unfortunately not well
documented, evidence that the Clovis point from
the multi-component Murphey site (Marion County,
Texas) was associated with mastodon bones (Story
1990:185). If that was the case, it would make this
locality one of the few in all of North America in
which Clovis was associated with mastodon (as
opposed to mammoth).
Moving slightly west into North Central Texas,
the Aubrey Clovis site (Ferring 1989, 1990;
Humphrey and Ferring 1994)--along with the
Lewisville site (Crook and Harris 1957, 1958;
Stanford et al. 1995)--are now filling in vital gaps
in the Clovis occupation of an area, an occupation
that is otherwise not well represented in the TCFPS.
The scarcity of Clovis age material in this area, as
in others, may be attributable to geologic processes
obscuring the archeological record, rather than an
absence of Clovis occupations.

Distribution of Clovis
and Folsom in Texas

Clovis, Folsom, and later Paleoindian occupations were traditionally thought to be similarly
adapted, and represented a continuous tradition of
big-game hunting that began with a focus on the
Pleistocene megafauna (mammoth and mastodon)
in Clovis times, and shifted to bison in Folsom and
later periods. In recent years, however, it has become clear the adaptive picture is far more complex, and that Clovis adaptations not only varied
across their range, but perhaps differed from those
of the Paleoindians who followed (Meltzer 1993a,
1993b).
Moreover, there is ample reason to doubt
Clovis groups were big-game hunters (of mastodon
or mammoth). More likely, they were generalized
hunter-gatherers who occasionally pursued biggame, but more often exploited smaller, less risky
prey. Like turtles. Turtle remains (and other small
game) appear with surprising regularity and abundance in Clovis sites (Meltzer 1993b), including
several in Texas such as Lewisville (Crook and
Harris !958; Stanford et al. 1995) and Aubrey
(Ferring 1990, 1995b). Our romantic image of specialized Clovis hunters moving in for the kill on a
trumpeting, rearing mammoth, may have to be replaced by one of Clovis foragers roasting turtles on
the half-shell, after a more leisurely and far less
dangerous hunt.

59

In contrast to Clovis, Folsom and later
Paleoindians (especially those on the Plains), were
more specialized hunter-gatherers, focusing on
bison, although theirs was not wholly a bison-diet
(see Hofman 1996). Given that contrast in
adaptation and the differences in land use that ought
to follow from that contrast, we would not expect a
strong correlation in the distribution of Clovis and
later Paleoindian localities. By and large, that proves
to be the case. Table 5 shows the correlation
between the numbers of Clovis and Folsom
occurrences, all Paleoindian sites, and all archeological sites (data on Folsom occurrences are from
Largent et al. [1991:Table 1]; data on Paleoindian
and all sites are from Biesaart et al. [1985]).
These results indicate that the distribution by
county of Clovis points is unrelated to the distribution of later Paleoindian sites: there is no correlation between the two (Spearman’s rho, r~ =. 1508,
significance = .074, and even less between Clovis
points and all archeological sites). However, there
was a strong correlation between the number of
Paleoindian sites and the total number of sites by
county (1~ = .6621, significance = .000). Granting
biases in the collection and reporting of Clovis
points versus Paleoindian sites, one might attribute
the lack of correlation between the two to differential intensity of land use on the part of Clovis groups
(Meltzer 1987:36).
Yet, it is important to note this lack of correlation is partly an artifact of scale. Reanalysis of the
data using fewer and larger spatial units, namely the
environmental and geographic regions defined by
Biesaart et al. (1985:9, and Figure 15), shows there
is a significant correlation between the number of
Clovis isolates and Paleoindian sites by such regions (~ = .6999, significance = .008). This means,
in effect, that at a coarser spatial scale the Paleoindian
archeological record (and this includes Clovis) is
more generally homogeneous, as perhaps might be
expected given regions are larger and more
archeologically meaningful units than counties. From
this one might speculate that intra-state, inter-regional Paleoindian land use patterns were similar.
Taking the analysis a step further, what of the
relationship between Clovis and Folsom? After examining the correlation of Folsom localities with
severa! variables (including county population, area,
number of TAS members, and number of available
publications), Largent et al. (1991:330) conclude
the "best way to predict Folsom localities is to

60

Texas Archeological Society

Table 5. Spearman (rS) rank order correlations of Clovis and later Paleoindian materials,
by county and region.
a) By county

Clovis
points

Folsom points

-.0445
sig = .600

Folsom
points

Paleoindian
sites

.1508

.2870

sig = .074

sig = .001

.1219
sig =. 150

.0214
sig = .801

.6621
sig = .000

b) By region~

Clovis
points

Folsom
points

Paleoindian
sites

Folsom points

.3269
sig = .276

Paleoindian sites

All sites

Paleoindian sites

All sites

.6999

.6138

sig = .008

sig = .026

.4972

.1515

.5447~

sig = .084

sig = .621

sig = .054

Region designations follow Biesaart et al. 1985

know the number of Clovis points in a county."
Relative to the other measures they included in
their analysis, this may be so.
Yet, analyzing the correlation between Clovis
and Folsom points, using the updated TCFPS data,
reveals the relationship is, at best, a very weak one
(r~ = -.0445, significance = .622; the correlation
measured by Kendall’s Tau-B [to allow comparison with Largent et al.’s 1991 results] is -.0375,
significance = .593). In fact, unlike the Clovis distribution, the Folsom data do correlate, albeit
weakly, with the number of Paleoindian sites per
county (Table 5). Our analysis differs somewhat
from that of Largent et al. (1991), in so far as we
examined the correlation between the number of
Clovis and Folsom points per county, not the number of localities per county (as was apparently done
by Largent et al. 1991). Still, since there is a very
strong correlation between Folsom points and
Folsom localities by county (r~ = .9648, signifi-

cance = .000), the difference between our approaches may be more apparent than real (cf.
Largent et al. 1991:328). It seems, then, the Clovis
and Folsom records are not significantly alike, at
least in their frequency and spatial patterning.

THE ARCHEOLOGICAL CONTEXT OF
TEXAS CLOVIS FLUTED POINTS
Clovis fluted points recorded by the TCFPS
were found in several contexts (Table 6): as isolated
surface occurrences (isolates); in well defined (and
perhaps sealed) Clovis site contexts; and, in the
clear majority of those where the context was
known, in surface scatters amidst archeological
material of many different types and ages, including
Clovis, other Paleoindian, Archaic, Late Prehistoric,
and even Historic material. Note that Table 6 shows
the number of individual points as well as number

Meltzer and Bever ~ Paleoindians of Texas
of localities within which those points occur (the
latter is included to offset the statistical effects of a
single locality having an inordinate number of
points, and will always be equal to or less than the
number of points). For nearly a third of the points,
the context was unknown, or at least insufficient
information was provided to make a secure
judgment, and we always preferred to err on the
side of caution, perhaps unduly so: TCFPS
respondents generally noted if other material was
present with a fluted point; the absence of such a
note provides some warrant to speculate that many
"unknown" points are, therefore, isolates. We did
not assume so in our analysis, however.
Them are a number of observations that might
be made of these data. For one, they highlight the
fact that discrete and well-defined Clovis sites are
rare, a point noted previously (Meltzer 1987:2728), and also observed in later Paleoindian
occupations elsewhere (e.g., Hofman 1996). Even
counting the surprising number of sites discovered
or reported since the initial TCFPS, notably Aubrey
(Ferring 1989, 1990; Humphrey and Fei’ring 1994),
Pavo Real (Henderson and Goode 1991), Gault
(Collins et al. 1991, 1992), Poverty Hill (Meltzer,
unpublished; Parker 1983; Walter 1990), and
Yellow Hawk (Mallouf 1988, 1989), as well as the
Clovis sites already known--some of which were
recently subject to reinvestigation (e.g., Miami
[Holliday et al. 1994] and Wilson-Leonard [Collins

et al. 1993])--the essential fact that Texas Clovis
sites are rare remains unchanged. Which itself
reaffirms the importance of examining the
distribution of individual Clovis fluted points (and
not just sites) across the state.
But is that scarcity of sites itself meaningful,
perhaps suggestive of Clovis settlement activities
(Meltzer 1987:27-28), or is it simply an artifact of
an archeological record that has somehow made it
difficult to see once-intact Clovis sites? The latter
possibility might seem supported by the large
number of Clovis points that occur within surface
scatters, if one assumes those scatters also include
the debitage and tools from Clovis assemblages
that, unlike fluted points, are difficult to recognize
as Clovis.
However, the occurrence of Clovis points
within those larger surface scatters could result from
one of several causes, but precisely which causes
can be difficult to determine, especially from a
distance. For example, the occurrence of a Clovis
fluted point in a large surface scatter might indicate, as above, that a larger Clovis component was
once present at the locality, but by virtue of a heavy
artifact rain of later occupations and only light sedimentation, just the fluted point (and not the tools
and debitage that were part of the same assemblage
and are still present at the site) is recognized as
Clovis (while the occurrence ought to be tallied as
a site). Alternatively, that Clovis point might be no

Table 6. Context in which Texas Clovis fluted points are found, by region1
Number by regionz
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Totals

6/3

2/2

0

0

0

0

14/6

22/11

Surface scatter

29/25

3/3

18/17

75/6

7/7

1/1

57/52

190/111

Isolate

15115

5/5

6/6

0

5/5

1/1

8/8

40/40

59

11

23

11

15

4

3__Q0

154

109/43

2t/!0

47/23

86/6

27/12

6/2

109/66

406/162

Context

Clovis site

Unknown

Totals

61

Region designations follow Table 3
Figures are Numbers of points / Numbers of sites or localities in which points are found

62

Texas Archeological Society

more than a single isolate left at that locality by
earlier Clovis groups (and should be counted as an
isolate, and not as a site). Finally, the Clovis point
might have been picked up elsewhere by later
groups and brought into the site by them for their
use (its present context therefore providing few clues
as to whether its original context was as an isolate
or in a site).
These several possibilities, especially the first
two, are likely in areas where key resources, freshwater or stone, for instance, long attracted human
occupation, while the third would be likely (but not
necessarily restricted) to stone-poor areas. And unless the Clovis point was re-fashioned into a later
style (notched, say), its post-Clovis life history
might not be easily traced. Examples of Clovis
points apparently recycled by later groups would
include the fluted points at Ryan’s site (Hartwell et
al. 1989), Crockett Gardens (Hays 1982), the
Doering site (Wheat 1953), 41SP69 (Chandler
1982), the Fred Yarbrough site (Johnson 1961), La
Perdida (Weir 1956), the Meier site (Meier and
Hester 1972, 1976), and the Obshner site (Crook
and Harris 1955).
Sorting these and other possibilities (the ones
listed are just the few that come readily to mind) is
mostly a methodological problem: how can we differentiate Clovis versus later debitage, for example?
Resolving that problem will also require detailed
information on the archeological, geological, hydrological, and paleoenvironmental context of the
occurrence, information that unfortunately rarely
accompanies the points in the TCFPS. Thus, while
"surface scatter" is presently the most common context in which Clovis points occur, we cannot conclude that they represent scattered Clovis
components or, for that matter, Clovis isolates.
A related matter bears mention: as seems evident elsewhere in Clovis times, and particularly in
comparison to later, post-Paleoindian occupations,
Clovis groups did not always participate in the
highly structured spatial behavior that produces
sites. As highly mobile hunter-gatherers, whose
movements were virtually unrestricted across the
very thinly inhabited and relatively rich Late Pleistocene landscape, Clovis groups were not forced to
use the same localities repeatedly, and hence would

not necessarily build up a visible archeological
record at any one. Indeed, most of the known Texas
Clovis sites represent single, very short-term events
(the Aubrey site [Ferring 1989, 1990, 1995b] being
a particularly well-documented example).
The exception to this pattern would be those
areas in which key resources were relatively rare
and spatially restricted (so-called point resources):
like the freshwater springs and ponds on the High
Plains. Such point resources would lend themselves
to repeated and perhaps cyclical Clovis exploitation
and use, which in turn would lead to the build-up of
spatially concentrated debris (sites). Given that many
of the springs and ponds on the High Plains dried in
the Early Holocene (Holliday 1989, 1995), these
localities would not necessarily be targets of later
groups, and hence would not become palimpsests of
different occupations (surface scatters).
Conversely, where the point resources were
unaffected by changing climates or environments
(high-quality stone outcrops, for example), use by
Clovis and later groups would ultimately result in
large surface scatters. Again, however, unless there
was active sedimentation on site, discrete Clovis
components may not be separable. The intensive
use of the Edwards chert outcrops along the
Balcones Escarpment provides a good illustration
of this. It is appropriate to add that the resultant
concentration of Clovis material need not arise, as
Shiner (1983) suggested, from sedentary Clovis occupations, but simply from the build-up of assemblages over repeated visits (Meltzer 1987:44).
To a degree, these inferences are supported by
the analysis in Table 7, which provides the chisquare and adjusted residuals3 values for the locality
data in Table 6 (which of course excludes tallies on
the Clovis points for which the context was
"unknown"). The significant chi-square result
indicates that site context and region are not
independent: there are regions in which points occur
in certain contexts more often than would be
expected by chance. The adjusted residuals help
pinpoint which of the cells (region by context)
contributed most to the chi square.
In Central Texas, as inferred, surface scatters
occur significantly more often than would be expected by chance, while isolates are significantly

3 Adjusted residuals help identify which cells are responsible for a significant chi-square value (Everitt 1977:46-47). Adjusted
residuals are read as standard normal deviates; values greater than 1.96 (or -1.96) mark cells in which the observed values are
significant--hence, have observed values greater (or lesser) than would expected (and thus drive the chi-square value).

Meltzer and Bever ~ Paleoindians of Texas

63

Table 7. Chi square and adjusted residuals analysis of the context in which Texas Clovis fluted
points are found, by region (data are from Table 4, excluding the "unknown" row).
Adjusted residuals by region1
Context

Clovis site
Surface scatter
Isolate

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

.06

1.71

-1.40

-.67

-.97

-.38

.97

-1.71

-2.71

.60

1.69

-.79

-.57

2.33

1.81

1.92

.17

- 1.43

1.42

.84

-3.08

Chi square = 23.156, df = 12, significant at 0.026
Region designations follow Table 3

under-represented (adjusted residuals values of 2.33
and -3.08, respectively). A similar pattern seems to
characterize the Coast region. For lack of other
information, McFaddin Beach is currently designated as a surface scatter, given that it has also
yielded other Paleoindian points, as well as those of
Archaic and Late Prehistoric age (Turner and Tanner 1994:324). Were the McFaddin Beach materials
derived from one or more discrete site contexts, the
results would almost certainly change. In the Plains/
Panhandle and in North Central Texas, the pattern is
just the reverse: Clovis points found as isolates are
more common, surface scatters less so.
These results open a window into Clovis settlement strategies, suggesting as they do that such
strategies differ across the state. Perhaps, following
the earlier line of argument, resource exploitation
in Central Texas entailed the kind of highly structured spatial behavior that produces sites: camping
at springs and refurbishing tool kits from locally
abundant supplies of chert, for example. We might
speculate, therefore, that Clovis points occurring
within surface scatters at localities with such key,
point resources might represent palimpsests of sites,
more so than a record of isolates (after all, if the
locality attracted repeated use throughout prehistory, then it may equally have attracted repeated
occupations by Clovis groups).
In contrast, in North Central Texas and on the
Plains/Panhandle it would appear more non-point
resources were utilized. On the Plains, point resources that were visited repeatedly, such as the
freshwater springs and lakes around which many of

the isolates were found, were not otherwise used in
ways that produced a significant archeological
record~ Such speculations, however, are limited by
the lack of more fine-grained data in the TCFPS on
the precise contexts of Clovis points.

VARIATION AND PATTERN IN TEXAS
CLOVIS FLUTED POINTS
There is additional information to be gleaned
from the points themselves which sheds light on
this and other aspects of Clovis adaptations. To
explore these issues, we sought through the TCFPS
data on the kinds of lithic raw material used in the
manufacture of the points (which may reveal something of Clovis settlement strategies), patterns in
fluted point size and shape (which might bear on
technology, function, and possibly style), and information on fluted point life-histories.

Raw material sources and usage
The analysis of lithic raw materials used in the
production of Texas fluted points was limited by
the fact that correspondents were generally able to
identify the stone to type (chert as opposed to quartzite, say), but less often to specific outcrops or even
sources; this is a difficulty hardly limited to TCFPS
correspondents, given the well-known complexity
of raw material sourcing (Banks 1990:6-7; Hofman
et al. 1991). Even so, enough raw material types
were identified to make some statements about the

64

Texas Archeological Society

sources of raw material used by Clovis groups in
the manufacture of their points or, short of that, at
least the general rock type used (Table 8).
Not surprisingly, the majority of the 137 Clovis
points across the state identifiable to raw material
type were manufactured of Edwards Formation
(Cretaceous) cherts, which crop out over a large
area of Centra! Texas (Banks 1990:Figure 3.1;
Frederick and Ringstaff 1994:Figures 6.3-6.5).
Based on those data, and the descriptions that accompany many of the reports, we would speculate
that a majority of the 269 "unknowns" in Table 8
are also made of Edwards chert. In those instances
where uncertainty existed, however, we tallied the
stone type as unknown.
Far fewer Clovis points statewide are manufactured of Alibates agatized dolomite and Tecovas
jasper, which crop out in relatively smaller areas of
the Plains/Panhandle and escarpment (Banks
1990:91-92). Less common still are points made of
quartzite (those that were fashioned of Morrison or
Dakota quartzite, which crops out discontinuously
across the High Plains [Banks 1990:90]). Individual Clovis specimens were also fashioned of petrified wood (source locality unknown), Manning fused
glass (Brown 1976,1994; this material outcrops in
eastern Texas [Banks 1990:53]), and obsidian.

An interesting pattern emerges in the data on
Edwards, Alibates, and Tecovas materials that comprise the bulk of the identified sources. If one collapses the data in Table 8 to show only the number
of Clovis points fashioned of Edwards chert by
region, arrayed against the number of Clovis points
fashioned of either Alibates or Tecovas by region
(combining the Alibates and Tecovas stone sources
on the rationale that together they represent a "High
Plains" source), as in Table 9, it becomes clear
there is a distinct asymmetry in Clovis stone usage.
Clovis points fashioned of Edwards chert were
commonly found in Central Texas as well as on the
High Plains (although as the adjusted residuals indicate, Edwards is still significantly under-represented on the High Plains). Yet, Clovis points made
from the High Plains sources were common on the
High Plains, but rarely were carried east into Central Texas (and given the cautions of Goode [cited
in Banks 1990:61], there is a possibility the few
that do occur in that region are not actually Alibates
or Tecovas, but an anomalous local Edwards variety). The easternmost occurrence of a point manufactured of Alibates "flint" is from the McFaddin
Beach locality (Long 1977:7), but as noted previously, it exhibits little of the attrition that often
occurs on points so far from their source, and thus

Table 8. Raw material types identified in the TCFPS, by region

Number by region~
Source/type

3

4

5

6

7

Unk

Totals

Edwards chert

37

7

3

0

7

0

39

0

93

Tecovas jasper

6

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

7

Alibates dolomite

18

2

0

0

0

0

4

1

25

Alibates or Tecovas?

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

2

Quartzite

4

1

0

1

0

0

0

0

6

Petrified wood

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

0

2

Obsidian

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

0

2

Manning fused glass

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

42

10

41

84

20

6

65

0

268

Unknown

Region designations follow Table 3

Meltzer and Bever ~ Paleoindians of Texas

65

Table 9. Clovis fluted points made of Edwards versus
Alibates & Tecovas, grouped by region

Number by region~
Source/type
Edwards chert
Adjusted residuals

Alibates & Tecovas
Adjusted residuals

Totals

1

2

3

4

6

Totals

37

7

3

0

7

0

39

-3.84

-.28

1.04

0

1.62

0

3.10

26

3

0

0

0

0

4

3.84

.28

-1.04

0

-1.62

0

-3.10

63

10

7

0

43

93

33

126

~Region designations follow Table 3

seems oddly out of place on the Texas Gulf coast
(Meltzer 1987:45). Points made from Alibates and
Tecovas, however, were often carried onto the
High Plains far to the north and west of their
source, as seen most notably in their occurrence in
the Drake Cache in North Central Colorado, some
485 km from the Alibates outcrops (Stanford and
Jodry 1988).
What this pattern of stone use might indicate
is that the Clovis High Plains settlement system
tracked predominantly to the north and west of that
region (and then back), more so than to the south
and east, although, of course, High Plains groups
did utilize Edwards chert (Meltzer 1989b). Unless
the Edwards chert on the High Plains marks Clovis
groups from Central Texas moving onto the High
Plains, it suggests as well that they cycled back to
Central Texas without procuring or using to any
significant degree the stone local to the High Plains.
Such speculations, however, must be taken with the
caveat that the raw material evidence is saying no
more than that certain stone sources were being
used, and is not directly tracking whether Clovis
settlement systems did not extend in certain directions or in specific regions. Still, it does highlight
the fact that in order to truly understand the movements of hunter-gatherers as wide-ranging as these
Clovis groups clearly were, one must attack the
problem on a very large scale, and (reinforcing the
point made at the outset) pay no attention to modern political boundaries.

Perhaps shedding additional light on Clovis
settlement systems is an intriguing bit of largely
negative evidence, which naturally must be taken
with great caution. No artifact-quality obsidian occurs in Texas (Hester 1988); hence, any obsidian in
or near the state is exotic and was imported. For
reasons outlined in Meltzer (1989b), it is suspected
that where exotic stone comprises the bulk of a
group’s stone supply, then it most likely was obtained by the group directly at the distant outcrop.
Cases where exotic stone is extremely rare open the
possibility that either direct procurement or exchange might have been the mechanism by which
the stone was moved from source to site. In general, most lithic raw material used in Clovis sites
(and perhaps Folsom as well [Hofman 1992:198]),
appears to have been directly procured. But obsidian-rare as it is and distant as its sources--may
prove the exception to that rule.
One obsidian Clovis point occurs on the High
Plains at Blackwater Locality No. 1 (the Clovis
type site) in New Mexico, just across the Texas
border. It was made of obsidian from the Valles
Caldera in the central Rio Grande Valley of New
Mexico, some 350 km west of the site (Johnson et
al. 1985:52). No other obsidian Clovis points from
this or any other central Rio Grande source have
been found on the High Plains. This indicates that
in Clovis times at least there was only infrequent
traffic between the two regions, which may reveal
something of the direction of Clovis settlement

66

Texas Archeologieal Society

systems, backhanded support for the supposition
that Plains Clovis groups were moving south to
north, or perhaps some evidence of the scale of
these systems.
In regard to the latter, one might observe that
obsidian Clovis points tend to be infrequent in North
America, occurring most often and in the greatest
abundance in what we might term "Clovis-proximity" to major obsidian sources (e.g., the Dietz site
in Oregon [Willig t988]). "Clovis proximity" is
about 300 km, the figure that turns up repeatedly in
measures of the distances these groups are known
to have traveled from their stone sources (Haynes
1982:392; Meltzer 1993a:305). It may well be that
if groups cycling through the central Rio Grande
were heading towards the Plains, they did not do so
often or extend very far onto the Plains (it being
beyond Clovis proximity), or interact with groups
that were on the Plains. It would be most interesting, although well beyond the scope of the present
paper, to determine the relative frequency of Clovis
points made of Alibates or Tecovas in the central
Rio Grande Valley, in order to see the degree to
which the pattern evident in the use of obsidian in
Texas was mirrored in the other direction by the
use of Texas cherts Judge (1973:248) notes that 21
percent of a sample of 26 Clovis points from the
central Rio Grande are made of "chert and obsidian," but does not specify the chert in question.
Judge adds that 43 percent of the points are made
of chalcedony, which appears at the Aubrey site
(Ferring, personal communication, 1995) as well; it
was not distinguished in the TCFPS analysis, but
does occur in this sample.
Only two obsidian Clovis points have been
found within Texas. One was reported by Hester
(1988) from the Port Lavaca area of Calhoun County
on the central Gulf Coast (41CL72), and had been
heavily abraded by wave action. The precise source
of the obsidian could not be determined by laboratory analysis: however, it did not match the known
New Mexico sources, nor did it match sources
known from old Mexico (each at least 1000 km to
the west and south, respectively) (Hester t988:28).
In this instance, knowing the context of the discovery is crucial (notably, whether the point was picked
up and moved by post-Clovis groups), for if that
context is securely Clovis and its source can be
located it may be possible to infer something of the
scale and direction of Clovis movements across the
landscape or Clovis exchange.

In that regard, the obsidian Clovis point from
Kincaid Shelter is of some interest. This point, originally described by Hester et al. (1985:t50-151) as
an indeterminate (possibly Angostura-like) Paleoindian point, has subsequently been identified by
Collins et al. (1989) on the basis of the point’s
morphology and context as Clovis. The point was
fashioned of obsidian derived from a Valley of
Mexico source (Queretaro) some 1000 km south of
Kincaid. It is a heavily ground basal fragment, which
Collins (personal communication, 1995), believes
represents a re-tooling discard. Point manufacture
was taking place at Kincaid, and not surprisingly
the Clovis preforms from the site are made of locally available chert; the obsidian point was one of
the very few exotics in the Kincaid Clovis assemblage. If this obsidian specimen was acquired directly at the source by highly mobile Clovis groups,
as opposed to obtained via exchange, its presence
in Central Texas would imply a considerable settlement range. Taking this evidence a step further, if
Clovis groups were the first Americans and were
generally trending southward through the hemisphere (in addition to their more "local" settlement
moves), then this evidence would also indicate that
the migratory process was not unidirectional, and
that even after travelling some distance south of the
Rio Grande, these groups cycled back north as well.
This is in keeping with recent models of the peopling of the Americas, which anticipate "reverse
migrations" in the long process of colonizing the
continent (Meltzer 1995), but again it assumes that
Clovis groups were the first Americans--which may
or may not be the case.

Texas Clovis Morphometrics

Of the 201 points added to the data set since
1986, morphological and metric data are available
on 132 of them (Table 10). Measurements on all
variables were not always available for all
specimens, however; hence, the different values for
n in Table 10. Adding those data to the analysis is
revealing in several ways, not the least of which is
that despite substantially increasing the number of
points from the original sample, the overall size
and shape patterns remain largely unchanged
(compare Table 10 with Meltzer 1987:Table 9).
That there was so little change between the two
samples demonstrates that the original data set was
indeed a reasonably representative one in terms of

Meltzer and Bever ~ Paleoindians of Texas
point morphology. Were the original sample not
representative, the additional data would have
significantly changed the statistical patterning.
The data from the TCFPS indicate that the
"average" Texas Clovis fluted point is just over 6
cm long, and 2.75 cm wide at its widest spot (generally, the base is narrower, only 2.36 cm wide). The
widest spot occurs partly up the blade, 2.88 cm up
from the base, just a few mm beyond where the haft
ended. The haft area in Clovis points is marked by
edge grinding, which on average extends upwards
from the base 2.59 cm, and is present on virtually all
of the points in the TCFPS. The maximum thickness
of these points averages 7.3 mm, and generally the
points are thickest on the blade portion well beyond
the haft (3.5 cm from the base) and beyond the point
of maximum width. In effect, these points are "front
heavy." All of which means they have a slight taper,
in both plan and longitudinal section. Flute scars
generally do not extend beyond the haft area, are
centered over the point axis, and are sufficiently
narrow (on average, 1.29 cm wide) that they rarely
extend to the lateral edges of the point.
Further, the points in this sample tend to scale
by size in a relatively straightforward manner:
longer points are generally thicker and wider (at
both their maximum and at their base), and the
spots in which they are widest and thickest are
farther from the base (correlations of length with
maximum width to base and maximum thickness to
base are rp = .7090 and .8681, respectively, with
both significant at the .000 level). Longer points
also tend to have longer flute scars although their
length does not correlate as strongly with overall
length (rp = .3562, p = .000). As might be expected, the extent of the edge grinding does not
correlate with length (rp = .0878, p = .149); the
size of the haft was apparently relatively constant
regardless of point size (see below, as well). To
highlight the obvious: the length of edge grinding
can also be more tightly controlled than flute scar
length, which is also part of the haft. The number
of flute scars does not correlate at all with point
length (r~= -.0432, significance = .475, and -.0754,
significance = .215, for flute scars on the obverse
and reverse faces, respectively).
At least those are the statistical averages and
trends. Of course, it is highly unlikely that all (or
even most) of the 406 points in the TCFPS conform
precisely to the averages in Table 10. But these
statistics do show that in certain attributes there is

67

considerable conformance to the mean, while in
others there is more variance about the mean (as
measured by, for example, kurtosis, which indicates the shape of the distribution of cases about a
mean: normal distributions have a kurtosis value of
zero, positive kurtosis values result where most of
the individual cases cluster tightly around the average value for all cases, while negative values occur
where cases are scattered widely around the mean).
While we obviously cannot describe each point individually, we can use such measures to help gain
insight into how and in what attributes the "average" values are representative (or not), and from
that perhaps draw some general inferences about
Texas Clovis fluted point morphology, technology,
and function.
As was true in the original survey, a measure
that shows considerable variation is the maximum
length of the fluted point, which in the original
sample had a kurtosis value of -.28; the value is
currently .05, indicating a very slight "tightening"
of the distribution about the mean in this larger
sample. The relative scatter of length values is easily understandable: length varied considerably over
the life history of a Clovis fluted point as a result of
use, breakage, and reworking (Meltzer 1987:56).
Because the data in Table 10 come from all the
cases in the TCFPS, including whole, reworked,
and broken points, the values naturally vary. Accordingly, the subsample of only the whole and
completely unbroken points in the TCFPS is longer
and much less varied (mean = 7.81 cm; kurtosis =
.81), than the subsample of only the reworked points
(mean = 5.38 cm; kurtosis = .50). In fact, there is a
statistically significant difference in the lengths of
whole versus reworked points (t-value = 6.49, significant at .000 level) (see also Meltzer 1987:49).
In general, it appears points were reworked
while still mounted in their haft (Meltzer 1987:49),
based on the "shouldering" just beyond the haft
that occurs in many cases, and the fact that flute
scars and edge grinding were rarely removed by
subsequent flaking or retouch. Thus, reworking
mostly affected the blade portion of the fluted point,
and because reworking did not just make the points
shorter, but narrower too (by moving the blade
edges in), the maximum width to base measure is
significantly reduced in reworked points as well
(the mean for whole points is 3.33 cm, for reworked
points it is 2.26 cm, producing a t-value of 4.97,
significance = .000).

68

Texas Archeological Society

Table 10. Descriptive statistics for Texas Clove fluted points, 1986
and current samples (in centimeters)

Variable

n in
sample

Mean

Minimum

Maximum

Standard
Deviation

Kurtosis

1986 data only~
Maximum length

155

5.75

1.10

13.04

2.69

-.28

Maximum width

155

2.73

1.71

4.80

0.49

1.46

130

2.78

.00

6.50

1.28

-.01

Base width

144

2.34

1.38

4.50

0.46

2.43

Maximum thickness

137

0.72

.30

1.20

0.15

.36

Average flute length2

106

2.42

.95

5.20

.83

.41

Average flute width3

111

1.28

.65

2.30

.35

-.27

Basal depth

124

.21

.00

.80

.17

.24

87

2.51

1.07

4.88

.79

-.30

Maximum length

285

6.14

1.10

16.40

2.78

.05

Maximum width

287

2.75

1.71

4.89

0.49

1.60

Distance from maximum
width to base

235

2.88

.00

8.13

1.39

1.03

Base Width

260

2.36

1.38

4.50

0.46

1.82

Maximum thickness

269

0.73

0.30

1.20

0.15

0.23

17

3.50

1.50

5.63

1.20

-.39

Average flute length

138

2.42

.95

5.20

.81

.36

Average flute width

146

1.29

.65

2.30

.33

-. 11

Distance from maximum
width to base

Average length edge
grinding4

All data

Distance from maximum
thickness to base

18

.57

.42

.88

.11

2.21

Basal depth

177

.28

.00

.80

.17

.10

Average length edge
grinding

140

2.59

.97

5.72

.78

1.18

Flute thickness

~There were several discrepancies in the original published version of this table (Meltzer 1987:Table 9)--the most glaring of
which was maximum fluted point thickness erroneously listed as 2.80 cm, far thicker than any fluted point in this or perhaps any
other sample. We present the corrected data here. Certain measurements were not taken in the original survey, hence the
difference in the variable list between the 1986 and current samples.
-~ These values are derived by first calculating the average flute length on an individual fluted point (by summing flute length on
the obverse and reverse faces of the point, then dividing by two), then averaging those values for all points.
3 The calculation for average flute width was done in the same manner as the calculation for average flute length.
4 The calculation for average length of edge grinding was done in a similar manner as average flute length and width, only in this
instance the length of the left and right edge grinding was averaged for each individual point.

Meltzer and Beret ~ Paleoindians of Texas
If reworking also made the blade thinner, then
there should be a difference in maximum thickness
to base between whole and reworked points. However, if reworking was of the sort that characterized Dalton points, in which the blade was
narrowed and its edges steepened, but the blade
was not thinned. In that case, there would be no
significant difference between whole and reworked
points. Unfortunately, we have measurements of
maximum thickness to base on only nine of the
whole and reworked points in the TCFPS, so a test
of that proposition would not be statistically meaningful at present.
But perhaps we can explore this issue another
way: by looking at the values for maximum thickness. These were normally distributed about the
mean, and showed approximately the same dispersion as maximum length values (see Table 10).
That variability might result from reworking and/or
use, or perhaps other factors. In a recent discussion,
Tankersley (1994) argued that variation in fluted
point thickness results from variation in the lithic
raw material selected for use, and as a byproduct of
the use of a percussion-based bifacial reduction
strategy. He assumed that percussion flaking yields
less precise and more variable thinning flakes than
that resulting from the controlled pressure-flake fluting of Folsom times (Tankersley 1994:506). Unfortunately, Tankersley’s paper proposes, but by no
means demonstrates, that the relationship between
thickness and raw material/technology occurs, and
the proposition is weakened on several counts, not
least that the site (Williamson) in Tankersley’s
sample with the most raw material variability is not
the one with the greatest variation in point thickness (see Tankersley 1994:Tables 2 and 10). Still,
the proposition makes intuitive sense, so it is appropriate to ask, is there such variation in the thickness of fluted points in the TCFPS sample, and can
that variation be correlated with raw material types?
A histogram of the distribution of fluted point
maximum thickness reveals a bimodality in the
TCFPS sample: one mode centers around 0.63 cm,
the other around 0.81 cm. Obviously, if Tankersley’s
supposition is correct, then that bimodality ought to
represent two distinct lithic raw material subgroups
within the sample. Our data do not support this,
however. These two modes do not correspond with
raw material types. Instead, the maximum thickness
of points made of Edwards chert and Alibates
agatized dolomite is quite similar (average thickness

69

for Edwards points [n=86] is 0.742 cm; average
thickness for Alibates points [n=22] is 0.756 cm),
and statistically indistinguishable (t-value = -.35,
significance ; .727). While Tankersley’s proposition
is not supported by this particular data set, there is
always the possibility that raw material differences
might emerge in the use of other, more contrasting
lithic raw materials than Edwards and Alibates: it
would be useful, therefore, to compare points made
of, say, Edwards, and those made of Dakota
quartzite, but unfortunately, sample sizes of
quartzite and other non-chert materials in the TCFPS
are currently too small to make statistically
meaningful comparisons. Thus, it remains to be
demonstrated that fluted point thickness varies with
raw material type (see also the comments in Amick
1995:34).
As to what does explain the observed variation
and bimodality in fluted point thickness, we explored whether it might sort by region, reworking,
and many other possibilities, ultimately concluding
that point thickness appears to sort by breakage
types. Specifically, whole points tend to be significantly thicker than points that have snapped in half:
the average thickness for whole points (n=135) is
0.752 cm; the average thickness for laterally snapped
point bases (n=42) is 0.654 cm; the two means are
significantly different (t-value = 3.72, significance
= .000). That, of course, brings us back to the observation earlier made that the spot of maximum
thickness generally occurs on the blade beyond the
haft. Since lateral snaps usually occur along the
upper edge of the haft (also Meltzer 1987:49), that
effectively removes the thickest portions of the
point, and thus gives us the observed bimodality. In
effect, then, it does not appear there is any significant variation in fluted point thickness, at least none
that is not explained by the overall size of the points
in the TCFPS sample.
The fact that reworking was generally done
outside the haft helps explain the relatively higher
kurtosis values for variables within the haft area,
such as flute thickness and basal width, as well as
why the averages for the latter changed less than
0.2 mm between the 1986 and current samples. It is
worth noting, as well, that the average value of
basal width in the TCFPS sample is within 0.2 and
0.6 mm of the averages for 305 Clovis points from
the Midwest, and 57 Clovis points from Oklahoma
(see Hofman and Wyckoff 199!:30; Tankersley
1994:Table 3).

70

Texas Archeological Society

In turn, these relatively high kurtosis values
suggest that since the attributes most directly associated with the haft vary the least, there was a
degree of "standardization" in point manufacture.
Were these artifacts all intended for use as spear
points, one might suggest the standardization reflects the critical size range necessary for maximum penetrating efficiency (e.g., Sollberger 1988:2,
11). However, that argument may not hold, as many
of these points (by their wear and retouch patterns,
lack of impact fractures, and distinctive breakage)
were almost certainly also used as halted knives
(see Meltzer 1987:46-54).
Alternatively, the standardization may reflect
hafting demands, and those required of maintaining
composite (tool, haft, and foreshaft) artifacts (for a
further discussion along these lines, see Bleed
[1986]). Judge (1973), and others (e.g., Amick 1995;
Keeley 1982; Meltzer 1987:56; Odell 1994:54-55;
Shott 1986:43) have inferred that hafted tools were
made to fit their hafts, and not vice versa, and that
the hafts themselves were maintained and curated
through the lifetimes of several points (hence, the
standardization in attributes such as basal width).
Perhaps this implies that the raw materials for hafting (bone, wood, or ivory) were scarcer or by some
other measure (perhaps the labor involved in manufacture or the scarcity of suitable materials) more
"costly" than the stone to make the points. Or perhaps it indicates that stone points simply had a much
shorter use life than the non-stone hafts. In any case,
making a new point was likely more efficient and
less costly than making a new haft, and thus the
point became the most readily expendable and interchangeable part in this artifact system.
This conclusion may seem somewhat counterintuitive, given the time involved in point production, and especially the potential for failure in the
very last stages of point manufacture--the fluting
itself (Bradley 1993; Sollberger 1988:13). Still,
Clovis fluting may have been less prone to failure
than fluting the thinner Folsom points (Bradley
1993:255), although it nonetheless always involved
a degree of risk of errant flutes ending in reverse
hinge or step fractures that broke the preforms
(Sollberger 1988:9). But stone was, relatively speaking, a reasonably inexpensive commodity, and perhaps the risks of fluting were less than they appear
some 11,000 years after the fact.
The specific technological process by which
Clovis fluting was accomplished--whether direct

or indirect percussion, pressure, or levered pressure-is still a matter of discussion and debate (e.g.,
Bradley 1993; Collins 1990, unpublished;
Henderson and Goode 1991; Mallouf 1989;
Sollberger 1988). There is little in the TCFPS data
that will resolve that issue, since it is difficult to
tease technological information from morphological data on a group of finished and primarily isolated fluted points. The TCFPS data do, however,
shed some light on the fluting process, at least on a
statewide scale.
For one, it was a remarkably exact process.
The tight distribution of flute thickness is evidence
of that, indicating as it does that there was a narrow
range of thickness tolerances, perhaps driven by
the requirements of the haft. The fluting process
most often involved a single flute on each face, and
only occasionally multiple flutes (flutes side by
side and sometimes overlapping); roughly 30 percent of the 285 points for which data are available
have two or more flutes. Multiple flutes were in
some cases struck to provide guide ridges for a
main flute.
Basal preparation in advance of fluting is not
always obvious in the finished products, especially
when the base was retouched afterwards. However,
it is of interest to observe that the basal concavity
in these points is on average rather shallow (less
than 3 mm), much smaller than the average for
Clovis points in other parts of North America, notably in the northeast U.S. and on the northern Plains
(e.g., Colby points), and considerably smaller than
the average in some forms that have basal concavities upwards of 8 mm deep (Gramly 1982:Table 2;
Tankersley 1994:Table 3). The depth of the basal
concavity may be a stylistic feature and!or a technological one, and in the case of the latter may
represent one (or more) of several possibilities: a
by-product of pre-flute platform preparation
(whether bevelling or preparation of nipple platforms) and platform remodeling (e.g., Sollberger
1988:12); the result of fluting; or a consequence of
post-fluting trimming and retouch (possibly by pressure flaking) (Collins 1990:74). One fact seems
clear: the depth of the basal concavity is unrelated
to flute length (rp = -.1306, p = .145),flute width
(rp = -.0266, p = .763), and the number of flutes, so
does not appear to be a direct correlate of the fluting process itself.
Flute length, as noted, seems to scale with
overall point length, but only weakly, which

Meltzer and Bever u Paleoindians of Texas
suggests that beyond a certain minimum length the
extent of the flute did not particularly matter. In
fact, while the overall range of flute length extends
up to a maximum of 5.2 cm, that maximum value is
an anomaly, much longer than the next longest
flute scar (4.5 cm). Plotting the distribution of
average flute lengths reveals that in the large
majority (77 percent) of the cases, flute length falls
between 1.5 and 3 cm. There was clearly little effort,
at least in this sample of Clovis points, to create
flutes that ran much past the haft, let alone the full
length of the point, as they do in Folsom points,
and in some eastern fluted styles (e.g., Barnes,
Cumberland). As an aside, the empirical observation
that longer flutes occur on later point styles
(Sollberger 1988:11) seems correct on a continental
scale, but that does not mean the reverse is true:
that is, shorter flutes are not necessarily earlier. In
fact, some of the later eastern varieties, like
Holcombe, have short flutes (for a useful discussion
of stylistic change in eastern and some western
fluted points, see Deller and Ellis [1992:125-133]).
Nor is it yet clear that full-length fluting can be
used as a chronological marker independent of
radiocarbon dating, or that flute length increased
over time as a result of technological improvements
which yielded greater hunting efficiency (Sollberger
1988:3, 7).
There is in the TCFPS sample evidence for a
regional difference in flute length: points from
Central Texas tend to have longer flutes than those
on the High Plains (the means are 2.68 and 2.28
cm respectively, producing a t-value of 2.61, significance =.01). But as points on the High Plains
also show a higher incidence of reworking (see
below), often obscuring the distal portion of the
flute scars (a practice that, in general, was avoided
by Clovis knappers [Bradley 1993:254]), these differences influte length are likely not technological
or stylistic. In fact, when only whole points are
considered,flute length does not differ between the
two areas.

Clovis Life-histories

As is evident, Clovis fluted points in the TCFPS
vary considerably in their condition. The numbers
of whole and broken points are tallied in Table 11.
The tally is obviously biased toward whole points
and points in which at least a portion of the base
remains. The reason for that is twofold: first, whole

71

points are more likely to be collected and reported;
and, second, only points in which the flute is visible are likely to be recognized as C!ovis. There are
in the TCFPS sample some 55 fluted point bases
(categories 2 and 5), most of which snapped off at
the haft line. Just as many distal ends were once
attached to those bases, and at least some of them
ought to be present in the archeological record, but
if they lack any evidence of a flute their Clovis
affinities might not be obvious (and as flutes tend
not to extend much beyond the haft, they were
likely absent on many of those distal ends).
The frequency of whole points is actually
higher than it appears in Table 11, for several of the
other categories (4, 6 and 7) are points that are
virtually intact, and have only minor breaks that
likely took place after the points had been discarded or lost (it is common for points lying on a
surface, for example, to lose a tip or corner). In
fact, 169 of the points in Table 11 (the sum of
categories 1, 4, 6, and 7) can be counted having
been discarded or lost while still essentially intact.
While that is a large number for the size of the
sample, it is not unexpected, given the manner in
which points are recognized and collected.
Of the remainder of the points in Table 11,
breakage likely took place while the points were in
use; perhaps this was the reason the points were
discarded. As before (cf. Meltzer 1987:Table 6),
lateral snaps are the most common break in the
TCFPS sample (categories 2 and 5, n = 55). For a
variety of reasons (Meltzer 1987:48-49), lateral
snaps may indicate points broken while being
levered in the haft. That action hints at the additional
use of these points as knives, a suggestion
corroborated in some instances by patterns of
retouch and utilization.
Reworking (categories 3 and 10) is evident on
58 of the points, and is responsible for some of the
morphometric patterns seen in the sample (as just
noted). Furthermore, reworked points are not distributed evenly among the regions; rather, the incidence of reworking is significantly higher than
would be expected in the Plains~anhandle region
(Table 12). Lithic raw material was, of course, relatively scarce there (above, see also Johnson and
Holliday 1984:67; Meltzer 1987:43), which led
Paleoindians (and, for that matter, later groups) to
conserve their raw material through judicious reworking and reuse of points and tools (see also
Amick 1995; Hofman 1992).

Texas Archeological Society

72

Table 11. Breakage patterns for Texas Clovis fluted points
(breakage patterns are unknown for 99 specimens)
Distribution by region
Soume/type

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Unk

Totals

31

5

14

21

8

1

34

0

114

2 Base only (lateral snap)

19

5

4

2

2

1

15

0

48

3 Reworked (distal end)

21

5

4

1

9

0

12

0

52

4 Distal tip broken

11

1

1

5

2

1

7

0

28

2

0

1

0

1

0

3

0

7

6 Broken comers

2

1

3

1

2

1

7

0

17

7 Distal tip broken, broken comers

2

0

0

1

1

0

5

1

10

8 Broken base

2

0

1

1

0

0

4

0

8

9 Distal tip broken, broken base

1

2

2

1

0

0

2

0

8

10 Reworked (distal end), impact
fracture

5

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

6

11 Edge damage

0

0

0

2

0

0

1

0

3

12 Failed preform

0

0

0

0

0

0

6

0

6

Total

96

19

30

35

25

4

97

1

307

1

Whole points (no breaks)

5 Base only (lateral snap)
with broken corners

Overall, reworked points tend to be the same
length regardless of region and regardless of raw
material type, which indicates that there may have
been a threshold size beyond which a point was no
longer useful in that form, and reworking ceased.
There is a further, interesting pattern bearing on
reworking hinted at when these data are partitioned
by the major raw. material types: whole and reworked points made of Edwards chert tend be
slightly longer (by 0.27 cm) in Central Texas (their
source areas) than on the High Plains (where they
had to be imported). The difference is not statistically significant. And yet whole and reworked points
of Alibates and Tecovas also tend to be slightly
longer (this time, by 1.32 cm) in Central Texas and
not the Plains, where the raw material occurs. Again,
the difference is not statistically significant, and the
sample sizes make any conclusions premature (there
are 16 points for which data are available). Still,

these data raise the possibility that reworking of
Alibates and Tecovas was more extensive on the
High Plains where the distance (in time and space)
to stone sources enhanced efforts to prolong point
use-life through resharpening and reworking; reworking was less extensive in Central Texas where
there was an ample supply of raw material to replace the points long before they reached the threshold beyond which they were unusable or exhausted.
Impact fractures (n -- 6) remain extremely rare
in Texas Clovis fluted points, and occur mostly (5/
6) on points from the Plains~anhandle. Whether
that regional difference bespeaks different uses of
the points is uncertain, especially given the small
sample size, and the fact that reworking may have
masked impact fractures that were once on other
points. Reworked points, as noted earlier, are shorter
and narrower than whole points, but whether some
of those represent impact damaged-projectiles that

Meltzer and Bever m Paleoindians of Texas

73

Table 12. Whole point (categories 1, 4, 6 and 7) versus reworked
points (categories 3 and 10), by region.
Number by region~
Condition

3

4

Totals

Whole points
Adjusted residuals

46
-2.57

7
-1.34

18
.80

28
2.89

13
-1.78

3
1.01

54
1.56

169

Reworked points
Adjusted residuals

26
2.57

5
1.34

4
-.80

1
-2.89

9
1.78

0
-1.01

12
-1.56

57

72

12

22

29

22

66

226

Totals

Region designations follow Table 3
Chi square = 19.73, df = 6, significant at .00309

were repaired, as opposed to points that were simply
resharpened, is unknown. Taking this low figure at
face value, however, does highlight (he contrast
between Clovis and later Paleoindian assemblages,
especially those from Plains bison kills, in which
impact features are common damage on points used
to bring down large game. The low incidence of
impact fractures in this large sample of Clovis
points, including the one from the Murphey site
apparently associated with mastodon remains (Story
1990:185), raises the question of whether these
points were regularly used as the tips of spears
(also Meltzer 1987:50-51).
Preforms (broken and whole) are equally rare
in the TCFPS sample (n = 6), although this is partly
a definitional matter: only later stage preforms in
which the flute was present (and hence recognizable as Clovis) were recorded in the survey. Earlier
stage preforms and reduction debris are present at a
few sites in Texas, notably Aubrey (Ferring, personal communication, 1995), Kincaid Shelter
(Collins et al. 1989), Spring Lake (Takac 1991),
and Yellow Hawk (Mallouf 1989), and ultimately
it is this evidence that will yield the most precise
information on C!ovis technology.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

The salient facts that emerge from this update
of the TCFPS are as follows: the sample (n = 406)

is now nearly double what it was originally, and in
most respects is a representative one. The sample is
not biased by modern population density, and its
statistical similarity to the original data set suggests
it provides a valid profile of Texas Clovis material
(with exceptions as noted).
In this updated sample, points were added to
33 counties where Clovis records had not previously been reported, raising the total number of
Texas counties with Clovis points to 128. The vast
majority of counties have less than two Clovis
points, though a few (Crosby, Gaines, and
Jefferson), have more than 10. The average density
of Clovis points by region is 15 per 10,000 square
miles, although some regions (such as the TransPecos) have far lower densities, while in other regions (the Coast) the densities are much greater.
These patterns are also reflected in finergrained statewide maps, which also show a considerable density of Clovis material on the High Plains
and on a crescent-shaped arc through Central Texas,
but lower densities in East Texas, and a near absence of Clovis material on the Lower Plains. In
some areas (such as the Trans-Pecos, Central Texas,
and the High Plains), those patterns may accurately
represent the relative intensity of Clovis land use.
In other areas, the patterns may be skewed by geological processes which either mask Clovis age surfaces and remains (the Lower Plains), or prevent us
from understanding the context from which Clovis
remains are derived (McFaddin Beach on the Coast).

74

Texas Archeological Society

One pattern does seem clear, which is that the
Clovis distribution is not coincident with the
distribution of later Paleoindian remains (including
Folsom), except at a very coarse spatial scale. This
contrast may imply differences in land use
strategies, and is in keeping with independent
evidence that the adaptations of Clovis groups may
be quite different than those of the Paleoindians
who followed.
A further expression of Clovis land use patterns
is in the context in which Clovis materials occur.
Most are found within surface scatters of material
of later age; the remainder occur as true isolates;
only a few occur in discrete Clovis sites. Such
patterns, which to a degree vary by region, bespeak
adaptations which did not always involve the
redundant use of space, except perhaps in those
instances where fixed, point resources occur, such
as freshwater springs on the Plains or chert in
Central Texas.
The majority of Texas Clovis fluted points are
made of Edwards Group chert from Central Texas;
a significant minority are fashioned of Alibates
agatized dolomite and Tecovas jasper from the High
Plains/Panhandle region; a few specimens are made
of Dakota quartzite; individual points occur on a
sprinkling of rare materials. There are regional differences in raw material use: Edwards cherts are
common throughout the state, while the High Plains
raw materials tend to drop off sharply in frequency
moving east off the Plains, though stone from these
same sources was routinely carried north on the
Plains. Such patterns, and the extreme scarcity of
material such as obsidian, reveal something of the
scale and direction of Clovis settlement mobility.
Texas Clovis fluted points are generally 6 cm
long, around 2.5 cm wide, are less than a cm thick,
taper in both plan and longitudinal section, were
fluted only once on each face, and generally were
fluted only within the haft area (as defined by the
extent of lateral grinding). As a group, however,
they also vary in their morphology and along certain
dimensions (notably length and thickness), but that
variation is attributable to reworking and breakage,
and not raw material differences or technological
strategies. In contrast, other dimensions of the points,
such as basal width and fluting thickness, are tightly
constrained, indicating considerable standardization
in the manufacture of these points. That standardization appears to be related to the demands of
fitting the points to pre-existing hafts.

Reworking of these points generally took
place while the points were still in the haft, and one
of the most common breakage patterns (lateral
snaps) also occurred while the points were in their
hafts. Reworking and breakage patterns varied by
region, with point attrition being especially pronounced on the Plains, where raw material was
scarcest and where, perhaps not coincidentally, the
few points with impact fractures were mostly recovered. Patterns in the use, reworking, and breakage of these points generally suggest they were
multifunctional: not simply projectile points, but
hafted knives as well.
In the end, much as there is to gain from this
enhanced sample of 406 fluted points, we can only
surmise that even more information will come as
additional records of Texas Clovis are compiled.
Certainly, more is still needed. We should continue
to seek more (and more precise) data’ on Clovis
occurrences; greater information on the
paleoenvironmental stage which Clovis groups inhabited; data on raw material use and the context in
which these points are found; and information on
the technology, form, and function of these points.
We have little doubt that additional records
will be forthcoming, since we believe that the current tally remains just a sample (of size yet unknown) of the Clovis fluted points of Texas. More
will surely be recorded in collections yet undocumented, sites still uninvestigated, and regions now
but lightly examined. As these new data emerge,
they warrant careful investigation and documentation, for they continue to provide important insights into the adaptive strategies of the first
hunter-gatherers of Texas.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
As before, the TCFPS could not have been
accomplished without the help of the many people
who provided information on their Clovis points,
reported on points in other collections, allowed access to the Clovis points in their charge, or otherwise insured the success of the survey. The previous
paper (Meltzer 1987:61-62) acknowledged those
who provided data for the first round of the TCFPS.
We would like to thank them again, and here also
acknowledge those who provided the data for this
update of the survey:

Meltzer and Bever m Paleoindians of Texas
Del Barnett

Royce Lesley

Chris Borsellino

Paul Lorrain

Bradley Bowman

Fain McDaniel

Charles L. Boyd

Charles Morris

Terry. Bradshaw

Peter W. Nichols

Murry Brown

Wayne Parker

Jeff Cerrier

Leland W. Patterson

C. K. Chandler

Timothy K. Perttula

J. W. Cohen

Dale Phelps

75

Amick, D. S.
1995 Patterns of technological variation among Folsom
and Midland projectile points in the American southwest. Plains Anthropologist 40:23-38.
Arbingast, S. et al.
1976 Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The
University of Texas, Austin.
Banks, L. D.

Darrell Creel

Leon Pope

William Dickens

Ken Smith

C. Reid Ferring

Lewis B. Smith

Robert S. Fore

Tim Smith

Jesse Fremont

Arnold F. Sommer

William N. German

Roberta D. Speer

Keith C. Glasscock

Paul Tanner

Jack Hofman

Larry R. Thompson

Jim Hogue

Richard W. Walter

Bon Hovorak

Morris Weeks

Jeffery A. Huebner

Westelle Whitaker

Tom Kelly

Bill Young

1990

From Mountain Peaks to Alligator Stomachs: A Review of Lithic Sources in the Trans-Mississippi
South, the Southern Plains, and Adjacent Southwest. Memoir No. 4. Oklahoma Anthropological
Society, Oklahoma City.

Baumgardner, R.
1986 Terraces of the Upper Little Red River. In Geomorphology and Quaternary Stratigraphy of the Rolling Plains, Texas Panhandle, edited by T.
Gustavson, pp. 20-28. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Biesaart, L., W. Roberson, and L. Spotts
1985 Prehistoric archaeological sites bz Texas: a statistical overview. Special Report 28. Office of the State
Archeologist, The Texas Historical Commission.
Bleed, P.
1986 The optimal design of hunting weapons. American
Antiquity 51:737-747.
Blum, M., J. T. Abbott, and S. Valastro
1992

Evolution of landscapes on the Double Mountain
Fork of the Brazos River, West Texas: implications

Additional help and much welcomed advice
was provided by C. Britt Bousman, C. K. Chandler,
Harold Hietala, Jack L. Hofman, and David Welch
(SMU’s resident SAS-GRAPH Guru), and especially Michael B. Collins, C. Reid Ferring, and
Vance T. Holliday, who also gave a draft of this
manuscript a thorough reading and caught most of
the errors. We accept full responsibility for any and
all errors that managed to sneak past their watchful eyes. Grants to Meltzer from The Potts and
Sibley Foundation have greatly facilitated this research, and the Foundation’s support is gratefully
acknowledged.

for preservation and visibility of the archaeological
record. Geoarchaeology 7:339-370.
Blum, M., and S. Valastro
1992 Quaternary stratigraphy and geoarchaeology of the
Colorado and Concho Rivers, West Texas.
Geoarchaeology 7:419-448.

Bradley, B.
1993 Paleo-indian flaked stone technology in the North
American High Plains. In Frotn Kostenski to Clovis:
Upper Paleolithic-Paleo-indian adaptations, edited
by O. Soffer and N. Praslov, pp. 251-262. Plenum
Press, New York.
Brown, T., K. Killen, H. Simons, and V. Wulfkuhle
1982 Resource protection planning process for Texas.
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

REFERENCES CITED
Alexander, H. J.
1963 The Levi site: a paleo-indian campsite in central
Texas. American Antiquity 28:510-528.

Brown, K. M.
1976 Fused volcanic glass from the Manning Formation.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 47:189207.
1994

Four Clovis points from San Augustine County,
Texas. La Tierra 21:24-39.

76

Texas Archeological Society

Bryant, V. M. and R. G. Holloway
1985 A Late-Quaternay paleoenvironmental record of
Texas: an overview of the pollen evidence. In Pollen records of Late-Quaternary North American
sediments, edited by V. M. Bryant and R. G.
Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists, Dallas.
Chandler, C. K.
1982 Paleo-indian projectile points from San Patricio
County, Texas. La Tierra 9(3):26-28.
1983

Paleo-indian projectile points from Kendall County,
Texas. La Tierra 10(4):36-37.

Chandler, C. K. and D. Rogers
1995 Clovis points from Montgomery and Brazoria counties in southeast Texas. La Tierra, In press.
Collins, M. B.
1976 Terminal Pleistocene cultural adaptations in southern Texas. In Habitats humains anterieurs a
l ’HoIocene en Amerique, edited by J. B. Griffin, pp.
t02-135. UISPP, Nice, France.
1990

Observations on Clovis lithic technology. Current
Research in the Pleistocene 7:73-74.

Collins, M. B., G. E. Evans, T. N. Campbell, M. C. Winans,
and C. E. Mear
1989 Clovis occupation at Kincaid Shelter, Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 6:3-4.

Deller, D. B. and C. J. Ellis
1992 Thedford II: A Paleoindian site in the Ausable River
watershed of southwestern Ontario. Memoirs No.
24. University of Michigan, Museum of Anthropology, Ann Arbor.
Enlow, D. and T. N. Campbell
1955 Some Paleo-indian projectile points from the southeastern periphery of the Great Plains. The Panhandle-Plains Historical Review 28:29-38.
Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc.
1981 A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of
the Proposed Stacy Reservoir, Concho, Coleman
and Runnels Counties, Texas. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.
Etchieson, G., R. Speer, and J. Hughes
1979 Archaeological investigations in the Crowell Reservoir area, Cottle, Foard, King, and Knox counties,
Texas. Report submitted to the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, by the Archaeological Research Laboratory, Killgore Research Center, West Texas State
University, Canyon, Texas.
Everitt, B. S.
1977

The analysis of contingency tables. Chapman and
Hall, London.

Faught, M., D. G. Anderson, and A. Gisiger
1994 North American Paleoindian database: an update.
Current Research in the Pleistocene 11:32-34.

Collins, M. B., T. R. Hester, and P. Headrick
1992

Engraved cobbles from the Gault site, Central Texas.
Current Research in the Pleistocene 9:3-4.

Collins, M. B., T. R. Hester, D. Olmstead, and P. Headrick
1991 Engraved cobbles from early archaeological contexts in central Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 8:13-15.

Ferring, C. R.
1989 The Aubrey Clovis site: a Paleoindian locality in
the Upper Trinity River basin, Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 6:9-t 1.
1990

The 1989 investigations at the Aubrey Clovis site,
Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 10:1012.

Collins, M. B., C. B. Bousman, P. Goldberg, P. Takac, J. Guy,
J. L. Lanata, T. W. Stafford, and V. T. Holliday
1993 The Paleoindian sequence at the Wilson-Leonard
site, Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene
!0:10-12.

1995a Middle Holocene environments, geology, and archaeology in the Southern Plains. In Archaeological Geology of the Archaic Period h~ North America,
edited by E.A. Bettis, pp. 21-35. Special Paper 297.
Geological Society of America, Boulder.

Cooper, B.
1974 A fluted point from McMullen County, Texas. La
Tierra 1(3):18.

1995b Subsistence and mobility patterns at the Aubrey
Clovis site, Texas. Paper presented at the 60th Annual Meeting, Society for American Archaeology,
Minneapolis.

Crook, W. W. and R. K. Harris
1955 Scottsbluff points in the Obshner site near Dallas,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
26:75-100.
1957

Hearths and artifacts of early man near Lewisville,
Texas and associated fauna. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 28:7-97.

1958

A Pleistocene campsite near Lewisvitle, Texas.
American Antiquity 23:233-246.

Frederick, C. and C. Ringstaff
1994 Lithic resources at Fort Hood: further investigations. In Archaeological investigations on 571 prehistoric sites at Fort Hood, Bell, and Coryell Counties, Texas, edited by W. N. Trierweiler, pp. 125181. Research Report No. 31, Archaeological
Resourse Management Series. U.S. Army, Fort
Hood.

Meltzer and Bever ~ Paleoindians of Texas

77

Frison, G. C.
1991 The Clovis cultural complex: new data from caches
of flaked stone and worked bone artifacts. In Raw
material economies among prehistoric hunter-gatherers, edited by A. Montet-White and S. Holen, pp.
321-333. Publications in Anthropology, No. 19.
University of Kansas, Lawrence.

Hester, T. R.
n.d. A distributional study of Paleo-indian projectile
point types in Texas. Unpublished paper, on file
with the authoi" (prepared t967).
1974

On fluted points and south Texas archaeology. Texas
Archeology (The Newsletter of the Texas Archeological Society) 18(2): 11-14.

Gramly, R. M.
1982 The Vail site: a palaeo-indian encampment in Maine.
Bulletin of the Buffalo Society of Natural Sciences,
Volume 30.

t980

A survey of Paleo-indian archaeological remains
along the Texas Coast. In Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas Coast, edited by L. Highley and T.
R. Hester, pp. 1-12. Special Report No. 11. Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.

1988

Paleoindian obsidian artifacts from Texas: a review.
Current Research in the Pleistocene 5:27-29.

Greer, J. W.
1968 Some unusua! artifacts from Val Verde county,
Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 20:183-192.
Gustavson, T. C., R. J. Finley, and K. McGillis
1980 Regional distribution of Permian salt in the
Anadarko, Dalhart, and Palo Duro Basins of the
Texas Panhandle. Report of Investigations No. 106.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Hartwell, W. T., E. Johnson, V. T. Holliday, R. Ralph, and S.
Lupton
1989 A re-evaluation of Ryan’s site: a disturbed Plainview
cache on the Southern High Plains of Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 6:14-15.
Hays, T. R. (editor)
1982

Archaeological investigations of the San Gabriel
Resevoir Districts, Central Texas. 4 Vols. Institute
of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University,
Denton.

Hayner, E.W.
1955 Research in east Texas projectile points. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 26:235-243.
Haynes, C.V.
!982 Were Clovis progenitors in Beringia? In Paleoecology of Beringia, edited by D. M. Hopkins, J.
Matthews, C. Schweger, and S. Young, pp. 383398. Academic Press, New York.
1991

Geoarchaeological and palaeohydrologicat evidence
for a Clovis-age drought in North America and its
bearing on extinctions. Quaternary Research
35:438-450.

Hedrick, John A.
1989 A preliminary report on archaeological resources in
southern Culberson County in the vicinity of Van
Horn, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 59:129-156.
Henderson, J. and G. Goode
1991 Pavo Real: an early Paleoindian site in south-central, Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene
8:26-28.

Hester, T. R., M. B. Collins, D. A. Story, E. S. Turner, P.
Tanner, K. Brown, L. D. Banks, D. Stanford, and R. J. Long
1992 Paleoindian archaeology at McFaddin Beach, Texas.
Current Research in the Pleistocene 9:20-22.
Hester, T., G. Evans, F. Asaro, F. Stross, T. Campbell, and H.
Michel
1985 Trace element analysis of an obsidian Paleoindian
projectile point from Kincaid Rockshelter, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56:143153.
Hofman, J.
1992 Recognition and interpretation of Folsom technological variability on the Southern Plains. In IceAge hunters of the Rockies, edited by D. Stanford,
and J. Day, pp. 193-224. New Series, No. 1. Denver
Museum of Natural History and University Press of
Colorado, Denver and Niwot.
t996

Sites, localities, and isolates: a regional perspective
on southern Plains Folsom evidence. In Folsom Archaeology, edited by P. Jodry and D. Stanford.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C. In
press.

Hofman, J. L. and D. G. Wyckoff
1991 Clovis occupation in Oklahoma. Current Research
in the Pleistocene 8:29-32.
Hofman, J. L., L. C. Todd, and M. B. Collins
1991 Identification of centra! Texas Edwards chert at the
Folsom and Lindenmeier sites. Plains Anthropologist 36:297-308.
Holliday, V. T.
1989 Middle Holocene drought on the Southern High
Plains. Quaternary Research 31:74-82
1995

Stratigraphy and paleoenvironments of Late Quaternary valley fills on the Southern High Plains.
Memoir 186. Geological Society of America, Boulder, in press.

78

Texas Archeological Society

Holliday, V. T., C. V. Haynes, J. L. Hofman, and D. J. Meltzer
1994 Geoarchaeology and geochronology of the Miami
(Clovis) site, southern High Plains of Texas. Quaternary Research 41:234-244.
House, K.
1974 A Paleo-Indian fluted point from Live Oak County,
Texas. Texas Archeology (The Texas Archeological
Society Newsletter) 18(1): 17- l 9.
Humphrey, J. D. and C. R. Ferring
1994 Stable isotope evidence for latest Pleistocene and
Holocene climatic change in north-central Texas.
Quaternary Research 41:200-213.
Jensen, H.
1968 Report on excavations at the Field Ranch site
(X41 CO- 10) Cooke County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 39:133-146.

Largent, F. B.
1995 Some new additions to the Texas Folsom point database. Plains Anthropologist 40:69-71.
Largent, F. B., M. R. Waters, and D. L. Carlson
1991 The spatiotemporal distribution and characteristics
of Folsom projectile points in Texas. Plains Anthropologist 36:323-341.
Long, R. J.
1977 McFaddin Beach. The Patillo Higgins Series of
Natural History and Anthropology, Number 1.
Spindletop Museum, Lamar University, Beaumont.
MacNeish, R. S. and A. Nelken-Turner
1983 The preceramic of Mesoamerica. Journal of Field
Archaeology 10:71-84.
Mallouf, R. J.
1981 Observations concerning environmental and cultural
interactions during the terminal Pleistocene and

Johnson, E.
1983

Early Holocene in the Big Bend of Texas and ad-

The Lubbock Lake Paleoindian record. In Guidebook to the Central Llano Estacado, edited by V. T.

joining regions. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 52:121-146.

Holliday. Center for Arid Land Studies, Texas Tech
University, Lubbock.

1985

A synthesis of eastern Trans-Pecos prehistory. Unpublished Master’s Thesis, Department of Anthro-

Johnson, E. and V. T. Holliday
1984

pology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Comments on "Large springs and early American
indians" by Joel L. Shiner. Plains Anthropologist

1988

The Yellow Hawk site: a Clovis quarry workshop in
north-central Texas. Current Research in the Pleis-

29:65-70.

tocene 5:17-18.

Johnson, E., V. Holliday, F. Asaro, F. Stross, and H. Michel
1985 Trace element analysis of Paleoindian obsidian artifacts from the southern High Plains. Current Research in the Pleistocene 2:51-53.
Johnson, L.
1961 The Yarbrough and Miller sites of northe~astern
Texas, with a preliminary definition of the La Harpe
Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
32:14! -284.
Judge,
1973

Paleoindian occupation of the central Rio Grande
Valley in New Mexico. University of New Mexico
Press, Albuquerque.

Keeley, L.
1982 Hafting and retooling: effects on the archaeological
record. American Antiquity 47:798-809.
Kelly, T. C.
1983 The Brom Cooper Paleo-indian collection from
McMullen County, Texas. La Tierra 10(3): 17-40.
Kingston, M. (editor)
1993 The Texas Almanac. A. H. Belo Corporation, Dallas.

1989

A Clovis quarry workshop in the Callahan Divide:
the Yellow Hawk site, Taylor County, Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 34:81-103.

Meier, C. J. and T. R. Hester
1972 Notes on the Meier site, Fayette County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Lower Plains Archeological Society
3:69-72.
1976

Paleo-indian artifacts from the Meier site, southeast
Texas. La Tierra 3(1):16-19.

Meltzer, D. J.
1986 A study of Texas Clovis points. Current Research
in the Pleistocene 3:33-36.
1987

The Clovis Paleoindian occupation of Texas: results of the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:27-68.

1989a An update on the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey.
Current Research in the Pleistocene 6:31-33.
1989b Was stone exchanged among eastern North American Paleo-indians? In Eastern Paleo-indian lithic
resource use, edited by C. Ellis and J. Lothrop, pp.
11-39. Westview Press, Boulder.
1993a Was there a Clovis adaptation? In From Kostenski
to Clovis: Upper PaleoIithic-Paleo-indian adaptations, edited by O. Softer and N. Praslov, pp. 293310. Plenum Press, New York.

Meltzer and Bever ~ Paleoindians of Texas

Meltzer, D.J. (Continued)
!993b Search for the first Americans. Smithsonian Books,
Washington, D.C..
1995

Clocking the first Americans. Annual Review ofAnthropology 24:21-45.

Mitchel!: J. B. and J. Winsch
1973 A Paleo-Indian point from south Texas. Ohio Archeologist 23(2):9.

Odell, G.
1994 Prehistoric hafting and mobility in the North American Midcontinent: examples from Illinois. Journal
of Anthropological Archeology 13:51-73.

79

Saner, B.
1995 An in situ Clovis point find from Kerr County. La
Tierra, in press.
Scurlock, J. and W. Davis
1962 Appraisal of the archeological resources of Toledo
Bend Reservoir, Panola, Newton, Sabine, and Shelby
Counties, Texas; Sabine and De Soto Parishes, Louisiana. Report submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Sellards, E. H.
1940

Pleistocene artifacts and associated fossils from Bee
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Geological Society of

Orchard, C. and T. Campbell
1954 Evidences of early man from the vicinity of San
Antonio, Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 4:454465.
Parker, W.
1983 Preliminary notes on a Clovis point associated with
mammoth tusk fragments in Hockley County, Texas.
La Tierra 10(4):31-35.
Patterson, L. W.
1986

Site 41HR571, a long prehistoric sequence in Harris

America 51:1627- 1658.
1952

Early man in America. University of Texas Press,
Austin.

Shiner, J. L.
1983 Large Springs and early American Indians. Plains
Anthropologist 28:1-7.
Shott, M.
1986 Technological organization and settlement mobility: an ethnographic examination. Journal of Anthropological Research 42:15-51.

County, Texas. Journal of the Houston Archeological Society 88:15-18.
1993

The archaeology of inland southeast Texas: a quantitative study. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 61:255-280.

Patterson, L. W., J. D. Lockwood, R. L. Gregg, and S. M.

Skinner, S. A. and R. Rash
1969 A Clovis fluted point from Hood County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:1-2.
Sollberger, J. B.
1988

the Texas Archeological Society 59:1-17.

Kindall
1992a The Lockwood collection (41HR343), Harris
County, Texas. Journal of the Houston Archeological Society 104:16-24.

1992b Prehistoric sites 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris
County, Texas. Journal of the Houston Archeological Society 104:25-30.

On replicating fluted projectile points. Bulletin of

Stanford, D. and M. Jodry
1988 The Drake Clovis cache. Current Research in the
Pleistocene 5:21-22.
Stanford, D., M. Jodry, and L. Banks
1995

Early Paleoindian diet breadth as seen from the
Lewisville site: critter buffet as an alternative to

Perttula, T. K.
1989 The Paleoindian archaeological record in Northeast
Texas: evidence from avocational collecting activities. Current Research in the Pleistocene 6:19-21.
Ray, C. N.
1930 Report on some recent archaeological researches in
the Abilene section. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 2:59-78.
Sabin, T. J. and V. T. Holliday
1995 Playas and lunettes on the Southern High Plains:
morphometric and spatial relationships. Annals of
the Association of American Geographers 85:286305.

mammoth barbecue. Paper presented at the 60th
Annual Meeting, Society for American Archaeology, Minneapolis.

Story, D. A.
1981 An overview of the archaeology of east Texas.
Plains Anthropologist 26:139-156.
1990

Culture history of the Native Americans. In The
archeology and bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal
Plain, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M.
D. Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive,
and K. J. Reinhard pp. 163-366. 2 Vols. Research
Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

80

Texas Archeological Society

Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas archeology: type descriptions.
Special Publication 1, Texas Archeo!ogical Society
and Bulletin 4, Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.

Weir, F.
1956 Surface artifacts from La Perdida, Starr County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
27:59-78.

Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An introductory handbook of Texas archaeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25
(whole volume).

Wheat, J. B.
1953 An archaeological survey of the Addicks Dam basin, southeast Texas. River Basin Surveys Papers 4,
Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.

Takac, P.
1991 Underwater excavations at Spring Lake: a
Paleoindian site in Hays County, Texas. Current
Research in the Pleistocene 8:46-48.
Tankersley, K.B.
1994 The effects of stone and technology on fluted-point
morphometry. American Antiquity 59:498-510.
Turner, E. S. and P. Tanner
1994 The McFaddin Beach site on the upper Texas coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65:319336.
Walter, R. W.
1990

Similarities between two Texas Clovis fluted points
found on the South Plains. The South Plains Archeological Society Newsletter 99.

Willig, J. A.
1988 Paleo-Archaic adaptations and lakeside settlement
patterns in the northern Alkali Basin. In Early human occupation in far western North America: the
Clovis-Archaic interface, edited by J. A. Willig, C.
M. Aikens, and J. L. Fagan, pp. 417-482. Anthropological Papers, Number 21. Nevada State Museum,
Carson City.
Wilson, J.
1979 A preliminary report on the Little Pin Oak Creek
site (41FY53): a campsite with Clovis, Plainview,
and subsequent artifacts in Fayette County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 50:135140.

Meltzer and Bever m Paleoindians of Texas

81

APPENDIX A: TEXAS CLOVIS FLUTED POINT SURVEY FORM
Sequence

County

Please attach a tracing of the outline (or a photocopy) of both faces of the fluted point. Be sure to show the outline of
the flute(s), broken areas, and the extent of edge grinding. If possible, please take measurements in centimeters. Refer
to Figure 1 as a guide for the measurements.
1. Maximum length

2. Maximum width

3. Width of base

4. Distance from maximum
width to base

5. Maximum blade thickness

6. Distance from maximum
thickness to base

7. Maximum thickness

8. Basal concavity depth

9. Obverse flute length

10. Obverse flute width

11. Reverse flute length

12. Reverse flute width

13. Number of flutes obverse

14. Number of flutes reverse

15. Length of grinding left edge

16. Length of grinding right edge

17. Basal grinding

Yes

I

18. Measurements in

No

19.

Location where point was discovered:

(Please be as specific as possible: include County name)
20.

Artifacts or features found with the point:

21.

Color and type of stone material:

22.

Please print name and address:

Please return the completed form to:
David J. Meltzer
Department of Anthropology
Southern Methodist University
Dallas, Texas 75275-0336

s rmu mn of ped Projectile Points
in Texas
Elton R. Prewitt

ABSTRACT
Distribution and density data for 151 projectile point types currently recognized in Texas are presented in
a series of maps. Drawn from 736 sources, the data encompassing 60,519 projectile points show generalized
distribution areas. Gaps are indicated in the 67 (of 254) counties which lack published data, and in the 110
counties represented by three or fewer reports. While extensive, the database is limited and does not include every
published source that deals with Texas archeology.

INTRODUCTION
During the period ! 980-821 reviewed 428 journal articles and monographs to compile distribution
data for projectile points at the county level for the
state of Texas. Subsequently, numerous people have
been subjected to my admonishments that
unquantified perceptions of type distributions are
not necessarily accurate. When I was approached to
write an overview of a particular region of the state
for this volume of the Bulletin, I returned a counterproposal to update the point type data and present
an article consisting of distribution and density maps
with no accompanying interpretation. The proposal
was accepted, and I reviewed another 308 articles
and monographs for a total of 736 bibliographic
entries. For the most part the sources are readily
obtainable, but the list is by no means complete.
In general, reports published before 1947 are
not included in the review. These early reports tend
to be very difficult to work with because of incomplete descriptions and poor illustrations. This makes
typological assignments difficult and uncertain. The
cutoff date for recent reports is December 1994. A
number of reports dated 1994 but which were not
received before March 1995 are not included either. Other omissions include many theses and dissertations, and some local or regional journals. The
Record published by the Dallas Archeological Society, for example, was not readily available and is
not included. A glance at the database sources will
quickly reveal the journals utilized. Reports published by private contracting firms are included

where possible, but some firms provide minimal
distribution of their reports. The final source not
consulted is the compliance and review holdings of
the Texas Historical Commission. The primary caveat is that this review of the literature is extensive,
but it is certainly not comprehensive.
Readers will find that the distribution and density data presented in this article varies from their
firsthand knowledge. Reactions will vary, but I expect most will be along the lines of "This map is
wrong; it does not show type Zeta in Alpha County,
and I have 49 Zeta points from there in my collection!" My advance reply to all such comments is
simple: publish descriptions of your collections so
the rest of us can use the information. It is just as
important to remember that, while these maps may
not show a particular type extending into a nearby
county, it does not mean the type cannot occur
there. The accuracy of the maps reflects the accuracy of published data, and as is demonstrated later
in this article, there are large gaps in the existing
database.

METHODS
Each report was examined critically in regard
to typological assignments. Written descriptions and
illustrations were compared to my own set of
illustrations and descriptions as well as to standard
references such as Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954),
Suhm and Jelks (1962), Bell (1958, 1960), Perino
(1968, 1971), Chapman (1975, 1980), and Turner
and Hester (1985, 1993). Detectable errors in

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

84

Texas Archeological Society

typological assignment were corrected. A number
of reports were disregarded as unusable because,
although type names and quantities were given,
there were inadequate descriptions and few or no
illustrations.
Also not used are articles devoted exclusively
to descriptions of single point types or to surveys of
point types. It was extremely difficult to sort out
specimens already reported in other sources from
those previously unreported. Rather than bias the
sample with an unknown quautity of duplicate entries, these two types of articles were disregarded.
This created a different problem in a number of
instances where quantities of reported specimens
are low: some types are seriously under-represented
in the database compared to the published distributions. Notable examples include Axtell (Prewitt and
Chandler 1992), Caracara (Saunders and Hester
1993), Clovis (Meltzer 1987; see also Meltzer and
Bever, this volume), Folsom (Largent, Waters, and
Carlson 1991) and Jetta (Hester 1979). Several
types, especially recently named groups such as
Devils (Turpin and Bement 1992), do not appear at
all in the database.
Adjustments have been made in the definition
of a few point types. Neches River is used as originally defined by Kent ( 1961; see also Jelks 1965:Figure 72A-F). The Oletha variety of Neches River
(Prewitt 1974:66-67) is treated as a separate type
rather than as a variety, and the name is accordingly
given as Oletha. Baird and Taylor are used as defined by Kelley (1947), while Tortugas is used for
those specimens not clearly assignable to the earlier
two types. One type only cursorily defined in print
is used: the Zephyr (Prewitt 1976) category includes
specimens formerly subsumed along with Hoxie
under Darl, and the Mahomet designation (originally proposed as a variety) is dropped in favor of
using Darl. Another type not yet defined in print is
Merrell; closely resembling and usually misidentified
as Frio, published examples of this type can be
found in Campbell (1948:Plate 3A9), Suhm and
Jelks (1962:Plate 98C, E) and Sorrow, Shafer and
Ross (1967:Figure 15d).
Data were compiled on worksheets that contained a reference number, county, site number, site
name (or other identifier as appropriate), type code
number, type name, quantity, and short bibliographic reference. Reference numbers were assigned in sequential order of review; these numbers
are included in parentheses following the authors’

names in the alphabetical listing of database
sources. Type codes are taken from my as yet unpublished compilation of type names (with dates
and references) that have been used in Texas or
proposed for use in print. Type names are sometimes used with a following question (?) mark, or
in other cases have "-like" appended. These reflect
uncertainties by either the original analyst, myself,
or both. I felt that these specimens should be included on a broad scale so that if they formed distinctive distribution patterns, then we should look
toward defining new types or varieties. In most
cases the questionable specimens did not alter distributions for the types as a whole, so they were
included in the final density maps. However, in a
very few cases questionable specimens occurred at
considerable distances from the core distribution
areas. These were reviewed once more, and in all
but two instances the specimens were removed
from the final density maps.
The data sheets for the first 428 reports were
entered into the Excel spreadsheet application on a
Macintosh IIsi. After initial proofing and manipulation, the data were shipped into the Quattro Pro
spreadsheet application on a Dell 486DX, and the
additional 308 reports were entered. The entire compilation was imported into the Paradox database
application where final sorting and preparations
were made. This database was then imported into
the Mapviewer thematic mapping application where
the individual distribution maps were created.
Preceding the projectile point maps are two
key maps that aid in evaluating the distributions.
Figure la illustrates the distribution and density of
reports per county included in the database. Because some reports cover multiple counties they are
tallied more than one time. Thus, 736 sources are
counted as 822 in this figure. Sixty-seven counties
(26 percent) lack reported data (keep in mind that
the database is extensive, but it is not complete),
while 110 counties (43 percent) are represented by
one to three reports, 60 counties (24 percent) by
four to nine reports, and 17 counties (7 percent) by
ten or more reports (n=276, or 33.5 percent). The
five counties with the greatest numbers of reports
(15 percent) are Bexar (32), Val Verde (27), Travis
(23), Harris (22), and Williamson (22).
Figure lb illustrates the distribution and density of 60,519 projectile points by county. As noted
above, 67 counties (26 percent) lack reported data
while 103 counties (40.5 percent) are represented

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

DISTRIBUTION OF REFERENCES CONSULTED BY COUNTY

(N = 822)

[] Over 10
[] 4to9
[] lto3
[] No Data

DISTRIBUTION OF ALL PROJECTILE POINTS BY COUNTY

(N- 60,519)

[] Over 1000
[] 101 to 1000
[] 1 to 100
[] No Data
Figure 1

85

86

Texas Archeological Society

by 1 to 100 points, 70 counties (27.5 percent) by
101 to 1,000 points, and 14 counties (5.5 percent)
by more than 1,000 points. The five counties with
the greatest numbers of points are Wittiamson with
10,236 (16.7 percent), Val Verde with 4,642 (8
percent), Travis with 2,081 (3.5 percent), Rockwall
with 1,732 (3 percent), and Hill with 1,660 (3 percent). These five counties (2 percent) contain 20,351
(33.6 percent) of the points in the database, while
the 14 counties (5.5 percent) with more than 1,000
points contain 32,491 (53.7 percent) of the points.
The distribution and density maps are presented
in alphabetical order beginning with Abasolo in
Figure 2a. Each map is accompanied by an
illustration of the type. Key references provided for
each type are indicated by one or more numbers
enclosed in parentheses following the type name.
These numbers (from 1-36) refer to entries listed in
the References Cited, not the Projectile Point Data
Base Sources (no. 1-736). Additional interpretive
information such as arrow point or dart point, age
estimates, and period assignments are not included
in order for the distributions to be presented as free
of interpretation as possible. Distributions are
presented in a shaded density format with darker
shading indicating higher density. Values remain
constant for all of the types.
The database is maintained on file at the ofrices of Prewitt and Associates, Inc., 7701 North
Lamar Blvd., Suite 104, Austin, Texas 78752-1012.
Should one desire to review the actual numbers or
obtain a copy of the database, inquiries should be
sent to the preceding address.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This review could not have been completed
without the generous assistance of many people.
Special thanks go to Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
(PAI) staff members Linda Nance Foster for typing
the original database in the early 1980s, R. Brent
Scott for computer data entry and preliminary
manipulation, Sandra L. Hannum for generation of
the maps, and Helen H. Holum for creating the
computerized bibliography of database sources.
Advice and encouragement have been provided by
PAI staff members Ross C. Fields, Douglas K.
Boyd, and Steve A. Tomka, and by former staff
members C. Britt Bousman and Michael B. Collins.
Welcome criticism and helpful suggestions offered
by the acerbic LeRoy Johnson, Jr., have hopefully

improved the final product. Finally, the patience of
BTAS editor Timothy K. Perttula is greatly
appreciated. The accuracy and limitations of the
data remain my responsibility.

REFERENCES CITED
Bell, R. E.
1958

Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points. Special Bulletin 1. Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Oklahoma City. (1)

1960

Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points’. Special Bulletin 2. Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Oklahoma City. (2)

Bement, L. C.
1991 The Statistical Analysis of Langtry Variants from
Arenosa Shelter, Val Verde County, Texas. In Papers on Lower Pecos Prehistory, edited by S. A.
Turpin, pp. 51-64. Studies in Archeology No. 8.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin. (3)
Campbell, T. N.
1948 The Merrell Site: Archaeological Remains Associated with Alluvial Terrace Deposits in Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 19:7-35. (4)
Chapman, C. H.
1975

The Archaeology of Missouri, 1. University of Missouri Press, Columbia, Missouri. (5)

1980

The Archaeology of Missouri, H. University of Missouri Press, Columbia, Missouri. (6)

Flinn, R. and J. Flinn
1968 The High Bluff Site on the Clear Fork of the Brazos
River. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
38:93-125. (7)
Hester, T. R.
1979 Notes on Gower, Jetta and Other Projectile Points
of the Pre-Archaic Period. La Tierra 6(3):5-8. (8)
Hughes, J. T. and P. S. Willey (editors)
1978 Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir. Archeological
Survey Report 24. Office of the State Archeologist,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin. (9)
Jelks,
1962

The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect
Site in Hill County, Texas. Archaeology Series No.
5. Department of Anthropology, The University of,

1965

Texas at Austin. (10)
The Archeology of McGee Bend

Texas.
of Anof Texas at Austin. (11)
Reservoir,

Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Department

thropology, The University

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

Johnson, L., Jr.
1962 The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern
Texas, with a Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe
Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
32:141-284. (12)
Kelley, J. C.
1947 The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clear Fork Focus. American Antiquity
13(2):97-109. (13)
Kelly, T. C.
1983 The Brom Cooper Paleo-Indian Collection from
McMullen County, Texas. La Tierra 10(3):17-40.
(14)
Kent, D. T., Jr.
1961 Letter to Lathel F. Duffield containing MS descriptions of Neches River and Booker dart points. In
McGee Bend Reservoir Files, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin. (15)

87

Prewitt, E. R.
1974 Upper Navasota Reservoir: An Archeological Assessment. Research Report 47. Texas Archeological
Survey, The Univesity of Texas at Austin. (24)
1976

The Rogers Springs Site: 1974 Excavations. Research
Report 54. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin (unpublished manuscript on
file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory). (25)

Prewitt, E. R. and C. K. Chandler
1992 Axtell: A Middle Archaic Dart Point Type. La Tierra
19(1):15-20. (26)
Saunders, R. K. and T. R. Hester
1993 A Typological Study of Side-Notched Arrow Points
from the Falcon Lake Region of Texas and Mexico.
La Tierra 20(2):22-31. (27)
Smith, C. B.
1965 A New Method of Projectile Point Classification
and Site Survey. Transactions of the First Southeastern New Mexico and West Texas Symposium

Krone,
1976 The Ahumada Point: A Projectile Point from Northem Chihuahua, Mexico. The Artifact 14(2):41-43.
(16)
Largent, F. B., Jr., M. R. Waters and D. L. Carlson
1991 The Spatiotemporal Distribution and Characteristics of Folsom Projectile Points in Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 36(137):323-341. (17)
Leslie, R.
1978 Projectile Point Types and Sequence of the Eastern
Jornada-Mogotlon, Extreme Southeastern New
Mexico. Transactions of the 13th Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New
Mexico and Western Texas. (18)
Meltzer, D. J.
1987 The Clovis Paleoindian Occupation of Texas: Results
of the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 57:27-68. (19)
Mitchell, J. L.
1976 A Tentative New Type of Late Paleo-Indian Point
from South Texas. La Tierra 3(1):20-22. (20)
Nunley, J. P., L. F. Duffield, and E. B. Jelks
1965 Excavations at Amistad Reservoir, 1962 Season. Miscellaneous Papers No. 3. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin. (21)

Perino,
1968 Guide to the Identification of Certain American In-

1971

Papers, pp. 15-17. (28)
Sorrow, W. M., H. J. Shafer and R. E. Ross
1967

Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers
11. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas, Austin. (29)

Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jetks
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
Joint Publication, Texas Archeological Society Special Publication No. 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin No. 4. Austin. (30)
Suhm, D. Ann, A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25
(whole volume). (31)
Taylor, W. W.
1966 Archaic Cultures Adjacent to the Northeastern Frontiers of Mesoamerica. In Handbook of Middle American Indians, Archaeological Frontiers and External
Connections, Volume 4, edited by R. Wauchope,
pp. 59-94. University of Texas Press, Austin. (32)
Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1993

A Field Guide to the Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
2nd Edition. Gulf Publishing Company, Houston. (33)

Turpin, S. A. and L. C. Bement
1992

Skyline Shelter and Devils Triangular Dart Points:

dian Projectile Pohzts. Special Bulletin 3. Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Oklahoma City. (22)

Evidence for a New Component of the Lower Pecos

Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points. Special Bulletin 4. Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Oklahoma City. (23)

Anthropologist 37(138):41-57. (34)

Early Archaic Sequence, Southwest Texas. Plains

Texas Archeological Society

ABASOLO (1, 30, 33)

AGATE BASIN (5, 22)

AHUMADA (16)

[] Over 50
[] 11 to 51
[] ltoll
Figure 2

[] No Data

Prewitt m Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

89

ALBA (1, 30, 33)

ALMAGRE (30, 33)

ANDICE (33)

[] Over 50
11 to 51
Figure 3

[] ltoll
[] No Data

90

Texas Archeological Society

ANGOSTURA (30, 33)

ARENOSA (3)

AXTELL (33)

[] Over 50
[] 11to 51
Figure 4

[] ltoll
[] NO Data

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

91

BAIRD (13)

BAKER (33)

BANDY (38)

[] Over 50
[] 11 to 51
[] ltoll
[] No Data

92

Texas Archeological Society

BARBER (33)

]~ASSETT (1, 30, 33)

BELL (38)

[] Over 50
11 to51
[] ltoll
Figure 6

[] No Data

Prewitt m Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

93

BIG SANDY (2, 5)

BONHAM (2, 30, 33)

BOOKER (15)

[] Over 50
11 to 51
[] 1toll
[] No Data

94

Texas Archeological Society

t~ULVERDE (2, 30, 33)

CALF CREEK (23)

CAMERON (30, 33)

[]

Over BO~
11to 51
[] ltoll
Figure 8

[] No Data

Prewitt m Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

95

CARACARA (33)

CARLSBAD (18)

CARRIZO (23, 33)

Figure 9

[]
[]
[]
[]

Over 50
11to 51
ltoll
No Data

96

Texas Archeological Society

CARROLLTON

(1, 30, 33)

CASTROVILLE (2, 30, 33)

CATAHOULA (2, 33)

[] Over 50
[] 11 to 51
[] ltoll
Figure 10

[] No Data

Prewitt w Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

CATAN (1,

97

30, 33)

CHADBOURNE (33)

CLIFFTON (2, 30, 33)

[] Over 50
11to 51
[] ltoll
Figure 11

[] No Data

98

Texas Archeological Society

CLOVIS (1, 5, 30, 33)

COLBERT (33)

COMSTOCK (21)

[] Over 50
[] 11 to 51
[] ltoll
Figure 12

[] No Data

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

99

CONEJO (33)

CUNEY (30, 33)

[] Over 50
11 to 51
[] ltoll
[] No Data

1 O0

Texas Archeological Society

DARL (2, 30, 33)

DAWSON (33)

DEADMANS (9)

[] Over 50
[] 11 to 51
Figure 14

[] ltoll
[] No Data

Prewitt -- Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

101

DELHI (22, 33)

DESMUKE (2, 30, 33)

EDEN (22)

[] Over 50
11 to 51
[] ltoll
[] No Data

102

Texas Archeological Society

EDGEWOOD (1, 30, 33)

EDWARDS (23, 33)

ELAM (30, 33)

Figure 16

[]
[]
[]
[]

Over 50
llto 51
ltoll
No Data

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

103

ELIASVILLE (7)

ELLIS (2, 30, 33)

ENSOR (2, 30, 33)

Over 50
11 to51
ltoll
Figure 17

No Data

104

Texas Archeological Society

EPPS (22, 33)

EVANS (1, 33)

FAIRLAND (2, 30, 33)

[] Over 50
[] 11 to 51
[] 1toll
Figure 18

[] No Data

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

105

FIGUEROA (33)

FIRSTVIEW (33)

[ OLSOM (1, 5, 30, 33)

[] Over 50
[] 11 to 51
[] 1toll
Figure 19

[] No Data

106

Texas Archeological Society

FRESNO (30, 33)

~’RILEY (2, 33)

FRIO

(2, 30, 33)

[] Over 50
11to 51
[] 1toll
Figure 20

[] No Data

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

107

GARY (1, 6, 30, 33)

GARZA (23, 33)

GODLEY (23, 33)

[] Over 50
[] 11to 51
[] ltoI1
Figure 21

[] No Data

108

Texas Archeological Society

GOLONDRINA (22, 33)

GOWER (33)

GRANBURY (10)

[] Over 50
[] 11 to 51
[] ltoll
Figure 22

[] No Data

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

109

GUERRERO (33)

HARDIN

HARRELL

[] Over 50
11 to 51
[] 1toll
Figure 23

[] No Data

(2, 5)

(1, 30, 33)

110

Texas Archeological Society

HASKELL (23)

HAYES (1, 30, 33)

HELL GAP (22, 33)

[] Over~
[] llto 51
[] ltoll
Figure 24

[] No Data

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

111

HOMAN (23, 33)

Hoxm (33)

HUFFAKER (2, 6)

[] Over 50
11 to 51
ltoll

[] No Data

112

Texas Archeological Society

JEI~A (33)

JORa (32)

KENT (2, 30, 33)

[] Over 50
11 to51
[] ltoll
Figure 26

[] No Data

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

113

KEOTA (23)

KINNEY (1, 30, 33)

LA JITA (33)

[] Over 50
[] 11 to 51
[] ltoll
Figure 27

[] No Data

114

Texas Archeological Society

LANGE (1, 30, 33)

LANGTRY (19, 30, 33)

LERMA (1, 30, 33)

Figure 28

[]
[]
[]
[]

Over 50
11to 51
ltoll
No Data

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

115

LIVERMORE (2, 30, 33)

LONE OAK (33)

LOXT (33)

Figure 29

[] Over 50
11 to 51
[] ltoll
[] No Data

116

Texas Archeological Society

MALIAMAR 1 (28)

MALJAMAR 2 (28)

MARCOS (1, 30, 33)

Figure 30

[]
[]
[]
[]

Over 50
11to 51
ltoll
No Data

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

117

MARSHALL (1, 30, 33)

MARTINDALE (2, 30, 33)

MATAMOROS (1, 30, 33)

Figure 31

[]
[]
[]
[]

Over 50
11 to 51
ltoll
No Data

118

Texas Archeological Society

MAUl) (1, 30, 33)

MCGLOIN (33)

MCKEAN (1)

[] Over 50
[] 11 to 51
[] ltoll
Figure 32

[] No Data

Prewitt w Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

119

MERRELL (4)

MESERVE (1, 30, 33)

MIDLAND (22, 33)

[]
[]
[]
[]

Over 50
11 to51
1toll
No Data

120

Texas Archeological Society

MILNESAND (1, 33)

MINTER (12)

MONTELL (1, 30, 33)

[]

Over~
11 to 51

[] 1toll
Figure 34

[] No Data

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

MORmSS (1, 30, 33)

MORRILL (30, 33)

MORmS (1)

[] Over 50
11 to 51
[] ltoll
[] No Data

122

Texas Archeological Society

MOTLEY (1, 33)

NECHES RIVER (15, 33)

NEFF (36)

Over 50
11 to 51
1 toll
Figure 36

No Data

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

123

NOLAN (1, 30, 33)

(~LETHA (24, 33)

ORCHARD (20)

[] Over 50
[] 11to 51
[] ltoll
[] No Data

124

Texas Archeological Society

PADRE (33)

PAISANO (30, 33)

PALMILLAS (2, 30, 33)

Figure 38

[]
[]
[]
[]

Over 50
11 to 51
ltoll
No Data

Prewitt n Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

125

PANDALE (1, 30, 33)

PANDORA (2, 30, 33)

PEDERNALES (1, 30, 33)

[] Over 50
11 to51
[] ltoll
Figure 39

[] No Data

126

Texas Archeological Society

PELICAN (23, 33)

PERDIZ (2, 30, 33)

PLAINVIEW

Figure 40

(1, 30, 33)

[] Over~
11 to 51
[] ltoll
[] No Data

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

127

PONTCHARTRAIN (23, 33)

REED (1)

REFUGIO

Figure 41

[]
[]
[]
[]

Over 50
11 to51
ltoll
No Data

(1, 30, 33)

t 28

Texas Archeological Society

ROCKWALL (22)

SABINAL (33)

SAN PATRICE (1, 33)

[] Over 50
11 to 51
[] ltoll
Figure 42

[] No Data

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

129

SANDY CREEK (12)

SCALLORN

(2, 6, 30, 33)

SCOTTSBLUF (1, 30, 33)

[] Over ~0
[] 11to ~1
[] ltoll
No Data

130

Texas Archeological Society

SHL~LA (2, 30, 33)

SINNER (33)

STARR (30, 33)

[] Over 50
[] llto 51
[] ltoll
Figure 44

[] No Data

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

131

STEINER (33)

TALCO (1, 30, 33)

TAYLOR (13)

Figure 45

[]
[]
[]
[]

Over 50
11 to51
ltoll
No Data

132

Texas Archeological Society

TORTUGAS (30, 33)

TOYAH (2, 30, 33)

TRAVIS (1, 30, 33)

[] Over 50
[] 11 to 51
[] ltoll
Figure 46

[] No Data

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

133

TRINITY (1, 30, 33)

TURNEY (30, 33)

UVALDE

[] Over 50
[] 11 to 51
[] ltoll
Figure 47

[] No Data

(2, 30, 33)

134

Texas Archeological Society

VAL VERDE (33)

VICTORIA (14)

WASHITA (1, 33)

[] Over 50
11to 51
[] ltoll
Figure 48

[] No Data

Prewitt I Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

WELLS

135

(1, 30, 33)

WESLEY (12)

WILLIAMS (2, 30, 33)

[] Over 50
[] 11to 51
[] ltoll
Figure 49

[] No Data

136

Texas Archeological Society

WILSON (35)

WODEN (33)

YANTIS (12)

Figure 50

Over 50
11 to 51
1 toll
No Data

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

YARBROUGH

(2, 30, 33)

YOUNG

(2, 30, 33)

ZAVALA

__

[] Over 50
11 to 51
[] ltoll
[] No Data

137

(33)

138

Texas Archeological Society

ZELLA (14)

ZEPHYR (25)

ZO1LRA (33)

Figure 52

[]
[]
[]
[]

Over~
11to 51
ltoll
No Data

Prewitt-- Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas
Weir, F. A.
1985

An Early Holocene Burial at the Wilson-Leonard

139

Aten, Lawrence E. (86)
1967 Excavations at the Jamison Site (41 LB 2), Liberty

Site in Central Texas. The Mammoth Trumpet 2(1): 1,

Co., Texas. Report 1. Houston Archeological Soci-

3. (35)

ety, Houston.

Wiseman, R. N.
1971 The Neff Site, A Ceramic Period Lithic Manufacture Site on the Rio Felix, Southeastern New Mexico.
The Artifact 9(1): 1-30. (36)

PROJECTILE POINT DATA BASE
SOURCES
Alexander, Herbert L., Jr. (415)
1963 The Levi Site: A Paleo-Indian Campsite in Central
Texas. American Antiquity 28(4):510-528.

Aten, Lawrence E. (642)
1971 Archaeological Excavations at the Dow-Cleaver
Site, Brazoria County, Texas. Technical Bulletin 1.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Aten, Lawrence E. (653)
1983 Analysis of Discrete Habitation Units in the Trinity
River Delta, Upper Texas Coast. Occasional Papers
2. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin.
Aten, Lawrence E., Charles K. Chandler, A1 B. Wesolowsky,

Alexander, Robert K. (192)
1970 Archaeological Excavations at Parida Cave, Val

(84)

Excavations at the Harris" County Boys’ School Cem-

Texas

etery: Analysis of Galveston Bay Area Mortuary

Archeological Salvage Project, The University of

Practices. Special Publication No. 3. Texas Archeo-

Texas at Austin.

logical Society, Dallas.

Verde

County,

Texas.

Papers

19.

Ambler, J. Richard (258)
1967 Three Prehistoric Sites near Cedar Bayou,

Bailey, Gail L., and Douglas K. Boyd
1990

(563)

Archeological Investigations at 41TL38, Tyler

Galveston Bay Area. Report 8. Archeological Pro-

County, Texas. Technical Reports 10. Prewitt and

gram, State Building Commission, Austin.

Associates, Inc., Austin.

Ambler, J. Richard (173)
1970 Additional Archeological Survey of the Wallisville
Reservoir Area, Southeast Texas. Survey Reports 6.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Anderson, Keith M. (354)
1971 Archeological Resources of Lake Palestine, Texas.
Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
Assad, Cristi
1978

and Robert M. Malina
1976

(311)

An Evaluation of Archaeological Sites in the Vicinity of Floodwater Retarding Structure 2, Dry Comal

Bailey, Gail L., Douglas K. Boyd, and C. Britt Bousman
(564)
1991 Archeological Survey of the City Lakes Area and
Geomorphological and Magnetometer Surveys, Cooper Lake Project, Delta and Hopkins Counties,
Texas. Technical Reports 11. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Bailey, Gail L., Ross C. Fields, and Martha Doty Freeman
(525)
1986 Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at
the Buttercup Creek H Subdivision, Williamson
County, Texas. Reports of Investigations 50. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Creek, Comal County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 50. Center for Archaeological Research,

Ball, Henry F.

The University of Texas at San Antonio.

1986

(434)

Rock Art at Monk’s Cave (41RK84) Rusk County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

Assad, Cristi A. (312)
1979 Archaeological Testing in the Devine Road Area
North of Ohnos Dam, San Antonio, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 53. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

55:153-169.
Bandy, Phillip A.
1980

(336)

Archaeological Investigations at Sanderson Canyon Watershed, Terrell, Pecos, and Brewster Counties, Texas. Environment Consultants, Inc., Dallas,
Texas.

Assad, Cristi A. and Daniel R. Potter (319)
1979 An Intensive Archaeological Survey of Enchanted
Rock State Natural Area, Llano and Gillespie Counties, Texas. Archaeo!ogical Survey Report 84. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.

Banks, Larry D., and Joe Winters (85)
1975 The Bentsen-Clark Site, Red River County, Texas:
A Preliminary Report. Special Publication No. 2.
Texas Archeological Society, San Antonio.

140

Texas Archeological Society

Baskin, Barbara J. (284)
1978 Test Excavations at a Prehistoric, Stratified Camp-

Bement, Leland C., and Solveig A. Turpin
1988

site: Big Bend National Park, Brewster County,

(469)

A Folsom Point from Hinds Cave, 41 VV 456, Val
Verde County, Texas. La Tierra 15(1):5-7.

Texas. Submitted to the National Park Service,
Sonthwest Region Office, by Author. Privately
printed, Austin.
Beadles, Murray L.
1992

Benfer, Alice and Robert Benfer (100)
1981 The Mason Ranch Burial Cave, Uvalde County,
Texas. Ixt Tierra 8(3): 16-26.

(496)

A Preliminary Report on the Dewees Site (41KR38),

Birmingham, W.W.

Kerr County, Texas. 1~ Tierra 19(3):27-39.

1980

(105)

Scottsbluff Points from Victoria and De Witt Counties. La Tierra 7(4):27-29

Beasley, Tom S.

(116)

1978a A Site with Edwards Arrow Point Type. La Tierra

Birmingham, W. W., E. H. Schmiedlin, and Thomas R. Hester
(126)

5(4):23-31.

1976

Beasley, Tom S. (117)
1978b A Late Prehistoric Site in Webb County, Texas. La
Tierra 5(2):4-9.

Black, Stephen L.
1978

Beasley, Tom S.
1982

Archaeology at the Wells Site (41 JK 146), Jackson
County, Texas. La Tierra 3(4):29-33.
(314)

Archaeological Investigations at the Banquete Bend
Site (41 NU 63) Nueces County, Texas. Archaeo-

(95)

Paleo-Indian Artifacts from a Site in McMullen

logical Survey Report 63. Center for Archaeologi-

County. La 7)’erra 9(3):34-38.

cal Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

Bell, Milton
1981

(243)

The Alex Justiss Site: A Caddoan CemetetT in Titus

Black, Stephen L.

County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology, Report

1986

(629)

The Clemente and Herminia Hinojosa Site, 41 JW

21. Highway Design Division, Texas State Depart-

8: A Toyah Horizon Campsite in Southern Texas.

ment of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.

Special Report 18. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Bement, Leland C. (635)
1984 Intensive htvestigations of 41BPl91 and 41BP192,
The Powell Bend Prospect, Bastrop County, Texas.

Black, Stephen L., and A. Joachim McGraw
1985

(601)

The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change

Research Report 87. Texas Archeological Survey,

and Continuity within the Upper Salado Creek Wa-

The University of Texas at Austin.

tershed, South-Central Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 100. Center for Archaeological Research,

Bement, Leland C.
1987

The University of Texas at San Antonio.

(468)

Ephemeral Site Morphology: Fuller Shelter (41 KY
27), Kinney County, Texas. La Tierra 14(3):5-23.

Blaine, Jay C.
1968

Bement, Leland C.
1989

(406)

A Preliminary Report of an Early Man Site in West
Texas. Transactions of the Third Regional Archeo-

(583)

Excavations at 41BPI9, The Kennedy Bluffs¯ Site,

logical Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico

Bastrop County, Texas. Contract Reports in Archae-

and Western Texas, pp. 1-11.

ology, Report 5. Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.
Bement, Leland C.
1990

(488)

Archeological Assessment of 41HY197: The

Blaine, Jay C., R. K. Harris, Wilson W. Crook, and Joel L.
Shiner (140)
1968 The Acton Site: Hood County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 39:45-94.

Beecroft Site Complex, Hays County, Texas.
Boisvert, Richard

Tierra 17(4): 10-30.

1985
Bement, Leland C.
1993

from Guadalupe Mountains National Park, Texas.

(446)

A Flexed Burial from Llano County, Texas. Bulle-

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:1-

tin of the Texas A rcheological Society 61:281-287.

103.

Bement, Leland C., Rolfe D. Mandel, Jesus F. de la Teja, Dan
K. Utley, and Solveig A. Turpin
1987

(430)

A Technological Analysis of Lithic Assemblages

(639)

Bond, Clell L.
1978

(291)

Three Archeological Sites at Hoxie Bridge,

Buried in the Bottoms: The Archeology of Lake

Williamson County, Texas. Report 43. Anthropol-

Creek Reservoir; Montgome~3, CounO,, Texas. Re-

ogy Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College

search Report 97. Texas Archeological Survey, The

Station.

University of Texas at Austin.

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas
Bond, Clell L. (287)
1981 Testing of Three Archeological Sites: TMPA Gibbons Creek Project, Grimes County, Texas. Report
!5. Cultura! Resources Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Bond, Clell L.
(670)
1982 Archaeological Testing of Site 41TT309, Titus
County, Texas. Document 82404. Espey, Huston &
Associates, Inc., Austin.
Bond, Clell L., and Stan Grysinski (585)
1980 San Miguel-Marion Transmission Line: An
Archeological Assessment. Report 2. Cultural
Resources Laboratory, Texas A&M University,
College Station.

Boyd, Douglas K., C. Britt Bousman, and Martha Doty
Freeman (545)
1991 Archeological Survey of Wildlife Mitigation Lands,
Justiceburg Reservoir, Garza County, Texas. Reports of Investigations 79. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.
Boyd, Douglas K., I. Wayne Cox, and Herbert G. Uecker
(541)
1990 Archeological and Historical Investigations at Camp
Bullis, Bexar and Comal Counties, Texas: The 1989
Season. Reports of Investigations 75. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.
Boyd, Douglas K., Martha Doty Freeman, Michael D. Blum,
Elton R. Prewitt, and J. Michael Quigg (535)
1989 Phase I Cultural Resources Investigations at

Bond, Clell L., and William E. Moore (584)
1980 Archeological Investigations in the Davy Crockett

Justiceburg Reservoir on the Double Mountain Fork
of the Brazos River, Garza and Kent Counties,
Texas. Reports of Investigations 66. Prewitt and

National Forest. Report 1. Cultural Resources Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.

Bond, Clell L., Greg Sundborg, and Jeff Goodson (669)
1982 Archeological Testing of Nine Sites, North Tract

Associates, Inc., Austin.

Boyd, Douglas K., and Margaret A. Howard (560)
1988 Archeological Testing at 41WA97, Sam Houston

Big Brown, Freestone County, Texas. Document

National Forest, Walker County, Texas. Technical

82301. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

Bousman, C. Britt, Michael B. Collins, and Timothy K.
Perttula (529)
1988 Quaternary Geomorphology at Cooper Basin: A
Framework .for Archeological Inquiry, Delta and
Hopkins Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations
55. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Bousman, C. Britt, Steve A. Tomka, and Gail L. Bailey (542)
1990

Prehistoric Archeology and Paleoenvironments in
Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, South Texas: Re-

Reports 3. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Boyd, Douglas K., Jay Peck, Steve A. Tomka, and Karl W.
Kibler (553)
1993

Henry), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase III,
Associates, Inc., Austin.
Boyd, Douglas K., Jay Peck, Steve A. Tomka, Karl W. Kibler,
and Martha Doty Freeman (557)
1994

111, Season 3. Reports of Investigations 93. Prewitt

tin.

and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Bousman, C. Britt, and Linda Ven-ett (355)
1973 An Archaeological Reconnaissance of Aubrey Reservoir. Archaeology Research Program, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.

Boyd, Douglas K., Steve A. Tomka, C. Britt Bousman, Karen
M. Gardner, and Martha Doty Freeman
1992

Season 1. Reports of Investigations 84. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.

Winnie’s Mound (41BU17): A Study in the Prehistory of Burleson County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas

Boyd, Douglas K., James T. Abbott, William A. Bryan, Colin
M. Garvey, Steve A. Tomka, and Ross C. Fields (538)
Phase H Investigations at Prehistoric and Rock Art
Sites, Justiceburg Reservob; Garza and Kent Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations 71. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.

(549)

Data Recovery at Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan
Henry), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase 11I,

(436)

Archeological Society 56:39-74.

1990

Data Recovery at Lake Alan Henry (Justiceburg
Reservoir), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase

Investigations 76. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Aus-

1985

Data Recovery at Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan
Seas’on 2. Reports of Investigations 88. Prewitt and

sults of the Phase H Test Excavations. Reports of

Bowman, Bradley F.

141

Breeding, A.W.
1971

(401)

Gresham Lake Site: 41 Mt 3. Transactions of the
Sixth Regional A rcheological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 1-8.

Briggs, Alton K. (266)
1971 An A rcheological Survey of Ingrain Reservoir. Archeological Survey 9. Texas Historical Survey Committee and Texas Water Development Board, Austin,
Texas.

142

Texas Archeological Society

Brook, Vernon Ralph
1980

(395)

The Sabina Mountain Site. Transactions of the 15th
Regional Archeological Symposium Jbr Southeast-

Brown, Kenneth L., and Susan A. Lebo (699)
1991 A rchaeological Testing of the Lewisville Lake Shoreline, Denton County, Texas. Institute of Applied
Sciences, University of North Texas, Denton.

ern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 15-86.
Brown, Claude H.
1968

(407)

A Multiple Fire Pit Excavation - 41 LU 5. Transac-

Brown, Kenneth M. (616)
1983 Archaeological Studies at the CPS Butler Lignite

tions of the 77lird Regional Archeological Sympo-

Prospect, Bastrop and Lee Counties, Texas, 1983.

sium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western
Texas, pp. 33-40.

Archaeological Survey Report 140. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.

Brown, Claude H.
1993

(451)

S.P.A.S. LU-22. Transactions of the 29th Regional

Brown, Kenneth M.

Archeological Symposium jbr Southeastern New

1986a Archaeological Survey and Backhoe Testing for

(609)

Flume No. 3 Right-of-Way at Coleto Creek Reser-

Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 1-8.

voir, Goliad County, Texas. Archaeological Survey
Brown, David O.
1983

(605)

Report 128. Center for Archaeological Research,

The Berger Bluff Site (41 GD 30A): Excavations in

The University of Texas at San Antonio.

the Upper Deposits, 1979. Archaeological Survey
Report 115. Center for Archaeological Research,

Brown, Kenneth M.

The University of Texas at San Antonio.

1986b Archaeological Testing at Sunrise Canyon Subdivi-

(613)

sion (41BX441), Universal City, Texas. ArchaeoBrown, David O. (compiler)
1987

(630)

logical

Survey

Report

133.

Center

for

Archeology at Aquilla Lake, 1978-1982 Investiga-

Archaeological Research, The University of Texas

tions, Volumes I/ll/IH. Research Report 81. Texas
Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at

at San Antonio.
Brown, Kenneth M.

Austin.

1994
Brown, David O., Wayne Glander, Ken White, Sally Victor,

(505)

Four Clovis Points from San Augustine County,
Texas. La Tierra 21(2):24-39.

Clell Bond, Ed Baxter, Doug Allen, Juana L. C. Ibanez, and
Cliff Ladd
1987

Brown, Kenneth M., Daniel R. Potter, Grant D. Hall, and

(682)

Archeological Investigations in the Texas Municipal Power Agency Gibbons Creek Mine Areas,

Stephen L. Black
1982

(329)

Excavations at 41 LK 67: A Prehistoric Site in the

Grimes County, Texas. Document 861142. Espey,

Choke Canyon Reservoir, South Texas. Choke Can-

Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

yon Series, Volume 7. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Brown, David O., Laura Jones, Juana L. C. Ibanez, Clay
Carruthers, and Joe Lara
1986

Bryant, William A., Jack M. Jackson, and Elton R. Prewitt

(686)

Cultural Resources Survey and Testing of the
Monticello-Winfield Coal Surface Mine, Titus
County, Texas. Document 851200. Espey, Huston

(522)
1985 Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at
the Village at Western Oaks Municipal Utility District, Travis Count),, Texas. Reports of Investiga-

& Associates, Inc., Austin.

tions 44. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Brown, David O., Paul Lukowski, Thomas R. Hester, and
Jack D. Eaton (302)
1977 Archaeological Assessment of Two Sites in the Vicinity of Floodwater Retarding Structure No. 11,

Bryant, William A., Jack M. Jackson, and Elton R. Prewitt
(523)
1985

Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at
the Southland Oaks Municipal Utility District, Travis

Salado Ctz, ek Watershed, Bexas County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 35. Center for Archaeo-

County, Texas. Reports of Investigations 45. Prewitt

logical Research, The University of Texas at San

and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Antonio.
Campbell, T.N.
Brown, David O., and Ray D. Kenmotsu
1980

(225)

1947

(81)

The Johnson Site: Type Site of the Aransas Focus

Test Excavations in the Fayette to Lytton Springs

of the Texas Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo-

Transmission Corridot; Bastrop and Fayette Coun-

logical and Paleontological Society 18:40-75.

ties, Texas. Research Report 77. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

Prewitt m Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

Campbell, T.N.
1948

(80)

143

The Merrell Site: Archeological Remains Associ-

Carlson, Shawn B., H. Blaine Ensor, David L. Carlson,
Elizabeth A. Miller, and Diane E. Young (724)

ated with Alluvial Terrace Deposits. Bulletin of the

1987

Archeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Socieo,

Year 1984. Research Report No. 14, Archaeological

19:7-35.

Resource Management Series. United States Army
Fort Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.

Campbell, T.N.
1952

(75)

The Kent-Crane Site: A Shell Midden on the Texas
Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
23:39-77.

Carlson, David L. (editor)
1992

(731)

Archaeological Investigations in Spicewood Creek:

Chadderdon, Mary Frances (135)
1975 Notes on the Menger Collection, Site 41BX272,
Bexar County, Texas. La Tierra 2(1 ): 15 - 18.
Chadderdon, Mary Frances
1983

(628)

Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas: The 1976

Results of the 1991 Summer Archaeological Field

Excavations. Special Report 13. Center for Archaeo-

School. Research Report No. 22, Archaeological

logical Research, The University of Texas at San

Resource Management Series. United States Army

Antonio.

Fort Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.
Carlson, David L. (editor)
1993

(728)

Archaeological Investigations in Bull Branch: Results of the 1990 Sutnmer Archaeological Field

Chandler, C.K. (94)
1982 Paleo-Indian Projectile Points from San Patricio
County, Texas, Texas Coastal Bend. La Tierra
9(3):26-33.

School. Research Report No. 19, Archaeological
Resource Management Series. United States Army
Fort Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.
Carlson, David L. (editor) (734)
1994 Archaeological Site Testing and Evaluation on the
Henson Mountain Helicopter Range A WSS Project
Area, Fort Hood, Texas. Research Report No. 26,

Chandler, C.K. (453)
1983a Notes on Some Bell Points from San Patricio
County, Texas. La Tierra 10(3):7-10.
Chandler, C.K. (458)
1983b Paleo-Indian Projectile Points from Kendall County,
Texas. La Tierra 10(4):36-39.

Archaeological Resource Management Series.
United States Army Fort Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.

Chandler, C.K.
1989

Carlson, David L., Shawn Bonath Carlson, Frederick L.
Briuer, Erwin Roemer, Jr., and William E. Moore (723)
1986 Archeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal
Year 1983, The Eastern Training Area. Research
Report No. 11, Archaeological Resource Management Series. United States Army Fort Hood, Fort
Hood, Texas.

Texas: The George S. Meyer Collection. La Tierra
16(3):29-37.
Chandler, C.K.

(482)

1990a Clovis Points from Comanche and Falls Counties,
Texas. La Tierra 17(1):26-28.
Chandler, C.K.

Carlson, David L., John E. Dockall, and Ben W. Olive (733)
1994 Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal

(477)

Paleo-Indian Projectile Points from Kendall County,

(483)

1990b A Folsom Point from Bexar County, Texas. La
Tierra 17(2): 12-13.

Year 1990, The Northeastern Perimeter Area. Research Report No. 24, Archaeological Resource
Management Series. United States Army Fort Hood,

Chandler, C.K. (500)
1993 A Boatstone from Kerr County, Texas. La Tierra
20(3): 19-21.

Fort Hood, Texas.
Carlson, David L., D. Gentry Steele and Henry L. Bruno
(296)
1982

Archeological bzvestigations at the Allison Site
(41NU185), Nueces Count3,, Texas. Reports of Investigations 1. Archeological Research Laboratory,
Texas A&M University, College Station.

Chandler, C.K. (504)
1994 Paleo-Indian Projectile Points from the Olmos Basin in San Antonio, Texas. La Tierra 20(1):11-19.
Chandler, C. K., and Kay Hindes
1993

(498)

Scottsbluff Points from Atascosa, Frio and
McMullen Counties, South-Central Texas. La Tierra

Carlson, Shawn B., Cristi Assad, Erwin Roemer, and David L.
Carlson (595)
1983 Archeological and Historical Investigations in
Milam County. Archeological Surveys 1. Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.

20(1):31-36.
Chandler, C. K., Florence Knolle, and Mary Margaret Knolle
(452)
1983

Paleo-Indian Projectile Points from Jim Wells and
Nueces Counties, Texas. La Tierra 10(2):23-27.

144

Texas Archeological Society

Chandler, C. K., and Don Kumpe
1993

Cliff, Maynard B., Carol Carter, and Linda Verrett

(501)

Stemmed Points with Massive Barbs from the Lower
Rio Grande Valley. La Tierra 20(3):26-28.

1974

(357)

Archaeological Survey of the Welsh Power Plant.
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Clark, John W., Jr., and James E. Ivey
1974

Archeological and Historical Investigations at Mar-

Cloud, William A., and James E. Smith II

tin Lake, Rusk and Panola counties, Texas. Re-

1993

(449)

The Trinque Site (41ER27), Erath County, Texas.

search Report 32. Texas Archeological Survey, The

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:269-

University of Texas at Austin.

327.

Cliff, Maynard B. (editor)
!994

(205)

Coffman, Robert J., and Martha Doty Freeman

(716)

Cultural Resources Survey of a Portion of The White

1985

(521)

Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at

Oak Creek Mitigation Area (WOCMA), Bowie, Cass,

the Meadows at Chandler Creek Municipal Utility

and Morris Counties, Texas: 1990-1992. White Oak

District No. 1, Williamson County, Texas. Reports

Creek Mitigation Area Archeological Technical Se-

of Investigations 41. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,

ries, Report of Investigations 2. Geo-Marine, Inc.,

Austin.

Plano, Texas.
Coffman, Robert J., Martha Doty Freeman, and Ross C. Fields
Cliff, Maynard B., Marie Brown, Duane E. Peter, and Sharlene
N. Allday
1990

Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at

Cultural Resources Survey Along Salado Creek,

the Ideal Basic Tract, Williamson County, Texas.

Bexar County, Texas. Miscellaneous Report of In-

Reports of Investigations 38. Prewitt and Associ-

vestigations 17. Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano, Texas.

ates, Inc., Austin.

Prehistoric Archaeology within the Sabanna River

Coffman, Robert J., and Elton R. Prewitt (517)
1985 Phase 2 Cultural Resources Investigations in Por-

Watershed. Archaeology Research Program, South-

tions of the Buttercup Creek Subdivision, Williamson

Cliff, Maynard B. and Duane E. Peter
1975

(518)
1985

(711)

(358)

County, Texas. Reports of Investigations 36. Prewitt

ern Methodist University, Dallas.

and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Cliff, Maynard B. and Duane E. Peter (editors)
1990

(709)

b~tensive Archeological Survey and Archival Investigations at the Red River Army Depot and Lone
Star A rmy Ammunition Plant, Bowie County, Texas.

Coffman, Robert J., Margaret C. Trachte, and Michael B.
Collins
1986

the Cunningham Site, Canyon Creek Development,

RRAD/LSAAP Archeological Technical Series,
Report of Investigations 2. Geo-Marine, Inc., Piano,

Travis County, Texas. Reports of Investigations 53.

Texas.

Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Cliff, Maynard B. and Duane E. Peter (editors)
1992

(528)

Cultural Ecology of the Kenyon Rockshelter and

(715)

Cultural Resources Survey of the Moist Soils Man-

Coleman, Roger E., Shawn B. Carlson, and David L. Carlson

agement Area, White Oak Creek Mitigation Area

(597)
1984 An Archeological Reconnaissance in Selected Ar-

(WOCMA), Cass County, Texas. White Oak Creek

eas of Western Shelby County, Texas. Archeologi-

Mitigation Area Archeological Technical Series,

cal Surveys 3. Archeological Research Laboratory,

Report of Investigations 1. Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano,

Texas A&M University, College Station.

Texas.
Collins, Michael B.
Cliff, Maynard B. and Duane E. Peter (editors)
1994

(708)

1969

(189)

Test Excavations at Amistad International Reser-

Cultural Resources Survey of 2,226 Hectares within

voit; Fall, 1967. Miscellaneous Papers 6. Texas Ar-

the Red River Army Depot and Lone Star Army

cheological Salvage Project, The University of Texas

Ammunition Plant, Bowie County, Texas. RRAD/

at Austin.

LSAAP Archeological Technical Series, Report of
Investigations 4. Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano, Texas.

Collins, Michael B.
1972

Cliff, Maynard B. and Duane E. Peter (editors)
1994

(714)

Archeological Survey of Selected Portions of the
Longhorn Army Ammunition Plant, Harrison
County, Texas, 1989-1992. Miscellaneous Report
of Investigations 38. Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano, Texas.

(18)

The Devil’s Hollow Site, A Stratified Archaic Campsite in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 43:77-100.

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas
Collins, Michael B., Bruce Ellis, and Cathy Dodt-Ellis (657)
1990 Excavations at the Camp Pearl Wheat Site
(41KR243), An Early Archaic Campsite on Town
Creek, Kerr County, Texas. Studies in Archeology
6. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Collins, Michael B., Thomas Roy Hester, and Frank A. Weir
(33)
1969 Part I: The Floyd Morris Site (41CF2): A Prehistoric Cemetery Site in Cameron County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:119-146.
Cooper, Brom
1974

145

Creel, Darrell (8)
1978 An Archeological Survey in the South Concho River
Area, West Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 49:241-307.
Creel, Darrell (294)
1979 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis
Site, Cherokee County, Texas, Summer 1978. Texas
Antiquities Permit Series, Report 1. Texas A&M
University and Texas Antiquities Committee, College Station.
Creel, Darrell (575)
1990 Excavations at 41TG91, Tom Green County, Texas.

(138)

A Fluted Point from McMullen County, Texas. La

Publications in Archaeology Report 38. Highway

Tierra 1(1):18.

Design Division, Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.

Corbin, James E. (45)
1963 Archeological Materials From the Northern Shore
of Corpus Christi Bay, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 34:5-30.

Crook, Wilson W., Jr., and R. K. Harris (73)
1955

Scottsbluff Points in the Obshner Site near Dallas,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
75-100.

Corbin, James E. (352)
1977 A rcheological Research at 41SA25, Mission Dolores
de Los Ais. Stephen F. Austin State University,

Crook, Wilson W., Jr., and R. K. Harris (64)
1957

Nacogdoches, Texas.

Hearths, and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville,
Texas and Associated Faunal Material. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 28:7-97.

Corbin, James E., Joseph M. Studer, and Lee Nummi (353)
1977 The Chayah Site. Papers in Anthropology 1. Stephen
F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches.

Cruse, Brett (394)
1982 The Bobby Clay Site (A2070) in Motley County,
Texas. Transactions of the 17th Regional Archeo-

Couzzourt, Jim
1982

(393)

logical Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico

Archeological Testing at Cal Farley’s Boys Ranch,

and Western Texas, pp. 135-146.

Oldham County, Texas. Part One: The Maintenance
Barn Site (A1543). Transactions of the 17th Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern

Daniels, RogerL.
1976

New Mexico, and Western Texas, pp. 57-134.

Cox, David (122)
1977 A Preliminary Report on "Early Man" Artifacts
Found in Northeast Bexar County. La Tierra 4(3):79.

(125)

Preliminary Excavations at the Randig Site,
Williamson County, Texas. La Tierra 3(4):21-28.

Davis, E. Mott, and Bernard Golden (423)
1960 The Ben McKinney Site: A Titus Focus Site in the
Ferrell’s Bridge Reservoir Area, Northeastern
Texas. Division of Research in Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Crawford, Daymond D.
1965

(36)

The Granite Beach Site, Llano County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 36:71-97.

Davis, Michael W. (650)
1985 An A rcheological Survey and Assessment at the San
Marcos (Wood) Fish Hatchery, Hays County, Texas.

Crawford, Daymond D.
1971

(641)

Technical Bulletin 79. Texas Archeological Survey,

An Archaeological Reconnaissance of Ecleto Creek

The University of Texas at Austin.

Watershed, South Central Texas. Survey Reports 8.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.

Davis, Michael W., Dan K. Utley, Steve A. Tomka, and
Solveig A. Turpin
1987

Crawford, Daymond D.
1973

(228)

(638)

Continuing Cultural Resource Investigations in the
Calvert Prospect: The 1986 Season, Robertson

An Archaeological Survey on Interstate Highway

County, Texas. Research Report 95. Texas Archeo-

10. Publications in Archaeology Report 2. Highway

logical Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

Design Division, Texas Highway Department,
Austin.

146

Texas Archeological Society

Davis, W.A.
1962

Dibble, David S., and Elton R. Prewitt

(153)

Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Sanford

1967

(169)

Survey and Test Excavations at Atnistad Reservoir,

Reservoir: Hutchinson, Moore and Potter Counties,

1964-65. Survey Report 3. Texas Archeological Sal-

Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The

vage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.

University of Texas at Austin.
Davis, W. A., and Helen Ruth Horn
1964

(44)

The Zavonian Springs Site: An Archaic--NeoAmerican Site in McGee Bend Reservoir, San Augustine County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas

Dillehay, Tom D. (215)
1975 Prehistoric Subsistence Exploitation in the Lower
Trinity River Delta, Texas. Research Report 51.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Archeological Society 35:213-250.
Doehner, Karen, and Richard E. Larson

Davis, William A., and E. Mott Davis (253)
1960 The Jake Martin Site. An Archaic Site in the Ferrell’s
Bridge Reservoir Area, Northeastern Texas. Archaeology Series, Report 3. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

1978

Lake, Northeast Texas 1974-1975. Research Report
108. Archaeology Research Program, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.
Duffield, Lathel F.

Day, D. William
1984

1960

(676)

(359)

Archaeological Research at the Proposed Cooper

Archeological Mitigation at the Doyle Martin Site,

(151)

Survey and Apptz~isal of the Archeological Re-

41LN178 and the P. 1. Ridge Site, 41FT52, Leon,

sources of Navarro Mills Reservoir; Navarro, and
Hill Counties, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage

and Freestone Counties, Texas. Document 82209.

Project, The University of Texas at Austin.

Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.
Duffield, Lathel F.
Day, D. William, Jane Laurens-Day, and Elton R. Prewitt

1961

County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological

(382)
1981

(59)

The Limerick Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
Society 30:51-1 !6.

Cultural Resources Surveys, and Assessments in
Portions of Hidalgo, and Willacy Counties, Texas.
Reports of Investigations 15. Prewitt, and Associ-

Duffield, Lathel F.

ates, Inc., Austin.

1963a The Strawn Creek Site: A Mixed Archaic and Neo-

(155)

American Site at Navarro Mills Reservoir, Navarro
Denney, Pamela
1981

County, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project,

(668)

The University of Texas at Austin.

A Cultural Resource Survey, and Assessment of the
Maverick County Coal Project. Document 81252.
Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

Duffield, Lathel F.

(48)

1963b The Wolfshead Site: An Archaic--Neo-American
Denton, JoeT.
1976

Site in San Augustine County, Texas. Bulletin of

(233)

No-Name Creek Site: A Terrace Site of the Middle,
and Late Archaic Period in Gillespie County, Texas.

the Texas A rcheological Society 34:83-141.

Publications in Archaeology, Report 7. Highway

Duffield, Lathel F. (41)
1964 Three Panhandle Aspect Sites at Sanford Reservoir,
Hutchinson County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 35:19-81.

Design Division, Texas State Department of Highways, and Public Transportation, Austin.
Dibble, David S.
1967

(164)

Excavations at Arenosa Shelter, 1965-66. Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, The University of

Duffield, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks
1961

(254)

The Pearson Site. A Historic Indian Site at Iron
Bridge Reservoir, Rains County, Texas. Archaeol-

Texas at Austin.

ogy Series 4. Department of Anthropology, The
Dibble, David S.
1979

University of Texas at Austin.

(640)

Archaeological Reconnaissance in the Salado Creek
Watershed, Bexar County, Texas. Survey Report 9.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Dibble, David S., and Dessamae Lorrain
1968

(246)

Bonfire Shelter: A Stratified Bison Kill Site, Val
Verde County, Texas. Miscellaneous Papers 1. Texas
Memorial Museum, University of Texas at Austin.

Duke, Paul L. (123)
1977 Lake Thunderbird Site (41BP78), Bastrop, Texas.
La Tierra 4(3): 15-26.

Dusek, Curtis
1980

(107)

Plainview Points from 41MC10, McMullen County,
Texas. La Tierra 7(3)39-41.

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas
Dusek, Curtis (96)
1982 A Pottery Vessel from 41MC320, The Nichols I
Site, McMullen County, Texas. La Tierra 9(2):4042.

147

Ensor, H. Blaine, and David L. Carlson (582)
1988 The Crawford Site, 41PK69, Central Trinity River
Uplands, Polk County, Texas. Contract Reports in
Archaeology, Report 4. Texas State Department of
Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.

Earls, Amy C., and Darryl C. Newton (717)
1988 Class III Survey and Testing of Cultural Resources
in Proposed Flood Control System Rights-of-Way,
Southeastern El Paso, El Paso County, Texas.

Ensor, H. Blaine, Shawn B. Carlson, and David L. Carlson
(596)
1983

Mariah Associates, Inc., Albuquerque, New Mexico.

Archeological and Historic Investigations of the
Harris County Lease in Barker Reservoir, Harris
County, Texas. Archeological Surveys No. 2. Ar-

Eddy, Frank W.
1973

(166/167/168)

cheological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M Uni-

Salvage Archeology in the Laneport Reservoir Dis-

versity, College Station.

trict: Central Texas. Texas Archeological Survey,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Ellzey, Tom S.
1966

Ensor, H. Blaine, John E. Dockall, and Frank Winchell (592)
1991 National Register Eligibility Testing and Assessment

(410)

at the Al Soloman I, and Al Soloman H Sites, Cypress

A Panhandle Aspect Site (Preliminary Report).

Creek,

Transactions of the Second Regional Archeological
Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and West-

41FB71 and 41FB72 in Barker Reservoir, Fort Bend

Texas.

Reports

Archeological

of

Research

Station.
Ensor, H. Blaine, Randy Korgel, Saul Aronow, and C. S.
Mueller-Wille
1989

(591)

Archeological and Geomorphological Investigations

County, Texas. Reports of Investigation No. 3.

of 41GM23, Rocky Creek, Grimes County, Texas.

Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M

Reports of Investigations 7. Archeological Research

University, College Station.
Ensor, H. Blaine
1987

County,
12.

Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College

ern Texas, pp. 59-65.

Ensor, H. Blaine (587)
1984 Archeological Investigations at Sites 41FB70,

Harris

Investigations

Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.

(588)

The Cinco Ranch Sites, Barker Reservoir, Fort Bend
County, Texas. Reports of Investigation No. 4. Ar-

Ensor, H. Blaine, and Catherine S. Mueller-Wille (581)
1988 Excavations at the Bull Pen Site 41BP280, Colo-

cheological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M Uni-

rado River Drainage, Bastrop County, Texas. Con-

versity, College Station.

tract Reports in Archaeology, Report 3. Texas State
Department of Highways and Public Transporta-

Ensor, H. Blaine (599)
1991 Archeological Survey of Cypress Creek from Spring

tion, Austin.

Branch to Kuykendahl Road, Harris County, Texas.

Epstein, Jeremiah F.

Archeological Survey 8. Archeological Research

1962

(49)

Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val

Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College

Verde County, Texas, 1958. Bulletin of the Texas

Station.

A rcheological Society 33:1 - 129.

Ensor, H. Blaine (732)
1991 Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal
Year 1987, The MCA Range Construction, Pidcoke
Land Exchange and Phantom Range Projects.
Research Report No. 23, Archeological Resource

Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. (331)
1980 A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of
the Limestone Electric Generating Station, Limestone & Freestone Counties, Texas. Document 8023.
Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.

Management Series. United States Army Fort Hood,
Fort Hood, Texas.
Ensor, H. Blaine, Saul Aronow, Martha Doty Freeman, and
Joseph M. Sanchez
1990

(598)

An Atvheological Survey of the Proposed Greens

Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. (334)
1981 Archaeological Investigations at the Limestone Electric Generating Station, Limestone & Freestone
Counties, Texas. Document 81438. Espey, Huston
& Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.

Bayou Regional Stormwater Detention Facility,
Greens Bayou, Harris County, Texas. Archeological Survey 7. Archeological Research Laboratory.
Texas A&M University, College Station.

Etchieson, Gerald Meeks (695)
1981 Archeological Survey at Lake Meredith Recreation
Area, Moore, and Potter Counties, Texas. U.S. Department of the Interior, Water and Power Resources
Service, Southwest Region, Amarillo.

148

Texas Archeological Society

Etchieson, Gerald Meeks, and Douglas K. Boyd
1982

Cultural

Resources

Survey

for

(698)
Proposed

Fields, Ross C. (editor)
1990

(537)

Rehabilitation and a New Drain Jbr Hidalgo County

Excavations at the Charles Cox, Lambs Creek Knoll,
and Buffalo Branch Sites, Jewett Mine Project, Leon

Irrigation District No. 16. U.S. Department of

and Freestone Counties, Texas. Reports of Investi-

Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, Southwest Region,

gations 70. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Amarillo.

Etchieson, Gerald Meeks, and James E. Couzzourt (696)
1987 Shoreline Survey at Lake Meredith Recreation Area
in the Texas Panhandle. U.S. Department of the
Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, Southwest Region,
Amarillo.

Fields, Ross C., Stephen P. Austin, Roger W. Johnson, Karl
W. Kibler, and Jerrilyn B. McLerran (552)
1992 National Register Assessments of Seven Prehistoric
and Two Historic Sites at the Jewett Mine, Freestone and Leon Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations 87. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Etchieson, Gerald Meeks, Roberta D. Speer, and Jack T.
Hughes (349)
1978 Archeological Investigations in the Truscott Reservoir A tea, King and Knox Counties, Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory, Killgore Research
Center, West Texas State University, Canyon, Texas.

Fields, Ross C., C. Britt Bousman, and Sylvia J. Kooren

Etchieson, Gerald Meeks, Roberta D. Speer, and Jack T.

Fields, Ross C., Martha Doty Freeman, and Steven M. Kotter

National Register Assessments of Six Prehistoric
Sites at the Jewett Mine, Leon County, Texas. Reports of Investigations 67. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.

Archeological Investigations in the Crowell Reser-

(386)
1983 Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at

voir Area, Cottle, Foard, King, and Knox Counties,

A(ldicks Reservoir, Harris County, Texas. Reports

Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory, Killgore

of Investigations 22. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,

Research Center, West Texas State University, Can-

Austin.

Hughes
1979

(536)
1988

(348)

yon, Texas.
Fields, Ross C. (652)
1978 Report on the 1977 h~vestigations at the George C.
Davis Site, Caddoan Mounds State Historic Site,
Cherokee County, Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department and the Texas Archeological Research

Fields, Ross C., Eloise F. Gadus, L. Wayne Klement, C. Britt
Bousman, and Jerrilyn B. McLerran (556)
1993 Excavations at the Tick, Spike, Johns Creek, and
Peerless Bottoms Sites, Cooper Lake Project, Delta
and Hopkins Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations 91. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin.
Fields, Ross C., Eloise F. Gadus, L. Wayne Klement, and

Fields, RossC. (516)
1984 Archeological Investigations at 41LN134 and

Karen M. Gardner (556)
1994 Excavations at the Spider Knoll Site, Cooper Ix~ke

41LN144, Jewett Mine Project, Leon County, Texas.

Project, Delta County, Texas. Reports of Investiga-

Reports of Investigations 35. Prewitt and Associ-

tions 96. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

ates, Inc., Austin.
Fields, Ross C. (editor) (532)
1987 Excavations at the Alley Road Site (41LN149B) and
the Harris Hole Site (41LN30), Jewett Mine Project,
Leon County, Texas. Reports of Investigations 61.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Fields, Ross C. (editor)

(534)

1988a Archeological Survey of the 1989-1993 Permit Area,
Jewett Mine Project, Freestone and Leon Counties,
Texas. Reports of Investigations 63. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.
Fields, Ross C. (editor)

(533)

1988b Cultural Resources Investigations Along Whiteoak
Bayou, Harris County, Texas. Reports of Investigations 62. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Fields, Ross C., Molly Ficklen Godwin, Martha Doty Freeman,
and Susan V. Lisk (520)
1986 Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at
Barker Reservoir, Fort Bend and Harris Counties,
Texas. Reports of Investigations 40. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.
Fields, Ross C., L. Wayne Klement, C. Britt Bousman, David
H. Jurney, and Melissa M. Green (539)
1990 National Register Assessments of Eight Prehistoric
and Four Historic Sites at the Jewett Mine, Freestone and Leon Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations 73. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas
Fields, Ross C., L. Wayne Klement, C. Britt Bousman, Steve
A. Tomka, Eloise F. Gadus, and Margaret A. Howard

Fox, Anne A.
1993

(547)
199!

Excavations at the Bottoms, Rena Branch, and

Archaeological Survey Report 217. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas

gations 82. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

at San Antonio.

(524)

Fox, Anne A., D. William Day, and Lynn Highley
1980

(600)

Archaeological and Historical Investigations at

National Register Assessments of Archeological and

Wallisville Lake, Chambers and Liberty Counties,

Historical Resources at the Jewett Mine, Leon
County, Texas. Reports of Investigations 48. Prewitt

Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 90. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas

and Associates, Inc., Austin.

at San Antonio.

(512)

Fox, Anne A. and Thomas R. Hester

Archeological and Historical Investigations at the

1976

(299)

An Archaeological Survey of Coleto Creek, Victoria
and Goliad Counties, Texas. Archaeological Sur-

Reports of Investigations 29. Prewitt and Associ-

vey Report 18. Center for Archaeological Research,

ates, Inc., Austin.

The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Fields, Ross C., and J. Peter Thurmond

(378)

The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas:

Fox, DanielE.
1979

Spring 1980 Archeological Investigations. Reports

(317)

An Intensive Survey of Sixteen Prehistoric Archaeological Sites in Start" County, Texas. Archaeological

of Investigations 8. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,

Survey Report 72. Center for Archaeological Re-

Austin.

search, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Flaigg, Norman G.

(503)

Fox, Daniel E.

A Report on Some Paleo-Indian and Early Archaic

1980

(108)

Text Excavations at the Classen Rockshelter, North-

Artifacts from the Sinkhole Site (41WM754),

eastern Bexar County, Texas, 1967. La Tierra

Williamson County, Texas. La Tierra 20(4):8-28.

7(1):16-23.

Flinn, Richard, and Judy Flinn
1968

in

Juan Capistrano, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.

Lost Lake Disposal Area, Harris County, Texas.

1993

and Monitoring

stone and Leon Counties, Texas. Reports of Investi-

Fields, Ross C., and Nancy Reese

1980

Testing

Moccasin Springs Sites, Jewett Mine Project, Free-

Freeman, and Gail L. Bailey

1984

(627)

Archaeological

Connection with a Drainage Project at Mission San

Fields, Ross C., Susan V. Lisk, Jack M. Jackson, Martha Doty
1986

149

(146)

Fox, Daniel E., Robert J. Mallouf, Nancy O’Malley, and

The High Bluff Site on the Clear Fork of the Brazos
River. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

William M. Sorrow
1974

38:93-125.

(268)

Archeological Resources of the Proposed Cuero 1
Reservoir, Dewitt and Gonzales Counties, Texas.
Archeological Survey 12. Texas Historical Commis-

Forrester, Robert E., Jr.
1951

(77)

sion and Texas Water Development Board, Austin.

A Series of Eighteen Indian Skeletons Excavated in
Shackelford County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas

Fox, Daniel E., and H. G. Uecker

Archeological Society 22:132-143.

1977

(309)

An Archaeological Study of the McPherson Road
Extension Project, Laredo, Texas. Archaeological

Foster, Michael S., and J. Charles Kelley
1989

(506)

Survey Report 45. Center for Archaeological Re-

Archaeological Investigations in the Three-Mile and

search, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Sulphur Draw Watershed, Culberson County, Texas.
The Artifact 27(3): 1-89.

Freeman, Martha Doty, and Joe C. Freeman
1981

Fox, Anne A. (626)
1992 Archaeological Investigations in Alamo Plaza, San
Antonio, Bexar County, Texas, 1988 and 1989. Archaeological Survey Report 205. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.

(332)

A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of
the Proposed Stacy Reservoir, Concho, Coleman,
and Runnels Counties, Texas. Volume II, Historic
Cultural Resources. Document 81052. Espey,
Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

Freeman, Martha Doty, and Leonard R. Voellinger
1982

(671)

A Cultural Resources Survey of the First Five-Year
Permit A rea, Jewett Mine Project. Document 81233.
Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

150

Texas Archeological Society

Fritz, Gayle
1975

Gates, Ted, and Alyce Hart

(212)

Matagorda Bay Area, Texas: A Survey of the

1977

(396)

The Garza Burial. Transactions of the 12th Regional

Archeological and Historical Resources. Research

Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New

Report 45. Texas General Land Office and Texas

Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 145-154.

Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Gibson, Eric C. (32t)
1981
The Santonino Project: An Archaeological Recon-

Austin.
Frkuska, Augustine, Jr., and Elizabeth G. Frkuska
1982

naissance for Urex, Inc., Southeastern Webb County,

(322)

Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 102. Center

A Cultural Resource Survey Jbr Medina Electric
Cooperative, Inc., in Uvalde, Medina, and Frio

for Archaeological Research, The University of

Counties, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 117.

Texas at San Antonio.

Center for Archaeological Research, The UniverGilmore, Kathleen

sity of Texas at San Antonio.

1974
Fullem, Bruce B.
1977

(211)

Cultural Variation on the Texas Coast: Analysis of
an Aboriginal Shell Midden, Wallisville Reservoir,

(234)

The Black Hopper Site. Publications in Archaeol-

Texas. Research Report 44. Texas Archeological

ogy, Report 10. Highway Design Division, Texas

Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

State Department of Highways and Public TransGlander, Wayne P., and Cynthia Brandimarte

portation, Austin.

1983

Tracts A, B and C, Panola County, Texas. Document

Gadus, Eloise F., Ross C. Fields, C. Britt Bousman, Steve A.
Tomka, and Margaret A. Howard (544)
1992

(672)

Cultural Resources Survey of the Martin Lake Mine:
83121. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

Excavations at the Finley Fan Site (41HP159), Cooper Lake Project, Hopkins Count),, Texas. Reports

Glander, Wayne P., Greg Sundborg, David Moore, David

of Investigations 78. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,

Brown, Nancy Barker, David Jurney, Ken White, and
Laura Jones

Austin.

1987

(683)

Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed

Gadus, Eloise F., Ross C. Fields, and C. Britt Bousman (551)

Monticello-Leesburg Mine, Catnp County, Texas.

1992

Archeological Investigations at 41DTll, 41DT21,

Document 861094. Espey, Huston & Associates,

41DT50, 41DT54, and 41DT63, and 41DT63 at

Inc., Austin.

Cooper Lake, Delta County, Texas. Reports of
Investigations 86. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,

Glander, Wayne P., and Sally Victor

Austin.

1984

(678)

Additional Cultural Resource Investigations: Martin lxtke Mine, Tracts A, B, and C. Document 83718.
Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

Gadus, Eloise F., Ross C. Fields, L. Wayne Klement, C. Britt
Bousman, Margaret Ann Howard, and Karen M. Gardner
(546)
1991
Testing, Revisitation, and Evaluation of Selected
Sites at Cooper Lake, Delta and Hopkins Counties,
Texas. Reports of Investigations 81. Prewitt and

Glander, Wayne P., Sally Victor, Tom Bearden, Mark
Turnbough, Don Blanton, David Jurney, Ken White, and
Steve Tomka
1986

(680)

A Report on Continued Cultural Resources Investigations of the Martin Lake Coal Surface Mine,

Associates, Inc., Austin.

Tracts A, B, & C, Panola County, Texas. Document
Gadus, Eloise F., and Margaret Ann Howard
1990

851165. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

(540)

Hunter-Fisher-Gatherers on the Upper Texas Coast:
Areheological htvestigations at the Peggy Lake Dis-

Glander, Wayne P., Sally Victor, Mark Turnbough, Greg

posal Area, Harris County, Texas. Reports of In-

Sundborg, David Jumey, Ken White, and Steve Tomka

vestigations 74. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

(679)
1986

Gallagher, Joseph G., and Susan E. Bearden
1976

Cultural Resources Survey of the MonticelloWinfield Coal Surface Mine, Titus County, Texas.

(372)

The Hopewell School Site: A Late A rchaic Campsite

Document 85417. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc.,

in the Central Bmzos River Valley. Contributions in

Austin.

Anthropology, No. 19. Department of Anthropology,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Glasscock, Keith and Alma Glasscock
1955

Garrett, Clay M., and Timothy D. Smith
1990

(489)

Lithic Artifacts from a Late Paleo-Indian Site in
Terrell County, Texas. La Tierra 17(4):35-39.

(390)

A Preliminary Report on CR-1, an Indian Campsite
in Moore County, Texas. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review XXVIII:96-106.

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

Good, Carolyn E., Solveig A. Turpin, and Martha Doty
Freeman (224)
1980 A Cultural Resource Assessment of the Calvert and
Cole Creek Lignite Prospects, Robertson County,
Texas. Research Report 75. Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Graham, John Allen and William A. Davis
1958

(148)

151

Gunn, Joel and Royce Mahula (323)
1977 Hop Hill: Culture and Climatic Change in Central
Texas. Special Report 5. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Gunter, Rita R. (461)
1985 The Ben Bickham Collection from North Padre Island, Texas. La Tierra 12(1):6-17.

Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Diablo
Reservoir, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas Archeo-

Hall, Grant D.

logical Salvage Project, The University of Texas at

1974

Austin.

(207)

Leona River Watershed, Uvalde County, Texas: An
Archeological and Historical Survey of Areas Proposed for Modification. Research Report 37. Texas

Green, F.E. (61)
1961 Archaeological Salvage in the Twin Buttes Reservoir Area, San Angeleo, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
A rcheological Society 30:183-197.

Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Hall, Grant D. (219)
1981

1971

Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of
the Lower Brazos River Valley, Texas. Research

L.M. (22)
Notes on the Archeology of the Happy Patch Site,
San Saba County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 42:319-333.

Report 61. Texas Archeo!ogical Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Hall, Grant D., Stephen L. Black, and Carol Graves

1973

L. M., and Thomas Roy Hester (15)
The Finis Frost Site: A Toyah Phase Occupation in
San Saba County, Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 44:69-88.

Greer, John W. (141)
1968 Excavations at a Midden Circle Site in El Paso
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological

1982

(328)

Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase 1 Findings. Choke
Canyon Series No. 5. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Hall, Grant D., Michael B. Collins, and Elton R. Prewitt
(531)
!987

Cultural Resources Investigations along Drainage
Improvements, Hidalgo and Willacy Counties,

Society 39:111-131.

Texas: 1986 Investigations. Reports of Investiga-

Greer, John W. (11)
1976 Neo-American Occupation at the Wheatley Site,
Pedernales Falls State Park, Blanco County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 47:89169.

tions 59. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Hamilton, D.L.
1988

(439)

Archaeological Investigations at Shy Pond, Brazoria
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 58:77-145.

John W., and Robert A. Benfer

1975

(12)

Austin Phase Burials at the Pat Parker Site, Travis
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 46:189-216.

Griffin, F. Eugene
1976

(127)

Harris, R. K., Inus Marie Harris, Jay C. Blaine, and Jerrylee
Blaine (40)
1965 A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study
of the Womack Site, Lamar County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 36:287-363.

Summary of S.T.A.A. Bear Creek Reservation Site
Survey. £z~ Tierra 3(3):2-6.

Gudmjan, Thomas H. (360)
1981 Archaeological Investigations in the Forest Grove/
Big Rock Areas North-Central Texas. Archaeology
Research Program, Southern Methodist University,
Dallas.

Harris, R. K., and Dee Ann Suhm (editors) (156/157)
1963 An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of
Forney Reservoir, Collin, Dallas, Kaufinan, and
Rockwall Counties, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, University of Texas at Austin.
Harrison, Billy R., and Bob T. Griffin
1973

Guderjan, Thomas H. (435)
1986 Big Rock: a Woodland and Caddoan Rock-Shelter
in East Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:171-187.

(14)

An Infant Burial in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 44:61-68.

Hasskarl, Robert A., Jr.
1961

(63)

The Boggy Creek Sites of Washington County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
30:287-300.

152

Texas Archeological Society

Hays, T. R. (compiler and editor)
1982

(339/340/341/342/343)

Archaeological Investigations at the San Gabriel

Hester, Thomas Roy, and Michael B. Collins
1969

(416)

Burials from the Frisch Auf! Site:41FY42. The Texas
Journal of Science XXI(2): 131-166.

Reservoir Districts, Central Texas. Volumes I-III.
Archaeology Program, Institute of Applied Sciences,
North Texas State University, Denton.

Hester, Thomas Roy, Michael B. Collins, Frank A. Weir, and
Frederick Ruecking, Jr.

Headrick, Pamela
1993

(662)

1969

(33)

Two Prehistoric Cemetery Sites in the Lower Rio

The Archeology of 41NUll, The Kirchmeyer Site,

Grande Valley of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Ar-

Nueces County, Texas: Long-Term Utilization of A

cheological Society 40:119-166.

Coastal Clay Dune. Studies in Archeology No. 15.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Hedrick, John A. (441)
1989 A Preliminary Report on Archeological Resources
in Southern Culberson County in the Vicinity of
Van Horn, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas ArcheoIogical Society 59:129-156.

Hester, Thomas Roy, and T. C. Hill, Jr. (16/17)
1972 Prehistoric Occupation at the Holdsworth and Stewart
Sites on the Rio Grande Plain of Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Areheological Society 43:33-76.
Hester, Thomas Roy, Thomas C. Kelly, and Feris A. Bass, Jr
(327)
1975 An Initial Archaeological and Historical Assessment of Three Proposed Dam Sites in Gonzales and

Henderson, Jerry
1979

Kendall Counties, Texas. Regional Studies 2. Cen-

(236)

The Mothershed Spring Site. Publications in Ar-

ter for Archaeological Research, The University of

chaeology, Report No. 12. Highway Design Divi-

Texas at San Antonio.

sion, Texas State Department of Highways and
Public Transportation, Austin.

Hester, Thomas Roy, and Robert C. Parker
1970

Hester, Thomas Roy
1968

(24)

The Berclair Site: A Late Prehistoric Component in
Goliad County, Southern Texas. Bulletin of the

(143)

Paleo-Indian Artifacts from Sites Along San Miguel

Texas Archeological Society 41:1-23.

Creek: Frio, Atascosa and McMullen Counties,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

Hester, Thomas Roy, and Charles M. Whatley

39:147-161.

1992a Notes on South Texas Archaeology: 1992-1. Ar-

(492)

chaeological Materials from Site 41UV20: Uvalde
Hester, Thomas Roy
1969

County, South-Central Texas. La Tierra 19(1):3-8.

(261)

Archeological Investigations in Kleberg and Kenedy
Counties, Texas in August, 1967. Report 15. Ar-

Hester, Thomas Roy, and Charles M. Whatley

cheological Program, State Building Commission,

1992b Notes on South Texas Archaeology:

(495)
1992-3.

Chipped Stone Artifacts from Site 41DM59: Dimmit

Austin.

County, Southern Texas. La Tierra 19(3): 1-7.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1971

(19)

Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site,

Hester, Thomas Roy, L. D. White, and Joy White

Uvalde County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Ar-

1969

(424)

Archeological Materials from the Oulline Site (41
LS 3) and Other Sites in La Salle County, Southwest

cheological Society 42:51 - 148.

Texas. The Texas Journal of Science XXI(2): 131Hester, Thomas Roy
1977

(307)

166.

Archaeological Research at the Hinojosa Site (41
JW 8), Jim Wells County, Southern Texas. Archaeological Survey Report No. 42. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San

Hester, Thomas Roy, Diane Wilson, and Pamela Headrick
(497)
1993

Notes on South Texas Archaeology: 1993-1. An
Austin Phase Burial from Frio County, South Texas:

Antonio,

Archaeology and Physical Anthropology. La Tierra
Hester, Thomas Roy
1989

(478)

20(1):5-8.

Notes on South Texas Archaeology: 1989-4. A Cremation Burial from a Site in Dimmit County, South-

Highley, Lynn

ern Texas. La Tierra 16(4):2-4.

1979

(110)

A Note on Arrowpoints Collected in Webb and
Duval Counties. La Tierra 6(4):36-39.

Hester, Thomas Roy, Byron D. Barber, and Pamela Headrick
(499)
1993

Notes on South Texas Archaeology: 1993-3. Insights into Clovis Technology: A Clovis Point from
Atascosa County, Southern Texas. La Tierra
20(3):3-5.

Highley, Lynn, Jeffery A. Huebner, Joseph H. Labadie,
Rochelle J. Leneave, and Robert R. Harrison.
1988

(473)

Salvage Archaeology at the Brandes Site (41 AU
55), Austin County, Texas. La Tierra 15(3):6-19.

Prewitt m Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

Highley, Lynn, Carol Graves, Carol Land, and George Judson

(7)
!978

Howard, Margaret Ann
!983

Areheological Investigations at Sco~ion Cave (41

153

(412)

A Quantitative Study of the Booker Site and Other
Burned Rock Midden Sites of the Lake Travis Basin,

ME 7) Medina County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas

Central Texas. Master’s thesis, Department of An-

Archeological Society 49:139-194.

thropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Highley, Lynn (325)

Howard, Margaret Ann, and Martha Doty Freeman

1980

1984

Archaeological Materials from the Alazan Bay Area,

(515)

Settlement in the Upper Bull Creek Basin: An In-

Kleberg County, Texas. In Papers on the Archaeol-

ventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at

ogy of the Texas Coast, edited by Lynn Highley and

the Canyon Creek Development, Travis County,

Thomas R. Hester, pp. 61-78. Specia! Report 11.

Texas. Reports of Investigations 32. Prewitt and

Center for Archaeological Research, The Univer-

Associates, Inc., Austin.

sity of Texas at San Antonio.
Howard, Margaret Ann
Highley, Lynn, and Dan Lengefeld
1977

(121)

1988

(561)

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed City of

Preliminary Investigations at the Wolf Site, Blanco

Robinson Water Plant, McLennan County, Texas.

County, Texas. La Tierra 4(4): 16-19.

Technical Reports 4. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.

Hillier, Laura E.
1977

(290)

An Archeological Survey of the Industrial Generat-

Howard, Margaret Ann

ing Company Lignite Mining Area, Milam County,

1991

(543)

National Register Testing at the Spanish Moss Site

Texas. Report 35. Anthropology Laboratory, Texas

(41GVIO) and 41GV53, Galveston County, Texas.

A&M University, College Station.

Reports of Investigations 77. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Hines, Margaret Howard (554)
1992 Exploratory Investigations at 41GV53 on Clear
Creek, Galveston Count3,, Texas. Reports of Inves-

Howard, Margaret Ann, and Martha Doty Freeman
1990

tigations 89. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

(562)

Archeological Reconnaissance in the Second Reach
of the Clear Creek Flood Control Project, Galveston
and Harris Counties, Texas. Technical Reports 8.

Hines, Margaret Howard, Steve A. Tomka, and Karl W.
Kibler (559)
1994

Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Data Recovery Excavations at the Wind Canyon Site,

Howard, Margaret Ann, Martha Doty Freeman, and C. Britt

41HZl19, Hudspeth County, Texas. Reports of In-

Bousman (548)
1991 Archeological Reconnaissance on Upper Greens

vestigations 99. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Bayou, Harris County, Texas. Reports of InvestigaHolliday, VanceT.
1977

(411)

tions 83. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Cultural Chronology of the Lubbock Lake Site. Master’s thesis, Museum Science Department, Texas
Tech University, Lubbock.

HoIliday, Vance T., and Kerry A. Grombacher
1974

(204)

An Assessment of the Archeological and Historical
Resources to be Affected by the Proposed Chiltipin
Creek Flood Control Project San Patricio County,

Howard, Margaret Ann, Martha Doty Freeman, and C. Britt
Bousman (550)
1992 A rcheological Reconnaissance in the Third Reach
of the Clear Creek Flood Control Project, Galveston
and Harris Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations 85. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Texas. Research Report No. 29. Texas Archeologi-

Hsu, Dick Ping, and Ronald W. Ralph

cal Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

1968

Honea, Kenneth (2)
1980 Marks Beach, Stratified Paleoindian Site, Lamb
County, Texas: Preliminary Report. Bulletin of the
Texas A rcheological Society 51:243-269.

Cibolo Reservoir, Wilson Count)’, Texas. Archeological Survey 1. Texas State Building Commission
and Texas State Water Development Board, Austin.
Hudgeons, Mark D.
1979

Houk, Brett A., and Jon C. Lohse
1993

(263)

An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of

(445)

(112)

A Clovis Point Fragment from DeWitt County. La
Tierra 6(1):24.

Archeological Investigations at the Mingo Site,
Bandera County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Ar-

Hudgins, Joe D.

cheological Society 61 : 193-247.

1986

(432)

A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55:29-

Howard, Calvin D. (137)
1974 Paleo-Indian Surface Finds in Bexar County. La
Tierra !(3):14-18.

51.

154

Texas Archeological Society

Hudgins, Joe D., and L. W. Patterson (485)
1990 Two Aboriginal Sites in Jeff Davis County, Texas.
La Tierra 17(2):25-30.

Ivey, James E., and Anne A. Fox
1981

(602)

Archaeological Survey and Testing at Rancho de
las Cabras, Wilson County, Texas. Archaeological
Survey Report 104. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Hudson, William R., Jr., Warren M. Lynn, and Dan Scurlock
(282)
1974 Walker Ranch: An Archeological Reconnaissance
and Excavations in Northern Bexar County, Texas.
Report 26. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.

Huebner, Jeffrey A., and Anthony G. Comuzzie (659)
1992 The Archeology and Bioarcheology of Blue Bayou:
A Late Archaic and l_x~te Prehistoric Mortuary Locality in Victoria County, Texas. Studies in Archeology 9. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.

Jackson, JackM. (633)
1982 A Cultural Resource Survey in Martin Lake Area D:
Intensive Survey I, Rusk County, Texas. Research
Report 85. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Jackson, Jack M., and Ross C. Fields
1986

(526)

ArcheologicaI Investigations at 41LN208, A Workers Housing Area for an Early Twentieth-Century
Lignite Mine, Jewett Mine Project, Leon County,
Texas. Reports of Investigations 51. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.

Hughes, Jack Thomas (413)
1942

An Archaeological Report on the Harrell Site of
North-Central Texas. Master’s thesis, Department
of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Hughes, JackT. (72)
1955 Little Sunday: An Archaic Site in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
26:55-74
Hughes, Jack T. (5t)
1961 Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
32:65-84.
Hughes, JackT.
1972

(347)

A rcheological Reconnaissance in the Wichita River

Jackson, MarshaF. (425)
1974 Archeological Resources of the North Fork Reservoir Area: Results of Survey and Testing--1970 Season. Texas Archeological Survey, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Jarvis, R. Whitby and Daymond D. Crawford (229)
t974 Archaeological Excavations on Interstate Highway
10, Sutton County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology, Report 4. Highway Design Division, Texas
State Highway Department, Austin.
Jelks, Edward B. (255)
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect
Site in Hill County, Texas. Archaeology Series 5.
Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Drainage of North-Central Texas. Archeological
Research Laboratory, Killgore Research Center,
West Texas State University, Canyon, Texas.

Hughes, Jack T. and Patrick S. Willey (editors) (274)
1978 Archeology at MacKenzie Reservoir. Archeological
Survey No. 24. Office of the State Archeologist,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Hyatt, Robert D., and Karen Doehner (370)
1975 Archaeological Research at Cooper Lake, Northeast Texas, 1973. Contributions in Anthropology,
No. 15. Department of Anthropology, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.

Jelks, Edward B. (editor) (35)
1967 The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 37 (whole volume).
Jelks, Edward B. and Curtis D. Tunnell (252)
1959 The Harroun Site. A Fulton Aspect Component of
the Caddoan Area, Upshur County, Texas. Archaeology Series 2. Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Jetks, Edward B. and Curtis D. Tunnell (150)
1960 Appraisal of the ArcheologicaI Resources of Proctor Reservoir, Comanche County, Texas. Texas Ar-

Ivey, James E. (607)
1983 Archaeological Testing at Rancho de las Cabras,
41 WN 30, Wilson County, Texas, Second Season.
Archaeological Survey Report 121. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.

cheological Salvage Project, The University of Texas
at Austin.

Jensen, Harald P., Jr. (142)
1968 Report on Excavations at the Field Ranch Site
(X41CO-10). Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 39:133-146.

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas
Jodry, Pegi, and Dan Prikryl
1981

(666)

Appendix C: Survey and Assesstnent of the Cultural

Jones, Buddy C.
1957

Resources within Proposed Site Locations for a
Steam Electric Plant,

(70)

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 28:198-231.

Ward County, Texas.

Document 81106. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc.,
Austin.
Johnson, Eileen, Vance T. Holliday, Michael J. Kaczor, and
Robert Stuckenrath (9)
1977

155

The Garza Occupation at the Lubbock Lake Site.

Jones, Laura K., Gregory Sundborg, and Laurel A. Smyth
(685)
1988 A Cultural Resources Survey of the Lampasas to
Goldthwaite Transmission Line, Lampasas, Mills,
and San Saba Counties, Texas. Document 880627.
Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeologica! Society 48:83109.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.

(57)

1961a An Archeological Survey of Blackburn Crossing
Reservoir on the Upper Neches River. Bulletin of
the Texas A rcheological Society 31:213-238.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.

(53/54)

1961b The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern

Katz, PaulR. (303)
1978 An Inventory and Assessment ofArchaeological Sites
in the High Country of Guadalupe Mountains National Park, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report
36. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Katz, PaulR. (6tl)
1987 Archaeological Mitigation at 41 BX 300, Salado

Texas, with a Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe

Creek Watershed, South-Central Texas. Archaeo-

Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

logical Survey Report 130. Center for Archaeologi-

32:141-284.

cal Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

Johnson, LeRoy, Jr. (373)
1964 The Devil’s Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at
Amistad Reservoir, Val Verde County, Texas. Ar-

1977

(304)

An Archaeological Test Excavation at John James

chaeo!ogy Series 6. Department of Anthropology,

Park, City of San Antonio, Texas. Archaeological

The University of Texas at Austin.

Survey Report 38. Center for Archaeological Re-

Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1991

Katz, Susanna R.

search, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

(576)

Early Archaic Life at the Sleeper Archaeological
Site 41BC65 of the Texas Hill Country, Blanco

Katz, Susanna R. and Paul R. Katz (270)
1976 Archeological Investigations in Lower Tule Can-

County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology, Re-

yon, Briscoe County, Texas. Archeological Survey

port 39. Highway Design Division, Texas State De-

Report 16. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas

partment of Highways and Public Transportation,

Historical Commission, Austin.

Austin.
Keller, John Esten
Johnson, LeRoy
1994

(568)

The Life and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk: The
Buckhollow Encampment Site, 41KM16, Kimble

(230)

The Black Dog Village Site: A Panhandle Aspect
Manifestation in Hutchinson County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology, Report 5. Highway Design

County, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist,

Division, Texas State Department of Highways and

Report 38. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Public Transportation, Austin.

Johnson, LeRoy, Jr., Dee Ann Suhm, and Curtis D. Tunnell
(247)
1962

1975

Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The
Wunderlich, Footbridge, and Oblate Sites. Bulletin

Keller, John Esten (232)
1976a The Crystal Rivers Site. Publications in Archaeology, Report 6. Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.

5. Texas Memorial Museum, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Johnson, MalcomL. (98)
1981 Notes on Two Sites Along Oso Creek, Nueces

Keller, John Esten (231)
1976b The StickleafSite. Publications in Archaeology, Report 8. Texas State Department of Highways and
Public Transportation, Austin.

County, Southern Texas. La Tierra 8(4): 12-28.
Johnson, Malcom L. (466)
1986 Site 41 NU 190: Indications of Ceremonial Activity
on the Texas Coast. La Tierra 13(4):23-39.

Keller, John Esten and Frank A. Weir (237)
1979 The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archaeology, Report 13. Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.

156

Texas Archeological Society

Kelley, David B., George J. Castille, Charles E. Pearson,
Richard A. Weinstein, and Douglas D. Bryant (702)
1994 Archaeological Testing and Evaluation of the Flat
Bank Creek Site (41 FB 99), Fort Bend Count3,,
Texas. Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge.

Kelly, Thomas C. and Thomas R. Hester (300)
1976b The McQueeney Municipal Utility District Project:
An Archaeological Reconnaissance. Archaeological Survey Report 19. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Kelley, J. Charles (83)
1947 The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the
Toyah, Uvalde, and Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 18:115-128.

Kelly, Thomas C. and Lynn Highley (316)
1979 The Jackpump Project: An Archaeological Survey
of Portions of Karnes and Gonzales Counties, Texas.
Archaeological Survey Report 65. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.

Kelley, J. Charles (78)
1949 Archaeological Notes on Two Excavated House
Structures in Western Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 20:89114.

Kelly, Thomas C. and Harvey P. Smith, Jr. (50)
1962 An Investigation of Archeological Sites in Reagan
Canyon, Brewster County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 33:167-190.

Kelly, Thomas C. (58)
1961 The Crumley Site: A Stratified Burnt Rock Midden,
Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 3 ! :239-272.

Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele (447)
1992 The Mayhew Site: A Possible Hasinai Farmstead,
Nacogdoches County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 63:135- ! 73.

Kelly, Thomas C.

Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele

1962

(50)

Archeological Investigations at Roark Cave,
Brewster County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Ar-

1993

(569)

Survey in the McKittrick Canyon Watershed,
Guadalupe Mountains National Park, Culberson
County, Texas. Department of Antiquities Protec-

cheological Society 33:191-227.

tion, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Kelly, Thomas C. (455)
1983 The Brom Cooper Paleo-Indian Collection from
McMullen County, Texas. La Tierra 10(3): 17-40.

Kibler, Karl W., and Martha Doty Freeman
1993

(555)

Preliminary Cultural Resources Investigations for
the Pharr-Reynosa h~ternational Bridge, Hidalgo

Kelly, Thomas C. (467)
1987 Archeology of the Gamenthaler Valley, Gillespie
County, Central Texas: A Preliminary Report. La
Tierra 14( 1 ):5-27.
Kelly, Thomas C. (474)
1988 The Nockenut Clovis Point. La Tierra 15(4):7-18.
Kelly, Thomas C. (484)
1990 The La Vernia Folsom Point, Wilson County, Texas.
La Tierra 17(2): 14-24.
Kelly, Thomas C. and Carol Graves (320)
1980 The El Sauz Project: Archaeological Testing of Selected Sites in the Arroyo Los Olmos Watershed,
Starr County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report
88. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Kelly, Thomas C. and Thomas R. Hester (298)
1976a Archaeological Investigations at Sites in the Upper
Cibolo Creek Watershed, Central Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 17. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

County, Texas. Reports of Investigations 90. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Kibler, Karl W., Margaret Howard Hines, and Ross C. Fields
(565)
1992 National Register Testing of 41GV91, Galveston
County, Texas. Technical Reports No. 17. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Koch, Joan K., and C. S. Mueller-Wille (726)
1989a Archeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal
Year 1985, The Southwestern Training Area. Research Report No. 17, Archaeological Resource
Management Series. United States Army Fort Hood,
Fort Hood, Texas.
Koch, Joan K., and C. S. Mueller-Wille (727)
1989b Archeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal
Year 1985, The Northern Training Area. Research
Report No. 18, Archaeological Resource Management Series, United States Army Fort Hood, Fort
Hood, Texas.
Kotter, Steven M. (379)
1980 Archeological Assessments at Site 41ZP73, Falcon
State Recreation Area, Zapata County, Texas. Reports of Investigations 9. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas
Kotter, Steven M. (384)
1982 A Preliminary Assessment of the Cultural Resources

Labadie, Joseph H.
1987

within the Millican Project, Navasota River Basin,

(620)

A Reconnaissance of Electrical Transmission Line
Rights-of-Way in Bandera and Kerr Counties, Texas.

Brazos, Grimes, Leon, Madison and Robertson

Archaeological Survey Report 164. Center for Ar-

Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations 19.

chaeological Research, The University of Texas at

Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

San Antonio.

Kotter, Steven M.
1985

157

(637)

Labadie, Joseph H.

Cherry Tree Shelter: Excavation of a Stratified Late

1988

(580)

Archaeological Excavations at the Shrew Site

Archaic and Neoarchaic Rockshelter, Travis Count3,,

41WN73, Wilson County, Southern Texas. Contract

Texas. Research Report 92. Texas Archeologica!

Reports in Archaeology, Report 2. Highway Design

Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

Division, Texas State Department of Highways and
Public Transportation, Austin.

Kotter, Steven M., and Ross C. Fields (507)
1983 National Register Testing of Site 41HR436, Addicks
Reservoir, Harris County, Texas. Reports of Inves-

Land, Howard D. (433)
1986 The Gregg Ranch Site (41HY131), Hays County,

tigations 23. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Kotter, Steven M., and Jan A. Guy (376)
1980 Archeologica! Survey and Assessment of Two Areas
to be Affected by Proposed Critical Area Treatment
Measures within the Ecleto Creek Watershed,
Karnes County, Texas. Reports of Investigations 5.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Kotter, Steven M., and Henry B. Moncure
1985

Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
55:73-113.
Largent, Floyd B., Jr., and Elinore Stewart
1989

(475)

A Folsom Point from Live Oak County, Texas. La
Tierra 16(1):36-39.

Lebo, Susan A., and Kenneth Lynn Brown (700)
1990 A rchaeological Survey of the Lewisville Lake Shore-

(651)

line, Denton County, Texas. Institute of Applied

Cultural Resource Survey at the Proposed City of

Sciences, University of North Texas, Denton.

Austin Water Treatment Plant Number Four, Travis
County, Texas. Technical Bulletin 80. Texas

Lintz, Christopher, Abby C. Treece, Fred M. Oglesby, Karl

Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at

Kibler, Patrick O’Neill, W. Nicholas Trierweiler, Charles
Frederick, J. Michael Quigg, and A. J. Taylor (719)

Austin.

1993
Kotter, Steven M., and Linda A. Nance
1980

(380)

Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie
Reservoir, Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Coun-

Archeological Assessments at 41GL57 and 41GL91,

ties, Texas, Volume II: Test Excavations at Prehis-

Enchanted Rock State Natural Area, Gillespie
County, Texas. Reports of Investigations 10. Prewitt

toric Sites and Assessment of Rock Cairn Features.
Technical Report 346-II. Mariah Associates, Inc.,

and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Austin.

Kotter, Steven M., Patience E. Patterson, Dan K. Utley, and
Henry B. Moncure (660)
1991 Final Report on Cultural Resource Investigations
at the Cummins Creek Mine, Fayette County, Texas.
Studies in Archeology 11. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Long, Joseph K., II
1961

(62)

Three Central Texas Aspect Sites in Hill County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
30:223-252.

Lonain, Dessamae
1968

(260)

Archeological Excavations in Northwestern Crockett
County, Texas, 1966-1967. Report 12. Archeologi-

Kotter, Steven M., Robert Rogers, Richard Taylor, Kathryn
Reese-Taylor, and Wayne P. Glander (692)
1993 Archaeological Investigation within the Monticello
B-2 First Five- Year Disturbance Area, Titus County,
Texas. Document 920013. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

cal Program, State Building Commission, Austin.
Luke, Clive J. (235)
1978 The Marshall Powder Mill Site: The 1973-74 Excavation. Publications in Archaeology, Report 11.
Highway Design Division, Texas State Department
of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.

Kuykendall, Mark C.
1992

(494)

Archaeological Survey of the Lower San Geronimo

Luke, Clive J.

Creek Watershed, South-Central Texas. La Tierra

1979

19(1):21-38.

(239)

The Cook’s Slough Site (41 UV 68). Publications in
Archaeology, Report 15. Highway Design Division,
Texas State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Austin.

158

Texas Archeological Society

Luke, Clive J.

(240)

1980a Continuing Archaeology on State Highway 16 in
Kerr County, Texas: The Excavations of The Shep
Site (41 KR 109) and The Wounded Eye Site (41 KR

Lynott, Mark J., and Duane E. Peter (362)
1977 1975 A rchaeological Investigations at Aquilla Lake,
Texas. Archaeology Research Program, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.

107). Publications in Archaeology, Report 16. Texas
State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Highway Design Division, Austin.
Luke, Clive J.

(241)

1980b Test Excavations at the Famous Amos Site, Crockett
County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology, Report 17. Highway Design Division, Texas State De-

Mallouf, Michae! G. (221)
1977 Archeological b~vestigations at Lake Limestone.
Research Report 71. Texas Archeological Survey,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Mallouf, Robert J.
1976

(271)

Archeological btvestigations at Proposed Big Pine
Lake, 1974-1975, Lamar and Red River Counties,

partment of Highways and Public Transportation.

Texas. Archeological Survey Report 18. Office of
the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commis-

Luke, Clive J. (570)
1983 Continuing Archaeology on Interstate 10: The Musk

sion, Austin.

Hog Canyon Project, Crockett County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology, Report 24. Highway De-

Mallouf, Robert J. and Barbara J. Baskin

sign Division, Texas State Department of Highways

1976

Watershed Hill and McLennan Counties, Texas.
Archeological Survey Report 19. Office of the State

and Public Transportation.
Lukowski, Paul D.
1987

(272)

Archeological Surveys in the Tehuacana Creek

Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

(612)

Archaeological lnvestigations Along the Leona River
Watershed, Uvalde County, Texas. Archaeological

Mallouf, Robert J., Barbara J. Baskin, and Kay L. Killen (273)

Survey Report 132. Center for Archaeological Re-

1977

search, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

A Predictive Assessment of Cultural Resources in
Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas. Archeological Survey Report 23. Office of the State Archeolo-

Lukowski, Paul D.
1988

gist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

(614)

Archaeological Investigations at 41 BX 1, Bexar
County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 135.

Mallouf, Robert J. and Anthony N. Zavaleta

Center for Archaeological Research, The Univer-

1979

(283)

The Unland Site: A Prehistoric Group Burial from
Laguna Atascosa National Wildlife Refuge,

sity of Texas at San Antonio.

Cameron County, Texas. Special Report 25. Office
of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Com-

Lynn, Warren M., B arbara J. Baskin, and William R. Hudson,
Jr.
1975

mission, Austin.

(269)
A Preliminary Archeological Reconnaissance of Selected Public Free School Lands in El Paso County,

Malone, James M.

Texas. Archeological Survey Report 13. General Land

1970

(265)

Archeological Reconnaissance in the MacKenzie
Reservoir Area of TuIe Canyon. Archeological Sur-

Office and Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

vey No. 8. Texas Historical Survey Committee and
Lynn, Warren M., and John R. Fuszek
1981

Texas Water Development Board, Austin.

(335)

Walnut Creek District Park Archeological Testing
at the Wells Site 41TV368, City of Austin, Travis

Malone, James M.

County, Texas. Parks and Recreation Planning As-

1972

(267)

Archeological Reconnaissance at Proposed Mineola
Reservoir. Archeological Survey 10. Texas Histori-

sociates, Inc., Austin.

cal Survey Committee and Texas Water DevelopLynott, Mark J.
1975

ment Board, Austin.

(371)

Archaeological Excavations at Lake Lavon 1974.
Contributions in Anthropology, No. 16. Department

Malone, James M. and Alton K. Briggs

of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University,

1970

(264)

An Archeological Survey of the Texarkana Reservoir Enlargement Area:Report on the First Season.

Dallas.

Archeological Survey 7. Texas Historical Survey
Lynott, Mark J.
1978

Committee and Texas Water Development Board,

(364)

Austin.

An Archaeological Assessment of the Bear Creek
Shelter, Lake Whitney, Texas. Research Report 115.
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Method-

Marmaduke, William S.

ist University, Dallas.

1978

(272)

Prehistory at Bear Creek, Brewster County, Texas.
Archeological Survey Report No. 25. Office of the
State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

159

McClurkan, Burney B. (195)
1968 Livingston Reservoir, 1965-66: Late Archaic and
Neo-American Occupations. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 12. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas
at Austin.

McGraw, A. Joachim, and Kay Hindes

McCormick, Olin F., III (367)
!973 Archaeological Resources in the Lake Monticello
Area of Titus County, Texas. Contributions in An- ’
thropology, No. 8. Department of Anthropology,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

McGraw, A. Joachim, and Dennis A. Knepper (608)
n.d.
The East Chacon Project: 11,000 Years of Prehistory Along the Upper Nueces River, Southern Texas.
Archaeological Survey Report 125. Center for Archeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.

McCormick, Olin F. and C. Reid Ferring (350)
1980 Cultural Resource Evaluation of the Proposed Lake
Amon G. Carter Enlargement, Montague County,

1987

(619)

Chipped Stone and Adobe: A Cultural Resources
Assessment of the Proposed Applewhite Reservoir,
Bexar County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 163. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

McGraw, A. Joachim and Fred Valdez, Jr.
1978

Texas. Privately printed.

(313)

Investigation of Prehistoric Rockshelter and Terrace Sites Along Portions of the Salado Creek Drainage, Northern Bexar County, Texas. Archaeological

McCormick, Olin F. and Roger E. Filson
1975

(351)

Survey Report 55. Center for Archaeological Re-

Archaeological Survey of Portions of Hamilton

search, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Creek Watershed, Burnet County, Central Texas.
Institute for Environmental Studies, North Texas
State University, Denton.

McGraw, A. Joachim, Fred Valdez, Jr. and Waynne Cox
(305)
1977

McDonald, Andrew J. (197)
1972 An Archeological Survey of the Martin Lake Area,

An Archaeological Survey of Areas Proposed for
Modification in the Encino Park Development,
Northern Bexar County, Texas. Archaeological Sur-

Rusk and Panola Counties, Texas. Research Report

vey Report 39. Center for Archaeological Research,

14. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The Uni-

The University of Texas at San Antonio.

versity of Texas at Austin.
McGraw, A. Joachim, Beverly J. Van Note, and Courtenay J.
McGraw, A. Joachim
1979

(318)

A Preliminary Archaeological Survey for the

Jones (604)
1987 Archaeology of the Brasada: A Cultural Resources

Conquista Project in Gonzales, Atascosa, and Live

Assessment of the Chevron Resources Company

Oak Counties, Texas. Archaeological Survey Re-

Properties in Northeastern Duval County, Texas.

port 76. Center for Archaeological Research, The

Archaeological Survey Report 113. Center for Ar-

University of Texas at San Antonio.
McGraw, A. Joachim
1983

race Sites along the Rio Grande, Laredo, Texas.
Archaeological Survey Report 106. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.

1984

San Antonio.

(603)

Arroyo de los Muertos and Other Prehistoric Ter-

McGraw, A. Joachim

chaeological Research, The University of Texas at

(610)

Archaeology in the South Texas Sand Sheet: A Study
of Chevron Properties in Brooks County. Archaeo-

McGuff, Paul R. (217)
1978 Prehistoric A rcheological Investigations at Pahnetto
Bend Reservoir: Phase 1, Jackson County, Texas.
Palmetto Bend Reservoir Series, Volume 3, Research Report 58. Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.
McNatt, Logan D.
1978

logical Survey Report 129. Center for Archaeologi-

Recreation Area Site (41WA82) Walker County,

cal Research, The University of Texas at San

Texas. Report No. 44. Anthropology Laboratory,

Antonio.

McGraw, A. Joachim (621)
1987 An Archaeological Survey of Proposed Seismic and
Pipeline Routes at the Chaparral Wildlife Management Area, Dimmit and La Salle Counties, Southern
Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 165. Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.

(292)

Archeological Investigations at the Kaygal

Texas A&M University, College Station.
McReynolds, Mary Jane, H. Blaine Ensor, and David L.
Carlson
1988

(589)

Archeological Investigations at 41HR530 and
41HR608, Langham Creek, Addicks Reservoir, Hart’is County, Texas. Reports of Investigations 6. Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station.

160

Texas Archeological Society

McReynolds, Mary Jane, Randy Korgel, and H. Blaine Ensor

(590)
1988

Archeological hwestigations at a 1.ate Ceramic Period Bison Kill Site, (41HR541), Whiteoak Bayou,
Harris County, Texas. Reports of Investigations 7.
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M

Mercado-Allinger, Patricia A., and Crystal Sasse Ragsdale
(512)
1984 Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources,
Jamail Property Development, Williamson County,
Texas. Reports of Investigations 28. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.

University, College Station.
Miller, E. O. and Edward B. Jelks

McReynolds, Richard L. (101)
1981 Additional Paleo-Indian Artifacts from the Coleto
Creek Project Area of Southern Texas. La Tierra
8(3):28-31.

1952

(76)
Archeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir,
Coryell County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas ArcheologicaI Society 23:168-217.

Mitchell, Jimmy L.
McReynolds, Richard L.
1982

1974

(91)

(139)

4lAT18: An Archaeological Site in Atascosa
County, Texas. La Tierra 1(1):32-36.

Marine Shell Artifacts from Southwest Bexar
County. La Tierra 9(4): 13-16.

McReynolds, Richard L.
1983

(456)

Two Late Paleolithic Tools from Coleto Creek,
Victoria County, Southern Texas. La Tierra
10(4):26-30.

McReynolds, Richard, and Keith Grunewald
1981

(104)

An Archaeological Sample from an Undocumented
Edwards Site in Northern Bexar County, Southern

Mitchell, Jimmy L. (13)
1975 Notes on Some Archeological Materials from the
Palo Duro Creek Area of Hansford County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 46:217230.
Mitchell, Jimmy L. (128)
1976a Artifacts from the Johney Creek Area of LaSalle
County, Southern Texas. La Tierra 3(3):7-10.

Texas. La Tierra 8(1):15-22.
Mitchell, Jimmy L.
McReynolds, Richard, Ben McReynolds, and Mike
McReynolds
1980

from South Texas. !xt Tierra 3(1):20-22.

(106)

Additional Late Paleo-Indian Artifacts from
Southwestern Atascosa County, Texas. La Tierra

Mitchell, Jimmy L.

7(3):34-38.

1977

Meier, Carl J., Jr., and Thomas R. Hester
1976

(131)

1976b A Tentative New Type of Late Paleo-Indian Point

(120)

41CM52 - A Salvage Site in Comat County, Texas.
La Tierra 4(4):2-9.

(130)

Paleo-lndian Artifacts from the Meier Site, South-

Mitchell, Jimmy L., C. K. Chandler, and T. C. Kelly

east Texas. La Tierra 3(1):16-19.

!984

(459)

The Rudy Haiduk Site (41KA23): A Late Archaic
Burial in Karnes County, Texas. La Tierra 11(2): 12-

Mercado-Allinger, Patricia A.
1983

Survey,

39.

(385)

Testing and Assessment of Cultural

Resources in Portions of Willacy CounO, Drainage
District No. 1, Willavv County, Texas. Reports of
Investigations 20. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.
Mercado-Allinger, Patricia A., Ross C. Fields, Kathleen
Gilmore, and Nancy Reese
1984

(509)

bwentory and Assessment of Cultural Resources,
Cleat" Lake

Channel

Improvement

Mitchell, Jimmy L., and Shirley Van der Veer (454)
1983 Late Prehistoric Projectile Points from the Vicinity
of the Dan Baker Site, 41 CM 104, Comal County,
Texas. La Tierra 10(3):11-16.
Mokry, E. R., Jr. (132)
1976 Notes on Paleo-Indian Projectile Points from
McMullen County. La Tierra 3(1):26-27.

Project,

Galveston and Harris Counties, Texas. Reports of
Investigations 26. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.

Mercado-Allinger, Patricia A., Elton R. Prewitt, and Crystal
Sasse Ragsdale (513)
1984 Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources in
Portions of the Buttercup Creek Subdivision,
Williamson Count., Texas. Reports of Investigations 30. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Mokry, Edward R., Jr. (109)
1979 Survey of Archaeological Sites in Starr County,
Texas. Lzz Tierra 6(4): 16-25.
Moncure, Hank (645)
1980 Cultural Resource Survey of the Diamond 1 Lignite
Prospect, Robertson County, Texas. Technical Bulletin 42. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

Prewitt m Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas

161

Moncure, Henry B. (648)
1981 An Archeological Survey of the Verde Creek Transmission Line, Kerr County, Texas. Technical Bulletin 54. Texas Archeological Survey, The University
of Texas at Austin.

Nash, Michael A., and Robert M. Rogers

Moncure, Henry B. (649)
1983 A Cultural Resource Survey and Assessment in the
North Central Austin Growth Corridor, Travis
County, Texas. Technical Bulletin 63. Texas
Archeologica! Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Neureuther, Rita (462)
1985 Archaeology of the Allen Haag Ranch: A Survey of
Goss Creek, Kendall County, Texas. La Tierra
12(4):25-39.

Moore, Bill (93)
1982 Report on Testing at the Wells Rockshelter (41 RE
53): A Middle Archaic Site in Real County, Texas.
La Tierra 9(4):26-31.
Moore, Gary (289)
1976 An Archeological Assessment of Sites 41WM21,
41WM124, & 41WM133 in Granger Reservoir,
Williamson County, Texas. Report 32. Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College
Station.
Moore, William E. (429)
1983 Archeo!ogical Investigations at Musk Hog Canyon,
Crockett County, Texas: A Report of the 1976 Texas
Archeological Society Field School. Bulletin of the
Texas A rcheological Society 53:13-81.
Moore, William E. (471)
1988 Analysis of Surface-Collected Materials from Site
41 GL 19, A Late Prehistoric Site in Gillespie
County, Texas. La Tierra 15(2):21-26.
Moore, William E. (479)
1989 An Andice Point from the Fietsam Site (41 FY 52),
Fayette County, Texas. La Tierra 16(4):8-9.
Moore, William E. (577)
1992 Archaeological Investigations at the Connor Creek
Site (41NY9), Young County, Texas. Publications in
Archaeology, Report 40. Texas State Department of
Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.
Mueller-Wille, C. S., and David L. Carlson
1990

(729)

Archeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal

1992

(689)

Data Recovery on Four Archaeological Sites for
the Channel to Liberty Project, Chambers and Liberty Counties, Texas. Document 900737. Espey,
Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

Neureuther, Rita (464)
1986 Cecil’s Rockshelter: The Goss Creek Shelter 2 (41
KE 110), Kendall County, Texas. La Tierra
13(2):12-3!.
Newell, H. Perry and Alex D. Krieger (88)
1949 The George C. Davis Site - Cherokee County, Texas.
Memoirs No. 5. Society for American Archaeology,
Menasha, Wisconsin.
Newton, Milton B., Jr. (144)
1968 The Distribution and Character of Sites, Arroyo Los
Olmos, Start County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 38:18-24.
Nightengale, Bruce A., and Leland C. Bement (647)
1982 A Cultural Resource Survey and Assessment of the
Texaco-Sunedco Hobson Uranium Prospect, Karnes
County, Texas. Technical Bulletin 51. Texas
Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Nightengale, Brace A., William A. Cloud, Henry B. Moncure,
David G. Robinson, and Solveig A. Turpin (655)
1988 Intensive Survey of Cultural Resources in the Extended San Miguel Prospect, Atascosa and
McMullen Counties, Texas. Studies in Archeology
2. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Nightengale, Bruce A., Cheryl Lynn Highley, and S.
Christopher Caran (656)
1989 Continuing Cultural Resource Assessments in the
San Miguel Prospect 1988 Season, Atascosa and
McMullen Counties, Texas. Studies in Archeology
3. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Year 1986. Research Report No. 21, Archaeological
Resource Management Series. United States Army
Fort Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.

Nash, Michael A. and Erwin Roemer, Jr.
1994 Cultural Resource Investigations
Archaeological Site (41BT215),
Texas. (Draft) Document 940243.
Associates, Inc., Austin.

(693)
at the Kingsland
Burnet County,
Espey, Huston &

Nightengale, Brace A., and Jack M. Jackson (634)
1983 Intensive Survey of Cultural Resources in the
Cummins Creek Prospect, Fayette Count-),, Texas.
Research Report 86. Texas Archeological Survey,
The University of Texas at Austin.

162

Texas Archeological Society

Nightengale, Bruce A., Jack M. Jackson, and Henry B. Moncure
(636)
1985 Additional Intensive Survey of Cultural Resources
in the Cummins Creek Prospect, Fayette County,
Texas. Research Report 89. Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

Parsons, Mark L., Ronnie Hill, and Wayne Parker (4)
1979 The Old Tom Burial, Dickens County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 50:69-87.

Nunley, John P.

Patterson, L.W. (134)
1975 41HR210, A Multicomponent Site in Harris County,
Texas. La Tierra 2(4): 17-22.

(194)

1963a Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of
Livingston Reservoir Polk, San Jacinto, Trinity, and

Patterson, L.W. (136)
1974 A Multiple Rock Midden Site. La Tierra 1(3):10-13.

Walker Counties, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.

Patterson, L.W.
1976

Nunley, John P.

3(3):23-28.

(417)

1963b Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Columbus Bend Reservoir, Colorado and Fayette
Counties, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, The University of Texas at Austin.

(129)

The Hillboldt Site, Austin County, Texas. La Tierra

Patterson, L.W. (124)
1977 An Archeological Complex in Kendall County,
Texas./xz Tierra 4(2):6-16.
Patterson, L. W. (119)

Nunley, John P., Lathel F. Duffield, and Edward B. Jelks
(176)
1965 Excavations at Amistad Reservoir, 1962 Season.
Miscellaneous Papers No. 3. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.

1978

An Archaic Rock Midden Site (41 BN 11), Bandera
County, Texas. La Tierra 5(1):21-26.

Patterson, L.W.

(87)

1980a The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas. Report 3. Houston

O’Brien, Michael
1971

(23)

The Fullen Site, 41HR82. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 42:335-365.

Archeological Society, Houston.
Patterson, L.W.

(324)

1980b 41HR206, A Major Site in Harris County, Texas. In

Olds, Dorris L. (38)
1965 Report on Materials from Brawley’s Cave, Bosque
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 36:111-152.
Parker, Wayne
1982

(92)

The Wooden Bow Burial Site, Floyd County, Texas.
La Tierra 9(4):17-25.

Parker, Wayne (457)
1984 Preliminary Notes on a Clovis Point Associated with
Mammoth Tusk Fragments in Hockley County,
Texas. La Tierra 10(4):31-35.
Parker, Wayne and Jim Mitchell (111)
1979 Notes on Some Bell Points from A Site in Crosby
County, Texas. La Tierra 6(2):26-27.
Parsons, Mark L.
1965

(177)

1963 Test Excavations at Fate Bell Shelter, Amistad
Reservoir, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas Archeo-

Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas Coast, edited by Lynn Highley and Thomas R. Hester, pp.
13-27. Special Report No. 11. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

Patterson, L.W. (103)
1981 A Late Paleoindian and Archaic Rockshelter, Pecos
County, Texas. La Tierra 8(2):21-24.
Patterson, L.W. (97)
1982 Some Prehistoric Sites on the Uvalde-Zavala County
Line, Texas. La Tierra 9(1): 11-14.
Patterson, L.W. (90)
1983 An Archaeological Survey in Northwest Val Verde
County, Texas. La Tierra 10(1):32-38.
Patterson, L. W., R. W. McCausland, and J. D. Hudgins (480)
1989 Site 41 CD 122, A Long Occupation in Colorado
County, Texas. La Tierra 16(4):33-38.

logical Salvage Project, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Parsons, Mark L.
1967

Patterson, L. W., and W. Robert Wehner (133)
!975 The Las Moras Site in Kinney County, Texas. La
(257)

Archeological Investigations in Crosby and Dickens
Counties, Texas During the Winter, 1966-1967. Report 7. State Building Commission Archeological
Program, Austin.

Tierra 2(4): 11-15.

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas
Patterson, Patience Elizabeth (209)
1974 Upper San Marcos River VCatershed, Hays County,
Texas: An Archeological Survey of Areas Proposed
for Modification. Research Report 42. Texas
Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Patterson, Patience Elizabeth (573)
1987 Archaeological Excavations at 41LL78, The Slab
Site, Llano County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology, Report No. 34. Highway Design Division,
Texas State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Austin.
Patterson, Patience Elizabeth, and Mary Margaret Ford
(206)
1974 Oso Creek Flood Control Project Area, Nueces
County, Texas: A Report on the Archeological and
Historical Resources. Research Report 35. Texas
Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at

163

Peterson, Fredrick (149)
1965 The Erwin’s Bridge Site at Somerville Reservoir,
Burleson County, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas, Austin.

Pevey, Jody C., and Judy Van Cleve (381)
1981 An Archeological Survey and Assesstnent of Overhead Power Distribution Lines, Fayette, Lavaca and
Austin Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations
13. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Pliska, James R. (644)
1980 Archeological Investigations at the Three Rivers
Flood Control Project: A Final Report. Technical
Bulletin 30. Texas Archeo!ogical Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Pliska, James R., Bruce A. Nightengale, and Jack M. Jackson
(226)
1980

Austin.

A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of
the North Tract, Big Brown Lignite Project, Freestone County, Texas. Research Report 78. Texas

Peck, Jay (658)
1991 An Analysis of the Projectile Points from the 1932
Excavation of Fate Bell Rockshelter. In Papers on
Lower Pecos Prehistory, edited by Solveig A.
Turpin, pp. 65-85. Studies in Archeology 8. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Pollard, J.C., John W. Greer, and H. F. Sturgis (46)
1963 Archeological Excavations at the Boy Scout
Rockshelter (41TV69), Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 34:31-56.

Perkins, John L. (418)
1956 Tonk Creek Shelter. Central Texas Archeologist
7:40-47.

Preston, Nolan E.

Perttula, Timothy K., Bob D. Skiles, Michael B. Collins,
Margaret C. Trachte, and Fred Valdez, Jr. (527)
1986 "This Everlasting Sand Bed": Cultural Resources
Investigations at the Texas Big Sandy Project, Wood
and Upshur Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations 52. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Prewitt, Elton R. (43)
1964 Excavations at the Terri and Lightfoot Sites, Proctor Reservoir, Comanche County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas A rcheological Society 35:143-187.

Perttula, Timothy K., Bob D. Skiles, and Bonnie C. Yates
(444)
1993 The Goldsmith Site (41WD208): Investigations of
the Titus Phase in the Upper Sabine River Basin,
Wood County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 61 : 139-191.

1969

(34)

The McCann Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:167-192.

Prewitt, Elton R. (419)
1966

A Preliminary Report on the Devils Rockshelter
Site, Val Verde County, Texas. The Texas Journal
of Science XVIII(2):206-224.

Prewitt, Elton R.
1970

(276/277/278/279/280)

The Piedra Del Diablo Site, Val Verde County,
Texas and Notes on Some Trans-Pecos, Texas Archeological Material in the Smithsonian Institution,

Peter, Duane E., William A. Cloud, Cynthia Stiles-Hansen,
and MaynardB. Cliff (710)
1990 Intensive Survey Investigations of the Dughest
Project, Val Verde County, Texas. Miscellaneous
Reports of Investigations 6. Geo-Marine, Inc., Piano,
Texas.
Peter, Duane E., and Steven M. Hunt (712)
1992 A Sample Survey of the San Antonio Ranch Property, Bexar County, Texas. Miscellaneous Report of
Investigations 3 !. Geo-Marine, Inc., Piano.

Washington, D.C. Archeological Report 18. Texas
Historical Survey Committee, Austin.

Prewitt, Elton R. (202)
1973 An Archeological Reconnaissance of the Areas to
be Affected by the Proposed Louisiana Loop Pipeline, Cameron Parish, Louisiana, Jefferson and Liberty Counties, Texas~ Research Report 25. Texas
Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.

164

Texas Archeological Society

Prewitt, Elton R. (213)
1974a Upper Navasota Reservoir: An Archeological Assessment. Research Report 47. Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

Prewitt, Elton R., and Douglas A. Lawson
1972

(163)

An Assessment of the Archeological and Paleontological Resources of Lake Texoma, Texas - Oklahoma. Research Report 10. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.

Prewitt, Elton R.

(214)

1974b Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site,
Williamson County, Texas. Research Report 49.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of

Prewitt, Elton R., Susan V. Lisk, and Margaret Ann Howard

(530)
1987

National Register Assessments of the Swan Lake
Site, 41AS16, on Copano Bay, Aransas County,

Texas at Austin.

Texas. Reports of Investigations 56. Prewitt and
Prewitt, Elton R.
1975

(216)

Associates, Inc., Austin.

Upper Navasota Reservoir: Archeological Test Excavations at the Barkley and Louie Sadler Sites.

Prewitt, Elton R., and Michael G. Mallouf

Research Report 53. Texas Archeological Survey,

t977

(220)

Upper Navasota Reservoir: Test Excavations at Lake
Lbnestone, Spring 1976. Research Report 66. Texas

The University of Texas at Austin.

Archeological Salvage Project, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Prewitt, Elton R. (344/345/346)
1982 Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox,
Loeve and Tombstone Bluff Sites in the Granger

Prewitt, Elton R., and Linda A. Nance

Lake District of Central Texas. Archeological In-

1980

(377)

Archeological Survey and Assessments on the

vestigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts,

McBryde Lease, Duval County, Texas. Reports of

Central Texas, Volume IV. Archeology Program,

Investigations 7. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,

Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State

Austin.

University, Denton.
Prikryl, Daniel J.
Prewitt, Elton R. (editor)
1984

1990

(508)

(567)

Lower Elm Fork Prehistory: A Redefinition of Cul-

Archeological and Historical Investigations in the

tural Concepts" and Chronologies along the Trinity

Proposed Baker’s Port Project and Vicinity, South-

River, North-Central Texas. Report 37. Office of

ern Live Oak Peninsula, San Patricio County, Texas.

the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commis-

Reports of Investigations 25. Prewitt and Associ-

sion, Austin.

ates, Inc., Austin.
Prikryl, Daniel J., Kathleen Gilmore, Ross C. Fields, and
Prewitt, Elton R. (editor)
1991

Nancy Reese

(566)

Camp TexIake: A Cultural Resources Survey and

1984

Assessment, Travis County, Texas. Special Report 1.

(510)

Archeological and Historical Investigations at
41TT310, Lake Bob Sandlin State Park, Titus
County, Texas. Reports of Investigations 27. Prewitt

Travis County Archeological Society, Austin.

and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R.
n.d.

(428)

The Rogers" Springs Site, 41TV39:1974 Investiga-

Prikryl, Daniel J., and Jack M. Jackson

tions. Research Report 54. Texas Archeological Sur-

1985

(519)

Waco Lake, McLennan County, Texas: An Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources. Reports

vey, The University of Texas at Austin.

of Investigations 39. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Prewitt, Elton R., and David S. Dibble
1974

(208)

Austin.

The San Felipe Creek Watershed Project, Val Verde
County, Texas: An Archeological Survey. Research

Prikryl, Daniel J., and Crystal Sasse Ragsdale

Report 40. Texas Archeological Survey, The Uni-

1984

(514)

Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources,
Scofield Farms Development, Travis County, Texas.

versity of Texas at Austin.

Reports of Investigations 31. Prewitt and AssociPrewitt, Elton R., and Kerry A. Grombacher
1974

(210)

ates, Inc., Austin.

An Archeological and Historical Assessment of the
Areas to be Affected by the Proposed Twin Oak and

Prikryl, Daniel J., and Bonnie C. Yates (editors)

Oak Knoll Projects, East-Central Texas. Research

1987

Report 43. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

(70!)

Test Excavations at 41C0141, Ray Roberts Reservoir, Cooke County, Texas. Contributions in Archeology, No. 4. Institute of Applied Sciences, North
Texas State University, Denton.

Prewitt m Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas
Quigg, J. Michael, Christoper Lintz, Fred M. Oglesby, Amy
C. Earls, Charles D. Frederick, W. Nicholas Trierweiler,
Douglas Owsley, and Karl W. Kibler
1993

165

Riggs, Aaron D., Jr. (404)
1968b A Preliminary Report on a Crockett County, Texas

(721)

Shelter 41CX12. Transactions of the 4th Regional

Historic and Prehistoric Data Recovery at Palo

Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New

Duro Reservoir, Hansford County, Texas. Technical

Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 2-8.

Report No. 485. Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.

Quinn, Jean, and Jane Holden (79)
1949 Caves and Shelters in Dawson and Bordon Counties. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
20:115-131.
Raab, L. Mark, Allan J. McIntyre, James E. Bruseth, and
Daniel E. McGregor (Part I), and C. Reid Ferring, and
Nancy G. Reese (Part II)
1982

Riggs, Aaron D., Jr. (408)
1968c A Crockett County Shelter (41 CX 10). Transactions of the Ninth Regional Archeological Sytnposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western
Texas, pp. 41-50.
Riggs, Aaron D., Jr.

(145)

1968d Excavation of a Buried Midden, Site 41CXll in

(414)

Crockett County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Ar-

Archaeological Investigations at Lakeview Lake:

cheologicaI Society 38:76-82.

1979 and 1980, Part I and Part II. Archaeological
Monographs, Research Report No. 2. Archaeology
Research Program, Southern Methodist University,

Riggs, Aaron D., Jr. (399)
1972 The Petree Site: SPAS-MT-30. Transactions of the

Dallas.

Seventh Regional Archeological Symposium for
Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp.

Redder, Albert
1967

(391)

1-20.

Possum Branch, A Forest-Buried Type Midden.
Central Texas Archeologist 8:21-26.

Riggs, Aaron D., Jr.
1974

Redder, Albert
1985

(450)

Horn Shelter Number 2: The South End, A Prelimi-

(398)

Nan’s Shelter: 41CX109. Transactions of the Ninth
Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 25-38.

nary Report. Central Texas Archeologist 10:37-65.
Richner, Jeffrey J., and Reed Lee
1977

(363)

Robinson, David G. (227)
1980 A Cultural Resource Survey of Rhode Ranch,

Archaeological and EthnohistoricaI Survey at Ten-

McMullen County, Texas. Research Report 79. Texas

nessee Colony Lake, Texas, 1975. Research Report

Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at

No. 104. Archaeology Research Program, Southern

Austin.

Methodist University, Dallas.
Roemer, Erwin, Jr., and Stephen L. Black
Ricklis, Robert A.
1988

(438)

1977

(310)

Archaeological Survey and Testing at The City of

Archeological Investigations at the McKenzie Site

Live Oak Park, Bexar County, Texas. Archaeologi-

(41NU221), Nueces County, Texas: Description and

cal Survey Report 47. Center for Archaeological

Contextual Interpretations. Bulletin of the Texas Ar-

Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

cheological Society 58:1-76.
Roemer, Erwin, Jr., and Shawn Bonath Carlson

Ricklis, Robert A., Michael D. Blum, and Michael B. Collins
(661)
1991 Archeological Testing at the Vera Daniel Site
(41TV1364) Zilker Park, Austin, Texas. Studies in
Archeology, No. 12. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

1987

(579)

Excavations at 41BUI6: State Highway 21 at the
Brazos River, Burleson County, Texas. Contract
Reports in Archaeology, Report 1. Highway Design
Division, Texas State Department of Highways and
Public Transportation, Austin.

Roemer, Erwin, Jr., Shawn Bonath Carlson, and David L.

Ricklis, Robert A., and Rita R. Gunter (463)
1986 Archeological Investigations at the Means Site (41
NU 184), Nueces County, Texas. La Tierra
13(1):15-32.

Carlson
1985

(722)

Archaeological Surveys at Fort Hood, Texas, The
FY ’82 Range Construction Projects, Final Report
Vol. I and 11. Research Report No. 10 (Draft), Archeological Resource Management Series. U. S.

Riggs, Aaron D., Jr. (409)
1968a The Reed Shelter: A Petroglyph Site in Garza

Army Fort Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.

County, Texas. Transactions of the Second Regional

Rogers, Robert (687)

Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New

1990

Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 44-58.

A Cultural Resources Survey of The Proposed Winchester-Salem 138kV Transmission Line, Fayette
and Washington Counties,

Texas. Document

890550. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

166

Texas Archeological Society

Rogers, Robert (688)
1991 National Register Testing of Nine Prehistoric Sites
at the Gibbons Creek Third Five-Year Mine Area,
Grimes Count),, Texas. Document 900500. Espey,
Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.
Rogers, Robert, and Eugene Foster
1994

(694)

National Register Assessment of Three Archaeological Sites at the Gibbons Creek Lignite Mine,

Saunders, R.K.

(472)

1988b A Possible Late Paleo-Indian Site on Chiltipin
Creek, San Patricio County, Texas. La Tierra
15(2):27-35.

Saunders, R.K. (481)
1990 Second Interim Report on the Fox Draw Site
(41GL175): An Archaic Midden Site in Gillespie
County, Texas. La Tierra 17(1):13-25.

Grimes County, Texas. Document 940325. Espey,
Saunders, R.K.

Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

1993

(41GL175): A Paleo-Archaic Midden Site in

Rogers, Robert, Eugene Foster, Mary McReady, Steve Kotter,
and J. Phil Dering
1993

Gi!lespie County, Texas. La Tierra 20(3):29-47.

(691)

A Cultural Resources Survey of the Gibbons Creek
Lignite Mine East Area (GCLM V), Grimes County,
Texas. Document 920305. Espey, Huston & Asso-

Schmidt-Couzzourt, Beverly
1983

Texas. U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of
Reclamation, Southwest Region, Amarillo.

Rogers, Robert, Karen Yancy, Mary Parker, and Wayne
Glander

(690)

Cultural Resources htvestigations of the Oak Hill

Schmiedlin, E.H.

2280 Acre Stud), Area, Rusk County, Texas. Docu-

1979

ment 900083R. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc.,
Austin.
Ross, Richard E.
1965

1981

(180)

The Archeology of Eagle Cage. Papers 7. Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, The University of

Ross, Richard E.

(182)

The Upper Rockwall and Glen Hill Sites, Forney
Reservoit; Texas. Papers 9. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.

Runkles, FrankA.
1964

(113)

A Preliminary Report on the Burris Site (41 VT 66),
Victoria County, Texas. La Tierra 6(1):25-27.

Schmiedlin, E.H."Smitty"

Texas at Austin.

1966

(697)

The Chicken Creek Site, Archeological Testing in
the Locke Meredith Recreation Area, Potter County,

ciates, Inc., Austin.

1992

(502)

Third Interim Report on the Fox Draw Site

(102)

Preliminary Investigation of the Kerlick Sites,
DeWitt County, Texas. La Tierra 8(2): 16-20.

Schuetz, Mardith K. (65166/67/68169)
1957 A Report on Williamson County Mound Material.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 28:135168.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
1969

(259)

The History and Archeology of Mission San Juan
Capistrano, San Antonio, Texas. Report 11.

(42)

Archeological Program, State Building Commission,

The Garza Site: A Neo-American Campsite Near

Austin.

Post, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 35:101 - 125.

Scott, Robert F., IV, and Daniel E. Fox
Runkles, Frank A., and E. D. Dorchester
1987

(437)

1982

the Choke Canyon Reservoir, South Texas. Choke

The Lott Site (41GR56): A Late Prehistoric Site in
Garza County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo-

Canyon Series, Volume 8. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

logical Society 57:83-115.
Sanders, John T. and Elaine L. Sanders
1978

(330)

Excavations at Sites 41 LK 31/32 and 41 LK 202 in

(118)

A Ranch Survey in the Upper Santa Isabella Watershed, Webb County, Texas. La Tierra 5(2):2-18.

Scurlock, J. Dan
1961

(55)

The Culpepper Site, A Late Fulton Aspect Site in
Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 32:285-320.

Saunders, R.K.
1986

(465)

Preliminary Report on the Fox Draw Site (41 GL
175): An Archaic Midden Site in Gillespie County,
Texas. La Tierra 13(3):6-27.

Scurlock, J. Dan, and W. A. Davis
1962

(152)

Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Toledo
Bend Reservoir, Panola, Newton, Sabine and Shelby
Counties, Texas; Sabine and De Soto Parishes, Loui-

Saunders, R.K.

(470)

1988a Interim Report on the Fox Draw Site (41 GL 175):
An Archaic Midden Site in Gillespie County, Texas.
La Tierra 15(1):8-25.

siana. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas
Scurlock, J. Dan, Warren M. Lynn, and R. Thomas Ray (281)
1974 An Assessment of the Archeological Resources of
Padre Island National Seashore, Texas. Special Reports, No. 11. O[t]ce of the State Archeologist, Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.
Sellards, E. H., Glen L. Evans, and Grayson E. Meade (426)
1947 Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from
Plainview, Texas. Bulletin of the Geological Society of America 58:927-954.
Shafer, Harry J. (47)
1963 Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified Terrace Site in Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 34:57-81.
Shafer, Harry J.
1964

(158)

An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of

Shafer, Harry J., and Edward P. Baxter
1976

167

(288)

Archeological Investigations at 41CN13 and
41CN14, Northwest Laterals Watershed, Coleman
County, Texas. Report No. 30. Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.

Shafer, Harry J., Edward P. Baxter, Thomas B. Steams, and
James PhilDering (338)
1975 An Archeological Assessment of the Big Thicket
National Preserve. Report No. 19. Anthropology
Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College
Station.
Shafer, Harry J., and James E. Corbin (159/!60/161/162)
1965 An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of
North Fork, South Fork and Laneport Reservoirs,
Williamson County, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.

Bardwell Reservoir, Ellis County, Texas. Texas Archeologicat Salvage Project, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Shafer, Harry J.
1967

(170)

An Archeological Survey of Robert Lee Reservoir,
Coke County, Texas. Survey Reports No. 4. Texas

Shafer, Harry J., Dee Ann Suhm, and J. Dan Scurlock (175)
1964 An Investigation and Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Belton Reservoir, Bell and Coryell
Counties, Texas: 1962. Miscellaneous Papers 1.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.

Archeological Salvage Project, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Shafer, Harry J. (186)
1968 Archeological Investigations in the San Jacinto
River Basin, Montgomery County, Texas. Papers
No. 13. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Shafer, Harry J. and Hayden Whitsett
1975

Archeological Surveys of Structures No. 1, 2, 4.
Report 9. Anthropo!ogy Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Shawn, RonnieA.
1971

Sharer, Harry J.
1969

(286)

Pecan Creek Watershed, Hamilton County, Texas.

(190)

(402)

Morgan Creek Mortar Camp. Transactions of the
Sixth Regional Archeological Symposium for

Archeological Investigations in Robert Lee Reser-

Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp.

voir Basin, West Central Texas. Papers No. 17.

49-62.

Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.

Shafer, Harry J. (174)
1971 a An Archeological Reconnaissance of the Sanderson
Canyon Watershed, Texas. Papers No. 7. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas
at Austin.

Shawn, Ronnie A. (397)
1975 The Bull Hill Site Excavation. Transactions of the
Tenth Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 1-47.
Skelton, Duford W.
1977

(218)

Archeological Investigations at the Fayette Power
Project, Fayette County, Texas. Research Report

Shafer, Harry J.

(193)

60. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of

1971b Investigations into South Plains Prehistory, West

Texas at Austin.

Central Texas. Papers No. 20. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.

Shafer, Harry J. (1)
1981 Archeological Investigations at the Attaway Site,
Henderson County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:147-178.

Skelton, Duford W. and Martha Doty Freeman
1979

(222)

A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment at
Camp Swift, Texas. Research Report 72. Texas
Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Skinner, S. Alan (20)
1971 Prehistoric Settlement of the De Cordova Bend
Reservoir, Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
A rcheological Society 42: ! 49-269.

168

Texas Archeological Society

Skinner, S. Alan (337)
1982 The Archaeology and History of Lake Ray Roberts,
Cultural Resources Survey. Volume 1. Cultural Resources Report 82-6. Environment Consultants, Inc.,
Dallas, Texas.
Skinner, S. Alan and Maynard B. Cliff
1973

(356)

Smith, Timothy D., and Clay M. Garrett
1991

(490)

Clovis Points from Southeast Dallas County, Texas.
l_x~ Tierra 18(I):35-38.

Smith, Timothy D., and Clay M. Garrett (493)
1992 A Folsom Point from Southeast Dallas County,
Texas. La Tierra 19(1):13-14.

Archaeological Survey of the Blue Hills Station,
Newton County, Texas. Archaeology Research Pro-

Snavely, Ralph

gram, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

1984

(615)

An Archaeological Survey of the Probst and McGriff
Leases in Live Oak County, Texas. Archaeological

Skinner, S. Alan, and Deborah T. Connors
1979

Survey Report 139. Center for Archaeological Re-

(365)

search, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Archeological Investigations at Lakeview Lake. Research Report No. 118. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Sollberger, J.B.

(114)

1978a A Prehistoric Rockshelter in Kerr County, Texas.
La Tierra 5(4):2-6
Skinner, S. Alan, and Joseph Gallagher
1974

(369)

An Evaluation of the Archaeological Resources at
Lake Whitney, Texas. Contributions in Anthropology, No. 14. Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Skinner, S. Alan, R. King Harris, and Keith M. Anderson
(editors)
1969

(366)

5(4):7-12.
Sollberger, J. B., and Thomas Roy Hester

Archeological Investigations at The Sam Kaufman
Site, Red River County, Texas. Contributions in An-

Skinner, S. Alan, and Gerald K. Humphreys

(368)

The Historic and Prehistoric Archaeological
Resources

of the

Squaw

Creek

Reservoir.

(115)

1978b Three Sites in Atascosa County, Texas. La Tierra

1972

thropology, No. 5. Department of Anthropology,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

1973

Sollberger, J.B.

(420)

The Strohacker Site: A Review of Pre-Archaic
Manifestions in Texas. Plains Anthropologist
t7(58):326-344.

Sommer, Arnold E. (405)
1968 Parker Ranch Ring Midden 1: 41CX30. Transactions of the Fourth Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western
Texas, pp. 9-17.

Contributions in Anthropology, No. 10. Department
of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University,

1971

Dallas.
Skinner, S. Alan and Randle Rash
1969

Sommer, Arnold E.

Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 111-122.

(31)

A Clovis Fluted Point From Hood County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:1-2.

Sommer, Arnold E.
1972

Smith, Harvey P.
1978

(315)
Archaeological Survey and Assessment of Properties for the Conquista Project in Live Oak and
Karnes Counties, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 64. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

Smith, Harvey P. and Kenyon McDonald
1975

(403)

Big Spring Site. Transactions of the Sixth Regional
Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New

(297)

An Archaeological Survey of Friedrich Park, Bexar
County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 12.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio,

Smith, James E., II. Contributions by Jay C. Blaine, Kathleen
Gilmore, R. King Harris, and Inus M. Harris (448)
1993 The Vinson Site (41LT1): A Nortefio Focus Indian
Village in Limestone County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas A rcheological Society 64:65-162.

(400)

The Windmill Site: 41CX57. Transactions of the
Seventh Regional Archeological Symposium for
Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp.
115-121.

Sorrow, William M. (183)
1966 The Pecan Springs Site, Bardwell Reservoir, Texas.
Papers No. 10. Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Sorrow, William M. (187/188)
1968 The Devil’s Mouth Site: The Third Season - 1967.
Papers No. 14. Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Sorrow, WilliamM. (191)
1969 Archeological Investigations at the John lschy Site:
A Burnt Rock Midden in Williamson County, Texas.
Papers No. 18. Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
The University of Texas at Austin.

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas
Sorrow, William M. (196)
1970 Archeological lnvestigations at the Barker Site. Research Report 1. Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Sorrow, William M. (165)
1973a Test Excavations in the North Fork Reservoir Area.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.

169

Story, Dee Ann (editor) (251)
1981 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis
Site, Cherokee County, Texas: Summers of 1979
and 1980. Occasional Papers No. 1. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Story, Dee Ann and Harry J. Sharer (178)
1965 1964 Excavations at Waco Reservoir, McLennan
County, Texas: The Baylor and Britton Sites. Mis-

Sorrow, William M.

(198/199/200/201/202)

cellaneous Papers No. 6. Texas Archeological Sal-

1973b Preliminary Archeological Reconnaissance of Se-

vage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.

lected Areas to be Affected by the Trinity River
Multiple-Purpose Project. Research Report 17.

Suhm, DeeAnn

Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The Univer-

1955

sity of Texas at Austin.
Sorrow, William M., and Wayne N. Cox
1973

(7!)

Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 26:7-54.

(203)

A Reconnaissance of the Archeological and His-

Suhm, Dee Ann
1957

torical Resources of the Navasota River Basin,

(421)

Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis
County. The Texas Journal of Science IX(1):26-58.

Texas. Research Report 26. Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

Suhm, Dee Ann
1959

Sorrow, William M., Harry J. Shafer, and Richard E. Ross
(184/185)
1967 Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Miscellaneous Papers No. 11. Texas Archeological Sal-

(422)

The Williams Site and Central Texas Archeology.
The Texas Journal of Science XI(2):218-250.

Suhm, Dee Ann (56)
1961a The Beidleman Ranch Site: An Early Man Kill Site

vage Project, University of Texas at Austin.

in Stonewall County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
A rcheological Society 31:207-212.

Steele, D. Gentry, and E. R. Mokry, Jr. (431)
1985 Archeological Investigations of Seven Prehistoric
Sites along Oso Creek, Nueces County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:287-308.

Suhm, Dee Ann (52)
1961b The White Site: An Historical Burial in Yoakum
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 32:85-119.

Steele, Janet Fitzsimmons
1989

(476)

Archaeology at Bear Creek Scout Reservation. La
Tierra 16(2): 10-37.

Suhm, Raymond W. and Thomas R. Hester
1980 The La Paloma Mammoth Site, Kenedy County,
Texas, with notes on the archaeology. In Papers on

Stephenson, Robert L.
1950

(147)

the Archaeology of the Texas Coast, edited by Lynn

Archeological Survey of McGee Bend Reservoir,

Highley and Thomas R. Hester, pp. 79-103. Special

Jasper, Sabine, San Augustine, Angelina and

Report No. 11. Center for Archaeological Research,

Nacogdoches Counties, Texas: A Preliminary Re-

The University of Texas at Austin.

port. River Basin Surveys, Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C.

Sullivan, Timothy L.
1977

Stephenson, Robert L. (25/26/27128/29/30)
1970 Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:37-286.
Story, Dee Ann (39)
1965 The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir,
Henderson and Kaufman Counties, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 36:163-257.
Story, Dee Ann (374/375)
1968 Archeological Investigations at Two Central Texas
Gulf Coast Sites. Report 13. Archeological Program,
State Building Commission, Austin.

(361)

Archaeological Investigations at Lake Bob Sandlin,
Texas. Research Report 99. Archaeology Research
Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Sundborg, Greg, Jane Rathbun, Clell Bond, JeffGoodson, and
Wayne Glander (674)
1984 Archaeological Site Evaluations, MonticelloWinfield Mine, Titus and Franklin Counties, Texas.
Document 82532. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc.,
Austin.

170

Texas Archeological Society

Taylor, Anna J. (618)
1985 Archaeological h~vestigations of a Shell Midden (41
HR 39) at de Zavala Point, Harris County, Texas.
Archaeological Survey Report 150. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.

Thurmond, J. Peter, and Ulrich Kleinschmidt
1979

(250)

Report on the Fall 1978 Investigations at the George
C. Davis Site, Caddoan Mounds State Historic Site,
Cherokee County, Texas. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin,
and Texas Antiquities Committee, Texas Antiquities Permit Series.

Taylor, Anna J., and Anne A. Fox
1985

(617)

Archaeological Survey and Testing at Rancho de
las Cabras, 41 WN 30, Wilson County, Texas, Fifth
Season. Archaeological Survey Report 144. Center

Thurmond, J. Peter, Martha Doty Freeman, and Susan L.
Andrews
1981

(383)

A Preliminary Assessment of the Cultural Resources

for Archaeological Research, The University of

in the Brazos Natural Salt Pollution Control Project,

Texas at San Antonio.

Kent, King and Stonewall Counties, Texas. Reports
of Investigations 18. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,

Texas Archeological Survey Research Staff (631)
1981 Phase lIl: Prehistoric Archeological Research

Austin.

within Palmetto Bend Reservoir, Jackson County,

Townsend, Richard E., Jr.

Texas. Palmetto Bend Reservoir Series/Volume 6,

1990

(487)

Possible Almagre Points from the Panther Springs

Research Report 82. Texas Archeological Survey,

Creek Sites, Bexar County, Texas. La Tierra

The University of Texas at Austin.

17(3):32-37.

Thoms, Alston V. (editor)

(593)

1993a The Brazos Valley Slopes Archaeological Project:
Cultural Resources Assessments for the Texas A&M

Treece, Abby C., Christopher Lintz, W. Nicholas Trierweiler,
J. Michael Quigg, and Kevin A. Miller
1993

(719)

Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. lvie
Reservoir, Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Coun-

University Animal Science Teaching and Research
Complex, Brazos County, Texas. Reports of Investi-

ties, Texas, Volume III: Data Recovery Results from

gations 14. Archeological Research Laboratory,

Non-Ceramic Sites. Technical Report 346-III.

Texas A&M University, College Station.

Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.

Thoms, Alston V. (editor)

(735)

1993b Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal
Years 1991 and 1992: Cantonment and Belton Lake

Treece, Abby C., Christopher Lintz, W. Nicholas Trierweiler,
J. Michael Quigg, and Kevin A. Miller
1993

(720)

Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie

Periphery Areas. Research Report No. 27, Archaeo-

Reservoir, Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Coun-

logical Resource Management Series. United States

ties, Texas, Volume IV: Data Recovery Results from
Ceramic Sites. Technical Report 346-IV. Mariah

Army Fort Hood, Fort Hood, Texas.

Associates, Inc., Austin.
Thoms, Alston V. (editor) (594)
1994 The Valley Branch Archaeological Project: Excavations at an Archaic Site (41MU55) in the Cross

Trierweiler, W. Nicholas (editor)
1994

(736)

Archeological Investigations on 571 Prehistoric

Timbers Uplands, North-Central Texas. Reports of

Sites at Fort Hood, Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas.

Investigations 15. Archeological Research Labora-

Research Report No. 31, Archeological Resource

tory, Texas A&M University, College Station.

Management Series. United States Army Fort Hood,
Fort Hood, Texas.

Thuesen, Kevin (491)
1991 Results of Preliminary Excavations in Sorcerer’s
Cave, Terrell County, Texas. La Tierra 18(3):30-38.
Thurmond, J. Peter
1982

(646)

Turner, Robert L., Jr. (6)
1978 The Tuck Carpenter Site and Its Relation to Other
Sites within the Titus Focus. Bulletin of the Texas
A rcheological Society 49:1-110.

Archeological Testing and Assessment of 41TV461
and the Onion Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant

Tunnell, Curtis D.

Site, Travis County, Texas. Technica! Bulletin 49.

1961

(60)

Evidence of a Late Archaic Horizon at Three Sites

Texas Archeologica! Survey, The University of

in the McGee Bend Reservoir, San Augustine

Texas at Austin.

County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 30:123-158.

Tunnell, Curtis D., and J. Richard Ambler (256)
1967 Archeological Excavations at Presidio San Agust[n
de Ahumada. Report 6. Archeological Program, State
Building Commission, Austin.

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas
Tunnell, Curtis D., and Jack T. Hughes
1955

(388)

Voellinger, Leonard R.

An Archaic Bison Kill in the Texas Panhandle. Pan-

1987

handle-Plains Historical Review XXVIII:63-70.

171

(684)

The National Register Testing of 41GV22, Galveston
County, Texas. Document 870648. Espey, Huston
& Associates, Inc., Austin.

Tunnell, Curtis D., and Harald P. Jensen, Jr.
1969

(262)

Archeological Excavations in Lyndon B. Johnson
State Park, Summer, 1968. Report 17. Archeological Program, State Building Commission, Austin.

Tunnell, Curtis D., and W. W. Newcomb, Jr. (249)
1969 A Lipan Apache Mission: San Lorenzo de la Santa

Voellinger, Leonard R., Cynthia Brandimarte, and Melissa
W. Voellinger (673)
1983 Phase I Archaeological Testing in the Jewett Mine
Project Area, Leon, Limestone, and Freestone Counties, Texas. Document 83038. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

Cruz - 1762-1771. Report 14. Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin.

Voellinger, Leonard R., and Martha Doty Freeman
1980

Turpin, Solveig A.
1982

(632)

(664)

A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of
the Limestone Electric Generating Station, Lime-

Seminole Canyon: The Art and the Archeology, Val

stone & Freestone Counties, Texas. Document 8023.

Verde County, Texas. Research Report 83. Texas

Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Voellinger, Leonard R., and Martha Doty Freeman
1980

Turpin, Solveig A., and Leland C. Bement
1989

(440)

Areas of the Jewett Mine Project Area, Appendix C

The Live Oak Hole Complex: Plains Indian Art and

to an Assessment of the Cultural Resources of the

Occupation in the Lower Pecos River Region. Bul-

Jewett Mine Project Area. Document 80353. Espey,

letin of the Texas Archeological Society 59:65-82.
Turpin, Solveig A., and Michael W. Davis
1993

(443)

The 1989 TAS Field School: Devils River State
Natural Area. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological

Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.
Voellinger, Leonard R., Martha Doty Freeman, and Melissa
Voellinger (663)
1980

Society 61 : 1-58.
Turpin, Solveig A., and Margaret J. Kluge
1980

Cultural Resource Sampling, Survey and AssessElectric Station, Robertson County, Texas. Research
Report 74. Texas Archeological Survey, The Uni-

Voellinger, Leonard R., Robert L. Gearhart, Charles Frederick,
and David W. Moore, Jr.
1987

Document 870219. Espey, Huston & Associates,

Usrey, Steve, Stan Grysinski, and Clell L. Bond

Inc., Austin.

(295)

Archeological Sites 41AT22 and 41AT24, South
Central Texas. Report No. 46. Anthropology Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, Col-

Voellinger, Leonard R., Thomas D. Hayes, and Melissa W.
Voellinger
1984

lege Station.

1977

W. Pirkey Power Plant and South Hallsville Lignite
(308)

County, Texas. Document 83434. Espey, Huston &
Associates, Inc., Austin.

Sites, Upper Cibolo Creek Watershed, Kendall
County, South Central Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 44. Center for Archaeological Research,

Voellinger, Leonard R., and Christian Nightengale
1985

The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Valdez, Fred, Jr., Joy White, and L. D. White (99)
1981 Three Point Fragments of the Late Paleo-Indian Period from La Salle County, Southern Texas. La
Tierra 8(4):35-38.

1989

(675)

The Cultural Resources Investigations of the Henry
Mine Transportive Systems Reroute, Harrison

An Archaeological Evaluation of Three Prehistoric

Vernon, Caro! R.

(681)

Archaeological and Historical Investigations at
Cinco Ranch, Fort Bend and Harris Counties, Texas.

versity of Texas at Austin.

Valdez, Fred, Jr., and A. Joachim McGraw

An Assessment of the Cultural Resources of the
Jewett Mine Project Area. Document 8011. Espey,
Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

(223)

ment in Areas to be Affected by the Twin Oak Steam

1978

(665)

A Cultural Resources Survey of the First hnpact

(654)

The Prehistoric Skeletal Remains from the
Crestmont Site, Wharton County, Texas. Studies in
Archeology 1. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

(677)

A Cultural Resources Survey of the Block House
Creek Development, Williamson County, Texas.
Document 84930. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc.,
Austin.

Wakefield, Walter H.
1968

(171/172)

Archeological Surveys of Pahnetto Bend and Choke
Canyon Reservoirs, Texas. Survey Report 5. Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, The University of
Texas at Austin.

172

Texas Archeological Society

Walley, Raymond (74)
1955 A Preliminary Report on the Albert George Site in
Fort Bend County. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 26:218-234.

Wesolowsky, A1B., Thomas R. Hester and Douglas R. Brown

(10)
1976

Archeological Investigations at the Jetta Court Site
(41TV151), Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 47:25-87.

Ward, Paul M. (460)
1984 A Statistical Analysis of Archaic Projectile Points
from the Nueces River Area of Central South Texas:
The Brom Cooper Collection. La Tierra 10(4):1434.

Wheat, Joe Ben (82)
1947 Notes on the W. A. Myatt Site. Bulletin of the Texas
A rcheological Society 18: 87-93.

Watt, FrankH. (37)
1965 Notes on the Clark Site, McLennan County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 36:99110.

Whitsett, Hayden and Harry J. Shafer (285)
1975 Rush Creek Watershed, Comanche County, Texas.
An Archeological Survey of Floodwater Retarding
Structures Nos. 1, 2 and 3. Report 10. Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College
Station.

Watt, FrankH. (392)
1967 Lookout Point, Lake Waco. Central Texas Archeologist 8:27-39.

Wilson, Joseph B.
1979

(5)

A Preliminary Report on the Little Pin Oak Creek
Site (41FY53): A Campsite with Clovis, Plainview,

Webb, Clarence H., Forrest E. Murphey, Wesley G. Ellis, and
H. Roland Green. (32)
1969 The Resch Site 41HS16, Harrison County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeologica! Society 40:3106.

Winchell, Frank, George Brown, Maynard B. Cliff, and

Weinstein, Richard A.

1992

and Subsequent Artifacts, in Fayette County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas ArcheoIogical Society 50:135140.

Sherrian K. Edwards
1991

(705)

(713)

Cultural Resources Monitoring/Survey of a JTF-6

Lido Harbor (41GV82): A Late Prehistoric Camp-

Action, Van Horn, Texas Sector. Miscellaneous Re-

site and Extraction Locale, Galveston County, Texas.

port of Investigations 33. Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano.

Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge.

Weinstein, Richard A. (707)
1992 Cultural Resources btvestigations Along the Channel to Victoria, Calhoun and Victoria Counties,
Texas. Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge.
Weinstein, Richard A.
1994

(706)

Archaeological Investigations Along the Lower

Witte, Adolph Henry (389)
1955 A Double Indian Burial From Donley County Texas.
Panhandle-Plains Historical Review XXVIII:82-86.
Woerner, Michael C. and Lynn Highley (89)
1983 The Bromley F. Cooper Collection of Pre-Archaic
and Archaic Dart Points from McMullen County.
La Tierra 10(1)3-28.

Lavaca River, Jackson County, Texas: The Channel
to Red Bluff Project. Coastal Environments, Inc.,
Baton Rouge.

Weinstein, Richard A., Thurston H. Hahn III, Margaret Swett
Henson, David B. Kelley, and James P. Whelan, Jr. (703)
1989 Archaeological Testing and Mitigation at Cedar Hill
Park, Wallisville Lake Project, Chambers County,
Texas. Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge.
Weinstein, Richard A., Charles E. Pearson, James P. Whelan,
Jr., and David B. Kelley (704)
1988 Archeological Investigations Along the Lower Trinity River, Chambers and Liberty Counties, Texas.
Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge.

Woolridge, H.G. (643)
1979 A Cultural Resource Survey and Assessment of the
Big Brown Lignite Project. Technical Bulletin 29.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Woolridge, H. G., Michael Davis, Pamela Denney, Joe
Freeman, Martha Doty Freeman, and JeffGoodson (667)
1981 Archaeological Investigations at the Limestone Electric Generating Station, Limestone, Freestone, Leon,
and Robertson Counties, Texas. Document 81438.
Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.
Word, James H.
1971

Weir, Frank A. (3)
1979 Greenhaw: An Archaic Site in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 50:5-67.

(21)
The Dunlap Complex in Western Central Crockett
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 42:271-318.

Prewitt ~ Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas
Wo~, James H. (442)
1991 The 1975 Field School for the Texas Archeological

Society. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
60:57-106.
Word, James H. and Charles L. Douglas
1970

(248)
Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde County,
Texas. Bulletin No. !6. Texas Memorial Museum,
The University of Texas at Austin.

Young, Wayne C. (238)
1979 The Elm Creek Site (41UV67). Publications in Archaeology, Report 14. Highway Design Division,
Texas State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Austin.
Young, Wayne C.

(242)

Young, Wayne C. (571)
1985 Archaeological Excavations at Site 41BT6, Burnet
County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology, Report 28. Highway Design Division, Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation,
Austin.
Young, Wayne C. (572)
1986 Archaeological Investigations in Eastern Kimble
County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology, Report 30. Highway Design Division, Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation,
Austin.
Young, Wayne C.
1987

tions in Archaeology, Report 36. Highway Design

County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology, Re-

Division, Texas State Department of Highways and

port 20. Highway Design Division, Texas State De-

Public Transportation, Austin.

partment of Highways and Public Transportation,

Young, Wayne C.

Young, Wayne C.
(244)

1981b Test Excavations at the Tankersley Creek Site, A
Multicomponent Campsite in Titus County, Texas.
Publications in Archaeology, Report 22. Texas State
Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.
Young, Wayne C.
1982

(245)

Excavations at the Ratn’s Head Site, 41PC35, Pecos
County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology, Report 23. Highway Design Division, Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation,
Austin.

(574)

Archaeological Investigations at the Ammans Crossing Site, 41KE93, Kendall County, Texas. Publica-

1981a Investigations at the Squawteat Peak Site: Pecos

Austin.

173

1990

(578)

Archaeological Investigations at the Sandbur Site,
41FY135, Fayette County, Texas. Publications in
Archaeology, Review Draft. Highway Design Division, Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.

]Prehistoric and r L or c Aborigina!
Ceramics in Texas
Timothy K. Perttula, Myles R. Miller, Robert A. Ricklis,
Daniel J. Prikryl, and Christopher Lintz

ABSTRACT
The use of ceramics by prehistoric Native Americans was widespread in Texas, being adopted by groups
in East Texas as early as ca. 500 B.C. and then continued to be used as late as the nineteenth century among a
number of different Native American groups across the state. The variety of ceramic forms, decorations,
manufacturing technologies, and functions is impressive, ranging from: coastal Goose Creek and Rockport
pottery; the Toyah and Henrietta ceramics of the buffalo hunters of the prairie-plains; the Puebloan and Antelope
Creek ceramics of the Panhandle farmers and buffalo hunters; the impressive Jornada Mogollon ceramics of the
E1 Paso area Puebloan groups; and the well-made and finely decorated ceramics of the Caddoan groups of Eastern
Texas. This paper provides broad overviews of the different currently recognized prehistoric and historic
regional ceramic assemblages in Texas, focusing on their technological and functional character, and changes
over time in ceramic styles, types, and vessel forms.

INTRODUCTION
Much attention has been paid by Texas archeologists over the years to the stone projectile points,
tools, and lithic debris made and discarded by the
prehistoric Native Americans who lived in the state
of Texas (e.g., Turner and Hester 1993; Davis 1991;
Suhm and Jelks 1962). While not without problems
of analytical scope and clarity (sensu Johnson 1989),
the archeological focus on stone artifacts has produced a wealth of information on the manufacture
and use of stone tools, as well as a better understanding of the cultural context and chronology of
these tools--most notably the temporal sequences
of the dart and arrow projectile points in the different regions of Texas (Turner and Hester 1993:1163; see also Prewitt, this volume).
Unfortunately, the same cannot be said about
the prehistoric and historic aboriginal ceramics in
Texas. Certainly, valuable information has been
gained since the 1940s and 1950s on the styles and
types of ceramics made in Texas by Native Americans (Krieger 1946; Suhm et al. 1954; Suhm and
Jelks 1962). This is especially true of the wel!made and abundant ceramic vessels recovered in
quantities from prehistoric Caddoan sites in Northeast Texas, and much of importance has been

learned of late from analyses of Coastal (Aten 1983;
Ellis 1992; Ricklis 1990), Canyonlands (Boyd et al.
1993), and Toyah phase ceramics (Johnson 1994;
Quigg and Peck 1995; Treece et al. 1993). Nevertheless, overall it is fair to say that our general level
of understanding concerning prehistoric ceramics,
and the appreciation of the kinds of useful information their study can provide about cultural affiliations, well-defined temporal frameworks, site
function, food processing and storage, and trade
and exchange between groups, is not well developed in Texas archeology today.
This paper begins to redress this relative lack
of attention given prehistoric and historic aboriginal
ceramics by Texas archeologists. We consider
regional ceramic assemblages in Texas (i.e.,
Northeast Texas [Caddoan], North Central [Plains
Village], East Central, Southeast Texas, Central and
South Texas [Toyah and Rockport], Rolling Plains
and Panhandle [Antelope Creek] and Caprock
Canyonlands, and West Texas Mountains and
Basins [Jornada Mogollon]), and focus on two main
goals: (a) to discuss the technology and functional
character of these regional ceramic assemblages
(Figure 1); and (b) to summarize the context and
temporal framework of the assemblages, with
particular attention to changes over time and space

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

176

Texas Archeological Society

in the ceramic styles, design elements, types, and
vessel forms for each Texas region.
Caddoan Ceramics from
Northeast Texas
The distinctive styles and forms of ceramics
found on sites in Northeast Texas hint at the variety,
temporal span, and geographic extent of a number
of prehistoric Caddoan groups in this region (cf.
Thurmond 1985, 1990). The diversity in decoration

and shape in Caddoan ceramics is substantial, both
in the utility ware jars and bowls, as well as in the
fine ware bottles, carinated bowls, and compound
vessels. However, prehistoric ceramics had been
manufactured in Northeast Texas for about 1000
years before the development of the Late Prehistoric
(after ca. A.D. 800/900) Caddoan ceramic tradition.
Story (1990:246-247, 277-319), in an excellent discussion of the cultural context and archeological character of these early ceramic-making
groups, indicates that the earliest ceramics in the

40
34
35

40

Figure 1. The Distribution of Regional Ceramic Assemblages in Texas and selected archeological sites mentioned
in the text. Toyah phase sites: 1, East Levee; 2, Buckhollow; 3, Smith; 4, Hinojosa; 5, Kyle; 6, Mustang Branch.
Rockport phase sites: 7, Kirchmeyer; 8, McGloin Bluff & 41SP 120; 9, Live Oak Point; 10, Mustang Lake; 11, Aransas
River sites; 12, Mellon. West Texas sites: 13, Polvo; 14, Granado Cave; 15,41HZA93; 16, North Hills; 17, Firecracker
Pueblo; 18, Hot Wells; 19, Ysleta WIC. Northeast Texas sites: 20, Resch; 21, George C. Davis; 22, Deshazo; 23,
Benson’s Crossing; 24, 41MX5. Southeast Texas sites: 25, Mitchell Ridge; 26, Carl Matthews. East Central Texas
sites: 27, Jewett Mine sites; 28, Bird Point Island. North Central Texas sites: 29, Cobb-Pool; 30, Chicken House &
Dillard; 31, Harre!l; 32, Spanish Fort sites. Lower Plains, Caprock Canyonlands, and Texas Panhandle sites: 33,
Deadman’s Shelter; 34, Buried City Complex; 35, Antelope phase sites, Canadian River; 36, Lubbock Lake; 37,
Bridwell; 38, Tierra Blanca; 39, Headstream & Longhorn; 40, Palo Duro Reservoir; and 41, Andrews Lake.

Perttula et aL m Prehistoric Ceratnies in Texas
region date between ca. 500-!00 B.C. and are
closely related to the kinds of ceramics being produced in the Lower Mississippi Valley (LMV).
Groups manufacturing these early ceramics were
relatively sedentary hunter-gatherers. South of the
Sabine River, the earliest locally produced ceramics are plain wares with sandy pastes (sharing similarities with the coastal and inland Southeast Texas
ceramic Goose Creek Plain), while north of the
Sabine River to the Red River, the early ceramics
are principally from thick, plain grog- (Williams
Plain) and bone-tempered (Cooper Boneware) vessels, although sandy paste wares are also present in
low numbers (Story 1990:246).
Between the introduction of ceramics in the
region, and the emergence of distinctive Caddoan
vessel forms and decorative motifs around A.D.
800, the local plain ware traditions seem to have
continued relatively unchanged. LMV-related ceramics are present as well, although not in great
numbers, including distinctive Marksville,
Troyville, and Coles Creek incised and stamped
vessels (see Phillips 1970) from sites such as Resch,
Coral Snake, Tankersley Creek, and James Pace in
the Sabine River and Cypress Creek basins.
As Story (1990:247) notes:
Sometime probably between A.D. 700 and
A.D. 900 (there is a lot of room for arguing
the age), Caddoan ceramics came to dominate
the northeastern part of [Texas]. These ceramics are distinguished by certain vessel forms
(especially a long-necked bottle with a globular body and a carinated bowl), engraved decorations, and other attributes. Although the
bottle form and engraving may have an exotic
origin, most of the Caddoan ceramics can be
recognized as local developments with strong
influences from the LMV.
A diverse and distinctive ceramic assemblage characterizes the Caddoan tradition in Northeast Texas.
Ceramics are quite common in domestic contexts
on habitation sites across the region (i.e., it is not
unusual to recover more than 10,000 sherds from
hundreds of vessels on Caddo settlements on excavation projects, and assemblages with upwards of
100,000 sherds are not uncommon at the larger
sites), and also occur as grave goods in mortuary
contexts (see for example the large well-analyzed
sherd assemblages from George C. Davis [Newell
and Krieger 1949; Stokes and Woodring 1981],

177

Deshazo [Fields 1981], Benson’s Crossing
[Driggers 1985], and 41MX5 [Brewington et al.
1995]). Much attention has been paid by Caddoan
archeologists over the years to the well-made ceramics manufactured by the Caddo peoples, and it
is accurate, we think, to state that the study of
Caddo ceramics is integral to the study of any Caddo
site in the four-state Caddoan archeological area.
The Caddo made ceramics in a wide variety of
vessel shapes (cf. Reynolds 1992), and with an
abundance of well-crafted and executed (Johnson
1992) body and rim designs and surface treatments
(Table 1). From the archeological contexts in which
Caddo ceramics have been found, as well as inferences about their manufacture and use, it is evident
that ceramics were important to the prehistoric
Caddo in: the cooking and serving of foods and
beverages, in the storage of foodstuffs, as personal
possessions, as beautiful works of art and craftsmanship (i.e., some vessels were clearly made to
never be used in domestic contexts), and as social
identifiers (that is, certain shared and distinctive
stylistic motifs and decorative patterns marked
closely related communities and constituent groups
[David et al. 1988; Thurmond 1985]).
The Caddo made both fine wares (with very
finely crushed temper [Schambach and Miller
1984:109]), bottles and many bowls, and utility
wares (some of the simple bowls, as well as the jars
that were made in a variety of sizes). Almost without exception, Caddoan ceramics were tempered
with grog (crushed sherds) or bone, although burned
and crushed shells were used as temper after ca.
A.D. 1300 among most of the Red River Caddo
groups (see Bruseth 1995; Schambach and Miller
1984) and on later Caddoan sites in the upper Sulphur River basin (see Fields et al. 1994; Cliff and
Perttula 1995). After adding the temper to the clay,
the kneaded clay was formed into clay coils that
were added to flat disk bases to form the vessel,
and the coils were apparently smoothed with a round
river pebble to create the finished vessel form. Decorations and slips were added before, as well as
after, baking in an open fire, and commonly the
vessels were then burnished and polished; red ochre
and white kaolinite clay pigments were often added
to or painted on to the decorations on bottles and
carinated bowls.
These kinds of ceramics were designed to
serve different purposes within Caddoan communities and family groups--from that of a cooking

178

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Caddoan Vessel Forms*

Engraved

ca. A.D. 1400-1700

ca. A.D. 900-1400

Decoration

bowls: carinated, boat-shaped,

bowls: compound, deep, simple,

cylindrical, compound, hemispherical,

carinated, conical and globular,

simple, deep, flat, globular; bottles,

compound globular, vase-like, squat

effigy bottle, gourd-shaped bottle;

square box, hemispherical;

compound bottle, goblet,

hubcap; platter, ladle-like,

spitoon-shaped, small jar, and

barrel-shaped, short globular and

cylindrical jar

tripod bottles, ollas, effigy bottles,
bottles with legs, and small jars

Incised

cylindrical jar, small jar, oval effigy,

j ars

barrel-shaped, bottle, bowls:simple
with rim peaks, carinated, small
hemispherical, compound and deep,
globular, and square bowl

jars

Trailed-Incised
Pinched

small jars (some with pedestal base),
simple bowls, bottle

Fingernail-Impressed

small jars, carinated bowls, compound
bowl, compound vessels

Punctated

small jars

j ars

Punctated-lncised

carinated bowls, cylindrical vessels,

jars

shallow bowls
jars

Ridged
Neck-banded

jars

jars

Appliqued

jars

Brushed

jars, ollas, barrel-shaped, carinated
bowls
globular jars, triple vessels (joined

Stamped

globular bowls)
Noded

bottles (includes tripod bottles)

bowls and bottles

Rattles & Effigies
Plain

bowls: simple, carinated, deep,
hemispherical; jars, plates or
platters, barrel-shaped vessels,
and bottles

* After Suhm and Jelks (1962)

bowls and bottles

jars

Perttula et aL ~ Prehistoric Ceratnics in Texas

pot to the mortuary function of a ceremonial beaker-and this is reflected in differences in paste,
surface treatment, firing methods, decoration, and
vessel form between the two wares. Both the early
and later Caddoan fine wares were usually wellpolished, and decorated with fine-line incised and
engraved designs (Figure 2a-n, Figure 3a-p, and

Figure 4a-e, h). The earlier Caddoan fine ware
designs are curvilinear, rectilinear, and horizontal,
and frequently cover the entire vessel surface; other
fine ware designs simply are placed on the rim (see
Figure 3c, f-k, m-n), or sometimes on the interior
rim surface. In general, the earlier Caddoan fine
wares across Northeast Texas (and indeed extend-

F

E

A

I

H

0

179

d

G

K

P

T

Figure 2. Early Caddoan Ceramic Forms and Decorations (after Krieger 1946): a-k, curvilinear incised and punctated; ln, punctated-incised; o-r, horizontal incised; s, fingernail impressed; t, fingernail impressed-brushed.

180

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

H

G

F

K

L

M

Q
Figure 3. Early Caddoan Bottles, Bowls, and Jars (after Krieger 1946): a-e, 1, curvilinear and scroll engraved; f-j, horizontal
engraved; k, m-n, vertical and diagonal engraved; o-p, complicated incised; q, neck-banded-punctated.

ing across much of the Caddoan area itself) are
quite uniform in style and form, suggesting broad
and extensive social interaction between Caddoan
groups across the region.
The later Caddoan fine ware designs in
Northeast Texas include scrolls, scrolls with ticked

lines, scrolls and circles, negative ovals and circles,
pendant triangles, diagonal lines and ladders, and
S-shaped motifs (see Figure 4a-e, h; also Suhm and
Jelks 1962; Shafer 1981; Middlebrook 1994; Fields
et al. 1994:Figure 13; Perino 1994:Figures 9-14).
These kinds of decorative elements continued in

Perttula et al. ~ Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

181

H

Figure 4. Late Caddoan bowls,jars, and bottle: a-e, engraved curvilinear and scrolls; f-g, neck-banded and
applique; h, engraved scrolls. Photographs courtesy of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.

use in historic Caddoan ceramics (that is, until about
A.D. 1800 [Gregory 1973]). They are best
exemplified by the intricate scrolls, ovals, and
circles on Hudson Engraved and Keno Trailed
bottles and Natchitoches Engraved bowls among
Red River Caddoan groups, the scrolls and ticks of
Patton Engraved among Hasinai Caddo groups
south of the Sabine River (Fields 1981), and the
pendant triangles and engraved scolls on Womack
Engraved bowls on the upper Sabine (Duffield and
Jelks 1961; Jelks 1967) and the middle Red River
(Harris et al. 1965).
The later Caddoan fine wares (that is, dating
after ca. A.D. 1300/1400) are more stylistically diverse across Northeast Texas, and there are very
specific differences in vessel shapes, designs, and
decorative attributes between Caddoan ceramics in

individual drainages, or even within specific smaller
segments of river and creek basins (e.g., Thurmond
1985; Perttula et al. 1993). This diversity can be
reasonably interpreted to be representative of specific Caddoan social groups. In historic Caddoan
times, ceramic vessel forms and decorations are
considerably more homogeneous across much of
the Caddoan area, suggesting extensive intra-regional contact between contemporaneous Caddoan
groups (Perttula 1992:154 and Table 14).
Table 1 indicates the impressive diversity of
vessel forms among the Caddoan fine wares. This
includes carinated bowls, deep compound bowls,
double and triple vessels (joined bowls and bottles
[Suhm and Jelks !962:Plates 38k, 51e, 59d]),
bottles, ollas, zoomorphic and anthropomorphic
effigy bowls and bottles, ladles, platters, peaked

182

Texas Archeological Society

jars, gourd and box-shaped bowls, and chalices.
The Caddoan utility vessels usually have a
coarser paste, a rougher surface treatment, and
thicker body walls than the fine wares, which was
probably related to the performance needs of the
cooking pot to withstand thermal shock and cracking during use (see the experimental studies by
Schiffer et al. 1994 on the thermal response of
cooking pots). Typical utility vessel shapes included
small to large jars (see Figure 2t, Figure 3q, and
Figure 4f-g), as well as a variety of conical and
simple bowl and bottle forms, most of the latter in
the earlier Caddoan ceramics (and the historic
Caddoan ceramics) being plain and unpolished. The
utility vessels have carbon encrustations, food residues, and soot stains, suggesting they were employed by the Caddo as cooking pots. Some of
these kinds of vessels were used primarily for storage (those with large orifice diameters and vessel
volumes) of foodstuffs and liquids.
While plain utility vessels were commonly
used by Caddoan groups in Northeast Texas, particularly before ca. A.D. 1300-1400 (see Table 1),
they were also decorated in a variety of ways. The
earlier Caddoan utility wares had horizontal (see
Figure 2o-r) and cross-hatched incised lines, fingernail impressions (see Figure 2s-t), pinching, fingernail and tool punctates on the rim and bodies, as
well as neck-banding, at least south of the Sabine
River [see Newell and Krieger 1949] (see Figure
3q). The types of decorations and/or surface treatments on later Caddoan utility vessels included
neck-banding or corrugation (see Figure 4f-g),
brushing, ridging, applique (Perino 1994:Figure 7ef, h), and combinations of zoned and diagonal incised and punctated designs on the rim and body of
jars. In historic Caddoan times, rows of fingernail
punctations on the rim of everted-rim Emory
Punctated-Incised jars are a common decorative
treatment. Handles and lugs were present on some
of the utility vessels.
Caddoan ceramics were apparently widely
traded in Texas, as they have been found in significant quantities on North Central, East Central, Central, and inland Southeast Texas archeological sites
(Story 1990:247). The earlier Caddoan ceramics
(dating before ca. A.D. 1300) were most widely
distributed in the upper Trinity and Brazos River
basins of North Central Texas (see Prikryl and
Perttula, below), and in inland Southeast Texas,
while the Late Caddoan ceramic wares appear to

have been most commonly exchanged with East
Central and Central Texas groups after A.D. 1300,
as well as with prehistoric peoples living along the
Trinity River in inland Southeast Texas (McClurkan
1968). Caddoan ceramic finewares were also traded
extensively in parts of the Midwest and Southeastern U.S., most notably after ca. A.D. 1300-1400
with Native American groups living in the Lower
Mississippi Valley of Arkansas and Louisiana (Early
1993:232-233).
Other types of ceramic artifacts manufactured
by prehistoric Caddoan groups include ceramic
earspools and disks, figurines, and a variety of pipe
forms (Jackson 1933:71). The earliest types of
Caddoan clay pipes were plain, tubular and cigarshaped forms, followed by the long-stem "Red
River" pipes (Hoffman 1967) with burnished and
polished stems and bowls; rectangular platform
pipes and some elbow pipe forms (Bruseth and
Perttula 1981:Figure 5-11a-b) have also been recovered in Caddoan sites dating before A.D. 1200.
The later Caddoan pipe forms in Northeast Texas
are biconical and elbow pipe forms with small bowls
(< 25 mm) and small stem diameters (< 25 mm)
(see Jackson 1933:Plates 16-18).
Two recent advances in the study of Caddoan
ceramics hold great promise for increasing our
knowledge about prehistoric stylistic, technological,
and functional changes in this material culture. First,
compositional analyses using petrographic and
chemical characterizations are now being used on
samples of Caddoan ceramics (see Fischbeck et al.
1989; Steponaitis et al. 1995) to discern
manufacturing techniques, source/regional
distributions of particular wares, and functional
characteristics of different kinds of vessels (ReeseTaylor 1994, 1995a). For example, recent analyses
of the petrographic constituents in the pastes of
Caddoan ceramic assemblages in the Sabine River,
Cypress Creek, and Sulphur River basins has shown
that there appear to be consistent paste differences
(specifically in the percentages of alkali feldspars
and quartz) between the ceramics in each of the
river and creek basins (Figure 5). This is turn seems
to reflect the local basin-specific production by
Caddoan groups of ceramic vessels from locally
available clays (Reese-Taylor 1995), with limited
evidence for the exchange of vessels from one group
to another in different basins. This type of analysis
should prove of great utility in examining the
archeological record in Northeast Texas (and

Perttula et al. m Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

183

Drainage Basins
i Percentage Quartz and Alkali Feldspars
4O%
35%30%25% 20% ~

15%-4
10%
5%
~.....................

0%-0%
10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

Quartz
Sabine River

,7

Cypress River

®

Sulphur River

Figure 5. Petrographic Analysis of Quartz and Alkali Feldspars in Caddoan Ceramics from the
Sabine, Cypress, and Sulphur River drainage basins (from Reese-Taylor 1995a).

adjacent regions) for considerations of cultural
affiliation, and exchange between Caddo and nonCaddo groups, as well as for discerning
manufacturing techniques, raw material use, source/
regional distributions of particular wares, and
specific functional characteristics of different kinds
of vessels (Neff 1995; O’Brien et al. 1994).
Second, a very detailed analytical classificatory system of decorative motifs and patterns has
been developed for Caddoan ceramics by
Schambach (Schambach 1981; Schambach et al.
n.d.) that has proved useful in detecting fine-scale
temporal and stylistic changes (on the order of 2030 years) in ceramic decoration among prehistoric
Caddoan groups on the Red and Ouachita rivers in
Arkansas and Louisiana (e.g., Schambach and
Miller 1984; Kelley 1994). The system uses a hierarchical or paradigmatic (see Dunnell 1986) classification of decorative techniques and motifs (classes
A-H, such as diagonal or vertical rectilinear incised
[A], horizontal rectilinear and curvilinear designs
[B], brushed [D], engraved [E], and applique [HI,
etc.) for rims and vessel bodies in combination with
groups of similar designs within classes, called patterns. Figure 6 illustrates how the classification
works with a sample of vessels from the Late

Caddoan Cedar Grove site in southwestern Arkansas (Schambach and Miller 1984); for example, the
Austin-Abraham vessels on the top row illustrate
Class A rim and body decorations, while Austin 1
and Austin 2 represent different designs with the
Austin pattern of vertical incising on short rims.
The definition of such stylistic attributes is
well-suited to the recognition of comparable design, vessel, and rim sets across the Caddoan area.
With this kind of specific and idiosyncratic information on prehistoric vessel decorations (element
as well as placement), and forms, as well as the
character of stylistic variation present at different
times among related groups (e.g., Neiman 1995),
we can confidently explore the nature of social
relationships among Caddo groups "from the message and meaning ascribed to ceramic design"
(Early 1995:4).

Southeast Texas

Prehistoric ceramics are common in inland and
coastal sites throughout Southeast Texas (cf. Aten
1983; Bollich 1995). According to Aten (1983),
ceramics were adopted by coastal hunter-gatherers
about 2000 years B.P., and perhaps by 1500 years

184

Texas Archeological Society

Arlts 2

Austin 2

Belhaven 13

Baker 4

Benedict 1

Central 5

Central 4

Dewey

Dewey i

2

Devey 3

~elhaven

14

Central 7

El Dorado 2

Evelyn 1

El£zabeth

Eden

2

1

Figure 6. Class and Pattern Classification of Caddo Ceramics from the Cedar Grove Site, Lafayette County, Arkansas
(after Schambach and Miller 1984).

Perttula et al. m Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

ago in the Conroe-Livingston inland area; ceramics
continued to be an important part of the material
culture assemblage of these groups unti! at least
A.D. 1700. Story (1990:256 and Figure 39) includes these coastal and inland groups under the
rubric "Mossy Grove" as "a general cultural pattern
and as a regional tradition that partly parallels development of the Caddoan tradition to the north.
And, like the Caddoan tradition/culture, it encompasses the archeological remains of what were
surely different ethnic (and possibly even linguistic) groups."
Recently compiled computer data bases for
the region indicate that ceramics have been recovered in quantity from several hundred published

185

surface-collected and excavated sites (Patterson
1993, n.d.). By far the dominant kind of ceramics
in Southeast Texas is Goose Creek Plain (Aten
1983:231-232), an undecorated sandy paste ware
that was manufactured across the region (Table 2).
This ceramic occurs as relatively simple and small
to medium sized jars, beakers, and bowls (Figure 7)
with rounded bases and relatively straight (vertical)
walls (Ellis 1994; Ricklis 1994; Weinstein 1991).
Aten (1983:206-245) has developed a useful
ceramic typological system for prehistoric and early
historic Southeast Texas ceramics, basing his
approach on the type-variety system propounded by
Phillips (1970) for the LMV. Ceramic pastes (i.e.,
untempered sandy paste, sand-tempered, bone-

Table 2. Ceramic Type Distributions

Pottery Type
Goose Creek
Plain
Goose Creek
Incised
Goose Creek
Red Film
Goose Creek
Stamped
Conway
Rockport
Asphalt-coated 1
Bone-temper
Shell-temper
San Jacinto
Plain
San Jacinto
Incised
Techefuncte
Marksville
Stamped
Mandeville
Plain
Caddoan

COASTAL MARGIN
West
Central
East

West

INLAND ZONE
Central

East

7*

19

87

33

55

9

2

12

36

8

17

5

-

4

11

-

4
1

10

2

2
8
1

5
4
-

20
11

11
-

9
-

6

13

61

7

12

7

1

8
4

32
12

2

3
2

5

1

3

3
9
2

_
3

5
-

*Number of sites (Patterson 1993, n.d.). Based on a sample of 39,140 sherds from coastal margin sites and 29,437 sherds from
inland Southeast Texas sites.

186

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 7. Vessel Forms from a probable Clear Lake period
(ca. A.D. 100-425) site in Harris County, Texas (from Ring
1994:Figure 15).

tempered, and grog-tempered) are the key to the
typological classification of Southeast Texas
ceramics, since most of the vessels were apparently
undecorated, but he also used decorative attributes
(such as incising, stamping, red filming, etc.) to
define specific varieties (Figure 8), including Goose
Creek Incised, Goose Creek Red-Filmed, and others.
From this classificatory scheme, Aten
(1983:Figure 14.1-14.3) has created a detailed ceramic seriation that charts temporal changes in
pastes and vessel decorations. This ceramic seriation
has recently been shown not to work that well for
estimating the chronological placement of specific
ceramic assemblages (Ellis and Ellis 1994; Ricklis
1994:213-215), probably in large measure because
it is based on small sherd sample sizes, the limited
stylistic variability in Southeast Texas ceramics,
and slow rates of change in the use of different
types of paste (which is probably tracking basic
technological continuities in the manufacture and
use of ceramics in the region). Nevertheless, it still
has merit as a chronological tool (particularly in
the absence of independently derived absolute
dates), and is currently the best available synthesis
of Southeast Texas ceramic change.
From Aten’ s (1983 :Figure 14.1) Galveston Bay
area seriation, by about A.D. 100 untempered sandy

paste ceramics--plain (Goose Creek Plain) and
stamped (Goose Creek Stamped)--and LMV
Tchefuncte wares (with contorted pastes and poor
wedging) were common, with low amounts of
coarse-grained sand-tempered pottery (O’Neal Plain
variety Conway) between about A.D. 250-425 (Aten
1983:287). Goose Creek Incised and Goose Creek
Red-Filmed, although present earlier, became more
common (perhaps combining for as much as 10
percent of particular site ceramic samples) between
ca. A.D. 650-1000, after which Goose Creek ceramics are virtually replaced by plain and decorated grog-tempered wares.
Aten (1983) has defined these grog-tempered
wares as Baytown Plain and San Jacinto Incised,
and suggests they are most frequent in sites dating
between A.D. 1000-1400+, after which they rapidly declined in popularity. More recently,
Weinstein (1991:106) has proposed that Baytown
Plain along the Upper Texas Coast be restricted to
vessels having obvious and abundant grog temper
in a clayey or silty paste matrix, as it is in the LMV

Figure 8. Decorated Sherds from the 1970s Excavations at
the Mitchell Ridge (41GV66) site (from Ricklis 1994:Figure
7.21): a, multiple horizontal incised lines; b, multiple
horizontal incised lines with secondary element of pendant
triangles; c-d, pendant triangles as primary design element;
e, nicked lip as primary design element; f, vertical brushing;
g, decorated with small, round punctations.

Perttula et al. m Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

classification, and that a San Jacinto Plain type be
used for sandy paste sherds with only small amounts
of finely-crushed grog. Weinstein (1991) further
suggests that the Baytown Plain wares are not common in Southeast Texas other than between ca.
A.D. 1300-1400, and that the clearly locally produced Goose Creek and San Jacinto jars and bowls
dominate the ceramic assemblages up to about A.D.
1700. Analyses of vessel forms made during this
period of grog-tempered ceramics (Figure 9) indicate that they were predominately straight-walled
jars and wide-mouth bowls (Ellis 1994; Howard
1990; Ricklis 1994; Weinstein 1991).

Figure 9. Galveston Bay Late Prehistoric Vessel Shapes
from the Mitchell Ridge site (from Ricklis 1994:Figure
7.6).

Incised ceramics of several different styles and
decorative motifs (Aten 1983:Figure 12.6) are particularly characteristic of the period between ca.
A.D. 1000-1700 in both San Jacinto and Goose
Creek ceramics. These include in approximate sequential order as follows: zoned incised-punctated
designs, multiple horizontal incised lines, and diagonals, cross-hatching, engraved panels, and pendant triangles (Aten 1983:242). As Aten (1983:242)
and Ricklis (1994:209) have pointed out, there are
many parallels between coasta! and inland Southeast Texas ceramic styles and decorative styles used
in contemporaneous LMV Coles Creek and
Plaquemine culture ceramics (Figure 10). Ricklis
(1994) also identifies lip incising and scalloping as

187

common decorative elements in the large (+26,000
sherds) Mitchell Ridge (41GV66) ceramic assemblage, which dates principa!ly between ca. A.D.
1300-1600. He defines these decorative elements
as Goose Creek Modified Lip and San Jacinto Plain
Modified Lip types.
The period after A.D. 1000 in Southeast Texas
is also marked by the occasional appearance of
Caddoan ceramics, including kinds of engraved,
incised, and brushed sherds being made and used
by Early and Late Caddo groups in the Neches and
Angelina River basins of Northeast Texas. Caddoan
ceramics are quite abundant in the ConroeLivingston area (Aten 1983:Figure 14.5), and Aten
(1983:295) suggests from the ceramic analysis of
four sites and three radiocarbon dates that there
were two peaks in the frequency of Caddoan ceramics in the area (ca. A.D. 1000-1350, and after
A.D. 1500).
Bone-tempered ceramics appear in some quantity in Southeast Texas after ca. A.D. 1400. As
Patterson (this volume) notes, some of the ceramics
in the western part of the region may be related to
Toyah phase Leon Plain, but elsewhere in the region its sandy paste, and occasional incised designs, clearly relate it to the Mossy Grove ceramic
tradition (e.g., Aten 1983:244). At about the same
time as the peak in bone-tempered ceramics, Goose
Creek Plain ceramics appear to replace the San
Jacinto Plain and Baytown Plain, and by A.D. 1700
it accounts for more than ca. 94 percent of the
ceramic assemblages. From then until about A.D.
1800, ceramics decline in frequency on Native
American sites in Southeast Texas, although Goose
Creek Plain continued to be manufactured and used
by these groups (Aten 1983:289).
Alabama-Coushatta ceramics are also found
after 1800 in their recently established Southeast
Texas village sites. The Carl Matthews site in Polk
County is probably the best-known AlabamaCoushatta archeological site in the region. The Alabama-Coushatta ceramics are principally sandy
paste, deep flaring, Chattahoochee Roughened, vat.
Chattahoochee jars, with roughened or brushed
bodies, and with applique and crimped fillets along
the rim (Jurney and Perttula 1995), but cazuelas
and hemipsherical bowls were also manufactured.
In most particulars, Alabama-Coushatta ceramics
are virtually identicial to the ceramics being made
by their Creek Indian relatives in Alabama after
1780.

188

Texas Archeological Society

MITCI~ELL RIDGE SITE

LMV/MISSISSIPPI DELTA

Coles Creek

Ha~’i.son Bayo~ Incised
Figure 10. Similarities in decoration between Mitchell Ridge sherds and sherds from the Lower Mississippi Valley and
Southern Louisiana (from Ricklis 1994:Figure 7.24).

Perttula et al. ~ Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

East Central Texas
Sandy paste ceramics are apparently the earliest wares in the Trinity and Navasota River basins,
being adopted by ca. 50 B.C. in Woodland or Early
Ceramic period contexts (Fields 1993:119); these
ceramics are quite comparable to the Goose Creek
Plain ceramics noted in the southern part of Northeast Texas and across all of Southeast Texas. Thin
shell-tempered and kaolin paste ceramics also appear in Early Ceramic contexts at several sites in
the middle Trinity and Navasota River basins
(McGregor and Bruseth 1987; Fields 1993).
By about A.D. 800, the early plain wares were
replaced by grog, grit, and bone-tempered jars,
simple bowls, and carinated bowls with punctated
and incised decorations on vessel rims and bodies
(Bruseth 1987:Table 8- t 7). The decorative elements
are quite similar to those seen on Northeast Texas
Caddoan utility wares, and the stylistic resemblances
increase in ceramic assemblages dating after ca.
A.D. 1000 (McGregor and Bruseth 1987:184; Fields
et al. 1991).
At Richland Creek, dominant ceramic decorative styles between ca. A.D. 1000-1200 include
horizontal incised lines with zoned punctates, random punctations, and diagonal incised lines, with
incised and punctated sherds accounting for about
55 percent of the decorated sherds at Bird Point
Island (Bruseth 1987:Table 8-17); engraved sherds
represent only about 3 percent of the decorated
sherd sample. Similar ceramic styles are evident in
Late Prehistoric assemblages from a number of sites
at the Jewett Mine (Fields et al. 1991). The later
ceramics (dating after ca. A.D. 1300/1400) again
bear strong resemblances to Caddoan ceramics from
Northeast Texas, particularly from Frankston phase
Caddoan groups residing in the upper Neches and
Angelina River basins (cf. Shafer 1981; Fields
1981). Well represented are brushed, incised, engraved, neck-banded, and punctated vessels that
compare well to the Poynor Engraved, Maydelle
Incised, and Bullard Brushed types (Bruseth
1987:125-126; Fields et al. 1991:254-256).
Bruseth (1987:125-126) interprets the
Caddoan-related ceramics at Richland Creek to be
of local manufacture, but a product of "interaction
with these eastern neighbors," with the possibility
of some occupation by Caddo groups from East
Texas after ca. A.D. 1300. Fields et al. (1991:258)
conclude that the Jewett ceramics are "comparable
to Caddoan pottery from East Texas proper, and

189

there is no reason to suppose that most of the vessel
ceramics were not deposited as a result of occupations by Caddoan groups." Detailed petrographic
and chemical analyses of the pastes of Northeast
Texas Caddo and East Central Texas ceramics (e.g.,
Reese-Taylor 1995a), in conjunction with the study
of stylistic and functional attributes of both regional
assemblages, should help to resolve the cultural
and social affiliation of the Late Prehistoric ceramics from this region.
Other types of ceramic artifacts were made in
Late Prehistoric times in East Central Texas. Ceramic pipes are present, although not nearly as common as on domestic Caddo sites in Northeast Texas,
and the forms of the pipes are different from the
long-stemmed or elbow pipes most common in the
latter region (Fields et al. 1991:258 and Figures 43
and 93d; Bruseth 1987:123-124). Several small clay
beads were found at Bird Point Island in a postA.D. 1300 context (Bruseth 1987:Figure 8-4c-d).

North Central Texas
Daniel J. Prikryl and Timothy K. Perttula
Prehistoric ceramics began to be made and
used by aboriginal peoples in North Central Texas
after about A.D. 1000. Although it is possible that
some small amount of grog, grit, and bone-tempered ceramics were being used as early as ca. A.D.
750 + 100 at the Baggett Branch site (41DL149) in
the upper Trinity River basin (Peter and McGregor
1988a; see also Story 1990), ceramics, however,
become common only in archeological contexts in
the region after about A.D. 1000.
A diverse range of prehistoric ceramic wares
occur across the North Central Texas region, although with the exception of villages on the Red
River (e.g., Lorrain 1967, 1969; Martin 1994; Price
1993; Witte 1935, !936), and an occasional site on
the middle Brazos (Wright 1995), the Elm Fork
(Prikryl 1990; Ferring and Yates 1995), West Fork
(Peter and McGregor 1988b), and East Fork of the
Trinity River, in most cases ceramics are not a
particularly abundant part of the material culture of
the Late Prehistoric cultural groups in the region.
For example, of 238 Native American sites reported
by Prikryl (1990) on the Elm Fork, only 35 sites
(14 percent) have yielded aboriginal ceramics. This
rarity in ceramics is especially evident in comparison with that seen in contemporaneous Caddoan

190

Texas Archeological Society

groups in Northeast Texas, and Jornada Mogollon
Puebloan groups in West Texas, where ceramics
are by far the most abundant artifact class. This
must relate to the relatively minimal importance of
the use and function of ceramic vessel containers in
the cooking and storage of food stuffs, oils, and
seed stock in the North Central Texas region.
As we discuss below, by far the most common
kinds of ceramics found in ca. A.D. 1000-1300
archeological assemblages in North Central Texas
are plain and decorated non-shell-tempered wares
that resemble the ceramics found on Caddoan sites
(Krieger [1946], and Harris [1936, 1945] before
him, noted this characteristic of the ceramics from
North Central Texas sites) in the Neches, Sabine,
and Red River drainages in the Pineywoods and
Post Oak Savannah (see Perttula, this volume). Plain
mussel shell-tempered (also including fossil-shell
and other calcareous aplastics) pottery is also wellrepresented in the North Central Texas region, principally on Plains Village archeological sites (i.e.,
the outmoded Henrietta focus or complex) that date
after about A.D. 1250/1300. We discuss these ceramics in more detail later, but we turn first to a
consideration of the pre-A.D. 1300 ceramics manufactured, and/or traded for, by aboriginal peoples in
the prairies and savannah habitats of North Central
Texas.
Caddoan grog-, bone-, and grog/bone-tempered
decorated ceramics (incising, engraving, and
punctated elements) are notable in prehistoric archeological sites dating before ca. A.D. 1300 along
the East Fork of the Trinity River and the Blackland Prairie (i.e., Harris 1936, 1945; Krieger
1946:131; Ross 1966; Sorrow 1966; Martin and
Bruseth 1988), on the Elm Fork (Prikryl 1990), in
rock shelter and terrace sites in the middle Brazos
River basin (Jelks 1962; Stephenson 1970; Brown
et al. 1987; Story 1990; Wright 1995), and at the
Cobb-Pool site at Joe Pool Lake in the drainage
basin of the West Fork Trinity River (Peter and
McGregor 1988b). Since there have been no petrographic or chemical compositional analyses of these
Caddoan ceramics to be certain of their place of
manufacture or source area, no general consensus
has been reached about whether the Caddoan ceramics represent: (a) trade wares from Caddo groups
in Northeast Texas, (b) locally-manufactured ceramic wares where vessel forms and decorative
styles may have been borrowed or copied from
nearby Caddoan communities, (c) the residues from

actual settlement of Caddoan groups in North Central Texas, or (d) some combination of the above
that may vary regionally and temporally. The occurrence of these Caddoan ceramics in the region
speaks to important issues of local and extra-local
trade and exchange between Caddoan horticulturists/agriculturists and hunter-gatherers, as well as
to perceived expansions in the broad land use patterns of the social and politically complex Caddoan
communities between ca. A.D. 1000-1300 (e.g.,
Story 1990; Perttula 1993; see also Fields, this volume); thus, ceramic sourcing studies of the North
Central Texas Caddoan ceramics will be crucial for
unravelling Late Prehistoric cultural change in the
region.
Along the middle Brazos, the small numbers
of Caddoan ceramics are represented by portions of
vessels of Hickory Engraved and Holly Engraved
from rockshelter deposits (e.g., Jelks 1962:Figure
24; Stephenson 1970:Plate 23), while sherds from
Kiam Incised, Dunkin Incised, and Weches Fingernail-Impressed vessels have been recovered in preA.D. 1300 contexts at sites such as Chupik (Story
1990), Asa Warner (Wright 1995), and McDonald
(Brown et al. 1987). These kinds of Caddoan sherds
point to associations with earlier Caddoan settlements in the Neches River basin of Northeast Texas
(e.g., Newell and Krieger 1949; Stokes and
Woodring 1981). In the upper Trinity River basin,
any specific Caddoan regional affiliations are more
elusive, in part because of the small size of the
sherds in the collection (which make typological
identifications difficult at best), and limited descriptions or illustrations of the decorated sherds in site
assemblages (i.e., Peter and McGregor 1988b).
Based simply on geographical proximity, however,
one should look to Caddoan groups in the upper
Sabine and middle Red River for vessel form and
stylistic comparisons with the upper Trinity ceramics. In this regard, it is worth mentioning that a
Sanders Engraved vessel (a Caddoan carinated bowl
form manufactured between ca. A.D. 1100-1300 in
the upper Sabine and middle Red River areas) was
recovered in a burial context at the Upper Rockwall
site on the East Fork of the Trinity (Ross 1966:Figure 10e).
The relatively large ceramic assemblage from
the Cobb-Pool site (n--721 sherds) gives a good
sense of the character of the pre-A.D. 1300 ceramics in the upper Trinity River basin, even in the
absence of sherd illustrations (Peter and McGregor

Perttula et aL m Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

1988b: 149-158). The site, essentially interpreted as
a single component occupation dated between ca.
A.D. 1000-1200, contains primarily grog-, quartzor grog-quartz-tempered ceramics decorated on the
body and rim with parallel incised lines or random
to parallel rows of fingernail punctations; the incised and punctated sherds account for 85 percent
of the decorated sherds (Peter and McGregor
1988b:Tables 9-12 and 9-17). The decorated sherds
represent about 29 percent of the sherd assemblage.
Engraving (8 percent), brushing (5 percent), and
interior slipped (2 percent) round out the decorated
ceramics from the site. What sets the Cobb-Pool
ceramic assemblage apart from contemporaneous
Caddoan sites in Northeast Texas is the amount of
plain shell (or fossil shell [Ferring 1988]) or shellquartz-tempered sherds from Cobb-Pool (129 sherds
or 18 percent of the ceramic assemblage [Peter and
McGregor 1988b:Tables 9-12 and 9-17]); as discussed above, plain shell-tempered ceramics are
absent from Caddo archeological sites in Northeast

191

Texas till after A.D. 1300. Plain shell-tempered
pottery, however, also occurs on several East Fork
Trinity River and Trinity River archeo!ogicat sites
that were primarily occupied before A.D. 1300 (see
Ross 1966; Sorrow 1966; Martin and Bruseth 1988),
as well as in a component at the Chicken House site
on the Red River in Cooke County, Texas that may
date between A.D. 1030 and A.D. 1280 (Prikryl
1994; see also Lorrain 1969). The earliest shelltempered pottery from this site is from plain flatbased flowerpot-shaped vessels (Figure 1 la-b).
Southwestern ceramics are rare in North Central Texas archeological sites prior to A.D. 1300.
After A.D. 1300, small quantities of Jornada
Mogollon brownwares, Chupadero black-on-white
sherds, and Rio Grande polychromes have been
found in sites on the upper Red River, the Clear
Fork of the Brazos, and on the Elm Fork of the
Trinity (see Krieger 1946; Prikryl 1990; see also
Miller’s discussion of West Texas Puebloan ceramics, below). This seems to reflect broad, regional

a
c

h
\

/

Figure 11. Shell-tempered Ceramic Vessel Forms from Plains Village sites on the Red River in North Central Texas:
a-b, flower-pot jar; c, globular jar with flat or round disk base; d, globular jar with rim nodes; e, globular jar with rounded
base; f, olla; g, bottle; h, deep bowl; i, hand-molded redware with roughened exterior.

192

Texas Archeological Society

changes in trade and exchange relationships between Puebloan groups and Plains Village peoples
on the Southern Plains (see Spielmann 1991; Vehik
and Baugh 1994).
Certainly the most notable Southwestern ceramic find on the earlier Late Prehistoric sites, is
the stirrup-spout Arboles Black-on-White vessel recovered from the Lower Rockwall site on the East
Fork of the Trinity (Lorrain and Hoffrichter 1968).
This vessel was manufactured between A.D. 9501050 (Lorrain and Hoffrichter 1968:56), and petrographic analyses by McIntrye and McGregor (1982)
indicate that the basalt-tempered piece was manufactured among Puebloan groups along the upper
Rio Grande in New Mexico.
Where prehistoric archeological sites have been
radiocarbon dated in the North Central Texas region, plain shell-, fossil shell-, and calcareous-tempered (i.e., bone or crushed limestone) ceramic
wares dominate ceramic assemblages dating from
after ca. A.D. 1200/1300 to A.D. 1600. In most
particulars--temper, vessel forms, and surface treatment--these wares strongly resemble Plains Village ceramics from Washita River phase sites
(Richard Drass, 1994 personal communication to
Daniel J. Prikryl), and sites at Lake Texoma on the
Red River, in South Central Oklahoma (Bell 1984;
Brooks 1989, 1994). Washita River phase ceramic
assemblages have the following characteristics: (a)
they are coiled and smoothed; (b) a variety of calcareous tempers were used, but crushed shell was
preferred; (c) vessel forms are primarily globular
and vase-like (or "flowerpot") jars with round or
flat disk bases and outflaring rims; (d) decoration
of these vessels is minimal, principally consisting
of rows of nodes, applique fillets, lip tabs, as well
as vessel body cord-marking; and (e) also present
are small (7.5 cm in height), thick, barrel-shaped
cups with corncob-roughened exteriors and interior
surfaces that have a bright red/reddish-yellow staining (Bell 1984:318-320 and Figure 14.5).
In North Central Texas, this ware has been
called Nocona Plain, as defined by Krieger
(1946:110-111) primarily from the analysis of the
ceramics from the Harrell site at the confluence of
the Clear Fork of the Brazos and the main Brazos
River in Young County. It is one of the key defining characteristics of the Late Prehistoric Henrietta
focus (Krieger 1946:87-159), a rather nebulous archeological construct that groups together archeological remains along the upper Red River valley

and tributaries, such as the Wichita, Little Wichita,
and Pease rivers, and along the headwater areas of
the Trinity and Brazos rivers.
As Krieger (1946:110-111) defined the plain
shell-tempered pottery from the Harrell site, which
represented 95 percent of the 597 sherds in the
collection, it was primarily from rounded or globular jars with rounded bases, although deep bowls
were also present. He did note that plain shelltempered flowerpot jars with flat, extended bases
occur in Henrietta archeological components on the
upper Red River (Krieger 1946:111, 141). A few
sherds had rows of nodes at the rim-body juncture,
or vertical fingernail marks, crudely incised diagonal lines, and vertical striations on the rim, or impressions (stamped with a paddle or textile
impressed?) on the body of the vessel. The jar rims
were upright to outwardly flaring. Also present in
the Harrell site ceramic assemblage were 16 sherds
of a thick, molded ware from small bowls (4-8 cm
in height) with a reddish-yellowish paste and heavily
scored exterior surfaces, a sherd of southeastern
New Mexico brownware, and a sherd from a Late
Caddoan Poynor Engraved bowl (Krieger
1946:111).
Subsequent analyses of the ceramics found in
Henrietta sites since Krieger’s time basically confirm his descriptions (e.g., Lorrain 1967, 1969; Martin 1994) of these wares. Studies by Prikryl (1990,
1994) of the shell-tempered pottery from Elm Fork
and Red River Plains Village components do indicate, however, that these post-A.D. 1300 ceramic
assemblages are much more variable in vessel form,
base shape, and temper inclusions than was recognized in Krieger’s (1946) summary.
The variability within post-A.D. 1300 ceramic
assemblages can be illustrated in several respects.
For instance, limestone and limestone-shell tempered sherds amounted to 52 percent of the sherd
assemblage from the 13th and 14th century Dillard
site (41CO174) on the Red River, while contemporaneous sites nearby and upstream have more
than 93 percent crushed mussell shell tempering
(Lorrain 1967, 1969; Prikryl 1994). Furthermore,
Prikryl’s (1990:80) examination of sherds from the
Ledbetter site (41DN5) showed that most of what
had previously been considered shell-tempered
ceramics by Stephenson (1949) were actually tempered with bone, crushed limestone, and fossil
shell. Cord-marked globular jars, tempered with
bone and grit, are also present in ceramic assem-

Perttula et al. ~ Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

blages on the upper Red River. Krieger (1946:131)
notes only a few cordmarked sherds from sites on
the Red River at the confluence with the Little
Wichita River, and these vessels are comparable to
the Lindsay Cordmarked ceramics found on contemporaneous Washita River phases in South Central Oklahoma (Bell 1984; Brooks 1989, 1994).
Finally, the kinds of vessels represented in these
assemblages includes more than simply jars and
deep bowls, namely: flat disk-based flowerpotshaped jars, round and flat-based globular jars
(some 40 cm in diameter and 60 cm in height
[Lorrain 1969]), deep straight-walled bowls, ollas,
short-necked bottles, and the thick molded bowls
or mugs (Prikryl 1994) (see Figure 11).
The globular jars, probably cooking jars, are
the most frequent vessel form in the post-A.D. !300
ceramics on the Red River (Figure !2). They have
an abundant calcareous temper (often leached out,
creating a porous surface), thin body walls (4-8
mm), smoothed surfaces (particularly on the exterior
of the vessel, with smoothing on interior surfaces

193

River locales; Lorrain (1967:200) called it
Redware. The hand-molded pottery is from thick
(10-20 ram) but small cylindrical mugs or bowls
(see Figure 1 li), 40-80 mm in diameter, with corncob-roughened exteriors and occasional random
brushing marks. The interiors of the mugs or bowls
are bright red and Lorrain (1967) and Bell (1984)
have speculated that this is possibly from holding
fire or perhaps they were used as cups that held an
ochreous paint.
Lorrain (1967:200, 1969) also identifies a thin
(2.7-3.5 mm), plain, blackware tempered with
burned and crushed mussel shell from the prehistoric Coyote and Glass sites in the Spanish Fort
area. An occasional bone, grit, or grog-tempered
sherd may also be found in the Red River ceramic
assemblages.
Other kinds of ceramic artifacts on post-A.D.
!200 Late Prehistoric Plains Village archeological
sites in North Central Texas include pottery beads,
pottery disks (spindle whorls?), clay figurine
fragments (Krieger 1946:141), and long-stemmed
pipes. The beads and disks are rarely found in
archeological contexts, but the long-stemmed clay

Figure 12. Flaring rim, globular jar.

limited mainly to smoothing over the coil lines),
and they are almost always plain; 1-2 rows of nodes,
strap and loop handles, and diagonal incising are
rare decorative flourishes. Bases are predominantly
flat disks (Figure 13c-e), although conical or semirounded jars are also known (see Figure lle). Jar
rim sherds are strongly everted or outflaring (Figure
13a-b).
The thick, untempered, hand-molded pottery
(Figure 14) is present in post-A.D. I200 Late Prehistoric sites in the upper Brazos and upper Red

Figure 13. Rim and Base sherd profiles from shell-tempered
ceramics from the Coyote and Glass sites, Montague
County, Texas.

194

Texas Archeological Society

b
Figure 14. Hand-molded Redware vessel: a, showing
corncob roughened exterior; b, interior.

pipes have been recovered in some quantity in 13th
and 14th century contexts at sites on the Red River
(Lorrain 1969; Martin 1994). These pipes have
small-bore long-stems, and small bowls with simple
rounded lips (Martin 1994:Figure 34), and they have
a polished surface finish. Unlike the long-stemmed
pipes from Caddoan sites (cf. Hoffman 1967), those
on the Plains Village sites appear to have been
tempered with shell, as well as bone and grit.
Historic aboriginal ceramics have been found
in eighteenth century Nortefio phase archeological
sites, well-documented as related to the Wichitaspeaking Wichita, Tawakoni, Taovayas, and Waco
groups (cf. Newcomb 1993; Bell et al. 1967; Story
1985), in the upper Brazos, Trinity, and Red River
basins in North Central Texas. The ceramics include pottery vessels, globular pottery beads, elbow pipes, and unbaked clay figurines.
Pottery sherds or vessels are not apparently
common on Nortefio sites, as aboriginal ceramics

were being replaced by metal and tin containers
supplied to the Wichita peoples by European and
American traders. For instance, despite extensive
excavations at sites such as Longest (Bell and Bastian
1967) or Vinson (Smith 1993), less than 300 sherds
were recovered from either site, representing only a
handful of vessels. Moreover, some of the vessels
used by the Nortefios were not manufactured by
them, but were objects of trade from Puebloan or
Caddoan groups (e.g., Krieger ! 946). Caddoan vessels of the types Natchitoches Engraved, Simms
Engraved, and Hudson Engraved (manufactured by
Caddoan groups living several hundred miles downstream in the Great Bend area of the Red River) are
particularly notable trade vessels, as were northern
Rio Grande Puebloan ceramic wares.
Nortefio ceramics in North Central Texas include small, plain, globular jars, usually shell-tempered, but also bone-tempered or with a combination
of tempers (Gilmore 1967; Bell and Bastian 1967),
as well as bowls, carinated bowls, and bottles. The
plain jars have outflaring rims and flat disk bases,
and resemble what has been called Nocona Plain
on Late Prehistoric Plains Village sites in North
Central Texas. Petrographic analysis of Spanish Fort
sherds indicated that these jars were made from
local fossiliferous Permian clays (Gilmore 1967).
The non-jar vessel forms were usually decorated
with incised and engraved lines, fingernail
punctates, and brushing (Bastian 1967; Smith 1993),
and the design elements clearly resemble Caddoan
ceramics manufactured in Northeast Texas and
Southwest Arkansas in the eighteenth century (e.g.,
Schambach and Miller 1984). However, Gilmore’s
(1967) petrographic analyses of Womack Engraved
and Emory Punctated-Incised sherds from Spanish
Fort sites suggests they were made of local Pleistocene clays or fossiliferous Permian clays.
Other plainwares in Nortefio sites includes Leon
Plain (see discussion of Leon Plain in Ricklis, this
paper) and Goliad Plain from the Vinson site (Smith
1993:114-115, 117). Bastian (1967) also notes a
highly polished, buff to dark brown, plain pottery
(tempered with bone, grit, and shell) from the Upper
Tucker site, while ridged or paddle-marked pottery
was identified by Krieger (1946:163) from the Spanish Fort sites that is similar to paddle-marked pottery from Wichita sites in South Central Kansas and
northern Oklahoma (Wedel 1959; Scott 1994).
The Wichita-speaking groups made distinctive
ceramic elbow pipes (see Story 1985:Figure 4a-a’).
They had smoothed or polished conical bowls, and

Perttula et aL ~ Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas
slightly flaring thick-walled stems with short spurs
at the heel, and were usually plain, although
Womack Engraved motifs were added to pipe bowls
from Red River Wichita sites (Bell and Bastian
1967; Bastian 1967). The pipes were tempered with
a combination of grog, bone, or shell, and they had
compact pastes.
Human and animal figurines of a distinctive
reddish-brown clay are notable on Nortefio archeological sites; for example, some 74 clay figurines or
figurine fragments were recovered in excavations
at the Longest site (Bell and Bastian 1967). In addition to figurines with human shape (Figure 15c),
quadruped (horse?) and bird form figurines were

a

b

9

h

i

Figure 15. Figurines from Nortefio sites on the Red River.

made of baked or unbaked clay. Bell and Bastian
(1967:95) suggest that the bird forms, subrectangular tablets (see Figure 15h-i), represent owls.
They also note that some unbaked figurine fragments had irregularly placed holes in them, as if the
holes could be used for the insertion of sticks. Fortyone similar figurines and fragments have been documented by Prikryl from sites on the Texas side of
the Red River opposite the Longest site; these are
in the Benton-Whiteside collection. The most common recognizable forms are horses (see Figure 15ab,f). One horse head figurine fragment has an
applique bridle, and other horse figurine fragments
have incised lines which appear to distinguish
manes. Other zoomorphic forms appear to represent dogs and birds (probably owls).

195

The Ceramics of the Toyah Horizon and the
Rockport Phase as Indicators of Some
Basic Sociocultural Patterns
Robert A. Ricklis
Beginning ca. A.D. 1250/1300, ceramics
became a regular part of archeological assemblages
in Central and southern Texas. In these regions,
bone-tempered pottery, more often than not
undecorated, appeared as part of a Late Prehistoric
material culture which included: Perdiz arrowpoints,
unifacial end scrapers, thin bifacially flaked knives,
flaked chert drills/perforators made on blades and/
or flakes, and a prismatic blade-core industry (e.g.,
Hester 1975, 1980; Prewitt 1981;
Black 1986; Highley 1986; Johnson
1994; Ricklis and Collins 1995). This
kind of pottery was manufactured by
Toyah folk until late in the
seventeenth century (Johnson [ 1994]
dates the Toyah phase from A.D.
1300 to 1660), although a corrected
radiocarbon date of A.D. 1770 + 60
(Beta-70658) has recently been
obtained from organic residue on the
walls of a Leon Plain olla-like vessel
from 41CV174 at Fort Hood (Abbott
1995:6-112).
On the central Texas coast, ceramics seem to have been made a slightly
earlier appearance. Pottery in this area
is generally made from sandy clays
which are indistinguishable from
much of the clayey sediments found
in the Pleistocene Beaumont Formation, the region’s geologic foundation. Sandy paste
pottery has been found along the central coast associated with Scallorn arrowpoints (Story 1968), which
are well-dated in Texas to ca. A.D. 700-1250/1300
(Prewitt 1981, 1985). Ceramic technology probably
arrived in the region via the diffusion of ideas and
techniques from the upper Texas coast (Campbell
1961), where the regional pottery of the Mossy
Grove tradition (Story 1990) appeared some 2,000
years ago, probably in response to influences from
still farther afield in the Lower Mississippi Valley
area (Aten 1983). The earliest central coast pottery
was thus usually a plain, sandy paste ware similar to
the Goose Creek Plain potter,./of the upper Texas
coast (Story 1968; Ricklis 1990:Appendix A;
Weinstein 1992).

196

Texas Archeological Society

At least by ca. A.D. 1250/1300, asphaltum
was being applied as coating and/or decoration,
judging from radiocarbon dates associated with asphaltum surface-treated sherds at the Mellon site
(41RF21) (see Ricklis, this volume). Campbell
(1961) suggested that asphaltum-painted designs
(subsumed under the general typological designation of Rockport Black-on-Gray [see Suhm and
Jelks 1962]) may have been inspired by the blackon-white decorations on Huastecan ceramics found
along the Gulf coastal plain of Northeastern Mexico
(see Hester, this volume). However, the designs on
Rockport ware are not the same as those on
Huastecan pottery, and asphaltum coating/decoration may have been an intra-regional development.
The use of asphaltum as coating for baskets is well
documented for the Late Archaic on the central
coast (see Ricklis, this volume), and the transfer of
this practice to an introduced ceramic technology
would presumably not have involved any major
shifts in behavioral patterns.
The origins of inland, bone-tempered wares
(so-called Leon Plain [Suhm and Jelks 1962[) of
the central and southern Texas Toyah phase or horizon are less clear. With very rare exceptions, pottery appears rather abruptly in the archeological
record, in conjunction with Perdiz arrowpoints and
the other elements of the Toyah techno-complex,
and with an apparent emphasis on bison hunting
(Prewitt 1981, 1985; Black 1986; Johnson 1994;
see also discussions in Mallouf 1987; Huebner 1991;
Ricklis 1992). The apparent lack of in situ evolution of the Toyah ceramic tradition (judging by the
virtual absence of earlier pottery in the Toyah area)
suggests introduction from some other area or areas, which to date have not been identified (Johnson
[1994] suggests possible influences from the eastern margins of the greater American Southwest).
Leaving the question of origins aside, it is clear
that by A.D. 1300 two broadly definable ceramic
traditions were in place in Central and southern
Texas. The Toyah ceramic tradition of bonetempered pottery extended across a very large area,
from West Central Texas, into the northern part of
southern Texas and onto the inland part of the Gulf
coastal plain (see Figure 1). The coastal Rockport
ceramics are found in a narrow strip along the Gulf
coast, from the Colorado River delta on the north to
Baffin Bay on the south. The geographic
distributions of these two prehistoric pottery
traditions offer excellent opportunities to delineate
major cultural patterns, to define the spatial

boundary between the two, and by extension, to
gain insight into how prehistoric hunter-gatherer
populations interacted along a major cultural
boundary. To facilitate discussion, it is worthwhile
to summarize the salient characteristics of each of
these two major pottery traditions.

Salient Features of Toyah Ceramics
Descriptions of Toyah ceramics have appeared
in a number of publications in recent decades. A
typological description of the Leon Plain type, originally thought to be restricted to Central Texas, may
be found in Suhm and Jelks (1962). Later reports on
sites in the northern part of South Texas presented
additional descriptive data, which established that
bone-tempered plainware, essentially indistinguishable from Leon Plain, had a broader geographic
distribution than originally suggested. This pottery
has been found in moderate abundance in the Choke
Canyon area in Live Oak and McMullen counties
(Hall et al. 1986; Highley 1986), to the west along
the Rio Grande Plain (Hester 1975), as far south as
the Hinojosa site in Jim Wells County (Black 1986),
and along the coastal prairies inland from the central
Texas coast (Hester and Parker 1970; Ricklis 1990).
In general, the Toyah ceramics share a number of
common attributes: (a) the range of vessel forms
was limited, and included simple bowls, jars, and
constricted-neck ollas; (b) most vessels were undecorated; (c) pots were usually tempered with more
or less abundant amounts of crushed bone; and (d)
vessel surfaces, especially exteriors, tended to be
oxidized to various shades ranging from tan through
pinkish-orange to reddish colors (Figure 16).
Most recently, LeRoy Johnson (1994:187-210)
has presented a descriptive summary of Toyah pottery, based on examination of ceramics from the
Buckhollow site in Kimble County in West Central
Texas. Johnson (1994) identifies the following characteristics which he attributes to the pottery of what
he calls "classic" Toyah culture:

(a) the various bowl, jar, and olla forms were
constructed using thick coils or ropes of clay;
(b) pots were usually tempered with abundant
crushed bone, so that the bone constitutes up to
one-third of the prepared clay body;
(c) still-moist vessel interiors were often scraped
with bundles of small sticks, creating striated
surfaces;

Perttula et al. ~ Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

Figure 16. Selected examples of Toyah horizon bonetempered pots, Central and southern Texas, based on
vessel sections: a, bowl, Buckhollow site, 41KM16
(Johnson 1994); b, Jar with vertical brushing under
horizontal rows of punctations, Mustang Branch site,
41HY209-T (Ricklis and Collins 1995); c-d, Ollas (d has
pair of loop handles), 41LK201 (Highley 1986); e, Olla,
Mellon site, 41RF21 (Ricklis 1990).

(d) vessel exteriors were well-smoothed and frequently burnished or floated; and
(e) most vessel surfaces were oxidized to various
shades of pale pink or red.
Chemical analyses of residues scraped from
the walls of five Toyah vessels at the Rush site
(41TG346) provide significant insights into the use
of the vessels. Stable carbon and nitrogen isotope
data suggest "that a single type of food was not
being prepared in all vessels" (Quigg and Peck
!995:148), but that bison bone grease/fat, mesquite
bean/bison bone grease, and deer/bison bone grease
were processed and cooked in broad ollas, large
jars, and/or bowls.
Other characteristics of Toyah pottery include
the occasional use of loop handles (e.g., Highley
1986; Ricklis 1990), and the presence on some pots
of a thin red wash or slip (the so-called Doss Redware

197

of Kelley [1947]; see also Hester and Hit1 [1971]
and Highley [1986]). Also, it should be pointed out
that not all Toyah pottery is devoid of other decorative elements. Black (1986) notes the occasional use
of asphaltum decoration on sherds from the Hinojosa
site, as did Hester and Parker (1970) for several
bone-tempered sherds from the Berclair site in Goliad
County. Although these sherds do not bear typical
Rockport ceramic decorations, they do suggest that
the practice of asphaltum painting was inspired from
the nearby Rockport pottery tradition of the central
Texas coast. Along the eastern margin of the Toyah
area in Central Texas (see Figure 1), a fair number
of pots had brushed exteriors, sometimes in conjunction with rows of punctations, both attributes
reminiscent in a general way of certain pottery types
further to the east in the Caddo area of eastern Texas
(e.g., Suhm 1955; Ricklis and Collins 1995). Petrographic analyses of selected sherds from Toyah phase
sites at Fort Hood and Hays County--focusing on
types of temper, frequency of non-plastic inclusions, and porosity--has been able to sort out the
ceramics made by Toyah groups from the grogtempered, low porosity ceramics manufactured by
Caddoan groups in Northeast Texas (Reese-Taylor
1995b; Reese-Tay!or et al. 1995). Interestingly, asphaltum decorations and Caddo-like surface treatment are both found, respectively, near the eastern
and southeastern margins of the Toyah area. This
suggests external stylistic influences from adjacent
cultural areas.

Rockport Ware
Although pottery has long been recognized as
part of the later prehistoric material culture
assemblage on the central Texas coast (e.g., Martin
1931; Sayles 1935), formal typological definitions
were not forthcoming until Suhm and Jelks (1962)
defined three types of Rockport ware: Rockport
Plain, Rockport Black-on-Gray, and Rockport
Incised. In general, Rockport vessels were
recognized as: (a) thin-walled pots built by the
coiling technique; (b) simple, rounded-base vessel
forms such as bowls, jars, and constricted-neck olla
or bottle-like shapes; and (c) were made of a sandy
paste clay body. Rockport Plain was defined to
include undecorated vessels of various shapes,
although minor decorative elements in the form of
lip notches or crenelations were included in the
type. Rockport Incised referred to pots with simple
geometric incised designs on the exterior rim section

198

Texas Archeological Society

of vessels. Rockport Black-on-Gray included
vessels with asphaltum surface treatment in the
form of coating and/or painted decorations
(straight or squiggly lines and/or dots).
In an examination of various technical,
formal, and decorative attributes on 464
Rockport ware rimsherds from four central
Texas coast sites, I was able to identify several
key correlations of specific attributes which
justified a revision of the Suhm and Jelks (1962)
ceramic typology. The ceramic samples came
from the Kirchmeyer site (41NU11) near Corpus
Christi, the McGloin Bluff site (41SP11) on the
north shore of Corpus Christi Bay, the Live
Oak Point site (41AS2) on Copano Bay, and the
Guadalupe Bay site (41CL2) on Guadalupe Bay,
an arm of San Antonio Bay (see Figure 1).
Ceramics from all four sites are housed at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin, where the
analyses were conducted.
The revised Rockport ware typology inFigure 17. Five Rockport ware pottery types discussed in text.
cludes a total of five types (Figure 17). These
Vessel shapes are those most characteristic of each type, based
can be briefly summarized in terms of attributes,
on correlations between designs and rimsherd curvatures.
as follows (the reader is referred to Ricklis
[1990: Appendix A] for more detailed discussions and data presentation):
mouth bowl or jar forms, indicating a correlation
Rockport Plain. This type defintion remains
between this decorative element and specific
essentially unchanged from that provided by Suhm
Rockport vessel forms. Vessels occasionally
and Jelks (1962), except that it does not include
contained sparse to moderate amounts of crushed
otherwise plain pots which bear lip crenelation. In
bone temper, and they were fired in both oxidizing
the analyzed rim sherd sample, the great majority
and reducing atmospheres. It is important to note
(89 percent) of the rim sherds were from widethat the type is very similar, if not virtually
mouth vessels (bowls and jars), while only 11 peridenticial, to crenelated-rim vessels from the Brazos
cent represented small-mouth constricted neck or
River delta area of the upper Texas coast (Johnney
olla forms. Vessels of this type were occasionally
Pollan, 1986 personal communication), and thus
tempered with sparse to moderate amounts of
apparently represents an as yet undefined
crushed bone. Pots were fired in variable atmorelationship, or exchange of stylistic ideas, with
spheres, so that some were oxidized to light buff or
that area.
shades of pale orange or red, and others were reRockport Incised. This type is unchanged from
duced to various shades of gray. The exterior and/
the definition by Suhm and Jelks (1962). It can be
or interior surfaces frequently bear striations creadded, however, that all sherds of this type in the
ated by the use of a ribbed bivalve shell to scrape
sample represent wide-mouth bowls or jars. As
the still-wet clay (see Calhoun 1961).
pointed out by Suhm and Jelks (1962), the incised
Rockport Crenelated. These vessels, as already
designs are strongly reminiscent of those on Goose
mentioned, are distinguished by the presence of
Creek Incised of the upper Texas coast, and it can
small, square, or rectangular notches removed from
be confidently assumed that the decorative motifs
the lip, which gives the rim an overall crenelated
derive from that region, and indirectly from the
effect. A separate type designation is warranted
Coles Creek-Plaquemine tradition of the Lower
because: (a) crenelation is in fact a distinctive
Mississippi Valley (see Aten 1983; Ricklis 1994;
decorative technique, and (b) all vessels were wideand discussions above on Southeast Texas ceramics;

Perttula et al. ~ Prehistoric Cera~nics in Texas

see also Corbin 1974 for illustrations of the range
of variations in geometric designs).
Rockport B!ack-on-Gray I. The ceramic analysis revealed distinct clusterings of key attributes in
asphaltum coated/decorated pots, indicating that
Rockport Black-on-Gray can be divided into two
separate types. The diagnostic decorative element
on Rockport Black-on-Gray I is a band of asphaltuna paint along the lip, which was sometimes wide
enough to extend 1-2 cm onto the exterior rim of
the vessel. The lower portion of the vessel exterior
was sometimes coated with asphaltum, but vessel
interiors were nearly always left uncoated. Pots of
this type were generally fired in an oxidizing atmosphere, but one that was often not well-controlled,
since surface colors frequently are variable, ranging from light (oxidized) to gray or dark gray (reduced). Vessels were occasionally tempered with
sparse to moderate amounts of crushed bone. Pots
were most often bowls or jars; 91 percent of the
sherds of this type were from wide-mouth vessels.
Rockport Black-on-Gray H. This type has several diagnostic attributes. Decoration consists of:
(a) an asphaltum lip band, (b) vertical squiggly or
wavy lines extending from the lip band to the basal
portion of the pot, and sometimes (c) a circular
patch of asphaltum on the base of the vessel (see
Figure 17). In contrast to other Rockport types, the
majority of vessels (76 percent of the analyzed
sherds) were constricted neck olla or bottle-like
forms. Virtually all pots of this type bore interior
asphaltum coating. Vessels were consistently fired
in a well-controlled oxidizing atmosphere, so that
colors virtually always fall in the range from very
light buff to pale orange or pale red. Finally, pots
of this type were almost never tempered with
crushed bone (none of the sherds in the analyzed
sample were bone-tempered, and nearly all specimens examined from other Rockport sites are free
of bone temper).
The combination of attributes in Rockport
Black-on-Gray II pots suggests a specialized function for these vessels. Exterior asphaltum painting
would seemingly not be practical on a pot which
was to be used for cooking, since the asphaltum
would melt; similarly, the asphaltum coating on the
interior of virtually all pots of the type would hardly
be desirable in cooking pots. At the same time, the
common form for these pots--nanow-mouth ollas
or bottle-like shapes--would be well suited for
transport and/or storage of water or other liquids.

199

Also, the interior asphaltum coating would serve to
seal vessels used as water containers. Finally, the
consistent tack of bone tempering may be another
signature of non-cooking vessels, since the crushed
bone occasionally found in other Rockport types
may have served to lessen the effects of thermal
shock. The sand inclusions found in Rockport
Black-on-Gray II (and virtually all other Rockport
ware) would perhaps not serve very well, alone, as
a tempering agent in cooking vessels, since sand
has a very different coefficient of expansion and
contraction than does clay (Rice 1987:229).

Ceramics, Cultural Boundaries, and
Sociocultural Relations in the Late
Prehistory of Southern Texas
In addition to their importance as time markers, and as components of Late Prehistoric technology, Toyah and Rockport ceramics serve to
delineate, with some accuracy, the geographic
boundary between fundamentally different adaptive systems and, presumably, populations with divergent sociocultural traditions. Analyses of ceramic
samples from a number of Rockport phase and
Toyah horizon sites on Texas’ central coastal prairie strongly suggest that inland folk ranged within
about 40 km of the mainland shoreline, and that
this was the inland margin of the area used by
coastal people of the Rockport phase. Sites within
about 40 km of the mainland shoreline yield, for
the most part, ceramics which can be classified as
Rockport ware, whereas sites farther inland have
largely produced the bone-tempered plainware attributable to the Toyah horizon.
Since most Rockport phase sites on the coastal
prairie, away from intensively occupied shoreline
fishing camps, are small, with thin deposits and
low artifact densities (see Ricklis, this volume),
large ceramic samples are not available from any
given site. Sizeable samples of rim sherds are not,
therefore, available from these sites with which to
conduct statistically reliable typologica! analyses.
However, it is possible to distinguish samples of
Rockport ware from Toyah pottery on the basis of
key attributes which can be observed on even the
smallest sherds.
As may be seen in Figure 18, in ceramic
samples from shoreline sites, which clearly represent
occupation by coastal groups, approximately 50
percent of the vessels bear asphaltum surface

200

Texas Archeological Society

treatment, as coating and/or painted decoration
(these data and all others, except from the Hinojosa
site, are based on vessel counts, as represented by
sherds which can be sorted into vessel groups based
on attributes of color, hardness, surface treatment,
and aplastic inclusions; the Hinojosa ceramic data
are derived from a select sample of 100 individual
sherds [Black 1986]). Additionally, Figure 19 shows
percentages of sherd groups in samples from
Rockport phase sites with no bone temper, and
sparse, moderate, and profuse bone temper (using
for the sake of comparison, Black’s [1986]
definitions of sparse, moderate, and profuse bone
temper as representing, respectively, <5 percent, 525 percent, and >25 percent of the total volume of
the sherd). The percentage breakdowns of asphaltum
surface-treated pots versus pots without asphaltum,
and pots with varying amounts of bone tempering,
are thus effective "signatures" of coastal Rockport

Figure 18. Percentages of vessels with asphaltum surface
treatment (black) and without asphaltum surface treatment
(hachured), Rockport phase sites on or within 5 km of bay/
lagoon shorelines. Site 41SP120 is on the northeastern
shore of Corpus Christi Bay, and 41NU221 and 41 NU255
are near the head of Nueces Bay.

Figure 19. Percentages of vessels without bone temper
(none), and sparse, moderate, and profuse bone temper
from Rockport phase sites on or near bayshores. Sites
41SP103 and 41SPll are on the northern shoreline of
Corpus Christi Bay.

ware by virtue of the redundant similarities in the
proportional representation of these attributes.
Ceramics from inland Toyah sites on the
coastal plain show marked contrasts in terms of
these basic attributes. The Hinojosa site (41JW8) in
Jim Wells county, west of Corpus Christi, is an
excellent point of departure for Rockport-Toyah
comparisons, since: (a) the site is clearly attributable
to the Toyah horizon, and (b) Black (1986) has
quantified data on the key attributes which can be
readily compared to the Rockport ceramic data. As
shown at the top of Figure 20, in Black’s (1986)
"select" analytical sample of 100 sherds from
Hinojosa, only 11 percent bear asphaltum surface
treatment. The percentage breakdown of sherds
without bone temper versus those with sparse,
moderate, and profuse crushed bone is, respectively,
4 percent, 27 percent, 53 percent, and 16 percent
(Figure 21). If the Hinojosa pottery can be taken to
be more or less representative of coastal plain Toyah
ceramics, then it can be concluded that even limited
pottery samples, consisting perhaps of mostly small
sherds, can be said to have markedly differing
attribute signatures, according to whether they
represent coastal or interior peoples and culturaladaptive patterns.
In fact, the signatures for Rockport ceramics
and for the Hinojosa Toyah pottery have proved to

Perttula et al. -- Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

too

41SP159

201

41SP167

Figure 20. Percentages of ceramic sample with (black) and
without (hachured) asphaltum surface treatment, fourToyah
phase sites. The Hinojosa site is in Jim Wells County (data
based on Black [1986]); 41SP169, 41SP170 (Aransas
River), and 41RF21 (Copano Creek) are approximately 40
km from the mainland shoreline.
41SP170 - NORTH COMPONENT

41RF21 ¯ SOUTH COMPONENT

Figure 22. Percentages of vessels with (black) and without
(hachured) asphaltum surface treatment, four Rockport
phase sites approximately 40 km from the mainland
shoreline. Sites 41 SP159, 41 SP167, and 41SP170 are near
the Aransas River, and 41RF21 is near a branch of Copano
Creek.

Figure 21. Percentages of ceramic samples with no (none)
bone temper, and sparse, moderate, and profuse bone
temper. Hinojosa site graph based on data in Black (1986);
other sites are those indicated in Figure 20.

be discernible at various sites along the inland
margin of the Rockport phase area, at just that
point where one may expect to find a Late
Prehistoric cultural boundary. As shown in
Figures 22 and 23, small Rockport phase sites on
the Aransas River (41SP159, 41SP167, and
41SP170-North component), all about 40 km
from the mainland shoreline, have very similar
proportional representations of the key attributes
of asphaltum surface treatment and presence/
absence/quantity of bone tempering as found at
unambiguous coastal sites in shoreline settings.
By contrast, at sites 41SP169 and 41SP170-South
component (see Figures 20 and 21), the attribute
breakdowns mimic those from Hinojosa.
Similarly, at the Mellon site (41RF21) in Refugio
County, also located approximately 40 km inland
from the mainland shoreline, spatially discrete
Rockport and Toyah components could be
identified on the basis of ceramic samples (see

202

Texas Archeological Society

were occupied during the fall-winter, and that
Rockport phase sites saw spring-summer
occupations. A seasonal, ecological complementarity in boundary zone use is
suggested, with Toyah folk moving in small
groups into the boundary zone to fill the void
created as Rockport people tended to
aggregate at large fall-winter fishing camps
on the coast (see Ricklis 1990, and Ricklis,
this volume).
At the Mellon site, the spatially discrete
Rockport and Toyah components may represent simultaneous use of the site. Abundant
bison and deer bones were found in test units
and excavations across most of this small site,
indicating that it was a locus for more or less
intensive butchering/processing of large game
(Ricklis 1989, 1990). The two components,
Figure 23. Percentages of vessels with no bone temper (none),
and sparse, moderate, and profuse bone temper; sites are the same
which were both at the same level in the site
as represented in Figure 22.
and which both produced radiocarbon dates
with intercepts falling at ca. A.D. 1250-1275,
may
reflect
shared hunting and processing activities
Figures 20 and 21) in which the attribute
by coastal and interior peoples. Had the Rockport
breakdowns matched either those from shoreline
and Toyah occupations been sequential rather than
sites or those presented for Hinojosa (Ricklis 1989,
simultaneous, it would seem likely that the respec1990:387-414).
tive components would have overlapped at the top
These findings suggest, then, that both
of the small knoll on which the site is located. In
Rockport phase and Toyah horizon sites are identifact, the north half of the site produced Toyah potfiable on the coastal prairie in a zone about 40 km
tery, while the south half yielded Rockport ware;
inland. That this in fact represents a major Late
thus, the distribution of the two kinds of pottery was
Prehistoric cultural/ethnic boundary is supported
spatially segregated, and the two components adby ethnohistorical documentation which suggests
joined
at the virtual center of the site.
that the inland margin of coastal Karankawa terriThe fact that fundamental prehistoric behavtory was this same distance from the coast. In the
ioral patterns can be elucidated using ceramic analyearly nineteenth century, Mexican authorities idenses, in conjunction with other lines of information,
tified the inland margin of a proposed Karankawa
has additional interpretive implications. It is un"reserve" at 10 leagues (25 miles, or 40 km) from
likely that the Toyah-Rockport boundary zone could
the shoreline (Smithwick 1900:13). This also fits
be identified using other kinds of material evidence,
with recorded eighteenth century Spanish observasuch as lithics, for example, since there is little
tions to the effect that the Karankawa preferred to
difference between the lithics of the Rockport phase
operate close to the coast, and considered Mission
and the Toyah horizon. Both cultural expressions
Rosario at Goliad (38 kin) from the mainland shoreare characterized by abundant Perdiz arrowpoints,
line) too far inland for practical use (Ricklis
unifacial end scrapers, thin bifacial (sometimes bev1990:576-578, in press).
eled) knives, and a prismatic blade-core industry.
With meaningful cultural distinctions thus
Without the presence of the ceramics, a small
made on the basis of the geographic distributions of
Rockport phase hunting camp would be indistindiagnostic ceramic assemblages, it is possible to
guishable from a small Toyah campsite.
move to higher levels of interpretation regarding
Following the almost universal assumption that
prehistoric behavioral patterns. It is most interesting,
most North American aboriginal pottery was
and probably significant, that at the Aransas River
manufactured by females, and that hunting
sites mentioned above, seasonality analyses of
technology was primarily the domain of males, it is
Rangia cuneata shells suggest that Toyah campsites

Perttula et al. ~ Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

possible that patterns of gender-related expressions
of material culture operated at different scales.
While Rockport ware pottery, as a material
expression of both technology and style, is found
within a remarkably narrow zone along the coast,
the lithic techno-complex, which was apparently
linked with bison hunting/processing, diffused over
a very large area, from the Trans-Pecos (Mallouf
1987), through Central Texas (Prewitt 1981, 1985;
Johnson 1994; Ricklis and Collins 1995), into
southern Texas (Hester 1975; Black 1986; Highley
1986), and onto the central and upper Texas coasts
(Ricklis 1992, 1994). While this may or may not
reflect differences in the spatial scale of female vs.
male inter-group relations, it does warn against
assumptions concerning the utility of lithic data as
an indicator of the geography of prehistoric
sociocultural patterns. Regardless of the broader
implications of the widespread distribution of a lithic
package, the more localized ceramic expressions
suggest that pottery is the more reliable indicator of
social identity, and cautions against assumptions
that lithic horizon styles or techno-complexes
directly represent the distributions of cultural,
ethnic, or linguistic groups.

Prehistoric and Protohistoric Ceramics from
the Lower Plains, Caprock Canyonlands,
and Texas Panhandle
Timothy K. Perttula and
Christopher Lintz
Emerging material culture patterns suggest that
the Texas Panhandle, Caprock Canyonlands, and
Lower Plains regions have been a vascillating border area for at least three diverse ceramic wares or
ceramic traditions. These include: (a) a cord-marked
ware derived from the Plains (to the north, east, and
northwest) which is found mostly in the upper Texas
Panhandle but also in the lower plains of North
Central Texas (e.g., Krieger 1946); (b) a mediumpasted plain brownware primarily found in the lower
panhandle, the Caprock Canyonlands, and the

203

Lower Plains that appears to have been derived
from the Southwest (principally the Jornada
Mogollon area); and (c) a thin, dark sandy to micaceous paste plain ware found throughout these regions in Protohistoric contexts (after ca. A.D. 1450),
and apparently deriving from the north central portions of New Mexico (see general summaries in
Hofman and Brooks 1989; Brooks 1989; Hofman
1989). The recognition of these three general ceramic wares oversimplifies the tremendous range
of variability present in the ceramic assemblages
found on aboriginal sites in these regions. For the
most part, the gross delineation of ceramic types
has been used as a crude temporal and cultural
indicator, and we archeologists have a long way to
go in recognizing and refining the temporal, spatial, and cultural significance of the ceramics used
in these areas.
The earliest prehistoric ceramics manufactured
in the upper Texas Panhandle appeared about ca.
A.D. 400 (e.g., Couzzourt 1985, 1988). They are
closely related to the Plains Woodland ceramics
found in Kansas, Nebraska, Oklahoma, and Colorado (cf. Bozell and Winfrey 1994:Figure 2a-d;
Vehik 1984) in that they are large, thick-walled,
conical or conoidal-shaped vessels,1 and have completely cord-roughened exterior surfaces with little
to no rim or lip decoration. The small assemblage
of sherds from such sites as Lake Creek (Hughes
1962) and Tascosa Creek (Couzzourt 1985, 1988)
are dominated by these thick cord-roughened vessels, tempered with crushed rock (usually quartz
and carbonate, but scoria-tempered [Hughes et al.
1978:102] and basalt-tempered [Quigg et al.
1993:149] wares are also known in parts of the
Texas Panhandle) and bone. Diagonal incising is
the only other apparent decorative element represented in these Texas Panhandle WOodland ceramic
assemblages. Smooth-finished sherds with crushed
plagioclase feldspar temper found associated with
cord-marked Woodland vessels on these early sites
have been tentatively identified as intrusive
Mogollon brownwares, probably Alma Plain
(Hughes 1991:26-27).

~A whole Woodland period pot of unknown provenience in the collections of the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum stands
33 cm high with an orifice diameter of 33 cm. It has a conical base, and the vessel’s maximum diameter is not at the rim, but farther
down on the body; the walls are 8-9 mm thick at the rim. Stick impressions were present on the lip of the pot, and just below the
rim were two parallel incised lines with punctations between the lines (A. J. Taylor, personal communication to Christopher Lintz,
1995).

204

Texas Archeological Society

In the Caprock Canyonlands, the earliest ceramics date from between about A.D. 200 and A.D.
1100, based on radiocarbon dates from the
Deadman’s Shelter (41SW23), Sam Wahl
(41GR291), South Sage Creek (41KT33), and Kent
Creek (41HL66) sites (Willey and Hughes 1978;
Boyd et al. 1992, 1994; Cruse 1992; see also Boyd,
this volume). The ceramics from these Palo Duro
Complex sites appear to uniformly be Mogollon
brownwares--including Jornada Brown, Middle
Pecos Micaceous Brown, and Roswell Brown-and the petrographic analyses by Robinson (1992,
1994) suggest they were manufactured in the
Middle Pecos valley in southeastern New Mexico.
Eastern Jornada Mogollon occupations (the
Querecho phase) dating towards the end of this
period (ca. A.D. 950-1100) on the southwestern
part of the Llano Estacado had locally-made
brownwares as well as a few Puebloan tradewares
(e.g., Corley 1965).
Locally-manufactured Plains Village (ca. A.D.
1100/1200-1450/1500) ceramics in the Texas and
Oklahoma panhandles include the large globularbodied Borger Cordmarked vessels in the Antelope
Creek phase (see Krieger 1946:44; Suhm and Jelks
1962:15; Lintz 1984:333-335; J. Hughes 1991:3233), and the cord-marked and distinctive rim/lip
decorated ceramics from the Buried City complex
along Wolf Creek (Hughes and Hughes-Jones 1987;
D. Hughes 1991). These Late Prehistoric cordmarked ceramics are undoubtedly related to the
earlier Woodland ceramic tradition in the region.
Across most of the Llano Estacado and Caprock Canyonlands, the few ceramics that are found
on Late Prehistoric campsites include Jornada
Mogollon E1 Paso brownwares, Puebloan
polychromes, and Chupadero Black-on-white vessels from the Salinas Pueblo area along the Pecos
River in eastern New Mexico (e.g., Johnson
1978:107, 1993, 1995; Krieger 1946:77-81;
Holliday and Johnson 1990:45). However, along
the southwestern edge of the Llano Estacado, relatively sedentary groups were manufacturing their
own local brownwares and corrugated utility vessels (and then later indented brownwares [Collins
1969]), and were trading for painted Puebloan wares
in the Mimbres, Salinas, northern Rio Grande, and
Three Rivers areas of New Mexico (see summary
in Baugh 1994).
Suhm and Jelks (1962:15) provide the most
thorough description of Borger Cordmarked. This

is an elongated to globular jar (made by coiling
clay ropes) with short vertical to flaring rims (Figure 24), 20-30 cm in height with orifice diameters
ranging between 14-22 cm. Crushed rock (usually
quartz) and sand were used as temper, along with
mica, bone, or other inclusions. The jars have convex bases, and generally thin walls, perhaps thinner
near the base than the rim. The rim and body of the
vessels are covered with fine vertically-placed cord
impressions on the upper body which overlap considerably near the base (sometimes the cord impressions are smoothed over) from paddles used in
shaping and weld{rig the vessels, and rarely with
incisions, punctations, and notches on the rim and
lip; red, gray, and black washes or slips have also
been documented in a few Antelope Creek phase
ceramic assemblages.
In a sample of 272 rims from five Antelope
Creek phase sites (McGrath, Black Dog Village,
Two Sisters, Stamper, and Roy Smith), Lintz
(1978:Figure 6) noted that: 65 percent were only
plain or had cordmarking, 7 percent had diagonal
punctations on the lip, 6.3 percent had pinched liprim junctures, and 6.6 percent had a single row of
fingernail gouges around the rim; the other 7
percent of the rims were represented by dotpunctated lips and rims, diagonal incised lines, lip
tabs, or had distinctive collared and cambered rims.
Brushed bodies, fingernail punctates on the vessel
shoulder, and parallel trailed lines on the body, are
other rare decorative elements in the Antelope
Creek ceramic medium. There is a relatively high
percentages of decorated rims (particularly pinched
rims, as well as the diagonal incising) in the
ceramic samples from the Roy Smith, Stamper, and
Two Sisters sites in the Oklahoma Panhandle. This
suggests interaction between these Antelope Creek
phase groups and the Buried City Complex, on
Wolf Creek in the northeastern part of the Texas
Panhandle, because rim decorated vessels with
similar decorative elements are much more
common in the Buried City Complex (cf. Hughes
1991; see below for discussion of Buried City
Complex ceramics).
The general shape and form of the Borger
Cordmarked vessels, and the soot-blackened and
smudged exterior and interior surfaces, certainly
indicate that these were cooking jars. Exactly what
was being cooked in the jars is uncertain, as
organic residues on the vessels have not been
studied, but stable carbon isotope analysis of

Perttula et al. ~ Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

205

present as trade wares in small amounts. Lintz
and Reese-Taylor’s (1995) petrographic analysis of collared and non-collared rims in Antelope Creek phase, Buried City, and Upper
Republican assemblages suggests that many of
the collared rim vessels were made in the Panhandle, probably by the Buried City Complex
groups, and do not represent tradewares from
Central Plains Tradition groups. Miniature vessels (5-6 cm in height), unfired and not coiled,
have been recovered from Spring Canyon
(Duffield 1964), site 41MO7 (Green 1986:41),
Saddleback (Holden 1934:39), Chicken Creek
(Schmidt-Couzzourt 1983), and Coetas Ruin 55
(Studer 1934).
In the Buried City Complex, the locallymanufactured ceramics are the large globular or
subconoidal jars, but unlike in the Antelope
Creek phase, these vessels often have high and
slightly flaring rims (D. Hughes 1991:Figures
25 and 26; Hughes and Hughes-Jones 1987:Figures 16 and 17; whole globular and subconoidal
vessels with high and flaring rims found in a
feed lot in Darrouzett, Texas appear to be related to the Buried City Complex [Jackson et al.
1982:108-109]). Again, a mixture of temper inclusions were used, including bone, caliche,
sand, grog, shell, and scoria, with a fine quartz
sand being most frequently employed as an
Figure 24. Borger Cordmarked Vessels from the Antelope
aplastic.
Creek phase (from Suhm and Jelks 1962:Plate 8).
Vessels were usually finished with a cordmarked paddle, with about 20 percent of the
Antelope Creek phase human remains (Habichtsherds from vessels with smoothed over cord imMauche et al. 1994) suggests that maize, amaranth,
pressions. The rims and lips of the Buried City
and bison grease were cooked, heated, and/or
ceramics were commonly decorated (i.e., not inboiled in these pots. In a few instances, whole or
cluding rims with cord-marking, about 57 percent
large fragmentary Borger Cordmarked vessels were
of the rims from Courson B [41OC27] were decoplaced in burial pits as grave goods (e.g.,
rated in a variety of ways [Hughes and HughesCouzzourt and Schmidt-Couzzourt 1988; Lintz
Jones 1987]). This includes notched rims and
1986; Green 1986).
notched lip tabs~ nodes, fabric and corncob-imOther kinds of ceramics on Antelope Creek
pressed, brush-poked, pinched, incised or trailed,
phase sites include a wide variety of Southwestern
shell-impressed, applique fillets, and rows of
ceramic vessel sherds and Pecos-style and Taos
punctated indentations; a few vessels had thin slips
Incised pipes, particularly Northern Puebloan types
or washes. The pinched decorations--one to two
(Table 3) on late subphase (A.D. 1350-1500) comrows of punctations and pinching along the neck
ponents (Lintz 1991:93); locally made ceramic items
and rim--appear to be the most common decorainclude perforated and fired clay beads (Hughes et
tive element, and Hughes and Hughes-Jones
al. 1978:Figure 121-m), short tubular pipes, and
(1987:Figure 17) call these ceramics Courson
perforated cord-marked pottery disks. Lintz (1984)
Pinched. Hughes and Hughes-Jones (1987) also bealso notes that ceramics from the Central and Southlieve that the rim treatment and decorative style of
ern Plains, as well as from the Caddoan area, are
these pinched vessels resemble the Geneseo pottery

206

Texas Archeological Society

Table 3. Southwestern Ceramics on Antelope Creek phase sites, on sites in the Lower Plains
and Caprock Canyonlands, and on the Southern High Plains

Ceramic Type

Antelope Creek~

Rolling Plains/
Caprock Canyonlands2

S, High Plains/
Llano Estacado3

Northern Puebloan Area
Santa Fe Black-on-white
Wiyo Black-on-white
Galisteo Black-on-white
Rowe Black-on-white
Abiquiu Black-on-gray
Agua Fria Glaze-on-red
Cieneguilta Glaze Yellow
San Clemente Glaze Polychrome
Largo Glaze Polychrome
Largo Glaze Yellow
Kuaua Glaze Polychrome
San Lazaro Glaze Polychrome
Rio Grande Glaze Polychrome I-VI
Tewa Polychrome
Pecos-style pipes

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

x (:)
X

X
X
X

X
X

Western Puebloan Area
Kowina Black-on-white
Jeddito Yellowware
St. Johns Polychrome
Heshotauthla Polychrome
Little Colorado Glaze I
Gila Polychrome

X
X
X
X
X

X

X

Southern Puebloan or Jornada Mogollon Area
Chupadero Black-on-white
Lincoln Black-on-red
E1 Paso Polychrome
E! Paso Brownware
Jomada Brownware
Three Rivers Red-on-terracotta
Ochoa Indented Brown
Mimbres Black-on-white
South Pecos Brown
Roswell Brown
McKenzie Brown
Middle Pecos Micaceous Brown

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

x
x
x
x

Northern Chihuahuan Area
Ramos Polychrome
Playas Red
Lintz 1991; Wedel 1982; Crabb 1968
2 Boyd, this volume; Boyd et al. 1989, 1993, 1994; Baugh 1992
3 Boyd et al. 1989; Johnson 1993, 1995; Quigg et al. 1993

X
X

Perttula et al. ~ Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

of western Kansas (see Wedel 1959:575-576); in
that the Geneseo Plain and Simple Stamped pottery is decorated with applied fillets as well as
single and double rows of pinches and gouges,
there are stylistic resemblances. However, the
Geneseo ceramics from Kansas are smooth-surfaced (not cord-impressed), often have flat bases,
and have loop handles (Scott 1994:71), ceramic
attributes that are not characteristic of the Buried
City Complex ceramic assemblages.
In contrast to the Plains Village cord-marked,
globular jar ceramic traditions in the Canadian
River basin of the Texas and Oklahoma panhandles, Puebloan ceramics are widely distributed
on the Llano Estacado at this time (as are the New
Mexican glazewares from the Galisteo Basin, although they appear to be concentrated in the Plains
Village sites on the Canadian River [Spielmann
1983:Figure 6]), and local ceramic traditions appear to be absent except for those of the eastern
extension of the Jornada Mogollon. Krieger
(1946:77-81) had noted some 50 years ago that
nearly all the ceramics found in dune areas, lake
beds, and by springs on the Llano were manufactured by Jornada Mogollon and other Puebloan
groups. Most recently, Johnson (1995) states that
the most frequent Puebloan ceramics on the southern High Plains found in contexts dating between
ca. A.D. 950-1450 include Chupadero Black-onwhite, Three Rivers Red-on-terracotta, Jornada
Brown, and E1 Paso Brownware (see Table 3).
Ochoa Indented brownware, made by eastern
Jornada Mogollon groups after ca. A.D. 1350, is
also broadly distributed on the Llano Estacado,
from the White River south to the Midland area
(Johnson 1993:Figure 12.4).
These eastern Jornada Mogollon groups on the
southwestern part of the Llano Estacado continued
to manufacture plain brownwares, corrugated jars,
and after A.D. 1350 the Ochoa Indented

207

brownware. Northern Rio Grande tradewares
became common after ca. A.D. 1300, and included
polychromes, black-on-whites, black-on-reds, and
yellow-glazed wares from the Salado, Upper Rio
Grande, Salinas, and Three Rivers areas of New
Mexico and Arizona, as well as Ramos Polychrome
from northern Chihuahua (Casas Grandes) (Collins
1971). The Salt Cedar site in Andrews County,
Texas, one of the more important eastern Jornada
Mogollon sites on the Llano Estacado, had
Puebloan tradewares such as Agua Fria Glaze-onred, Chupadero Black-on-white, E1 Paso
polychrome, and San Clemente Glaze A
polychrome (Collins 1968).
The character of aboriginal ceramics found on
campsites and villages across the Texas Panhandle
and Llano Estacado, as well as in the. Caprock
Canyonlands and the Lower Plains, changed
greatly after ca. A.D. 1450. The ceramic wares are,
with few exceptions, dominated by Northern Rio
Grande glazewares (glazes III-VI or C-F) and thin,
dark plain utility wares of one sort or another,2
most closely resembling Southwestern-style culinary pottery, particularly those made in the Pecos
and Galisteo pueblos (see Habicht-Mauche 1987,
1988, 1991; Boyd and Reese-Taylor 1993; Baugh
1986, 1992; Baugh and Eddy 1987; Spielmann
1983). Red River Late Caddoan style ceramics are
also present in small amounts, particularly in the
Edwards phase sites in western Oklahoma? These
changes in the composition of ceramic assemblages
appear to be related to the development of new and
more intensive forms of economic interaction and
exchange between the Pueblo farmers of the Rio
Grande, the bison hunters of the southern High
Plains, and horticultural villages communities on
the Red, Washita, and Canadian rivers in western
Oklahoma.
Spielmann (1983:268) concluded that the local manufacture of ceramics on the southern High

2Some Texas archeologists have referred to this kind of plain micaceous ceramics as "Apache pottery" (Hughes 1991;
Holliday and Johnson 1990; Johnson 1987), which is an inappropriate ethnic and cultural appellation, if not downright inaccurate,
given: (a) the difficulty in visually sorting it from utility wares produced at Pecos and Galisteo pueblos, and (b) the divergent
findings from the petrographic and compositional studies conducted on these utility wares by Boyd and Reese-Taylor (1993),
Peck (1993 ), and Habicht-Mauche (1987, 1988, 1991). The 1985 Southern Athapaskan Ceramics Conference had codified this
as an Apachean ware, Llano Estacado Gray Ware (Baugh and Eddy 1987).
3Twenty-five sand and shell-tempered sherds (90 percent sand and 10 percent shell inclusions) from the Floydada Country
Club site were identified as Caddoan because of the shell tempering and a similarity to Caddoan utility wares (Word 1991:77),
but this is unlikely because Caddoan shell-tempered vessels along the Red River do not contain sand tempering.

208

Texas Archeological Society

Plains ceased after ca. A.D. 1450,4 as the Llano
Estacado bison hunters obtained the Rio Grande
wares as their main source of ceramics in exchange
for bison meat, hides, and related products.
Through time (by ca. A.D. 1600) as the exchange
system evolved, the Pecos and Picuris glazewares
had replaced the glazewares produced for the market from the Galisteo and Tonque pueblos. In plotting the distribution of post-A.D. 1450 Rio Grande
ceramic glaze wares, Spielmann (1983:Figure 6)
also noted that they appeared to be concentrated on
sites along the major waterways that originate in,
and flow east out of, New Mexico, specifically
along the White River and the Prairie Dog Town
Fork, as well as Tierra Blanca Creek (a tributary
of the Prairie Dog Town Fork) and the North Fork
of the Red River. In major protohistoric Garza and
Tierra Blanca Complex components such as
Bridwell (41CB27), Montgomery (41FL17), Pete
Creek (41CB1), and Blackburn (41RD20), Rio
Grande glazewares may amount for as much as 75
percent of the ceramic assemblages (e.g., Baugh
1986:Table 4; Spielmann 1983); they may be lacking entirely from Tierra Blanca and Garza camps
where micaceous utility wares are better represented along with smaller amounts of sandy-paste
Edwards Plain and grog-tempered Little Deer Plain
(see Baugh [ 1986:170-172] for definitions of these
Southern Plains utility wares).
At the time of Spielmann’s (1983)
consideration of Puebloan-Southern Plains
exchange systems, the thin, plain micaceous utility
wares on Southern High Plains sites were
considered to have also been manufactured by
Puebloan groups, probably at Pecos Pueblo given
their resemblances to Blind Indented Corrugated
and Faint-Striated jars at Pecos Pueb!o (Kidder and
Shepard 1936). However, petrographic analyses of
utility ware sherds--and variability in tempers,
paste, textures and finish, vessel size, and color-from Garza, Tierra Blanca, and Wheeler phase sites

by Habicht-Mauche (1987, 1988, 1991) suggested
that these culinary ceramics were more likely to
represent ceramics locally produced by High Plains
bison hunters, but out of a shared Southwestern
ceramic tradition (Habicht-Mauche 1987:184);
nevertheless, a small percent of the utility wares
were thought to have been actually obtained in
trade from Rio Grande pueblos (Habicht-Mauche
1991:67).
Given these findings, the Southern Plains striated utility ceramics were assigned to a new type,
Tierra Blanca Plain (Habicht-Mauche 1987:178180, 1988:217-272), named after the protohistoric
component at the Tierra Blanca site in Deaf Smith
County, Texas. It is a thin (averaging 3-5 mm),
coil-constructed ware of "small-to-medium globular to slightly elongated jars with everted rims and
gently curving shoulders" (Habicht-Mauche
1987:180; Figure 25). The exterior surfaces, brownish gray to black in color, were smoothed to faintly
striated, probably by scraping with a corn cob, and
only rarely decorated with two to three parallel
rows of fingernail punctations (see Figure 25d).
The paste is slightly sandy, with silica-rich crushed
rocks added as temper, and variable amounts of
mica particles are also present as a paste constituent, but it is not considered by Habicht-Mauche
(1987:178) as a "micaceous" ware.
The study of 17th century ceramic assemblages
from the Headstream (41KT51) and Longhorn
(41KT53) sites in the Double Mountain Fork of the
Brazos River basin provide a different perspective
on the character and place of aboriginal ceramics
among bison-hunting groups living in the Caprock
Canyonlands (Boyd et at. 1993). Puebloan redwares,
glazewares, and matte paint wares accounted for 58
percent of the estimated 31 vessels at the two sites,
probably originating mainly from Pecos Pueblo,
but also from the Santa Clara (Tewa) and Salinas
pueblos of the northern Rio Grande (Boyd and
Reese-Taylor 1993; Peck 1993); Pecos-style tubu-

4Garza components at Lubbock Lake and Lott do provide clear evidence that locally-manufactured ceramics are part of the
material culture assemblage of these Southern Plains bison hunters. At Lubbock Lake, the local ware is a thick, grit-tempered
ceramic with brushing and corncob impressions (Johnson et al. 1977:Figure 4e; Johnson 1978:Figure 27x, 1987:115); Johnson
(1987:115) indicates this ware has been found in protohistoric contexts in sites on the southern half of the Llano Estacado. The
local ware at the Lott site is a bone-tempered ceramic manufactured from Triassic clays, and decorated with incised diagonals,
parallel lines, and rows of punctations; vessel forms are bowls,jars, and carinated bowls (Runkles and Dorchester 1987). A sherd
of thick grit temper, with brushing and corncob impressions, was also present in the Lott site ceramic assemblage (Group I in
Runkles and Dorchester [1987]).

Perttula et al. ~ Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

Figure 25. Protohistoric Tierra Blanca Plain vessel forms,
decorations, and rim profiles on the Southern Plains (after
Habicht-Mauche 1991).

lar pipes (Boyd et al. 1993:Figure 82) were also
found at both sites.
Plain utility and micaceous utility vessels
represent a minimum of 13 vessels at Headstream
and Longhorn. Technologically and stylistically
these wares cannot be distinguished from either
Tierra Blanca Plain or the Pecos or Picuris Pueblo
Faint Striated utility wares. However, based on the
petrographic analysis of sherds from these
Justiceburg Reservoir sites as well as the examination of petrographic data and ceramic thin
sections from Pecos Pueblo and Tierra Blanca Plain,
and X-Ray flourescence of paste composition, Boyd
and Reese-Taylor (1993:374-375) conclude that:
(1) the plain utility wares are from the same sources
as the glazewares, most probably Pecos Pueblo, as
they have the same variability in pastes and that (2)
these culinary wares "probably represent
Puebloan...rather than Plains-made wares." Thus,
they question the utility of Tierra Blanca Plain if it
refers to Southern Plains-made striated culinary
wares or to a "widespread indigenous Plains ceramic
tradition" (Boyd and Reese-Taylor 1993:375), and
point out the need for further study of the

209

compositional variability of Puebloan plain and
striated utility wares
Although no Northern Rio Grande glazewares
were recovered in the investigations at Palo Duro
Reservoir in Hansford County, Texas, another interesting protohistoric (with three radiocarbon dates
averaging A.D. 1550 and a TL date of A.D. 1655 +
155) ceramic assemblage was recovered from
41HF8, Block C, along Palo Duro Creek in the
northernmost part of the Texas Panhandle (Quigg
et al. 1993). Reconstrnctable sections of three quartz
sand-tempered vessels were found in Block C
(Qu!gg et al. 1993:Figure 5.61), including: a small
(14 cm orifice diameter) bean pot with smooth,
non-striated exterior surfaces; a second smoothedsurface vessel with a vertical to outflating rim and
constricted neck (12-13 cm orifice diameter); and a
small, molded globular "cup" with flared lip and
slightly restricted orifice.
Petrographic analyses indicate that these utility vessels were made in the Panhandle, using clays
from outwash alluvial sediments with a fine quartz
sand added as temper (Reese-Taylor 1993). It is
notable that mica is lacking in the paste, whereas
the Tierra Blanca Plain ceramics in contemporaneous Tierra Blanca, Garza, and Wheeler phase usually have small to moderate amounts of finely
crushed mica in their pastes (Habicht-Mauche
1991:59).

Concluding Comments on Panhandle,
Caprock Canyonlands, and
Lower Plains Ceramics
Our understanding of prehistoric and protohistoric ceramic variability in the Lower Plains,
Caprock Canyonlands, and Texas Panhandle regions has been hindered by the completion of few
large archeological projects within the past 50 years.
These types of projects can provide an opportunity
to examine a suite of temporally and culturally distinct ceramic sites. However, there has been an
uneven archeological emphasis on excavating
mostly prominent Late Prehistoric village sites with
abundant artifacts, including pottery, the recovery
of mostly small and often culturally mixed ceramic
assemblages from other time periods, and until recently, a tendency to utilize a lumpers (as opposed
to a splitters) approach in studying ceramics with
the primary goal of delineating gross temporal
trends. Few attempts have been made to rigorously

210

Texas Archeological Society

and the other ends, as well as any cultural connotations inherent in such divisions, remains mostly a
matter of conjecture at this time. Simply for ease of
presentation, we consider the Jornada Mogo!lon
portion of West Texas as including the areas where
ceramic production occurred, or else where ceramics are commonly found in abundance. This generally encompasses the basin and range physiographic
zone west of a line drawn along the Guadalupe and
Delaware Mountains, then roughly following the
Cermnics of the Jornada Mogollon and
southern boundary of Culberson County to the Rio
Trans-Pecos Regions of West Texas
Grande, and extending southeast along the Rio
Grande valley to a point near the town of Redford,
Miles Miller
several km east of Presidio (Figure 26).
The Hueco Bolson (along with the adjacent
In contrast to the ceramic traditions of Central,
Tularosa
and Mesilla Bolsons of South Central New
southern, and eastern Texas described elsewhere in
Mexico)
in
the vicinity of E1 Paso can be considered
this paper which are stylistically related to ceramthe geographic "heartland" of E1 Paso Brownware
ics produced by Lower Mississippi Valley cultures,
production. Between the fifth and fifteenth centuwe now turn towards the American Southwest and
ries A.D., this region witnessed the development of
North Central Mexico (northern Chihuahua and
a distinctive, indigineous ceramic tradition known
Casas Grandes) for the ultimate derivation and inas E1 Paso Brownware. In addition to this locally
spiration of ceramic design and vessel form in the
produced
tradition, evidence of widespread interacregion of West Texas. For convenience, West Texas
tion
with
the
greater Southwest is demonstrated by
may be subdivided into the Jornada Mogollon and
the
variety
of
ceramic types commonly found at
Trans-Pecos regions, although where one begins
West Texas archeological sites which
derive from the Mogollon, Anasazi, and
Casas Grandes regions of western and
northern New Mexico, East Central Arizona, and northern Chihuahua.
While the Hueco Bolson may be
considered the heartland of Jornada
Mogollon ceramic production, E1 Paso
New Mexic~
Brownware
and other important
c=~ .Texas
Mogollon types such as Mimbres
Black-on-white and Chupadero Blackon-white occur throughout West Texas
and the Trans-Pecos (see Hedrick
1995). Mogollon ceramics have been
reported from several small sites along
the Diablo Plateau (Ackerly et al.
1987); the Fort Hancock and Sierra
Blanca areas (Betancourt 1981;
Edwards and Peter 1992; Glander et
al. 1973; Hubbard 1991; Martin 1990;
Miller 1992a; Miller et al. 1988a,
1988b; McConnel and Crim 1941;
O’Laughlin and Martin 1992; Skinner
et al. 1973, 1974; Walker and Trexler
1941); the Guadalupe Mountains
Figure 26. Jornada Mogollon and Trans-Pecos regions of West Texas
(Bradford 1980; Ekland 1977; Phelps
and southern Mexico.

describe ceramic assemblages, using technological,
petrographic, and chemical compositional analyses, to delineate the rich temporal and spatial variability of the regional prehistoric ceramic medium,
and until such studies are completed, many important research problems focusing on prehistoric and
protohistoric Southern High Plains lifeways will
not be resolved.

Perttula et al. ~ Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas
1974; P. Katz 1978; S. Katz 1985; Katz and Katz
1975, 1979; Kenmotsu 1992; Roney 1983; Shafer
!970); the Salt Flat Basin (Banks 1977; Cliff and
Fifield 1980; Foster and Kelley 1989; Katz and
Lukowski 1981; Miller 1994; Rohrt and Skinner
1974); the Delaware Mountains (Miller 1994); and
the Diablo Mountains (Cherry and Torrence 1973).
E1 Paso Brownware is also commonly found
along the Rio Grande Valley for several hundred
miles (Betancourt 1981; Johnson 1977; Kelley
1948). This includes the La Junta district at the
confluence of the Rio Grande and Conchos rivers
in the vicinity of Presidio (Beckes 1975; Kelley
1939, 1949, 1953, 1985; Kelley et al. 1940; Mallouf
1985; Shackleford 1951, 1955).
Production of E1 Paso Brownware ceramics
probably took place in several of these areas, particularly at settlements presumably affiliated with agricultural economies in the Salt Flat Basin and the Rio
Grande corridor. Several settlements in these areas
have typical Jornada Mogollon ceramic assemblages,
with the addition of arrow point technologies more
closely resembling those of the Trans-Pecos region
(Ackerly et al. 1987; Miller 1994). Verification of
production zones outside the Hueco Bolson will
require chemical compositional analysis such as that
undertaken by Ekland (1977), and offers an intriguing study for the future. Also interesting is the relatively common occurrence of both Viejo and Medio
period Chihuahuan ceramics in the southern part of
the region (Skinner et al. 1973, 1974; Martin 1990;
Miller 1992a; Hamilton n.d.).
The frequency of Jornada Mogollon ceramics
declines markedly as one progresses east of the line
dividing the Jornada Mogollon and Trans-Pecos
regions. Sporadic occurrences of E1 Paso
Brownware sherds have been noted in the Eagle
Mountains south of Van Horn (Creel 1991; Howard
1994; Jackson 1932, 1937; Miller 1992b), at
Granado Cave and Caldwell Ranch in the Rustler
Hills north of Van Horn (Hamilton n.d.; Tanner
1949), a small number of rockshelters throughout
the Big Bend region (Hilton 1986; Mallouf 1985),
and even north into the Texas Panhandle (Boyd
1993; Johnson 1993, 1995; see also Boyd, this volume). It can be reasonably assumed that these occurrences resulted from interregional exchange
networks rather than local production.
In the Jornada Mogollon region, E1 Paso
Brownware ceramics are found at large pithouse
and pueblo residential sites situated along the well-

211

watered alluvial flanks of mountain chains, playa
basins, and river valleys, as well as at virtually
thousands of srnalt, short-term settlements distributed throughout interior desert basins. Collections
of 30,000 or more sherds have been recovered from
sites such as Hueco Tanks Village (41EP2A), Hot
Well Pueblo (FB6363), and Firecracker Pueblo
(41EP25). While the larger samples occur on residential sites, small collections of sherds are commonly found distributed across interior basins.
Technologically, the E1 Paso ceramic tradition
is characterized by a distinctive coarse-grained temper of crushed igneous rock, usually granite or syenite, with feldspar, quartz, and sometimes biotite
mica being the primary non-plastic inclusions.
Sherds often have a dark carbon streak, and surface
colors range from dark red to light brown or tan,
depending upon clay sources and firing conditions.
Surface finishes are usually smoothed, wiped, or
sometimes self-floated, and are uneven with numerous temper pits and drag marks clearly visible.
From the earliest typological descriptions
(Lehmer 1948; Mera 1938, 1943; Runyan and
Hedrick 1973; Stallings 1931), E1 Paso Brownware
has been traditionally classified into three types
based on stylistic and chronological criteria: an undecorated type known as E1 Paso Brown or Plain
Brown, and two painted types designated E1 Paso
Bichrome and E1 Paso Polychrome. It should be
noted that the terms E1 Paso Bichrome and E1 Paso
Polychrome are somewhat misleading. E1 Paso
Bichrome is actually a monochrome, with a red (or
rarely a black) pigment applied to the otherwise
undecorated and unslipped, plain, brown vessel surface. Likewise, E1 Paso Polychrome should be considered a bichrome, with both red and black paint
applied to the vessel surface. However, the original
descriptive terms are here retained due to their primacy in the archeological literature.
Despite over four decades of archeological
work, developmental ceramic chronologies for West
Texas are still poorly known. The general ceramic/
architectural phase sequence outlined in Lehmer’s
(1948) seminal study of the Jornada Branch of the
Mogollon continues to be a standard reference,
despite its publication date of over 40 years ago.
Several modifications and refinements to the
sequence have been proposed over the past 20 years,
mostly through the pioneering work of Michael
Whalen (1977, 1978, 1980, 1981, 1985)in the
Hueco Bolson, and David Carmichael (1983, 1986)

212

Texas Archeological Society

Table 4. Radiocarbon-based chronological periods for
in the adjacent Tulorosa Basin of New
El Paso Brownware and Historic Brownware
Mexico. Despite these efforts, our
production in West Texas
understanding of chronological
changes in vessel form and design style
A.D. 200/600-1000/1100
E1 Paso Brown
remain at a basic level, mostly
revolving around the shift from E1 Paso
A.D. 800/1000-1100/!250
E1 Paso Bichrome
Brown to E1 Paso Polychrome and their
respective early and late variants--all
E1 Paso Polychrome
of which have yet to be placed within
Early/Transitional variants
A.D. 1000/1100-1250
a sound chronological framework.
Several factors account for the
A.D. 1250-1450
Classic Variants
lack of chronological control. First,
A.D. 1450-1680
Protohistoric Brownware
West Texas and southern New Mexico
lack the well-developed tree-ring chroYsleta/Socorro Brownware
A.D. 1680-1880
nologies and collections of whole vessels available from other regions of
the Southwest. Stratified archeologifine chronological periods of less than 100-150 years.
cal deposits and sequences common to other areas
The beginning dates for the appearance of ceof Texas are also rare. Therefore, ceramic dating in
ramics,
or the inception of ceramic production, in
West Texas has mostly relied on cross-dating with
West
Texas
have yet to be resolved. Lehmer
extra-regional sequences. Only recently have ce(1948:87-89) first established a date of A.D. 900
ramic types been directly correlated with series of
for the appearance of E1 Paso Brown and, by extenchronometric dates from within the region itself.
sion, the begining of the Mesilla phase in the
Another problem has to do with the confusion surJornada Mogollon. The subsequent 45+ years of
rounding the dating of ceramic types and how these
research have seen this beginning date continually
relate to the singular and irreconcilable issues of
pushed back, with published dates for the first apheuristic phase sequences and evolutionary changes
pearance of E1 Paso Brown now ranging from A.D.
in regional adaptive systems (Miller 1993). This
200 to A.D. 600 (Carmichael 1986; Hard 1983;
observation then leads to an intuitively attractive
Kauffman and Batcho 1988; Whalen 1980). The
proposition that it may simply be much more proearliest dates have been obtained for sherd collecductive to abandon attempts to develop precise cetions associated with small hearth/artifact scatters
ramic chronologies in terms of gross stylistic and
in active sand dune environments. Noting the many
morphological criteria, but rather focus on specific
contextual ambiguities for artifacts in dynamic
changes in production technology through time
aeolian environments, some have justifiably ques(Whalen 1994a).
tioned
the association between the radiocarbon dated
Aside from these chronological and contextual
hearths
and the brownware sherds scattered nearby
problems which have hindered ceramic studies (and
(e.g.,
O’Laughlin
et al. 1988). In any case, solid
most other research) in West Texas, some advances
evidence exists for the widespread production of E1
have been made in the past few years. The dating of
Paso Brownware by at least A.D. 600, less securely
E1 Paso Brown and early/transitional E1 Paso Polyby A.D. 400, or even A.D. 200. Regardless of which
chrome has been examined in the context of several
date proves accurate, ceramics appear late in West
site-specific radiocarbon studies (Whalen 1993,
Texas
relative to other areas of the Southwest.
t994b; Miller 1990), and a regional analysis of
For
the first several hundred years, Jornada
ceramic sequences and associated radiocarbon-dated
Mogollon
region ceramic production is dominated
contexts has been undertaken at Fort Bliss, Texas
by E1 Paso Brown. Vessel forms include predomi(Miller et al. 1994). Table 4 presents a tentative
nantly neckless jars or tecomates, and hemispherisynthesis of these studies. Note that a certain degree
cal bowls (Figure 27), along with occasional ladles,
of imprecision is evident for each type. This is a
cups, and necked forms (O’Laughlin 1985; Whalen
result of including some problematic dated contexts
1977, 1978). Early and Late E1 Paso Brown are
in the synthesis, as well as the inherent limitations
differentiated
on the basis of subtle variations in
of using series of radiocarbon age estimates to de-

Perttula et aL ~ Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas
rim form. Early E1 Paso Brown has contracting rim
walls and pointed (or "pinched") lips, while the
later variety dating to ca. A. D. 1000 or 1050 tends
towards more uniform rim walls with flat or rounded
lips. Recent studies have demonstrated how variations in these rim forms reflect increases in orifice
diameter and vessel size, and therefore demonstrate
a shift to the production and use of slightly larger,
wider-mouthed vessels at ca. A.D. 1000.
Aside from minor changes in rim form and
orifice diameter, many researchers have noted the
otherwise almost complete lack of variation for most
of the 500-700 year span of plain brownware production (Whalen 1993, 1994a, 1994b; Miller n.d.).
It is easy to bemoan this lack of variation, particularly since it has been extremely difficult to identify
chronological trends in brownware production, not
to mention the inability to construct a ceramic
seriation which could aid in site dating. Reed (1991),

Figure 27. E1 Paso Brown vessel forms and rim profiles: ab, neckless jar or tecomate; c, necked jar; d, bowl.

213

on the other hand, proposed that this should be
viewed more as a function of a highly stable, successful adaptation to the semi-arid basin and range
environments of West Texas, a position which, rather
than viewing ceramics as simply a chronological
device, integrates them into an overall conception
lining ceramic technology and settlement adaptations. The lack of functional changes in rim and
vessel form indicates that the role of ceramics in
hunting and gathering adaptations may not have
changed appreciably for most of the Mesilla phase,
although this interpretation merits further research
through more controlled technological analyses of
E1 Paso Brownware temper, paste, strength, and
thermal resistivity characteristics.
The period from A.D. 1000 to A.D. 1250 witnessed several developments in local ceramic production, as well as changes in the inventories of
non-local ceramic types. Beginning sometime in
the eleventh or early twelfth century, painted varieties of E1 Paso Brownware first appear. As seen in
Table 4, there is no clear chronological division
between the production dates for undecorated E1
Paso Brown and the two painted types: E1 Paso
Bichrome and early variants of E1 Paso Polychrome.
Instead, current evidence suggests that all three
types were either produced contemporaneously, or
represent a rapid development and sequential replacement of types within a relatively brief period
of 100-150 years. At present, evidence for either
position is equivocal. However, a notable aspect of
this period is that the three traditional types as defined on the basis of decorative attributes all have
nearly identical vessel forms. E1 Paso Bichrome
and early/transitional E1 Paso Polychrome vessel
forms continue the pattern of predominantly
neckless jars and hemispherical bowls seen in E1
Paso Brown vessel assemblages, indicating that between A.D. 1000 and A.D. 1250 a relatively rapid
change in decorative styles occurred with little concomitant change in vesse! form and function.
E1 Paso Bichrome continues to pose problems
for chrono!ogical placement, mostly due to the fact
that very few chronometrically dated pure
bichrome assemblages have been excavated or
reported. Most E1 Paso Bichrome assemblages
have been found in association with late E1 Paso
Brown, Mimbres Black-on-white, and often the
early/transitional variants of E1 Paso Polychrome,
from components dating between ca. A.D. 10001250. A few incidences have been reported of

214

Texas Archeological Society

crudely painted bichrome sherds recovered from
sites or contexts dating as early as A.D. 600-800,
but neither the dating nor the painting have been
conclusively verified.
The few suitable E1 Paso Bichrome collections
that have been studied show close similarities to E1
Paso Brown in terms of overall vessel and rim
forms. The primary difference between the two
types is the addition of red or black-painted designs
on E1 Paso Bichrome. Some have questioned the
existence of the black-on-brown variety. While redon-brown designs are much more common, a few
examples of true black-on-brown are known from
several excavated collections. Designs are simple,
consisting of single or double diagonal lines appended from the rim or a rim band. On larger sherds,
the lines can sometimes be observed to form triangles and chevrons (Figure 28).
E1 Paso Polychrome first appears between A.D.
1000 and A.D. 1100. Early and transitional variants
of E1 Paso Polychrome follow the basic vessel form
trends established in the E1 Paso Brown series, and
the design layouts of E1 Paso Bichrome. Again, the
predominant vessel form is the neckless jar and
hemispherical bowl, although necked jar forms also

Figure 28. Early E1 Paso Polychrome designs on rim
sherds and example of design band layout.

occur for the transitional variant during this period.
Designs on early and transitional E1 Paso
Polychrome are similar to those for E1 Paso
Bichrome, with the addition of both black and redpainted parallel lines. Primary design layouts consist
of diagonal red and black bands appended from the
rim, or a rim band which form combinations of
chevrons and triangles (see Figure 28). The
transitional variant is notable for the first incidence
of stepped fret designs which become common in
later classic variants.
While two variants of El Paso Polychrome
dating before A.D. 1250 have been recognized during recent analyses of several excavated collections, it is not yet possible to determine whether
they represent functional and/or chronological variation or simply minor differences among site assemblages. The two variants are classified on the basis
of a slightly greater proportion of necked jars and
the occurrence of stepped fret design elements on
the transitional variant. However, it is often difficult to distinguish necked and neckless jar forms
using collections of small rim sherds, and stepped
frets are generally rare. Therefore, the two variants
can seldom be discriminated among sherd lots.
By A.D. 1250, there is virtually a complete
replacement of Plain Brown and Bichrome types,
as well as the early/transitional variant of E1 Paso
Polychrome, with Classic E1 Paso Polychrome (Figure 29). This pattern is unique among Southwestern ceramic technologies, since no plain or
corrugated utilitarian wares are produced in combination with the painted E1 Paso Polychrome ceramics. Instead, E1 Paso Polychrome is painted only on
the upper half to two-thirds of the vessel. The lower
portion of the vessel--the area most likely to come
into contact with heating fires--was left undecorated. Therefore, E1 Paso Polychrome served multiple functions as both a utilitarian and
non-utilitarian decorated ware.
Classic E1 Paso Polychrome jar forms include
the characteristic everted rim, restricted orifice
necked jar, or olla. Bowl forms include hemispherical shapes with somewhat larger orifice diameters
and sizes than earlier variants. Some Classic E1
Paso Polychrome jars measure nearly one meter in
height and have orifice diameters of nearly 35 cm,
and represent some of the largest vessels ever produced in the Southwest. Unusual vessel forms include paired jars connected by a "stirrup" handle,
jars with attached base supports, and a highly styl-

Perttula et aL -- Prehistoric Ceratnics in Texas

215

ized bowl form with modeled stepped frets
protuding from the rim (Figure 30).
Two variants of Classic Et Paso Polychrome
have recently been identifed; they are differentiated
on the basis of subtle differences in wall thickness,
rim form, and design elements. One variant is characterized by relatively thicker walls, and a slightly
outcurved ri~n with a flat or rounded lip. The second variant tends towards thinner vessel walls, a
greater degree of rim eversion and thickening with
a rounded lip, and perhaps a slightly higher incidence of curvilinear design elements. While it would
be tempting to classify these variants as early and
late, analysis of chronometric data has found little
differentiation among the two, and other archeological evidence suggests that they may represent
slight functional differences associated with different settlement types rather than discrete chronological developments.
Unlike other Southwestern decorated ceramic
traditions, painted E1 Paso brownwares have never
developed a reputation for aesthetic achievement in
terms of design elements and layout. It is the
author’s opinion that the complexity of design
layouts on Classic E1 Paso Polychrome vessels has
been unappreciated, perhaps due in part to the fact
that so few whole vessels are available for study.
Further, design layouts are constructed from a

Figure 29. E1 Paso Polychrome: a, Early/Transitional E1
Paso Polychrome vessel; a’, rim forms; b, Classic E1 Paso
polychrome vessel; and b’, rim forms. Photographs
reproduced with the permission of Museum of Indian Arts
and Culture, Laboratory of Anthropology, Santa Fe, New
Mexico.

Figure 30. E1 Paso Polychrome stepped-fret bowl.
Photograph reproduced with the permission of
Museum of Indian Arts and Culture, Laboratory
of Anthropology, Santa Fe, New Mexico.

216

Texas Archeological Society

limited set of elements, consisting primarily of
alternating red and black parallel or interlocking
bands, and stepped frets (Figure 31). Circles, combs,
and crosses are sometimes present as secondary
elements. Morn recent appraisals have observed that
this restricted set of design elements is integrated
into an extremely complex and dynamic series of
band layouts between the rim and lower framing
lines (Miller n.d.; Thomas O’Laughlin, personal
communication, 1994).

0

While up to this point we have emphasized the
indigenous E1 Paso Brownware tradition, it must
also be noted that a variety of noteworthy ceramics
occur in West Texas, including types such as
Mimbres Black-on-white and Ramos Polychrome,
which rank among the most remarkable of prehistoric North American ceramics. By far, the two
most common non-local ceramic types am Mimbres
Black-on-white and Chupadero Black-on-white.
Mimbres Black-on-white occurs on most
pithouse sites in the area dating prior to A.D. 1150,
usually in association with E1 Paso Brown,
Bichrome, and early/transitional Polychrome variants. Mimbres ceramics are known for their fine
design execution and highly stylized naturalistic
representations of animals and humans. Figure 32
illustrates an example of a partial Mimbres Classic
Black-on-white vessel with a naturalistic design
motif from the North Hills I site (41EP355) in northeast E1 Paso. Chupadero Black-on-white is one of
the most widely distributed ceramics throughout
West Texas and New Mexico. It is also one of the
longest-lived types, with dates reported from ca.
A.D. 1150 to A.D. 1650.
Other important additions to the West Texas
ceramic inventow originated in the Casas Grandes
area of the North Central Mexican state of Chihuahua. Medio and Tardio period ceramics are commonly found in the area at pueblo sites dating
between A.D. 1250 and A.D. 1450. Common types
include the finely made Ramos Polychrome (Figure 33), with fine-line red and black designs and
occasional effigy vessels, and Villa Ahumada Polychrome with relatively thick red and black designs

3 cm

Figure 31. Classic E1 Paso Polychrome design
elements.

Figure 32. Mimbres Classic Black-on-white bowl with
naturalistic motif from North Hills I site (41EP355).

Perttula et al. ~ Prehistoric Ceralnics in Texas

painted over a chalky white slip. Playas Red is
another common ceramic notable for a wide range
of textured and modeled design elements. Although
considered primarily of Chihuahuan origin, there is
some evidence for local production of Playas Red
variants across the Jornada Mogollon region (Bradley and Hoffer 1985; Creel et al. 1995).
Recent excavations and survey projects have
also documented the presence of earlier Viejo period (ca. A.D. 700-1150) red-on-brown and polychrome types throughout the southern portion of
West Texas. Viejo period ceramics, such as Mata
Polychrome, Anchondo broad-line red-on-brown,
Pilon, Leal, and Fernando narrow-line red-onbrown, and several Convento textured varieties,
have been recorded at pithouse and rockshelter sites.
Locations include several pithouse sites around E1
Paso (Miller 1989), the Rio Grande valley terraces
and Alamo arroyo in the vicinity of Fort Hancock
(Martin 1990; Miller 1992a), near Sierra Blanca
(Skinner et al. 1973, 1974), and at Granado Cave
near Van Horn where a whole Mata Polychrome
vessel was found filled with cotton seeds (Hamilton
n.d.; Mallouf 1985). The presence of these Viejo
period ceramics now suggests a much !onger period of contact between West Texas and Chihuahua
than has previously been considered, and close similarities between the design trends of Viejo period
ceramics and E1 Paso Bichrome and early E1 Paso
Polychrome have been noted (Miller 1991a).
Finally, an assortment of other Mogollon and
Anasazi types occur in West Texas, although these
are much fewer in numbers than the types described
above. White Mountain Redwares from East Central
Arizona, including St. John’s, Fourmile, Pinedale,
and Heshotauthla Polychrome, occur at pueblo and
some late pithouse sites. Salado Polychromes (Pinto,

Figure 33. Ramos Polychrome sherd from Dona
Ana County Airport site west of El Paso.

217

Gila, and Tonto Polychrome) are also sometimes
found at pueblo sites in the region, as are Cibola
whitewares from northern New Mexico and Arizona.
By most accounts, the prehistoric E1 Paso
Brownware ceramic tradition comes to an end with
the abandonment of E1 Paso phase puebloan settlements at A.D. 1450. The following 230 year period
presents a rather blank picture for local ceramic
traditions affiliated with various protohistoric
groups, such as the Manso, Suma, and Jumano,
who from Spanish accounts are known to have occupied the region. Several coarsely finished, sandtempered sherds thought to be of historic origin
were recovered from a possible Manso site (LA
26780) near the Dona Ana County Airport, 16 km
west of E1 Paso (Batcho et al. t984). Occasionally
an odd sherd with a sand temper or an unusual
surface treatment or color has been reported during
survey or testing projects in the Hueco Bolson and
elsewhere in the Trans-Pecos. However, these also
have similarities to prehistoric Western Mogollon
plainwares such as Alma Plain. To date, none of
the unusual Jornada sherds has been conclusively
identified as protohistoric in affiliation.
It is not until the Spanish Colonial/Post-Pueblo
Revolt period after A.D. 1680 that a distinctive
local ceramic tradition can again be recognized in
West Texas. With the establishment of the Socorro
and Ysleta missions by Pueblo Revolt refugees from
North Central New Mexico came a new ceramic
tradition known as Ysleta and Socorro Brownware
(Peterson and Brown 1991). Ceramic production at
Native American settlements affiliated with the missions, such as the Ysleta WIC site (41EP2840),
offers several interesting contrasts to local prehistoric technologies (Miller and O’Leary 1992), including a greater level of standardization in vessel
form, size, and symmetry. Also notable is the combination of the traditional olIa jar form and carinated bowl forms similar to northern New Mexico
Puebloan ceramics with new forms such as candlesticks and platos (flat plate-like vessels) imposed
by Spanish consumers (Figure 34). This tradition
continued until later historic times with the introduction of wheel-thrown commercial ceramic production in the 1800s.
Again, non-!ocal types occur with some frequency, demonstrating participation in regional exchange networks, particularly along the Camino
Real (see Palmer t993). Tewa and Ogapoge
Polychromes and Rio Grande Glazewares from

218

Texas Archeological Society

northern and central New Mexican Pueblos have
been found at several sites in the Rio Grande valley
in the vicinity of E1 Paso (Figure 35). A notable
addition to the ceramic inventory of this period are
the porcelain-like majolica wares produced in
Puebla, Mexico, and transported along the Camino
Real as it passed through E1 Paso del Norte.

k

d

I

Figure 35. Tewa-Ogapoge Polychrome sherds from Ysleta
Clinic Site (41EP2840): a, Tewa Polychrome bowl sherd;
b-p, Tewa-Ogapoge Polychrome jar sherds.

Soup
Plate

Flat
Plate

Olla

(t)

(u)

(v)

Figure 34. Ysleta Brownware carinated bowls,platos, and
olla sherds from the Ysleta Clinic site (41EP2840): a-c,
direct rim carinated bowls; d-f, direct rim hemispherical
bowls; g-j, incurved bowls; k, direct carinated bowl rim
profiles; 1. incurved bowl rim profiles; m, flared bowl rim
profiles; n-r, plato rims; s, olla rim; t, soup plate rim
profile; u, flat plate rim profile; v, olla rim profiles.

Several ethnohistorically documented Spanish
Colonial period groups produced ceramics in the
La Junta District, including several affiliated with
early mission settlements which predate the Pueblo
Revolt occupation of the El Paso area (Kelley 1953,
1986). However, the ceramics of this area have not
yet been fully described (but see Hoyt 1994; Cloud
et al. 1994:86-102). Further reserach should be emphasized in the La Junta District, since here we
have the potential to examine the entire range of
ceramic production from prehistoric to late historic
times in West Texas.

Summary of West Texas Ceramics
Despite more than 40 years of archeological
research and 20 years of intensive cultural resource
management survey and excavation projects, ceramic studies in West Texas are essentially still in

Perttula et al. m Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

their infancy. While other regions of the Southwest
have moved on to issues of technological production within a wider framework of anthropo!ogica!
theory, ceramicists in West Texas are still wrestling with fundamental issues of typology, chronology, and context. Although these are worthwhile
pursuits, it is perhaps time to broaden our perspectives, theoretical outlooks, and range of analytical
tools (Miller 1991b).
Aside from their utility as relative chronological indicators, and for other traditional research
avenues, more interesting is the potential information afforded by various technological aspects of E1
Paso Brownware production. As several passages
in this section have noted, the E1 Paso Brownware
tradition is one of the more distinctive in the American Southwest, although it is one that is often portrayed in a rather negative manner for, as noted by
Stephen LeBlanc (1982), E1 Paso Polychrome represents "...one of the least aesthetically pleasing
ceramics produced in the southwest." Aside from
the aesthetic critiques, such viewpoints reflect our
perception of the relatively unstandardized and unchanging technology of the region.
Rather than viewing ceramic production solely
in aesthetic and typological terms, it would be more
productive to examine ceramic technology within
the context of the particular settlement and
subsistence systems of the region. Only recently
have we begun to reconsider the functional roles
of ceramic technological variability in the context
of highly mobile, hunter-gatherer settlement
adaptations characteristic of most of West Texas
(Miller 1990, n.d.; Poche 1995; Reed 1991;
Whalen 1994a, 1994b). This will require a
fundamental shift in how we perceive ceramic
production, as well as the development of new
analytical tools and methods.
I see great potential for an expanded
application of geochemical and petrographic
methods for identifying ceramic compositional
groups and how they relate to production zones and
resource locations (Bentley 1994; Burgett n.d.;
Bradley and Hoffer 1985). These data offer several
possibilities, including: refined models of
production, use, exchange, and discard for mobile
hunter-gatherer groups; as well as interactions
between the Mimbres Valley, northern Chihuahua,
the Jornada Mogollon, and the greater Trans-Pecos.
Did E1 Paso Polychrome serve as the "tin can" of
the Southwest as proposed by DiPeso et al. (1974),

219

serving primarily as a cheap container for the
exchange of goods? Or will more subtle functional
implications be found upon closer examination?
Variations in temper selection and preparation,
vessel wall strength, thermal shock resistance, and
surface treatments may also furnish some insight
into the role of ceramics in an essentially hunting
and gathering economy (Whalen 1994a). How the
role of ceramics changed in the context of later
prehistoric agricultural development may also be
examined, clarifying whether or not the application
of necks to jar forms was a functional result of the
increasing use of ceramics for the preparation of
corn, in turn reflecting greater agricultural
dependence after A.D. 1100 or A.D. 1250 (Seaman
and Mills 1988; Hard et al. 1995). These questions
offer intriguing research results for the future.
Perhaps no other region of Texas, with the
exception of the Caddoan area of Northeast Texas,
offers such potential for ceramic studies.

SUMMARY COMMENTS
This review of the prehistoric and historic
aboriginal ceramics made and used by aboriginal
peoples in Texas barely scratches the surface in
terms of truly characterizing the impressive
stylistic, functional, and technological diversity of
the many ceramic wares found across the state. As
we discussed, ceramics were manufactured in
Texas beginning as early as 500 B.C. in parts of
Northeast Texas, and by A.D. 1200/1300 or so,
ceramics were a very significant part of the
material culture of aboriginal peoples in Southeast
and coastal Texas, among Caddoan and Jornada
Mogollon groups, and among the Plains Village
communities in the Texas Panhandle and the North
Central Texas prairies.
Differences and trends in the use of ceramics
by these aboriginal peoples relate to the most basic
issues of prehistoric and historic Native American
cultural adaptations (see O’Brian et al. t994), not
simply to standard but less-compelling issues of
chronology and cultural-temporal systematics.
Thus, it is high time that Texas archeologists begin
to truly take full advantage of the valuable research
information to be gained by the comprehensive
regional and site-specific study of ceramic style,
function, and technology embedded in the diverse
aboriginal ceramic assemblages found across the

220

Texas Archeological Society

state in archeological contexts. Accordingly, we
hope that this overview will bring renewed
archeological attention to the prehistoric and
historic aboriginal ceramics found in Texas, and
that new methods of study-- and most importantly
new ways of thinking--result in refined
understanding of the role of ceramics in Native
American lifeways.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Perttula would like to thank Ann M. Early and
Kathryn Reese-Taylor for interesting discussions
about Caddoan ceramics, G. Lain Ellis for
comments on the draft manuscript, and to Ann for
a copy of the South Arkansas ceramic class and
pattern MS. He and Lintz would also like to thank
A. J. Taylor for supplying the information about the
whole Woodland period vessel in the PanhandlePlains Historical Museum collections. Miller
would like to thank Tom O’Laughlin for his many
insights concerning E1 Paso Brownware ceramics.
Current research on E1 Paso Brownware ceramics
and chronology is funded by the Department of the
Army, Directorate of Environment, Fort Bliss,
Texas. Figures for West Texas ceramics were
drafted by Trace Stuart and Kristi Shaw.
Photographs of E1 Paso Brownware vessels are
presented courtesy of the Museum of Indian Arts
and Culture, Laboratory of Anthropology, Santa
Fe, New Mexico. The photographs of the Mimbres
bowl from the North Hills site, and the historic
ceramics from the Ysleta WIC site, are presented
courtesy of Batcho & Kauffman Associates, Las
Cruces, New Mexico. Prikryl thanks Milton Bell
for drawings and photographs of North Central
Texas ceramics and figurines and Lee Johnson for
sage counsel, while Ricklis wishes to thank Dee
Ann Story, former Director, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL), for providing access
to collections of coastal pottery housed ~it TARL,
as well as for comments on the revision of
Rockport ware typology summarized here.
Appreciation is also extended to James A. Neely,
Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas at Austin, for reviewing and commenting on
this typological analysis.

REFERENCES CITED
Abbott, J. T. (editor)
1995

NRHP Significance Testing of 57 Prehistoric Archeological Sites on Fort Hood. Review Draft. Research Report No. 34, Archeological Resource
Management Series. U.S. Army, Fort Hood.

Ackerly, N., R. Buck, D. Carlson, S. Carlson, S. DeAtley, G.
Dean, M. Green, J. Ponczynski, J. Schuldenrein, D. Sick, J.
Swartout, and J. Wilde
1987 Interim Descriptive Report on Cultural Resources
Found Along the All American Pipeline Right-ofWay Between Celeron MPM 11 and All American
MPM 1285. Cultural Resources Management Division, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces.
Aten, L.
1983 Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press,
New York.
Banks,
!977 Prehistoric Settlement in the Salt Basin, Texas.

Transactions of the 12th Regional Archaeological
Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 1-14. El Paso.
Bastian, T.
1967

Native-Made Artifacts from Historic Sites. In A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and
Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks,
and W. W. Newcomb, pp. 184-196. Final report for
Grant GS-964. National Science Foundation, Washington, D.C.

Batcho, D. G., D. L. Carmichael, M. Duran, and M. Johnson
1984 Archaeological Investigations of Sites Located at
the Southern Dona Ana County Airport, Santa
Teresa, New Mexico. Report No. 533. Cultural Resources Management Division, New Mexico State
University, Las Cruces.
Baugh, T. G.
1986 Cultural History and Protohistoric Societies in the
Southern Plains. In Current Trends in Southern
Plains Archaeology, edited by T. G. Baugh, pp.
167-187. Plains Anthropologist 31(114), Part 2,
Memoir 21.
1992

Protohistoric Cultural Manifestations on the Southern Plains: A Reconsideration of the Wheeler Phase
and Garza Complex. In Cultural Encounters and
Episodic Droughts: The Protohistoric Period on
the Southern Plains, edited by E. Johnson, pp. 2139. Quaternary Research Center Series Number 3.
Lubbock Lake Landmark, Museum of Texas Tech
University, Lubbock.

Perttula et al. ~ Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

Baugh, T. G. (Continued)
1994 Holocene Adaptations in
In Plains Indians, A.D.
logical Past of Historic
Schlesier, pp. 264-289.
Press, Norman.

the Southern High Plains.
500-1500: The ArchaeoGroups, edited by K. H.
University of Oklahoma

Baugh, T. G. and F. W. Eddy
1987 Rethinking Apachean Ceramics: The 1985 Southern Athapaskan Ceramic Conference. American Antiquity 52(4):793-798.
Beckes, M. R.
1975

Summary Report on an Archaeological Survey of

221

Boyd, D. K.
1993 Archaeological Investigations at the Sam Wahl Site:
Jornada Mogollon Influence in the Texas Southern
Plains. Paper presented at the Ninth Jornada
Mogollon Conference, Tularosa, New Mexico.
Boyd, D. K. and K. Reese-Taylor
1993 Petrographic Analysis of Ceramic Sherds and Clay
Samples. In Data Recovery at Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan Henry), Garza and Kent Counties,
Texas: Phase Ili, Season 2, by D. K. Boyd, J. Peck,
S. A. Tomka, and K. W. Kibler, pp. 339-378. Reports of Investigations, No. 88. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Areas to be Affected by the Cibolo Creek Floodway
Project, Presidio County, Texas. Technical Bulletin
No. 7. Texas Archeological Survey, Austin.

Bell, R. E.
1984 The Plains Villagers: The Washita River. In Prehistory of Oklahoma, edited by R. E. Bell, pp. 307324. Academic Press, New York.
Bell, R. E. and T. Bastian
t967 Preliminary Report upon Excavations at the Longest Site, Oklahoma. In A Pilot Study of Wichita
Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled by
R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb, pp.
54-118. Final report for Grant GS-964. National
Science Foundation, Washington, D.C.

Boyd, D. K., M. D. Freeman, M. D. Blum, E. R. Prewitt, and
J. M. Quigg
1989 Phase I Cultural Resources Investigations at
Justiceburg Reservoir on the Double Mountain Fork
of the Brazos River, Garza and Kent Counties,
Texas. 2 Vols. Reports of Investigations No. 66.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Boyd, D. K., J. Peck, S. A. Tomka, and K. W. Kibler
1993 Data Recovery at Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan
Henry), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase III,
Season 2. Reports of Investigations, No. 88. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Boyd, D. K., J. Peck, S. A. Tomka, K. W. Kibler, and M. D.
Freeman

Bell, R. E., E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb (assemblers)
1967 A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and
Ethnohistory. Final Report for Grant GS-964. National Science Foundation, Washington, D.C.
Bentley, M. T.
1994 An INAA Study of Hot Well Village Clays and
Affiliated Clay Sources Used in the Production of
El Paso Polychrome. Paper presented at the Eighth
Mogollon Conference, E1 Paso.
Betancourt, J.
1981 Quitman Mountains of Southern Hudspeth County.
In Five Archeological Investigations in the TransPecos Region of Texas, by J. Betancourt, D. Creel,
P. R. Katz, P. D. Lukowksi, L. McNutt, and R. W.
Ralph, pp. 27-82. Permit Series No. 6. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.

1994

Data Recovery at Lake Alan Henry (Justiceburg
Reservoir), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase
III, Season 3. Reports of Investigations No. 93.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Boyd, D. K., S. A. Tomka, C. B. Bousman, K. M. Gardner, and
M. D. Freeman
1992

Data Recovery at Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan
Henry), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase III,
Season 1. Reports of Investigations No. 84. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Bozell, J. R. and J. V. Winfrey
1994 A Review of Middle Woodland Archaeology in Nebraska. Plains Anthropologist 39(148): 125-144.
Bradford, J. E.
1980

Upper Dog Canyon Archaeology: Guadalupe Mountains National Park, Texas. National Park Service,

Black, S. L.
1986

The Clemente and Herminia Hinojosa Site, 41JW8:
A Toyah Horizon Campsite in Southern Texas. Special Report No. 18. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Bollich, C. N.
1995 Native American Ceramics of the Sabine Lake Area.
Texas Archeological Stewardship Network Newsletter 10(1): 17-18.

Southwest Cultural Resources Center, Santa Fe.

Bradley, R. J. and J. M. Hoffer
1985 Playas Red: A Preliminary Study of Origins and
Variability in the Jornada Mogollon. In Proceedings of the Third Jornada Mogollon Conference,
edited by M. S. Foster and T. C. O’Laughlin, pp.
161-178. The Artifact 23(1-2). E1 Paso Archaeological Society, E1 Paso.

222

Texas Archeological Society

Brewington, R. L., J. E. Dockall, and H. J. Shafer
1995 Archaeology of 41MX5: A Ix~te Prehistoric Caddoan
Hamlet in Morris County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 1. Center for Environmental Archaeology, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Brooks, R. L.
1989

Village Farming Societies. In From Clovis to

Calhoun, C. A.
1961 Scored Pottery of the Texas Coastal Bend. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 32:321-326.
Campbell, T. N.
1961 Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend
Region of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 32:331-336.

Comanchero: Archeological Overview of the Southern Great Plains, by J. L. Hofman, R. L. Brooks, J.
S. Hays, D. W. Owsley, R. L. Jantz, M. K. Marks,
and M. H. Manhein, pp. 71-90. Research Series No.
35. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
1994

Southern Plains Cultural Complexes. In Skeletal Biology in the Great Plains: Migration, Warfare,
Health, and Subsistence, edited by D. W. Owsley

Carmichael, D. L.
1983 Archaeological Settlement Patterns in the Southern
Tularosa Basin, New Mexico: Alternative Model of
Prehistoric Adaptations. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of
Illinois, Urbana.
1986

and R. L. Jantz, pp. 33-50. Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington, D.C.

Brown, D. O., R. P. Watson, D. Peter, and V. Rawn-Schatzinger
1987 McDonald Site - 41HI105. In Archeology atAquilIa
Ixtke: 1978-1982 Investigations, Volume II, compiled by D. O. Brown, pp. 38-1 to 38-145. Research
Report 81. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

Archaeological Survey in the Southern Tularosa
Basin of New Mexico. Historic and Natural Resources Report No. 3. Environmental Management
Office, Fort Bliss, Texas.

Cherry, J. and R. Torrence
1973

Archeological Reconnaissance in Victorio Canyon,
Hudspeth and Culberson Counties, Texas. In
Victorio Canyon, A Natural Areas Survey, Part IV,
edited by D. Kennard, pp. 115-163. Lyndon B.
Johnson School of Public Affairs, The University of

Bruseth, J. E.
1987 Ceramic Artifacts. In The Bird Point Island and
Adams Ranch Sites: Methodological and Theoretical Contributions to North Central Texas Archaeology, edited by J. E. Bruseth and W. A. Martin, pp.
109-126. Richland Creek Technical Series, Volume
II. Archaeology Research Program, Institute for the
Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
1995

The Development of Caddoan Polities Along the
Middle Red River Valley of Eastern Texas and Oklahoma. In The Native History of the Caddo: Their
Place in Southeastern Archaeology and
Ethnohistory, edited by T. K. Perttula and J. E.
Bruseth. MS in review for publication.

Bruseth, J. E. and T. K. Perttula
1981

Prehistoric Settlement Patterns at Lake Fork Reservoir. Texas Antiquities Permit Series, Report No. 2.
Southern Methodist University and Texas Antiquities Committee, Dallas and Austin.

Burgett, G. R.
n.d.
Compositional Analysis of Selected Ceramics from
the Hueco Mountain Archaeological Project. In Prehistoric Cultural Systems in the Northern
Chihuahuan Desert: Archaeological Research in the
Hueco Bolson of West Texas, by G. R. Burgett, K.
Poche, K. Faunce, M. Melton, D. Potter, B. Buck,
F. Almarez, J. Leach, T. O’Laughlin, R. Holloway,
and M. Newman. Cultural and Natural Resources
Report Series, Directorate of Environment, Fort
Bliss, Texas. In preparation.

Texas at Austin.
Cliff, M. B. and T. Fifield
1980 An Archaeological Evaluation of the Floodwater
Diversion in the Three-Mile and Sulphur Draw Watershed, Culberson County, Texas. Environmental
Consultants, Inc., Dallas.

Cliff, M. B. and T. K. Perttula
1995 Preliminary Ceramic Typology for Cooper Lake. In
Archaeological Survey of Cooper Lake: Cultural
Resources Studies for Cooper Lake, Hopkins and
Delta Counties, Texas, by D. H. Jurney, D. E.
McGregor, W. A. Martin, M. Green, R. W. Moir,
M. B. Cliff, and J. W. Saunders, pp. 573-612. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
Cloud, W. A., R. J. Mallouf, P. A. Mercado-Allinger, C. A.
Hoyt, N. A. Kenmotsu, J. M. Sanchez, and E. R. Madrid
1994 Archeological Testing at the Polvo Site, Presidio
County, Texas. Report 39. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, and U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Austin.
Collins, M. B.
1968 The Andrews Lake Locality: New Archeological
Data from the Southern Llano Estacado. Unpublished M. A. thesis, Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas at Austin.

Perttula et al. ~ Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

223

Collins, M. B. (Continued)
1969 What is the Significance of the Southwestern Ceramics Found on the Llano Estacado? Transactions
of the Fifth Regional Archeological Sytnposium for
Southeastern New Mexico and Western New Mexico,
pp. 45-63. Portales, New Mexico.

Cruse, J. B.
1992 Archeological Investigations at the Kent Creek Site
(41HL66): Evidence of Mogollon b~tTuence on the
Southern Plains. Publication No. 6. Panhandle Archeological Society, Amaril!o.

1971

David, N., J. Sterner, and K. Garua
1988 Why Pots are Decorated. Current Anthropology
29:365-379.

A Review of Llano Estacado Archaeology and
Ethnohistory. Plains Anthropologist 16(52):85-104.

Corbin, J. E.
t974 A Model for Cultural Succession for the Coastal
Bend Area of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 45:29-54.

Davis, D. R., Jr.
1991

Prehistoric Artifacts of the Texas Indians. Pecos
Publishing Company, San Antonio.

Corley, J. A.

DiPeso, C. C., J. B. Rinaldo, and G. J. Fenner

1965

1974

Proposed Eastern Extension of the Jornada Branch

Casas Grandes: A Fallen Trading Center of the

of the Mogollon. Transactions of the First Regional

Gran Chichimeca, Volume 6, Ceramics and Shell.

Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and West-

Amerind Foundation, Dragoon, Arizona.

ern Texas, pp. 31-36.
Couzzourt, J.

1985

Preliminary Report: Testing at the Tascosa Creek
Site, Oldham County, Texas. Transactions of the
Twentieth Regional Archeological Symposium for
Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp.
65-142.

1988

Tascosa Creek Site. Transactions of the Twenty-

Driggers, W. G.
1985 A Report on the Analysis of the Ceramic Vessel
Materials from the Benson’s Crossing Site
(41TT110), Titus County, Texas. Master’s thesis,
Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Duffield, L. F.
1964 Three Panhandle Aspect Sites at Sanford Reservoir,

third Regional Archeological Symposium for South-

Hutchinson County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas

eastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 44-79.

Couzzourt, J. and B. A. Schmidt-Couzzourt
1988 Report on the 1969 Texas Archeological Society
Field School at Blue Creek, Moore County, Texas
Panhandle. MS on file, Panhandle Archeological
Services-Texas, Canyon, Texas.
Crabb,
t968 Some Puebloan Trade Pottery from Panhandle Aspect Sites. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 38:83-89.
Creel, D. G.
1981 Eagle Mountains of Southern Hudspeth County. In
Five Archeological Investigations in the TransPecos Region of Texas, by J. Betancourt, D. Creel,
P. R. Katz, P. D. Lukowski, L. McNutt, and R. W.
Ralph, pp. 169-191. Permit Series No. 6. Texas
Antiquities Committee, Austin.
Creel, D., M. Williams, H. Neff, and M. Glasscock
1995 Neutron Activation Analysis of Black Mountain
Phase Ceramics from Old Town and Other Sites in
the Mimbres Area. Paper presented in the symposium "The Dynamics of Material Culture and Social Processes: The Interplay between Theory and
Data in Mimbres Archaeology." Annual Meeting of
the Society for American Archaeology, Minneapolis, Minnesota.

Archeological Society 35:19-81.
Duffield, L. F. and E. B. Jelks
1961

The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron
Bridge Reservoir, Rains County, Texas. Archaeology Series No. 4. Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Dunnell, R. C.
1986 Methodological Issues in Americanist Artifact Classification. In Advances in Archaeological Method
and Theory, Volume 9, edited by M. B. Schiffer, pp.
149-207. Academic Press, Orlando.
Early, A.M.
1995 Regional Change, Cultural Boundaries, and Worlds
of Thought: New Approaches Towards Caddoan
Ceramics. Paper presented in "Current and Future
Directions in the Study of Caddoan Ceramics" symposium, 1995 Caddo Conference, Austin.
Early, A. M. (editor)
1993 Caddoan Saltmakers in the Ouachita Valley: The
Hardman Site. Research Series No. 43. Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Edwards, S. K. and D. E. Peter
1992 Archaeological Survey and Monitoring of JTF-6
Road Improvements, Sierra Blanca, Hudspeth
County, Texas. Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano.

224

Texas Archeological Society

Ekland, C.
1977 Neutron Activation Analysis of West Texas Ceramics: A Statistical Evaluation. Bulletin of the Texas
A rcheological Society 48:119-132.
Ellis, G. L. and L. W. Ellis
1994 Ceramic Cross-Dating at 41HR616: Quantifying
Aten’s Galveston Bay Area Seriation. In Archeological Data Recovery Excavations at the Kingwood
Site, 41HR616, Harris County, Texas, by R. G.
Moore, pp. 167-200. Report of Investigations No.
100. Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston.
Ellis, L. W.
1992 Technological Style in Upper Texas Coastal Ceramics: A Case Study from 41HR616, Harris
County, Texas. M. A. thesis, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.
1994

Ceramic Analysis. In Archeological Data Recovery
Excavations at the Kingwood Site, 41HR616, Harris County, Texas, by R. G. Moore, pp. 97-165.
Report of Investigations No. 100. Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston.

Ferring, C. R.
1988 Ceramic Petrography of Selected Sherds. In Late
Holocene Prehistory of the Mountain Creek Drainage, edited by D. E. Peter and D. E. McGregor,
Appendix 6. Joe Pool Lake Archaeological Project,
Volume I. Archaeology Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Ferring, C. R. and B. C. Yates
1995

Holocene Archaeology and Geoarchaeology at Ray
Roberts" Lake, Northcentral Texas. Review Draft.
Institute of Applied Sciences, University of North
Texas, Denton.

Fields,
1981 Analysis of the Native Ceramics from the Deshazo
Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas. Master’s thesis,
The University of Texas at Austin.
1993

The Introduction of Ceramic Technology in the
Middle Trinity River Basin. In Archeology in the
Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N. A. Kenmotsu and T. K. Perttula,
pp. 118-120. Cultural Resource Management Report 3. Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.

Fields, R. C., E. F. Gadus, and L. W. Klement
1994 The Peerless Bottoms Site: A Late Caddoan Component at Cooper Lake, Hopkins County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65:55114.

Fields, R. C., L. W. Klement, C. B. Bousman, S. A. Tomka, E.
F. Gadus, and M. A. Howard
1991 Excavations at the Bottoms, Rena Branch, and Moccasin Springs Sites, Jewett Mine Project, Freestone
and Leon Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations, No. 82. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Fischbeck, H. J., J. D. Rogers, S. R. Ryan, and F. E. Swenson
1989 Sourcing Ceramics in the Spiro Region: A Preliminary Study using Proton-Induced X-Ray Emission
(PIXE) Analysis. Midcontinental Journal ofA rchaeology 14:3-17.
Foster, M. S. and J. C. Kelley
1989 Archeological Investigations in the Three-Mile and
Sulphur Draw Watershed, Culberson County, Texas.
The Artifact 27(3): 1-90. El Paso Archaeological Society, E1 Paso.
Gilmore, K.
1967 A Microscopic Study of Certain Pottery Types and
Clays in the Southern Plains. In A Pilot Study of
Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E. Belt, E. B. Jelks, and W. W.
Newcomb, pp. 221-230. Final report for Grant GS964. National Science Foundation, Washington,
D.C.
Glander, W. P., T, N. Sanders, and S. A. Skinner
1973 Archaeological Resources at Milehigh, Hudspeth
County, Texas. Archaeology Research Program,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Green, F. E.
1986 Report on Archaeological Salvage in the Sanford
Reservoir Area. Publication No. 4. Panhandle Archeological Society, Amarillo.
Gregory, H. F.
1973 Eighteenth-Century Caddoan Archaeology: A Study
in Models and Interpretation. Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Habicht-Mauche, J. A.
1987 Southwestern-Style Culinary Ceramics on the Southern Plains: A Case Study of Technological Innovation and Cross-Cultural Interaction, Plains
Anthropologist 32(116): 175-189.
!988

An Analysis of Southwestern-Style Utility Ware
Ceramics from the Southern Plains in the Context
of Protohistoric Plains-Pueblo Interaction. Unpublished Ph,D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Harvard University, Cambridge.

Perttula et al. ~ Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

Habicht-Mauche, J. A. (Continued)
1991 Evidence for the Manufacture of Southwestern-Style
Culinary Ceramics on the Southern Plains. In Fartners, Hunters, and Colonists: Interaction between
the Southwest and the Southern Plains, edited by K.
A. Spielmann, pp. 51-70. University of Arizona
Press, Tucson.

225

Hedrick, J. A. (Continued)
1995

Native American Ceramics of the Trans-Pecos.
Texas Archeological Stewardship Network Newsletter 10(1):13-16.

Hester, T. R.
1975

Late Prehistoric Cultural Patterns along the Lower
Rio Grande of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo-

Habicht-Mauche, J. A., A. A. Levendosky, and M. J.
Schoeninger
1994 Antelope Creek Phase Subsistence: The Bone Chem_
istry Evidence. In Skeletal Biology in the Great
Plains: Migration, Warfare, Health, and Subsistence, edited by D. W. Owsley and R. L. Jantz, pp.
291-304. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Hall, G. D., T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black
1986 The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas: Results of the Phase H Archaeological Investigations. Choke Canyon Series 10.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hamilton, D. L.
n.d.
Granado Cave. MS in preparation, Department of
Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Hard,
1983

RoJ.

Excavations in the Castner Range Archaeological
District of El Paso, Texas. Publications in Anthropology No. 11° El Paso Centennial Museum, The
University of Texas at E1 Paso.

Hard, R. J., P. Graeber, J. Manasco, C. Tennis, and K. Thuesen
1995 Dofia Ana Phase Ceramics and Cultural Evolution
in the Southern Jornada Mogollon. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 62:267-283.
Harris, R. Ko
1936 Indian Campsites of the Upper Trinity River Drainage. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 8:113-133.
1945

Bone Implement Burial, Collin County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 16:84-89.

Harris, R. K., I. M. Harris, J. C. Blaine, and J. Blaine
1965 A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary
Study of the Womack Site, Lamar County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 36:287365.

Hedrick, J. A.
1968 Plateau Station Area Survey. The Artifact 6(1):116. E1 Paso Archaeological Society.

logical Society 46:107-125°
1980

Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for
Amateur Archaeologists. Corona Publishing Company, San Antonio.

Hester, T. R. and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1971 An Initial Study of a Prehistoric Ceramic Tradition
in Southern Texas. Plains Anthropologist
16(52): 195-203.
Hester, T. R. and R. Parker
1970 The Berclair Site: A Single Component in Goliad
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 41:1-24.
Highley, C. L.
1986

Archaeological Investigations at 41LK201, Choke
Canyon Reservoir, Southern Texas. Choke Canyon
Series 11. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

Hilton, E.G.
1986 Survey of Texas Big Bend’s Prehistoric Indians and
Their Pottery: Circa A.D. 1000-1500. The Artifact
24(4):51-86. E1 Paso Archaeological Society, E1
Paso.
Hines, M.H°
1993 National Register Testing .at the Wind Canyon Site,
41HZl19, Hudspeth County, Texas. Technical Reports No. 18. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Hofman, J. L.
1989 Protohistoric Culture History on the Southern Great
Plains. In From Clovis to Comanchero: Archeological Overview of the Southern Great Plains, by J° L.
Hofman, R. L. Brooks, J. S. Hays, D. W. Owsley,
R. L. Jantz, M. K. Marks, and M. H. Manhein, pp.
91-100. Research Series No. 35. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Hofman, J. L. and R. L. Brooks
1989 Prehistoric Culture History--Woodland Complexes
in the Southern Great Plains. In From Clovis to
Comanchero: Archeological Overview of the Southern Great Plains, by Jo L. Hofman, R. L. Brooks, J.
S. Hays, D. W. Owsley, R. L. Jantz, M. L. Marks,
and M. H. Manhein, pp. 61-70. Research Series No.
35. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Texas Archeological Society
Hoffman, M. P.
1967 Ceramic Pipe Style Chronology Along the Red River
Drainage in Southwest Arkansas. The Arkansas Archeologist 8( 1 ): t - 14.

Hughes, D. T. and A. A. Hughes-Jones
1987 77~e Courson Archeological Projects: Final 1985
and Preliminary 1986. Innovative Publishing, Inc.,
Perryton, Texas.

Holden, T. C.
1934 A Study of the Pottery of Saddleback Ruin. M.A.
thesis, Texas Technological College, Lubbock.

Hughes, J. T.
1962 Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
32:65-84.

Holliday, V. T. and E. Johnson
1990 An Overview of the Cultural Chronology of the
Lubbock Lake Landmark. In Fifty Years of Discovery: The Lubbock Lake Landmark, edited by V. T.
Holliday and E. Johnson, pp. 19-54. Quaternary
Research Center Series, Number 2. Museum of
Texas Tecl] University, Lubbock.

1991

Howard, E. B.
1930 Archaeological Research in the Gaudalupe Mountains. Museum Bulletin 21:188-213. University of
Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia.
1932

Caves Along the Slopes of the Guadalupe Mountains. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 4:7-19.

Howard, M. A.
1990

Hughes, J. T., H. C. Hood, and B. P. Newman
1978 Archeological Testing in the Red Deer Watershed
in Gray, Roberts, and HemphiIl Counties, Texas.
Archeological Research Laboratory, Killgore
Research Center, West Texas State University,
Canyon.
Jackson, A. T.
1932 Report on Sites Visited and Conditions Found in
the Trans-Pecos Region of Texas, April, 1932. MS
on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
1933

Some Pipes of East Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 5:69-86.

1937

Exploration of Certain Sites in Culberson County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 9:146-192.

Ceramic Analysis. In Prehistoric Hunter-FisherGatherers" on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeological Investigations at the Peggy Lake Disposal Area,
Harris County, Texas, by E. F. Gadus and M. A.
Howard. Reports of Investigations No. 74. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Hoyt, C. A.
1994 Ceramics of the La Junta de Los Rios region. Paper
presented in the symposium "Archaeological and
Documentary Investigations at La Junta de Los Rios,
Presidio County, Texas, and Ojinaga, Mexico: An
Update." 52rid Annual Plains Anthropological Conference, Lubbock.
Hubbard, R.
1991

An ArcheologicaI Reconnaissance of the Hudspeth
County Conservation and Reclamation District #1
Proposed Regulating Reservoir #3, Hudspeth
County, Texas. Texas Water Development Board,
Austin.

Huebner, J. A.
1991 Late Prehistoric Bison Populations in Central and
Southern Texas. Plains Anthropologist 36(137):343 358.
Hughes, D. T.
1991 Investigations of the Buried City, Ochiltree County,
Texas: With an Emphasis on the Texas Archeological Society Field Schools of 1987 and 1988. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60:107-148.

Prehistoric Cultural Developments on the Texas
High Plains. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 60:1-55.

Jackson, B., J. Carlisle, and I. Colwell
1982 Man in the Oklahoma Panhandle. Mennonite Press,
Newton, Kansas.
Jelks, E. B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect
Site in Hill County, Texas. Archaeology Series, No.
5. Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas, Austin.
Jelks, E. B. (editor)
1967 The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 37:1-248.
Johnson, C. A. III
1977

A Preliminary Appraisal of Cultural and Historical
Resources Found Between Fort Quitman and
Haciendita, Texas. Publications in Anthropology
No. 5. E1 Paso Centennial Museum, The University
of Texas at El Paso.

Johnson, E. (editor)
1978

Phase Ill--Analysis of Materials Recovered from
the Lubbock Lake Site during Phase 1 and H. Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

Perttula et al. m Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

Johnson, E. (editor) Continued)
1987 Lubbock Lake: Late Quaternary Studies on the
Southern High Plains. Texas A&M University Press,
College Station.
1993

1995

Late Holocene Investigations at the Lubbock Lake
Landmark, Volume 1: The 1988 Work. Quaternary
Research Center Series Number 5. Lubbock Lake
Landmark, Museum of Texas Tech University,
Lubbock.
Late Holocene Investigations at the Lubbock Lake
Landmark, Volume 2: The 1989 and 1990 Seasons.
Quaternary Research Center Series Number 8. Lubbock Lake Landmark, Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

Johnson, E., V. T. Holliday, M. J. Kaczor, and R. Stuckenrath
1977 The Garza Occupation at the Lubbock Lake Site.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 48:83109.

Katz, S.R.
1985 Country Cousins: The Late Prehistoric Period in the
Southern Guadalupe Mountains. In Views of the
Jornada Mogollon, edited by C. M. Beck, pp. 1-4.
Contributions in Anthropology, Volume 12. Eastern New Mexico University, Portales.
Katz, S. R. and P. R. Katz
1975 A Summary of Recent Archaeological Investigations in Guadalupe Mountains National Park by the
Department of Anthropology, Texas Tech University. Texas A rcheology 19(2): t 1-15.
1979

A Status Report on Research into the Prehistory of
Guadalupe Mountains National Park, Texas. In
Jornada Mogollon Archaeology: Proceedings of the
First Jornada Conference, edited by P. H. Beckett
and R. N. Wiseman, pp. 359-370. New Mexico Historic Preservation Division, Santa Fe.

1981

Ring Middens of the Southern Guadalupe
Mountains. In Archaeological Essays in Honor of
Mark Wimberly, edited by M. S. Foster, pp. 203208. The Artifact 19(3 and 4), E1 Paso
Archaeological Society, E1 Paso.

Johnson, L., Jr.
1989 Classification of Stone Projectile Points by a Small
Texan Folk Community: A Case Study. The Texas
Journal of Science 41 (2): 193-203.
1992

1994

Stealing Secrets from Dead Potters: A Plea for Painstaking Ceramic Sleuthing. APR News and Views
4(1):14-16.
The Life and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk As Seen
from the Buckhollow Encampment, Site 41KM16, of
Kimble County, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist Report 38. Texas Department of Transportation and Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Jurney, D. H. and T. K. Perttula
1995 Nineteenth Century Alibamu-Koasati Pottery Assemblages and Culinary Traditions. Southeastern
Archaeology 14:17-30.
Katz, P. R.
1978 An Inventory and Assessment ofArchaeological Sites
in the High Country of Guadalupe Mountains National Park, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report
No. 36~ Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Katz, P. R. and P. D. Lukowski
1981 Results of Archaeological Survey in the Salt Flat
Locality of Northern Hudspeth County, Texas. In
Five Archeological Investigations in the TransPecos Region of Texas, by J. Betancourt, D. Creel,
P. R. Katz, P. D. Lukowski, L. McNutt, and R. W.
Ralph, pp. 1-26. Permit Series No. 6. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.

227

Kauffman, B. and D. Batcho
1988

Final Report ofArchaeological h~vestigations Along
El Paso Electric Company’s 345 KV CalienteNewman-Amrad Transmission System on Fort Bliss,
Texas. Historic and Natural Resources Report No.
4. Environmental Management Office, Fort Bliss,
Texas.

Kelley, D. B. (editor)
1994 The McLelland and Joe Clark Sites: ProtohistoricHistoric Caddoan Farmsteads in Southern Bossier
Parish, Louisiana. Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge.
Kelley, J. Charles
1939 Archaeological Notes on the Excavation of a
Pithouse Near Presidio, Texas. El Palacio
44(10):221-234.
t947

The Lehman Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the
Toyah, Uvalde, and Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 18:115-128.

1948

An Archeological Reconnaissance Along the Rio
Grande between Redford and Fabens, Texas, Summer 1948. MS on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

1949

Archeological Notes on Two Excavated House
Structures in Western Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 20:89114.

228

Texas Archeological Society

1953

The Historic Indian Pueblos of the La Junta de los

Lintz, C. (Continued)

Rios. New Mexico Historical Review 27(4):257-295

1986

Antelope Creek Phase of the Texas Panhandle. Stud-

and 28(1):21-51.
1957

ies in Oklahoma’s Past No. 14. Oklahoma Archeo-

The Livermore Focus: A Clarification. El Palacio

logical Survey, Norman.

64(1-2):44-52.
1985

Review of the Architectural Sequence at La Junta

Architecture and Community Variability Within the

199!

Texas Panhandle-Pueblo Interactions from the Thirteenth Through the Sixteenth Century. In Farmers,

de los Rios. In Proceedings of the Third Jornada

Hunters, and Colonists: Interaction between the

Mogollon Conference, edited by M. S. Foster and

Southwest and the Southern Plains, edited by K. A.

T. C. O’Laughlin, pp. 149-160. The Artifact 23(1

Spielmann, pp. 89-106. University of Arizona Press,

and 2). El Paso Archaeological Society, E1 Paso.

Tucson.
1986

Jumano and Patarabueye. Anthropological Papers
No. 77. Museum of Anthropology, University of

Lintz, C. and K. Reese-Taylor

Michigan, Ann Arbor.

1995

Migrations, Trade, or Replicated Ceramics: Petrographic Study of Collared Rim Sherds from the

Kelley, J. C., T. N. Campbell, and D. Lehmer

Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas Archeologi-

1940

cal Society 67, in press.

The Association of Archaeological Materials with
Geological Deposits in the Big Bend Region of
Texas. Publication No. 10, West Texas Historical
and Scientific Society Publication, and Bulletin Vol-

Lorrain, D.
1967

Artifacts from Prehistoric Sites. In A Pilot Study of

ume 21, No. 3, Sul Ross State Teachers College,

Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory, as-

Alpine.

sembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W.
Newcomb, pp. 197-203. Final report for Grant GS-

Kenmotsu, N. A.
1992

964. National Science Foundation, Washington,

A Summary of McKittrick Canyon Watershed,

D.C.

Guadalupe Mountains National Park, Culberson
County, Texas. The Artifact 30(2):1-32, El Paso

1969

Archaeological Excavations in the Fish Creek Reservoir. Contributions in Anthropology Number 4.

Archaeological Society, El Paso.

Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.

Kidder, A. V. and A. O. Shepard
1936

The Pottery of Pecos, Volume 2. Phillips Academy
Papers of the Southwestern Expedition 7. Yale University Press, New Haven.

Lorrain, D. and N. Hoffrichter
1968

The Lower Rockwall Site, Rockwall County, Texas.
Report submitted to the National Park Service by

Krieger, A. D.

the Salvage Project, Southern Methodist Univer-

1946

sity, Dallas.

Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas with Extension of Puebloan Datings to the
Mississippi Valley. Publication No. 4640. The University of Texas at Austin.

Mallouf, R. J.
1985

A Synthesis of Eastern Trans-Pecos Prehistory. Unpublished Masters Thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

LeBlanc, S. A.
1982

Temporal Change in Mogollon Ceramics. In South,
western Ceramics: A Comparative Review, edited

Northeastern Chihuahua, Mexico. Office of the State
Archeologist Report 35. Texas Historical Commis-

chaeologist 15.

sion, Austin.

The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon. Social Science Bulletin 17. University of Arizona, Tucson.

Lintz, C.
1978

Las Haciendas, A Cairn-Burial Assemblage from

by A. H. Schroder, pp. 106-127. The Arizona Ar-

Lehmer, D.
1948

1987

The Panhandle Aspect and its Early Relationship
with Upper Republican. In The Central Plains Tra-

Martin, D.
1990 Results of a Five Kilometer Archaeological Survey
within the Boundaries of the Second Proposed Location for the Hudspeth County, Texas, Low-Level
Radioactive Waste Disposal Authority. Report on
file at the Texas Low-Level Radioactive Waste Disposal Authority, Austin.

dition: Internal Development and External Relationships, edited by D. J. Blakeslee. Report 11.
Office of the State Archeologist, The University of
Iowa, Iowa City.
1984

The Plains Villagers: Antelope Creek. In Prehistory
in Oklahoma, edited by R. E. Bell, pp. 325-346.
Academic Press, Orlando.

Martin, E. R.
!994 The Dillard Site: A Late Prehistoric Plains Village
Site in Cooke County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
A rcheological Society 62:105-200.

Perttula et al. ~ Prehistoric Ceralnics in Texas
Martin, G. C.
1931

Texas Coastal Pottery. Bulletin of the Texas Ar-

Miller,
1989 Archaeological Excavations at the Gobernadora and

cheological and Paleontological Society 3:53-56.

Martin, W. A. and J. E. Bruseth
1988 Wylie Focus Pits: A New Look at Some Old Features. The Record, 50th Anniversary Edition, Volume 42(3):20-35. Dallas Archeological Society,
Dallas.

229

Qiasen Sims: Dona Ana Phase Settlement in the
Western Hueco Bolson. Research Report No. 673.
Center for Anthropological Research, New Mexico
State University, Las Cruces.

1990

Archaeological btvestigations in the North Hills
Subdivision, Northeast El Paso, Texas. Research
Report No. 1. Batcho & Kauffman Associates, El
Paso.

McClurkan, B. B.
1968

Livingston Reservoir, 1965-1966: Late Archaic and

Southern Jornada Mogollon, A.D. 1100-1200. Pa-

Archeological Salvage, Project 12. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at

per presented at the symposium "Current Ceramic

Austin.

Mogollon Conference, El Paso.

McConnet, R. B. and J. J. Crim, Jr.
1941

1991a Transitional Period Ceramic Developments in the

Neo-American Occupations. Papers of the Texas

Research in the Jornada Mogollon," Eighth Jornada

1991b Jornada Mogollon Ceramic Research at the Crossroads. Paper presented at the symposium "Current

Buried Hearths and Pottery in Alluvium of the Finlay

Ceramic Research in the Jornada Mogollon," Eighth

Mountains, Texas. Field and Laboratory, Contribu-

Jornada Mogollon Conference, E1 Paso.

tions from the Science Departments, No. 9, pp. 4852.

1992a Preliminary Statement of Findings for Archaeological Testing at Sites 41HZ491, 41HZ492, and
41HZ493, Hudspeth County, Texas. Cultural Re-

McGregor, D. E. and J. E. Bruseth
1987

Artifact Chronology. In Hunter-Gatherer Adapta-

sources Report No. 163. Batcho & Kauffman Asso-

tions along the Prairie Margin: Site Excavations

ciates, E1 Paso.

and Synthesis of PrehiStoric Archaeology, edited by

chaeological Clearance Surveys of Access Corri-

Richland Creek Technical Series, Volume III. Ar-

dors for the Proposed FAA Air Route Surveillance

chaeology Research Program, Institute for the Study

Radar 4 Facility on Eagle Peak, Hudspeth County,

of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist University,

Texas. Cultural Resources Report No. 150. Batcho

Dallas.

& Kauffman Associates, E1 Paso.

McIntyre, A. J. and D. E. McGregor
!982

1992b Archaeological Survey in the Eagle Mountains: Ar-

D. E. McGregor and J. E. Bruseth, pp. 171-184.

1993

Transitional Period (Dona Ana Phase). Paper pre-

Vessel recovered in Rockwall County, Texas. In

sented at the Ninth Jornada Mogollon Conference,

Season One (1982) Mitigation of Prehistoric Ar-

Tularosa, New Mexico.

chaeology in the Richland/Chambers Reservoir,
Navarro and Freestone Counties, Texas: Interim

Ceramic Chronologies, Phase Sequences, and Evolutionary Adaptive Trends: A Clarification of the

A Petrographic Analysis of a Southwestern Trade

1994

Jornada Mogollon Residential Settlements in the

Report, edited by A. J. McIntyre, pp. 513-520. Ar-

Salt Flat Basin and Delaware Mountains of West

chaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist

Texas. In Mogollon VII: Collected Papers of the

University, Dallas.

1992 Mogollon Conference Held in Las Cruces,
New Mexico, pp. 105-114. COAS Publishing and

Mera,
1938 Reconnaissance and Excavation in Southeastern

1943

Research, Las Cruces.
Time and Technology in Southern Jornada Mogollon

New Mexico. Memoirs No. 51. American Anthro-

Prehistory: A Chronometric Perspective. Cultural

pological Association, Menasha, Wisconsin.

and Natural Resources Report series. Directorate of

An Outline of the Ceramic Developments in South-

Environment, Fort Bliss, Texas. In preparation.

ern and Southeastern New Mexico. Technical Series Bulletin No. 2. Laboratory of Anthropology,
Santa Fe.
Middlebrook, T.
1994

An Update of Archaeological Investigations at the
Tyson Site (41SY92). Journal of Northeast Texas
Archaeology, No. 3:1-36.

Miller, M. R., T. Stuart, and W. Howell
1988a Preliminary A rchaeological Surveys and Documentation of Petroglyph Sites in Western Hudspeth
Count),, Texas, Part II: Preliminar?/’ Archaeological
Survey of a Proposed Low-Level Radioactive Waste
Disposal Site in Western Hudspeth County, Texas.
Cultural Resources Report Number 37. Batcho &
Kauffman Associates, E1 Paso.

230

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

Miller, M. R., T. Stuart, and W. Howell (Continued)
1988b Preliminary Archaeological Surveys and Documentation of Petroglyph Sites in Western HudsT)eth
Count),, Texas, Part I: Preliminary Archaeological

Palmer, G. G. (editor)
1993 El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro. Cultural Resources Series No. 11. Bureau of Land Management, New Mexico State Office, Santa Fe.

Survey and Documentation of Petroglyph Sites in
Western Hudspeth County, Texas. Cultural Re-

Patterson, L. W.

sources Report Number 37. Batcho & Kauffman

1993

The Archeology of Inland Southeast Texas: A Quantitative Study. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological

Associates, E1 Paso.

Society 61:255-280.
Miller, M. R., S. Decker, K. Shaw, and T. Stuart
1994 Chronological Developments in El Paso Polychrome

n.d.

Archeology of the Southeastern Texas Coastal Margin: A Quantitative Study. MS on file with the author.

Vessel Function and Design Styles. Paper presented
at the Eighth Mogollon Conference, El Paso.

Peck, J.
1993

X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis of Ceramic Sherds

Miller, M. R. and B. O’Leary
1992 The Ysleta Clinic Site: A Spanish Colonial Period

Reservoir (Lake Alan Henry), Garza and Kent Coun-

Native American Settlement in the Lower Valley of

ties, Texas: Phase lII, Season 2, by D. K. Boyd, J.

El Paso, Texas. Research Report No. 2. Batcho &

Peck, S. A. Tomka, and K. W. Kibler, pp. 379-387.

Kauffman Associates, El Paso.

Reports of Investigations, No. 88. Prewitt and As-

and Clay Samples. In Data Recovery at Justiceburg

sociates, Inc., Austin.

Neff, H.
1995 A Role for "Sourcing" in Evolutionary Archaeology. In Evolutionar3, Archaeology: Methodological
Issues, edited by P. A. Teltser, pp. 69-112. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Neiman, F. D.
1995 Stylistic Variation in Evolutionary Perspective: Inferences from Decorative Diversity and
Interassemblage Distance in Illinois Woodland Ceramic Assemblages. American Antiquity 60(1):7-36.

Perino, G.
1994

(41RR77), Red River County, Texas. Journal of
Northeast Texas Archaeology, No. 4:3-42.
Perttula, T. K.
1992

"The

Caddo

Nation":

Archaeological

and

Ethnohistoric Perspectives. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
1993

The Development of Agriculture in Northeast Texas
before A.D. 1600. In Archeology in the Eastern

Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1993

Archaeological Research at the Rowland Clark Site

Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, ed-

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 64:1-63.

ited by N. A. Kenmotsu and T. K. Perttula, pp. 121146. Cultural Resource Management Report 3.

Newell, H. P. and A. D. Krieger

Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas His-

1949

torical Commission, Austin.

The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.
Memoirs No. 5. Society for American Archaeology
and the University of Texas, Menasha, Wisconsin.

Perttula, T. K., B. D. Skiles, and B. C. Yates
1993

O’Brien, M. J., T. D. Holland, R. J. Hoard, and G. L. Fox
1994 Evolutionary Implications of Design and Performance Characteristics of Prehistoric Pottery. Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory
1(3):259-304.
O’Laughlin, T. C.
!995

The Goldsmith Site (41WD208): Investigations of
the Titus phase in the Upper Sabine River Basin,
Northeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 61:139-191.

Peter, D. E. and D. E. McGregor, with contributions by B. C.
Yates, G. J. Fritz, and J. E. Bruseth
1988a Site 41DL149. In Late Holocene Prehistory of the

Early Formative Ceramic Assemblages in the

Mountain Creek Drainage, edited by D. E. Peter

Mesilla Valley of Southern New Mexico. In Views

and D. E. McGregor, pp. 199-244. Joe Pool Lake

of the Jornada Mogollon, edited by C. M. Beck, pp.

Archaeological Project, Volume I. Archaeology Re-

54-67. Contributions in Anthropology, Volume 12.

search Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and

Eastern New Mexico University, Portales.

Man, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
1988b Site 41DL148: The Cobb-Pool Site. In Late Ho-

O’Laughlin, T. C. and D. L. Martin

locene Prehistory of the Mountain Creek Drainage,

1992

edited by D. E. Peter and D. E. McGregor, pp. 131-

Archaeological Testing of Three Sites below the
Rimrock of Diablo Plateau, Hudspeth County,

198. Joe Pool Lake Archaeological Project, Volume

Texas. The Artifact 30(1): 1-81. El Paso Archaeo-

I. Archaeology Research Program, Institute for the

logical Society, Inc., E1 Paso.

Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Perttula et al. ~ Prehisto~qc Ceramics in Texas

Peterson, J. and D. O. Brown (editors)
1991

El Valle Bajo: The Culture History of the Lower
Rio Grande Valley of El Paso. Volume 1: Lower

Quigg, J. M., C. Lintz, F. M. Oglesby, A. C. Earls, C. D.
Frederick, W. N. Trierweiler, D. Owsley, and K. W. Kibler
1993

Historic and Prehistoric Data Recovery at Palo

Valley Prehistory. Hicks and Company, Inc. and

Duro Reservoir, Hansford County, Texas. Technical

Archaeological Research, Inc., Austin and E1 Paso.

Report No. 485. Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.

Phelps, A. L.
1974

231

An Analysis of the Ceramics of the Guadalupe

Reed,
1991 Does Stability Imply Success or Stagnation? Paper

Mountains National Park. Bulletin of the Texas Ar-

presented at the Symposium "Current Ceramic Re-

cheological Society 45:121- ! 50.

search in the Jornada Mogollon," Seventh Mogollon
Conference, E1 Paso.

Phillips, P.
1970

Archaeological Survey in the Lower Yazoo Basin,

Reese-Taylor, K.

Mississippi,

1993

1949-1955. Papers, Volume 60.

Petrographic Analysis. In Historic and Prehistoric

Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and

Data Recovery at Palo Duro Reservoir, Hansford

Ethnology, Harvard University, Cambridge.

County, Texas, by J. M. Quigg, C. Lintz, F. M.
Oglesby, A. C. Earls, C. D. Frederick, W. N.

Poche,
1995 Ceramic Technology and Hunter-Gatherer Adapta-

Trierweiler, D. Owsley, and K. W. Kibler, pp. H-1
to H-13. Technical Report No. 485. Mariah Associ-

tions to Semi-Arid Basin Environments: Ceramic
Analysis for Project 91-07. In Prehistoric Cultural
Systems in the Northern Chihuahuan Desert: Ar-

ates, Inc., Austin.
1994

Ceramic Production and Consumption Patterns in
Early, Middle, and Late Caddoan Settlements from

chaeological Research in the Hueco Bolson of West

Rusk and Titus Counties, Texas. Paper presented at

Texas, by G. R. Burgett, K. Poche, K. Faunce, M.

the 65th Annual Meeting of the Texas Archeologi-

Melton, D. Potter, B. Buck, F. Almarez, J. Leach,

cal Society, Lubbock.

T. O’Laughlin, R. Holloway, and M. Newman. Cultura! and Natural Resources Report Series, Direc-

1995a Evidence of Resource Procurement and Manufacturing Techniques in Caddoan Ceramic Assemblages

torate of Environment, Fort Bliss, Texas.

from the Sabine, Cypress, and Sulphur River DrainPrewitt, E. R.

age Basins, Rusk and Titus Counties, Texas. Jour-

1981

nal of Northeast Texas Archaeology, No. 5:9-27.

Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89.

1985

1995b Petrographic Analysis of Ceramic Thin Sections

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central

from Fort Hood, Texas. In NRHP Significance Test-

Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo-

ing of 57 Prehistoric Archeological Sites on Fort

logical Society 54:201-238.

Hood, edited by J. T. Abbott, pp. E-1 to E-24. Review Draft. Research Report No. 34, Archeological

Price, G. R. D.

Resource Management Series. U.S. Army, Fort

1993

Hood.

Archeological Significance Testing at Sites 41MU60,
41MU61, 41MU62, and 41MU63, Montague
County, Texas. Texas Department of Transporta-

Reese-Taylor, K., J. Hageman, and R. A. Ricklis

tion, Division of Highway Design, Austin.

1995

Preliminary Paste Analyses of Ceramics from the
Mustang Branch (41HY209) and Barton Sites

Prikryl, D. J.
1990

1994

Lower Elm Fork Prehistory: A Redefinition of Cul-

(41HY202). In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek Valley,

tural Concepts and Chronologies along the Trinity

Hays County, Texas, by R. A. Ricklis and M. B.

River, North-Central Texas. Report 37. Office of

Collins. Studies in Archeology 19. Texas Archeo-

the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commis-

logical Research Laboratory, The University of

sion, Austin.

Texas at Austin.

A Reexamination of Shell-Tempered Pottery from
the Red River, North Central Texas. Paper presented
at the 52rid Annual Meeting of the Plains Anthropological Conference and the 65th Texas Archeological Society Meeting, Lubbock, Texas.

Reynolds, E. A.
1992

Caddo Pottery Shape Typology and Standardized
Measurements. University Museum, University of
Arkansas, Fayetteville.

Quigg, J. M. and J. Peck

Rice, P.

1995

1987

The Rush Site (41TG346): A Stratified Late Prehistoric Locale in Tom Green County, Texas. Technical Report No. 816C. Mariah Associates, Inc.,
Austin.

Pottery Analysis: A Sourcebook. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

232

Texas Archeological Society

Ricklis, R. A.
1989

Preliminary Observations on a Late Prehistoric Bison
Processing Site (4 l RF21) on the Central Part of the
Texas Coastal Plain. Texas A rcheology 33(2): 12-13.

1990

A Historical Cultural Ecology of the Karankawan
Indians of the Central Texas Coast: A Case Study in
the Roots of Adaptive Change. Ph.D. dissertation,
The University of Texas at Austin.

1992

The Spread of a Late Prehistoric Bison Hunting

Roney, J. R.
1983 Prehistory of the Guadalupe Mountains. Unpublished Masters Thesis, Department of Anthropology, Eastern New Mexico State Uuiversity, Portales.
Ross, R. E.
1966 The Upper Rockwall and Glen Hill Sites, Forney
Reservoir, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 9. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.

Complex: Evidence from the South-Central Coastal

1994

Prairie of Texas. Plains Anthropologist 37( 140):261 -

Runkles, F. A. and E. D. Dorchester

273.

1987

The Lott Site (41GR56): A Late Prehistoric Site in

Aboriginal Lift, and Culture on the Upper Texas

Garza County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo-

Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell Ridge Site,

logical Society 57:83-115.

41GV66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological
Research, Inc., Corpus Christi.
in press The Karankawa Indians of the Texas Coast: An

Runyan, J. W. and J. A. Hedrick
1973

chaeological Societies (SWFAS) Area. Transactions

Ecology Study of Cultural Tradition and Change.

of tile Eighth Regional Archaeological Symposium

University of Texas Press, Austin.

Ricklis, R. A. and M. B. Collins
1995 Archaic and Lztte Prehistoric Human Ecology in
the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas.
Studies in Archeology 19. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Ring, E. R., Jr.
1994

The Galena Sites (41HR61-41HR70): A Late Archaic to Late Prehistoric Complex in Harris County,
Texas. Bulletin of the 7k~xas Archeological Society
65:257-300.

Robinson, D. G.
1992 Petrographic Analysis of Nonlocal Plainwares. In
Data Recovet)’ at Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan
Henry), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase HI,
Season 1, by D. K. Boyd, S. A. Tomka, C. B.
Bousman, K. M. Gardner, and M. D. Freeman, pp.
221-227. Reports of Investigations No. 84. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.
1994

Petrographic Analysis of Plainwares from 41GR291.
In Data Recovery at Lake Alan Henry (Justiceburg
Resetwoir), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase
111, Season 3, by D. K. Boyd, J. Peck, S. A. Tomka,
K. W. Kibler, and M. D. Freeman, pp. 355-361.
Reports of Investigations No. 93. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Rohrt, M. and S. A. Skinner
1974 Archaeological Survey of Hitson, C&L, and
Washburn Draws and Cornudas, North, and Culp
Draws Watetwheds, West Texas and Southeast New
Mexico. Research Report No. 51. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University,
Dallas.

Pottery Types of the Southwest Federations of Ar-

for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas,
pp. 19-44. Hobbs, New Mexico.
Sayles, E. B.
1935

An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers No. 17. Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.

Scarborough, V.
1992 Ceramics, Sedentism, and Agricultural Dependency
At A Late Pithouse/Early Pueblo Village. In Research in Economic Anthrot)ology, Supplement 6, pp.
307-333. JAI Press, Inc., Westport, Connecticut.
Schambach, F. F.
1981 A Description and Analysis of the Ceramics. In Tile
Shallow Lake Site (3UN9/52) and its" Place in Regional Prehistory, by M. A. Rolingson and F. F.
Schambach, pp. 101-176. Research Series No. 12.
Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Schambach, F. F. and J. E. Miller
1984

A Description and Analysis of the Ceramics. In
Cedar Grove: An Interdisciplina~y Investigation of
a Late Caddo Farmstead in the Red River Valley,
edited by N. L. Trubowitz, pp. 109-170. Research
Series No. 23. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

Schambach, F. F., J. C. Weber, and A. M. Early
n.d.
Typology and Nomenclature for South Arkansas
Ceramics: The Descriptive Classification. MS in
progress, Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

Perttula et al. ~ Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

Schiffer, M. B., J. M. Skibo, T. C. Boelke, M. A. Neupert, and
M. Aronson
1994

233

Sorrow, W. M.
1966

The Pecan Springs Site, Bardwell Reservoir, Texas.

New Perspectives on Experimental Archaeology:

Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project

Surface Treatments and Thermal Response of the

No. 10. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The

Clay Cooking Pot. American Antiquity 59(2):197-

University of Texas at Austin.

217.
Spielmann, K. A.
Schmidt-Couzzourt, B.
1983

1983

Late Prehistoric Exchange between the Southwest

The Chicken Creek Site: Archeological Testing in

and Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist 28(102),

the Lake Meredith Recreation Area, Potter County,

Pt. 1:257-272.

Texas. U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of
Reclamation, Amaril!o.

Spielmann, K. A. (editor)
1991

Scott, FoW,
1994 Notes on Great Bend Aspect Ceramic Vessels in the

Farmers, Hunters, and Colonists’: Interaction between the Southwest and the Southern Plains. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

KSHS Collections. The Kansas Anthropologist
15(1):70-87.

Stallings, W. So
1931

Seaman, T. J. and B. J. Mills
1988 E1 Paso Brownware Rim Analysis. In Toward an

E1 Paso Polychrome. Technical Series Bulletin No.
3. Laboratory of Anthropology, Museeum of New
Mexico, Santa Fe.

Archeology of Landscapes: The Borderstar 85 Survey, edited by T. J. Seaman, W. H. Doleman, and R.

Stephenson, R. L.

Chapman, pp. 169-182. Office of Contract Archeol-

1949

ogy, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque.

Archeological survey of Lavon and Garza-Little Elm
reservoirs: a preliminary report. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 20:21-

Shackleford, W. J.
1951

Excavations at the Polvo Site in Western Texas.
Unpublished Masters Thesis, Department of An-

62.
1970

voir Area, Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Ar-

thropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
1955

Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Resercheological Society 41:37-277.

Excavations at the Polvo Site in Western Texas.
American Antiquity 29(3):256-262.

Steponaitis, V. P., M. J. Blackman, and H. Neff
1995

Large-Scale Patterns in the Chemical Composition

Shafer, H. J.

of Mississippian Pottery. MS submitted to Ameri-

1970

can Antiquity.

A Preliminary Report of an Archaeological Survey
in the Guadalupe Mountains National Park by the

!981

Texas Archeological Society in June, 1970. Texas

Stokes, J. and J. L. Woodring

Archeology 14(3): 10-17.

1981

Native-Made Artifacts of Clay. In Archeological
Investigations at the George C. Davis’ Site, Chero-

Archeological Investigations at the Attaway Site,
Henderson County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas

kee County, Texas: Summers of 1979 and 1980,

A rcheological Society 52:147 - 178.

edited by D. A. Story, pp. 135-238. Occasional Papers No. 1. Texas Archeological Research Labora-

Skinner, S. A., P. Po Steed, and S. E. Bearden
1973

gram, Southern Methodist University, Austin.
1974

tory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Prehistory at Milehigh. Archaeology Research Pro-

Prehistory of Milehigh. The Artifact 12(1):1-84. E1

Story,
1968 Archeological Investigations at Two Central Gulf
Coast Sites. Report No. 13. Archeological Program,

Paso Archaeological Society, E1 Paso.

Smith, J. E. II, with contributions by J. C. Blaine, K. Gilmore,
R. K. Harris, and I. M. Harris
1993 The Vinson Site (41LT1): A Nortefio Focus Indian
Village in Limestone County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 64:65-162.

State Building Commission, Austin.
1985

The Walton Site: An Historic Burial in McLennan
County, Texas. Central Texas Archeologist, Number 10:66-96.

1990

Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The
Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal
Plain, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M.

Smithwick, N.
1900

The Evolution of a State, or Recollections of Old
Texas Days. Gammel Publishing Co., Austin.

D. Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive,
and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. 2 Vols. Research
Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

234

Texas Archeological Society

Studer, F. V.
1934

Texas Panhandle Culture Ruin No. 55. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 6:80-96.

Suhm,
1962

D. A. and E. B. Jelks

Walker, K. F. and D. W. Trexler
1941 An Indian Camp Site in the Northern Finlay
Mountains, Hudspeth County, Texas. Fields and~
Laboratory: Contributions from the Science
Department No. 9:60-69. Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.

Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
Texas Archeological Society, Special Publication

Wedel, W. R.

No. 1, and Texas Memorial Museum, Bulletin No.

1959

An h~troduction to Kansas Archeology. Bulletin No.
174. Bureau of American Ethnology, Smithsonian

4. Austin.

Institution, Washington, D.C.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.

1982

Further Notes on Puebloan-Central Plains Contacts
in Light of Archaeology. in Pathways to Plains

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25

Prehistory: Anthropological Perspectives of Plains

(whole volume).

Natives and Their Pasts, edited by D. G. Wyckoff
and J. L. Hofman, pp. 145-152. Oklahoma Anthro-

Tanner, R. W.
1949 The Caldwell Ranch Sites: A Distinctive Culture
Complex in the Northeastern Trans-Pecos. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

pological Society, Memoir 3, and The Cross Timbers Heritage Association, Contributions 1. The
Cross Timbers Press, Duncan, Oklahoma.
Weinstein, R. A.
1991

Thurmond, J. P.
1985

Lido Harbor (41GV82): A Late Prehistoric Campsite and Extraction Locale, Galveston County, Texas.

Late Caddoan Social Group Identifications and

Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge.

Sociopolitical Organization in the Upper Cypress
Basin and its Vicinity, Northeastern Texas. Bulletin

1992

Archaeology and Paleogeography of the Lower
Guadahq)e River/San Antonio Bay Region: Cultural

of the Texas Archeological Society 54:185-200.

Resource Investigations Along the Channel to
1990

Archeology of the Cypress Creek Drainage Basin,

Victoria, Calhoun and Victoria Counties, Texas.
Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge.

Northeastern Texas and Northwestern Louisiana.
Studies in Archeology No. 5. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Whalen, M. E.
1977

Treece, A. C., C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler, J. M. Quigg, and

Settlement Patterns of the Eastern Hueco Bolson.
Anthropological Paper No. 4. E1 Paso Centennial
Museum, The University of Texas at E1 Paso.

K. A. Miller
1993

Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie

1978

Ceramics and Chronology in the Hueco Bolson. In

Reservoit; Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Coun-

Settlement Patterns of the Western Hueco Bolson,

ties, Texas. Volume IV: Data Recovery Results fi’om

edited by M. E. Whalen, pp. 58-70. Anthropologi-

Ceramic Sites. Technical Report 346-IV. Mariah

cal Paper No. 6. E1 Paso Centennial Museum, The
University of Texas at E1 Paso.

Associates, Austin.
1980

Special Studies in the Archaeology of the Hueco

Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester

Bolson. Anthropological Paper No. 9. E1 Paso Cen-

1993

tennial Museum, The University of Texas at E1 Paso.

A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
Second Edition. Gulf Publishing Company, Houston.

Turner, R. L.
1995 Native American Ceramics of Northeast Texas.
Texas Archeological Stewardship Network Newsletter 10(1):19-21.

1981

Origins and Evolution of Ceramics in Western
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:215-229.

1985

Dating the Past in Western Trans-Pecos Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:239250.

Vehik,
1984 The Woodland Occupations. In Prehistory of Oklahoma, edited by R. E. Bell, pp. 175-197. Academic
Press, Orlando.

Vehik, S. C. and T. G. Baugh
1994 Prehistoric Plains Trade. In Prehistoric Exchange
Systems in North America, edited by T. G. Baugh
and J. E. Ericson, pp. 249-274. Plenum Press, New
York.

1993

El Paso Plain Brown Rims as Chronological Markers? New Data on an Old Question. The Kiva
58(4):475-486.

1994a Turquoise Ridge and Late Prehistoric Residential
Mobility in the Desert Mogollon Region. Anthropological Papers No. 1 !8. University of Utah Press,
Salt Lake City.

Perttula et al. w Prehistoric Ceramics in Texas

Whalen, M. E. (Continued)
1994b Ceramic Technology and the Dating of E1 Paso
Brown Pottery. Paper presented at the Eighth
Mogollon Conference, El Paso, Texas.
Willey, P. S. and J. T. Hughes
1978 The Deadman’s Shelter Site. In Archeology at
Mackenzie Reservoir, edited by J. T. Hughes and P.
S. Willey, pp. 149-197. Survey Report 24. Office of
the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Witte, AoH.
1935 Archeology of a Section of Upper Red River Drainage. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 7:47-56.

1936

235

Kitchen Middens of the Upper Red River Drainage.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 8:71-86.

Word, J. H.
1991 The 1975 Field School of the Texas Archeological
Society. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
60:57-106.
Wright, J. F., with contributions by B. H. Butler, R. L. Turner,
and C. K. Chandler
1995 The Asa Warner Site (41ML46), McLennan County,
Texas. MS submitted for publication in the Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society.

PART

THE REGIONAL
ARCHEOLOGY OF TEXAS

The Archeo!ogy of Southeast Texas
Leland W. Patterson

ABSTRACT
The archeology of Southeast Texas is becoming increasingly better known with a rapid accumulation of data
in the last 20 years. Evidence for human habitation of this region covers an interval of about 11,000 to 12,000
years. A broad-based hunting and gathering lifeway was practiced up to approximately A.D. 1800. Archeological data from Southeast Texas are especially valuable for the study of hunter-gatherer adaptations to a variety
of ecological settings. While the partial nature of the archeological record precludes complete reconstruction of
prehistoric lifeways, regional syntheses can still be made with significant detail.

INTRODUCTION
Much of the nature of the archeological record
in Southeast Texas has been determined by the
region being an interface between the Southern
Plains and Southeast Woodlands. Technological
characteristics in Southeast Texas archeological assemblages seem to have been influenced by traditions from adjacent regions. The effects of
migrations of peoples and diffusion of technology
must be considered here, as well as local innovation. There are also occasional examples of longdistance trade, especially during the Late Archaic
period. Throughout this paper, distinctions are made
between the inland and coastal margin subregions
of Southeast Texas. These two subregions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the inland subregion
has a much longer ctu-onological record. Aten (1983)
has detailed many of the aspects of the archeology
of the coastal margin subregion. Story (1990) has
included Southeast Texas in her detailed overview
of the archeology of the Gulf coastal plain, from
the coastline to Arkansas and eastern Texas.
Archeological data of Southeast Texas are now
well-organized. There is a continuing bibliographic
series (Patterson 1992a), and there are computerized data bases for published sites of the inland and
coastal margins subregions (Patterson 1989a,
1989b). A quantitative summary of the inland subregion data base has been published (Patterson
1993a). A detailed synthesis of Southeast Texas for
all geographic areas and time periods is being developed by the author. Southeast Texas has a large

number of published site surface collections and
excavated sites.
This paper considers the usual research topics
that are applied to hunter-gatherers with a nomadic
lifeway, such as subsistence patterns, mobilitysettlement patterns, social organization, and technologica! traditions. The basic pattern of lifeways
of conservative hunter-gatherers is characterized by
generally slow change in artifact styles, only a few
changes in basic technologies, and long continuities of subsistence and mobility-settlement patterns.
GEOGRAPHIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL
SETTING
For this paper, Southeast Texas is defined as a
21 county area (Table 1). This regional definition
includes data for an area from the Colorado River
on the west to the Sabine River on the east, for
about 200 km inland from the Gulf coastline. Previous studies have shown that it is especially important to consider together the archeology of Fort
Bend and Austin counties, with the eastern part of
Wharton County, as it seems to be an area where
much mixing of technologies occurred, and it has a
distinctive Late Archaic mortuary tradition.
The coastal margin of Southeast Texas is a
zone about 25 km inland from the coast. It covers
the area of influence of Gulf tidal flows on the
salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. There is considerable variation in the ecology of this subregion,
including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes, wetlands, marine coastline, and barrier islands off the

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

240

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1. Sites in Southeast Texas Data Bases

County

no. of
inland sites

no. of coastal
margin sites

recorded
sites

Austin

9

N.A.

80

Brazoria

4

12

183

Chambers

0

147

356

Fort Bend

22

N.A.

223

Galveston

0

7

137

Grimes

10

N.A.

403

Hardin

5

N.A.

t6

120

30

751

Jefferson

1

0

67

Jasper

6

N,A.

123

Liberty

14

5

86

Montgomery

32

N.A.

127

Newton

0

0

88

Orange

2

2

84

11

N.A.

173

San Jacinto

5

N.A.

154

Tyler

2

N.A.

39

Walker

5

N.A.

123

Waller

5

N.A.

21

Washington

3

N.A.

64

Wharton

27

N.A.

88

Total

283

203

3386

Harris

Polk

N.A.=not applicable

coastline. The inland subregion of Southeast Texas
also has significant ecological variation, including
mixed woodlands, coastal prairies and dense piney
woods. Even the piney woods habitat is not uniform, being dissected by oak-pine zones along major rivers (Figure 1). Dense piney woods occur in
the northeastern part of this region. This band of
piney woods extends over most of the eastern Gulf
Coastal Plain (Larsen 1980:35) as a distinct ecological zone with a low productivity of food resources. The western part of Southeast Texas is
well-known for nut trees, such as pecan. This part
of the region seems to have had a high productivity

of food resources. Principal vegetation zones of
Southeast Texas are shown in Figure 1.
There are distinct adaptive and cultural patterns
for the inland and coastal margin subregions, as
characterized by differences in subsistence patterns,
settlement patterns, and artifact types. Most coastal
margin sites are brackish water Rangia cuneata
shell middens, with some oyster shell middens found
on the coastline in a saltwater marine environment.
The general Galveston Bay area is especially wellknown for Rangia shell middens. Most inland sites
are sandy middens located near water sources, with
some freshwater mussel shell middens found mainly
in the western part of the region.
There are few data available concerning
paleoclimates in Southeast Texas. Although periodic variations in average rainfall and temperature
have occurred throughout the Holocene period, after 11,000 years B.P., there is little evidence for
significant changes in floral and faunal communities during this time period. Faunal remains indicate
that subsistence patterns appear to have been similar
throughout the Holocene period. Some dry periods
may be indicated by caliche (carbonate) deposits
(Aten 1983:134). However, the presence of caliche
at stratified sites is difficult to relate to climatic
conditions because caliche occurs at different time
periods at different sites in Southeast Texas, and
many archeological sites in the region have no caliche at any time period. Pollen which would provide
data on climatic change is generally not preserved at
sites in this region.
While there seems to be much changing of
river channels near the coast (Aten 1983:Chapter 8),
channels of smaller inland streams appear to have
been subject to less change. Many sites along inland
streams have long periods of use that imply stability
of stream channel locations. Thoms (1993:51) has
noted that over most of the West Gulf coastal plain a
sandy mantle, that typically contains most of the
material evidence of past cultures, caps clay-rich
soil horizons. For about 130 km inland, a sandy
mantle typically caps the clay-rich Beaumont formation. It is common to find archeological sites
with artifacts dating from 11,000-10,000 years ago
on the surface of Beaumont clay, which is not thought
to date later than 30,000 years ago (Aronow 1971:51).
At many locations, about 20,000 years of geological
deposits seem to be missing, possibly due to severe
erosional events caused by extended heavy rainfall
between 25,000 and 9000 B.P. (Aten 1983:133).

Patterson m The Archeology of Southeast Texas

241

Lo~loncl
Ploteou

Figure 1. Vegetation Zones in Southeast Texas (adapted from Story et al. 1990:Figure 11). Inset shows 21-county area
of Southeast Texas. Reprinted with the permission of the Arkansas Archeological Survey and the author.

242

Texas Archeological Society

Therefore, Southeast Texas is a poor area to look for
archeological sites predating 12,000 B.P.
After the Pleistocene period, sea level on the
Gulf of Mexico continued to rise. By 4500 years
ago, sea level was probably within 4.6 m of its
present level (Paine and Morton 1986:9). Sea level
stabilized at its present level about 3500 years ago
(Gagliano 1977:1). Coastal margin archeological
sites older than 3500 B.P. would generally now be
underwater. Therefore, a full chronological sequence for human occupation is only available for
the inland portion of this region. There are some
sites on the present coastal margin where rising sea
level changed the site environment from freshwater to brackish water, with a corresponding change
in human subsistence pattern, such as on upper San
Jacinto Bay (Patterson and Marshall 1989).

files of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL), but only about 14 percent of these sites have
been published. Unpublished site records seldom
describe the nature of each site in much detail.
Therefore, two computerized data bases for inland
and coastal margin subregions have been developed
(Patterson 1989a, 1989b) which are limited to
published site reports. Quantitative summaries of the
original 1989 data base fbr the inland subregion has
been published (Patterson 1993a). As of early 1994,
the current inland data base has 283 sites (101
excavated and 182 surface collections), and the coastal
margin database has 203 sites (56 excavated and 147
surface collections). As may be seen in Table 1,
coverage of various counties is far from uniform. A
typical prehistoric site excavation by the Houston
Archeological Society is shown in Figure 2.

THE REGIONAL DATA BASE

GENERAL REGIONAL CHRONOLOGY

As shown in Table 1, over 3380 archeological
sites have been recorded for Southeast Texas in the

Data on human habitation of Southeast Texas
covers an interval of about 12,000 years, with time

Figure 2. A Houston Archeological Society Excavation Proj ect, Site 41WH38, April 1994. Photograph by L. W. Patterson.

Patterson -- The Archeology of Southeast Texas

periods used here as follows:
Early Paleoindian

10,000-8000 B.C

Late Paleoindian

8000-5000 B.C.

Early Archaic

5000-3000 B.C.

Middle Archaic

3000-1500 B.C.

Late Archaic

1500 B.C.-A.D. 100

Early Ceramic

A.D. t00-600

Late Prehistoric

A.D. 600-1500

Protohistoric

A.D. 1500-1700

Historic Indian

A.D. 1700-1800+

Time periods are based more on artifact types
than on any differences in lifestyles. A nomadic
hunting and gathering lifestyle was practiced
throughout all prehistoric time periods in this region. Time intervals used for Southeast Texas may
be different than for adjacent regions, even though
the same period names are used. For example, the
time intervals used for the Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods are different in Central and Southeast
Texas, and there is no Early Ceramic period in
Central Texas.
The Early Paleoindian period is based on the
dating of Clovis and Folsom points in other parts of
Texas (see Meltzer and Bever, this volume). It is
now known that several varieties of side-notched
points also occur in Southeast Texas during the
same time period as Folsom. The Late Paleoindian
period represents the presence in Southeast Texas
of Plains types of lanceolate points, even though
several non-lanceolate point types were also used
during this time period. The Late Paleoindian period
in Texas corresponds to the Early Archaic period in
the eastern U.S. In Southeast Texas, the Late
Paleoindian period closes with the start of
dominance of stemmed point types. The Archaic
period in this region starts at the end of the Late
Paleoindian period and ends at about A.D. 100 (Aten
1983:297). The Early Ceramic period begins with
the adoption of pottery and ends with the
approximate start of bifacial arrow points (Aten
1983:306) at A.D. 600, the onset of the Late
Prehistoric period. More varied ceramics and other
material culture items characterize the Late
Prehistoric period, while the Protohistoric period
dates from after inital contact between the Native
Americans of Southeast Texas and European
explorers, colonists and settlers, and archeological

243

sites as early as the seventeenth century contain
European trade goods (e.g., Ricklis 1994). The
Historic Indian period ends between about 18001810 and 1840 with the more permanent European
and Anglo-American settlement of the region, and
the removal of the Native American groups.

TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE
AND CONTINUITY
The conservative hunter-gatherer lifeway in
Southeast Texas is characterized by slow change in
projectile point styles, and only a few major technological changes. Introduction of the bow and arrow and pottery were significant technological
changes, but they do not appear to have had a major
impact on lifestyle of Indians in the inland subregion. The use of pottery was more important on the
coastal margin, judged by the large quantities of
pottery at shell midden sites. The slow diffusion of
pottery into Southeast Texas is an indication that
conservative hunter-gatherers are not quick to adopt
new technology. It is probably characteristic of the
hunter-gatherer lifeway that a technological change
is accepted only when it makes a significant contribution to efficiency and group survival. Some sophisticated traits of complex cultures would be of
little value to the basic hunter-gatherer lifeway.
Some examples of this technological continuity in
the region are the use of the Gary-Kent dart point
series for thousands of years, the long use of fired
clayballs, and the gradual smooth trends in flake
size distributions toward higher percentages of
smaller size flakes in later time; the latter follows a
gradual trend toward smaller-sized dart points.

SUBSISTENCE PATTERNS
Because of poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas are
known mainly through the study of faunal remains.
Preservation of faunal remains is best at shell
middens, both inland (McClure 1987), and on the
coastal margin (Dillehay 1975). There is little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct
megafauna, as was done by Paleoindians in some
parts of North America. It appears that a broadbased subsistence pattern was practiced during all
prehistoric time periods, even during the Paleoindian
period (Patterson et al. 1987).

244

Texas Archeological Society

Tabulations of faunal remains for the inland
(Patterson 1989a, 1990a) and coastal margin
(Patterson 1989b) subregions show that Indians
were practically omnivorous, utilizing a range of
fauna from small animals, such as rat and rabbit, to
large animals, such as deer and bison. The types of
terrestrial fauna used by inland and coastal margin
Indians are similar, but there are differences in
aquatic species used in the two subregions because
of local availablity. Deer and land turtle were important food resources throughout the region. Fish
were a minor food resource in the inland subregion,
and a major food resource on the coastal margin.
The use of fish at coastal margin sites is underestimated by conventional screening at excavations.
At 41CH161 on the coastal margin (Kindall and
Patterson 1993), fine screening has yielded over
100,000 bone specimens, mainly of fish. Table 2
gives a summary of both terrestrial and aquatic
faunal remains found at sites in inland and coastal
margin subregions of Southeast Texas.
Aquatic faunal resources used in this region
include shellfish, alligator, fish and water turtle.
Freshwater shell middens are found in the western
part of inland Southeast Texas, such as 41FB37
(Patterson and Hudgins 1987), but are not of the
extensive nature of Rangia brackish water shell
middens on the coastal margin (see also Ricklis,
this volume). A few oyster shell middens occur on
the coastline in marine saltwater environment.
Rangia cuneata shell middens on the coastal margin can be quite large, some over 300 m in length
(Duke 1981). The importance of Rangia shellfish
in the diet should not be overestimated, as Rangia
meat is not a rich food material. A consumption of
hundreds of shellfish would be required to obtain
daily minimum calorie and protein requirements
(Dering and Ayers 1977:59). Judged by the low
proportion of damaged shell at shell middens, meat
was probably extracted by use of heat, rather than
by mechanical opening of shell (Patterson, Ebersole,
and Kindall 1991).
Nuts and acorns were widely available in parts
of ths region, and were probably utilized when available. Quantities of nuts vary widely from year-toyear as mast conditions change.
Bison were present in Southeast Texas, but
probably not continuously in prehistoric times. Bison had a limited geographic distribution and were
not present in large herds (Patterson 1992c). They
occupied the more open coastal prairie areas, but

Table 2. Summary of Faunal Remains

species

inland
sites

coastal
margin
sites

terrestrial
deer

39

38 ’

land turtle

37

11

snake

9

8

rat

8

8

land bird

11

6

bison

17

8

rabbit

15

11

gopher

11

4

skunk

3

3

mouse

5

3

raccoon

6

6

opossum

10

6

badger

2

0

antelope

4

0

squirrel

3

3

beaver

5

0

bear

1

2

mink

1

0

mush’at

0

3

aquatic
mussel

25

0

alligator

10

11

5

8

water bird

9

23

gar

15

26

misc. fish

water turtle

11

22

frog

8

3

catfish

9

16

drum

9

15

bass

4

0

Rangia

0

200+

Oyster

0

23

shark

0

1

redfish

0

1

sea trout

0

4

sheepshead

0

5

Patterson m The Archeology of Southeast Texas
did not penetrate the Big Thicket or dense piney
woods. There is some indication in the archeological record for an increased use of bison during the
Late Prehistoric period (Patterson 1992c).
Agriculture was not practiced in Southeast
Texas by aboriginal groups, even though the Caddo
Indians practiced agriculture in adjacent Northeast
Texas during the Late Prehistoric period. Agriculture may not have been a viable subsistence option
for much of the region (O’Brien and Spencer
1976). Soils of the Gulf Coastal Plain are not wellsuited for agriculture without use of modern farming methods.

MOBILITY-SETTLEMENT
PATTERNS
Mobility-settlement patterns are considered here
separately for the inland and coastal margin subregions. As Story (1990:260) notes, it is difficult to
determine seasonality and duration of stay at inland
campsites. Some aspects of mobility-settlement patterns for the inland subregion can be considered,
however (Patterson 1991d). Inland sites are: (1)
usually found near a water source (Patterson 1979),
(2) the majority are multi-component (Patterson
1983) with much reuse, (3) they have well-defined
intra-site areas, (4) there is little evidence of satellite
activity sites and separate base camps, and (5) even
at shell midden sites other kinds of subsistence activities are evident (McClure 1987).
Mobility-settlement patterns in inland Southeast Texas can be compared to two models proposed
by Binford (1980), which represent extremes of the
spectrum of mobility-settlement strategies. In one
model, highly mobile hunter-gathers are called "foragers," with residential bases that are frequently
moved and with other poorly defined subsistence
activity locations. In the other model, less mobile
hunter-gatherers are called "collectors," with welldefined residential bases and satellite locations that
tend to be reused. Collectors are characterized by
logistically organized subsistence activities, using
special task groups. The characteristics of sites of
inland Southeast Texas seem to fall within the two
extremes of Binford’s models. The lack of visible
satellite activity fits the forager model, but the high
reuse of sites fits the collector model. In Southeast
Texas, there appears to have been a genera! foraging
strategy, but on a highly scheduled basis. Thus, a

245

single model of mobility-settlement should be used
with caution. As Story (1990:269) notes, "Much of
the success of hunters and gatherers surely rested in
their ability to implement a number of different
economic responses, to be able to adjust to the good
as well as the bad times."
The reuse of sites in the inland subregion is
indicated by large amounts of artifacts at many
sites, and the high proportion (about 90 percent) of
multi-component sites. The high reuse of sites demonstrates scheduling and restricted mobility even
during the Paleoindian period, which is considered
to have had a more mobile lifestyle. There are somewhat higher proportions of inland single component sites in the Early Ceramic and Late Prehistoric
periods, showing a tendency for more dispersion
and mobility. There is archeological evidence that
inland Indians were more mobile in the Late Prehistoric (Patterson 1976:185), with less use of pottery and smaller sites.
The high proportion of multi-component shell
midden sites on the coastal margin indicates scheduling of subsistence activities in this subregion,
similar to the inland subregion. Indians of the coastal
margin seem to have utilized a zone about 25-30
km wide along the upper Texas Coast (Patterson
1990c, 1993d). There are certain traits that can be
used to distinguish the general boundary between
inland and coastal margin sites (Patterson 1993d).
Coastal margin type sites in the Galveston Bay area
are usually Rangia middens with few lithics, with
oyster shell tools, large quantities of pottery, and
many bone tools. Rangia shell middens can be found
up to 25 km inland from the coastline on streams
with tidal flow, which causes increased salinity.
Inland type sites are characterized by modest
amounts of pottery, fired clayballs at some sites,
much lithic material, but no shell tools; and in the
Late Prehistoric, limited amounts of San Jacinto
grog-tempered pottery, no Baytown Plain grog-tempered pottery, and concurrent use of the bow and
arrow and spear. The large size of many coastal
margin shell middens and the use of large quantities of pottery may indicate that coastal margin
Indians were less mobile than their inland counterparts; coastal margin Indians may have had more
plentifu! food resources.
Aten (1981) has developed a correlation for
the seasonality of Rangia collecting based on shell
growth ring patterns. His correlation generally
shows that Rangia collecting was a regularly

246

Texas Archeological Society

inland (Patterson 1987, 1991d, 1993a) and coastal
margin (Patterson 1987) subregions.
The population growth rate of the inland
subregion was low from the Late Paleoindian period
to the early part of the Late Archaic. During the
Late Archaic, the population growth rate accelerated
rapidly, with rapid growth continuing in the Early
Ceramic period. Population levels then decline in
the Late Prehistoric period (see Figure 3). There
seems to have been a decline in population level in
Central Texas at about the same time (Prewitt
1985:Figure 6).
Factors that might be considered for the high
population growth rate in the Late Archaic and
Early Ceramic periods include: (1) a wetter and
POPULATION DYNAMICS
more productive climate, (2) increased hunting efAvailable data are not suitable for determining
ficiency with early use of the bow and arrow, (3)
absolute population levels or short-term population
adaptation to a greater range of food resources, and
changes. It is possible, however, to estimate the
(4) migration of people into the region. The sharp
relative population levels in Southeast Texas for
increase in population in Southeast Texas occurred
each broad time period. Therefore, short-term popuduring the same time period of 800 B.C to A.D.
lation changes due to factors such as disease, drought,
800 as also seems to have been the case throughout
or food shortage cannot be assessed, but long-term
eastern North America (cf. Wenke 1990:565). The
population trends can be studied. The relative popupopulation decrease in the inland subregion during
lation level is estimated by calculating a relative
the Late Prehistoric appears to have been a repopulation factor (RPF). This is done by calculating
sponse to over-population, perhaps aggravated by
the average number of sites per year for each time
climatic deterioration. Story (1990:246) has noted
period. The calculation of RPF used here is the
a shift to a drier climate over the last 2000 years. A
number of site components of a period, divided by
more mobile lifeway in Southeast Texas in the Late
the number of years in the period, multiplied by 100.
Prehistoric (Patterson 1976) was perhaps caused by
Data from the mid-1992 data bases have been used,
over-population, which in turn could have resulted
with relative population levels for the inland and
in a lower population leve!. It has been observed
coastal margin subregions shown in Figure 3. These
that in hunter-gatherer societies, fertility rates are
graphs are similar to ones given previously for the
suppressed significantly simply due to materna! mobility (Wenke 1990:262).
inland
--~’- coastal
As shown in Figure 3, the population
growth rate on the coastal margin increased
4O
rapidly from the Late Archaic into the Early
Ceramic periods, similar to the inland sub3O
region. On the coastal margin, however, the
population growth rate leveled-off in the Late
Prehistoric, instead of declining as in the inland
2O
subregion, This does not match Aten’s
(1983:Figure 17.1) hypothetical model or
Patterson’s (1986b:Figure 2) model based on
an older, less detailed data set. On the coastal
margin, the reponse to over-population and
8
9
10
4
5
6
7
climatic
deterioration was a leveling-off of
(Thou~anda)
population growth rates rather than a decline,
probably due to the good availability of marine
Figure 3. Relative Population Levels over Time in Southeast
food resources. According to Cabeza de Vaca
Texas.

scheduled warm weather activity that began in late
spring and ended in mid-summer (Story !990:260).
This seasonality model is now under question,
however. The actual dates for live Rangia samples
from Trinity Bay do not give a good match with
dates calculated by Aten’s correlation (Patterson
and Gardner 1993), and it has been noted that Aten’s
correlation is not suitable for mixed samples of
Rangia collected during different months (Patterson,
Ebersole, and Kindall 1991). The seasonality of
subsistence activities on the coastal margin remains
a subject for future research.

Patterson ~ The Archeology of Southeast Texas

(Hedrick and Riley 1974:40), coastal margin Indians
were less hungry than inland Indians.
There are few Rangia she!! middens on the
coastal margin dated before 500 B.C., even though
the sea level stabilized about 1500 B.C. (Aten
1983:158). Perhaps Rangia shellfish resources were
not well-established until some time after sea level
stabilization. Another possibility is that the coastal
margin of Southeast Texas may have been fully
occupied only after migration of people from Louisiana who were already fully using marine food
resources. The low occupation of the coastal margin from 1500 to 500 B.C. implies that the coastal
margin may not have had much use by earlier Indians at earlier coastline positions.

MORTUARY PRACTICES
Isolated burials without grave goods are common throughout Southeast Texas. There are two
time periods in specific areas of the region, however, where organized burial practices occurred. In
the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late
Archaic mortuary tradition is found in the lower
Brazos and Colorado River valleys and in the intermediate area. This tradition has been best described
by Hall (1981) for the Aliens Creek sites near the
Brazos River. Organized burial practices actually
started during the Middle Archaic at this site complex, but reached full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods. Types of
exotic grave goods included: boatstones,
bannerstones, stone gorgets, corner-tang knives,
stingray spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads
and pendants. Other burial practices included the
systematic orientation of burial direction, position
of body, use of red ochre, and use of locally made
grave goods, such as long-bone implements and
bone pins. Many of the long-bone implements have
incised patterns. Most burials are in extended supine position, with some extended prone and bundle
burials also present. Burial direction is usually consistent at any one site, but varies from site to site.
There are now 11 sites identified as related to this
distinctive Late Archaic mortuary tradition in Austin (4), Fort Bend (4), and Wharton (3) counties
(Patterson et al. 1993b:Table 11).
Exotic grave goods are evidence of long-distance trade in the Late Archaic. Large corner-tang
knives are from the Edwards Plateau, marine shell

247

ornaments are from still unidentified coastal areas,
and ground stone items (beads, boatstones,
bannerstones, gorgers) are made of materials from
Arkansas. Widespread trade is known to have occurred in the Late Archaic, such as the Poverty
Point exchange system (Webb 1982; Gibson 1995).
Social status might be indicated by individuals buried with exotic grave goods, but a high degree of
social organization in not indicated for these egalitarian hunter-gatherers. Higher social status is likely
to have been given to shamans and "big men."
There is evidence of violence at several sites
of the Late Archaic mortuary tradition. Evidence of
violent death from projectile points has been noted
at 41AU36 (Hall 1981), 41FB42 (Patterson et al.
1993a), 41WH14 (Hudgins and Kindal! 1984), and
41WH39 (Vernon 1989). Hall (1981:308, 1988b)
has proposed that violence was from inter-group
conflict, and Patterson (1988b) has noted that intragroup conflict should also be considered. Another
organized mortuary tradition is found on the coastal
margin in the Galveston Bay area in the Late Prehistoric (Aten et al. 1976), Protohistoric, and Historic (Ricklis 1993, 1994) periods. Many of the
burials were flexed or semi-flexed, with a variety
of burial directions. At 41HR80 (Aten et al. 1976),
grave goods included marine shell beads and pendants, bird bone flutes, bone dice, bone awls, fishhooks, projectile points, and a possible rattle. Red
ochre was used with some burials. The Late Prehistoric mortuary tradition of the Galveston Bay area
had a degree of organization similar to the inland
Late Archaic mortuary tradition, except that not
much long-distance trade was involved in the coastal
margin tradition.
Ricklis (1993, 1994) describes four burial
groups at 41GV66 on Galveston Island, with two
groups containing Late Prehistoric burials, and two
containing burials of the Late Prehistoric,
Protohistoric, and early Historic Indian period.
Grave goods of the Late Prehistoric group are typical
of the mortuary tradition of the Galveston Bay area,
including bone and shell beads, bird bone flutes,
and perhaps a rattle. The Protohistoric and early
Historic Indian burials are significant for
understanding changes in Southeast Texas mortuary
practices in that there are differences in body
position (the bodies were extended in the grave
pits), and some graves had structural enclosures
placed around them. A wide variety of European
trade goods were found with these latter burial

248

Texas Archeological Society

groups, including glass trade beads, a hawk-bell,
spike fragments, iron tools, hand-wrought square
nails, and flat clear glass mirror fragments (Ricklis
1994:461-462). By contrast, most burials at inland
sites after the Late Archaic contain no grave goods.

and minimized the survival value of higher social
complexity. Brown and Price (1985:438) have observed that "decreased mobility retards flexible response to stress and engages more institutional
structures as essential solutions."

SOCIAL COMPLEXITY

BIOARCHEOLOGY

A high degree of social complexity is shown
by some of the mortuary traditions described above,
particularly the large organized cemeteries at Late
Archaic sites such as Allens Creek (Hall 1981), and
then as a reemerging pattern in the Protohistoric
and early Historic burial groups at Mitchell Ridge
where there was a differential disposal of grave
goods in cemeteries (Ricklis 1994). Increased social complexity has been associated with a more
sedentary lifestyle resulting from high population
level and sometimes from abundant food resources
(Brown and Price 1985). During the Late Archaic,
there was a rapidly rising population level in all
parts of Southeast Texas, which should have led to
decreased mobility, but the available archeological
evidence suggests that the highest social complexity is evident only in the western zone. Perhaps the
western zone had more abundant food resources
that permitted a more sedentary lifestyle, which in
turn may have created appropriate conditions for
more complex social practices to develop.
It should be noted from artifact styles that there
probably was more contact between different social
groups in the western zone, than in the central and
eastern parts of this region, which may have encouraged a higher degree of social organization.
The Late Archaic mortuary tradition of western
Southeast Texas has several traits usually associated with more complex organization and a sedentary lifestyle, including: high population density,
energy invested in grave preparation, differences in
burial due to grave wealth, long-distance trade, and
evidence of violence (e.g., Brown and Price
1985:437).
The Late Archaic mortuary tradition ended during a period of rapid population increase, and perhaps also a deteriorating climate, but research
attention in the region should also consider the relationship between changes in mortuary practices
at this time and changing demographic, subsistence,
and settlement patterns. Resulting higher mobility
of lifestyle possibly disrupted long-distance trade,

Data on bioarcheology for the central and western parts of Southeast Texas have been summarized by Reinhard et al. (1990). Burnett (1990) notes
the general paucity of data for the eastern part of
this region. Pathological conditions mentioned include classes of degenerative disease, metabolic
disease, infectious disease, and dental disease. Most
studies for this region simply itemize pathological
conditions found on skeletal remains. Only Powell
(1988) has integrated data to reach overall conclusions on Late Prehistoric adaptive success. Powell
(1988:262) states that groups of the coastal plain
had moderate success in buffering stress, although
stress may have been experienced at random or
seasonal intervals. Examples of average life
expectency during the Late Archaic are 24 years at
the Crestmont site and 32 years at Witte Group 2
(Vernon 1989:37). Examples of average life expectancy during the Late Prehistoric are 29 years at
the Boys’ School Cemetery and 39 years at Jamaica Beach (Aten et al. 1976:Table 13). Some
individuals in the Late Archaic lived over 50 years
(Black et al. 1992). Skeletons from the Late Archaic at 41FB3 (Patterson et al. 1993b) showed a
generally good state of health at time of death.

HISTORIC INDIAN USE OF
SOUTHEAST TEXAS
With a few exceptions, historic Indian sites in
Southeast Texas are not well-connected with the
ethnographic record (Story 1990:258). It is even
more difficult to relate the ethnographic record to
prehistoric Indian groups in this region, especially
because of Late Prehistoric and historic movements
of social groups. Aten (1983:Figure 3.1) shows reconstructed territories of native groups in the early
eighteenth century, including Coco (Karankawa?),
Tonkawa, Bidai, Akokisa, and Atakapa. However,
the presence of the Tonkawa in Southeast Texas
may be due to a rapid expansion from Central Texas

Patterson ~ The Archeology of Southeast Texas

in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries
(Newcomb 1993:27). Karankawa Indians of the Coco
tribe are thought to have occupied the coastal margin of this region as far east as Galveston Island and
the corresponding mainland (Aten 1983:Figure 3.1).
Judged by the scarcity of Rockport pottery on sites
east of the San Bernard River, the ethnic identity of
the Coco, as being firmly affiliated with the
Karankawa, may be in doubt, although a reasonable
alternative is that the Coco lived farther down the
coast in prehistoric times. The presence of any
Karankawa in the western part of the coastal margin
of Southeast Texas may be a rather late movement
of some individuals of this ethnic group. The only
site on the upper Texas coastal margin with much
asphalt-coated pottery of the Rockport type is
41CH110 in Chambers County (Gilmore 1974:59),
where asphalt-coated pottery started after A.D. 1350,
but may actually be protohistoric in age.
Protohistoric and Historic Indian period sites
(A.D. 1500-1800) are probably under-identified in
this region, because few aboriginal artifact types
changed from the Late Prehistoric to the Historic
Indian period (Patterson 1993c). Only a few nonEuropean artifact types are useful in identifying
historic Indian sites. Arrow point types that seem to
be found in Historic Indian period sites in Southeast Texas include Bulbar Stemmed and Guerrero
(Hudgins 1986) types, although Bulbar Stemmed
points from Mitchell Ridge were found in contexts
dating between ca. A.D. 1440-1640 (Ricklis 1994),
suggesting they also date to the Protohistoric period. Fresno and Cuney arrow points may date
mainly after A.D. 1500 in Southeast Texas (see
Hudgins 1986), but this is not clear. Loop handles
for pottery have been found at 41WH8 (Hudgins
1986:Figure 16) and at 41CH161 (Kindall and
Patterson 1993) which has a historic-era component. As of early 1994, the data bases for Southeast
Texas have 13 published historic Indian sites in the
inland subregion and 29 historic Indian sites in the
coastal margin subregion.
Historic Indian period sites are usually identified by the presence of glass and metal artifacts,
gunflints, and European types of pottery. In some
cases, radiocarbon dates indicate historic Indian
components when no trade goods are present, such
as at 41WIll9 (Patterson et al. 1987), with an uncorrected radiocarbon date on charcoal of A.D. 1585
+ 80 (SI-6455) from the excavated stratum nearest
the surface. At 41WH8 (Hudgins 1984), historic

249

artifacts included glass scrapers, a Spanish coin
with a date of 1738, loop handles for pottery, and a
projectile point made from an iron keyhole plate.
Glass beads have been found at a few Indian sites
in both the coastal margin and inland subregions,
including 41PK69 (Ensor and Carlson 1988);
41CH20, 41CH53 and 41CH103 (Ambler 1970:29);
41CH161 (Kindall and Patterson 1993); Mitchell
Ridge (41GV66) (Ricklis 1993, 1994); as well as
41CH110 and 41LB4 (Aten 1983:268). Most of the
Native American sites with glass beads are from
the Galveston Bay area. Ricklis (1993, 1994) has
found historic Indian burial groups at the Mitchell
Ridge site on Galveston Island, identified by European trade goods, including several thousand glass
beads, a brass bell, iron tool fragments, and flat
glass. Glass trade beads here are assignable to the
early to late-eighteenth century, perhaps ca. 17201770 (cf. Ricklis 1994:461). In the northern part of
Southeast Texas, a variety of Euro-American trade
goods can be found at early nineteenth century Alabama/Coushatta historic Indian sites (Perttula
1992:23, 1994).
Fullen (1978) has described the E10rcoquisac
Archeological District as follows: 41 CH57 includes
Joseph Blancpain’s trading post, Village de
Atakapas (1754), the first location of the Spanish
Presidio San Agustin de Ahumada (1756-1766),
and the first location of Mission Nuestra Senora de
La Luz (1756-1759). Site 41CH54 is the second
location of Mission de La Luz (1759-1771), and
41CH22 is the Orcoquisac Rancheria associated
with the mission. Site 41CH53 is the second location of the presidio. Many other Historic Indian,
Spanish, and French sites mentioned in the historical record have not yet been located. Newcomb
(1961) and Aten (1983) may be consulted for more
details on historic Indians in this region. The diary
of Cabeza de Vaca (Covey 1961; Hedrick and Riley
1974) provides the main ethnographic description
of the lifestyle of Indians in Southeast Texas.
European settlement of Southeast Texas did
not seriously disrupt the lifeway of Indians until
after 1700. The first half of the eighteenth century
was the period in which the fur trade and mission
system, as well as the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt and stress the native culture and socia! systems (Aten 1983:322)
This is clearly seen in the archeological record at
the Mitchell Ridge site, where the burial data suggests population declines and group mergers

250

Texas Archeological Society

(Ricklis 1994), as well as the increasing importance of Native American participation in the fur
trade. By the time heavy settlement of Texas began
in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian population was greatly diminished. Alabama/Coushatta Indians in Southeast Texas are migrants, displaced from the east in the late eighteenth
to early nineteenth centuries (Newcomb 1961:25),
but they lived through the 1840s in several large
villages in the lower Trinity and Neches River basins.

PROJECTILE POINT CHRONOLOGIES
Chronologies of projectile points in Southeast
Texas are summarized in Table 3. Chronologies
previously given for arrow points (Patterson 1991a)
and dart points (Patterson 1991b) in Southeast
Texas are used here with some later refinements.
Suhm and Jelks (1962) and Turner and Hester
(1985, 1993) have given descriptions of most point
types found in Texas. Principal prehistoric
projectile point types used in Southeast Texas are
shown in Figures 4 and 5.

EARLY PALEOINDIAN PROJECTILE
POINTS (12,000-10,000 B.P.)
Although there are no radiocarbon dates for
Clovis in Southeast Texas, it is presumed that this
is the earliest point type found in this region. Haynes
et al. (1984) date Clovis between 12,000-11,000
B.P. in the western U.S., extending to as late as
10,500 B.P. at some sites in the eastern U.S. The
context of Clovis points is not well-defined in Southeast Texas, but there are some sites where Clovis is
found in multi-component contexts: 41HR343
(Patterson et al. 1993c), 41HR731 (Patterson et al.
1993d), Doering (Wheat 1953), and 41HR571
(Patterson 1986). Clovis points have been found
over a stretch of several km along McFaddin Beach
near Beaumont (Long 1977), and a recent meeting
of collectors revealed over 60 Clovis points from
this location (Banks 1992; see also Turner and Tanner 1994). Huebner (1988) reported on a Clovis
point found on the beach of Bolivar Penninsula in
Galveston County, west of McFaddin Beach (see
also Meltzer and Bever, this volume).
Prehistoric occupations in Southeast Texas become more apparent between 11,000-10,000 B.P.

E

I

Figure 4. Early Projectile Points: a, Clovis; b,
Folsom; c, Plainview; d, Angostura; e, Early sidenotched; f, Early corner-notched; g, Big Sandy; h,
San Patrice; i; Early stemmed; j, Carrollton; k,
Wells; 1, Bulverde. Dots show ground edges.

F

d

G

H

K

L

Figure 5. Later Projectile Points: a, Pedernales; b,
Gary; c, Kent; d, Yarbrough; e, Dad; f, Ensor; g,
Ellis; h, Palmitlas; i, Perdiz; j, Catahoula; k,
Scallorn; 1, Alba.

Patterson ~ The Archeology of Southeast Texas

Table 3. Projectile Point Chronologies in Southeast Texas

Point type

Early

Late

E.

M.

L.

Early

Late

Paleo

Paleo

Arch

Arch

Arch

Ceramic

Prehistoric

Clovis
Folsom
Midland

X
X
X

Early SN
Dalton
Big Sandy
San Patrice

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

Plainview
Scottsbluff
Angostura
Meserve
Early CN

X
X
X
X
X

Early Stemmed

X

Bell
Trinity
Wells
Carrollton
Morrill

X
X
X
X
X
X

x
x
x
x

Bulverde
Lange

X
X

Pedemales
Williams
Travis
Large Gary
Large Kent
Morhiss

x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x

Ponchartrain

X

Darl
Yarbrough
Ensor
Ellis
Fairland
Palmillas
Marcos

X
X
X
X
X
X
X

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

small Gary
small Kent
unifacial arrow points

X
X
X

X
X
X

bifacial arrow points
SN=side-notched; CN=corner-notched

X
X
X
X

251

252

Texas Archeological Society

The Plains tradition is represented in Southeast
Texas at this time by a few Folsom and Midland
points. Folsom is dated to 11,000-10,000 B.P.
(Largent et al. 1991). The rarity of Folsom and
Midland points in the region may be due to the
limited availability of bison in this region during
this time period (cf. Munson (1990:Figure 3).
Single Folsom points have been found at
41WIll9 (Patterson et al. 1987), 41HR624
(Patterson, Marriott, and Marriott 1990), 41HR343
(Patterson et al. 1993c), and McFaddin Beach
(Banks 1992). Three Midland points were found at
41HR571 (Patterson 1986:Figure 2), although they
were originally classified as Plainview-like because
no Midland point had previously been reported in
this region. A few Midland points at other sites
(Patterson et al. 1993c, 1993d) does not change the
view that they are rare in the region. A Folsom
point was found in the same excavation level as an
Early Side-Notched point at 41WH19 (Patterson et
al. 1987), with an associated uncorrected radiocarbon date on charcoal of 9920 +_ 530 B.P. (AA-298).
Several other projectile point types were also
present in Southeast Texas during the same time
period as Folsom. These include Dalton, and sidenotched San Patrice, Big Sandy, and Early SideNotched types. Big Sandy and Dalton points are not
common, although Dalton points are frequent north
of Southeast Texas (Story 1990:Figure 27), and date
from as early as 10,500 B.P. (Goodyear 1982) to
9500 B.P. (Morse and Morse 1983:71). Big Sandy
points are common in the Southeast Woodlands,
with a date as early as 10,500 B.P. in northern
Alabama (Boyd 1992). They continued in use until
about 8000 B.P. (Justice 1987:61). Dalton points
have been found in Southeast Texas at McFaddin
Beach (Long 1977), and a few other places (Patterson
et al. 1993c, 1993d) in Harris County. Big Sandy
points have been found in this region at three sites in
Harris County (Patterson et al. 1987, 1993c, 1993d).
San Patrice and Early Side-Notched point types are
both common in Southeast Texas (Patterson 1989a,
1990a). Story (1990:202) provisionally dates the
San Patrice point to 10,300-9300 B.P. As noted
above, there is a radiocarbon date of 9920 + 530
B.P. from a level with Early Side-Notched points at
41WIll9 (Patterson et al. 1987).
San Patrice and Early Side-Notched points often occur together (Webb et al. 1971; Patterson et
al. 1987). One variant of the Early Side-Notched
point has been classified as Keithville (Turner and

Hester 1993:134), but this variant does not even
apply to all side-notched points at the type site
(Webb et al. 1971). There are considerable data to
indicate that San Patrice and Early Side-Notched
were the principal point types used in Southeast
Texas during the Early Paleoindian period.

LATE PALEOINDIAN PROJECTILE
POINTS (10,000-7000 B.P.)
This period is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points. Big Sandy, San Patrice, and Early
Side-Notched points continued into the early part of
this period, but these side-notched point types were
generally replaced by corner-notched points. A small
proportion of Early Stemmed points were also
present. Most specimens were ground on basal edges,
similar to points from the Early Paleoindian period.
Late Paleoindian point types of the Southern
Plains tradition found in Southeast Texas include
Plainview, Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura.
Plainview points have been found in Late
Paleoindian contexts at 41WIll9 (Patterson et al.
1987) and 41HR315 (Patterson 1980). Scottsbluff
points are not common in Southeast Texas, but are
found frequently farther north (Story 1990:210).
Most Scottsbluff points found in this region are
from surface collections (Hudgins and Patterson
t983; Patterson and Hudgins 1991), but there is an
excavated specimen from 41HR5 in Harris County
(Wheat 1953).There are excavated Angostura points
in possible Late Paleoindian contexts at 41FB42
(Patterson et al. !993a) and 41FB223 (Patterson et
al. 1994).
A few Early Stemmed points occur at 41WIll9
(Patterson et al. 1987) and 41HR3!5 (Patterson
1980). Perhaps these represent the start of development of stemmed point styles. The change from
side-notched to corner-notched point types occurred
throughout the Southeast Woodlands during Late
Paleoindian times (Fagan 1991:310). Site 41PK69
also has early notched points (Ensor and Carlson
1988:Tables 18 and 19).

EARLY ARCHAIC PROJECTILE
POINTS (7000-5000 B.P.)
Projectile points of the Early Archaic period in
Southeast Texas include Bell, Carrollton, Morrill,

Patterson ~ The Archeology of Southeast Texas

Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed
varieties. The Bell point is the only type in this
period closely associated with the Southern Plains.
Bell points are occasionally found in the western
and central parts of Southeast Texas, generally made
of exotic Edwards chert types. Most specimens of
other points types during this period are made of
local chert types.
Use of lanceolate and notched point styles
ended at the start of the Early Archaic in Southeast
Texas, with the dominance of stemmed point forms.
Bell (Prewitt 1981) and Morrill (Turner and Hester
1985:129) points are placed in this period using
Central and Northeast Texas chronologies. The only
excavated examples of Trinity points in Southeast
Texas are from 41HR315 (Patterson 1980:Table 3),
although Turner and Hester (1985:154) place this
point type in the Middle Archaic. Carrollton and
Wells point types are most common in the Early
Archaic period in this region, but seem to extend
into the early part of the Middle Archaic (Patterson
1980). There is an uncorrected radiocarbon date on
freshwater mussel shell of 6490 + 120 B.P. (I15333) in an excavation level with a Carrollton
point at 41FB37 (Patterson 1988).
A variety of Early Stemmed point types, all
with ground stem edges, from the Early Archaic
occur at 41WH19 (Patterson et al. 1987) and
41FB223 (Patterson et al. 1994). The practice of
stem grinding was commonly used in Southeast
Texas until the early part of the Middle Archaic,
although a few point specimens with ground stem
edges have also been found in this region as late as
the Late Archaic period (Patterson et al. 1987).

MIDDLE ARCHAIC PROJECTILE
POINTS (5000-3500 B.P.)
As noted above, Wells, Carrollton, Morrill,
and perhaps Trinity point types continue into the
early part of the Middle Archaic in this region.
Other projectile points found in Southeast Texas
during the Middle Archaic include: Bulverde,
Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and probably
the Gary-Kent series. Bulverde points have been
found in Middle Archaic context at 41HR315
(Patterson 1980) and 41FB42 (Patterson et al.
1993a).
The Pedernales point is found in both Middle
and Late Archaic deposits. Examples from Middle

253

Archaic contexts have been recovered at 41AU37
(Hall 1981), 41AU1 (Duke 1982:Figure 2), and
41FB34 (Patterson 1989d), which has an tmcorrected radiocarbon date of 5210 + 110 B.P. (I15510) on freshwater mussel shell in excavated
context. The Pedernales point has been found in
Late Archaic components at 41FB3 (Patterson et
al. 1993b), 41FB42 (Patterson et al. 1993a), and
41AU1 (Duke 1982:Figure 2).
The Gary-Kent series of straight and
contracting stem points seems to start in the Middle
Archaic in this region at sites such as 41AU37
(Hall 1981)and 41HR315 (Patterson 1980). These
point types continue through the Late Archaic,
Early Ceramic, and Late Prehistoric periods, but
tend to be smaller in the Early Ceramic and Late
Prehistoric periods (Ensor and Carlson 1991;
Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980). Gary and
Kent points are grouped as a series because of
morphological overlaps and frequent co-ocurrence
at the same sites.
LATE ARCHAIC AND EARLY
CERAMIC DART POINTS
(3500-1400 B.P.)

Dart point types of the Late Archaic and Early
Ceramic have been grouped together because several types occur in both periods (Patterson 1989d).
These include: Gary, Kent, Dad, Yarbrough, Ensor,
Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos. The
Ponchartrain point is a minor type from Louisiana
that is found in Southeast Texas during the Late
Archaic. As noted above, the Pedernales point may
continue into the early part of the Late Archaic in
this region. The chronologies of Marcos and
Fairland points are not well-established in Southeast Texas. Gary and Kent are the dominant point
types in this region during these time periods.
Gary, Kent, Dad, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, and
Palmillas dart points often occur together (Patterson
1990a). Story (1990:256) thinks that Yarbrough,
Darl, and Godley points types may be variations of
a general style. My opinion is that Yarbrough, Darl,
and Palmillas point types may be variants that developed from the Gary-Kent series. The Godley
point has been classified as a Yarbrough variant in
my data bases. The use of bone dart points was
fairly common during the Early Ceramic period on
the coastal margin (Aten 1983:262), and reflects
the lack of lithic materials in this subregion.

254

Texas Archeological Society

LATE PREHISTORIC DART POINTS
(1400-500 B.P.)
On the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use
of the spear was generally discontinued during the
Late Prehistoric (Aten 1983:306), in favor of use of
the bow and arrow. The spear and spearthrower
(atlatl) continued to be used during the Late Prehistoric in the inland subregion along with the bow
and arrow, however (Aten 1967; Keller and Weir
1979; Ensor and Carlson 1991; Patterson 1980;
Patterson et al. 1987; Wheat 1953). Small Gary and
Kent dart points are the principal types found in the
Late Prehistoric in inland Southeast Texas, as well
as a few Ensor and Ellis specimens. Further east,
Indians of the central and eastern part of the Gulf
coastal plain are also known to have used both the
spear-spearthrower and bow and arrow weapon systems (see Hudson 1976).

UNIFACIAL ARROW POINT
CHRONOLOGY
(est. 4000.500 B.P.)
Introduction of the bow and arrow is generally
viewed as started about A.D. 600 in Central (Prewitt
1981) and Southeast (Aten 1983:306) Texas, using
bifacial arrow points. With this model, however, no
explanations are given on how this introduction
occurred, or why no initial time period is apparent
that allows for a lengthy local adoption of this new
technology. I have proposed (Patterson 1982,
1992b) that use of the bow and arrow started in
Southeast Texas at about the end of the Middle
Archaic, using unifacial arrow points that were
mainly marginally retouched flakes. Odell (1988)
has reached a similar conclusion for the start of the
bow and arrow in the Central U.S. The bow and
arrow seems to have diffused from Northeast Asia
into the North American arctic, and then diffused
progressively south through the New World
(Patterson 1973, 1982, 1992b). In Southeast Texas,
unifacial arrow points are estimated to start at about
4000 B.P. and continue through the Late Prehistoric (Patterson 1992b:Table 1), based on estimated
chronologies at several sites with excavated data,
or from surface collections in apparent single component contexts. Unifacial arrow points appear to
be associated with a small prismatic blade technology (Patterson 1973). I have further proposed that
the start of bifacial arrow points in Southeast Texas

at about A.D. 600 represents the common use of
these types of tools, rather than the adoption of the
bow and arrow.

BIFACIAL ARROW POINT
CHRONOLOGIES
(A.D. 600-1500+)
Four major arrow point types were in use in
Southeast Texas during the Late Prehistoric, including Alba, Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn. No
serial sequence for these point types is apparent in
this region (Patterson 1991a), although there is a
definite Scallorn-Perdiz temporal sequence in adjacent Central Texas (Prewitt !981), and Perdiz occurs in post A.D. 1250/1300 contexts in Central
Texas (Johnson 1994), South Texas, North Central
Texas and Northeast Texas. The lack of a chronological sequence for major arrow point types in
Southeast Texas is best understood by the geographic distribution of these point types (Patterson
1991a, 1993a). The Scallorn arrow point appears to
have been introduced into Southeast Texas from
Central Texas, and Alba and Catahoula points are
thought to have been introduced into Southeast
Texas from Louisiana. These suppositions are based
on the east-west distribution frequencies of these
point types in Southeast Texas (Patterson 1993a).
I have also argued that Perdiz may have been
introduced in Southeast Texas about this time
(Patterson 1991a). The lack of a chronological sequence for major arrow point types in Southeast
Texas is the result of a mix of diffusion and local
innovation of point types. Use of Perdiz points continued in Southeast Texas until after A.D. 1500
(Patterson et al. 1987).

GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTIONS OF
PROJECTILE POINT TYPES
Quantitative distributions of projectile point
types within western, central, and eastern parts of
Southeast Texas have been published for the inland
subregion (Patterson 1993a). Southeast Texas shares
projectile point types also found in several adjacent
regions. There are technological influences from
the Southern Plains (Central Texas), and the Southeast Woodlands (Louisiana and farther east) during
all time periods (Table 4). Projectile point types in
Southeast Texas that are related to those found in

Patterson ~ The Archeology of Southeast Texas
Table 4. Periods of Point Types in Southeast Texas
Point type*

Geographic Affinity

Clovis
Folsom
Midland
Plainview
Scottsbluff
Angostura
Meserve
Early Side-Notched
Dalton
Big Sandy
San Patrice
Early Comer-Notched
Early Stemmed

general U.S.
Southern Plains
Southern Plains
Southern Plains
Southern Plains
Southern Plains
Southern Plains
Southeast Woodlands
Southeast Woodlands
Southeast Woodlands
Southeast Woodlands
Southeast Woodlands
Southeast Woodlands

Bell
Trinity
Wells
Carrollton
Morrill

Central Texas
Northeast Texas
shared with Northeast Texas
shared with Northeast Texas
Northeast Texas

Bulverde
Lange

Kent

Central Texas
Central Texas
Central Texas
Central Texas
Central Texas
Southeast Woodlands
Southeast Woodlands

Morhiss
Ponchartrain
Darl
Yarbrough
Ellis
Ensor
Fairland
Marcos
Palmillas
unifacial arrow points

Central Texas coast
Louisiana
Northeast and Central Texas
Northeast Texas
Northeast Texas
Central Texas
Central Texas
Central Texas
South Texas
diffusion from northwest (?)

Perdiz
Alba
Catahoula
Scallom

indigenous (?)
Louisiana
Louisiana
Central Texas

Paleoindian

Early Archaic

Middle Archaic

Pedemales
Williams
Travis
Gary

Late Archaic-Early Ceramic

Late Prehistoric

* Placement represents time period when use started (see Table 3 for temporal intervals)

255

256

Texas Archeological Society

adjacent regions do not necessarily reflect any influences of specific socia! groups. Justice (1987)
shows wide geographic distributions of many projectile point types that far exceeds social territories.

LITHIC PROCUREMENT

Lithic procurement patterns in Southeast Texas
are tied to the proximity of lithic source locations.
Chert sources are concentrated in the western part
of the region, and petrified wood sources are concentrated in the eastern part of the region. Large
chert cobbles (up to 15 cm in length) can be found
in the Colorado River drainage system, generally
north of Eagle Lake, just outside of the western
edge of the region. Smaller chert cobbles (generally less than 5 cm in length) and some petrified
wood can be found in the Brazos River valley.
Some small chert cobbles occur in streams in eastern Wharton County. Small pieces of chert, petrified wood, and fine-grained quartzite are present
north of Houston. Petrified wood occurs in the Trinity River drainage system. Types of lithic materials
at archeological sites generally reflect the geographic locations of various lithic sources. In western and central parts of Southeast Texas, sites
contain mainly chert artifacts, with limited use of
petrified wood. In the east, there is a predominant
use of petrified wood, as shown by the large Kyle
collection (Kindall and Patterson 1986).
In general, lithic procurement in Southeast
Texas does not appear to be "embedded" in seasonal subsistence rounds (cf. Binford 1979). At sites
remote from lithic sources, there are few indications of heavy use of stone tools or limited amounts
of debitage that would indicate that lithic procurement was an activity within seasonal subsistence
rounds, or perhaps by trade. On the contrary, there
are many large sites that are 40 to 80 km from lithic
sources that have large amounts of finished lithic
artifacts and debitage, and only light use of most
utilized flakes; examples are 41HR182 (Patterson
1985) and 41HR315 (Patterson 1980). Lithic procurement seems to have been by planned trips outside of seasonal subsistence movements.
Coastal margin sites contain only small
amounts of lithic materials, with shell and bone
tools often used instead of stone tools. This indicates either restricted access of coastal margin Indians to inland lithic sources, or cultural choices that
minimized lithic procurement.

Exotic lithic materials from the Edwards
Plateau are found in small quantities at sites in
Southeast Texas. This may indicate limited downthe-line trading in raw materials and projectile points
from Central Texas, or some inter-band movements
of a few individuals. In the Late Prehistoric, there
may have been some scavenging at earlier sites for
reworkable lithic materials, such as suggested by
Ricklis and Cox (!993:457) for sites on the central
Texas Gulf coastal plain. Good quality heat-treated
flakes from dart point manufacture suitable for
arrowpoint manufacture would have been available
at earlier sites.
There is a trend toward higher percentages of
smaller size flakes (Patterson 1980:Figure 19;
Patterson et al. !987:Figure 20) and smaller dart
points in later time periods. While there may be a
technological trend toward smaller size dart points,
it is possible that higher population levels in later
time periods restricted access to lithic sources, resuiting in use of more lithic sources with smaller
size pieces of raw material.

LITHIC MANUFACTURING
Most inland sites in this region have significant quantities of debitage from lithic manufacturing, but a low quantity of cores. Primary reduction
of raw materials was done mainly at lithic source
locations, with flake blanks and early stage preforms taken to campsites for projectile point manufacture. Arrow and dart point preforms in various
stages of completion or failure also show that biracial projectile points were manufactured at campsites, rather than at lithic sources. Use of flake
blanks to manufacture dart points at campsites allowed good material to be selected at the source,
and reduced transportation weight and volume.
Heat-treatment of chert to improve knapping quality was extensively used in all time periods, but it is
not clear whether heat-treatment was generally done
near lithic sources or at campsites. Heat treatment
near lithic sources would have been efficient, with
only successfully heat-treated materials being transported to campsites.
Quartzite hammerstones are often found at
campsites, and limestone hammerstones for soft
percussion are found occasionally, imported from
the Edwards Plateau. Antler billets and antler
pressure flaking tools are rarely preserved, but
were probably a significant part of the toolkit for

Patterson ~ The Archeology of Southeast Texas

projectile point production. There was usually a
low level of manufacture of formal unifacial tool
types at campsites.

LITHIC TOOL TYPES
AND FUNCTIONS
Other than projectile points, the dominant type
of stone tool in Southeast Texas was the utilized
flake, usually selected casually from bifacial reduction debitage. There is evidence that formal
unifacial tools (Figure 6) were used in the
Paleoindian period, in the form of the Albany
scraper (Patterson 1991 c), large scrapers, combination scraper-gravers, and miscellaneous large bifacia! tools (Patterson et al. 1987). During all time
periods, however, the utilized flake was the dominant tool type. After the Paleoindian period, formal types of unifacial tools occur only in small
quantities at most sites, usually made from thin
bifacial thinning flakes. These include scrapers,
denticulates, notched tools, perforators, and gravers. A few bifacial perforators (drills) are sometimes found at sites in this region.

Figure 6. Paleoindian lithic unifacial tools.

Examples of edge wear patterns from scraping, cutting, and planing functions can be found on
utilized flakes, consistent with edge wear patterns
illustrated by Tringham et al. (1974). Some types
of stone tool use do not give much edge wear,
especially when working soft materials such as rneat
(Patterson 1984). There is little evidence from stone
tool types to indicate that any sites were being used
as specialized activity locations.

257

CERAMIC TYPES, CHRONOLOGIES,
AND GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTIONS
The use of pottery did not start uniformly
throughout Southeast Texas. It diffused into this
region from adjacent regions, especially from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) states
that pottery was present at the Texas-Louisiana border on the coastal margin by about 70 B.C., in the
Galveston Bay area by about A.D. 100, in the western part of the coastal margin of this region by
about A.D. 300, and in the Conroe-Livingston inland area by about A.D. 500. The use of pottery in
the inland subregion of Southeast Texas appears to
have diffused from the coastal margin. The chronologies of various pottery types in Southeast Texas
are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where
Aten (1983:Figure t4.1) has established a detailed
chronological sequence. Aten (1983:206-245) has
given a detailed description of each pottery type
found in Southeast Texas.
Pottery was introduced at the start of the Early
Ceramic period, when there was a high regional
population level. The high population may have
resulted in restricted mobility, and a more sedentary lifestyle with longer stays at campsites. Since
pottery is not easily transported, the use of pottery
may have been more advantageous with a more
sedentary lifestyle. As noted below, the use of pottery decreased in the Late Prehistoric period in the
inland subregion when there was a higher degree
of mobility.
Goose Creek sandy paste pottery was used
throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat farther
north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and
early part of the Historic Indian periods (see Perttula
et al., this volume). A minor variety, Goose Creek
Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period
(Aten 1983:Figure 14.1). Winchell and Ellis (1991)
have considered the possibility of a more detailed
chronological sequence for Goose Creek pottery,
based on types of surface finish, but no definite
regional chronological sequence has been established based on the frequency of this attribute.
On the basis of geographic distribution of sandy
paste pottery, Story (1990:256) has proposed a
Mossy Grove cultural tradition. This designation is
problematical, because it is based mainly on a single
technological trait, while Southeast Texas is rather
heterogeneous with regard to other technological
traits. There is a smaller amount of Goose Creek
pottery in the western zone than in the central and

258

Texas Archeological Society

eastern parts of this region, which is consistent
with Aten’s (1971:Figure 10) model of slow diffusion of pottery down the Texas coast from Louisiana to Corpus Christi Bay.
Grog (crushed sherd)-tempered pottery was
used in the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods. The varieties of grog-tempered pottery are San
Jacinto Plain, and Baytown Plain, variety Phoenix
Lake. San Jacinto pottery has relatively low amounts
of small size temper, while Baytown Plain has large
amounts of sherd pieces as temper, often visible on
surfaces, and a clayey or silty paste (see Weinstein
1991). Both Goose Creek and San Jacinto wares
have small percentages of incised varieties, but studies have shown only a limited temporal signifi¯ cance for incised design motifs. Grog-tempered
pottery is more common on the coastal margin than
in inland Southeast Texas (Patterson 1990b). The
reported amounts of San Jacinto grog-tempered pottery in the inland subregion are probably over-stated
due to identification difficulties (Aten 1983:239).
Baytown Plain grog-tempered pottery is found only
on the coastal margin (Aten 1983:241), but is often
classified together with San Jacinto Plain.
Aside for Goose Creek Stamped, three other
minor pottery types were used only during the Early
Ceramic period: Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped),
Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain, variety Conway
(Aten 1983:Figure 14.1). Mandeville and
Tchefuncte types are characterized by contorted
paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy
paste like Goose Creek, and Tchefuncte paste has
little sand. There is a question as to whether or not
Mandeville and Tchefuncte ceramics are separate
types or simply represent different clay sources.
Conway pottery is like Goose Creek except that
coarse-grained sand has been added as temper.
Bone-tempered pottery types are not common
in Southeast Texas, but occur sporadically in time
and space, in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric,
and Protohistoric periods (Patterson 1993b; Aten
1983:Figure 14.1). Bone-tempered pottery found in
the western part of this region during the Late Prehistoric (Patterson and Hudgins 1989) may be related to Leon Plain pottery of Central Texas (Suhm
and Jelks 1962). Bone-tempered pottery seems to
occur only in the inland subregion during the Early
Ceramic period. Rockport Plain and Asphalt Coated
pottery are types from the Central Texas coast (see
Ricklis, this volume), found at only a few sites in
Southeast Texas during the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric periods.

The functional uses of pottery have not been
well-defined in this region, but possibilities include
cooking, food storage, and water storage. The common occurrence of sherds with drilled repair holes
implies that much of the pottery may have been
used for food storage, where a water-tight container was not required. A large proportion of pottery in the inland subregion was poorly fired, which
might indicate that cooking was not its major use
since a durable vessel would have been desired for
cooking. Pottery was better fired in the coastal margin subregion, and probably this attests to more
cooking use, such as boiling to process shellfish
and fish.

FIRED CLAYBALLS

Fired clayballs (Figure 7) are found at some
inland sites in this region. This artifact has a wide
geographic distribution, but the frequency of sites
with clayballs is low. There are 34 sites with
clayballs in the inland data base as of mid-1992.
Typically, clayballs vary from t5 to 76 mm in
diameter, with an average weight of 6 g. The number of clayballs at a site varies from a few to many
thousands (Patterson 1989e). At some sites clayballs
are mixed with pieces of caliche that appear to have
had the same function as clayballs.
The probable function of clayballs was for
roasting of food materials, although heat-treatment
of chert is another possibility. Hudgins (1993) has
conducted experiments for meat roasting with hot
clayballs with good results. Hot clayballs retain
heat longer than hot coals from a wood fire. The
relatively tow frequency of sites with clayballs

Figure 7. Fired clayballs from a site in Southeast Texas

Patterson ~ The Archeology of Southeast Texas
indicates that cooking with clayballs was not a
generally prefered method. Meat can be cooked
easily with an open fire, but some types of plant
materials are probably better processed by roasting
over clayballs. It has been proposed (Patterson
1989e) that sites with clayballs represent specialized
processing of plant foods on a seasonal basis. Poor
preservation of floral remains precludes identifying
the types of plant materials that were processed.
Fired clayballs occur from the Late Paleoindian
through the Late Prehistoric periods (Patterson et
al. 1987, Patterson et al. 1993a).

259

SHELL ARTIFACTS
Marine shell beads and pendants occur at inland Late Archaic (Hall 1981) and Late Prehistoric
coastal margin (Aten et al. 1976) burial sites. Oyster shell tools were used on the coastal margin as a
substitute for stone tools (Aten 1983:264; Patterson
1990c), for cutting and scraping. The distribution
of oyster shell tools is an indicator of the geographic settlement pattern of coastal margin Indians (Aten 1983:Figure 16.1).

SUMMARY COMMENTS
GROUNDSTONE ARTIFACTS
Mano-metate sets and grinding slabs of local
sandstone are occasionally found at sites in this
region. Possible uses of grinding tools include processing of plant materials and grinding of decorative pigments. At 41FB3 (Patterson et al. 1993b),
grinding slabs were used to produce powdered red
ochre to include with burials. Ground stone artifacts made of exotic materials include boatstones,
gorgets, bannerstones, and beads, often found as
grave goods in Late Archaic burials in the western
part of Southeast Texas (Hall 1981). Duke (1989)
has documented bannerstones found in this region.

BONE AND ANTLER
ARTIFACTS

Preservation of bone and antler is generally
not good in Southeast Texas, but artifacts made of
these materials are occasionally found. Bone tools
are most common at coastal margin sites, where
preservation is good in shell middens, and where
bone tools were often used instead of stone tools.
Bone tool types include awls, projectile points, fishhooks, pins, and needles. Long-bone implements
have been found at several sites. Hall (1988a) has
concluded that pointed long-bone implements were
used as awls, but that specimens with blunt ends
had other functions, such as use for hairpins, head
scratchers, or sweat scrapers. Bone beads are occasionally found, mainly as grave goods (Hall 1981).
Antler is not preserved as well as bone. A few
antler pressure flaking tools (Vernon 1989) and
projectile points (Aten et al. 1976:40) have been
found. Bone and antler tools were probably used
more than the archeological record indicates.

This paper has summarized the long period of
hunter-gatherer lifestyle in Southeast Texas, as reconstructed from current data. This lifestyle appears to have been a successful adaptation for a
period of about 11,000 years, characterized by a
continuity in settlement pattern type and slow technological change. Future research in this region
will result in more refined interpretations of various research topics and models. However, due to
the rapid destruction of archeological resources by
erosion and modern activities, the most important
research goal should be to obtain good representative samples of the archeology of all geographic
areas and time periods in Southeast Texas. Research on specific problems can be done as suitable
data become available. Much more research needs
to be done outside of the Cultural Resource Management regulatory process, to ensure better coverage of archeological resources on private lands.

REFERENCES CITED
Ambler, J. R.
1970

Additional Archeological Surveys of the Wallisville
Reservoir Area, Texas. Report No. 6. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas
at Austin.

Aten, L. E.
1967

Excavations at the Jameson Site, Liberty County,
Texas. Report No. 1. Houston Archeologica! Society.

1981

Determining Seasonality of Rangia cuneata from
Gulf Coast Middens. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:179-200.

260

Texas Archeological Society

Aten, L. E. (Continued)

Dering, P. and D. Ayers

1983

1977

hMians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press,

Archeological Investigations in the Village of Oyster Creek, Brazoria County, Texas. Report No. 42.

New York.

Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University,
College Station.

Aten, L. E., C. K. Chandler, A. B. Wesolowsky, and R. M.
Malina
1976

Excavations at the Harris County Boys’ School Cemetery. Special Publication No. 3. Texas Archeological Society, San Antonio.

Aranow, S.
1971

Dillehay, T. D.
1975 Prehistoric Subsistence Exploitation in the Lower
Trinity Rivet" Delta, Texas. Research Report No. 51.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Quaternary Geology. In Groundwater Resources of
Chambers and Jefferson Counties, Texas, edited by
J. B. Wesselman, pp. 34-53. Report No. 133. Texas

Duke,
1981 41HR74-A Harris County Shell Site on Lower San
Jacinto Bay. Houston Archeological Society News-

Water Development Board, Austin.

letter 70:18-30.
Banks, L.
1992

1982

The McFaddin Beach Site. Texas Archeology
36(2):9.

Society Journal 73:22-25.
1989

Organization and Formation Processes: Looking at
Curated Technologies. Journal 03"Anthropological
Research 35:255-273.

1980

Additional Bannerstones from Texas. Houston Archeological Society Journal 95:12-15.

Binford, L. R.
1979

The Goebel Site (41AU1). Houston Archeological

Ensor, H. B. and D. L. Carlson
1988

The CrawJbrd Site (41PK69), Central Trinity River
Highlands, Polk County, Texas. Contract Reports in

Willow Smoke and Dogs’ Tails: Hunter-Gatherer

Archeology, Report No. 4. Texas State Department

Settlement Systems and Archaeological Site For-

of Highways, Austin.

mation. American Antiquity 45( 1 ):4-20.
Black, W.M., L.W. Patterson, and R. Storey
1992

Burials with Marine Shells at 41WH44, Wharton
Co., Texas. Houston Archeological Society Journal
102:20-24.

Ensor, H. B. and D. L. Carlson (editors)
1991 Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie Zone, Harris
County, Southeast Texas. Reports of Investigations
No. 8. Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas
A&M University, College Station.

Boyd, C.
1992

Current Research, Alabama. Southeastern Archaeological Conference Newsletter 34( 1 ): 1.

Fagan, B. M.
1991

Ancient North America. Thames and Hudson, New
York.

Brown, J. A. and T. D. Price
1985

Complex Hunter-Gatherers: Retrospect and Pros-

Fullen, W. L.

pect. In Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers’: The Emer-

!978

gence of Cultural Complexity, edited by T. D. Price

E10rcoquisac Archeological District, Wallisville
Reservoir, Texas. Houston Archeological Society

and J. A. Brown, pp. 435-442. Academic Press,

Newsletter 59:5-12.

Orlando.

Bumett, B. A.
1990 The Bioarcheological Synthesis of the Eastern Portion of the Gulf Coastal Plain. In The Archeology
and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.
A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D. Freeman,
J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J.
Reinhard, pp. 385-418.2 Vols. Research Series No.
38. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Gagliano, S. M.
1977 Cultural Resources Evaluation of the Northern Gulf
of Mexico Continental Shelf. Cultural Resource Management Studies, Interagency Archeological Services, Washington, D.C.
Gibson, J. L. (editor)
1995

Exchange in the Lower Mississippi Valley and Contiguous Areas at 1100 B.C. Louisiana Archaeology
17:1-299.

Cohen, M. N.
1977 The Food Crisis in Prehistory. Yale University
Press, New Haven.

Gilmore, K.
1974

Cultural Variation on the Texas Coast: Analysis of
an Aboriginal Shell Midden, Wallisville Reservoit;

Covey, C. (translator and editor)
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier Books, New York.

Texas. Research Report No. 14. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

Patterson m The Archeology of Southeast Texas
Goodyear, A. C.
1982

The Chronological Placement of the Dalton Hori-

Jeter, M. D. and G. I. Williams, Jr.
1989

zon in the Southeastern United States. American

sippi Valley and Trans-Mississippi South in
Arkansas and Louisiana, by M.D. Jeter, J. C. Rose,

Hall. G. D.

G. I. Williams, Jr., and A. M. Harmon, pp. 111-170.

Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of
the Lower Brazos River Valley, Texas. Research

Research Series No. 37. Arkansas Archeological
Survey, Fayetteville.

Report No. 61. Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Ceramic Using Cultures, 600 B.C.-A.D. 700. In Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Lower Missis-

Antiquity 47:382-395.

1981

261

1988a Long Bone Implements from Prehistoric Sites in

Johnson, L.
1994 The Life and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk As Seen

Texas: Functional Interpretations Based on

from the Buckhollow Encampment, Site 41KM16, of

Enthnographic Analogy. Bulletin of the Texas Ar-

Kimble County, Texas. Report 38. Office of the

cheoIogical Society 59:157-176.

State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.

1988b Evidence of Conflict in Prehistoric Texas: A Response to Patterson. Houston Archeological Society
Journal 91:16-19.

Justice, N. D.
1987 Stone Age Spear and Arrow Points of the

Hayden, B.

Midcontinental and Eastern United States. Indiana

1977

University Press, Bloomington.

Stone Tool Functions in the Western Desert. In Stone
Tools as Cultural Markers, edited by R. V. S.
Wright. Humanities Press, Newark, New Jersey.

Keller, J. E. and F. A. Weir
1979

The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeol-

Haynes, C. V., D. J. Donahue, A. J. T. Jull, and T. H. Zabel

ogy, Report No. 13. Texas State Department of

1984

Highways, Austin.

Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point
Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of Eastern North
America 12:184-191.

Hedrick, B. C. and C. L. Riley
1974

The Journey of the Vaca Party. University Museum
Studies No. 2. Southern Illinois University,
Carbondale.

Hudgins, J. D.
1986 A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55:2951.
1993

Kenmotsu, N. A. and T. K. Perttula (editors)
1993 Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas:
A Planning Document. Cultural Resource Management Report 3. Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Kindall, S. M. and L. W. Patterson
1986 The Andy Kyle Archeological Collection, Southeast Texas. Houston Archeological Society Journal
86:14-21.
1993

52. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Excavations at 41CHt61, Chambers County. Houston Archeological Society Journal 106:1-9.

Cooking with Clayballs. The Cache, Volume 1:47-

Largent, F. B., M. R. Waters, and D. L. Carlson
1991

The Spatiotemporal Distribution and Characteristics of Folsom Projectile Points in Texas. Plains

Hudgins, J. D and S. M. Kindall
1984 Peikert Site. Houston Archeological Society Journal 80:9-22.

Anthropologist 36(137):323-341.
Larson, L. H.

Hudgins, J. D. and L. W. Patterson
1983

Aboriginal Subsistence Technology on the Southeastern Coastal Plain during the Late Prehistoric

logical Society Journal 75:1.

Period. University Presses of Florida, Gainesville.

Hudson, C.
1976

1980

Scottsbluff Point, Site 41WH19. Houston Archeo-

The Southeastern Indians. University of Tennessee
Press, Knoxville.

Long, R. L.
1977 McFaddin Beach. Pattillo Higgins Series of Natural
History and Anthropology No. 1. Lamar University,
Beaumont.

Huebner, J. A.
1988

A Clovis Point from 41GV101, Galveston County,

McClure, W. L.

Texas. Houston Archeological Society Journal 92:8-

1987

9.

FaunalAnalysis of41FB37. HoustonArcheological
Society Journal 89: 1-6.

262

Texas Archeological Society

Meltzer, D. J.

Patterson, L. W. (Contimted)

1993

1986

Is There a Clovis Adaptation? In From Kostenki to

Site 41HR571, A Long Prehistoric Sequence in Har-

Clovis, edited by O. Soffer and N. D. Praslov, pp.

ris Co., Texas. Houston Archeological Society Jour-

293-310, Plenum Press, New York.

nal 85:15-18.
1987

Moore, W. E.
1989 Archeological Bibliography for the Southeastern

Prehistoric Population Dynamics in Southeast Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas A rcheological Society 57:117121

Region of Texas. Special Report 31. Office of the
State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.

1988a Radiocarbon Dates from 41FB37, Fort Bend Co.,
Texas. Houston Archeological Society Journal
91:20-21.

Munson, P. J.
1990

Folsom Fluted Projectile Points East of the Great
Plains and Their Biogeographical Correlates. North
American Archaeologist 11(3):255-272.

Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961

1993

The h~dians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern
Times. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 64:1-63.

1988b Intergroup Conflict in Prehistoric Texas. Houston
Archeological Society Journal 90:8-10.
1989a A Data Base for Inland Southeast Texas Archeology. Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 6.
1989b An Archeological Data Base for the Southeastern
Texas Coastal Margin. Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 7.
1989c Early Dates for the Pedernales Point. La Tierra
16(1):28-30.
1989d Chronological Placement of Late Archaic and Early

O’Brien, M. J. and C. Spenser

Ceramic Dart Points in Southeast Texas. Houston

1976

A rcheological Society Journal 94:14-15.

The Upper Texas Coast: Environmental Variables
and Human Adaptation. The Texas Journal of Science 27(4):453-463.

Odell, G. H.
1988 Addressing Prehistoric Hunting Practices Through
Stone Tool Analysis. American Anthropologist
90:335-355.

1989e Additional Comments on Fired Clayballs. Houston
Archeological Society Joutwal 94:24-26.
1990a Relationships of Certain Dart Points in Southeast
Texas. Houston Archeological Society Journal 96:14.
1990b The Distribution of Coastal Margin Pottery Types in
Southeast Texas. Houston ArcheologicaI Society

Paine, J. G. and R. A. Morton
1986 Historical Shoreline Changes in Trinity, Galveston,
West and East Bays, Texas Gulf Coast. Geological
Circular 86-3. Bureau of Economic Geology, University of Texas at Austin.

Journal 97:14-19.
1990c Excavations at the J. D. Wells Site (41HR639), Harris Co., Texas. Houston Archeological Society Journal 97:1-7.
1991 a Arrow Point Chronologies in Southeast Texas. Hous-

Patterson, L. W.
1973

1976

1979

Some Texas Blade Technology. Bulletin of the Texas
A rcheological Society 44: 89-111.

1991b Dart Point Chronologies in Southeast Texas. Houston Archeological Society Journal 101:1-5.

Technological Changes in Harris County, Texas.

1991c Relationships of Early Notched Projectile Points in

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 47:171 -

Southeast Texas and the Greater Southeast Wood-

188,

lands. Houston Archeological Society Journal

Archeological Surveys and Settlement Patterns on

100:14-20.

the Upper Texas Coast. Houston Archeological So-

1980

namics of Inland Southeast Texas. Houston Archeo-

The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Se-

logical Society Journal 99:16-21.

Coast, No. 8. Houston Archeological Society, Spe-

Initial Employment of the Bow and Arrow in South-

cial Publication.

Experimental Meat Cutting with Stone Tools. La
Tierra 11(3):17-20.

1985

1992a Bibliography of the Prehistory of the Upper Texas

cal Society, Report No. 3.

ern North America. La Tierra 9(2):18-26.
1984

1991d Mobility-Settlement Patterns and Population Dy-

ciety Newsletter 65:2-8.

quence in Harris Co., Texas. Houston Archeologi-

1982

ton Archeological Society Journal 101:6-11.

A Long Occupation Sequence at Site 41HR182,
Harris Co., Texas. Houston Archeological Society
Journal 81 : 11-20.

1992b Current Data on Early Use of the Bow and Arrow in
Southern North America. La Tierra 19(4):6-15.
1992c Prehistoric Bison in Southeast Texas. Houston Archeological Society Journal 102:14-19.
1993a The Archeology of Inland Southeast Texas: A Quantitative Study. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 61:255-280

Patterson ~ The Archeology of Southeast Texas
Patterson, L. W. (Continued)
1993b Bone-Tempered Pottery in Southeast Texas. Houston Archeological Society Journal 105:2-5.
1993c Identifying Historic Indian Sites in Southeast Texas.
Houston Archeological Society Journal 106:23-26.
1993d The Boundary Between Inland and Coastal Margin
Settlement Patterns in Southeast Texas. Houston
A rcheological Society Journal 107:14-18.
Patterson, L. W. and C. R. Ebersole
1992 Site 4tCH290, A Multi-Component Shell Midden,
Chambers Co., Texas. Houston Archeological Society Journal 102:25-29.
Patterson, L. W., C. R. Ebersole, and S. M. Kindall
1991 Rangia Shellfish Utilization: Experimental Studies.
Houston Archeological Society Journal 101:26-29.
Patterson, L. W. and K. M. Gardner
1993

Additional Rangia Seasonality Studies. Houston Ar-

Patterson, L. W., J. D. Lockwood, R. L. Gregg, and S. M.
Kindall (Continued)
1993d Prehistoric Sites 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris
Co., Texas. Houston Archeological Society Journal
104:25-30.
Patterson, L. W., K. Marriott, and L. Marriott
1990 Site 41HR624, Another Long Sequence in Harris
Co., Texas. Houston Archeological Society Journal
96:21-26.
Patterson, L. W. and M. A. Marshall
1989 Some Archeological Sites on Upper San Jacinto Bay.
Houston Archeological Society Journal 94:1-8.
Perttula, T. K.
1992 The Early 19th Century Archeology of the AlabamaCoushatta Indians in Texas. Heritage 10(2):20-24.
Texas Historical Foundation, Austin.
1994

cheological Society Journal 105:28-30.

Patterson, L. W. and J. D. Hudgins
1987 Test Excavations at Site 41FB37, Fort Bend Co.,
Texas. Houston Archeological Society Journal 88:18.
1991

The Kovar Site, 41WH69, Wharton Co., Texas.
Houston Archeological Society Journal 99:1-5.

Patterson, L. W. , J. D. Hudgins, R. L. Gregg, and W. L.
McClure
1987 Excavations at Site 41WH19, Wharton County,
Texas. Houston Archeological Society, Report No.
4.
Patterson, L. W., J. D. Hudgins, R. L. Gregg, S. M. Kindall,
W. L. McClure, and R. W. Neck
1993a Excavations at the Ferguson Site, 41FB42, Fort
Bend County, Texas. Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 10.
Patterson, L. W., J. D. Hudgins, R. L. Gregg, S. M. Kindall,
and W. L. McClure
1994 Excavations at the Joe Davis Site, 41FB223, Fort
Bend County, Texas. Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 11.
Patterson, L. W., W. M. Black, W. L. McClure, R. Storey, and
S. Patrick
1993b Excavations at the Bowser Site, 41FB3, Fort Bend
County, Texas. Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 9.
Patterson, L. W., J. D. Lockwood, R. L. Gregg, and S. M.
Kindall
1993c The Lockwood Collection (41HR343), Harris Co.,
Texas. Houston Archeological Society Journal
104:16-24.

263

Material Culture of the Koasati Indians of Texas.
Historical Archaeology 28(1):65-77.

Powell. J. F.
1988 Stress and Survival: Models of Adaptive Success in
the Texas Late Prehistoric. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 58:249-266.
Prewitt, E. R.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89.
1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central
Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:210-238.

Reinhard, K. J., B. W. Olive, and D. G. Steele
1990 The Bioarcheological Synthesis of the Western Portion of the Gulf Coastal Plain. In The Archeology
and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.
A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D. Freeman,
J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, K. J. Reinhard, and B. W.
Olive, pp. 419-424. 2 Vols. Research Series No. 38.
Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Ricklis, R. A.
1993 Investigations at the Mitchell Ridge Site, 41GV66.
CRM News and Views 5(1):4-5. Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission.
1994

Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas
Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell Ridge Site,
41GV66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological
Research, Inc., Corpus Christi.

Ricklis, R. A. and K. A. Cox
1993 Examining Lithic Technological Organization as a
Dynamic Cultural Subsystem: The Advantages of
an Explicitly Spatial Approach. American Antiquity
58(3):444-461.

264

Texas Archeological Society

Story, D. A.

Vernon, C. R.

1990

1989

Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The
Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal

The Prehistoric Skeletal Remains from the
Crestmont Site, Wharton County, Texas. Studies in

Plain, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D.

Archeology 1. Texas Archeological Research Labo-

Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K.

ratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366.2 Vols. Research Series No.
38. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Webb, C. H.
1982 The Poverty Point Culture. Geoscience and Man,
Volume 17. Louisiana State University, Baton

Story, D. A., J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D. Freeman, J. C.

Rouge.

Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard
1990

The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf
Coastal Plain. 2 Vols. Research Series No. 38. Ar-

Webb, C. H., J. L. Shiner, and E. W. Roberts

kansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

1971

The John Pearce Site (16CD56): A San Patrice Site
in Caddo Parish, Louisiana. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 42:1-49.

Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
Texas Archeological Society, Special Publication

Weinstein, R. A.

No. 1 and Bulletin No. 4, Texas Memorial Museum,

1991

Lido Harbor (41GV82): A Late Prehistoric Campsite and Extraction Locale, Galveston County, Texas.

Austin.

Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge.
Thorns, A. V. (editor)
1993 The Brazos Valley Slopes Archeological Project.
Reports of Investigations No. 14. Archeological Re-

Wenke, R. J.
1990

Patterns in Prehistory. Second Edition. Oxford University Press, New York.

search Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.

Wheat, J. B.
Tringham, R., G. Cooper, G. Odell, B. Voytek, and A. Whitman
1974

1953

The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bu-

Experimentation in the Formation of Edge Damage:

reau of American Ethnology, U. S. Government

A New Approach to Lithic Analysis. Journal of

Printing Office, Washington, D. C.

Field A rchaeology 1 : 171 - 196.
Winchell, F. and L. W. Ellis
Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1985

1993

A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
Second Edition. Gulf Publishing Co., Houston.

Turner, E. S. and P. Tanner
1994 The McFaddin Beach Site on the Upper Texas Coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65:319336.

1991

The Ceramics of the Alabonson Road Site. In
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptation
to the Inland Coastal Prairie Zone, Harris County,
Southeast Texas, edited by H. B. Ensor and D. L.
Carlson, pp. 49-99. Report of Investigations No. 8.
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station.

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower
Texas Coast: A Regional Overview
Robert A. Ricklis

ABSTRACT
The prehistoric human occupation of the central and lower Texas coastlines is reviewed in light of recently
acquired archeological and environmental information. Greatest attention is devoted to the central coast, which
has seen more systematic research that the lower coast. A relatively long series of radiocarbon dates is now
available for this area, permitting the development of a basic chronology of adaptive change for the long-lived
Archaic, as well as the subsequent Late Prehistoric period. The chronological data suggest that shoreline
occupation over the long term was not continuous through time, but tended to fall into three distinct time intervals
that likely correlate with the emergence of biotically rich estuaries during periods of stable Holocene sea level.
Although understanding of the chronology of occupation and adaptive changes for the lower coast is limited by
a paucity of systematic research, some important work has also been accomplished within the framework of
cultural resource management projects.

INTRODUCTION
In 1960, T. N. Campbell published an
archeological synthesis of the central and lower
coasts (Campbell 1960). At that time, it was possible
to identify, for the central Texas coast, basic Archaic
and Late Prehistoric (or, as then termed, "NeoAmerican") cultural patterns involving human
occupation of the shoreline and exploitation of
shellfish and fish resources. Chronology was strictly
relative, since no radiocarbon dates had yet been
obtained in the area, and a cultural sequence could
be defined only on the basis of the stratigraphic
positions of identifiable artifact assemblages.
Based upon previous excavations at a few key
sites such as Kent-Crane (41AS3), Johnson
(41AS1), and Live Oak Point (41AS2) on Copano
Bay, and Webb Island (41NU1) in upper Laguna
Madre, Campbell (1947, 1952, 1956, 1958a, 1960)
suggested a bipartite chronology in which an
Archaic Aransas focus preceded a Neo-American
Rockport focus. The former was characterized by
shoreline shell middens yielding a variety of stone
dart point forms (later assignable mainly to the
Kent and Ensor types as defined by Suhm and Jelks
[1962]), various bone tools, including awls and pins
with engraved geometric decorations, and a suite of
shell tool forms consisting of perforated oyster

shells, conch columella gouges, bi-pointed
columella sections, adzes cut and ground from conch
whelk body whorls, and knives/scrapers of edgeflaked sunray venus clamshells. The Aransas focus
was also negatively defined by the absence of arrow
points and ceramics.
The Rockport focus, linked with the historic
Karankawa Indians of the region (Campbell 1960),
was identified on the basis of several arrow point
types and more or less abundant sandy paste ceramics, often decorated and/or coated with asphaltum, a natural tar which washes up on Gulf of
Mexico beaches. On the basis of the virtually consistent presence of sand in ceramic clay bodies, and
the occasional use of geometric incised line decorations below vessel rims, Campbell (1961) suggested
that central coast ceramic technology diffused from
the upper Texas coast.
Subsequent work on the central coast provided
additional insight into questions of prehistoric chronology and adaptive patterns (see summary review
in Shafer and Bond 1985). Dee Ann Story’s 1967
work at two sites in the region (Story 1968) was the
first professional excavation since the earlier work
reviewed and reported by Campbell. At the Anaqua
site (41JK8) on the lower Lavaca River, Story identified an important Late Prehistoric component with
plain, sandy paste ceramics similar to upper coast

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

266

Texas Archeological Society

Goose Creek Plain (Suhm and Jelks 1962), in apparent association with Scallorn and Granbury
(Scallorn preforms?) arrowpoints. At the Ingleside
Cove site (41SP43) on Corpus Christi Bay, Story’s
excavations revealed stratified deposits, with a Late
Archaic shell midden overlain by a midden pertaining to the Late Prehistoric Rockport manifestation.
These excavations provided the first radiocarbon
dates for the central coast: four samples (3 scallop
shell, 1 wood charcoal) were assayed, and appeared
on the basis of uncorrected dates to place the terminal Archaic component at ca. A.D. 1100-1250 (see
Story 1968:40).
In 1974, James E. Corbin published a relative
chronology for the central coast, based mainly upon
a seriation of dart and arrow point types. For the
Archaic, he suggested that the known dart point
types were too varied, and spanned too long a time,
to fit the relatively tight temporal requirements of a
"focus" (Corbin 1974). On this basis, Corbin suggested that the term Aransas Complex was more
appropriate, since the concept of a "complex" did
not imply a clearly bounded spatial and temporal
cultural expression. In a slightly later paper, Corbin
(1976) suggested that Archaic occupation of the
coast probably began ca. 2000 B.C., with the establishment of modern sea level. For the Late Prehistoric, Corbin’s seriation suggested a chronology of
several arrow point types, with Scallorn and Fresno
preceding Perdiz, which was in turn followed during the period of European contact by the Bulbar
Stemmed type.
At the time of Campbell’s 1960 article, the
lower coast was even more poorly investigated than
was the centra! coast. The archeological record,
known primarily from sites in the Rio Grande delta
area, in fact consisted only of surface-collected artifacts which could be related in part to materials
from northern Tamaulipas, Mexico. It was recognized that a long Archaic occupation, characterized
by triangular and subtriangular dart points, preceded an Neo-American one with unstemmed arrow points and a regional shell industry. Later work
has been intermittent, and the lower coast remains
poorly known.

THE CENTRAL TEXAS COAST
The central coast, as here defined, includes the
shoreline zone (including the barrier islands), and
the coastal plain to a point approximately 40-50 km

inland from the mainland strandline, between the
Colorado River on the north and the northern margins of Baffin Bay on the south (Figure 1). The
rationale for this geographic definition is twofold.
First, this is the area of the Late Prehistoric Rockport
phase, which can be quite accurately delimited on
the basis of the distribution of a distinctive artifact
assemblage. Second, while there is internal environmental variability, the area is unified by the
presence of five similar, major bay estuarine systems protected by a continuous barrier island chain,
in contrast to the prograded Brazos-Colorado River
delta to the north and the un-embayed shoreline of
the lower coast.
The following discussion presents, first, a brief
overview of what is currently known about the evolution of the central coast as an exploitable environment. This is followed by a summary of the
current archeological data base, presented chronologically from the Early Archaic through the Late
Prehistoric, along with discussions of fundamental
long-term patterns of human adaptive change.
The Paleoindian stage is not treated here, for
two reasons. First, the period is represented along
the coast only by sporadic surface finds of timediagnostic early and late Paleoindian dart point types
(see Hester 1980a); to date, no intact subsurface
Paleoindian components have been found at excavated sites (though the reader may refer to Lewis
[1988, 1994] for discussions of a Late Pleistocene
faunal assemblage with possible evidence of human presence, on Petronila Creek southwest of Corpus Christi). Second, the scattered Paleoindian
artifacts found within the modern central coast area
do not pertain to a contemporaneous coastal occupation, since the terminal Pleistocene shoreline was
situated a considerable distance seaward of the
present coast, due to lower global sea level. When
and if intact, subsurface Paleoindian components
are found in the region, they will represent terrestrial/riverine, rather than coastal, adaptations.

The Holocene Evolution
of the Central Coast
Environment
The central coast is part of the broad Gulf
Coastal Plain (Fenneman 1938), a nearly flat
physiographic unit that rises very gradually from
the coast to the interior. The surface geology
consists of sandy clays and clayey sands deposited
by major fluvial-deltaic systems during the

Ricklis m Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast

267

/
/

Figure 1. Map of the Texas Coast delimiting the central and lower coastal zones.

Pleistocene interglacials. The most recent geological
unit is the Beaumont Formation, a thick
accumulation of Pleistocene clays and sands that is
the geological foundation of the present coastline.
The Ingleside unit of the Beaumont is a long, narrow
deposit of sandy clays, representing a Pleistocene
barrier or strandplain; this overlies the main part of
the Beaumont Formation along the modern
strandline (Brown et al. 1976; Solis 1981).
During the last glacial maximum, ca. 20,000
B.P., sea level was as much as 100 meters lower

than at present, since much of the global water
supply was locked in massive continental ice sheets
and extensive montane glaciers. At that time,
coastal streams downcut deeply into the Beaumont
Formation. After ca. 18,000 B.P., global warming
resulted in rapid sea level rise, so that by ca. 9000
B.P. the river valleys along the central Texas coast
were inundated by transgressive marine waters,
thus creating the prototypes of the modern bay
systems (Byrne 1975; Brown et al. 1976;
McGowen et al. 1976).

268

Texas Archeological Society

Although there is not complete agreement on
the timing of Hotocene sea level rise, there is a
general consensus that marine transgression was
stepwise, with periods of rapid rise interrupted by
intervals of markedly slowed rise, slight regression,
or sea level stillstand (Curray 1960; Nelson and
Bray 1970; Frazier 1974; Paine 1991; Anderson
and Thomas 1991). The more recent geologic studies have suggested that sea level rose relatively
rapidly prior to 9000-8000 B.P., and then between
7000 and 6000 B.P. (Frazier 1974; Paine 1991).
Paine (1987, 1991) has suggested a rapid rise to an
approximately 1-meter highstand between ca. 4400
and 2600 B.P., and recent work by Anderson et al.
(1992) has suggested final rise and inundation of
river valleys ca. 4000 B.P. There is general agreement that modern stable sea level was established
around 3000 B.P., give or take a few centuries
(Frazier 1974; Brown et al. 1976; McGowen et al.
1976; Paine 1991; Anderson et al. 1992).
The modern coastal environment began to
emerge with the establishment of stillstand ca. 3000
B.P. With a stable sea level, wave action and
longshore drift deposited sand and shell offshore,
and disconnected Middle Holocene transgressive
barriers began to coalesce to form the modern, continuous chain of regressive barrier islands, which
probably approximated their present form by 25002000 B.P. (e.g., Brown et al. 1976). The development of the mature barrier chain created a series of
highly protected lagoons and estuarine embayments,
and ongoing sedimentation resulted in the extensive back-barrier shallows of the modern estuarine
environment. The emergence of broad, quiet-water
shallows played a key role in estuarine ecology,
since vegetated shallows and marshes provide important nutrients for the rich aquatic food chain, as
well as crucial nursery and spawning grounds for
fish (e.g., Odum et al. 1974; Perret et al. 1980;
Reagan !985; Matlock 1990). Thus, the modern
central coast environment is characterized by highly
productive, shallow-water, estuaries protected from
the high-energy wave action of the open Gulf by a
continuous barrier chain.
The terrestrial environment is varied according
to local soil and hydrological conditions. For the
most part, the barrier islands are treeless and characterized by stabilized sand dunes which support various grasses, and are fringed on their land sides with
salt marsh plant communities. Sandy soils on the
mainland shore support dense mottes of live and
blackjack oak (Jones 1983). Farther inland are the

coastal prairies, essentially flat upland areas covered with grasses and scattered clumps of mesquite
and, on sandy soils, live oak (Jones 1983). Faunal
species include various reptiles, amphibians, mammals, and birds (see Blair 1950), and bison were
present in significant numbers on the coastal prairie
in Late Prehistoric and Early Historic times, as indicated by archeological and historical documentation
(see Ricklis 1990, !992a; Huebner 1991).

THECHRONOLOGYOFHUMAN
OCCUPATION ON THE
CENTRAL TEXASCOAST
A Brief Consideration of Taxonomy
In light of chronological data acquired in recent
years, it is apparent that the cultural history of
coastal adaptation in the region was both longer
and more complex than can be adequately
represented by a simple bi-partite chronology
involving an undifferentiated Aransas focus and a
Late Prehistoric Rockport focus. While Campbell’s
early work identified the broadest outlines of
regional chronology and described major artifact
classes, it is now clear that the Archaic occupation
of the region has far greater time depth than once
assumed, and that distinct periods of occupation
with concomitant adaptive changes would be
masked by the continued use of a single taxonomic
label for the entire Archaic period. Thus, the Aransas
focus, or as it has more recently been termed, the
Aransas complex (Corbin 1974; Shafer and Bond
1985; Steele and Mokry 1985; Prewitt et al. 1987),
should be set aside in favor of a chronological
perspective which fits the currently available
empirical evidence.
Recently, Weinstein (1992, !994) has suggested a chronology of "phases" for the central
coast. This chronological construct is not employed
here. Most of Weinstein’s phases are largely conjectural, insofar as distinctive artifact assemblages
remain poorly defined and/or cannot be placed
within definable temporal or geographic limits on
the basis of the available archeological evidence. In
some cases, entire phases are based only on a single
projectile point type which has yet to be found in a
securely dated context. As Johnson (1987) has correctly pointed out, a "phase" must represent, at the
very least, a well-defined spatial-temporal unit of
archeological culture and, at best, a strongly inferred sociocultural entity. At present, these criteria

Rieklis ~ Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast
can be met only by the Late Prehistoric Rockport
phase, which is geographically discrete and which
is in large part, if not entirely, the archeologica!
correlate of the ethnically and linguistically distinct
Karankawa groups who inhabited the central coast
region in Early Historic times (Newcomb 1961,
1983; Ricklis !990, in press).

Radiocarbon Dating on
the Central Coast
Most of the radiocarbon dates now available
from discrete site components in the region are
derived from assays on estuarine shell species found
within shell middens. It is, therefore, important to
point out that shell samples provide reliable results
which are useful in placing site components within
a chronological framework. This fact has been discussed elsewhere (Ricklis and Cox 1991; Ricklis
1993), and the present article is not the place for a
detailed reiteration of these findings. Suffice it to
say that paired samples of shell and wood charcoal,
when extracted from the same cultural depositional
unit or feature, produce virtually identical results,
once the radiocarbon ages on shell are corrected for
the delta ~~C fraction (Table 1, dates nos. 7-13,
which all came from a single, stratigraphically discrete deposit of densely packed shell). Similar results were recently obtained on oyster shell and
hearth charcoal samples from a discrete zone of
Late Prehistoric archeological deposits at the
Mitchell Ridge site (41GV66) on Galveston Island:
when the shell assays were corrected for ~3C, the
radiocarbon ages were statistically identical to those
obtained on the charcoal samples (Ricklis
1994a: 107). To such specific results in paired charcoal-shell samples can be added the fact that multiple dates on shel! samples from within stratified
depositional sequences produce internally consistent results.
All radiocarbon dates from the central coast
that can be determined with confidence to have
come from stratigraphically discrete contexts are
shown in Table 1. The radiocarbon data are additionally reflected in Table 2, which lists discrete
stratigraphic components at shoreline sites and
shows their age ranges as indicated by one or more
corrected and calibrated radiocarbon assays. These
data do not include three early dates from possibly
mixed stratigraphic contexts: two dates on shell
from 41JK35, repol~ed by Weinstein, were extracted

269

from 10 cm arbitrary levels which may have crosscut more than a single stratigraphic zone (Weinstein
1994:159-t60); the third date comes from a handexcavated test unit at 41NU266 on Nueces Bay,
where there is some reason to believe that shells
from the oldest stratigraphic component were mixed
with materials from an overlying stratum (Ricklis
1995a). Because of the uncertain contexts of these
dates, they are not listed in Table 1 or incorporated
into the following discussion. Unless otherwise indicated, all radiocarbon age ranges on shell presented below are corrected for the ~3C fraction and
dendrochronologically calibrated at 1-sigma of error. Since charcoal dates are not significantly altered by ~3C correction, they have been calibrated
directly from the uncorrected assay results.

THE EARLY ARCHAIC
The earliest demonstrable human occupation
and exploitation of the central coast shoreline, as
noted above, can now be placed considerably earlier than once assumed. Numerous sites are currently assignable to the Early Archaic period, prior
to the establishment of modern sea level stillstand
and the emergence of the modem estuarine environment. Two major periods of Early Archaic occupation are indicated: ca. 7500-6800 B.P., and ca.
5800-4200 B.P.

Evidence for Shoreline Occupation,
ca. 7500-6800 B.P.
Occupation during this time interval is well
established on the basis of radiocarbon dates on
discrete stratigraphic components at several sites in
the Nueces Bay area (Figure 2). Cultural components consist of thin but dense lenses or strata of
oyster shells (Crassostrea virginica), resting at the
base of Holocene silty cumulic soils which rest
unconformably on eroded surfaces of the Pleistocene Beaumont Formation (Figures 3 and 4). At
41SP136 and 41SP153, both situated on upland
margins overlooking the north shore of Nueces
Bay, three corrected and calibrated age ranges on
oyster shell and one on scallop shell fal! into this
period (see Tables 1 and 2). At a third site,
41NU266 on the uplands overlooking the south
shore of Nueces Bay, similar oyster strata at several different locations produced age ranges falling

270

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1. Radiocarbon data from discrete occupational strata, central Texas coast. Calibrations
based on Stuiver and Pearson (1986) and Stuiver and Reimer (1993). Asterisk next to
corrected age indicates that correction for 13C is estimated at +400 years, based on
numerous AMS assays for laC on various estuarine shell species (see text).
Excludes data from ambiguous (possibly mixed)
stratigraphic contexts (see text).
Age BP, calibrated
1-sigma range with

Uncorrected

corrected

intercept(s) in

~4C age BP

for ~C

parentheses

Site

Reference

Assay No.

41RF21

Ricklis 1993

TX-6126

charcoal

750+ 100

--

742-660(683)

2 41RF21

Ricklis 1993

TX-6125

bison bone

450 + 70

790 + 70

768-675 (698)

3

41RF21

Ricklis 1993

TX-6127

bison bone

390 + 130

760 + 130

790-576 (685)

4

41SP43

Story !968

TX-520

charcoal

780 + 40

--

725-680 (691)

5

41SP120

Ricklis 1993

TX-7306

quahog

480 + 70

910 + 70

928-738 (880, 865,

41SP120

Ricklis 1993

TX-7305

scallop

510 + 60

910 + 60

926-741 (880, 865,

7

41SP120

Ricklis and Cox 1991

TX-6387

charcoal

950 + 110

--

970-730 (915)

8

41SP120

Ricklis and Cox 1991

TX-6920

charcoal

950+_ 80

--

943-751 (915)

9

41SP120

Ricklis and Cox 1991

TX-6925

whelk

580 + 70

980 + 70

960-793 (926)

10 41SP120

Ricklis and Cox 1991

TX-6919

scallop

630 + 70

1020 + 70

982-915 (938)

11

41SP120

Ricklis and Cox 1991

TX-6639

charcoal

1030 + 130

--

1060-790 (943)

12

41SP120

Ricklis and Cox 1991

TX-6926

quahog

610_+_ 70

1030_+. 70

990-919 (934)

13

41SP120

Ricklis and Cox 1991

TX-6924

oyster

760 + 50

1160 + 50

1161-996 (1064)

Story 1968

TX-52]~

scallop

710 + 40

1110_+ 40*

No,

1

Material

Age BP

823, 813, 796)
823, 813, 796)

14 41SP43

1062-970 (953, 902,
9OO)

41SP43

Story 1968

TX-521

scallop

820 + 50

1220 _+_ 50*

1235-1067 (1165)

16 41SP43

Story 1968

TX-523

scallop

820_+ 50

1220_+ 50*

1235-1067 (1165)

Ricklis 1993

TX-7312

whelk

770 + 60

1180 + 70

15
17

41SP120

1217-974 (7 intercepts
between 1168-1082)

18

41SP120

Ricklis 1993

TX-7313

scallop

950 + 60

1370 + 60

1338-1270 (1298)

19

41SP149

Ricklis 1993

TX-7304

R. cuneata

1060 _+ 70

1440 + 70

1407-1296 (1341, 1323,

This paper

Beta-77683 oyster

--

1640 + 60

Ricklis 1990, 1993

TX-5982

1180_+ 70

1580 _+_ 70*

1546-1395 (1509)

22 41NU266

Ricklis 1995a

Beta-80016 R. cuneata

1250 + 50

1670 + 50

1611-1522 (1545)

23

1312)
20 41CL3
21

41SP43

scallop

1569-1418 (1531)

41SP43

Ricklis 1990, 1993

TX-6062

quahog

1230 + 60

1659 + 60

1682-1514 (1545)

24 41SP43

Ricklis 1990, 1993

TX-5893

quahog

1260 + 70

1660 + 70*

1689-1515 (1552)

41SP43

Ricklis 1990, 1993

TX-5891

quahog

1450_+ 70

1850 _+_ 70*

1873-1711 (1816)

26 41JK24

Weinstein 1994

Beta-57911 oyster

--

1720 + 60

1712-1551 (1685, 1669,

27

Ricklis and Cox 1991

TX-7084

1400 +_ 70

1760_+ 70

This paper

Beta-77684 oyster

--

1810 + 60

1816-1626 (1715)

Weinstein 1992

UGA-6151

1403 + 88

1756 + 88

1818-1559 (1694, 1646,

Ricklis 1995a

Beta-80008 R. cuneata

1590 + 60

1910 + 60

1891-1752 (1862, 1852,

Weinstein 1992

UGA-6150 R. cuneata

1559 + 86

2006 + 86

2060-1873 (1955)

This paper

Beta-77685 oyster

--

2160 + 60

Ricklis 1993

TX-7303

1880 + 60

2230 + 60

2303-2051 (2138)
2340-2155 (7 intercepts

This paper

Beta-77686 oyster

--

2450 + 60

25

1617)
41SP153

oyster

1816-1749 (1695, 1645,
1634)

28 41CL3
29

41CL2

oyster

1633)
30 41NU268

1835)
31

41CL4

32 41CL3
33

41SP136

oyster

between 2308-2184)
34 41CL3

2713-2569 (2468)

Ricklis m Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast

271

Table 1 (Continued)

No.

Site

Reference

Assay No.

Material

Uncorrected
~4C age BP

Age BP
corrected
for ~3C

35

41JK35

Weinstein !994

Beta-57915 R. cuneata

--

2470 + 70

36
37
38
39
40

41NU267
41CL3
41AS3
41CL2
41NU46

Ricklis 1995a
This paper
Cox and Smith 1989
Weinstein 1992
Smith n.d.

Beta-80012
Beta-77687
TX-5564
UGA-6152
TX-5300

2170 _+ 50
-2210_+ 60
2244 + 89
2800 + 70

2580 +
2610 +
2610 +
2611 +
--

oyster
oyster
quahog
oyster
charcoal

50
60
60*
89

41 41NU46
Smith n.d.
42 41NU46
Smith n.d.
43 41NU266 Ricklis 1995a

TX-5302
charcoal
TX-5301
charcoal
Beta-80005 oyster

2880 + 90
2750 + 320
2610 + 60

--2990 + 60

44 41SP177
45 41SP120
46 41SP177

Ricklis 1993
Ricklis and Cox 1991
Ricklis 1993

Beta-47105 oyster
TX-6948
quahog
Beta-47104 oyster

2450 _+ 60
2445 + 80
3100 + 70

2840 + 60
2890 + 80
3470 + 70

47
48
49
50

41SP148
41SP120
41SP136
41SP153

Ricklis
Ricklis
Ricklis
Ricklis

TX-7314
TX-7311
Beta-46301
TX-7310

oyster
quahog
charcoal
scallop

3380 +
3560 +
4090 +
3810 __+

3780 + 60
3970 + 80
-4190 + 90

51

41SP156

Ricklis 1993

TX-6881

scallop

3770 + 50

1993
1993
1993
1993

60
80
80
80

52 41NU268 Ricklis 1995a
53 41SP153 Ricklis 1993

Beta-80009 R. flexuosa
TX-7309
charcoal

3920 + 70
4090_+ 270

54 41NU267 Ricklis 1995a
55 4lNU266 Ricklis 1995a

Beta-80013 oyster
Beta-80006 R. flexuosa

3990 _+ 50
4030 + 60

56 41SP148 Ricklis 1995a
57 41NU266 Warren 1993

TX-7037
oyster
Beta-53198 human bone

4020 + 70
--

58

41SP15

Ricklis and Cox 1991

TX-6963

scallop

4030 _+ 70

59

41SP153

Ricklis and Cox 1991

TX-7083

oyster

4110 + 70

60

41KL71

Smith 1984

SMU-1057 charcoal

4204 + 60

61

41NU281

Ricklis 1995b

Beta-80019 R. flexuosa

4340 + 50

Ricklis and Cox 1991

TX-7081

oyster

4380 + 90

63 41NU184 Ricklis 1993

TX-5303

R. flexuosa

4390 +_ 70

64 41NU221

Ricklis 1988, 1993

TX-5265

R.flexuosa

4410 + 90

65 41NU221
66 41NU221

Ricklis 1988, 1993
Ricklis 1988, 1993

TX-5263
TX-5264

R.flexuosa
R.flexuosa

4450 + 90
4630 +_ 90

62 41SP156

67 41NU266 Warren 1993
68 41JK24
Weinstein 1994

Beta-53072 oyster
Beta-57912 oyster

4500_+ 70
--

4210 + 70
4731)
4260 + 70
4080 + 270

Age BP, calibrated
1-sigma range with
intercept(s) in
parentheses
2736-2357 (2706, 2638,
2600, 2597, 2492)
2752-2716 (2742)
2764-2727 (2748)
2773-2740 (2752)
2837-2611 (2748)
2985-2845 (2925, 2914,
2882)
3204-2875 (2993)
3337-2469 (2854)
3258-3069 (3203, 3192,
3162)
3156-2873 (2859)
3 ! 57-2948 (3006)
3835-3642 (3757, 3753,
3720, 3709, 3703)
4266-4086 (4154)
4533-4353 (4484)
4822-4451 (4560)
4861-4568 (4826, 4749,
4661, 4657)
4859-4614 (4829, 4747,

4865-4636 (4835)
4962-4229 (4799, 4794,
4596, 4561)
4370 + 50
4986-4862 (4873)
4380 _+ 60
5036-4863 (4964, 4947,
4875)
4410 + 70
5245-4871 (4986)
4430_+ 60
5243-4873 (5024, 5016,
4989)
4430 + 70
5257-4875 (5040, 5014,
4992)
4500 _+ 70
5298-4991 (7 intercepts
between 5256-5059)
-5295-4994 (5257, 5183,
5127, 5111, 5084)
4750 _+ 50
5581-5332 (5565, 5540,
5474)
4750 + 90
5592-5325 (5560, 5531,
5472)
4790 + 70* 5633-5336 (5575, 5517,
5489)
4810 + 90* 5647-5336 (5582, 5501,
5498)
4850 + 90* 5724-5474 (5594)
5030 + 90* 5919-5654 (5851, 5832,
5761, 5741, 5739)
4900 + 70* 5716-5589 (5641, 5619)
4940 + 70
5736-5638 (5724, 5700,

272

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1 (Continued)

Uncorrected
~4C age BP

Site

Reference

Assay No.

69

41SP153

Ricklis 1993

TX-7038

70

41NU281

Ricklis 1995b

Beta-80017 R.flexuosa

4640+50

71

41NU266 Warren 1993

Beta-53073 oyster

5580 _+ 70

72

41SP136

Ricklis 1993

TX-7302

5680_+ 110

73

No.

Material

4610 + 70

oyster

oyster

41SP153

Ricklis 1993

Beta-57043 oyster

5700 _+ 80

74 41SP153

Ricklis 1993

TX-7082

oyster

5830 _+ 90

75

41NU266

Ricklis 1995a

Beta-80007 oyster

5860 _+ 70

76

41NU266

Ricklis 1995a

Beta-80014 oyster

5970 ± 50

77

41NU266

Ricklis 1995a

Beta-80009 oyster

6060 -+ 60

78

41NU266

Warren 1993

Beta-53647 oyster

6030 -+ 50

79

41NU266

Ricklis 1995a

Beta-80015 oyster

6090 _+ 50

80 41SP153

Ricklis and Cox 1991

6!80_+ 120

81

Ricklis 1995b

TX-7024
scallop
Beta-80018 oyster

41NU281

between 7381 and 6737 B.P. (Warren 1993; Ricklis
1995a; Table 1 herein). Finally, an oyster shell
midden at 41NU281, exposed by construction activities on the uplands overlooking the Nueces
River delta, produced an age range of 7525-7390
B.P. (Ricklis 1995b).
Aside from the fact that estuarine shellfish were
obviously exploited, very little is known of this
period. Excavations have been too limited to
produce much useful archeological information. A
scant amount of chert debitage and a chert core
from 41SP153, and a few utilized flakes from
41NU266, are the only lithic artifacts documented
from excavated components of the period. However,
surface finds of Early Archaic points resembling
the Uvalde type (Figure 5), and an excavated
specimen of the Gower type from 41SP154 on
Nueces Bay (found in a somewhat later component
where it may represent re-use and subsequent loss/
discard [Ricklis 1993:33-36]), may eventually prove
to pertain to this early period. Interestingly, the
edge-flaked sunray venus clamshell knife/scraper,
common at later sites (Figure 6), is now well
documented for this period. Two specimens were
recovered at 41SP153 in unquestionable context

6190 _+ 60

Age BP
corrected
for

Age BP, calibrated
1-sigma range with
intercept(s) in
parentheses

5655)
5888-5650(5732)
5895-5730(5854,5829,
5050_+50
5723)
5980 _+ 70* 6888-6737 6847,6829,
6796)
6070_+ I10 7159-6798(6945,6913,
6897)
7167-6857 (7139,7007)
6110 _+ 80
7189-7010(7!69)
6210 _+ 90
7220-7035 (7178)
6270 _+ 70
7360-7215 (7238)
6380 -+ 50
7371-7216(7262)
6390 -+ 60
7381-7237 (7359, 7322,
6430 _+ 50
7315,7285)
7395-7290 (7384)
6500 _+ 60
6550_+ 120 7509-7299 (7431)
7525-7390(7469,7468,
6600 _+ 60
7432)

4990+ 70

within the earliest basal shell stratum there (Ricklis
1993), and a third specimen was recently excavated
from within a discrete dense Early Archaic oyster
stratum at 41NU266 (Ricklis 1995a).
Aside from shellfish (mainly oysters), faunal
remains are almost entirely lacking from Early
Archaic components. Probably, this is in large part
the result of the complete decay of bone. On the
other hand, fish otoliths, which are remarkably
resistant to decay in the silty soils of the area, are
nearly absent; the only specimen, representing a
spotted seatrout, comes from 41NU266 (Ricklis
1995a). Fishing may not yet have played a
significant role in the subsistence economy. This is
an important question which will be addressed only
by extensive future excavations of site components
of the period.

Shoreline occupation,
ca. 5800-4200 B.P.
Better documentation is available for this period of Early Archaic coastal occupation, although
much important work remains to be done. Sites are
considerably more numerous than for the previous

Ricklis ~ Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast

273

Table 2. Chronological data from central Texas coast sites: corrected and calibrated age
ranges from discrete strata. Asterik indicates that 1-sigma range (B.P.) includes
combined ranges on multiple assays on a single stratigraphic component.
General
Locale, Site

Stratum

1-sigma
age range Reference

Nueces Bay/Nueces River delta
41SP15

Dense oyster and scallop, 50-60 cm bs, on eroded Beaumont clay

5257-4875 Ricklis and Cox 1991

41SP136

Dense oyster, 50-60 cm bs, on eroded Beaumont clay

7159-6798 Ricklis and Cox 1991
4822-4451 Ricklis and Cox 1991
2340-2155 Ricklis and Cox 1991

Dense oyster, 35-45 cm bs, within silty cumulic soil
Dense oyster, 20-30 cm bs, within silty cumulic soil
41SP148,
Unitl
Unit 2

41SP149

Dense oyster, 56-70 cm bs, base of silty cumulic soil on Beaumont 5245-4871 Ricklis 1993
surface
Dense oyster, 35-50 cm bs, base of silty cumulic soil on Beaumont 4266-4086 Ricklis !993
surface
Thin (5 cm) but dense Rangia cuneata, 10-20 cm bs, within silty
cumulic soil

1407-1296 Ricklis 1993

Dense oyster and scallop, 70-90 cm bs, base of silty cumulic soil,

7509-6857* Ricklis 1993

41SP153,
Unitl

on eroded Beaumont clay
Moderately dense oyster, 60-68 cm bs, within silty cumulic soil
Dense oyster and R. cuneata, 20-30 cm bs, within sility cumulic

5298-4991 Ricklis 1993
1816-1749 Ricklis 1993

soil
Area 2

Dense oyster and scallop, 50-60 cm bs, within sility cumulic soil

5888-4568* Ricklis 1993

41SP156

Dense oyster and scallop, 30-40 cm bs, base of silty cumulic soil

5592-4614" Ricklis 1993

41SP177

Moderate oyster, some scallop, 40-80 cm bs, in sand stratum with
scattered shell hash

3156-2873 Ricklis 1993

41NU184

Dense R. flexuosa, 30-50 cm bs, base of silty cumulic soil

5633-5336 Ricklis & Gunter
1986

41NU221

Dense R. flexuosa, some oyster, 50-70 cm bs, base of silty

5919-5336" Ricklis 1988, 1993

cumulic soil

41 NU266,
Area 1
Area 2
Locus 1

Locus 2
Locus 3

Moderate to dense oyster, 310 cm bs, within silty cumulic soil
Moderate to dense oyster, 350 cm bs, base of silty cumulic soil
Moderate to dense oyster, base of silty cumulic soil
Thin oyster lens, 170 cm bs, at base of colluvial soil, on
Beaumont surface
Dense R. cuneata lens, 20 cm bs, within colluviat soil
Oyster lens, 95 cm bs, at base of silty cumulic soil, on Beaumont
surface
Dense oyster lens, 60 cm bs, at base of cumlic soil, on Beaumont
surface
R. flexuosa lens, 40 cm bs, within cumulic soil
Oyster lens, 20 cm bs, within cumulic soil

5716-5589
6888-6737
7381-7237
7360-7215

Wa~en 1993
Wa~en 1993
Wa~en 1993
Ricklis 1995a

1611-1522 Ricklis 1995a
7395-7290 Ricklis 1995a

7371-7035" Ricklis 1995a
5036-4863 Ricklis 1995a
3258-3069 Ricklis 1995a

274

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2 (Continued)

Statrum

1-sigma
age range Reference

41NU267

Oyster lens, 80-90 cm bs, within cumulic soil
Oyster shells, 130-140 cm bs, within cumulic soil

2752-2716 Ricklis 1995a
4986-4862 Ricklis 1995a

41NU268

Dense rangia lens, 10-20 cm bs, R. flexuosa component

4865-4636 Ricklis 1995a

Dense rangia lens, 10-20 cm bs, R. cuneata component

1891-1752 Ricklis 1995a

Oyster midden, base of silty cumulic soil

7525-7390 Ricklis 1995b

R. flexuosa midden, base of silty cumulic soil

5855-5730 Ricklis 1995b

R. flexuosa lens, base of cumulic soil, resting on Beaumont

5581-5332 Ricklis 1995b

General
Locale, Site

41NU281

surface

Oso Creek
41NU46

Bottom occupation stratum, estuarine fish remains, hearths

3337-2845* Smith n.d.

Dense shell midden, 20-60 cm bs, in fine sand cumulic soil

1235-970" Story 1968

Dense shell midden, 20-60 cm bs, in fine sand cumulic soil

1816-1395* Ricklis 1990, 1993

Shell lens, 90-100 cm bs (mainly quahog and oyster), 20 cm
above base of fine sand cumulic soil
Dense shell midden, 30-60 cm bs (oyster, scallop, quahog,
whelk, and other species), within fine sand cumulic soil
Discrete shell lens, 100-110 cm bs (quahog, oyster, whelk),
within fine sand cumulic soil
Dense shell midden, 15-80 cm bs (oyster, scallop, whelk,
quahog and other species), within fine sand cumulic soil

3157-2948 Ricklis and Cox 1991

Base of dense shell midden, 60 cm thick, within cumulic soil
resting on Beaumont clay

2764-2727 Cox and Smith 1989

Ingleside Cove
41SP43

41SP120,
South Block

North
Block

1161-730" Ricklis and Cox 1991
4533-4353 Ricklis 1993
1338-741" Ricklis 1993

Copano Bay
41AS3

San Antonio/Guadalupe Bay
41CL2

Dense oyster and R. cuneata stratum, 20-40 cm bs, in cumulic
soil profile
Dense oyster stratum, 70-80 cm bs, in cumulic soil profile

1818-1559 Weinstein 1992
2837-2611

Weinstein 1992

41CL3

Very dense oyster stratum, 5-130 cm depth, on and within
cumulic fine sand soil

2764-1418* This paper

41 CL74

Discrete R. cuneata lens, 60-70 cm bs, within alluvium on
natural levee

2060-1873 Weinstein 1992

Lavaca River delta
41JK24

Dense oyster stratum, 30-40 cm bs, on Pleistocene clay at base

5736-5638 Weinstein 1994

of cumulic soil
Dense oyster stratum, 15-25 cm bs, within cumulic soil profile

1712-1557 Weinstein 1994

Ricklis - Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast

Table 2 (Continued)
General
Locale, Site

Statrum

1-sigma
age range Reference

41JK35

R. cuneata lens, 80-93 cm bs, within cumulic soil profile

2736-2357 Weinstein 1994

Oyster lens at base of cumulic soil profile

5295-4994 Smith 1984

Baffin Bay
41KL71

41JK8
41JK35
/ 4 IJK24

41CL2

/

Matagorda/
Lavaca Bay

41CL3
"x

Guadalupe Bay

,

41SP15, 41SP136

41SP148, 41SP14C~
41SP153, 41SP156
’
41SP177k

~.~

~x

CopanoBay

"~k.
41NU184
"/

t
I~

/

4:NUll ~

/’/

~,
~/ ~
~.. 41NU46 / /
41KL71
\
/ / \

gueces Bay

--

Baffin Bay

I00

O~
Kilometers

Figure 2. Map of the central coast area, showing locations of sites discussed in text.

275

276

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Excavation profile, 41SP 153, north shore of Nueces
Bay, showing three discrete shell strata within Holocene
cumulic silty soil.

Figure 4. Early Archaic oyster shell stratum (partially removed)
at 41NU266, south shore of Nueces Bay, dated to ca. 74007000 B.P. Note that shells rest on surface of light-colored
Beaumont (Pleistocene) clay, at base of Holocene cumulic
silty soil.

part of the Early Archaic period. As of this writing, 15 discrete stratigraphic components can be
assigned to the latter part of the Early Archaic
period on the basis of 24 individual radiocarbon
assays (see Tables 1 and 2, and Figure 7). Sites
include: 41NU184 (Ricklis and Gunter 1986),
41NU221 (Ricklis 1988), 41NU266 (Warren
1993; Ricklis 1995a), and 41NU267 (Ricklis
1995a), all along the lower Nueces River/delta;
several sites on the northern shore of Nueces Bay
(41SP15, 41SP136, 41SP148, 41SP153, and
41SP156 [Ricklis 1993; Ricklis and Cox 1991]);
one site (41KL71) on the north shore of Baffin
Bay (Smith 1984); an early component at
41SP120 on Ingleside Cove (Ricklis 1993); and
the basal shell stratum at 41JK24, overlooking
the Lavaca River delta (Weinstein 1994).
All components of this period are once again
more or less thin (5-25 cm thick) shell deposits,
usually consisting of oyster (though brackish-water Rangia flexuosa shells predominate in what
were probably more river-influenced areas at
41NU184 and 41NU221). Artifacts are not abundant, and some sites have produced only shells
and occasional chert flakes and fish otoliths.
However, there is some variability in both thickness of deposits and density of artifacts, which
suggests an as yet poorly understood, corresponding variability in the intensity and/or duration of occupations along the central coast. At the
McKinzie site (41NU221), for example, a fairly
extensive and relatively thick (15-20 cm) shell
deposit, with three radiocarbon age ranges falling between 5919 and 5336 B.P., yielded hundreds of chert flakes, utilized flakes, a chert
end-side scraper, and five chert dart points (2
Bell, 1 Early Triangular, 1 Tortugas, and 1
unstemmed, rounded-base form). This component also produced two shell implements, one a
perforated oyster shell, the other an edge-modified oyster shell (Ricklis 1988).
Although relatively extensive excavations
(24 m2 units) at the Means site (41NU184) produced only chert debitage, at least a dozen Early
Triangular dart points (see Turner and Hester
1993) have been surface collected from that part
of the site where a dense Rangiaflexuosa midden
was exposed by cultivation. This site also produced a post mold pattern representing a small
arc-shaped hut wall or windbreak, 3.2 meters
across (Ricklis and Gunter 1986). A cluster of
Rangia flexuosa, possibly associated with the

Ricklis m Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast

structure, yielded a corrected and calibrated age
range of 5592-5325 B.P.
Several artifacts, in addition to chert debitage,
were recovered from a discrete shell stratum at
41SP 156 on the north shore of Nueces Bay (Ricklis
1993), with age ranges spanning the time interval
between 5592 and 4614 B.P. A Gower point from
this stratum, mentioned above, may predate the
dated shell deposit, although its position securely
embedded within dense shell suggests it was
(re)used by the people responsible for deposition of
the shells. The distinctive barb section of an Andice
point (see Figure 5f) probably pertains to this stratum; while it was found on the surface of a machine
cut which transected the site, it appeared to have
eroded from the dated shell stratum.

277

Chert debitage and an Early Triangular dart
point (see Figure 5h) were excavated from deep
colluvial sol! at 4!NU267 near the south shore of
Nueces Bay. The level which produced the Early
Triangular point also contained oyster shells yielding a corrected and calibrated radiocarbon age range
of 4986-4862 B.P. (Ricklis 1995a). Finally, a Bell
dart point from the Swan Lake site (41AS16), although collected from the surface, is believed to
have eroded from a wave-reworked Early Archaic
shell midden at that site (Prewitt et al. 1987; Prewitt
and Paine 1988).
Limited subsistence data are available for this
time period. Fish otoliths have been recovered from
several site components (41NU184, 41NU221,
41NU267, 41SP156, and 41SP148). Species

A

B

Figure 6. Shell tool forms: a, edge-flaked sunray venus
clamshell knife or scraper; b, perforated oyster shell.

YRS. B.P.

D

E

Figure 5. Early Archaic dart points from the central coast:
a, Gower point, 41SP 156; b-c, Uvalde-like points, surface,
north shore of Nueces Bay (c has reworked media! break);
d-e, Bell points (d is from discrete shell midden stratum,
41NU221, radiocarbon dated to 5919-5336 B.P.; e is
surface find, north shore of Nueces Bay); f, Andice barb
fragment, probably eroded from dense oyster stratum
radiocarbon dated to 5592-4614 B.P.; g-h, Early Triangular
(g is from same stratum as Bell point, 41NU22!; h is from
level at 41NU267 dated to 4986-4862 B.P.).

Figure 7. Chart showing 1-sigma calibrated age ranges on
radiocarbon-assayed sample from the central Texas coast
(shown in order presented in Table 1). Note discontinuities
at ca. 6800-5800 and 4200-3100 B.P.

278

Texas Archeological Society

represented are black drum (Pogonias cromis),
spotted seatrout (Cynoscion nebulosus), redfish
(Sciaenops ocellata), Atlantic croaker (Micropogon
undulatus) and catfish (Aureusfelis?). Though not
abundant at any site (the largest n=32, is from the
McKinzie site [41NU221]), it is clear that
procurement of estuarine fish was part of the
subsistence economy by this time. Although
relevant deposits are generally still too old to contain
preserved bone, it can be assumed that hunting was
carried out, since dart points are present. At
41NU267, faunal bone was preserved within welldrained, colluviat fine sand, and bones of fish, deer
and rodents were recovered using fine-mesh screens
(Ricklis 1995a).
There are some limited seasonality data available for this period as well. Seasonality analysis of
oyster shells from several sites on the north shore
of Nueces Bay suggest that most shellfish gathering took place in the winter through early spring
(Cox and Cox 1993; Cox 1994). Since this time of
year, when plant foods were scarce and game was
low in body fat, would have been potentially stressful for prehistoric hunter-gatherers, shellfish may
have served as an important seasonal "back-up"
source of calories and protein. Seasonality analysis
of fish otoliths from the McKinzie site (Ricklis
1988) suggests that fishing was carried out mainly
in the fall through winter/early spring.
The increased number of sites during this time
interval may indicate an overall growth in population, in keeping with a postulated population increase in much of Texas during the Archaic period
(Story 1985). However, it should be noted that
most of the components of both Early Archaic periods rest on an eroded Beaumont (Pleistocene)
surface, and that much evidence for the earlier of
the two periods may simply have been removed by
Early to Middle Holocene erosion. Future
geoarcheological research, designed to place occupations within the context of a dynamically changing terrestrial landscape, will be required for a firm
understanding of long-term relative population
trends in the region.

THE MIDDLE ARCHAIC: AN
APPARENT HIATUS IN SHORELINE
OCCUPATION

One of the striking characteristics of the available radiocarbon data is a virtual lack of dense shell

deposits dating to the interval between ca. 4200 and
3100 B.P. (see Figure 7). This probably is not the
result of a sampling bias, since the lack of dates is
directly reflected in the actual physical stratigraphies at various sites, where physical evidence for
occupation between strata dated to before 4200
B.P. and after 3100 B.P. is not present. Occupational strata have been identified within intact,
cumulic soil profiles at 23 sites (producing a combined total of 47 discrete, radiocarbon-dated strata),
yet no single component falls into the time interval
in question (see Table 2). The sole possible exception is a light scatter of oyster shell at the bottom
of 41SP177 on the north shore of Nueces Bay, with
oyster shells dated to an age range of 3835-3643
B.P. (Ricklis 1993:36-44). However, the sparse
shell rests within a well-sorted massive deposit of
fine sand which may represent an old beachline,
since the site is within 1.2 meter of modern sea
level. Thus, the dated oyster shells may have been
deposited naturally. Even if the shells represent
human activity, occupation must have been quite
ephemeral, judging by the absence of artifacts and
faunal bone, both of which are abundant higher in
the deposit, where far more abundant oyster shell
has yielded an age range of 3156-2843 B.P.
Future research should be conducted with an
eye to locating components dating to between 4200
and 3100 B.P. However, even if such are found, the
present data base is sufficiently large to suggest
that they will be few relative to the numerous site
components dating earlier and later in time. This
time interval appears to have seen relatively little
occupation of the shoreline, the ecological implications of which are discussed further on.

THE LATE ARCHAIC, ca. 3100-950 B.P.
The beginning of the Late Archaic on the central coast, as here defined, corresponds to the approximate time at which sea level stabilized at its
modern position, ca. 3000 B.P. Beginning at about
this date, there is a continuous series of radiocarbon-dated site components at shoreline locations
(see Tables 1 and 2 and Figure 7). Major sites are
considerably larger than the known sites of the Early
Archaic, have thicker middens, and yield a greater
range and quantity of artifacts, all of which suggests more frequent and/or intensive occupations
than previously, and perhaps a higher regional population density.

Ricklis ~ Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast
There is evidence for a significant
intensification of estuarine resource use during the
two millennia of the Late Archaic, a trend probably
keyed to increasing biotic productivity in coastal
estuaries. Beginning ca. 3000 B.P., shellfish
gathering appears to have become, once again, a
more or less important subsistence activity. Faunal
preservation is generally good for the Late Archaic,
and it is clear that fishing was carried out, along
with hunting of game, most significantly whitetailed deer. By ca. 2000 B.P., there was a marked
increase in the importance of fishing, as indicated
by dramatic increases in the numbers of fish otoliths
and bones per unit volume of midden deposit.
The largest investigated sites of the Late Archaic are located near the seaward ends of bays.
The Kent-Crane site (41AS3), on the eastern margin of Copano Bay (see Figure 2), extends along
the top of a shoreline bluff for nearly 1 kin. This
site consists of a massive and dense shell midden
containing shells of a variety of moderate-to-high
salinity mollusks; the most common species are
oyster, scallop, sunray venus (Macrocallista
nirnbosa), quahog (Mercenaria campechensis), and
lightning whelk. At the time of the site’s original
excavation in the early 1940s, the midden was in
places as much as 1.8 meters thick (Campbell
1952). During recent testing, a sample of quahog
shell was extracted from the base of the midden for
radiocarbon dating. This produced an uncorrected
age of 2210 + 60 years (Cox and Smith 1989),
which corrects and calibrates to a 1-sigma age
range of 2773-2740 B.P. (Ricklis and Cox 1991).
Since this dates the very bottom of the midden, it
can be postulated that the site saw initial occupation at this time.
The Mustang Lake Site (41CL3; see Figure 2)
is located on the mainland shore of Mustang Lake,
a small lagoon separated from San Antonio Bay by
Late Holocene spit accretion under conditions of
modern, stable sea level. Recent survey and testing
here (Ricklis 1994b) showed that a dense oyster
shell midden extended along the shoreline for approximately 2 kin. Testing under the author’s direction in 1988 and again in !994 revealed a very
dense shell deposit with a thickness of 1.3 meters.
Shell, bone, and lithic artifacts were found throughout the deposit, but sandy paste pottery sherds were
present only in the top 20 cm. A radiocarbon date
from the base of the midden indicates that initial
occupation began at the same time as at Kent-Crane:
shells from the basal level produced an age range

279

of 2764-2727 B.P. Four other radiocarbon assays
on samples from various excavation levels show
that the midden continued to accumulate at a more
or less constant rate until at least ca. 1400 B.P.
(Figure 8). However, the presence of a Scallorn
arrow point in the 10-20 cm level suggests that
occupation actually continued somewhat later, since
the type dates to ca. 1250-600 B.P. in Texas (Prewitt
1981, 1985; Turner and Hester 1993). The Scallorn
point and sandy paste potsherds may have been
associated with Rangia cuneata clamshells which
were most abundant in the top 10 cm, and which
are, as yet, undated.
One of the most extensive and productive
known locales of Late Archaic occupation is at
Ingleside Cove on the northeastern shore of Corpus
Christi Bay. Two sites have been reported here,
41SP43 (Story 1968; Ricklis 1990, in press), and
41SP120 (Ricklis 1988, 1990, 1993, in press). These
sites (see Figure 2) were actually parts of a single
continuous cultural deposit which extended for several hundred meters along the top of the bluff overlooking the shoreline, prior to segmentation by
modern residential construction. At both 41SP43
and 41SP120, dense Late Archaic shell middens
rest within a fine sand cumulic soil (Figure 9). The

Figure 8. Excavation profile, Mustang Lake Site (4 ! CL3),
San Antonio Bay area. Shows thick and dense oyster shell
midden, and locations of oyster samples extracted for
radiocarbon assay, with corrected and calibrated 1-sigma
age ranges. Note that abundant fish otoliths are confined to
the upper 60 cm of the deposit.

280

Texas Archeological Society

most abundant shell species are oyster, scallop,
lightning whelk, quahog, sunray venus, and crossbarred venus (Chione cancellata). Overlying the
Late Archaic shell deposits at both sites is an extensive deposit of Late Prehistoric cultural materials.
Fish bones and otoliths have been found in profusion in both Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric components; the most common species are black drum,
redfish, spotted seatrout, and Atlantic croaker. Also
present are bones of white-tailed deer and, less
commonly, other mammals and birds (see Story
1968; Ricklis 1990, in press). A relatively long list
of radiocarbon dates (8 from 41SP43 and 14 from
41SP120) clearly indicates that the major occupation of the sites began shortly after 2000 B.P.

stratigraphically discrete deposit of particularly
dense shell at 41SP120, is securely dated to ca. 950
B.P. (A.D. 1000) on the basis of seven radiocarbon
assays (3 charcoal and 4 shell) with 1-sigma age
ranges spanning the time interval between 1161
and 743 B.P. (and with six of the seven calibrated
intercept points clustering tightly between 943 and
915 B.P.). Four Late Archaic dart points (2 Catan
and 2 Matamoros) were found resting within the
dated deposit (Figure 10); arrow points were absent.

Figure 10. Dart points from terminal Archaic stratum,
41SP120, dated to ca. A.D. 1000: a-b, Catan points; c-d,
Matamoros points.

Figure 9. Dense Late Archaic shell midden
at 41SP120 on Ingleside Cove, Corpus
Christi Bay.

The earliest Late Archaic occupation evidenced
at Ingleside Cove is represented by a thin but
stratigraphically discrete lens of oyster and quahog
shell at 41SP120 (Ricklis and Cox 1991). This lens
was found near the base of the cumulic sandy soil
at a depth of 1 m, and produced a corrected and
calibrated radiocarbon age range on quahog shells
of 3157-2948 B.P. Higher in the soil, usually at
depths ranging between 30 and 80 cm, are dense
shell midden deposits which, on the basis of 18
radiocarbon assays, place the main Late Archaic
occupation in the first millennium A.D. (see Table
2). The terminal Archaic, represented by a

Subsistence patterns during the Late Archaic
involved a dramatic increase in fishing ca. 2000
B.P. This trend is best indicated by the relative
abundances of otoliths in midden deposits, since
otoliths are resistant to decay under most conditions and thus will not be under-represented for
early time periods. As may be seen in Figure 11,
the numbers of otoliths per cubic meter of excavated deposit in the Corpus Christi Bay area shows
a dramatic increase after ca. 2000 B.P. Similarly, in
the thick midden at Mustang Lake on San Antonio
Bay, otoliths show by far the greatest abundance in
the upper 60 cm; radiocarbon dating of shells from
the 55-60 cm level produced an age range of 23032052 B.P. (Figure 12).
The increased economic importance of fishing
at this time can probably be linked to the emergence of the modern estuarine environment. After
the attainment of modern stable sea level ca. 3000

Ricklis ~ Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast
Otoliths/cu. meter
40O

300

200

IO0

Figure 11. Bar graph showing numbers of fish otoliths per
cubic meter of excavated site deposit, sites on Nueces and
Corpus Christi Bays. Note dramatic increase in abundance
after ca. 2000 B.P.

Otoliths/10-cm level
35

3O

25

2O

15

13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

Figure 12. Bar graph showing numbers of otoliths per 10
cm excavation level, Mustang Lake site (41CL3). Note
marked increase in level 6, from which oyster shell yielded
a corrected and calibrated 1-sigma radiocarbon age range
of 2303-2052 B.P.

281

B.P., continuous barrier islands formed, seemingly
reaching essentially their modern configuration ca.
2500-2000 B.P. Concomitantly, broad back-barrier
vegetated shallows emerged, providing extensive
spawning/nursery grounds for the economically important fish species which have historically
abounded in central coast bays and lagoons (e.g.,
Perret et al. 1980; Reagan 1985; Matlock 1990;
Sutter et al. 1986; Lorrio and Perret 1980). The
emergence of such broad, vegetated shallows led to
a considerable increase in estuarine fish carrying
capacity, and human populations shifted to greater
economic focus on fish procurement.
There is some evidence to suggest that major
shoreline fishing camps such as 41SP120 and Mustang Lake were most intensively occupied during
the fall through winter/early spring as part of a
basic settlement pattern involving cool-weather
shoreline occupation and warm-season riverine
hunting camps. This pattern, better documented for
the Late Prehistoric period, is discussed below.
The Late Archaic artifact assemblage consists
of a rather wide array of items of stone, bone, and
shell. Severa! types of flaked stone dart points pertain to the period (Figure 13). At the Kent-Crane
site, most dart points can be assigned to either the
Kent or Ensor types, and an examination of the
information presented by Campbell (1952) indicates that Kent points are more commonly found in
the lower part of the midden, while Ensor points
are better represented in the upper part. Since the
base of the midden dates to ca. 2700 B.P., the Kent
points fall at or somewhat later than that date. Kent
points (and one specimen each of the Godley and
Marcos types), were found eroding from the oyster
midden at 41SP177, which produced a calibrated
age range of 3156-2873 B.P. The Ensor points at
Kent-Crane are presumably contemporaneous with
specimens from Central Texas, dated between ca.
1750 and 1400 B.P. (Prewitt 1981, 1985). Small,
thick, unstemmed dart points assignable to the Catan
and Matamoros types (see Figure 10) are well-dated
to ca. 950 B.P. at 41SP120, and presumably these
types are representative of the terminal Archaic
period in the region. There is no hard evidence to
indicate, as sometimes suggested, that these types
persisted into the Late Prehistoric period. Other
lithic items (e.g., knives, scrapers, Clear Fork
gouges, and Olmos Bifaces [see Turner and Hester
1993]) are known from probable Late Archaic contexts (e.g., Campbell 1947, 1952; Story 1968; Steele

Texas Archeological Society

282

and Mokry 1985), but are never abundant, most
likely because shell was used as a surrogate tool
material at shoreline sites, which were at considerable distances from riverine chert sources (see discussion in Ricklis and Cox 1993).
The shell tool industry during the Late Archaic shows a fair degree of diversity. Perforated
oyster shells and edge-flaked sunray venus
clamshell knives/scrapers, documented for the Early
Archaic, continued to be made. A range of conch
shell tools, on the other hand, seems to appear only
during the Late Archaic (Early Archaic sites have
yet to produce conch tools or conch fragments which
could be interpreted as tool-manufacturing debris).
Adzes (Figure 14) were manufactured from body
whorls of large lightning whelks (see Mokry 1980).
Bi-pointed conch columellae, or central spires, are
quite common in Late Archaic deposits (Campbell
1952; Story 1968; Ricklis 1990); these may be awls
or perforators, or perhaps were used as fishing gear
(i.e., spear points or gorges). Conch shells were
used as hammers (Figure 15a), and gouges (Figure
15b-c) were fashioned from the stout columellae of
large lightning whelks and Florida Horse conches
(Pleuroploca gigantea).

A

B

Bone artifacts (Figure 16) are well documented
for the Late Archaic. Awls were made from deer
long bone splinters and ulnas, and deer ulnas were
also used as possible flint-flaking tools (e.g., Corbin
1963; Hester 1980b: 121). Bone pins with engraved
geometric designs are documented from several

Figure 14. Whelk shell body whorl
adze. Surface find, north shore of
Nueces Bay.

C

Figure 13. Late Archaic dart points and Olmos Biface,
central coast: a, Kent; b, Ellis; c, Marcos; d, Godley; e-f,
Ensor; g, Olmos Biface. A, c-d, and g are from 41SP177,
b is from 41S P 153, and e and f are from 41SP 156. All sites
on the north shore of Nueces Bay.

Figure 15. Whelk shell tools, central coast: a, hammer
(arrows point to battered edge); b, whelk columella gouge; c,
Florida Horse conch columella gouge. A is from 41SP43 on
Ingleside Cove, Corpus Christi Bay, and b and c are from the
Mustang Lake site (41CL3), San Antonio Bay area.

Ricklis m Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast

sites, including Kent-Crane (Campbell 1952),
41SP120, and 41CL3 (see Figure 16b-c). Small
cylindrical bird bone beads are also part of the
assemblage.

3 cm

C

F

Figure 16. Late Archaic/Late Prehistoric bone artifacts,
central coast: a, bone point with asphaltum hafting mastic
on base; b-c, engraved bone pins; d, antler point, e, bird
bone beads; f, deer ulna flaking tool; g, deer ulna awl; h,
deer metapodial awl. C is from the Mustang Lake site; all
others are from 41SP120.

283

As a final note concerning the Late Archaic,
it should be mentioned that cemeteries are present,
perhaps for the first time in the region. As discussed elsewhere (Story 1985; Hall 1995), the use
of cemeteries may have accompanied the emergence of well-defined group territories, a systemic
response to growing regional population density.
The cemeteries known from the coast range in size
from a few clustered interments to large cemetery
sites containing the remains of hundreds of individuals. Unfortunately, radiocarbon dates are not
available from cemeteries which were clearly used
by coastal populations; several dates were obtained
on burials at the Blue Bayou Site (41VT94), but
stable isotope analysis on human bone suggested
that the population subsisted on a non-coastal diet
(Huebner and Comuzzie 1991).
Limited bioarcheological analyses have been
carried out on skeletal samples from the central
coast. Late Archaic/Late Prehistoric populations
were relatively tall and robust for Native Americans (Comuzzie et al. 1986; Powell 1989), which
are physical characteristics generally attributed to
the Early Historic Karankawa Indians of the region. An examination of skeletal material from
41NU2 on Oso Bay at Corpus Christi showed that
approximately 24 percent of the burial population
had suffered from endemic treponematosis, a
chronic condition which may have been transmitted to such a large proportion of the population
during periods of seasonal group aggregation (Jackson et al. 1986).

THE LATE PREHISTORIC, ca. 950-250
B.P. (A.D. 1000-1700)
There is clear evidence for the use of basketry
in the Late Archaic in the central coast. Basketryimpressed burned clay nodules have been recovered at the Tucker site (41NU46) near Corpus
Christi, from a stratum with hearth charcoal dated
to ca. 3000 B.P. (Smith n.d.; three charcoal dates
from this stratum are listed in Table 1: no. 40-42).
Fragments of asphaltum with basket impressions
are reported from the Johnson and Kent-Crane sites
on Copano Bay (Campbell 1947, 1952; Cox and
Smith 1989), from the Late Archaic midden at
41SP120 (Ricklis 1990), and from the preceramic
levels of the midden at Mustang Lake (Ricklis
1994b). In all cases, baskets appear to have been
woven using a basic twinning technique.

Several changes mark the beginning of the
Late Prehistoric period. As elsewhere in Texas
(Suhm et al. 1954; Hester 1975, 1980b; Prewitt
1981, 1985), relatively thick and heavy stone dart
points give way to light, thin arrow points, signaling the replacement of the dart and atlatl by the
bow and arrow. Ceramics, although possibly in very
limited use in the terminal Archaic (see Ricklis and
Cox 1991), become common during this period. On
the basis of changes in major artifact form/types, as
well as probable shifts in subsistence patterns, the
Late Prehistoric can be divided into two subperiods
(discussed below chronologically in terms of calendar years, due to temporal proximity to the Early
Historic period).

284

Texas Archeological Society

THE INITIAL LATE PREHISTORIC,
A.D. 1000-1250/1300
The beginning date for this period is based on
findings at 41SP120, where the terminal Archaic is
well-dated to ca. A.D. 1000, and an initial Late
Prehistoric component has produced two dates on
shells, from a discrete stratigraphic unit, with calibrated ages of 928-738 and 926-741 B.P., or A.D.
1022-1212 and A.D. 1024-1209 (Ricklis 1993:51).
Profuse fish bones and ototiths were found in association with the dated shells, as were a number of
triangular arrow points morphologically assignable
to the Fresno type (Suhm and Jelks 1962; Turner
and Hester 1993; Figure 17). Scattered fragments
of deer bone indicate some importance for hunting
at this time.
In the northern part of the central coast region,
the side/corner-notched Scallorn arrow point type
(Figure 18d) appears to mark this time period.
Scallorn points have been recovered at Mustang
Lake (41CL3) (Ricklis 1994b) and 41CL2
(Weinstein 1992) in the San Antonio Bay area, and
in abundance at the Kendrick’s Hill site (41JK35;
Weinstein 1994, and 1994 personal communica-

tion) and the Anaqua site (41JK8; Story 1968),
both on the lower Lavaca River estuary. At Anaqua,
the Scallorn points were apparently in association
with plain, sandy paste pottery.

A

Figure 18. Various Late Prehistoric arrow points from the
central coast: a, Alba-like; b, Starr, c, Bulbar stemmed; d,
Scallorn. A-c are from 41SP120; d is from the Mustang
Lake site (41CL3).

Ceramics seem to have undergone a discernible, intra-regional evolution. Weinstein (1992:94)
suggests that plain, sandy paste pottery similar to
the Goose Creek ceramics of the upper Texas coast
are earlier than asphaltum-coated/decorated ceramics. As already mentioned, this kind of pottery was
found by Story (1968) at the Anaqua site in association with Scallorn arrow points, so it presumably is earlier than the asphaltum-treated Rockport
ceramics commonly associated with the later Perdiz
arrow point type. An analysis of attributes of decoration and surface treatment of Rockport ceramics
from 41SP120, according to depths within the excavated deposit, suggested in a preliminary way
that Rockport Black-on-Gray decorated wares were
somewhat later than plain pottery, and that the common vertical squiggle designs found on Rockport
pottery increased in "popularity" with time (Ricklis
1990:Appendix A).

THE FINAL LATE PREHISTORIC, ca.
A.D. 1250/1300-1700

Figure 17. Fresno arrow points, 41SP120. Found in
association with shells radiocarbon dated to ca. A.D. 10001250.

Beginning around A.D. 1250 or 1300, a distinctive artifact assemblage emerges on the central
coast. The diagnostic traits of the assemblage are a
lithic industry consisting of arrow points, mainly of

Ricklis -- Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast
the Perdiz type (Figure 19), small unifacial end
scrapers, thin bifacial knives which are sometimes
alternately beveled, small elongate cheg drills, and
a prismatic blade-core technology (Figure 20). Ceramics include bowls, jars, and constricted-neck
ollas, often coated and/or decorated with asphaltum
(Figure 21d-h). Other kinds of decoration include
geometric incised designs below rim exteriors
(Rockport Incised [see Figure 2 t a-b), and lip modification in the form of neatly executed square
notches which give a crenelated effect to vessel
rims (see Figure 21c). Cylindrical ceramic smoking
pipes, sometimes bearing asphaltum decoration, are
also present. Additionally, Rockport phase components have produced bone artifacts such as points,
awls, deer ulna flaking tools, and small cylindrical
bird bone beads. Shell tools include edge-flaked
sunray venus clamshell knives/scrapers and whelk
shell adzes (Ricklis 1990).
Judging from the distribution of Rockport pottery, the Rockport phase can be geographically defined with a fair degree of accuracy. In a survey of
the Matagorda Bay-lower Colorado River area,
Fritz (1975) found that Rockport ware sherds, with
characteristic asphaltum surface treatment, were
common around Matagorda Bay but gave way to
plain sandy paste and/or grog-tempered ware, similar to the pottery of the upper Texas coast, in the
Colorado River delta area. The southern limit of
Rockport ware is essentially the northern shore of
Baffin Bay; several sites there have produced fairly
abundant Rockport sherds, whereas only a few
sherds have been reported from sites on the southern shore of the bay (see Hester 1969a; Smith
1984). The inland extent of Rockport pottery is

285

only about 40 km from the mainland shoreline.
Sites farther inland are invariably characterized by
a predominance of bone-tempered plainware diagnostic of the inland Toyah phase or horizon (e.g.,
the Berclair site in Goliad County [Hester and
Parker 1970], the Hinojosa site in Jim Wells
County [Black 1986], and the Burris site in
Victoria County [J. Huebner, 1989 personal communication]). Significantly, a survey along the
Aransas River in northern San Patricio County
showed that Late Prehistoric sites with Rockport

C

D
’

2~m

’

Figure 20. Rockport phase lithics (all from 41SP 120): a, c,
unifacial end scrapers; b, chert dril!/perforator; d, fragment
of trimmed prismatic blade; e, biracial knife.

F
D

Figure ! 9. Examples of Perdiz arrow points from Rockport
phase components (all four specimens from 41SP120).

Figure 21. Examples of Rockport phase ceramics: a-b,
Rockport Incised; c, Rockport Crenelated; d-h, Rockport
Black-on-Gray.

286

Texas Archeological Society

pottery, and sites with predominantly bone-tempered plainware, were both present at a point about
40 km from the mainland strandline. Similarly, at
site 41RF21 in Refugio County, also approximately
40 km from the mainland shoreline, both Rockport
and Toyah components were identified on the basis of spatially discrete concentrations of Rockport
and bone-tempered ptainware sherds (Ricklis 1989,
1990, in press).
In terms of adaptive patterns, it is clear that
fishing continued to be of major importance during the Rockport phase, since Rockport materials
have been found in association with abundant fish
remains at numerous sites (e.g., Story 1968; Smith
1984; Ricklis 1988, 1990, in press; Weinstein
1992). Major fishing camps are found on the mainland shorelines of bays and lagoons, as well as on
the landward sides of barrier islands. Fishing may
have, in fact, reached its greatest economic importance at this time, judging by the peak in fish
otolith density at 41SP120 during the Late Prehistoric (see Figure 11).
It is perhaps significant that no major, dense,
shell middens have yet to be reported for discrete
Rockport phase components. At Ingleside Cove,
Rockport phase middens were found at both
41SP120 and 41SP43 that overlie Late Archaic shell
middens; the Rockport deposits contained abundant fish remains and artifacts, but only scattered
shell debris. Similarly, at 41CL2 on Guadalupe Bay,
abundant Rockport phase materials were found to
overlie an earlier, dense shell midden (Weinstein
!992, and 1992 personal communication). Major
Rockport phase components have been identified at
the Kirchmeyer site (41NUll) on Oso Bay
(Headrick 1993), and at the Packery Channel site
(41NU219) at the north end of Padre Island (Warren 1984; author’s personal field observations),
where only scattered shell debris is present. Hypothetically, fishing may have become sufficiently
productive to render shellfish gathering a very minor subsistence activity, a possibility which merits
future investigation.
Around A.D. 1250/1300, bison hunting appears
to have become a significant subsistence activity
among central coast groups, as it did in inland Texas.
Numerous small Rockport phase hunting camps
have been documented within about 40 km of the
mainland shoreline, primarily along the uplands
overlooking stream valleys (e.g., Carlson et al. 1983;
Ricklis 1988, 1990, in press). Fish and shellfish
remains are generally scarce or absent at these sites,

where the predominant faunal remains are bones of
deer and bison. Where faunal samples are adequate
for determination of the relative importance of various taxa, bison is found to have provided the greatest bulk of useable meat weight, with white-tailed
deer as an important secondary meat source (Ricklis
1990, in press).
The repeated presence of Perdiz arrow points
at Rockport phase riverine camps with bison bone
(Ricklis 1990:281-285) suggests that these sites
date to or after ca. A.D. 1250/1300, the generally

Figure 22. Concentration of bison and deer bone, Mellon
site (41RF21), on branch of Copano Creek, Refugio County.
Corrected and calibrated radiocarbon dates on bone and
charcoal place this feature at ca. A.D. 1250-1300.

accepted time of the appearance of the type across
much of Texas (Prewitt 1981, 1985; Mallouf 1987;
Turner and Hester 1993; Johnson 1994; Ricklis and
Collins 1995). This inference is supported by three
radiocarbon dates from the Mellon site (41RF21),
located on a tributary of Copano Creek in Refugio
County. Here, dense deposits of bison and deer
bone (Figure 22) were found in association with
Rockport ware pottery sherds and both Perdiz and
Scallorn arrow points (Ricklis 1989, 1990, in
press). Assays run on two samples of bison bone
and a sample of associated charcoal produced 1sigma calibrated age ranges of 742-660, 768-675,
and 790-576 B.P., or A.D. 1208-1290, A.D. 11821275, and A.D. 1160-1374. The respective intercept points of the three dates are A.D. 1267, 1252,
and 1265. The fact that both Scallorn and Perdiz
arrow points were found in close association with
the dated bones and charcoal suggests that Perdiz
points were quickly replacing the older Scallorn
type at this time.

Ricklis m Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast
In fact, the Rockport phase lithic assemblage
(see Figures 19 and 20) differs little from that seen
in the contemporaneous inland Toyah phase (Prewitt
t981) or horizon (Black 1986). Perdiz is the predominant arrow point type in both assemblages, and
both assemblages contain more or less abundant
unifacial chert end scrapers, bifacial (sometimes
alternately beveled) knives, and prismatic blades
(see Hester and Shafer 1975 for a discussion of
blade-core technology in the Rockport phase). The
only difference between the two lithic assemblages
is in the respective forms of flaked stone drills or
perforators: Toyah drills are made on flakes or blades
in which the proximal end has an expanded configuration because it is left unworked, whereas Rockport
phase drills, although also made on flakes or small
blades, are elongate or cylindrical in shape. Blades
and scrapers from Rockport phase sites tend to be
smaller than many Toyah counterparts, but this probably reflects the use of small-size raw materials in a
region with limited lithic resources (see Ricklis and
Cox 1993). A similar diminution of lithic forms is
noted at the Toyah horizon Hinojosa site, where the
small size of stone tools is attributed to a local
scarcity of useable cherts (Black 1986).
The available evidence strongly suggests that
Rockport phase people were adopting most of the
items of a widespread lithic technological package,
at about the same time it appeared across much of
Texas. This seems to reflect a correlation between
the appearance of abundant bison on the coastal
prairies--part of a general and widespread increase
in bison populations in Texas (e.g., Dillehay 1974;
Huebner 1991)--and the adoption of a techno-complex well-suited to the procurement of large game
and the processing of meat and hides (cf. Hester
1975; Black 1986; Mallouf 1987; Creel 199t;
Ricklis 1992a).
Settlement and subsistence patterns during the
Rockport phase involved, to some significant degree, shifting seasonal emphases, with occupation
of shoreline fishing camps during the fall through
winter-early spring, and later spring through summer residences at hunting camps commonly located
along the upland margins of stream valleys (Ricklis
1988, 1990, 1992b, in press). Seasonality analyses
of fish otoliths from large shoreline sites (41NU11,
41SP43, 41SP120, 41CL3) place most fish deaths
in the fall through early spring, a pattern which
appears to have emerged at least as far back as the
latter part of the Late Archaic. Winter or very early
spring occupations are also suggested at 41SP120

287

and 41CL3 by seasonality analyses of oyster and
Rangia cuneata shells. Conversely, analyses of
Rangia cuneata seasonality (see Aten t981; Carlson
1988), as well as of fish otoliths, point to springsummer occupations at small prairie-riverine campsites. Additionally, it has been hypothesized that,
since the large shoreline sites are relatively few and
the small prairie-riverine sites are more numerous,
that there was a seasonal aggregation of population
at major fishing camps, and a spring-summer dispersal into smaller groups at hunting camps along
the edges of stream valleys.
This pattern had significant ecological correlates (Ricklis 1988, 1990, 1992b, in press). The
largest economically important fish species, redfish
and black drum, tend to aggregate in large numbers
during their respective fall and winter-early spring
spawning seasons, thus providing the kind of predictable and concentrated food resources required
to support relatively large human groups. On the
other hand, by mid-spring, various plant species
found along stream floodplains and upland prairies
emerged as exploitable food resources, and important game animals such as white-tailed deer and
bison increased rapidly in body weight and fat content. Since many plant foods were widely distributed across the landscape, and since game tended to
be mobile and/or dispersed, the spring-summer
camps were probably occupied for relatively short
periods of time within a more or less highly mobile
warm-season settlement pattern. Available
ethnohistoric documentation appears to support
these inferences of seasonal settlement and resourceuse strategies; archival sources suggest that the Early
Historic Karankawas resided during the fall and
winter in large shoreline camps of 400-500 or more
people, but camped along stream courses during
the spring and summer, in bands averaging about
55 individuals (Ricklis 1990, 1992b, in press).

LONG-TERM ENVIRONMENTAL AND
HUMAN ADAPTIVE CHANGE ON
THE CENTRAL COAST

It is possible to construct a model of long-term
human response to a dynamically evolving
Holocene coastline. A striking aspect of the
archeological chronology is the clustering of
radiocarbon dates from shoreline sites into the three
major periods discussed above. As was seen in
Figure 7, age ranges derived from stratigraphically

288

Texas Archeological Society

discrete occupation components cluster between
7500-6800 B.P., 5800-4200 B.P., and after 3100
B.P. The absence of dated, clearly discrete,
occupational components ca. 6800-5800 B.P. and
4200-3100 B.P. suggest two time intervals, each
lasting about a millennium, during which there was
little shoreline occupation, or at least a significant
reduction of occupation to the extent that it is not
clearly represented in the current radiocarbon
chronology. Assuming that prehistoric peoples
would exploit a rich estuarine environment when
and where it was available, we may infer that the
two intervals of reduced shoreline occupation reflect
a corresponding reduction in the exploitable biomass
of central coast estuaries.
Estuaries are one of the most productive types
of environments, rivaled in primary biotic productivity only by tropical rainforests (Odum 1971;
Whittaker 1975). They are, however, ecosystemically
fragile, insofar as high primary productivity and a
rich food chain depend on certain crucial conditions. High photosynthesis occurs in extensive, shallow sunlit waters with relatively low turbidity.
Extensive shallows are also crucial in that they supply large amounts of organic nutrients through decay of aquatic vegetation and marsh plants (Odum
et al. 1974). When the geometry of shallow-water
estuaries is significantly altered, such that the nutrient-rich shallows are destroyed or greatly reduced
in area, there are corresponding negative effects on
the biotic productivity of the entire ecosystem. On
the Texas coast, for instance, artificial destruction
of shoreline shallows has been shown to reduce
populations of shrimp--a major primary consumer
and an important link in the estuarine food chain-by 80 percent and more (Mock 1966). Similarly, it
has been documented that destruction of shoreline
salt marshes through either draining or flooding has
resulted in reductions of molluscan and crustacean
populations by as much as 90 percent (Cooper 1974).
Inundation of nutrient-rich brackish water marshes
by transgressive high-salinity waters has severe detrimental effects on brackish marsh ecosystems
(Pezeshki et al. 1987).
In light of these basic principles of estuarine
ecology, it may be highly significant that the periods of relatively intensive human shoreline occupation correspond to postulated times of relatively
stable sea level during the Holocene (Figures 23
and 24). Under stable sea level conditions, ongoing
bay-bottom sedimentation produces extensive shallows along bay margins (e.g., Dalrymple et al.

1993), of the sort conducive to high photosynthesis
and establishment of widespread shoreline vegetation communities. At the same time, deposition of
river-borne sediments creates broad, prograding deltas which support extensive and nutrient-rich
marshes. High photosynthesis rates and a rich supply of organic nutrients support high primary consumer populations (e.g., crustaceans, molluscs),
which in turn provide the ecological basis for a
high fish biomass. Additionally, the same vegetated
shallows which provide nutrients also offer ideal
conditions for fish spawning and nursery grounds
for economically important species such as black
drum, redfish, spotted seatrout, and Atlantic croaker
(Perret et al. 1980; Lorrio and Perret 1980; Reagan
1985; Matlock 1990; Sutter et al. 1986).
During times of Holocene marine transgression, when sea level may have risen three meters
or more per century (Anderson and Thomas 1991),
sea level changes would have outpaced bay sedimentation, greatly reducing the area of, if not effectively destroying, critical shoreline shallows
and deltaic marshes. Overall photosynthesis
rates would have been reduced, both by a general
deepening of bay waters and by increased turbidity, as protective barriers were breached and/or
submerged and bays became exposed to high-energy wave action from the open Gulf. Concomitantly, average salinities would have increased,

Years

Figure 23. Diagram showing stepwise pattern of Holocene
sea level rise on the Texas coast (based on Frazier 1974,
as modified by Paine 1991), showing mid-points of
calibrated 1-sigma age ranges from archeological sites
(black dots). Note that radiocarbon dates cluster during
periods of postulated sea level stillstand. Timing of Paine’s
postulated highstand is narrowed somewhat to reflect the
archeological data (see discussion in text).

Ricklis m Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast

289

water estuaries (Odum 1971;
Whittaker 1975; Perlman 1980).
There is general agreement that
modern stable sea level was attained on the Texas coast by ca.
3000 B.P., give or take a few hundred years (Frazier 1974; Brown et
al. 1976; Paine 1991; Anderson et
al. 1992). It is almost certainly relevant that the final period of human shoreline occupation and
estuarine resource use begins at this
time, since modern sea level
stillstand resulted in the formation
of the continuous chain of barrier
islands, and the extensive shallowwater environment, which has historically been a rich source of
shellfish and fish resources. As already observed, the archeological
data strongly suggest a marked increase in fishing around 2000 B.P.,
which was probably an adaptive
response to increased fish biomass
made possible by the emergence
of highly extensive, protected shallows behind the modern barriers.
There is also a growing body
of geologic evidence which suggests a period of rapid sea level
rise just prior to the establishment
of the modem stillstand. Paine has
presented evidence for a rapid rise
to an approximately 1-meter hight~ . Represents human occupation and estuarine resource use
stand after ca. 4400 B.P. (Paine
1987, 1991; Prewitt and Paine
Figure 24. Schematic diagrams illustrating suggested relation between
1988). Anderson and others have
discontinuous sea level rise/stillstand, and periods of human occupation
posited a rapid sea level rise ca.
indicated by radiocarbon data, central Texas coast estuaries: A, before 9000
4000 B.P., based largely on seisB.P; B, stillstand ca. 7500-6800 B.P.; C, rapid sea level rise after ca. 6800 B.P.;
mic data from the Sabine-Trinity
D, stillstand, ca. 5800-4200 B.P.; D, rapid rise and possible highstand, ca.
River paleochannel offshore from
4200-3100 B.P.; F, modern sti llstand, after ca. 3100 B .P. (from Rickli s 1995a,
the present upper Texas coastline
modified from Blum et al. 1995).
(Anderson et al. 1992). The timing
of this period of rapid sea level
rise corresponds well with the hiaas estuaries came under greater marine influence,
tus in the archeological chronology of shoreline
resulting in reductions of economically important
occupation, at ca. 4200-3100 B.P.
low-to-moderate salinity molluscs (e.g., oysters,
Although the details of earlier Holocene sea
Rangia). In short, the bays of the Texas coast
level rise remain less well-defined, there is
would have more nearly approached the biotic
consensus among geological researchers that marine
conditions of the open ocean, which is well known
transgression along the Texas coast was a
to be far less productive than protected shallowdiscontinuous, stepwise process, with episodes of

290

Texas Archeological Society

rapid rise interrupted by periods of stillstand,
markedly slowed rise, or even slight reversal
(Curray 1960; Nelson and Bray 1970; Frazier 1974;
Paine 1991; Anderson et al. 1992). It can be
postulated, therefore, that the major periods of Early
Archaic occupation, ca. 7500-6800 B.P. and 58004200 B.P., correspond to times of high estuarine
biotic productivity during periods of sea level
stillstand. The apparent hiatus in occupation
between ca. 6800 and 5800 B.P. may match a period
of rapid sea level rise, since some researchers have
suggested stillstand during the eighth millennium
B.P. followed by marine transgression ca. 70006000 B.P. (Frazier 1974, as modified by Paine 199t;
see Figures 23 and 24).
While ongoing interdisciplinary studies will
help to better define the interrelations between
stepwise sea leve! rise, biotic productivity, and human adaptation, it is highly probable that the cultural history of the central coast region was keyed to
fundamental biophysical processes inherent in the
dynamic evolution of the Holocene coastline. The
region’s suitability for human occupation was seemingly not a long-term constant, but fluctuated in
response to local and regional changes which were
linked with environmental change at the global scale.

THE LOWER TEXAS COAST

The lower Texas coast (see Figure 1) can be
environmentally divided into two major subareas.
From the southern shore of Baffin Bay to the middle
of Willacy County, the coastal zone is part of the
South Texas sand sheet, an area in which Pleistocene sediments of the Beaumont Formation are
blanketed with Holocene sands, the result of deposition of surplus shoreline sand by prevailing southeasterly winds. This area, which is characterized by
a hummocky terrain of stabilized sand dunes supporting short grasses and mottes of live oak (Brown
et al. 1977), is virtually unknown archeologically.
A few poorly documented sites are recorded around
ephemeral ponds; these have produced sparse, surface-collected materials in the forms of scattered
chert debitage, occasional projectile points, lumps
of burned clay, marine shell fragments, and rare
pottery sherds (Hester 1969a; Bousman et al. 1990;
site files, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory [TARL], The University of Texas at Austin).
Paleoindian materials have been documented
at the La Paloma Mammoth site (41KN78), located

in clayey sand alluvium of the ancient Palo Blanco
River in the northwestern part of the sand sheet (R.
Suhm 1980). Several dart points, including one possibly fluted, lanceolate specimen, were found in
possible association with bones of mammoth and
Bison antiquus. Three radiocarbon assays on bone
collagen and apatite fractions date the animals to the
tenth millennium B.P. Unfortunately, the dart points
were recovered from backdirt piles, so direct association with the Pleistocene fauna is problematical.
To the south of the sand sheet is the Rio Grande
deltaic plain, a dry, subtropical area which includes
all of Cameron County, southern Willacy County,
and eastern and southern Hidalgo County (Figure
25). Several physiographic zones are included
within the area. Geologically, the mainland is comprised of both Pleistocene fluvial-deltaic sediments
and Holocene fluvi!!-deltaic sediments deposited
at the mouth of the Rio Grande. Upland vegetation
consists of various grasses, prickly pear cactus, and
clumps of mesquite, spiny hackberry, and other
thornbrush species (Johnston 1955, 1963). The area
is bounded on the south by the Rio Grande and its
modern floodplain and delta. Prior to environmenta! alterations associated with modem land-use practices, the delta area supported extensive fluvial
woodlands containing arboreal species such as elm,
ash, hackberry, mesquite, and pahnetto palms. The
mainland strandline is a complex interdigitation of
Pleistocene and Holocene fluvial-deltaic sediments,
clay dunes, and wind tidal flats. Eolian sedimentation during the Holocene deposited the shoreline
clay dunes, many of which have been shown to
contain archeological deposits (Prewitt 1974). Offshore is Padre Island, which formed between ca.
3400 and 2000 B.P., subsequent to establishment
of modern sea level stillstand. The island is virtually treeless, and is characterized by stable and
active sand dunes. Between the mainland and Padre
Island is lower Laguna Madre, a shallow-water lagoon rich in fish resources. Because the Rio Grande
discharges from a prograded deltaic lobe directly in
the Gulf of Mexico, lower Laguna Madre receives
little fresh water through stream discharge, and thus
tends toward hypersalinity and supports little in the
way of economically useful shellfish species (Brown
et al. 1980).
Archeological research in the delta area was
initiated in the first half of this century by A. E.
Anderson, an avocational archeologist who made
extensive surface collections from over 350 sites in
Cameron and Willacy counties (Anderson 1932;

Ricklis ~ Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast

291

cultural materials immediately to the
south in northeastern Tamaulipas. He
also suggested that both the Brownsville and Barril complexes were
preceded by an aceramic Repelo
complex, though he believed the latter
~
to be better represented south of the
~
Rio Grande.
~
The Brownsville complex, which
may pertain largely to the Late Prehistoric period, ca. A.D. 1000 and later
(Hester 1980b: 160), is apparently confined to the area of the Rio Grande
delta. The Complex is marked by the
aforementioned shell assemblage,
small lithic tools, and unstemmed
arrowpoint types (e.g., Cameron and
Starr [see Turner and Hester 1993]).
Discrete cemeteries are known for the
Brownsville complex (Hester 1969b,
1980b).
Little is known of the antecedents
of the Brownsville complex (Mallouf
Figure 25. Map of the Rio Grande delta area, lower Texas coast, showing
et al. 1977; Day et al. 1981; Bailey
resource zones as defined in Bousman et al. (1990). Upland Plain, located
1990). Numerous sites have been
to the west in Hidalgo County, is beyond the left margin of the map.
documented in Cameron and southern
Willacy counties, and many have produced a few lithic artifacts, including
notes and collections on file at TARL). Anderson’s
an occasional triangular or subtriangular dart point.
collections are a remarkable record of prehistoric
Radiocarbon dates from discrete occupation commaterial culture in the area, containing numerous
ponents are scarce, however. In part, this probably
small, triangular and subtriangular dart and arrow
reflects the sparse nature of cultural debris on most
points, tiny circular unifaces, and bifacially flaked,
of the investigated sites, but it is presumably also
pin-like drills, a wide range of shell tools and ornadue to a scarcity of hearth charcoal and a general
ments, and pottery sherds from the Huastecan area
dearth of other dateable organic material such as
of northeastern Mexico. The Huastecan sherds are
shell. Several dates are reported by Bailey and
few relative to the size of the collection, and probBousman (1990) from sites along a major west-toably represent some sort of exchange between local
east trending drainage ditch in Hidalgo and Willacy
folk and people living to the south in the Huasteca
counties. At 41HG 128, chert flakes were recovered
(Mason 1935; MacNeish !958; Campbell 1960;
in possible association with Late Prehistoric charHester 1980b: 160). The abundant shell artifacts incoa! ranging in age from 480 to 120 B.P. A human
clude conch adzes and columella gouges, edgeburial at 41WY113 produced a date on bone colflaked sunray venus clamshells, and various bead
lagen of 1088 B.P., and most of the artifacts at the
and pendant forms made from conch columellae
site apparently date to after 1260 B.P. (Bousman et
and body whorl sections.
al. 1990:138-139). Collins, Hall, and Bousman
Based upon examination of Anderson’s
(1989) report much older dates of 3622 B.P. and
collection, E. B. Sayles (1935) assigned archeological
3215 B.P. from 41HG118 near the inland margin of
materials from the delta area to the Brownsville
the greater delta area; assays were run on the orphase, which he characterized as a coastal cultural
ganic fraction of Holocene cumulic soils which were
expression with a specialized shell industry. Later,
believed to be contemporaneous with non-diagnosR. S. MacNeish (1958) suggested a separate
tic cultural materials. These researchers point out
designation, the Barril complex, for relatively late
the potential of dates derived from soils in an area

292

Texas Archeological Society

nearly devoid of other dateable materials. Finally,
recent testing at the Horse Island site (41CF29) on
the lower Laguna Madre mainland shoreline resuited in the recovery of a human burial which
produced a calibrated age range on human bone of
1352-1261 B.P. (Eling et al. 1993).
The poor understanding of areal chronology is
matched by a general lack of insight into
synchronic patterns of prehistoric resource use and
settlement patterns. Although various researchers
have noted that sites are situated in different topographical settings and environmental zones
(Prewitt 1974; Mallouf et al. 1977; Bousman et al.
1990), the relatively small number of excavations,
and only sparse data on subsistence and seasonality, provide little empirical basis for inferences
concerning intra-regional variations in subsistence
activities at different sites within different ecological zones. It seems clear from the available
ethnohistorical data that the native peoples of the
delta area subsisted by hunting, plant gathering,
and fishing (Salinas 1990), and there is nothing in
the known archeological record to suggest otherwise. Thus, it can be assumed that prehistoric
groups were more or less mobile, establishing temporary/seasonal camps within proximity to economically useful resources.
Recently, Tomka and Bousman (1990) identified several resource zones within the area (see
Figure 25), and ranked them according to biotic
productivity. These different zones are: (a) the Rio
Grande floodplain and delta, (b) the coast, (c) the
lowland plain, (d) the upland plain, and (e) the sand
sheet. Since these zones are based primarily on
assumed productivity, they differ in some ways
from earlier sets of environmental zones based
largely on geomorphic criteria (Mallouf et al. 1977;
Day et al. 1981; Hall et al. 1987).
Tomka (1990) has suggested that different resource zones would have seen variable intensity of
occupation according to the spatial concentration
and predictability of biotic resources. He presents
three alternative models of prehistoric land use,
based on assumptions that: (a) hunter-gatherers in
the area were more or less highly mobile in their
settlement and subsistence patterns, and (b) resource
zones would have been used according to the optimal availability of highly ranked food resources.
Tomka further suggested that mobility would have
operated within one of three hypothetical patterns
of group territoriality, as follows:

Groups moved about within a single large
territory. In this model, intra-areal territorial
boundaries did not exist; people moved
throughout the Rio Grande deltaic plain with
free access to any of the several resource
zones.
Rio Grande territorial groups. Here, each of
several groups operated within its own territory. Territories were elongate and parallel,
ran north-south, and each provided direct access to the Rio Grande floodplain along its
southern edge. Only the easternmost territory
provided access to the coast.
Coastal territorial groups. Again, there were
several parallel, elongate territories, but in
this case, they ran east-west, so that each
provided free access to the coast. Only the
southernmost territory included the Rio
Grande and its wooded floodplain and delta.
Tomka and Bousman (1990) attempted to test
the three models using lithic data from sites in three
of the five resource zones (the sand sheet, the upland plain, and the lowland plain). They based their
analyses on 12 lithic artifact categories, which they
postulated would be differentially distributed within
the region according to patterns of lithic material
transport that reflected movement of goods and
people according to one or another of the territoriality models. The working assumption was that,
since lithic raw material sources were found only
on the upland plain at the inland margin of the delta
region, the kinds of lithics on sites in different
locales would have to reflect established mobility
patterns, since raw material would have been unavailable in most places. Each of the 12 lithic categories was assigned an expected value for a given
resource zone, and its actual representation at a site
was then determined to be greater or lesser than the
expected value. Ideally, one of the three territorial
models would be supported when the actual values
matched those predicted according to the spatial
parameters of the model.
None of the spatial models was either clearly
confirmed or negated by the lithic data, however,
suggesting that either (a) none of the territorial models reflect the actual spatial organization of prehistoric adaptive patterns, or that (b) the distribution of
lithic materials is not a reliable indicator of prehistoric patterns of settlement and biotic resource procurement. It may be relevant to note that the

Rieklis ~ Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast
distributions of lithic artifacts on Late Prehistoric
sites along the central Texas coast do not conform in
a patterned way to basic settlement and subsistence
patterns as defined on the basis of independent criteria; the movement of lithic materials through the
system apparently did not depend on the mobility
patterns involved in the procurement of biotic subsistence resources (Ricklis and Cox 1993).
Regardless of the utility of lithic analyses for
defining patterns of biotic resource procurement,
the environmental zones defined by Tomka and
Bousman may eventually provide the most useful
basis for elucidating prehistoric subsistence and
settlement patterns. Definition of these basic patterns in the Rio Grande delta area will depend upon
data on subsistence and seasonality from a number
of sites within each resource zone.
Recent findings at the Horse Island site
(41 CF29) on the Laguna Madre mainland shoreline
(Eling et al. 1993) suggest that analyses of marine
fish otoliths can provide crucial information on the
seasonality of fishing on the lower coast. Eling
examined 100 black drum otoliths from test excavations at the site, and found that most fish died
during the late fall through spring. Relatively little
fishing seems to have taken place during the summer-early fall part of the annual cycle. More data
from other sites in the area will be required to
determine if this was a recurrent seasonal pattern
along the lower coast. It is interesting that Early
Historic Spanish documents suggest that native
peoples in northern Tamaulipas engaged in fishing
mainly during the winter, when inland plant resources were of low seasonal productivity (Salinas
1990:117). Additional archeological seasonality
studies may show that coastal fishing was an important winter subsistence focus, as it apparently
was to the north along the central Texas coast.
Another point which emerges from
ethnohistorical research is that the Rio Grande delta
was a rich biotic zone that supported a relatively
high human population density. Even as late as the
middle of the eighteenth century, after native populations had generally been reduced b,y Old World
epidemic diseases, the area may have been home to
as many as !5,000 people (Salinas 1990:138). It
remains to be determined whether indigenous populations were as highly mobile as assumed by Tomka
(1990), or whether the rich resource zones of the
delta proper and the Rio Grande and its floodplain
woodlands, along with the productive fisheries of

293

lower Laguna Madre, sustained relatively large
groups for significantly long segments of the annual
cycle. Conceivably, populations may have aggregated seasonally during the cooler months in these
zones, and then dispersed into smaller bands to
gather plant foods and hunt during the summer, as
suggested by the very limited ethnohistorical data.
Sites in Cameron County tend to exhibit higher
densities of cultural debris than sites situated further
from the Rio Grande delta (M. B. Collins, 1990
personal communication). It may be that most professionally investigated sites show low densities of
material, and thus suggest relatively short-term occupations by highly mobile groups, only because
they are located in marginal areas which have fortuitously been investigated within the framework of
cultural resource management projects (e.g., the various sites reported in inland Willacy and Hidalgo
Counties along artificial drainage ditches [see Day
et al. 1981; Collins et al. !989; Bousman et al.
1990]). Indeed, Hester (1969b:163) has suggested
that sizeable cemeteries in the southern part of the
region, in proximity to the Rio Grande, may represent coastal-riverine occupations by groups that practiced only limited mobility and buried their dead
repeatedly at favored locations. Systematic investigations of sites in more highly productive resource
zones on the lower Texas coast may then give a
significantly different picture of aboriginal adaptive
patterns than is presently available from the archeological record of the region.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Much of the more recent work discussed here
for the central coast, directed by the author, would
have been impossible without the enthusiastic assistance of many people. I would especially like to
thank those individuals who assisted for extended
periods in various field projects: Jerry Bauman,
Nancy and Larry Beaman, Jim and Marion Craft,
Kim and Susan Cox, Alexander N. Cox, John
French, Rita Gunter, Luke Huston, John and Arlene
McGee, Ray Myers, and Gregg Willman. The radiocarbon dates reported by the author were variously made possible by funding from the Donors
Fund of the Texas Archeological Society, the James
R. Dougherty Foundation, The Scientific Research
Society of Sigma Xi, and Koch Industries. Access
to important sites along the Aransas River was made

:294

Texas Archeological Society

possible by permission from the Welder Wildlife
Foundation of Sinton, Texas, James Teer, Director.
Access to the Mustang Lake site, located on the
Aransas Wildlife Refuge, was provided by a Special Use Permit issued by J. Brent Geizentanner,
Refuge Director, and an ARPA Permit issued
through the office of David Siegel, U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, Albuquerque. Alexander N. Cox
produced most of the artifact illustrations contained
in this article.

REFERENCES CITED

Anderson, A. E.
1932 Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin
of The Texas Archeo!ogical and Paleontological
Society 4:29-31.
Anderson, J. B. and M. A. Thomas
1991

Marine Ice-Sheet Decoupling as a Mechanism for
Rapid, Episodic Sea-Level Change: The Record of
Such Events and their Influence on Sedimentation.
Sedimentary Geology 70:87-104.

Anderson, J. B, M. A. Thomas, F. P. Siringan, and W. C.
Smyth
1992 Quaternary Evolution of the East Texas Coast and
Continental Shelf. In Quaternary Coasts of the
United States: Marine and Lacustrine Systems, edited by C. H. Fletcher III and J. F. Wehmiller, pp.
253-265. Special Publication 48. Society of Sedimentary Geology, Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Aten, L. E.
1981 Determining Seasonality of Rangia Cuneata from
Gulf Coast Shell Middens. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:179-200.
1983

Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press,
New York.

Bailey, G. L.
1990 Archeological Background. In Prehistoric Archeology and Paleoenvironments in Hidalgo and Willacy
Counties, South Texas: Results of the Phase H Test
Excavations, by C. B. Bousman, S. A. Tomka, and
G. L. Bailey, pp. 19-23. Reports of Investigations
No. 76. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Bailey, G. L. and C. B. Bousman
1990 Site Descriptions. In Prehistoric Archeology and
Paleoenvironments in Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, South Texas: Result of the Phase H Test Excavations, by C. B. Bousman, S. A. Tomka, and G. L.
Bailey, pp. 51-89. Reports of Investigations No. 76.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Blair, W. F.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of
Science 2(1):93-117
Black,
1986 The Clemente and Herminia Hinojosa Site, 41JW8:
A Toyah Horizon Campsite in Southern Texas. Special Report No. 18. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Blum, M. D., J. M. Durbin, and R. A. Ricklis
1995

Geoarchaeological Investigations. In Environmental and Human Adaptative Change on the Nueces
Bay Shoreline: Phase I Archaeological Data Recovery, Koch Refinery Middle Plant, Nueces County,
Texas, edited by R. A. Ricklis, pp. 94-116. Draft
MS on file, Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc.,
Corpus Christi.

Bousman, C. B.
1990 Paleoenvironments and Human Diets. In Prehistoric A rcheology and Paleoenvironments in Hidalgo
and Willacy Counties, South Texas: Results of the
Phase H Test Excavations, by C. B. Bousman, S. A.
Tomka, and G. L. Bailey, pp. 91-103. Reports of
Investigations No. 76. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.
Bousman, C. B., S. A. Tomka, and G. L. Bailey
1990 Prehistoric Archeology and Paleoenvironments in
Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, South Texas: Results of the Phase H Test Excavations. Reports of
Investigations No. 76. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.
Brown, L. F., Jr., J. L. Brewton, J. H. McGowen, T. J. Evans,
W. L. Fisher, and C. G. Groat
1976 Environmental Geologic Atlas of the Texas Coast:
Corpus Christi Area. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Brown, L. F., Jr., J. H. McGowen, T. J. Evans, C. G. Groat, and
W. L. Fisher
1977 Environmental Geologic Atlas of the Texas Coastal
Zone: Kingsville Area. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Brown, L, F., Jr., J. L. Brewton, T. J. Evans, J. H. McGowen,
W. A. White, C. G. Groat, and W. L. Fisher
1980 Environmental Geologic Atlas of the Texas Coastal
Zone: Brownsville-Harlingen Area. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Byrne,
1975 Holocene Depositional History of Lavaca Bay, Central Texas Coast. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of
Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Ricklis ~ Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast

Campbell, T. N.

Cox, K. A.

1947

1994

The Johnson Site: Type Site of the Aransas Focus
of the Texas Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo-

295

Oysters as Ecofacts. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 62:220-247.

logical and Paleontological Society 18:40-75.
1952

The Kent-Crane Site: A Shell Midden on the Texas

COX,

Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

1993

23:39-77.
1956

Archeological Materials from Five Islands in the
Laguna Madre, Texas Coast. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 27:7-46.

K. A. and S. A. Cox
Oyster Analysis at White’s Point. In A Model of
Holocene Environmental and Human Adaptive
Change on the Central Texas Coast:
Geoarchaeological Investigations at White’s Point,
Nueces Bay, and Surrounding Area, by R. A. Ricklis,
pp. 81-122. Coastal Archaeological Studies, Inc.,
Corpus Christi.

1958a Archeological Remains from the Live Oak Point
Site, Aransas County. Texas Journal of Science
10(4):423-442.

Cox, K. A. and H. A. Smith

1958b Probable Function of Perforated Oyster Shells found

1988

Kent-Crane Revisited. La Tierra 15(3):24-38.

in Aransas Focus Sites. Texas Archeology 2:7.
1960

1961

Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of
the Texas Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 29:145-175.
Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend
Region of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 32:331-336.

Carlson, D. L.
1988 Rangia Cuneata as A Seasonal Indicator for Coastal
Archeological Sites in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas

Creel, D. G.
1991 Bison Hides in Late Prehistoric Exchange in the
Southern Plains. American Antiquity 56(1 ):40-49.
Dalrymple, R. W., A. D. Chamrad, and T. W. Box
1992 Estuarine Facies Models: Conceptual Basis and
Stratigraphic Implications. Journal of Sedimentary
Petrology 62(6): 1130-1146.
Day, D. W., J. Laurens-Day, and E. R. Prewitt
1981

Archeological Society 58:201-214.

Cultural Resources Surveys and Assessments in Portions of Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations No.

Carlson, D. L., D. G. Steele, and H. L. Bruno
1983

15. Prewitt and

Associates, Inc., Austin.

Archeological h~vestigations at the Allison Site
(41NU185), Nueces County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 1. Archeological Research Labora-

Dillehay, T. D.
1974 Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the

tory, Texas A&M University, College Station.

Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist 19:180-196.

Collins, M. B., G. D. Hall, and C. B. Bousman

Eling, H. H., Jr., S. A. Turpin and J. F. Powell

1989

1993

Archaeological Applications of Geochronological

Limited Test Excavations at the Horse Island Site,

Techniques in Southern Texas. La Tierra 16(1): 14-

41CF29, Cameron County, Texas. Technical Series

27.

32. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Comuzzie, A. G., M. Marek, and D. G. Steele
1986 Analysis of Human Skeletal Remains from the Palm
Harbor Site (41AS80), a Mortuary Site on the Central Gulf Coast of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55:213-249.

Fenneman, N. M.
1938 Physiography of the Eastern United States.
McGraw-Hill, New York.
Frazier, D. E.

Corbin, J. E.
1963 Archeological Materials from the Northern Shore
of Corpus Christi Bay, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 34:5-30.
1974

1976

A Model for Cultural Succession for the Coastal
Bend Area of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 45:29-54.
The Archaic of the Texas Coast. In The Texas Archaic: A Symposium, edited by T. R. Hester, pp. 9197. Special Report No. 2. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

1974

Depositional Episodes: Their Relationship to the
Quaternary Stratigraphic Framework in the Northwestern Portion of the Gulf Basin. Circular No. 74.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Fritz, G. J.
1975

Matagorda Bay Area, Texas: A Survey of the Archeological and Historical Resources. Research
Report No. 45. Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.

296

Texas Archeological Society

Hall, G. D.

Hester, T. R. and H. J. Shafer

1995

1975

Interpretations and Hypotheses of Some Prehistoric

An Initial Study of Blade Technology on the Cen-

Cemeteries in Texas. In Archeological Investiga-

tral and Southern Texas Coast. Plains Anthropolo-

tions at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehis-

gist 20(69): t 75-185.

toric Cetnetery and Campsite in Live Oak County,
Texas, edited by A. J. Taylor and C. L. Highley, pp.
633-647. Studies in Archeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Huebner, J. A.
1991 Late Prehistoric Bison Populations in Central and
Southern Texas. Plains Anthropologist 36(137):343358.

Hall, G. D., M. B. Collins, and E. R. Prewitt

Huebner, J. A. and A. G. Comuzzie

1987

1989

Cultural Resources" Investigations along Drainage

The Archaeology and Bioarchaeology of Blue

Ditch itnprovements, Hidalgo and Willacy Coun-

Bayou: A Late Archaic and l_ztte Prehistoric Mortu-

ties, Texas: 1986 Investigations. Reports of Investi-

ary Locality in Victoria County, Texas. Studies in

gations No. 59. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Archeology 9. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Headrick, P.
1993

The Archeology of 41NUll, the Kirchmeyer Site,

Jackson, B. E., J. L. Boone, and M. Henneberg

Nueces County, Texas: Long-Term Occupation of a
Coastal Clay Dune. Studies in Archeology 15. Texas

1986

Possible Cases of Endemic Treponematosis in Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherer Populations on the Texas

Archeological Research Laboratory, The Univer-

Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

sity of Texas at Austin.

57:183-!93.

1969a Archeological Investigations in Kenedy and Kleberg

Johnson, L.
1987 A Plague of Phases: Recent Sociocultural Taxomony

Counties, Texas, in August 1967. Report No. 15.

in Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo-

Hester, T. R.

logical Society 57:1-26.

Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.

1994

The Life and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk, As Seen

1969b The Floyd Morris and Ayala Sites: A Discussion of

from the Buckhollow Encampment, 41KMI6, of

Burial Practices in the Rio Grande Valley and the

Kimble County, Texas. Office of the State Arche-

Lower Texas Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo-

ologist Report 38. Texas Department of Transporta-

logical Society 40:157-166.

tion and Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

1975

Late Prehistoric Cultural Patterns along the Lower
Rio Grande of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 46:107-125.

Johnston, M. C.
1955 Vegetation of the Eolian Plain and Associated
Coastal Features of Southern Texas. Ph.D. disserta-

1980a A Survey of Paleo-Indian Archaeological Remains
along the Texas Coast. In Papers on the Archaeol-

tion, The University of Texas at Austin.
1963

ogy of the Texas Coast, edited by L. Highley and T.

Past and Present Grasslands of Southern Texas and
Northeastern Mexico. Ecology 44(3):456-466.

R. Hester, pp. 1-12. Special Report No. 11. Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.

Jones, F. B.
1983

1980b Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for

The Flora of the Texas Coastal Bend. Welder Wildlife Foundation, Sinton Texas.

Amateur Archaeologists. Corona Publishing Co.,
San Antonio.

Lewis,
1988 A Possible 18,000 Year Old Hunting and Fishing
Camp on the Texas Coastal Plain. Current Research

Hester, T. R., M. B. Collins, and F. A. Weir
1969

Two Prehistoric Cemetery Sites in the Lower Rio
Grande Valley of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:119-166.

Hester, T. R. and R. Parker
1970 The Berclair Site: A Single Component in Goliad
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 41:1-24.

in the Pleistocene 5:15-16.

1994

Pleistocene and Holocene Bison with Associated
Artifacts from the Petronila Creek Site in South
Texas. La Tierra 21(4):6-16.

Lorrio, W. L. and W. S. Perret
1980 Biology and Ecology of the Spotted Seatrout
(Cynoscion nebulosus Cuvier). In Proceedings of
the Colloquium on Biology and Management of Red
Drum and Seatrout, October 19-20, 1978, pp. 7-13.
Gulf States Marine Fisheries Commission, Ocean
Springs, Mississippi.

Ricklis ~ Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast

McGowen, J. H., C. V. Procter, Jr., T. J. Evans, W. L. Fisher,
and C. G. Groat
1976

Nelson, H. F. and E. E. Bray
1970

Stratigraphy and History of the Ho!ocene Sediments

Environmental Geologic Atlas of the Texas Coastal

in the Sabine-High Island Area, Gulf of Mexico. In

Zone: Port Lavaca Area. Bureau of Economic Ge-

Deltaic Sedimentation, Modern and Ancient, edited

ology, The University of Texas at Austin.

MacNeish, R. S.
1958 Preliminary Investigations in the Sierra de
Tamaulipas, Mexico. Transactions of the American
Philosophical Society, New Series, 48, Part 6.
Mallouf, R. J.
1987 Las Haciendas, A Cairn-Burial Assemblage from
Northeastern Chihuahua, Mexico. Office of the State
Archeologist Report 35. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Mallouf, R. J., B. J. Baskin, and K. L. Killen
1977

297

by J. P. Morgan and R. H. Shaver, pp. 48-77. Special
Publication 15. Society of Economic Paleontologists
and Mineralogists.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961

The h~dians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern

1983

Karankawa. In Handbook of North American Indi-

Times. University of Texas Press, Austin.

ans, Volume i0, edited by A. Ortiz, pp. 359-367.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D. C.
Odum, E. P.
1971

Philadelphia.

A Predictive Assessment of Cultural Resources in
Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas. Office of the
State Archeologist Survey Report 23. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Fundamentals of Ecology. W. B. Saunders Co.,

Odum, H. T., B. J. Copeland, and E. A. McMahan (editors)
1974

Coastal Ecological Systems of the United States II.
The Conservation Foundation, Washington D. C.

Mallouf, R. J. and A. N. Zavaleta
1979

The Unland Site: A Prehistoric Group Bu~4al from
Laguna Atascosa National Wildlife Refuge,

Paine, J. G.
1987 The Swan Lake Site and the Holocene Highstand
Hypothesis. In National Register Assessments of the

Cameron County, Texas. Special Report No. 25.

Swan Lake Site, 41AS16, on Copano Bay, Aransas

Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical

County, Texas, by E. R. Prewitt, S. V. Lisk, and M.

Commission, Austin.

A. Howard, pp. 243-251. Reports of Investigations
No. 56. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Mason, J. A.
1935

The Place of Texas in Pre-Columbian Relationships

ety 7:29-46.

University of Texas at Austin.

The Life History of Red Drum. In Red Drum Aquaculture, compiled by G. W. Chamberlain, R. J. Miget,
and M. G. Haby, pp. 1-39. Texas A&M University
Sea Grant Program, College Station.

Mock, C. R.
1966

Late Quaternary Depositional Units, Sea Level, and
Vertical Movement Along the Central Texas Coast.

Matlock, G. C.
1990

1991

Between the United States and Mexico. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Soci-

Natural and Altered Estuarine Habitats of Penaeid
Shrimp. Proceedings of the Gulf and Caribbean
Fisheries Institute 19: 86-98.

Mokry, E. R., Jr.
1980 Notes on Conch Shell Adze Technology, Texas
Coast. In Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas
Coast, edited by L. Highley and T. R. Hester, pp.
51-60. Special Report 11. Center for Archaeo!ogical
Research, The University of Texas as San Antonio.

Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Geology, The

Perlman, S.
1980 An Optimum Diet Model, Coastal Variability and
Hunter-Gatherer Behavior. Advances in Archeological Method and Theory, Volume 3, edited by M. B.
Schiffer, pp. 257-310. Academic Press, New York.
Perret, W. S., J. E. Weaver, R. O. Williams, P. L. Johansen, T.
D. McIlwain, R. C. Raulerson, and W. M. Tatum
1980 Fishery Profiles of Red Drum and Spotted Seatrout.
Gulf States Marine Fisheries Commission, Ocean
Springs, Mississippi.
Pezeshki, S. R, R. D. De Laune, and W. H. Patrick, Jr.
1987

Response of Spartina patens to Increasing Levels
of Salinity in Rapidly Subsiding Marshes of the
Mississippi River Deltaic Plain. Estuarine, Coastal
and Shelf Science 24:389-399.

Powell, J. F.
1988 Stress and Survival: Models of Adaptive Success in
the Texas Late Prehistoric. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 58:249-266.

:298

Texas Archeological Society

Powell, J. F. (Continued)

Ricklis, R. A. (Continued)

1989

1993

An Epidemiological Analysis of Mortality and Mor-

A Model of Environmental and Human Adaptive

bidity in Five Late Prehistoric Populations from the

Change

Upper and Central Texas Coast. M. A. thesis, De-

Geoarchaeological Investigations at White’s Point,

on

the

Central

Texas

Coast:

partment of Anthropology, The University of Texas

Nueces Bay, and Surrounding Area. Coasta! Ar-

at Austin.

chaeological Studies, Inc., Corpus Christi.
1994a Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas

Prewitt, E. R.

Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell Ridge Site,

1974

Preliminary Archeological Investigations in the Rio

41GV66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological

Grande Delta Area of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 45:55-65.

Research, Inc., Corpus Christi.

1981

1985

1994b Limited Testing at the Mustang Lake Site, 41CL3,

Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of

under Special Use Permit 73683 & ARPA Permit

the Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89.

Aransas-94. Coastal Archaeo!ogical Studies, Inc.,

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central

Corpus Christi.

Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:201-238.

1995a (Editor)Environmental and Human Adaptative
Change on the Nueces Bay Shoreline: Phase I Archaeological Data Recovery, Koch Refinery Middle

Prewitt, E. R., S. V. Lisk, and M. A. Howard
1987 National Register Assessments of the Swan Lake

Plant, Nueces County, Texas. Draft MS on file,
Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc., Corpus

Site, 41AS16, on Copano Bay, Aransas County,

Christi.

Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 56. Prewitt
1995b Letter report prepared for Koch Refining Company,
January, 1995. Coastal Archaeologica! Research,

and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Prewitt, E. R. and J. G. Paine

Inc., Corpus Christi. On file, Texas Archeological

1988

The Swan Lake Site (41AS16) on Copano Bay,
Aransas County, Texas: Settlement, Subsistence and

Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at

Sea Level. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological So-

in press The Karankawa b~dians of the Texas Coast: An
Ecological Study of Cultural Tradition and Change.

ciety 58:147-174.

Austin.

University of Texas Press, Austin.
Reagan, R. E., Jr.
1985

Red Drum. Species Profiles: Life Histories and En-

Ricklis, R. A. and M. B. Collins

vironmental Requirements of Coastal Fishes and

1995

Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in

Invertebrates. Fish and Wildlife Service, U. S. De-

the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas.

partment of the Interior, Washington, D.C.

Studies in Archeology 19. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at

Ricklis, R. A.
1988

Austin.

Archeological Investigations at the McKinzie Site
(41NU221), Nueces County, Texas: Description and

Ricklis, R. A. and K. A. Cox

Contextual Interpretations. Bulletin of the Texas Ar-

1991

cheological Society 58:1-76.
1989

the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Bend Area. La
Tierra 18(2):13-31.

Preliminary Observations on a Late Prehistoric Bison Processing Site (41RF21) on the Central Part of

1990

Toward a Chronology of Adaptive Change During

1993

Examining Lithic Technological Organization as a

the Texas Coastal Plain. Texas Archeology 33(2): 12-

Dynamic Cultural Subsystem: The Advantages of

13.

an Explicitly Spatial Approach. American Antiquity

A Historical Cultural Ecology of the Karankawan

58(3):444-461.

Indians of the Central Texas Coast: A Case Study in
the Roots of Adaptive Change. Ph.D. dissertation,

Ricklis, R. A. and R. R. Gunter

The University of Texas at Austin.

1986

Archaeological Investigations at the Means Site
(41NU184), Nueces County, Texas. La Tierra 13:15-

1992a The Spread of a Late Prehistoric Bison Hunting

32.

Complex: Evidence from the South-Central Coastal
Prairie of Texas. Plains Anthropologist 37(140) :261273

Salinas, M.
1990

1992b Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation and Colonial
Period

Acculturation:

Archeological

Indians of the Rio Grande Delta: Their Role in the
History of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico.

and

University of Texas Press, Austin.

Ethnohistorical Evidence. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63:211-243.

Sayles, E. B.
1935

An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers No. 17. Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.

Rieklis ~ Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast

Shafer, H. J. and C. Bond
1985

299

An Archeological Review of the Central Texas

Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.

Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25

54:271-285.

(whole volume).

Smith,
1984 Prehistoric Settlement and Subsistence Patterns,

Suhm,
1980 The La Paloma Mammoth Site, Kenedy County,

Baffin Bay Area of the Lower Texas Coast. Ph.D.

Texas. In Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas

dissertation, Southern Methodist University, Dal-

Coast, edited by L. Highley and T. R. Hester, pp.

las.

79-103. Special Report No. 11. Center for Archaeo-

The Tucker Site, 41NU46, An Archaic Settlement

logical Research, The University of Texas at San

on the Lower Texas Coast. Unpublished MS on file

Antonio.

at the Corpus Christi Museum, Corpus Christi.
Solis, R. F.
1981

Sutter, F. C., R. S. Waller, and T. D. Mctlwain
1986 Black Drum. Species Profiles: Life Histories and

Upper Tertiary and Quaternary Depositional Sys-

Environmental Requirements of Coastal Fisheries

tems, Central Coastal Plain, Texas: Geology of the
Coastal Aquifer and Potential Liquid- Waste Reposi-

and Invertebrates (Gulf of Mexico). Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, and

tories. Report of Investigations No. 108. Bureau of

Coastal Ecology Group, Waterways Experiment Sta-

Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Aus-

tion, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Washington,

tin.

D.C. and Vicksburg.

Steele,
1988 Utilization of Marine Mollusks by Inhabitants of
the Texas Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58:215-248.

Steele, D. G. and E. R. Mokry, Jr.
1985 Archeological Investigations of Seven Prehistoric
Sites Along Oso Creek, Nueces County, Texas. Bul-

Tomka, S. A.
1990 Models of Late Holocene Human Adaptation in the
Lower Rio Grande Valley. In Prehistoric Archeology and Paleoenvironments in Hidalgo and Willacy
Counties, South Texas: Results" of the Phase H Test
Excavations, by C. B. Bousman, S. A. Tomka, and
G. L. Bailey, pp. 25-44. Reports of Investigations
No. 76. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

letin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:287308.

Tomka, S. A. and C. B. Bousman
1990

Testing the Hunter-Gatherer Mobility and Territo-

Story,
1968 Archeological hzvestigations at Two Central Gulf

rial Models for the Lower Rio Grande Valley. In

Coast Sites. Report No. 13. State Building Commis-

Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, South Texas: Re-

sion, Archeological Program, Austin.

sult.s" of the Phase H Test Excavations, by C. B.

Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West

Bousman, S. A. Tomka, and G. L. Bailey, pp. 105-

1985

Prehistoric Archeology and Paleoenvironments in

Gulf Coastal Plain. In Prehistoric Food Production

133. Reports of Investigations No. 76. Prewitt and

in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 19-56.

Associates, Inc., Austin.

Anthropological Papers No. 75. Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1993

Stuiver, M. and G. W. Pearson
1986 High-Precision Calibration of the Radiocarbon Time
Scale, AD 1950-500 BC. Radiocarbon 28(2B):805838.

Stone Artifacts" of the Texas Indians. Second Edition. Gulf Publishing Company, Houston.

Warren, J. E.
1984

A Cultural Resources Survey at Packery Point Development, Nueces County, Texas. Report 106. Archeology Consultants, Inc., George West, Texas.

Stuiver, M. and P. J. Reimer
1993

Suhm,
1962

Radiocarbon Calibration Program, Quaternary Iso-

1993

Archeological Investigations at Koch Refining Com-

tope Lab, University of Washington. Radiocarbon

pany Middle Plant Project, Nueces County, Texas.

35:215-230.

Archeology Consultants, Inc., George West, Texas.

D. A. and E. B. Jelks

Weinstein, R. A.

Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.

1992

Archaeology and Paleogeography of the Lower

Texas Archeological Society Special Publication No.

Guadalupe River/San Antonio Bay’ Region: Cultural

1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin No. 4,

Resource Investigations Along the Channel to

Austin.

Victoria, Calhoun and Victoria Counties, Texas.
Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge, Louisiana.

300

Texas Archeological Society
Zimmerman, L. S., D. G. Steele, and J. D. Meyer

Weinstein, R. A. (Continued)
1994

Archaeological Investigations Along the Lower
Lavaca Rivet; Jackson County, Texas: The Channel
to Red Bluff Project. Coastal Environments, Inc.,
Baton Rouge, Louisiana.

Whittaker, R. H.
1975 Communities and Ecosystems.
MacMillan, New York.

2nd Edition.

1988

A Visual Key for the Identification of Otoliths. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58:175-200.

The Archeoi ogy of the Post Oak Savannah
of East Central Texas
Ross C. Fields

ABSTRACT
This paper presents an overview of the Native American culture history of the Post Oak savannah of East
Central Texas, focusing especially on the Late Holocene epoch. This is accomplished chiefly by reviewing the
data from Cooper Lake in the upper Sulphur River basin and the Jewett Mine in the upper Navasota River basin
and adjacent Trinity River valley. Relevant information from three other project areas in the region--Lake Fork
Reservoir, Richland!Chambers Reservoir, and the Gibbons Creek Mine--is discussed in less detail, resulting in
data from a north-south transect along the western edge of East Texas.

INTRODUCTION
The primary goal of this paper is to present an
overview of the culture history of the Post Oak
savannah of East Central Texas. I had planned originally to accomplish this by synthesizing the wealth
of data recovered during the last two decades in
and near five project areas--Cooper Lake, Lake
Fork Reservoir, Richland/Chambers Reservoir,
Jewett Mine, and Gibbons Creek Mine--which provide a north-south transect along the western edge
of East Texas. However, this paper focuses on data
from the two areas with which I am most familiar
(Cooper Lake and Jewett Mine), using them as a
springboard to point out overall trends in the prehistory of the region. Even within these two areas, I
chiefly discuss the archeological data from the sites
where the most work has been done and where
components can be isolated. What this leaves out
are the data from survey and testing projects, as
well as the data from excavated sites where the
remains of multiple components cannot be separated. Where appropriate and feasible, however,
information from the other project areas listed above
is discussed herein, but I have not attempted detailed evaluations of the archeological data from
these other projects.
The Post Oak savannah occupies that part of
the West Gulf Coastal Plain that lies between the
pine forests of deep East Texas and the Blackland
Prairie to the west (Figure 1). As such, it is at the
western edge of the eastern U.S. woodlands. As the

name indicates, it is a vegetational region
characterized by hardwood forests mixed with
prairies. The forests are dominated by a variety of
species of nut-producing oaks and hickories, and
these apparently played a vital role in prehistoric
subsistence. The region also supports a rich fauna,
with taxa such as white-tailed deer, turtles, and
various small mammals being especially important
prehistorically.
The southern part of the area under study here
is drained by the southeastward-flowing Trinity
and Brazos rivers, while the Sulphur and Sabine
rivers flow eastward through the northern part. The
climate throughout the region is temperate. Mean
annual temperatures range from 63° F in Delta
County in the north, to 68° F in Grimes County in
the south, with a corresponding increase in the
length of the growing season from 233 days to 278
days. Mean annual precipitation varies from 36.6
inches to 45.0 inches; rainfall tends to be more
abundant in the northern counties (Delta, Hopkins,
Rains, Van Zandt, and Wood) and in Grimes and
Madison Counties at the southeastern edge of the
region, while rainfall averages less than 40 inches
elsewhere (Natural Fibers Information Center 1987).
Just when this modern climate, and flora and
fauna approximating those of the historic period
prior to disruption by modern land use practices,
became established remains debatable, but the data
presented by Collins and Bousman (1993:59) suggest that this happened about 3,000 years ago. Offering abundant natural resources, the region was

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

302

Texas Archeological Society

eastern edge of the Blackland Prairie
specifically to avoid dealing with Northeast
Texas on the east, and North Central and
Central Texas on the west. Thus, this study
intentionally skirts the Caddo heartland, and
it ignores the wealth of data obtained from
numerous projects on the central and western
Blackland Prairie, the Eastern Cross-timbers,
and the eastern Edwards Plateau (e.g., Ray
Roberts Reservoir, Lewisville Lake, Lavon
OIR
Lake, Lake Ray Hubbard, Mountain Creek
Lake, Bardwell Lake, Navarro Mills
Reservoir, Aquilla Reservoir, Whitney Lake,
Waco Lake, Fort Hood, Stillhouse Hollow
Lake, North Fork Reservoir, and Granger
Lake [see Prikryl 1993 for a summary]). For
at least certain parts of the prehistoric period,
these areas had culture histories that were
GIBBONS
distinctly different from those of East Central
Texas, and this provides some rationale for
viewing them separately. This is not to say,
of course, that these areas are irrelevant to
the archeology of the Post Oak savannah. In
fact,
one of the things that makes East Central
LEGEND
~ Post Oak Sovonnoh
Texas interesting is its position at the edge of
Cross Timbers
the Caddoan area and only a short distance
~ Blocklond Proirie
east of chert-rich Central Texas (e.g.,
[-----] Piney Woods
Frederick and Ringstaff 1994).
~ Gulf Coost PrQiries & Morshes
The study area for this summary, then, encompasses parts of 14 counties, extending
some 300 km from Delta County on the
Figure 1. Map showing the Post Oak savannah of East Central
north to Grimes County on the south (see
Texas and major archeological projects.
Figure 1). The northern edge is defined to
include Cooper Lake because, while it is
actually
in the eastern Blackland Prairie, this part
occupied intensively by Native Americans at this
of the Sulphur River valley has yielded important
time and later, and this partly explains the high
information recently about the prehistory of this
frequency of archeological sites dating to the Late
edge of the Caddoan area, and Post Oak savannah
Holocene (Figure 2). Also contributing to the scarcehabitat is present in part of the Cooper Lake basin.
ness of earlier archeological remains, however, are
The study area is not extended any farther north,
changes in the landscape that removed many prehowever, to avoid the distinctly different (at least
Late Holocene sites through erosion, and deeply
during the Late Prehistoric period) Red River valburied others. Thus, while the record recovered to
ley (Bruseth 1995).
date is primarily a Late Holocene one, this almost
The second anchor for this discussion is the
certainly exaggerates a general increase through
Jewett
Mine and adjacent Lake Limestone. These
time in occupational intensity in the Post Oak saproject
areas are about 200 km south of Cooper
vannah. Because earlier sites are so few and
Lake
in
the
upper Navasota River valley, with some
paleoenvironmental conditions are so poorly unof
the
Jewett
Mine sites straddling the divide
derstood, this narrative focuses mainly on just the
between the Navasota and Trinity rivers. Important
last few thousand years of the archeological record.
projects between Cooper Lake and the Jewett Mine
The study area for this summary is based only
include Lake Fork Reservoir, which is in the Sabine
partly on environmental factors. This review is
River drainage, and Richland/Chambers Reservoir,
limited to the Post Oak savannah and the adjacent

L

Fields m The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

Cooper
Lake

Upper
Riohlond/
Jewett
Gibbons
Totols
Sobine
Chombers
Mine
Creek
Bosio
Reservoir
Mine
0
12 0
8 0
13 0
9 0
62,

2O0O

Figure 2. Histograms of uncalibrated, non-modern
radiocarbon assays from archeological contexts at selected
project areas in the Post Oak savannah; assays are grouped
in 250-year increments. Cooper Lake assays are on
nutshells/charcoal, most corrected for carbon isotope
fractionation; Sabine Basin assays are on nutshells/
charcoal, not corrected for fractionation; Richland/
Chambers Reservoir assays are mostly on charcoal/
nutshells with a few on human bones, not corrected for
fractionation; Jewett Mine assays are mostly on charcoal/
nutshells with a few on soi! humates or human bones, most
corrected for fractionation; Gibbons Creek Mine assays
are on charcoal/nutshells, most corrected for fractionation.

which is situated near where the Trinity River enters
the Post Oak savannah. One of the notable gaps in
archeological coverage for the region occurs
downstream from this latter project area (i.e., the
stretch of the Trinity River valley that separates
Freestone and Leon Counties on the west from
Anderson and Houston Counties on the east).
The southern limit of the study area is marked
by the Gibbons Creek Mine on the lower Navasota
River. While the Post Oak savannah runs southwestward from Grimes County all the way to the

303

it difficult to incorporate the results of these projects
into a cultural historical narrative.
The summary below is broken down into three
major time periods, the first dealing with archeology that is more than about 4,000 years old (i.e.,
predating the Late Archaic period), the second encompassing the interval from ca. 2000 B.C. to about
A.D. 800 (i.e., the Late Archaic and Woodland or
Early Ceramic periods), and the third discussing
prehistoric archeology postdating A.D. 800 (i.e.,
the Late Prehistoric period). Use of this simple
scheme accomplishes several things. First, it provides a way to separate out the earliest remains,
which are so skimpy that it is hard to do more than
catalog their existence. Second, it partly parallels
traditional chronologies based on technological
changes in weaponry and food preparation (i.e., the
introduction of the bow and arrow and pottery vessels), so it should be easy to relate what is said here
to chronologies in other areas. And third, it allows
for more narrative flow than would be possible if
the timeline was segmented into a greater number
of temporal units, some of which currently have
only limited support in the radiocarbon evidence.
One issue that this summary does not address
is use of the region by Native Americans during the
historic period. Materials dating to this interval are
few and far between in the project areas listed above,
with the most conspicuous historic Native American sites in the Post Oak savannah--Gilbert,
Pearson, and Vinson (Duffield and Jelks 1961; Jelks
1967; Smith 1993)--representing Wichita groups
that moved southward into Texas in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries. While this certainly is an
interesting topic, its proper geographic frame of
reference is all of North Central Texas rather than
the Post Oak savannah. Further, except for the publication of the report on the 1960s excavations at
the Vinson site (Smith 1993), not much new information has appeared recently on these Nortefio sites.

other side of the Guadalupe River, the study area
discussed here does not extend beyond the Brazos
River. There are two main reasons for this. First,
the prehistory of the southern part of the Post Oak

PRE-LATE ARCHAIC PERIOD

savannah apparently has more to do with the archeology of Central and Coastal Texas than eastern
Texas. And second, while there have been some
interesting recent studies of sites in the Brazos River
valley (e.g., Bowman 1985, 1991; Roemer and
Carlson 1987; Thoms 1993), most of the projects
on the Brazos and beyond to the Colorado River
have been relatively limited in scope, and this makes

Cooper Lake

Only one site with an isolable component dating to this interval, the Finley Fan site (41HP159),
has been excavated and analyzed (Gadus et al.
1992), although it is likely that materials of this age
occur mixed with later deposits at a number of sites,
especially along the upland edge adjacent to the

304

Texas Archeological Society

valley. The Finley Fan site is situated in the upper
deposits of a thick Holocene alluvial fan. Most of
the archeological materials are Late Archaic in age,
but a Middle Archaic component (Analysis Unit 3/
4) dating to 4450-3250 B.C. was found in the lower
part of the excavations. The work in this low-density cultura! deposit found four cultural features, all
of which are burned rock concentrations interpreted
as food-processing facilities or general-purpose
hearths, and recovered a small collection of 462
lithic artifacts. The artifacts are dominated by unmodified debitage, but small numbers of dart points
(1 Yantis and 2 untyped fragments), other shaped
tools, modified flakes, cores, and ground/battered
stones were found as well (Figure 3). No faunal or
macrobotanical remains were recovered because of
poor preservation.

I

I

Figure 3. Yantis dart point from the Middle
Archaic component at the Finley Fan Site
(41HP159), Cooper Lake.

The remains appear to represent small occupational loci adjacent to the hearths. The intensity of
use appears to have been quite low, and comparisons with later sites at Cooper Lake suggest that the
Middle Archaic occupations of Finley Fan were
relatively short lived and infrequent. Nonetheless,
the materials recovered are more suggestive of residential occupations than use strictly for procurement!processing tasks.

small collection of classifiable dart points (1
Golondrina, 1 Hoxie, 1 Woden, 1 untyped specimen with a parallel stem, and 4 untyped lanceolate
points; Figure 4) suggest that a Late PaleoindianEarly Archaic component is present (although a
couple of sandy paste sherds in these deposits attest
to the inclusion of later materials as well). These
deposits contained a single burned rock hearth and
yielded a modest collection of 997 lithic artifacts.
The formal tool assemblage contains an unusually
high percentage of unifaces, with most of the other
tools being dart points and other bifaces. Because
of poor preservation, almost no faunal or
macrobotanical remains were recovered.
A somewhat later component was identified as
Analysis Unit 415 at the Charles Cox site
(41LN29A). While no radiocarbon dates were obtained from these deposits, a pre-Late Archaic age
is suggested for some of the remains by the dated
Late Archaic deposits above, and by the relatively
high proportion of untyped expanding-stem and
parallel-stem dart points (n=9; Figure 5), although
four later points (Axtell, Gary, and Neches River
types) and a single earlier point (San Patrice) are
included as well. No cultural features were found in
this unit, but scattered burned rocks suggest the
former presence of burned rock hearths. The lithic
artifact collection consists of 2,359 specimens, with
the formal tools being dominated by dart points and
other bifaces. This component yielded no faunal
remains at all and very few macrobotanical remains.
Based on comparisons to other sites in the
area, both of these pre-Late Archaic components
are interpreted as residentia! bases that were used
infrequently. While somewhat higher use intensity
is indicated for Charles Cox than the Lambs Creek

Jewett Mine and Lake Limestone

Components predating the Late Archaic period also are scarce in the upper Navasota River
basin, with only two excavated sites apparently containing substantial materials dating to this temporal
interval (Fields 1990). Both sites are in the uplands
along a tributary to the Navasota River, and the
archeological remains are contained in sandy colluvium. The earlier of these is Analysis Unit 4/5 at
the Lambs Creek Knoll site (41LN106), where a
single radiocarbon assay of ca. 8000 B.C. and the

1

2

Figure 4. Dart points from the Late Paleoindian-Early
Archaic component at Lambs Creek Knoll (41LN106),
Jewett Mine: a, Golondrina; b, Hoxie; c-d, untyped
lanceolates.

Fields ~ The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

0

1

2

0
c

cm

Figure 5. Dart points from the possible Early to
Middle Archaic component at the Charles Cox
site (41LN29A), Jewett Mine: a-c, untyped
expanding stem; d-e, untyped parallel stem.

Knoll site, it is difficult to relate this to differences
in occupation length and/or frequency of use, and
there is insufficient evidence to suggest that this
reflects an increase in population densities through
time. The evidence from these two sites is consistent with the idea that the upper Navasota River
basin was used by foragers during this time, and
that population densities were low.

LATE ARCHAIC AND
WOODLAND PERIOD
Cooper Lake
In the upper Sulphur River basin, components
dating to the Late Archaic and Woodland periods
are moderately common, with the best excavated
examples occurring at six sites: Finley Fan
(41HP159), Tick (41DT6), Spike (41DT16), Johns
Creek (41DT62), Hurricane Hill (41HP106), and
41HP137 (Fields et al. 1993; Gadus et al. 1992;
McGregor 1989; Perttula 1990a). Analysis Unit 1/2
at the Finley Fan site is the sole isolated and excavated Late Archaic component. Although datable
materials were scarce, the evidence suggests that
this component dates to ca. 1650-150 B.C. The
work in this part of the site identified two burned
rock hearths and yielded 2,939 lithic artifacts. The
formal tools are dominated by bifaces and a variety
of kinds of dart points (2 Dawson, 2 Gary, 2 Kent, 2
Morrill, 2 Trinity, 1 Wesley, 1 Yantis, 4 Yarbrough,

I

305

1

2

I

I

cm

e

Figure 6. Dart points from the Late Archaic component at
the Finley Fan site (41HP159), Cooper Lake: a, Dawson;
b, Gary; c, Kent; d, Morrill; e, Trinity; f, Wesley; g-h,
Yarbrough; i, untyped stemless; j-k, untyped expanding
stem.

4 untyped specimens, and 12 fragments; Figure 6),
but gouges, unifaces, cobble tools, and ground/battered stones also were recovered. Faunal and
macrobotanical remains were not preserved.
As in the earlier component at this site, the
Late Archaic remains appear to represent small,
hearth-associated occupational loci. The intensity
of use, although somewhat higher than for the earlier component at the Finley Fan site, is low compared to later sites in the area, and it is suggested
that the Late Archaic occupations of the Finley Fan
site were short lived and infrequent. The artifacts
recovered appear to indicate residential, rather than
limited purpose extractive tasks, however.
Tick and Spike are similar kinds of sites
situated in alluvium on low floodplain knolls
adjacent to the South Sulphur River. Both have
middens dating to the Woodland and Early Caddoan
periods and containing abundant artifacts and faunal
remains. The Woodland component at Tick

306

Texas Archeological Society

(Analysis Unit 3/4) appears to date chiefly to ca.
A.D. 50-700, while that at Spike (Analysis Unit 3/
4) dates primarily to ca. A.D. 0-800. No features
were found in the Woodland component at Tick,
but the Woodland deposits at Spike contained two
possible dumps of hearth debris, one small pit, and
one large pit. The artifact collections from these
deposits consist of !7,559 lithic items, 82 ceramic
vessel sherds, and 75 bone/antler/shell tools or
ornaments (mostly awls, but also antler pressure
flakers, beamers, a graver/scraper, and beads). The
19 arrow points recovered represent later materials
translocated down from the overlying later deposits,
and this is probably true for the ceramics as well,
since they are so few in number and no different
from the pottery in the overlying Late Prehistoric
contexts. The formal lithic tools are dominated by
bifaces and dart points; perforators, gouges,
unifaces, cobble tools, burins, ground stones,
hammerstones, and pitted stones are present in much
smaller numbers. These deposits contained 172 dart
points, with 76 percent of the classifiable specimens
being Gary points; most of the remainder are typed
as Dawson and Kent (Figure 7). Both components
yielded large faunal collections containing a diverse
array of taxa, with turtles, deer, rabbits, other small
mammals, and mussels being most common; Spike
also yielded a few elements identified as bison. The
modest collections of macrobotanical remains

Figure 7. Dart points from Woodland contexts, Cooper
Lake: a, Dawson; b-f, Gary; g-h, Kent.

consist mostly of hickory nutshells, with
Pediomelum (formerly Psoralea) rhizome
fragments, acorns, and vetch/peavine seeds
occurring in small numbers.
The Johns Creek site sits in probable alluvial
deposits on a low knoll adjacent to Johns Creek on
the floodplain of the South Sulphur River. The radiocarbon assays provide equivocal evidence about
the chronology of the site, but the diagnostic artifacts suggest occupations over much or all of the
Woodland period and a light later deposit is present
as well. The Woodland component (Analysis Unit
3/4) lacks midden deposits and no cultural features
were found, but a sample of 3,348 lithic artifacts
was obtained. The collection of formal tools consists mostly of bifaces and dart points, with small
numbers of perforators, gouges, unifaces, cobble
tools, burins, ground stones, hammerstones, and
pitted stones. The three arrow points clearly are
intrusive, while the collection of 56 dart points is
dominated by specimens classified as Gary or Kent
(77 percent of the classifiable specimens). Organic
materials were poorly preserved, and the faunal
collection is too small to be informative. The meager macrobotanicat collection contains hickory and
pecan nutshells, acorns, and wild plum seeds.
Hurricane Hill is a large upland site with a
complex history of use, although most of the archeological remains appear to represent occupations during the middle part of the Late Prehistoric
period and the Woodland period. Woodland materials are best represented in a portion of the site
termed the Southwest Rise, where a midden deposit
and numerous cultural features were encountered
and a modest artifact sample was obtained (Perttula
1990a, 1995). Unfortunately, this part of the site
yielded almost no faunal or botanical remains, and
it has not been dated. The artifacts assigned to the
Woodland period component consist of 19 dart
points (79 percent typed as Gary), 51 other chipped
stone tools, 8 cores, and 1 hematite axe. Small
numbers of arrow points (n=4) and ceramics (n=45)
were recovered, but these mostly represent later
use by Caddoan peoples. While a few of the features relate to the later component (e.g., an extended burial and an intrusive pit), most of the
features are interpreted as being associated with the
Woodland component. Included are 12 pits, 9
postholes or possible postholes, 6 possible flexed
burials, 4 single cremations, 2 multiple cremations,
and 1 hearth. The burials appear to constitute a
structured cemetery, perhaps representing a fairly

Fields w The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

short span of time, and the postholes and pits may
mark an adjacent locus of domestic activities. According to Perttula (1990a:276-277), the remains
are indicative of multi-seasonal, although not yearround, use for residential purposes. While the
deltal3C values of-15.0 and -17.6 obtained on the
collagen fraction of bones from Burials 15 and 17
imply that Ca plants, possibly including maize, were
an important part of the diet, maize has not been
recovered from any Woodland site in the project
area, and the lack of dates from the Southwest Rise
opens the door for questioning the Woodland age
assessment of these burials. While Hurricane Hill
is one of the more intriguing sites at Cooper Lake,
integrating the data from its Woodland component
with the information from other Woodland sites in
the area is complicated by the limited controlled
excavations there and the fact that it has not been
dated.
Site 41HP137, which is located in an upland
setting near Hurricane Hill, is a small site that appears to have both Woodland and Late Prehistoric
components. Because of uncertainty about the extent to which materials from these components may
be mixed, it is difficult to interpret 41HP137 on an
assemblage level. Regardless, the site did yield an
interesting collection of botanical remains from two
pit features that were dated to the Woodland period
(140 B.C. and A.D. 490). This collection consists
of hickory nutshells, cultivated squash rind fragments, acorn shells, and tuber and rhizome fragments identified tentatively as Psoralea (McGregor
1989:8-15), and this hints at a subsistence base
containing both wild and cultivated plants.
In sum, it appears that the Woodland period
saw a substantial increase in the intensity of site
use over the Archaic period, and this probably at
least partly reflects increased population densities.
Occupations of at least moderately long duration
are suggested for most, if not all, of the Woodland
components at Cooper Lake, and frequent reuse is
indicated for several. This increased redundancy in
the use of certain locales suggests decreased
residential mobility. The Cooper Lake sites appear
to have been used for broad ranges of procurement,
processing, and maintenance activities, but there is
no evidence of sedentary populations. Subsistence
pursuits focused on the hunting of a wide variety of
woodland, woodland-edge, and aquatic taxa and
on the gathering of wild plant foods. While there is
some indication of the use of squash, there is no
evidence for substantial reliance on horticulture.

307

Thus, these Woodland components may be
interpreted as hunter-gatherer residential bases.

JEWETT MINE AND
LAKE LIMESTONE
The upper Navasota River basin was occupied
intensively during the Late Archaic and Woodland
periods (Fields 1987, 1990; Fields and Klement
1995; Fields et al. 1991; Mallouf 1979). Late Archaic components have been isolated at the following eight sites: Buffalo Branch (41FT311, Analysis
Unit 3), Rena Branch (4tFT334, Analysis Unit 5/
6), Charles Cox (41LN29A, Analysis Unit 3), Alley Road (41LN149B, Analysis Unit 4/5), Moccasin Springs (41LN247C, Analysis Units 3-5), Old
Union Bridge (41LT12, Analysis Unit 4), Carl
Sadler (41LT17, Analysis Unit 4/5), and 41LT44
(Analysis Unit 1). Components dating predominantly to the Woodland period are present at the
Rena Branch (Analysis Unit 4), Charles Cox
(Analysis Unit 2), Harris Hole (41LN30, Analysis
Unit 1/2), Alley Road (Analysis Unit 3), Old Union
Bridge (Analysis Unit 3), and Carl Sadler (Analysis Unit 3) sites. The Bottoms (41FT89, Analysis
Unit 3), Buffalo Branch (Analysis Unit 2), Lambs
Creek Knoll (41LN106, Analysis Unit 3), and Cottonwood Springs (41LN107, Analysis Unit 2/3) sites
have components with mixed Late Archaic and
Woodland materials or components dating to the
Late Archaic-Woodland transition. In all, 20 components dating to this interval have been isolated,
and 62 of the 85 radiocarbon dates from archeological contexts at the mine pertain to this interval
(4000-!250 B.P., see Figure 2).
Three of these sites (Old Union Bridge, Carl
Sadler, and 41LT44) are situated along the Navasota
River, five sites (Charles Cox, Harris Hole, Lambs
Creek Knoll, Cottonwood Springs, and Alley Road)
are along tributaries to the Navasota River, and
four sites (Bottoms, Buffalo Branch, Rena Branch,
and Moccasin Springs) are along the upper reaches
of tributaries to the Trinity River. Old Union Bridge,
Carl Sadler, and Harris Hole are in alluvial settings,
while the deposits at the other sites are primarily
colluvial. Midden staining was present at Charles
Cox (Analysis Units 2 and 3) and maybe Old Union
Bridge, and most sites have limited ranges of feature
types. The features identified include the following:
51 concentrations of burned rocks interpreted as
hearths, shallow baking pits, or discarded hearth

308

Texas Archeological Society

debris (and large quantities of scattered burned
rocks); 1 possible non-rock hearth; 2 pits of
unknown function; t concentration of ground stone
tools; and 8 definite or possible human burials.
Seven of the burials were at a single site
(Cottonwood Springs), where they constituted a
small cemetery dating to ca. 2800-2000 B.P. Six of
the burials in this cemetery contained cremations,
and two were accompanied by exotic offerings
(galena and a slate gorget).
The artifact collections [~om these 20 components consist of 59,441 lithic items and just 104
ceramic vessel sherds. Most of the formal lithic
tools are dart points and other bifaces, but other
tool types--perforators, gouges, unifaces, cobble
tools, ground and battered stones, pitted stones, and
pigment stones--occur as well. Small numbers of
arrow points were recovered from some components (totaling 29 points and fragments), but they
appear to be intrusive from later occupations. The
dart point collection consists of over 400 specimens. The best represented groups among the classifiable specimens are Dawson (19 percent), Gary
(9 percent), Kent (8 percent), Neches River (6 percent), and Godley (5 percent), as well as a variety
of untyped expanding-stem (14 percent), parallelstem (14 percent), and contracting-stem (7 percent) forms (Figure 8). Dawson, Gary, Godley, and
Kent points appear to have been used throughout
this interval, while Neches River points are most
frequent in Woodland components. Minor types
that are most common in Late Archaic components
are Axtetl and Yarbrough.
Most of the ceramics (92 percent) are in
Woodland components or mixed Woodland and
Late Archaic components, and it is certain that the
few sherds in Late Archaic contexts are intrusive.
Interestingly, the ceramics are almost evenly split
between the sandy paste ware that one would expect
for this time period (e.g., Story 1990) and grog- or
bone-tempered ceramics, which are found more
often in later contexts at the mine and elsewhere in
the southern part of East Texas. Given this, it is
possible that many of these are intrusive later
specimens and that ceramics were an even less
prominent part of the material culture than is implied
by the small number of sherds found in Woodland
contexts at the mine. Another interesting aspect of
the ceramic collection is the inclusion of two
additional, unusual kinds of pottery: two sherds
that are tempered with shell and two sherds that are
untempered but have a fine kaolin paste. At least

the shell-tempered specimens, and maybe the
kaolin-paste sherds as well, may be related to the
possibly early shel!-tempered ceramics found at
Richland/Chambers Reservoir (McGregor and
Bruseth 1987:180). The ceramics from Woodland
contexts in the mine area are too few and too small
to contribute much information about the range of
vessel forms, and only a very few display
nondistinctive decorations (e.g., random body
punctations or incised lines).
Because of the sandy sediments and poor
preservation, some of the Late Archaic and
Woodland components at the Jewett Mine and Lake
Limestone have yielded no faunal remains at all.
Where animal bones have been recovered, they tend
to be few in number and highly fragmented. The
only identifiable specimens are deer and turtle.
Macrobotanical remains also are not wel! preserved,
although most of these components have yielded
burned nutshells. The nutshells are predominantly
hickory (Carya), with a few sites also containing
walnut (Juglans). Based on these limited data, it
appears that subsistence pursuits focused on

b

0

1

2

cm

k

Figure 8. Dart points from Late Archaic and Woodland
contexts at the Jewett Mine: a, Axtell; b-d, Dawson; e-f,
Gary; g, Godley; h-i, Kent; j, Neches River; k, Yarbrough.

Fields M The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

woodland resources, and there is no evidence for
horticulture during this time.
Of these 20 Late Archaic and Woodland components, 15 (at 11 sites) are interpreted as residential bases and five (at three sites) as procurement/
processing locations. Five of the residential base
components (at three sites) are located along the
Navasota River, while the others are in the uplands
to the east. All five of those in riverine settings are
interpreted as general-purpose residential bases (i.e.,
lacking a special focus on particular activities). In
contrast, the upland components consist of two general-purpose residential bases (at two sites) and
eight residential bases at which activities focused
heavily on plant processing and secondarily on hunting (at seven sites). This distinction suggests that
Late Archaic-Woodland settlement systems were
scheduled based on the occurrence of plant foods.
Eleven of the residential sites appear to have been
occupied with low or moderately low frequency,
suggesting low population densities overall. A
greater intensity of use is indicated for the other
four residential bases, and this probably reflects
more-frequent reoccupation, the relatively long
term nature of the occupations, or both.
The five analysis units interpreted as procurementiprocessing locations appear to have had a primary focus on plant processing and a secondary
focus on hunting-related activities. Four components (at two sites) are in the Trinity River basin in
the eastern part of the study mea, while the fifth is
along a Navasota River tributary to the west. The
moderately high to high frequency of use suggested
for three of these is surprising in view of the low
use frequency indicated for most of the residential
sites, and it suggests highly scheduled reuse of particular resource patches.
The data from these 20 components are consistent with the idea that Late Archaic-Woodland
groups were chiefly foragers. Procurement/processing locations suggesting logistical use are not
frequent, and the few that have been identified
suggest intensive exploitation of particular locales.
Settlement systems appear to have been highly
scheduled, probably on a seasonal basis, with residential sites in riverine settings differing from those
in the uplands. Comparisons with earlier components are difficult, but the much greater frequency
of Late Archaic-Woodland components and the
overall greater intensity of use suggest increased
population densities, decreased territories, or both.
This also is suggested by the occurrence of the

cemetery at
(41LN107).

the

Cottonwood

Springs

309

site

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD
Cooper Lake
The Cooper Lake area has yielded abundant
information on the Late Prehistoric period, especially for the early part (A.D. 800-1300). Components dating to this interval can be isolated at five
of the excavated sites--Tick (41DT6, Analysis Unit
2), Spider Knoll (41DT11), Spike (41DT16, Analysis Unit 1/2), Thomas (41DT80), and Doctors Creek
(41DT124)--and these are the ones providing most
of the summary data below (Cliff 1989; Fields et al.
1993, 1994; Martin 1989). Many other excavated
sites (e.g., Manton Miller [41DT1], Ranger,
[41DT37], Luna [41DT52], Lawson [41HP78],
Arnold [41HP102], Hurricane Hill [41HP106], Cox
[41HP105], and 41HP137) have cultural deposits
of this age as well, although separation of the early
Late Prehistoric remains from earlier or later ones
has proven difficult.
Three of the five sites where early Late Prehistoric components can be isolated are on floodplain knolls adjacent to the river and appear to be
in alluvial contexts, while the other two (Spider
Knoll and Doctors Creek) are on old terraces with
limited colluvial deposition. All five sites have
middens, and all but Tick have numerous cultural
features, including 14 hearths, 3 possible hearth
dumps, 1 shell-filled pit, 58 other pits, 13 pits/
postholes, 63 postholes, and 10 human burials. At
the Spider Knoll site, the spatial arrangement of the
features suggests the patterned use of the site over
time. One area was used most consistently for
domiciliary activities and outside activities associated with small and medium pits and probably
structures such as brush arbors and drying racks,
another area was used primarily for outside activities associated with large pits, and a third area was
used chiefly for trash disposal. This patterned use
of space implies residential occupations that were
long lived, but the houses built at the site were not
the sorts of substantial structures expected for
year-round occupations. Instead, they probably
were more like brush arbors more suitable for seasonal use. Such patterning was not found at the
other sites, but this probably can be ascribed to the
more limited excavations there.

310

Texas Archeological Society

The artifacts from the five components assigned most securely to the early part of the Late
Prehistoric period consist of 40,763 lithic items,
3,041 ceramic vessel sherds, 6 ceramic pipe sherds,
and 777 bone/shell/antler tools or ornaments (mostly
awls, but also engraved pins, antler pressure flakers,
beamers, gravers/scrapers, pestles, beads, and a fishhook). The formal lithic tools are dominated by
bifaces and projectile points, and other tool forms-perforators, gouges, unifaces, cobble tools, burins,
ground stones, pitted stones, and hammerstones-occur in smaller numbers. Arrow points are about
three times more frequent than dart points (920 vs.
310), but the latter occur in sufficient numbers to
show that the atlatl continued to be used after the
introduction of the bow and arrow. The most common arrow point groups are Colbert (21 percent of
the classifiable specimens) and Steiner (16 percent),
with Catahoula (8 percent), Friley (7 percent),
Scallorn (6 percent), and Alba (3 percent) points
occurring in moderate numbers (Figure 9); most of
the untyped specimens have contracting stems (12
percent), expanding stems (7 percent), parallel stems
(6 percent), or bulbar stems (4 percent). Gary points
are by far most numerous among the classifiable
dart points (65 percent), with most of the remainder
typed as Gary/Kent (8 percent) or Kent (7 percent).
Most of the ceramics (71 percent) are tempered
primarily with grog, while bone, sometimes in

Figure 9. Arrow and dart points from early Late Prehistoric
contexts at Cooper Lake: a, Alba; b, Catahoula; c-e,
Colbert; f, Friley; g, Scallorn; h-i, Steiner; j-k, Gary; 1,
Kent.

. combination with grog, is the second most common
tempering agent (24 percent). Shell tempering
occurs infrequently (2 percent), and these sherds
almost certainly are intrusive from later deposits at
the sites. Because the sherds tend to be small, it is
difficult to determine vessel forms, but it seems
that they represent primarily simple bowls, globular
bowls, barrel-shaped jars, small globular jars, and
large restricted jars. Only !0-20 percent of the
pottery is decorated, mostly with punctations and/
or incised or engraved lines. Relating the sherds to
defined types usually is not easy, but most of the
decorated specimens bear similarities to such
Caddoan types as Crockett Curvilinear-Incised and
Pennington Punctated-Incised (Figure 10). Present
in small numbers are sherds with decorative
treatments (e.g., overhanging incised lines, incised
lips, or punctated raised panels) that are more
common on ceramics from the Lower Mississippi
Valley (Phillips 1970), and some of these have
been classified to Coles Creek types. Also present
in consistently small numbers are base-body sherds
from flowerpot-shaped vessels that are strongly
reminiscent of Williams Plain. Most of the ceramic
pipe sherds are not very distinctive, but at least one
represents a long-stemmed Red River pipe
(Hoffman 1967).
All five sites yielded large faunal collections.
All show that deer, turtles, rabbits, and mussels
were important subsistence resources, and all contain a variety of other taxa as well, including fish,
amphibians, turkey and other birds, and various
small mammals. None of the sites yielded bison
remains. Hickory nutshells occur ubiquitously (but
not abundantly), and a variety of other kinds of
macrobotanical remains have been recovered. Included are acorns, pecans, Pediomelum rhizome
fragments, squash rind fragments, maize, and seeds
of Rubus, vetch/peavine, hackberry, maygrass, sunflower, knotweed, Cheno-am, grape, honey locust,
sumpweed, bedstraw, sedge, spurge, bindweed, and
Graminae.
The archeological data from the early Late
Prehistoric components at Cooper Lake indicate an
increase in the intensity of site use over the
Woodland period, and this probably reflects
continued increases in population densities. All five
of the components summarized above show evidence
of long--duration occupations and frequent reuse.
This suggests increased redundancy in site use and
further decreases in group mobility. The sites appear
to have been used for broad ranges of procurement,

Fields m The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

311

evidence in the skeletal remains analyzed
by Derrick and Steele (1993), suggest a
diet rich in carbohydrates, such as is
provided by maize or, more likely,
starchy seeds. Unfortunately, carbon
isotope analyses, which could help
resolve this question, have not been
performed on the Cooper Lake skeletal
materials dating to this interval.
The Cooper Lake area appears to
have been used less intensively during
the latter half of the Late Prehistoric
period than before. Only two excavated
sites, Hurricane Hill (41HP106) and
Peerless Bottoms (41HP 175), date to this
interval (Fields et al. 1993; Perttula
1990a). Late Prehistoric period materials occur widely across the Hurricane
Hill site, being especially common on
the North Rise and the South Rise. The
primary occupation may date to ca. A.D.
1200-1400 (based on thermoluminescence dates on ceramics), although it
probably was used earlier and later in
the Late Prehistoric period as well. The
extensive excavations on the North Rise
and South Rise sampled six middens and
identified almost 200 cultural features.
The features include 134 stains/postholes,
21 large pits, 15 small pits, 5 hearths, 4
refuse concentrations, 6 extended buri012
4
als, 2 flexed burials, and 2 cremations.
Patterns in the posthole distributions incm
dicate that two houses were present on
Figure 10. Ceramics from early Late Prehistoric contexts at Cooper
the North Rise and three on the South
Lake: a-e, Crockett Curvilinear-Incised/Pennington Punctated-Incised;
Rise, with both areas probably also conf, Williams Plain; g, Coles Creek Incised.
taining extramural features such as drying racks and brush arbors. Three of the
houses were circular to sub-rectangular
processing, and maintenance activities, and the
and two were rectangular, with diameters ranging
possibility of ephemeral structures at several sites
from 5.0 to 7.6 m.
hints that they may have been used as seasonal
The artifact collection from these two areas
campsites. There is no evidence for fully sedentary
consists of roughly 8,800 sherds, 42 ceramic pipe
populations, however, and the absence of constructed
fragments, 500 dart points, 106 arrow points, ca.
mounds or elaborate burials (almost all of the burials
127,000 other stone artifacts, and 60 bone/shell tools
at Cooper Lake lack grave goods) points to lessand ornaments. Most of the typeable dart points are
complex social systems than those of early Late
classed as Gary (79 percent), while the most comPrehistoric Caddoan groups to the north, east, and
mon arrow point types are Bonham (23 percent),
south. The macrobotanical remains indicate primary
Alba (21 percent), Hayes (20 percent), and Perdiz
reliance on wild plant foods, with tropical cultigens
(16 percent). The abundance of dart points surely
making modest contributions. The high caries rates
reflects mixing with earlier deposits rather than presummarized by Burnett (1990:401-402), and
dominant use of the atlatl over the bow and arrow.

312

Texas Archeological Society

As for the earlier pottery characterized above, most
of the ceramics (69 percent) are grog-tempered,
with bone occurring in 29 percent. Shell temper is
especially infrequent (less than 1 percent). The vessel forms represented include bottles, carinated
bowls, scalloped-rim bowls, and everted-rim jars
as well as simple bowls and jars. Only 8 percent of
the sherds are decorated, with the main decorative
techniques being incising, punctating, and engraving. Most of the decorated sherds can be related to
Caddoan types such as Canton Incised, Sanders
Engraved, Crockett Curvilinear-Incised, Pennington
Punctated-Incised, and Maxey Noded Redware. The
relatively large collection of ceramic pipes includes
a number of examples of the long-stemmed Red
River style. The bone/shell implements consist
mostly of awls, but antler flakers, fishhooks, beads,
and a beaver incisor tool are represented as well.
The faunal collection consists of a diverse array
of taxa, the best represented of which are deer,
turtles, and rabbits (but no bison). The macrobotanical
remains indicate utilization of hickory nuts, hazelnuts, and acorns while only traces of maize and
squash were found in the features on the South Rise.
Subsistence practices appear to have focused on the
collection of wild plants as well as the hunting of
game that frequented the woodland edge. Cultigens
are present, but the small quantity of these plants
suggests limited utilization. The data from a small
sample of six of the burials at Hurricane Hill seem to
be contradictory, with the carbon isotope values
(ranging from-15.2 to -17.6) suggesting that maize
(or some other C4 plants) was important, but with the
caries rates apparently being !ow.
The Peerless Bottoms site is buried within
alluvial fan deposits along Finley Branch on the
south side of the South Sulphur River floodplain.
The chronometric and artifactual evidence indicate
that it dates primarily to the latter part of the Late
Prehistoric period, probably ca. A.D. 1400-1500.
The excavations located five potential cultural
features-one hearth and four possible posts or
stakes--and recovered a large artifact sample
consisting of 1,930 ceramic vessel sherds, 7 pipe
fragments, 1 ceramic bead, 126 arrow points, 4 dart
points, 360 other chipped stone tools (including an
unusually large number of small end scrapers), 219
cores, 13,365 pieces of unmodified debitage, 30
ground or battered stones, and 16 bone tools. The
majority of the typeable arrow points are classed as
Turney (33 percent) or Perdiz (31 percent), with
most of the remainder being Cliffton, Fresno, and

2

!

Figure l 1. Arrow points from the late Late Prehistoric
component at the Peerless Bottoms site (41HP175),
Cooper Lake: a, Cliffton; b, Fresno; c-d, Perdiz; e, Talco;
f-h, Turney.

Talco (Figure 11). Both of the classifiable dart
points are typed as Gary.
The ceramic collection is unusual not only because of the large number of sherds, but also because many of the sherds are relatively large,
allowing reconstruction of vessel sections. The
sherds are distinctive in that 41 percent contain
shell temper (the remainder have grog and/or bone)
and 5 percent are red-slipped. A number of vessel
forms are represented, including several kinds of
carinated bowls, simple bowls, deep bowls, globular jars, large and small cylindrical jars, and bottles,
and a couple of the forms that are more typical of
Plains vessels than Caddoan ones (Fields et al.
1993). Nonetheless, most of the ceramics can be
related comfortably to such Caddoan types as Ripley
Engraved, Avery Engraved, Simms Engraved,
McKinney Plain, Nash Neck-Banded, and Emory
Punctated-Incised (Figure 12). Only two of the pipe
fragments are distinctive; one appears to be part of
an elbow-shaped pipe, while the other has a short
stem that is not typical of either elbow-shaped or
Red River pipes. The bone tool collection, although
small, is interesting because it contains a grooved
bison (?) rib possibly representing a rasp.
Faunal remains were not well preserved, and
only a small collection was recovered. The bestrepresented taxa are deer and turtles, with birds,
small mammals, bison, and pronghorn occurring in
smaller numbers. The macrobotanical remains consist mostly of hickory nutshells, with Pediomelum
rhizome fragments, honey locust and water locust

Fields m The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah ofEast Central Texas

313

times during this interval, but the other
certainly was not. Thus, limited residential
mobility is indicated, and these sites probably were similar, functionally, i.e., small
farmsteads occupied by groups with mixed
hunter-gatherer and horticultural economies. There is no evidence for substantially greater reliance on cultigens than
during the early part of the period, and
there is no indication of a shift to a bisonoriented hunting strategy, although bison
are present at Peerless Bottoms and not at
the earlier sites (except the Woodland component at the Spike site).
The small number of isolable compo012
4
nents
dating to this late interval makes it
I
I
I
cm
clear that this stretch of the Sulphur River
valley was occupied less densely during
this time than before. In fact, small numbers of late artifacts occur at many sites
that predominantly predate ca. A.D. 1300,
and because of their small numbers these
artifacts suggest that most of the late components in the project area represent nonFigure 12. Ceramics from the late Late Prehistoric component at the
intensive, presumably limited-purpose use.
Peerless Bottoms site (41HP175), Cooper Lake: a, untyped rim with
Thus, there is reason to question whether
scroll motif; b-c, Emory Punctated-Incised; d, Ripley Engraved; e,
the two excavated and analyzed compountyped red-filmed rim with crenelated lip; f, red-filmed Avery
nents discussed above are typical for the
Engraved.
area. From this perspective, it appears that
settlement systems during the latter half of
the Late Prehistoric period may have enseeds, pecans, acorns, black walnuts, hackberries,
tailed limited numbers of residential sites but relasquash rind fragments, and maize cupules occurtively large numbers of limited-function
ring less commonly. The subsistence data are conprocurement/processing sites. This implies an insistent with the interpretation of a mixed
crease in logistical mobility over the early Late
hunter-gatherer and horticultural economy. The disPrehistoric period.
tributional evidence suggests that the area sampled
represents an outside activity area associated with
an undiscovered structure, and comparisons with
Jewett Mine and Lake Limestone
other sites in the project area suggest that this component represents a single long-lived residential
Eleven components dating predominantly to
occupation, probably a small farmstead.
the Late Prehistoric period have been defined at the
In sum, the middle and late parts of the Late
Jewett Mine and Lake Limestone: Rena Branch
Prehistoric period at Cooper Lake are somewhat
(41FT334, Analysis Unit 2), Charles Cox
difficult to interpret because of the limited number
(41LN29A, Analysis Unit 1), Lambs Creek Knoll
of excavated components, but it is clear that there
(41LN106, Analysis Units 1 and 2), Alley Road
were changes in settlement strategies from the early
(41LN149B, Analysis Units 1 and 2), Moccasin
part of this period. The two analyzed components
Springs (41LN247D, Analysis Unit t/2/3), Old
appear to have seen long-lived occupations involvUnion Bridge (41LT12, Analysis Units ! and 2),
ing broad ranges of activities, and at least one, and
and Carl Sadler (41LT17, Analysis Units 1 and 2)
probably both, were used by sedentary groups. One
(Fields 1987, 1990; Fields et al. 1991; Mallouf
of the sites may have been reused a number of
1979). The Bottoms site (41FT89) also has an

314

Texas Archeological Society

important Late Prehistoric component (Analysis
Unit 112/5), but it is mixed with Woodland materials
and is difficult to interpret on an assemblage basis.
Just 21 of the 85 radiocarbon dates from
archeological contexts at the mine pertain to this
interval (1250-250 B.P., see Figure 2), and this
apparently reflects decreased intensity of use over
the preceding periods.
Two of these sites (Old Union Bridge and Carl
Sadler) are on the Navasota River, three (Charles
Cox, Lambs Creek Knoll, and Alley Road) are along
tributaries to the Navasota River, and three sites
(Bottoms, Rena Branch, and Moccasin Springs) are
along the upper reaches of tributaries to the Trinity
River. The Old Union Bridge and Carl Sadler sites
are in alluvial settings, while the deposits at the
others are mostly colluvial. Middens were present
at the Bottoms, Moccasin Springs, and perhaps Old
Union Bridge sites. Eight components lack cultural
features entirely, and only four concentrations of
burned rocks interpreted as hearths or discarded
hearth debris, two postholes, one pit of unknown
function, one burial, and one cache of cores were
found in the remaining three components. Sixteen
additional burned rock concentrations and three pits
were recorded at the Bottoms site, but it is hard to
be certain that these are associated with the Late
Prehistoric component. This is especially the case
for the rock concentrations, since rock hearths and
scattered non-feature burned rocks are much more
common in earlier (i.e., Late Archaic-Woodland)
contexts in the region. One additional human burial
dating to the Late Prehistoric period was found at
the Cottonwood Springs site (Fields and Klement
1995), but the associated occupational debris was
so sparse at this predominantly Late Archaic-Woodland site that a late component was not isolated.
The artifacts from the 11 Late Prehistoric components consist of 43,465 lithic specimens, t,703
ceramic vessel sherds, 4 ceramic pipe fragments,
and 6 bone tools (with mixed Analysis Unit 112/5 at
41FT89 contributing an additional 15,336 lithics,
556 vessel sherds, and 7 pipe fragments). The formal lithic tools are dominated especially heavily by
projectile points, but perforators, gouges, other
bifaces, unifaces, cobble tools, ground and battered
stones, pitted stones, and pigment stones are present
also. The collection from one site (Moccasin
Springs) contains an unsually large number of scrapers made on blades. The projectile point collection
consists of over 500 specimens, with arrow points
being almost twice as frequent as dart points. While

the bow and arrow was the predominant method of
taking game, it appears that the atlatl continued to
be used as well, especially during the early half of
the period. Perdiz is by far the best-represented
arrow point type (43 percent of the classifiable
specimens; Figure 13), although this late style occurs almost exclusively at only a few sites (Bottoms, Moccasin Springs, and Old Union Bridge).
Early arrow points that occur more widely but in
small numbers include specimens typed as Scallorn
(5 percent), Steiner (4 percent), and a variety of
untyped forms with expanding or parallel stems (12
and 7 percent, respectively). The most common
dart point types, chiefly from components dating to
the early part of the period, are Dawson (20 percent
of the classifiable specimens), Kent (10 percent),
Neches River (7 percent), and Gary (6 percent); 37
percent are untyped points (16 percent with parallel
stems, 12 percent with expanding stems, and 9 percent with contracting stems). The collection of bone
tools, all of which are from Moccasin Springs, contains two antler pressure flakers, three pointed tools
fashioned from long bone splinters (two have parallel grooves along their margins suggesting use as
rasps), and one deer metatarsal with parallel grooves
across one face which also may be a rasp.
The ceramics are overwhelmingly (96 percent)
grog or bone-tempered. Most of the remainder are
classified as the sandy paste ware that occurs in

g
h

J

k

cm

rn

Figure !3. Arrow and dart points from Late Prehistoric
contexts at the Jewett Mine: a-<t, Perdiz; e, Scallorn; f,
Steiner; g, untyped parallel stem; h-i, untyped expanding
stem; j, Dawson; k, Gary; 1, Kent; m, Neches River.

Fields ~ The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

315

small numbers in Woodland contexts at
the mine and elsewhere across southeastern Texas, and a few sherds be!ong to the
kaolin-paste ware also found earlier in
the region. It is unclear if these minor
groups represent ceramics actually used
during the Late Prehistoric period or if
they are intrusive from the earlier deposits. While most of the tempered ceramics
are plain, some exhibit decorations (e.g.,
random body punctations, brushing, diagonal incising, pinching, engraving,
neck-banding, and appliqued strips or
nodes) that are characteristic of pottery
in Caddoan sites to the east (Figure 14).
The motifs on a few sherds are strongly
reminiscent of those on defined Caddoan
types (e.g., Holly Fine Engraved,
Killough Pinched, Maydelle Incised,
Patton Engraved, Poyner Engraved, and
Weches Fingernail Impressed), although
design execution tends to be sloppier on
the sherds from the Jewett Mine sites.
Hence, it appears that some, and probably all, can be related to the Caddoan
ceramic tradition in one way or another,
be they pots made by Caddo peoples or
cm
copies made by local groups.
012
4
I
I
I
While sherds occur ubiquitously in
the Late Prehistoric components, they are
frequent in only a few. In fact, 95 percent
are from just two sites (Moccasin Springs
Figure 14. Ceramics from Late Prehistoric contexts at the Jewett
and Old Union Bridge), with the mixed
Mine: a-b, untyped diagonal incised rims; c-d, untyped engraved
component at the Bottoms site also yieldrims; e-f, Holly Fine Engraved; g, Poyner Engraved; h, Weches
ing a sizable sample of 556 sherds. In al!
Fingernail Impressed; i, punctated body; j, Maydelle Incised; k,
three of these cases, most of the sherds
brushed rim; 1, Killough Pinched.
probably relate to use during the latter
part of the Late Prehistoric period. These
late ceramics apparently represent a variety of bowl
sources used by these people. Deer, turtles, and
and jar forms. The later collections also are distinrabbits are the most common taxa from this site,
guished by being the only ones to contain ceramic
with other small mammals, bison, fish, birds, lizpipes. Although few in number, the recovered speciards, and snakes being represented as well. Carya
mens appear to represent short-stemmed forms that
nutshells are by far the most common plant reare unlike either the elbow-shaped form or the longmains; recovered in small quantities were Quercus
stemmed Red River form that are found most often
nutmeats and shells, Corylus nutmeats, and several
across eastern Texas.
kinds of seeds (Cheno-am, Vitis, Leguminosae, and
As for the earlier components, faunal and
Portulaca). There is no evidence for horticulture at
macrobotanical remains tend to be poorly preserved.
these components.
Most of the Late Prehistoric components have
Five of the Late Prehistoric components, four
yielded small numbers of animal bones, but only
along the Navasota River (at Old Union Bridge and
Moccasin Springs contained abundant faunal reCarl Sadler) and one at the far eastern end of the
mains that give a good idea of the range of restudy area (Moccasin Springs), are interpreted as

316

Texas Archeological Society

residential bases; another upland site (Bottoms) may
have been used in a similar fashion during this
time, but the Late Prehistoric component at this site
cannot be separated from the earlier Woodland materials. The other six Late Prehistoric components
(at Rena Branch, Charles Cox, Lambs Creek Knoll,
and Alley Road) are interpreted as procurement/
processing locations. These sites suggest that the
Late Prehistoric period saw a change in settlement
strategies from the Late Archaic and Woodland
periods, and that there were changes within the
Late Prehistoric period as well.
While many of these components are not well
dated, two of the residential components (at Moccasin Springs and Old Union Bridge) and one unit
with both Late Prehistoric and Woodland materials
(at the Bottoms site) stand out from the others in
their high frequencies of vessel ceramics, most of
which can be related to Late Caddoan types, and
the occurrence of ceramic pipes. These three components are the only ones to contain Perdiz points,
and it is likely that these components date primarily
to the latter half of the Late Prehistoric period (although small numbers of other kinds of points suggest that earlier occupations are represented also).
The other Late Prehistoric components, both those
interpreted as residential bases and as procurement/
processing locations, contain far smaller collections
of typeable arrow points and hence are more difficult to assess temporally, but most of the types
represented are suggestive of occupations dating to
the early half of the period.
All three of the residential bases dating to the
early part of the period are along the Navasota
River. Two of these appear to have been focused on
plant processing and to a lesser extent on huntingrelated activities, while the third exhibits no such
emphases. One appears to have been occupied moderately infrequently, but high-intensity use is indicated for the other two components. The greater
use intensity could be due to the long-term nature
of the occupations, more frequent reoccupation, or
both. Vessel ceramics are more common than in the
early Late Prehistoric procurement/processing locations or the residential bases dating to the Woodland period, suggesting that ceramic containers were
used relatively frequently at these sites.
Five of the early Late Prehistoric procurement/
processing locations appear to have been focused
on activities related to hunting, and the sixth may
have been used for varying purposes during different
occupations. All six are located east of the Navasota

River, suggesting primarily logistical use of the
uplands and a restriction of residential activities to
the fiver valley. This change from earlier periods,
and the heavy emphasis on hunting-related
activities, supports the idea of organizational
differences between early Late Prehistoric settlement systems and those of the Late Archaic and
Woodland periods. These components exhibit substantial variability in the frequency of reoccupation,
with low-frequency use indicated for one,
moderately low frequency use suggested for two,
and high-frequency use indicated for three. As noted
above, vessel ceramics are relatively infrequent here
compared to the residential bases, and this probably
reflects the shorter occupations and narrower ranges
of activities.
As noted above, only two excavated components date predominantly to the latter part of the
Late Prehistoric period. Both are residential bases,
with the one along the Navasota River having been
focused primarily on plant processing and secondarily on hunting and the one in the uplands supporting a similar range of activities but with relatively
little manufacture of plant processing tools. Both
were used intensively, probably reflecting the relatively long term nature of the occupations and/or
their frequent reoccupation. The especially high frequencies of vessel ceramics suggest relatively great
extra-regional mobility and/or interaction, as well
as pointing to changes in cooking technologies,
supporting the conclusion that the site occupations
were relatively long lived.
Based mostly on the abundance of Caddoan
ceramics in these components but the lack of evidence for permanent occupations (i.e., structures),
Fields et al. (1991) suggested that these sites were
used by Caddo Indians as base camps in support of
forays by hunting parties or other procurement/processing task groups, or perhaps by groups in transit
between the eastern and central parts of the state. It
is equally plausible, however, that they were created by local hunter-gatherer groups and that the
ceramics are the result of trade or the borrowing
of ideas about ceramic manufacture and decoration. The small sample of two human burials
found so far in late Late Prehistoric contexts at
the mine supports this latter interpretation in that
both almost certainly are not those of Caddoan
farmers. Both contained flexed skeletons lacking
offerings, and the bones yielded delta~3C values
(-21.1 and -22.3) much lower than would be expected for people who consumed maize regularly.

Fields ~ The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas
In sum, the Late Prehistoric period seems to
have seen two major changes in settlement
strategies. In the early part of the period, residential
bases were situated in the Navasota River valley,
and the uplands were used primarily for huntingrelated activities. This represents a shift to more
logistically organized strategies from the forager
systems that characterized the Late Archaic and
Woodland periods. The late part of the Late
Prehistoric period may have seen a return to forager
strategies, although it is also possible that the
scarcity of procurement/processing locations dating
to this period is more apparent than real. Perhaps
such sites are present but were not used with
sufficient intensity to be distinguishable archeologically (as suggested by the archeological record
at the Cottonwood Springs site), or maybe the
procurement/processing sites created during this
period are outside the Jewett Mine study area.

TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL
TRENDS IN THE DATA
Technologies
Several notable patterns regarding when and
how technologies changed in the Post Oak savannah
can be seen in the archeological data. First, the fact
that dart points make up about one-quarter of the
projectile points in Late Prehistoric contexts at
Cooper Lake and about one-third of those in
comparable contexts at the Jewett Mine suggests
that the atlatl continued to be used after the bow
and arrow was introduced at about A.D. 800. This
appears to have been particularly true through the
first half of the Late Prehistoric period; later
components still contain some dart points, but in
much lower frequencies. While some of these points
undoubtedly represent mixing with earlier deposits,
the numbers are so high and the pattern so consistent
that it seems unlikely that this accounts for all of
the dart points in the Late Prehistoric sites. Other
project areas in the Post Oak savannah contribute
limited information on this issue, in part because
most sites are multicomponent and poorly stratified
(at best). For example, Bruseth et al. (1987:241,
245, 247) posit continued use of the atlatl during
the Late Prehistoric period at Richland/Chambers
Reservoir, but the small artifact sample from one
site in an alluvial setting in this project area
(41FT193) suggests that this was not the case at all

317

locations (McGregor and Bruseth 1987:173). At
the Gibbons Creek Mine, Late Prehistoric
components are present at most of the excavated
sites (e.g., 41GM181A, 41GM201, 41GM205,
41GM281, and 41GM282; Rogers 1993, 1995), but
because of the difficulty of isolating components
and dating them, it is hard to tell if the bow and
arrow and atlatl were used contemporaneously.
The second technological change discussed
here is the use of ceramic containers. While Woodland contexts at both Cooper Lake and the Jewett
Mine do contain small numbers of sherds (the ratios of sherds to shaped chipped stone tools are
only 0.1:1 and 0.2:1, respectively), there is reason
to suspect that some, or maybe even all, of the
ceramics are intrusive from later occupations. Thus,
it appears that ceramics were at best a minor part of
the material culture during the Woodland period.
Pottery is only marginally better represented in early
Late Prehistoric contexts at the Jewett Mine (ratio
of sherds to shaped chipped stone tools = 0.5:1),
and it is clear that activities related to the use of
ceramics were not important at the sites used during this temporal interval. In contrast, vessel sherds
outnumber shaped chipped stone tools in early Late
Prehistoric contexts at Cooper Lake (1.1:1) and
especially in contexts dating to the latter part of the
Late Prehistoric period in both project areas (5.7:1
at Cooper Lake and 2.8:1 at the Jewett Mine). Thus,
both areas exhibit time-related trends in the importance of pottery, and regardless of time period, ceramics played a more prominent role in the material
culture at Cooper Lake than at the Jewett Mine.
It is difficult to use the data from other project
areas in the Post Oak savannah to elaborate on this
pattern because of problems with isolating components and because of varying recovery strategies
(e.g., the extensive use of plowing and systematic
surface collections at Lake Fork Reservoir). Nonetheless, the mean ratios of sherds to shaped chipped
stone tools in sites dating predominantly to the
Woodland and Late Prehistoric periods at both
Richland/Chambers Reservoir (ratio = 1.1:1, based
on Bird Point Island, Adams Ranch, Irvine, Polecat
Hill, Little Cedar Creek, and 41FT161B; data taken
from Table 18-3 in Bruseth et al. [1987:237] with
biface fragments added) and the Gibbons Creek
Mine (ratio = 1.0:1, based on 41GM166, 41GM181,
41GM201, 41GM205, 41GM224, 41GM281, and
41GM282; data taken from Rogers [1993, 1994,
1995]) are intermediate between the mean site values for the Jewett Mine (0.8:1) and Cooper Lake

Texas Archeological Society

318

(1.5:1). In contrast, the ratio (51:1) for sites at Lake
Fork Reservoir (Bracheen, Gilbreath, Grimes,
Hines, Killebrew, Osborn, Spoonbill, and Taddlock;
data taken from Tables 5-1 and 6-4 in Bruseth and
Perttula [1981]) is vastly higher than any of the
others, indicating the much more prominent role
played by ceramic vessels in the material culture of
the settled villagers who lived in this part of the
Sabine River valley.
Additional evidence of changes in cooking
technologies can be found in the features. For example, burned rock concentrations interpreted as
hearths or shallow baking pits are most frequent in
Archaic contexts at both Cooper Lake and the Jewett
Mine, although nonfeature burned rocks (disturbed
or displaced hearths?) are not so restricted. In fact,
based on ratios of shaped chipped stone tools to
total burned rocks, it appears that the greatest
changes occurred between the early and late parts
of the Late Prehistoric period in both areas (Figure
15). This parallels the dramatic increase in the use
of ceramic containers for food preparation during

2O

15

LEGEND
¯ --, Cooper Loke
0 0 Jewett Mine

¸10

this same interval. The ratios for the few pre-Late
Archaic components are quite similar, as is the
ratio for the single Late Archaic component at Cooper Lake and the mean value [’or the Late Archaic
components at the Jewett Mine. These low ratios
suggest similar cooking practices involving extensive use of rocks for heat retention during baking
and roasting. The great variability in the values for
the Late Archaic components at the Jewett Mine
probably reflects intersite variability in the resources
processed and perhaps seasons of use (see "Site
Functions and Settlement Patterns" below).
Interestingly, the ratios for the Woodland and
early Late Prehistoric components are virtually the
same within each project area but different between
project areas. The moderate value for the early Late
Prehistoric period at Cooper Lake probably can be
attributed at least partly to the moderately frequent
use of ceramic vessels, and the increased use of
boiling at the expense of roasting and baking. The
comparable value for the Woodland period suggests that this may not be the sole explanation,
however, since there is no evidence for substantial
use of pottery during this period. Although not testable with the data currently at hand, this change
also could reflect the use of new plant foods that
did not require roasting or baking. The fact that the
Woodland and early Late Prehistoric values for the
Jewett Mine are lower than those for Cooper Lake
suggests that groups occupying the southern Post
Oak savannah did not follow the same trajectory in
terms of changes in cooking practices as did those
living in the northern part. This may relate to the
lesser importance of ceramic vessels during the early
Late Prehistoric period at the Jewett Mine than at
Cooper Lake, and it might indicate differences in
the kinds of subsistence resources as well.

~5

l
Subsistence

0Pre-Late
Archoic

Late
Archoic

Lole
Early
Lore Prehistoric

Figure 15. Graph of shaped chipped stone tools/weight of
burned rocks by time period for Cooper Lake and the
Jewett Mine (includes only components assignable to
single periods and excludes the early Late Prehistoric
component at Rena Branch [41FT334] because of its
anomalously high value; where the ratios are derived
from multiple components, the symbols indicate means,
while the bars show ranges).

Almost no direct data pertaining to subsistence
have been recovered from the components predating
the Late Archaic period. Slightly better information
is available for the Late Archaic and Woodland
periods at the Jewett Mine, while the Cooper Lake
sites have contributed useful information for the
latter part of this interval. The overall subsistence
pattern prior to the Late Prehistoric period appears
to have entailed hunting of a wide variety of animals
that frequented woodland, woodland-edge, and
aquatic environments, with only minima! use of

Fields ~ The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

319

grassland taxa, and gathering of wild plant foods
including hardwood nuts, seeds, and tubers/
rhizomes. Very limited amounts of squash at one
site at Cooper Lake indicate some use of cultigens,
but there is no reason to think that they contributed
significantly to the diet. Hence, the Native
Americans who lived in the Cooper Lake and Jewett
Mine areas during the Late Archaic and Woodland
periods appear to have been hunter-gatherers.
Similar hunting patterns prevailed throughout
the succeeding Late Prehistoric period in both project
areas, with one possible minor exception. Specifically, bones positively identifiable as bison are most
common in contexts dating to the latter part of the
Late Prehistoric period, although bones identified as
possible bison are not so restricted. This may hint at
increased use of bison after A.D. 1400, and some
support for this can be found in the increased frequencies of formal scrapers at some late sites, but
neither the overall tool assemblages nor the faunal
collections themselves point to a shift toward bison-oriented economies. Rather, it appears that bison were simply a small part of what was a
predominantly woodland-oriented hunting strategy.
While the poor preservation of macrobotanical
remains at the Jewett Mine sites makes it difficult
to be certain, the plant remains recovered to date
and the limited stable carbon isotope evidence indicate that Late Prehistoric groups in the upper
Navasota River basin used wild plant foods and
were not horticulturalists. This is not the case for
the Cooper Lake area, however. Most of the Late
Prehistoric sites in the upper Sulphur River basin
have yielded small quantities of maize and squash,
as well as hardwood nuts, a variety of kinds of
seeds, and tuber/rhizome fragments. It is clear that
tropical cultigens contributed to the diet of groups
who occupied the area during both the early and
late parts of the period, but they are not sufficiently
abundant to indicate true agricultural economies.
Instead, it appears that limited horticulture may
have been incorporated into a hunter-gatherer system that had its roots in the preceding Woodland
period, or perhaps even earlier. Possibly contradicting this interpretation are the stable carbon isotope
values from a sample of the burials at Hurricane
Hill, which suggest a possible substantial reliance

The regional data show that the woodlandoriented hunting strategy evidenced at Cooper Lake
and the Jewett Mine prevailed throughout the Post
Oak savannah. This is the case in contexts dating to
the early and late parts of the Late Prehistoric period
at Lake Fork Reservoir (Perttuta 1990b:Part II, 3052), Woodland and Late Prehistoric contexts at
Richland/Chambers Reservoir (Bruseth et al.
1987:238), and Woodland and Late Prehistoric
contexts at the Gibbons Creek Mine (Nash 1993;
Rogers 1994:120, 149). Bison bones occur in small
numbers in some of these sites, but they are not
especially frequent in contexts dating to the late
part of the Late Prehistoric period. Hence, the
regional data do not support diachronic changes in
hunting strategies.
Greater variability is evident in the use of plant
foods across the Post Oak savannah. Sites at Lake
Fork Reservoir indicate that maize was an important subsistence resource throughout the Late Prehistoric period (Perttula 1990b:Part II, 30-52), and
it appears that groups who lived in this stretch of
the Sabine River basin relied on farming far more
than did groups at Cooper Lake. Moving southward
to the Trinity River basin, macrobotanical remains
from contexts postdating the Late Archaic period
point to use of the same kinds of wild plant foods-hardwood nuts, a variety of seeds, and tubers/rhizomes--that were used at Cooper Lake (Bruseth et
al. 1987:243). The only tropical cultigen is maize,
and it occurs in very small quantities only in contexts dating to the last half of the Late Prehistoric
period. Hence, groups who lived in this area clearly
were predominantly hunters and gatherers. Subsistence data from the Gibbons Creek Mine are especially sparse, but hardwood nutshells occur in most
sites and liliaceous bulb fragments were recovered
from a single site (Dering 1993, 1994; Rogers
1993:74, 174, 214, 1994:120, 149, 1995:56, 153).
Consistent with the lack of cultigens at Gibbons
Creek is the low stable carbon isotope value on
human remains from a Late Prehistoric burial at
41GM205 (Rogers 1993:D-1 through D-3).

on C4 plants such as maize. Given the limited analysis to date of the human remains from this site,
however, it is difficult to know how much reliance
to put on these isotope values.

Judging from their comparably diverse assemblages of stone tools, it appears that all of the excavated sites at Cooper Lake were used in a generally
similar manner: predominantly as residential sites

Site Functions, Settlement Strategies,
and Use Intensity

320

Texas Archeological Society

of one sort or another. None functioned primarily
as processing or procurement locations. It is certain
that these kinds of sites exist in the area, however,
and the fact that none have been identified probably can be attributed to their low archeological
visibility. In fact, there are hints that a number of
chiefly early Late Prehistoric sites were used in a
much more restricted fashion during the latter part
of the Late Prehistoric period, and that this may
have been related to a change toward more logistically organized settlement strategies.
The functional differences that can be seen
between sites at Cooper Lake appear to have been
more a matter of degree than kind and can be best
seen in the features. For example, the Archaic
components at the Finley Fan site have only a single
kind of feature, and these apparently represent
relatively short term use as a hunter-gatherer
campsite. At the other end of the scale, the Late
Prehistoric component at Hurricane Hill clearly
represents a settlement of hunter-gathererhorticulturalists who were sedentary, or nearly so,
and the Peerless Bottoms site can be interpreted in
this way as well. Occupying the middle ground are
the early Late Prehistoric components at Spider
Knoll, Spike, Thomas, and Doctors Creek. These
sites have middens and numerous features and,
judging from the structural evidence at Spider Knoll,
appear to have seen repeated occupations of perhaps
seasonal length by hunter-gatherer-horticulturalists.
Some of the Woodland components probably
represent occupations similar in nature to those of
the early Late Prehistoric period judging from the
presence of middens at Tick and Spike, and the
small cemetery and associated features on the
Southwest Rise at the Hurricane Hill site, while
others may represent less frequent residential use
(e.g., the Johns Creek site).
The excavated data from Cooper Lake are too
sparse to allow much to be said about settlement
strategies during the Archaic period. Nonetheless,
low-intensity use by hunter-gatherer groups is
likely, and this probably reflects low population
densities, high residential mobility, short-duration
occupations, and infrequent site reuse. The increased
intensity of use during the Woodland period probably represents longer-term site occupations and
more frequent reuse of some sites, and this may be
traced to decreased residential mobility and perhaps increased populations. There is no evidence
for increased logistical mobility among these

hunter-gatherer groups, however. This pattern
reached its culmination in the early part of the Late
Prehistoric period. While horticulture contributed
to the resource base, the area was still occupied by
groups with at least moderate residential mobility.
Individual sites probably were occupied for no
longer than a season at a time, although they were
reused frequently. Settlement strategies changed significantly in the latter part of the Late Prehistoric
period. Fewer sites were used for residential purposes, but they were occupied by groups who were
largely sedentary. Many other sites were used much
less intensively, probably chiefly for procurement/
processing tasks, and this appears to represent increased logistical mobility over the early Late Prehistoric period.
Most of the excavated components at the Jewett
Mine, especially those dating to the Late Archaic
and Woodland periods, also are interpreted as having been used for residential purposes based on
their diverse stone tool assemblages, but it is difficult to compare these sites to those at Cooper Lake
because nondurable features such as postholes and
pits are poorly preserved in the thick sands that
blanket the area. Nonetheless, these kinds of features were not frequent at the few sites where they
might have been preserved (e.g., the Bottoms and
Moccasin Springs sites), and this suggests that the
Jewett Mine residential occupations were of shorter
duration than most of those at Cooper Lake (i.e.,
less than seasonal length). Several kinds of residential sites have been documented at the mine, however. Some were focused primarily on plant
processing and secondarily on hunting-related activities as well as a range of maintenance activities,
while at others these activities were more balanced.
These differences probably can be attributed to the
sites having been used at different times of the year
when different resources were available.
The Jewett Mine also has a number of
components, most dating to the early Late
Prehistoric period, that are interpreted as
procurement/processing locations based on limited
diversity in the stone tool assemblages. Huntingrelated activities are especially well represented at
many of these, while plant processing may have
been more important than hunting at others. Several
explanations can be offered for the difference
between the Jewett Mine and Cooper Lake in terms
of the frequency of these kinds of components at
the excavated sites, with the most likely one

Fields -- The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

revolving around the different kinds of depositional
settings in the two project areas (i.e., it is easier to
isolate components in the often thick sands at
Jewett). Perhaps also contributing to the difference,
though, is the fact that the Jewett Mine sites
represent a broader range of environmental settings
(i.e., a major river valley, a major drainage divide,
and major and minor tributary valleys) than the
Cooper Lake sites, all of which are within or
immediately adjacent to a major river valley.
In sum, the Jewett Mine sites point to a similar
trajectory in changes in settlement stategies, albeit
with differences in timing, as that identified at Cooper Lake. The few pre-Late Archaic components at
Jewett suggest non-intensive use by mobile huntergatherers, indicating low population densities and
infrequent site reuse. More intensive use is indicated for the Late Archaic and Woodland periods.
This may mark increased population densities, more
frequent reuse of individual sites, or longer-term
occupations. The hunter-gatherers who occupied
the area still operated primarily as foragers, however, moving their residential bases frequently.
Settlement systems may have been scheduled on a
seasonal basis, with different activity sets (i.e., related to different subsistence resources?) represented
at residential sites in riverine and upland settings.
During the early Late Prehistoric period, residential
activities were increasingly restricted to lowland
sites, while the uplands were used mostly for hunting-related procurement/processing tasks. This indicates that logistical strategies became more
important, but, unlike at Cooper Lake, there is no
evidence that this was accompanied by increased
sedentism within the upper Navasota River basin
itself. During the late part of the Late Prehistoric
period, the Jewett area apparently saw a return to
forager-oriented hunter-gatherer strategies entailing more equable use of upland and lowland settings. The high intensity of use and the infrequency
of sites suggest that individual occupations were
longer lived and that residential mobility was lower
than during the Late Archaic and Woodland periods, however.
These patterns in occupational intensity are
illustrated by Figure 16, which plots the numberg
of shaped chipped stone tools per square meter of
controlled excavations by time period, excluding
the pre-Late Archaic components since the data are
so scanty (the ratios have been adjusted for different
time period lengths). Shaped chipped stone tools

321

60~

50-

LEGEND

40-

¯ ~ Cooper Leke
o -o Jewett Mine

30-

20 ~

10-

Lete
Archoic

Woodlond

Eorly
Lore
Lore Prehistoric

Figure 16. Graph of shaped chipped stone tools/m2
excavated by time period (corrected for differences in
length) for Cooper Lake and the Jewett Mine (includes
only components assignable to single periods and excludes
the Late Archaic component at 41LT44 because of its
anomalously high value; where the ratios are derived
from multiple components, the symbols indicate means
while the bars show ranges).

are used instead of total lithic artifact counts, as
were used by Fields et al. (1991, 1993) for both
Cooper Lake and the Jewett Mine, because of
differences between the areas in lithic procurement
and reduction strategies.
Specifically, the Jewett Mine sites have high
ratios of debitage to shaped chipped stone tools
(58:1 at Jewett vs. 21:1 at Cooper Lake, using only
the sites excavated by Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
to eliminate recovery and analysis biases), apparently because of the much more common use of
fine-grained materials (67 percent of the debitage
at Jewett is of fine-grained chert, as opposed to 3
percent at Cooper Lake [these figures are site
means rather than total percentages]) and the staged
reduction of bifaces imported from Central Texas
at Jewett (as indicated by the relatively numerous
biface caches there). This is reflected not only by
high debitage frequencies at the Jewett Mine sites,
but also by the fact that more of the debitage from
Jewett is small and entirely decorticate (84 percent

322

Texas Archeological Society

of the debitage at Jewett is smaller than 21 mm and
71 percent is entirely decorticate, while the figures
for Cooper Lake are 63 and 49 percent [these figures are site means rather than total percentages]).
Hence, including debitage in the density calculations would unfairly inflate the values for the
Jewett sites.
Figure 16 shows that both areas start out with
a very low intensity of use during the Late Archaic
period. The patterns for the two areas diverge after
this, however. At Cooper Lake, use intensity increased steeply through the Woodland and early
Late Prehistoric periods, followed by a decrease in
the latter part of the Late Prehistoric period. This
trend points to increasingly frequent site reuse and
probably longer individual occupations, followed
by less intensive residential use during the late Late
Prehistoric period.
The Jewett Mine sites show a much more
gradual increase in use intensity through the early
part of the Late Prehistoric period, consistent with
the idea that site occupations were not as frequent
or as long lived as at Cooper Lake and that
population densities may have been lower. As noted
above, the evidence indicates that, for the latter part
of this interval, this may have been related to
increased logistical use and less residential use. A
much steeper increase in intensity is indicated for
the late part of the Late Prehistoric period, perhaps
indicating rough comparability (although still lower
overall) with the early Late Prehistoric period at
Cooper Lake. The fact that the ratios for the two
late components at Jewett are higher than that for
the single late component at Cooper Lake is
intriguing given that the latter appears to represent
a single--component occupation by largely sedentary
hunter-gatherer-horticulturalists, while the former
are more likely to represent repeated, shorter-term
residential occupations by hunter-gatherers.
Assuming it is not a function of the small number
of sites involved, this difference may reflect the
more logistical nature of the late Late Prehistoric
settlement strategies at Cooper Lake (i.e., more
frequent performance of procurement/processing
tasks away from residential sites, resulting in
decreased tool densities).
Between Cooper Lake and the Jewett Mine, it
appears that most of the excavated sites at Lake
Fork Reservoir served residential functions, at least
during the Late Prehistoric period. This is most
clearly the case at the Hines and Spoonbill sites

where posthole patterns representing houses were
found, but many other sites (e.g., Taddlock, Steck,
Gilbreath, Grimes, Killebrew, Osborn, and Sandhill)
have middens and clearly were used for more than
procurement/processing activities (Bruseth and
Perttula 1981). Further, Perttula (1994) lists a number of known or potential mound sites in this stretch
of the Sabine River basin, and it is clear that this
part of the Post Oak savannah was used intensively
by sedentary farmers during most if not all of the
Late Prehistoric period.
Moving farther southward, the data suggest
that most of the excavated sites at Richland/Chambers Reservoir also were used for residential purposes during the Late Prehistoric period (Bruseth
et. al 1987:241,244, 246), although there are some
sites in the area, for example the streamside concentrations of mussel shells and artifacts at 41FT 193
and 41NV139, that probably were used in a more
limited fashion. The house patterns at the Bird Point
Island site point to occupations of some duration by
hunter-gatherers during the first half of the period,
while other components that are contemporaneous,
slightly earlier, or later (e.g., at Bird Point Island,
Adams Ranch, Irvine, and Little Cedar Creek) have
middens and numerous features suggesting intensive use but no houses. These components may
represent occupations that were seasonal in length,
comparable to most of the early Late Prehistoric
components at Cooper Lake. Shorter-term, but still
residential, occupations may be represented by the
Late Archaic-Woodland components at sites such
as Bird Point Island, Adams Ranch, and 41FT200,
judging from the artifact assemblages and the presence of large depressions interpreted as roasting
ovens associated with hunter-gatherer band coalescence at the first two of these (Bruseth et. al
1987:225,237).
At the Gibbons Creek Mine in the southern
Navasota River basin, the excavated sites appear
generally similar to most of those at the Jewett
Mine in that they generally lack middens (except at
41GM28!), they have numerous burned rock
features but few other features, and they contain
generalized (rather than specialized) stone tool
assemblages (Rogers 1993, 1994, 1995). Based on
these similarities, it is possible that the Gibbons
Creek sites, dating mostly to the Woodland and
Late Prehistoric periods, represent short-term
residential occupations by hunter-gatherers. On the
other hand, there are two pieces of evidence

Fields ~ The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

suggesting that some of these sites may have
functioned more as procurement/processing
locations than residential campsites. Specifically,
the sites at the Gibbons Creek Mine have much
lower frequencies of shaped chipped stone tools
(the overall ratio of debitage to shaped chipped
stone tools is 106:1) than do the sites at the Jewett
Mine or Cooper Lake (58:1 and 21:1, respectively),
perhaps implying that the occupations were
especially short-lived. And second, the Gibbons
Creek sites have greater quantities of burned rocks
(the overall ratio of burned rock weight to shaped
chipped stone tools is 2.2:1, excluding 41GM166,
4tGM281, and 41GM282, for which burned rocks
are not quantified in the report) than the Jewett
Mine or Cooper Lake sites (1.3:1 and 0.3:1,
respectively), suggesting that certain kinds of
processing activities were quite important.

Sociocultural Interaction
It is difficult to address the topic of sociocultural interaction with much precision because of
the complex relationships between trade, other kinds
of interaction between groups, and the various kinds
of mobility (i.e., residential vs. logistical, intra-regional vs. extra-regional). Nonetheless, there are
some clear patterns.
First, truly exotic items are universally scarce.
For example, obsidian flakes (at Cooper Lake and
the Jewett Mine)~ galena (at Cooper Lake, Jewett
Mine, and Gibbons Creek Mine), and marine shell
beads (at Cooper Lake) have been recovered, but
they are so few in number that it is clear that they
represent down-the-line exchange rather than any
substantial involvement in especially far-flung trade
networks. Tools and flakes of chert from the Ozark
Mountains apparently occur in fair numbers at Lake
Fork Reservoir (Perttula 1984:140), but these materials have not been identified in other project areas (It is likely that these Ozark cherts were from
gravel aggregates in Ouachita Mountain sources).
The distributions of the typed projectile points,
as presented in Prewitt’s paper in this volume, convey some information about interaction, but they
must be used with caution since projectile point
styles seldom correlate specifically with social
groups. Nonetheless, the fact that many of the most
common types in the Post Oak savannah (e.g., Gary,
Dawson, Kent, Yarbrough, Alba, Catahoula, Friley,
and Steiner) occur widely across eastern Texas but

323

not beyond to the west, indicates that there was
sufficient interaction among groups who lived in
the eastern part of the state to lead to some degree
of uniformity in dart and arrow point styles. The
only major types that have more westerly distributions are Perdiz and Scallorn. While both of these
could represent increased interaction with groups
who lived to the west during parts of the Late Prehistoric period, the case is stronger for Perdiz (i.e.,
the second half of the Late Prehistoric period) than
for Scallorn given the heterogeneity evident in this
latter type.
Interestingly, there are a few projectile point
types, most of them minor, that point to differences
between the northern and southern parts of the Post
Oak savannah, and suggest relatively localized interaction spheres. For example, the Archaic dart
point types Trinity and Yantis occur mostly in the
north and suggest ties between the Post Oak savannah and areas to the east, while Archaic types Axtell
and Hoxie have restricted distributions to the south
and extending westward to Central Texas. Later
dart point styles Godley and Neches River oletha
also are relatively common south and west of the
Trinity River. Among the arrow points, triangular
types such as Turney, Talco, and Maud occur in the
north but not the south, as do occasional examples
of types such as Homan, Keota, Huffaker, and
Washita. The former securely link this part of the
Post Oak savannah to Northeast Texas proper, while
the latter indicate interaction with groups living
north of the Red River and west onto the Plains.
The ceramics also point to some clear
differences between the northern and southern parts
of the Post Oak savannah. The Woodland-age sandy
paste ceramic tradition that is characteristic of the
southern part of East Texas is not represented at all
at Cooper Lake, and the pottery dating to the early
part of the Late Prehistoric period in the upper
Sulphur River basin shows clear ties to the Caddoan
area to the east and north, based on the
predominance of Crockett Curvilinear-Incised/
Pennington Punctated-Incised among the decorated
wares, the consistent occurrence of Williams Plain
pottery, and the occasional occurrence of Spiro
Engraved ceramics as well as sherds assignable to
Coles Creek types. The pottery from the single
excavated late Late Prehistoric site also indicates
strong connections both northward to the Red River
and eastward to the Cypress Creek basin, judging
from the presence of types such as Avery Engraved,

324

Texas Archeological Society

Ripley Engraved, Taylor or Wilder Engraved,
McKinney Plain, and Emory Punctated-Incised.
This late collection also contains sherds representing
a few globular jars that are more reminiscent of
Plains vessel forms than those found in this part of
the Caddoan area, however, and this points to
westward or northwestward contacts.
At the Jewett Mine, most of the presumably
early pottery is the sandy paste ware typical of the
southern part of East Texas, while a few shelltempered sherds and a few sherds with kaolin pastes
hint at local experimentation with ceramic manufacture. The pottery from early Late Prehistoric
contexts indicates interaction with Caddoan groups
to the east, based on the small numbers of sherds
typeable as Holly Fine Engraved and Weches Fingernail Impressed. The later pottery, with its high
incidence of brushing and a few sherds typeable as
Maydelle Incised, Killough Pinched, Poyner Engraved, and Patton Engraved, also indicates ties to
Caddoan groups living east of the Trinity River,
specifically to Hasinai Caddo groups in the Neches
and Angelina River basins.
Not far south of Cooper Lake, Caddoan pottery is especially abundant at Lake Fork Reservoir,
and most of the types identified (e.g., Canton Incised, Sanders Engraved, Ripley Engraved, and
¯McKinney Plain) point north to the Red River or
east toward the Cypress Creek basin (Bruseth and
Perttula 1981:77-91). Moving farther south to
Richland/Chambers Reservoir, sandy paste pottery
apparently is present, as are a few arguably early
shell-tempered sherds that may relate to similar
ceramics at the Jewett Mine. Otherwise, the ceramics clearly relate to Caddoan wares, with most of
the identified types (e.g., Maydelle Incised, Poyner
Engraved, and Weches Fingernail Impressed) indicating contact with groups in the Neches River
drainage east of the Trinity. The ceramics from
most of the excavated sites at the Gibbons Creek
Mine (Rogers t993:102, 160-!73, 2!0-212,
1994:116, 1995:108-123, 168-171) are the sandy
paste ware that occurs throughout Southeast Texas,
first in Woodland contexts and then in some Late
Prehistoric contexts (e.g., on the upper coast). Two
sites (41GM281 and 41GM282) also have sizable
samples of pottery tempered with grog or bone.
Some of these probably are related to the Late Prehistoric San Jacinto ware that occurs on the upper
coast to the east and southeast, while small numbers of sherds bear designs similar to those seen on
Caddoan pottery to the northeast.

The final line of evidence concerning
interaction deals with lithic raw material
procurement and the use of nonlocal sources. Figure
17 shows that Cooper Lake and the Jewett Mine are
dramatically different in this respect, and the
evidence indicates that the relationships between
the use of nonlocal lithics and interaction (or maybe

LEGEND
,--, Cooper Lake
O-O Jewett Mine

~ 60-1

Pre-Late
Archaic

Late
Archaic

Woodland

Early
Late
Late Prehl.stOrlC

Figure 17. Graph of percentages of shaped chipped stone
tools of nonlocal materials by time period for Cooper
Lake and the Jewett Mine (includes only components
assignable to single periods and excludes the Late
Prehistoric component at the Hurricane Hill site because
of its anomalously high values [between 3-7 percent];
where the percentages are derived from multiple
components, the symbols indicate means while the bars
show ranges).

mobility) are not always simple. Cooper Lake shows
a simple decrease through time in the use of nonlocal
materials, although they were not frequent during
any time period. Most of the identified specimens
probably represent gravels from the Red River, and
the data could suggest an overall decrease in
interaction with groups living to the north. This is
not supported by the ceramic evidence, however,
and it is equally plausible that the graph reflects
decreased demand for higher quality materials rather
than decreased interaction. In any case, the lithics
point to greater use of materials from the Red River
than from Central Texas. They do not say much
about interaction to the west, east, or south,

Fields ~ The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

however, since these areas do not contain lithic
materials that are likely to have been imported or
that could be distinguished readily from the !oca!
Cooper Lake materials. The nonlocal items that
were imported were brought in as finished tools,
and the very small quantities of debitage of these
materials reflect tool refurbishing rather than
manufacture.
A very different pattern is evident at the Jewett
Mine. Nonlocal lithics, mostly from Central Texas,
were used commonly during all time periods, but
especially during the Late Archaic period and the
late part of the Late Prehistoric period. This certainly indicates substantial interaction with groups
who lived west of the Blackland Prairie, and the
fact that it did not change much over time is intriguing in view of the other changes that occurred,
apparently suggesting that lithic raw material procurement strategies were largely separate from the
strategies that conditioned settlement patterns. An
explanation for this can be found in the tools and
debitage made of these materials and the occasional
caches of nonlocal lithics. Specifically, the data
indicate that these materials were brought into the
Jewett Mine area as large biface and uniface blanks,
which were then reduced further. Sometimes they
were made into tools that were used in the Jewett
area, and sometimes the tools or blanks were exported for use elsewhere. This accounts for the
extreme intersite variability in the percentages of
nonlocal lithics shown in Figure 17, since some
sites saw more reduction of imported lithics while
use of tools of these materials was more common at
other sites. This pattern indicates that the Jewett
area served as a conduit for the transport of Central
Texas materials into the eastern part of the state for
much of the Holocene, which is not surprising given
its location at the western edge of the woodlands
and not far east of numerous source areas for abundant high quality lithics.
Elsewhere in the Post Oak savannah, lithics
from Central Texas occur in small numbers at the
Gibbons Creek Mine, but the vast majority of the
tools in the Gibbons Creek sites are made of local
materials (Robert Rogers, personal communication
1995). As at Cooper Lake, it is hard to know if this
relates to limited sociocultural interaction or little
demand for Central Texas lithics. The data from
Richland!Chambers Reservoir suggest a decrease
in the use of chert over time, reflecting decreased
mobility westward across the Blackland Prairie and
decreased territory sizes (McGregor 1987, 1993),

325

but it is unknown how this relates to changes in
interaction. At Lake Fork Reservoir, nonlocal lithics
from a variety of sources (i.e., Central Texas, the
Ouachita and Arbuckle Mountains via the Red
River, and Ozark Mountains gravels) are present,
and there are changes through time in the frequencies of these materials (Perttula 1984). It is difficult
to factor out the effects of interaction and mobility,
however. In sum, there is much variability across
the Post Oak savannah in the use of lithics obtained
from nonlocal sources, and it is clear that the frequency of imported lithics is not always a good
indicator of sociocultural interaction. On a gross
level, however, it is noteworthy that most of the
nonlocal materials from Cooper Lake and Lake Fork
Reservoir in the northern part of the region are
from the Red River, while to the south most of the
nonlocal materials were derived from Central Texas.

SUMMARY
Because the archeotogical record of the Post
Oak savannah dates mostly to the Late Holocene, it
is difficult to say much about the pre-Late Archaic
cultures of the region. In fact, for much of the
western edge of East Texas, even Late Archaic
components are so infrequent that it is hard to discern coherent patterns in the archeological data.
Nonetheless, it is clear that the region was used by
hunter-gatherers during this time, and the evidence
from Cooper Lake and especially the Jewett Mine
indicates that these groups operated largely as foragers, i.e., moving their residentia! bases frequently
to take advantage of temporal and spatial changes
in resource availability. Population densities probably were low, and group territories may have been
relatively unconstrained. Large territories and widespread interaction may account for the extensive
distributions of the most common dart point types,
but there are a few types with restricted distributions suggesting distinct localized interaction
spheres in the northern and southern parts of the
region. This north-south distinction is also evident
in the importation of nonlocal lithics, with materials from the north being more common in the Sulphur and Sabine basins and Central Texas materials
being more frequent in the Trinity and Navasota
basins.
While it sometimes has proven difficult to isolate components dating to the Woodland period,
the data from Cooper Lake, Richland/Chambers

326

Texas Archeological Society

Reservoir, the Jewett Mine, and the Gibbons Creek
Mine suggest that a forager-oriented hunter-gatherer settlement strategy persisted throughout this
period. Squash remains were found at one Woodland site at Cooper Lake, but there is no other
evidence that horticulture contributed to the subsistence base. Further, there is no indication of
sedentism. It does appear, however, that the Post
Oak savannah was used more intensively during
this time than before. This likely reflects increases
in populations, more frequent reoccupation of favored sites, and occupations of longer duration than
during the Archaic period. Ceramic technology was
introduced in parts of the region during this interval
(e.g., Richland/Chambers Reservoir, Gibbons Creek
Mine, and maybe Jewett Mine), but this was not
universally the case and there is no evidence that
this technological change was accompanied by significant changes in lifeways. Nonetheless, the occurrence of sandy paste pottery only in the southern
part of the region and the apparent differences in
the timing of this innovation indicate that the northsouth distinction noted above for the Archaic period continued into the Woodland period. That this
was the case is also indicated by the patterns in the
use of nonlocal lithics.
The settlement strategies of the Native Americans who occupied the Post Oak savannah changed
during the Late Prehistoric period, and intraregional
variability became even more pronounced during
this time than before. There is no doubt that these
changes were related in part to the development of
the Caddo culture in Northeast Texas proper and
adjacent parts of Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Louisiana. This was most conspicuously the case in the
part of the Post Oak savannah traversed by the
Sabine River, as this area was occupied throughout
the period by sedentary Caddoan farmers.
Groups with a mixed hunter-gatherer-horticultural economy occupied the Cooper Lake area to
the north in an intensive fashion during the Late
Prehistoric period, with the first half of the period
being marked by seasonal residential mobility and
the latter half by increased sedentism and increased
logistical use but decreased population densities.
The Richland/Chambers Reservoir area saw a similar trajectory involving intensive use during the
early half of the period and decreased population
densities in the latter half. At Richland/Chambers
Reservoir, however, the greatest evidence for
sedentism, albeit occasional (i.e., it is not the case

at all sites) and not associated with horticulture,
was during the early Late Prehistoric period, with
more forager-oriented, residentially mobile systems
entailing limited horticulture being the case after
that. In both of these areas, the decreased intensity
of use during the late part of the period may have
been related to population aggregations elsewhere
in the Post Oak savannah or, perhaps more likely,
in the Caddoan area itself.
Evidence for horticulture or any degree of
sedentism at all is lacking from the two southernmost project areas considered here: the Jewett Mine
and the Gibbons Creek Mine. At the former, the
settlement strategies of local hunter-gatherer groups
changed during the early Late Prehistoric period
such that residential occupations were restricted to
the Navasota River valley while the uplands to the
east were used mostly for hunting-related activities.
This change may have been prompted by pressures
from Caddoan groups to the east, but the lack of data
from the pmt of the Trinity River basin east of the
Jewett Mine prevents serious evaluation of this hypothesis. The late part of the Late Prehistoric period
saw another change in how Native Americans used
the area, but there are ambiguities about how this
change should be interpreted. It may be that the
region was occupied by local forager-oriented
hunter-gatherers who interacted regularly with
Caddoan groups to the east, or it may be that the
area was used mostly by the Caddo on hunting trips
or other kinds of forays to the west. It is harder to
reconstruct settlement strategies at the Gibbons Creek
Mine, although the most recent work there does hint
at changes during the late part of the Late Prehistoric period that may parallel those at the Jewett
Mine. In any case, it is clear that the lower Navasota
River basin was occupied by mobile hunter-gatherers throughout the Late Prehistoric period.
The kinds of ceramics and projectile points
and the types of nonlocal lithic materials from Late
Prehistoric contexts all point to continued
distinctions between the northern and southern parts
of the Post Oak savannah, and these probably mark
increasingly localized developments. In the north,
the strongest ties were with groups living to the
east in Northeast Texas proper and to the north
along the Red River and beyond. This area was not
homogeneous culturally, however. Groups living in
the Sabine Basin were fully involved in the Caddo
culture, while those farther north in the Sulphur
Basin were only marginally so. To the south,

Fields ~ The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas

especially in the Navasota Basin, Caddoan lifeways
never took hold, but it is clear that there was
substantial interaction with Caddoan groups to the
east. Further, continued contact with Central Texas
is reflected in the use of nonlocal lithics, and some
of the ceramics from the Gibbons Creek Mine point
toward the upper coast.
On one level, the intraregional variability that
characterized the Post Oak savannah during the
Late Prehistoric period can be ascribed to varying
degrees of integration into the Caddoan culture, a
situation that is not surprising given the peripheral
location of the region relative to the Caddo heartland. This is not a wholly satisfactory explanation,
however. It is clear that some of this variability had
its roots in distinctions dating to the Archaic period, and it probably can be explained best as the
result of overlap between persistent local variations
on common adaptive strategies, differences in interaction spheres, variability in the adoption of new
technologies and subsistence practices, and differences in the acceptance of new ideologies among
groups who had occupied the woodlands of eastern
Texas for millenia. Of course, this issue pertains to
an area much larger than the Post Oak savannah,
emphasizing the critical need for more comparative
studies that integrate archeological data between
regions rather than simply within them.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many people have contributed to this summary in one way or another. Most importantly, the
Fort Worth District of the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers and Northwestern Resources Co. funded
the excavations at Cooper Lake and the Jewett Mine
that served as the foundation for the study. Eloise
Gadus and Wayne Klement also contributed immeasurably, both in directing the field crews who
gathered the data at Cooper and Jewett and in analyzing and interpreting that data. Others at Prewitt
and Associates who participated either in the analyses or in discussions about what the information
might mean include Steve Tomka, Elton Prewitt,
and Doug Boyd. Outside our organization, Tim
Perttula, Dan McGregor, and Robert Rogers freely
shared information from the parts of the Post Oak
savannah where they have worked. Finally, I would
like to express my appreciation to the behind-thescenes players at Prewitt and Associates who lend
their expertise to making our reports look and sound

327

good: Sandra Hannum for drafting and layout, Brent
Scott for artifact paste-up, Ellen Atha for artifact
illustrations, and Linda Nance Foster for editing
and production.

REFERENCES CITED
Bowman, B. F.
1985 Winnie’s Mound (41BU17): A Study in the Prehistory of Burleson County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 56:39-74.
1991

The Foster Site Cremation: A Single Individual,
Partition Cremation in Milam County, Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 36( 133):31-42.

Bruseth, J. E.
1995 The Development of Caddoan Polities Along the
Middle Red River Valley of Eastern Texas and Oklahoma. In The Native History of the Caddo: Their
Place in Southeastern Archaeology and
Ethnohistory, edited by T. K. Perttula and J. E.
Bruseth. MS in review for publication.
Bruseth, J. E., D. E. McGregor, and W. A. Martin
1987 Hunter-Gatherers of the Prairie Margin: Summary
of the Prehistoric Archaeological Record. In HunterGatherer Adaptations Along the Prairie Margin:
Site Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric Archaeology, edited by D. E. McGregor and J. E.
Bruseth, pp. 229-256. Richland Creek Technical
Series, Vol. III. Archaeology Research Program,
Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.
Bruseth, J. E. and T. K. Perttula
1981

Prehistoric Settlement Patterns at Lake Fork Reservoir. Texas Antiquities Permit Series Report No. 2.
Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin, and Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.

Burnett, B. Ao
1990 The Bioarcheological Synthesis of the Eastern Portions of the Gulf Coastal Plain. In The Archeology
and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.
A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D. Freeman,
J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J.
Reinhard, pp. 385-418.2 Vols. Research Series No.
38. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Cliff, M. B.
1989 Archaeological Investigations at the Thomas Site
(41DT80). In A rchaeological Investigations at CooperLake: 1987Season, edited by R. W. Moir, D. E.
McGregor, and D. H. Jurney, pp. 6-1 through 6145. Review Draft. Archaeology Research Program,
Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.

328

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

Collins, M. B. and C. B. Bousman
1993 Historic Context: Quaternary Environments and Archeology in Northeastern Texas. In Areheology in
the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document, edited by N. A. Kenmotsu and T. K.
Perttula, pp. 49-67. Cultural Resource Management
Report 3. Department of Antiquities Protection,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Fields, R. C., L. W. Klement, C. B. Bousman, S. A. Tomka, E.
F. Gadus, and M. A. Howard
1991 Excavations at the Bottoms, Rena Branch, and Moccasin Springs Sites, Jewett Mine Project, Freestone
and Leon Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 82. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Fields, R. C. (editor)
1987

Excavations at the Alley Road Site (41LN149B) and

Dering, J. P.

the Harris Hole Site (41LN30), Jewett Mine Project,

1993

Flotation Samples from Sites 41GM181,41GM201,

Leon County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No.

and 41GM205: The Archaeobotanical Remains. In

61. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Data Recovery of Three Prehistoric Sites at the

1994

Excavations at the Charles Cox, Lambs Creek Knoll,
and Buffalo Branch Sites, Jewett Mine Project, Leon

Grimes County, Texas, by R. Rogers, pp. C-I

and Freestone Counties, Texas. 2 Vols. Reports of

through C-7. Document No. 910529. Espey, Huston

Investigations No. 70. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,

& Associates, Inc., Austin.

Austin.

Plant Remains from 41GM224, Gri~nes County,
Texas. In Excavations at Site 41GM224 in the Gibbons Creek Lignite Mine Permit 38A Area, Grimes
County, Texas, by R. Rogers, pp. D-1 through D-6.
Document No. 930476. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

Derrick, S. M. and D. G. Steele
1993

1990

Gibbons Creek Third Five-Year Mine Permit Area,

Analysis of Human Remains from 41DT6 and
41DT16. In Excavations at the Tick, Spike, Johns

Frederick, C. D. and C. Ringstaff
1994 Lithic Resources at Fort Hood: Further Investigations. In Archeological Investigations on 571 Prehistoric Sites at Fort Hood, Bell and Coryell
Counties, Texas, edited by W. N. Trierweiler, pp.
125-181. Research Report No. 3l, United States
Army Fort Hood Archeological Resource Management Series. Directorate of Engineering and Housing, Environmental Management Office, Fort Hood.

Creek, and Peerless Bottoms Sites, Cooper Lake
Project, Delta and Hopkins Counties, Texas, by R.
C. Fields, E. F. Gadus, L. W. Klement, C. B.
Bousman, and J. B. McLerran, pp. 271-286. Reports of Investigations No. 91. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Duffield, L. F. and E. B. Jelks
1961 The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron
Bridge Resem, oir, Rains County, Texas. Archaeology Series No. 4. Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Fields, R. C., E. F. Gadus, L. W. Klement, C. B. Bousman, and
J. B. McLerran
1993

Excavations at the Tick, Spike, Johns Creek, and
Peerless Bottoms Sites, Cooper Lake Project, Delta

Gadus, E. F., R. C. Fields, C. B. Bousman, S. A. Tomka, and
M. A. Howard
1992 Excavations at the Finley Fan Site (41HP159), Cooper Lake Project, Hopkins County, Texas. Reports
of Investigations No. 78. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.
Hoffman, M. P.
1967 Ceramic Pipe Style Chronology Along the Red River
Drainage in Southwest Arkansas. The Arkansas Archeologist 8(1 ): 1 - 14.
Jelks, E. B. (editor)
1967 The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 37:1-248.

and Hopkins Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 91. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Ma!louf, M. G.
1979

Archeological Investigations at Lake Limestone, Fall

Fields, R. C., E. F. Gadus, L. W. Klement, and K, M. Gardner

and Winter 1977. Research Report No. 71. Texas

1994

Excavations at the Spider Knoll Site, Cooper Lake

Archeologica! Survey, The University of Texas at

Project, Delta Count2,’, Texas. Reports of Investiga-

Austin.

tions No. 96. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Fields, R. C. and L. W. Klement
1995 Excavations at the Cottonwood Springs Site, Jewett
Mine Project, Leon County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 102. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.

Martin, W. A.
1989 Archaeological Investigations at the Doctors Creek
Site (41DT124). In Archaeological Investigations
at Cooper Lake 1987 Season, edited by R. W. Moir,
D. E. McGregor, and D. H. Jurney, pp. 7-1 through
7-110. Review Draft. Archaeology Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Fields ~ The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Central Texas
McGregor, D. E.
1987

Lithic Raw Material Utilization. In Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations Along the PraitTe Margin: Site
Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric Archaeology, edited by D. E. McGregor and J. E: Bruseth,
pp. 185-196. Richland Creek Technical Series, Vol.
III. Archaeology Research Program, Institute for

Perttula, T. K.(Continued)
1990b Historic Context: The Evolution of Agricultural Societies in Northeast Texas before A.D. !600. Historic context funded by the Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.
1994

Caddoan Mound Sites in the Sabine River Basin of
Northeast Texas. Caddoan Archeology Newsletter
IV(4):4-19.

1995

Early Ceramic Settlement in Northeast Texas: Archeological Investigations of the Hurricane Hill Site
(41HP106), Cooper Lake. In Advances in Texas Archeology: Contributions from Cultural Resource
Management, Volume 1, edited by J. E. Bruseth and
T. K. Perttula, pp. 131-154. Cultural Resource Management Report 5. Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
1989

Excavations at Site 41HP137. In Archaeological
Investigations at Cooper Lake: 1987 Season, edited
by R. W. Moir, D. E. McGregor, and D. H. Jurney,
pp. 8-1 through 8-28. Review Draft. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth
and Man, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

1993

329

Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions: Evidence for
Changing Territorial Size in North Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:247-

Phillips, P.

267.

1970

Archaeological Survey in the Lower Yazoo Basin,
Mississippi, 1949-1955. Papers of the Peabody Mu-

McGregor, D. E. and J. E. Bruseth
1987

seum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Volume 60.

Artifact Chronology. In Hunter-Gatherer Adapta-

Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology,

tions Along the Prairie Margin: Site Excavations

Harvard University, Cambridge.

and Synthesis" of Prehistoric Archaeology, edited by
D. E. McGregor and J. E. Bruseth, pp. 171-184.

Prikryl, D. J.

Richland Creek Technical Series, Vol. III. Archae-

1993

Introduction to the Regional Plan for Archeological

ology Research Program, Institute for the Study of

Resoumes, Prairie-Savanna Archeological Region.

Earth and Man, Southern Methodist University, Dal-

In Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region,

las.

Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N. A.
Kenmotsu and T. K. Perttula, pp. 189-203. Cultural

Nash, M.
1993

Faunal

Resource Management Report 3. Department of
Remains

from

Sites

41GM205

and

Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commis-

41GM181, Area A. In Data Recover3, of Three Pre-

sion, Austin.

historic Sites at the Gibbons Creek Third Five-Year
Mine Permit Area, Grimes County, Texas, by R.
Rogers, pp. F-1 through F-10. Document No.

Roemer, E., Jr. and S. B. Carlson
1987 Excavations at 41BU16: State Highway 21 at the

910529. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

Brazos River, Burleson County, Texas. Contract
Reports in Archaeology No. 1. Texas State Depart-

Natural Fibers Information Center
1987

ment of Highways and Public Transportation, High-

The Climate of Texas Counties. Natural Fibers In-

way Design Division, Austin.

formation Center, The University of Texas at Austin, in cooperation with Office of the State

Rogers, R.

Climatologist, Texas A&M University, College Sta-

1993

tion.

Data Recovery of Three Prehistoric Sites at the
Gibbons Creek Third Five-Year Mine Permit Area,
Grimes County, Texas. Document No. 910529.

Perttula, T. K.
1984

Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

Patterns of Prehistoric Lithic Raw Material Utilization in the Caddoan Area: The Western Gulf Coastal

1994

Plain. In Prehistoric Chert Exploitation: Studies

Texas. Document No. 930476. Espey, Huston &

from the Midcontinent, edited by B. M. Butler and

Associates, Inc., Austin.

E. E. May, pp. 129-148. Occasional Paper No. 2.
Center for Archaeological Investigations, Southern
Illinois University at Carbondale.
1990a The Hurricane Hill Site (41HPl06): Excavations at
Cooper Lake, Hopkins Count3,, Texas. Second Draft.
Contributions in Archaeology No. 9. Institute of
Applied Sciences, University of North Texas,
Denton.

Excavations at Site 41GM224 in the Gibbons Creek
Lignite Mine Permit 38A Area, Grhnes County,

1995

Archeological Excavations at Prehistoric Sites
41GM166, 41GM281, and 41GM282 at the Gibbons Creek Lignite Mine, Grimes Count)’, Texas.
Document No. 940611. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

330

Texas Archeological Society

Smith, J. E.
1993 The Vinson Site (41LT1): A Nortefio Focus Indian
Village in Limestone County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 64:65-162.
Story,
1990 Cultural History of the Native Americans. In Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain,
by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D.
Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and
K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. 2 Vols. Research Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

Thorns, A. V. (editor)
1993 The Brazos Valley Slopes Archeological Project:
Cultural Resources Survey and Assessment for the
Texas A&M University Animal Science Teaching
and Research Complex, Brazos County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 14. Archaeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College
Station.

The Archeology of the Pineywoods and
Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas
Timothy K. Perttula

ABSTRACT
This paper considers the diverse character of the prehistoric and early historic archeological record in the
Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of the Northeast Texas Archeological Region, especially that of the
Sabine River and Cypress Creek basins. Native Americans settled in the region some 12,000 years ago, and
ranged through its forests, grasslands, and broad floodplains and wetlands as mobile hunter-gatherers. About
2000 years ago, these Native Americans (ancestral to Caddo peoples) began to settle down in recognizable
territories, to make better use of native seeds and tropical cultigens, and practiced the art of ceramics. From
this milieu, developed the vibrant and sophisticated prehistoric Caddo culture ca. A.D. 800. The prehistoric
Caddo were prosperous horticulturists and traders, lived in dispersed sedentary hamlets and villages, and
were temple and burial mound builders marking the ceremonial and religious places of important priests and
chiefs. The Caddo continued to live in this part of Northeast Texas until as late as 1842, cooperatively living
and interacting with the European and American colonizers of their land until they were removed to the
Brazos River in the 1840s-1850s, and then removed again to Oklahoma in 1859.

INTRODUCTION
The main purpose of this paper is to summarize the current state of knowledge concerning the
prehistoric and early historic archeo!ogical record
of the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas (Figure 1). I first discuss the natural
setting of the area and the history of archeological
investigations in Northeast Texas, then turn to a
succinct but broad presentation of the native history of the region. Much attention is given to the
Late Caddo period (ca. A.D. !400-1680) archeological record (as defined by Story 1990), particularly what archeologists have come to call the Titus
phase, because our knowledge of this span of Caddo
prehistory is reasonably well-developed (e.g.,
Thurmond 1985, 1990a; Turner !978, 1992; Perttula
1992a), and because our focus on the Titus phase
provides the best opportunity to understand what
prehistoric Caddo culture was like before, and immediately after, Europeans invaded the area.

NATURAL SETTING

Northeast Texas has three main biotic communities: the Post Oak Savanna or Oak Woodlands,

the Blackland Prairie, and the Pineywoods. The
area of interest discussed herein lies principally
within the modern distribution of the Pineywoods
and the Post Oak Savanna, with a small portion of
the Blackland Prairie at the western margins of the
region (Figure 2).
The Post Oak Savanna is a narrow southwestnortheast trending woodland belt that marks a
natural transition zone or ecotone between the more
xeric Blackland Prairie to the west and the more
mesic Pineywoods to the east (Kfichler 1964). Both
the Post Oak Savanna and the Pineywoods have
medium-tall to tall broadleaf decidous forests, and
shortleaf and loblolly pines are common in the
Pineywoods on upland fine sandy loam soils with
adequate moisture. Small areas of tall grass prairie
may be present in both communities throughout the
region (e.g., Jordan 1981:Figure 4.1). Bottomland
communities along the Sabine and Cypress
drainages contained a diverse hardwood and swamp
forest.
The climate of the region is humid, with a
mean annual precipitation of at least 120 cm; periods of maximum rainfall occur in the spring and
fall seasons. Droughts are not uncommon, and dendrochronological analyses of tree rings for the last
500 years suggest there were numerous wet and dry

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

332

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. The Caddoan Archaeological Area, Physiographic
zones (from Fenneman 1938), and the location of the study area.

spells between ca. A.D. 1500-1700. The worst
droughts occurred around A.D. 1555, 1570, 1595,
and 1670, and the period between A.D. 1549-1577
has been suggested to have been the worst June
drought in the past 450 years (Stahle et al. 1985).
These climatic perturbations presumably affected
the predictability and success of the maize harvests
during the Caddoan occupation of the Pineywoods
and Post Oak Savanna, and certainly similar perturbations in the Holocene also affected the range,
distribution, and abundance of naturally occurring
plants and animals during the long prehistoric Native American settlement of Northeast Texas (see
Collins and Bousman 1993:57-59; Ferring 1994).
How these droughts affected the flow of the numerous upland springs used by the Caddo in the
Pineywoods is unknown.
The Holocene paleoenvironmental record for
Northeast Texas is not particularly well known,

although paleoenvironmental data from
Prairie-Savannah Texas pollen cores and
stable carbon isotopes have proved useful to
Fields and Tomka (1993) in modelling
Paleoindian and Archaic mobility strategies
in the Northeast Texas Archeological Region.
A 14,000 year stable isotopic record from the
Aubrey site in the Trinity River basin
documents significant changing climatic
conditions, with wetter (and perhaps slightly
cooler) or more humid climates from ca.
11,000-7500 years B.P., then again between
4000-2000 years B.P., and after 1000 years
ago (Humphrey and Ferring 1994:Figure 8).
It was drier than today between 7500-4000
years ago and about 2000-1000 years ago. It
is interesting that fossil vertebrate, pollen, and
stable isotope data from Central Texas and
the Edwards Plateau tell a somewhat different
story, highlighting two dry climatic peaks
between ca. 7000-3000/2500 years B.P. and
after 1000 years ago (e.g., Toomey et al.
1993). While these presumed climatic changes
have implications for the relative position of
the prairie-forest border, the possible presence
or absence of bison, and the natural resource
potential of the Pineywoods and Post Oak
Savanna, it remains to be determined how
these broad environmental changes actually
pertain to the archeological record from
Northeast Texas.

HISTORY
OF
INVESTIGATIONS
Archeological research in the central part of
the Northeast Texas Archeological Region has a
lengthy history that has been thoroughly discussed
by Story (1990), Thurmond (1990a), and Guy
(1990). Please consult these excellent publications
for more specific information on the history of archeological research in Northeast Texas.
Much of our knowledge of the prehistoric use
of the region is primarily based on the 1930s
excavations of aboriginal sites and cemeteries
(Pearce !932; Jackson 1933, 1934) in the Cypress,
Sabine, and Sulphur basins by the University of
Texas. Since the 1930s, most of the information
about the Paleoindian, Archaic, Early Ceramic, and

Perttula ~ The Archeology of the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas

333

2b
1. PINEY WOODS
la. Longleaf Pine Forest
lb. Mi~ed Pine-Hardwood Forest
2c

2. OAK WOODS & PRAIRIES
2a. Oak Woodlands
2b. Eastern Cross Timbers
2c. Western Cross Timbers
3. BLACKLAND PRAIRIES
3a. Blackland Prairie
3b. Grand Prairie

4. GULF COAST PRAIRIES & MARSHES
4a. Dunes/Barrier
4b. Estuarine Zone
4c. Upland Prairie & Woods

3a

4b

Figure 2. Vegetation zones in the Eastern Planning Region of Texas (after Diamond et al. 1987), and within the central
portion of the Northeast Texas Archeological Region.

Caddoan archeological record in the Pineywoods
comes from avocational archeological investigations
(cf. Nelson et al. 1994; Thurmond 1990a; M. Turner
1993, 1994; R. Turner 1978, 1992, 1995; Webb et
al. 1969), along with professional archeological
work in a number of state and federally-funded or
permitted reservoirs in the Sabine and Cypress
basins (Bruseth and Perttula 1981; Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc. !993, 1995;
McClurkan et al. 1966; Thurmond 1990a; Woodall
1969) as well as in large surface lignite mines (e.g.,
Kotter et al. 1991, t993; Nash et al. 1995; Rogers
et al. 1994).
Another source of information, unfortunately,
includes the activities of the numerous pothunters
and collectors in Northeast Texas. Most of the larger
Caddoan cemeteries and habitation sites in the
region (including those on Federal lands) have been
located and dug by pothunters over the last 15 years
(Perttula 1992a, 1992b), although site looting and
vandalism has been a persistent problem in the
region since the early 1900s (Perttula 1993d:2425). Very little, if any, reliable archeological data

from pothunter digs has been accessible to the
professional archeological community. The
indiscriminate collecting of lithics and ceramics
from sites exposed along the shorelines of federal
and state-maintained reservoirs in the region has
also unfortunately destroyed many Caddoan
archeological sites as well as much useful
archeological information.

THE NORTHEAST TEXAS
PINEYWOODS AND POST OAK
SAVANNA ARCHEOLOGICAL RECORD

The Native American settlement of the Post
Oak Savanna and Pineywoods of Northeast Texas is
a story that began over 11,000 years ago, and "is
long, complex, and endlessly fascinating"
(Schambach 1993:1). From the archeological record
of this region, one may grasp bits and pieces of the
tale: the mobile Paleoindian and Archaic foragers;
the !ong-distance trade and exchange of goods (i.e.,
lithic raw materials); the development of sedentary

334

Texas Archeological Society

communities of foragers and possibly pre-maize
cultigen users (e.g., Fritz 1994); the adoption of
ceramics and the bow and arrow; the development
of complex Caddoan horticultural and agricultural
societies; the use of earthen mounds; and the seemingly rapid abandonment of much of the region in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries due in large
measure to the effects of European-introduced diseases as well as the European colonization of traditional Caddoan territory, followed by the permanent
expulsion of Caddo groups. Many of the archeological details of these events and developments are
well-known (see especially Story 1990; Thurmond
1988, 1990a; Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993:69-187).
For the period prior to about 6000 years ago,
the Northeast Texas archeological record primarily
consists of surficial, mixed, or isolated finds of
diagnostic projectile points (cf. Johnson 1989; Story
1990). Undoubtedly discrete archeological components are present in the region (as shown by the
buried Finley Fan site occupied as early as 6400
years B.P. [Gadus et al. 1992] and the spatially
discrete Late Paleoindian John Pearce site [Webb
et al. 1971]), but they have proven to be quite
difficult to define and recognize.
Paleoindian materials have been recovered at
a number of archeological sites in the Pineywoods
and Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas, and the
locations of the better known sites are illustrated in
Figure 3. At the Forrest Murphey site (41MR62),
Clovis, Plainview, Dalton, and other lanceolate projectile point forms and tools were found in several
discrete concentrations on a high terrace above Big
Cypress Creek; faunal remains from extinct elephants were also recovered in apparent association (Story 1990), which is rather rare (see Meltzer
and Bever, this volume).
The distributions of Paleoindian artifacts within
the Sabine River and Cypress Creek basins suggest
that these early occupations were principally situated within the valleys of major stream basins
(Thurmond 1990a:Table 53 and 54). The relatively
sparse Paleoindian archeological record, in conjunction with the dispersion of artifacts on many landforms and different settings within the region, seems
to indicate that the Paleoindian groups were very
mobile hunters and gatherers rather than specialized
hunters of extinct megafauna (Fields and Tomka
1993:82). Johnson (1989) also suggests that some of
the Paleoindian archeological remains (Plainview
and Scottsbluff projectile points, and Cody knives)
from the region are a result of Plains Late Paleoindian

Figure 3. Important Paleoindian archeological sites
mentioned in the text from the central part of the Northeast
Texas Archeological Region: (1) Murphey (41MR62);
(2) Benson’s Crossing (41TTll0); (3) Jake Martin
(41UR12); (4) Swanson’s Landing (16CD8); (5) Grace
Creek 1 (41GG33); (6) Alum Branch (41WD40); and (7)
Lilly Creek (41CP27).

(ca. 10,000-9,000 years ago) groups that moved into
parts of Northeast Texas, during periods when grassland habitat spread eastward, to exploit the plains
resources (such as bison) found there.
Archeological data from the Yarbrough site
(41VN6; see Figure 4) were employed by Johnson
(1962) to bring chronological and cultural order to
the diverse Archaic (ca. 6000-200 B.C.) archeological record found in Northeast Texas. Of particular import, were Johnson’s (1962:208) temporal
divisions of the Archaic based on projectile point
sequences, and the introduction of plain ceramics
at the end of the Archaic. Story (1990:Figure 32)
and Thurmond (1990a:Table 8) provide the most
current chronological classifications of Archaic-age
dart points, with straight and expanding stem forms
characteristic of the Early and Middle Archaic periods and the contracting stem darts particularly diagnostic of the Late Archaic (and much of the Early
Ceramic period as well [Schambach 1982]).
What have we learned about the Archaic populations who lived in Northeast Texas? While the
archeological data are still rather limited, it appears
that group mobility remained high for these hunting-gathering foragers during the Early Archaic,
and group territories were large and poorly defined,

Perttula ~ The Archeology of the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas

335

Mile~

Figure 4. Important Archaic period archeological sites:
(1) Yarbrough (41VN6); (2) Tankersley Creek (41TT 108);
(3) Jake Martin (41UR12); (4) 41HS463; (5) 41WD114,
Trammell Crow Pond (41WD185); (6) Finley Fan
(41HP159); (7) R. W. Watts #2 (41CP14); (8) 41SY81;
(9) Benson’s Crossing (41TT1 I0); and (10) Mothershed
Springs (41CS 119).

with most sites conforming to what Thurmond
(1990a:41) called "heavy" and "limited-use" areas;
that is, repeated and recurrent occupations by small
groups. By the Middle Archaic in the Sabine and
Cypress drainages, fairly substantial and extensive
occupations are recognized within the major basins, with a rather limited use of smaller tributaries
and headwater areas (see Thurmond [1990a:Figure
9] where Middle Archaic "heavy use" sites occur
along Big and Little Cypress Creek, or on tributaries near their confluence with Big Cypress Creek).
Lithic raw material data from a possible Middle
Archaic assemblage at Lake Fork Reservoir suggests that the exchange of non-local materials (particularly finished tools) was common place (Perttula
1984), although "patterns in raw material use were
not uniform across Northeast Texas" (Fields and
Tornka 1993:92).
Late Archaic sites are widely distributed in the
Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna, occurring along
the major streams, near springs, on spring-fed
branches, upland ridges, and on tributary drainages
of all sizes (cf. Thurmond 1990a). Some Late
Archaic occupations contain earthen middens (i.e.,
the Yarbrough site along the Sabine River). These
settlement data are compatible with higher

Figure 5. Important Early Ceramic period archeological
sites: (1) Resch (41HS16); (2) Hurricane Hill (41HP106),
41HP137, and Lawson (41HP78); (3) Folly (41RK26);
(4) James Pace (16DS268); (5) Osborn (41WD74); (6)
Tankersley Creek (41TTI08); (7) Bert Davis (41HP3);
(8) William Farrar (41TT1); (9) Shelton-Downs
(41HS27); (10) Snipes (41CS8); (11) Limerick (41RA8);
(12) 41RA65; (13) X41SY100; (14) 41CP75; (15) Grace
Creek (41GG11); (!6) Swanson’s Landing (16CD8); (17)
41SY82; and (18) 41SY49.

population densities, limited group mobility, the
possible establishment of definable territorial
ranges, and a well-developed foraging economy
based on the hunting and gathering of local food
resources. No paleobotanical evidence is available
that indicates the Late Archaic populations in
Northeast Texas cultivated native plant species (i.e.,
such as sumpweed, sunflower, and chenopod), as
was the case by the first millenium B.C. in many
parts of Eastern North America (Fritz 1994:25-27).
The high use of local lithic raw materials during the
Late Archaic in the Sabine and Cypress basins
speaks to a more confined interregional interaction
at this time (Perttula and Bruseth 1995).
The Early Ceramic period (ca. 200 B.C. to ca.
A.D. 800) in this part of Northeast Texas is recognized primarily by plain and relatively thick ceramic bowls and "flowerpot" shaped jars,
double-bitted axe heads, the smaller and thinner
Gary projectile points, and later in the period by
corner-notched arrowpoints (Thurmond 1990a). In
several instances, as at the Resch and Folly sites
(Figure 5), Lower Mississippi Valley (LMV) re-

336

Texas Archeological Society

lated ceramics (such as Tchefuncte Stamped,
Churupa Incised, Marksville Incised, Troyville
Stamped, and Marksville Stamped) occur with some
frequency in Early Ceramic period components in
the Sabine River drainage (Story 1990:246). Later
LMV Coles Creek period ceramics (and expanding
stem arrowpoints similar to the Colbert and Friley
types) are present in notable quantities in several
sites along the Sabine River, particularly at James
Pace in a context dated between ca. 1300-1000
years B.P. (Girard 1994). Similar dated contexts in
the Upper Sabine River basin have ceramic assemblages dominated by horizontally incised decorative motifs, and Friley arrowpoints occur in
association (Bruseth and Perttula 1981).
While there is much archeologists do not know
about the Early Ceramic period peoples of Northeast Texas, what has been learned over the last 40
years or so is that they were still primarily huntergatherers who lived in increasingly larger groups
and resided for longer periods of time at certain
sites. These latter sites have relatively substantial
midden deposits, and some evidence for structures
(probably daubed pole and thatch structures), but
the degree of permanence is still less than that seen
in the subsequent long-term Caddo settlement of
Northeast Texas (Perttula, Fields, Corbin, and
Kenmotsu 1993:99).
No Early Ceramic period burial mounds have
been documented in the Pineywoods and Post Oak
Savanna of Northeast Texas, although they have
been found on the Red River in Northwest Louisiana and Southwest Arkansas (Schambach 1982;
Webb 1984), and on the Angelina, Neches, and
Sabine rivers in Deep East Texas (Story 1990). The
two or three mounds at James Pace did not, however, apparently serve as platforms for burials or
structures, or as caps for these features, and their
functional significance is equivocal (Girard
1994:15). The appearance of burial mounds in the
broader region around Northeast Texas does suggest that more complexly organized local groups
did develop during the Early Ceramic period in
these localities.
When we turn to a consideration of the
Formative (ca. A.D. 800-1000), Early (ca. A.D.
1000-1200), and Middle (ca. A.D. 1200-1400)
Caddoan period occupation of the Pineywoods and
Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas, there is an
abundance of archeological information to draw
upon. Many an archeologist has been captivated by
the beautifully manufactured ceramics and other

material goods, the earthen mounds, the wellpreserved villages and hamlets, and the existence
of an ethnohistorical record (e.g., Swanton 1942;
Bolton 1987) that has helped to bring to light
behavioral analogs with which to interpret the
archeological story. Consequently, our view of the
lifeways of these prehistoric Caddo groups is much
fuller, and perhaps more behaviorally meaningful,
than has been the case for the Paleoindian, Archaic,
and Early Ceramic regional archeological record.
First of all, Caddo archeological sites of these
ages (Figure 6) are quite common throughout the
Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna (Thurmond
1990a; Story 1990). They are situated primarily on
elevated landforms (alluvial terraces and rises, natural levees, and upland edges) adjacent to the major

Miles

Figure 6. Important Formative, Early, and Middle
Caddoan period archeological sites: (1) Oak Hill Village
(41RK214); (2) Spoonbill (41WD109), Taddlock
(41WD482) and Hines (41WD87); (3) Mound Pond
(41HS12 and 41HS29); (4) Arnold (41HS102); (5)
Hurricane Hill (41HP106); (6) McKenzie (41WD55); (7)
Boxed Springs (41UR30); (8) Hudnall-Pirtle (41RK4);
(9) 41HS74; (10) Grace Creek 1 & 2; (11) Bryan Hardy
(41SM55); (12) Carlisle (41WD46); (13) Jamestown
(41SM54); (14) Yarbrough (41VN6); (15) Limerick
(41RAS); (16) Hightower (41FKT); (17) Hale (41TT12);
(18) Jaggers (41FK3); (19) Harold Williams (41CP10);
(20) C. D. Marsh (41HS269); (21) Richard Watson
(41MX6); (22) 41PN14; (23) 41SY81; (24) W. A. Ford
(41TI’2); (25)41TT65; (26) Davis-McPeak (41UR4/99);
(27) Minnie Garrison (41WD 16); and (28) Griffin Mound
(4tUR142).

Perttula ~ The Archeology of the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas

streams, as well as along minor tributaries and
spring-fed branches. Proximity to arable sandy loam
soils were preferred for settlement locations, presumably because of good drainage for habitation,
and for cultivation purposes.
The majority of these Caddo sites are:
permanent settlements that have evidence of
the structures, including posts, pits, and features marking their residency, along with the
cemeteries and graves where the dead were
buried; the middens where the animal and plant
food refuse was discarded amidst broken stone
tools and pottery vessels; and the material remains of tools and ceramics used in the procurement and processing of the bountiful
resources of the region. They represent the
settlements of Caddoan communities and
sociopolitical entities, and the civic-ceremonial
centers that were their focus (Perttula
1993a: 125).

337

eral midden deposits (including a large, possibly
communal trash dump near the south end of the
site) have been identified that appear to be associated with individual structures.
These Formative-Middle Caddoan groups seem
to have been horticulturists, cultivating maize and
squash, along with several kinds of native seeds
(Perttula and Bruseth 1983), as well as proficient
hunters of deer, fish, and many other animal species. The available paleobotanical and
bioarcheological evidence from Northeast Texas
(and elsewhere in the Caddoan area) does not indicate, however, that Caddoan groups became dependent upon maize and other domesticated crops until
about A.D. 1300; by ca. A.D. 1450, maize comprised more than 50 percent of the diet (see Rose et
al. 1995; Burnett 1990).
Both temple and burial mounds were built by
these Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna Caddoan
groups. The larger sites are important civicceremonial centers containing multiple mounds
(Figure 8) and associated villages. The multiple
mound centers are rather evenly spaced along both
the Sabine River and Cypress Bayou, and those that
are contemporaneous may represent hierarchical
systems of an "integrated...regional network of
interaction and redistribution" (Thurmond
1990a:234). Perttula (1994:12) identifies the
Jamestown (8 mounds and village), Boxed Springs
(4 mounds, village, and large cemetery), and

The distribution of Caddoan settlements across the
landscape suggests that all habitats were used, either by the sedentary communities and farmsteads,
or by logistical camps where specific natural resources could be procured by the Caddo in bulk.
The most common types of Caddoan settlements appear to be small hamlets and farmsteads
(Perttula et al. 1986; Thurmond 1990a), but larger
communities have been recognized
that occur in association with
mound centers (such as the large
settlements at Hale (41TT12) and
Hudnall-Pirtle [Bruseth !991]).
One of the more significant
Caddoan sites investigated to date
in
the
Northeast
Texas
Pineywoods, the Oak Hill Village
(41RK214), estimated to date between ca. A.D. 1200/1300-1450,
has at least 42 circular and rectangular structures (Figure 7). Some
of the structures had been rebuilt
and some overlapped earlier structures, and they were arranged over
the 3.5 acre village in a circular
pattern around a central plaza area
(Cruse 1994, 1995; Rogers et al.
Figure 7. Structure 2 at the Oak Hill Village, a Middle Caddoan period site;
1994:Figure 11). A small mound
wood stakes mark posthole stains of the structure walls and extended
(covering a burned structure) is at
entranceway. Photo courtesy of Mr. Bo Nelson.
the north end of the site, and sev-

338

Texas Archeological Society

including: carinated bowls, simple
bowls, compound bowls, bowls with
collared rims and rim tabs, bottles with
tall and tapered necks, and substantial
jars with short to tall necks or rims and
cylindrical to spherical bodies. Many
o Multiple Mound Site
of the utility vessels were decorated,
usually with incising, punctation,
Single Mound Site
fingernail impressions, and applique;
brushing of vessel bodies is a form of
surface treatment that is notable after
ca. A.D. 1300 in the Cypress Creek
50
basin, and in Middle Caddoan period
Miles
sites such as Carlisle and Bryan Hardy
(see Figure 6) on the Sabine River
(Perttula et al. 1993b). The use of a
red hematite slip on interior and/or
exterior surfaces of carinated bowls
and bottles occurs with some regularity
in Early and Middle Caddoan ceramic
assemblages, and in the case of Maxey
Noded Redware, the squat, longFigure 8. Mound Sites in the Northeast Texas Archeological Region (from
necked bottles also have appliqued
Perttula 1993a).
and/or punctated designs below the
neck of the bottle (Krieger 1946).
Engraved curvilinear, scroll, and
Hudnall-Pirtle (8 mounds and 60 acre village)
horizontal and/or diagonal motifs were commonly
multiple mound centers (see Figure 6), as
employed on the carinated bowls and bottles. This
representing the apex of postulated local Earlyincludes such defined types as Hickory Engraved,
Middle Caddoan networks in (he Sabine River basin.
Holly Fine Engraved, Spiro Engraved, Sanders EnWhether this is actually the case or not, the
graved, and Haley Engraved (Suhm and Jelks 1962;
distribution, number, and spacing of mound centers
Turner 1995).
in this part of Northeast Texas clearly indicates that
The Late Caddoan Titus phase (ca. A.D. 1400the Caddoan peoples who built and used these
1680) represents the archeological remains of a
mounds were integrated into societies of
number of Caddoan groups who lived between the
considerable socio-political complexity.
Sabine and Sulphur rivers in the Northeast Texas
The Formative, Early, and Middle Caddoan
Pineywoods (Figure 9). These Caddoan peoples
Pineywoods groups possessed a rich material cullived in dispersed year-round settlements where they
ture. Well-made, corner-notched, and rectangularfarmed and hunted, buried their dead in planned
stemmed arrowpoints were common, along with
cemeteries, and manufactured culturally distinctive
siltstone and greenstone celts, perforators, large
ceramics of considerable stylistic and functional
Gahagan bifaces, and a variety of more expedient
diversity. The same may be said for the contempostone tools (flake scraping and cutting implements).
raneous Frankston phase groups in the Upper
Long-stem Red River (Hoffman 1967) and cigarNeches and Angelina River basins (Kleinschmidt
shaped ceramic pipes were made by the Caddo at
1982; Story andCreel 1982), and Late Caddoan
this time, as were ceramic earspools and figurines
groups living in the Angelina and Attoyac River
(see Newell and Krieger 1949).
basins (Middlebrook 1994).
Most distinctive of these Caddo groups were
Socio-politically, these Pineywoods Caddo
the ceramics they made for cooking, storage, and
were somewhat akin to the Kadohadacho Caddo
serving needs (see Perttula et al., this volume).
groups on the Red River--who were elite-controlled
These vessels were made in a variety of forms,
and hierarchically-ranked societies (cf. Barker and

Perttula ~ The Archeology of the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas

339

Titus Phase Cultural Systems
Boundaries, Time, and People
FOCl

Several hundred Titus phase
components have been identified in
the Pineywoods of Northeast Texas
Belcher/Texarkana
(Figure
10).1 The largest
Titus
concentration of Titus phase
components is found in the Cypress
Late Angelina
Bayou (or Big Cypress Creek) valley
(Thurmond 1990a), with a scattering
Frankston
of sites in the Little Cypress, Sulphur
River, White Oak Creek, and Sabine
River drainages. For the most part,
the general regional limits of the
Titus phase are well established, but
information on the intra-regional
Miles
density of sites (including large
cemeteries) is still rather biased due
to limited professional investigations
across the region as a whole (cf.
Figure 9. The distribution of Late Caddoan archeological phases in the
Thurmond 1990a:Figure 5; Perttula
Northeast Texas Archeological Region (from Perttula 1993c).
et al. 1986:35-59), extensive
pothunting on Cypress Bayou, and
the lack (until quite recently) of an
Pauketat 1992)---especially as noted in patterns of
avocational archeological network
in the Pineywoods (Nelson and Perttula 1993). Thus,
mound construction and mortuary behavior in the
Belcher, McCurtain, and Texarkana phases
"apparent site density within the Cypress basin...is
(Gregory 1980; Webb 1959; Thurmond 1990a; see
largely a function of survey intensity" (Thurmond
Bruseth 1995), and in terms of sociopolitical
1990a:32).
organization (Smith 1994). However, these
The Late Caddoan period extends from A.D.
Pineywoods Caddo groups did not remain in historic
1400-1680 (Story 1990:334). In the Northeast Texas
times in the Sabine and Cypress basins to be other
Pineywoods, both the Whelan and Titus phases
extend into this period. Calibrated radiocarbon dates
than cursorily described by Europeans, unlike either
the Kadohadacho and Hasinai groups to the north,
for the Whelan phase indicate it began around A.D.
1350, with the Titus phase dated from ca. A.D.
east, and south (cf. Smith 1995). Scrutiny of the
archeological record of these Pineywoods Caddo
1450 to the early 1600s (Thurmond 1990a; Perttula
illustrates their social, economic, and political
1992a: 102-107). The chronological span of the two
dynamism during times of significant cultural
phases is poorly developed because of the virtual
change in the Caddoan area (e.g., Jeter et al. 1989;
absence of absolute dates for the Late Caddoan
Story 1990; Perttula 1992a). The next section of the
period sequence (Thurmond 1990a:Table 60; Story
paper discusses the basic fabric of Late Caddoan
1990:Table 81), although this is changing with
period societies between the Sabine and Sulphur
recent excavations in the Cypress Creek, White
rivers as a prelude to exploring the changing nature
Oak Creek, and Sulphur River basins (e.g., Fields
of these group’s socio-political and economic
et a!. 1994; Horizon Environmental Services 1995;
character through time.
Kotter et al. 1991, 1993; Nash et a!. 1995).
McOurtain

1Figure l 0 is based on Thurmond (1990a) and Perttula (1993a), recent research by Thurmond on the Late Caddoan ceramics
at Toledo Bend Reservoir on the Sabine River, and information provided by knowledgeable avocational archeologists in
Northeast Texas (Bo Nelson and Mike Turner, 1993-1994 personal communications).

340

Texas Archeological Society

1600s. Roughly equivalent to the
"classic" Titus phase as described by
Thurmond (1985:189-190).
Thurmond (1985, 1990a) has proposed
that the Titus phase is composed of four
contemporaneous spatial subclusters within
GREAT BEN[
the larger Cypress Cluster: the Three Basins, Tankersley Creek, Swauano Creek, and
Big Cypress Creek (Figure 12). This is in
N
contrast to the interpretations of Turner
(1978), who proposes early and late chroBo~i~ and Bclclmr phase
nological subdivisions within the Titus phase
Bclc.h~
based on motif variations on Ripley Engraved carinated bowls (see, for example,
Figure 1 l a-b, f-g), and changes in vessel
form. Examination of the association of vessel forms, motifs, arrowpoint types, and
available radiocarbon dates for the Titus
Titus pb.a~ components
phase suggests a simple alternative: that
Important Late Caddoan Sims
both spatial and temporal factors contribute
to the archeological character of the Titus
phase and its subclusters (Perttula 1992a).
The subclusters appeared to have maintained
a regional or local spatial integrity, "while
at the same time there were diachronic
changes in their formal composition
that.., permit establishing a detailed temporal sequence" (Perttula 1992a: 106).
Each of the subclusters are defined by
Figure 10. The distribution of Titus phase components in Northeast
Thurmond (1985, 1990a) on the basis of
Texas, and the location of selected Late Caddoan period settlements
different Ripley Engraved bowl motifs or
in the Red, Sulphur, and Cypress basins.
motif combinations (see Figure lla-g),
other shared pottery types of the engraved
My recent attempt to grapple with the Titus
fine
wares
(see Figure llh-p), and different
phase and Cypress Cluster chronological sequences
proportions
of
various arrowpoint styles. Each Titus
(Perttula 1992a:243-249), through an analysis of
phase
subcluster
is characterized by a distinctive
engraved ceramic types (Figure 11), and motif/
constellation
of
ceramic
and lithic styles (Thurmond
arrowpoint associations, led me to propose three
1985:193-194). In Period 2 of the Cypress Cluster,
temporal periods and a number of subphases (in the
dating
from ca. A.D. 1450 to 1550-1600 (estimated),
sense of Johnson [1987:19]):
Ripley Engraved is most common, along with
Maydelle Incised, Bullard Brushed, and Harleton
Period 1, subphases a and b, estimated to date
Applique. Period 3 of the Cypress Cluster, the
from ca. A.D. 1350-1450; equivalent to the
"classic" Titus phase, may have lasted only into the
Whelan phase as described by Thurmond
early
1600s, but it certainly seems to have ended by
(1985:189).
1700 at the latest (Thurmond 1990a, 1990b). Again,
Period 2, subphases a and b, may date from ca.
Ripley Engraved is the most common fine ware in
A.D. 1450 to 1550/1600. Components included
the grave lots. There are also a number of Red
in the Titus phase.
River Valley trade wares present in the Period 3
burials of the Titus phase (see Figure 1 ll-p), such
Period 3, subphases a-c, estimated to date afas Avery Engraved and Simms Engraved.
ter ca. A.D. 1550/1600 into the early-middle

Perttula w The Archeology of the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas

Thurmond (1985:191) has argued that the Titus
phase spatial groups denote socio-politically
integrated separate tribes or subtribes similar to the
confederacies known historically among the Hasinai
or the Red River Kadohadacho groups. Thus, the
larger Cypress Cluster is:

south and the Kadohadacho to the northeast.
Four subclusters ... are believed to represent
the individual component groups comprising
this affiliated group (Thurmond 1985:196).

No direct measurements of prehistoric
demography are possible for the Titus phase, but
changes in settlement count over time in the Cypress
Creek and Lake Fork Creek basins do indicate that
there was a steady increase in the number and
relative frequency of prehistoric sites through the

the archeological manifestation of a series of
social groups banded together in a sociopolitical
structure analogous to and at least partially contemporaneous with that of the Hasinai to the

A

I

B

J

M

341

K

N

D

C

L

O

p

Figure 11. Engraved finewares found in Titus phase cemeteries (after Krieger 1946): a-g, Ripley
Engraved; h, Wilder Engraved; i-j, Taylor Engraved; k, Bailey Engraved; l-m, Simms Engraved; np, Belcher Engraved.

342

Texas Archeological Society

A ~

Alex

u liss

cK[n

MN
~ Titus Phase C~m~onent
~
0

~

I0

ZO

~

~

kilo~elltS

A

Titus
with

Phase Componenl
European Trade Goods

Titus Phase Component

with Evidence of Social Ranking

Figure 12. Distribution of Three Basins, Tankerstey Creek, Swauano Creek, and Big Cypress
subclusters within the Cypress cluster of the Titus phase, Cypress Creek Basin (after Thurmond
1990a).

lengthy Archaic period (6000 B.C. to A.D. 0),
followed by a decrease in the Early Ceramic period
(A.D. 0-800), and then a substantial increase in the
Early and Middle Caddoan periods (Bruseth 1987;
Thurmond 1990a). The highest number and density
of components occurs during the Late Caddoan
period (Table 1).
Studies in the Lake Fork Creek basin (Bruseth
and Perttula 1981; Bruseth 1987; Perttula et al.
1993a), and recent investigations in portions of the
Big Sandy Creek (Perttula et al. 1986) and Little
Cypress Creek basins (Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. 1993, 1995; Glander et al. 1993), as well
as at Caddo Lake (Cliff and Peter 1994:141), are
similar to Thurmond’s overall results for the Cypress Creek Basin in confirming the high frequency
of Late Caddoan occupations. Clearly, regional
Caddoan populations were extensive throughout
much of the Pineywoods after ca. A.D. 1350.

Settlement Configuration

Late Caddoan period settlements in the
Pineywoods of Northeast Texas have been termed
rural Caddoan community systems (Perttula
1992a:96) because they were distributed along

TABLE 1. Relative Frequency of Prehistoric
Cultural Components in the
Cypress Creek Basin
Components/
100 Years

Period/Phase

Total
Components

Paleoindian

40

1.00

Early Archaic

52

2.60

Middle Archaic

94

4.70

Late Archaic

123

6.83

Early Ceramic

24

4.00

Early Caddoan

40

8.00

Middle Caddoan

14

14.00

Whelan

50

50.00

Titus

77

51.33

Late Caddoan

From: Thurmond (1990a:Table 63)

secondary streams, were widely dispersed, and
because they consisted of functionally equivalent
farmsteads and hamlets. Similar kinds of rural
communities occur throughout much of the Caddoan
area (Story 1982, 1990; Jeter et al. 1989).

Perttula ~ The Archeology of the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas

Small mound centers were being constructed
and used up to ca. A.D. 1500 in Northeast Texas,
but they lack evidence of burial mounds or large
platforms; rather, they contained mounds that buried burned structures. The larger Caddoan "towns"
were distributed along the major stream valleys,
such as the Red, Ouachita, and Little rivers. These
communities were hierarchically arranged with:
civic-ceremonial centers (those with platform and
burial mounds), associated "towns" of linear but
dispersed farmstead compounds with several structures, bark- or brush-covered shelters and storage
platforms (Schambach 1983:7-8), hamlets, farmsteads, and specialized processing and/or procurement locales (such as salt-making sites [Em’ly 1994])
(see also Gregory 1980:356-357).
Thurmond (1990a) recognizes three types of
Titus phase settlements: limited use areas, slnall
settlements, and large settlements. The limited use
areas were seasonally occupied locations where extractive/processing activities took place, while the
settlements were year-round habitations. Small
settlements (ranging between 0.2-1.8 ha in size,
with midden accumulations, and wattle-daub concentrations) account for 73 percent of the known
Titus phase settlements in the Cypress Creek basin,
the limited use areas 23 percent, and the large settlements (those larger than 1.8 ha, and with midden
accumulations as well as wattle-daub concentrations) only 4 percent of the sample.
The settlements appear to have been composed
of one to several family units, with house middens/
daub concentrations and trash midden mounds (Figure 13). The range of domestic materials recovered
in the midden mounds (e.g., Perttula et al. 1993a),
along with limited evidence of structure rebuilding,
suggests that most Titus phase settlements were
occupied only about a generation, when the settlement was moved to another area where farming
was possible. Small family cemeteries typically occurred nearby (Bruseth 1987; Perttula et al. 1993a;
Thurmond 1990a).
Analyses of the spatial distribution of cultural
materials at the small settlement at the Burks site
(41WD52), a Three Basins subcluster component,
indicates that the disposal of broken pottery vessels, tools, and animal bones, was quite patterned
across the site itself (Perttula et al. n.d.). Midden
mounds up to one meter in height were common on
Titus phase settlements before they began to be
plowed in historic times. Excavations at Late
Caddoan Pineywoods settlements also suggest that

343

many activities occurred outside the houses, resulting in trash-filled pits, hearths, and posts in these
areas, where ramadas and granaries may also have
been present, along with concentrations of artifacts
and debris (Bruseth and Perttula 1981; Thurmond
1990a; Woodall 1969).
Because of the intense professional and
avocational focus on the cemeteries that occur on
Titus phase settlements, few specifics are available
on the types of houses and storage structures used
by these groups. Based on a few excavated Late
Caddoan structures in the Pineywoods (some of
which were in mounds and may thus not be at all
characteristic of domestic structures), the single
pole structures were probably circular in shape,
were thatched and wattled, measured between five
and six meters in diameter (Figure 14), and may
have had, on occasion, extended entranceways
(Thurmond 1990a:144, 146, 148, 168, 210-211;
Clark and Ivey 1974). Structures had central
hearths and centerposts, possible interior benches
and racks for sleeping and above-ground storage
purposes, as well as storage and trash pits.
Structures had some midden accumulation on their
floors (i.e., house middens), which were not

Figure 13. Settlement plan at the Burks site (41WD52),
Wood County, Texas.

344

Texas Archeological Society

41 RK 19
MusgoSo Site
Plan Mop of Moin
North

Excavation Area

Pits
Post holes
Burned

Areos

Rocks
Midden
1972

Deposil

Tesl

SlruClure

Pil

oulline

Figure 14. Structure, middens, and other features at the Musgafio site (41RKI9) (fl’om Clark and Ivey
1974).

prepared or clay-lined, but the vast majority of the
daily trash and refuse was deposited on the nearby
trash midden mound.
When Pedro Vial visited the Nadaco Caddo
"village" near the Sabine River in 1788 (probably
in the vicinity of Longview and Marshall, Texas),
he described it as having thirteen to fifteen houses
scattered over a distance of three leagues (about 8
miles) (Nasatir and Loomis 1967:344-345). The
houses or ranchos of the Nadaco were evidently
distributed mainly along tributaries of the Sabine
River (Jones 1968; Perttula t992a:177). The distribution of Titus phase settlements indicates an
equal dispersion of agricultural farmsteads and
hamlets in prehistoric times, usually being found
near springs, arable soil, and level ground, but also
preferring settings along tributary streams.

Localities and their Character
The best information on the distribution of
Titus phase settlements in the Pineywoods comes

from Thurmond’s (1990a) study of the archeology
of the Cypress Creek Basin. Titus phase sites tend
to occur on valley terraces, upland projections, and
upland slope landforms, with the greatest use of
minor (2-10 square kilometers) and upland basins.
Fifty-four percent of all Titus phase components
(including farmsteads, hamlets, villages, cemeteries, and a small number of extractive/processing
sites) occur in the uplands. Given that the majority
of archeological survey efforts in the Cypress Creek
Basin have concentrated on major streams, and
stream valleys in general, "...the frequent occurrence of sites along smaller streams is indicated.
One suspects that the occurrence of sites in upland
areas may be higher than the present data would
indicate" (Thurmond 1990a:220).
The permanent settlements and cemeteries of
the Titus phase tend to occur in association with
freshwater springs (Thurmond 1990a:Table 58 and
Figure 33). Known Late Caddoan mound centers,
how-ever, typically do not occur in proximity to a
spring, but rather are on the floodplain floor in

Perttula ~ The Archeology of the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas

major and intermediate basins, or they are situated
on upland projections. Associated occupations are
present on terraces, floodplain rises, or upland
projections, but are not found on floodplain floor
landforms.

Mounds

345

phase." A similar association has been noted for
Late Caddoan mounds and settlements in part of
the Middle Sabine river basin (Perttula 1989,
1994:Figure 9).

Cemeteries
There are two types of cemeteries used by the

Mound-building in the Late Caddoan period in
Titus phase groups: the small family cemetery, and
the Pineywoods appears to have ceased
between roughly A.D. 1400 and 1500
(Thurmond 1990a; Perttula 1989,
1993a). Only a small number of Late
Caddoan period mounds are known in
the region (Figure 15), ranging from
Texarkana phase
one to four small mounds per site, and
they are unlike the types of mound
complexes typically constructed in the
major river valleys at this time (Story
1990). Pineywoods mounds were sub" ~ KnightsBluff
structural mounds; no pyramidal platform or burial mounds2 are known for
this time period. Substructural mounds
Bossier and Belcher phase
are restricted to mounds that cap a
burned circular structure (Figure 16)
Motmd~ Plantmloo
that was constructed on the ground surface or in a small, shallow pit. In at
least two instances, the mounds contained sequent structures, but the
"structures originated at higher levels
Tiros pha~ component~
in the mound[s] due to occupational
Important Late Caddoan Sites
accumulations of soil and ash, and not
Late Caddoan Mounds
the result of any deliberate capping"
(Thurmond 1990a: 168).
Thurmond
(1990a:234-235)
suggests that the locations of Late
Caddoan period mounds in the Cypress
basin appear to be associated with
clusters of contemporaneous settlements, cemeteries, and limited use
areas, "and it is therefore possible that
Figure 15. Distribution of Late Caddoan mound centers: 1. P.S. Cash
these concentrations of components
(41CP2); 2. Sam Roberts (41CP8); 3. Whelan Estates (41MR2); 4.
represent the archeological manifesHarroun (41UR10); 5. Charles L. Dalton (41URll); 6. 41SY15; 7.
tation of... Cypress cluster constituent
Lane Mitchell farm (41HS4); 8. Jones or Pine Tree (41HS 15); 9. Camp
groups during the [preceding] Whelan
Joy (41UR144).
2Webb et al. (I 969:7-8) describe the Resch Burial Mound on Potters Creek in the Sabine River Basin as having affiliations
with the Titus phase in that burial pits in the mound included Ripley Engraved, Hodges Engraved, Glassell Engraved, Cass
Appliqued, Pease Brushed-Incised, and Karuack Brushed-Incised ceramics as well as Perdiz and Bassett arrowpoints. Based on
the limited information available, the burial pits were placed in the mound between A.D. 1350-1450 (cf. Perttula 1992a:Appendix
A-1). The regional significance and sociopolitical relationships of this middle Sabine River Caddoan occupation remain to be
clearly elucidated.

Texas Archeological Society

346

o

than adults. The graves of males often
contain clusters of arrowpoints in
patterns suggesting quivers of arrows,
and those of females contain polishing
stones or more numerous pottery
vessels. Items of exotic material . . .
are extremely rare. The occurrence of
graves containing very large numbers
of artifacts is also quite limited.

The large community cemeteries of the
Titus phase (Figure 17) are the product of
interments from a number of communities
in the vicinity, and thus they are reflective
of a wider community-based participation
in ceremonial and mortuary activities (Story
1990:338-339). These cemeteries usually
contain at least 40 individuals, but some are
known that contained at least 150-300 indiHARROUN SITE-A1 URIO
viduals (Turner 1978; Thurmond 1990a;
PLAN OF" HOU~ NO. 3
Story 1990; Perttula 1993a).
MOUND B
The community cemeteries contain excellent evidence for the existence of social
differentiation within the Titus phase (see
below). Since community cemeteries are
recognized by the type of burial interment,
their relative size, grave good associations,
and their relative separation from habitation
Figure 16. Mound B, House No. 3, Harroun site (41UR10)
sites, they are analogous in functional con(from Jelks and Tunnell 1959).
text to the mound centers. Known community cemeteries are not uniformly distributed
among
the
Titus phase groups, but are concentrated
the large supralocal or community cemetery.
on Big Cypress Bayou, the Titus phase "heartland,"
Demographic profiles from these small cemeteries
with a few large cemeteries known on Little Cyappear to be representative of a family group in that
press and White Oak creeks (see Figure 17). Prethey contain roughly equal adult male and female
sumably, this locality had the most regionally
representation (e.g., Rose 1984:240). The family
complex sociopolitical organization, and/or the
cemetery is located in immediate proximity to the
highest population densities during Late Caddoan
farmstead or hamlet (as at the Burks site described
times (e.g., Story 1990:339-340).
above), contains few interments (typically about
The larger community cemeteries are internally
10), and evidences no differential status or social
organized
by space and structurally divided by rank
rank in grave good associations and burial treatment.
(Turner 1978:Figure 3; Thurmond 1990a:Figure 20).
Burials within the family cemeteries include
There is little evidence for graves’ overlapping, but
single extended inhumations within a patterned arinstead the cemeteries appeared to have regularly
rangement of burials; burials are oriented roughly
expanded over time (see Perttula 1992a:Figures 18
east-west. Children were typically buried in subfloor
and 19). Since the cemetery plan was consistently
pits within the household structures themselves.
maintained, they may reflect community participaAccording to Thurmond (1990a:235-236), artifact
tion over several generations; the varying position
associations in family cemeteries differ only by age
of the higher status burials (as at Tuck Carpenter
and sex:
and H. R. Taylor) evidences this spatial expansion
adolescents were buried with more offerings
through time.
than children or infants, and with fewer offerings

Perttula ~ The Archeology of the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas

347

mestic and mortuary contexts. The
wide variety of vessel shapes and
decorations, as well as their frequency in domestic contexts, demonstrates the importance of ceramics
in the Titus phase for the cooking
and serving of food, as personal possessions, and as social identifiers.
Both fine wares and utility wares
were manufactured in the Titus
phase. Differences in paste (and
decoration) between the two wares
presumably relate to technological
and functional variability in the way
these kinds of vessels were made
and designed to be used (e.g.,
Steponaitis 1984:85-114).
The fine wares were tempered with
finely crushed grog and bone, and
Titus phase components
were well-polished; shell-tempered
Important Late Caddoan Sites
vessels are quite rare, and are typiLarge Titus phase cemetefes
cally trade wares from the Red River
Caddo. The fine ware was decorated
with engraved lines, with scrolls,
scrolls and circles, pendant triangles,
and other curvilinear motifs being
the most common decorative elements in the Titus phase ceramics
(see Figure 11). Another form of
decoration was the application of a
Figure 17. Distribution of large Titus phase cemeteries: 1. Tuck Carpenter
red hematite slip on both interior and
(41CP5); 2. Lower Peach Orchard (41CP17); 3. Tracy (41CP71); 4. H.R.
exterior surfaces, and the painting
Taylor (41HS3); 5. Mires (41MR4); 6. Pleasure Pt. (41MR63); 7. Southall
of engraved lines with hematite or
(41UR3); 8. Carson Kennedy (no trinomial); 9.41HS235; 10. Gold Star
kaolin. The diversity of vessel forms
(41UR32); 1 !. Spider Lilly (41UR143); 12. Oil-Topped (no trinomial);
is impressive: carinated bowls, com13. Site G (no trinomial); 14. Site B (no trinomial); 15. Meddlin Creek
pound bowls, bottles, conoidal
(no trinomial); 16. Arms Creek (no trinomial); 17. Harold Williams
(41CP10).
bowls, ollas, everted rim jars, square
bowls, globular peaked jars, and
chalice forms.3 Other fine wares include zoomorphic effigies and rattle bowls.
Material remains and
The utility vessels were tempered with grog
Technological character
and grit, and had a coarser paste along with a thicker
The most notable aspect of the Late Caddoan
body. Small to large jars (over 30 cm in height with
Pineywoods archeological record is the diverse and
orifice diameters greater than 25-30 cm) (Figure
distinctive aboriginal ceramics that occur in do18) and plain conical bowls were typical utility
3The chalice-form occurs on only a few Titus phase sites in the Cypress Creek drainage (Turner 1978:98; Bo Nelson, 1993
personal communication). Turner (1978:100) suggests that the ceramic chalices were copies of stemmed wine-glasses, stemmed
cups, or stemmed goblets in the possession of individuals in the de Soto entrada. It is interesting to note that the sixteenth century
.Hispanic bottles, goblets, decanters, and vases illustrated by Deagan (I 987) have a similar form to the stemmed vessels recovered
~n the Titus phase sites. These Titus phase sites are in the area where the province of Lacane has been located (Hudson 1990;
Thurmond 1990b; Perttula 1992a; Bruseth 1992; Kenmotsu et al. 1993).

348

Texas Archeological Society

vessel shapes. The presence of carbon encmstations,
food residues, and sooting on many of the utility
vessels indicate that these pots were used for
cooking (e.g., Skibo 1992); the large orifice
diamaters and vessel volumes also suggests that
some utility vessels were used primarily for storage
of foodstuffs and liquids.
The types of decorations and/or surface
treatment on the utility vessels included neck-

banding or corrugation, brushing, applique, incision,
punctation, or various combinations thereof (Turner
1995:Table 1). Small handles or lugs were present
on some of the utility vessels. Based on sherd
samples from domestic contexts, utility vessels
probably comprised between 50 to 70 percent of
the ceramic assemblages in Titus phase sites, with
proportionally fewer utility vessels in mortuary
contexts (Thurmond 1990a).

[3

Figure 18. Titus phase utility vessels (after Krieger 1946): a-b, LaRue Neck-banded; c,
Karnack Brushed-Incised; d-f, Harleton Appliqued; g-i, Bullard Brushed.

Perttula ~ The Archeology of the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas

Other ceramic artifacts manufactured by Late
Caddoan Pineywoods groups include ceramic
earspools, as well as biconical and elbow pipes (see
Jackson 1933). Other types of earspools include
ones manufactured from siltstone and sandstone, as
well as ones of wood (Turner 1992:84). One set of
earspools from the Tuck Carpenter site had been
covered with copper plate. The elbow pipes are
commonly decorated with engraved lines that have
been painted with hematite or kaolin clay.
Generally speaking, lithic tools and debris are
uncommon on Late Caddoan period sites in the
Pineywoods, and presumably this reflects the strong
development of wood and bone tool industries, few
examples of which are preserved in the archeological record. The tool diversity is low, consisting
primarily of triangular and corner-notched
arrowpoints, flake tools (drills, scrapers, and retouched pieces), lithic debris and cores, along with
an array of groundstone implements. These include
petaloid and tabular celts, metates and manos, battered and polished cobbles and pebbles, hematite
and limonite pigment stones, and abrading slabs
(Turner 1992; Thurmond 1990a).
Although bone is not usually well-preserved
on Titus phase sites, bone tools have been recognized at a number of sites. They include deer mandibles, deer beamers, ulna punches, antler tines,
and deer and bird bone pins. Turtle carapace rattles
have also been noted.

Social status and activity variation
The social status ranking apparent in the Cypress Cluster burials is based on four criteria seen
in the archeological record:
(1) high-status burials include large shaft tombs
and multiple interments; all other Titus phase
burials are single, individual burials. Family
cemeteries do not contain shaft tombs or
multiple interments;

(2) quantities of grave goods are significantly
higher than the mean average for the regional
burial population as a whole (approximately
14-15 grave goods per burial [Perttula
!992a:Table 7]). Higher status burials differ
from the population primarily in the
frequency of arrowpoints and ceramic vessels

placed as grave
1992a:Table 8);

(3)

offerings

349

(Perttula

certain types of artifacts are found in higher
status burials. One such example in the Cypress and Upper Sabine basins is the Galt
biface (Thurmond 1990a:235); and

(4) they are always adult males.
There are about 10 to 15 Titus phase sites in
the Pineywoods that have burials of presumed highstatus individuals, such as Galt, Caldwell, Lower
Peach Orchard, Tuck Carpenter, H. R. Taylor, and
others (see Perttula 1992a:Table 8);4 all those known
are along Cypress Bayou and its tributaries (see
Figure 12). Certainly the best-known and studied
community cemeteries with high-status burials are
the Tuck Carpenter (Turner 1978, 1992) and H. R.
Taylor (Thurmond 1990a) sites.
At Tuck Carpenter, high-status burials dating
between ca. A.D. 1350-1550 are at the center of the
70-interment cemetery, while the latest high-status
burials (estimated to date after ca. A.D. 1550 to the
early 1600s) are alongside the outside cemetery
boundaries (see Perttula 1992a:Figure 18; Turner
1978). With the exception of the two multiple interments, other single, extended interments were
placed in the cemetery in roughly aligned northsouth rows. The high-status burials contained on
average of 37 grave goods/burial, compared to the
14.8 grave goods/burial for the cemetery as a whole
(Turner 1978, 1992).
The same type of burial program noted at the
Tuck Carpenter site was in use at the H. R. Taylor
site (see Perttula 1992a:Figure 19). Mean values of
ceramic vessels (8.3/individual), arrowpoints (5.09/
individual), and total number of specimens (14.5/
individual) as grave goods at H. R. Taylor are not
significantly different from other Titus phase cemeteries, but the high-status burials each contained
on the average between 27-55 grave goods (Perttula
1992a:Table 7; Thurmond 1990a).
The segregation of interments by presumed
status indicates that high-status individuals account
for 8 to 9 percent of the burials at H. R. Taylor and
Tuck Carpenter, respectively. Low-status
interments, namely those with quantities of grave
goods two standard deviations below the mean
average for the two sites (between 0 to 9.0 items at
Tuck Carpenter and 0 to 6.7 items at H. R. Taylor),

4This does not include several community cemetery sites in the Lake O’ the Pines area that still remain poorly documented.

350

Texas Archeological Society

account for 19 and 23 percent of the burials at the
two sites. Lower-status individuals at these
community cemeteries were usually adult females,
juveniles, or children. Overall, in the Titus phase
mortuary populations, high-status individuals
account for less than 2 percent of all known burials
(Thurmond 1990a:235).
A perusal of Perttula (1992a:Table 8) indicates that the majority of burials of presumed highstatus in the Pineywoods date after ca. A.D.
1550-1600. Those individuals buried prior to A.D.
1550 demonstrate considerable intraregional variability in the manner of burial treatment, as well as
in the types of artifactual remains placed in the
burials as offerings. For example, in addition to the
multiple interments at Tuck Carpenter, shaft tombss
are represented in a pre-A.D. 1550 cemetery at the
Lower Peach Orchard site (see Figure 12). At the J.
E. Gait site, the high-status burial included such
offerings as a large number of celt fragments and
other native stone implements, rather than caches
of arrowpoints (Thurmond 1990a:Table 29). Galt
bifaces were also recovered from the cemetery.
The large Titus phase cemeteries with individuals of high-status are distributed within each of
the four spatial subclusters identified by Thurmond
(1985, 1990a) in the Cypress Creek basin. The earliest appearance of this type of community integration occurs in the Tankersley Creek, Three Basins,
and Swauano Creek subclusters, with the latest being present in the Swauano Creek and Big Cypress
Creek subclusters (see Figure 12). No post-A.D.
1550-1600 community cemeteries are known in the
Three Basins and Tankersley Creek subclusters,
with the exception of Tuck Carpenter, which suggests that much of these areas were abandoned by
resident Caddoan groups about this time.
In general, these community cemeteries are
relatively short-term mortuary phenomena that were
used intensively in portions of the Pineywoods after about A.D. 1550 to the early 1600s. It is probably no coincidence that the intensive use of
community cemeteries in the region occurs generally contemporaneously with the initial contact between Titus phase Caddoan populations and the
Spanish De Soto/Moscoso entrada of 1542-1543.

Indeed, Bruseth (1992:91) interprets the short-term
use of these cemeteries as reflecting the passage of
the army as well as increased mortality from European diseases. The timing in the intensification of
this form of community cemetery in the region is
also of considerable significance because the Titus
phase community cemeteries appear to have replaced the use of mounds for community ceremonial and religious functions by the 1550s. I have
argued that this process of replacement is a reflection of changes in social complexity and the scope
of community integration, perhaps accompanied by
a spatial coalescence and/or decrease in settlement
density within the Pineywoods (Perttula 1992a: 115).
Subsistence Studies
Titus phase subsistence remains with interpretive significance are rather limited to date to a few
sites in the upper Sabine and upper Cypress basins,
rather at the western edge of its settlement distribution (Perttula 1993a). However, well-preserved
subsistence remains are known from a number of
other sites of this age in Northeast Texas that have
as yet received little professional attention (Perttula
1993b; Thurmond 1990a). Floral evidence from
trash midden deposits suggests that the tropical
cultigen maize (Zea mays L.) was a dietary staple,
and beans (Phaseolus vulgaris) were also an important food source. Nuts and seeds were also gathered, but they appear to have been of lesser
importance in the Titus phase than they were between ca. A.D. 900-1400 (Crane 1982; Perttula and
Bruseth 1983; Perttula et al. 1982). In fact, the
subsistence evidence from the Titus phase in the
Pineywoods, as well as elsewhere in the Caddoan
area, suggests the successful development of an
Caddoan maize-based economy at this time (Fritz
1990:421,425).
Vertebrate species identified in Titus phase
trash middens include deer, turkey, cottontail rabbit, jackrabbit, squirrel, and beaver. Turtle and fish
were also present, but were relatively uncommon
compared to mammals and birds. Deer and turkey
appear to have been the dominant exploitable species (Perttula et al. 1982, 1993a).

5Shaft tombs are reported at several other large cemeteries on Cypress Bayou, but their context and grave contents have not
been fully assessed. One shaft tomb at the Pleasure Point site was reported to have been about three meters deep and contained
two episodes of multiple burial interments (Mike Turner, 1993 personal communication). At the Lower Peach Orchard site, five
or six shaft tombs were excavated by collectors from a large community cemetery. The one shaft tomb where information is
available contained three individuals and large quantities of grave goods (see Thurmond 1990a).

Perttula ~ The Archeology of the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas

The examination of bioarcheological remains
lends some additional light to the subsistence character of the Titus phase populations, but to date the
results have not been substantial. This is because of
the relatively small samples of human remains that
have been analyzed from Pineywoods Late Caddo
sites (Burnett 1990:402-408). Based on admittedly
limited bioarcheological evidence, principally the
low frequency of dental caries and porotic
hyperostosis, Burnett (1990:405,408) suggests that
the Late Caddoan inhabitants of the Cypress/upper
Sabine and the middle Sabine consumed little to no
maize, and "were not dependent upon a maize-rich
diet." The lack of infections, such as osteoarthritis
and osteoporosis, in the Late Caddoan samples,
while again rather small, may indicate both a different lifestyle and workload than Caddoan residents on the Red River, as well as a high measure
of adaptive success (Burnett 1990:404). It is important for current Pineywoods Caddo research to resolve the question of why there is this substantial
contradiction between the archeological and
bioarcheological evidence regarding the nature of
Titus phase subsistence.

351

An analysis of the grave good associations in a
large sample of Whelan and Titus phase burials
indicates that a modicum of interaction occurred
between the Pineywoods groups and Caddoan populations to the north between A.D. 1350-1450, and
this increased during the Titus phase proper. Glassell
Engraved is a significant item of ceramic trade after 1450, with interaction to the north and east
seemingly intensifying after about the middle 1500s.
In fact, between 3.2-7.6 percent of ceramic vessels
in Titus phase burials are Red River trade wares
(Perttula 1992a:249).
Significant quantities of non-local lithic raw
materials are also present in Titus phase assemblages. Detailed examination of lithic raw materials in Three Basins subcluster components in the
Sabine River basin indicates that Red River gravel
cherts and chalcedonies comprised about 20 percent of the lithic tools and debris (Perttula 1984).
These lithic raw materials were available from Red
River Caddoan groups who lived in the vicinity of
the McCurtain phase Arnold Roitsch (41RR16)
civic-ceremonial center (see Figure 10). Hatton tuff
and siliceous shales were obtained from the
Ouachita Mountains for the manufacture of celts.

REGIONAL RELATIONSHIPS
External Relationships
Although many of the details are sketchy, mortuary goods and other exotic artifacts (such as conch
shell, lithic raw materials, etc.) suggest that
intraregional contacts and the exchange of resources
between rural and town Caddoan communities flourished at the time of initial European contact in the
sixteenth century. Interregional exchange and contact was also well developed between Caddoan polities, and horticulturists living in the southwestern
United States, the Southern Plains, and the Lower
Mississippi Valley (see Baugh !995; Kidder 1995).

Among Caddoan Groups

Ceramic wares imported from the Red River
Caddoan groups are present in the Titus phase.
They include such fine wares as Belcher Ridged,
Belcher Engraved, Glassell Engraved, and Hodges
Engraved from the Belcher phase to the east (Webb
1959:153), and Avery Engraved and Simms Engraved pottery types of the McCurtain and
Texarkana phases to the north some 100 km (see
Bruseth 1995).

In one study of the lithic raw materials present
in Three Basins subcluster sites (Perttula t984),
Edwards chert from Central Texas (Banks 1990)
represented about 8 percent of the lithic tools and
debris. This material had to have been obtained by
Caddoan peoples through trade and exchange with
non-Caddoan peoples living more than 150 km to
the west and southwest of the Pineywoods Caddo.
Galt bifaces, possible "badges of rank or ofrice" (Thurmond 1990a:35), found with high-status
Titus and Belcher phase burials, are made from
"non-local high grade cherts." Documentation of
several Galt bifaces from the Pleasure Point
(41MR63) community cemetery on Big Cypress
Bayou indicate that they were also manufactured
from a dark-brown Edwards chert (Mike Turner,
1993 personal communication).
The presence of Nortefio phase ceramics
(Womack Engraved) from Titus phase sites in the
Three Basins subcluster suggests that the Nortefios
(or Wichita-speaking groups who moved into
Texas) interacted to some extent with the
Pineywoods Caddo. Neither sites with Nortefio

352

Texas Archeological Society

ceramics contained European trade goods (e.g.,
Scurlock 1962), though, and the period when there
was Nortefio and Titus phase contact can only be
suggested to have occurred in perhaps the early to
late seventeenth century.
Gulf Coast conch shell was obtained by the
Pineywoods Late Caddo for the manufacture of
conch columella beads and pendants. This exotic
material is rarely used in the Titus phase (Turner
1978), however, compared to that seen among the
Red River Belcher and McCurtain phase Caddo
groups (Webb 1959; Skinner et al. 1969; Trubowitz
1984; Kelley 1994).

DIACHRONIC PERSPECTIVES
The demise of the Titus phase
A reconsideration of Titus phase chronologies,
in combination with new assessments of the route
of the de Soto-Moscoso 1542-1543 entrada through
Northeast Texas (Bruseth 1992; Hudson 1990;
Kenmotsu et al. 1993; Schambach 1989; Thurmond
1990b), suggests that: (a) the Spanish entrada encountered the Titus phase peoples-- probably the
Lacane province--and (b) that within 50-60 years
of that encounter the area occupied by the Titus
phase had been virtually abandoned. While it is
likely that some Titus phase peoples moved to either the Red River among the Kadohadacho, or to
the Hasinai Caddo south of the Sabine River, current explanations for the demise of the Titus phase
hinge on the introduction and initial exposure of
Caddoan groups to European epidemic diseases
(Thurmond 1990a:233, 1990b; Perttula 1992a),
which led to substantial depopulation among the
Pineywoods populations.
Subsequent to the discontinuation of
community cemeteries in the early to midseventeenth century, most of the upper Sabine and
Cypress Creek basins were abandoned (Thurmond
1990b; Perttula 1992a). The only post-1700
Caddoan occupations that can be related to earlier
use of the Pineywoods are to be found in the lower
Sulphur and Sabine rivers (Figure 19a) at known
trade portages or along trail crossings of these major
streams (Harris et al. 1980; Jones 1968; Perttula
1992a: 172-177). None of the Caddoan communities
in the Cypress Creek/upper Sabine basins appear to
have been ethnographically described, and what is

known from ethnographic and archival documents
pertains principally to the Nadaco or Anadarko
Caddo (Figure 19b). This group’s prehistoric
antecedents are poorly known, and they appear to
have only settled in the Sabine River basin after ca.
1770 (Smith 1995:74).
Late Caddoan period Pineywoods sites such as
those of the Titus phase hold great promise to document the nature of sociopolitical, demographic, and
economic changes in the region during an eventful
time in Caddoan prehistory and protohistory. This
is due in large part to their potential for fine-scale
chronological control, say on the order of 20-30
years. As other studies of Caddoan archeology make
clear, there have been substantial changes in
Caddoan societies from ca. A.D. 800 to European
contact (cf. Story t990; Jeter et al. 1989), with one
of the more important being the development of
more egalitarian sociopolitical systems after ca.
A.D. 1400 in many regions of the Caddoan area,
including the Pineywoods of Northeast Texas
(Perttula 1995).
The intensification of maize-based economies
after ca. A.D. 1400 in much of the Caddoan area
may be in large part responsible for the demise of
many of the civic-ceremonial centers at a time
when there was a reorganization of social and political relationships within Caddoan culture on a
regional level. The tangible development of predictable maize surpluses at all levels, the "quality
of abundance" referred to by Helms (1992:188),
would have led to the social homogeneity noted
above among Late Caddoan groups in the
Pineywoods because household agricultural sufficiency negated the regionally expansive role of the
elite-controlled social and political economy. After this time, therefore, social and political integration appears to have been regionally and locally
redefined.

CONCLUDING REMARKS
Since the 1950s, a great deal has been learned
by a dedicated group of avocational and professional archeologists about the prehistory of this part
of Northeast Texas, particularly regarding the last
1000-2000 years when the ancestors of the Caddo
Tribe of Oklahoma settled in the area and thrived
(Carter 1995; Smith 1995). The knowledge gained
about the Native American past in the region, about

Perttula ~ The Archeology of the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas

353

KADOHADACHO

Taovayas

~.Natchitoches
~Kadohadacho

}

HASINAI

ATAKAPA

~,

o

~

Multiple Sites

°

Single Site

[]

Little River

[]

Hunt

’/

A

%.,,,/

\

B

Kinsloe

5o

~==:::z~==:::z~=
Miles

e

[]

Allen

Figure 19. A, Historic Caddoan archeological sites and phases in the Northeast Texas Archeological Region; B, general
locations of Native American groups in the Eastern Planning Region of Texas in the early eighteenth century (from
Perttula 1993c).

the challenges faced during times of cultural change,
and during the wrenching episode (still ongoing) of
contact and interaction between the Caddo peoples
and European and Anglo-American colonizers and
settlers, helps to bring "native history" to the forefront, not a footnote, of the ongoing study of Texas’
cultural heritage.
While there is every reason to think that our
knowledge of Northeast Texas prehistory will continue to grow by leaps and bounds, there are tremendous research and preservation challenges
ahead. On a mundane level, it is important that we
continually cast a critical and discerning eye at our
research priorities, the value of our methodological
approaches, and the worth of our cultural resource
management planning documents. From the innovative use of these tools come the new perspectives
and conceptions that lead to broader and
parsiminious understandings of the past.

Changes in research strategies are critical, but
in Northeast Texas they are only, unfortunately,
part of the archeological story. Of the utmost concern for the long-term protection and preservation
of the region’s archeological heritage is dealing
straight on with the unabated looting and vandalism of prehistoric Caddo villages and cemeteries-on private as well as state and federal lands. The
archeological landscape is pitted and pocked with
the looter’s holes and backdirt piles. Many of the
most important archeological sites in the region
have been irretrievably damaged and destroyed, and
it is questionable that the looting frenzy can be
staunched even if an unmarked burial protection
bill was to be made law in Texas. The cultural
patrimony of the Caddo peoples is being taken from
them, with almost no hand being lifted to help
protect these significant cultural treasures. This is
our greatest challenge in the years ahead: to find a

354

Texas Archeologieal Society

way, in concert with the Caddo people, to protect
and preserve this cultural legacy:
In 1541 when the Spaniards arrived, every place
in the Caddo country had, of course, a Caddo
name but almost all of those names are gone
now, like the people who bestowed them
(Schambach 1993:7).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to especially thank Bo Nelson and
Mike Turner of the Northeast Texas Archeological
Society, and Dan McGregor and Robert "Skipper"
Scott of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers-Fort
Worth District, for providing me with outstanding
cooperation concerning unpublished information on
a number of sites and collections in the Lake O’
The Pines area, and in the Little Cypress Creek
basin. Bo Nelson in particular shared a wealth of
information on Titus phase sites outside of the Big
Cypress Creek basin. I also thank Pete Thurmond,
Bob D. Skiles, and Dee Ann Story for also sharing
information with me on Caddoan sites in Northeast
Texas. Finally, I want to acknowledge the editorial
comments and suggestions of Bonnie Yates on an
earlier draft of the paper.

REFERENCES CITED

Baugh, T. G.
1995 Regional Polities and Socioeconomic Exchange:
Caddoan and Puebloan Interaction. MS on file with
the author.
Bolton, H. E.
1987 The Hasinais: Southern Caddoans as Seen by the
Earliest Europeans. University of Oklahoma Press,
Norman.

Bruseth, J. E.
1987 Late Holocene Environmental Change and Human
Adaptive Strategies in Northeast Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.
1991

Hudnall-Pirtle Site (41RK4): An Early Caddoan
Mound Complex in Northeast Texas. Caddoan Archeology Newsletter II(3):9-15.

1992

Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition: The Evidence
from Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 63:67-97.

1995

The Development of Caddoan Polities Along the
Middle Red River Valley of Eastern Texas and Oklahoma. MS on file with the author.

Bruseth, J. E. and T. K. Perttula
1981

Prehistoric Settlement Patterns at l_xlke Fork Reservoir. Texas Antiquities Permit Series, Report No. 2.
Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin, and Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.

Burnett, B. A.
1990 The Bioarchaeological Synthesis of the eastern portion of the Gulf Coastal Plain. In The Archeology
and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.
A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D. Freeman,
J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J.
Reinhard, pp. 385-418.2 Vols. Research Series No.
38. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Banks,
1990

From Mountain Peaks to Alligator Stomachs: A Re-

Carter, M. E.

view of Lithic Sources in the Trans-Mississippi

1995

South. the Southern Plains, and Adjacent South-

Caddo History: Where We Come From. University
of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

west. Memoir No. 4. Oklahoma Anthropological
Society, Norman.

Clark, J. W. and J. E. Ivey
1974 Archaeological and historical investigations at Mar-

Barker, A. W. and T. R. Pauketat

tin Lake, Rusk and PanoIa Counties, Texas. Research

1992

Report No. 32. Texas Archeological Survey, Austin.

Introduction: Social Inequality and the Native Elites
of Southeastern North America. In Lords" of the
Southeast: Social Inequality and the Native Elites
of Southeastern North America, edited by A.W.

Cliff, M. B. and D. E. Peter (editors)
1994 Archeological Survey of Selected Portions of the

Barker and T. R. Pauketat, pp. !-10. Archeological

Longhorn Army Ammunition Plant, Harrison

Papers of the American Anthropological Association

County, Texas 1989-1992. Miscellaneous Report of

Number 3. American Anthropological Association,

Investigations No. 38. Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano.

Washington, D.C.

Perttula ~ The Archeology of the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas

Collins, M. B. and C. B. Bousman
1993 Quaternary Environments and Archeology in Northeast Texas. In Archeology in the Eastern Planning
Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N.
A. Kenmotsu and T. K. Perttula, pp. 49-67. Cultura!
Resource Management Report 3. Department of
Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Crane,
1982 Plant Utilization at Spoonbill, an Early Caddo Site
in Northeast Texas. Midcontinental Journal of Archaeology 7:81-97.
Cruse, J. B.
1994 Archaeological Investigations at a Middle Caddoan
Village Site (41RK214) in Rusk County, Texas.
Paper presented at the 65th Texas Archeological
Society Meeting, Lubbock, Texas.
1995

Archaeology at the Oak Hill Village Site: A Caddoan
Settlement in Rusk County. Heritage 13(1):10-14.
Texas Historical Foundation, Austin.

355

Fields, R. C., E. F. Gadus, and L. W. Klement
1994 The Peerless Bottoms Site: A Late Caddoan Component at Cooper Lake, Hopkins County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65:55114.
Fritz,
1990

1994

Multiple Pathways to Farming in Precontact Eastern North America. Journal of World Prehistory
4:387-435.
The Value of Archaeological Plant Remains for
Paleodietary Reconstruction. In Paleonutrition: The
Diet and Health of Prehistoric Americans, edited
by K. D. Sobolik, pp. 21-33. Occasional Paper No.
22. Center for Archaeological Investigations, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale.

Gadus, E. F., R. C. Fields, C. B. Bousman, S. A. Tomka, and
M. A. Howard
1992 Excavations at the Finley Fan Site (41HP159), Cooper Lake Project, Hopkins County, Texas. Reports
of Investigations No. 78. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.

Deagan, K.
1987

Artifacts of the Spanish Colonies of Florida and the
Caribbean, 1500-1800. Volume I: Ceramics, Glassware, and Beads. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.

Diamond, D. D., D. H. Riskind, and S. L. Orzell
1987

A Framework for Plant Community Classification
and Conservation in Texas. The Texas Journal of
Science 39:203-221.

Early, A. M. (eeditor)
1994

Girard, J. S.
1994 Investigations at the James Pace Site (16DS268),
DeSoto Parish, Louisiana. Caddoan Archeology
Newsletter V(1):8-16.
Glander, W., G. Sundborg, D. Moore, D. Brown, N. Barker,
D. Jurney, K. White, and L. Jones
1993 Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed
Monticello-Leesburg Coal Surface Mine, Camp
County, Texas. Document No. 861094. Espey,
Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

Caddoan Saltmakers in the Ouachita Valley: The
Hardman Site. Research Series No. 43. Arkansas

Gregory, H. F.

Archeo!ogical Survey, Fayetteville.

1980

Fenneman, N. M.
1938 Physiography of Eastern United States. McGrawHill Book Company, Inc., New York.
Ferring, C. R.
1994 McGee Creek in Regional Paleoenvironmental Context. In Past Environments and Prehistory at McGee
Creek Reservoir, Atoka County, Oklahoma, edited
by C. R. Ferring, pp. 29-43. Volume V, Part 4 of the
McGee Creek Archaeological Project Reports. Institute of Applied Sciences, University of North
Texas, Denton.
Fields, R. C. and S. A. Tomka
1993 Hunter-Gatherer Mobility in Northeast Texas,
10,000-200 B.C. In Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited
by N. A. Kenmotsu and T. K. Perttula, pp. 69-95.
Cultural Resource Management Report 3. Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.

A continuity model for Caddoan adaptation on the
Red River in Louisiana. Louisiana Archaeology
5:347-360.

Guy, J. A.
1990 Previous Archeological Investigations. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal
Plain, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M.
D. Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive,
and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 27-130. 2 Vols. Research
Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.
Harris, R. K., I. M. Harris, and M. P. Miroir
1980 The Atlanta State Park Site in Northeastern Texas.
Louisiana Archaeology 6:223-230.

356

Texas Archeological Society

Helms, M. W.
1992 Political Lords and Political Ideology in Southeast-

Johnson, L., Jr. (Continued)
1987

logical Society 57:1-26.

Lords of the Southeast: Social h~equality and the
Native Elites of Southeastern North America, edited

A Plague of Phases: Recent Sociocultural Taxonomy
in Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo-

ern Chiefdoms:Comments and Observations. In
1989

Great Plains htterlopers in the Eastern Woodlands

by A. W. Barker and T. R. Pauketat, pp. 185-194.

in ix~te Paleoindian Times: The Evidence from Okla-

Archeological Papers of the American Anthropo-

homa, 7~xas, and Areas Close By. Report Series 36.

logical Association Number 3. American Anthropo-

Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical

logical Association, Washington, D.C.

Commission, Austin.

Hoffman, M, P.
1967 Ceramic Pipe Style Chronology Along the Red River
Drainage in Southwestern Arkansas. The Arkansas
Archeologist 8( 1 ):4-14.

Jones, g,c.
1968 The Kinsloe Focus: A Study of Seven Historic

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1993 Cultural Resources of the Proposed Lake Gilmer

Jordan, T. G.

Caddo Sites in Northeast Texas. Master’s thesis,
University of Oklahoma, Norman.

1981

Project, Upshur County, Texas. Horizon Environ-

Trails to Texas: Southern Roots of Western Cattle
Ranching. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.

mental Services, Inc., Austin.
1995

Test Excavations at Proposed Ix~ke Gilmet; Upshur

Kelley, D. B.

Count),, Texas. Horizon Environmental Services,

1994

The McLelland and Joe Clark Sites: ProtohistoricHistoric Caddoan Farmsteads in Southern Bossier

Inc., Austin.

Parish, Louisiana. Coastal Environments, Inc., Ba-

Hudson, C. M.
1990 A Synopsis of the Hernando De Soto expedition,
1539-1543. In De Soto Trail: De Soto National Historic 7)’ail Study, by the National Park Service,
Southeastern Regional Office, pp. 75-126. National
Park Service, Washington, D.C.
Humphrey, J. D. and C. R. Ferring
1994 Stable Isotopic Evidence for Latest Pleistocene and
Holocene Climatic Change in North-Central Texas.
Quaternary Research 41:200-213.
Jackson, A.T.
1933

1934

Some Pipes of East Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 5:69-86.
Types of East Texas Pottery. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 6:38-57.

Jelks, E. B. and C. D. Tunnell
1959 The Harroun Site: A Fulton Aspect Component of
the Caddoan Area, Upshur County, Texas. Archae-

ton Rouge.

Kenmotsu, N. A., J. E. Bruseth, and J. E. Corbin
1993 Moscoso and the Route in Texas: A Reconstruction.
In The Expedition of Hernando De Soto West of the
Mississippi, 1541-1543: Proceedings of the De Soto
Symposia 1988 and 1990, edited by G. A. Young
and M. P. Hoffman, pp. 106-131. University of Arkansas Press, Fayetteville.
Kidder, T. R.
1995 Rethinking Caddoan-Lower Mississippi Valley Interaction. MS on file with the author.
Kleinschmidt, U. K. W.
1982

41AN19, Anderson County, Texas. Master’s thesis,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Kotter, S. M., L. Jones, C. Frederick, and W. Glander
1991

County, Texas. Document No. 910264. Espey,

The University of Texas, Austin.

1989

Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Trans-Mississippi South in Arkansas and Louisiana. Research Series No. 37.

Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.
Kotter, S. M., R. Rogers, R. Taylor, K. Reese-Tay!or, and W.
P. Glander
1993

Texas. Document No. 920013. Espey, Huston &
Associates, Inc., Austin.

Johnson, L., Jr.
The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern
Texas, with a Preliminary Definition of the LaHarpe
Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
32:141-284.

Archaeological Investigation within the Monticello
B-2 First Five-Year Disturbance Area, Titus County,

Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

1962

An Archaeological Investigation of 41TT182 in the
Monticello-Winfield South Surface Mine, Titus

ology Series, No. 2. Department of Anthropology,

Jeter, M. D., J. C. Rose, G. I. Williams, Jr., and A. M. Harmon

Review and Analysis of the A. C. Saunders Site,

Krieger, A. D.
1946

Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas with Extension of Puebloan Datings to the
Mississippi Valley. Publication No. 4640. University of Texas, Austin.

Perttula ~ The Archeology of the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas

K~ichler, A.W.
1964 Potential Natural Vegetation of the Conterminous
United States. American Geographical Society Special Publication 36. New York.
McClurkan, B. B., W. T. Field, and J. N. Woodall
1966 Excavations in Toledo Bend Reservoit; 1964-65.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
No. 8. Texas Archeologicat Salvage Project, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Middlebrook, T.
1994 An Update of Archaeological Investigations at the
Tyson Site (41SY92). Journal of Northeast Texas
Archaeology No. 3:1-36.
Nasatir, A. P. and N. M. Loomis
1967

Pedro Vial and the Roads to Santa Fe. University
of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

Nash, M. A., S. M. Kotter, and K. V. Reese-Taylor
1995

National Register Testing of Ten Sites in the
Monticello B-2 Surface Mine, Titus County, Texas.
Document No. 930529. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.

Perttula, T. K. (Continued)
1992a "The

Caddo Nation": Archaeological and
Ethnohistoric Perspectives. University of Texas
Press, Austin.

1992b The Looting and Vandalism of Archaeological Sites

in East Texas. American Society for Conservation
Archaeology Report 18 (No. 2):3-13.
1993a The Development of Agriculture in Northeast Texas
before A.D. 1600. In Archeology in the Eastern
Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N. A. Kenmotsu and T. K. Perttula, pp. 121146. Cultural Resource Management Document 3.
Texas Historical Commission, Department of Antiquities Protection, Austin.
t993b Sites with Excellent Faunal and Floral Preservation
in the Northeast Texas Archeological Study Region. In Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N. A.
Kenmotsu and T. K. Perttula, pp. 259-261. Cultural
Resource Management Document 3. Texas Historical Commission, Department of Antiquities Protection, Austin.
1993c Effects of European Contact on Native and Immi-

grant Indians in Northeast Texas. In Archeology in
the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document, edited by N. A. Kenmotsu and T. K.
Perttula, pp. 147-187. Cultural Resource Management Report 3. Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Nelson, B. and T. K. Perttula
1993 Site 41UR136, a Titus Phase Site in the Little Cypress Creek Basin, Texas. Caddoan Archeology
Newsletter III (No. 4): 11-16.

Nelson, B., T. Perttula, and M. Turner
1994 Caddoan Archaeology in the Little Cypress Creek
Valley: Recent Investigations at the Griffin Mound
Site (41UR142), Upshur County, Texas. Caddoan
Archeology Newsletter 5(3):6-17.
Newell, H. P. and A. D. Krieger
1949 The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.
Memoirs No. 5. Published jointly by the Society for
American Archaeology and the University of Texas,
Menasha, Wisconsin.

357

1993d Threats to Archeological Resources in the Eastern
Planning Region. In Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited
by N. A. Kenmotsu and T. K. Perttula, pp. 15-25.
Cultural Resource Management Report 3. Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.
1994

Caddoan Mound Sites in the Sabine River Basin of
Northeast Texas. Caddoan Archeology Newsletter
IV(4):4-19.

1995

Agricultural Economies and the Character of
Caddoan Societies in the Trans-Mississippi South.
In Politics and Economies in the Mississippian
Southeast, edited by C. Cobb and J. Muller. MS
under review, University of Alabama Press.

Pearce, J. E.
1932 The Archaeology of East Texas. American Anthropologist 34:670-687.
Perttula, T. K.
1984

Patterns of Prehistoric Lithic Raw Material Utilization in the Caddoan Area: The Western Gulf Coastal
Plain. In Prehistoric Chert Exploitation-Studies from
the Midcontinent, edited by B. M. Butler and E. E.
May, pp. 129-148. Occasional Paper 2. Center for
Archaeological Investigations, Southern Illinois University-Carbondale.

1989

Perttula, T. K. and J. E. Bruseth
1983 Early Caddoan Subsistence Strategies, Sabine River
Basin, East Texas. Plains Anthropologist 28:9-21.
1995

Trade and Exchange in Eastern Texas, 1100 B.C.A.D. 800. In "Exchange in the Lower Mississippi
Valley and Contiguous Areas in 1100 B.C.," edited
by J. L. Gibson. Louisiana Archaeology 17:93-121.

A study of mound sites in the Sabine River Basin,
Northeast Texas and Northwest Louisiana. Final
report submitted to the Texas Historical Commission by the University of North Texas, Institute of
Applied Sciences, Denton.

Perttula, T. K., C. J. Crane, and J. E. Bruseth
1982 A Consideration of Caddoan Subsistence. Southeastern A rchaeology ! :89-102.

358

Texas Archeological Society

Perttula, T. K., B. D. Skiles, and B. C. Yates
1993a The Goldsmith Site (41WD208): investigations of

Schambach, F. F. (Continued)
1989

The end of the trail: The route of Hernando de

the Titus phase in the Upper Sabine River Basin,

Soto’s army through Southwest Arkansas and East

Northeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeologi-

Texas. The Arkansas Archeologist 27128:9-33.

cal Society 61 : 139-191.

1993

A Summary of the History of the Caddo People.
Notes on Northeast Texas Archaeology, No. 2:1-7.

1993b The Carlisle Site (41WD46), a Middle Caddoan
Occupation on the Sabine River, Wood County,

n.d.

Texas. Notes on Northeast Texas Archaeology, No.

Scurlock, J. D.

1:34-62.

1962

Northeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeologi-

The Burks Site (41WD52), A Late Caddoan Titus

cal Society 32:285-316.

Phase Village in Wood County, Texas. MS in preparation.

Skibo, J. M.

Perttula, T. K., R. C. Fields, J. E. Corbin, and N. A. Kenmotsu
1993

The Culpepper Site, A Late Fulton Aspect Site in

1992

num Press, New York and London.

The Emergence of Sedentism in the Northeast Texas
Archeological Region, ca. 500 B.C. to A.D. 1000.
In Archeology in the Eastetw Planning Region,

Pottery Function: A Use-Alteration Perspective. Ple-

Skinner, S. A., R. K. Harris, and K. M. Anderson (editors)
1969

Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N. A.
Kenmotsu and T. K. Perttula, pp. 97-120. Cultural

Archaeological Investigations at the Sam Kaufman
Site, Red River County, Texas. Contributions in Anthropology No. 5. Department of Anthropology,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Resource Management Report 3. Department of
Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Smith,
1994

The Red River Caddos: A Historical Overview to

Perttula, T. K., B. D. Skiles, M. B. Collins, M. C. Trachte, and

1835. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

F. Valdez, Jr.
1986 "This Everlasting Sand Bed": Cultural Resources

65:115-127.

Investigations at the Texas Big Sandy Project, Wood

1995

and Upshur Counties, Texas. Reports of Investiga-

College Station.

tions No. 52. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Stahle, D. W., M. K. Cleaveland, and J. G. Hehr

Rogers, R., E. Foster, and K. Reese-Taylor
1994

National Register Testing at Eight Archaeological

1985

Rusk County, Texas. Document No. 930169. Espey,
Huston & Associates, Inc., Austin.
Rose, J. C.
1984 Bioarchaeology of the Cedar Grove Site. In Cedar
Grove: An Interdisciplinary htvestigation of a Late
Caddo Farmstead in the Red River Valley, edited by
N. L. Trubowitz, pp. 227-256. Research Series No.
23. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Rose, J. C., M. P. Hoffman, B. A. Burnett, A. M. Harmon, and

A 450-Year Drought Reconstruction for Arkansas,
United States. Nature 316:530-532.

Sites within the Oak Hill 2,280-Acre Study Area,

Steponaitis, V. P.
1984 Technological Studies of Prehistoric Pottery from
Alabama: Physical Properties and Vessel Function.
In The Many Dimensions of Pottery: Ceramics in
Archaeology and Anthropology, edited by S. E. Van
Der Leeuw and A. C. Pritchard, pp. 79-127.
Universiteit van Amsterdam, Amsterdam.
Story, D. A.
1990

Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The
Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal

J. C. Barnes
1995

The Caddo Indians: Tribes at the Convergence of
Empires, 1542-1854. Texas A&M University Press,

Plain, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M.

Skeletal Biology of the Prehistoric Caddo. MS on

D. Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive,

file with the author.

and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. 2 Vols. Research
Schambach, F. F.

Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey,

1982

Fayetteville.

An Outline of Fourche Maline Culture in Southwest
Arkansas. In Arkansas Archeology in Review, edited by N. L. Trubowitz and M. D. Jeter, pp. 132197.

Research

Series

No.

15.

Arkansas

Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Story, D. A. and D. G. Creel
1982

The Cultural Setting. In The Deshazo Site,
Nacogdoches County, Texas, Volume 1, edited by
D. A. Story, pp. 20-34. Report No. 7, Texas Antiq-

1983

The Archeology of the Great Bend Region in Arkansas. In Contributions to the Archeology of the
Great Bend Region, edited by F. F. Schambach and
F. Rackerby, pp. 1-11. Research Series No. 22. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

uities Permit Series. Texas Antiquities Committee,
Austin.

Perttula ~ The Archeology of the Pineywoods and Post Oak Savanna of Northeast Texas

Story, D. A. (editor)
1982 The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas. Volume 1. Texas Antiquities Permit Series, Report No.
7. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.
Swanton, J. R.
1942

can Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.

Thurmond, J. P.
1981 Archeology of the Cypress Creek Drainage Basin,
Northeastern Texas and Northwestern Louisiana.
M.A. thesis, University of Texas at Austin.

1988

Turner, M. (Continued)
!994 From Soccer Socials to Caddo Archeology. The
Cache: Collected Papers on Texas Archeology,
Volume 2, edited by C. A. Hoyt, pp. 69-72. Office
of the State Archeo!ogist, Texas Historical
Commission.

Source Material on the History and Ethnology of
the Caddo Indians. Bulletin 132. Bureau of Ameri-

1985

359

Late Caddoan social group identifications and
sociopolitical organization in the upper Cypress Basin and its vicinity, Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas ArcheologicaI Society 54:185-200.
Caddoan Archeology--Its Present Status and Future Directions: A Perspective from Northeast Texas.
Paper presented at the 30th Caddo Conference, Dallas.

1990a Archeology of the Cypress Creek drainage basin,
Northeastern Texas and Northwestern Louisiana.
Studies in Archeology, No. 5. Texas Archeotogical
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin.
1990b Was the Cypress Cluster one of the (many) victims

of the 1539-1543 De Soto expedition? Caddoan
Archeology Newsletter Volume I(3):5-11.

Turner, R. L.
1978 The Tuck Carpenter site and its relation to other
sites within the Titus focus. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 49:1-110.
1992

Prehistoric Mortuary Remains at the Tuck Carpenter Site, Camp County, Texas. Studies in Archeology, No. 10. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin.

1995

Native American Ceramics of Northeast Texas.
Texas Archeological Stewardship Network Newsletter 10(1):19-21.

Webb, C. H.
1959 The Belcher Mound, A Stratified Caddoan Site in
Caddo Parish, Louisiana. Memoirs, No. 16. Society for American Archaeology, Salt Lake City, Utah.
1984

The Bellevue Focus: A Marksville-Troyville Manifestation in Northwestern Louisiana. Louisiana Archaeology 9:25 t-274.

Webb, C. H., J. L. Shiner, and E. W. Roberts
1971 The John Pearce Site (16CD56): A San Patrice Site
in Caddo Parish, Louisiana. Bulletin of the Texas
A rcheological Society 42:1-49.

Toomey, R. S. III, M. D. Blum, and S. Valastro Jr.
1993

Late Quaternary Climates and Environments of the
Edwards Plateau, Texas. Global and Planetary
Change 7:299-320.

Trubowitz, N. L. (editor)
1984 Cedar Grove: An Interdisciplinary Investigation of
a Late Caddo Farmstead in the Red River Valley.

Webb, C. H., F. E. Murphey, W. G. Ellis, and H. R. Green
1969 The Resch Site, 41HS16, Harrison County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:3106.
Woodall, J. N.
1969

Archaeological Excavations in the Toledo Bend Res-

Research Series No. 23. Arkansas Archeological

ervoir, 1966. Contributions in Anthropo!ogy No. 3.

Survey, Fayettevi!le.

Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.

Turner, M.
1993 A Two-Phase Caddo Mound at the Camp Joy Site
(41UR144). Notes on Northeast Texas Archaeology, No. 2:66-75.

Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas
Michael B. Collins

ABSTRACT
Substantive, theoretical, and methodological accomplishments in the archeology of Central Texas since the
1954 publication of An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology are notable and diverse, but scientific
maturity has not been achieved.

INTRODUCTION
This contribution to the 66th Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society reviews what has been
learned about the prehistory of the Central Texas
archeological region, a task undertaken twice before
in this venue (Suhm, t~ieger, and Jelks 1954; Suhm
1960). In the earlier of these, a formal structure of
archeological inquiry was established for the entire
state, and the diverse data gathered over the first
half of the century were organized and synthesized.
Although successive metamorphoses have rendered the particulars of the 1954 Handbook virtually unrecognizable in current practice, each revision
was built on what had gone before, so that much of
what we know today rests on sturdy foundations
laid 40 years ago. Typologies of ceramics and projectile points published in the Handbook have remained more intact than the other cultural
constructs. In his introduction to the Handbook,
Krieger (Suhm et al. 1954:2-10) also established a
number of the tenets of typology that continue to
underlie some artifact classifications in the state.
The review published in !960 is the first
metamorphosis, beginning by offering a smaller
and less rigidly bounded delineation of "Central
Texas" (Suhm 1960:Figure 1). Among the lasting
contributions of the review are good visual (Suhm
1960:Figures 2 and 3) and descriptive (Suhm
1960:89-103) images of the nature of the Central
Texas archeological data base, particularly its key
sites. Historic Indian groups in Central Texas
received greater treatment, and Suhm’s review also
reflects the beginnings of the preoccupation with
prehistoric chronology-building that overwhelmed
the research effort over the next 25 years and

dominated subsequent reviews and syntheses. At
the time Suhm wrote her review (1958), only one
radiocarbon date was available for a Central Texas
site (Suhm 1960:88), and analyses of stratified site
excavations were too few to use as a basis for
establishing a chronology.
Since 1960, several topically, temporally, or
theoretically focused reviews of Central Texas archeology have been written (e.g., Weir 1976), or
published (e.g., Johnson 1967; McKinney 1981;
Prewitt 1981, 1985; Black 1989; Creel 1991;
Howard 1991; Johnson and Goode 1994; Lintz
1993; Ellis 1994). Some of these have been more
influential than others, but, as the present review
will show, none has adequately considered the nature of the region’s archeological record.
The vast data base that now exists for Central
Texas cannot be adequately synthesized and presented in the space available. This essay attempts
instead to:
o critique the practice of archeology in Central
Texas,
¯ offer a brief summation of what we presently
know, and

opine some ways by which we might know
significantly more, and have greater confidence
in that knowledge, by the time a next review is
written.
It is necessary to critique the manner of our
work because archeology rarely answers questions
that have not been asked, and because the questions
asked and the ways they are addressed in any archeological paradigm largely dictate the nature of
the substantive findings. Over most of the last 40

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

362

Texas Archeological Society

years, archeological efforts in Central Texas have
excessively emphasized questions of chronology,
have failed to identify and sustain a focus on but a
few other issues of substance, and have not adequately understood the nature of the archeological record.
Inexplicably, the preoccupation with chronology prevailed without development of a very effective methodology for its pursuit. Specifically,
although the sondage technique was adopted, the
greatest effort has been expended on precisely the
kinds of sites with the least potential for yielding
good chronological information, while sites with
that potential languished with comparatively little
attention. There have been many data generated,
but not much synthesis of those data.
Belatedly, four trends have emerged in the last
100 months that encourage me to believe that the
prospect is good for significantly improved research
in the archeology of the region (cf. Ellis 1994).
First, we have begun to better recognize the nature
of the archeological record, and how it was formed,
as well as the greater need for data quality over
data quantity. Second, preoccupation with issues
chronological has begun to give way to sustained
concern with several questions of human adaptation. Third, research now reflects an awareness of
great data potential that had long been overlooked,
and the relevance of data to the questions asked is
being scrutinized. Finally, cracks may be appearing
in the wall of provincialism that surrounds us. Great
openings should follow and, in the words of Johnson
(1991:21-22):
The future of archaeological research in the
Edwards Plateau and adjacent areas will be considerably less gloomy if the region can get the
attention it deserves, and if its synthesis is addressed to a national or international audience
that will be critical of any local misadventures.
Lest the wrong impression be implied by the
foregoing, archeology is a historical science;
therefore, constantly improving chronological
control of the past must remain a primary objective,
but only as the framework for ordering more
substantive inquiries and findings. In this vein,
much has been said about the validity and meaning
of various temporal frameworks offered for Central
Texas prehistory. In spite of the use of terms such
as phase, and the discussion of phases in ways
suggesting they have ethnic meaning, the foremost

purpose of such constructs has been temporal
ordering of archeological material culture. These
are based largely on morphological (supposedly
stylistic) trends in artifact forms, and, as such, are
archeological style periods, not unlike style periods
(e.g., Victorian, Greek Revival, or Tudor) used by
architects. Johnson (1987, 1991) has suggested that
some of our archeological style periods be called
patterns, and I (Collins et al. 1990) have proposed
the label, intervals. Either of these is better suited
than phase, to which we both object, but I continue
to prefer interval, first because it emphasizes the
main thrust--time--and, second, because pattern
implies that we know more about the material
cultural composition of some of the time slices than
I believe we do. Whatever we call the segments of
our temporal framework, their function is to order
cultural change, which is the essentia! basis for
understanding cultural processes.

CENTRAL TEXAS AS AN
ARCHEOLOGICAL AREA
Culture areas (Kroeber 1939) and their archeological counterparts (e.g., as used by Willey 1966)
have long served to focus attention on regions of
shared cultural traits. At any single moment in time,
culture area boundaries often can be drawn relatively easily. Some boundaries persist for centuries
or millennia, but others shift and blur over time.
The longer the time period under consideration, the
more arbitrary boundaries become. Much of North
America might be considered a single culture area
during Clovis times, but by A.D. 1000, scores of
areas would be needed to each embrace the same
degree of material-culture sameness as seen in all
of Clovisdom.
Any delineation of the Central Texas archeological area is highly arbitrary. Conversely, to draw
boundaries based on careful considerations of material-cultural sameness would result in a sequence of
perhaps a dozen Central Texas areas of quite different sizes and shapes, an unmanageable array for the
purposes of this essay. So, for the present discussion, Prewitt’s (1981:71 and Figure 2) delineation
of the Central Texas Archeological Area (Figure 1)
has been used as a descriptive framework, but its
boundaries have not been adhered to rigidly as regards certain archeological and geological data that
inform on key issues in the local record. Also, this
delineation is selected with the proviso that, like any

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

Figure 1. The Central Texas archeological area (after
Prewitt 1981).

such arbitrary construct, it is more satisfactory for
some parts of the prehistoric record than for others.
More importantly, as Gamble (1986), Hodder
(1978), Clarke (1977), Ebert (1992) and others have
noted in general, and Ellis (1994:54-56) has discussed specifically for the Central Texas culture
area (see also Ellis et al., this volume), our spatial
concepts can seriously impair our efforts to interpret past human adaptations. In the past 11,000
years, there probably has never been any cultural
group whose key resources, geographic range, or
political sphere conformed even approximately to
what archeologists designate as "Central Texas."
This is an area of roughly 84,300 square kilometers, or 12 percent of the area of the state. As of
January 1995, recorded archeological sites numbered 11,355 for Central Texas, which could be as
low as 10-20 percent of the actual number, judging
from site densities in a few thoroughly surveyed
areas. Documented sites are located in open areas
on various topographic features, along blufflines,
in rockshelters, and in caves; site characteristics
differ greatly, but afford clues as to the function or
functions of any given site, or of a component within
a site (Table 1).
In Central Texas, the most common kind of
site recognized is an accumulation of debris (burned

363

rock, stone chipping residue, pottery sherds) and
diverse utilitarian objects (grinding stones,
hammerstones, unifaces, bifaces), sometimes in
great quantities. Although various more-specific interpretations ("base camps," "extractive sites," etc.)
have been offered, it is probably safest to say that
the vast majority of these represent the residue from
one or more periods of habitation; in simplified
terms, these are camp sites where people stayed for
a time, regardless of their more specific purposes
for being at that location. Camps are found in all
settings (see Table 1; Figure 2): in the open, along
bluffs, in rockshelters, and even a few in caves
such as Scorpion~ and Halls. Features found at
camps include just about all kinds: hearths (Figure
2a), knapping areas, graves, caches, pits, houses,
and many others. One of the more conspicuous
and, therefore, most commonly noted features in
Central Texas, are massive, mounded accumulations of burned rocks or "burned rock middens"
(Figure 3a-c). Because they have played such a
large role in the archeology of Central Texas (cf.
Ellis 1994), burned rock middens are discussed
separately, below.
The elements (artifacts and features) that make
up or accompany camp sites sometimes occur apart

Table 1. Simplified characterization of site
types and settings in Central Texas
SITE TYPES

SITE SETTINGS

Open

Bluffline

Rockshelter

camp

x

x.

x

caches

x

x

x

isolated artifacts

x

x

x

interments

x

x

x

cemeteries

x

x

kill/butchery

x

x

quarry/workshop

x

lithic scatters

x

rock art

x

x

x

~Bibli})graphic references for sites and geologic studies mentioned in the text and Table 2 are in the Appendix.

Cave

364

Texas Archeological Society

b

d
Figure 2. Examples of common kinds of archeological sites in Central Texas: a, open campsite; b, stratified open
campsite; c, rockshelter; d, lithic quarry and workshop.

from camps. These include caches, isolated
artifacts, burials, bedrock mortars, and rock art
(Figure 3d), all of which are known to occur in
various settings (see Table 1). Cemeteries, in and
away from camps, are known in the prehistoric
record of Central Texas, and have been found in
rockshelters (Watt 1936), open localities (Loeve
Fox, Frisch Auf!), and in vertical shaft caves
(Hitzfelder, Mason Burial Cave).

Few animal kill sites have been documented in
Central Texas. The Late Prehistoric bison skeleton
(Feature 66) at Loeve Fox is one possible example
(Prewitt 1982:73-79). Another is inferred from
fossilized bison bones and Folsom points dislodged
by treasure-hunters from the floor of Kincaid
Rockshelter, where it seems a bison died after it
was wounded but not retrieved by Folsom hunters
(Collins 1990b).

Collins m Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

365

b

d
Figure 3. Examples of the very common burned rock middens (a-c) and the uncommon rock art panels (d) of Central
Texas: a, a pristine burned rock midden in Blanco County; b, burned rock midden and hearth in the stratified Wiley
Williams site, Travis County; c, typical structure of a burned rock midden (Sutton County); d, pictographs at Paint Rock
in Concho County.

Chert has been the most important kind of
toolstone throughout the prehistory of Central
Texas, and the area is rich in the quantity and quality
of this raw material (Banks 1990). This is reflected
in numerous sites where chert was acquired
(quarries), acquired and knapped (quarry/workshops
[see Figure 2d]), or just knapped (lithic scatters).
Each of these kinds of sites has its own
characteristic parameters. The diverse kinds of sites
are not equally visible to the archeologist, their
interpretive potential varies greatly, they were never
equally numerous, and they have survived the

vagaries of nature at different rates. Efforts to
interpret and compare patterns of land use over
time, or to estimate such things as relative
population sizes, are heavily burdened with these
sampling issues.
As a natural area, Central Texas is diverse. Its
single most significant feature is a prominent fault
scarp, the Balcones Escarpment, which arcs from
northeast to southwest around the center of Central
Texas, and breaks the area into two contrasting
subareas (Figure 4a). The larger subarea is north
and west of the scarp, on its upside. Most of this is

366

Texas Archeological Society

Icones
carpment
Ecotone

b

d
Figure 4. Geographic aspects of Central Texas: a, physiography; b, major fiver basins; c,
geology; d, soils (A=alfisols; M=mollisols; V=vertisols; f=fluvial valley fills, various
soils).

dissected plateau land of resistant limestone and
thin upland soils, but deeply eroded crystalline
rocks--the Central Texas Mineral Region--are
present as well. The prevailing vegetation is oak
and juniper savanna. Of roughly half the size is the
smaller subarea, south and east of the scarp, on its
downside. This is part of the coastal plain, a region
of relatively soft bedrocks and deep soils. Most of
this subarea is prairie with deep clayey soils, but a
narrow strip along its eastern margin is post oak
forest standing on deep sandy soils.
Along the escarpment lies a great ecotone (see
Figure 4a) where natural conditions are transitional
between the plateau to the west and north and the
prairies to the east and south. More importantly, it

is beneficial for humans to occupy an ecotone
whence they can readily access contrasting resources in the adjacent biomes and capitalize on the
resource diversity of the transitional zone.
Annual precipitation decreases from east to
west across Central Texas from near 100 cm to 55
cm. The primary water resources for preindustrial
peoples are streams and springs. Two river systems, the Brazos and the Colorado, drain approximately 75 percent of the Central Texas area (Figure
4b); the remaining 25 percent is roughly equally
divided into the catchments of the Nueces, San
Antonio, and Guadalupe rivers (see Figure 4b). Generally, drainage is toward the southeast. Of the 281
springs documented for Texas, 139 (49 percent) are

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

in the area, including both of the state’s very large
springs (>100 cubic ft/sec), and 12 of the state’s 17
large (10-100 cubic ft/sec) springs (Brune 1975).
Change, as it is everywhere, is and always has
been unrelenting across the land of Central Texas.
Wind, water, and gravity move earth material from
place to place; lakes, streams, and springs flourish
and fail; caves and rockshelters form, enlarge, degrade, and coliapse. The delicate balances between
soils, climates, plants, and animals are ceaselessly
being adjusted. Terra firma is but an illusion.

LANDSCAPE EVOLUTION FROM
EARTHQUAKES TO
EARTHWORMS
Foremost among deficiencies in the methodology by which most of the Central Texas
archeological record has been built is inadequate
recognition of the dynamic nature of the physical
environment, and the profound implications
landscape evolution has for archeological inquiry.
Issues of !ong-term changes in climate (Bryant and
Shafer 1977; Bryant and Holloway 1985) and biotic
communities (e.g., Dillehay 1974) have received
considerable attention from archeologists, but these

are like words wtihout music when portrayed across
a static terrain. A few examples will illustrate the
importance of integrating archeological inquiry with
an understanding of landscape change--whether
studying a region or a single site.
Most archeological surveys, until recent years,
were conducted without the explicit objective of
discovering buried sites (e.g., Shafer et al. 1964).
Even though awareness of the need for subsurface
reconnaissance has increased (e.g., Saunders et al.
1992), much of our archeological data base was
generated without this awareness and is significantly
biased as a result. Corollary to discovering buried
sites is the recognition that in some areas landscape
change has been sufficient to obliterate sites. The
important point here is that geologic and pedogenic
processes have nonrandomly altered, buried, and
destroyed sites (e.g., Abbott 1994). Examples from
different areas of Central Texas are instructive.

Fluvial Systems
Simplified depictions of site distributions from
archeological surveys in three reservoirs along the
Colorado River clearly illustrate one aspect of this
bias. In two of the three project areas (Figures 5 and
6), virtually no sites were recorded on the inside of

Location Map

0
Key

miles

Absense of
Site=

Figure 5. Site distributions in the basin of Robert Lee Reservoir; note paucity of sites on the
inside of river bends (from Shafer 1967).

367

368

Texas Archeological Society
occurs in the upper reaches of small streams
(Blum and Valastro 1989; Collins et al. 1990).
Skinner (1974) found larger sites typically occurring along the main trunk of the Guadalupe
River, with small sites more characteristic of the
tributaries. He interpreted this to reflect an Archaic settlement pattern with base camps on the
large river linked to extractive sites in the smaller
valleys. However, this conclusion cannot be valid
because the archeological record formed differently along the main trunk and its tributaries.
Exposed Early Archaic sites are extremely infrequent in the main Guadalupe valley, probably
because most of them are deeply buried in Late
Holocene alluvium, whereas in the upper reaches
of tributaries, where little deposition has occurred
since the Early Holocene, components dating
throughout the Archaic are present, often mixed

8 km

[

Key
sites
Ablsence of
Sites

Figure 6. Site distributions in Buchanan Lake Basin; note
paucity of sites on the inside of river bends (from Jackson and
Woolsey 1938).
235

bends in the river (Sharer 1967; Jackson and Woolsey
1938). In the third (Figure 7), only a few sites, "ephemeral and not worthy of excavation," were noted on the
inside of bends (TARL files). Are we to infer that
people chose ahnost never to live on the inside of river
bends? No, I suggest we are to infer instead that the
surveys failed to discover sites buried on the interior of
the river bends. Since streams almost invariably cut on
the outside of their bends and deposit on the inside, a
sequence of prograding deposits forms on the interior
of bends. These are referred to as "pointbars," and are
often the ideal depositional environment for the formation of stratified sites. Such sites, however, are commonly invisible or decidedly meager in appearance at
the surface, exactly the pattern seen in the three surveys.
Another aspect of site distributional data in the
valleys of major streams is that even along a single
stream, different histories of deposition often occurred
in different areas. Almost no Early Holocene fill is
exposed in the larger stream valleys in the central
Edwards Plateau, and almost no Late Holocene fill

i

!
0
I

2

4 km
!

Figure 7. Site distributions in the lower reaches of
Marshall Ford (Lake Travis) basin; note that relatively
few sites were mapped on the inside of river bends;
sites 41TV207, 208,220, 229, and 240 tabulated in
survey report as "ephemeral and not worthy of
excavation" (from records on file, TARL).

Collins w Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

together in multi-component sites on long-stable
surfaces (Collins et al. 1990:13-15).
Finally, recent mapping and dating of a!!ostratigraphic2 units in the valley of the Colorado
River downstream from the Balcones Escarpment
(Blum 1992) has shown that major changes have
taken place in a much shorter time than previously
inferred (e.g., Baker and Penteado-Orellana 1978).
During the culturally-relevant past (ca. 12,000 B.P.
to the present), four periods of Colorado River valley geomorphic history can be recognized, based
on Blum’s (1992) findings, as relevant to the formation of the archeological record in the eastern
part of Central Texas.
At ca. 12,000 years ago, the river had downcut
in its older valley fill and was cutting into bedrock.
High surfaces of the older fill (the Eagle Lake
Alloformation that had built up during the period
between 18,000 and 15,000 B.P.) were exposed as
terraces along the river as possible localities for any
very early sites to form. Significant portions of this
landform were subsequently cut away, but scores
of square kilometers are still present in the Central
Texas stretch of the lower Colorado River valley.
From then until ca. 3500 years ago, the valley floor
aggraded, forming a unit mapped as Member 1 of
the Columbus Bend Alloformation. This unit dates
from ca. 11,000 to 3300 years ago, and often exceeds 10 meters in thickness. Deeply stratified sites
containing Paleoindian to Late Archaic components, such as the Vara Daniel site in Austin’s
Zilker Park (Ricklis et al. 1991), formed in this
unit. This unit was then partly cut by the river.
Member 2 of the same alloformation then aggraded
against, and partly over, Member 1 between about
1600 and 1000 years ago. Member 2 often exceeds
12 meters in thickness and contains Late Archaic
to early Late Prehistoric sites; these, too, were
present at the Vara Daniel site (Takac et al. 1992).
There are a few hundred square kilometers of members 1 and 2 of the Columbus Bend Alloformation
in Central Texas, concealing an untold number of
buried archeological components.
The river downcut again, ca. 1000 years ago,
before depositing its most recent unit, Member 3 of
the Columbus Bend Alloformation, which is inset
against the older members 2 and 1. Blum (1992:193)
noted modern artifacts (e.g., barbed wire) in this

369

member, but radiocarbon ages back to ca. 500 B.P.
(Blum 1992:Table 6.4) indicate that some buried
Late Prehistoric components could be present. Accelerated deposition in the last 100 years (Blum
1992:193), is probably attributable to disruption of
the natural vegetation by grazing and farming, and
this may have buried most late sites.
For the archeologist, the horizontal extent of
fluvial deposits may be as important as their temporal coverage. Deposits of any particular age might
occur only in extremely limited areas favorable for
deposition, might be massive and extensive, or
might be moderately widespread. Knowledge of
these conditions is essential to discovering sites,
and to interpreting their frequencies relative to other
sites and by time periods.

"Eocene" Sand Sheet and the
Big Brushy Formation

Along the eastern margin of the Central Texas
Archeological Area is a narrow strip of deep sandy
land (see Figure 4c), generally mapped as Eocene
on geologic maps (Barnes 1981). As in much of
eastern Texas, prehistoric sites found in this setting
commonly are either buried or exposed by some
kind of land disturbance (cf. Brown 1986; Taylor
1987). Just outside the Central Texas area, but in the
same sand belt, recent geoarcheological work has
defined a Holocene unit (the Big Brushy formation),
a widespread sand mantle of variable thickness which
in places contains buried archeological remains
(Bianchi 1984; Perttula et al. 1986). This work sheds
light on the kinds of formation processes that might
be expected in the Central Texas part of the sand
belt. Basically, in the words of Bousman and Fields
(1988:195) regarding the Big Brushy formation:
sand thickness is viewed as having a direct
bearing on the preservation and interpretability
of the archeological record, with thick sands
having the potential to contain intact, stratified
cultural deposits and thin sands having a greater
likelihood of containing eroded, displaced
cultural materials.

Furthermore, since the Big Brushy formation is
thought to have aeolian and colluvial facies, it has

2A sedimentary unit defined and mappable on the basis of its bounding discontinuities; such a unit itself does not have to
be continuous (North American Commission on Stratigraphic Nomenclature 1983: 865-867).

370

Texas Archeological Society

the potential of reflecting changes in environmental
conditions over time.

Ubiquitous Processes
Minor surface deformation events, as well as
earthquakes with magnitudes up to 5 on the Rich-

Blackland Prairie
That band of the coastal plain just east of the
Balcones Escarpment known as the Black Prairie
or Blackland Prairie is an area of deep soils ultrarich in clay, called "ultraclay soils." Sites formed in
these soils are subject to extreme disruption through
soil processes (pedoturbation). Soil textbooks (e.g.,
Boul et al. 1989) even use Houston Black Clay, the
prevalent soil series in the Blackland Prairie, as
representative of the adverse properties of ultraclay
soils (see Figure 4d). Extreme plasticity when wet,
deep vertical cracking when dry (Duffield 1970),
and a propensity to roll like a slowly boiling thick
liquid (producing soil features called gilgai), are
the factors that threaten site integrity. Gilgai movement in soil is like that in dough as it is kneaded. In
deep Houston Black Clay, the rolling motion typically extends downward about 1.5 to 2 meters and
produces distinctive shear features, called slickensides, between masses of soil that move past each
other. I have seen pieces of modern metal and glass
dragged to the bottom of gilgai (a downward distance of more than 1.5 meter) by this process, showing that the rolling time of gilgai is on the order of
decades. If excavations encounter large slickensides
(often observable in irregular planes 25 to 50 cm or
more across) in a site, that site, in all likelihood, is
badly disturbed.

Bluffs and colluvial slopes
Much of Central Texas is dissected limestone
plateau land, and there are also areas where hills of
granite, sandstone, and other rock types occur. Hillsides and valley walls in all of these are subject to
degradation in the form of slope movement, or
colluviation. At least one site (41ML64 in
McLennan County) has been documented as partially disrupted by a landslide (Collins and Holliday
1985). Where overhangs occur ("rockshelters"),
these, too, degrade and collapse over time (Collins
1991b). Sites on, or at the toe of, slopes are subject
to movement or burial by colluviation. As
rockshelters degrade and collapse, sites within them
are buried in detritus. All of these factors profoundly
shape the archeological record.

ter scale, occur in the area (Osmond 1963; Davis
et al. 1989). The consequences of seismicity and
tectonic activity during the Late Quaternary (cf. E.
Collins 1982; E. Collins et al. 1980) may have influenced human history or the archeological record
of that history in Central Texas. Expectable consequences of earthquakes include: degradation of
rockshelters and blufflines (Collins 1991b), soil
liquefaction or ejection events, and the alteration
of stream courses (Rapp 1986; Schumm 1977;
Talwani and Cox 1985).
Pedoturbation occurs to some extent in all soils.
Common forms include the action of roots of trees,
brush, and herbaceous vegetation; the burrowing of
animals; and the constant action of earth worms.
Dens of the social insects, particularly ants, can
also cause extensive damage to sites.
As the landscape aggrades, soil formation and
the disruptive forces that accompany soils are
lessened proportionally to the rate of aggradation.
Conversely, cessation of aggradation intensifies
disturbance in the soil zone. It also invites the
mixing of archeological evidence from multiple
periods of occupation, called palimpsests (cf.
Fen’ing 1986). It is important to recognize that any
surface upon which archeological materials rest
was stable, at least briefly. If that surface is buried,
aggradation resumed after a time of stability. Not
all buried surfaces are equal, since the time of
stability can vary from days to millennia before
deposition resumes.
Archeologists do not always discriminate the
differences among buried archeological surfaces,
placing too much emphasis on the fact of burial and
not enough on the nature of the interval of stability
(lacuna or hiatus) that preceded burial. Palimpsest
sites can become buried and be just as mixed as
their counterparts at the present surface.
A particular pitfall is that of penecontemporaneity, or burial at the same time. At any
moment, the land surface will be composed of
surfaces that have been exposed for different lengths
of time. If widespread deposition abruptly covers
part of that land surface, the preceding interval of
stability will have been of greater duration in some
areas than in others, but the overlying sediments
will all be of the same age. Any attempt by

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas
archeologists to use the age of a depositional unit to
estimate anything other than the minimum age of
underlying archeological materials is at risk.

CHRONOLOGY AND OTHER
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
It has become fashionable to criticize efforts
to build an archeological chronology for Central
Texas. McKinney (1981), Peter et al. (1982),
Johnson (1987, 1991; Johnson and Goode 1994),
Black (1989), Collins (1994a; Collins et al. 1991),
Ellis (1994), among others, have all found fault
with the leading chronological schemes proposed
by Weir (1976), and by Prewitt (1981, 1985). There
are significant flaws in both, but these are also two
remarkable and significant contributions to the archeology of the region, not so much as chronologies but as attempts to integrate and synthesize
large amounts of archeological data. It is also important to remember that Weir and Prewitt did not
lack for prototypes (notably those of Johnson et al.
[1962] and of Sorrow et al. [1967]).
Johnson, Suhm, and Tunnell (1962) and Sorrow, Shafer, and Ross (1967) proposed local archeological chronologies, each on the basis of a
few sites. The data from the Footbridge, Oblate,
and Wunderlich sites were not robust chronologically, but an effort was made to bring Central
Texas chronological thought into closer agreement
with that being used in the Eastern United States
(Johnson et al. 1962; Johnson and Goode 1994).
The Evoe Terrace and Landslide sites (Sorrow et
al. 1967) afforded better chronological evidence,
especially with the benefit of earlier findings at the
nearby Youngsport site (Shafer 1963). Sequencing
of diagnostic chipped stone tools, especially projectile points, was emphasized in these efforts.
Weir (1976) and Prewitt (1981, 1985)
proceeded beyond chronologizing projectile point
types, sought to find temporal patterning in site
types, features within sites, and assemblages of
artifacts, and offered suggestions to explain some
of the patterns they discerned. Ellis (1994) presents
an insightful critique of Weir’s and Prewitt’s efforts.
It is a credit to Weir’s and Prewitt’s skills in
the art of archeological analysis that such comprehensive schema could be developed, when many of
the data they used were from sites with: (a) mixed
components, (b) poor stratification, (c) unclear as-

371

sociations among artifacts and between artifacts and
features, and (d) weak associations between samples
dated by radiocarbon and the target archeological
manifestations. Weir (1976) relied on only 46 radiocarbon dates, the vast majority of which were
from sites outside of Central Texas; Prewitt (1985)
had 147.
Considerable use has been made of Weir’s and
especially of Prewitt’s chronological schemes and
revisions have been proposed (e.g. Johnson and
Goode 1994; Collins et al. 1991; Ricklis and Collins
1994). The work of verifying and improving the
regional archeological chronology will always remain unfinished. Recent efforts, especially the more
rigorous use of absolute dating (cf. Johnson and
Goode 1994), show promise for substantial improvements. Importantly, the caveat emptor posted
by Johnson (1987) regarding Prewitt’s chronology
must continue to be heeded.
Many sites in Central Texas are deficient or
totally lacking in suitable organic materials for conventional radiocarbon dating. Use of AMS (accelerator mass spectrometry) in radiocarbon dating has
enhanced the capability of the technique and brings
more sites within the scope of radiocarbon dating.
Alternatives to radiocarbon dating and application of radiocarbon techniques to a wider array of
materials are also important developments.
Archeomagnetic (Eighmy 1993), optically-stimulated luminescent (Stokes 1992), thermoluminescent (Collins 1994c:499-501), and in rare cases even
obsidian hydration (Stevenson 1992), procedures
may hold promise for dating certain recalcitrant
sites in the area. Dating of organic constituents of
bone, soil, sediments, snail shells, travertines and
other carbonate rocks using radiocarbon techniques
are becoming more useful as the chemistry of each
becomes better known, and the problems associated
with assaying these materials become less serious.
Burned rock middens, because they are
numerous and conspicuous in Central Texas, have
long received a large share of the archeologists’
attention. After decades of limited success in
understanding what these sites represent in human
behavioral terms, recent efforts employing more
thoughtful research strategies and improved
techniques for gathering and analyzing data have
begun to extract information that promises to answer
some questions and more-clearly frame others.
Perhaps the single most fundamental conceptual
advance in burned rock midden research is

372

Texas Archeological Society

recognition that burned rock middens likely formed
in several different ways. Recovery of detailed data
on the structure, composition, content, and context
of middens in search of data on explicitly defined
material expressions of different aspects of human
behavior is the approach that has long been lacking
in burned rock midden research (Collins 1991a,
1994b; Creel 1991; Goode 1991; Howard 1991;
Prewitt 1991; Hester 1991; Potter et al. 1995; Potter
and Black 1995).
Archeology in Central Texas has also seen
development of sophisticated research into the technology of stone tool manufacture and use. A trend
that began in the late 1960s (e.g., Sorrow 1969) and
has become almost routine (e.g., Ensor and MuellerWille 1988), is to include technological findings in
lithic artifact descriptions. This has included efforts
at sourcing cherts (e.g., Quigg and Peck 1995) and
obsidians (e.g., Hester et al. 1985), along with sustained considerations of how people acquired stone,
worked it, as well as used, maintained, and recycled the resultant objects. What has not occurred
is any regional synthesis of the diverse descriptive
data that have been amassed. Debitage analysis,
properly done on assemblages of high contextual
quality, contributes otherwise unknowable information about prehistoric knapping behavior (cf.
Ensor and Mueller-Wille 1988; Quigg and Peck
1995; Collins 1994a; Ricklis 1994b).
Although ceramics are far less common than
lithic artifacts in Central Texas, concern with
ceramic technology and the cultural implications of
pottery-making behavior has recently emerged (e.g.,
Johnson 1994; Reese-Taylor et al. 1994). This is an
important development that, if sustained, will
produce valuable results concerning the prehistoric
Central Texas archeological record.
Archeologists in Central Texas have increasingly considered the processes of site formation
and incorporated the findings into their interpretations (e.g., Potter and Black 1995). This is not a
research goal in its own right, but it is an essential
element in sound archeological inquiry, and it
should become a routine part of any site investigation. An outstanding early example of the site-formation-process perspective is that of Kelley and
Campbell (1942), which considered the relationship between rates of alluviation and the formation
of burned rock middens. Unfortunately, this perspective did not prevail in the region, and only
recently has it become very common.

Butzer (1982) notes that the archeological
record can be viewed on three contrasting scales-micro, meso, and macro. Research at each scale has
its own set of strengths and weaknesses. Archeological inquiry in Central Texas has heavily emphasized the meso-scale, which usually
encompasses a single site and its immediate setting. Unfortunately, archeological patterns are more
vulnerable to disruption at the meso-scale than at
either the micro-scale or the macro-scale (Collins
et al. 1991a). A few studies at the macro-scale,
where archeological data patterns covering wide
areas are sought, have been concluded which incorporate data from Central Texas (Meltzer 1987, 1989,
see also Meltzer and Bever, this volume; Creel
1991; Howard 1991; Largent and Waters 1990),
but considerable gain could be expected from more
such studies.
Historically, archeological excavations in Central Texas have emphasized the vertical dimension,
a direct outgrowth of the emphasis placed on the
building of an archeological chronology. Growing
interest in recovering evidence of human behavior
has led to increasing use of wide-area excavations
on "living surfaces" (e.g., at the Slab, Loeve Fox,
Higgins, Camp Pearl Wheat, Mustang Branch, Turkey Bend Ranch, Sleeper, and Rush sites, to name a
few). These shifts in emphasis constitute one of the
most positive developments in the regional paradigm, but much is yet to be done to bring this
approach to full fruition. Principally, the first requirement is that any archeological array thought to
be a "living surface" be assessed for length of exposure. The primary aim in excavations of this sort
is to find horizontal patterning within a single component of short duration. Ideally, that is a surface
lived upon by only one cultural group, who left
material clues of the spatial organization of their
activities where those patterns have not been sullied by subsequent occupations of the same surface
(cf. Ferring 1986; Johnson 1987). Rapid burial of
such surfaces is the surest process by which such
conditions are produced, and comprehensive geologic evidence is the best indicator that burial was
swift and sure. Good examples of these conditions
having been met are for Late Prehistoric components at the Rush (Quigg and Peck 1995) and Mustang Branch (Ricklis 1994a, 1994b) sites.
Obviously, "living surfaces" can be reused, as at
the Slab site, where multiple components are clearly
indicated at the same level in the site (Patterson

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas
1987). Difficulty arises when it is unclear how long
a surface remained exposed, and how many episodes of use may be represented by the archeological materials on that surface (Collins 1994a).
A great advantage of horizontal exposures in
archeological sites is the opportunity to fully investigate entire features in their horizontal contexts.
Thoughtful inquiry into the form, function, and content of burned rock features, and the behaviors responsible for their creation (cf. Thorns 1989), is
burgeoning in Central Texas (Johnson 1991; Collins
et al. 1990; Collins 1991a; Potter et al. 1995). Explicit criteria for recognizing ovens, open hearths,
rock disposal heaps, and other behaviorally-significant kinds of burned-rock features are emerging,
although consensus on these interpretations does
not yet exist. The use of geomagnetic evidence to
determine whether or not any given burned rock
has been moved since it was last heated and cooled
is one technique that holds promise in this area of
inquiry (Gose 1994). The greater use of comparative ethnology and ethnographic analogy (Thoms
1989) has also been a major benefit to this line of
inquiry. It is too early to know what the ultimate
potential of investigations in this vein might be.
Wide area excavations have also brought about
more interest in the nature of prehistoric structures
in Central Texas. For example, at the Slab, Turkey
Bend Ranch, Mustang Branch, Currie, Rocky
Branch, and Zatopec sites, possible evidence of
structures has emerged. These suggest the presence
of domiciles or other architecture from Early
Archaic to Late Prehistoric times. The nature and
functions of domestic structures has been one of
the more neglected topics in Central Texas
archeology, but these recent developments should
bring about increased awareness and interest in the
subject. New findings will then follow in due course.
Faunal remains and, less often, floral remains
have long been identified and reported when recovered from archeological sites in Central Texas (Jelks
1962; McDonald 1974; Weir 1979; Sorrow et al.
1967). In the last few years, investigators have emphasized closer scrutiny of faunal taphonomy, and
have made more concerted efforts to recover and
interpret economically important floral remains, including pollen and phytoliths as well as macrofloral
specimens (Jelks 1962; Hester 1973; Black and
McGraw 1985; Holloway 1988; Howard 1991).
Bone breakage is no longer lamented as interfering
with taxonomic classification, but is seen as an

373

eloquent expression of the cultural and natural
forces that have operated on the assemblage
(Masson and Holderby !994). These are essential
views to understanding the human behaviors and
adaptations behind the regional archeological
record, and thus integrate closely with the investigation of living surfaces and burned rock features.
Archeologists in Central Texas have been
mindful of the need to understand the relationship
between cultural history and past climatic conditions (Bryant and Shafer 1977; Bryant and
Holloway 1985; Gunn and Mahula 1977). Integration of the two lines of evidence (cf. Bryant and
Shafer 1977) has not been particularly successful,
however, in part because the better environmental
records have not been found in archeological sites
(Blum 1992), and because neither record has been
consistent and precise.
An almost complete hiatus exists between the
prehistoric and ethnographic records of native
peoples in Central Texas. In the last decade, considerable progress has been made in clarifying this
gap, and in focusing attention on issues which are
perhaps subject to meaningful investigation. No
longer are the Jumanos (Kelley 1947), nor the
Tonkawas (Suhm 1960), considered to be possible
descendants of the authors of Toyah prehistoric
manifestations; no serious scholar still considers
Cabeza de Vaca’s trek to have crossed Central
Texas (Campbell and Campbell 1981). The present
territory of Central Texas was not the long ancestral homeland of any indigenous group for whom
an ethnographic account exists. The ethnographically known Comanche, Apache, Wichita, Kiowa,
and even the Tonkawa arrived in Central Texas just
before or during the early European contact period
(Newcomb 1961, 1993; Campbell 1988). Historic
records document the presence of numerous other
groups during the first decades of European contact but provide rather little information about
them. Concerted ethnohistoric work (Campbell:
multiple listings under Indian group names in
Branda 1976; Campbell 1988; Campbell and
Campbell 1985; Newcomb 1993) has gleaned valuable but incomplete information on these peoples
who mostly vanish from historical view by the
early 18th century. Thus we have an early part of
the Historic period, essentially a protohistoric,
consisting of historic glimpses of indigenous
peoples, and a later Historic subperiod during
which relocated, acculturated remnants of earlier

374

Texas Archeological Society

groups as well as very recently arrived groups are
known from more complete historic records and,
in some cases, later ethnographic studies. These
facts greatly reduce, but do not eliminate, the usefulness of any direct historical approach to the prehistory of Central Texas (Newcomb 1993; Collins
and Ricklis 1994).

THE FRENCH HAVE A
WORD FOR IT
Six features and 35 artifacts recovered in excavation of the Camp Pearl Wheat site in Kerr
County (Collins et al. 1990) tell more about Archaic lifeways than the large burned rock midden
and its 1,282 artifacts documented at the John Ischy
site in Williamson County (Sorrow 1969). The difference is in data quality. At John Ischy, multiple
components were hopelessly mixed as they accumulated in a midden on a long-stable land surface;
at Camp Pearl Wheat, the land surface was stable
for only a brief time during which people occupied
the site on one or a very few occasions, and their
leavings were buried before later cultural materials
could be added. Sorrow could detect patterns in the
distributions of certain artifact classes across the
John Ischy site--for example manos were more
abundant just outside of the midden than within or
farther away from it (Sorrow 1969:50-51 and Figure 27)--but there was no way to know if this
reflects behavior that continued throughout the
3,200 or so years (my estimate) of the site’s use, or
to only some portion of that time.
In contrast, all or part of a single, integrated,
functional artifact assemblage is probably represented at the Camp Pearl Wheat site in an isolable
component. These contribute to an emerging regional pattern of site types and distributions that
reflect subsistence behavior during the Early Archaic (see discussion, below).
Localities where low-energy natural deposition is active during or between episodes of human
occupation afford the optimum conditions for the
isolation of discrete assemblages of material culture remains. Such localities become stratified archeological sites with one or more isolable
archeological components sealed between strata of
natural deposits. When archeological methods of
investigating such sites are integrated with those
from the earth sciences, the results are superior to

any which derive from archeology alone. Prehistorians in the Old World, especially in France, have
long recognized and practiced this integrated approach to site-specific and regional studies (a good
discussion as regards rockshelters appears in Laville
et al. 1980).
A site with stratified archeological and geological layers is referred to in French as a gisement
(plural, gisements [both pronounced "geezemohn,"
the "gee" as in "gee whiz"]). Increasingly over the
last 40 years in Old World prehistory, the methodology for excavating and interpreting gisements has
emphasized the interdisciplinary approach, covering geology, soil science, paleontology, palynology, archeology, and whatever other fields are
appropriate. Had archeologists in Central Texas over
the last 40 years concentrated on the discovery and
comprehensive analysis of gisements, even a small
fraction as much as have their counterparts in the
Old World, the record at hand today would be more
complete; chronology would have been much more
easily controlled; better constrained assemblages
would exist for each time interval; and the regional
archeological sequence would be integrated with a
paleoenvironmental sequence. Data of this improved
quality would have long ago fostered the kinds of
substantive research just now beginning to emerge
in the Central Texas region.
Gisements can form in caves, rockshelters,
dunes, or any area of natural, low-energy
deposition. As a practical matter in Central Texas,
however, most have formed in the alluvium of
stream valleys.

GISEMENTS AND CENTRAL
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY

Contrary to an appearance that gisements might
be scarce in Central Texas or that none was known
until recently, the problem has been that most archeologists have simply not appreciated the value of the
ones that have been found and have not rigorously
sought others. Also, it is common for gisements in
Central Texas to have denser cultural deposits in the
upper layers and sparser ones at depth (e.g., Landslide, Wilson-Leonard). I have no doubt that countless times the excavators of such sites stopped
digging either when artifact counts dropped off or
when a sterile deposit was encountered (cf. account
of the previous testing of the Camp Pearl Wheat Site

Collins-- Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

375

[Collins et al. 1990]). In those cases, any deeper
none the less, useful in organizing the archeological
components went undetected.
record. Subdivi-sions of these periods into subperiods
Deep stratified sites, with one, severa!, or many
are also based on adaptive shifts thought to reflect
isolable cultural components, have been docuchanges in subsistence strategies. In this presentamented for at least 60 years (for examples the
tion, the subdivisions of the Archaic follow the
Merrell site, excavated in 1934 and 1935 [Campbell
recent revisions proposed by Johnson and Goode
1948], and Rob Roy, dug in 1938 and 1939 [Jackson
(1994). Early and late subperiods of the Paleoindian
1939]). A few have been important in the
and Late Prehistoric periods are used in this presendevelopment of the local archeological record
tation to reflect distinctive archeo-logical patterns.
(notably Youngsport, Landslide, Kyle, Smith, Loeve
The finer subdivisions, style intervals, are deFox, and Jetta Court). None the less, in spite of
pendent primarily on diagnostic projectile point
archeological work begun at
least by 1918 (Pearce 1932:48),
only about 31 gisements with
one or more securely isolated
archeological components have
been reported in Central Texas
(Table 2 and Figure 8).
I have characterized the
components at these sites as having either very high or moderately high integrity on arbitrary
and somewhat subjective criteria. Components with high integrity (depicted in solid shading in Table 2) show evidence
of rapid burial, lack evidence
for extensive post-depositional
disturbance, and consist of a
relatively homogeneous archeological assemblage (especially
of diagnostic artifact forms).
a
Components of moderately high
b
integrity (stippled in Table 2)
are either slightly deficient in
one or more of these criteria,
the sample is too small for a
high-confidence assessment, or
sufficient information is lacking to fully assess integrity.
Several aspects of the information in Table 2 require
comment. Three main periods,
Paleoindian, Archaic, and Late
Prehistoric are used approximately in the conventional
sense to depict what have long
been inferred to be significant
Figure 8. Representative gisements (deeply stratified layers of cultural and
shifts in adaptations. While natural deposits) in Central Texas: a-b, open gisements in fluvial valley fill
these inferences may not be en- (Wiley Williams and Wilson-Leonard); c, rockshelter gisement in limestone
tirely sound, the periods are, detrital fill (Kyle site).

376

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2. Central Texas Archeological Chronology key Gisements, and Paleoenvironmental Records
(See Appendix for references)

RadioCarbon
Years
B.P.

Archeological
Periods and
Subperiods
HISTORIC

Archeological
Style
Intervals

middle
earl},

1000

late
LATE
PREHISTORIC
early

Perdiz
Scallorn,
Edwards
Dad
Ensor, Frio,
Fairland
Marcos, Montell,
Castroville

2000
late

Lange, Marshall,
Williams

Pedernales,
Kinney
3000

Bulverde
4000
Nolan,
Travis

middle

Taylor

5000
BelI-AndiceCalf Creek

o
t~
<
6000

Martindale,
Uvalde
7000
early

Early Split
Stem

8000
Angostura

St. Mary’s Hall

9000
late

GolondrinaBarber

Wilson
10,000

Z

(Dalton,
San Patrice)
Plainview?)

Folsom
11,000

12,000

early

Clovis

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

Table 2. (Continued)

Bog
Pollen

Hall’s Cave
Microfauna
(tentative)

377

378

Texas Archeological Society
weighted toward the recent end with 19 (31 percent)
of the 61 components assigned to the Late
Prehistoric Period (the last 1000 years, or 8.7
percent, of the local prehistory). The Late
Paleoindian and Middle Archaic subperiods are
represented by the fewest components (4 and 5,
respectively; that means that 6.5 percent of the
components are in the Late Paleoindian subperiod,
which is 10 percent of the sequence, and that 8.2
percent are in the Middle Archaic subperiod--16.5
percent of the sequence).
Twelve geological, palynological, or paleontological records (see Table 2) in and near the Central Texas archeological area reflect a consistent
but generalized environmental sequence (sources
listed in the Appendix). Alternating intervals of
comparatively mesic or xeric conditions have been
inferred by Bousman from the pollen sequences
from bogs in East Central Texas (Collins et al.
1993), and by Toomey from the vertebrate faunal
record of Hall’s Cave (Toomey 1993; Toomey et
al. 1993). The bog-pollen sequence is not well controlled chronologically; however, the available dates
indicate relatively constant rates of sedimentation
from which Bousman interpolated the depicted sequence. Bousman’s interpretation of the reported
pollen data from Weakly and Boriack bogs considered the relative frequency of grass to
arboreal pollens. In doing this, a climatically-sensitive aspect of the pollen record emerges from the complete
:
:
spectrum, which otherwise contains
:
numerous taxa whose abundances are
:
:
more likely to be reflective of local:
ized conditions around the bogs.
"
A deeply-stratified, abundant,

styles ("types") which change for reasons not really
understood at our present level of knowledge. These,
too, follow approximately the scheme offered by
Johnson and Goode (1994), and derive from the
syntheses of Weir (1976) and Prewitt (1981, 1985).
As already observed, some style intervals are better
constrained than others--that called Toyah being
probably the best; and that called Taylor, perhaps
the poorest.
Absolute dating is portrayed in radiocarbon
years before the present on Table 2, the convention
generally followed by geoarcheologists. This convention facilitates use of uncalibrated dates from
the literature of the geological sciences and from
that of earlier archeological projects. It also allows
any calibration to be applied. As a better,
stratigraphically-constrained archeological sequence
emerges, higher-precision radiocarbon procedures
along the lines advocated by Johnson and Goode
(1994) will have greater efficacy.
Sixty-one components of moderately high to
high stratigraphic integrity are reported for the 31
Central Texas gisements presented in Table 2.
Additional components of lesser integrity occur at
a number of these sites, but these are not included.
As seen in a cumulative percentage graph of these
components by subperiod (Figure 9), the record is

lOO

II

o
oO

E
6O

4O

EarLy

I

Late

Paleoindian

Archeological Chronology

Figure 9. Cumulative percentage graph of documented gisements by
archeological time periods in Central Texas.

high-resolution sequence of small animal remains was found in Hall’s Cave.
Toomey excavated 3.7 m into the fill
of Hall’s Cave and recovered thousands of faunal specimens (over
12,000 had been cataloged in 1993,
with many more remaining to be cataloged). Only the upper 2 m of the
Hall’s Cave sequence is considered
here, and the climatic history depicted
is based only on the relative proportions of the least shrew (Cryptotis
[which requires a relatively moist habitat]) to the desert shrew (Notiosorex
[found in more arid habitats]) follow-

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

ing Toomey (1993) and Toomey et al. (1993). The
Hall’s Cave sequence I have used here is controlled
by 4! radiocarbon dates on bone provided by
Stafford (personal communication, 1995) and by
three charcoal dates (Toomey 1993). Because of
the large number of dates, the fact that the dates are
almost perfectly stratigraphically consistent, and
there is generally high internal agreement between
radiocarbon ages determined on different chemical
fractions of the same bone, this sequence can be
considered one of the best-dated and most environmentally sensitive records in North America. Concern expressed by Johnson and Goode (1994:22) in
regard to dates on the earthen fill of Hall’s Cave are
clearly dispelled by the bone-organic chronology.
When it is fully reported, the Hall’s Cave biostratigraphy will be a landmark contribution to Quaternary studies.
These pollen and faunal records both indicate
an early xeric interval ending near 12,000 B.P.
(closely correlative with the "Clovis Drought" noted
by Haynes [1991]), followed by a significant time
of relatively mesic conditions. Each record then
indicates a long Middle Holocene interval of
relatively xeric conditions, that was slightly
ameliorated at roughly its midpoint. That the two
records are not synchronous probably results largely,
if not entirely, from inaccuracy in the ages
interpolated for the bog-pollen sequence. In general
terms, the Middle Holocene xeric interval lasted
approx-imately 5,000 years-close to half of the
local prehistory. The effects of Middle Holocene
aridity are seen widely in Central Texas, often in
the form of stream incision, but precise dating is
often difficult (cf. Abbott 1994).
Late Holocene conditions returned to being
more mesic. The pollen and faunal evidence is inconsistent only in the latest Holocene where a final
swing toward xeric conditions appears in the Hall’s
Cave fauna. Other than relatively small samples of
the species (and, therefore, possible sampling error) on which Toomey based the depicted interpretations, the inconsistency is not readily understood.
It is possible, of course, that contrasting conditions
could exist because the pollen record is from the
eastern-most, while the faunal record is from more
nearly the western-most, edges of the area.
The relative abundance of bison in and near
Central Texas has been inferred from occurrences
in archeological sites (Dillehay 1974; Prewitt 1981,
1985; Collins et al. 1990). There is a general corre-

379

lation between bison occurrences and comparatively
mesic portions of the bog-pollen and Hall’s Cave
faunal records.
The geologic records are based on fluvial sequences where episodes of valley filling alternate
with periods of erosion and/or stability and soil
formation. Geologic sequences portrayed in Table 2
are based on data of varying completeness and precision (particularly as regards dating). Geologists
working with Quaternary-age sequences vary widely
in their application of the concept of soils (some
emphasizing soil-formation and reporting every minor soil, others emphasizing sedimentary process
and reporting only major soils). Local conditions in
each fluvial system differ, and circumstances determining the amount of radio-carbon dating that can
be applied are unequal. Furthermore, investigators
allocate their radiocarbon resources differently, some
targeting soils, others preferring to date sediments.
For these reasons, the depictions in Table 2 must be
viewed only as indicating general trends, and are
not to be taken to represent detailed, precisely-dated
alluvial sequences.
Consistently, the valleys of Central Texas (and
much of North America [Haynes 1991, 1992,
1993]) were downcut and scoured of sediment in
the Late Pleistocene, ca. 15,000 to 12,000 years
ago. Valley filling followed during the ensuing
mesic interval, and it is in these sediments that a
number of the important Early Paleoindian sites
have been found.
Erosion and stability with soil formation are
more characteristic of the Middle Holocene, during
the long xeric interval. This interval was first
recognized in North America on the basis of
extensive evidence for erosion and arroyo-cutting
in the Southwest, and has been called the
Altithermal (Antevs 1955). Whether or not the
interval was significantly warmer, it does seem to
have been drier, and the paleoenvironmental record
of Central Texas was clearly influenced by those
conditions. It is yet to be determined exactly what
the consequences of this xeric interval were in terms
of human ecology. It is abundantly clear that the
archeological record has been significantly and
adversely affected by the Middle Holocene xeric
conditions. Erosion undoubtedly destroyed many
sites and many others formed on stable surfaces,
resulting in palimpsests of long duration. The
approximately 5,000 years of the Middle Holocene
xeric interval--43 percent of the record--are

380

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

represented by only about 17 (22 percent) of the 61
components in Table 2.
Downcutting of valleys occurred widely in the
Middle Holocene, leaving former valley floors
above the reach of most flooding and bringing deposition on these surfaces to a virtual halt. Major soils
that formed on these long stable surfaces are documented over wide areas in the valleys of Central
Texas during the Middle Holocene, and many sites,
especially burned rock middens, reside on those
surfaces. It is from these numerous, highly-visible,
artifact-rich sites that much of the archeological
record for the Middle Holocene has been derived.
Returning for a moment to the poorly-defined
Taylor style interval, the question to be answered
by future research is whether its archeological
scarcity reflects a cultural reality, or results from
gaps in the archeological record brought about by
erosion and reduced deposition during the Middle
Holocene. This poorly-represented "interval" is left
on Table 2 to underscore this aspect of the record,
and to provide a tempting target for sound
archeological dismissal or verification.
Fortunately, all Central Texas streams did not
respond in exactly identical fashion to the Middle
Holocene xeric interval, and neither erosion nor
non-deposition are absolute in any fluvial system-there is always deposition somewhere. Deposits of
Middle Holocene age are present but less abundant
and less conspicuous than those of Early and Late
Holocene ages. Corollary to this, there are sites of
Middle Holocene age in good geologic context to
be found. The search will need to be made using
geomorphological sampling designs (cf. Blum and
Lintz 1993:313; Mandel 1992:79-83; Nordt
1992:68-80).
In the Late Holocene, valley filling prevailed,
but one widespread episode of downcutting occurred
ca. 1000 B.P. (Hall 1990). In part because the evidence is better preserved, the Late Holocene record
includes several less significant interruptions to
deposition (see Table 2).
Some ten years ago, Hall (1986) reviewed an
entirely different set of geologic data and recognized essentially the same aspects of the Quaternary record as revealed by the data summarized
here in Table 2. He presented an insightful synthesis of those data in an effort to inform archeologists
of the nature of the data base with which they were
working. That paper (Hall 1986) has not been published, but the essence of the synoptic graph from

that presentation (Hall, personal communication,
1995) is reproduced here as the far fight column of
Table 2. It is noteworthy that Hall perceived these
patterns in valleys primarily north and northeast of
Central Texas, indicating the geographic extent of
this general sequence.

A BRIEF SYNTHESIS OF
THE PREHISTORY OF
CENTRAL TEXAS
Several lines of evidence are now brought together to offer a generalized cultural history of
Central Texas. Ideally the empirical basis for this
effort would come solely from the 61 isolable components arrayed in Table 2, but two limitations
stand in the way of that approach. First, there are
comparatively few paleoenvironmental data from
those components, and those that are available are
not consistent or systematic. Second, archeological
assemblages recovered from short-term components tend to be small, and sampling error is probably responsible for gaps in the data. We need
many more such components to produce a less rarefied record.
Pre-Clovis
One site in Central Texas--Levi Rockshelter
(Alexander 1983)--has been explicitly interpreted
as containing a component that predates the Clovis
horizon. There is no question that humans made the
purported pre-Clovis artifacts at Levi, but poor
stratigraphy, lack of a coherent assemblage with
several consistent radiocarbon dates, and no unambiguous cultural associations with fauna known to
have become extinct before 11,500 B.P., render
Alexander’s argument for a pre-Clovis age invalid.
A human presence of great antiquity has been discussed to account for selected fractured stones from
Friesenhahn Cave (Krieger 1964), the absence of
caudal vertebrae among mammoth remains at the
Waco Mammoth site (J. Fox et al. 1992), and for a
"presapiens" human form at Hitzfelder Cave (Givens 1968a, 1968b). None of these suggestions has
been sustained with sufficient evidence for general
acceptance. This is not to say that some future find
might not prevail as a pre-Clovis site.
In addition to meeting the widely recognized
criteria of stratigraphic integrity, unambiguous human evidence, and secure dating, two factors must

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

be overcome in any search for sites earlier than
Clovis. The first is geomorphological. Most valleys
in much of North America were scoured to bedrock
during the time immediately before Clovis, meaning that there is little chance of finding components
stratigraphically beneath Clovis in fluvial contexts.
Outside of alluvial valley settings, sites would either be on upland landforms or in rockshelters.
Upland localities rarely produce good stratigraphic
contexts and rockshelters of pre-Clovis age may be
highly degraded (Collins 1991b). The second is
cultural. It is not known what might constitute the
pre-Clovis material culture assemblages, and, lacking these criteria for its recognition, the evidence
will almost certainly have to come from the unlikely context of stratigraphically underlying a
Clovis archeological component.

Paleoindian

Paleoindian sites and isolated artifacts are
fairly common in Central Texas. Concepts of
Paleoindian lifeways in North America generally,
and in Central Texas particularly, are changing
rapidly. The simple cultural sequence of big-game
hunting "cultures"--Clovis, Folsom, Plainview,
and Cody (Krieger 1947; Sellards and Evans 1960;
W0rmington 1957; Suhm et al. 1954)--is no longer
adequate to accommodate the diverse material culture assemblages, projectile point styles, and indicated subsistence behaviors now documented
during what has been traditionally recognized as
the Paleoindian period; that is, the period earlier
than ca. 8800 B.P. It is necessary to draw upon
some data from outside of Central Texas to adequately portray these developments, but this is
warranted because (1) there is an almost frenetic
tempo of Paleoindian research in the Americas at
the moment, (2) there is no cultural manifestation
during Paleoindian times constrained to just Central Texas, and (3) although sites in Central Texas
are contributing evidence to the broader developments, there are important ideas emerging elsewhere with implications for understanding the local
Paleoindian evidence.
In this discussion, because the fundamental
defining criteria of "Paleoindians" (best stated in
Wormington’s [1957] Paleoeastern Tradition) as
nomadic big-game hunters are being challenged,
the Paleoindian period is defined as a temporal
span from ca. 11,500 to 8,800 B.P. This allows the

381

issue of Paleoindian lifeways to be considered
more objectively. As already noted, an Early and a
Late subperiod of the Paleoindian period are proposed for Central Texas (see Table 2).
The Paleoindian period began as the Pleistocene waned, when now-extinct forms of large
animals were among the prey taken by Early
Paleoindian hunters. Projectile points in use during the Early Paleoindian subperiod were primarily, if not exclusively, of lanceolate form and
typically were fluted, Clovis and Folsom being the
defined types.
Clovis is the earliest well-defined cultural horizon in Central Texas, assumed on the basis of
dating at sites elsewhere in North America to have
existed here between approximately 11,200 and
10,900 B.P. (Haynes 1992). Kincaid Rockshelter,
Wilson-Leonard, Gault, Horn Shelter #2, Pavo Real,
and Crockett Gardens are where the principal Clovis
components have been documented in the area, and
surface finds of distinctive Clovis points are reported from a number of other localities (Meltzer
1987; see also Meltzer and Bever, this volume).
Generally, in North America Clovis manifestations
are the most diverse in the Paleoindian period with
types of sites including: kill, quarry/stone-working,
caches, camps, ritual, and burial. The artifact inventory includes chipped stone artifacts produced
using bifacial, flake, and prismatic-blade techniques,
always on high quality and often on exotic stones
(Collins 1990). Engraved stones (Collins et al. 1991;
Collins et al. 1992), bone and ivory points, a bone
shaft straightener, stone bolas, and ochre are reported from Clovis contexts (Collins n.d.b)
Subsistence in Clovis times was based on diverse fauna, including large herbivores such as
mammoth, bison, and horse as well as smaller animals such as water turtles, land tortoises, alligator,
mice, badger, and raccoon. An array of plants presumably also constituted part of Clovis subsistence
(Collins et al. 1989).
A paved floor at Kincaid Rockshelter reflects
a greater investment of labor than nomadic hunters
could afford on a fleeting habitation (enough stones,
totalling more than 2 metric tons, were brought in
from the nearby river bed to cover ten square meters
of the muddy shelter floor [Collins et al. 1989;
Collins 1990]). Caches of Clovis artifacts (in Texas
and elsewhere in North America [Collins n.d.a])
are suggestive of hunting and gathering rounds that
returned groups to the same places more reliably

382

Texas Archeological Society

than is the case with nomadic hunters of big game.
Overall, the data indicate the Clovis lifeway
to have been that of well-adapted, generalized
hunter-gatherers with the technology to hunt big
game but not the need to rely exclusively on it.
Either their travels or their contacts with other
groups enabled them to acquire exotic stone from
great distances. Ironically, more is known of these
earliest Paleoindians than of those who came later.
In contrast to Clovis lifeways, subsistence in
Folsom times seems to have been more reliant upon
specialized hunting of big game, namely bison.
Sites with Folsom-age components in Central
Texas include Horn Shelter 2, Pavo Real, WilsonLeonard, and Kincaid, the latter two of which evidence bison-hunting. Camps, stone-working, and
kill sites are all that have been documented, mostly
in or near grassland habitats. These, along with a
tool kit of Folsom points, end scrapers, and large
ultra-thin bifaces, are the trappings of hunters. Diagnostic artifacts in Folsom times are the large thin
bifaces, fluted Folsom points, and thin unfluted
("Midland") points.
An urgent problem in and beyond Central
Texas regards what constitutes "Plainview," and
where that manifestation fits chronologically. Much
that has been called Plainview--a plethora of
unfluted, lanceolate dart point forms--fails to match
the type-site points in thinness and flaking technology. A serious revisiting of existing typological
and contextual evidence bearing on this problem is
needed as well as new and better archeological
data. I am beginning to suspect that tree Plainviews
(as at the Plainview site and some of the artifacts
from Bone Bed 2 at Bonfire Shelter) are equally as
old as Folsom (i.e., greater than 10,200 B.P. [cf.
Haynes 1993]), and are absent from, or extremely
rare in, Central Texas. "Plainview" points at Horn
Shelter 2 are thicker and have more deeply-concave bases than those at the Plainview site and
come from zones dated ca. 8400 B.P. (Redder 1985).
At Wilson-Leonard, the unfluted lanceolate points
previously identified as Plainview (Weir 1985) are
morphologically distinct from points at the
Plainview type site and date to the interval 95008000 B.P. These points from Wilson-Leonard are
placed in the Late Paleoindian subperiod and are
referred to as Golondrina, Barber, and St. Mary’s
Hall (Masson and Collins 1995).
Also murky in Central Texas and elsewhere
are the temporal position and cultural significance

of the few Dalton and not-so-few San Patrice-like
points (variously called San Patrice, Brazos Fishtail, and Rodgers Side-Hollowed). The latter occur
at Wilson-Leonard and at Kincaid, and both occur
at Horn Shelter 2 in Central Texas. Daltons are
dated in the Middle Mississippi valley as ca. 9500
to 10,500 B.P. (Morse and Morse 1983) and are
close to that age at Horn Shelter 2 (ca. 9500-9980
B.P. [Redder 1985]). San Patrice-like Rex Rodgers
points are associated with a Clovis point and an
unfluted lanceolate point in what appears to be a
single-event bison kill site in the Texas Panhandle
(Willey et al. 1978). They occur in a deposit dated
between 9500 and 9980 B.P. at Horn Shelter 2
(Redder 1985) but remain undated at Kincaid
(Collins 1990b). Everything about the fauna, associated artifacts, and features (including a double
burial) found with San Patrice ("Brazos Fishtail")
and Dalton points at Horn Shelter 2 suggests an
Archaic-like, hunter-gatherer cultural manifestation
(Redder 1985). Tentatively, I have placed this material as transitional between Early and Late
Paleoindian on Table 2; hopefully future work or
new finds will clarify the picture.
Three style intervals, Wilson, GolondrinaBarber, and St. Mary’s Hall, are here proposed for
the late subperiod of the Paleoindian period (see
Table 2). These are moderately well defined at the
Wilson-Leonard site (Masson and Collins 1995).
The Wilson component is the better represented,
and is characterized as having corner-notched,
Archaic-like Wilson dart points (Weir 1985; Masson
and Collins 1995) in association with features, a
burial, artifacts, and faunal remains more Archaic
than Paleoindian in appearance. Dates for this
component are ca. 10,000 to 9650 B. P. (Masson
and Collins 1995).
The Archaic-like character continues for the
Golondrina-Barber and St. Mary’s Hall components, dated between 9500 and 8800 B.P. All three
of these components (Wilson, Golondrina-Barber,
and St. Mary’s Hall) have burned rock features, but
the size of the features and the amounts of rock
present is decidedly less than that in Archaic features of younger ages. The subperiod here called
Late Paleoindian is in many ways archeologically
intermediate (or "transitional") between Early
Paleoindian and the Archaic; the question to be
answered is how accurately this material culturebased impression reflects their respective human
adaptations.

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas
Two burials between 9500 and 10,000 years
old, one at Wilson-Leonard and one at Horn Shelter 2, have produced three of the better-preserved
early human skeletons in North America (Steele
and Powell 1994). Both of these contained objects
of a utilitarian as well as an ornamental nature.

Archaic
Two-thirds of the prehistory of Central Texas
is "Archaic" in character. Archeologists have
viewed the Archaic as a time when hunting and
gathering of local resources was intensified over
that in Late Paleoindian times. Material culture
shows greater diversity--especially in the application of ground stone technology. A hallmark of the
Archaic in Central Texas is extensive use of heated
rocks found archeologically as various forms of
hearths, ovens, middens, scatters, and other features. Multiple tons of heat-altered rocks occur at
many Archaic sites in the region. The full gamut of
uses of these rocks can only be guessed at from
available evidence, but thoughtful inquiry into this
problem is increasingly common.
For more than 7500 years the basic Archaic
mode of life prevailed in Central Texas. There are
distinctive changes to be seen within the Archaic
archeological record, but it is not clear how
significant these really were at the times they
occurred. It is clear, however, that, in the broadest
sense, this long span represents a basic adaptation
that was successful. A priority in the investigation
of the Archaic record is to better understand the
fundamentals of that adaptation, and to determine
the significance of the variations seen over time
and across space. In briefly reviewing the Archaic
of Central Texas, the cultural-chronological
framework recently proposed by Johnson and Goode
(1994) is adopted with minor adjustments.
The early part of the Archaic, from ca. 8800 to
6000 B.P., is here subdivided into the three projectile point style intervals, Angostura, Early Split Stem,
and Martindale-Uvalde (see Table 2). Open campsites (including Loeve, Wilson-Leonard, Richard
Beene, Sleeper, Jetta Court, Youngsport, Camp Pearl
Wheat, and Landslide) as well as a cave (Hall’s
Cave), occupied at the far reach of daylight, contain
noteworthy components of the Early Archaic. Numerous dart points and Guadalupe tools attributable
to the Early Archaic also are present in Kincaid
Rockshelter, but in mixed context.

383

It is unclear if the distributional data are
representative, but a number of authors have noted
a concentration of Early Archaic components near
the eastern and southern margins of the Edwards
Plateau (Johnson 1991; Johnson and Goode 1994;
Ellis 1994; Black 1989; McKinney 1981). Large
and varied burned-rock features (Sleeper, Camp
Pearl Wheat, Wilson-Leonard, Richard Beene),
domestic structures (Turkey Bend Ranch), and
caches (Lindner) are known from the Early Archaic.
Grinding and hammering stones, Clear Fork and
Guadalupe bifaces (both inferred to be specialized
tools, probably for wood-working), along with a
variety of unifacial and bifacial chipped stone
implements, are reported from Early Archaic
components. Subsistence data are sparse for the
subperiod, but hunting of deer, exploitation of
various small animals including fish, and the
cooking of bulbs in earth ovens are indicated.
If the presently-known site distributional data
reflect land use in the Early Archaic, this was a
time when people were living in the better watered
parts of the live-oak savanna habitats on the
Edwards Plateau. Acorns, deer, and turkey are conspicuous among live-oak savanna resources, but
geophytes (e.g., onions, prairie turnip), other nuts
(e.g., pecan, walnut), berries (e.g., agarita, hawthorn), fruits (e.g., grapes, plums, persimmons), and
grass seeds, along with a host of small terrestrial,
amphibious, and aquatic animals round out a diverse and reliable subsistence base.
Pollen and fluvial geologic evidence portrays
an oscillation from mesic through extremely xeric
and back to mildly xeric conditions during the Early
Archaic (see Table 2). Bison (and antelope?) were
evidently scarce or absent. What mix of other foods
constituted the staple diet(s) during the Early
Archaic is unknown at this time.
The appearance during the Early Split Stem
interval (as at Wilson-Leonard) of specialized cooking appliances which use quantities of stone as heating elements reflect a sophisticated technology for
exploiting the oak-savanna resource base. These
features almost certainly represent the technological antecedents of the larger burned rock middens
that become a diacritic of later intervals in the Archaic of Central Texas.
The middle subperiod of the Archaic, from ca.
6000 to 4000 B.P., too, is further subdivided into
three style intervals (Bell-Andice-Calf Creek, Taylor, and Nolan-Travis; see Table 2). The earlier two

384

Texas Archeological Society

of these intervals reflect a shift in lithic technology
from that which had prevailed earlier. Bell-AndiceCalf Creek and Taylor are thin, basically triangular
bifaces with long thinning flakes emanating bifacially from the base; Taylor bifaces remain
unnotched whereas Bell, Andice, and Calf Creek
bifaces are characterized by deep, narrow basal
notches. All of these thin-bladed forms would serve
equally well as knives or as tips of lances, spears,
or darts. Impact fractures common on the BellAndice-Calf Creek forms attest to their use as
weapon tips.
Climate during the earliest interval (BellAndice-Calf Creek) was somewhat mesic. It was a
time when bison were hunted, leading Johnson and
Goode (1994) to surmise, correctly I think (Collins
1994a:94), that these thin bifaces were part of a
specialized bison-hunting weaponry, probably
brought to the region by peoples moving southwesterly from the prairie, prairie margins, and
woodlands west of the Ozarks (see Wyckoff 1995).
A tantalizing hint of functionally-different sites is
seen in this interval, with a greater diversity of tool
forms occurring at the Landslide, than at the Barton,
Bell-Andice components. Notable at Landslide are
more wood- and bone-working kinds of tools and,
especially, milling equipment that is absent from
the Barton site. It seems apparent that more diverse
tasks were undertaken at Landslide than at Barton.
Large burned rock features--hearths as well as rock
ovens--are inferred for the interval, particularly at
the Barton site. In a very subjective sense, components of this interval seem to me to show less intense use than that indicated at earlier-interval
components, particularly those of the Early Split
Stem interval. Perhaps greater mobility associated
with bison hunting is indicated.
By the later Middle Archaic intervals (Taylor
and Nolan-Travis), bison have disappeared from
the record and a more xeric climate has returned-in fact, culminating toward the end of the NolanTravis interval in what appears from the record to
have been the onset of the most xeric conditions
ever experienced by humans in Central Texas. Interestingly, Taylor and Nolan-Travis components
again have the appearance of either long-term or
intensive use, or both. Burned rock middens debut
(best seen at the Wounded Eye site in Kerr County
where Taylor bifaces dominate the assemblage recovered from a small burned rock midden). Another technological shift is seen in the production

and morphology of Nolan and Travis projectile
points, which are comparatively thick and often
have narrow blades (especially on Travis points)
with stems and shoulders; distinctive beveling of
the stems is characteristic of Nolan points.
Johnson and Goode (1994:26) suggest, as
Prewitt (n.d.) had done earlier, that burned rock
middens at this time were more frequently being
used to cook xerophytes such as sotol that may
have thrived in Central Texas as conditions became
drier. This does not necessarily signal an end to
extraction of the more typical oak-savanna floral
and faunal resources, but perhaps a shift in emphasis with concomitant adjustments in subsistence
technology, strategic planning, and scheduling (cf.
Bousman 1993).
The Late Archaic, ca. 4000 to 1200 or 1300
B.P., began as effective moisture was at its lowest
in Central Texas, but gradually the climate became
substantially more mesic (see Table 2). Six style
intervals have been postulated for the Late Archaic
(see Table 2). The Late Archaic is well represented
by investigated sites, including a number with components in good stratified contexts, although wellstratified components are almost completely
unreported for the earliest style interval (Bulverde).
Middle Archaic subsistence technology, and the
burned rock middens resulting from a portion of it,
continue well into the Late Archaic. In fact, during
the second style interval (best known for its
Pedernales points), the growth of burned rock
middens was at its greatest, especially in the easterly parts of the area. It appears, however, that
xeric vegetation and whatever reliance people
placed upon it, gradually disappeared from the easterly parts of Central Texas between 3500 and 2500
B.P. and burned rock midden growth slowed, but
did not cease. The xeric vegetation remained, and
continues to remain, in the western reaches of the
area, where its exploitation continued to include
use of communal earth ovens into Late Prehistoric
times (Goode 1991).
Johnson and Goode (1994) have offered a succinct account of the main cultural aspects of the
Late Archaic on the eastern Edwards Plateau. In so
doing, they distinguished between early ("Late Archaic I") and late ("Late Archaic II") subperiods.
Their provocative ideas need not be repeated here
other than to mention some highlights. Diverse and
comparatively complex archeological manifestations toward the end of the Late Archaic attest to

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

the emergence of kinds of human conduct without
precedent in the area. Among factors that have been
cited as contributing to these developments are increasing population size (Weir 1976; Prewitt 1981)
and stimuli from religious practices in the eastern
part of the continent (Johnson and Goode 1994).
Much remains to be learned about the hunter-gatherers of Central Texas in Late Archaic times, and
the questions prompted by the interpretations of
Johnson and Goode (1994) will require thorough
and comprehensive archeological investigations using data of the highest possible integrity.

Late Prehistoric
Considerable discomfort is evident among
archeologists faced with assessing the magnitude
of material culture change that occurred ca. 1200
B.P. in Central Texas. This is the somewhat arbitrary
break commonly made between the long Archaic
period and its successor, the "Late Prehistoric."
Previously this was referred to as the "NeoAmerican Stage" (Suhm et al. 1954:20) in the
expectation that all three defining traits (pottery,
bow and arrow, and agriculture) would eventually
be recognized in the region. It now appears that
generally for Central Texas, only the bow and arrow
appeared initially, pottery was added later, and
agriculture came last and was of quite minor
importance. Because basic hunting and gathering
subsistence continued, what is here called the Late
Prehistoric has also been labeled the "Neo-Archaic"
(Prewitt 1981) or the "Post-Archaic" (Johnson and
Goode 1994). Two subperiods, early and late (see
Table 2) are here recognized in the Late Prehistoric
(Jelks 1962); these correspond to the Austin and
Toyah "phases" (I will continue to use "interval")
of long-standing in the systematics of the local
prehistory (Prewitt 1981). More than projectilepoint style change distinguishes Austin from Toyah
manifestations, and the subperiod level of
designation is intended to reflect the importance of
these differences. I agree with Johnson and Goode
(1994:39-40) when they note that an equally
satigfactory solution would be to place the break
between the Archaic and the Late Prehistoric at ca.
800 B.P., when Toyah replaces Austin as the
prevailing archeological configuration.
The most apparent change seen at the beginning of the early Late Prehistoric (or Austin interval) is from a prevalence of dart points to that of

385

arrowpoints and, inferentially, from use of the atlatl
and dart to that of the bow and arrow. Evidence is
seen of widespread hostilities in the form of what
are thought to be numerous incidents of arrowwound fatalities (Prewitt 1974). Otherwise, comparatively little change is noted from terminal Late
Archaic patterns, particularly in subsistence behavior. Goode (1991) even finds evidence that in western Central Texas burned rock middens continued
to be produced in what he believes to be the cooking of sotol.
The late subperiod of the Late Prehistoric is
expressed as a single style-interval, designated on
Table 2 by the Perdiz arrow point. However, it has
long been recognized that in Central Texas the
Toyah archeological manifestation consists of a
constellation of traits--notably pottery (both local
and imported from the Caddoan area; see also
Perttula et al., this volume), large thin bifaces, Perdiz
arrowpoints, end scrapers, and prismatic blades-all associated with the hunting of bison as well as
deer and antelope. The occurrence of these
distinctive traits on about the same time line across
a wide area of the state distinguish the Toyah as an
archeological "horizon." A question that arises is
whether such a horizon is the spread of a people
across the landscape, or the spread of ideas and
their adoption by different peoples. Johnson (1994)
and Ricklis (1994b) have recently brought forth
differing views on Toyah lifeways. In keeping with
traditional interpretations, Johnson sees Toyah as
the material leavings of a single ethnic group
("folk"). Ricklis, in contrast, observes that the
cultural materials which define Toyah represent
tools and technologies that can be spread among
different groups rather easily--a techno-complex.
The issue hinges on how similar do lithic and
ceramic objects, and their technologies of
production, have to be to represent the work of a
single ethnic group? In the absence of linguistic
evidence (which is precluded by a pre-contact
truncation of Toyah culture) or more robust
archeological data, the issue will not be resolved
since the answer to the question just posed is too
subjective. No time in the prehistory of Central
Texas is represented by more gisements, and thus
the prospects for discovering more and better Toyah
components are good. The debate framed by Ricklis
and Johnson is the kind of anthropological issue so
rare in the history of Central Texas archeology.
Because it is both intriguing and substantive, such

386

Texas Archeological Society

a debate can be expected to continue, grow, and be
refined--maybe even resolved to a degree with
robust new data in the future.
Historic
Historic archeology differs from prehistoric archeology in that past people, places, and events can
be investigated from the two vantages of written
accounts as well as tangible archeological records.
In the case of Central Texas, the collision of multiple indigenous and European cultures produced
complex and rapidly changing events that are
chronicled spottily in the early documents, and seen
sparingly in the archeological record. With time,
both the written and archeological records become
fuller, but by the middle of the 19th century, little
but the European-derived cultures remained.
This review considers three subperiods in the
Historic period of Central Texas--early, middle,
and late. In the first two, vestiges of both indigenous and European peoples and cultures are represented; in the third, the indigenous peoples have
virtually disappeared.
The early Historic subperiod in Central Texas
begins in the late 17th century with the first documented arrival of Europeans (Bolton 1915;
Newcomb 1961; Berlandier 1969). Although there
are documentary glimpses of the indigenous groups
in and near Central Texas, political consequences
of the arrival of Europeans were already in motion,
most notably the southern advance of mounted
Apaches. For the indigenous peoples, little more
than group names, locations, and limited descriptions exist. Concerted ethnohistorical research
(Campbell: multiple listings under Indian group
names in Branda 1976; Campbell 1988; Hester
1989a, 1989b; Newcomb 1961, 1993) has been used
to piece together important, yet incomplete, accounts which reveal several distinctive features of
native cultures in Central Texas between the late
17th (ca. 1690) and early 18th (ca. 1720) centuries.
In these earliest historical accounts, numerous
displaced groups are found in and near Central
Texas, some having gone northeastward to escape
Spanish oppression, others having fled southeastward ahead of the Apache incursion. Their lifeways
had been affected substantially by the political accommodations to this new propinquity, and possibly by social disruption brought about by the
mortality of European-introduced diseases. French

and Spanish vying for the territory that is now Texas
often manipulated the indigenous groups for their
own political purposes. Also, native patterns of
mobility had been altered by acquisition of horses.
It is obvious that these accounts do not provide
direct analogs to prehistoric patterns. Instead, they
represent a time of drastic cultural change and political conflict to be investigated in its own right.
There may be some indigenous cultural patterns
that prevail through this time and afford insights
into prehistoric lifeways of Central Texas (Collins
and Ricklis 1994). Small band-sized residential
camps are indicated, but so are large, diffuse
encampments composed of peoples with mixed
ethnic affiliations. It is not clear whether the large,
diffuse camps or political amalgamations occurred
prehistorically, but to judge from the apparent ease
and frequency of these occurrences historically, it
is possible that large camps shared by different
ethnic groups had precedents in prehistory.
Hunting, particularly of bison but also of deer
and of antelope, is repeatedly noted in Spanish and
in French documents, as is the extensive use and
exchange of bison products. Much of the mobility
and hunting behavior of peoples was in response to
movements and densities of bison populations.
Although the historically-observed behavior was
affected by use of horses, the same was probably
true to some extent of pedestrian peoples whenever
bison were present in the area.
Of particular interest to our understanding of
Late Prehistoric archeology are the many historic
accounts of Hasinai Caddo traveling into Central
Texas to hunt bison, and at times camping with
indigenous groups (see Foster 1995). The fairly
common presence of Caddoan ceramics, and of
local pottery with Caddoan style decoration, in
Toyah interval sites of Central Texas suggests that
this was a long-standing pattern.
At a very general level, the early Historic
subperiod informs prehistoric archeological inquiry
on two topics. First, indigenous peoples clearly were
more cosmopolitan than most archeologists seem
to think. Second, large and dispersed encampments,
exceeding the usual parameters of "a site," may
have been fairly common.
The middle Historic subperiod, when much of
the record on aboriginal peoples is in reference to
remnants of native groups living in the Spanish
missions, began about 1730 and ended about 1800
as the mission system was failing (Hester 1989a).

Collins m Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

Central Texas lies mostly outside of the Spanish
colonial sphere, and the mission Indian subperiod
is manifest primarily at the missions in Bexar
County (Campbell and Campbell 1985). Interesting continuities from prehistoric times, and new behaviors resulting from acculturation, are reflected
in the material culture of the mission Indians (D.
Fox 1979).
Shoshonian-speaking Comanches, who had
become consummate equestrians by 1800, began to
spread into northwestern Texas from the high plains
toward the end of the middle Historic subperiod
(Wallace and Hoebel 1952). Their presence in Central Texas is documented mostly from the hostile
view of Euroamerican settlers.
The late Historic subperiod, extending into the
20th century, encompasses minor numbers of mission Indians, far flung nomadic native groups (primarily the Comanches) until the late 19th Century,
and a rich archeological record of the Europeanderived cultural presence (D. Fox 1983). As the
Comanche presence in Central Texas waned in the
mid-to late 19th century, the more than 11 millennia of Native American presence in the area came
to an end.

CONCLUSIONS AND COMMENTS
ON FUTURE RESEARCH
Central Texas was occupied by Native American hunter-gatherers more or less continuously for
longer than 11,000 years. During that time the net
change in population was from zero to a precontact
figure that may have been as high as 150,000 (based
on a very approximate hemisphere-wide estimate
of 2.1 persons per km2 [Dobyns 1966]), but was
probably much lower (Ubelaker 1988). Whatever
the actual ending figure, and however nonlinear the
rate of increase, it is an absolute certainty that over
time more and more people lived in and around
Central Texas. Without doubt, population growth
increasingly constrained subsistence and mobility
options and may have fostered political conflict,
but it also led to a cosmopolitan condition where
more knowledge, commodities, words, and mates
could be exchanged.
Exchange in each of these domains of culture
is likely to have comparatively low archeological
visibility except when non-perishable commodities
are exchanged, or knowledge is transmitted that is

387

reflected in durable items of material culture. The
more exchange occurs, no matter its form, the more
likely it is to have archeological visibility.
In the course of Central Texas prehistory, archeological evidence for the exchange of ideas and
exotic commodities becomes more visible in the
latter part of the Late Archaic and reaches its greatest expression in the Toyah interval (assuming that
exotic lithics in Paleoindian times more often represent high mobility). When Late Archaic sites in
Central Texas contain exotic obsidian and marine
shells, and there are interments influenced by
Hopewellian burial ceremonialism, the indigenous
population is not living in isolation. Unseen behind
these tangibles are undoubtedly culture brokers,
travelers, mulfilingual interpreters, and diplomats-prehistoric counterparts of the likes of Juan Sabeata,
Sacagewea, and the Turk.
To have reached sufficient levels for archeological expression in the Late Archaic, when did
distant connections first develop? I doubt the natives of Central Texas were ever isolated---a key
element in my views of the local prehistory which
follow.
Horticulture or agriculture had come to be practiced in all directions (Mesoamefica, the Southwest, Southeast, and Plains) during what in Central
Texas was still the Late Archaic. Early European
settlers found Central Texas optimal for farming
(Fehrenbach 1968), and much of it is farmland today. A shift to horticulture or agriculture by natives
of the region was not precluded by natural conditions of soil or climate. Nor was it precluded out of
ignorance on the part of its inhabitants. These conclusions argue for the alternative interpretation that
efficient technologies for hunting and gathering prevailed, and that the plant and animal resource base
was both rich and diverse. Central Texas was one
of those places in the world where the labors and
limitations of food production could be looked upon
with disdain.
What then are the ingredients of that technology and the characteristics of that resource base?
The axiom that specialization is the path to
extinction seems to be born out by it corollary-11,000 years of successful, generalized exploitations of a diverse resource base in Central Texas.
The adaptability of hunter-gatherer subsistence in
Central Texas is underscored by the swings in
climate (see Table 2): from relatively mesic (ca.
11,500 to 8800 or 8500 B.P.) to xeric (ca. 8800 or

388

Texas Archeological Society

8500 to 2800 or 3000 B.P.), with a brief amelerioration (ca. 6800 to 5500 B.P.), and back to
mesic again (ca. 2800 to 1000 B.P.), then followed
by a brief drying interval near 1000 B.P. Since ca.
1000 B.P., the climate seems to have been rather
moderate compared with the more mesic and more
xeric periods of earlier times.
From the earliest arrival of peoples into the
area, which present evidence places near the middle
of the 12th millennium B.P., until ca. 8800 B.P.,
conditions were relatively mesic; the archeological
record reflects hunter-gatherers of moderately high
mobility. Campsites of these Paleoindians usually
have simple fireplaces with little or no use of rock.
During Folsom times, there may have been a
substantial reliance on bison-hunting, but otherwise
Paleoindian subsistence seems to have been rather
generalized. A small human population and
reasonably abundant plant and animal resources
would seem to best account for the archeological
evidence.
Beginning around 8800 years ago, large
fireplaces with quantities of burned rocks appear
and signal important changes in adaptations,
ushering in what we refer to as the Archaic. It is in
the Archaic that we see the development and
perseverance of archeological patterns distinctive
to Central Texas; a conspicuous element in that
distinctiveness is extensive use of rock in a variety
of fireplaces. It is apparent that these rocks were
used primarily for their heat-storage capacity in
most cases, and that this is basic to the long history
of Archaic adaptations.
There is a clear correlation in Central Texas
between mesic climatic indicators and the archeological occurrence of bison remains. There is a less
clear, but suggestive appearance that burned rock
features (middens and complexes of earth ovens)
grew at faster rates in the more xeric intervals. In
general, large hot-rock cooking appliances are
needed for plant foods requiring long cooking
times, whether baking or steaming. The labor and
fuel required for efforts of this kind are efficient
only if a large volume of food is cooked. It follows
that the existence of the large hot-rock cooking appliances is prima facie evidence of bulk processing of starchy plants, be they sotol bulbs, prairie
turnip roots, cattail roots, acorns, or wild onion
bulbs. But it is important to consider that once the
effort is made to construct and fuel a hot-rock
cooking appliance, it can be used to cook almost

any kind of food, plant or animal--wherein lies the
adaptability of these facilities.
As the abundance of various plant foods change
seasonally or in response to longer-term climatic
shifts, rock ovens can be used to bake or steam, as
appropriate, the most available bulk staple, augmented with anything from river mussels or turtle
meat to hawthorn or persimmon fruits. It would
appear, in this vein, that at those (mesic) times
when bison were more abundant, somewhat less
reliance was placed on the bulk processing of plant
foods, and there was relatively less use of hot-rock
appliances. One of those times was when Calf
Creek, Bell, and Andice bifaces were in vogue,
another (although far less evident) when Marcos,
Montell, and Castroville points prevailed. Johnson
and Goode (1994) offer the suggestion that makers
of Calf Creek and related forms migrated into the
region as bison ranges spread.
Central Texas environments are, and have been,
far from uniform, and the foregoing generalizations
will not apply equally over the region (see Ellis et
al., this volume), and not at all in places. Certainly
such potentially important resources as desert
succulents, bison, acorns, and riverine plants and
animals have varied greatly over time, and
archeological understanding of their importance will
emerge locally, not regionally.
During the late (Toyah) interval of the Late
Prehistoric, when bison-hunting and mobility were
evidently at their highest levels since Folsom times,
the ancient practice of using large hot-rock appliances came to an end. Once again, as in the BellAndice-Calf Creek interval, there is good evidence
that the Toyah interval is the archeological expression of bison hunters that migrated into the area.
These hunters neither depended very much on other
local resources nor adopted the technology for their
exploitation.
Such are a few general interpretations of the
prehistory of Central Texas. Should any of these be
found worthy, they could guide future archeological investigations in a general sense, but as framed
they are too general to be tested directly. Instead,
archeological effort in the area needs to be directed
toward more basic tasks, including accumulating
specific evidence relevant to these generalizations.
First, a very small percentage of the archeological data base of Central Texas derives from
well-stratified contexts. To correct this deficiency,
gisements need to be targeted as widely in space

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

and as fully along the temporal vector as possible.
Artifact assemblages and paleoenvironmental data
of high resolution derived from such contexts can
provide the evidence needed to address most of our
presently-recognized archeological issues.
As assemblages with greater integrity--higher
data quality--are investigated, more comprehensive data-recovery and analytical techniques must
be applied. First, the basics of archeological evidence must be better met, and second, the perspective of comparative ethnology should be used to
structure inquiry.
The basics of archeological inquiry are relatively simple---obtaining well-documented, representative samples of archeological assemblages, and
controlling for the relative and absolute dating of
those assemblages. A start at this task has been
made in Central Texas.
I suggest that a comparative ethnological
perspective is needed because in Central Texas we
have learned relatively little about the human
lifeways that came and went here for nearly 12,000
years. We need to have an organizational framework
for our investigations that defines objectives and
directs effort toward those objectives in the greatest
need of attention. An obvious framework is
comparative ethnology. The elements of culture that
ethnologists compare cannot all be known from
extinct cultural systems, but a subset of those that
realistically can be at least partially reconstructed
out of archeological evidence is useful. A matrix
table with cultural traits across the top and our
archeological intervals arrayed up the left side would
constantly remind us of our major data gaps. Within
each cell of the matrix is a research objective that
must be carefully considered in terms of what
archeological evidence is needed, and how that
evidence would best be obtained. Traits from the
general (e.g., subsistence, settlement pattern,
transhumance) to the specific (e.g., burial practices,
ornaments, wood-working tools) need to be
included. Obviously, the evidence required to satisfy
any specific objective will not be found just because
it is listed in the matrix. What is important is that
research will proceed with that objective in mind,
the essential evidence needed to satisfy the objective
will have been thought out, and in the long run our
efforts will be more productive by being allocated
more appropriately.
A significant element in our lack of progress
to date is redundancy. We keep digging up the

389

same kinds of evidence using the same techniques.
Targeting other aspects of the archeological record
and using a greater array of procedures are priorities.
Another impediment is how we conceive evidence. We see deer bones and dart points and infer
that game was taken with a weaponry that employed darts. We rarely consider alternative or
complementary paraphernalia or strategies--use of
nets, snares, or dogs. We seldom ask, much less try
to answer, questions like: "what was made using
those tools we infer to be adzes or gouges; were
people making canoes, shelter, wooden mortars; if
so, what were they doing with them?"
Explicitly defined research objectives on the
macro-, meso-, and micro-scales of investigation
are starting points. Fuller use needs to be made of
the more sophisticated techniques of dating and
archeometry--techniques that mostly are not warranted unless applied to data from superior contexts. These are suggestions that carry a price. The
costs of doing archeology, even mediocre archeology, continue to rise, and unless substantive new
information is gained on nearly every attempt,
those costs are not justified. Only by eliminating
redundant efforts, and targeting quality data with
explicit research objectives and well-conceived
plans for data recovery and analysis, can we expect
to make those substantive contributions. Because
archeologists working in Central Texas have begun
to evaluate site data for their integrity, to move
beyond single-minded pursuit of chronology-building, to give thought to data and analytical requirements for selected other research objectives, and to
have recognized important kinds of evidence previously ignored, conditions are right for making
real progress in understanding the local prehistory.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Tim Perttula for offering me the opportunity to write this essay, and the following individuals for valuable counsel during its preparation:
Jan Guy Motrick, Susan W. Dial, C. Britt Bousman,
Glenn T. Goode, Anne C. Kerr, Thomas R. Hester,
Stephen L. Black, Marilyn A. Masson, Darrell Creel,
Linda Wootan Ellis, and Charles Frederick. At the

390

Texas Archeological Society

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Lauren
Sullivan assisted with research in the site files,
Pamela J. Headrick drafted the figures, and Elizabeth Andrews printed the photographs. Rickard
Toomey III and Tom Stafford graciously allowed
me to use unpublished radiocarbon dates from Hall’s
Cave, and Glenn T. Goode shared his unpublished
data on the Anthon Site. C. E. (Gene) Mear and
Paul Goldberg granted me access to unpublished
geologic data.
This paper considers the 40 years since I became a member of the Texas Archeological Society, and I sincerely hope that it is not a discredit to
those inspiring teachers--Glen Evans, Tom
Campbell, Dee Ann (Suhm) Story, Alex D. Krieger,
Bill Newcomb, Mott Davis, and Ernest Lundelius-by whom my formative acquaintance with the prehistory of Central Texas was especially enriched
and encouraged. I also thank Elton Prewitt, Harry
Shafer, LeRoy Johnson, Jr., Jerry Epstein, Ed Jelks,
Jim Corbin, Bill Sorrow, Dave Dibble, Tom Hester,
Glenn Goode, Vaughn Bryant, Jr., Frank Weir,
Steve Black and many others for the dialog over
these 40 years that has made the topic exciting, and
for their many shared ideas that are undoubtedly
embedded in this essay. To all of these, I extend my
appreciation without any burden of responsibility
for my errors.

FINIS FROST

Green and Hester 1973

FOOTBRIDGE

Johnson et al. 1962

FRIESENHAHN CAVE

Krieger 1964

FRISCH AUF!

Hester and Collins

GAULT

Collins et al. 1991;

1969
Collins et al. 1992
GIBSON

Ray 1940

HALL’S CAVE

Toomey t993;

HIGGINS

Black et al. 1993

HITZFELDER CAVE

Givens 1968a, 1968b

HORN SHELTER 2

Redder 1985

JETTA COURT

Wesolowsky et al.

JOHN ISCHY

Sorrow 1969

KINCAID

Collins 1990b; Collins

KYLE

Jelks 1962

LANDSLIDE

Sorrow et al. 1967

LEVI ROCKSHELTER

Alexander 1963, 1983

Toomey et al. 1993

1976

et al. 1989

LINDNER

Brown 1985

LOEVE

Prewitt 1982

LOEVE FOX

Prewitt 1974

MASON BURIAL CAVE

Benfer and Benfer

MERRELL

Campbell 1948

MUSTANG BRANCH

Ricklis and Collins

OBLATE

Johnson et al. 1962

PAVO REAL

Henderson and Goode

RICHARD BEENE

Thorns and Mandel

ROB ROY

Jackson 1939

ROCKY BRANCH

Treece et al. 1993

RUSH

Quigg and Peck 1995

SCORPION

Highley et al. 1978

SLAB

Patterson 1987

SLEEPER

Johnson 1991

1981

1994

APPENDIX
ALPHABETICAL LISTING OF
SELECTED CENTRAL TEXAS SITES
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DATA
SETS WITH BIBLIOGRAPHIC
REFERENCES

Sites

ANTHON
BARTON

Goode n.d.
Ricklis and Collins
1994

BULL PEN

Ensor 1988

BUZZARD

Stephenson 1970

CAMP PEARL WHEAT

Collins et al. 1991

CLARK

Watt 1965

CROCKETT GARDENS

McCormick 1982

CURRIE

Treece et al. 1993

EVOE TERRACE

Sorrow et al. 1967

1991
1992

SMITH

Suhm 1957

TURKEY BEND RANCH

Treece et al. 1993

VARA DANIEL

Collins et al. 1990;
Ricklis et al. 1991;
Takac et al. 1992

WACO MAMMOTH

J. Fox et al. 1992

WILEY WILLIAMS

TARL Files

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

APPENDIX (Continued)

WILSON-LEONARD

Collins et al. 1993;
Mear n.d.b; Masson
and Collins 1995

WOUNDED EYE

Luke 1980

WUNDERLICH

Johnson et al. 1962

YOUNGSPORT

Shafer 1963

ZATOPEC

Garber 1987

391

REFERENCES CITED
Abbott, J. T.
1994 Geomorphic Context of the Barton Site (41HY202)
and the Mustang Branch Site (41HY209). InArchaic
and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle
Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R. A.
Ricklis and M. B. Collins, pp. 353-379. Studies in
Archeology 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

UNNAMED SITE IN
BANDERA COUNTY

Beasley 1978

41BC50

TARL Files

41CC1

TARL Files

41GL160

Kelly 1987

41ME19

Hester and Kelly 1976

41ML64

Collins and Holliday

41SU43

TARL Files

Alexander, H. L. Jr.
1963 The Levi Site: A Paleo-Indian campsite in central
Texas. American Antiquity 28:510-528.
1983

The Pre-Clovis and Clovis Occupations at the Levi
Site. In Peopling of the New World, edited by J. E.
Ericson, R. E. Taylor, and R. Berger, pp. 133-145.
Ballena Press, Los Altos.

1985
41TG91

Creel 1990

41TV29

TARL Files

Environmental Data Sets

Antevs, E.
1955 Geologic-Climatic Dating in the West. American
Antiquity 20:317-335.
Baker, V. R. and M. M. Penteado-Orellano
!978 Fluvial Sedimentation Conditioned by Quaternary
Climatic Change in Central Texas. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology 48:433-451.

BISON ABUNDANCE

Dillehay 1974

Banks, L. D.

BOG POLLEN

Collins et al. 1993

1990

SABINAL RIVER

Mear n.d.a

view of Lithic Sources in the Trans-Mississippi

PEDERNALES RIVER

Blum and Valastro

South, the Southern Plains, and Adjacent South-

1989
FT. HOOD

Nordt 1992

COLORADO RIVER
AT BASTROP

Blum 1992

COLORADO RIVERIN

From Mountain Peaks to Alligator Stomachs: A Re-

west. Memoir 4. Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Norman.

Barnes, V. E.
1981 Austin Sheet. Geologic Atlas of Texas. Bureau of
Economic Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin.

CONCHO AND
COLEMAN COUNTIES

Blum and Valastro
1992

Beasley, T. S.
1978 A Site with Edwards Points in Bandera County,
Texas. La Tierra 5(4):23-31.

BRAZOSRIVER
AT SOUTH BEND
BRUSHY CREEK

Mandel 1992
Mear n.d.b; Collins et
al. 1993; Masson
and Collins !995

Thoms and Mandel
1992

SOUTHERN PLAINS

Berlandier, J. L.
1969 The Indians of Texas in 1830. Edited by J. C. Ewers. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

MEDINA RIVER AT
APPLEWHITE

Benfer, R. and A. Benfer
1981 The Mason Ranch Burial Cave, Uvalde County,
Texas. La Tierra 8(3):16-26.

Hall 1986

Bianchi, T. H.
1984 The Surficial Stratigraphy of State Highway 16
within the Amite River Valley. In CRMP Level H
Cultural Resource Investigations along Route LA
16 between Watson and Amite, edited by A. F.
Servello, pp. 416-419. Louisiana Department of
Transportation and Development, Baton Rouge.

392

Texas Archeological Society

Black, S. L.
1989

Central Texas Plateau Prairie. In From the Gulf to
the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation in Central,
South, and Lower Pecos Texas, by T. R. Hester, S.

Bousman, C. B.
1993 Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations, Economic Risk and
Tool Design. Lithic Technology 18 (Nos. 1 & 2):5986.

L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. J.
Reinhard, and L. C. Bement, pp. 17-38. Research

Bousman, C. B. and R. C. Fields

Series No. 33. Arkansas Archeological Survey,

1988

Results of the Geoarcheo!ogical Investigations. In
Archeological Survey of the 1989-1993 Permit Area,

Fayetteville.

Jewett Mine Project, Freestone and Leon Counties,
Texas, edited by R. C. Fields, pp. 195-237. Reports

Black, S. L. and A. J. McGraw
1985

The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change

of Investigations 63. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.

and Continuity Within the Upper Salado Creek Wa-

Austin.

tershed, South-Central Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 100. Center for Archaeological Research,

Branda, E. S. (editor)

The University of Texas at San Antonio.

1976

The Handbook of Texas, Vol. IIl. The Texas State
Historical Association, Austin

Black, S. L., K. Jolly, and D. R. Potter
1993

The Higgins Experiment. Wurzbach Project Work-

Brown, K. M.

ing Papers. Texas Archeological Research Labora-

1985

Three Caches of Guadalupe Tools from South Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56:75-

tory, The University of Texas at Austin.

126.
Blum, M. D.
1992

1986

Archaeological Studies of the CPS Butler Lignite

Modern Depositional Environments and Recent Alluvial History of the Lower Colorado River, Gulf

Prospect, Bastrop and Lee Counties, Texas, 1983.

Coastal Plain of Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. Disser-

chaeological Research, The University of Texas at

tation, Department of Geology, The University of

San Antonio.

Archaeological Survey Report 140. Center for Ar-

Texas at Austin.
Brune, G.
Blum, M. D. and C. Lintz
1993

1975

Late Quaternary Geology in the Reservoir Basin. In

Major and Historical Springs of Texas. Report 189.
Texas Water Development Board, Austin.

Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. lvie
Reservoir, Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas, Volume I: Project Introduction, Setting
and Methods, by C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler, A. C.

Bryant, V. M. Jr.
1977 A 16,000 Year Pollen Record of Vegetational
Change in Central Texas. Palynology 1:143-156.

Earls, F. M. Oglesby, M. Blum, P. L. O’Neill, J.
Kuhl, R. Holloway, L. Scott-Cummings, and D.
Scurlock, pp. 280-314. Technica! Report No. 346-I.
Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.
Blum, M. D. and S. Valastro, Jr.
1989

Response of the Pedernales River of Central Texas
to Late Holocene Climatic Change. Annals of the

Bryant, V. M., Jr. and R. G. Holloway
!985 A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of
Texas: An Overview of the Pollen Evidence. In
Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited by V. M. Bryant, Jr. and R.
G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists, Dallas.

Association of American Geographers 79(3):435456~
1992

Quaternary Stratigraphy and Geoarchaeology of the

Bryant, V. M., Jr. and H. J. Sharer
1977

Model for the Archeologist. Bulletin of the Texas

Colorado and Concho Rivers, West Texas.
Geoarchaeology 7:419-448.
Bolton, H. E.
1915 Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century: Studies in
Spanish Colonial History and Administration. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Boul, S. W., F. D. Hole, and R. J. McCracken
1989

Soil Genesis and Classification. Iowa State University Press, Ames.

The Late Quaternary Paleoenvironment of Texas: A
Archeological Society 48: t-25.

Butzer K. W.
1982

Archaeology as Human Ecology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Campbell, T. N.
1948 The Merrell Site: Archeological Remains Associated with Alluvial Terrace Deposits in Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 19:7-35.

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas
Campbell, T. N. (Continued)
1988 The Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern
Mexico. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
Department of Anthropology, College of Liberal
Arts, and Institute of Latin American Studies, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Campbell, T. N. and T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indian Groups of the Choke Canyon Reservoir and Surrounding Area, Southern Texas.
Choke Canyon Series, Volume 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.
1985

Indian Groups Associated with Spanish Missions of
the San Antonio Missions National Park. Special
Report 16. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

Clarke, D. L.
1977 Spatial Information in Archaeology. In Spatial Archaeology, edited by D. L. Clarke, pp. 1-32. Academic Press, London.
Collins, E. W.
1982 Surface evidence of tectonic activity and erosion
rates, Palestine, KeechL and Oakwood salt domes,
East Texas. Geological Circular 82-3. Bureau of
Economic Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Collins, E. W., D. K. Hobday, and C. W. Kreitler
1980 Quaternary faulting in East Texas. Geological Circular 80-1. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Collins, M. B.
1990a Observations on Clovis Lithic Technology. Current
Research in the Pleistocene 7:73-74.
t990b The Archaeological Sequence at Kincaid
Rockshelter, Uvalde County, Texas. Transactions
of the 25th Regional Archeological Symposium for
Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp.
25-33. Midland Archeological Society, Midland,
Texas.
1991a Thoughts on future investigations of burned rock
middens. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An
Archeological Symposium, edited by T. R. Hester,
pp. 1-24. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
1991b Rockshelters and the Early Archaeological Record
in the Americas. In The First Americans: Search
and Research, edited by T. D. Dillehay and D. J.
Meltzer, pp. 157-182. CRC Press, Boca Raton.

393

Collins, M. B. (Continued)
1994a Evidence of Early Archaic Occupation. In Archaic
and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle
Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R. A.
Ricklis and M. B. Collins, pp. 67-t00. Studies in
Archeology 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
1994b Late Archaic Evidence in the Project Area. In Archaic
and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle
Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R. A.
Ricklis and M. B. Collins, pp. 10t-189. Studies in
Archeology 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
1994c Chronometric Investigations. In Archaic and Late
Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle Onion
Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R. A. Ricklis
and M. B. Collins, pp. 499-505. Studies in Archeology 19. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
n.d.a

The Keven Davis Cache (41NV659) and Clovis
Blade Technology in the South Central United
States. Manuscript on file, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

n.d.b

Taking Stock of Paleoindian Archeology in Texas,
1994. Manuscript on file, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Collins, M. B. M. D. Blum, R. A. Ricklis, and S. Valastro
1990 Quaternary Geology and Prehistory of the Vera
Daniel Site, Travis County, Texas. Current Research
in the Pleistocene 7:8-10.
Collins, M. B., C. B. Bousman, P. Goldberg, P. R. Takac, J. C.
Guy, J. L. Lanata, T. W. Stafford, and V. T. Holliday
1993 The Paleoindian Sequence at the Wilson-Leonard
Site, Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene
10:10-12.
Collins, M. B., C. B. Bousman, and T. K. Perttula
1993 Historic Context: Quaternary Environments and Archeology in Northeastern Texas. In Archeology in
the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document, edited by N. A. Kenmotsu and T. K.
Perttula, pp. 49-67. Cultural Resource Management
Report 3. Department of Antiquities Protection,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Collins, M. B., B. Ellis and C. Dodt-Ellis
1990 Excavations at the Camp Pearl Wheat Site
(41KR243): An Early Archaic Campsite on Town
Creek, Kerr County, Texas. Studies in Archeology
6. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

394

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

Collins, M. B., G. L. Evans, T. N. Campbell, M. C. Winans,
and C. E. Mear
1989 Clovis Occupation at Kincaid Shelter, Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 6:3-4.

Ebert, J. I.
1992

Distributional Archaeology. University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Eighmy, J.
Collins, M. B., T. R. Hester, and P. J. Headrick
1992

1993

Engraved Cobbles from the Gault Site, Central

Archaeomagnetic Results. In Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. lvie Reservob; Concho
Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas, Volume IV:

Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 9:3-4.

Data Recovery Results frotn Ceramic Sites, by A.

Collins, M. B., T. R. Hester, D. Olmstead, and P. J. Headrick
1991 Engraved Cobbles from Early Archaeological Contexts in Central Texas. Current Research in the
Pleistocene 8:13-15.

C. Treece, C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler, J. M. Quigg,
and K. A. Miller, pp. K-1 through K-22. Technical
Report 346-IV. Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.
Ellis, G. L.

Collins, M. B. and V. T. Holliday
1985 Geoarcheology in the Lower Bosque Basin,
McLennan County, Texas. Report submitted to U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District, Fort
Worth, Texas.

1994

Archeological Overview and Theoretical Perspectives. In Significance Standards for Prehistoric Cultural Resources: A Case Study from Fort Hood,
Texas, by G. L. Ellis, C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler,
and J. M. Jackson, pp. 41-99. Technical Report
CRC-94104. U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, Con-

Collins, M. B. and R. A. Ricklis
1994 Cultural Background. In Archaic and Late Prehis-

struction Engineering Research Laboratories,
Champaign, Illinois.

toric Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek
Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R. A. Ricklis and

Ensor, H. B. and C. S. Mueller-Wille

M. B. Collins, pp. 11-26. Studies in Archeology !9.

1988

Texas Archeologica! Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Excavations at the Bull Pen Site 41BP280, Colorado River Drainage, Bastrop County, Texas. Contract Reports in Archaeology, Report Number 3.
Texas State Department of Highways and Public

Creel, O.G.
1990 Excavations at 41TG91, Tom Green County, Texas,
1978. Publications in Archaeology, Report No. 38.
Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.

1991

Assessing the relationship between burned rock

Transportation, Austin

Fehrenbach, T. R.
1968 Lone Star, a History of Texas and the Texans.
Collier, New York

midden distribution and archaic subsistence in west
central Texas. In The Burned Rock Middens of
Texas: An Archeological Symposium, edited by T.
R. Hester, pp. 33-43. Studies in Archeology 13.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Davis, S. D., W. D. Pennington, and S. M. Carlson
1989 A Compendium of Earthquake Activity in Texas.
Geological Circular 89-3. Bureau of Economic
Geeology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Dillehay, T. D.
1974 Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the
Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist 19(65): 180196.

Ferring, C. R.
1986 Rates of Fluvial Sedimentation: Implications for
Archaeological Variability. Geoarchaeology 1:259274.
Foster, W. C.
1995 Spanish Expeditions into Texas, 1689-1768. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Fox, D.
1979

The Lithic Artifacts of lndians at the Spanish Colonial Missions, San Antonio, Texas. Special Report
3. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

1983

Traces of Texas History: Archeological Evidence of
the Past 450 Years. Corona, San Antonio.

Dobyns, H. F.
1966 Estimating Aboriginal American Population, an
Appraisal of Techniques with a New Hemispheric
Estimate. Current Anthropology 7:395-416
Duffield, L. F.
1970

Vertisols and Their Implications for Archeological
Research. American Anthropologist 72:1055-1062.

Fox, J. W., C. B. Smith, and D. O. Lintz
1992 Herd Bunching at the Waco Mammoth Site: Preliminary Investigations, 1978-1987. In Proboscidean
and Paleoindian Interactions, edited by J. W. Fox,
C. B. Smith, and K. T. Wilkins, pp. 51-73. Baylor
University Press, Waco.

Collins ~ Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas

Gamble, C.
1986

The Paleolithic Settlement of Europe. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

Garber, J. F.
1987 Transitional Archaic Structure and Activity Areas
at the Zatopec Site, San Marcos, Texas. La Tierra
14(2): 19-30.
Givens, R. D.
1968a On the Peopling of America. Current Anthropology
9:219.
1968b A Preliminary Report on Excavations at Hitzfelder
Cave. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
38:47-50.

Goode, G. T.
1991 Late Prehistoric burned rock middens in Central
Texas. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An
Archeological Symposium, edited by T. R. Hester,
pp. 71-93. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.
n.d.

Report on excavations at the Anthon site, Uvalde
County, Texas. Manuscript on file, Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.

Gose, W.
1994 Archeomagnetism. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric
Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek Valley,
Hays County, Texas, by R. A. Ricklis and M. B.
Collins, pp. 507-537. Studies in Archeology 19.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

1973

L. M., and T. R. Hester
The Finis Frost Site: A Toyah phase occupation in
San Saba County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 44:319-333.

Haynes, C. V., Jr. (Continued)
1992 Contributions of radiocarbon dating to the geochronology of the peopling of the New World. In Radiocarbon after Four Decades, edited by R. E. Taylor,
Ao Long, and R. S. Kra, pp. 355-374. SpringerVerlag, New York.
1993

Texas. Special Report 5. Center for Archaeological

Hall, S.
1986 Late Quaternary Alluvial Chronology of the Southern Plains. Geological Society ofAmerica, Abstracts
with Programs 18:625.
1990

Channel trenching and climatic change in the Southern U.S. Great Plains. Geology 18:342-345.

Haynes, C. V., Jr.
1991 Geoarchaeological and paleohydrological evidence
for a Clovis-age drought in North America and its
bearing on extinction. Quaternary Research 35:438450.

Clovis-Folsom Geochronology and Climatic
Change. In Frotn Kostenki to Clovis, edited by O.
Softer and N. D. Praslov, pp. 219-236. Plenum Press,
New York.

Henderson J. and G. T. Goode
199t Pavo Real: An Early Paleoindian Site in SouthCentral Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene
8:26-28.
Hester, T. R.
1973 The Formation of a Burned Rock Midden: A California Example. The Record 30(1):4. Dallas Archeological Society, Dallas.
1989a Texas and Northeastern Mexico: An Overview. In
Columbian Consequences, I/olume 1: Archaeological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands West, edited by D. H. Thomas, pp. 191-211.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington.
1989b Perspectives on the Material Culture of the Mission
Indians of the Texas-Northeastern Mexico Borderlands. In Columbian Consequences, Volume 1: Archaeological and Historical Perspectives on the
Spanish Borderlands West, edited by D. H. Thomas, pp. 213-229. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington.
1990

1991

Plainview Artifacts at the St. Mary’s Hall Site, South
Central Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene
7:14-17.
Preface. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An
Archeological Symposium, edited by T. R. Hester,
pp. v-vii. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of

Gunn, J. and R. A. Mahula
1977 Hop Hill: Culture and Climatic Change in Central
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

395

Texas at Austin.
Hester, T. R., G. L. Evans, F. Asaro, F. Stross, T. N. Campbell,
and H. Michel
1985

Trace Element Analysis of an Obsidian Paleo-Indian Projectile Point From Kincaid Rockshelter,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
56:143-153.

Hester, T. R. and T. C. Kelly
1976 Archaeological investigations at sites near Natalia,
Medina County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 20. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Highley, L., C. Graves, C. Land, and G. Judson
1978 Archeological investigations at Scorpion Cave
(41ME7), Medina County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 49:139-194.

396

Texas Archeological Society

Hodder, I.

Johnson, L. Jr., D. A. Suhm, and C. D. Tunnell

1978

1962

The Spatial Structure of ’Cultures:’ A Review of

Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The

Some of the Evidence. In The Spatial Organization

Wunderlich, Footbridge, and Oblate Sites. Bulletin

of Culture, edited by I. Hodder, pp. 93-1 l 1. Univer-

5. Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.

sity of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh.
Kelley, J. C.
Holloway, R. G.
1988

1947

The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the

Pollen Analysis of 41M18, Mills County, Texas. Con-

Toyah, Uvalde, and Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of

tribution 4. Laboratory of Quaternary Studies, De-

the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Soci-

partment of Anthropology, Eastern New Mexico

ety 18:115-128.

State University, Portales.
Kelley, J. C. and T. N. Campbell
Howard, M. A.
1991

1942

What are the Burnt Rock Mounds of Texas? American Antiquity 7:319-322.

Burned rock midden excavations, hearths and botanical remains. In The Butwed Rock Middens of
Texas: An Archeological Symposium, edited by T.

Kelly, T. C.

R. Hester, pp. 45-69. Studies in Archeology 13.

1987

Archaeology of the Gamenthaler Valley, Gillespie

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The Uni-

County, Central Texas: A Preliminary Report. La

versity of Texas at Austin.

Tierra 14(1):5-27.

Jackson, A. T.
1939 A Deep Archeological Site in Travis County, Texas.

Krieger, A.D.
1947

Certain Projectile Points of the Early American

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleonto-

Hunters. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and

logical Society ! 1:203-225.

Paleontological Society 18:7-27.
1964

Early Man in the New World. In Prehistoric Man in

Jackson, A. T. and A. M. Woolsey

the New World, edited by J. D. Jennings and E.

1938

The Fall Creek Sites and Additional Buchanan Lake

Norbeck, pp. 23-81. University of Chicago Press,

Sites. Publications 3802. The University of Texas,

Chicago.

Austin
Kroeber, A. L.
Jelks, E. B.
1962

The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect

1939

Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North
America. Publications in American Archaeology and

Site in Hill County, Texas. Archaeology Series 5.

Ethnology 38. University of California, Berkeley.

Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas, Austin.

Largent, F. B. and M. R. Waters
1990

Johnson, L. Jr.
1967

1987

The Distribution of Folsom Points in Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 7:27-28.

Toward a Statistical Overview of the Archaic Cultures of Central and Southwestern Texas. Bulletin

Laville, H., J-P. Rigaud, and J. Sackett

12. Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.

1980

Rock Shelters of the Perigord. Academic Press, New
York.

A Plague of Phases:Recent Sociocultural Taxonomy
in Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:1-26.

Lintz, C.
1993

1991

Earl), Archaic Life at the Sleeper Archaeological
Site, 41BC65, of the Texas Hill Country, Blanco
County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology, Report
39. Texas Department of Transportation. Austin.

1994

Paleoenvironmental Reconstruction. In CulturalResource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie Reservoir,
Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas,
Volume I: Project Introduction, Setting and Method,
by C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler, A. C. Earls, F. M.

The Life and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk as Seen

Oglesby, M. Blum, P. L. O’Neill, J. Kuh!, R.

From the Buckhollow Encampment, Site 41KM16

Holloway, L. Scott-Cummings, and D. Scurlock,

of Kimble County, Texas. Office of the State Arche-

pp. 261-280. Technical Report No. 346-I. Mariah

ologist Report 38. Texas Department of Transporta-

Associates, Inc., Austin.

tion and the Texas Historical Commission, Austin
Johnson, L. Jr. and G. T. Goode
1994 A New Try at Dating and Characterizing Holocene
Climates, as well as Archeological Periods, on the
Eastern Edwards Plateau. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65:1-51.

Luke, C. J.
1980 Continuing Archaeology on State Highway 16: The
Shep Site (41KR109) and the Wounded Eye Site
(41KR107). Publications in Archaeology 19. State
Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.

Collins ~ For~y Years of Archeology in Central Texas
Mandel, R. D.
1992 Geomorphology. In An Archeological Survey of The
Proposed South Bend Reservoir Area: Young,
Stephens, and Throckmorton Counties, Texas, edited by J. W. Saunders, C. S. Mueller-Wille, and D.
L. Carlson, pp. 53-83. Archeological Surveys No.
6. Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station.

397

Meltzer, D. J. (Continued)
1989

An Update on the Texas Fluted Point Survey. Current Research in the Pleistocene 6:3 !-34.

Morse, D. F. and P. A. Morse
1983 Archaeology of the Central Mississippi Valley. Academic Press, San Diego
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.

Masson, M. A. and M. B. Collins
1995 The Wilson-Leonard Site (41WM235). Cultural
Resource Management News and Views 7( 1):6-10.
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Masson, M. A. and M. W. Holderby
1994 Subsistence Patterns at 41HY209 and 41HY202: An
Analysis of Vertebrate Faunal Remains. In Archaic
and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle
Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R. A.
Ricklis and M. B. Collins, pp. 353-379. Studies in
Archeology 19. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

1961

The Indians of Texas: Frotn Prehistoric to Modern
Times. University of Texas Press, Austin.

1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 64:1-63.

Nordt, L. C.
1992

Archaeological Geology of the Fort Hood Military
Reservation, Ft. Hood, Texas. Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report 25.
United States Army, Fort Hood, Texas.

North American Commission on Stratigraphic Nomenclature
1983

North American Stratigraphic Code. The American
Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin

McCormick, O.
1982 41WM419 (Crockett Gardens Site). InArchaeological Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, compiled and edited by T. R.
Hays, pp. 12.135-12.166. Archaeology Program, Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State Uni-

67:841-875.

Osmond, J. C., Jr.
1963 Recent Small-Scale Deformations of Limestone
Strata. Guide Book, Publication 61-46. West Texas
Geological Society, Midland.

versity, Denton.

McDonald, J.
1974 Non-human Bones from the Loeve-Fox Site: A Preliminary Analysis. In Archeological Investigations
at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson County, Texas,
by E. R. Prewitt, pp. 132-134. Research Report 49.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
McKinney, W. W.
1981 Early Holocene Adaptations in Central and Southwestern Texas: The Problem of the PaleoindianArchaic Transition. Bulletin of the Texas
A rcheological Society 52:91-120.
Mear, C.E.
n.d.a Quaternary Geology of the Upper Sabinal River
Valley, Uvalde and Bandera Counties, Texas. Manuscript on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
n.d.b

Geomorphology and Quaternary Geology of the Wilson-Leonard site area. Manuscript on file, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Patterson, P. E.
1987 Archaeological Excavations at 41LL78, the Slab
Site, Llano County, Texas. Publications in Archaeology 34. State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Austin.
Pearce, J. E.
1932 The Present Status of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 4:44-54.
Peter, D. E., D. Prikryl, O. McCormick, and M. A. Demuynck
1982 Site Excavation Reports: Primary Contract. In Archaeological Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, Volume 1, edited by
T. R. Hays, pp. 8-1 through 8-156. Archaeology
Program, Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas
State University, Denton.
Perttula, T. K., B. D. Skiles, M. B. Collins, M. C. Trachte, and
F. Valdez, Jr.
1986

"This Everlasting Sand Bed": Cultural Resources
Investigations at the Texas Big Sandy Project, Wood
and Upshur Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations 52. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin

Meltzer, D. J.
1987 The Clovis Paleoindian Occupation of Texas: Results of the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:27-68.

398

Texas Archeological Society

Potter D. R. and S. L. Black
1995 Archeology Along the Wurzbach Parkway, Module
2: Initial Testing and Evaluation of Five Prehistoric Sites in the Upper Salado Watershed, Bexar
County, Texas. Studies in Archeology 18. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Potter, D. R., S. L. Black, and K. Jolly
1995

Archeology along the Wurzbach Parkway, Module
1: Introduction, Conceptual Framework, and Contexts of Archeological hzvestigations in Bexar
County, South-Central Texas. Studies in Archeol-

Redder, A. J.
1985 Horn Shelter Number 2: the south end, a preliminary report. Central Texas Archeologist 10:37-65.
Reese-Taylor, K., J. Hageman, and R. A. Ricklis
1994 Preliminary Paste Analyses of Ceramic Samples
from the Mustang Branch Site (41HY209) and
Barton Site (41HY202). In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek
Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R. A. Ricklis and
M. B. Collins, pp. 549-568. Studies in Archeology
19. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

ogy 17. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Prewitt, E. R.
1974

1981

Ricklis, R. A.
1994a Occupation in the Project Area during the Austin
Interval, or Early Part of the Late Prehistoric Pe-

Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site,
Williamson Count),, Texas. Research Report 49.

riod. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecol-

Texas Archeological Survey, The University of

Texas, by R. A. Ricklis and M. B. Collins, pp. 191-

Texas at Austin.

205. Studies in Archeology 19. Texas Archeologi-

ogy in the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County,

cal Research Laboratory, The University of Texas

Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of

at Austin.

the Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89.
1982

Archaeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox,

1994b Toyah Components: Evidence for Occupation in the
Project Area During the Latter Part of the Late

Loeve, and Tombstone Bluff Sites in the Granger

Prehistoric Period. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric

Lake District of Central Texas. In Archaeological

Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek Valley,

Investigations in the San Gabriel Reservoir Dis-

Hays County, Texas, by R. A. Ricklis and M. B.

tricts, Central Texas, Volume 4, edited and compiled by T. R. Hays. Archaeology Program, Institute

Collins, pp. 207-316. Studies in Archeology 19.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The Uni-

of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University,

versity of Texas at Austin.

Denton.
1985

From Circlevitle to Toyah: comments on Central

Ricklis, R. A. and M. B. Collins

Texas chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo-

1994

logical Society 54:201-238.
1991

Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in
the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas.

Burned rock middens: A summary of previous in-

Studies in Archeology 19. Texas Archeological

vestigations and interpretations. In The Burned Rock

Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at

Middens of Texas: An Archeological Symposium,

Austin.

edited by T. R. Hester, pp. 25-32. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
n.d.

The Rogers Springs Site: 1974 Investigations. Research Report 54. Manuscript on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin. Austin

Quigg, J. M. and J. Peck
1995

The Rush Site (41TG346) A Stratified Late Prehistoric Locale in Tom Green County, Texas. Technical Report 816C. Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.

Rapp, G., Jr.
1986 Assessing Archaeologial Evidence for Seismic
Catastrophics. Geoarchaeology 1:365-379.
Ray, C. N.
1940

The Deeply Buried Gibson Site. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 12:223237.

Ricklis, R. A., M. D. Blum, and M. B. Collins
1991 ArcheoIogical Testing at the Vera Daniel Site
(41TV1364), Zilker Park, Austin, Texas. Studies in
Archeology t2. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Saunders, J. W., C. S. Mueller-Wille, and D. L. Carlson
(editors)
1992 An Archeological Survey of the Proposed South
Bend Reservoir Area: Young, Stephens, and
Throckmorton Counties, Texas. Archeological Surveys 6. Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas
A&M University, College Station.
Schumm, S. A.
1977 The Fluvial System. John Wiley and Sons, New
York.

Collins m Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas
Sellards, E. H. and G. L. Evans
1960 The Paleo-Indian Culture Succession in the Central
High Plains of Texas and New Mexico. In Men and
Cultures: Selected Papers of the 5th International
Congress of Anthropological and Ethnographical
Sciences, 1956.
Shafer, H. J.
1963 Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified Terrace Site in Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 34:57-81.
1967

Skinner, S. A.
1974 Prehistoric Settlement of a "Natural Area." Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Sorrow, W. M.
1969 Archeological Investigations at the John Ischy Site:
A Burnt Rock Midden in Williamson County, Texas.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project
No. 18. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Sorrow, W. M., H. J. Shafer, and R. E. Ross
1967

Stevenson, C. M.
1992 Obsidian Hydration Summary. In An Archeological
Su~-vey of the Proposed South Bend Reservoir Area:
Young, Stephens, and Throckmorton Counties,
Texas, edited by J. W. Saunders, C. S. MuellerWille, and D. L. Carlson, pp. 539-541. Archeological Surveys 6. Archeological Research Laboratory,
Texas A&M University, College Station.
Stokes, S.
1992

An Archeological Survey of Robert Lee Reservoir,
Coke County, Texas. Survey Report 4. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas
at Austin.

Sharer, H. J., D. A. Suhm, and J. D. Scurlock
1964 An Investigation and Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Belton Reservoir, Bell and Coryell
Counties, Texas: 1962. Miscellaneous Papers 1.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas, Austin.

Excavations at Stillhouse Reservoir. Papers of the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project No. 11. Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Steele, D. G. and J. F. Powell
1994 Paleobiological Evidence of the Peopling of the
Americas: A Morphometric View. In Method and
Theory for Investigath~g the Peopling of the Americas, edited by R. Bonnichsen and D. G. Steele, pp.
141-163. Center for the Study of the First American, Oregon State University, Corvallis.
Stephenson, R. L.
1970 Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:37-286.

399

Optical Dating of Independently Dated Late Quaternary Eolian Deposits from the Southern High
Plains. Current Research in the Pleistocene 9:125129.

Suhm,
1957 Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis
County, Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 9:2658.
1960

A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 29:63-107.

Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25
(whole volume).
Takac, P. R., M. B. Collins, P. Goldberg, and S. Valastro, Jr.
1992 Archeological and Geomorphological Testing Along
The Proposed South Austin Outfall Relief Main,
Phase H Tunnel Alignment: The Vara Daniel Site
(41TV1364), Zilker Park, Austin, Texas. Technical
Series 28. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Talwani, P. and J. Cox
1985 Paleoseismic evidence for recurrence of earthquakes
near Charleston, South Carolina. Science 229:379381.
Taylor, A. J.
1987 Archaeological Survey of the CPS Butler Lignite
Prospect, Bastrop and Lee Counties, Texas, 1984.
Archaeological Survey Report 151. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.
Thomas, G. B.
1978 A survey and assessment of the archeological resources of Fort Hood, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 49:195-240.
Thoms, A. V.
1989 The Northern Roots of Hunter-Gatherer Intensification: Camas and the Pacific Northwest. Unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology,
Washington State University, Pullman.

400

Texas Archeological Society

Thoms, A. V., and R. D. Mandel

Wallace, E. and E. A. Hoebel

1992

1952

The Richard Beene Site: A Deeply Stratified

The Comanches, Lords of the South Plains. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

Paleoindian to Late Prehistoric Occupation in SouthCentral Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene
9:42-44.

Watt, F. H.
1936

A Prehistoric Rock-Shelter Burial in Bell County,

Toomey, R. S. III

Texas. Bulletin of the Central Texas Archeological

1993

Society 2:5-27.

Late Pleistocene and Holocene Faunal Changes at
Hall’s Cave, Kerr County, Texas. Unpublished Ph.D.

1965

dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.

Notes on the Clark Site, McLennan County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 36:99110.

Toomey, R. S. III., M. D. Blum, and S. Valastro, Jr.
1993

Late Quaternary Climates and Environments of the

Weir, F. A.

Edwards Plateau, Texas. Global and Planetary

1976

Change 7:299-320.

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Washington State University, Pullman.

Treece, A. C., J. M. Quigg, C. Lintz, and K. Miller
1993

Rocky Branch Site (41RN169). In Cultural Resource

1979

tin of the Texas Archeological Society 50:5-67.

Investigations in the O. H. lvie Reservoir, Concho,
Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas, Volume IV:
Data Recovery from Ceramic Sites, by A. C. Treece,

Greenhaw: An Archaic Site in Central Texas. Bulle-

1985

An Early Holocene Burial at the Wilson-Leonard
Site in Central Texas. Mammoth Trumpet 2(1): t, 3.

C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler, J. M. Quigg, and K. A.
Miller, pp. 3 t-118. Technical Report 346-IV. Mariah
Associates, Inc., Austin.

Wesolowsky, A. B., T. R. Hester, and D. R. Brown
1976

Archeological Investigations at the Jetta Court Site
(41TV151) Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 47:25-87.

Treece, A. C., J. M. Quigg, K. Miller, and C. Lintz
1993

Turkey Bend Ranch Site (41CCl12). In Cultural
Resource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie Reservoir,
Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas,

Willey, G. R.
1966

An Introduction to American Archaeology, Volume

Volu~ne III: Data Recovery Results from Non-Ce-

1: North America. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,

ramic Sites, by A. C. Treece, C. Lintz, W. N.

New Jersey.

Trierweiler, J. M. Quigg, and K. A. Miller, pp. 67242. Technical Report 346-III. Mariah Associates,
Inc., Austin.

Treece, A. C., J. M. Quigg, K. Miller, and P. L. O’Neill
1993 Currie Site (41CC131). In CulturalResource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie Reservoir, Concho,
Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas, Volume IV:
Data Recovery from Ceramic Sites, by A. C. Treece,
C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler, J. M. Quigg, and K. A.
Miller, pp. 119-306. Technical Report 346-IV.
Mariah Associates, Inc. Austin.
Ubelaker, D.
1988

North American Indian Population Size, A.D. 1500
to 1985. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 77: 289-294.

Willey, P. S., B. R. Harrison, and J. T. Hughes
1978

The Rex Rodgers Site. In Archaeology at MacKenzie
Reservoir, edited by J. T. Hughes and P. S. Willey,
pp. 51-1 !4. Archeological Survey Report 24. Office
of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Wormington, H. M.
1957

Ancient Man in North America. Fourth Edition. The
Denver Museum of Natural History, Denver.

Wyckoff, D. G.
1995

A Summary of the Calf Creek Horizon in Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological
Society 42:179-210.

Implications of Environmental Diversity in the Central
Texas Archeolog cal Reg n
Linda Wootan Ellis, G. Lain Ellis, and Charles D. Frederick

ABSTRACT
The Central Texas environment is usually described in terms of Blair’s (1950) biotic provinces. However,
Blair’s provinces obscure wide environmental diversity, even within the relatively small area subsumed under
Elton Prewitt’s (1981, 1985) version of the Central Texas archeological region. As a result, hunter-gatherers
distributed across Prewitt’s Central Texas would have faced substantially-even radically-different subsistence
challenges, and any synchronic regional description or comprehensive explanation of prehistory in the region
as a whole would necessarily gloss over a wide range of diversity. Furthermore, under conditions of uniform
precipitation change, environments in different parts of Central Texas will not change uniformly. Even ira single
climate history applies all across the region, different cultural or processual histories will occur in different places
because substantially different adaptive challenges will be imposed on people who already had substantially
different subsistence regimes. Thus, any regional culture or processual history would have to gloss over a wide
range of adaptive responses that lie at the heart of any prehistory of Central Texas. Consequently, to achieve any
accuracy about the cultures and/or processes that characterize Central Texas prehistory as a whole, it is necessary
to simplify our descriptions of cultures and/or processes to a series of quintessential constructs that do not refer
to the people or activities we are interested in understanding as prehistorians.

Rounding off lies at the heart of working with symbols and speech. Rounding off compresses
information. It simplifies matters and reduces the many to the few, reduces the complex to the
manageable .... We have to simplify to get things going, at least at first. No harm in that. But actions
have costs.

--Kosko (1993:90)
When you speak, you simplify. And when you simplify, you lie.
--Kosko (1993:86)

INTRODUCTION
Central Texas traditionally has been treated as
a relevant match-up between prehistory and geography. However, despite the fact that archeologists
have begun to question their basic approaches to,
and assumptions about, Central Texas prehistory
(e. g., Potter and Black 1995; Ellis 1994; Black et
al. 1993; Collins 1991), the validity and utility of
the term "Central Texas" has yet to be evaluated to
determine the extent to which the term is relevant
to either culture history or processual approaches to
archeology. In our view, the term "Central Texas"
obscures too much environmental variability to be

useful as a spatial concept around which to build
our knowledge of prehistory: despite the fact that
typologically similar artifacts occur widely in and
around Central Texas, the environment subsumed
within this area is simply too variable to support
talk about "Central Texas archeology" except in
overgeneralized terms.
Our argument is as follows. Although the Central Texas environment traditionally has been described in terms of Blair’s (1950) biotic provinces,
more recent environmental studies show that there
is wide environmental diversity within Blair’s provinces, even within the relatively small area subsumed under Prewitt’ s (1981) version of the Central

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

402

Texas Archeological Society

Texas archeological region. By looking at an array
of hypothetical hunter-gatherer territories distributed across Prewitt’s Central Texas, it is obvious
that groups exploiting different parts of the region
would face substantially-even radically-different
subsistence challenges at any given time. Thus, any
synchronic regional description or explanation of
prehistory in the region would gloss over a wide
range of diversity.
Furthermore, recent paleoclimate research has
produced a series of conflicting models of Central
Texas climate history: if Centra! Texas can be subsumed under a single climate model, then at least
one of the extant climate models must be false. In
any event, examining hypothetical change in precipitation shows that under conditions of uniform
precipitation change, environments in different parts
of Central Texas will not change uniformly. Even if
a single climate history applies to all of the region,
different culture or processual histories will occur in
different parts of the region because substantially
different adaptive challenges must be met by peoples
who already had substantially different subsistence
practices. Simply put, any regional culture or
processual history would have to gloss over or ignore a wide range of adaptive responses that lie at
the heart of any prehistory of Central Texas. As a
result, to achieve any accuracy about the cultures
and/or processes that characterize Central Texas prehistory as a whole, it is necessary to simplify our
descriptions of cultures and/or processes to a series
of quintessential, lowest-common-denominator constructs. However, the price of such simplification is
high because to attempt to identify accurate regionwide quintessential constructs creates fictive entities that do not refer to the people or activities we
are interested in learning about as prehistorians.
WHERE IS CENTRAL TEXAS,
ANYWAY?
Central Texas has traditionally encompassed
most or all of the Edwards Plateau and varying
adjacent areas. However, the "Central Texas"
geographic region has no well-fixed boundaries:
they shift with each new problem. Studies that focus
on geologic problems generally depict Central Texas
differently from studies that focus on natural
vegetation, fauna, or archeology. For example,
Spearing’s (1991:112) geologic study of Texas
defines Central Texas as encompassing all of the

Edwards Plateau, the Hill Country, and the Llano
Uplift, with the Balcones Escarpment representing
its eastern margin. However, in Gehlbach’s
(1991 :Figure 1) analysis of terrestrial vertebrates,
Central Texas begins at the eastern margins of the
Edwards Plateau and extends past the escarpment
to the Trinity River on the northeast and Grimes
and Washington counties on the southeast. Thus, it
appears that "Central Texas" is not so much a
discrete geographic area, as it is more a study area
that is defined by the nature of a particular problem
and by the state of current understanding about the
phenomena relevant to that problem.
If Central Texas is more a study area than a
discrete geographic area, then how do we draw
geographic boundaries for the Central Texas archeological region? If the boundaries are drawn on
the basis of specific problems, then by what criteria
do we affix geographic boundaries to cultural
boundaries? For purposes of the present discussion,
we focus on the relationship between the geographic
boundaries that presently define the Central Texas
archeological region and the environmental domains
they encompass.
Over the past 40 years, the geographic boundaries of the Central Texas archeo!ogical region have
shifted (Figure 1). As archeological research progressed and new data came to light, the geographic
boundaries shifted to reflect the results of new investigations. However, as Suhm (1960:63) pointed
out, there are no precise boundaries for the region
and "one can anticipate that they will always remain somewhat fuzzy."
In 1954, Suhm et al. (1954:102-1!2) used trait
complexes to define the boundary of the Edwards
Plateau Aspect or Archaic Stage in Central Texas
prehistory. It covered a large area from the Brazos
River basin on the northeast and southeast, and
extended westward to about Sterling County on the
northwest and the headwaters of the Devil’s and
Nueces rivers on the southwest. It reached approximately as far north as Jones County and then as far
south as Victoria County (Suhm et al. 1954:Figure
4). A second somewhat more restricted area was
defined for the later chronological stage known as
the Central Texas Aspect of the Neo-American Stage.
The Central Texas Aspect was seen as extending
from the Brazos River drainage on the east and
north, to about Tom Green and Edwards counties on
the west, and to the central Gulf Coastal Plain on the
south (Suhm et al. 1954:112 and Figure 5).

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick u Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

403

(Weir 1976:2). No southern boundary was
noted, and no map was given.
A similar geographic area was included
within the Central Texas archeological region defined by Brown et al. (1982) during
Kansan
Texan
~
the Texas Historical Commission’s Resource Protection Planning Project. Using
an interdisciplinary approach, geographic
Austroboundaries were defined based on specific
riparian
Chihuahuan
sociocultural systems. These boundaries
Balconian ~
were seen as "transitional demarcations"
that may or may not have changed through
time, and were designed after Suhm (1960)
Tamaulipan
and Weir (1976). For Central Texas, these
boundaries remained relatively unchanged
Suhm (1960)
from Archaic times through the Late PreBrown et al. (1982)
historic
(Brown et al. 1982:Figures 4 and
Prewitt (1981 )
5). The Brown et al. (1982) study defined
Biotic province boundaries
(Blair 1950)
the Central Texas Archaic/Late Prehistoric
geographic extent as extending to just below the escarpment on its southern edge.
Figure 1. Selected versions of the Central Texas Archeological
Region and their relationship to Blair’s (1950) biotic provinces.
At its eastern margins it was seen as extending northeastward along a line running
from southern Bexar County to eastern Lee
By 1960, the geographic boundaries of
County. Its northern boundary extended just
prehistoric Central Texas more closely resembled
to the north of the middle stretches of the Colorado
the 1954 boundaries ascribed to the Central Texas
River and included the southern portions of RunAspect, except that the eastern boundary had shifted
nels and Coke counties. Its western boundary into include portions of the Trinity River basin. Suhm
cluded eastern Val Verde County, most of Crockett
(1960:63 and Figure 1) defined the Central Texas
County, and western Reagan County.
archeological region as:
Currently, the most commonly used geographic
boundaries for the Central Texas archeological reembracing the middle stretches of the Colorado
gion are those defined by Prewitt (1981). In his
and Brazos rivers and their tributaries. More
attempt to devise a cultural chronology for the area,
specifically, it customarily extended westward
Prewitt (1981:72 and Figure 2) narrowed the deto include Tom Green and Edwards counties,
fined boundaries to include fewer counties on its
northward to a line reaching from Jones to
northern, western, and eastern margins. Prewitt
Kaufman counties, eastward to the middle Trin(1981:71) did note that although geographic boundity River, and southward to approximately the
aries may shift through time, the greater Central
central section of the Gulf Coastal Plain.
Texas archeological region was seen as including:

~

Weir’ s (1976) definition of prehistoric Central
Texas appears to include an area similar to that
defined by Suhm (1960). For Weir (1976:1), Central
Texas included "the headwaters of the Nueces and
Guadalupe rivers, and the middle stretches of the
Colorado and Brazos rivers including their
tributaries." His northern and northeastern
boundaries were less explicit, being defined only as
"from the Plateau onto the Blackland Prairies, and
northward onto the Grand and Rolling prairies"

the eastern half of the Edwards Plateau, the
Llano Uplift, most of the Lampasas Cut Plains,
the Comanche Plateau, the southern end of the
Grand Prairie, and the Blackland Prairies bordering the Balcones Escarpment from near
Waco to near Uvalde.
It should be noted, however, that Prewitt’s Central
Texas, although smaller than previously defined regions, still includes all or part of 47 Texas counties.

404

Texas Archeological Society

Regardless of which definition one accepts,
the Central Texas archeological region has vague
geographic boundaries, and encompasses an
environmentally diverse area that is characterized
by dramatic changes in landscapes, climatic
variations, and vegetative zones. Note that the wider
the definition one accepts for "Central Texas"
(whether geographic or archeological), the greater
the environmental diversity it contains. In what
follows, we will arbitrarily accept Prewitt’s
definition of "Central Texas." Because Prewitt’s
Central Texas is relatively small, if it subsumes too
much environmental diversity to be a plausible
match-up between geography and culture, the other
schemes will, too.

ENVIRONMENTAL DIVERSITY IN
PREWITT’S CENTRAL TEXAS
To understand why the term "Central Texas"
may not be especially informative for archeological purposes, it is useful to begin with a discussion
of current conditions of environmental diversity.
Until recently, Blair’s (1950) discussion of biotic
provinces has been the virtually universal reference
of choice in archeological discussions of flora and
fauna.
One feature of this historical practice is that
Blair’s model subsumes a very large portion of all
archeological versions of "Central Texas" under a
single biotic rubric-the Balconian province. In
Prewitt’s Central Texas, the counties not contained
in the Balconian province are contained in the
Texan, Kansan, and Tamaulipan provinces. The historical association between Prewitt’s (and others’)
Central Texas and Blair’s Balconian province has
helped reinforce the notion that the former is a
relevant match-up between prehistory and geography. The distributions of geology, large-scale landforms, biota, and typologically distinct artifacts
seem to provide a basis for judging that the spatial
conjunction of artifactual and environmental evidence is too close to be a coincidence.
However, Blair’s biotic provinces are fairly
blunt descriptive instruments. The Central Texas
archeological region encompasses all or part of six
natural vegetative regions: Oak Woods and Prairies,
Blackland Prairies, Edwards Plateau, Llano Uplift,
Rolling Plains, and South Texas Plains. The major
regions represent broad and general distributions of

plant communities that can be distinguished on the
basis of physiographic and biological differences.
These major regions can be divided further into
subregions representing varying, distinctive
vegetative patterns that occur within the larger,
associated plant communities (Lyndon B. Johnson
School of Public Affairs [LBJ] 1978:20-24 and
Figure 2; McMahan et al. 1984; Van Auken 1988).
Table 1 and Figure 2 show the natural regions and
subregions included in Prewitt’s Central Texas.
Two of the Edwards Plateau subregions, the
Live Oak-Mesquite Savanna and the Balcones
Canyonlands, lie entirely within the Balconian
province. The undissected uplands of the central
and western Edwards Plateau are known as the Live

Table 1. Natural Regions and Subregions
in and Around Prewitt’s Central Texas
Regions
Oak Woods and Prairies

Subregions
Post Oak Savanna*
Eastern Cross Timbers
Western Cross Timbers

Blackland Prairies

Blackland Prairie
Grand Prairie

Rolling Plains

Mesquite Plains
Escarpment Breaks**
Canadian Breaks**

Llano Uplift

Mesquite Savanna
Oak & Oak-Hickory
Woodlands

Edwards Plateau

Live Oak-Mesquite
Savanna
Balcones Canyonlands
Lampasas Cut Plains

South Texas Plains

South Texas Brush
Country
Bordas Escarpment**
Subtropical Zone*

* Prewitt’ s Central Texas does not contain these subregions,
but Suhm’s does.
** Neither Prewitt’s nor Suhm’s Central Texas includes these
subregions.

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick ~ Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

405

al. 1984:10, 17). Of the more than
400 species of terrestrial vertebrate
found on the Edwards Plateau, only
a few are actually endemic to the
area (Dixon 1987, cited in Toomey
et al. 1993).
In the more mesic Balcones
Canyonlands subregion, plant
communities are dominated by evergreen woodlands and deciduous
forests. The steep slopes are covered by short-stature woodlands
ranging from evergreen juniper
and juniper-oak to deciduous
mixed-oak-hardwood woodlands.
Along high gradient perennial
streamsides, bald cypress and sycamore predominate, while intermittent drainages support sycamore woodlands or cedar elm.
Floodplains along major, perennial
waterways have gallery forests
whose composition varies considerably from east to west. For example, in the eastern, more mesic
LO-MS-Live Oak-Mesquite Savanna
BrC-South Texas Brush Country
bottoms, pecans and chinkapin
LCP-Lampasas Cut Plains
WCT-Western Cross Timbers
oaks predominate, while in the
BaC-Balcones Canyontands
ECT-Eastern Cross Timbers
BP-Blackland Praide
MP-Mesquite Plains
western, more xeric bottoms, live
GP-Grand Prairie
LU-Llano Uplift (Mesquite Savanna & Oak
oak
and cedar elm predominate.
OW--Oak Woodlands
and Oak-Hickory Woodlands subregions)
~ ~ ~ ~. Blair’s boundaries
..... Prewitt’s boundaries
Grasslands are primarily restricted
to drainage divides and include
100 km
both mid- and short-grass varieties (LBJ 1978:Figure 2; Riskind
Figure 2. Natural subregions of Centra! Texas (LBJ School of Public
and Diamond 1986:24-25; Van
Affairs 1978) and Blair’s (1950) biotic provinces. Subregions of the Llano
Auken 1988:52-55). Although
Uplift cannot be resolved clearly at this scale. Note the gross environmental
there are several species of terresdiversity within the biotic provinces and Prewitt’s Central Texas.
trial reptiles, nesting songbirds,
and mammals endemic to the
Balcones Canyonlands (Blair
Oak-Mesquite Savanna. This portion of the Edwards
1950: t 12; Kutac and Caran 1994:10), the area also
Plateau is more xeric and is characterized by a
reflects an intermixture of fauna (Gehlbach
grassland-woodland-shrubland mosaic. Here, woody
1991:420).
plants and scrubs grow in clusters surrounded by
The Lampasas Cut Plain overlaps two biotic
continuous grasslands such as Texas wintergrass
provinces, the Balconian and the Kansan.
and little bluestem. The patchy landscape of the
Biologically, it represents a transitional area
central portion of the region supports more woodland
between the Edwards Plateau and the Oak Woods
mixtures of mesquite, Texas oak, Shin oak, cedar
and Prairies region (Kutac and Caran 1994:1 !), and
elm, and hackberry. At its western edge, mesquitestudies often disagree as to which vegetative region
juniper shrublands mixed with yucca, sotol, and
this area is most closely affiliated. Some studies
Texas prickly pear predominate (LBJ 1978:Figure
suggest that it is most closely affiliated with the
2; Diamond et al. 1987:204, 208-211; McMahan et
plant communities of the Edwards Plateau

406

Texas Archeological Society

vegetative region (see LBJ 1978; Riskind and
Diamond 1986), while others think the area is more
closely related to the prairie vegetative region (see
Diamond and Smeins 1985; McMahan et al. 1984).
In general, the more mesic climate of the Lampasas
Cut Plain results in taller trees than those found in
the upland Live Oak-Mesquite Savanna of the
Edwards Plateau. There are, however, fewer
drainages and more open grassland prairies than in
the Balcones Canyonlands, and there are fewer
southern elements, such as Mexican pinyon and
Lacey oaks. The shallow soils of the area support a
more open woodland of post oak, blackjack oak,
Ashe juniper, hickory, and mesquite, intermixed
with tall-, mid-, and short-grass prairies (Riskind
and Diamond 1986:29). Many of the fauna in this
subregion are at their edge of range (Gehlbach
1991:422).
The Llano Uplift is part of the Balconian biotic province. Its sandier soils and rolling topography are dominated by Oak-Hickory Woodlands
interspersed with Mesquite-Whitebrush Savannas.
These two subregions are patchily distributed in the
region and cannot be distinguished as subregions in
Figure 2. Weathering of the granite has produced
coarse textured, gravelly to stony sandy loams supporting a mesquite-whitebrush savanna. Pockets of
deep, well-watered sandy soils occur in the stream
bottoms and support an Oak and Oak-Hickory
Woodlands. While live oak, post oak, and blackjack oak abound, there is a conspicuous absence of
the Texas oak and Ashe juniper that are so common
throughout the Edwards Plateau. In general, the
uplift area has a greater affinity with plant communities to the north/northeast rather than with plant
communities to the west and south (Arbingast et al.
1973:10; Diamond et al. 1987:204, 208-211; LBJ
1978:22; Riskind and Diamond 1986:29).
The Mesquite Plains, a subregion of the Rolling
Plains, tie within the Kansan biotic province.
Although it represents the southernmost extension
of the Great Plains, the Mesquite Plains receive
more precipitation. The moderately rolling
topography is dissected by narrow intermittent
stream valleys that also make the Mesquite Plains
better drained than the Great Plains. The soils,
ranging from coarse sands to red-bed clays, support
a predominately mesquite-grasslands mosaic (Blair
1950:109-112; Gould 1962:12-13). Grasslands
include a number of mid- and tall-grass species;
however, mesquite appears to have increased

significantly during historic times. Oaks are also
present, and cedar mixes with the deciduous trees
in the western portions of the Mesquite Plains
(Diamond et al. 1987:207-212; LBJ 1978:22-23).
Only a few faunal species are endemic to the area;
rather, most are intermixtures of species that prefer
either eastern evergreen woodland or western
grassland habitats. For example, of the more than
30 species of snakes found in the area only one
species, Tatrix harteri, is restricted to the Mesquite
Plains (Blair 1950:110-112).
The Blackland Prairie and the Grand Prairie
lie within the Texan biotic province. They form the
southernmost extension of the True Prairie communities to the north (Diamond and Smeins 1985:307).
The dark, calcareous clay soils of the Blackland
Prairie support predominately tall-grass prairies that
have, in recent years, been invaded by mesquite,
blackjack oak, and post oak. Isolated bands of
Blacktand Prairies occur within the Oak Woods
and Prairies region to the east (LBJ 1978:19-20),
while the Balcones Escarpment serves as its western boundary. This area forms a range barrier to the
east-west dispersal of a number of faunal species
(Gehlbach 1991:423).
The slight topographic and lithologic differences between the Grand Prairie and the Blackland
Prairie create somewhat different vegetative zones.
The Grand Prairie, with its gently sloping, almost
level, surfaces and shallower Mollisols, supports a
mid-grass rather than tall-grass prairie. Annual
forbs, such as GailIardia (members of the sunflower family) and Draba (members of the mustard
family), are also abundant. However, due to increased grazing activities, perennial forbs (and
grasses) have increased significantly. Woody plants,
such as mesquite, blackjack oak, and hackberry,
are confined to the valleys and stream margins
(Dyksterhuis 1946; LBJ 1978).
The Western and Eastern Cross Timbers, subregions of the Oak Woods and Prairies, lie within
the Texan biotic province. These continuous belts
of woodland/forest extend southward from the Red
River, crosscutting, rather than paralleling, the major fiver valleys and flanking the Grand Prairie.
Due to the difference in rainfall amounts, the Western Cross Timbers are less well-developed than the
Eastern Cross Timbers.
In the Western Cross Timbers region, the
vegetative patterns reflect the character of the
underlying geological formations and the rainfall

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick ~ Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

patterns. The original savanna-like landscape has
been severely modified by grazing. Today, the
overstory vegetation consists primarily of
woodlands of blackjack oak, post oak, and black
hickory. Mesquite is a recent invader. Originally,
the understory vegetation was essentially prairielike, in that tall-and mid-grass species predominated.
However, since the 1850s, short-grass species and
perennial grasses, such as buffalograss, have almost
wholly displaced the tall- and mid-grass species
(Dyksterhuis 1946; LBJ 1978:20-21). Fauna in the
Western Cross Timbers subregion is a mix of both
eastern Austroriparian species and western grassland
species (Gehlbach 1991). (For a more detailed
discussion of the environment of the Western Cross
Timbers subregion, see Gardner [1992].)
The Eastern Cross Timbers subregion consists
of a narrow strip of woodland/forest that separates
the Grand Prairie from the Blackland Prairie. This
subregion has woody vegetation that is common to
both the Western Cross Timbers and the Post Oak
Savanna.~ Blackjack oak, post oak, and black
hickory are also common in the Eastern Cross Timbers. However, due to the more abundant rainfall in
this subregion, forests are denser and taller here
than they are in the Western Cross Timbers. In
places where the oak overstory is thinner, prairies
of mid-grass species, such as little bluestem, are
also found. During historic times, this subregion
has also been severely impacted by cultivation and
grazing. As a result, the Eastern Cross Timbers
subregion has been heavily overrun by mesquite,
juniper, and other woody brush types (Diamond et
al. 1987:206-209; LBJ 1978:20; Texas Almanac
1994:95).
The South Texas Brush Country, a subregion
of the South Texas Plains, is an area of thorny
brush and grassland. Originally a more open grassland or savanna, historical land use patterns, such
as grazing, have significantly altered the landscape.
Thorny short brush, such as cactus and bullnettle,
and tal! brush, such as mesquite and spiny hackberry, are now the principal vegetation in the area.
Mid- and short-grass species predominate (Diamond
et al. 1987:207, 210-211; LBJ 1978:21; Texas Almanac 1994:95).
Thus, when moving from north to south or
from east to west across Prewitt’s Central Texas,
loca!ly specific physiographic, climatic, and biotic

407

elements interact to produce a wide range of
distinctive environments. Within each major natural
region, there are distinctive subregions whose plant
communities are distributed along soil and moisture
gradients with local modifying factors such as
exposure, relief, and soil depth (see Van Auken
1988:55). The importance of the close relationship
between geology, soils, topography, climatic, and
biotic elements should not be underestimated
because each has important influences on the
structure and content of the environment. Moreover,
it is important to recognize that despite the fact that
the defining features of each subregion produce a
much more differentiated description of major
environmental features than do Blair’s (1950) biotic
provinces, these subregions nonetheless do obscure
a great deal of local environmental variation.
The pattern of environmental diversity in Central Texas becomes much more complex when the
regional variability of mean annual precipitation is
added to the picture (Figure 3). In general, precipitation declines from east to west, with isohyets
bulging markedly westward at the southeast edge
of the Edwards Plateau. Mean annual precipitation
ranges from about 36 inches in the southeastern
corner to less than 22 inches at the west-central
edge. Since biological productivity within any natural subregion depends largely on precipitation (cf.
Owen and Schmidly 1986), one can readily divide
each of the subregions on the basis of precipitation,
forming "subsubregions" that comprise specific
moisture regimes within the larger patterns of climate, geology, soils, topography, and vegetation
that make up the natural subregions. Net primary
above-ground productivity of vegetation decreases
by about 145 g/m2/yr for each 2 inch decrease in
mean annual precipitation from east to west (Table
2). Thus, for example, the area of the Live OakMesquite Savanna at the 22 inch isohyet (763 g/m2/
yr) is about half as productive as the area at the 32
inch isohyet (1490 g/m2/yr). These precipitationbased subsubregions therefore represent distinct
subdivisions of biological productivity within their
respective subregions and regions.
As areas with a particular range of mean annual precipitation values, the subsubregions also
are places that have distinct probability distributions for the occurrence of more or less than average yearly precipitation. As a result, in each

~The Post Oak Savanna is east of the area depicted in Figure 2.

408

Texas Archeological Society

year with a 2 inch deviation from
mean annual precipitation in the
Live Oak-Mesquite Savanna
subsubregion at the 22 inch and 32
inch isohyets would reduce annual
productivity by about 145 g/m2 in
both places. However, the area at
the 22 inch isohyet would have a
19 percent productivity loss,
whereas the area at the 32 inch isohyet would have a 10 percent loss.
Thus, the amount of precipitation
in the west might fall below the
failure threshold for a particular resource without doing so in the east.
Hence, in a year that was relatively
dry all over the region, resource
failure might occur in a western
subsubregion without occurring in
an eastern one.
It is within these smaller-scale
patterns of local environmental
vm’iation that culture and processual
histories have been played out during the course of prehistory. At any
given time, Central Texans had at
36"
34"
28"
30" 32"
26"
24"
22"
their disposal a cultural geography
2" isohyet (after Larkin
.
(consisting, among other things, of
and Bomar 1983)
100 km
their knowledge of how resources
Net primary above-ground
are distributed in space and time in
productivity (g/m2/yr)
their territories) and a range of
Figure 3. Precipitation and natural environments. Isohyets divide natural
learned, more or less patterned prosubregions into "subsubregions" with different productivity characteristics,
cedures for accomodating their subincreasing the resolution of environmental diversity in Prewitt’s Central
sistence activities to known patterns
Texas.
of resource availability. Some subsistence activities, such as the
Mariames’ well known "tuna trek"
(cf. Potter and Black 1995), are patterned at the
subsubregion, the annual total productivity of any
strategic level, and reflect tried and true formulas for
given plant resource would vary from year to year-being in the right general area at the right general
sometimes drasticallyias a function of normal ostime to accomplish certain subsistence goals. Other
cillations above and below the mean (including
subsistence activities are patterned at the tactical
normal seasonal oscillations). Consequently, each
level, and reflect tried and true gambits for achieving
subsubregion is characterized by a different probstrategic goals in a specific place at a specific time
ability distribution with respect to the frequency at
under specific conditions. For example, Eskimos
which a given plant resource would fail as a result
and Ngatatjaras frequently leave areas with abunof precipitation that was too much, too little, too
dantly available resources to obtain information about
early, or too late.
resource availability elsewehere, or to exploit less
Since the different subsubregions occupy difsecure resource bases, knowing that if they fail, they
ferent places on the overall precipitation gradient, a
have a safety net (Binford 1983:204-205).
normal oscillation that produces a resource failure
For lack of a better term, we will refer to
in one subsubregion might not produce a resource
patterned strategic and tactical subsistence
failure in another. For example, a relatively dry
22"

24"

26"

28"

30"

32"

34"

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick ~ Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

409

Table 2. Relationship between net primary above-ground
productivity and mean annual precipitation
Mean Annual

Net Primary Above-

Precipitation

Ground Productivity
(g/mVyr)

Note:

20"

618

22"

763

24"

908

26"

1054

28"

1199

30"

1345

32"

1490

34"

1635

36"

1780

Comparative Productivity Differentials (g/mVyr)
20"

22"

24"

26"

28"

30"

0

145

290

0

32"

34"

435

580

145

290

435

725

870

1015

1160

580

725

870

1015

0

145

290

0

145

435

580

725

870

290

435

580

725

0

145

290

435

580

0

145

290

435

0

145

290

0

145

36"

0

Calculated from data in Owen and Schmidly (1986:Table 2) by linear regression of productivity against mean annual
precipitation. Comparative productivity differentials are rounded.

procedures as "practices" in which fulfilling
subsistence goals depends on successful integration
of strategies and tactical activities on a day-to-day,
season-to-season basis. Indeed, some of the most
important tactical gambits are the ones that enable
a group to respond successfully to an unforeseen
resource failure by adjusting their strategic mobility
plans and/or implementing back-up tactics that
ordinarily would not have been the chosen course
of action (cf. Binford 1983:207-208). At any given
time, then, a successful adaptation is one in which a
population has (and passes on to its children)
subsistence practices enabling them to deal with
resource failures that follow normal oscillations
around precipitation means, including wet and dry
extremes. In other words, a successful subsistence
practice is one in which the members of any given
group had back-up procedures (including
scheduling, mobility, social, and other mechanisms)
that would allow them to cope successfully with
resource failures of particular kinds and magnitudes.
However, a strategy or tactical gambit that serves
as a back-up response to worse-than-average
conditions in one subsubregion would probably
work as a prime response to average conditions in
another. Thus, successful subsistence practices in
any given subsubregion would consist of an array
of strategic and tactical decision-making responses
that are implemented at varying frequencies that
largely correspond to the frequencies at which
variations in precipitation lead to resource

abundance or failure. Given the broad range of
natural subregions in Prewitt’s Central Texas, it
should be very surprising indeed if prehistory in the
region could be accurately and precisely described
in terms of a single culture or processual history
because subsistence practices and cultural geographies are culture traits which must be as highly
variable as the region or subregion they were
developed in.

A THOUGHT EXPERIMENT:
HUNTER-GATHERERS
ON A DIVERSE LANDSCAPE
In order to see the effects of environmental
diversity on the possibility of a unified culture or
processual history in Central Texas, it would be
useful to impose some hunter-gatherer territories
onto the landscape. However, no nonspeculative
estimates of territory size are available for the region
since little attention has yet been paid to exactly
what the term "highly mobile" means when it is
applied in the region. Since the Alaskan Nunamiut
are undoubtedly familiar to many readers, they
provide a good worst-case example since the
Nunamiut occupy an area that is much less
climatically favorable than Central Texas. The
residential core of a Nunamiut annual range may be
up to 5,400 km2, and the area exploited during a
year may be up to 25,000 km2 (Binford 1983:110).

410

Texas Archeological Society
22"

24"

26"

28"

30"

32"

34"

small expanses of Brush
Country and Oak Woodlands.
Moreover, the western territory
is substantially drier, and hence
less productive than the eastern
one: plant productivity ranges
from 908-1343 g/m2/yr in the
western territory and from 12721573 g/m2 in the east. The most
productive area of the western
territory is only marginally more
productive than the least
productive eastern area.
In contrast to these territories, another fits almost entirely
within the Live Oak-Mesquite
Savanna. Unlike other territories
containing the Savanna, this one
occupies the driest Savanna
subsubregions in Prewitt’s Central Texas. However, even this
territory is not overly homogeneous because it contains a precipitation gradient that ranges
from a high of just under 26
34"
36"
26"
28"
30" 32"
22"
24"
inches to a low of about 21
2" isohyet
..... Prewitt’s boundaries
inches, a difference that differentially affects biological proHypothetical 5,400 km2 residential core (inner circle) with
ductivity in the territory. An
25,000 km2 exploitation territory (outer circle)
examination of all of the territo,,
ries shows that regardless of
1 O0 km
which subregions they occupy,
Figure 4. Hypothetical Nunamiut-size territories superimposed over Central
they all subsume a precipitation
Texas. Even these overly large territories contain comparatively different
gradient of at least 4 inches and
ranges of environmental characteristics and biological productivity.
a productivity gradient of at least
290 g/m2/yr. They also occupy
generally different positions on
the scale between minimum and maximum precipiIf a series of idealized, Nunamiut-size residential
tation in Prewitt’s Central Texas. Even if huntercores and exploited territories are distributed around
gatherer groups occupied and exploited huge
Prewitt’s Central Texas (Figure 4), we can see that
territories, the territories would subsume a wide
despite the very large size of these territories, the
variety of natural/moisture subsubregions, many of
people occupying them face quite different adaptive
which would not closely resemble the mix or range
challenges.
of subsubregions in other territories.
For example, superimposing these territories
Of course, it is unlikely that Central Texans
at the southern corners of the region yields two
required or used Nunamiut-size territories to supterritories with large areas of interfingered
port themselves. If we envision a distribution of
Canyonlands and Live Oak-Mesquite Savanna.
5,400 km2 territories (the smaller circles), we see
However, the western territory is composed almost
that groups occupying smaller territories would be
entirely of this mix with a relatively small amount
exploiting less geographically diverse environof Brush Country, whereas the eastern territory
ments that were restricted to narrower portions of
includes a large expanse of Blackland Prairie and

@

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick ~ Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

the precipitation and productivity gradients. As a
result, we see groups faced with subsisting within
smaller arrays of distinct subsubregions. Thus, as
territory size decreases to more realistic parameters, the array of distinct environments exploited
by different Central Texas groups would multiply
dramatically so that there is no quintessential Central Texas environment or cultural geography, even
if there are at least some quintessentially Central
Texan culture traits.
However, subsistence practices (i.e., combinations of strategic and tactical activities) would not
be on the list of quintessential traits because the
different environments of the region would require
Central Texans to make widely divergent economic
choices from season to season and year to year. In
other words, to the extent that environment-specific subsistence practices are part of the cultures to
be described in an accurate Wi!ley and Phillips-like
culture history of Central Texas, this very important aspect of culture would not be shared throughout the region. There is virtually no chance that
subsistence strategies would be similar enough all
across the region to be subsumed under a single
description of adaptive process that accurately captures the variability of strategic and tactical decision-making that must accompany the region’s
environmental variability. Even in periods when
typologically similar artifacts occur all across the
region, the economic aspects of culture would be so
variable that no single description could accurately
circumscribe them withouit simplifying them so
much that the description does not refer meaningfully to an economy that actually existed.

CLIMATE CHANGE IN
CENTRAL TEXAS
Diachronic environmental variability
compounds the improbability of a culture or
processual history that could characterize the region
as a whole. The reason for this is that the diverse
environmental baseline would lead to differential
environmental responses (and opportunities) for
people in different parts of the region. To illustrate
this, it would be useful to examine the effects of
climate change on hunter-gatherer populations.
Unfortunately, paleoclimate research has not
advanced to the point where one can examine the
history of climatically induced environmental change

411

in a rigorous way. Hence, we will resort to another
hypothetical exercise. Before doing so, however, let
us examine the state of paleoclimate research since
many readers will be put off by the foregoing claim
about the utility of existing paleoclimate models.
Over the last several decades, paleoclimate
models have become an increasingly common element of archeology in Central Texas. A broad array
of kinds of evidence has been used to build these
models, and a broad array of models has been forthcoming. Among the kinds of evidence that has been
used are fossil vertebrates (e.g., Lundelius 1967;
Toomey 1993; Toomey et al. 1993), pollen (e.g.,
Bryant and Shafer 1977; Bryant and Hol!oway
1985), geomorphic changes (e.g., Blum and Valastro
1989; Holliday 1985, 1989; Hall 1990; Nordt 1992;
Johnson and Goode 1994; Johnson 1995), stable
isotope ratios (e,g., Humphrey and Ferring 1994;
Nordt et al. 1994), and fossil invertebrates (Elias
1994; Johnson and Goode 1994; Johnson 1995).
Although some of the models are based on a variety of kinds of evidence (e.g., Toomey et al. 1993;
Johnson and Goode 1994; Johnson 1995), others
are based on a single line of evidence (Nordt et al.
1994) or a very narrow range of evidence
(Humphrey and Ferring 1994). Moreover, the source
locales for climatic data in most of the models
typically come from a highly limited geographic
area (e.g., Nordt et al. 1994), and many of the
source locales are peripheral to the Central Texas
region (e.g., Humphrey and Ferring 1994) in all but
the broadest definition of the term "Central Texas."
Note that although some of the models were not
constructed explicitly for use in Central Texas (e.g.,
Holliday 1985, 1989; Humphrey and Ferring 1994;
Hall 1990), they nevertheless get used as a basis for
discussing paleoclimate in Central Texas.
Figure 5 illustrates a range of paleoclimate models that have been constructed for major high-temperature and/or dry periods (i.e., the Altithermal or
similar events) in and around Central Texas. In
general, the figure shows that different lines of evidence from different places in and around the region
have yielded largely different temporal reconstructions of paleoclimate.
It would do little good to elaborate on the
differences between the models (see Potter 1995:1417 for a discussion) because the basic point has
already been made implicitly in Figure 5: the current
models are mutually exclusive on major and/or
minor issues. Part of the mutual exclusivity of the

412

Texas Archeological Society

For example, cut-and-fill cycles are
geomorphic responses to the amount and
I Johnson (1995)
speed of surface runoff (as well as
I
Humphrey and Ferring (1994) I
intrinsic thresholds); soil formation
I Holliday (1989)
I
episodes are responses to periods of
I
I Nordt et al (1994)
surface stability; differential tree-ring
Meltzer (1991) ~
I
growth is a response to changes in the
moisture intake of the plant; and pollen
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
1
I
assemblages respond to changes in
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
vegetation
structure. Obviously,
Radiocarbon Years BP
significant long-term changes in rainfall
Figure 5. Major hot and/or dry periods postulated by selected models
would affect all four proxies. However,
for areas in and around Central Texas. Shorter hot/dry periods have
each proxy has a different sensitivity
been omitted.
and threshold response to climatic
variations (Butzer 1982:27-28). For
example, noncomplacent tree species will begin to
models follows from the fact that different
record a pattern of diminished precipitation
researchers have used different proxy variables as a
immediately, whereas a change in rainfall could
basis for constructing climate history, which
take an archeologically significant amount of time
introduces two dimensions of uncertainty about the
to register a detectable change in either
accuracy of their results.
geomorphology, soil, or pollen records. Research in
First, as Caran (1994) notes, none of the proxcentral Europe indicates that cycles of downcutting
ies that have been used to date in models that are
were clearly visible in the European geomorphic
applied in Central Texas are "first-order" proxies
record after several centuries. However, striking
from which one can make "first-order" inferences
changes in the pollen record were only visible after
from proxy measurements directly to one or more
several millennia. This implies that "slope-soilclimatic variables. For example, Nordt et al. (1994)
stream subsystems had lower critical thresholds than
use stable carbon isotope measurements from hudid
the vegetative subsystems" (Butzer 1982:29).
mic materials as a basis for reconstructing vegetaThus,
it is difficult to compare the significance of
tion history, from which they then infer temperature
data from one proxy with that of another, which is
and moisture history. Although the inference from
another way of saying that it may be too optimistic
proxy measurements to vegetation can be considto believe that different proxies should be expected
ered a first-order inference, all subsequent climatic
to yield directly comparable results.
inferences are second- or higher-order inferences,
Moreover, some proxies are subject to
the soundness of which depends on both the soundequifinality constraints (e.g., Butzer 1982; Blum
ness of the first-order inference and the soundness
of the middle-range theories (sensu Kosso 1991)
1987:103-108; Caran 1994) such that the same outcome
can be caused by different things. Nordt
that support additional inferences from hypotheti(1992),
for example, links stream entrenchment at
cal vegetation structure to climate conditions. Thus,
Fort Hood to periods of aridity. However, Hereford
inaccuracy and/or imprecision may enter into model
(1984) links aggradation in Arizona to increased
construction as a function of how accurately and
aridity, while Macklin et al. (1992) link stream
precisely changes in first-order proxy measurements
entrenchment in Great Britain to periods of indirectly reflect the climate values inferred from
creased humidity. Hence, individual fluvial systems
them. Since each additional order of inference has
may exhibit a wide range of adjustments under
its own precision constraints (e.g., quantified stanchanging climatic conditions, and many of these
dard errors of estimates or unquantified levels of
adjustments may have more to do with internal
uncertainty), the accuracy of second- and highersystemic constraints than with climatic change
order inferences can be maintained only by accept(Blum 1987:103-108). Thus, the accuracy of a cliing increasing levels of imprecision, or conversely,
mate model is only as high as the researcher’s abildecreasing levels of confidence.
Second, each different proxy operates within
ity to constrain interpretation according to a well
developed body of middle-range theory that reduces
different process-response (i.e., causal) networks.
I

I

1

Bryant and Holloway (1985)
4 Toomey et al (1994)

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick ~ Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

ambiguity about the relationships between proxies
and climatic processes. As a result, part of the models’ mutual exclusivity probably follows from the
fact that different proxies may record the same climate event in different ways, at different magnitudes, and/or at different times relative to the time
of the event’s onset. This is another way of saying
that two or more different climatic models could be
accurate accounts of climate history, but might appear to be mutually exclusive because the proxies
record the same climatic events at different levels
of temporal precision.
Other elements of mutual exclusivity may result from problems of assigning dates to climatic
events. For climate to be an explanatory variable,
the timing of climatic change must be correlated in
a determinate way with the timing of change in
cultural or processual history. Any lag between the
time of a change in a crucial climatic variable and
the time that the change becomes measurable in
one or more proxy variables introduces spurious
chronological correlations between climatic and cultural/processual events. In particular, the models
are affected by chronological precision constraints.
It is especially telling that the chronological boundaries of various events typically fall at even increments of 1000 or 500 radiocarbon years B.P. The
fact that climatic events are chronologically
bounded in this manner should suggest that the
chronological precision usually obtained from
paleoclimate studies does not come very close to
the chronological precision that often can be obtained in a stratigraphic sequence of occupations
that reflect different culture-history units or subsistence practices. This issue is important because any
given 500 radiocarbon-year interval is long enough
to contain two of Prewitt’s (1981, 1985) phases, or
to subsume part of three of his phases, including
two phase-to-phase shifts. Thus, the boundaries between climatic events are not dated precisely enough
to tell whether a particular climatic event occurs
several hundred years before or after a particular
cultural!processual change. As a result, the matchup between climate history and culture/processual
history must be regarded as loose. The key problem
to be resolved in using paleoclimate as an explanatory dimension is thus to correlate the timing of
crucial climatic thresholds and crucial changes in
the record of cultural or processual history.
Climate is a set of average values accompanied by more or less patterned annual or seasonal

413

oscillations. As such, a climate is characterized by
a range of low-, high-, and extreme-magnitude oscillations around average conditions. The range of
these oscillations places limits on the extent that
many floral and faunal species can flourish or survive in a given area. From a particular species’
perspective, a climatic threshold is a set of boundary conditions within which the range of oscillations around average conditions limits its ability to
survive and successfully reproduce. With climatic
change, a species in a given territory may be progressively decimated by increases in the frequency
of years with unfavorable weather conditions. At
some point, the range of weather oscillations includes too few favorable years, and climate crosses
a crucial threshold beyond which a species cannot
survive. Since one species’ Purgatory can be
another’s Eden, a climatic change that progressively
decimates or extirpates one species may cross a
crucial threshold that eliminates climatic obstacles
to colonization or expansion of populations.
For instance, the ability of agaves and cacti to
withstand low winter temperatures depends on their
ability to "harden" by internally redistributing water and organic molecules (Nobel 1994:102-103).
The degree of hardening, however, depends on the
speed at which temperature declines from fall to
winter values. Furthermore, at any degree of hardening, the length of time that subfreezing temperatures are sustained determines whether cellular
dehydration and tissue damage are severe enough
to kill the plant. For agaves and cacti to colonize a
new territory, therefore, average climatic conditions
must cross a threshold where years with rapid fallto-winter cooling and sustained very low temperatures are rare enough to support reproductively
successful populations. Moreover, years with rapid
spring-to-summer heating and sustained very high
temperatures must remain rare enough to avoid killing off seedlings and pups (Nobel 1994:103-106).
Climatic thresholds vary from organism to organism, but all species of flora and fauna have them.
It is important to identify climatic thresholds
because in cases where climate best explains culture
change, crossing a climatic threshold is the causal
factor that leads to culture change (e.g., Meltzer
1991). Consider Johnson’s recent and forthcoming
(Johnson and Goode 1994; Johnson 1995) model of
climate and culture change for the eastern half of
Central Texas. Johnson (Johnson and Goode
1994:26) correlates the development of burned rock

414

Texas Archeological Society

middens in the Middle Archaic with a gradual
drying trend that led to the expansion of succulents,
and their exploitation by people who baked them in
rock ovens. Johnson’s model relies on an unstated
claim that climate crossed a threshold that allowed
xerophytes to expand their range in Middle Archaic
times. Although Johnson’s climate/culture model is
plausible and well-argued (especially in Johnson
1995), that his model does not address climatic
thresholds leaves several issues implicit and
unaddressed. First, when did climate conditions
cross the threshold that allowed xerophytes to occur
in sufficient densities to become enough of a staple
to lead to formation of burned rock middens all
across the eastern Edwards Plateau? Second, did
the warming trend start from thresholds above the
tolerance level for xerophytes, or did the warming
occur in a climate that already widely supported
them across the region? If these thresholds were
crossed early, and xerophytes were both widespread
and sparsely exploited before the Middle Archaic,2
then climate changes (at least with respect to
climate/xerophyte relationships) would not explain
culture change. If these thresholds were crossed
later, then climate change might explain the
adoption of xerophytes as a staple without
explaining why burned rock middens began to form.
Third, and of most importance, is the crucial culturechanging threshold one that led to the expansion of
xerophytes, or another that led to the extirpation of
a different resource? In other words, Johnson could
be absolutely correct about a correlation between
an unquantified warming trend and the emergence
of certain culture traits without being correct about
whether climate change has an explanatory role,
and without having identified the correct climate/
resource relationship(s) that led to culture change.
Thus, the point is not whether Johnson’s or
anyone else’s model is accurate (although at least
several of them must be false for Central Texas);
rather, the point is that even if they are accurate, they
are not sufficiently precise to permit a critical
evaluation of the results of using them in descriptions

and explanations of culture change. The varying
degrees of remoteness between proxies and climatic
variables, the absence or imprecision of evidence
about the magnitude of climatic events, and the
chronological imprecision of climate history,
combine to indicate that the models can be used only
in impressionistic ways. Of course, many may not
be persuaded by this argument, if for no other reason
than that our current explanatory needs require some
climate model. However, as Caran (1994) argues, it
is important to recognize that the paleoclimate models
we currently apply to Central Texas are not ready to
bear the descriptive and explanatory burden which
we as prehistorians require of them. Note that we are
not arguing that paleoclimate models should not be
used. Rather, we argue that they be treated
consciously as the provisional, imprecise constructs
that they are. Indeed, a productive line of research
would be to use climate/culture models to formulate
problem-specific hypotheses about the timing of
crucial climate thresholds, and to identify proxies
capable of showing whether those specific thresholds
were crossed.3

ANOTHER ENVIRONMENTAL
THOUGHT EXPERIMENT
In the absence of a precise climate history, we
also argue that one cannot offer a rigorous empirical basis for examining environmental variations
that would take place under changing climatic conditions in Central Texas. However, we can examine
the relevance of the term "Central Texas" by positing a hypothetical and uniform climatic event that
affects the region. By understanding what it would
mean to extend a single model of climate change to
all of the region, one can appreciate in some detail
the extent to which virtually any model of climate
change produces a Central Texas environment of
extraordinary diversity which, in turn, appears to
require an equally diverse history of culture or human adaptation.

~-Sotol occurs in stratified context in a hearth dated at about 8000 B.P. at 41UV88 (unpublished data from the Five Burned
Rock Midden Sites Project, in progress at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory).
3In Johnson’s case, the objective would be to identify the climatic variables that limit sotol and other edible xerophytes, and
to identify specific proxies that can address these specific limits. Perhaps a combination of dendroclimatological analyses (cf.
Stahle and Cleaveland 1988) of radiocarbon-dated charcoal, analyses of temperature- and moisture-sensitive fauna (cf. Toomey
et al. 1993), and epimerization analyses of land snails (cf. Goodfriend and Mitterer 1993) would narrow down the timing of the
moisture and temperature thresholds that allow particular xerophytes to flourish.

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick ~ Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

415

Modern precipitation gradient

and the vegetation productivity
losses that would occur at the isohyets. Figure 6 also implicitly shows
that shifting the precipitation regime
produces a new mosaic that (1) cannot be any more uniform than the
previous mosaic, (2) does not simply shift environmental conditions
around on the landscape, and (3) presents differential adaptive challenges
to people occupying different areas
of the region.
Ecological adjustment (sensu
Collins and Bousman 1993:55-56)
should occur in each natural subregion as a result of starting with the
same basic assortment of plants, but
changing only precipitation among
the nonbiological variables that create natural environments. Thus, ecological adjustment within a given
subsubregion would be equivalent
to reproducing a drier, less productive version of the existing vegetation regime, which would be roughly
equivalent to moving a subsubregion
20"
22"
24"
26"
28" 30"
32"
34"
to the east by one pair of isohyets
Hypothetical precipitation gradient after uniform 2" decrease
with a concomitant loss of 145 g/
m2/yr in net primary above-ground
Points discussed in text
productivity at each isohyet. How1 O0 km
Productivity decline
ever, where precipitation (rather than
geology, soils, and/or topography)
Figure 6. Hypothethical climate change in Prewitt’s Central Texas.
is the limiting variable on vegetaUniform precipitation change shifts modem isohyets 2 inches to the east.
Productivity declines by 145g/m2/yr at each isohyet. Numbered points are
tion composition, drying could proenvironments discussed in text.
duce basic floristic change in those
locations where oscillations around
average precipitation falls below
Since moisture gradients are a major determithresholds necessary to sustain the major comnant of environmental conditions (and a central one
ponents of the plant populations. Precipitation
in discussions of paleoenvironmental change), conchange could also affect some plants more than
sider what happens when the precipitation gradiothers, producing partial floristic change. Vegetation
ents shift. Suppose that an Altithermal-like event
change in any given subsubregion, therefore, could
strikes the region, lowering mean annual precipitaoccur along a continuum that ranges from: (1)
tion by 2 inches (about 5 cm) and shifting the isoreduction of total biological productivity with no
hyet values to the east.4 Figure 6 shows the
change in relative frequencies of plant species, to
conjunction of natural subregions and precipitation
(2) reduction of productivity and changes in species
gradients before and after the precipitation shift,
relative frequencies, or to (3) reduction of
22"

24"

26"

28"

30"

32"

34"

4This scenario oversimply assumes that other climatic variables do not change and that nonclimatic controls over the locations
of isohyet positions keep the isohyets where they are. The implications of this unrealistic assumption arise later, and ultimately
reinforce our claims.

416

Texas Archeological Society

productivity with minor to major floristic change in
the species composition of the vegetation regime.
The kinds of climate change that archeologists
discuss would not occur in any Central Texan’s
lifespan. However, within the human time-frames
that it takes for the precipitation shift to occur,
Central Texans would encounter ecological adjustments in terms of increased frequency of resource
failures following on dry seasons and decreased
frequency of resource failures following on wet seasons. In other words, subsistence tactics for exceptionally wet years would become increasingly
unnecessary, subsistence tactics for exceptionally
dry years would have to be implemented with increasing frequency, and subsistence tactics for formerly average years would become the decisions
implemented in wetter-than-average years. Furthermore, they would encounter cases of partial and/or
basic floristic change in terms of changed probabilities of alternative resources in the event that any
diminished or lost plant resource (and herbivores
that feed on it) was replaced by a new plant resource
(and its herbivores). Consequently, back-up and/or
alternative tactics for exploiting alternative resources
probably would be implemented more frequently.
Their ability to sustain their populations would be
contingent on their ability to transform their backup and infrequently used strategies and tactics into
more or less typically used strategies, and an ability
to recognize alternative resources and incorporate
those into their back-up and/or typical practices.
The variable subsistence challenges that climate
change would present to Central Texans can be
illustrated by examining shifts in subsubregions under the initial heuristic assumption that precipitation
change leads to ecological adjustment without floristic change.
In the hypothetical scenario, some subregions
are simply reproduced to the east (points 1 in Figure
6). In other cases, the eastward shift of isohyets
reproduces a relatively small subregion as a
relatively large one (points 2) and vice versa (points
3). As a result, the precipitation shift not only moves
the isohyets east and changes the amounts of
territory subsumed between pairs of isohyets, it
also expands and contracts the amount of area that
is subject to resource failures that accompany highand low-magnitude oscillations around mean annual
precipitation. In some cases, the precipitation shift
cannot simply result in an eastward shift of the
natural subsubregions. The precipitation shift at

points 4 cannot result in eastward shifts of
vegetation regimes because the geologic, edaphic,
and topographic characteristics of the subsubregions
do not exist to the east.
Consequently, nonbiological elements of the
subsubregions limit the extent to which uniform
precipitation change can result in uniform environmental change, and the topographic and other environmental controls that modify the shapes of the
isohyets ensure that the spatial properties of any
given 2 inch precipitation gradient will not be reproduced to the east. The climate shift also creates
subsubregions (points 5) that did not previously
exist in Central Texas, and ecotones (points 6) between subsubregions that are juxtaposed for the
first time. Thus, under conditions of uniform precipitation change: (1) there are changes in the
amount of area covered by different portions of the
precipitation gradient, (2) some subsubregions are
lost as new ones are created, and (3) some spatial
juxtapositions of subsubregions are lost as new ones
are created. Regardless of whether one deals with
prehistory in a framework of culture history or process, these patterns of environmental change would
pose adaptive challenges if Central Texans were to
successfully weather the climate change.
In many cases, subsubregions shift east to areas of equivalent size and with similar nonbiological
environmental characteristics. If people alter their
territories to follow the isohyets, then they adapt to
climate change by shifting their exploitation zones.
They also apply their subsistence practices on
slightly different landscapes that otherwise contain
the environmental/spatial characteristics with which
they are already familiar, and for which they have
subsistence practices that require them to simply
learn a new landscape. Their primary adaptive challenges are likely to be social if groups to the east do
not follow the isohyets and, hence, do not conveniently oblige the immigrants’ subsistence goals by
creating a residential and exploitation vacuum that
circumvents increased competition for a decreasingly productive resource base.
However, if people map onto territories rather
than precipitation regimes, they are unlikely to
follow the isohyets east (at least until enough
subsistence failures accumulate to persuade them
otherwise). In this circumstance, former back-up
strategies and tactics must become quite regular
(albeit, perhaps, not typical) components of yearto-year subsistence activities. Their primary

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick m Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

adaptive challenge is to transform subsistence
practices for drier-than-average years into strategies
for average years, which certainly would involve
adjusting mobility patterns. The effects of uniform
drying on mobility requirements can be approximated by examining the pattern of change in net
primary vegetation productivity that would occur
by the end of the precipitation decline.
Although there would be a uniform, regionwide reduction in the amount of above-ground
productivity, the percentage decrease would vary
considerably. For example, average productivity in
the area between the original 20-22 inch isohyets
(point 7 in Figure 6; Table 3) would decline by 1923 percent across the gradient between isohyets. In
contrast, average productivity between the original
34-36 inch isohyets (point 8 in Figure 6) would
decline by 8-9 percent. Depending on how directly
a percentage decrease in total productivity
translates into a percentage increase in the amount
of territory needed to harvest a consistent food
supply, groups in the west would have to increase
their mobility rates much more than that of eastern
groups. This pattern would be aggravated in years
with worse-than-average precipitation under the
new moisture regime. If both areas have years with
precipitation 2 inches below their new means, a
one-year 145 g/m2 loss in the west would amount
to a productivity loss of 23-31 percent beyond
already reduced annual average productivity levels,

417

whereas in the east, the additional loss would be
about 9-10 percent.
To accomodate a climate change with a 2 inch
decrease in mean annual precipitation with regular 2
inch oscillations below the mean, people in the west
would have to adjust their subsistence practices to
an environment that averages about 19-23 percent
below previous productivity levels, and regularly
falls about 38-47 percent below average productivity before the climate change. People in the east,
however, would only have to adjust to 8-9 percent
average losses, and regular losses of only 16-18
percent below former levels of productivity. Therefore, we would expect not only average mobility
requirements to increase more in the west, but also
additional mobility would be necessary to compensate for the increase in drier-than-average years.
During the period when mean annual precipitation
is declining, climatic thresholds that lead to alteration of mobility patterns would be reached earlier
in the west than in the east, and the timing of mobility changes from east to west would vary along with
the need for them. In other words, the gradients for
precipitation and productivity (which are parallel
because of the latter’s dependence on the former)
are also mobility gradients in the sense that areas
with lower total productivity are by definition areas
that produce less above-ground vegetation, and areas with less above-ground vegetation require more
mobility to harvest a given quantity of vegetation.

Table 3. Relative productivity losses with 2 inch decrease of mean
precipitation and 2 inch oscillation below new mean
Original Mean

New Mean
Annual Precipitation/

Change

Productivity

Annual Precipitation/

New Mean

2 in Below

Productivity (g/m2/yr)

Productivity (g!m2!yr)

Productivity

New Mean

20" ! 618

18" / 473

-23 %

328

-31%

-47 %

22" ! 763

20" / 618

-19 %

473

-23 %

-38 %

24" / 908

22"/763

-16 %

618

-19 %

-31%

26" / 1054

24" ! 909

-14 %

763

-16 %

-28 %

28" ! 1200

26" / 1054

-12 %

909

-14 %

-24 %

30" / 1345

28"/1200

-11%

1054

-12 %

-22 %

32" / 1490

30" / 1345

-10 %

1200

-11%

-19 %

34" / 1635

32" / 1490

-9 %

1345

-10 %

-18 %

36" / 1780

34" / 1635

-8%

1490

-9%

-16%

Productivity Change at
2 in Below New Mean:
re: New Mean
re: Original

418

Texas Archeological Society

Because the precipitation shift often expands
or contracts the area under a given precipitation
regime, productivity and mobility gradients will
expand or contract accordingly. Thus, the spatial
rearrangement of productivity and mobility gradients would not be uniform, requiring people exploiting the same precipitation gradients to
differentially adjust their mobility to very different
spatial patterns of declining productivity.
The treatment of productivity has, so far, ignored the underlying environmental diversity within
which total productivity is reduced. Drainages in
Central Texas are better watered than the adjacent
uplands because of concentrated flows from springs
and/or precipitation, and productivity in drainages
would probably decline at a slower rate than it
would in the uplands, creating differential declines
in productivity within any given subsubregion. Still
further, productivity in spring-fed drainages would
decline slower than in runoff-fed drainages, producing additional local differences. However, topography (and hence the spatial distribution of
springs and drainages) is one of the variables that
creates environmental diversity, and some subregions (e.g., the Balcones Canyonlands) are characterized by greater incision than others (e.g., the
Live Oak-Mesquite Savanna). As a result, differential upland/drainage productivity losses at the
subsub-regional scale would be accompanied by
further differences related to the overall drainage
pattern at the subregional spatial scale.
Moreover, it is highly unlikely that ecological
adjustment from one subsubregion to another would
be accomnpanied by proportional species-to-species
reduction in productivity. Although each natural
subregion is partially defined by a characteristic
array of plants, the existence of precipitation
gradients within each subregion guarantees that each
characteristic species in each subregion occupies a
territory varying somewhat from optimal moisture
conditions. This means that each species in each
subsubregion is closer to, or farther from, the
climatic thresholds that determine whether it
flourishes, barely survives, or cannot survive.
Despite the fact that each subsubregion has the
same basic array of characteristic

flora,

there is

considerable, indeed subtle, variation in the
proportional representation of characteristic plants.
Furthermore, the boundaries between subregions
are neither

sharp nor impermeable. The major

characteristic species in one subregion typically

extend beyond subregional boundaries to comprise
minor species in adjacent subregions. Thus, variable
representation of characteristic flora in a subregion
is accompanied by a variable representation of
minor species that are characteristic of other
subregions.
The different subsubregions vary not only as a
function of the differential representation of characteristic species: they simultaneously vary as a
function of the extent to which the locally peculiar
spread of characteristic species in adjacent
subsubregions spills over to become a minor component of the vegetation regime. Since all of the
species--characteristic and minor--in any given
subsubregion occupy different positions relative to
their optimal moisture conditions, the decline in
precipitation will lead to differential change in proportional species representation by subsubregion as
a result of an initial variability in the mix of characteristic and minor species, and the initial positions
such species occupy relative to their optimal moisture regimes.
Note, therefore, that our initial heuristic assumption that ecological adjustment is the only process accompanying declining productivity is
unrealistic. Floristic change, at least in the form of
species changing from minor to major components
(and vice versa), should also occur in at least some
of the subsubregions. Moisture is a major variable
that distinguishes the vegetation of the Live OakMesquite Savanna, the Balcones Canyonlands, and
the Lampasas Cut Plains. With more xeric conditions, stream flows would decline in the more
ephemeral drainages of the Canyonlands, especially
in the westernmost reaches since they are not springfed to the degree that the easternmost reaches are.
This would create conditions differentially favoring the xeric species of the Savanna habitat, and
increase their proportional representation in the
Canyonlands (perhaps to the extent they become
characteristic rather than minor species in some
areas). The trees on the Cut Plains are limited by
moisture regime, so floristic change in the arboreal
community would be likely. The characteristic species of the Western Cross Timbers are especially
limited by precipitation, and the creation of a new
subsubregion would largely eliminate them in favor of minor species with greater xeric tolerance.
Floristic change would also then be highly probable at the southernmost reaches of the Blackland
Prairies and Oak Woodlands. In other words, the

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick ~ Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

productivity of resources with higher thresholds to
xeric conditions would be differentially favored over
resources with lower thresholds all across the region, and in some cases this would result in substantial floristic change.
At the beginning of this scenario, we spoke in
terms of subsubregions (and juxtapositions thereof),
but we have now arrived at a discussion cast almost
entirely in terms of overlapping environmental gradients and processes that are differentially distributed in space. As a result, even under conditions of
uniform precipitation change, the vegetation of Central Texas would undergo productivity changes, ecological adjustment, and changes in species
proportions and mixes, all of which would occur
highly differentially in space.
Progressive (and, we confess, partial) "decompression" of the environmental information that gets
lost when speaking in terms of biotic provinces and
natural subregions shows that environmental responses to climate change would be enormously
complex, contextually and historically contingent,
and, therefore, extremely variable from place to
place. The different subsubregions (which are lesssimplified, smaller lies than provinces, regions, and
subregions) start off with different mixes of geology, soil, topography, and climate, assuring they
will have different floral species compositions,
which in turn assures that the Central Texas environment cannot respond in a uniform way. If one’s
version of "Central Texas" is larger than Prewitt’ s,
then our claims may be far too conservative, because a larger version of "Central Texas" will contain more climatic, edaphic, and topographic
diversity, and will be characterized by even more
diverse responses. Thus, just as there is no
quintessentially Central Texas environment today,
there could be no quintessentially Central Texas
environmental response under realistic conditions
of uniform or nonuniform climate change.

IS A PREHISTORY OF CENTRAL
TEXAS POSSIBLE?
Moreover, just as there could be no quintessentia! environmental response, there could be no
quintessential adaptive response by Central Texans.

419

Some would have the option of following the
isohyets and reproducing their subsistence practices
in a new place; others would not. Some would face
radical changes in resource productivity and/or
resource composition; others would barely notice
the difference. Given a wide array of environments
and practices for exploiting them, Central Texans
would necessarily face highly divergent subsistence
challenges under changing climatic conditions. The
issue is not whether they could meet those
challenges: hunter-gatherers are, after all, intelligent,
highly-skilled people, and environmental change
would not occur so rapidly that their cultural
geographies and subsistence practices would
become obsolete before they could be fixed? Rather,
the issue is whether they would notice a difference
in the effectiveness of their strategies and tactics,
and reach the same conclusions about how to change
them, if necessary. Central Texans who started out
with very different subsistence practices from place
to place in the region would not respond in a uniform
way to climate change because some might have
little to respond to, and others would be responding
to different problems of different kinds and
magnitudes.
In other words, cultural responses to environmental change would take substantially different
trajectories from substantially different starting
points because hunter-gatherers are smart enough
to recognize in advance that some things will work,
and others will not. As a result, an accurate history
of changing relationships between climate and culture in the region as a whole could not rely on
"cultures" defined as quintessential sets of traits
unless prehistorians are willing to ignore most of
the aspects of culture that have to do with subsistence, or to suggest that variable subsistence practices are not particularly relevant to the cultures
they are interested in describing and explaining.
The long-standing fascination with burned rock
middens (BRMs) in Central Texas serves as a case
in point.
In recent years, some researchers (Prewitt n.d.;
Goode 1991; Johnson and Goode 1994; Johnson
1995) have adopted one or another version of the
"sotol hypothesis" for the origin and spread of
BRMs, which often are viewed as a quintessentially
Central Texan trait. According to this hypothesis,

5Especially if among their tactics they had procedures for scouting out resources in bad years, which would be the ideal
laboratory for developing new tactics in a changing environment.

420

Texas Archeological Society

BRMs formed as a result of the long-term construction of earth and rock facilities for cooking succulents and semisucculents. However, sotol does not
grow well in clayey soils (Dering 1995), and yucca
does not grow well in the coarse soils favored by
sotol (Johnson 1994). Given the gross distributions
of these soils within and beyond Prewitt’s Central
Texas, a climatic event that increases the range of
these plants would do so differentially. For example, in a climate shift favoring xeric plants, sotol
would be favored in the sandier soils of the Llano
Uplift, whereas yucca would be favored in the
clayier soils of the Blackland Prairies. Thus, the
regionwide adoption of technologies leading to the
formation of BRMs would necessarily be accompanied by subsubregional variations in the mix and
amount of succulents available for exploitation. To
the extent that different succulents require different
procurement, scheduling, and/or processing strategies, regionwide formation of BRMs also would be
accompanied by a variety of ways of doing things
that lead to forming middens.
Moreover, even if it is true, as Black et al.
(1993:27) hypothesize, that BRMs "resulted from a
single phenomenon throughout their distribution in
time and space," and even if this single phenomenon
was the repetitive construction of ovens for cooking
succulents (which Black et al. [1993] do not
explicitly claim), local solutions to the problem of
integrating other resources into the subsistence
system would vary from place to place. These
solutions would vary as a combined function of the
differential spatial and seasonal availability of
different succulents, and the differential spatial and
seasonal availability of supplementary and back-up
resources. As a result, if Black et al. (1993) are
correct in claiming that BRMs are typically smaller
in the western part of Central Texas because
resource density was lower there and led to less
repetitive occupation of sites, they are correct
because west-Central and east-Central Texans faced
substantially different subsistence problems related
to the differential productivity of different
environments in Central Texas. These problems
would have included scheduling, mobility, and the
social organization of work, especially with respect
to integrating exploitation of other resources into

the procedures and schedule for exploiting
succulents. Given that there is enormous
environmental diversity within the western and
eastern portions of Central Texas, the easternwestern division obscures a substantial amount of
relevant descriptive and explanatory detail.
Consequently, even if it turned out that all BRMs in
Central Texas formed through the sequential
construction of intersecting ovens used to cook
succulents, we would know very little about the
role of BRMs in Central Texas prehistory unless
and until we also found out how succulent
exploitation was integrated into diverse subsistence
strategies in diverse environments. Again, it is
important to note that if one adopts a version of
"Central Texas" that is larger than Prewitt’s, our
claim is an understatement.
To the extent that BRMs are a quintessentially
Central Texan trait, they are very unlikely to fit into
a quintessentially Central Texan behavioral pattern.6
The same is true for the typologically distinct projectile points and other tools that have been a traditional mainstay for defining phases and stages. The
reason for this is that to whatever extent burned
rock technologies and tools are cultural traits shared
universally across the region, changes in their patterns of spatio-temporal distribution do not and cannot refer to the cultural or other phenomena that
account for the changes. Making a successful living by hunting and gathering is a pastime for welltrained professionals who cannot survive without
well-honed subsistence strategies that (among other
things) apply mobility, scheduling, and other organizational skills to a particular landscape according
to a well-understood cultural geography. However,
subsistence practices and cultural geographies are
culture traits, and environmental diversity requires
different practices and geographies among the
hunter-gatherers occupying Central Texas. Thus, it
is virtually certain that the subsistence traits which
provided the basis for generation-to-generation
transmission of burned rock technologies and various tool types were not universally shared across
the region. Consequently, the spatio-temporal distribution of regionally similar artifacts and features
in Central Texas cannot coincide with a spatiotemporal distribution of regionally similar cultural

6Indeed, since Black et al. (1993:28) note that"rock oven cooking extends far beyond the borders of Texas up into Oklahoma,
down into Mexico, and west into and beyond the American Southwest," it would be truly extraordinary if the same subsistence
activities or systems account for burned rock middens throughout their spatio-temporal distribution.

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick-- Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

421

subsistence traits that were necessary for
the reproduction of culture in general.
In fact, a real problem for culture
history would be to explain how it is that
BRMs occur over most of Prewitt’s Central
Texas, while many of their culturally
associated artifacts do not. Over the period
of Archaic midden formation, it is not clear
that there actually were any typologically
distinct artifacts that were used region-wide.
The distributions of projectile point types the usual index of choice for culturechronology building and identification of
cultural affiliation - do not coincide with
Suhm’s (1960) Central Texas
Prewitt’s (or anyone else’s) Central Texas.
Figure 7 shows the distribution of three
Prewitt’s (1981 ) Central Texas
commonly found projectile points (from
Pedernales
Turner and Hester 1993). Only one of these
Castroville
covers all of Prewitt’s region, but none of
Bulverde
- ’, ,,. ,, ,, ,,., - Spatial overlap of Pedernales, Castroville, Bulverde, Fdo, Fairland,
them cover all of Suhm’s (1960) Central
Lange, Marcos, Marshall, Martindale/Uvatde, and Travis
Texas, and all of them cover greatly
different areas compared to each other.
Figure 7. Distribution of selected projectile points relative to
Interestingly, the area of overlap of at least
Suhm’s (1960) and Prewitt’s (1981) versions of Central Texas.
ten common projectile points covers a
Point distributions are based on figures in Turner and Hester
relatively small proportion of Prewitt’s
(1993). Note that spatial overlap of at least 10 point types excludes
much of what has been accepted historically as "Central Texas."
region, and quite a small proportion of
Suhm’s.7 Hence, it is obvious that to
whatever extent point types refer to distinct
"cultures," different parts of Central Texas must
folly to construct a traditional culture history withhave had different histories of different peoples
out either (1) addressing the behavioral systems
doing different things in different environments.
that composed the culture or (2) anticipating the
Indeed, the term "Central Texas" does not refer to
kinds of data and processes that will explain culan area that is especially relevant to a history that
tural phenomena because the resulting culture hisuses projectile points as an index of sociocultural
tory can only accidentally contain the evidence
affiliation, because the area contains neither the
necessary for successful description and explanapeople nor the behavioral patterns of interest. That
tion. Phases defined for Central Texas have been
is to say, if distinct "cultures" produced distinct
roundly and soundly criticized (Peter et al. 1982;
projectile points, the prehistory of Central Texas
Johnson 1987; Black 1989) for failing to meet the
cultures extends well beyond Central Texas, no
criteria needed to establish them as entities that
matter how it is defined.
refer to culture-historical units. If our argument is

CONCLUSIONS

Lewis Binford has been criticized for many
things over his career. However, one of the things
he was right about from the beginning (Binford
1962, 1965, 1968; see also Wylie t982) is that it is

approximately correct, then successful phase-building for Central Texas necessarily will be subject to
the problems Binford has noted, because it will not
produce culture-historical units that actually refer
to any particular entity that can fit successfully into
the describe-first/explain-next procedures of traditional culture history (Willey and Phillips 1958;
Sabloff and Wiltey 1967; see Ellis 1994). This is

7As this is being written, Prewitt (this volume) is finishing a major re-evaluation of the distribution of projectile points. His
findings will undoubtedly modify the basis for Figure 7.

422

Texas Archeological Society

because virtually any culture-historical units that
accurately describe regionwide phenomena can do
so only by stripping away or ignoring the culture
traits that make hunter-gatherers hunter-gatherers
rather than merely producers of similar artifacts.
By accurately referring to all Central Texans
in terms of the things they universally share (which
apparently is little beyond rock ovens if Black et al.
[1993] and Turner and Hester [1993] are both correct), well-produced culture-historical units will refer only vacuously to any actual social or other
entities: they will refer at best to abstractions, and
not to people who actually lived, worked, and died
in Central Texas. In recognition of this problem,
LeRoy Johnson, who from the 1960s to the late
1980s was at the vanguard of calls to use "proper"
methods for defining culture-history units, has progressively abandoned the expectation that phases
do or can refer to the same thing regionwide
(Johnson and Goode 1994; Johnson 1994, 1995),
and has suggested (personal communication to G.
L. Ellis) that even if we produced "proper" phases,
they would not be good for much. Similarly, if we
replaced regionwide "phases" with regionwide "adaptations," we would replace one normative,
referentless construct with another: the term "human adaptation" will not refer to anyone in Central
Texas if we speak broadly and accurately enough
to refer to everyone in Central Texas.
The term "Central Texas" does not refer to a
simple thing. Using the term as if it does transforms
both Central Texas and Central Texans into mythical
things that can only be described and explained in
mythical terms. Central Texas’s environments are
too diverse. Its environmental responses to climate
change would be equally diverse and differentially
distributed no matter what climate changes occurred.
Hence, its human history must be diverse, and must
be expected to have taken different paths in response
to climate change. A prehistory of Central Texas
appears to be possible only if one is willing and
able to deal with it as an area with enormous
environmental diversity exploited by people with
different subsistence systems and, surely, different
large-scale sociocultural affiliations that extended
well beyond the region itself. The cost of
simplification in Central Texas -whether in culture
or processual history- is that only a truth-eliminating
brush paints strokes broad enough to cover Central
Texas. Thus, speaking in terms of what applies all
across Central Texas makes the region’s prehistory

manageable by making it refer to very little. If ease
of manageability is what archeologists want, then
the cost of simplification is reasonable. On the other
hand, for researchers who, like us, hold the perverse
belief that reality resides in the details of variability
rather than the abstractions of commonality, the
cost of simplification is too high, and it is long past
time to reconsider how-or even if-one can continue
to use the term "Central Texas" as a meaningful
concept around and within which to organize our
understanding of prehistory.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Much of the research for this article was performed in conjunction with the "Five Burned Rock
Midden Sites Project," a joint effort of the Texas
Department of Transportation (TxDOT) and the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin. The authors are grateful for TxDOT’s generous support. The authors, if
not the article, were aided by comments from Lee
Johnson and Steve Black.

REFERENCES CITED

Arbingast, S. A., L. G. Kennamer, R. H. Ryan, A. Lo, D. L.
Karney, C. P. Zlatkovich, M. E. Bonine, and R. G. Steele
1973

Atlas of Texas. Revised Edition. Bureau of Business
Research, University of Texas at Austin.

Binford, L. R.
1962 Archaeology as Anthropology. American Antiquity
28:217-225.
1965

Archaeological Systematics and the Study of Culture Process. American Antiquity 31:203-210.

1968

Some Comments on Historical versus Processual
Archaeology. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 24:267-275.

1983

In Pursuit of the Past: Decoding the Archaeological Record. Thames and Hudson, New York.

Black, S. Lo
1989 Central Texas Plateau Prairie. In From the Gulf to
the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation in Central,
South, and Lower Pecos Texas, by T. R. Hester, S.
L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. J.
Reinhard, and L. C. Bement, pp. 17-38. Research

Series No. 33. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick m Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

Black, S. L., K. Jolly, and D. R. Potter
1993 The Higgins Experiment Field Report. Wurzbach

423

Collins, M. B.
1991 Thoughts on Future Investigations of Burned Rock

Project Working Papers. Texas Archeological

Middens. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas:

Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at

An Archeological Symposium, edited by T. R.

Austin.

Hester, pp. 1-24. Studies in Archeology Number
13. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Uni-

Blair, W. F.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas.The Texas Journal of
Science 2:93-117.
Blum, M.D.
1987 Late Quaternary Sedimentation in the Upper
Pedernales River. Unpublished Masters Thesis, Department of Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin.
1990

Climatic and Eustatic Controls on Gulf Coastal Plain
Fluvial Sedimentation: An Example from the Qua-

versity of Texas at Austin.

Collins, M. B. and C. B. Bousman, with contributions by T. K.
Perttula
1993 Quaternary Environments and Archeology in Northeast Texas. In Archeology in the Eastern Planning
Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N.
A. Kenmotsu and T. K. Perttula, pp. 49-67. Cultural
Resource Management Report 3. Department of
Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

ternary of the Colorado River. Gulf Coast Section

Association of American Geographers 79:345-456.

Dering, J. P.
1995 Appendix I: Modern and Contact-Period Vegetation
in the Area of the Jonas Terrace Site of Northern
Medina County. In The Archeology of the Jonas
Terrace Site, 41ME29, of the Southernmost Edwards
Plateau, by L. Johnson. Texas Department of Transportation and Texas Historical Commission, Austin,
in press.

Brown, T., K. L. Killen, H. Simons, and V. Wulfkuhle
1982 Resource Protection Planning Process for Texas.

Diamond, D. D., D. H. Riskind, and S. L. Orzell.
1987 A Framework for Plant Community Classification

Society for Economic Paleontology and Mineralogy
Foundation Eleventh Annual Research Conference,
Program with Abstracts, pp. 71-83.

Blum, M. D. and S. Valastro, Jr.
1989 Response of the Pedernales River of Central Texas
to Late Holocene Climatic Change. Annals of the

Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

and Conservation in Texas. The Texas Journal of
Science 39:202-221.

Bryant, V. M. and R. G. Holloway
1985

A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of

Diamond, D. D., and F. E. Smeins

Texas: An Overview of the Pollen Evidence. In

1985

Composition, Classification and Species Response

Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North Ameri-

Patterns of Remnant Tallgrass Prairies in Texas.

can Sediments, edited by V. M. Bryant and R. G.

American Midland Naturalist 113:294-308.

Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas.

Dixon, J. R.
1987

Bryant, V. M. and H. J. Sharer
1977 Late Quaternary Paleoenvironment of Texas: A
Model for Archeologists. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 48:1-26.

Amphibians and Reptiles of Texas. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.

Dyksterhuis, E. J.
1946 Vegetation of the Fort Worth Prairie. Ecological
Monographs 16:1-29.

Butzer, K. W.
1982

Archaeology as Human Ecology: Method and
Theory for a Contextual Approach. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Caran, S,C.
1994 Quaternary Paleoenvironmental and Paleoclimatic
Reconstruction in the Southern Great Plains: A Discussion and Critique. Paper presented at the 52nd
Annual Plains Anthropological Conference and 65th
Texas Archeological Society Annual Meeting, Lubbock, Texas.

Elias, S. A.
1994 Insect Fossil Evidence of Late Glacial Environments
at the Aubrey Clovis Site, Texas. Program andAbstracts of the 13th Biennial Meeting, p. 77. American Quaternary Association. University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis.

424

Texas Archeological Society

Ellis, G. L.
1994 Archeological Overview and Theoretical Perspectives. In Significance StandardsJbr Prehistoric Cultural Resources: A Case Study from Fort Hood,

Humphrey, J. D. and C. R. Ferring
1994 Stable Isotopic Evidence for Latest Pleistocene and
Holocene Climatic Change in North-Central Texas.
Quaternary Research 41:200-213.

Texas, by G. L. Ellis, C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler,
Report CRC-94/04, Tri-Services Research Center

Johnson, L.
1987 A Plague of Phases: Recent Sociocultural Taxonomy

Series. United States Army Construction Engineer-

in Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo-

and J. M. Jackson, pp. 41-99. USACERL Technical

logical Society 57:1-26.

ing Research Laboratory, Urbana, Illinois.
1994
Gardner, K. M.
1992

Modern Enviroument. In An Archeological Survey

Kimble County, Texas. Office of the State Arche-

of the Proposed South Bend Reservoir Area: Young,

ologist Report 38. Texas Department of Transporta-

Stephens, and Throckmorton Counties, Texas, ed-

tion and Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

ited by J. W. Saunders, C, S. Mueller-Wille, and D.
L. Carlson, pp, 13-17. Archeological Surveys No.

1995

partment of Transportation and Texas Historical

University, College Station.
Gehlbach, F. R.
The East-West Transition Zone of Terrestrial Vertebrates in Central Texas: A Biogeographical Analy-

Commission, Austin, in press.
Johnson, L. and G. T. Goode
1994

Eastern Edwards Plateau. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65:1-51.

Goode, G.
Late Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in Central
Texas. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An
Archeological Symposium, edited by T. R. Hester,

Kosko, B.
1993

Archeological Research Laboratory, University of

Fuzzy Thinking: The New Science of Fuzzy Logic.
Hyperion, New York.

pp. 71-93. Studies in Archeology Number 13. Texas
Texas at Austin.

A New Try at Dating and Characterizing Holocene
Climates, as well as Archeological Periods, on the

sis. The Texas Journal of Science 43:415-427.

!991

The Archeology of the Jonas Terrace Site, 41ME29,
of the Southernmost Edwards Plateau. Texas De-

6. Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M

1991

The Life and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk as Seen
from the Buckhollow Encampment, Site 41KM16, of

Kosso, P.
1991 Method in Archaeology: Middle-Range Theory as
Hermeneutics. American Antiquity 56:621-627.

Goodfriend, G. A. and R. M. Mitterer
1993

A 45,000-yr Record of a Tropical Lowland Biota:
The Land Snail Fauna from Cave Sediments at Coco

Kutac, E. A. and S. C. Caran
1994

Ree, Jamaica. Bulletin of the Geological Society of

Birds and Other Wildlife of South Central Texas.
University of Texas Press, Austin.

America 105:18-29.
Larkin, T. J. and G. W. Bomar
Gould,
1962

1983
Texas Plants-A Checklist and Ecological Summary.

Climatic Atlas of Texas. Publication LP-192. Texas
Department of Water Resources, Austin.

Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Hall, S. A.
1990

Channel Trenching and Climatic Change in the
Southern U.S. Great Plains. Geology 18:342-345.

Lundelius, E. L., Jr.
1967 Late-Pleistocene and Holoceue Faunal History of
Central Texas. In Pleistocene Extinctions, edited by
P. S. Martin and H. E. Wright, Jr., pp. 287-319.
Yale University Press, New Haven.

Hereford, R.

Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs

1984

1978

Climate and Ephemeral-Stream Processes: Twentieth-Century Geomorphology and Alluvial Stratig-

Preserving Texas’ Natural Heritage. Project Report
31. Natural Heritage Policy Research Project, Uni-

raphy of the Little Colorado River, Arizona. Bulletin

versity of Texas at Austin.

of the Geological Society of America. 95:654-668.
Macklin, M. G.
Holliday, V, T.
1985

Archaeological Geology of the Lubbock Lake Site,
Southern High Plains of Texas. Bulletin of the Geological Society of America 96:1483-1492.

1989

Middle Holocene Droughts on the Southern High
Plains. Quaternary Research 31:74-82.

1992

Flood Alluviation and Entrenchment: Holocene Valley-Floor Development and Transformation in the
British Uplands. Bulletin of the Geological Society
of America 104:631-643.

Ellis, Ellis, and Frederick m Implications of Environmental Diversity in Central Texas

425

McMahan, C. A., R. G. Frye, and K. L. Brown

Prewitt, E. R.

1984

1981

Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of

1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central

The Vegetation Types of Texas (Including Cropland). Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Wildlife Division, Austin.

Meltzer, D. J.
1991 Altithermal Archaeology and Paleoecology at Mustang Springs, on the Southern High Plains of Texas.
American Antiquity 56:236-267.

the Texas Archeological Society 52:65-89.

Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological Society 54:201-238.
n.d.

The Rogers Springs Site:

1974 Investigations.

Unpublished manuscript on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas
at Austin.

Nobel, P. S.
1994

Remarkable Agaves and Cacti. Oxford University
Press, New York.

Riskind, D. H. and D. D. Diamond
1986

Plant Communities of the Edwards Plateau of Texas:

Nordt, L. C.

An Overview Emphasizing the Balcones Escarp-

1992

ment Zone Between San Antonio and Austin with

Archaeological Geology of the Fort Hood Military
Reservation, Fort Hood, Texas. Research Report

Special Attention to Landscape Contrasts and Natu-

Number 25, Archaeological Resource Management

ral Diversity. In The Balcones Escarpment: Geol-

Series. United States Army, Fort Hood, Texas.

ogy, Hydrology, Ecology and Social Development
in Central Texas, edited by P. L. Abbott and C. M.

Nordt, L. C., T. W. Boutton, C. T. Hallmark, and M. R. Waters

Woodruff, Jr., pp. 1-15. Published Papers of the

Late Quaternary Vegetation and Climate Changes
in Central Texas Based on the Isotopic Composition of Organic Carbon. Quaternary Research
41:109-!20.

Geological Society of America, Annual Meeting,

1994

November 9-14, 1986. Comet Reproduction Service, Santa Fe Springs, California.
Sabloff, J. A. and G. R. Willey

Owen, G. and D. J. Schmidly
1986

1967

The Collapse of Maya Civilization in the Southern

Environmental Variables of Biological Importance

Lowlands: A Consideration of History and Process.

in Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 38:99-119.

Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 23:311-336.

Peter, D., T. R. Hays, and M. A. Demuynck

Spearing, D.

1982

1991

An Evaluation of the "Phase" Concept. In Archaeological Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir

Roads’Me Geology of Texas. Mountain Press Publishing, Missoula, Montana.

Districts, Central Texas, Volume 2, compiled and
edited by T. R. Hays, pp. 21-1 to 21-18. Archaeology Program, Institute of Applied Sciences, North

Stahle, D. W. and M. K. Cleaveland
1988 Texas Drought History Reconstructed and Analyzed

Texas State University, Denton.

Potter,
1995 Past and Present Environments. In Introduction,

from 1698 to 1980. Journal of Climate 1:59-74.
Suhm, D. A.
1960 A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of

Conceptual Framework, and Contexts of Archeo-

the Texas Archeological Society 29:63-107.

logical Investigations in Bexar County, South-Central Texas, by D. R. Potter, S. L. Black, and K.

Suhm, D. A., A. B. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks

Jolly, pp. 5-17. Archeology along the Wurzbach

1954

An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.

Parkway, Module 1. Studies in Archeology Number

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25

17. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, the

(whole volume).

University of Texas at Austin.
Taylor, W. W.
Potter, D. R. and S. L. Black
1995

1948

A Study of Archaeology. Memoir No. 69. American

Conceptual Framework. In Introduction, Concep-

Anthropologist 50(3), Part 2. Reprinted as A Study

tual Framework, and Contexts" of Archeological In-

of Archaeology, by Center for Archaeologica! In-

vestigations in Bexar County, South-Central Texas,

vestigations, Southern Illinois University at

by D. R. Potter, S. L. Black, and K. Jolly, pp. 19-37.

Carbondale, 1983.

Archeology along the Wurzbach Parkway, Module
1. Studies in Archeology Number 17. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, the University of
Texas at Austin.

Texas Almanac
1994 Texas Almanac and State Industrial Guide. A. H.
Belo, Dallas.

426

Texas Archeological Society

Toomey, R. S. III, M. D. Blum, and S. Valastro, Jr.

Weir, F.

1993

1976

Edwards Plateau, Texas. Global and Planetary

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Washing-

Change 7:299-320.

ton State University, Pullman.

Late Quaternary Climates and Environments of the

Toomey, R. S. III

Willey, G. R. and P. Phillips

1993

1958

Late Pleistocene and Holocene Faunal Changes at

Method and Theory in American Archaeology. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Hall’s Cave, Kerr County, Texas. Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Wylie, M. A.
1982

Postivism and the New Archaeology. Unpublished

Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester

Ph.D. Dissertation, University Microfilms, Ann

1993

Arbor.

A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
Second Edition. Gulf Publishing, Houston.

Van Auken, O. W.
1988

Woody Vegetation of the Southeastern Escarpment
and Plateau. In Edwards Plateau Vegetation, edited
by B. B. Amos and F. R. Gehlbach, pp. 1-15. Baylor
University Press, Waco, Texas.

The Prehistory of South Texas
Thomas R. Hester

ABSTRACT
The prehistoric archeology of southern Texas is summarized in this paper. The region, often known as the
Rio Grande Plain, has a distinctive archeological record in terms of site use patterns and artifact types. From the
Paleoindian through the Early Archaic, the cultural patterns of the area are part of broad phenomena crosscutting
this and other regions. With the Middle Archaic and Late Archaic, specific regional patterns can be seen; of
particular note are major cemetery sites and trade or interaction with other regions. During the Late Prehistoric,
regional patterns are present, and the Toyah horizon of Central Texas expands to encompass much of the area.
Protohistoric sites of the 16th and 17th centuries are also known. Much remains to be learned about South Texas
prehistory, since few sites have been excavated, few radiocarbon dates exist, and specific theoretical goals have
not been made explicit.

INTRODUCTION
The southern Texas archeological area (Figure
1) has been the subject of synthesis in a booklength treatment by Hester (1980), an overview of
the western Gulf coastal Plain (Story 1985), a paper
that dealt with both the interior and coastal portions
of this region (Black 1989), and a regional synthesis
written in the context of the Loma S andia (41LK28)
analysis (Black 1995). The present paper focuses
on the interior of the region, usually referred to as
the Rio Grande Plain, the Nueces Plain, or the South
Texas Plains. The northern boundary can be placed
at the Balcones Escarpment, the western edge set
artificially at the Rio Grande, the northeastern
boundary in the Guadalupe-San Antonio rivers
drainage system, the eastern boundary at the
juncture with the coastal bend, some 50-65 km
inland from the modern Gulf of Mexico shoreline,
and south, at the mouth of the Rio Grande. Black
(1989:Figure 19) noted five "biogeographical areas"
in the region: the Rio Grande Plain, the Rio Grande
Delta, the Nueces-Guadalupe Plain, the Sand Sheet,
and the Coastal Bend. As noted above, I will not
deal with the coasta! bend region in this present
synthesis (see Ricklis, this volume). Another
suggested set of subdivisions for this region was
proposed in the first South Texas Archeological
Palaver in 1988. The "South Texas Planning
Region" was divided into the Middle Nueces Zone,
the Brasada (McGraw et al. 1987), the Sand Sheet,

and the Rio Bravo corridor encompassing the
archeology of both sides of the Rio Grande. This
particular configuration did not include the Rio
Grande delta, leaving it as part of the coastal strip
extending up the coast from Brownsville.
The earlier syntheses have summarized various facets of the ecology of the South Texas region
(see also Jurgens 1980). Hester (1981) has noted
the variation in plant and water resources across the
region, distinguishing between "high density" (resource) areas and those of "low density." These
manifest different archeological records.
The difficulty in describing, in any detail, the
hydrology, vegetation, and fauna of the region
results from wholesale modification of the South
Texas environment during the Historic era. Hester
(1980) has outlined these, as has Hall (1985; see
also Hall et al. 1982, 1986). The principal changes
can be briefly summarized here. First, the mesquite
and other thorny shrubs that dominate the "Brush
Country" today spread (or at least increased in
density) within Historic times (e.g., Fisher
1977:183; Doughty 1983:122-123). However,
mesquite was clearly present in riverine zones as
early as 6000 B.P. This is based on wood species
identification of hearth charcoal done by Hol!oway
(1986); Jurgens (1980) suggests that the typical
riverine environmental pattern in that area today
was in place by 300 B.C. There is considerable
deba~e in the literature over the extent of mesquite
on the Rio Grande Plain, based on early Historic

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

428

Texas Archeological Society

35
41 36

31
~
2~8
27

7

6
29~

15

-%~

"o ~
24

GULF
OF
MEXICO
SHEET

0
0

50

1
100 kilometers

16
/

Figure 1. Map of Southern Texas, With Locations of Key Sites and Areas
Mentioned in the Text: 1, Loma Sandia (41LK28); 2, 41LK31/32; 3, 41LK201;
4, 41LK51; 5, 41LK67; 6, 41MC222; 7, 41LK106; 8, proposed Cuero
Reservoir; 9, 41VT17; 10, 4tVT15; 11, J-2 Ranch site (41VT6); 12, Berger
Bluff (41GD30); 13, Blue Bayou (41VT94); 14, River Spur (41VT112); 15,
Hinojosa (41JW8); 16, Floyd Morris (41CF3); 17, Ayala (41HG1); 18,
41WY40; 19, 4 lWY42; 20, Coleto Creek; 21, Berclair (41GD4); 22, Berclair
Terrace (Buckner Ranch); 23, Falcon Reservoir area (includes 41ZP83 and
41SR174); 24, Duval County area; 25, Laredo area; 26, 4lWB56; 27,
Chaparrosa Ranch (41ZVI0 and Mariposa [41ZV83]); 28, East Chacon
survey; 29, 41ZV37; 30, 41ZV155; 31, 41ME34; 32, 41ME19; 33, proposed
Applewhite Reservoir (includes 41BX831); 34, 41ZV263; 35, 41BX228; 36,
St. Mary’s Hall (41BX229); 37, Pavo Real (41BX52); 38, Shrew site
(41WN73); 39, Guerrero, Coahuila missions; 40, 41AT111; 41, 41BX1; 42,
Lake Corpus Christi area; 43, Haiduk site (41KA23).

accounts. Some report vast grasslands, while others
note that mesquite was rather widely distributed
(e.g., Inglis 1964; Lehmann 1984; Weniger 1984).
Various factors contributed to the spread of
mesquite, especially overgrazing and the lowering
of the water table. The latter was aggravated with
20th century deep well irrigation. This had the effect
of drying up springs that had fed perennial streams,
perhaps for millenia. A county park with abandoned
bath houses sits, like ancient ruins, adjacent to a
1920s swimming hole, on formerly spring-fed

Carrizo Creek (Dimmit County
[Brune 1981:165-166]).
The animal population has
also been significantly altered.
Gone are the bison, pronghorn,
bear, wolf, and jaguar (Doughty
1983:76) that were present in
southern Texas up to the
beginning of the 20th century
(Doughty 1983:54). Added to the
species list is armadillo (in the
19th century) and javelina; the
latter apparently first appeared ca.
A.D. 1400 (e.g., at site 41MC222
[Hall et al. 1986:215]), but began
to flourish in the 18th century,
based on faunal records from
Spanish Colonial missions (e.g.,
Davidson and Valdez 1976).
Except for Late Prehistoric sites,
faunal preservation is often poor
in South Texas. Steele and Hunter
(1986) provides a faunal study
from three Choke Canyon sites
that looks at diet, hunting patterns,
and environmental reconstruction,
topics not easily dealt with in
most
faunal
assemblages
elsewhere in the region.
One aspect of long-term environmental change on the Rio
Grande Plain has been the movement of stream channels through
time. Rivers like the Nueces and
the Frio, and their major tributaries, have often cut widely across
their valleys, creating a dendritic
pattern. Some channels can be
traced and roughly dated by archeological remains on their
banks (e.g., at Chaparrosa Ranch

[Hester 1978a]). In the Choke Canyon Project, Bunker (1982) studied in detail the movements of the
Frio River, and in their unpublished manuscript on
the East Chacon Project (Zavala and Uvalde counties), McGraw and Knepper (1983) have proposed
shifts in the Nueces River channel since Late Pleistocene times, as well as in its tributaries in their
study area.
South Texas archeology is beginning to benefit from geomorphological research, especially in
the terraces along the Rio Grande (Collins 1991)

Hester ~ The Prehistory of South Texas
and in the Rio Grande Delta (Collins et al. 1989).
Other studies were also carried out at Choke Canyon (Bunker !982) and Loma Sandia (Ho!liday
1995), but much remains to be done across the
region.
Evidence of climatic change in the region is
also hard to obtain. Robinson (1982) used phytolith
data from Choke Canyon Reservoir to offer a pattern of short vs. tall-grass occurrence through time,
perhaps reflecting alternating wet and dry episodes.
While tree-ring coring has helped to give drought
histories for part of Texas since 1698 (Stahle and
Cleaveland 1988), this has had only preliminary
application in South Texas (Gunn 1985).
The history of archeology in southern Texas
has been reviewed in detail by Mallouf et al.
(1977), and most recently by Black (1989:40-44).
In essence, little work was done in the region prior
to the late 1960s. Since that time, a number of important sites have been excavated (e.g., Montgomery 1978; Highley 1986; Black 1986), a major
reservoir study was carried out at Choke Canyon
(Live Oak and McMullen counties) providing 12
volumes on the prehistory, history, and
ethnohistory of that area, a number of cultural resource management surveys (and occasionally, test
excavations) have been done (including a largescale survey of the proposed Cuero I reservoir [Fox
et al. 1974]), and site reports and artifact distributional studies have been reported in the pages of
La Tierra, the quarterly journal of the Southern
Texas Archaeological Association. A series of
major surveys, archival studies, and excavations
have also taken place along the Medina River in
southern Bexar County at the locus of the proposed
Applewhite Reservoir (McGraw and Hindes 1987;
Thoms 1992). This study area is on the northern
periphery of southern Texas, as were the excavations at 41ME34 to the west (Hester 1990a). However, both have chronological data that help to
build on the cultural-historical framework of southern Texas.
The native peoples of southern Texas are traditionally labeled as "Coahuiltecans" (Newcomb
196t). However, they included Coahuilteco speakers (Johnson and Campbell 1992), and groups that
spoke perhaps six other languages (Goddard 1979)
and a language known as Sanan, recently published
by Johnson and Campbell (1992). The South Texas
hunting and gathering lifeways are hard to reconstruct from Spanish documents. The descriptions

429

by Newcomb (1961) provide a general view of
their existence, but for more details, the studies by
Campbell, gathered in a volume in 1988, are highly
recommended. The Indians of the Rio Grande delta
have been studied by Salinas (1990), and McGraw
et al. (1991) have shed new light on a number of
South Texas groups encountered by the Spanish
along the Camino Real and related early trails. The
native peoples became culturally extinct in the 18th
century (Hester 1989a) as a result of Spanish-introduced diseases, raiding by Apaches and
Comanches, the Spanish missionization process,
and acculturated new lives as farmers. After the
missions were secularized in 1794, many of these
lost their lands to "avaricious townspeople" as at
San Antonio de Valero (Almaraz 1989:38-39; de
la Teja 1995).

THE NATURE OFTHESOUTHTEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICALRECORD
Evidence of human occupation in southern
Texas is extremely abundant, yet has proven quite
challenging in terms of dating and interpretation.
Open occupation sites dominate the site types, usually found to be heavily eroded, with abundant surface debris such as chert flakes, land snails, mussel
shells, scattered hearthstones, and eroding hearths.
For a detailed discussion of South Texas site types
and features within sites (e.g., lithic caches, hearths,
pits, bone clusters, and activity areas), see Black
(1989:46-48).
These sites have been a boon for artifact-collectors, since large numbers of projectile points are
deflated onto a common surface. It is not uncommon for South Texas projectile point collections to
range into the many thousands of specimens. Thus,
"arrowhead collecting" is a popular pastime, as this
author found beginning around age 7! Today, much
of the ranchland is leased for hunting, and "arrowhead collecting" is often featured in urban sports
pages as an activity to while away the time during
deer-hunting. This results in large numbers of projectile points being indiscriminately collected and
"exported" to Houston, San Antonio, and beyond
by hunters. Of course, local collectors have been
active for decades; Shafer and Baxter (1975) point
to the absence of points at surface localities in a
McMullen County study area (see also Robinson et
al. 1992).

430

Texas Archeological Society

The South Texas open camp sites are very
difficult to excavate. Unlike Central Texas camp
sites where cultural debris is often concentrated in
a small area, and where a few test pits can provide
chrono!ogical information, the typical streamside
South Texas open site is really an "occupation zone"
(Hester 1981)--long, narrow strips of occupation.
Excavations will detect components of different age
in horizontally-separated parts of the site, seldom
overlapping to any great extent. The task of excavating these kinds of sites was evident at Choke
Canyon where small test pits yielded little, and our
strategy of open, block excavations (Figures 2-3)
improved both recovery and studies of horizontal
patterning (supplemented by machine-stripping; see
Brown et al. 1982) but they produced far less data
than we had expected (Hester 1986a). The same is
true for sites on Chaparrosa Ranch, again where
block excavations failed to yield little beyond scattered hearths and occasional diagnostics (Hester
1978a; Montgomery 1978). This is not to say that
such occupation zones are insignificant and not
worthy of excavation. Rather, we have to think in
terms of larger blocks and the use of backhoes and
geomorphological input for planning excavation
placement. By contrast, Late Prehistoric sites in
southern Texas are often dense concentrations of

a

features, faunal remains and artifacts, and have been
productively studied through the use of block excavations (Black 1986; Hightey 1986).
Another common type of site is related to lithic
procurement. On the high terraces of the NuecesFrio drainage systems, Uvalde gravels are extensively exposed. Here, one finds loci of tested cobbles,
debitage, and bifaces abandoned during reduction
(Hester 1975a). In the Duval County area, Chandler
and Lopez (1992) report an outcrop of qum’tz arenite
(Goliad formation) used by Archaic knappers. Along
the Rio Grande in the Laredo region, Warren (1989)
has reported "lithic reduction sites" in the uplands,
along with larger "lithic procurement/quarry sites"
that cover up to 1500 acres (see also Miller 1995).
Near the Rio Grande, multi-colored Rio Grande
gravels are reduced. Such sites in South Texas have
not been adequately studied; indeed, sometimes they
are not even given site numbers due to their broad
horizontal extent (cf. Warren 1989). I would argue,
however, that much more could be done with them,
especially in terms of defining local tithic reduction
sequences (Hester 1975a; Kotter 1980). They should
not be ignored or dismissed as unimportant by cultural resource management surveys.
Temporary campsites are often found in the
uplands or along high terraces. Characterized by a

b

Figure 2. Excavation at Site 41LK67, Choke Canyon Reservoir, Southern Texas: a, view of portion of block excavation
(1 x 1 meter squares); b, plan of features exposed during excavation (Brown et al. 1982:109).

Hester- The Prehistory of South Texas

431

Cemetery sites are present
in southern Texas, and are
rather common in the coastal
bend. The Loma Sandia site
(41LK28 [Taylor and Highley
1995]) is the best known, having yielded a large number of
burials with associated mortuary caches. Loma Sandia
once appeared to be anomalous, with its concentration of
burials and numerous grave
goods. Now, we know of two
or more such cemeteries in the
Falcon Reservoir area of
South Texas and adjacent
northeastern Mexico, again
with many burials and grave
Figure 3. Block Excavation at 41LK201. Partial view showing Toyah horizon
goods paralleling those of
artifacts pedestaled in situ. Courtesy of News and Information, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.
Loma Sandia. Unfortunately,
lack of enforcement of antiquities laws and treaties have
few hearths or scattered burned rock, flakes and an
left these Falcon sites to the mercies of collectors
occasional diagnostic, they are clearly an important
and looters, and only a couple of devoted
part of regional settlement patterns, albeit of
avocational archeologists have made the effort to
speculative function at this time. Warren
(1989) also notes "intermediate campsites,"
which based on his definition appear to
represent similar short-term activities.
Deeply stratified open campsites do
occur in southern Texas. Excavations at
41LK31/32 at Choke Canyon provide one
example (Figure 4; Scott 1982) While little
could be contributed to regional culture
history at this site, it did yield abundant data
on intrasite activities (i.e., a chert-reduction
area, and concentrations of mussel and fish
remains) and large, well preserved hearths
with abundant charcoal for both dating and
wood species identification. Such stratified
sites also occur in the middle Guadalupe
River drainage, including Johnston-Heller
(Birmingham and Hester 1976), Willeke
(41VT17), and Berger Bluff (41GD30, on
Coleto Creek). To date, only Berger Bluff
has been partially excavated (D. Brown
1983; K. Brown 1987, n.d.). I have also seen
stratified sites at the mouths of major creeks
emptying into the Rio Grande in Webb
County; no excavations have been done at
these.

Figure 4. Deeply Buried Occupations at Site 41LK31/32, Choke
Canyon Reservoir Project. One occupation level, represented
by hearth in profile, dates to ca. 2400 B.C. Earliest occupation
is at the base (note the shell accumulation), at ca. 3400 B.C.
From Hester (1980:Figure 4.30).

432

Texas Archeological Society

document and scientifically record these burials.
This fiasco at Falcon, during low-water episodes in
the 1980s and 1990s, is evidence of the failure of
the International Boundary and Water Commission
to live up to its responsibility to protect archeological sites (although one minor survey was done by
O’Neill et al. [1992]) on both sides of this reservoir. None of these kinds of sites were detected by
the limited Falcon Reservoir salvage efforts in the
early t950s (e.g., Cason 1952), and despite state
and federal laws, and international treaties, motorboat looters have largely erased a critical archeological record.
Other burial sites have been documented in
recent years. These include the Haiduk burial
(Mitchell et al. 1984), with Late Archaic diagnostics at a site in Karnes County; several disturbed
burials at the Shrew site (Labadie 1988); a burial in
Lavaca County (Hester 1994a) with an associated
Gahagan biface, reflecting trade with East or southeastern Texas; and a Late Prehistoric burial in Frio
County (Hester et al. 1993) with an associated
Scallorn arrow point. One burial salvaged by James
B. Boyd at Falcon Reservoir had a Caracara point
(Saunders and Hester 1993; Turner and Hester 1993)
deeply embedded in a vertebra; other burials in that
area have also yielded Caracara points as mortuary

ROCK
~es of Red

Yellow

inclusions. We are awaiting radiocarbon dates to
help place this point type, and these burials, in the
appropriate temporal niche within the Late Prehistoric. Stable isotope studies, designed to reveal dietary information, have also been undertaken by
Jeffery Huebner.
Sites with rock art are extremely rare in southern Texas. Overhangs with pictographs are known
from Webb County (e.g., Hester 1986b; see Figure
5), and James B. Boyd has photodocumented several pictograph sites on the Mexican side of the Rio
Grande in the Falcon Reservoir area. A major
petroglyph site known as the Fronton de Piedras
Pintas (Morales 1983) lies about 50 km from the
border near Paras, Nuevo Leon; it has been visited
in recent years by Rose Trevifio (Laredo), who has
extensive photographic records from the site. Other
pictograph sites are known to occur in overhangs or
on bluffs along the Nueces River between Uvalde
and La Pryor (e.g., the Bee Bluff pictograph and
petroglyph site reported by Ray Smith, personal
communication, 1987; records on file at TARL). A
petroglyph site is also reported by Smith east of
Uvalde, just south of the Balcones Escarpment.
At several sites, painted pebbles have been
found. These are thought of as typical of Lower
Pecos rockshelters (Shafer 1986). However, a

ART PANEL

o

~o 2o

,~o

0M

Figure 5. Pictograph Panel at Site 41WB56, Webb County. Note legend regarding colors of the rock art. Drawn by
Kathy B. Roemer (from Hester 1988:Figure 1). Courtesy of Southern Texas Archaeological Association.

Hester ~ The Prehistory of South Texas

433

these data with professional archeologists. This
effort needs to be greatly intensified. Unfortunately, there is the erroneous belief among many
collectors in the region that professionals can
"confiscate" their collections; this is patently untrue, but can restrict documentation tasks. Landowners such as Radcliffe Ki!lam of Laredo have
made collections available for documentation
(Bettis 1994), while some families have donated
major collections for long-term curation and research (e.g., at TARL, the Bromley Cooper and
Dr. Pat Riley collections). This is to be especially encouraged.

CULTURAL-HISTORICAL
FRAMEWORK
The characteristics of the South Texas archeological record, and the comparative lack of
intensive excavations, all contribute to a chronology that remains poorly known. Johnson and
Goode (1994) have recently offered a revised
chronology for the central part of Texas, derived
from more than 70 years of excavations and
0
5crn
recent major research efforts that have yielded
better stratigraphic and radiocarbon ages. UnFigure 6. Painted Pebble from Zavala County. Various views
fortunately, this cannot be done for southern
are shown; painting is in red. Drawing by Richard McReynolds.
Texas, nor can we fine-tune the chronology as
Courtesy of H. Ray Smith.
they have done for Central Texas. What can be
presently offered is a general framework for the
Paleoindian, Archaic, Late Prehistoric, and
Protohistoric periods. Our knowledge of the culture
number have now been documented at sites on the
history is improving, both through field and laboracoastal plain in southern Uvalde and northern Zavala
tory research and by cross-dating artifact types with
Counties (Figure 6; Hester 1977a; Ray Smith,
other areas, and specific examples are given here.
personal communication, 1987; records on file at
However, we still have to rely on the basic chronoTARL). The date(s) of the rock art sites or the
logical divisions provided by Hall et al. (1986) and
painted pebbles is unknown.
by Black (1989).
As the South Texas archeological record vanishes, from natural erosion, reservoir projects, urban expansion, relic-collecting, and hobbyist
Paleoindian
activities, there is a special need to document collections as thoroughly as possible. The members of
It has long been known that fluted points of
the Southern Texas Archaeological Association, esthe Clovis and Folsom types occur in South Texas
pecially C. K. Chandler, William W. Birmingham,
(Hester 1968, 1977b). The presence of Clovis (FigE. H. Schmiedlin, Jimmy L. Mitchell, and others
ure 7) suggests that the earliest occupation begins
(who have documented, for example, the Bromley
around 11,200 years ago.
Cooper collection in a series of papers) are to be
In the case of both of these types, intensified
commended for their efforts. Others, like James B.
collection documentation in South Texas has proBoyd, are recording and documenting sites and arvided much additional information on their distritifacts with great precision, and are openly sharing
bution and their variability in morphology and raw

434

Texas Archeological Society

c

0

5 cm
0

5cm

Figure 7. Clovis Points from Southern Texas: a, Nockenut
Clovis from Wilson County (Kelly 1988); b-b’, unfinished
Clovis point from Atasocosa County (Hester, Barber, and
Headrick 1993); c, Clovis point from Dimmit County
(Turner and Hester 1993). A, drawn by Richard
McReynolds; b, b’, Pam Headrick; c, Kathy Roemer.
Courtesy of Southern Texas Archaeological Association
and Gulf Publishing Co.

Figure 8. Folsom Points from Southern Texas: a, Zapata
County; b, Maverick County; c-d, Webb County; e-f,
Falcon Reservoir area (d-f, unfinished Folsoms abandoned
in manufacture). A-b, drawings by Richard McReynolds;
c-f, drawings by Pare Headrick; a-b, from Chandler and
Kumpe (1994a), courtesy, Southern Texas Archaeological
Association; c-d, Bettis (1994); e-f, courtesy, James B.
Boyd.

material. For example, large Clovis specimens made
of Edwards Plateau chert (see Figure 7a) (translucent brown) have been found at sites in Wilson and
Dimmit counties (Kelly 1988). Another from
Atascosa County provides insight into manufacturing techniques (see Figure 7b-b’; Hester et al. 1993).
One Clovis base was found at a locality on Southern Island on the Mexican side of Falcon Reservoir; reportedly, up to 22 other Paleoindian points
were collected from that site (notes on file with the
author, TARL).
No mammoth kill or butchering sites attributable to Clovis have been found in South Texas,
although the Late Pleistocene fauna and possibly
associated lithics in the deposits of the Berclair
Terrace in Goliad and Bee counties remain an enigma
(Sellards 1940). Mammoth remains are commonly
found as secondary deposits along South Texas
creeks (T. C. Hill, Jr., personal communication, 1971;
Kay Hindes, personal communication), as well as in
the paleochannel of the Palo Blanco River of Kenedy
County (Suhm 1980). Brown (1990) reports the
geomorphological context of elephant remains bur-

ied in gully fill at the interface of the South TexasEdwards Plateau regions north of the San Antonio
airport. However, no artifacts were found in association with the elephant remains.
Folsom artifacts are also widely reported across
the Rio Grande Plain (Figure 8; Chandler and Kumpe
1994a; see also Largent and Waters [ 1990], although
their distribution map is not a wholly accurate representation of the geographical or numerical distribution of Folsom in the area). Numerous brief papers
have appeared in La Tierra documenting specimens
from the region, along the drainage of the Rio Grande
(Chandler and Kumpe 1994b; Cole Moore, personal
communication; notes on file at TARL) and east and
south on the coastal plains (e.g., Chandler and Lopez
1992). Folsom point preforms or failures have been
found in collections in Webb County (Bettis 1994;
Figure 8c-d) and near Falcon Lake (James B. Boyd,
personal communication, 1995; notes on file at
TARL; see Figure 8e-f’). Aside from localities with
two or three Folsom points (Hester 1968), no Folsom
camp or kill sites have been located. The nearest, on
the edge of the Balcones Escarpment in Bexar

Hester ~ The Prehistory of South Texas

County, is Pavo Real (41BX52 [Henderson and
Goode 1991]); Clovis materials are also reported
from this site.
Certainly the most intriguing Paleoindian site
to have been excavated in the region is Berger
Bluff (41GD30) in Goliad County (Brown 1987,
n.d.). Buried more than 8 meters below the surface
along Coleto Creek (and now indundated by Coleto
Creek Reservoir), excavations on a ledge or bench
deposit uncovered a hearth, an in situ chipping area,
cores, two small pits, and an unfinished (or rejected) triangular biface; there were no projectile
point diagnostics. Eight radiocarbon dates were obtained, averaging around 9500 B.P., although both
earlier and later dates were obtained. Associated
with the cultural material was a considerable bone
deposit of small mammals, reptiles, and amphibians. Detailed research by Brown (n.d.) indicates
that these were collected and eaten by human foragers, perhaps by what Brown suggests was a task
group of women and children. The Berger Bluff
fauna, as well as tiny snails obtained by
waterscreening, is fully Holocene in character, but
with some species that are no longer present in the
area today. Three species of snails, now extripated
in the Coleto Creek/southern Texas area, are more
typical of colder waters, or of marshes more typical
of the eastern United States.
Later Paleoindian patterns in southern Texas
are represented by large numbers of projectile points
(Figure 9; Weir 1956; Hester 1977b, 1987). However, typological problems abound in distinguishing
between Plainview (ca. 10,000 B.P.) and Golondrina
(ca. 9000 B.P. [Hester t983]). Clearly, there are
points that would fit within the range of Southern
Plains Plainview points, and many of the Golondrina
forms are quite distinct (Figure 9d-e, but see Figure
10, a cache of Golondrina points from southern
Uvalde County, reflective of variation within the
type, ranging from the finished form to heavily
resharpened ([Hester 1994c:41]). Kelly (1982) provided a statistical approach to distinguishing between the two types, using specimens from South
Texas. In addition, there are many parallel-sided
points that have been called Plainview (see Figure
9a-b) but which are usually smaller and more narrow than those from the type site and related localities. For example, at St. Mary’s Hall in Bexar County,
excavations in 1977 revealed a discrete camp site
and chipping locality with distinctive points. While
they have been called Plainview in several papers

435

(e.g., Hester 1990b), I am now convinced that they
are not of this type. My re-assessment is based on
stratigraphically-recovered points from the WilsonLeonard site in Williamson County, where similar
points appear to date after Golondrina. Anne Kerr
(personal communication, 1995) calls these "St.
Mary’s Hall points." A better picture of the relationships of several Central and South Texas Late
Paleoindian types will be possible upon analysis
and publication of the Wilson-Leonard data.
Another Paleoindian type known from Devil’s
Mouth (Johnson 1964) and Wilson-Leonard
(Michael B. Collins, personal communication, 1995)
is also present in South Texas. This is the Early
Stemmed or "Wilson" type (Turner and Hester
1993). Bettis (1994) reports one specimen from
Webb County.
Extremely common in southern Texas is the
Angostura type (see Figure 9f-g). Recent excavations
in the area of the Applewhite Reservoir in southern
Bexar County have uncovered a buried Angostura
component radiocarbon dated to approximating 9800

b

0

5 cm

Figure 9. Late Paleoindian Points From Southern Texas:
a-a’, b, Plainview (Chandler 1994; Hester 1968); c-e,
Golondrina (Hester 1968); f-g, Angostura (courtesy, H.
Ray Smith); h, Scottsbluff (Chandler and Hindes 1993).
Drawings by Richard McReynolds.

436

Texas Archeological Society

stratified Paleoindian site. However, excavations
by Michael B. Collins and myself in June-July,
1995, indicate that these materials were in a lag
(secondary) deposit.

Early Archaic

Figure 10. Cache of Golondrina Artifacts from
Southern Uvalde County. Courtesy of H. Ray Smith.

B.P. (Thoms and Mandel 1992). This is in line with
dates for Angostura from Wilson-Leonard (M. B.
Collins, personal communication, 1995). Possibly
related to Angostura is the Early Stemmed Lanceolate
form (Turner and Hester 1993) found in some
numbers in Victoria County (Birmingham and Hester
1976), and perhaps in the Late Paleoindian/Early
Archaic cache reported from Loma Sandia (Taylor
and Highley 1995).
Scottsbluff points (see Figure 9h) typical of
the Plains and into eastern Texas (Turner and
Hester 1993), are scattered across southern Texas
(Hester and Hill 1971a; Chandler and Hindes
1993), with a notable concentration in the Victoria
County area. Based on cross-dating with the Plains,
these are thought to date around 8800-8400 B.P.
(Gunnerson 1987).
A typological problem that is present in South
Texas Paleoindian studies involves the so-called
Lerma type (as defined by MacNeish 1958). These
narrow, bipointed specimens may or may not be of
Paleoindian age (Turner and Hester 1993). An unpublished manuscript by the late T. C. Kelly (1989)
remains the best effort to assemble data on the Lerma
form in southern Texas and northeastern Mexico. A
point classified as Lerma was found at the base of a
stratified site on the Nueces River (41ZV263) by
Gibson (1981), but is not chronometrically dated.
The best opportunity in southern Texas to find
the Late Paleoindian forms in context, and to gain
other than typological or distributional data for
them, are the deep sites noted earlier in Victoria
County, especially Johnston-Heller and Willeke.
Work at the River Spur site (41VTl12) in 1993
(Cloud et al. 1994) suggested that this was a

In dealing with the Early Archaic, I draw heavily
from a paper prepared for a conference on the Archaic of southern North America (Hester 1989b).
We are still a long way from having a sufficient
number of excavated sites and applicable radiocarbon dates to develop a detailed description and chronology of this early period in southern Texas.
To summarize the Early Archaic patterns in
the 1989 paper, I offered definitions of two widespread horizons. The first was termed the "Early
Corner Notched Horizon," followed by the "Early
Basal Notched Horizon" (the latter has affinities to
the Calf Creek horizon in Oklahoma and Arkansas
[Wyckoff 1995]). Dating of these horizons parallel
the chronological parameters provided in Central
and lower Pecos Texas for related phenomena (see
papers by Collins and Turpin, this volume). My
goal in offering these two concepts was to emphasize the broad cross-regional distributions of the
index-marker projectile points of these horizons in
the Texas-Mexico borderlands.
In southern Texas, the "Early Corner Notched
Horizon" is most poorly known. It is typified by
corner-notched dart points with recurved or notched
bases. Typologically, these would fit within the
Martindale-Uvalde-Baker-Bandy continuum (Figure
l la-c; see also McReynolds 1993), and to some
specimens of the Gower type (Ricklis and Cox
1991). While points of this horizon are seen in
collections from the region (e.g., Hester and
Whatley 1992), their site distribution is little
understood. In the excavations at Choke Canyon
reservoir, site 41LK51 yielded a Bandy-style point,
along with thin triangular bifaces, and from a
context 20 cm below a radiocarbon assay of 51304450 B.C. At Chaparrosa Ranch, points of this
horizon are on high terraces overlooking Turkey
and Chaparrosa creeks. As noted above, settlement
patterns for the Early Archaic are unknown; perhaps
these peoples operated as small bands, highly mobile
and wide-ranging due to the arid climate inferred
for part of this time frame (McKinney 1981; Story
1985). McGraw and Knepper (1983) in their survey
of the East Chacon area found Guadalupe tools to

Hester ~ The Prehistory of South Texas

e
~

~

5era

Figure 1 I. Artifacts from the "Early Corner Notched Horizon"
in Southern Texas: a, Atascosa County; b-c, Bexar County
(McReynolds 1993); d-e, Guadalupe tools from Choke Canyon
(Hall et al. 1982: Figures 75-76). Drawings of a-c by Richard
McReynolds.

be "water-proximate," while the general Early
Archaic settlement paralleled that of the previously
mentioned Chaparrosa Ranch and the Paleoindian
site distribution in this area.
The "Early Corner Notched" horizon markers
may encompass the bifurcated base points found by
Thorns (1992) at the Richard B eene site (41BX831),
with a radiocarbon date of about 7000 B.P. Interestingly, James Karbula (personal communication,
1995) has found what appear to be identical points
at the Eckols site in Travis County, stratigraphically
below a component with Martindale points (Karbula
1993). It may be that these bifurcated points are a
Central Texas, not a South Texas, form, but this is
just speculation given the meagre data on hand.
From typological cross-dating, the temporal span
of the "Early Corner-Notched Horizon" may be
from ca. 6000-3500 B.C.
Associated with this earliest Archaic horizon
appear to be Guadalupe tools (see Figure 1 ld-e;

437

Hester and Kohnitz 1975; see also Prewitt
1981:78). Alhough found mostly in the San
Antonio-Guadalupe River basins (Black and
McGraw 1985), they also occur along the
Rio Grande, along the middle Nueces drainage (Brown 1985, 1989; Nightengale et al.
1989), and in the Zavala County region
(Highley 1984). Based on radiocarbon dates
for Guadalupe tools along the southern edge
of the Balcones Escarpment, they fall somewhere in the range of 3300-4700 B.C. (e.g.,
Hester 1990a: 1).
The subsequent "Early Basal Notched
Horizon" includes specimens with deep basal
notches, large barbs, and distinctive long stems
(Figure 12a-g). The recognized types include
Bell and Andice of the Calf Creek horizon.
Early Triangular bifaces are probably also
part of this horizon (Hester and Whatley 1992);
some of these are preforms for Bell/Andice,
others may have been used as knives (Black
and McGraw 1985), and yet others bear impact flutes indicative of their use as dart points.
Based on my excavations in Uvalde County
(at the La Jita and Smith sites [Hester 1971;
Hester et al. 1989]), it looks as if the Early
Triangular form may first appear in the "Early
Corner Notched Horizon," and perhaps continue into the later horizon.

The "Early Basal Notched Horizon" extends from the southern Texas coast, across
the Rio Grande Plain, and into northeastern Mexico
east of the Sierra Madre Oriental (Chandler and
Kumpe 1993; James B. Boyd collection; notes on
file at TARL). Fox and Hester (1976) reported
Andice points from 41VT17 in Victoria County,
and Bell/Andice are noted in several papers in La
Tierra as derived from surface contexts in South
Texas (e.g., Hester and Whatley 1992; Chandler
and Kumpe 1993). Ricklis and Cox (1991) report
Bell points from the McKinzie site (41NU221) at
the mouth of the Nueces River; these specimens,
and three unstemmed points, are linked to radiocarbon assays of ca. 3000-3600 B.C. (see Ricklis, this
volume). In general, the "Early Basal Notched Horizon" likely dates in this rough time frame. Other
recognizable traits of this horizon are large unifacial
"Clear Fork" tools (Hester and Kohnitz 1975), as
well as smaller forms (Hall et al. 1982:Figure 79)
and multi-notched "eccentric" Bell/Andice specimens, found as far south as Falcon Reservoir (see

438

Texas Archeological Society
32, the early occupation dated at 3380-3350 B.C.
yielded diagnostics of neither horizon. While there
were several well-defined features, abundant mussel and Rabdotus shell, cores, debitage and faunal
remains, the only "formal" artifacts were three
unstemmed thin biface fragments (Hall et al.
1986:397). The diet appeared to focus on freshwater mussel, Rabdotus snails, turtles, and freshwater
drum (Scott 1982).

Middle Archaic

0

5cm

Figure 12. Artifacts from the "Early Basal Notched
Horizon" in Southern Texas: a-g, points of the Calf Creek
horizon (a-b, Start County; c, McMullen County; d,
41VT6; e, 41ZP83, f, Zapata County; g, 41SR174.
Drawings a-b, e-f from Chandler and Kumpe [1993]; c-d
from Turner and Hester [1993]); h, multi-notched Calf
Creek "eccentric" (Southern Island, Falcon Reservoir
[Hester 1990c]). Drawn by Richard McReynolds, a, b, eg; c-d, Kathy Roemer; h, Pare Headrick. Courtesy
Southern Texas Archaeological Association, and Gulf
Publishing Co., Houston.

Figure 12h; Hester 1990c). In the Falcon Reservoir,
the large Andice/Bell stems are sometimes reworked
into projectile points (Boyd Collection; notes on
file at TARL).
Although Johnson and Goode (1994:5) include
the latter part of this range in their Central Texas
"Middle Archaic," I prefer to follow Hall et al.
(1986) in defining the South Texas Middle Archaic
period with the onset of specific regional cultural
patterns ca. 2500 B.C., emphasizing unstemmed
dart points and smaller bifacial and unifacial beveled tools. Of course, the way in which I have
modeled these two horizons, in defining broad cultura! patterns across several parts of Texas, may be
too simplistic as we learn more about the southern
Texas Early Archaic. For example, at site 41LK31/

Hall et al. (1986) date the Middle Archaic between 2500-400 B.C. As just noted above, this period represents a regional material culture pattern
easily seen in the archeological record. Triangular
dart points, known as Tortugas and Abasolo (Figure
13a-b), dominate the projectile point assemblage.
Some of them may have been used as "knives;"
however, studies of triangular point assemblages
from South Texas by Karbula (1990) and Bettis
(1994) reveal high frequencies of impact fractures
at the tip. Another regionally-specific type is Carrizo
(Turner and Hester 1993), illustrated in Figure 13c.
Utilitarian lithics include smaller unifacial distallybeveled tools (the Dimmit form [Figure 14] of Nunley
and Hester [1966]), in some areas made in high
frequencies from gray quartzite (Hester et al. 1973;
see also Inman et al. 1995). Some distally-beveled
tools are also bifacial. There is much reworking and
resharpening of these tools, which appear to have
been used largely in woodworking tasks (Hester et
al. 1973; see Howard [1973] for experimental data).
Along the Rio Grande between Eagle Pass and Falcon Reservoir, the artifacts are often made on cortex
flakes, with the dorsal side flaked, and the ventral
side remaining as cortex (Chandler 1974). While
Hall et al. (1982:Figure 79) have proposed a sequence of these distally-beveled forms, focusing on
Early vs. Late Archaic (Figure 15), it is likely that
localized examples of these tools, along with extensive resha~ening and other modification (e.g., for
hafting) have left a functional and technological
morass that will require much research to sort out.
One example is the Nueces tool (see Figure 13e-f;
Hester, White, and White 1969; Nightengale et al.
1989; Turner and Hester 1993), which can be lunate
to trapezoidal in outline, largely reflecting the extent of resharpening of the beveled bit.
Middle Archaic sites, especially in the northern part of South Texas (Nunley and Hester 1969),

Hester ~ The Prehistory of South Texas

439

b

5cm
O

5cm

Figure 13. Middle and Late Middle Archaic Artifacts
from Southern Texas: a, Tortugas point; b, Abasolo point;
c, Carrizo point; d, Lange point. A-d, Loma Sandia (Taylor
and Highley 1995); e,f, Nueces tools (Hall et al.
1982:Figure 73).

Figure 14. Distally-beveled Tools from Southern Texas
(from 41DM14 and other Dimmit County sites). These
are unifacial "gouges" of the form termed Dimmit by
Nunley and Hester (1966).

are often identified by the presence of stemmed
points that can be cross-dated with Central Texas
(Pedernales, Lange; see Figure 13d), the lower
Pecos (Langtry), and the central coastal plain
(Morhiss). Assemblages that include Middle Archaic materials (and those of both earlier and later
periods) are published from the middle Nueces
drainage (Ward 1984; Woerner and Highley 1983;
Nightengale et al. 1989), western South Texas (e.g.,
41DM59 [Hester and Whatley 1992]), the Shrew
site (Labadie 1988), and Falcon Lake (Kotter 1980;
Saunders 1985). Many of the tubular sandstone
pipes (Figure 16) found across South Texas may
also date to this era (Hester 1969; Chandler and
Kumpe 1993). A buried and as yet unexplored
Middle Archaic component appears to be present at
41ZV37 (Inman et al. 1995), with one radiocarbon
date of !831-1880 B.C. (Tx8112-calibrated); a
unifacial distally-beveled tool (Clear Fork uniface)
was associated with this component.
Settlement patterns in the Choke Canyon and
Chaparrosa study areas, along with those at East

Chacon (McGraw and Knepper 1983) suggest that
Middle Archaic open camp sites are to be found
along present or former stream channels. In later
Middle Archaic times, sites are present on floodplains, low terraces, and natural levees of present
stream courses. Middle and Late Archaic sites in
Starr County have been characterized by Nunley
and Hester (1975:13) as "gallery" (on terraces or
arroyo banks) and "bower" (in hilly areas overlooking the arroyos and their tributaries).
Dietary information is meagre, due to poor
faunal preservation. However, data from Choke
Canyon (e.g., Scott 1982), recovered from wood
species identification of charcoal from well-constructed hearths, suggest use of the beans and nuts
of mesquite, acacia, oak, and hackberry. Hall et al.
(1986) surmise that it is during this time that plant
resources drew heavy emphasis, as reflected by an
increase in formal hearths, earth ovens, and burned
rock accumulations
Disposal of the dead in the Middle Archaic,
especially late in this period (ca. 600-800 B.C.),

440

Texas Archeological Society

41 LK 6"7

1520" 9O BC

LATE

41LK 201

Figure 15. Sequence of Distally-beveled Tools from Choke
Canyon Reservoir (from Hall et al. 1982:Figure 79). Courtesy,
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio.

apparently involved cemeteries. Loma Sandia stands
out as the best known example (Taylor and Highley
1995), with 205 burials, and more than 400 features
documented at the site, many of these including
clusters of grave goods found with individual burials
(Figure 17). Contents of these clusters, often tightly
packed as if in a net, hide bag, or basket, included
triangular points (Tortugas, though with larger and
smaller forms, and Abasolo), Lange, Morhiss, and
Pedernales points, medium sized "gouges" (mostly
unifacial distally-beveled tools), flakes, cores,
fragments of marine shell (including conch), tabular
pieces of sandstone (it seems like just about
everyone had to be buried with small pieces of
unmodified sandstone), and tubular sandstone pipes
(see Hester 1980:116). In contrast to the dates for

Figure 16. Tubular Stone Pipes from Southern Texas:
a, stone pipe with bone smoking tube (Loma Sandia,
Feature 226A [Taylor and Highley 1995]); b, Zapata
County; c, Rio Salado, Tamaulipas (Falcon Lake area
[Chandler and Kumpe 1994b]; drawn by Richard
McReynolds.
Courtesy,
Southern
Texas
Archaeological Association, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, and Texas Department of
Transportation.

Tortugas points at this site, a single assay from
41ME34 puts a Tortugas-like point at 3362-3398
B.C. (calibrated); Hester (1990a:1) does not
consider it to be Early Triangular, although the
dates are more in line with that form.
However, there are apparently other cemeteries in the region, based on as-yet unpublished data
from Falcon Reservoir. The Southern Island site
(sites?), on the Mexican side of the river, has yielded
many burials with numerous grave goods. These
include tubular stone pipes and triangular dart points
(as at Loma Sandia), along with Oliva shells, and
bone beads.

Hester ~ The Prehistory of South Texas

441

e

d

0

Figure 17. Artifacts from Mortuary Context at Loma
Sandia (41LK28), Feature l l-D (Taylor and Highley
1995:Figure 31): left to right, triangular biface; Tortugas
points; distally-beveled tool. Courtesy, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory and Texas
Department of Transportation.

Late Archaic
The Late Archaic is better known, dating from
400 B.C. to around A.D. 600/700. Several excavated
components have been published or at least
described in preliminary fashion. For example, at
41ZV10 in western South Texas, Hester (1978a)
found Shumla, Ensor (Figure 18a), Marcos, and
Montell points, stratigraphically below Late
Prehistoric occupations. Interestingly, the Marcos
and Shumla points were in deposits below those
containing Ensor and Montell. The Shumla type,
best known from the Lower Pecos, is also a
widespread marker of the Late Archaic in southern
Texas. A very high percentage of the South Texas
specimens are made of heat-treated chert (Hester
and Collins 1974). Olmos bifaces, small triangular
gouge-like tools with specialized resharpening
techniques, apparently date mainly to the Late

5 cm

Figure 18. Late Archaic Artifacts from Southern Texas:
a, Ensor; b, Desmuke; c, Matamoros (a-c, Loma Sandia
[Taylor and Highley 1995]); d-h, Olmos bifaces (Duval
County [from Turner and Hester (1993]), i, corner tang
biface; j, Marcos point (i-j, Haiduk site [Mitchell et al.
1984]; drawn by Richard McReynolds). Courtesy, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas Department
of Transportation, Southern Texas Archaeological
Association, and Gulf Publishing Co., Houston.

Archaic although they may have continued to be
used in Late Prehistoric times (see Figure 18d-h
[Shafer and Hester 1971]).
At Choke Canyon, 44 sites yielded diagnostics
of the Late Archaic, including Ensor, Frio, Ellis,
Fairland, and Marcos points. Sites have extensive
deposits of fire-cracked rock, both hearths and
earth ovens (these continue from the latter part of
the Middle Archaic), and grinding implements
(manos, metates) are commonly found. These may
reflect further intensification of the exploitation of
mesquite and acacia beans (as welt as other plant
resources) after these species appeared (and
spread?) during the Middle Archaic. However, at
site 4tLK67, Feature 8 was found, a large
accumulation of fire-cracked rock (55 kg), with
considerable quantitities of mussel shell, and
Brown et al. (1982) note that "the cooking of
mussels may have been at least one of the

442

Texas Archeological Society

functions" (Feature 8 was radiocarbon dated at 400
B.C.). At Choke Canyon, Middle and Late Archaic
faunal remains suggest exploitation of small
animals (rodents, rabbits, turtles, fish, lizards, and
snakes) and deer. Rabdotus snails and mussel shells
are common, reflecting their collection as food
sources.
Late Archaic camp sites are almost always
located adjacent to present stream channels or adjacent sloughs (e.g., Kelly 1979; Highley 1986;
McGraw and Knepper 1983; Warren 1986). There
is clear evidence of lithic procurement sites as very
common occurrences in Late and Middle Archaic
times on high terraces and ridges containing Rio
Grande gravels (Kelly 1979; Warren 1986) or
Uvalde gravels (Hester 1975a; Davis 1992). There
is no doubt that these same chert resources were
also used in Paleoindian and Early Archaic times
(e.g., Berger and Associates 1989). In areas where
these outcrops did not occur (e.g., McGraw
1979:24), stream pebbles, gravels, silicified wood,
and quartzite were exploited.
Elsewhere in southern Texas, especially in
Webb and La Salle counties, Desmuke, Matamoros,
and Catan points appear to be markers of the Late
Archaic (see Figure 18b-c), along with Olmos tools.
I suspect that we will eventually find (as the data
suggest from 41ZV 10) that the Late Archaic can be
broken into two parts, or that it would be wise to
use the concept of a "terminal Archaic" for sites
with Ensor, Frio, Catan, and Matamoros points in
particular. This is because they often show up in
the early Late Prehistoric sites in the region (cf.
Creel et al. 1979).
Cemeteries may have continued to be used in
this period, as they did on the Texas coastal bend
(e.g., the Oso cemetery, 41NU2) and in Bexar
County (41BX1; Lukowski 1987). However,
isolated burials with grave goods provide other
insights into burial patterns. On the lower Nueces,
in the area of present Lake Corpus Christi, a single
burial associated with Ensor points was found
(Hester 1989c). In Karnes County, the Rudy
Haiduk site burial, with corner-tang bifaces,
Marcos points (see Figure 18i-j), and other Late
Archaic indicators has been published (Mitchell et
al. 1984), and another, with an Ensor point in the
chest area, was reported by Huebner et al. (1995).
A burial found by McGraw (1983) in a Holocene
Rio Grande terrace south of Laredo may also date
to this period. The disturbed burials at the Shrew

site are likely Late Archaic (Labadie [1988:110]
places Burial 1, with the associated large triangular,
edge-polished biface [Figure 19a], in the "latter
part of the Archaic").

0

5 cm

Figure 19. Large Triangular Bifaces from Southern Texas:
a, 41WN73, Shrew Site (Labadie 1988); b, 41ATlll
(Hester and Barber 1990). Courtesy, Texas Department
of Transportation and Southern Texas Archaeological
Association.

There may have been increased trade with Central Texas in the Late Archaic. Large, smallstemmed bifaces (Figure 20a-b; Hester and Green
1972) are found on an occasional basis, including a
specimen from Frio County, and one with a cache
of 50 bifaces (Figure 20c-g), many made of Edwards
chert (Michael B. Collins, personal communication, 1995), found with a burial at Falcon Reservoir
in late 1994. Large triangular bifaces (see Figure
19b) of Edwards chert are found in several areas of
South Texas (e.g., the Riley cache [Figure 21];
Miller 1993; see also Hester and Barber 1990).

Late Prehistoric
The Late Prehistoric in southern Texas has
been extensively studied and published on (see

Hester ~ The Prehistory of South Texas

443

Matamoros, Catan, and Zavala often occur in
what are otherwise Late Prehistoric contexts,
some even in very late contexts. These are
smal! points and surely could have been used
with the bow and arrow. Whether they were
"recycled" by Late Prehistoric hunters, or
were made and used as part of the bow and
arrow system is hard to tell (evidence for the
latter comes from 41LK106 [Creel et al.
1979]).
If we use the Central Texas sequence as
a
b
an analogy, we can argue that Edwards and
Scal!orn points (Figure 22a-c) represent the
first
diagnostics of the Late Prehistoric
0
5crn
period. At Blue Bayou (41VT94), Huebner
and Comuzzie (1992) report a Scallorn point
in a Late Prehistoric cemetery radiocarbondated in the 6th century A.D. Another
Scallorn point (Figure 22c) was found with
a burial in Frio County (Hester et al. 1993).
Scallorn points, and arrow points resembling
Edwards (Turner and Hester 1993), are
widespread in South Texas, but we have so
little on their cultural context that it is
unclear as to their affinity with Central
c
d
Texas. This is further complicated by their
apparent co-occurrence with Perdiz points at
sites like 41ZV155 (Tortuga Flat [Inman
n.d.]), and with pottery, straight-stemmed
arrow points, and late radiocarbon dates at
41MC222 (Hall et a!. 1986). A distinctive
artifact that does appear at this time is the
arrow shaft straightener (Figure 22d), made
of limestone, and often broken from repeated
reheating in the arrow-straightening process
(Turner and Hester 1993).
The introduction of pottery is another
g
f
thorny issue. Once it was thought that boneFigure 20. Selected Specimens from Cache at Falcon Lake: a,
tempered pottery was introduced by the
stemmed biface from Falcon Lake cache; b, specimen from
Spanish missionaries (Suhm et al. 1954).
San Saba County (Hester and Green 1972): compare with a; cSubsequently, Hester and Hill (1971b) cong, selected triangular bifaces from cache (c-d, Rio Grande
clusively demonstrated the prehistoric origravels; a, e-g, Edwards chert). Courtesy of Cynthia Scott and
gins of this pottery (see also Black !982). It
James B. Boyd.
has been assumed that it was largely introduced via the Toyah horizon (Black 1986).
Black 1986, 1989; Highley 1986 for summaries).
However, at 41LK106 (Creel et al. 1979), there is
It shares cultural patterns with Central Texas to a
bone-tempered pottery associated with Matamoros
certain extent, especially in the occurrence of the
points at a hearth in Unit B. Though not directly
Toyah horizon in the region (Black 1986). The
radiocarbon dated, other dates for the Late Prehisearlier parts of the Late Prehistoric are less clear.
toric at 41LK106 are comparatively early, ca. A.D.
For example, "dart points" such as Ensor,
860-1250.

444

Texas Archeological Society

0

Figure 21. Selected Specimens from the Riley Cache, Atascosa
County, Southern Texas (see Miller 1993). All specimens are
of Edwards chert.

Further uncertainties about Late Prehistoric internal
chronology are seen along the Rio Grande below Laredo.
Here, Starr points are common, but undated. They
apparently have several variants about which little is
known. Another type, Caracara (Figure 23; Saunders
and Hester 1993; see also Fox 1979:Figure 17), is also
undated but recent burials with associated Caracara
points found at Falcon Reservoir may yield radiocarbon
assays. Toyah points are also found with some frequency
in that area, and are occasionally seen at other South
Texas sites. These are assumed to date very late in the
Late Prehistoric period, but we know nothing about
what cultural pattern they might represent.
Across southern Texas, including portions of the
coastal bend (Ricklis, this volume), the best documented
Late Prehistoric pattern is the Toyah horizon (Black
1986), dating between A.D. 1250/1300 to 1600/1650.
Several Toyah open camp sites have been excavated,
including: Hinojosa (41JWS; Black 1986), 41LK201
(Highley 1986), 41MEt9 (Hester and Kelly 1976), and
the material culture reported from surface contexts at
Berclair (41GD4; Hester and Parker 1970). Cultural
traits include Perdiz points (Figure 24), small end scrap-

5cm

Figure 22. Late Prehistoric Artifacts from
Southern Texas: a, Edwards; b, Scallorn (a-b,
Loma Sandia [Taylor and Highley 1995]); c,
Scallorn point associated with a burial in Frio
County (Hester et al. 1993; drawn by Pam
Headrick); d, arrow shaft straightener from
Briscoe Ranch, Dimmit County (top and side
views; courtesy Dr. Dorothy M. Brown [Hester
and Brown
1988]). Courtesy, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory; Texas
Department of Transportation; and the Southern
Texas Archaeological Association.

ers (sometimes made on blades), flake
knives (again, some made on blades), beveled knives (Figure 25; see Brown et al.
1982) bone-tempered (Leon Plain) pottery
(Figure 26), perforators made on flakes, ceramic figurines, and perhaps pipes, marine
shell and freshwater mussel shell ornaments, tubular bird bone beads, and spatulate objects made on bison bone fragments
(see Figure 24j).
Faunal remains are well preserved at
these sites, with up to 45 taxa represented.
While there is abundant bison bone, white-

Hester m The Prehistory of South Texas

445

b

0

5 cm

Figure 23. Caracara Points from the Falcon Lake
Vicinity (from Saunders and Hester 1993 and Turner
and Hester 1993) Drawings by Kathy Roemer.
Courtesy of the Southern Texas Archaeological
Association, and Gulf Publishing Co., Houston.

tail deer may have been more extensively hunted,
along with pronghorn and a variety of smaller
game. Processing areas and bone discard locales
are noted at 41LK20! and 41JW8. Turtles, freshwater mussels, and land snails continue to be a part
of the diet.
Toyah sites are located along present stream
channels or nearby sloughs (e.g., 4ILK201), sometimes buried just below the surface of natural levees
paralleling the streams. This is a pattern for other
Late Prehistoric sites in much of southern Texas
(e.g., Mariposa [Montgomery 1978] and in the East
Chacon study area [McGraw and Knepper 1983]).
Black (t986, 1989) reasons that the Toyah
archeological record represents either population

Figure 24. Artifacts of the Toyah Horizon from
Southern Texas: a-b, Perdiz points; c-e, end
scrapers; f, beveled knife; g, perforator made on
flake; h, i, flake-blade knives; j, bone spatulate
object (a-c, h-i from 41GD4 [Hester and Parker
1970]; d, 41JW8 [Turner and Hester 1993]; e-g,
41LK201 [Highley 1986]; j, 41VT66 [Huebner
1987]). Courtesy, Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, and Southern Texas Archaeological
Association.

C. 2--BEVEL FORM

D, EXHAUSTED
81FACE

Figure 25. Beveled Knife Forms in Southern Texas (from Brown et al. 1982:Figure 22). Drawn by Kenneth M. Brown.
Courtesy, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

446

Texas Archeological Society

/+
I

\
\
\
I

!
!
I
\
\

!
I

c

4cm

Figure 26. Pottery from Southern Texas: a, olla with fugitive red filming; b, bottle; c, olla
(41LK201 [Highley 1986:Figure 38a-b and Figure 40]). Courtesy, Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

movement or the cultural diffusion of traits (perhaps
largely associated with bison hunting practices).
He favors the latter idea (see also Hester 1975b),
and thus proposes the use of the term "horizon"
when referring to Toyah manifestations.
Supportive of Black’s argument is the presence of selected Toyah traits in contemporary Late
Prehistoric sites in parts of South Texas. For example, in the Chaparrosa Ranch area, along
Tortugas Creek in Zavala County, and south into
Webb, Zapata, and other counties, sites often yield
Perdiz points, bone-tempered pottery, beveled
knives, or some combination of Toyah traits (e.g.
41ZV155 [Inman n.d.]). However, the whole assemblage is not present at South Texas sites, and
often, bison is absent (or poorly represented) in the
faunal list (e.g., 41ZV10 [Hester 1978a]).
There are also sites like 41MC222 (Skillet
Mountain #4 [Hall et al. 1986]) in the Choke Canyon area that have produced bison (indeed, it appears to be a bison-butchering station), and
bone-tempered pottery, but stemmed arrow points
that are not Perdiz, as well as the absence of beveled knives, end scrapers, etc. Scallorn and Edwards
points are also present.
I suspect that native peoples of Late Prehistoric times had adopted all or some of the traits of

the Central Texas Toyah, or even that Central Texas
hunting parties ventured onto the coastal plain (cf.
Hester and Parker 1970). The uneven diffusion of
Toyah traits across the region indicates that they
should be considered horizon-markers, and not part
of a "phase" (Johnson 1987).
The latter part of the Late Prehistoric, which
includes Toyah, also has evidence of South Texas
connections to a north-south Plains trade network.
Recognizable remnants of such trade are the bits of
Idaho (Malad) obsidian that show up in southern
Texas at this time (Hester et al. 1991).
Equally intriguing as a problem of cultural
interaction is the archeological record in the Rio
Grande delta during the Late Prehistoric (Hester
1969, 1988, 1994b). Numerous sites and their assemblages have been recorded and studied by A.
E. Anderson (1932), Richard S. MacNeish (1958),
and others (Prewitt 1974; Hester 1978b, 1994b).
This cultural pattern, known as the Brownsville
Complex (see Ricklis, this volume) is noted for
manufacture of great numbers of shell ornaments
(Figure 27a-c, g). Numerous artifacts of bone were
also made (Figure 27d-f, h-j). The Brownsville
Complex groups utilized clay dunes for camp sites
and for cemeteries (e.g., Hester et al. 1969; Prewitt
1974). They were hunters (using Cameron and

Hester ~ The Prehistory of South Texas

447

MacNeish’s (1958) survey of Tamaulipas,
along the coastal plain south of Brownsville,
he revisited some ofAnderson’s sites and
found more Huastecan pottery.
In addition to the Mesoamerican ceramics, Anderson also collected several bits of
obsidian and some pieces of jadeite and
a
b
c
serpentine. These, too, were items of material culture exotic to the lower Rio Grande
Delta. Later studies, such as excavation of
the Floyd Morris cemetery site in Cameron
County (Collins et al. 1969), uncovered a
large tubular jadeite bead (see Figure 27n)
with Brownsville Complex materials. Surveys by R. J. Mallouf yielded two additional obsidian flakes in Willacy County
(41WY40), and Day (1981) recovered several obsidian flakes from 41WY72.
Where did these artifacts originate and
how did they get to the Rio Grande delta?
The ceramics include ollas, bowls, and
many fragments of vessels and sherds.
Some have black-on-white decoration,
while others are polychrome. These are
clearly from the Huasteca, and date to Periigure 27. Selected Artifacts of the Brownsville Complex.
ods V and VI of Ekholm’s (1944) sequence.
Specimens from the Floyd Morris and Ayala sites in Cameron
This is the Early and Late Postclassic, from
and Hidalgo counties (Collins et al. 1969; Hester 1969): a-c,
ca. A.D. 1000-1520 (Willey 1966:90). In
Oliva shell tinkler and beads; d-f, carved bone pendant; g, conch
terms of context, they come from at least
shell pendant (length is 16.4 cm); h-j, tubular bone beads; k, diskt6 sites. Most of the complete vessels ocshaped stone bead; l-m, triangular bifaces; n, jadeite bead from
Mexican source. From Hester (1980:Figure 4.10).
curred with burials, although Anderson and
MacNeish both collected Huastecan sherds
from delta sites with no apparent burial asStarr points [Turner and Hester 1993]), gatherers
sociations. One of the ollas came from a site known
and fishers, but we know little else about them
as Tanque Salado (Figure 28), likely associated
(Kibler [1994:62] suggests they were "logistical
with a female burial. On it is a motif almost identicollectors;" see also Ricklis [1990]).
cal to one illustrated on a Huastecan vessel in
Anderson, early in his research, also noted the
Ekholm (1944:Figure 131). Another o!la was found
occasional discovery of artifacts from what he
with a child’s burial (Cayo Atascoso clay dune site)
termed the "Huaxtec" (notes on file at TARL). In
in 1928 in Cameron County. Three other vessels,
1917, he recorded a conch whorl ornament with an
all from the Tamaulipan side of the delta, were with
engraved human face that was clearly not locally
or near burials; they included a Huastecan bowl
made. He also found several large pottery vessels,
and substantial portions of two ollas from the Loma
or portions thereof, and knew enough about Mexide la Pesca and La Loma Atravasada sites.
can cultures to link these to the "Huaxtec." These
The polychromes, described as Tancol Polyidentifications were confirmed and the vessels parchrome by Ekholm (1944:433), and the Huasteca
tially illustrated by Mason (1935; Hester 1988:3).
Black-on-White, are probably all from Period VI,
Ekholm (1944) published what is still the definitive
dated between A.D. 1200-1520. However, a corrustudy of archeology in the Huasteca region, and he
gated sherd may date to the Las Flores phase, or
also noted the presence of vessels from this
Period V, the Early Postclassic (ca. A.D. 1000Mesoamerican culture in the Rio Grande delta. In
1200, again based on Ekholm’s study (1944:395).

448

Texas Archeological Society

a

b
Figure 28. Comparisons of Design Elements on
Huastecan Pottery and Vessel Found in the
Brownsville Complex: a, portion of a design from an
olla found at Tanque Salado (A. E. Anderson
Collection); b, design element from a Huastecan
vessel reported by Ekholm (1944:Figure 131).

The geologic sources of several obsidian flakes
from the delta have been pinned down with precision, with the techniques of nuclear chemistry used
by the Texas Obsidian Project (Figure 29; Hester et
al. 1991). For example, a tiny flake of black opaque
obsidian found by Anderson in Cameron County is
linked to the Zacualtipan source in the state of
Hidalgo. Seven obsidian flakes from 41WY72 are
all of green obsidian (Day 1981). Visually, these
appeared to be from the Pachuca, or Cerro de las
Navajas source, the most famous in ancient Mexico.
X-ray fluorescene analysis confirmed this (Kibler
1994:16). Finally, two flakes found by Mallouf at
41WY40, have also been identified as to source,
although when we first analyzed them in the late
1970s, their source was unknown. Recently, however, David O. Brown of Austin, provided obsidian
samples from a source known as Ojos Zarcos in
Queretaro state not far from Guanajuato. Colleagues
at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, used precise

x-ray fluorescence analysis (PXRF [Giauque et al.
1993]), and convincingly linked it to the 41WY40
specimens.
The jadeite and serpentine artifacts found in
the delta area include a tiny celt-like specimen and
a piece of worked serpentine. There is also the tubular bead noted earlier from the Floyd Morris site
in Cameron County, along with what Anderson
described as a spherical or jade(ite) bead no longer
available for study. The geologic sources of these
are unknown. They would have to come from beyond the Huasteca, perhaps in Oaxaca or any number of other areas where jadeite and serpentine are
known in central and southern Mexico. What is
important here is their occurrence; though they are
not true jade, they are "green stone" of the sort very
important in Mesoamerican cultures.
What processes might have been involved in
trade or contact between the Brownsville Complex
and ancient Mesoamerica? First of all, it is safe to
say that the main conduit was the Huastecan culture, the northern edge of which is about 500 km
down the Gulf coast from the delta (Figure 29).
During the Early Postclassic, the Huasteca maintained trade relations with the Toltec empire. Late
Postclassic Huastecan culture was part of the Aztec
empire amd paid tribute to them (Hosler and
Stresser-Pean 1992). Clearly, then, the region was
closely linked with central Mexico. In the Late
Postclassic, it is equally clear that the well-known
Aztec traders, known as the pochteca, interacted
with the Huastecs. Indeed, it is said that the markets of the Huasteca competed with those of Aztec
Tenochtitlan (Fagan 1984:66). Throughout the
Postclassic the Huastec merchants could have obtained obsidian and jade through Toltec or Aztec
trade networks.
But how and why did these Huastecan commodities reach the Brownsville Complex? There
are a series of frontier Mesoamerican villages in
the Sierra de Tamaulipas dug by MacNeish (1958)
and Stresser-Pean (1977). At first glance, they look
to be likely intermediaries. MacNeish (1958) notes
Huastecan Period VI "trade ware" in late sites in
the Sierra de Tamaulipas, and Stresser-Pean’s
(1977) study of the site of San Antonio Nogalar in
the southern Sierra de Tamaulipas also illustrates
late Huastecan ceramics.
There is also the broad flat coastal plain east
of the Sierra de Tamaulipas that could have been
traversed by Huastec merchants, or perhaps travel

Hester ~ The Prehistory of South Texas

449

Figure 29. Map Showing Location of Geologic Sources of Obsidian From Brownsville Complex
Sites (from Hester 1994b:Figure 2). Courtesy, Southern Texas Archaeological Association.

was by boat along the coast. MacNeish (1947)
found what he termed Huastecan campsites north
of the Rio Soto la Marina and near the Laguna
Madre, only 250 km south of the Rio Grande. What
drew the Huastecans north to the delta? I believe it
was the shell ornament production of the
Brownsville Complex. We cannot yet resolve the
"chicken-or-the egg" dilemma of which came
first--the shell beads or the Huastecs? Doubtless
the hunters and gatherers making the prodigious
numbers of shell ornaments were after more than a
few pots, obsidian flakes, and poor quality jadeite!
There were surely other commodities that have not
been preserved. And, were the Huastecs only interested in the shell beads for themselves?
Brownsville-style Oliva tinklers occur among the
Huasteca (Ekholm 1944), are depicted on Huasteca
stone sculpture, and MacNeish (1947) states that

Brownsville Complex shell ornaments are common
in Huasteca sites. But are these from the delta or
made by the Huastecs themselves from Gulf coast
shell in their region? We cannot answer this question with the paucity of modern excavation data
from the Huasteca or the Rio Grande delta. It is
interesting to note that one commodity specially
favored by the Aztecs for their Tenochtitlan markets were marine shells and marine shell ornaments, perhaps largely supplied through Huastec
tribute.

Protohistoric
Adkins and Adkins (!982:242) define
"protohistory" as "the transition period between the
prehistoric and historic periods denoting a phase
for which few written records are available, and for

450

Texas Archeological Society

which most evidence is derived from archaeology."
In the archeology of the Plains, the Protohistoric
concept is often used (e.g., Baugh 1986). It includes sites up to ca. 1750 at which Southwestern
Indian and some European trade goods appear, but
recognizes that Euro-american explorers and settlers had not yet entered the area in sufficient numbers to have "impacted the economy of the Southern
Plains peoples" (Baugh 1986:183). This is exactly
what we have in South Texas in the 16th and 17th
centuries, before the Spanish explorers and mission
system "impacted the economy" of the Late Prehistoric groups.
There are a number of sites that fall into this
era. Especially well known are several in Zavala
County (Hester and Hill 1975) with radiocarbon
dates in this time frame. Only 60 km to the west,
missions were established at what is now Guerrero,
Coahuila, in the early 18th century (Eaton 1981),
drawing their neophytes in part from this very area.
Thus, in South Texas, the Protohistoric period
seems an apt term for Native American sites dating after Cabeza de Vaca’s unfortunate shipwreck,
and the even more unfortunate arrival of Spaniards
in the 1600s. These initial entries had no lasting
effect on the native groups (unless it was the initial introduction of disease, so rampant in the 18th
century), and left few written records about them.
Strictly speaking, the native cultures at this time are
neither Late Prehistoric nor Historic, and thus despite the views of some colleagues (McGraw et al.
1991:116, 118; Hindes 1995), I think the
Protohistoric is a cultural-historical concept; absolute dates are not significant, but rather it is the
potential to address important issues of culture process that is important about this period. Once we
learn more about this critical time frame, we can
talk with more clarity about the continuity, or lack
thereof, of native culture into the mission setting
(Hester 1989d). For example, given the long tradition of making bone-tempered pottery in South
Texas, extending back to A.D. 800-1000, I think it
is confusing to refer to the mission-era bone-tempered material as "Goliad," unless it has designs or
motifs that are definitely of mission origin. Clearly,
the Toyah ceramic traditions were still in place
south of San Antonio and towards the coast. Such
pottery seems to have disappeared, however, at the
Protohistoric sites in the Chaparrosa Ranch area,
perhaps one reason no bone-tempered ware is
present in the Guerrero missions.

CONCLUDING REMARKS
This paper has attempted to summarize the
present status of research in South Texas prehistory. There are numerous reports in the CRM literature that I have doubtless missed, and I apologize to
their authors for these inadvertent exclusions. Many,
however, contain either negative evidence or limited information, and I simply did not have room,
within the scope of this paper, to include these
results.
The cultural-historical emphasis of much of
this paper provides the only logical way that we
have to organize the available archeological data.
As noted on several occasions, we have few large
projects on which to draw for discussions of settlement, subsistence, and behavioral change (e.g., Hall
et al. 1986; Fox et al. 1974). Other sets of archeological data, such as those from Chaparrosa Ranch,
have been presented in preliminary summaries
(Hester 1978a), but have still not been analyzed in
a complete and comprehensive manner.
An effort was made in the late 1980s to use a
different approach to the synthesis of archeological
information from Central, lower Pecos, and southern Texas (Hester et al. 1989). The Southwest Division Corps of Engineers, working with the Arkansas
Archeological Survey, commissioned overviews of
the major parts of the Southwest and Southern
Plains. The concept of"adaptation types" (Fitzhugh
1975) was employed (Hester 1989e), and while
there were problems with this approach, I think
some useful new viewpoints were obtained.
For example, the "specialized hunter" adaptation type reflected the focus (we assume) of Clovis
and Folsom as well as those of the Toyah horizon
at the other end of the time spectrum. "Holocene
hunters and foragers" encompassed the cultural patterns of South Texas peoples from Late Paleoindian
times up through the Late Holocene, including the
early Late Prehistoric and the Protohistoric. Lumping the archeological phenomena of southern Texas
into these broad groups does have a certain appeal!
However, to look at issues like climate change,
shifts in resource focus, and the spread of horizons
(or ethnic groups/phases), we still must press on
with obtaining the empirical data so badly needed
for future progress in understanding the ancient
cultures of this region. We do not have enough
substantive information to enter even a simple debate over whether these peoples were "collectors"

Hester ~ The Prehistory of South Texas
or "foragers" (cf. Bettinger 1991; see also Bousman
et al. 1990). Using the geoarcheological approach
has much potential for understanding site formation processes. Improved data recovery methods,
such as fine-mesh water-screening and flotation,
may lead to better samples of botanical remains (as
we are now learning by processing old soil samples
from Central Texas burned rock middens; Stephen
L. Black, personal communication, 1995). Longterm microwear research of lithic tools, with experimental components, is vital; casual observations
and ruminations about edge-beveling and function
are no longer sufficient to study the use and curation
of tools. Ethnohistoric research pioneered by T. N.
Campbell needs to be continued through careful
scholarship. Yet with this, and more, in the final
appraisal, we need more well excavated, stratified
sites, and more chronometfic dates for associated
cultural and ecological remains.

451

Bettis, A. C., Jr.
1994 Chipped Stone Tools from the Killam Ranch, Webb
County, Texas. Manuscript on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Birmingham, W. W. and T. R. Hester
1976

Late Pleistocene Archaeological Remains from the
Johnston-Heller Site, Texas Coastal Plain. In Papers on Paleo-Indian Archaeology in Texas, 1, edited by T. R. Hester, pp. 15-33. Special Report 3.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Black,
1982

Prehistoric Ceramic Artifacts. In A rchaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir, South
Texas: The Phase I Findings, by G. D. Hail, S. L.
Black, and C. Graves, pp. 390-452. Choke Canyon
Series 5. Center for Archaeo!ogical Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

1986

The Clemente and Herminia Hinojosa Site, 41JW 8:
A Toyah Horizon Campsite in Southern Texas. Special Report 18. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio.

1989

REFERENCES CITED

South Texas Plains. In From the Gulf to the Rio
Grande: Human Adapation in Central, South and
Lower Pecos Texas, by T. R. Hester, S. L. Black, D.

Adkins, L. and R. A. Adkins

G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. Reinhard, and

1982

L. C. Bement, pp. 39-62. Research Series No. 33.

A Thesaurus of British Archaeology. David and

Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Charles, London.
1995
Almaraz, F. D., Jr.
1989

Archaeological and Ethnohistoric Background. In
Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia

The San Antonio Missions and Their System of Land

Site (41LK28), A Prehistoric Cemetery. and Camp-

Tenure. University of Texas Press, Austin.

site in Live Oak County, Texas, by A. J. Taylor and
C. L. Highley, pp. 31-45. Studies in Archeology 20.

Anderson, A. E.
1932 Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 4:29-31.

Black, S. L. and A. J. McGraw
1985

Baugh, T. G.
1986

The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change
and Continuity Within the Upper Salado Creek Wa-

Cultural History and Protohistoric Societies in the

tershed, South-Central Texas. Archaeological Sur-

Southern Plains. In Current Trends in Southern

vey Report 100. Center for Archaeological Research,

Plains Archaeology, edited by T. G. Baugh, pp.

The University of Texas at San Antonio.

167-187. Memoir 21, Plahzs Anthropologist 31 (114),
Part 2.
Berger, L. and Associates, Inc.
1989

Phase 1 Archaeological Survey, Federal Correctional Institution Site, Three Rivers, Live Oak
County, Texas. Louis Berger and Associates, Inc.,

Bousman, C. B., S. A. Tomka, and G. L. Bailey
1990 Prehistoric Archeology and Paleoenvironments in
Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, South Texas: Results of the Phase H Test Excavations. Report of
Investigations No. 76. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.

East Orange, New Jersey.

Bettinger, R. L.
1991 Hunter-Gatherers: Archaeological and Evolutionary Theory. Plenum Press, New York.

Brown, D. O.
1983

The Berger Bluff Site (41GD3OA): Excavations in
the Upper Deposit, 1979. Archaeological Survey
Report 115. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio.

452

Texas Archeological Society

Brown, K. M.
1985 Three Caches of Guadalupe Tools from South Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56:75125.
1989

The Bingaman Cache of Stone Tools from Webb
County. La Tierra 16(3):8-28.

1990

Depositional Context of the San Antonio Airport
Proboscidean Site. Manuscript on file with the
author.

n.d.

Berger Bluff. In The New Handbook of Texas. Texas
State Historical Association, Austin, in press.

Brown, K. M., D. R. Potter, G. D. Hall, and S. L. Black
1982 Excavations at 41LK67, A Prehistoric Site in the
Choke Canyon Reservoir, South Texas. Choke Canyon Series 7. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Brune, G.
1981 Springs of Texas, Volume 1. Branch-Smith, Inc.,
Fort Worth.

Chandler, C. K. and D. Kumpe (Continued)
1994a Folsom Points from Deep South and Southwest
Texas. La Tierra 21(3):6-9.
1994b Tubular Stone Pipes from the Lower Rio Grande
Valley. La Tierra 21(3): 14-21.
Chandler, C. K. and L. Lopez
1992

A Quarry Site in Western Duval County. La Tierra
19(2):12-13.

Cloud, W. A., R. J. Mallouf, E. A. Vogt, Jr., W. W. Birmingham, and E. H. Schmiedlin
1994 The River Spur Site: Paleoindian Occupation in the
Texas Coastal Prairie. Current Research in the Pleistocene 11:25-27.
Collins, M. B.
1991 Observations on the Geomorphology of the Location of the Proposed International Bridge Facility,
Eagle Pass, Maverick County, Texas. Report submitted to Groves and Associates, San Antonio,
Texas.

Bunker, R. C.

Collins, M. B., G. D. Hall, and C. B. Bousman

1982

1989

The Geomorphic Framework of Human Occupation
in the Frio River Valley, Choke Canyon Reservoir
Area, Live Oak and McMu!len Counties, Texas. In
Archaeological b~vestigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase 1 Findings, by G. D.
Hall, S. L. Black, and C. Graves, pp. 498-517. Choke
Canyon Series 5. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Campbell, T. N.
1988

The Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern
Mexico. Selected Writings of Thomas Nolan
Campbell. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Cason,

1952

Report on Archeological Salvage in Falcon Reservoir, Season of 1952. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 23:218-259.

Chandler, C. K.
1974 Use Wear Analysis of "Clear Fork" Tools from the
Falcon Reservoir Area, Southern Texas. La Tierra
1 (4): 15-21.
1994

Paleo-Indian Projectile Points from the Olmos Basin in San Antonio, Texas. La Tierra 21(1):11-19.

Archaeological Applications of Geochronological
Techniques in Southern Texas. La Tierra 16(1):1427.

Collins, M. B., T. R. Hester, and F. A. Weir
1969 Two Prehistoric Cemetery Sites in the Lower Rio
Grande Valley of Texas, Part I. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 40:119-146.
Creel, D. C., A. J. McGraw, F. Valdez, Jr., and T. C. Kelly
1979 Excavations at Site 41LK 106: A Prehistoric Occupation Site in Live Oak County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 62. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Davidson, B. and F. Valdez, Jr.
1976 Subsistence Data from San Juan Bautista and San
Bernardo-East. In The Archaeology and
Ethnohistory of the Gateway Area: Middle Rio
Grande of Texas. Report of the 1976 Investigations,
assembled by R. E. W. Adams. The University of
Texas at San Antonio.
Davis, M. W.
1992

Archeological Sites Along the Camino Columbia: A
Proposed Toll Road in Webb County, Texas.
Archeology Series 12 (Draft). Hicks and Company,
Austin.

Chandler, C. K. and K. Hindes
1993

Scottsbluff Points from Atascosa, Frio and
McMullen Counties, South-Central Texas. La Tierra

Day, D. W.

20(1):31-36.

1981

An Assessment of Archeological Sites 4IWY71 and
41WY72,

Chandler, C. K. and D. Kumpe
1993 Stemmed Points With Massive Barbs from the
Lower Rio Grande Valley. La Tierra 20(3):26-28.

Willacy County, Texas. Reports of

Investigations No. 15. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.

Hester n The Prehistory of South Texas
de la Teja, J. F.
1995

San Antonio de Bexar: A Community on New Spain’s
Northern Frontier. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque.

453

Giauque, R. D., F. Asaro, F. H. Stross, and T. R. Hester
1993 High-Precision Non-Destructive X-Ray Fluorescence Method Applicable to Establishing the Prowenance of Obsidian Artifacts. X-Ray Spectometry
22:44-53.

Doughty, R. W.
1983

Wildlife and Man in Texas: Environmental Change

Goddard, I.

and Conservation. Texas A&M University Press,

1979

College Station.

The Languages of South Texas and the Lower Rio
Grande. In The Languages of Native America, edited by L. Campbell and M. Mithun, pp. 355-389.

Eaton, J. D.
1981

University of Texas Press, Austin.

Guerrero, Coahuila, Mexico. A Guide to the Town
and Missions. Report 4, Archaeology and History
of the San Juan Bautista Mission Area, Coahuila
and Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

Gunn, J.
1985 Tree Ring Study 1. Korus #3 Post Oak. Texas Climate Bulletin, September, pp. 7-10. ECS Corporation, San Antonio.

Ekholm, G. F.
1944 Excavations at Tampico and Panuco in the Huasteca,
Mexico. Anthropological Papers XXXVIII, Part V.
American Museum of Natural History, New York.

Gunnerson, J. H.
1987 Archaeology of the High Plains. Cultural Resource
Series 19. Bureau of Land Management, Colorado
State Office, Denver.

Fagan, B.
1984 The Aztecs. W. H. Freeman, New York.

Hall, G. D.

Fisher, C. E.
1977 Mesquite and Modern Man in Southwestern North
America. In Mesquite, Its" Biology in Two Desert
Shrub Ecosystems, edited by B. B. Simpson, pp.
177-188. Dowden, Hutchinson, and Ross, Inc.,
Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania.

1985

Comparative Ecologies: The Texas Chaparral Versus the Australian Outback. La Tierra 12(3):6-19.

Hall, G. D., S. L. Black, and C. Graves
1982

Arehaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase I Findings. Choke
Canyon Series 5. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Fitzhugh, W. E.

Hall, G. D., T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black

1975

1986

A Comparative Approach to Northern Maritime

The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon Reservoit;

Adaptations. In Prehistoric Maritime Adaptations

Southern Texas: Results" of Phase H Archaeological

of the Circumpolar Zone, edited by W. E. Fitzhugh,

b~vestigations. Choke Canyon Series 10. Center for

pp. 339-386. Mouton Publishers, The Hague.

Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio.

Fox, A. A. and T. R. Hester
1976 An Archaeological Survey of Coleto Creek, Victoria
and Goliad Counties, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 18. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Henderson, J. and G. T. Goode
1991 Pavo Real: An Early Paleoindian Site in SouthCentral Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene
8:26-28.

Fox, A. A., E. H. Schmiedlin, and J. L. Mitchell

Hester, T. R.

1978

1968

Folsom Points from Southwest Texas. Plains An-

1969

The Floyd Morris and Ayala Sites: A Discussion of
Burial Practices in the Rio Grande Valley and the
Lower Texas Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:157-166.

1971

Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site,

Preliminary Report on the J-2 Ranch (41VT6),
Victoria County, Texas. La Tierra 5(3):2-14.

Fox, D. E. (with the collaboration of T. R. Hester)
1979 An Intensive Survey of Sixteen Prehistoric Archaeological Sites in Starr County, Texas. Archaeological
Survey Report 72. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

thropologist 13 (40): 117.

Uvalde County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas ArFox, D. E., R. J. Mallouf, N. O’Malley, and W. M. Sorrow
1974

Archeological Resources of the Proposed Cuero I
Reservoir; Dewitt and Gonzales Counties, Texas.
Archeological Survey Report 12. Texas Historical
Commission and Texas Water Development Board,
Austin.

cheological Society 42:51-148.

1975a Chipped Stone Industries of the Rio Grande Plain
of Texas: Some Preliminary Observations. The Texas
Journal of Science 26( 1-2):213-222.

454

Texas Archeological Society

Hester, T. R. (Continued)

Hester, T. R. (Continued)

1975b Late Prehistoric Cultural Patterns Along the Lower

1989d Perspective on the Material Culture of the Mission

Rio Grande of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo-

Indians of the Texas-Northeastern Mexico Border-

logical Society 46:107-126.

lands. In Columbian Consequences, Volume l: Archaeological and Historical Perspectives on the

1977a A Painted Pebble from a Site on the Nueces River,
Southern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeologi-

Spanish Borderlands West, edited by D. H. Thomas, pp. 213-229. Smithsonian Insitution Press,

cal Society 48:139-144.

Washington, D.C.
1977b The Current Status of Paleo-Indian Studies in Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico. In Paleo-In-

1989e An Archeological Synthesis. In From the Gulf to
the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation in Central,

dian Lifeways, edited by E. Johnson. The Museum

South, and Lower Pecos Texas, by T. R. Hester, S.

Journal 17:169-186. Museum of Texas Tech Uni-

L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K.

versity, Lubbock.

Reinhard, and L. C. Bement, pp. 115-128. Research
1978a Background to the Archaeology of Chaparrosa

Series No. 33. Arkansas Archeological Survey,

Ranch, Southern Texas. Volume 1: Studies in the
Archaeology of Chaparrosa Ranch. Special Report
6. Center for Archaeological Research, The Univer-

Fayetteville.
1990a Radiocarbon Dates from Archaeological Excavations in Medina County. La Tierra 17(4): 1-3.

sity of Texas at San Antonio.
1978b The Archaeology of the Lower Rio Grande Valley

1990b Plainview Artifacts at the St. Mary’s Hall Site, South
Central Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene

of Texas. In Proceedings, An Exploration of a Com-

7:14-17.

mon Legacy: A Conference on Border Architecture,
pp. 66-81. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
1980

1994a Large Triangular Bifaces as Grave Goods in Southern Texas: An Example from 41LC4. La Tierra

Tradition and Diversity Among the Prehistoric Hunters and Gatherers of Southern Texas. Plains Anthropologist 26(92):119-128.

1983

ern and Central Texas. La Tierra 17(3): 1-5.

Digging into South Texas Prehistory. Corona Publishing, San Antonio.

1981

1990c Early Archaic "Eccentric" Lithic Artifacts in South-

21(4):1-3.
1994b The Contexts of Trade Between the Brownsville
Complex and Mesoamerican Cultures: A Prelimi-

Late Paleo-lndian Occupations at Baker Cave,
Southwestern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Atwheological Society 53:101-119.

nary Study. La Tierra 21(2): 1-4.
1994c Lithic Typology: Background, Goals and A Personal Perspective. Lithic Technology 18(1 & 2):36-

1986a The Archaeology of Greater South Texas in 1986:

45.

An Overview. La Tierra 13(3):2-5.
1986b A Rock Art Site in Southern Texas. La Tierra
13(4):2-4.
1987

1988

Hester, T. R. (editor)
1979 A Preliminary Archaeological and Historical As-

Problems and Progress in Paleo-Indian Studies in

sessment of the Proposed Tenneco Pipeline: Hidalgo

Southern Texas. La Tierra 14(1):2-4.

to Victoria Counties, Texas. Archaeological Survey
Report 51. Center for Archaeological Research, The

Mesoamerican Artifact Occurrence in Southern,

University of Texas at San Antonio.

Central, and Western Texas: An Update. La Tierra
15(4):2-6.
1989a Historic Native American Populations. In From the
Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human Adapation in Cen-

Hester, T. R., F. Asaro, F. Stross, H. Michel, A. C. Kerr, and
P. Headrick
1991

tral, South, and Lower Pecos Texas, by T. R. Hester,

An Overview of the Results of the Texas Obsidian
Project. La Tierra 18(1):4-7.

S. L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox,
K. Reinhard, and L. C. Bement, pp. 77-84. Re-

Hester, T. R. and B. D. Barber

search Series No. 33. Arkansas Archeological Sur-

1990

vey, Fayetteville.

A Large Biface from Atascosa County, With Comments on the Function of Such Artifacts in Prehistoric South Texas. La Tierra 17(2):2-4.

1989b The Archaic of the Texas-Mexico Borderlands. Paper presented at the symposium, The Archaic of
Southern North America, October, 1989. Manuscript

Hester, T. R., B. D. Barber, and P. Headrick

on file with the author.

1993

1989c A Late Archaic Burial from the Lower Nueces River
Drainage, Live Oak County, Texas. La Tierra
16(2):2-3.

Insights into Clovis Technology: A Clovis Point
from Atascosa County, Southern Texas. La Tierra
20(3):3-5.

Hester ~ The Prehistory of South Texas
Hester, T. R., S. L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox,
K. J. Reinhard, and L. C. Bement
1989 From the Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation in Central, South and Lower Pecos Texas. Research Series No. 33. Arkansas Archeological
Survey, Fayetteville.
Hester, T. R. and D. M. Brown
1985 A Cache of Bifaces from Southern Texas. La Tierra
12(4):3-5.
Hester, T. R., D. Gilbow, and A. D. Albee
1973

A Functional Analysis of "Clear Fork" Artifacts

455

Hester, T. R. and C. M. Whatley
1992 Chipped Stone Artifacts from Site 41DM59, Dimmit
County, Southern Texas. La Tierra 19(3): !-7.
Hester, T. R., L. White, and J. White
1969 Archeological Materials from the Outline Site (41
LS 3) and Other Sites in La Salle County, Texas.
The Texas Journal of Science 21 (2): 131-166.
Hester, T. R., D. Wilson, and P. Headrick
1993 An Austin Phase Burial from Frio County, Southern
Texas: Archaeology and Physical Anthropology. La
Tierra 20(1):5-8.

from the Rio Grande Plain of Texas. American Antiquity 38(1):90-96.

Hester, T. R. and L. M. Green
1972 Functional Analysis of Large Bifaces from San Saba
County, Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
24(3):343-350.

Highley, L.
1984 Guadalupe Tools from Zavala County. La Tierra
11(1):28-35.
Highley, C. L.
1986

Archaeological Investigations at 41LK 201, Choke
Canyon Reservoir, Southern Texas. Choke Canyon

Hester, T. R. and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1971a Notes on Scottsbluff Points from the Texas Coastal
Plain. Southwestern Lore 37(1):27-33.

Series 11. Center for Archaeological Research, The

1971b An Initial Study of a Prehistoric Ceramic Tradition
in Southern Texas. Plains Anthropologist
16(52): 195-203.

Hindes, K. V.
1995 Native American and European Contact in the Lower
Medina River Valley. La Tierra 22(2):25-33.

1975

Holliday, V. T.

Some Aspects of Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric
Archaeology in Southern Texas. Special Report 1.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Hester, T. R., J. A. Huebner, P. Maslyk, C. Ward, and J.
Hageman
1989 Excavations at Two Sites in Uvalde County, South
Central Texas. La Tierra 16(3):3-7.
Hester, T. R. and T. C. Kelly
1976

Archaeological Investigations Near Natalia, Medina
County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 20.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Hester, T. R. and H. Kohnitz
1975 Chronology and Placement of"Guadalupe" Tools.
La Tierra 2(2):22-25.
Hester, T. R. and R. C. Parker
1970 The Berclair Site: A Late Prehistoric Component in
Goliad County, Southern Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 44:1-23.
Hester, T. R., F. H. Stross, and D. M. Brown
1988 Arrow Shaft Straighteners in Southern Texas and
Some California Ethnographic Comparisons. La
Tierra 15(3): 1-5.

University of Texas at San Antonio.

1995

Geoarchaeology. In Archeological Investigations at
the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28), A Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas, by
A. J. Taylor and C. L. Highley, pp. 19-30. Studies
in Archeology 20. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Holloway, R. G.
1986 Macrobotanical Analysis of Phase II Materials from
the Choke Canyon Reservoir Area, Texas. In The
Prehistoric Sites of Choke Canyon Reservoir, Southern Texas: Results" of Phase H Investigations, by G.
D. Hall, T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black, pp. 437-451.
Choke Canyon Series 10. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hosler, D. and G. Stresser-Pean
1992 The Huastec Region: A Second Locus for the Production of Bronze Alloys in Ancient Mesoamerica.
Science 257:1215-1220.
Howard, C. D.
1973

A Study of the Clear Fork Gouge. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 44:51-60.

Huebner, J. A.
1987 A Toyah Horizon Bone Tool from Victoria County,
Texas. La Tierra 14(4):5-15.

456

Texas Archeological Society

Huebner, J. A., R. Blackburn, C. K. Chandler, J. L. Mitchell,
and E. H. Schmiedlin
1995 Human Burial Recovery from 41KA89. La Tierra,
in press.
Huebner, J. A. and A. G. Comuzzie
1992 The A1vheology and Bioarcheology of Blue Bayou:
A I,ztte Archaic and l_xtte Prehistoric Mortuary Locality in Victoria County, Texas. Studies in Archeology 9. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.

Archeological Investigations at the Tortuga Flat Site
(41ZV 155), Zavala County, Southern Texas. Manuscript on file with the author.

Kelly, T.C.
1982 Criteria for Classification of Plainview and
Golondrina Projectile Points. La Tierra 9(3):2-25.
1988

The Nockenut Clovis Point. La Tierra 15(4):7-18.

1989

The Lerma Projectile Point Problem. Manuscript on
file with the author.

Kelly, T. C. (with the collaboration of T. R. Hester)
1979 An Archaeological Reconnaissance of the Palafox
Mining Area, Webb County, Southern Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 71. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Kibler, K.
1994

at Prehistoric Sites 41WY50 and 41WY60, Willacy

Inman, B, T. R. Hester, and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1995

1964

County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 95.

Test Excavations at the Errol Jonsson #1 Site,
4 l ZV37, South Texas. !xt Tierra 22(1): 17-32.

Inglis,
A History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain.

Archeological and Geomorphological htvestigations

Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Kotter, S. M.
1980 Archeological Assessments at Site 41ZP73, Falcon
State Recreation Area, Zapata County, Texas. Re-

Bulletin 45. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department,

ports of Investigations No. 9. Prewitt and Associ-

Austin.

ates, Inc., Austin.
Johnson, L., Jr.
1964

The Devil’s Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at
Amistad Reservoit; Val Verde County, Texas. Ar-

Labadie, J. H.
1988 Archaeological Excavations at the Shrew Site,
41WN73, Wilson County, Southern Texas. Contract

cheology Series 6. Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas, Austin.

Reports in Archaeology 2. Texas State Department
of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.

1987

A Plague of Phases: Receut Sociocultural Taxonomy
in Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:1-26.

Lm-gent, F. B. and M. R. Waters
1990 The Distribution of Folsom Points in Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 7:27-28.

Johnson, L. and T. N. Campbell
1992

Sanan: Traces of a Previously Unknown Aboriginal
Language in Colonial Coahuila and Texas. Plains

Lehmann, V. W.
1984

Anthrol)ologist 37( 140): 185-212.

Bobwhites in the Rio Grande Plain of Texas. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.

Johnson, L. and G. T. Goode
1994 A New Try at Dating and Characterizing Holocene
Climates, as well as Archeological Periods, on the
Eastern Edwards Plateau. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65:1-51.

Lukowski, P.
1987 Archaeological Investigations at 41BXI, Bexar
County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 115.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Jurgens, C. J.
1980 Food and the Environment -- A Model of Potential
Resource Variation for Portions of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Area of South Texas. Unpublished
M.A. thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas
Tech University, Lubbock.

MacNeish, R. S.
1947 A Preliminary Report on Coastal Tamaulipas. American Antiquity 13(1):1-15.

Karbula, J.
1991

Knives or Projectile Points? Manuscript on file with
the author.

1993

The Eckols Site: Continuing Studies. Newsletter of
the Friends of the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory 1 (2):29.

1958

Preliminary Archaeological Investigations in the Sien’a de Tamaulipas, Mexico. Transactions of the
American Philosophical Society 48(6). American
Philosophical Society, Philadelphia.

Hester ~ The Prehistory of South Texas

457

McGraw, A. J.
1979 A Preliminary Archaeological Survey for the
Conquista Project in Gonzales, Atascosa and Live
Oak Counties, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 76. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

Mallouf, R. J., B. J. Baskin, and K. L. Killen

1983

Arroyo de los Muertos and Other Prehistoric Terrace Sites Along the Rio Grande, Laredo, Texas.
Archaeological Survey Report !06. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.

Mason, J. A.
1935 The Place of Texas in Pre-Columbian Relationships
Between the United States and Mexico. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 7:29-46.

1984

Archaeology in the South Texas Sand Sheet: A Study
of Chevron Properties in Brooks County. Archaeo-

1977

A Predictive Assessment of Cultural Resources in
Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas. Archeo!ogical Survey Report 23. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Miller,

KoA.

1993

A Study of Prehistoric Biface Caches from Texas.

logical Survey Report 129. Center for Archaeologi-

Unpublished M.A. thesis, Department of Anthro-

cal Research, The University of Texas at San

pology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Antonio.
1995

McGraw, A. J., J. W. Clark, Jr., and E. A. Robbins (editors)
1991 A Texas Legacy: The Old San Antonio Road and the
Caminos Reales, A Tricentennial History, 16911991. Texas State Department of Highways and
Public Transportation, Austin.

Archaeological Investigations of a Proposed Wastewater Line to Service Colonia Larga Vista Near
Laredo, Webb County, Texas. SWCA, Inc. Environmental Consultants, Austin.

Mitchell, J. L., C. K. Chandler, and T. C. Kelly
1984

The Rudy Haiduk Site (41 KA 23): A Late Archaic

McGraw, A. J. and K. Hindes

Burial in Karnes County, Texas. La Tierra 11(2): 12-

1987

39.

Chipped Stone and Adobe: A Cultural Resources
Assessment of the Proposed Applewhite Reservoir,
Bexar County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 163. Center for Archaeological Research, The

Montgomery, J. L.
1978

The Mariposa Site: A Late Prehistoric Site on the
Rio Grande Plain of Texas. Special Report 6(2).

University of Texas at San Antonio.

Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

McGraw, A. J., B. J. Van Note, and C. J. Jones
1987

Archaeology of the Brasada: A Cultural Resource
Assessment of the Chevron Resources Company
Property in Northeastern Duval County, Texas. Ar-

Morales, J. O.
1983

Testimonios el Fronton de Piedras Pintas y los
Aborigenes del Nuevo Reyno de Leon. Edicion

chaeological Survey Report 113. Center for Ar-

Auspiciada, Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo Leon,

chaeological Research, The University of Texas at

Monterrey.

San Antonio.
McGraw, A. J. and D. Knepper

Newcomb, W. W., Jr.

1983

1961

The East Chacon Project: 11,000 Years of Prehis-

Times. University of Texas Press, Austin.

tory Along the Upper Nueces River, Southern Texas.
Archaeological Survey Report 125. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.

McKinney, W. W.
1981 Early Holocene Adaptations in Central and Southwestern Texas: The Problem of the Paleo-IndianArchaic Transition. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:91 - 120.

Nightengale, B. A., C. L. Highley, and S. C. Caran
1989

Continuing Cultural Resource Assessments in the
San Miguel Prospect 1988 Season, Atascosa and
McMullen Counties, Texas. Studies in Archeology
3. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Some Examples of Bandy Points. La Tierra 20(3):9-

Nunley, P. and T. R. Hester
1966 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Dimmit
County, Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
18(3):233-253.

16.

1975

McReynolds, R.
1993

The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern

An Assessment of A rchaeological Resources in Portions of Start County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 7. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio.

458

Texas Archeological Society

O’Neill, P. L., F. M. Oglesby, W. N. Trierweiler, and C. Lintz
1992 A Cultural Resource Survey at Falcon Reservoit;
Zapata County, Texas. Mariah Associates, Inc.,
Austin.

Scott, R. F., IV
1982

Excavations at Sites 41 LK 31/32 and 41 LK 202 in
the Choke Canyon Reservob; South Texas. Part l:
Prehistoric Investigations. Choke Cauyon Series 8.
Center for Archaeological Research, The Univer-

Prewitt, E. R.
1974 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in the Rio
Grande Delta Area of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 45:55-65.
1981

Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Areheological Society 52:65-90.

Ricklis, R. A.
1990 A Historical Cultural Ecology of the Karankawan
Indians of the Central Texas Coast: A Case Study in
the Roots of Adaptive Change. Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Geography, The University of Texas at Austin.
Ricklis, R, A. and K. A. Cox
1991 Toward a Chronology of Adaptive Change During
the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Bend Area. La
77erra 18(2): 13-31.

sity of Texas at San Antonio.

Sellards, E. H.
1940 Pleistocene Artifacts and Associated Fossils from
Bee County, Texas. Bulletin of the Geological Society of America 51 : 1627-1657.
Schmiedlin, E. H.
1993

County, Texas. The Cache 1:33-45. Office of the
State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.
Shafer, H. J.
1986

1975

Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University,
College Station.

bltensive Survey of the San Miguel Lignite Mine
Counties, Texas. Technical Series 29 (draft). Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The Univer-

Shafer, H. J. and T. R. Hester
1971

Choke Canyon Reservoir, Live Oak County, Texas:
Preliminary Summary of Climatic Implications. In
Archaeological htvestigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase 1 Findings, by G. D.
Hall, S. L. Black, and C. Graves, pp. 597-610. Choke
Canyon Series 5. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Salinas, M.
1990 htdians of the Rio Grande Delta. The University of
Texas Press, Austin.

Saunders, R. K.
1985 Recovery of Drowned Rio Grande River Artifacts,
Zapata and Starr Counties, South Texas. La Tierra
12(2):6-20.
Saunders, R. K. and T. R. Hester
1993 A Typological Study of Side-Notched Arrow Points
from the Falcon Lake Region of Texas and Mexico.
La Tierra 20(2):22-31.

A Study of the Function and Technology of Certain
Bifacial Tools front Southern Texas. Archeological
Report 20. Texas Historical Survey Committee,

sity of Texas at Austin.
Robinson, R. L.
1982 Biosilica Analysis of Three Prehistoric Sites in the

An Archeological Survey of the Lignite Project,
Atascosa and McMullen Counties, Texas. Report 7.

A. Turpin
Extension: 1991 Season, Atascosa and McMullen

Ancient Texans: Rock Art and Lifeways Along the
Lower Pecos. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.

Shafer, H. J. and E. P. Baxter

Robinson, D. G., M. W. Davis, K. Hindes, S. C. Caran, and S.
1992

Investigation of a Toyah Horizon Site in Karnes

Austin.
Stahle, D. W. and M. C. Cleaveland
1988

Texas Drought History Reconstructed and Analyzed
from 1698 to 1980. Journal of Climate 1:59-74.

Steele, D. G. and C. A. Hunter
1986 Analysis of Vertebrate Faunal Remains from 41
MC 222 and 41 MC 226, McMullen County, Texas.
In The Prehistoric Sites of Choke Canyon Reservoir, Southern Texas: Results" of Phase H Archaeological Investigations, by G. D. Hall, T. R. Hester,
and S. L. Black, pp. 452-502. Choke Canyon Series
10. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Story,
1985 Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West
Gulf Coastal Plain. In Prehistoric Food Production
in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 19-56.
Anthropological Papers 75. Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Stresser-Pean, G.
1977 San Antonio Nogalar. Etudes Mesoamericaines, Vol.
III. Mexico City, D. F.

Hester-- The Prehistory of South Texas
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25
(whole volume).

Ward, P. M.

Suhm,

Warren, J. E.

1980

Ro

The La Paloma Mammoth Site, Kenedy County,

1984

A Statistical Analysis of Archaic Projectile Points
from the Nueces River Area of Central South Texas:
The Brom Cooper Collection. La Tierra 11 : 14-20.

1986

Texas. In Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas

Los Quetnados: Archeological Testing at the Highway 359 Sanitary Landfill in Laredo, Webb County,

Coast, edited by L. Highley and T. R. Hester, pp.

Texas. Report 143. James E. Warren, George West,

79-103. Special Report 11. Center for Archaeologi-

Texas.

cal Research, The University of Texas at San Anto-

1989

nio.

Warren, George West, Texas.

Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia
Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. 2 Vols. Studies in

An Archeological Context for the Lower Rio Grande
Laterials Archeological Region of Southern Texas
and Northeastern Mexico. Report 185. James E.

Taylor, A. J. and C. L. Highley
1995

459

1992

A Cultural Resources Survey of Lake Casa Blanca
State Park, Webb County, Texas. Report 284. Archaeology Consultants, Inc., George West, Texas.

Archeology 20. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Weir, F. A.
Thorns, A. V.
1992 Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene Regional Land

1956

Surface Artifacts from La Perdida, Starr County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
26:59-78.

Use Patterns: A Perspective from the Preliminary
Results of Archaeological Studies at the Richard
Beene Site, 41BX831, Lower Medina River, South
Texas. In Guidebook, lOth Annual Meeting, SouthCentral Friends of the Pleistocene: Late Cenozoic
Alluvial Stratigraphy and Prehistory of the Inner
Gulf Coastal Plain, South-Central Texas. Quaternary Research Center Series 4 (draft). Lubbock Lake
Landmark, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

Thoms, A. and R. Mandel
1992 The Richard Beene Site: A Deeply Stratified
Paleoindian to Late Prehistoric Occupation Site in
South-Central Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 9:42-44.
Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1993

A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
Second edition. Gulf Publishing, Houston.

Weniger, D.
1984

The Explorer’s Texas: The Lands and Waters. Eakin
Press, Austin.

Willey, G. R.
1966

An Introduction to American Archaeology. Volume
I, North and Middle America. Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.

Woerner, M. C. and L. Highley
1983 The Bromley F. Cooper Collection of Pre-Archaic
and Archaic Dart Points from McMullen County.
La Tierra 10(1):3-28.
Wyckoff, D. G.
1995 A Summary of the Calf Creek Horizon in Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological
Society XLII: 179-210.

The Pa!o Duro C9mplex: Redefining the Early
Ceramic Period in the Caprock Cany nlands
Douglas K. Boyd

ABSTRACT
When the Palo Duro complex was first defined in 1978, it appeared to represent a group of hunting-oriented
peoples who obtained a few Jornada Mogollon pots in trade. Recent excavations at the Kent Creek and Sam Wahl
sites have revealed rectangular and circular pithouses, storage pits, large baking pits, and substantial ground
stone assemblages. The evidence suggests that Palo Duro peoples may have been under considerable influence
from, and maintained ties with, the Jornada Mogollon region, but the nature and extent of Plains Woodland
influence/interactions is not well defined. The complex is reinterpreted as representing peoples who subsisted
primarily by collecting, processing, and storing wild plant foods (perhaps also involving limited horticulture?)
during seasonal occupations in the Caprock Canyonlands. The emphasis on plant foods may be related to
increasingly mesic conditions after A.D. 500, while the onset of xeric conditions and increasing numbers of bison
after A.D. 1100 may have necessitated shifts in human subsistence and settlement strategies that ultimately led
to the disappearance of the Palo Duro complex.

INTRODUCTION
Paleoclimatic interpretations for the Southern
Plains suggest that the the Early Ceramic, or Late
Prehistoric I, period was probably wetter than the
preceding Late Archaic period, and it appears that
conditions were generally less favorable for bison.
While the precise relationships between climate,
vegetation, and bison may never be fully understood, a general decline in the number of bison in
the Southern Plains may have occurred around A.D.
500, and populations probably remained relatively
low until around A.D. 1200 (Dillehay 1974:187).
Just prior to or during this time, two major events,
the westward spread of Eastern Woodland culture
and the eastward spread of Southwestern Puebloan
culture, had a significant and widespread impact on
the peoples of the Southern Plains. The two traditions met, or perhaps collided, along the eastern
margins of the Llano Estacado, and this canyonland
region, herein termed the Caprock Canyonlands,
apparently played a prominent role in the cultural
developments and interactions during the first
millenium A.D.
The Woodland tradition spread eastward from
the upper Midwest into the Great Plains, arriving
in North Central Oklahoma by A.D. 100-300, and

in South Central Oklahoma prior to A.D. 450.
There are a number of diagnostic traits, such as
"corner-notched dart and arrow points, shell disc
beads, burial in mounds or ossuaries, an increase
in the frequency of ground stones, and the appearance of tools associated with horticulture," but it is
the distinctive cord-marked pottery vessels (elongated forms with conoidal bottoms) that is the hallmark of the Woodland tradition (Vehik 1984:175).
Not all of these diagnostic traits are manifest in the
Oklahoma Plains Woodland sites, however, and it
is not until ca. A.D. 800 that good evidence for
agriculture and semipermanent villages appears
(Vehik 1984:195-197). Despite the absence of
definite evidence for pre-A.D. 800 agriculture, it
is notable that most of the Woodland complexes in
the Southern Plains are thought to have begun between A.D. 100-500 (Hofman and Brooks 1989).
Other researchers have noted that agriculture probably appeared in the Plains during this time. In the
Chaquaqua Plateau of southeastern Colorado, for
example, Campbell (1976:53-54) suggests a date
of A.D. 500 for the appearance of maize.
The Woodland tradition had spread into the
Delaware Canyon area of West Central Oklahoma
by around A.D. 50-250 (Ferring 1982, 1986), and
archeological evidence from sites on the Thurmond

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

462

Texas Archeological Society

Ranch (Thurmond 1991) and the Swift Horse site
(Briscoe 1987) indicates that it had spread into western Oklahoma as early as A.D. 200-400. A thermoluminescence date of A.D. 520 on a cord-marked
sherd from the Tascosa Creek site is the earliest
occurrence of Woodland pottery in the Texas Panhandle, but absolute chronological evidence is limited, and Woodland occupations probably began
somewhat earlier. The appearance of the Woodland
tradition in the Panhandle Plains occurred at approximately the same time as the disappearance of
the Late Archaic bison-hunting lifestyle, around
A.D. 500. The Plains Woodland remains in the
Texas Panhandle are called the Lake Creek complex (Hughes 1962, 1991).
At about this same time, the Jornada Mogollon
culture of South Central New Mexico, Trans-Pecos
Texas, and northern Chihuahua (Lehmer 1948) expanded across all of southeastern New Mexico and
onto the western edge of the Llano Estacado. This
eastern extension of the Jornada Mogollon (Corley
1965a, 1965b; Leslie 1979) may represent the spread
of Jornada Mogollon peoples, or at least considerable expansion of their cultural influence among
neighboring peoples. Additional Southwestern influence, indicated by the sporadic occurrence of
Mogollon brownware pottery (see Miller, this volume), may be traced all across the southern Llano
Estacado, particularly around large playas or pluvial lakes, and into the southern Caprock
Canyonlands. First recognized at a small rockshelter
in Swisher County, Texas, the Palo Duro complex
(Willey and Hughes 1978b) appeared to represent a
group of hunter-gatherers who simply obtained
brownware pottery in trade, directly or indirectly,
with Jornada peoples. More recent archeological
findings of residential base camps with pithouses
and storage facilities at the Kent Creek (Cruse 1992)
and the Sam Wahl (Boyd et al. 1994) sites are
changing our perceptions about who the Palo Duro
peoples were, and it now appears that the Jornada
Mogolton influence involved much more than just
pottery (see Hughes 1991).
Although there are many similarities between
the Plains Woodland-tradition Lake Creek complex and the Jornada Mogollon-influenced Palo
Duro complex, the differences in these manifestations have been interpreted as evidence that two
groups of people occupied the Texas Panhandle
Plains during the first millenium A.D. Assuming
that the distribution of pottery traditions represents

the maximum extent of cultural influence (e.g., the
extent of exchange networks, diffusion of technology, or even the spread of related peoples),
Couzzourt (1982, 1985) and Hughes (!991) interpret the archeological data to indicate that a cultural boundary between Woodland and
Southwestern-influenced peoples existed along the
drainage divide between the Canadian and Red rivers. As early as the 1940s, Krieger (1946, 1978)
observed the existence of this cultura! boundary,
and suggested that it represented the southern limit
of Central Plains-tradition complexes or influence.
It is notable that brownware pottery occurs in very
few sites in the Canadian River drainage, while it is
much more common to the south in the Red River
and Brazos River drainages. Conversely, while sites
yielding Woodland pottery are common in the Canadian River valley, only a few are found in the
northern tributaries of the upper Red River, and
none are known south of the Prairie Dog Town
Fork. Consequently, defining the relationships between the Palo Duro and the nearby Plains Woodland and Southwestern cultural phases and
complexes is critical to understanding the Late Prehistoric I period (ca. A.D. 500-1100/1200) in the
Caprock Canyonlands.
The goals of this paper are as follows: (1) to
describe briefly the Caprock Canyonlands as an
archeologically significant ecological subregion; (2)
to summarize the Late Holocene culture history
and paleoclimatic reconstructions for the Caprock
Canyonlands; (3) to identify pertinent regional cultural phases and complexes that surround the Palo
Duro complex; (4) to identify the important archeological remains that are attributed to the Palo Duro
complex; (5) to reevaluate and redefine the Palo
Duro complex in light of recent archeological finds;
and (6) to speculate on the intercultural relationships between Palo Duro peoples and the cultures
around them.
This paper evolved out of the ongoing cultural
resources studies at Lake Alan Henry, a municipaluse water reservoir built for the City of Lubbock,
Texas. From 1987 to 1993, Prewitt and Associates,
Inc. of Austin, Texas, conducted a series of archeological surveys, testing, and data recovery efforts
within the 11,280 acre project area on the Double
Mountain Fork of the Brazos River in Garza and
Kent counties, Texas. Each phase of work resulted
in a separate archeological report, but the publication of a regional synthetic archeological overview

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Cotnplex
was planned for the conclusion of these studies.
The extensive research done in conjuction with the
regiona! synthesis, which is scheduled to be published this year (Boyd et al. 1996), concentrates on
redefining the culture history of the Caprock
Canyonlands. One of the more significant contributions of this study is a thorough reevaluation of the
Early Ceramic period Palo Duro complex, which is
the subject of this article.

THE CAPROCK CANYONLANDS:
ENVIRONMENTAL DIVERSITY,
PALEOENVIRONMENT, AND
CULTURE HISTORY
One of the important conclusions that was
reached during the course of the Lake Alan Henry
archeological investigations is that the traditional
view of the Texas Panhandle Plains environment
and ecology is an oversimplification that obscures
some very important concepts that have significant
bearing on archeological interpretations. The traditional archeological view is that the Texas Southern Plains is comprised of only two regions--the
High Plains and Lower Plains. The High Plains and
Lower Plains are distinct in many ways, and each is
broadly characterized by its own geology and physiography, climate and hydrology, and flora and
fauna. What became apparent during the course of
the investigations at Lake Alan Henry, however, is
that the archeology of the project area did not fit
neatly with that of either the High Plains or Lower
Plains. The greatest similiarities were seen in other
project areas located in the rugged canyonlands
along the Caprock Escarpment, but not to the west
in the vast expanses of Llano Estacado flatlands or
to the east in the rolling hills that comprise most of
the Lower Plains. Emerging from this research, then,
was the concept of the Caprock Escarpment as its
own archeological region; one that is intimately
related to, but yet distinctive from, the archeology
of the High Plains and most of the Lower Plains.
The southern end of the High Plains, which is
physically separated from the central Great Plains
by the wide Canadian River valley, is an isolated
plateau called the Llano Estacado. It is the single
dominating physiographic feature in the southern
Great Plains. It is a flat, nearly featureless plain
broken only by occasional ephemeral stream valleys (or draws) and small basins called playas (that

463

seasonally hold rainwater) or pluvial lakes (that
intersect the underlying Ogallala groundwater aquifer). To the east of the Llano Estacado is the Lower
Plains, a region that is largely comprised of undulating or rolling hills of soft Permian mudstones
that have been severely eroded. Hence, other names
that have been used for this region include the
Redbed Plains, Eroded Plains, Rolling Plains, Western Rolling Plains, and Low Rolling Plains.
While the notion that the High Plains and
Lower Plains are environmentally unique is accurate, it is a gross oversimpification. Sandwiched
between the Llano Estacado and the Lower Plains
is the Caprock Escarpment that constitutes the eastern edge of headward stream erosion eating away
at the High Plains plateau. The Caprock Escarpment is often thought of as a single dividing line,
but it is more realistically viewed as a long, northsouth strip of rugged canyonlands that separates the
High Plains from the Rolling Plains. The Caprock
Canyonlands generally coincide with exposures of
Tertiary Ogallala and Triassic Dockum Group formations on any state geological map. Because the
Ogallala caliche and Triassic sandstones are more
resistant to erosion than anything above or below,
differential erosion has resulted in the formation of
a rugged canyonland topography. The term "Caprock Canyonlands" is a fitting name for this northsouth corridor that divides the High Plains from the
Rolling Plains (Figure 1).
Caprock Canyonlands is a term borrowed
from Flores (1990), whose book Caprock
Canyonlands: Journeys into the Heart of the
Southern Plains is a treatise on the unique
ecologica! character of the rugged canyons along
the Caprock Escarpment. Notably, the Natural
Heritage Policy Research Project, a Texas ecology
project sponsored by the Lyndon B. Johnson
School of Public Affairs, calls this area the
"Escarpment Breaks" and recognizes that it is a
distinct ecologica! subregion. In addition, the
National Park Service recognized the ecological
importance of the escarpment canyonlands as early
as the 1920s and, in 1934, they considered the
development of a million acre "National Park of the
Plains" that focused on the canyonlands of the Red
River (including Palo Duro Canyon). For various
political reasons (Flores 1990:160-165), the
National Park Service never followed up on any of
its proposals, but the State of Texas has created two
small parks along the Caprock Escarpment--the

464

Texas Archeological Society

The environmental characteristics of the Caprock
Canyonlands, and the many
subtleties that distinguish it
from the High Plains and Lower
Plains, are not described in detail here. What is important is
the recognition of the fact that,
because of its geologic and geomorphic history, the Caprock
Canyonlands was an oasis in
an otherwise arid landscape. For
prehistoric peoples, the
canyonlands provided more
abundant (in terms of quality
and quantity) and predictable
resources than could be found
anywhere else in the Southern
Plains--natural shelter, firewood, raw lithic materials, plant
and animal foods, and, most importantly, water. Freshwater
springs emerging primarily
from the Ogallala aquifer, and
to a lesser extent from Triassic
and Quaternary aquifers, are
common all along the Caprock
Escarpment, and major riverHigh Plains (includes Llano Estacodo)
ine systems were generally
Caprock CanyonlQnds
well-watered in prehistoric
Lower Plains
Cross Timbers into Grand Prairie
times. Prior to the depletion of
West Central Texas (inlcudes Edwards
groundwater aquifers in the
Plateau & Northern Creteceous Outliers)
twentieth century, such springs
and spring-fed tributaries proFigure I. Ecological/archeological regions within the Texas Panhandle Plains.
vided abundant water and lush
The Caprock Canyonlands subregion is defined based on a combination of
vegetation that attracted man
topography (Raisz 1957), surface geology (Curtis and Ham 1972; Renfro
and beast. Water has always
1973; Williams and McAllister 1979), vegetation areas (Arbingast et al.
been,
and still is, the single most
1973), and geographic regions (Johnson 1931).
critical resource dictating the
distribution of plant, animal,
and human communities throughout the Southern
16,400 acre Pato Duro Canyon State Park, and the
Plains. Prehistoric peoples recognized this fact, and
13,906 acre Caprock Canyons State Park. Just as
they adapted their lifestyles and settlement patterns
modern man finds the Caprock Canyonlands to be
accordingly.
unique and inviting, so too did the prehistoric
In contrast to the well-watered canyonlands,
Native Americans living in the Southern Plains,
surface water over most of the Llano Estacado was
and it is not surprising to find that the archeology
(with a few exceptions such as major pluvial lakes
of this subregion also is unique. This is not an
or spring-fed draw segments) sporadically
entirely new revelation, but the culture history
distributed, subject to considerable seasonal
synthesis by Boyd et al. (1996) is the first attempt
fluctuation, and generally unpredictable. The same
to formalize the concept of the Caprock
is true of the Lower Plains, but the water supply
Canyonlands as a unique archeological subregion.

Boyd -- The Palo Duro Cotnplex
there also suffers from one additional problem: Any
surface or groundwater that passes through the
Permian redbed country becomes ch!ofinateO, often
to the point of being unpalatable because it is several
times more salty than sea water. Because of this, it
is likely that there were large areas of the Lower
Plains where little or no potable water could be
found during prehistoric times.
The resource-rich Caprock Canyonlands
played a major role in the development and
evolution of cultures in the Southern Plains. The
escarpment area seems to have been a critical zone,
in terms of subsistence and settlement, for many

465

Boyd et al. (1996) reviewed the regional
paleonvironmental and cultural data for the Middle
to Late Holocene in the southern Panhandle Plains
and Caprock Canyonlands, and summaries of their
interpretations are presented in Figure 2. The various
lines of evidence that form the foundation of these
interpretations are not presented here, but it is
notable that the paleoenvironmental reconstruction
and culture history are in general agreement with
studies done throughout the Southern Plains. The
focus of the remainder of this paper is the Late
Prehistoric I cultural period from prior to A.D. 500
to ca. A.D. 1100-1200.

different prehistoric populations over many
thousands of years. In a simplistic fashion, the
Caprock Canyonlands may be viewed as a home

REGIONAL CULTURAL COMPLEXES
AND PHASES DURING THE LATE
PREHISTORIC I PERIOD

base for many cultures whose seasonally oriented
activities extended over a much larger territory that
included the Llano Estacado and Lower Plains.

SOUTHERN
YEARS

0-

PANHANDLE PLAINS
PALEOENVIRONMENTAL
RECONSTRUCTION

CAPROCK CANYONLANDS
NATIVE AMERICAN
CULTURE HISTORY

PERIODS

CULTURES

Historic

Comanches,
Apaches, & Teyos

Protohistoric

Late Prehistoric

YEARS

- 1950

Tierro Slanca &
GorzoComplexes

- 1000

1000Late Prehistoric I

Palo Duro &
Lake Creek
Complexes

Tronsitlonal

-o

2000Late
Little Sunday &
Archaic

3000-

Summers
Complexes

- 1000

Period

- 2000

4000

Middle

5000

Archaic

undefined

- 3000

Period

6000

- 4000

Figure 2. Comparison of the Middle to Late Holocene paleoclimatic
reconstruction for the southern Panhandle Plains and the culture
history of the Caprock Canyonlands (from Boyd et al., 1996).

The Late Prehistoric I period was
a time of dynamic cultural interaction
in the Southern Plains, and the cultural
conditions and changes that characterize the Palo Duro complex cannot be
fully understood without a brief mention of the archeological manifestations
defined for surrounding areas (Figure
3 and Table 1). The Late Prehistoric I
period in the Caprock Canyonlands
spans the entire Plains Woodland stage
of cultural development in the Texas
Panhandle (i.e., the Lake Creek complex), and the latter part of the period
is contemporaneous with late Plains
Woodland/formative Plains Village occupations in western Oklahoma (i.e.,
the Custer phase) and with unknown
cultural groups in West Central Texas
(i.e., the Blow Out Mountain phase).
This period also coincides with the
Southwestern pithouse periods in
southeastern New Mexico and far western Texas (i.e., the E1 Paso and Dofia
Ana phases of the Jornada branch of
the Mogollon; the Querecho and
Maljamar phases of the eastern extension of the Jornada Mogollon; and the
18 Mile and Mesita Negra phases of
the Middle Pecos), and ends at the time
of the pithouse to surface pueblo transition. The reader is referred to Bell

466

Texas Archeologieal Society

western Oklahoma have
evidence of contemporaneous
Plains Woodland occupations.
Plains Woodland sites in the
Texas Panhandle are attributed
to the Lake Creek complex
(Hughes 1962, 1991). A
detailed summary of the Lake
Creek complex is beyond the
scope of this paper (see Boyd et
al. 1996), but this manifestation
is discussed later because it is
critical to defining the nature of
the interaction between Plains
Woodland and Palo Duro
Complex peoples.

ARCHEOLOGICAL
REMAINSOFTHE
PALODURO
COMPLEX

Based on the 1973-1974
excavations at Deadman’s Shelter in Mackenzie Reservoir,
Willey and Hughes (1978b) proposed that the site was representative of a widespread
cultural manifestion characterCultural Complexes/phases
ized mainly by Mogollon
brownwares and early cornerand basal-notched arrow points.
Many other sites in the Red
River drainage had produced
Figure 3. Map of Late Prehistoric I culture complexes and phases in and around
similar materials and were
the Texas Panhandle Plains.
thought to be related to this new
"Palo Duro complex" (Willey
and Hughes 1978b: 190). A few
(1984), Brooks (1989), Creel (1990), Corley
more
Palo
Duro
sites
have been investigated since
(t965a), Hofman (1975, 1978, 1984a, 1984b),
that
time,
including
some
in the Brazos River drainHofman and Brooks (1989), Hughes (1991), Jelinek
age, and the complex now covers a larger area than
(1967), Lehmer (1948), Leslie (1979), LeBlanc and
was originally proposed (see Figure 4 and Table 1).
Whalen (1980), and Lintz (1982, 1984, 1986) for
The chronology of the Palo Duro complex is known
general information on these and other Plains Woodprimarily from radiocarbon dates from eight sites
land and Plains Village manifestations in the south(Table 2).
ern Great Plains.
Most of the Palo Duro sites that have been
Many sites in the Caprock Canyonlands and
tested or excavated may be grouped into one of two
surrounding areas date to the Late Prehistoric I period
site type categories--campsites or rockshelters-and are of considerable importance for defining the
and there appears to be considerable variability in
Palo Duro complex (Figure 4). Many of the sites
site function within these groups. Recent inveshave been attributed to the Palo Duro complex, but a
tigations have added a third category, that of
large number of sites in the Texas Panhandle and

Boyd n The Palo Duro Complex
Table 1. Selected Late Prehistoric I sites in and around the Texas Panhandle Plains

No.*

Late Prehistoric I
Cultural Affiliation

Site Name (Number)

Reference

Residential Bases
1
2
3
4

Kent Creek (41HL66)
Sam Wahl (41GR291)
Buffalo Lake (PPHM-A2042)
Tahoka Lake

Palo
Palo
Palo
Palo

5
6
7
8

Greenbelt (41DY 17)
Duncan Ranch (41HC124)
Merchant (LCAS-E4)
Laguna Plata (LA-5148)

Lake Creek complex
Lake Creek complex
Eastern Jornada Mogollon
Eastern Jornada Mogollon

9
10
11

Boot Hill (LCAS-B5)
Salt Cedar (4lAD2)
King Ranch (LA 26764)

12

Fox Place (LA 68188)

Eastern Jornada Mogollon
Eastern Jornada Mogollon
Middle Pecos or Eastern
Jornada Mogollon
Middle Pecos or Eastern
Jornada Mogollon

Duro complex
Duro complex
Duro complex (7)
Duro complex (?)

Cruse 1992
Boyd et al. 1994
Hays 1986
Lee Johnson, personal
communication 1993
Campbell 1983
Gustafson 1994a, 1994b
Leslie 1965
Lea County Archeological
Society 1971; Runyan 1972
Corley and Leslie 1960
Collins 1968
Wiseman 1981, 1988
Wiseman, personal
communication 1993

Campsites
13

Chalk Hollow (PPHM-A883)

14

Blue Clay (41BI42)

15

County Line (41BI33)

16

Cat Hollow (41GR303B)

17

Gobbler Creek Bridge (41GR383)

18

South Sage Creek (41KT33)

19

Fatheree (41GY32)

20

Maintenance Barn (PPHM-A1543

21

South Ridge (PPHM-A 1568)
Floydada Country Club (41FL1)

22
23

Montgomery (41FL17)

24

Big Spring (41HW2)

25

Lake Creek (PPHM-A48)

26

Tascosa Creek (PPHM-A2060)

27

Sanford Reservoir unnamed (41MO5)

28

Sanford Reservoir unnamed (41PT29)

29

Night Storm (41RB21)

30

Sandy Ridge (41HF5)

31
32

Swift Horse (34RM501)
Beaver Dam (34RM208)

33
34
35

Middle Cheyenne (PPHM-A2082)
Carrizozo Bridge (34CI199)
East Levee (41TG91)

Palo Duro compelx

Wedel 1975
Willey et al. 1978
Palo Duro complex (?)
Willey and Hughes 1978a
Palo Duro complex
Boyd et al. 1994
Palo Duro complex (?)
Boyd et al. 1994
Palo Duro complex
Boyd et al. 1992
Palo Duro/Lake Creek complexes Hughes et al. 1978
Palo Duro complex
Couzzourt 1982
Palo Duro complex
Etchieson 1979
Palo Duro complex
Word 1963, 1991
Palo Duro complex (?)
Word 1965; Northern 1979
Palo Duro complex (?)
Sommer 1971
Lake Creek complex
Hughes 1962
Lake Creek complex
Couzzourt 1985
Lake Creek complex
Green 1986
Lake Creek complex
Green 1986
Lake Creek complex
Hughes et a!. 1978
Lake Creek complex
Quigg, Lintz, Oglesby,
Earls et al. 1993
Lake Creek complex (?)
Briscoe 1987, 1989
Plains Woodland
Thurmond 1988a, 1988b,
1988c, 1991
Lake Creek complex
Couzzourt 1982, 1985
Plains Woodland
Saunders !983
Blow Out Mountain phase
Creel 1990
Palo Duro complex

Rockshelters
36
37
38
39

Deadman’s Shelter (41SW23)
Boren Shelter No. 2 (41GR559)
Canyon City Club Cave (PPHM-A251)
Blue Spring Shelter (PPYM-A485)

Palo
Palo
Palo
Palo

*Numbers are key to site locations shown on Figure 3.

Duro complex
Duro Complex
Duro complex
Duro complex

Willey and Hughes 1978b
Boyd et al. 1994
Hughes 1969
Hughes 1978

467

468

Texas Archeological Society

possible residential bases of the
Palo Duro complex. These two
sites are important because
they highlight the fact that
there may be many other Palo
Duro residential base sites that
have not yet been identified.
Hays (1986:10-11, 20)
identifies a probable Palo Duro
complex site (PPHM-A2042)
in the Buffalo Lake National
Wildlife Refuge, Randall
County, Texas. This site was
initially visited in 1980 by
Hughes (Jack T. Hughes
fieldnotes, February 6, 1980),
who observed a greater density
of cultural materials (e.g., bone
fragments, fire-cracked quartzite, burned caliche, and lithic
debris) than seen at any other
site in the Refuge. Artifacts observed or collected consist of
dart points, arrow points (including some Deadman’s),
bifaces, unifaces, ground
stones, and sherds of Mogollon
Polo Duro Complex 8ires
brownware. A test pit indicated
~ Rockshelter
e Compsite
that substantial buried deposits
,~ Residentiol Bose
exist. Of particular importance,
Other Sites
Hughes noted that several de~ Rockshelter
o Compsite
pressions at the site were probA Residentiol Bose
ably pithouses. Without further
testing, however, the interpreFigure 4. Map of selected Late Prehistoric I sites in the Texas Panhandle Plains
tation that the site represents a
and surrounding areas.
Palo Duro pithouse village is
tentative.
Tahoka Lake, a large pluvial lake in Lynn
residential bases, to the site type inventory, also
County, Texas, also has been suggested as a posadding a new dimension to the settlement pattern.
sible location of a pithouse site that might be reA fourth class of archeological remains, that of
lated to the Palo Duro complex (see Boyd 1995a,
human burials, also has important implications for
1995b). Lee Johnson (personal communication,
defining the complex. Each of these site types is
1992) remembered seeing possible pithouse depresdiscussed below.
sions and Mogollon ceramics in the vicinity of
Tahoka Lake many years ago, prior to the complete
Residential Bases
cultivation of the area. Lacking an adequate archeological investigation, however, it is impossible
The Kent Creek and Sam Wahl sites are the
to evaluate the potential for the existence of a Palo
only two sites that have been positively identified
Duro pithouse site near Tahoka Lake. Surface colas residential bases of the Palo Duro complex. Two
lections from a site 5 km south of Tahoka Lake
other sites that have not been adequately
have yielded corner-notched and stemmed arrow
investigated have been tentatively proposed as

Boyd m The Palo Duro Complex

+l

+1

~:~

~

+1

469

470

Texas Archeological Society

O~

0

0

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Cotnplex

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

!

I

I

471

472

Texas Archeological Society

g<

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex
points, indicating the presence of Late Prehistoric I
occupations, but no pottery was found (Riggs 1965).
Watts (1963:1-4) notes that undifferentiated
brownwares have been found near Tahoka Lake
and at many other lake sites on the southern Llano
Estacado. Watts’ (1963) study is quite outdated,
but another ceramic distribution study is in progress
(Wiseman et al. 1994) that eventually should provide much more detailed information on Southwestern wares on the Llano Estacado. Given the
limited data available at this time, the presence of
Palo Duro complex occupations on the southern
Llano Estacado cannot be discounted.
Both of the sites that have been identified confidently as residential bases of the Palo Duro complex have been investigated intensively. The Kent
Creek site, located along a spring-fed tributary of
the North Pease River in southeastern Hall County,
was excavated in 1985/1986 by Cruse (1992), and
was the first site where habitation structures were
identified. The early occupation period at the Sam
Wahl site, located in the canyonlands along the
Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos River in
Garza County, was identified as a residential base
based on excavations by Boyd et al. (1994). The
similarities and differences between these two sites
have important implications for defining the Palo
Duro complex.

Structure 1 is a rectangular (4.3 x 3.3 m)
pithouse with an east-facing entryway centered
along one long wall. Interior features include a
trough or step-down just inside the house (probably a water trap), a large posthole just off-center,
three other postholes along the front and side walls,
and two clusters of burned caliche rocks lying on
the floor that are thought to be heating ovens. A
subfloor human burial (see Burials below) also was
found in the center of Structure 1, but the house
was abandoned at the time the individual was interred, and the burial pit could have destroyed a
central hearth. Charcoal from the floor of Structure
1 was radiocarbon dated to A.D. 665-977, providing an approximate age for the occupation of the
pithouse and the subfloor burial.
Structure 2 is a rectangular (2.3 x 3.3 m) house
with a west-facing entryway and no interior features except for shallow "troughs" or depressions
all along the front and back walls (possible water
traps). The floor of this structure was virtually devoid of artifacts.
Because of their differences, Structure 1 is interpreted as a habitation while Structure 2 is thought
to represent a storage facility, but they both exhibit
some similar characteristics. Both structures have
clay-plastered entryways, approximately 1 m wide

Kent Creek Site (41HL66)

The 62 m2 of hand excavations
at the Kent Creek site uncovered two
complete rectangular pithouses, a
possible third structure, and five extramural features (Figure 5). The latter consist of two oval pits (one claylined and one clay-capped) that may
have functioned as storage facilities,
a smal! rock-lined hearth, an unlined
hearth, and a large baking pit (80 cm
diameter, 30 cm deep) filled with
ash, charcoal, and burned rocks.
Charcoal from the !ower and upper
portions of the baking pit provided
calibrated radiocarbon age ranges of
A.D. 733-985 and A.D. 902-1393,
respectively. Two postholes located
just outside Structure 1 could represent extramural activities, or they
may be related to the structure.

473

Unlined

Hearth

Cloy-copped Pit

I

°

~Possibte Structure
-

STIR

°T

LEGEND
~ Depression
~
~:~ IRockFeoture
o

Post Hole

01/21

b
0
’

meters
2 ,i
f~-~et

2
8

P&AII9515LH

Figure 5. Map of structures and features at the Kent Creek site (modified
from Cruse 1992:Figure 6).

474

Texas Archeological Society

and over 2 m long, in the form of ramps that gradually slope upward from the floor level. The pithouses
are shallow, with floor levels at ca. 35 cm below
the ground surface. Some erosional beveling of the
landform probably has occurred, but it is unlikely
that the houses were dug down much more than 50
cm, and some form of superstructure must have
extended above ground. Pieces of daub recovered
from the fill of Structure 1 suggested that it may
have had a wattle-and-daub superstructure. Patches
of clay/gravel and large rocks with plaster remnants found in the fill may indicate that Structure 2
had a partial masonry superstructure.
The possible structure is a small (190 x 85 cm)
subrectangular depression with cobbles, gravel, and
daub fragments mixed in its fill, and a mano cache
(n=3) along one end. Since it is too small to have
been a habitation, this possible structure may have
served as a storage facility or perhaps a small grinding shelter.
The precise duration of the occupations at the
Kent Creek site is not well established since there
are only three radiocarbon dates (see Table 2). The
two dates from the baking pit are problematic. They
may indicate reuse of the feature at different times,
but two use episodes some several hundred years
apart does not seem likely. The 1-sigma ranges for
these two dates do overlap somewhat, at A.D. 902985, and the feature might date to this time. Another interpretion is that the older date is accurate
while the upper sample may have been contaminated by younger carbon. The latter seems most
likely since the standard deviation for the upper
baking pit sample is quite large (i.e., + 250 years).
Since the earlier baking pit date is very close to the
date for Structure 1, it is suggested that the site
occupations occurred primarily around A.D. 7001000. Cruse (1992:124) calibrated an average of
the three dates and concluded that the site was
occupied between A.D. 690-1010, and the total
duration of the occupations may have been between
100-300 years.
Over 13,000 artifacts were collected from
Kent Creek, including 57 arrow points (Deadman’s
and Scallorn are the only identifiable types), 12
dart points (some identified as Ellis), a variety of
other chipped lithic tools (bifaces, unifaces, drills,
gouges, and spokeshaves), cores and debitage, 20
manos and 8 metate fragments, and 34 brownware
sherds. Of the latter, most were identified as
Jornada Brown, Roswell Brown, or Middle Pecos

Micaceous Brown, while one sherd is unlike any
varieties of Jornada Mogollon pottery and could
represent a locally made brownware. The faunal
assemblage indicates that the inhabitants killed and
ate more deer and/or antelope than any other animals, and only one bison element was recovered.
Other animals that may have been utilized for food
include skunks, rabbits, and turtles, while snake,
prairie dog, and other rodent remains are probably
intrusive. Pollen analyses provided somewhat
equivocal results (and a preservation bias is likely),
but slightly higher concentrations of Cheno-ams
were observed in some features. Charred plant remains recovered from extramural features indicate
that goosefoot and purslane may have been food
resources, and juniper and cottonwood/willow
were used as firewood. In addition, charred oak
acorns were recovered from the fill of the burial,
from a trough depression inside Structure 2, and
from the possible structure. Although the species
was not identified, it is likely that these represent
the use of shin oak (Quercus havardii) as a food
resource. The number of analyzed pollen and flotation samples was minimal, and Cruse (1992:141)
notes that "the possibility that horticulture was
practiced cannot be ruled out."
The Kent Creek site is interpreted as a multifunctional residential village but its size (i.e., the
number of pithouses present) is unknown because
the excavated area represents only a small portion
of a much larger site. The primary activities that
are evident at the site are hunting and processing
of small- to medium-sized animals; procurement,
processing, and possibly storage of plant foods; and
a full range of lithic tool manufacture and maintenance.

Sam Wahl Site (41GR291)

The Sam Wahl site was discovered in 1987
(Boyd et al. 1989) and tested in 1988 (Boyd et al.
1990). Diagnostic and unusual artifacts recovered
consist of four arrow points (including one Scallorn
and one Deadman’s), an untyped dart point, two
plain brownware sherds (cf. Jornada or Roswell
Brown), and a fragment of a pendant made of nonlocal kaolinite that is visually identical to the hydrothermally altered kaolinite found at Burro Mesa
in Big Bend National Park (Alex 1990). No radiocarbon dates were obtained, and a thermoluminescence date on a burned rock yielded an erroneous

Boyd-- The Palo Duro Complex

o

o

3,970 artifacts had been recovered.
Site chronology is established by 11
radiocarbon dates that indicate numerous occupations over a long period of time (Figure 7). When the
features, calibrated radiocarbon
dates, and artifacts were analyzed, it
was clear that they were separable
into three time periods that were defined as separate analysis units.
A burial component consists of a
single cairn-covered burial (discussed below) that is radiocarbon
dated to ca. A.D. 230 to 400. This
burial is some two centuries earlier
than, and may be unrelated to, the
earliest occupational evidence at the
site. The late occupation period is
defined by 1,916 artifacts and two
features that are radiocarbon dated
to ca. A.D. 1150/1200 to 1350/1400.
This later occupation postdates the
Palo Duro complex and appears to
have been quite different from the
earlier occupations.
The early occupation period is attributed to the Palo Duro complex
and is represented by 1,445 artifacts

29

BLOCK 4
O BLOCK

LEGEND
-- Backhoe Trench
Blade Cut
o Excavation Unit
¯ Feature in Blade Cut

BLOCK 3

~5

28

Cairn Burial
BLOCK 1
37
thouse
0
0

10
40

20
80

4O
160

feet
Contour Interval = 50 cm

~

LEGEND

o HeorthtookJng Pit
~ Burned Rock Cluster

meters
0 510 20

Figure 6. Map of the north-central portion of 41GR291
showing locations of data recovery mechanical excavations,
hand excavations, and cultural features.

475

1400 LATE
OCCUPATION
PERIOD

age. The site occupations were considered to date
to Late Prehistoric I times and to represent a manifestation of the Palo Duro complex.
Data recovery excavations in 1992 consisted
of extensive mechanical excavations (three long
maintainer blade cuts and 36 backhoe trenches) and
hand excavation of 106 lxl m units (Figure 6). The
extensive mechanical excavations were done in an
effort to locate buried structures and features and
these were quite successful. Many of the features
that were critical for accurately interpreting the site
(i.e., the pithouse and storage pit features) were
first encountered in maintainer bladecuts and backhoe trenches, and they might not have been discovered otherwise.
By the end of the data recovery investigations,
37 cultural features had been documented and

O’,mcoe~umed

8OO
EARLY

OCCUPATION
I

Z

F.17 He:Y~
F.41
8’°r°ge

PERIOD

5~

t

BURIAL
COMPONENT

Fo23

Figure 7. Graph of calibrated radiocarbon dates from
the Sam Wahl site.

476

Texas Archeological Society

and a feature complex that consists
of a pithouse, 10 storage pits, and
two baking pits that are radiocarbon
dated to ca. A.D. 600 to 1050/1100.
The pithouse (Feature 37) is a 3 x
3.5 m oval, basin-shaped depression
that was dug down ca. 40 cm below
the former ground surface into the
bedrock substrate (Figure 8). Two
large oval-basin metates were found
Figure 8. Overview of excavated pithouse at the Sam Wahl site (looking
cached (i.e., stored upside down) innorthwest). The two largest rocks are upside-down metates.
side the pithouse, and a third slabtype metate in the structure (found
in the backhoe trench) also may have
storage capacities of these pits range from 0.24been cached. Subtle burned areas in the central
0.31
m-~ for the smallest to 0.53-0.68 m3 for the
floor of the pithouse may represent an interior
largest.
Flotation samples did not provide definihearth(s); no definite entryway was identified, but
tive
evidence
of what was being stored, but charred
it may have been to the southwest. Charred mesgrass seeds (four taxa) were abundant and may
quite beans were recovered from the floor of the
represent the use of grass linings inside the pits.
pithouse.
Other features associated with the early occuThe 10 storage pits (Features 17-20, 24-25,
pation period include two baking pits that presum30-32, and 39) are all quite similar in morphology,
ably were used to cook some type of plant food.
being round in plan view and ranging in diameter
Unfortunately, flotation of the feature fill failed to
from 85-110 cm and 50-80 cm deep with rounded
yield any definitive macrobotanical evidence of
to flat bottoms and sides that taper slightly inward
what plants were being cooked. Notably, the rocks
(Figure 9). All of the pits are intrusive ca. 40-60
used in the construction of one of the baking pits
cm into bedrock, and two had large oval-basin
included 25 recycled ground stone fragments (mano,
metates cached (again upside down) at the top of
metate, and indeterminate fragments) representing
the pit. The fill of these features is generally fairly
31 percent of the total rocks.
clean sandy sediment (except for one that may have
In addition to the pithouse/storage pit/baking
been backfilled with trash), and there is little doubt
pit complex, two bedrock mortars were found 170
that they represent storage pits. They are all clusm southwest of the pithouse. Although these featered into a relatively small 8 x 8 m area (see Figure
tures cannot be directly dated, they are indirectly
6), and it is hypothesized that they were located in
associated with the early occupation period because
this particular spot and dug into the bedrock in
a broken pestle was found on the floor of the
order to provide rodent-proof storage. The estimated

a
Figure 9. Storage pit (Feature 17) at various stages of excavation: (a) Half-excavated pit; (b)
completely excavated pit.

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Co~nplex

pithouse. This provides circumstantial evidence that
mortars were used at approximately the same time
as the pithouse.
One of the late occupation period features (Feature 12) is of particular importance and is radiocarbon dated to ca. A.D. 1200. It is a well-defined,
ovate (2 x 3 m) charcoal-stained area that is superimposed on top of, and definitely postdates, two of
the storage pits (Features 17 and 18). A small charcoal-filled pit along one edge of the stain appears
to represent an in situ unlined hearth. This feature
is interpreted as representing an ephemeral surface
house with a small interior fireplace. If this interpretation is correct, then the occupants of the Sam
Wahl site may have shifted from living in pithouses
during Palo Duro times to living in surface houses
after ca. A.D. 1100.
The early occupation is interpreted as a small
pithouse village of the Palo Duro complex. Plant
procurement, processing, and storage were major
activities. Except for the mesquite beans found in
the pithouse, the specific plants that might have
been utilized are not well documented. Charred
remains of some other plants, such as Chenopodium
and cucurbit seeds, may represent food resources,
but their archeological contexts do not confirm this
interpretation. The charred cucurbit seeds cannot
be identified to species and probably represent a
wild species (such as Buffalo Gourd) rather than a
cultivated variety, but the absence of domesticated
plants in the macrobotanical samples from 41GR291
cannot be interpreted as an absence of agriculture
altogether. Since the absence of cuttigen remains
could be due to differential preservation or plantprocessing techniques that did not result in charred
remains, the question of whether the early occupants were involved in farming must remain open.
The archeo!ogical evidence (primarily the features and artifacts) suggests that there were dramatic changes in site function and subsistence
activities around A.D. 1100. In general, the early
occupation period is characterized by a greater dependence upon plant processing (i.e., more and
larger ground stone tools), and the late occupation
period is characterized by a greater reliance upon
hunting (i.e., more arrow points) and an increase in
the manufacture of chipped stone tools (i.e., more
unmodified debitage). It is hypothesized that the
increasing importance of hunting activities and the
shift from pithouses to surface houses are related to
climatic changes that occurred around A.D. 1100.

477

There is not enough evidence to determine whether
the late occupation represents a late variant of the
Pa!o Duro complex or something else entirely.

Campsites and Rockshelters
Twelve campsites and four rockshelters that
have been tested/excavated constitute the bulk of
the archeological data for the Palo Duro complex.
Boyd et al. (1996) present individual site summaries for Palo Duro campsites and rockshelters, but
they are only discussed briefly as a group here.
Subsurface investigations at many open campsites have produced definable Palo Duro components with artifact assemblages that are useful for
comparative purposes, while investigations at other
campsites have yielded only minimal evidence of
Palo Duro occupations (Table 3). The level of work
at these sites varies from minimal testing with scattered units, to comprehensive excavations involving
large blocks of contiguous units. The discreteness of
the Palo Duro components or occupations, and the
quality of the data reporting, also range from very
good to very poor. Thus, one must take into account
the quality and quantity of the archeological data
when evaluating the interpretations offered by various investigators. To illustrate the differences, it is
notable that only five of the campsites meet the
following criteria: (1) have discrete Palo Duro components with definable artifact assemblages of over
1,000 specimens, (2) have had more than 30 m2 of
hand excavation, and (3) have adequately reported
excavation data that are useful for comparative purposes. As discussed later, however, it is clear that
the campsites vary considerably in terms of site
function and intensity of use/occupation.
One point in regard to open campsite investigations is worth stressing. Most campsites attributed to the Palo Duro complex were investigated
before pithouse structures were recognized as an
important component of the complex. The existence of residential base villages has been realized
only within the last decade, and archeologists were
not consciously searching for such evidence prior
to this time. Cruse (1992) excavated at the Kent
Creek site for quite some time before accidentally
discovering the pithouses there, and a substantia!
mechanical testing effort at the Sam Wahl site was
specifically designed to search for buried houses.
Since the pithouses at these sites were undetectable
on the surface, it is very possible that many of the

478

Texas Archeological Society
Table 3. Summary of Campsites Attributed to the Palo Duro Complex
Total No. of
Area

Site/Component

No.

Diagnostic Artifacts

Assessment of

Artifacts in

Excavated

of

Palo Duro

(m2)

Dates

Assemblage

Points

Brownware

Palo Duro

Data

Sherds

Component

Quality

?

x

good

none

--

1,701

x

good

good

70

--

1,492

x

good

good

Cat Hollow

27

2

623

x

good

fair

Gobbler Creek Bridge

53

3

2,160

x

good

good

South Sage Creek

62

1

2,052

x

X

good

good

11

6

Blue Clay

65

County Line

Chalk Hollow,
upper midden

7

--

213

x

X

~ir

fair

Maintenance Barn

28

--

?

x

X

poor

fair

South Ridge, East

32

--

x

X

good

good

Floydada Country Club

108

--

?

x

X

poor

poor

Montgomery

>20

--

?

x

X

poor

poor

15

--

?

x

X

unknown

fair

Fatheree, Area 1

Big Spring

1,077

*See Table 1 for references to site investigations
Component
good = discrete component
fair = may be discrete component but investigations are limited
poor = component is mixed or otherwise poorly defined
unknown = possible Palo Duro component cannot be adequately defined

Data Quality
good = data adequately reported and sample size is adequate
fair = data adequately reported but sample size is small
poor = assemblages are not defined/definable
none = no data are reported

campsites listed in Table 3 are actually residential
bases. Sites that have a wide diversity of features
and artifact types, brownware ceramics, and large
ground stone tool assemblages are particularly likely
to be residential bases.
The South Sage Creek site is an example of a
site that has many interesting characteristics that
indicate it is a good candidate for a possible residential base. It is the only other site in the region

that has yielded a complete large basin metate, like
those found in association with the pithouse and
storage pits at the Sam Wahl site. Unfortunately,
the South Sage Creek site was not recognized as a
Palo Duro complex site at the time that the data
recovery work was planned and, without realizing
the potential for structural remains, the investigation strategy was quite different from that employed
at the Sam Wahl site.

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex

Four rockshelters in the Caprock Canyonlands
contain evidence of occupations by Palo Duro
peoples or date to Palo Duro complex times. The
archeological evidence suggests that the canyonland
rockshelters were used in different ways by Palo
Duro peoples (Table 4). Occupations at Boren Shelter No. 2 (lower shelter) were brief and periodic,
generating little cultural debris (only 28 artifacts
excluding debitage). Occupations at the Canyon
City Club Cave also appear to have been brief and
generated few artifacts (44 excluding debitage), but
the greater number of projectile points and bones
indicates that hunting was a primary activity. In
contrast, a higher frequency of artifacts (643 excluding debitage) indicates that occupations at
Deadman’s Shelter were much more intensive (i.e.,
of longer duration and more frequent). While hunting is well represented (i.e, points account for 15
percent of all artifacts), the number of manos and
metates is exceptionally high (17 percent of all
artifacts). In addition, the total artifact assemblage
from Deadman’s is quite varied, and certainly denotes a wide range of activities. Consequently, the
data are interpreted to mean that occupations at
Deadman’s Shelter were more like those at multifunctional campsites or residential bases than those
at the other rockshelters.

479

Burials

Human burials in the Southern Plains are particularly important because they provide direct evidence of cultural behavior that is very different
from the subsistence activities documented at most
sites. There are only 10 burial locations in the region that include burials dating to Late Prehistoric I
times and have a bearing on defining or understanding the Palo Duro complex (Figure 10). Of
these, only seven burials at five localities are definitely or possibly affiliated with the Palo Duro complex.
The burial of an adult male, in an almost extended position with its legs semiflexed in an oval
pit inside Deadman’s Shelter, is described by Willey
and Hughes (1978b:154, 190). The skeleton was
accompanied by the following artifacts as grave
offerings: a complete terrapin (mud turtle) shell,
two mussel shells, and nine modified deer bones
(an awl, an ulna, and seven neatly stacked split
metapodial halves). The burial apparently occurred
during or near the end of Statum D times, radiocarbon dated to A.D. 79-383 (see Table 2). Based on
similarities in cranial measurements, Willey (1978)
indicated that the Deadman’s cranium was most
similar to skeletal populations at Pecos Pueblo, and

Table 4. Comparison of Palo Duro Complex Components at Rockshelters
Deadman’s Shelter

Canyon City Club

Boren Shelter No. 2

(all strata)

Cave (Level 4)

(Lower Shelter)

35-50
(estimated)**

16.7

<30

30

41.8

15 (inside only)

630

44

28

3,720

?

88

No. of faunal elements

2,000+

1,844

482

No. of points/manos and metates

96/108

1314

1/0

Attributes
Shelter size

(m2)

Area excavated (mz) including areas
outside shelter
No. of artifacts (excluding debitage)
No. of debitage

*See Table 1 for references to site investigations. Blue Spring Shelter is excluded from this table because no excavation data
have been reported.
**The size of the shelter is estimated because dimensions are not given and the shelter was not completely excavated.

480

Texas Archeological Society

pendants. The tip of an arrow
point was found beneath the
skeleton, and since the grave
fill was otherwise devoid of
cultural material, Cruse
(1992:55) speculated that an
arrow wound may have been
the cause of death. Since the
pit was dug into the floor and
the gravelly fill was piled up
above the level of the floor,
the pithouse must have been
abandoned immediately after
the interment. Thus, a radiocarbon date on charcoal from
the floor of Structure 1 places
the approximate age of the
interment at A.D. 665-977
(see Table 2).
The Jim Arnold site, also
located along Kent Creek in
Hall County, consists of a ca.
60 cm thick cultural zone exposed in a gravel pit. Two
separate but closely spaced
burial pits observed in the wall
of the gravel pit were subsequently investigated by
Cultural Affiliation
o Polo Duro Complex
Tunnell (1964). Both burials
® Unknown, possibly Palo Duro Complex
had been disturbed by gravel
~ Plains Woodland/Custer Phase
operations and subsequent
[] Blow Out Mountain Phase
0 Unknown
slumping of the edges of the
* Exact location within county is not known
P&A It9515L H
gravel pit walls. Hence, the
skeletal materials and artifacts
Figure 10. Map of selected Late Prehistoric I burials in the Texas Panhandle
that were recovered are incomPlains.
plete, but sufficient information was salvaged to indicate
the nature of the graves. Burial
1,
a
young
adult
female,
had been dislodged from
to Middle Woodland and Kansas Hopewell populathe
burial
pit,
but
four
modified
deer bones (two
tions. He tentatively suggested a possible genetic
awls
and
two
awl
fragments)
were
found with the
affiliation representing a mixture of Southwestern
redeposited skeletal remains. Burial 2, an adult male,
and Woodland traits.
was partially intact, probably in a semiflexed posiThe burial of an adult female, tightly flexed in
tion, inside an oval pit. Associated grave offerings,
a circular pit in the floor of Structure 1 at the Kent
which were found in situ, consisted of six modified
Creek site (see Figure 5), contained four modified
deer bones (three awls and three split metapodial
deer bones (one awl and three split metapodial
halves) and three modified mussel shells as grave
halves), three mussel shells (two unworked valves
and one with notches along its ventral edge), and a
offerings. One of the mussel valves had a ground
bifacial chert knife.
edge and may have been used as a scraper, while
The graves at the Jim Arnold site, located
the other two had drilled holes, were found in the
within 1 meter of each other, are similar in that
skeleton’s chest area, and probably were worn as

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex
both were primary interments in shallow oval pits,
both were in identical stratigraphic contexts with
identical pit fill, and both contained modified deer
bones. Tunnell (1964) noted that the burial pits
were intrusive into a sterile zone from the bottom
of the overlying cultural zone. No investigation of
the cultural zone was made, but flint artifacts and
bison bones were noted and dart points were found
on the surface. Tunnell (1964) could not determine
their age and cultural affiliation, but subsequent
researchers (Hughes 1991; Miller 1992; Willey and
Hughes 1978b:190) have indicated that the Jim
Arnold burials are probably associated with the Palo
Duro complex, and noted that the burial site is
located less than 2 km from the Kent Creek site.
Lacking a radiocarbon date or any temporally diagnostic artifacts, the assignment of this burial to the
Palo Duro complex is based only on similarities in
mortuary offerings.
The four burials described above are considered
to be affiliated with the Palo Duro complex, and
they exhibit many similar mortuary characteristics.
All are primary burials containing modified deer
bones as grave offerings, and three of the burials
contained a combination of deer bone awls, split
deer metapodials (awl preforms), and modified and
unmodifed mussel shells. The burials differ in pit
shape (round to oval) and in skeletal placement
within the pits (nearly extended to tightly flexed),
but differences in their intrasite contexts (one in a
house, two in open campsites, and one in a
rockshelter) may account for some of this
variability.
Two individuals buried in a single cairn-covered pit in Donley County were excavated in 1938
(Witte 1955). Both were buried in flexed positions,
but one was reported to have been placed "head
downward" on top of a "carefully prepared sitting
burial" (Witte 1955:85). The skeletons represent
adults (sex not determined) that had apparently been
killed. Two arrow points were found among the
ribs and left scapula of the first individual, and five
arrow points were found in the torso and pelvic
areas of the second person. The points, several of
which have impact breaks, are quite similar to
Deadman’s points in that they have corner to basal
notches and long prominent barbs (see Witte
1955:Plate 13), but the burial specimens are generally larger (i.e., longer and wider with slightly
broader expanding stems) and have serrated blades.
No grave offerings were present, but the points

481

indicate that the burial dates to the Late Prehistoric
I period. Although its precise location is not stated,
the Double Burial site is !ocated between 50 and
100 km north of the Kent Creek site.
The Double Burial is undated, but the associated points indicate that it is probably contemporaneous with, and perhaps related to, the Palo Duro
complex. This was suggested by Willey and Hughes
(1978b: 190) based primarily on the similarities of
the burial points to the Deadman’s arrow point style.
This interpretation is plausible, but the fact that
these two individuals probably were killed by arrows tipped with Deadman’ s-like points is equally
important. An alternative interpretation is that these
individuals may have been killed by people of the
Palo Duro culture rather than having been Palo
Duro peoples themselves, and this possibility also
has been noted by Lintz (1986:225).
The only other burial that might possibly be
associated with the Palo Duro complex is one found
at the Sam Wahl site. It is a single, cairn-covered
human interment (Feature 23 in Figure 6) that is
radiocarbon dated to A.D. 256-415. The human
skeletal materials were found in an oval pit and are
interpreted as a secondary (i.e, bundle) burial of a
middle-aged male. The bones were extremely fragmented and jumbled, and their context (in a tight
cluster in one portion of the pit) suggested that they
might have been confined inside an organic container such as a basket or a hide bag. The only
grave inclusions were a ground and faceted piece
of hematite (i.e., paint stone), and a 6 cm long
Scallorn arrow point. The latter was found in a
context suggesting that an arrow had been laid over
the bone cluster.
Since the Sam Wahl site burial dates to the
transitional Archaic period and is earlier than the
earliest documented occupations at the site, it is
possible that the burial is not associated with the
Palo Duro complex at all. This interpretation is
supported by the fact that the Sam Wahl burial is
quite different from the three Palo Duro burials
described above, none of which are secondary cairn
burials. An alternative interpretation is that the
burial is affiliated with the early Palo Duro complex.
Three lines of circumstantial evidence suggest that
this interpretation is tenable: (1) the burial at the
Sam Wahl site is approximately contemporaneous
with the Palo Duro complex burial at Deadman’s
Shelter; (2) the associated Scallorn arrow point,
although unusually large, would not be stylistically

482

Texas Archeological Society

occurred on-site. Not surprisingly, the residential
bases have the widest range of activity diversity
with 15-16 of the 17 artifact categories represented.
Deadman’s Shelter also has a high activity diversity
with 15 categories represented, while all of the
campsites exhibit moderate artifact diversities with
between 10 and 13 categories represented. Boren
Shelter No. 2 has the lowest artifact diversity with
only 9 of the 17 categories represented.
Two other calculations presented in Table 6
are useful for further comparing and contrasting
these components. One is the total artifact density,
calculated as the number of artifacts per mz of
excavation, and the other is the adjusted artifact
density, calculated as the number of artifacts
(excluding unmodified debitage) per mE of
excavation. These artifact densities are considered
to be crude measures of the relative intensity and/or
duration of occupation.
The Kent Creek site and Deadman’s Shelter
have much higher total artifact densities than do any

out of place in the Palo Duro complex; and (3) the
burial was found at a pithouse village of the Palo
Duro complex. Based on the current evidence,
however, the cultural affiliation of the burial from
the Sam Wahl site is debatable, and the possibility
that it represents a burial of a transitional Archaic
or even a Plains Woodland (i.e., Lake Creek)
individual cannot be discounted.

REDEFINITION OF THE
PALO DURO COMPLEX
Chronology

Many components attributed to the Palo Duro
complex have been radiocarbon dated (Figure 11;
see Table 2). Occupations that are attributable to
the Palo Duro complex may have begun during
transitional Archaic times (ca. A.D. 0-500), but are
definitely recognizable by at least A.D. 500. Palo
Duro occupations apparently continued until around
A.D. 1100, but they seem to disappear quite suddenly. Thus, the Palo Duro complex is
contemporaneous with the Plains
Woodland occupations in the northern
YEARS RESIDENTIAL
BASES

ROCKSHELTERS

CAMPSITES

3URIAL

(A.D.)

Texas Panhandle (i.e., the Lake Creek
complex) and western Oklahoma, the
Blow Out Mountain phase of West
Central Texas, and the pithouse phases
of the Jornada Mogollon and Middle
Pecos areas.

Kent
Creek

Som
Wahl,
Eady

Cot
-k~llow,
Lc~,er

Ct~tk
Hollo,v,
Upper

Deo~
man’s
Shelter

Cony~
~
~kxen
Shelt~’g2,
City
Spring
Loa~
CiubCav~ Shelter

Som
Wahl

1500.
~

Subsistence and Site Function
Material Culture
A comparison of artifacts recovered from residential base camps,
rockshelters, and campsites of the Palo
Duro complex indicates that there are
some significant similarities and
differences between and among these
site types. The data presented in Tables
5 and 6 show that the Palo Duro
material culture is extremely diverse
overall, but that there are some sites,
presumably where limited or special
activities occurred, where the diversity
is rather low. The site data may be
compared using the artifact diversity
index (see Table 6) as a crude representation of the variability in activities that

1000

-

500 -

0
P&Altg,5/SLH

]~ Calibrated Radiocarbon Dates

~ Uncalibrated Radiocarbon Dates

Figure 11. Graph of radiocarbon dates for Palo Duro complex
components.

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex

483

484

Texas Archeological Society

o

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Co~nplex

48~

of the other sites. As discussed below, this may be
Wahl, and its radiocarbon dates indicate that it was
due to differences in site function or in the total
occupied repeatedly for a long time, perhaps as
duration and intensity of the occupations, but one
much as 450 years during the early occupation peother factor also plays a role in the unusually high
riod (see Figure 11). Thus, one must suspect that
artifact density seen at Kent Creek. The Kent Creek
the differences in the artifact densities at these two
site has a significantly higher percentage of unsites are related primarily to site function rather
modified debitage (accounting for 97 percent of all
than the duration of the occupations.
artifacts recovered) than does Deadman’s Shelter
Another calculation useful for identifying site
(debitage represents 86 percent of all artifacts) or
function is the projectile point/grinding tool index
any of the other sites (debitage represents 76-91
(see Table 6), calculated as the number of projecpercent of all artifacts). The differential availability
tile points divided by the number of grinding tools
of lithic source materials seems to be a partial expla(manos, metates, and pestles only). The projectile
nation for the higher total artifact density at Kent
point/grinding tool index is a crude measure of the
Creek, because it is the only site where good quality
relative importance of hunting vs. plant processing
chert is immediately available and abundant. Tecovas
within each component. When the adjusted artifact
jasper, which is found in the stream terrace gravels
densities are compared with the projectile point/
exposed on-site, comprises over 90 percent of all
grinding tool indexes, the Palo Duro components
the stone artifacts at Kent Creek and most of the
display considerable variability that may be attribcorticate debitage represents stream-worn gravels
uted to differential site function and use intensity
(Cruse 1992:72 and Table 2). Because the Kent
(Figure 12).
Creek occupants were sitting on a chert source area,
Somewhat surprisingly, the Kent Creek site
it is not surprising that they would generate a higher
has the highest representation of hunting activities
percentage of waste lithic debris than would people
while the Sam Wahl site is at the opposite end of
in areas located much farther from good quality
the spectrum. The vast difference between these
lithic sources.
two residential bases is interpreted as evidence that
The immediate availability of lithic material is
these two residential bases functioned quite differonly a partial explanation for this phenomenon,
ently. While the diversity of artifacts indicates that
because when the adjusted artifact densities are compared, the Kent Creek site
falls to second place, but it still appears
NIGH
to have been used more intensively than
4, LOW
INTENSITY/DURATION
¯
OF OCCUPATION
INTENSIVE
most of the other sites. The adjusted
×
NUNTING
t,
artifact density indicates that the most
Kent Creek
intensively occupied site is Deadman’s
.~
Shelter, and the radiocarbon dates sugCounty Une
~3
gest that this may be due in part to the
~"
_z
long duration of repeated occupations
RELATIVE
there (perhaps as much as 500-800
IMPORTANCE
,7-21
OF ACTIVITIES
years). The spatial confinement of acFatheree
~
tivities within the rockshelter also may
~"
oSo~h Rk~
have played a role in that refuse accu~
mulation would be expected to be much
~ 1 -t Sam Wahl
more concentrated.
Deedmen’s
,B,ue Clay
Shelter
The Kent Creek site, with the second highest adjusted artifact density,
has radiocarbon dates that indicate this
5
10
15
20
residential base was occupied for at least
ARTIFACT DENSITY (per ma)
200-400 years and perhaps as long as
R~helter
~ Cam~ite ¯ Residential Base
400-600 years. In contrast to Kent
Creek, the least intensively used site
Figure t 2. Comparison of artifact density and projectile point/grinding
(except for Boren Shelter No. 2) is Sam
tool indexes for Palo Duro components.
C.43! HO~!OW

, , , , .... ,,,

486

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

both sites were multifunctional, the data presented
in Figure 12, along with other lines of evidence
discussed below, support the interpretation that the
Sam Wahl site was a specialized residential base
and that the primary activities there were related to
the processing, storage, and utilization of plant
foods. The low artifact density at Sam Wahl is
further explained by the fact that these activities
would have generated much less residue, particularly chipped stones, than would hunting activities.
All of the Palo Duro campsites exhibit similar
artifact densities but vary considerably in terms of
site function. While hunting activities are fairly
well represented at the County Line, Fatheree, and
South Ridge sites, plant processing was very much
the dominant activity at the Blue Clay, South Sage
Creek, Gobbler Creek Bridge, and Cat Hollow sites.
In this regard, the latter sites are more like the Sam
Wahl site than they are the other campsites.
The chipped stone tool assemblages from Palo
Duro sites (see Table 5) can be characterized as
being rather homogeneous, but the relative frequencies of artifacts vary considerably from site to site.
When only the chipped stone tools (i.e., projectile
points, drills, gouges, bifaces, cobble tools, unifaces,
and edge-modified flakes) are considered, and sites
with stone tool samples of less than 50 specimens
are excluded, some interesting patterns emerge.
Unifaces and edge-modified flakes are the most
common tools, and they respectively constitute between 10-40 percent and 20-53 percent of all
chipped stone tools in a single site. Most of these
tools cannot be attributed to specific functions, but
they occur in relatively high frequencies both in
sites where activities were mainly hunting oriented
and in sites where plant processing was the dominant activity. Projectile points, bifaces, and cobble
tools are less common in general but are quite variable from site to site, respectively constituting between 2-43 percent, 3-24 percent, and 2-26 percent
of the chipped stones at any one type of site. There
is a tendency for cobble tools to be much better
represented at plant-processing sites, and it has
been suggested that these tools may have been used
to refurbish (i.e., peck the surfaces of) grinding
stones (Boyd et al. 1994:78-79, 145). Two classes,
drills and gouges, are generally rare and respectively make up between 0-5 percent and 0-8 percent of chipped stone tools at any one site.
Most of the gouges found at Palo Duro sites
are Clear Fork-type unifaces (Turner and Hester

1985:205-208), and they usually have some
evidence of haft wear. There is a tendency, albeit
weak, for these tools to be better represented at
sites where intensive plant processing occurred. If
gouges were used for wood working, as has been
suggested for South Texas (Hester et al. 1973),
then it is possible that they were used as adzes for
making and maintaining digging sticks or other
wooden tools. Alternatively, gouges could have
been used to tip the ends of some type of multipurpose scraping/planing tool or digging stick (Ray
1941:161-162). Of particular interest, Clear Fork
gouges have been found in sufficient frequencies
and at enough Palo Duro complex sites to dispel
the popular notion that they are diagnostic Archaic
tools in the Panhandle Plains (e.g., Bagot and
Hughes 1979:50; Etchieson et al. 1977:33, 35,
1978:83, 1979:353; D. Hughes 1984:116; J. Hughes
1991:19).
Dart points are present at some sites, and despite the possibility of earlier components in some
cases, there seems to be growing evidence for the
contemporaneous use of dart and arrow points in
the Southern Plains between ca. A.D. 200 and A.D.
500 (see Boyd et al. 1996). The arrow points associated with the Palo Duro complex are characterized as early corner-notched and stemmed forms
that are usually typed as Scallorn and Deadman’s,
respectively. However, arrow point assemblages
also are characterized by a great deal of variability,
and there are seldom few specimens from any one
site that can be considered classic Scallorn or
Deadman’s forms. One need only look at the early
arrow point forms from the Sam Wahl, Kent Creek,
and Deadman’s Shelter sites (Figures 13-15) to see
the diversity in gross morphology. Points typed as
Deadman’s generally have the diagnostic long slender barbs and long straight or bulbous stems, but
other variations include specimens with shorter, often reworked, barbs and wider Scallorn-like expanding stems. Most of the points typed as Scallorn
do not fit the classic wide-stemmed form illustrated by Turner and Hester (1985:189), but conform more closely to the coryell and eddy varieties
illustrated by Jelks (1962:Figure 13). The Scallorn
and Scallorn-like specimens from Palo Duro sites
often appear to be nothing more than reworked
Deadman’s points with the barbs shortened or removed altogether.
Ground stone tools are obviously well
represented at some Palo Duro sites (see Table 5),

Boyd D The Palo Duro Complex

0

I
cm

Figure 13. Early arrow points from the Sam Wahl site: a,
Bonham; b-e, Scallorn. A barb fragment, typed as Deadman’s,
is not illustrated. Specimen e is associated with the cairn
burial.

but the assemblage from Sam Wahl is rather unique
in comparison with the other sites. There appear to
be three sets of grinding tools repesented at the Sam
Wahl site. One set consists of the thin oval pestles
used with pointed-oval bedrock mortars. These may
be tools for grinding mesquite beans, as has been

487

suggested for mortars (bedrock and portable)
and pestles throughout the southwestern United
States (Bel! and Castetter ! 937). The abundance
of pestles at Mesilla phase sites in the Tularosa
Basin is considered to be evidence of extensive
mesquite processing (Carmichael 1986:220),
and it is possible that bedrock mortars, which
are common in the Caprock Canyonlands, may
have been used in a similar fashion.
The second set of grinding tools consists of
flat-faced manos, usually sandstone, used with
fiat-slab metates, and the third set consists of
convex-faced manos, usually quartzite, used
with oval-basin metates. The latter set is the
best represented of the grinding tools at the Sam
Wahl site. Caching (or storing) of complete
large oval-basin metates may indicate that this
grinding tool kit was the most important in
terms of the amount of materials being processed at Sam Wahl.

o

t

/
0

1
×

o
I

Figure 14. Scallorn and Deadman’s arrow points
from the Kent Creek site: a-g, Deadman’s; h-o,
Scallorn. Drawn from selected specimens illustrated
in Cruse (1992:Figure 18).

I

Figure 15. S caltorn and Deadman’s arrow points from
Deadman’s Shelter: a-j, Scallorn; k-y, Deadman’s.
Drawn from selected specimens illustrated in Willey
and Hughes (1978:Figures 54 and 55).

488

Texas Archeological Society

Although less abundant, the grinding tools from
the Kent Creek site do exhibit roughly the same
morphological variability as do those from Sam
Wahl. At Kent Creek, no complete metates were
found, but the fragments represent both slab and
basin types (one fragment of a thick slab with a
deeply worn concavity), and the manos are either
oval in shape with flat or convex faces or they are
rectangular with flat faces. Two of the rectangular
manos have beveled faces.
When the ground stone assemblages from the
residential bases are compared by material type and
completeness, an interesting pattern emerges (Table
7). Metate fragments heavily dominate the assemblage at Sam Wahl, but they are only moderately
abundant at the Kent Creek site. In addition, most
of the metate fragments at Sam Wahl were recycled
(i.e., reused as hearthstones), while none of those at
Kent Creek were found in recycled contexts: Since

Triassic sandstones and Quaternary gravel outcrops
are immediately available at both sites, the distance
to material sources is not a factor affecting the
frequency of grinding tools. Thus, some other factor must account for these differences. While it is
possible that grinding activities were simply more
important at Sam Wahl than at Kent Creek, this
explanation is not totally satisfactory. Schlanger
(1990, 1991) has observed that complete and fragmentary ground stones are considerably more abundant in villages sites that were occupied for longer
periods of time. The early occupations at the Sam
Wahl site lasted for some 400 years or more (based
on six radiocarbon dates), certainly long enough
for numerous’ grinding implements to have been
broken and recycled. The chronology of the Kent
Creek site is less precise (see discussion above),
but it may have been reoccupied for only one or
two centuries. If this is the case, then the lower

Table 7. Comparison of Grinding Assemblages
from the Sam Wahl and Kent Creek Sites
Kent Creek Site

Sam Wahl Site, Early Occupation

Sandstone

Tool Class

#

Sandstone

Quartzite

%

#

%

Quartzite

%

#

%

Manos
Complete

1

1.3

5

6.4

6

21.4

2

7.2

Fragments

4

5.1

5

6.4

6

21.4

6

21.4

Metates
Complete

5

6.4

48

61.5

3

3.8

7

9.0

Subtotals

68

87.2

GRAND TOTALS

78

Fragments

....
--

--

8

28.6

Pestles
Complete
Fragments
Other
Complete
Fragments

(100.0)

......

10

12.8

20

28

71.4

(100.0)

8

28.6

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex
frequency of grinding tool recycling could be a
function of time rather than evidence that grinding
activities were less important at Kent Creek. As
discussed later (see "Seasonality, Residential Mobility, and Settlement Pattern" below), differential
abandonment processes (i.e., planned vs. unplanned)
are evident at these sites and at dwellings within
these sites.
The results of a study of ground stone tools in
the Jornada Mogollon area by Calamia (1991) support the interpretations that the Sam Wahl and Kent
Creek sites are both residential bases but that their
functions are somewhat different. It was observed
that complete manos are much more common in
special-activity sites, while broken manos are more
common in residential bases. Calamia (1991 :Figure
8) shows that only ca. 38 percent of the manos found
at Jornada Mogollon residential bases are complete,
compared to ca. 77 percent complete manos at special-activity sites. The higher frequency of broken
manos at residential bases is thought to be related to
the greater intensity and/or duration of occupations
that occurred there. The percentages of whole manos
at the Sam Wahl and Kent Creek sites (ca. 40 percent at each) are very close to the figure given for
Jornada Mogollon residential bases.

489

Calamia (1991:Figures 2-7) also uses mano
size as an indirect measure of residential mobility
and intensity of plant processing in the Jornada
region. He demonstrates that manos are generally
smaller at special-activity sites than at residential
bases and that there is a general increase in the size
of manos through time (from the Archaic period to
the E1 Paso phase). Other researchers have
suggested that increasing mano size is a reflection
of increasing dependence upon plant foods in
general and horticulture in particular (e.g., Mauldin
1991, 1993).
When the mano size data for the Sam Wahl
and Kent Creek sites are compared (Table 8), another interesting pattern emerges (acknowledging
that the sample sizes are quite small and thus interpretations are tentative). Although ground stones
are most abundant at the Sam Wahl site, the manos
there are considerably smaller than those at the
Kent Creek site. These data may indicate that grinding activities were more intensive at the Kent Creek
site but that the overall duration of occupations was
longer at the Sam Wahl site. If the site occupations
were sequential, these data could reflect increasing
dependence upon plant resources through time, as
is suggested for the Jornada area. But there is no

Table 8. Comparison of Mano Size Data for Palo Duro Complex Residential Bases
Attributes

Sam Wahl (Early Occupation)

Kent Creek

6

8

Length

7.1-11.4

9.7-14.0

Width

5.4-8.5

8.3-9.9

Thickness

2.9-6.2

2.6-5.7

11.6

Sample Size (# of whole manos)
Size Range (minimum-maximum, cm)

Mean Size (cm)
Length

9.0

Width

7.2

8.7

Thickness

4.6

3.5

Mean Length/Width Ratio

1.25

1.34

Mean Grinding Surface Area (cm2)*

66.5

101.38

*Grinding area is an approximation that is figured as length times width. It slightly overestimates the grinding areas of most
manos because they are subrectangular, oval, or round rather than rectangular or square.

490

Texas Archeological Society

evidence indicating that the Kent Creek site occupations are dominantly later than those at the Sam
Wahl site. In fact, the chronometric evidence points
to the contrary, and it appears that the Palo Duro
components are more or less contemporaneous, but
that occupations of the Sam Wahl site continued
later (i.e., the post-A.D. 1100 late occupation period) than at the Kent Creek site. If the Palo Duro
occupations at these sites were indeed contemporaneous (perhaps with Sam Wahl being occupied more
frequently), then the data may be interpreted as
representing differences in site function. This interpretation is preferred, and it is possible that differences in the grinding tools between these sites are
due to the processing of different plants (see "Faunal and Floral Remains" below).
The ceramics from Palo Duro sites are interesting for a variety of reasons. Sherds are usually
absent or rare in most sites (see Table 5), accounting for less than 9 percent of all artifacts (excluding
debitage), but sherds are quite common at the Blue
Clay and South Ridge sites, where they comprise
22 percent and 16 percent of all artifacts (excluding
debitage), respectively. The total absence of pottery sherds in some Palo Duro sites could be due to
limited investigations, but their absence at other
sites that have produced large artifact samples is
intriguing. The fact that no sherds were found at the
County Line and Gobbler Creek Bridge sites, despite fairly extensive investigations, may indicate
that pottery was not being used by the inhabitants.
From a functional perspective, one should not expect pottery to be present at every site occupied by
Palo Duro peoples, and it should not be surprising
to find special-activity sites with no pottery.
The brownware pottery found at Palo Duro
sites is generally classifiable as belonging to the
Jornada Mogollon tradition. Detailed visual analyses by Southwestern ceramicists (i.e., Jack Hedrick,
Regge Wiseman, and Helene Warren) have identified several different varieties that probably represent different source areas within southeastern New
Mexico and/or western Texas. The types that have
been specifically identified are Jornada Brown (and/
or Alma Plain), Roswell Brown, Middle Pecos Micaceous Brown, South Pecos Brown, and McKenzie
Brown. Some researchers recognize many regional
variations of Jornada Mogollon brownwares and
are willing to make visual type identifications in
some cases, while others think that few or no types
may be identified accurately by visual examina-

tions alone. Petrographic studies of brownwares
from several Palo Duro sites, however, generally
support the visual type identifications made by various ceramic experts.
Petrographic studies of Palo Duro complex
brownwares include two sherds from 41BI265
(Etchieson et al. 1977:64); three sherds from
Deadman’s Shelter, six from the Kent Creek site,
and three from the South Sage Creek site
(Robinson 1992); and five sherds from the Sam
Wahl site (Robinson 1994). These petrographic
data indicate that there is considerable compositional variability in the brownwares, representing
different source areas. These studies also have confirmed that almost all of this pottery is of non-local origin and was made in the Jornada Mogollon
or Middle Pecos areas. As yet, there have been no
convincing studies to indicate that brownware pottery was made in the Caprock Canyonlands or
Southern Llano Estacado, although occasional
sherds that do not match any varieties of Jornada
brownware are considered to be possible candidates for locally made wares (e.g., one sherd at
Kent Creek was identified as possibly being of
local manufacture).
There may be some evidence, albeit weak, for
temporal differentiation of brownware types.
Thicker brownwares tempered with crushed igneous rocks primarily containing quartz and feldspars,
such as the Jornada Brown/Alma Plain found at
Deadman’s Shelter, appear to be the earliest
brownwares in the Texas Panhandle Plains, perhaps dating as early as A.D. 100-300. Thinner
sherds with more-variable crushed rock tempers
may be later. In particular, some sherds found at
the Kent Creek and South Sage Creek sites contain
significant quantities of biotite (see Robinson 1992,
1994), and have been tentatively identified as
Middle Pecos Micaceous Brown, while some distinctive sherds from the Sam Wahl site have been
tentatively identified as South Pecos Brown. According to Jetinek (1967), these wares were manufactured in the Middle Pecos area between A.D.
800-1300.
There are some interesting patterns in the
distribution of bone and mussel shell artifacts. Most
notable is the presence of modified deer bones
(primarily metapodial awls and awl blanks), and
modified and unmodified mussel shells (scrapers,
pendants, and shell blanks) in human burials. As
mentioned above, the use of these items as mortuary

Boyd m The Palo Duro Complex
offerings is intriguing, but their significance is not
understood. Excluding burial contexts, the
distribution of modified bones within Palo Duro
sites (see Table 5) is almost certainly related to
differential preservation rather than differing site
function. The total absence of modified bones in
residential bases and campsites does not mean that
no bone artifacts were used at these sites. Since
bones are generally sparse and poorly preserved in
open sites, it is reasonable to assume that bone
tools could have been deposited but subsequently
lost to deterioration.
Modified bones are found in only one site, the
intensively occupied Deadman’s Shelter, where
bone preservation was very good. Since differential
preservation does not seem to be a factor in any of
the rockshelters, one may assume that bone tools
were not commonly used and/or discarded in the
ephemerally occupied rockshelters. The 21 bone
artifacts that were found at Deadman’s Shelter include: awls and awl blanks made. of split deer
metapodials, polished deer antler tips (flaking
tools?), and unidentifiable fragments that were cut,
polished, and/or incised. One fragment with two
drilled holes in it may have been a pendant.
Mussel shell fragments are common in many
Palo Duro sites (see "Faunal and Floral Remains"
below), and differential preservation is less likely
to have been a factor affecting the distribution of
shell artifacts. Mussel shells occasionally were used
as scrapers, but the most common forms of modification (such as cut edges, drilled holes, notches,
and surface etching) probably represent shell jewelry or waste debris as a by-product of the manufacture of shell jewelry. Evidence for the use of
shell jewelry and/or the manufacture of shell ornaments was found at the South Sage Creek, Sam
Wahl, and Kent Creek sites.

Features
A comparison of feature types for Palo Duro
complex sites (Table 9) shows a wide range of
generalized and specific activities and supports the
differential site functions seen in Figure 12. As
expected, the diversity of features is greatest for the
residential bases and is somewhat less variable for
campsites and rockshelters. There are some
obvious correlations, such as the presence of
pithouses and storage pits only at residential bases,
but the most ubiquitous features at all sites are

491

rock-lined and unlined hearths, burned rock
clusters, and baking pits. While the former types
are considered general heating/cooking features,
the baking pits are more substantial rock-lined or
rock-filled pits that are interpreted as plantcooking ovens (see Boyd et al. [1994:38-43, 135138] for descriptions of baking pits found at Lake
Alan Henry). Baking pits were found at the
Gobbler Creek Bridge and Cat Hollow sites, along
with large quantities of burned rocks thought to be
residue discarded during pit baking. Because of the
tremendous quantities of burned rocks at these
sites, they are interpreted as specialized plantprocessing campsites.
There is considerable variability in the architecture of the roughly contemporaneous pithouses
at the Kent Creek and Sam Wahl sites (Table 10).
These pithouses include both ovate and rectangular forms, their sizes vary somewhat with floor
areas ranging from 7.6 to 14.2 m2, and the entry
directions are all different. As described earlier,
there also are many differences in the interior features and in the construction of the superstructures.

Faunal and Floral Remains
Faunal remains provide substantial evidence
for the use of animals as food resources by Palo
Duro peoples. The animal bones recovered from
various sites, summarized in Table 11, generally
have been treated in one of three ways: they have
been completely ignored during analysis; they have
been identified by taxa and listed but not analyzed;
or they have been identified by taxa and analyzed
for evidence of modification (e.g., burning and
butchering), and their distributions have been carefully studied. This differential treatment helps explain many of the question marks that appear in
Table 11. It also is important to realize that in many
cases, particularly when dealing with rodents and
other burrowing animals and with rockshelter assemblages, it is unclear whether animals were introduced into sites by natural processes rather than
human activity.
The largest faunal assemblages are from the
Kent Creek site and Deadman’s Shelter. At both of
these sites, deer is the only medium-large animal
recognized as having been a significant food
resource while bison is poorly represented. A wide
variety of other small animals are present, but their
relative importance as food resources is

492

Texas Archeological Society

Table 9. Comparison of Features Associated with Palo Duro Complex Components

Residential Bases

Rockshelters
Various

Feature Type

Kent Creek

Pithouse (habitation)

X

Pithouse (storage)

X

Sam Wahl

Deadman’s

Boren No. 2

Campsites

Small pitroom
Storage pit

x

Bedrock mortar

x

X

Baking pit

x

X

Unlined hearth
Rock-lined hearth

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Burned rock cluster/scatter*

?

Fire-cracked rock cluster**

?

Hearth fill dump

X

Wind deflector

X

Human burial
No. of Feature Types Represented

6-7

4-7

*Burned rock cluster/scatter is a catchall type that includes many undefined burned rock features.
**Fire-cracked rock features are distinguished by the presence of heat-fractured quartzite rocks and may represent boiling stone
dumps.

comparatively low or unclear. In contrast to these
sites, the faunal evidence indicates that rabbits and
rodents were the most frequently eaten animals at
Boren Shelter No. 2.
The faunal assemblages at all of the other sites
are either so meager that they are uninterpretable
(and they are likely to be biased by differential
preservation) or they are just large enough to provide some interpretable information. When the probably intrusive animal bones are weeded out and
burning/butchering are taken into account, the minimum numbers of individuals for specific taxa are
so low that it is impossible to determine the relative
dietary importance of various animals. Thus, even
though they were carefully analyzed, many of these
smaller faunal assemblages produced little more
than a grocery list of animals that were likely to
have been or definitely were hunted. The faunal
remains from the Chalk Hollow site, although apparently a sizable and interesting assemblage, have
not been analyzed at all.

Freshwater mussel shells are consistently present
in Palo Duro sites, and there is some evidence that
they may have been utilized as food. For example,
heated hinge fragments (presumably heated to cause
ttie live mussel to open) were recovered from the
South Sage Creek site. Mussel remains have not
been found in sufficient quantities, however, to suggest that they were an important food resource. They
certainly were never used by Palo Duro peoples to
the extent that they were in other areas. Large accumulations of shells in the East Levee site, 41TG91
(Creel 1990), near San Angelo, and at sites at Lake
O. H. Ivie (Treece et al. 1993:519-523), indicate
that mussels were an important food for peoples in
the Colorado and Concho river valleys, but there is
no such evidence for the Caprock Canyonlands. In
fact, the relatively high frequency of modified mussel shells and single unmodified valves (but never
whole mussels) in Palo Duro complex sites and
burials suggests that the shells themselves may have
been much more important than the mussels.

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex

493

Table 10. Architectural Variability in Pithouses of the Palo Duro Complex
Kent Creek Site
Sam Wahl Site
Attributes

Shape
Size (m)

Pithouse 1

Pithouse 2

rectangular

rectangular

ovate

4.3x3.3

3.3x2.3

3.5x3

Pithouse

Floor area (ms)

14.2

7.6

10.5

Entry direction

east

west

southeast (?)

plastered ramp

plastered ramp

unknown

35+

33+

45+

Troughs (or water traps?)

yes

yes

no

Large postholes

yes

no

no

Entry type
Depth (cm)*
Interior Features

Small postholes
Hearth
Rock clusters/ovens

Exterior postholes
Probable type of

yes

no

uncertain

no**

no

probable

yes

no

no

no

no

uncertain

wattle and daub

stone masonry

very ephemeral,

superstructure

jacal-like

*Depths represent minimum estimates of how deep the floors were excavated from the original ground surface.
**No interior hearth was found, but a post-abandonment subfloor burial in the center of the structure could have destroyed a
hearth.

Palynological samples have been taken and
analyzed from several Palo Duro sites (i.e., the
Kent Creek, Sam Wahl, and Gobbler Creek Bridge
sites), but the fossil pollen in these samples consistently has been found to be seriously degraded,
and the data are generally considered unusable for
economic (or paleoenvironmental) interpretations
(Bryant 1993; Dering 1994; Dering and Bryant
1992; Jones 1990). Phytoliths have been extracted
from feature sediments at Lake Alan Henry sites,
but the resulting data are generally not useful for
subsistence interpretations. Unlike pollen, the
phytoliths have been found to be well preserved,
but the interpretations are limited by the current
state of the art (primarily the inability to recognize
specific taxa and the lack of comparative collections, but phytolith analysis has improved considerably in recent years). One notable exception is
that calcium oxylate crystals found in sediments
associated with a baking pit at the Gobbler Creek
Bridge site are thought to be from prickly pear

(Cummings 1990:541).
Macrobotanical remains recovered from
sediment flotation provide the most useful evidence
for interpreting the plants that were or may have
been used as food resources (Table 12). Carbonized
seeds of many different plants have been recovered
from sediments in a variety of contexts (e.g., on
pithouse floors, in storage pits and baking pits, and
in nonfeature samples), and in all cases the charring
is thought to be the result of human activities (as
opposed to natural fires). The question, then, is
which plants were used as food and which plants
may have been burned accidentally or used in some
other manner, such as for fuel? The data presented
in Table 12 show various plant taxa as being either
present or moderately abundant in charred form but
do not attempt to make a judgment as to why the
seeds were burned. Various analysts generally
address these questions on a case by case basis,
taking many factors into account (e.g., the nature of
the plant, the frequency of charred seed occurrence

494

Texas Archeological Society

Boyd m The Palo Duro Cotnplex

495

Table 12. Comparison of Macrobotanical Evidence for Use of Specific Plant Foods
at Palo Duro Complex Components*
Residential Bases

Common and Scientific Name

Kent Creek

Rockshelter

Sam Wahl,

Boren No. 2,

Early Occupation

Lower Shelter

Goosefoot (Chenopodium sp.)

X

Pigweed (Amaranthus sp.)
Prickly poppy (Argemone sp.)
Purslane (Portulaca sp.)

?
?

Bottle gourd (Cucurbitacaea)
Carpet weed (Mollugo verticillata)
Skullcap (Scutellaria sp.)

X

Mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa)
Oak (Quercus sp., probably shin oak)
Lotebush (Ziziphus obtusifolia)
Hackberry (Celtis reticulata)

X

Brome grass (Bromus sp.)

0

Paspalum (Paspalum sp.)

0

Dropseed (Sporobolus sp.)

0

Panic grass (Panicum sp.)

0

Number of flotation samples analyzed

4

14

X

X

10

*Macrobotanical evidence consists of carbonized seeds recovered from flotation (charred wood is not included). A few flotation
samples from the Gobbler Creek Bridge and South Sage Creek sites were analyzed, but no carbonized seeds were recovered.
? = presence noted in one or more samples.
x = moderately abundant; found in multiple samples from different types of features.
o = recovered only in storage pits; may be evidence of grass lining rather than food.

in various contexts, and ethnographic evidence for
utilization of plants).
While any of the taxa listed may represent food
resources, the taxa that are most abundant (in terms
of the quantity of charred seeds from individual
samples and the ubiquity of their occurrence in
multiple samples from different types of features)
are more likely to have been used for food. Of all of
the taxa listed, however, only the mesquite beans
and shin oak acorns have been found in archeological
contexts that strongly suggest they were used for
food. Dering (1994:335-341) provides an interesting
discussion of the probable use of mesquite at the
Sam Wahl site, and Cruse (1992:121) discusses shin
oak acorns found at the Kent Creek site.
It also is notable that Chenopodium is much
more abundant than any other taxa and is associated with three types of features (i.e., pithouse,

storage pits, and baking pits) at the Sam Wahl site.
Dering (1994:341) suggests that the ubiquity of
charred goosefoot at the Sam Wahl site, in contrast
to its absence at other Lake Alan Henry sites, is
evidence that goosefoot was being processed as
food. While goosefoot was very abundant in one
storage pit flotation sample, it was not found in
sufficient quantity or consistency in other storage
pit samples to indicate that it was the principal
plant food that was being stored.
In addition to the evidence for food use,
Dering (1994:340-341) observed that four species
of grass seeds consistently were found in storage
pits at the Sam Wahl site, but they were not recovered in any other type of feature. He speculated that
this may be evidence that the pits had been lined
with grass, rather than that grass seeds were being
stored in the pits.

496

Texas Archeological Society

There is no definitive evidence for the range of
plant foods that might have been processed in the
baking pits (see Hines et al. [1994] for a detailed
discussion of pit roasting) at residential bases or at
specialized campsites, or what season(s) of the year
they might have been used. There are a multitude
of possibilities, however, such as baking pits having been used: (1) during one time of the year for
cooking a particular plant, (2) during one time of
the year for cooking a variety of different plants,
(3) during multiple seasons for cooking a few specific plants, or (4) during multiple seasons for cooking a wide variety of plant foods. It is likely that the
baking pits were used primarily during the late
spring, summer, and fall, when a wide range of
wild plant foods (e.g., seeds, beans, berries, tubers,
and tunas and pads) are available for exploitation.
Given the paucity of direct evidence, it is impossible to know whether these ovens were
multiseasonal and multifunctional (i.e., used for
cooking many plant foods as they became available), or season and resource-specific (i.e., used
primarily for cooking some superabundant plant
food during one particular season).
Based on ethnographic evidence for arid and
semiarid environments (e.g., Basehart 1960;
Castetter and Opler 1936:35-38; Pennington 1963;
Sonnichen 1958), many different plants were
cooked in pit ovens, but the principal ones were
agave, sotol, prickly pear, yucca, and corn. Agave
is not found in the Caprock Canyonlands today and
probably never ranged that far north. Sotol, although
not found there today, may have been present there
in the past since its current range has been seriously
altered by modern ranching practices (see Boyd et
al. 1994:264). Prickly pear and yucca are ubiquitous in the area today and probably were abundant
in Palo Duro times as well. Although it is not known
whether the Palo Duro peoples practiced horticulture, corn is yet another possible plant food that
was oven roasted.
Although their contemporaneity has been demonstrated by the radiocarbon dates from the Sam
Wahl site, it is not known if the grinding tools,
baking pits, and storage pits were used together as
part of an integrated technology for some specific
resource(s) or if they were used independently for
different resources. Some foods may have been
ground before being cooked, or vice versa, and these
foods may or may not have then been stored for
future use. It also is possible that many plants were

ground while only a few were cooked and/or stored.
Again, the possibilities are numerous, and there is
no hard evidence to support any one interpretation.
Besides the possible oven-baked plant
resources mentioned above, a wide range of other
plants may have been important food resources
(including but not limited to all of the plants listed
in Table 12). Boyd et al. (1994:264-266) provide a
detailed discussion of the various plants that could
have been significant food resources in the Caprock
Canyonlands and Rolling Plains. The plants and
plant parts that may have been sufficiently abundant
and nutritious to have been utilized intensively as
food resources by Palo Duro peoples are (in no
particular order): seeds of various grasses and
flowering plants (e.g., dropgrass and Cheno-ams);
various roots and tubers (e.g., buffalo gourds and
prairie turnip); pads, stalks, fruits, and/or bulbs of
desert succulents and cacti (e.g., yucca, sotol,
prickly pear, and cholla); various cucurbits (e.g.,
bottle gourds); acorns of shin oak and possibly live
oak (remnant groves of live oak are present at Lake
Alan Henry); possibly pecan or hickory nuts
(charred Carya sp. wood from a hearth at 41GR484
indicates that pecan or hickory was once in the
Lake Alan Henry area); and mesquite beans. There
are undoubtedly many other plants that might have
been important food resources, but they are perhaps
less obvious in the ethnographic or archeological
records. A variety of horticultural crops (e.g., corn,
squash, and beans) should not be discounted as
possible food resources despite their absence in the
archeological record.
Of all the plants mentioned above, shin oak
and mesquite warrant further consideration as having been important or staple sources of food for
Palo Duro peoples. The extent of shin oak distribution in the Caprock Canyonlands today is not well
known, but it is confined mainly to areas where
sandy calcareous soils predominate and in areas
where limestone crops out. Assuming that its distribution was similar in the past, one may only speculate that shin oak may have been sufficiently
abundant in some areas to have comprised a significant food resource for Palo Duro peoples. The
occurrence of charred acorns, tentatively identified
as shin oak because it is the only species that grows
in the immediate vicinity today, in several feature
contexts at the Kent Creek site is intriguing evidence. Since shin oak is not a particularly good fuel
source, the acorns are not likely to have been intro-

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex
duced incidentally or accidentally. Although the
use of shin oak acorns for food is not well documented ethnographically, its use by prehistoric
peoples in and around the northern Llano Estacado
has been suggested by various researchers (e.g.,
Collins 1971:76; Leslie 1979:185).
Mesquite, on the other hand, is well documented in the ethnographic literature as a staple
resource for many peoples in the southwestern
United States and northern Mexico (Bell and
Castetter 1937:21-33), along the Texas Coast and
in Central Texas (Covey 1961:66, 86-87, 100), and
in the Rio Grande delta (Salinas 1990:117-119).
Although direct archeological evidence is limited,
mesquite has been suggested as having been an
important resource throughout the Jornada
Mogollon region (Brethauer 1979; Carmichael
1986:220; Leslie 1979:186), and even the historic
Comanche and Kiowa of the Texas Panhandle
Plains utilized mesquite beans as food (Carlson and
Jones 1940:530; Galvin 1970:30-3t; Vestal and
Schultes 1939:33-34). Nutritional data compiled
by Hiles (1993) indicate that mesquite pods and
beans are very high in protein, carbohydrates, fiber, and sugar.
Boyd et al. (1994:265-266) dispel the myth
that mesquite was not present or rare in the Texas
Panhandle Plains prior to late nineteenth century
ranching. The distribution of mesquite has certainly
increased dramatically due to historic and modern
ranching and agricultural practices (Flores
1990:60-61; Kirkpatrick 1992:141). Its rapid
spread into new areas (such as uplands) that were
once devoid of mesquite is the source for the common misconception that "there was no mesquite
before ranchers came." However, early historic
accounts (e.g., Bailey 1951:105, 121; Foreman
1937:97; Parker 1984:170-171, 184) clearly indicate that mesquite trees were very abundant in riverine environments prior to cattle grazing (and
overgrazing), root plowing and chaining, and control of range fires. The mid-nineteenth century
distribution of mesquite suggests that it was abundant throught the Caprock Canyonlands in prehistory, and it is the best candidate for having been a
staple resource (but not necessarily the only one)
for Palo Duro peoples. It also should be noted that
charred mesquite beans should not be expected to
be common in the archeological record even if they
were extensively utilized. Most ethnographic accounts indicate that beans were crushed and ground

497

before being cooked. If they were not cooked in
pod or bean form, the chances of their being
charred, and hence preserved in the archeo!ogica!
record, are much lower.
Five main interpretations can be derived from
the Palo Duro Complex subsistence data. First, bison hunting and use of bison as a food resource are
poorly documented. That bison were present during Late Prehistoric I times is unquestionable since
bison remains dating to this time are found in many
sites. Bison remains are exceedingly rare, however,
compared to the preceding Late Archaic period,
and even at sites where the artifactual evidence
indicates that hunting was an important activity,
the principal game animals appear to have been
deer and smaller animals. In addition, no bison kill
or butchering localities are known for the Palo Duro
complex, and it appears unlikely that any form of
communal bison hunting occurred. From this, one
may infer that bison were somewhat scarce in, but
never absent from, the Caprock Canyonlands during Palo Duro times (assuming that people would
have hunted them much more if large populations
were present). While a general scarcity of bison
remains has been noted for the Southern Plains
between A.D. 500 and 1200 (Dillehay 1974), this
does not preclude the possibility that bison were
abundant in other areas at this time. Treece et al.
(1993:523-524) note that bison remains dating to
this time period are well represented in sites at
Lake O. H. Ivie in West Central Texas.
The second major point is that multiple lines
of evidence indicate that the primary subsistence
resources for Palo Duro peoples were plant foods.
Although hunting activities are fairly well
represented at some sites, some evidence for the
use of plant foods is found at all Palo Duro sites,
and it is overwhelmingly dominant in many
components. The contemporaneous use of storage
pits, baking pits, at least two kinds of portable
grinding tool kits (i.e., mano/metate sets), and
bedrock mortars/pestles at residential bases, all
denote a heavy emphasis on plant foods. The
activities that occurred at these sites were often of
sufficient duration to warrant the construction of
pithouses, and it is likely that these residential
villages were occupied on a seasonal basis.
Third, while a wide range of plant foods probably was utilized, it may be hypothesized that, just
as they were important in the Jornada Mogollon
and Eastern Jornada areas, mesquite beans and shin

498

Texas Archeological Society

oak acorns also may have been important foods for
Palo Duro complex peoples. Many Eastern Jornada
campsites may have been occupied by people harvesting these foods, and Leslie (1979:185-186)
notes that "acorns and mesquite beans mature at
about the same time (August-early September) but
vary in different areas and different years; the two
foods were possibly harvested at the same time
when possible." The same may be true for peoples
living in the Caprock Canyonlands.
The fourth point is that in spite of the absence
of domesticated plant remains or definite agricultural tools, the possibility that Palo Duro peoples
practiced some form of limited horticulture must be
considered. The introduction of domesticated plants
into the southwestern United States has been characterized as a "monumental nonevent" that had
"little immediate impact on native human populations" (Minnis 1985:310). It was the intensification
of agricultural production, rather than its mere introduction, that had significant and widespread impacts upon prehistoric economies. Following
Bronson’s (1977) terminology (cited in Minnis
1985:338), it may be suggested that Palo Duro
peoples were not agriculturalists ("those dependent
upon cultivated plants"), but that they could have
been cultivators ("those for whom crops are not
necessarily major economic items"). Lacking definitive evidence, it can only be suggested that limited plant cultivation may have been incorporated
into a seasonal pattern of resource collection (Minnis
1985:331). Certainly, it is likely that Palo Duro
peoples were at least aware of farming since agricultural systems were well established in the Southwest by A.D. 500-700 (Minnis 1985:310;
Woodbury and Zubrow 1979:50-51), in the Central Plains by A.D. 900 (Adair 1988:114), and in
South Central Oklahoma (Vehik 1984:196) and
Northeast Texas (Perttula 1992:13; Perttula and
Bruseth 1983:17) by A.D. 800. Ford (1985:352,
362-364) suggests that the Southern Plains may
have been a corridor for the continued eastward
spread of cultigens (specifically maize and beans),
and presumably farming technologies, from the
American Southwest. If so, the Palo Duro complex
may have even played some critical role in the
diffusion process.
The final major point is that there is ample
evidence for considerable variability in site function. This has been observed not only between different types of sites but also between sites of a

single type. The differences between the contemporaneous pithouse occupations at the Kent Creek
and Sam Wahl sites are particularly notable. This
diversity of site function is indicative of a high
degree of residential mobility within the Palo Duro
complex, which in turn is suggestive of a seasonal
organization of subsistence activities.

Seasonality, Residential Mobility,
and Settlement Pattern
Reconstructing the settlement pattern of the
Palo Duro culture is a daunting task given the paucity of definitive seasonality data and the constraints
imposed by the small sample of sites that have been
adequately investigated. Limited inferences may be
made, but they are based largely on indirect and
circumstantial evidence. Thus, the interpretations
offered in this section are tentative and should be
viewed cautiously and critically.
It can be stated with some degree of confidence
that the Palo Duro complex peoples organized their
subsistence activities on a seasonal basis. This
interpretation is based in large part on the fact that
the distribution, abundance, usefulness, and
predictability of various plant and animal resources
in the Caprock Canyonlands varies according to the
seasons and certainly did so in prehistoric times as
well. When the residential bases, rockshelters, and
campsites are considered together, the adaptive
strategy of Palo Duro complex peoples must be
viewed as extremely mobile and dominantly plantoriented. The discovery of pithouses and substantial
storage facilities at sites in the Caprock Canyonlands
constitutes new evidence requiring a total
reevaluation of the settlement pattern of Palo Duro
complex people.
As discussed below, it may be inferred from
the archeological evidence that Palo Duro peoples
maintained a high degree of residential mobility in
response to seasonal changes in the availability of
food resources. Although the seasonality of their
occupations is speculative, rockshelters and campsites probably represent habitation sites that were
occupied at different times of the year than were
the residential bases. Two types of Palo Duro
rockshelters have been noted: some, such as Boren
Shelter No. 2, were used only on an ephemeral
basis, while others, such as Deadman’s Shelter,
were intensively occupied. It is notable that the
material culture from Deadman’s Shelter mimics

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex
that from the residential bases, and denotes the
considerable importance of grinding plant foods
and hunting deer and smaller animals. There is no
convincing direct evidence for seasonality, but it is
likely that there was winter or cold-weather use of
larger rockshelters as short-term residential bases,
and ephemeral use of smaller rockshelters by
smaller groups (families or task groups?) during
various seasons, perhaps mainly as temporary havens from inclement weather.
Campsites range from multifunctional locations
where hunting was an important component (e.g.,
the County Line site) to very specialized activity
areas where grinding and cooking of plant foods
were nearly exclusive activities (e.g., the Cat Hollow and Gobbler Creek Bridge sites). It is likely that
some of this variation in subsistence activities is
related to different seasons of occupation. Again,
there is no good evidence for seasonality, but most
of the plants that would have been cooked at the
specialized plant-processing localities ripen or are
ready for harvest during the late spring to fall. The
absence of storage pits at campsites suggests that
they were not occupied during the winter. If the
plant foods that were processed were intended for
storage, one might expect that some of these plantprocessing campsites would be located in close proximity to residential bases. This does seem to be the
case at Lake Alan Henry, as evidenced by the close
proximity of the Cat Hollow and Sam Wahl sites.
The two residential bases also appear to have
functioned in different ways. At the Sam Wahl site,
baking, grinding, and storage of plant foods were
extremely important activities, but the use of animal resources appears to have been minimal. At
Kent Creek, grinding, cooking, and storage of plant
foods also are evident and represent important activities, but hunting of deer and smaller animals
was significantly more important than at Sam Wahl.
The differences in storage techniques used at these
sites are particularly notable and probably relate to
variations in site function. While pit storage is well
represented at the Sam Wah! site, it is only minimally represented at Kent Creek where aboveground storage may have been more common. As
discussed below, however, it is somewhat difficult
to translate the apparent functional differences between these sites directly into interpretations of the
seasonality of occupation.
Perhaps of equal or greater importance to the
recognition of the variability between the residential

499

bases is the fact that the Kent Creek and Sam Wahl
sites are, in many ways, more similar than they are
different. The presence of permanent habitation
structures and storage facilities at both of these
sites provides considerable evidence for speculating
on the seasonal orientation of subsistence activities.
From a theoretical perspective, pithouse dwellings
generally imply some degree of residential mobility
and seasonal organization of activities, storage
generally implies seasonal changes in resource
availability, and subterranean food storage implies
the use of plant foods. These concepts are important
for understanding the Palo Duro culture’s settlement
pattern, and warrant more consideration.
In the southwestern United States, recent research has emphasized the importance of understanding residential mobility (e.g., Carmichael
1990; Nelson and LeBlanc 1986; Whalen and
Gilman 1990). Shifting away from the view that
pithouses are evidence of sedentism, most researchers now embrace the view that the pithouse
period may have been characterized by considerable and varying degrees of residential mobility
(e.g., O’Laughlin 1980, 1993; Whalen 1977, 1978,
1980). Bearing in mind that "hunter-gatherer adaptations come in many kinds, with many levels of
mobility" (Whalen and Gilman 1990:73), some
inferences can be made about the nature of residential mobility in the Texas Panhandle Plains during
the latter half of the first millenium A.D. Gilman
(1987:548) states that "pithouse structures are the
most adaptive and useful choice of habitation under conditions of biseasonal settlement systems,
dependence upon stored foods, and cold season
sedentism." If this idea holds true beyond the
Southwest, then the pithouse occupations at the
Kent Creek and Sam Wahl sites can be interpreted
as having been at least seasonal, and possibly
biseasonal, residences. However, it should not be
assumed that the mere presence of pithouses is
indicative of a single site function or a particular
season of occupation. This assumption does not
seem to be valid for the Jornada Mogollon region
(Carmichael 1986:218), nor is it particularly tenable for the Caprock Canyonlands. In fact, until
archeological data prove otherwise, it is probably
safer to assume that differences in architectural
styles, storage facilities, artifact assemblages, and
macrobotanical remains could relate directly to
variations in site function and/or the seasonality of
occupation.

500

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

Storage in general, and subterranean storage
in particular, has been interpreted as evidence of
seasonally oriented resource distribution and residential mobility (Binford 1990; DeBoer 1988;
Goland 1983; Ingold 1983; O’Laughlin 1993;
Raymer 1988; Ward 1985). Boyd et al. (1994:262)
provide a more detailed discussion of the implications of storage at the Sam Wahl site, but a few
major ethnographic observations need to be considered: (1) bulk food storage generally occurs at
the locality where the resource is procured or harvested; (2) subterranean storage in temperate climates almost always involves storage of plant
foods (both wild and domesticated); (3) one important function of pit storage is to conceal foodstuffs
during periods of site abandonment; (4) stored
foods are usually consumed at or near the storage
locality; and (5) consumption of stored foods most
often occurs during the winter--the lean season
when most food resources are scarce.
Based on these observations, one possible scenario is that the Sam Wahl and Kent Creek sites
were occupied between late summer and late fall
when plant foods were harvested and stored. Archeological evidence for the use of mesquite beans
(and possibly goosefoot) at Sam Wahl and the use
of shin oak acorns (and possibly goosefoot) at Kent
Creek support this interpretation. The use of storage implies that the sites also may have been occupied during the middle to late winter, at which time
the stored foods were consumed. It is more speculative, however, to infer whether the sites were
occupied continuously from fall through winter, or
whether they may have been abandoned during late
fall to early winter and reoccupied during mid- to
late winter. Assuming that one function of subterranean storage was for concealment, the predominant use of storage pits at Sam Wahl may be
interpreted as evidence that the site was temporarily abandoned during late fall/early winter. In
contrast, the predominant use of above-ground storage at Kent Creek could mean that this site was not
temporarily abandoned during this time, perhaps
because the inhabitants had greater access to other
resources such as game animals. Thus, it is possible
that differences in site abandonment could have
been at least partially responsible for some of the
archeological differences between the Kent Creek
and Sam Wahl sites.
Numerous ethnoarcheologicat and archeological case studies (e.g., Cameron and Tomka

1993) suggest that the caching of complete and
fully functional metates at the Sam Wahl site may
be evidence of planned abandonment on an episodic
or, more likely, seasonal basis. Schlanger (1990,
1991) notes that complete tools are often found in
use contexts (i.e., cached or left in primary activity
areas) within village sites, presumably because the
last abandonment was perceived as temporary by
the final inhabitants. The last inhabitants at Sam
Wahl, who left the metates stored upside down on
storage pits and inside the pithouse, probably left
fully expecting to return to the site.
In contrast, Structure No. 1 at the Kent Creek
site may have been abandoned hastily and its inhabitants left with no intention of returning. This
pithouse probably was abandoned permanently upon
the death and burial of one of its occupants. Cruse
(1992:136 and Figure 27) was able to define two
distinct activity areas (a lithic work area and a food
storage/processing area) based on the distribution
of artifacts within the structure. Some of the tools
that were left behind, including a mano and a side
scraper, were complete. This does not necessarily
mean that no usable artifacts were salvaged from
the house, but it does suggest that the final
abandoment was unplanned and disorderly. Brooks
(1993) notes similarly well defined artifact patterning in the interior of a Plains Village period Washita
River phase house which had burned. The burning
of the house could have been accidental, but it
seems more likely that it was intentional upon the
death of a child occupant who was buried inside. In
either case, the abandonment was unplanned, and
the house-floor artifacts, including a grinding basin and five manos, were left in their primary contexts reflecting the locations of household activities.
If limited horticulture was incorporated into
their subsistence base, Palo Duro peoples might
have occupied the villages on a biseasonal basis.
The people may have occupied the villages during
planting season in early spring, abandoned the site
while foraging and hunting during the summer, and
returned in the late fall to harvest the crop and stay
through the winter. A simplistic model of prereservation Western Apache horticulture, as defined
by Welch (1991), is useful for understanding one
way in which such subsistence activities might have
been scheduled. No genetic affiliation with
Athapaskan-speaking peoples is intended nor is it
suggested that this model is a direct analog for Palo
Duro culture adaptation. It is simply one possible

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex

scenario for how Palo Duro peoples might have
organized a biseasonal adaptation involving limited
horticulture.
According to Welch (1991:78), the pre-reservation Western Apaches’ diet consisted of "roughly
equal amounts of cultivated, gathered, and hunted
foods." He states that:
...Apache horticulturalists integrated cultivation
with foraging through scheduling and resource
procurement task groups (see Binford 1980).
When a food source failed, greater emphasis
could be placed on the other two, or on raiding.
Family clusters based loosely on clan affiliations were the main settlement and subsistence
units. These clusters contributed labor to the
cultivation (mainly maize and cucurbits)...The
cultivation cycle began as early as March and
as late as July with digging out silted irrigation
ditches and clearing and planting fields. The
very old and young sometimes remained at the
farmsteads to weed, protect, and irrigate the
crops while others descended to harvest cactus
fruits and other late spring and early summer
foods. Additional gathering took place until the
band reunited in early September to harvest and
store food for late winter and early spring and
to prepare for fall hunting [Welch 1991:78, 81 ].
The concentration of Palo Duro sites in the
Caprock Canyonlands suggests that these people
made this area their home for most of the year
because it offered the most abundant and predictable food resources and the widest range of other
essential resources such as wood and water. When,
why, and how often they moved about within the
canyonland environment and adjacent regions is
still a mystery because too many pieces of the
puzzle, particularly good subsistence and seasonality data, are still missing. At this point, one can
only speculate on the precise manner in which residentia! bases, rockshelters, and campsites fit together to form a coherent picture of the adaptive
strategy of the Palo Duro peoples.

Geographic Range and
Intercultural
Relationships
The vast majority of sites and components
attributed to the Palo Duro complex are located in
the escarpment breaks along the Prairie Dog Town

501

Fork of the Red River and the Double Mountain
Fork of the Brazos River. This constitutes the core
area of the Palo Duro complex. Besides the Palo
Dum sites that have already been discussed (see
Table 1), other possible Palo Duro components that
have not been tested may be present at Lake Alan
Henry (41GR256 in Boyd et al. 1989:Table 12) and
in Caprock Canyons State Park (41BI365 in Bagot
and Hughes 1979:Figure 43; 41BI265 in Etchieson
et al. 1977:Figure 23). Since Palo Duro components
have been found in all three of the intensively
surveyed canyonland areas (i.e., Mackenzie
Reservoir, Caprock Canyons State Park, and Lake
Alan Henry), one must speculate that the complex
may be well represented all along the Caprock
Escarpment, including the intervening areas that
have yet to be studied. So little archeological work
has been done over most of the Caprock
Canyonlands that our view is limited to a few little
windows into the landscape. Extrapolating site data
from these intensive survey areas, however, there is
likely to be a very high density of Palo Duro
complex sites in other areas of the canyonlands,
particularly along all major tributaries. One must
also realize that for every Palo Duro complex site
that has been identified, many more probably go
unrecognized because the prehistoric cultural
activities did not generate, or the archeologists failed
to find, any diagnostic residue.
As mentioned above, the northern boundary of
the Palo Duro complex seems to overlap with the
southern boundary of the Lake Creek complex.
Couzzourt (1988:47) states that "Deadman points,
characteristic to diagnostic of the Palo Duro Culture,
are rare to absent in the northern Panhandle, though
they do occur, as do some seemingly ’intermediate’
types between corner-notched and base-notched
types." Mogollon brownwares also are relatively
rare in the Canadian River valley (as compared to
the Caprock Canyonlands), but a few Palo Duro
components are found in the upper headwaters of
the Prairie Dog Town Fork (i.e., upstream of Palo
Duro Canyon State Park as far as Buffalo Lake)
and even into the Lake Meredith area of the
Canadian River (see Figures 3 and 4). Thus, the
area of overlap is the drainage divide between the
Canadian River and Prairie Dog Town Fork, and it
is this zone that has been proposed as a territorial
border between the Plains Woodland and
Southwestern-influenced cultures (Couzzourt 1982;
Cruse 1992; Hughes 1991; Krieger 1946, 1978).

502

Texas Archeological Society

The evidence for violence and intercultural
conflict seems to support the existence of a cultural
boundary between Palo Duro and Lake Creek/
Plains Woodland peoples. The Palo Duro woman
who was buried, presumably by her relatives, in the
pithouse at the Kent Creek hamlet probably was
killed by non-Palo Duro peoples. The cultural
identity of the two men who were killed and buried
together in a single grave in Donley County is
uncertain, but they may have been killed by
members of the Palo Duro group. Could they have
been Lake Creek or Plains Woodland peoples?
Other Plains Woodland or transitional Archaic
burials to the northeast of the Palo Duro area also
have evidence of violence. Numerous human burials exposed by shoreline erosion at Lake Altus, in
Greer County, Oklahoma, represent cemeteries dating to the Plains Woodland period and into the
Custer phase (Agogino and Button 1985; Boyd 1982;
Button and Agogino 1986, 1987). These burials
occur mainly as primary (usually flexed) skeletons
in isolated graves but also include a few secondary
burials and one primary interment of five individuals. Although many of the burials contained no artifacts and have not been dated, they are found at sites
dominated by Late Prehistoric I materials, including
abundant cord-marked pottery. Cord-marked sherds
have been found in the fill of two of the burials, and
sherds from one were identified as Stafford
Cordmarked, a diagnostic type of the Custer phase
(Boyd 1982:10-16). In addition, a single burial is
dated to A.D. 470-650 (uncalibrated), and the multiple interment of five individuals is dated to A.D.
590-770 (uncalibrated) (Button and Agogino
1987:19, 31). While the pottery suggests that these
cemeteries might be affiliated with the Custer phase,
the dates indicate that some of the burials are earlier.
Which cultural complex or period the Lake Altus
burials are assigned to is a matter of semantics and
the lack of chronological control. Of particular importance, however, are the two clear cases of violence within the Lake Altus cemeteries. One
individual, possibly a bundle burial, had an untyped
fragmentary arrow point embedded in its ulna (Boyd
1982:15-16; LeVick and LeVick 1966). One of the
individuals in the multiple burial had a fatal blow to
the head, and the composition of the multiple burial
group--an elderly male (with the head injury), a
middle-aged female, two juvenile males, and a female child--led Button and Agogino (1987:30-31)
to speculate that the entire group had been killed.

Another multiple burial in western Oklahoma
provides evidence for violence during the transitional Archaic period. Gettys (1991) reports that
Burial 2 at 34RM668 consisted of three flexed skeletons in a single interment. One of the individuals
was beheaded prior to burial, and corner- and sidenotched dart points associated with two individuals are interpreted as the cause of death. Two
radiocarbon dates on bone collagen indicate that
these individuals were killed and buried between
A.D. 210-440 (Oklahoma Archeological Survey
1993). This multiple burial, which is approximately
contemporaneous with the Sam Wahl site burial,
provides evidence for intercultural conflict immediately preceding or perhaps early in Palo Duro
complex times.
The archeological evidence indicates that intercultural conflicts had begun at least by the first
few centuries after Christ and continued throughout
the first millenium A.D. While there is no indisputable evidence indicating that the Palo Duro and
Lake Creek/Plains Woodland peoples were enemies,
both groups were engaged in conflicts of some type
and it seems likely that this might have been the
case. If the Double Burial victims were Plains
Woodland folks who were killed by Palo Duro
peoples, the evidence argues for a cultural boundary between Palo Duro and Lake Creek/Plains
Woodland peoples somewhere in the vicinity of the
Prairie Dog Town Fork of the Red River.
The few Palo Duro components found along
the Canadian River (i.e, the South Ridge, the Maintenance barn, and Fatheree sites) are located well
inside the area where Lake Creek occupations are
common. Given the possibility of warfare between
these cultures, this phenomenon is somewhat difficult to explain. These sites indicate that Palo Duro
peoples ventured into the Canadian River valley,
but it is not known if this represents an unusual
occurrence or if there may have been consistent
overlap and/or periodic fluctuation in the territorial
boundary. The presence of occasional brownware
sherds in some Lake Creek components could indicate that there was some form of exchange between
the two groups.
There are many possible explanations of the
relationship between the Palo Duro and Lake Creek
(and other Plains Woodland) peoples, and a few of
them are offered here, as food for thought: (1) the
Palo Duro and Lake Creek peoples were never
enemies, their territories overlapped and they

Boyd m The Palo Duro Complex
interacted frequently, and other groups were
responsible for the violence; (2) the Palo Duro and
Lake Creek peoples were long-time enemies who
came from very different cultural traditions, the
territorial boundary between them fluctuated, and
the Palo Duro culture extended into the Canadian
River at some time; (3) the Palo Duro and Lake
Creek peoples may have coexisted peacefully for
some time, but hostilities developed near the end of
the Late Prehistoric I period; or (4) the Palo Duro
and Plains Woodland cultural traditions actually
represent many different groups (rather than just
two) who interacted with each other in various ways
(as allies or enemies) at different times.
The extent of the Palo Duro complex to the
east is uncertain. Diagnostic Palo Duro artifacts
were not recovered in the surveys and testing at
Truscott (Etchieson et al. 1978) and Crowell
(Etchieson et al. 1979) reservoirs, nor have they
been reported elsewhere in the Texas Rolling
Plains. Thus, it is not certain whether Palo Duro
peoples avoided the region or perhaps ventured
there occasionally but left behind no diagnostic
artifacts that archeologists have recognized. It does
seem unlikely that residential bases would be common in some parts of the Texas Rolling Plains.
Even if some riverine areas had sufficient flesh
water and other resources to support such occupations, these areas would have been isolated oases
within a sea of saline water and sparse resources.
And, being outside their primary territory, such
isolated villages would have been much more vulnerable to attack.
It is not known whether the Palo Duro complex extends south into the canyonlands of the upper Colorado River drainage. Little archeological
work has been reported immediately south of Lake
Alan Henry, but one gets the impression that
Deadman’s-like points and Mogollon pottery are
rare. No pottery or early stemmed arrow points
were found during the recent survey and testing at
Mitchell Reservoir, but Scallorn-like points indicate that some occupations occurred during Late
Prehistoric I times (Lintz, Oglesby, and Treece
1993; Lintz et al. 1991). There are not sufficient
archeological data to indicate whether the upper
Colorado River (in Borden, Dawson, Howard,
Mitchel!, and Scurry counties) was or was not occupied by Palo Duro peoples. The Big Spring site
(Sommer 1971) in Howard County, for example,
has produced artifacts similar to those of the Palo

503

Duro complex, but the context and age of these
materials are not certain. If this site represents a
Palo Duro component, which is possible, it would
provide evidence that the complex does extend into
the upper Colorado River drainage.
Immediately southeast of the Palo Duro complex is the aceramic Blow Out Mountain phase. It
is possible that this poorly defined cultural entity is
misrepresented because the apparent absence of ceramics is due to inadequate archeological sampling.
The Blow Out Mountain phase appears to be different from the Palo Duro complex in some ways, but
the projectile points are similar. While no true
Deadman’s points are reported in the area, the arrow points of the Blow Out Mountain phase include stemmed Bonham-like varieties that look like
Deadman’s with shorter barbs or without barbs (cf.
Creel 1990:Figure 42; Wulfkuhle 1986:Figure 132),
and they are quite similar to many of the stemmed
points found at Palo Duro sites. Not much is known
about the Blow Out Mountain phase because the
East Levee site (41TG91) is the only site that has
been investigated intensively (Creel 1990), except
for burials. Thus, it is quite speculative to comment
on the relationship between the Palo Duro and Blow
Out Mountain cultures at this time.
A large number of excavated burials have been
attributed to the Blow Out Mountain phase, and
they constitute an important data base.
Unfortunately, published data are nonexistent or
inadequate for most of these burials, and none have
been radiocarbon dated. In the 1930s, Cyrus Ray
(1932, 1933, 1936, 1946)investigated numerous
burials found on prominent hills and ridges, both as
isolated cairn--covered burials, and as large rock
cairns containing individual and multiple graves.
These "covered mounds" or "stone cist mounds" as
Ray (1932, 1933) called them, represent cemeteries
that usually contain primary burials in flexed
positions, but cremated remains are sometimes
present as well. Many burials in the region are
found inside rock-lined cists, but most contain few
grave goods and no diagnostics. Hence, their
association with the Blow Out Mountain phase is
tentative and is based on the fact that some of the
burials have stemmed (Bonham-like) arrow points
associated with them. It is interesting that Ray
(1933:23) suggests a Southwestern origin for the
cist-lined graves observed in many of the Abilenearea burial mounds, but the diversity of Blow Out
Mountain mortuary traits (e.g., lined and unlined

504

Texas Archeological Society

graves, with and without cairns, containing primary
interments, bundle burials, and cremations) has not
been studied in any detail. What is important,
however, is that the stemmed points in Blow Out
Mountain burials are somewhat similar to points
found in the Palo Duro complex, and the contexts
of many of the points indicate that they represent
the cause of death rather than grave offerings.
The Roberts Covered Mound no. 3 (probably
in Taylor County) is a good example of a Blow Out
Mountain phase cemetery, and Ray (1933) reports
that this mound contained 10 individual interments.
Two were bundle burials, found in the upper part of
the mound, and one of these had a stemmed (Albalike) arrow point associated with it (Ray 1933:Plate
8). The other eight were primary flexed burials in
individual cists, and very few artifacts were found
in association (i.e, a bison toe bone and a bone awl
are the only items mentioned). Five of the primary
burials had no mandibles, and their absence could
not be attributed to any form of disturbance. Ray
(1933:19-20) suggested that the j aws had been taken
as war trophies. A mandible also was missing from
one cist grave in the nearby Alexander Mound (Ray
1933:22).
Forrester (t951) reports similar findings in a
series of burials in Shackelford County. A total of
18 individuals were found in four separate burial
areas, or "burial plots," within 300 yards along a
creek terrace. Of particular interest, two young
males in Burial Plot II (a single grave) had been
killed. Both had stemmed arrow points found in
contexts indicating that they were the cause of death.
One individual was missing his hands and feet, and
cut marks on the distal end of the ulna suggest that
they were removed as war trophies. In addition, the
charred mandible of a child was found in the chest
area of one skeleton, indicating that this war trophy
had been worn as a pendant.
Of nine individuals in Burial Plot III, which is
similar to Ray’s (1933) covered-mound cemeteries, two adult males (Skeletons 4 and 5) were buried with grave offerings reminiscent of those in
Palo Duro complex burials (i.e., mussel shells and
deer bone tools). A stemmed arrow point was found
in association with one man (Skeleton 4) who had
been buried in a single grave with three other people
(Skeltons 1-3 are an elderly female and two infants). The point has proximal and distal breaks
that appear to be impact related (the proximal break
is almost identical to the one on the arrow point

embedded in the humerus of Skeleton 2 in Burial
Plot II), and the point probably represents the cause
of death. If this interpretation is correct, it is quite
possible that the other three individuals buried in
the same grave also were killed.
None of the Shackelford County burials have
been radiocarbon dated, but the association with
early style arrow points indicates that they date to
Late Prehistoric 1 times, and also suggest a likely
affiliation with the Blow Out Mountain phase (Creel
1990:17). These points are basically similar to the
Alba, Bonham, and Sabinal styles, but they do not
quite fit into a single type. Forrester (1987) has
since suggested that they be called Moran points.
Several cairn burials have been found in and
near Lake O. H. Ivie in Concho, Coleman, and
Runnels counties, and two date to Late Prehistoric I
times. Although it is not yet reported in detail,
Lintz et al. (1993:647-649) mention a burial excavated by the Concho Valley Archeological Society
at 41CN94 that is similar to the Shackelford County
burials and yielded a Sabinal arrow point (J. A.
Jaquier, 1993 personal communication). At
41CC237, a child cremation and a bundle burial of
an adult male probably were interred at the same
time in a single cairn-covered grave (Lintz et al.
1993:649-659). Although the artifacts found in the
burial pit (i.e., thin bifacial preforms, unifacial tools,
debitage, modified limonite fragments, and 19
Olivella shell beads) are not temporally sensitive, a
radiocarbon date of A.D. 280-570 (calibrated) was
obtained on bone collagen from the adult skeleton.
A possible cut mark observed on one rib may be
evidence of dismemberment, and the mandible is
notably absent from the burial.
The evidence for violence in Blow Out Mountain phase burials (and in culturally unassigned burials such as at 41CC237) is intriguing, but it is too
early to draw any firm conclusions. Perhaps the
Palo Duro peoples were engaged in conflicts with
peoples to the south and southeast, as well as with
groups to the north and northeast? The taking of
human jaws as war trophies attests to the intensity
of the hostilities, which had perhaps escalated to
the point of all-out warfare.
To the west and southwest of the Palo Duro
complex are the Middle Pecos and Eastern Jornada
Mogollon culture areas. Lying between is a sizable
portion of the Llano Estacado which, one would
think based on the paucity of published
archeological data, was virtually uninhabited.

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex
While this perception may be true to an exent, there
is evidence that people traversed the Llano using
southeastward-flowing drainages as highways, and
there is evidence for more than ephemeral Late
Prehistoric occupations at some large playa and
pluvial lakes on the southern Llano. The only welldocumented Late Prehistoric playa lake site in the
southern Llano Estacado is the Salt Cedar site
(Collins 1968). Occupations at this residential base,
which currently marks the easternmost edge of the
Eastern Jornada Mogollon, date primarily after
A.D. 1100, but may have begun during Late
Prehistoric I times.
Based on survey evidence alone, it may be
speculated that the Palo Duro complex extends up
onto the eastern edge of the southern Llano
Estacado. The possibility that a Palo Duro component may be present in Lynn County has been mentioned, and early stemmed arrow points and Jornada
brownware pottery have been found at several playa
lake sites in Lubbock County (Brown 1985, 1990a,
1990b, 1991a, 1991b, n.d.). The presence of Palo
Duro occupations on the southern Llano has yet to
be confirmed through excavations, but it is possible
that at least a few components did exist around
playa and pluvial lakes. If this is the case, there is
still much to be learned about how these High Plains
sites fit into the overall Palo Duro subsistence and
settlement pattern.
Despite the geographic gap in the regional data,
the Palo Duro complex contains definite evidence,
in the form of brownware pottery, that there was
some transfer of material culture from the Jornada
Mogollon area across the southern Llano Estacado
and into the Caprock Canyonlands. There also is
other circumstantial evidence for some form of cultural interaction and exchange of ideas between
Jornada Mogotlon and Palo Duro peoples. It is this
author’s opinion, apparently one that is also shared
by Cruse (1992) and Hughes (1991), that the interaction between these groups was direct, that the
Jornada influence upon the Palo Duro culture was
quite strong and consistent through time, and that it
involved much more than just the acquisition of
pots. The nature and extent of the interaction between the Eastern Jornada peoples and the Palo
Duro culture is a research problem that is likely to
be controversial. Although the ideas discussed below admittedly are speculative, it is hoped that they
will spur debate between Southwestern and Southern Plains archeologists.

505

Pottery constitutes the only direct evidence for
influence from the Jornada Mogollon area. Almost
all of the pottery sherds found at Pa!o Duro sites
are identified generically as some variety of Jornada
Mogollon brownware. Most are tempered with
crushed igneous rocks and are indisputably of
nonlocal origin when found in the Texas Panhandle
Plains. The varieties that have been identified (i.e.,
Jornada Brown, Alma Plain, E1 Paso Brown,
Roswell Brown, South Pecos Brown, Middle Pecos
Micaceous, and McKenzie Brown) were manufactured in the Jornada Mogollon or Middle Pecos
areas, and very few brownware sherds have been
identified as possibly being locally-made wares.
The consistent presence of small quantities of
nonlocal brownwares in many Texas sites indicates
that the Palo Duro peoples maintained at least periodic contact with Jornada Mogollon peoples over a
long period of time. Pottery sherds are not very
abundant, but sometimes as many as four vessels
are represented at a single Palo Duro site. Ceramics
are sufficiently scarce to indicate that the supply of
pots was rather limited, perhaps because Palo Duro
groups did not make journeys to the Jornada region
on an annual or regular basis, or perhaps because of
the high labor cost involved in transporting large,
fragile vessels over long distances on foot. Exactly
how the pots made their way into the Panhandle
Plains region is not known. Although intermediary
groups could have been involved, the relatively
short distance between the Caprock Canyonlands
and the Pecos River valley (i.e., 250-300 km) suggests that Palo Duro peoples acquired pots directly
from the Eastern Jornada groups.
Other evidence for the Palo Duro complex having been influenced by the Jornada Mogollon culture is circumstantial, but it is nonetheless strong.
The architectural similarities between the Palo Duro
and Eastern Jornada pithouses are particularly intriguing. Various researchers have noted similarities between the Palo Duro pithouses and those of
the Jornada Mogo!lon area, while noting the lack of
similarities with houses of nearby Plains Woodland
and Plains Village complexes (Boyd 1995a, t995b;
Boyd et al. 1994:116-117, 260; Cruse 1992:127129; Hughes 1991:26). Although rectangular and
circular pithouses are found among many cultures
and the shape alone is not diagnostic, when the
combination of traits is considered, the closest architectural parallels are clearly to the west and
southwest rather than to the north or east. It is

506

Texas Archeological Society

notable also that pithouses in the Jornada Mogollon
area exhibit considerable architectural variability,
and if the sample of three is any indication, so do
the pithouses of the Palo Duro complex.
Rectangular structures--both surface and
pithouses--are known for Southern Plains Woodland and Plains Village complexes but they are
very different from those at the Kent Creek site
(Boyd et al. 1994:116). In contrast, Cruse
(1992:127-129) notes that many architectural traits
observed for the Kent Creek pithouses are similar
to those seen in Jornada Mogollon pithouses. Particularly diagnostic are the ramped entryways, which
are a common feature in Jornada pithouses but are
not seen in any Plains Woodland or Plains Village
houses. Other architectural parallels between Kent
Creek and Mogollon pithouses include small trough
features/steps just inside the entryway, comparable
variability in interior floor area, the use of a single
large roof support post, and the practice of subfloor
burials inside houses.
In addition, there is one example that shows a
striking parallel between Kent Creek and the
Jornada area. A rectangular pithouse (Pitroom R2) excavated at the Merchant site in Lea County,
New Mexico, is very similar in size, shape, and
entry configuration to Structure 2 at Kent Creek
(cf. Leslie 1965:Figure 3 with Cruse 1992:Figures
6 and 10). Unfortunately, there are no radiocarbon
dates directly associated with either structure, and
Leslie’s (1965) assessment that the Merchant site
dates to the fifteenth century is based solely on a
few decorated pottery sherds (which make up only
a small percentage of the total ceramic assemblage)
and could be very misleading. Cruse (1992:129)
notes that the elongated trough features along the
front and back walls of Structure 2 are unique to
the Kent Creek pithouses.
Similarly, the ephemeral pithouse at the Sam
Wahl site has no analogs in nearby Plains Woodland
or Plains Village complexes, but very similar round
to oval structures are present in the Keystone Dam
area near E1 Paso (Carmichael 1985:142-149;
O’Laughlin 1980:135-149) and at the Fox Place
and King Ranch sites near Roswell (Wiseman
1981:174-175,
1988:229, 1993 personal
communication). The Keystone Dam structures date
earlier (ca. 550 B.C. to A.D. 150) than the Sam
Wahl pithouse, while the King Ranch structures are
later (ca. A.D. 1150-1300). No dates have been
published for the Fox Place pithouses. Southwestern

pithouse occupations are continually being pushed
back earlier in time, and it seems likely that Jornada
Mogollon pithouses will prove to be the prototypes
for those in the Caprock Canyonlands.
There also are broad similarities in the subsistence strategies and settlement patterns of the Palo
Duro and Eastern Jornada peoples. Mesquite and
shin oak have been identified as probable staple
foods utilized by both groups. Except for a slightly
lower rainfall and minor differences in plant and
animal communities, the Mescalero Escarpment on
the west edge of the Llano Estacado is in many
ways similar to the Caprock Escarpment. Consequently, it should not be surprising that human
populations adapted to these areas in a similar
manner. Many of the subsistence and settlement
pattern characteristics proposed for the Eastern
Jornada area are similar to adaptive strategies that
Palo Duro peoples may have employed in the Caprock Canyonlands. Leslie (1979) notes that the
Querecho-Maljamar phases are characterized by
pithouse villages and seasonal campsites, a heavy
dependence upon plant foods, the predominant use
of oval-basin metates and convex-faced manos,
and the dominant use of a variety of cornernotched arrow points.
The same amount of variability in arrow point
morphology within the Palo Duro complex is evident in the arrow points of the pithouse period in
the Eastern Jornada area (Leslie 1978). The corner- and basal-notched stemmed arrow points of
the Palo Duro complex are very similar to, and
exhibit the same range of variability as, Leslie’s
(1978) Types 3A through 3E, including occasional
serrated blades. These points are associated with
Leslie’s (1978:Figure 13) Querecho phase, although
the dates that he gives for this phase are probably
far too young. Jelinek (1967:103-105, 110) also
documents a similar variety of points in the Late
Archaic through Late 18 Mile phases and notes that
serration is most strongly associated with pithouse
occupations of the Early 18 Mile through Early
Mesita Negra phases (i.e., A.D. 800-1100).
Similarly, the most common points associated
with the Blow Out Mountain phase are a variety of
stemmed points that do not fit neatly into a single
type but are similar to arrow points of the Palo
Duro complex and Eastern Jornada areas (i.e., Type
3D in Leslie [1978]). Regardless of the names one
assigns to them, there seems to be some morphological continuity between the stemmed arrow

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex
points of the Palo Duro complex, the Blow Out
Mountain phase, the Eastern Jornada, and Middle
Pecos areas. While corner-notched dart points (i.e.,
Ellis-like) of the Panhandle Plains Late Archaic
bison hunters may be the prototypes for ubiquitious
Scallorn-like arrow points of the Lake Creek and
Palo Duro complexes, the unusual Deadman’s arrow points seem to appear suddenly and rather early
(probably before A.D. 500). There is no precursor
evident among Southern Plains Late Archaic points,
and it is possible that the prototype for Deadman’s
points may be found in the Shumla dart points of
the Lower Pecos and South Texas areas. Shumlalike dart points are present, but rare, throughout
much of the Jornada area at least as far west as Las
Cruces, New Mexico (MacNeish 1993:179). In addition, the corner-notched to stemmed (and sometimes serrated) Pendejo points found in southern
New Mexico (along with Shumla and Hueco points)
are quite similar to the early stemmed arrow points
found in the Caprock Canyonlands and West Central Texas. In the Jornada area, Pendejo points are
found in the Late Archaic and in the Mesilla phase
(MacNeish 1993:183-184), and they could be the
prototype for similar arrow points in the Palo Duro
complex and Blow Out Mountain phase.
The rather sudden appearance of Deadman’slike arrow points may only signal the adoption of
the bow and arrow by indigenous groups, or it may
mark the appearance of new peoples in the Caprock
Canyonlands (i.e., the Palo Duro complex) and in
West Central Texas (i.e., the Blow Out Mountain
phase). This author prefers the latter interpretation
and suggests that strong evidence for the arrival of
new peoples is found in the burials throughout the
region. A growing amount of evidence--some definitive, some circumstantial---denotes the formation of territorial boundaries and increasingly
widespread violence among many Southern Plains
cultures during the first millenium A.D. These
events set the stage for the escalating warfare seen
during later Plains Village times (Brooks t994).
If Palo Duro peoples were newcomers to the
Caprock Canyonlands sometime between A.D. 1
and 500, where did they come from? Perhaps Krieger
(1946:80-82) was on the right track some 50 years
ago when he observed that there was virtually no
difference in the archeology of the New Mexico and
Texas portions of the southern Llano Estacado. He
suggested that the southern High Plains had been
"actually inhabited by Puebloans, if only season-

507

ally" (Krieger 1946:80). Given the evidence for
cultural influence from the west, one must look to
the Jornada Mogo!lon region (including its eastern
extension east of the Pecos River) as the most likely
area of origin for many cultural traits of the Palo
Duro complex. It is not suggested that Palo Duro
peoples were direct lineal descendants of Jornada
Mogollon peoples. Although this certainly is one
possibility, there simply is not enough evidence to
support such a statement. There is sufficient evidence, however, to suggest that Palo Duro peoples
may have been descendants of hunther-gatherers
who, having lived in close contact with Jornada
Mogollon peoples in what is now southeastern New
Mexico and far western Texas, migrated east or
northeastward onto the Southern Plains.
What became of the Palo Duro complex is
equally problematic and perplexing. Without going
into the myriad of possibilities regarding the fate of
this culture, the most logical idea is one that links
the Palo Duro complex (and perhaps the Blow Out
Mountain phase) with the Toyah phase of Central
and South Texas. Shafer (1977) originally proposed
that the Toyah culture was derived from Southern
Plains bison-hunting peoples who migrated southward. Johnson (1994:271-281) recently elaborated
upon this idea and proposes that the classic Toyah
phase retains enough subtle traits, primarily in pottery styles and manufacturing techniques, to link it
to the Jornada Mogollon cultural tradition. While
much of its material culture represents classic Plains
bison-hunting gear (i.e., the beveled Harahey skinning knives and Plains-style hafted end scrapers),
the pointed-stemmed Perdiz point is distinctive,
and its logical prototype is found in the stemmed
arrow points of the Blow Out Mountain culture.
Johnson (1994) suggests that Toyah peoples are
descendants of groups who made Jornada
Mogollon-tradition pottery, slightly modified their
stemmed arrow points into the distinctive Perdiz
style, and adopted a Plains bison-hunting lifestyle.
He also suggests that the Mogollon influence may
have been indirect and that the earliest Toyah
peoples could have come from the Southern Plains
rather than from the Jornada Mogollon region.
I would further modify Johnson’s (1994) hypothesis and suggest that the Blow Out Mountain
phase is somehow related to the Palo Duro complex. Although purely conjectural, these manifestations may prove to be northern and southern variants
of the same cultural tradition. The stemmed

508

Texas Archeological Society

Bonham-like arrow points that characterize the
Blow Out Mountain phase are little more than modified Deadman’s points, but the latter represent the
earliest narrow-stemmed arrow point form in the
Texas Panhandle Plains. Consequently, the
Deadman’s point is the logical prototype for the
stemmed Blow Out Mountain points and ultimately,
if Johnson (1994) is correct, for Perdiz points as
well. Although it will be difficult to prove that the
Palo Duro complex and the Blow Out Mountain
phase are ancestral to the Toyah phase, this is an
hypothesis worth testing.
One possible scenario is that, as the climate
dried and bison populations increased in the Southern Plains around A.D. 1100-1300, peoples of the
Palo Duro complex and the Blow Out Mountain
phase quickly adopted a Plains bison-hunting
lifestyle and material culture, and they began to
migrate southward. This migration may have been
spurred, in a domino effect, by pressures from southward-migrating Athapascan-speaking peoples who
moved from the Central Plains into the Southern
Plains around A.D. 1300-1400 (but this is another
story altogether!). The wide geographic range and
the extreme archeological variability that characterize the Toyah phase may be partially explained if
these proto-Toyah peoples spread throughout Central and South Texas within one or two centuries and
eventually displaced or assimilated with, but adopted
traits from, many of the indigenous groups.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
The Pato Duro complex has been redefined in
light of recent archeological finds. The complex
dates to the period between A.D. 500 and A.D.
1100-1200, and a wide range of activities and site
functions are inferred for the three types of habitation sites that are recognized. The Kent Creek and
Sam Wahl sites are identified as residential bases
where people lived in pithouses while procuring,
processing, storing, and consuming a wide range of
wild plant foods. Mesquite beans and shin oak
acorns have been identified as possible staples, but
other plants such as goosefoot and buffalo gourds
also may have been important foods. Although no
cultigens have been found, this does not preclude
the possibility that limited horticulture was practiced at residential sites. Occupations at these villages were at least seasonal (i.e., during late summer

to fall harvest and into winter) and may have been
biseasonal (i.e., during planting and then again during fall harvest and into winter).
Palo Duro peoples lived in rockshelters and
open camps at various times of the year and for
different reasons. Rockshelters were occupied on a
sporadic and ephemeral basis, or were more intensively used and may then have served as relatively
permanent bases. Some campsites were little more
than specialized processing sites where baking and
grinding of plant foods were the primary activities,
while others were multifunctional bases where considerable hunting and processing of animals was
done. Deer and small animals appear to have been
the principal game animals. Bison were hunted but
they do not appear to have been a major food resource, and the evidence suggests that populations
may have been relatively low.
Palo Duro culture is now viewed as
representing semisedentary peoples who maintained
a high degree of residential mobility in order to
exploit a wide range of resources that were locally
available and abundant on a seasonal basis. Sites of
this complex are found mainly in the Caprock
Canyonlands, an ecological subregion that offered
the most predictable and widest range of subsistence
resources (i.e., water, plants, and animals) within a
relatively arid landscape. The home territory for
Palo Duro peoples was in the upper drainages of
the Red and Brazos rivers, although they may have
ranged on occasion north into the Canadian River
valley, east into the Rolling Plains, south into the
upper Colorado River drainage, and west onto the
Llano Estacado.
Human burials provide evidence of widespread
violence in and around the Caprock Canyonlands
during the Late Prehistoric I period, and the Palo
Duro culture may have come into periodic contact
with enemy peoples to the north and east (i.e., Lake
Creek or Plains Woodland groups) and to the south
and southeast (i.e., Blow Out Mountain and other
undefined groups). Palo Duro peoples did maintain
some form of cultural contact with the Jornada
Mogollon peoples of southeastern New Mexico and
western Texas over a long period of time. There
appears to be a significant amount of Jornada
Mogollon cultural influence across the southern
Llano Estacado and into the Caprock Canyonlands,
and the Palo Duro complex exhibits many traits
(e.g., imported brownware pottery and pithouse
architectural styles) that were derived, whether

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Cotnplex

directly or indirectly, from the Jornada Mogollon
region. In addition, the similarities between the
subsistence and settlement patterns proposed for
the Palo Duro complex and those proposed for their
eastern Jornada Mogollon neighbors may be more
than a mere coincidence. In summary, it is unclear
whether.the Palo Duro complex represents an actual
migration of Jornada Mogollon or related peoples,
or whether it simply represents indigenous Southern
Plains people who came under the widespread
influence of Jornada Mogollon culture, or something
much more complex.

509

REFERENCES CITED
Adair, M. J.
1988 Prehistoric Agriculture in the Central Plains. Publications in Anthropology No. 15. University of Kansas, Lawrence.
Agogino, G. and V. T. Button
1985

A Secondary Burial of Human Cranial Fragments
from 34GR6, a Prehistoric Cetnetery on the Shoreline of Lake Altus, Greer County, Oklahoma. U.S.
Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation,
Southwest Region, Amarillo.

Alex, T.C.
1990 The Search for the Elusive Kaolinite: Prehistoric

Utilization of a Lithic Resource for Ornamental Artifacts. In Papers from the Third Sy~nposium on
Resources of the Chihuahuan Desert Region, pp.
163-168. Chihuahuan Desert Research Institute,
Alpine, Texas.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This article stems from a multi-year archeological research effort at Lake Alan Henry, conducted by Prewitt and Associates, Inc. of Austin,
Texas, and funded by the City of Lubbock, Texas.
The successful completion of the project is due
primarily to the supervision and guidance of Elton
R. Prewitt and Ross C. Fields. This article was
initially edited by Fields and Linda Nance Foster,
and final editing was done by Timothy K. Perttula.
The illustrations were prepared by Sandy Hannum.
Individuals who have at various times contributed
ideas or insights during the author’s study of the
Palo Duro complex are, in alphabetical order, Jim
Couzzourt, Brett Cruse, Lain Ellis, Ross Fields,
Billy Harrison, Jack Hughes, Lee Johnson, Chris
Lintz, Elton Prewitt, Mike Quigg, Steve Tomka,
and Regge Wiseman. Many of the ideas and interpretations presented in this article were developed
during discussions with these individuals over a
period of many years, but they may not agree with
all (or perhaps any) of my conclusions, and I take
full responsibility for the interpretations proposed
herein. Any errors of omission or fact are the sole
responsibility of the author. Special thanks go to
Jack T. Hughes, the now-retired "dean of Panhandle archeology," who has contributed more than
he will ever know to inspire "the boy from Tulia"
(as Jack noted in his field notes for Mackenzie
Reservoir during the Winter of 1973) to become an
archeologist.

Arbingast, S. A., L. G. Kennamer, R. H. Ryan, A. Lo, D. L.
Karney, C. P. Zlatkovich, M. E. Bonine, and R. G. Steele
1973 Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Bagot, J. T. and J. T. Hughes
1979

Archeological Inventory of a Portion of Caprock
Canyons State Park in Briscoe County, Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory, Killgore Research
Center, West Texas State University, Canyon.

Bailey, C. H.
1951

The Texan Santa Fe Trail. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review 24 (entire volume).

Basehart, H. W.
1960 Mescalero Apache Subsistence Patterns and SocioPolitical Organization, Section I: MescaleroChiricahua Land Claims Project. The University of
New Mexico, Albuquerque.

Bell, R. E.
1984 The Plains Villagers: The Washita River. In Prehistory of Oklahoma, edited by R. E. Bell, pp. 307324. Academic Press, New York.
Bell, W. H. and E. F. Castetter
1937 The Utilization of Mesquite and Screwbean by the
Aborigines in the American Southwest. University
of New Mexico Bulletin No. 314. Ethnobiological
Studies in the American Southwest, Biology Series
5(2). University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Binford, L. R.
1980 Willow Smoke and Dogs’ Tails: Hunter-Gatherer
Settlement Systems and Archaeological Site Formation. American Antiquity 45( 1):4-20.

510

Texas Archeological Society

Binford, L. R. (Continued)
1990

Mobility, Housing and Environment: A Comparative

Brethauer, D. P.
1979 The Possible Role of Mesquite as a Food Resource

Study. Journal of Anthropological Research

in the Jornada Mogollon Region. In Jornada

46(2): 119-152.

Mogollon Archaeology: Proceedings of the First
Jornada Conference, edited by P. H. Beckett and R.

Boyd, D. K.

N. Wiseman, pp. 67-80. Historic Preservation Bu-

1982

Human Skeletal Remains from 34GR6, Greer

reau, State Planning Office, Santa Fe, and Cultural

County, Oklahoma. Department of the Interior, Bu-

Resources Management Division, New Mexico State

reau of Reclamation, Southwest Region, Amarillo.

University, Las Cruces~

1995a Rethinking the Palo Duro Complex: Jornada
Mogollon Influence in the Texas Southern Plains’?

Briscoe, J.

Transactions of the 30th Regional Archeological

1987

Analysis of Cultural Materials from the Swift Horse
Site, an Early Plains Woodland Site on the Black

Symposium.for Southeastern New Mexico and West-

Kettle National Grasslands, Roger Mills County,

ern Texas. Clarendon Archeological Society,

Oklahoma. Briscoe Consulting Services, Butler,

Clarendon, Texas. In press.

Oklahoma.
1995b Archeological Investigations at the Sam Wahl Site:
Jornada Mogollon Influence in the Texas Southern

1989

Chronology and Distribution of Lake Creek Focus/
Complex: Information from the Swift Horse Site. In

Plains? In Jornada Mogollon Archeology: Proceedings of the Eighth Jornada Conference, 1993. Hu-

In Light of Past Experience: Papers in Honor of

man Systems Research, Tularosa, New Mexico. In

Jack T. Hughes, edited by B. C. Roper, pp. 105115. Publication No. 5. Panhandle Archeological

preparation.

Society, Amarillo.
Boyd, D. K., J. T. Abbott, W. A. Bryan, C. M. Garvey, S. A.
Tomka, and R. C. Fields
1990

Phase H Investigations at Prehistoric and Rock Art
Sites, Justiceburg Reservoir; Garza and Kent Counties, "12,xas. Reports of Investigations No. 71.2 Vols.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Boyd, D. K., M. D. Freeman, M. D. Blum, E. R. Prewitt, and

Bronson, B.
1977 The Earliest Farmers: Demography as Cause and
Consequence. In Origins of Agriculture, edited by
C. A. Reed, pp. 23-48. Mouton, The Hague.
Brooks, R. L.
1989

J. M. Quigg
1989

ern Great Plains, by J. L. Hofman, R. L. Brooks, J.

Phase I Cultural Resources Investigations at

S. Hays, D. W. Owsley, R. L. Jantz, M. K. Marks,

Justiceburg Reservoir on the Double Mountain Fork

and M. H. Manhein, pp. 71-90. Research Series No.

of the Brazos River, Garza and Kent Counties,
Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 66. 2 Vols.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Village Farming Societies. In From Clovis to
Comanchero: Areheological Overview of the South-

35. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
1993

Household Abandonment among Sedentary Plains
Societies: Behavioral Sequences and Consequences

Boyd, D. K., J. Peck, S. A. Tomka, K. W. Kibler, and M. D.

in the Interpretation of the Archeological Record.

Freeman
1994

Ethnoarchaeological and Archaeological Ap-

Reservoir), Gatza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase

proaches, edited by C. M. Cameron and S. A.

111, Season 3. Reports of Investigations No. 93.

Tomka, pp. 178-187. Cambridge University Press,

Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Cambridge.

Boyd, D. K., S. A. Tomka, and M. D. Freeman
1996

In Abandonment of Settlements and Regions:

Data Recovery at Lake Alan Henry (Justiceburg

Caprock Canyonlands Archeology: A Synthesis of
the Late Prehistory and History of Lake Alan Henry
and the Caprock Escarpment. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin. In preparation.

Boyd, D. K., S. A. Tomka, C. B. Bousman, K. M. Gardner, and
M. D. Freeman
1992 Data Recovet3’ at Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan
Hen~. ), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase lII,
Season 1. Reports of Investigations No. 84. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.

1994

Warfare on the Southern Plains. In Skeletal Biology
in the Great Plains: Migration, Warfare, Health,
and Subsistence, edited by D. W. Owsley and R. L.
Jantz, pp. 317-323. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.

Brown, C.
1985 A Tale of Two Sites: A (41LU34) and B (41LU29).
Transactions of the 20th Regional Areheological
Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 143-155.
1990a SPAS-LU-10: Report #1--Middle Archaic. South
Plains Archeological Society Newsletter 102.

Boyd m The Palo Duro Complex
Brown, C. (Continued)
1990b SPAS-LU-10: Report #2--Late Archaic. South

Carmichael, D. L.
1985

Plains A rcheologicaI Society Newsletter 103.
1991a SPAS-LU-10:

Report

#3--Arrow

Catnpsites Near Keystone Dam, El Paso, Texas.
versity, Las Cruces.

Manos--Core Knives--Perforators. South Plains
1986

Archaeological Survey in the Southern Tularosa
Basin of New Mexico. Historic and Natural Re-

1991b SPAS-LU-10: Report #4. South Plains Archeologichl Society Newsletter 105.
n.d.

Archeological Excavations at Two Prehistoric
Occasional Papers No. 14. New Mexico State Uni-

Points--

Archeological Society Newsletter 104.

511

sources Report No. 3. Environmental Management
Office, Directorate of Engineering and Housing,

A Lubbock County Site: 41LU75. Unpublished MS

United States Army Air Defense Artillery Center,

on file with the author.

Fort Bliss, Texas.
Bryant, V. M.
1993

1990

Patterns of Residential Mobility and Sedentism in

Pollen Analysis of Archeological Sediments from

the Jornada Mogollon Area. In Perspectives on

4IKT53. In Data Recovery at Justiceburg Reser-

Southwestern Prehistory, edited by P. E. Minnis

voir (Lake Alan Henry), Garza and Kent Counties,

and C. L. Redman, pp. 122-134. Westview Press,

Texas: Phase III, Season 2, by D. K. Boyd, J. Peck,

Boulder, Colorado.

S. A. Tomka, and K. W. Kibler, pp. 435-443. Reports of Investigations No. 88. Prewitt and Associ-

Castetter, E. F. and M. E. Opler

ates, Inc., Austin.

1936

The Ethnobiology of the Chiricahua and Mescalero
Apache. A. The Use of Plants for Foods’, Beverages,

Button, V. T., and G. Agogino
1986

and Narcotics. The University of New Mexico Bul-

A Report on Additional Human Skeletal Matelial

letin, Biological Series 4(5). University of New

Exposed by Reservoir Induced Erosion at Lake Altus,

Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Southwestern Oklahoma. U.S. Department of the

1987

Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, Southwest Region,

Collins, M. B.

Amarillo.

1968

Data from the Southern Llano Estacado, Texas. Un-

Human Skeletal Material Exposed by Reservoir-

published Master’s thesis, Department of Anthro-

Induced Erosion at Lake Altus, Southwestern Okla-

pology, The University of Texas at Austin.

homa. Bulletin of the Oklahotna Anthropological
Society 36:15-37.

The Andrews Lake Locality: New Archeological

1971

A Review of Llano Estacado Archaeology and
Ethnohistory. Plains Anthropologist 16(52):85-104.

Calamia, M. A.
1991

Ground Stone Variability among Jornada Mogollon

Corley, J. A.

Sites and Its Implications for Interpreting Residen-

1965a Proposed Eastern Extension of the Jornada Branch

tial Mobility. In Mogollon V, edited by P. Beckett,

of the Mogollon. Transactions of the First Regional

pp. 119-132. COAS Publishing and Research, Las

Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas: 31-36.

Cruces.

1965b Proposed Eastern Extension of the Jornada Branch
Cameron, C. M., and S. A. Tomka (editors)
1993 Abandonment of Settlements and Regions:

of the Mogollon. Bulletin of the Lea County Archeological Society 1:30-36.

Ethnoarchaeological and Archaeological Approaches. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Corley, J. A. and R. H. Leslie
1960

Campbell, R. G.
1976

The Boot Hill Site: L.C.A.S. B-5, a Preliminary
Report. Reprinted 1965. Bulletin 2. Lea County Ar-

The Panhandle AsT)ect of the Chaquaqua Plateau.

cheological Society, Hobbs, New Mexico.

University Graduate Studies 11. Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

Couzzourt, J. E.
1982

Campbell, T. J.
1983 The Greenbelt Site: An Example of Variation among
Prehistoric Plains Village Sites in the Texas Panhandle. Unpublished Master’s thesis, Department
of Anthropology, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Carlson, G. G. and V. H. Jones
1940

Archaeological Testing at Cal Farley’s Boys Ranch,
Oldham County, Texas. Transactions of the 17th
Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas. Midland Archeological Society, Midland, Texas.

1985

Preliminary Report: Testing at the Tascosa Creek
Site, Oldham County, Texas. Transactions of the

Some Notes on Uses of Plants by the Comanche

Twentieth Regional Archeological Symposium for

Indians. Papers of the Michigan Academy of Sci-

Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp.

ence, Arts, and Letters 25:5 !7-542.

65-142.

512

Texas Archeological Society

1988

The Tascosa Creek Site: New Developments and

Dillehay, T. D.

Dates. Transactions of the 23rd Regional Archeo-

1974

Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the
Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist 19(65): 180-

logical Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico

196.

and Western Texas, pp. 44-79.

Etchieson, G. M.
Covey, C. (translator)
1961

Cabeza De Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown

1979

Archeological Testing at the South Ridge Site, Lake
Meredith RecreationArea, Hutchinson County, Texas.

Interior of America. University of New Mexico

Archeological Research Laboratory, Killgore Re-

Press, Albuquerque.

search Center, West Texas State University, Canyon.

Creel,
1990 Excavations at 417~91, 7bin Green County, Texas.
O.G.

Publications in Archaeology Report No. 38. Texas

Etchieson, G. M., R. D. Speer, and J. T. Hughes
1977

An Archeological Survey of Certain Tracts in and
near Caprock Canyons State Park in Eastern

State Department of Highways and Public Trans-

Briscoe County, Texas. Archeological Research

portation, Highway Design Division, Austin.

Laboratory, Killgore Research Center, West Texas

Cruse,
1992

State University, Canyon.
Archeological Investigations at the Kent Creek Site

1978

(41HL66): Evidence of Mogollon lnfluence on the

voir Area, King and Knox Counties, Texas. Archeo-

Southern Plains. Publication No. 6. Panhandle Ar-

logical Research Laboratory, Killgore Research

cheological Society, Amarillo.
Cummings, L. S.
1990

Center, West Texas State University, Canyon.
1979

Counties, Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory, Killgore Research Center, West Texas State

Art Sites, Justiceburg Reservoir, Garza and Kent

University, Canyon.

Counties, 7)xas, by D. K. Boyd, J. T. Abbott, W. A.
Bryan, C. M. Garvey, S. A. Tomka, and R. C. Fields,

Ferring, C. R.

pp. 533-550. 2 Vols. Reports of Investigations No.

1986

71. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

homa. In Current Trends in Southern Plains Archaeology, edited by T. G. Baugh, pp. 55-82. Plains

Geology and Earth Resources of Oklahoma: An At-

Anthropologist 31 ( 114, Pt. 2), Memoir 21.

las of Maps and Cross Sections. Education Publication No. 1. Oklahoma Geological Survey, Norman.

Ferring, C. R. (editor)
1982

DeBoer, W. R.
1988

The Late Holocene Prehistory of Delaware Canyon, Oklahoma. Contributions in Archeology 1. In-

Subterranean Storage and the Organization of Sur-

stitute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State

plus: The View from Eastern North America. South-

University, Denton.

eastern A rchaeology 7( 1 ):1-20.
Dering,

Late Holocene Cultural Ecology in the Southern
Plains: Perspectives from Delaware Canyon, Okla-

Curtis, N. M., Jr. and W. E. Ham
1972

Archeological Investigations in the Crowell
Reservoir Area, Cottle, Foard, King and Knox

Phytolith and Pollen Analysis: A Feasibility Study.
In Phase H Investigations at Prehistoric and Rock

1994

Archeological h~vestigations in the Truscott Reser-

Flores, D. L.
J. P.

Analysis of Plant Remains from 41GR291 and

1990

Caprock Canyonlands: Journeys into the Heart of the
Southern Plains. University of Texas Press, Austin.

41GR559. In Data Recovery at Lake Alan Henry
(Justiceburg Reservoir), Garza and Kent Counties,
Texas: Phase IlL Season 3, by D. K. Boyd, J. Peck,
S. A. Tomka, K. W. Kibler, and M. D. Freeman, pp.

1985

Patterns of Prehistoric Food Production in North
America. In Prehistoric Food Production in North

331-345. Reports of Investigations No. 93. Prewitt

America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 341-364. Anthro-

and Associates, Inc., Austin.

pological Papers No. 75. Museum of Anthropology,

Dering, P. and V. M. Bryant, Jr.
1992

Ford, R. I.

Pollen Analysis of Archeological Sediments from
Justiceburg Reservoir. In Data Recovery at
Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan Henry), Garza
and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase HI, Season 1, by
D. K. Boyd, C. B. Bousman, S. A. Tomka, K. M.
Gardner, and M. D. Freeman, pp. 211-220. Reports
of Investigations No. 84. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Foreman, G. (editor)
1937 Adventures on the Red River: Report on the Exploration of the Headwaters" of the Red River by Captain Randolph B. Marcy and Captain G. B.
McClellan. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Cotnplex
Forrester, R. E.
1951 A Series of Eighteen Indian Skeletons Excavated in
Shackelford County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 22:132143.

Hiles, H.

1987

The Moran Point from North-Central Texas. Bulle-

Hines, M. H., S. A. Tomka, and K. W. Kibler

tin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society

1994

1993

513

Guide to Protein and Nutritional Values of Plants
Used by Native Americans of the Southwest. Southwest Research Native, Fairacres, New Mexico.

Data Recovery at the Wind Canyon Site, 41HZl19,
Hudspeth County, Texas. Reports of Investigations

36:131-136.

No. 99. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Galvin, J. (editor)
1970

Army Expedition Led by Lieutenant James W. Abert

Hofman, J. L.
1975 A Study of Custer-Washita River Foci Relationships. Plains Anthropologist 20(67):41-5 i.

of the Topographical Engineers. John Howell

1978

Through the Country of the Comanche Indians in
the Fall of the Year 1845: The Journal of a U.S.

Books, San Francisco.
Gettys, F.
1991

Salvage Excavation in Roger Mills County. Oklahoma Archeological Survey Newsletter 11(3).

Gilman, P. A.
1987 Architecture as Artifact: Pit Structures and Pueblos
in the American Southwest. American Antiquity
52(3):538-564.
Goland, C. A.
1983 The Ecological Context of Hunter-Gatherer Storage Strategies. Unpublished Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill.

The Development and Northern Relationships of
Two Archeological Phases in the Southern Plains
Subarea. In The Central Plains Tradition: Internal
Development and External Relationships, edited by
D. J. Blakeslee, pp. 6-35. Report No. 11. Office of
the State Archeologist, Iowa City.

1984a The Plains Villagers: The Custer Phase. In Prehistory of Oklahoma, edited by R. E. Bell, pp. 287305. Academic Press, New York.
1984b The Western Protohistoric: A Summary of the
Edwards and Wheeler Complexes. In Prehistory of
Oklahoma, edited by R. E. Bell, pp. 347-362. Academic Press, New York.
Hofman, J. L., and R. L. Brooks
1989

Prehistoric Culture History: Woodland Complexes
in the Southern Great Plains. In From Clovis to
Comanchero: Archeological Overview of the South-

1986

ern Great Plains, by J. L. Hofman, R. L. Brooks, J.

Report on Archaeological Salvage in the Sanford
Reservoir Area. Publication No. 4. Panhandle Ar-

S. Hays, D. H. Owsley, R. L. Jantz, M. K. Marks,

cheological Society, Amarillo.

and M. H. Manhein, pp. 61-70. Research Series No.
35. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Gustafson, A. A.
1994a The Duncan Ranch Site 1: A Late Woodland/Incipient Antelope Creek Phase Site. Paper presented at
the 30th annual meeting of the Southwestern Federation of Archeological Societies, Clarendon,
Texas.
1994b The Duncan Ranch Site 1: Evidence for Late Woodland Transition to Antelope Creek Phase Development. Paper presented at the 59th annual meeting of
the Society for American Archeology, Anaheim,
California.

Hughes, D. T.
1984

The Foragers: Western Oklahoma. In Prehistory of
Oklahoma, edited by R. E. Bell, pp. 109-117. Academic Press, New York.

Hughes, J. T.
1962 Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
32:65-84.
1969

The Canyon City Club Cave in the Panhandle of
Texas. Ms. on file, Office of the State Archeologist,

Hays, J. S.
1986 An Archeological Survey of Portions of the Buffalo
Lake National Wildlife Refuge, Randall County,
Texas. United States Department of the Interior,
Bureau of Reclamation, Southwest Region.
Hester, T. R., D. Gilbow, and A. D. Albee
1973

A Functiona! Analysis of "Clear Fork" Artifacts
from the Rio Grande Plain, Texas. American Antiquity 38(1):90-96.

Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
1978

Archeology of Palo Duro Canyon. Panhandle-

1991

Prehistoric Cultural Developments on the Texas

Plains Historical Review 51:35-57.

High Plains. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 60:1-55.

Texas Archeological Society

Hughes, J. T., H. C. Hood, and B. P. Newman

Lea County Archeological Society

1978

1971

Archeological Testing in the Red Deer Creek

The Laguna Plata Site, L.C.A.S. C-IO-C, LA-5148:

Watershed in Gray, Roberts, and Hemphill Counties,

A Prelimina~ Report. Lea County Archeological

Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory, Killgore

Society, Hobbs, New Mexico.

Research Center, West Texas State University,
LeBlanc, S. A. and M. E. Whalen (editors)

Canyon.

1980
1983

An Archeological Synthesis of South-Central and
Southwestern New Mexico. Office of Contract

Ingold, T.
The Significance of Storage in Hunting Societies.

Archaeology,

Man 18:553-571.

Albuquerque.

Jelinek, A. J.

Lehmer, D. J.

1967

1948

A Prehistoric Sequence in the Middle Pecos Valley,

University

of

New

Mexico,

The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon. Social Science Bulletin 17. University of Arizona, Tucson.

New Mexico. Anthropological Papers No. 31. Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann
Leslie,

Arbor.

1965

The Merchant Site: L.C,A.S. E-4. Transactions of

Jelks, E. B.

the First Regional Archeological Symposium for

1962

Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp.

The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect

23-29.

Site in Hill County, Texas. Archaeology Series No.
5. Department of Anthropology, The University of

1978

Texas at Austin.

Projectile Point Types and Sequence of the Eastern
Jornada-Mogollon, Extreme Southeastern New
Mexico. Transactions of the 13th Regional Archeo-

Johnson, E. H.

logical Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico

1931

and Western Texas, pp. 81-157.

The Natural Regions of Texas. Bulletin No. 3113.
University of Texas, Austin.
1979

The Eastern Jornada Mogollon, Extreme Southeast-

Johnson, L.
1994 The Life and 7)’mes of Toyah-Culture Folk: The

ern New Mexico (A Summary). In Jornada

Buckhollow Encampment, Site 41KM16, Kimble

Jotwada Conference, edited by P. H. Beckett and R.

County, Texas. Office of the State Archeological

N, Wiseman, pp. 179-199. New Mexico State Uni-

Report 38. Texas Department of Transportation and

versity, Cultural Resources Management Division,

Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Las Cruces.

Jones,
1990 Assessment

Mogollon Archaeology: Proceedings of the First

LeVick, G. and L. LeVick
of

Pollen

Preservation

and

1966

The Case of the Aching Ulna or Would you Believe

Macrobotanical Analysis. In Phase H hzvestigations

a Projectile in an Elbow? Oklahoma Anthropologi-

at Prehistoric and Rock Art Sites, Justiceburg Res-

cal Society Newsletter 14(9):9-10.

ervoir, Garza and Kent Counties, Texas, by D. K.
Boyd, J. T. Abbott, W. A. Bryan, C. M. Garvey, S.
A. Tomka, and R. C. Fields, pp. 521-532. 2 Vols.

Lintz,
1982

actions of the 17th Regional Areheological Sympo-

Reports of Investigations No. 71. Prewitt and Asso-

sium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western
Texas, pp. 37-56.

ciates, Inc., Austin.

1984

Kirkpatrick, Z. M.
1992

Academic Press, New York.
1986

ies in Oklahoma’s Past No. 14. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman.

Mississippi Valley. Publication No. 4640. University of Texas at Austin.

Architecture and Community Variability within the
Antelope Creek Phase of the Texas Panhandle. Stud-

Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northetv~
Texas with Extension of Puebloan Datings to the

1978

The Plains Villagers: Antelope Creek. In Prehistory
of Oklahoma, edited by R. E. Bell, pp. 325-346.

Wildflowers of the Western Plains: A Field Guide.
University of Texas Press, Austin.

Krieger, A. D.
1946

An Overview of the Antelope Creek Focus. Trans-

Lintz, C., A. Treece, F. M. Oglesby, K. Kibler, P. O’Neill, W.

The Southern Limits of Central Plains Culture
Complexes. In Proceedings of the Fifth Plains
Conference .for Archeology, assembled by J. L.

N. Trierweiler, C. Frederick, J. M. Quigg, and A. J. Taylor
1993

Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. lvie
Reservoit; Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties,

Champe, pp. 98-99. Reprint of 1949 Laboratory of

Texas, Volume H: Test Excavations at Prehistoric

Anthropology Note Book No.

Sites and Assessment of Rock Cairn Features. Tech-

Nebraska, Lincoln.

1. University of

nical Report 346-II. Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Complex
Lintz, C., W. N. Trierweiler, F. Oglesby, P. O’Neill, W.
Doering, and M. McFaul
1991

A Cultural Resource Survey at Mitchell Reservoir,
Mitchell County, Texas. Technical Report 433.
Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.

MacNeish, R. S.
1993

O’Laughlin, T. C.
1980 The Keystone Dam Site and Other Archaic and Formative Sites in Northwest El Paso, Texas. E1 Paso
Centennial Museum Publications in Anthropology
No. 8. The University of Texas at El Paso.
1993

P.reliminary Investigations of the Archaic in the Region of Las Cruces, New Mexico. Historic and Natural Resources Report No. 9. Cultural Resources
Management Program, Directorate of Environment,
United States Army Air Defense Artillery Center,
Fort Bliss, Texas.

1984

lands. In Mogollon V, edited by J. H. Kelley and P.

Texas, in the Summer of 1854. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Pennington, C. W.
1963

search, Las Cruces, New Mexico.
1993

The Tarahumar of Mexico. University of Utah Press,
Salt Lake City.

The Relationship between Groundstone and Agricultural Intensification in Western New Mexico.
Kiva 58(3):317-330.

Miller,
1992

Notes Taken during the Expedition Commanded by
Capt. R. B. Marcy, U.S.A., through Unexplored

Agricultural Intensification in the Mogollon HighH. Beckett, pp. 62-75. COAS Publishing and Re-

The Long and Short of It: Jornada Pueblo Occupational History. Paper presented at the Jornada
Mogollon Conference VIII, March 18-21, 1993,
Tularosa, New Mexico.

Parker, W. B.

Mauldin, R.
1991

515

Perttula, T. K.
1992 "The Caddo Nation": Archaeological and Ethnohistoric Perspectives. University of Texas Press,
Austin.

41HG66 Skeletal Analysis. In A rcheological Investigations at the Kent Creek Site (41HL66): Evidence of Mogollon Influence on the Southern Plains,
by J. B. Cruse, pp. 161-165. Publication No. 6.
Panhandle Archeological Society, Amarillo.

Minnis, P. E.
1985 Domesticating People and Plants in the Greater
Southwest. In Prehistoric Food Production in North
America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 309-339. Anthropological Papers No. 75. Museum of Anthropology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Perttula, T. K. and J. E. Bmseth
1983 Early Caddoan Subsistence Strategies, Sabine River
Basin, East Texas. Plains Anthropologist 28(99):921.
Quigg, J. M., C. Lintz, F. M. Oglesby, A. C. Earls, C. D.
Frederick, W. N. Trierweiler, D. Owsley, and K. W. Kibler
1993

Historic and Prehistoric Data Recovery at Palo
Duro Reservoir, Hansford County, Texas. Technical
Report No. 485. Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.

Quigg, J. M., C. Lintz, F. M. Oglesby, and A. C. Treese
Natural Heritage Policy Research Project
1978

1993

The Testing Phase at Mitchell Reservoir, Mitchell

Preserving Texas’ Natural Heritage. Policy

County, Texas. Technical Report No. 820. Mariah

Research Project Report No. 31. The Natural

Associates, Inc., Austin.

Heritage Policy Research Project, Lyndon B.
Johnson Schoo! of Public Affairs, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Raisz, E.
1957 Landforms of the United States. Map, 6th revised
edition, to accompany Atwood’s "Physiographic

Nelson, B. A. and S. A. LeBlanc
1986

Provinces of North America."

Short-Term Sedentism in the American Southwest:
The Mimbres Valley Salado. University of New

Ray, C. N.

Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

1932

Archeological Research in Central West Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontologi-

Northern, M. J.
1979 Archaeological Investigations of the Montgomery
Site, Floyd County, Texas. Master’s thesis,
Department of Anthropology, Texas Tech
University, Lubbock.
Oklahoma Archeological Survey
1993 Radiocarbon Dates for RM-668. Oklahoma Archeological Survey Newsletter 12(3).

cal Society 4:63-70.
1933

Multiple Burials in Stone Cist Mounds of the
Abilene Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 3:14-24, and 32
(Plate 8).

1936

Some Unusual Cremated Burials Found near Colorado, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society 8:9-16.

516

Texas Archeological Society

Ray, C. N. (Continued)

Saunders, R.

1941

1983

The Various Types of the Clear Fork Gouge. Bulle-

Highway Archaeology 7. Oklahoma Department of

Society 13:152-162.
!946

Transportation, Oklahoma City.

Two Buried Multiple Stone Cist Structures. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society 17:18-27.

Raymer, L. E.
1988 The Form and Function of Subterranean Food Storage Structures: A Cross-Cultural Study of the Conditions Affecting Pit Storage in the Ethnographic
Records. Paper presented at the symposium "The
Economics of Storage: Developing an Iuterpretive
Framework for Archaeology" at the 53rd Annual
Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology,
April 29, 1988, Phoenix, Arizona.

The Carrizozo Bridge Site: A Plains Woodland Site
on the Oklahoma/New Mexico Border. Papers in

tin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological

Schlanger, S. H.
1990 Artifact Assemblage Composition and Site Occupation Duration. In Perspectives on Southwestern Prehistory, edited by P. E. Minnis and C. L. Redman,
pp. 103-121. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.
1991

On Manos, Metates, and the History of Site Occupations. American Antiquity 56(3):460-474.

Shafer, H.
1977

Late Prehistory of Centra! Texas. Bulletin of the
South Plains Archeological Society’ 3:18-27.

Renfro, H. B.
1973 Geological Highway Map of Texas. United States
Geological Highway Map Series, Map No. 7. American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa.

Sommer, A. E.

Riggs, A. D., Jr.

Sonnichsen, C. L.

1965

LY-4: A Surface Site of the South Plains. Bulletin

1971

Big Spring Site. Transactions of the Sixth Regional
Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New
Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 111-122.

1958

The Mescalero Apaches. University of Oklahoma
Press, Norman.

of the South Plains A rchaeological Society 2:1-35.
Floydada, Texas.
Robinson, D. G.
1992

Petrographic Analysis of Nonlocal Plainwares. In

Stuiver, M. and H. A. Polach
1977 Discussion: Reporting of ~C Data. Radiocarbon
19:355-363.

Data Recovery at Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan
Henry), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase 111,
Season 1, by D. K. Boyd, S. A. Tomka, C. B.

Stuiver, M. and P. J. Reimer
1993

221-227. Reports of Investigations No. 84. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.
1994

Thurmond, J. P.
1988a The 1988 Society Field School: The Beaver Dam

Petrographic Analysis of Plainwares from 41GR291.

Site, 34RM208, Roger Mills County. Oklahoma

In Data Recovecv at Lake Alan Henry (Justiceburg

Anthropological Society Newsletter 36(4):2-5.

Reservoir), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase
HI, Season 3, by D. K. Boyd, S. A. Tomka, K. W.

1988b An Update on Investigations at the Beaver Dam
Site (34RM208), Roger Mills County. Oklahoma

Kibler, and M. D. Freeman, pp. 356-361. Reports

Anthropological Society Newsletter 36(6):3-9.

of Investigations No. 93. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.
Runyan, J. W.
1972

Extended ~C Database and Revised CALIB 3.0 Age
Calibration Program. Radiocarbon 35:215-230.

Bousman, K. M. Gardner, and M. D. Freeman, pp.

1988c Update on the 1988 Fall Dig at 34RM308. Oklahoma Anthropological Society Newsletter 36(8):3.
1991

Archeology of the Dempsey Divide: A Late Ar-

The Laguna Plata Site: LCAS-CI0-C, LA 5148.

chaic/Woodland Hotspot on the Southern. Plains.

Transactions of the Seventh Regional Archaeologi-

Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society

cal Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and

39:103-157.

Westetw Texas, pp. 101-114.
Treece, A. C., C. Lintz, W. N. Trierweiler, J. M. Quigg, and
Salinas,.M.
1990

Indians of the Rio Grande Delta: Their Role in the
History of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico.
University of Texas Press, Austin.

K. A. Miller
1993

Cultural Resource Investigations in the O. H. Ivie
Reservoir, Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Texas. Vol. III: Data Recovery Results from
Non-Ceramic Sites. Technical Report No. 346-III.
Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.

Boyd ~ The Palo Duro Cotnplex
Tunnell, C. D.
1964 Two Burials from the Jim Arnold Site in Northwest
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
35:83-93.
Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1985 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas h~dians.
Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
Vehik, S. C.
1984

The Woodland Occupations. In Prehistory of Oklahoma, edited by R. E. Bell, pp. 175-197. Academic
Press, Orlando.

Vesta!, P. A. and R. E. Schultes
1939 The Economic Botany of the Kiowa Indians as it
Relates to the History of the Tribe. Botanical Museum, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

517

Willey, P. S.
1978 Human Skeletal Remains from the Deadman’s
Shelter Site. In Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir,
edited by J. T. Hughes and P. S. Willey, pp. 198204. Archeological Survey Report 24. Office of the
State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.
Willey, P. S. and J. T. Hughes
1978a The County Line Site. In Archeology at Mackenzie
Reservoir, edited by J. T. Hughes and P. S. Willey,
pp. 115-137. Archeological Survey Report 24. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
1978b The Deadman’s Shelter Site. In Archeology at

Mackenzie Reservoir, edited by J. T. Hughes and P.
S. Willey, pp. 149-190. Archeological Survey Report No. 24. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.

Ward,
!985

Social Implications of Storage and Disposal Patterns.
In Structure and Process in Southeastern Archaeology, edited by R. S. Dickens and H. T. Ward, pp. 82101. University of Alabama Press, University.

Willey, P. S., B. R. Harrison, and J. T. Hughes
1978

The Blue Clay Site. In Archeology at Mackenzie
Reservoir, edited by J. T. Hughes and P. S. Willey,
pp. 138-140. Archeological Survey Report No. 24.
Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical

Watts,
1963 Distribution of Pottery in Surface Sites on the South
Plains of Texas. Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society 1 : 1-25.

Commission, Austin.
Williams, J. L. and P. E. McAllister
1979

New Mexico in Maps. Technology Application Center, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque.

Wedel, W. R.
1975 Chalk Hollow: Culture Sequence and Chronology
in the Texas Panhandle. Actas del XLI Congreso
Internacional de Americanistas 1:271-278. Mexico,
D.F.

Wiseman, R. N.
1981 Further Investigations at the King Ranch Site,
Chaves County, New Mexico. The Artifact 19(3 and
4):169-198.
1988

Welch, J. R.
1991 From Horticulture to Agriculture in the Late Prehistory of the Grasshopper Region, Arizona. In
Mogollon V, pp. 75-92. COAS Publishing, Las
Cruces, New Mexico.
Whalen, M. E.
1977

Settlement Patterns of the Eastern Hueco Bolson.
El Paso Centennial Museum Publications in Anthropology No. 6. The University of Texas at E1
Paso.

1980

The Pithouse Periods of South-Central New Mexico.
In An Archeological Synthesis of South-Central and
Southwestern New Mexico, edited by S. A. LeBlanc
and M. E. Whalen, pp. 318-386. Office of Contract
Archaeology, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque.

Whalen, M. E. and P. A. Gilman
1990 Introduction: Transitions to Sedentism. In Perspectives on Southwestern Prehistory, edited by P. E.
Minnis and C. L. Redman, pp. 71-75. Westview
Press, Boulder, Colorado.

The Continuing Saga of the King Ranch Site (LA
26764): Update and Summaries of Findings. In
Fourth Jornada Mogollon Conference (Oct. 1985)
Collected Papers’, edited by M. S. Duran and K. W.
Laumbach, pp. 223-254. Human Systems Research,
Inc., Tularosa, New Mexico.

Wiseman, R. N., D. V. Hill, and D. Mclntosh
1994 The Llano Estacado Pottery Project. Paper presented
at the 52nd Plains Conference and 65th annual meeting of the Texas Archeological Society, Lubbock,
Texas.
Witte, A. H.
1955 A Double Indian Burial from Donley County, Texas.
Panhandle-Plains Historical Review 28:82-86.
Woodbury, R. A., and E. B. W. Zubrow
1979 Agricultural Beginnings, 2000 B.C.-A.D. 500. In
Southwest, edited by A. Ortiz, pp. 43-60. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 9.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

518

Texas Archeological Society

Word, J. H.

Wulfkuhle, V. A.

1963

Floydada Country Club Site (41FL1). Bulletin of
the South Plains Archeological Society 1:37-63.

1986

1965

The Montgomery Site in Floyd County, Texas. Bulletin of the South Plains A rcheological Society 2:55102.

1991

The 1975 Field School of the Texas Archeological
Society. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
60:57-106.

Investigations into the Prehistory of the Upper Clear
Fork of the Brazos River, Fisher and Jones Counties, Texas. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Archeology and Late Quaternary Environments
of the Southern High Plains
Eileen Johnson and Vance T. Holliday

ABSTRACT
The Southern High Plains contains a rich record of Late Quaternary sedimentation and human occupation
spanning the past 12,000 years. The stratigraphic and cultura! records are best preserved in the three principal
loci of Late Quaternary deposition: draws, dunes, and playa basins. The best-known multiple-occupation sites
within good stratigraphic contexts are found in draws. This paper is a summary of the archeological and
paleoenvironmental record of the Southern High Plains. A model for the cultural sequence (Paleoindian,
Archaic, Ceramic, Protohistoric, and Historic) is based on the Lubbock Lake record, supported by data from
other sites. The paleoenvironmental sequence is based on region-wide investigations of paleontology, paleobotany, sedimentology, pedology, and geomorphology. The record is one of changing climatic, environmental,
and hydrological conditions, and the adjustments to those changes made by the peoples inhabiting the region.
The climate changed from one with reduced seasonal contrasts in the Late Pleistocene, with increased effective
precipitation, to a more seasonal climate in the Early Holocene, culminating in drought in the Middle Holocene.
The modern continental climate was established in the Late Holocene. Some of the cultural subdivisions coincide
with these changes and others do not. The cultural record spans at least the last 11,500 years and relects both the
various aboriginal and European peoples who inhabited the region. The aboriginal record is primarily that of
grasslands hunter-gatherers engaged in task-oriented economic pursuits and short-term residential activities.
These activities came to an end as Europeans begin to use the region from the 1860s onward.

INTRODUCTION
The Southern High Plains of northwestern
Texas and eastern New Mexico (Figure 1) contains
a rich record of human occupation and sedimentation spanning the past 12,000 years. The sediments,
a!ong with soils and paleontological and paleobotanical remains contained within them, provide evidence of the environmental history of the region.
Numerous prehistoric sites are located throughout
the Southern High Plains, including some of the
best-known Paleoindian sites in North America.
Most archeological sites are single-occupation localities or surface occurrences. Several multipleoccupation sites with good stratigraphic context
have been investigated to varying degrees. Early
investigators (e.g., Cotter 1937; Howard 1935;
Sellards 1952; Wendorf 1961; Wendorf and Hester
1975) focused on the stratigraphy, depositional environments, and paleoenvironments of deposits
older than about 8000 B.P. (Pateoindian-age), although these sites generally also contained younger
strata and cultural remains. These sites include:

Lubbock Lake (Johnson 1987a), Clovis (Blackwater
Draw Locality #1) (Hester 1972), Plainview
(Sellards et al. 1947), Marks Beach (Honea 1980),
and Lake Theo (Harrison and Killen 1978)
Among these sites that have long been of interest to archeologists, Lubbock Lake has undergone the most scrutiny with excavations throughout
its lengthy Late Quaternary record, producing the
most complete site-specific Late Quaternary archeological and environmental database in the region.
Geoarcheological work over the past 20 years
(Holliday 1985, 1993, 1995a; Holliday and Allen
1987) has produced a well-dated stratigraphic record
covering the last 12,000 years. This stratigraphic
record is complemented by detailed cultural and
zooarcheological records for the same time period
(Johnson 1987a, 1993, 1995a, 1995b; Johnson and
Holliday 1989). The Lubbock Lake records form
the database for modeling the regional culture history and its relationship to paleoenvironmental
change, supported by data from other sites.
This paper reviews the results of investigations
into the stratigraphy and cultural history of the

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

520

Texas Archeological Society

Llano

Estacado
L’ipscomb

San Jon

Lake Theo

Lone Wolf Ck
Mclea~n

Sites
Citio~

Figure l. Map of the Southern High Plains with locations of selected Paleoindian sites and inset of Texas locating the
Southern High Plains; note that BWD#1 is the Clovis site.

Southern High Plains, with supplementary data from
other Southern Plains sites immediately adjacent to
the region. The time period covered is the Late
Quaternary, from the latest Pleistocene through the
Holocene, and encompasses five major cultural
periods. Paleontological and geoscientific research
that began at Lubbock Lake has expanded to
encompass the entire region (Holliday 1989b,
1995b, 1995c; Johnson 1986a, 1986b, 1989a, 1991,
1994; Johnson and Shipman 1986, 1993; Johnson
et al. 1982, 1986, 1987). The Late Quaternary
paleoenvironments, therefore, are reconstructed
from a regional database with details from sitespecific records.

REGIONAL SETTING

The Southern High Plains (or Llano Estacado)
is an extensive plateau covering about 130,000 km2
and bounded by escarpments on the east, north, and
west. The southern portion of the High Plains surface grades into the Edwards Plateau (see Figure
1). The region has a virtually featureless, constructional surface formed by deposition of thick, widespread aeolian sediments (Blackwater Draw
Formation) during the Pleistocene (Reeves 1976;
Holliday 1989c, 1990). These sediments rest on
aeolian and alluvial deposits of the Ogallala Formation (Miocene-Pliocene), and locally on Pliocene

Johnson and Holliday ~ Archeology and Late Quaternary Environments

and Pleistocene lacustrine sediments (Reeves 1972;
Hawley et al. 1976; Caran 1991).
Slight topographic relief on the High Plains
surface is provided by small lake basins, dunes, and
dry valleys (Reeves 1972; Wendorf 1975; Hawley
et al. 1976; Holliday 1985a; Sabin and Holliday
1995). About 20,000 small (<5 km2) depressions
dot the landscape and contain seasonal lakes or
"playas." About 40 larger (tens of km2) basins, also
called "playas" or "salinas," are interspersed
throughout the region. The playa and salina basins
contain the only available surface water on the
Southern High Plains, although the water is seasonal and often brackish or saline. Lunettes (fringing dunes) often are found adjacent to the playas,
and several large sand dune fields are present along
the western Llano Estacado. The dry valleys or
"draws" are northwest-southeast trending tributaries of rivers on the Rolling Plains to the east (see
Figure 1). The Late Quaternary (post-Blackwater
Draw Formation) stratigraphic record of the Southern High Plains, containing the in situ archeological record, is found in draws, playas, salinas, and
dunes (Reeves 1972; Harbour 1975; Holliday
1985a, 1995b, 1995c).
The climate of the Southern High Plains is
continental and semi-arid (classified as BScDw), a
steppe with dry winters, mainly mesothermal years
(mean temperature of the coldest month is 32-64°
F) with occasional microthermal years (mean temperature of the coldest month is below 32° F)
(Russell 1945). Relatively uniform gradients in precipitation and temperature occur across the region;
precipitation generally increases from west to east,
and temperature usually increases from northwest
to southeast (Lotspeich and Everhart 1962; Cart
1967; Haragan 1983; Bomar 1983).
The historic vegetation of the Southern High
Plains is a mixed-prairie grassland, and the dominant
native plant community is short-grass (Blair 1950;
Lotspeich and Everhart 1962). Trees are absent
except along the escarpments and reentrant canyons.
Native plant communities of the region occur in
very few areas today, however, because most of the
Southern High Plains is under cultivation.
The Southern High Plains has low, even
environmental gradients, flat topography, and
uniform regional geology. These topographic and
geologic conditions prevailed throughout the Late
Quaternary, suggesting that past environments were
relatively uniform throughout the region and that

521

geomorphic responses to climate were similar and
synchronous. This situation, in turn, suggests that
long distance geological and paleoenvironmental
correlations can be made with some degree of
confidence.

CULTURAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL
CHRONOLOGY
Five general cultural periods are recognized
for the Southern High Plains: Paleoindian (11,5008500 B.P.); Archaic (8500-2000 B.P.); Ceramic
(2000 B.P. to ca. A.D. 1450); Protohistoric (ca.
A.D. 1450-1650); and Historic (ca. A.D. 16501940s). The Paleoindian period covers the transition from the latest Pleistocene to the earliest
Holocene when now-extinct mammals were hunted
by people. The Archaic, from the later Early Holocene into the Late Holocene, is characterized by
evidence for systematic incorporation of plant use
in the subsistence base. The Ceramic period, in the
Late Holocene, is marked by the presence of both
ceramic artifacts and arrowpoints. The Protohistoric
period covers the time when Europeans were in the
region, but their influence was not manifested in
the aboriginal material culture nor in the archeological record. The Historic period is denoted by
European material culture in the archeological
record, and includes both aboriginal and AngloEuropean occupations.
The timing of the three major environmental
periods under discussion for the Southern High
Plains is based on geological and geomorphological work of the junior author (Holliday 1985a,
1985c, 1989a, 1995b, 1995c). The latest Pleistocene
and Early Holocene are presented as a combined
period covering the time from 12,000 to 7500 B.P.,
while the Middle Holocene dates from 7500 to 4500
B.P., and the Late Holocene dates from post-4500
B.P. The boundary between the Early and Middle
Holocene previously was set at 6500 B.P. (e.g.,
Johnson and Holliday 1993), based on the Lubbock
Lake record. Regional stratigraphic and paleoenvironmental studies have revised the age of the
boundary to 7500 B.P. (Holliday 1995c). The
boundaries for some of the environmental subdivisions sometimes crosscut the cultural divisions. Environmental reconstructions for these periods are
based on paleontological, sedimentologicat, pedological, and geomorphic data sets.

522

Texas Archeological Society

Pre-Clovis Period
The existence of a pre-Clovis period is a subject of intense debate (e.g., Dincauze 1984; Lynch
1990; Bryan 1978, 1986; Dillehay and Meltzer
1991), focusing on the issues of when people entered the New World and the type of archeological
evidence considered acceptable for pre-Clovis occupations. This period generally is considered to
date to the Late Wisconsinan, from around 25,000
to 11,500 B.P. (e.g., West 1983; Johnson 1991).
Currently, cultural subdivisions are not recognized,
as the few purported pre-Clovis sites come from
widely disparate times and locations throughout the
New World (West 1983).
Very little is known about the environment for
the period 25,000 to 11,500 B.P. on the Southern
High Plains (Johnson 1991). An equitable, humid,
maritime-like climate occurred over the Southern
Plains, with cool summers, mild winters, and
abundant precipitation (Lundelius et al. 1983;
Johnson 1993). Significant areas of open grassland
environments existed on the Southern Plains,
including parklands and savannas (Lundelius et al.
1983; Bryant 1977). Limited evidence from pollen
and stable carbon isotopes suggest that during this
time, the environment may have fluctuated between
cool-moist and cool-dry conditions (Hall and
Valastro 1995; Holliday 1995c).
Currently, only one site has materials that may
date to this uncertain period. At Lubbock Lake (see
Figure 1), two Late Pleistocene occupation levels
occur, the younger of Clovis-age, and the older still
undated. Geologic evidence, and the age of the
younger cultural level, indicate an age of >11,100
B.P. (Holliday and Johnson t984; Johnson and
Holliday 1985). The bone bed contains the remains
of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cut lines
occur on various elements from these species, and
those on the bison remains were confirmed by
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis
(Johnson and Shipman 1986; Johnson 1989). The
remains are found on a gravel terrace above the
Clovis-age stream bed, and could represent either
early Clovis activities or an occupation from the
pre-Clovis period. Additional work needs to focus
on the depositional context of the materials, and
dating, before any further claims of a pre-Clovis
period occupation are made. Alexander (1978:21)
suggests that "middle or early Pleistocene" artifacts
were found at Lubbock Lake. However, this
statement is based on a misinterpretation of the

stratigraphy, as Holocene artifacts were mixed into
much older Pleistocene lake beds.
Paleoindian Period
The Paleoindian period is subdivided on the
basis of distinctive projectile point types
(Wormington 1957; Wheat 1972; Frison 1991,
1993) representing cultures that consistently have
tightly-clustered radiocarbon ages and discrete time
periods. On the Southern Plains, the Paleoindian
period is subdivided into the Clovis (11,500 to
11,000 B.P.), Folsom (10,800 to 10,300 B.P.),
Ptainview (ca. 10,000 B.P.), and Firstview (ca. 8600
B.P.) cultures.
The Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene sediments of most archeological significance are found
in the draws that cross the region (see Figure 1).
The draws developed during the Pleistocene, probably the result of repeated cutting and filling, but
their origin and chronology are poorly known
(Holliday 1995b, 1995c). The oldest dated alluvial
sediments are 12,000 to 11,000 years old. During
this time, bedded sand and gravel was deposited in
most draws, indicative of competent streams flowing in the drainages (Holliday 1995b, 1995c). Water ceased to flow, and lacustrine deposition, in the
form of diatomite and sapropelic mud, began
abruptly about 11,000 B.P. in some reaches in a
number of draws. Otherwise, the streams continued
to flow until about 9500 B.P. (Holliday 1995b,
1995c).
During the Clovis period, an equitable, humid,
maritime paleoclimate existed with a lower mean
annual temperature than today; there also were
cooler summers and warmer winters that lacked
extended freezing conditions (Johnson 1986a,
1987c). Open grassland environments (mixed-grass
prairie) existed on the uplands with parklands along
the draws. Low gradient streams, with emergent
vegetation and sedge beds along the banks, meandered through the draws. Mean annual temperature
was about 10°-13°C (Johnson 1986a, 1987c) compared to 15°C today (Haragan 1983; Bomar 1983).
A lowered summer temperature by at least 5.6° C
existed with a winter temperature at or above 0° C
(Johnson 1986a, 1987c). A winter rainfall pattern
may have existed, coupled with cool, dry summers.
These climatic conditions produced more effective
moisture, lower evaporation rate, and greater humidity than today.

Johnson and Holliday ~ Archeology and Late Quaternary Environments

Three sites on the Southern High Plains (see
Figure 1) have yielded evidence of Clovis-age occupation. At Blackwater Draw Locality #1 (Hester
1972; Haynes 1995), the most extensive occupation
studied was along the northern edge of the
paleobasin, and involved at least five mammoth
that represented individual kill or scavenging
events (Saunders 1980). Remains from horse,
camel, and bison recovered during excavations of
the mammoth exhibited cut lines, dynamic impact
features, and evidence of tool use (E. Hughes 1984;
Johnson 1989a). Two worked sections of mammoth tusk also were recovered from the general
area of the E1 Llano Dig #1 excavations (Saunders
et al. 1990, 1991). Radiocarbon assays from carbonized plants in the sediments surrounding the
mammoths yielded ages of 11,040, 11,170, and
11,630 B.P. (Hester 1972). Near the southern end
of the South Pit, Cotter’s (1937) excavation revealed two mammoth that had been scavenged by
Clovis peoples (Saunders and Daeschler 1994).
Jelinek’s (1956) excavation in an area between the
North and South pits yielded the partial, remains of
a mammoth and four bison that represented different events, most likely scavenging by people. Organic sediments taken from around the jacketed
mammoth skull yielded an age of 10,780 B.P.
(Johnson and Holliday 1995). Several Clovis points
from this site were resharpened and reused as
butchering tools (Johnson 1991).
At Miami (Sellards t938), the remains of five
mammoth (three adults and two juveniles) were
found in sediments filling a playa-lake basin. While
Saunders (1980:94) interpreted the site as a single
kill event based on the age profile of the mammoth,
Holliday et al. (1994) offered alternative interpretations, including scavenging by Clovis peoples.
Marks on the ribs that appeared to be hack marks
from butchering could not be confirmed by SEM
analysis because of cortical surface erosion (Johnson
and Shipman 1986). Long bones were not fractured
(Johnson 1989a). Radiocarbon dates bracketed the
Miami bone bed between 11,400 and 10,800 B.P.
(Holliday et al. 1994). Clovis points from Miami
were resharpened and used as butchering tools
(Johnson 1991).
The Late Pleistocene occupation level at Lubbock Lake dates to 11,100 B.P. (Holliday et al.
1983). At least six species of megafauna were processed, with their remains exhibiting cut lines, helical fracture surfaces, dynamic loading points, and

523

evidence of tool use (Johnson 1985, 1987b, 1995;
Johnson and Holliday 1985; Johnson and Shipman
1986). Fractured mammoth limb elements were recovered associated with two large caliche boulders.
Mid-diaphyseal impact was used to fracture the
humerus and produce radial diaphyseal segments
(Johnson 1985). Modified lithic tools were absent,
although a Clovis point was recovered from the
bone bed during dredging operations that uncovered the site. The point was resharpened and used
as a butchering tool (Johnson 1991; Johnson and
Holliday 1987).
Post-depositional disturbance to the bone bed
had occurred, and bone orientation data (Kreutzer
1988) showed that bones were realigned; the stream
velocity and competency data indicated, however,
that neither the large caliche boulders nor the
megafaunal limb elements could have been transported in by the stream (Kreutzer 1986; Johnson et
al. 1987). Stream velocity and competency data
were based on grain size analysis of sediment
samples, and these demonstrated that the stream
was competent to transport particles no larger than
2 cm (Kreutzer 1986). Kreutzer’s (1986, 1988)
analysis further demonstrated an orientation of
bones by fluvial action, but did not demonstrate
transport or, therefore, secondary context. Johnson
(1995a), in a more detailed analysis of all in situ
bones, demonstrated that the bone bed comprising
the Clovis-age megafaunal processing station was
in primary context, and that transport did not occur
although the bones were realigned. Furthermore,
discrete cultural activity areas still were discernible. Carnivore disturbance was minimal, as less
than 3 percent of the total bone assemblage was
affected by carnivore modification.
The C!ovis-Folsom transition (ca. 11,000 B.P.)
on the Southern High Plains was a time of significant climatic and environmental change that continued into Late Paleoindian times (Johnson 1986a,
1987c; Lundelius et al. 1983; Holliday, 1995b,
1995c). An accelerated warming trend, greater seasonality, increased annual temperature fluctuation,
and wide-spread extinctions denote this transition.
Higher mean annual temperatures and warmer summers prevailed over the preceding period. Winter
temperatures were lower with sustained belowfreezing periods. Minimum and maximum temperatures fluctuated near 21° C from highs greater than
32° C to lows be!ow 0° C (Johnson 1986a, 1987c).
These conditions reflect a less equitable climate

524

Texas Archeological Society

than in the previous period, but one still more ameliorated than today. Perennial streams still existed
in some reaches of the lower draws, but extensive
freshwater, clear ponds with weedy growth, were
in the valley axes in upper reaches. Water levels in
these ponds fluctuated; the water was centimeters
to meters deep or it was at or below the surface,
exposing the floor of the draw. The mixed grasslands habitat became dominant with scattered deciduous trees on the draw slopes and around the
ponds. Wet meadow grasses and sedge beds around
the ponds graded into better-drained mixed grasslands along the valley floor. By 10,000 B.P., many
of the streams ceased to flow and the ponds evolved
into muddy marshes. On the uplands, playas and
salinas continued to have seasonal, if not perennial,
freshwater. Localized sand sheets formed in lowland settings, indicating a regional reduction in vegetative cover. This reduction most likely was the
result of drying, reflecting the waning stages of
pluvial conditions.
Four Folsom sites in good stratigraphic context are known for the region. At Blackwater Draw
Locality #1 (Hester, 1972), a series of small herds
of bison were killed and butchered around the
ponded spring waters. Radiocarbon ages date these
kills between 10,900-10,200 B.P. (Hester 1972;
Haynes 1995). Just off the Southern High Plains to
the northeast, Lipscomb (Barbour and Schultz 1941)
and Lake Theo (Harrison and Killen 1978) appear
to represent Folsom kills of larger herds of bison.
At Lake Theo (Harrison and Killen 1978), at least
12 to 14 bison were killed and butchered. An apparent camping area was associated with the bison
kill. Bone butchering tools were not recognized but
expedient lithic flake tools were common. However, little else is known about Lake Theo.
Lipscomb (Hofman 1991; Hofman and Todd
1990; Hofman et al. 1989, 1991; Todd et al. 1990)
appears to be a single-event, large-scale kill of at
least 55 bison that took place in the late summer or
fall. Of the skeletally mature animals, the sex ration is 3:1 females to males. Topographic setting
still is unclear although the bone bed was adjacent
to a 2 m-deep arroyo that existed at the time.
Butchering of the carcasses appears limited, with
many still fully articulated. Carnivore damage is
limited and the bone bed appears to have been
buried soon after the event. Some of the Folsom
points have been reworked to extend their usefulness (Hofman 1992). Lipscomb now represents the

largest single-event Folsom kill known for the
Southern Plains.
At Lubbock Lake, Folsom occupations are represented by a series of bison kills around the marshy
edges of ponds. Each kill was of a small cow-calf
herd, and the animals were butchered on the spot
using both expedient lithic and bone butchering tools
(Johnson and Holliday 1987; Johnson 1987b). Bones
from an individual carcass were stacked in small
piles representing butchering units. Lithic tools were
either retouched or utilized amorphous flakes. Production of the bone butchering tools took place in
the kill area and the debris and tools were discarded
at the locale when the tasks were finished (Johnson
1985). Folsom points were refashioned and also
resharpened for use as butchering tools (Johnson
and Holliday 1987). Based on one kill analyzed for
seasonality data, kills took place in the late fallearly winter (Johnson 1987c). The Lubbock Lake
Folsom occupation is radiocarbon dated between
10,800 to 10,300 B.P. (Holliday et al. 1983, 1985).
Four Plainview sites in good stratigraphic
context are known for the region (see Figure 1). At
the Plainview site (Sellards et al. 1947), the type
locality, a thick bone bed was embedded in pond
deposits in an abandoned stream channel in Running
Water Draw. The bone bed represented at least two
large-scale kill events that totaled over 100 bison.
One event took place in the spring while the other
was in the early fall (Johnson 1989a). The lithic
tool kit consisted primarily of Plainview projectile
points (refashioned into butchering knives) with a
few amorphous flake tools (Knudson 1983); bone
butchering tools were not recognized. Two
radiocarbon assays on bone yielded ages of 10,200
B.P. and 9860 B.P. (Speer 1986). Testing at Lake
Theo (Harrison and Killen t978) yielded Plainview
projectile points and other lithic tools and flakes in
place stratigraphically above the Folsom occupation.
Little else is known about the nature of occupation.
A radiocarbon assay on soil humates yielded an age
of 9950 B.P. (Johnson et al. 1982), while assays on
bone yielded ages of 9360 B.P. and 8010 B.P.
(Harrison and Killen 1978)
At Ryan’s site (Johnson et al. 1987; Hartwell
1991, 1995; Hartwell et al. 1989), Plainview points,
large bifaces, and large flakes were found within
lacustrine deposits of a very small, extinct playa
that overlooked Yellowhouse Draw. The morphology of the points ranged from pristine to reworked.
The lineal distribution, and damage and breakage

Johnson and Holliday ~ Archeology and Late Quaternary Environments
patterns (cf. Mallouf 1982), indicated plow-disturbed material that appears to have represented a
cache.
The Plainview occupation at Lubbock Lake is
characterized by the continuation of kills of small
herds of bison around the marshy edges of ponds,
the clus.tering or grouping of bones in distinct concentrations, and a change in weaponry design and
the technology to produce the new design. The
practice continued of resharpening and reusing the
points as butchering tools. The lithic tool kit was
complemented by a bone butchering tool kit made
from the bison being processed in the locales. The
Plainview occupation at the site is radiocarbon
dated to 10,000 B.P. (Johnson and Holliday 1980).
Testing at Mark’s Beach (Honea 1980) uncovered an apparent bison kill of Plainview age. Disarticulated remains from a bison were found in
lacustrine deposits. Neither lithic nor bone tools
were recovered, but a radiocarbon assay on bone
yielded an age of 9920 B.P. (Honea, 1980), and a
sample of soil humates was dated at ca. 9710 B.P.
(Holliday 1995c).
By the time of the Firstview occupation of the
Southern High Plains, the Early Holocene warming
and drying trend was intensifying. Effective
precipitation was decreasing with a shift away from
the previously established rainfall pattern, and
maximum summer temperatures were rising.
Periodic summer droughts and disappearing surfacewater resources denoted the end of the pluvial period
and the beginning of the trend toward modern
climatic conditions. Seasonality was more strongly
expressed with greater seasonal temperature
fluctuations, decreasing rainfall, and lowered
humidity. A scrub-grasslands, transitional from a
mixed-prairie to a desert-plains grasslands,
dominated the draws while the uplands probably
were a short-grass prairie. Alkaline marshes began
to dominate the floors of the draws (Holliday
1995c). Locally, valley-axis wet meadowsfreshwater marshlands with emergent vegetation and
sedge beds were available, grading into betterdrained valley floors and margins with mixed-grass
prairie (Johnson 1986a, 1987c; Holliday 1995c).
These hydrologic changes resulted from warming
of water, and from a reduction in effective
precipitation that decreased the discharge of springs
and seeps (Holliday 1995c). Deposition of aeolian
sediments in the draws, and as dunes on the uplands,
increasingly became more common. Playas and

525

salinas held seasonal water as well as locally
accumulated aeolian sediment.
Three Firstview sites have been excavated in
the region (see Figure 1). At Clovis (Hester 1972),
Firstview occupations are from the carbonaceous
silts (Unit E [Haynes 1975, 1995]), but the stratigraphic and geochronological situation of the material is not clear. Only a few radiocarbon ages are
available from this unit, but at most, it spans the
period from ca. 10,500 to 8500 B.P. (Haynes 1995).
Little information is available on excavated activity
areas within the carbonaceous silts. At least three
bison kill/butchering locales were excavated, two
in the lower part of the silts and one in the upper
part (Hester 1972; Agogino et al. 1976), while a
possible fourth locale is mentioned by Agogino and
Rovner (1969).
At Station E along the northwestern edge of
the South Pit, Evans (Sellards 1952) uncovered a
large bone bed in the upper silts containing the
remains of numerous bison in association with a
suite of projectile points and amorphous lithic flake
tools (Hester 1972). Sellards (1952) based his
Portales Complex on this suite of projectile points.
Bones were jumbled and the deposit may have been
trampled. At least three episodes of surface weathering are evident on the elements, indicating more
than one kill event (Johnson 1986b; Johnson and
Holliday 1995). Radiocarbon assays on organic
sediments taken from jacketed bone blocks yielded
ages of 8970 B.P. (bone block #1) and 8690 B.P.
(bone block #2) that did not overlap at two-sigma
(Johnson and Holliday 1995). These dates fall
within the age range for Firstview on the Southern
High Plains (Johnson and Holliday 1981; Johnson
1987a), and indicate that the bone bed represents
at least two Firstview occupational events. Wheat
(1972) reexamined the projectile points and concluded that most were resharpened variants of the
Firstview design.
San Jon (Roberts 1942), on the northwestern
edge of the Southern High Plains (see Figure 1),
was a stratified, multi-component site where cultural activities took place along the edge of a playa
basin. The "San Jon" bone bed in Area II yielded a
minimum of five bison, and articulated limb elements, particularly lower limbs, were common. Presumably, this bone bed represented a small-scale
bison kill at the edge of the playa. The one projectile point recovered from the bone bed was the type
specimen for the San Jon point (Roberts 1942), and

526

Texas Archeological Society

its tip was reworked (Hill et al. 1995). Wheat (1972)
subsumed the San Jon type into his Firstview type.
Organic sediments from within the bone bed yielded
an age of ca. 8360 B.P. (Hill et al. 1995).
At Lubbock Lake, Firstview peoples continued to hunt and butcher small herds of bison at the
edge of the marshlands (Johnson and Holliday
1981). Bone concentrations and the stacking of elements continued. Bone fracturing was minimal and,
therefore, bone tool manufacture and use was reduced and marrow processing was rare. The amorphous lithic flake tools were common, and Firstview
points were resharpened and reused as butchering
tools. The Firstview occupation at Lubbock Lake
was radiocarbon dated to 8600 B.P. (Holliday et al.
1983, 1985).

Archaic Period
In the Early Archaic, during the latter part of
the Early Holocene, available moisture and humidity levels continued to decrease, reflecting the intensification of the warming and drying trend, and
more marked seasonality. By the end of the Early
Holocene, hard-water, alkaline marshes, localized
desiccation, and aeolian sedimentation characterized deposition in the draws (Holliday 1989b,
1995b, 1995c). Marshes that persisted in the valley
axes were surrounded by a treeless mixed-grass
prairie. Sedge beds and wet meadows were absent.
On the uplands, aeolian sediments accumulated as
sand dunes, in lunettes, and in playa basins as a
result of reduced vegetation cover and wind deflation of the High Plains surface brought on by
drought.
Little is known about the Early Archaic, and
Lubbock Lake (Figure 2) is the only excavated site
for this time period. The practice of hunting and
butchering small herds of bison continued. A bone
concentration representing several individual bison
consisted of articulated to semiarticulated segments
indicating butchering units. None of the elements
were broken for marrow. Neither lithic nor bone
butchering tools were recovered, although numerous resharpening flakes indicated the use of several
lithic tools. Radiocarbon ages on soil humates date
the Early Archaic activity to ca. 8000 B.P. (Johnson
and Holliday 1989).
Although not excavated, an Early Archaic
bison bone bed dated to ca. 7600 B.P. occurs
stratigraphically above the Firstview bison bone

bed at San Jon in Area II (Hill et al. 1995). The two
projectile points recovered from the bone bed have
not been identified as to type, however (Hill et al.
1995). This bone bed around the playa basin
potentially represents the second known Early
Archaic bison kill for the region.
By about 6000 B.P., the lakes and marshes in
the draws had left significant accumulations of marl,
but the dominant sediment across the region, in and
out of the draws, was wind-blown material (Holliday
1989b, 1995b, 1995c). Aeolian sedimentation was
episodic but widespread from 9000 until 5500 B.P.,
with most areas affected by 6500 B.P. Between
5500 and 4500 B.P., aeolian sedimentation occurred
throughout the Southern High Plains. This aeolian
sedimentation culminated in significant filling of
draws, construction of sand dunes, local sedimentation in playa basins, and additions to lunettes
throughout the region. This aeolian activity marked
peak aridity in the Late Quaternary and the period
between 6500 and 4500 B.P. is known as the
Altithermal (Holliday 1989b).
The Altithermal coincides with the Middle Archaic period. Conditions were hot, dry, and dusty
(Holliday t989a; Johnson and Holliday 1986). The
massive aeolian sedimentation that occurred indicates further reduction in vegetation cover probably due to increased temperatures and decreasing
effective moisture in the form of lower effective
precipitation. Dental abnormalities in bison at this
time indicate poor range conditions due to excess
grit on the vegetation. The presence of yellowfaced gophers denotes semiarid to arid conditions
(Johnson 1987c; Johnson and Holliday 1986). Open,
treeless grasslands covered the valleys and available surface water decreased greatly. Given the climatic conditions derived from geologic and faunal
evidence, a desert-plains grasslands probably occurred on the Southern High Plains during the
Middle Archaic.
Excavated Middle Archaic materials in good
stratigraphic context are documented at five sites
(see Figure 2). Three sites yielded evidence for the
excavation of wells by prehistoric occupants in the
Middle Holocene. At Blackwater Draw Locality #1
(Evans 1951; Green 1962), at least 19 wells are
known. At Mustang Springs (Meltzer 1991; Meltzer
and Collins 1987), dozens of wells were discovered.
Excavations at Mark’s Beach (Honea 1980) exposed
a purported well. A hearth and associated Clear
Fork gouge were recovered in Middle Archaic

Johnson and Holliday n Archeology and Late Quaternary Environments
context from substratum 4A at 41LU26 (Bandy et
al. 1981). Although this material was undated,
substratum 4A at Lubbock Lake, less than 1 km
upstream, dated from 5500 to 5000 B.P. (Johnson
and Holliday 1986).
Despite the harsh conditions, relatively intensive occ.upation continued throughout this period at
Lubbock Lake. At least 28 activity areas are known
that include: camping events, bison kill/butchering
locales, and a large oven probably used for vegetal

Llano

5:27

processing (Johnson and Holliday 1986). The oven
is a large oval basin filled with ash, and capped by
a layer of burned caliche cobbles. A broken, worn
sandstone metate was found in the rock covering.
This feature was radiocarbon dated to ca. 4800 B.P.
(Johnson and Holliday 1986).
Little deposition or erosion occurred during
much of the Late Holocene and, as a result, the
Middle Holocene sediments often are modified
strongly by pedogensis. Some local deposition

Estacado
Lake C~’ee ke

~-Oocku m Spgs.

Johnson Ck,

Figure 2. Map of the Southern High Plains with locations of selected Post-Paleoindian sites.

528

Texas Archeological Society

occurred within the last several thousand years.
Late Holocene marsh sediments appear to be
common along the floors of the draws (Holliday
1985b, 1995b, 1995c). The most recent period of
aeolian sedimentation in the large dune fields and
lunettes appear to be less than 2,000 years old
(Holliday 1995b, 1995c; Haynes 1975, 1995).
Localized, relatively short term drought is suggested
by the varied occurrences of aeolian sediment.
By 4500 B.P., the climate began to ameliorate
and return to cooler and morn moist conditions that
brought about landscape stability and environmental changes that generally have persisted into modern times. Sedimentation ceased, little wind erosion
occurred, and a stable vegetation cover returned.
Formation of the Lubbock Lake Soil at Lubbock
Lake and similar soils at other localities (Holliday
1985b, 1990, 1995b, 1995c) occurred. This landscape stability heralded the establishment of essentially modern conditions and continental climate.
Range conditions improved, and a mixed grass prairie replaced the probable desert-plains grasslands
of the Middle Holocene, both in the draws and on
the uplands. Localized marshlands returned to the
valley axes with a resurgence of springs; occasional
hardwood trees were found in the draws. On the
uplands, playas and salinas held seasonal to yearround water (Holliday 1995b, 1995c). More extensive surface water was available, indicating more
available and effective moisture.
Only three sites in the region have Late Archaic materials within good stratigraphic context
(see Figure 2). The "lower midden zone" at Chalk
Hollow (Wedet 1975) is composed of three occupations dating between ca. 3800-2200 B.P. (Lintz
1995). These deposits, with corner and side-notched
Late Archaic points, represent camps for hunters
pursuing bison herds (Lintz 1995).
At San Jon in Area III, Roberts (1942)
excavated a Late Archaic bison kill, the only
excavated bison kill site for this time period on the
Southern High Plains. A minimum of seven bison
were killed and butchered at the edge of the playa.
Based on the bone bed distribution map (Hill et al.
1995:Figure 7), skulls and mandibles were common,
some articulated limb and vertebral units occurred
presumably representing butchering units, and bones
or articulated units were disassociated from each
carcass. Organic sediments from the substratum in
which the bone bed occurs yielded an age of ca.
3600 B.P. (Hill et al. 1995). The two projectile

points associated with the bone bed were not
identified as to type (Hill et al. 1995).
At Lubbock Lake, the Late Archaic is represented by at least nine occupation surfaces found
buried within the A-horizon of the Lubbock Lake
Soi!. These surfaces are denoted by scattered burned
caliche (from disturbed hearths), broken lithic tools,
and both diffuse and concentrated lithic flaking debris. These activities appear to represent camping
events. Diagnostic artifacts have not been recovered with the occupation surfaces, but a Late Archaic age is based on stratigraphic position and
radiocarbon ages associated with the stratigraphic
unit (Holliday !985a; Holliday et al. 1983, 1985).
Because this A-horizon represents a stable land surface that existed well into the Ceramic period, Late
Archaic and Ceramic-age materials may be mixed
in the uppermost occupation surfaces. A Late Archaic hearth has been excavated at 41LU29
(Johnson 1989b), on the eastern rim of Yellowhouse
Draw overlooking Lubbock Lake, and a Late Archaic-age cache was recovered from 41LU6 in
Yellowhouse Draw less than 1 km upstream from
Lubbock Lake (Buchanan 1995)
Archaic-age deposits have been investigated
in the Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan Henry)
area on the Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos
River, downstream from Lubbock Lake ca. 97 km.
This area is located in the same drainage system as
Lubbock Lake and is just off the Southern High
Plains, southeast of Lubbock, on the Rolling Plains.
Most sites are in geologically unstratified deposits
(Boyd et al. 1989, 1990). Site types identified
include campsites, rockshelters, bison processing
stations or kill sites, and lithic procurement sites.
At least six sites (41GR207, 41GR287, 41GR376,
41GR383, 41GR456, and 41KT49) have been
identified as Archaic, and another six as Late
Archaic in age (41GR471, 41KT33, 41KT34,
41KT52, 41KT53, and 41KT151) based on
excavated features (primarily hearths), radiocarbon
ages, and artifact types (Boyd et al. 1990).

Ceramic Period
Ameliorated conditions continued until about
2,000 years ago when a pattern of episodic drought
began that continues today. This episodic pattern
indicates minor departures towards some aridity
through increased temperatures and decreased
effective moisture. Regionally, the details of this

Johnson and Holliday ~ Archeology and Late Quaterna~2 Environ~nents
episodic pattern are not clear. Although these
droughts appear not to have been severe enough to
alter the modern Southern Plains faunal
communities, they are severe enough to cause
vegetation denuding and surface erosion that led to
deposition and alteration of the landscape (Holliday
1985a, 1990; Johnson 1987b).
However, a range change occurs with one
mammalian community member that has been used
as an environmental indicator. Between 1830-1240
B.P., the pine vole (Microtus ochrogaster)
reestablishes itself on the northern portion of the
Southern High Plains (Willey and Hughes 1978),
reflecting the ameliorated, more mesic conditions
that prevailed after 4500 B.P. during the Late
Archaic and early Ceramic periods. After 1240 B.P.,
Microtus ochrogaster no longer ranged onto the
Southern High Plains. The periodic droughts
progressively are less severe, or of less duration, or
both. Coincident aeolian activity in the dune fields
record the same events (Holliday 1985b, 1995b,
1995c). Limited stable isotope data support drier
conditions on the Southern High Plains within the
last 1,000 years (Holliday 1995b, 1995c).
In upper reaches of the draws without spring
activity during this time, slopewash and aeolian
sedimentation occurred. But in the lower reaches, a
spring-fed stream and wet meadow-marshland complex existed along valley axes for the past 1,000
years (Holliday 1985a, 1995b, t995c). Hackberry,
native walnut, and mesquite grew along the valley
floor and slopes. The local environs were those of a
mesquite savanna surrounding a riparian marshland
complex (Johnson 1987c).
The earlier part of the Ceramic (ca. 2000 to
1000 B.P.) period appears to have been one of
transition from traditional Archaic lifeways--denoted by the retention of Archaic point designs--to
a newer lifeway signaled by the adoption of technological changes brought about with ceramics and
the bow and arrow. Three sites in the region with
good stratigraphic context have dart points or mixed
dart and arrow point assemblages (see Figure 2).
Camping features have been excavated at County
Line, Blue Clay, and Deadman’s Shelter (Hughes
and Willey 1978). At Deadman’s Shelter (Willey
and Hughes 1978), dart and arrow points have been
found in association with brownware pottery. Radiocarbon ages of ca. 1740 B.P. and 1830 B.P. are
the earliest dates associated with arrowpoints and
pottery in the region. Several bison kills (Twilla,

529

Bell, Strong, Collier, Sitter, Finch, R.O., and Hoover
sites) found just east of the Southern High Plains
(see Figure 2) contain a variety of Late Archaic
point designs with radiocarbon ages that averaged
1387 B.P. (D. Hughes 1977).
This 1,000 year span within the Ceramic period also is characterized by comer-notched Scallom
arrow points and coarse-tempered cordmarked pottery (Hughes and Willey 1978). Only a few
Scallorn-associated sites are known and they are
not well-dated. Chalk Hollow (Wedel 1975) has an
upper component with Scallorn points and pottery
(Lintz 1995), while Lake Creek (J. Hughes 1962)
and Borger Bridge (Hughes and Willey 1978) are
also considered to date from Scallorn times. At
Lubbock Lake, this period of occupation is indicated by a hearth with associated camping debris
that included a Scallorn point, modern bison remains, lithic tools and flakes, and bone beads
(Kelley 1974). Downstream at 41GR291
(Justiceburg Reservoir or Lake Alan Henry),
Deadman’s and Scallorn points were found associated in a camp occupation (Boyd et al. 1990; see
also Boyd, this volume).
The later Ceramic period (ca. 1000 to 500 B.P.)
is characterized by a mixed assemblage of Puebloan
trade pottery and Plains lithic tool types. The
tradewares are dominated by Mogollon ceramics,
representing the eastern variety of the Jornada
branch of the Mogollon culture (see Perttula et al.,
this volume). Numerous sites are known from this
time period but few occur in good stratigraphic
context. Examples are such sites as Jim Arnold
(Tunnell 1964), A769 (Harrison and Griffin 1973),
Floydada Country Club (Word 1963, 1991),
Montgomery (Word 1965), 41CB27 (Parker 1982),
Pete Creek, Grape Creek, and Dockum Springs
(Parsons 1967), 41TY2 (Pope 1991), the lower level
at Slaton Dump (Booker and Campbell 1978),
Petree (Riggs 1972), Gresham Lake (Breeding
1971), and Bull Hill (Shawn t975).
At Lubbock Lake, game-animal (modem bison, pronghorn antelope, coyote, and wolf) processing stations are found in serial stratigraphic
position. Although these stations lack ceramics, radiocarbon assays and stratigraphic position indicate
this latter part of the Ceramic as the period of occupation (Johnson 1987b). At Justiceburg Reservoir
(Lake Alan Henry), two late Ceramic campsites
(41GR303 and 41GR393), four Ceramic-age campsites (41GR359, 41GR383, 41GR456, 41KT52),

530

Texas Archeological Society

and one Ceramic-age rockshelter (41GR559) have
been investigated (Boyd et al. 1990).

(bison kill and camp sites) on the Mescalero Plains
near Bottomless Lake.

Protohistoric Period

Historic Period

Numerous Protohistoric sites are known in the
region but again few occupations are in good stratigraphic context. At Lubbock Lake, numerous occupation levels attest to intense and repeated use of
the area. These levels are characterized by Garza
points, occur in serial stratigraphic sequence, and
have associated radiocarbon ages of ca. 500 to 300
B.P. (Johnson et al. 1977; Holliday et al. 1983,
1985). Both living surfaces with associated hearths
and large game-animal processing stations occur in
these occupation levels.
Less than ! km downstream from Lubbock
Lake, Protohistoric Garza occupations within a geologically-stratified context have been excavated at
41LU26 and 4tLU35 (Bandy et al. 1981). Wheat
(1955) tested a Garza campsite on the uplands overlooking Yellowhouse Canyon in the vicinity of Buffalo Springs Lake. Further downstream at the
Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan Henry) area, Boyd
et al. (1989, 1990) recorded and tested several Garza
occupations, and excavated two sites (Longhorn
and Headstream) spanning the Protohistoric and
Historic periods that may be Garza occupation sites
(Boyd et al. 1990, 1993; Boyd and Peck 1992). The
Garza (Runkles 1964) and Lott (Runkles and
Dorchester 1987) sites, in geologically-unstratified
context, are located just off the Southern High Plains
along tributaries of the Double Mountain Fork of
the Brazos River.
Northeast of Lubbock Lake, in the Running
Water Draw system, a Garza occupation within a
stratified context was tested at the Floydada Country Club site (Word 1963, 1991) in Blanco Canyon
near Floydada. Downstream about 5 km, Garza occupations mixed in unstratified contexts with earlier and later components also were tested at the
Montgomery site (Word 1965) and 41CB27 (Parker
1982; Baugh 1992). Northward in lower Tule Canyon, Katz and Katz (1976) excavated a hearth at
41BI83 that dates to this time period, but it lacked
diagnostic artifacts. Further north, J. Hughes (1971)
tested a Garza occupation within a stratified context at the Canyon City Club Cave site along Palo
Duro Creek at the outskirts of Canyon. West of
Lubbock Lake just off the Southern High Plains,
Speth and Parry (1978, 1980) excavated Garza sites

Historic period sites in good stratigraphic context are extremely rare on the Southern High Plains.
This period is marked by the appearance of European trade goods and modern horse remains. It is
subdivided into aboriginal Historic and Anglo-Historic times. At Lubbock Lake, numerous aboriginal
Historic occupation levels are characterized by
Washita points. These levels occur in serial stratigraphic sequence, and have associated radiocarbon
ages of ca. 300 to 150 B.P. (Holliday et al. 1983,
1985). Processing stations are similar to ones in the
Protohistoric and Ceramic periods. They are distinctive, however, in the inclusion of modern horse
as a game-animal.
Further downstream, aboriginal Historic sites
have been tested at 41LU35 (Bandy et al. 1981),
41GR484, 41KT53, and 41KT69 (Boyd et al. 1990).
Several historic rock art sites are present in the
Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan Henry) area
(Boyd 1992; Boyd and Kibler 1993). Historic period
glass trade beads from the 1700s have been
recovered from 41CB27 (Parker 1982) in Blanco
Canyon near Crosbyton, and the Headstream site
(Boyd and Peck 1992; Peck et al. 1993) at
Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan Henry). To the
north, two probable Comanche sites have been
excavated at MacKenzie Reservoir (Hughes and
Willey 1978) in Tute Canyon with distinctive
hearths and post- 1840 glass seed beads. At Lubbock
Lake, a Comanche occupation is represented by
several activity areas that have yielded glass seed
beads (Ladkin 1993, 1995). The Codgell (Word
and Fox 1975) and White (Suhm 1961) sites in
Floyd and Yoakum counties also contained glass
seed beads.
European occupation of the Southern High
Plains began in the middle to late 1800s. The first
Europeans were buffalo hunters and U.S. military
units, followed by sheepherders (Pastores), traders,
ranchers, and settlers. Few excavations of these
sites have been conducted. A buffalo hunter’ s camp,
occupied sometime between 1874 and 1879, was
tested at Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan Henry)
(41GR528 [see Freeman and Boyd 1990]). The
Pastores, Hispanic sheepherders from New Mexico,
began moving into the Canadian River Valley in

Johnson and Holliday ~ Archeology and Late Quaternary Environments
the early 1870s, and by the late 1870s, small
settlements, such as at Tascosa, were being
established in the valley (Archambeau 1946; Taylor
1980), with the southernmost settlement at MerrellTaylor Village (Guffee 1976) on Quitaque Creek
along the escarpment below Palo Duro Canyon.
Test excavation and recording of rock corrals at the
Ellis site (Lichti 1994; Hicks and Johnson in
preparation) in Yellowhouse Canyon near
Southland, and the Massie site (Word 1980; Lichti
1994) in Blanco Canyon near Floydada, document
the transhumance use of the Southern High Plains
by the Pastores. By the mid-1880s, the Pastores had
left the region and returned to New Mexico (Rathjen
1973; Taylor 1980).
At the northern end of the Southern High
Plains, excavations at Adobe Walls (Baker and
Harrison 1986) along the Canadian River revealed
a wide variety of European goods available to the
area’s occupants during the late 1860s to 1870s.
Along Yellowhouse Draw in the east-central Southern High Plains, Singer Store was a trading post
located at Lubbock Lake from 1881 to 1886 (Holden
1974). Testing produced artifacts (square nails,
metal cans, and a ginger beer bottle) relating to this
occupation, as well as artifacts attesting to buffalo
hunting activity (heavy-caliber rifle shell casings)
(Johnson 1987b). Archaeological exploration occurred at one of the XIT Ranch headquarters (Jackson 1976) near Hereford.
Just off the Southern High Plains in the
Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan Henry) area, testing of historic sites (Freeman and Boyd 1990) included that of a sheepherder’s camp dating from
the 1880s (41GR443), several dugouts occupied
between the 1880s and 1900 (41GR474, 41GR263,
41GR392, and 41KT150), an 1880s to 1920s line
camp (41KT84), several homesteads (41GR250,
41GR474, and 41GR443), ranch headquarters
(41GR13), and a town building (41GR331).
Investigations at an Anglo-Historic dump in
Lamb County documented two dumping periods at
the site, one episode around 1915 and the other
centered around 1935 (Hicks et al. 1994). These
episodes corresponded with two periods of population increase for the city of Littlefield. At Lubbock
Lake, Anglo-Historic dumps from the early 20th
century were tested. Dumping episodes centered
around 1940 and t955, also corresponding to periods of population increase for the city of Lubbock
(O’Brien 1995).

531

SUMMARY DISCUSSION
The Late Quaternary archeological and
paleoenvironmental records of the Southern High
Plains are well-preserved in the draws, dunes, and
lake basins of the region. The fill in the draws historically is most-closely linked to the human history of the region as a result of the discovery of
several renowned archeological sites in these settings. The draws also provide the most complete
and sensitive regional environmental record so far
available.
At the beginning of the Paleoindian occupation, the environment of the Southern High Plains,
for the most part, was relatively cool and moist.
The draws had perennial flowing water, and lake
basins probably had permanent water. Haynes
(1991) proposed a Clovis-age drought for the region based on stratigraphic data from the Clovis
and Miami sites and argued that megafaunal extinctions at the end of the Pleistocene were linked
to that drought. This hypothesis is not supported by
paleobotanical, paleontological, or other stratigraphic data from the regional draws, dunes, or
playas (Holliday 1995b, 1995c). The earliest evidence of warming and drying in the Late Quaternary is from the Folsom period (Holliday 1995c).
By Folsom times, hydrologic conditions
changed. Less flowing water was available in the
draws as spring discharge and runoff declined.
Streams were replaced with ponds and marshes.
Aeolian sedimentation appeared in the stratigraphic
record by 10,000 B.P., and aeolian deposition in
the draws, dunes, and playas became more widespread through the Early Holocene.
This deposition culminated in the Middle Holocene in significant filling of draws and construction of sand dunes. This aeolian activity likely
marked peak aridity in the Late Quaternary in response to increased temperatures and lower effective precipitation relative to the preceding or
following periods. By about 4,500 years ago, a
change in climate toward more moist and cooler
conditions, relative to the Middle Holocene, brought
landscape stability and environmental changes that
have more or less persisted to present times. This
stability resulted in little Late Holocene sedimentation in the region.
This stratigraphic and paleoenvironmental
scheme generally follows earlier reconstructions of
the paleoecology of the Southern High Plains (e.g.

532

Texas Archeological Society

Wendorf 1961; Wendorf and Hester 1975) but
differs considerably in detail. The various Late
Pleistocene and Early Holocene climatic intervals
proposed in earlier schemes are not identifiable in
the stratigraphic record now emerging due to
problems of dating, stratigraphic correlation, and
pollen preservation in the work that led to the earlier
schemes (Holliday 1987, 1995c).
The known archeological record for the Southern High Plains provides a lengthy and rich heritage for the region. People have lived on and used
the Southern High Plains for at least 11,000 years,
and perhaps for as long as people have been in the
New World. Although varying through time in variety, quality, and plentitude, the environments of
the Southern High Plains have provided ample natural resources for the various peoples inhabiting the
region. This resource base is spread over large parameters of seasonality, space, and time, and the
abundance or scarcity and sparcity of such resources
as lithic materials, water, and wood on the Southern High Plains has influenced the adaptive responses to environment and environmental change
as conditions went from pluvial, to xeric, to mesic.
The relationship between environment and the
people that occupied that environment, then, potentially could be well-defined in such settings.
High-quality lithic resources were a localized
resource at best, represented by Alibates agate at
the northern edge of the region along the Canadian
River and Tecovas jasper at the eastern edge of the
escarpment near Quitaque (e.g., Holliday and
Welty 1981; Banks 1990). Ogallala Formation
quartzites and cherts (generally of much poorer
quality) were available along the escarpment and
at localized outcrops within the draws (Holliday
and Welty 1981). Due to this limited distribution,
imported lithic resources, particularly from Central
Texas (Edwards Formation chert), played a major
role in the adaptive strategies utilized on the Southern High Plains.
Resource availability of wood and water
closely mirrored the climatic changes of the region.
Both commodities were available regionally, and
were locally abundant during the Late Pleistocene
and Early Holocene, but became much more scarce
and further localized during the Middle Holocene
(Johnson 1987c; Meltzer 1991; Holliday 1989,
1995b, 1995c). Surface waters in playas and draws
increased again in the Late Holocene (Holliday
1995b, 1995c), with limited wood resources

available only within the draws (Johnson 1987c).
An episodic pattern of droughts for about the past
2,000 years (Holliday 1985, 1995b, 1995c)
undoubtedly affected long-term adaptive strategies.
Coupled with the drought pattern for at least the
last 500 years was the steady influx of various
groups of non-local peoples, from the Athabascans
and Comanche to the Pastores and AngloAmericans, and the eventual replacement of the
indigenous people.
The long record of occupation of the Southern
High Plains primarily was of hunter-gatherer
peoples, presumably practicing a seasonal yearly
round of activities. In general, Clovis peoples had a
broad-spectrum, meat-related subsistence base
where they were hunting and scavenging a widevariety of game animals. With widespread extinctions, bison became the major game animal of
post-Clovis peoples. Later Paleoindian peoples had
a very narrow-spectrum, meat-related subsistence
base, systematically cropping both small cow-calf
herds as well as large mixed herds of bison. By the
Middle Holocene, Archaic peoples had a mixed
desert plant and meat-related subsistence base, and
they were forced to rely on wells for water in the
western and southern part of the Southern High
Plains. A mixed plant and meat-related subsistence
base continued throughout Late Holocene Ceramic
through aboriginal Historic times, but with more
mesic vegetation and abundant surface water
(Johnson 1987c, 1991, 1994; Johnson and Holliday
1986; Meltzer 1991).
The occupation of the Southern High Plains
through time by these hunter-gatherer peoples appears to be by small groups of people for both
economic (hunting, plant processing, and tool production and rejuvenation) and short-term residential uses, with repeated use of the landscape as well
as differential use of landscape features. Key aspects missing from the record are longterm home
bases and quarries for lithic resources. Quarries
must have existed along the outcroppings of
Alibates and Tecovas but they have not been documented. Quarrying of outcrops of Ogalalla Formation materials has been documented on the Rolling
Plains just off the eastern escarpment in the Brazos
River drainage (Johnson 1994).
Various Late Holocene peoples along the Canadian River and associated drainageways, in particular the Antelope Creek peoples, practiced
agriculture that modified or changed lifestyles and

Johnson and Holliday ~ Archeology and Late Quaternary Environments

social organization. This lifeway was brief on the
Southern High Plains, being practiced for much
less than 1,000 years and apparently coming to an
end in the A.D. 1400s as outsiders moved into the
region. From then on into the 1800s, aboriginal

occupation of the northern Southern High Plains
was again by hunterer-gatherers.
By the 1860s, a quick succession of non-aboriginal peoples began using the Southern High
Plains for economic purposes, and then settling the
region. This intrusion brought to a close the aboriginal occupation of the region by the late 1870s.

Archambeau, E. R.
1946 Spanish Sheepmen on the Canadian at Old Tascosa.
Panhandle-Plains Historical Review 19:72-96.
Baker, T. L. and B. R. Harrison

1986

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Adobe Walls. The History and Archeology of the
1874 Trading Post. Texas A&M University Press,
College Station.

Bandy, P., J. Montgomery, W. J. Mayer-Oakes, and R. O.
Keslin
1981

Archaeological Mitigation, Canyon Lakes Project,
Lubbock, Texas. Cultural Resources Institute, Department of Anthropology, Texas Tech University,

The use of land and other resources changed dramatically from the aboriginal patterns to patterns of
the non-aboriginal peoples. The buffalo hunters
decimated the bison herds while the Pastores and
ranchers used the plains grasslands to pasture domestic stock (sheep, then cattle). The early settlers
plowed the grasslands to raise domesticated crops.
By the turn of the century, towns were being established on the uplands, away from the traditional
aboriginal resource bases of the draws and playas.

533

Lubbock.

Banks,
1990

From Mountain Peaks to Alligator Stomachs: A Review of Lithic Sources in the Trans-Mississippi
South, the Southern High Plains and Adjacent Southwest. Memoir 4. Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Oklahoma City.

Barbour, E. H. and C. B. Schultz
1941 The Lipscomb Bison Quarry, Lipscomb County,
Texas. Bulletin of the University of Nebraska State
Museum 2(7):67-68. Nebraska State Museum, University of Nebraska, Lincoln.
Baugh, T. G.
1992

The Bridwell Site: A Protohistoric Community in
the Texas South Plains. In Cultural Encounters and

This paper represents part of the ongoing research of the Lubbock Lake Landmark into Late
Quaternary cultural adaptations to ecological change
on the Southern High Plains. Technical assistance
was provided by Scott Malone.

Episodic Droughts: The Protohistoric Period on
the Southern Plains, edited by E. Johnson, pp. 4142. Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary Research
Center Series 3. Museum of Texas Tech University,
Lubbock Lake Landmark, Lubbock.
Blair, W. F.
1950

REFERENCES CITED
Agogino, G. A. and I. Rovner
1969 Preliminary Report of a Stratified Post-Folsom Sequence at Blackwater Draw Locality No. 1. American Antiquity 34:175-176.
Agogino, G. A., D. K. Patterson, and D. E. Patterson
1976 Blackwater Draw Locality No. 1, South Bank: Report for the Summer of 1974. Plains Anthropologist
21(73):213-224.
Alexander, H. L.
1978 The Legalistic Approach to Early Man Studies. In
Early Man in America from a Circum-Pacific Perspective, edited by A. L. Bryan, pp. 20-22. Occasional Papers 1. University of Alberta, Department
of Anthropology, Occasional Papers, Alberta,
Canada.

The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal
of Science 2:93-117.

Bomar, G.W.
1983 Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Booker, R. and J. Campbell
1978 An Excavation Report on Site 41LU6: Slaton Dump
Site. Bulletin of the South Plains A rcheological Society 4:19-37.
Boyd, D. K.
1992 Historic Native American Rock Art of Garza
County, Texas. In Cultural Encounters" and Episodic Droughts: The Protohistoric Period on the
Southern Plains, edited by E. Johnson, pp. 69-90.
Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary Research Center Series 3. Museum of Texas Tech University,
Lubbock Lake Landmark, Lubbock.

534

Texas Archeological Society

Boyd, D. K. and K. W. Kibler
1993

Rock Art Site Investigations, Monitoring and
Survey,

and

Off-Site

Geomorphological

Investigations. In Data Recovery at Justiceburg
Reservoir (Lake Alan Henry), Garza and Kent
Counties, Texas: Phase 11I, Season 2, by D. K.
Boyd, J. Peck, S. A. Tomka, and K. W. Kibler, pp.

Buchanan, B.
1995 Archaeological Background of Lubbock County. In
Archaeological b~vestigations at Reese Air Force
Base and Tero’ Counq Auxilliary Airfied, edited by
E. Johnson. Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary
Research Center Series 9. Museum of Texas Tech
University, Lubbock Lake Landmark. In press.

237-240. Reports of Investigations 88. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.

Boyd, D. K. and J. Peck
1992 Protohistoric Site Investigations at Justiceburg Reservoir, Garza and Kent Counties, Texas. In Cultural
Encounters and Episodic Droughts: The
Protohistoric Period on the Southetw Plains, edited
by E. Johnson, pp. 43-68. Lubbock Lake Landmark
Quaternary Research Center Series 3. Museum of
Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake Landmark,
Lubbock.
Boyd, D. K., M. D. Freeman, M. D. Blum, E. R. Prewitt, and
M. Quigg
1989

Justiceburg Reservoir; Garza and Kent Counties,
72,xas: Phase 1 Cultural Resources Investigations
on the Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos Rivet’.

Caran, S. C.
1991 Cenozoic Stratigraphy, Southern Great Plains Area.
In Quaternau Nonglacial Geology: Coterminous
U.S., edited by R. B. Morrison, plate 5. Centennial
Volume K-2. Geological Society of America, Boulder.
Carr, J. T.
1967

The Climate and Physiography of Texas. Report 53.
Texas Water Development Board, Austin.

Cotter,
!937 The Occurrence of Flints and Extinct Animals in
Pluvial Deposits near Clovis, New Mexico, part IV.
Report on Excavation at the Gravel Pit, 1936. Proceedings of the Philadelphia Academy of Natural
Sciences 90:2-16.

Reports of Investigations 66. 2 Vols. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin,

Dillehay, T. D. and D. J. Meltzer (editors)
1991

Boyd, D. K., J. T. Abbott, W. A. Bryan, C. M. Garvey, S. A.
Tomka, and R. C. Fields
1990 Phase H Investigations at Prehistoric and Rock Art
Sites, .lusticeburg Reservoir, Garza and Kent Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations 71. 2 Vols.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Boyd, D. K., J. Peck, S. A. Tomka, and K. W. Kibler
1993

Data Recovery at Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan

Dincauze, D. F.
1984 An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for PreClovis Occupations. Advances in World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Evans, G. L.
1951

Associates, Inc., Austin,

Freeman, M. D. and D. K. Boyd
1990

Bryan, A. L. (editor)
1978 Early Man in America from a Circum-Pacific PersT~ective. Occasional Papers 1. University of Alberta,
Department of Anthropology, Edmonton, Alberta.
1986

of Investigations 72. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,

Gresham Lake Site: 41ML3. Transactions of the
Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastetw New Mexico and Western Texas 6:1-8.

New Evidence for the Pleistocene Peopling of the
Americas. Center for the Study of Early Man, University of Maine, Orono.

Bryant, V. M. Jr.
1977 A 16,000 Year Pollen Record of Vegetational
Change in Central Texas. Palynology 1:143-156.

Phase H Historical Investigations at Justiceburg
Reservoir, Garza and Kent Counties, Texas. Reports

Breeding, A.W.
1971

Prehistoric Wells in Eastern New Mexico. American Antiquity 17(1 ): 1-9.

Henry), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase IlL
Season 2. Reports of Investigations 88. Prewitt and

The First Americans: Search and Research. CRC
Press, Inc., Boca Raton, Florida.

Austin.

Frison,
1991 The Goshen Paleoindian Complex: New Data for
Paleoindian Research. In Clovis Orgins and Adaptations, edited by R. Bonnichsen and K. L. Turnmire,
pp. 133-151. Center for the Study of the First Americans, University of Maine, Orono.
1993

The North American Paleoindian: A Wealth of New
Data but Still Much to Learn. Plains Anthropologist
Memoir 27:5-16.

Green, F. E.
1962

Additional Notes on Prehistoric Wells at the Clovis
Site. American Antiquity 28(2):230-234.

Johnson and Holliday ~ Archeology and Late Quaternary Environments
Guffee, E.
1976 Merrell-Taylor Village Site. Llano Estacado Museum, Wayland Baptist College, Plainview.
Hall, S. A. and S. Valastro, Jr.
1995 Grassland Vegetation in the Southern Great Plains
During the Last Glacial Maximum. Quaternary Research 44(2):237-245.

535

Haynes, C. V. Jr. (Continued)
1991 Geoarchaeological and Paleohydrological Evidence
for a Clovis-age Drought in North America and its
Bearing on Extinction. Quaternary Research
35:438-450.
1995

Geochronology of Paleoenvironmental Change,
Clovis Type Site, Blackwater Draw, New Mexico.
Geoarchaeology 10:317-388.

Haragan, D. R.
!983

Blue Northers to Sea Breezes: Texas Weather and
Climate. Hendrick-Long Publishing Co., Dallas.

Hester, J. J.
1972

Blackwater Locality No. 1: A Stratified, Early Man
Site in Eastern New Mexico. Publication of the Ft.

Harbour, J.
1975 General Stratigraphy. In Late Pleistocene Environments of the Southern High Plains, edited by F.
Wendorf and J. J. Hester, pp. 33-55. Publication of
the Ft. Burgwin Research Center 9. Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Harrison, B. R. and B. T. Griffin
1973

An Infant Burial in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of
the Texas A rcheological Society 44:61-68.

Burgwin Research Center 8. Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
Hicks, J. K. and E. Johnson
n.d.
Pastores on the Southern High Plains. MS in preparation by the authors.
Hicks, J. K., M. Hamilton, W. Kinney Jr., K. Hicks, and T.Peach
1994

Analysis. In Historic Anglo-European Occupation An Archaeological Survey of the City of Littlefield
Proposed Wastewater Treatment Plant, Latnb

Harrison, B. R. and K. L. Killen
1978

Lake Theo: A Stratified, Early Man Bison Butcher-

County, Texas, edited by E. Johnson, pp. 33-58.

ing and Camp Site, Briscoe County, Texas. Special

Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary Research Cen-

Archeological Report 1. Panhandle-Plains Histori-

ter Series 7. Museum of Texas Tech University,

ca! Museum, Canyon, Texas.

Lubbock Lake Landmark, Lubbock.

Hartwell, W. T.
1991 Ryan’s Site: A Plow-Disturbed Plainview Cache on
the Southern High Plains of Texas. Unpublished
Master’ s thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas
Tech University, Lubbock.
1995

The Ryan’s Site Cache: Comparisons to Plainview.
Plains Anthropologist 40( 152): 165-184.

Hartwell, W. T., E. Johnson, V. T. Holliday, R. W. Ralph, and
S. Lupton
1989 A Re-evaluation of Ryan’s Site: A Disturbed
Plainview Cache on the Southern High Plains of
Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene 6:14-15.

Hill, M. G., V. T. Holliday, and D. J. Stanford
1995 History of Investigations, Geoarchaeology, and Reexamination of the Extant Lithic and Faunal Collections from the San Jon Site, New Mexico. Plains
Anthropologist, in press.
Hofman, J. L.
1991

New Light on the Lipscomb Bison Quarry. Oklahoma Archeological Survey Newsletter 11 (3):2-4.

1992

Recognition and Interpretation of Folsom Technological Variability on the Southern Plains. In Ice
Age Hunters of the Rockies, edited by D. J. Stanford
and J. S. Day, pp. 193-224. University Press of
Colorado, Niwot.

Hawley, J. W., G. O. Bachman, and K. Manley
1976 Quaternary Stratigraphy in the Basin and Range
and Great Basin Provinces, New Mexico and Western Texas. In Quaternary Stratigraphy of North
America, edited by W. C. Mahaney, pp. 235-274.
Dowden, Hutchingson and Ross, Inc., Stroudsburg,
Pennsylvania.
Haynes, C. V. Jr.
1975 Pleistocene and Recent Stratigraphy. In Late Pleistocene Environments of the Southern High Plains,
edited by F. Wendorf and J. J. Hester, pp. 57-96.
Publication of the Ft. Burgwin Research Center 9.
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Hofman, J. L. and L. C. Todd
1990 The Lipscomb Bison Quarry: 50 Years of Research.
Transactions of the Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western
Texas 25:43-58.
Hofman, J. L., R. L. Brooks, J. S. Hays, D. Owsley, R. L. Jantz,
M. K. Marks, and M. H. Manhein
1989 From Clovis to Comanchero: ArcheoIogical Overview of the Southern Great Plains. Research Series
No. 35. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

536

Texas Archeological Society

Hofman, J. L., L. C. Todd, and M. B. Collins
1991 Identification of Central Texas Edwards Chert at
the Folsom and Lindenmeier Sites. Plains Anthropologist 36( 137):297-308.

Holliday, V.T. (Continued)
1995a Geoarchaeological Investigations at the Lubbock
Lake Landmark, 1989 and 1990 Season. In Late
Holocene Investigations at the Lubbock Lake Landmark, Volume 2: The 1989 and 1990 Work, edited

Holden, W. C.
1974

by E. Johnson, pp. 33-53. Lubbock Lake Landmark

Historical Background of the Lubbock Lake Site. In

Quaternary Research Center Series 8. Museum of

History and Prehistory of the Lubbock Lake Site,

Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake Landmark,

edited by C. C. Black. The Museum Journal 15:1114. Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

Lubbock. In press.
1995b Late Quaternary Stratigraphy of the Southern High
Plains. In Ancient Peoples and Landscapes, edited

Holliday, V. T.

by E. Johnson, pp. 289-3 ! 3. Museum of Texas Tech

1985a Archaeological Geology of the Lubbock Lake Site,

University, Lubbock.

Southern High Plains of Texas. Geological Society
of America Bulletin 96:1483-1492.

1995c Stratigraphy and Paleoenvironments of Late Quaternary Valley Fills on the Southern High Plains.

1985b New Data on the Stratigraphy and Pedology of the

Memoir 186. Geological Society of America, Boul-

Clovis and Plainview Sites, Southern High Plains.

der. In press.

Quatetvtary Research 23:388-402.
1985c Holocene Soil-Geomorphological Relations in a
Semi-arid Environment--The Southern High Plains

1986

Holliday, V. T. and B.L. Allen
1987

Geology and Soils. In Lubbock Lake: Late Quater-

of Texas. In Soils and Quaternary Landscape Evo-

nary Studies on the Southern High Plains, edited by

lution, edited by J. Boardmen, pp. 325-357. John

E. Johnson, pp. 14-21. Texas A&M University Press,

Wiley and Sons, New York.

College Station.

Late Pleistocene Vegetation of the Southern High
Plains: A Reappraisal. Current Research in the Pleistocene 3:53-54.

Holliday, V. T. and E. Johnson
1984

The Lubbock Lake 1983 Field Season. Current Research in the Pleistocene 1:11-13.

1987

Re-examinatiou of Late-Pleistocene Boreal Forest
Reconstructions for the Southern High Plains. Qua-

Holliday, V. T. and C. R. Welty

ternary Research 28:238-244.

1981

214.

Lake Landmark, 1987 Season. In 1987 Fenceline
Corridor Survey and Testing Program, edited by E.
Johnson, pp. 69-82. Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary Research Center Series 1. Museum of Texas
Tech University, Lubbock Lake Landmark, Lubbock.
1989b Middle Holocene Drought on the Southern High
Plains. Quaternary Researeh 31:74-82.
1989c The Blackwater Draw Formation (Quaternary): A

1990

Lithic Tool Resources of the Eastern Llano Estacado.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:201-

1989a Geoarchaeological Investigations at the Lubbock

Holliday, V. T., C. V. Haynes Jr., J. L. Hofman, and D. J.
Meltzer
1994 Geoarchaeology and Geochronology of the Miami
(Clovis) Site, Southern High Plains of Texas. Quaternary Research 41:234-244.
Holliday, V. T., E. Johnson, H. Haas, and R. Stuckenrath
1983

Radiocarbon Ages from the Lubbock Lake Site,

1A-plus m.y. Record of Eolian Sedimentation and

1950-1980: Framework for Cultural and Ecological

Soil Formation on the Southern High Plains. Geo-

Change on the Southern High Plains. Plains An-

logical Society of America Bulletin 101 : 1598-1607.

thropologist 28( 101): 165-182.

Soils and Landscape Evolution of Eolian Plains:
The Southern High Plains of Texas and New

1985

Radiocarbon Ages from the Lubbock Lake Site: 19811984. Plains Anthropologist 30( 110):277-291.

Mexico. In Soil and Landscape Evolution, edited by
P. L. K. Knuepfer and L. D. McFadden. Geomorphology 3:489-515.
1993

Geoarchaeological Investigations at the Lubbock
Lake Landmark, !988 Season. In Late Holocene
htvestigations at the Lubbock Lake Landmark, Volume 1: The I988 Work, edited by E. Johnson, pp.
23-34. Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary Research Center Series 5. Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake Landmark, Lubbock.

Honea,
1980 The Marks Beach Site, Stratified Paleoindian Site,
Lamb County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 51:243-269.

Howard, E. B.
1935 Evidence of Early Man in North America. The Museum Journal 24:61-175. University of Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia.

Johnson and Holliday n Archeology and Late Quaternary Environments
Hughes, D. T.
1977 Analysis of Certain Prehistoric Bison Kills in the
Texas Panhandle and Adjacent Areas. Unpublished
Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville.
Hughes, E.
1984 The Blackwater Draw Locality #1 Collection of the
Museum, Texas Tech University: A Case Study in
Conservation, Collection Management, and Data
Reconstruction. Unpublished Master’s thesis, Texas
Tech University, Lubbock.

537

Johnson, E. (Continued)
1987c Paleoenvironmental Overview. In Lubbock Lake:
Late Quaternary Studies on the Southern High
Plains, edited by E. Johnson, pp. 90-99. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.
1989a Human Modified Bones from Early Southern Plains
Sites. In Bone Modification, edited by R. Bonnichsen
and M. H. Sorg, pp. 431-471. Center for the Study
of the First Americans, University of Maine, Orono.
1989b (Editor) 1987 Fencelbze Corridor Survey and Testing Program. Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary
Research Center Series I. Museum of Texas Tech

Hughes, J. T.
1962 Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
32:65-84.
1971

The Canyon City Club Cave in the Panhandle of
Texas. Unpublished report submitted to the Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.

Hughes, J. T. and P. S. Willey (editors)
1978 Archeology at MacKenzie Reservoir. Archeologica!
Survey Report 24. Office of the State Archeologist,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

University, Lubbock Lake Landmark, Lubbock.
1991

Late Pleistocene Cultural Occupation on the Southern Plains. In Clovis Origins and Adaptations, edited by R. Bonnichsen and K. L. Turnmire, pp.
215-237. Center for the Study of the First Americans, Oregon State University, Corvalis.

1993

A Late Pleistocene Small Mammal Fauna from
South Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene
10:105-107.

1994

Archaeological Survey Along the Mobil ESTE C02
Pipeline Corridor from Denver City to Clairemont,
Texas. Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary Re-

Jackson, M.
1976 Field notes on the excavation at XIT headqua~ers.
On file at the Museumof Texas Tech University,
Lubbock.

search Center Series 6. Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake Landmark, Lubbock.

1995a Site Formation and Disturbance Processes at Lubbock Lake (Southern High Plains, U.S.A.) During
the Terminal Pleistocene. In Ancient Peoples and

Jelinek, A. J.
1956 Field notes on the excavation in the brown sand
wedge at the Clovis site. On file at the Vertebrate
Paleontology Laboratory, Texas Memorial Museum,
Austin.
Johnson, E.
1985 Current Developments in Bone Technology. In Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, Vol.
8, edited by M. B. Schiffer, pp. 157-235. Academic
Press, New York.
1986a Late Pleistocene and Early Holocene Vertebrates
and Paleoenvironments on the Southern High Plains,
U.S.A. Gdographie physique et Quaternaire
40(3 ):249-261.
1986b The 1949 Bone Bed from the Carbonaceous Unit at
Blackwater Draw Locality #1. Current Research in
the Pleistocene 3:7-9.
1987a (Editor) Lubbock Lake: Late Quaternary Studies on
the Southern High Plains. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.
1987b Cultural Activities and Interactions. In Lubbock
Lake: Late Quaternary Studies on the Southern High
Plains, edited by E. Johnson, pp. 120-158 Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.

Landscapes, edited by E. Johnson, pp. 315-340.
Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

1995b

(Editor) Late Holocene Investigations at the Lubbock Lake Landmark, Volume 2: The 1989 and 1990
Work. Lubbock Lake Landmark Quaternary Research Center Series 8. Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake Landmark, Lubbock. In press.

Johnson, E. and V. T. Holliday
1980

A Plainview Kill/Butchering Locale on the Llano
Estacado - the Lubbock Lake Site. Plains Anthropologist 25(88):89-111.

1981

Late Paleoindian Activity at the Lubbock Lake Site.
Plains Anthropologist 26(93):173-193.

1985

A Clovis-Age Megafaunal Processing Station at the
Lubbock Lake Landmark. Current Research in the
Pleistocene 2:17-19.

1986

The Archaic Record at Lubbock Lake. In Current
Trends in Southeru Plains Archaeology, edited by T.
G. Baugh. Plains Anthropologist Memoir 22:7-54.

1987

Lubbock Lake Artifact Assemblages. In Lubbock
Lake: Late Quaternary Studies on the Southern High
Plains, edited by E. Johnson, pp. 100-119. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.

538

Texas Archeological Society

Johnson, E. and V. T. Holliday (Continued)

Knudson, R.

1989

1983

1993

Lubbock Lake: Late Quaternary Cultural and Envi-

semblages. Reports of Investigations 60. Labora-

USA. Journal of Quaternary Science 4:145-165.

tory of Anthropology, Washington State University,

et Paldoclimatique. L ’Anthropologie 97(4):651-673.
Analysis of Paleoindian Features at the Clovis Site:
New Data from Old Excavations. Plains Anthropologist, in press.
Johnson, E. and P. Shipman
1986

Pullman.

Les Cultures Prdhistoriques des Southern High
Plains (USA) dans leurs Contextes Stratigraphique

1995

Kreutzer, L. A.
1986 Cultural vs. Natural Bone Deposition in Feature
Area 2-1, Lubbock Lake Site. Unpublished Master’s
thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of
Washington, Seattle.
1988

Scanning Electron Microscope Studies of Bone
Modification. Current Research in the Pleistocene
3:47-48.

1993

Organizational Variability in lxtte Paleo-lndian As-

ronmental Change on the Southern High Plains,

Scanning Electron Microscope Analysis of Bone

Megafaunal Butchering at Lubbock Lake, Texas: A
Taphonomic Reanalysis. Quaternary Research
30(2):221-231,

Ladkin, N.
1993

Glass Seed Beads fi’om the 1988 Excavations. In

Modifications at Pendejo Cave, New Mexico. Cur-

Late Holocene h~vestigations at the Lubbock Lake

rent Research in the Pleistocene 10:72-75.

Landmark, Volume 1: The 1988 Work, edited by E.
Johnson, pp. 213-222. Lubbock Lake Landmark

Johnson, E., V. T. Holliday, and L. A. Kreutzer
1987 Significance of Bone Orientation Data for the
Clovis-age Bone Bed at the Lubbock Lake Landmark. Current Research in the Pleistocene 4:77-78.

Quaternary Research Center Series 5. Museum of
Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake Landmark,
Lubbock.
1995

Analysis of Ceramics and Glass Seed Beads. In

Johnson, E., V. T. Holliday, and R. Neck

Late Holocene Investigations at the Lubbock Lake

1982

Lake Theo: Late Quaternary Paleoenvironmental

Landmark, Volume 2: The 1989 and 1990 Work,

Data and New Plainview (Paleoindian) Date. North
American Archaeologist 3(2): 113-137.

edited by E. Johnson, pp. 313-330. Lubbock Lake
Landmark Quaternary Research Center Series 8. Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake
Landmark, Lubbock.

Johnson, E., V. T. Holliday, M. J. Kaczor, and R. Stuckenrath
1977

The Garza Occupation at the Lubbock Lake Site.
Bulletin of the Texas At~’heological Society 48:83109.

Lichti,
1994 Pastores Culture in the Southern Area of the Texas
Llano Estacado. Report to the National Endowment
for the Humanities Younger Scholars Program,

Johnson, E., V. T. Holliday, James Warnica, and Ted

Washington, D.C.

Williamson
1986

The Milnesand and Ted Williamson Paleoindian
Sites, East-Central New Mexico. Current Research

Lintz,

in the Pleistocene 3:9-11.

1995

Radiocarbon Dates from Chalk Hollow, A Stratified Site in the Texas Panhandle. Paper presented at
the 53rd Annual Plains Anthropological Conference,

Johnson, E., V. T. Holliday, R. W. Ralph, R. Knudson, and S.

Laramie, Wyoming.

Lupton
1987

Ryan’s Site: A Plainview Occupation on the Southern High Plains of Texas. Current Research in the
Pleistocene 4:17-18.

Katz, S. R. and P. R. Katz
1976

Lotspeich, F. B. and M. E. Everhart
1962 Climate and Vegetation as Soil Forming Factors on
the Llano Estacado. Journal of Range Management
15:134-141.

Archeological h~vestigations in Lower Tule Canyon, Briscoe County, Texas. Archeological Survey
Report 16. Texas Historical Commission, Office of
the State Archeologist, Austin.

Lundelius, E. L. Jr., R. W. Graham, E. Anderson, J. Guilday,
J. A. Holman, D. W. Steadman, and S. D. Webb
1983

Terrestrial Vertebrate Faunas. In Late Quaternary
Environments of the United States: The Late Pleis-

Kelley, J. H.
1974 A Brief Resume of Artifacts Collected at the Lubbock Lake Site Prior to 1961. In History and Prehistory of the Lubbock Lake Site, edited by C. C.
Black. The Museum Journal 15:43-78. Museum of
Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

tocene, edited by S. C. Porter, pp. 311-354. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.

Lynch, T. F.
1990 Glacial-Age Man in South America? A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1): 12-36.

Johnson and Holliday ~ Archeology and Late Quaternary Environments

539

Mallouf, R. J.
1982 An Analysis of Plow-Damaged Chert Artifacts: The
Brookeen Creek Cache (41HI86), Hill County,
Texas. Journal of Field Archaeology 9(1):79-98.

Riggs, A. D. Jr.

Meltzer, D. J.
1991 Altithermal Archaeology and Paleoeco!ogy at Mustang Springs, on the Southern High Plains of Texas.
American Antiquity 56:236-267.

Roberts, F. H.H.
1942 Archaeological and Geological lnvestigations in the
San Jon District, Eastern New Mexico. Smithsonian
Miscellaneous Collections 3:1-39. Bureau of
American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C.

Meltzer, D. J. and M. B. Collins
1987 Prehistoric Water Wells on the Southern High
Plains: Clues to Altithermal Climate. Journal of
Field Archaeology 14:9-28.
O’Brien, K.
1995 Historic and Modern Dumps at Lubbock Lake Landmark. In Late Holocene Investigations at the Lubbock Ixzke Landmark, Volume 2: The 1989 and 1990
Work, edited by E. Johnson, pp. 331-404. Lubbock
Lake Landmark Quaternary Research Center Series
8. Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock Lake
Landmark, Lubbock.
Parker, W.
1982

The Petree Site: SPAS-MT-30. Transactions of the
Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas 7:1-20.

Runkles, F. A.
1964 The Garza Site: A Neo-American Campsite Near
Post, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 35:101-115.
Runkles, F. A. and E.D. Dorchester
1987 The Lott Site: A Late Prehistoric Site in Garza
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 57:83-115.
Russell, R.
1945 Climates of Texas. Annals of the Association of
American Geographers 35:37-52.

Archeology at the Bridwell Site. Crosby County Pioneer Memorial Museum and Crosby County Historical Commission, Crosybyton.

Parson, M. L.
1967

1972

Archeological Investigations in Crosby and Dickens

Sabin, T. J. and V. T. Holliday
1995 Playas and Lunettes on the Southern High Plains:
Morphometric and Spatial Relationships. Annals of
the Association of American Geographers" 95:286305.

Counties, Texas, Durhzg the Winter, 1966-1967.
Archeological Program Report 7. State Building
Commission, Austin.
Peck, J., S. A. Tomka, and K. W. Kibler
1993

Saunders, J. J.
1980 A Model for Man-Mammoth Relationships in Late
Pleistocene North America. Canadian Journal of
Anthropology 1 ( 1 ):87-98.

Investigations at 41KT51, the Headstream Site. In
Data Recovery at Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan
Henry), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas: Phase III,
Season 2, by D. K. Boyd, J. Peck, S. A. Tomka, and
K. W. KIbler, pp. 35-86. Reports of Investigations
88. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Saunders, J. J. and E. B. Daeschler
1994 Descriptive Analyses and Taphonomical Observations of Culturally-Modified Mammoths Excavated
at "The Gravel Pit," Near Clovis, New Mexico in
1936. Proceedings of the A cademy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia 145:1-28.

Pope, L.
1991

The Hogue Site (41TY2). Transactions of the Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern
New Mexico and Western Texas 27:3-4.

Rathjen, F. W.
1973 The Texas Panhandle Frontier. M. K. Brown Range
Life Series 12. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Reeves, C. C. Jr.
1972 Tertiary-Quaternary Stratigraphy and Geomorphology of West Texas and southeastern New Mexico.
In Guidebook for East-Central New Mexico, edited
by V. Kelley and F. D. Trauger, pp. 108-117. New
Mexico Geological Society, Albuquerque.
1976

Caliche: Origin, Classification, Morphology and
Uses. Estacado Books, Lubbock.

Saunders, J. J., G. A. Agogino, A. T. Bouldurian, and C. V.
Haynes Jr.
1991 A Mammoth-Ivory Burnisher-Billet from the Clovis
Level, Blackwater Locality No. 1, New Mexico.
Plains Anthropologist 36(137):359-363.
Saunders, J. J., C. V. Haynes Jr., D. Stanford, and G. A.
Agogino
1990 A Mammoth-Ivory Semifabricate from B lackwater
Locality No. 1, New Mexico. American Antiquity
55(1):112-119.
Sellards, E. H.
1938

Artifacts Associated with Fossil Elephant. Bulletin
of the Geological Society of America 49:999-1010.

540

Texas Archeological Society

Se!lards, E. H. (Continued)
1952 Early Man in America. University of Texas Press,

Wedel, W. R.
1975

Chalk Hollow: Culture Sequence and Chronology
in the Texas Panhandle. Actas del XL1 Congreso

Austin.

h~ternacional de Americanistas 41:270-278.
Sellards, E. H., G. L. Evans, and G. E. Meade
1947

Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from
Plainview, Texas. Bulletin qf the Geological Soci-

Wendorf, F.
1961

Shawn, R. A.
1975

Paleoecology of the Llano Estacado. Museum of
New Mexico Press, Santa Fe.

ety of America 58:927-954.

The Bu!l Hill Site Excavation. Transactions of the
Regional Archeological ,S),mposium Jbr Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas 10:1-48.

Smith, G. I. and F. A. Street-Perrott
1983 Pluvial Lakes of the Western United States. In LateQuaternary Environments of the United States, Vol.

Wendorf, F. and J. J. Hester (editors)
!975 Late Pleistocene Environments qf the Southern High
Plains. Publication of the Ft. Burgwin Research
Center 9. Department of Anthropology, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.
West, F. H.
1983

The Antiquity of Man in America. In Late-Quater-

1: The Late Pleistocene, edited by S. C. Porter, pp.

nary Environments of the United States, Vol. 1: The

190-212.

1.ate Pleistocene, edited by S. C. Porter, pp. 364-

University

of

Minnesota

Press,

382. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.

Minneapolis.

Speer,
1986 History of the Plainview Site. Guidebook to the

Wheat,

J. B.

1955

Two Archeological Sites near Lubbock, Texas. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review 28:71-77.

Archaeological Geology of Classic Paleoindian Sites
on the Southern High Plains, Texas and New

1972

The Olsen-Chubbuck Site. A Paleo-htdian Bison

Mexico, edited by V. T. Holliday, pp. 52-59. De-

Kill. Memoirs 26. Society for American Archaeol-

partment of Geography, Texas A&M University,

ogy, Washington, D.C.

College Station.
Willey, P. S. and J. T. Hughes
Speth, J. D. and W. J. Parry
1978

1980

1978

The Deadman’s Terrace Site. In Archeology at

Late Prehistoric Bison Procurement in Southeast-

MacKenzie Reservoir, edited by J. T. Hughes and P.

ern New Mexico: The 1977 Season at the Garnsey

S. Willey, pp. 205-225. Archeological Survey Re-

Site (LA-18399). Technical Reports 8. University of

port 24. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas

Michigan, Museum of Anthropology, Ann Arbor.
ix~te Prehistoric Bison Procurement in Southeast-

Historical Commission, Austin.

etw New Mexico: The 1978 Season at the Garnsey

Word, J. H.

Site (LA-18399). Technical Reports 12. University

1963

Floydada Country Club Site 41FL1. South Plains
Archeological Society Bulletin 1:37-63.

1965

The Montgomery Site in Floyd County, Texas. South
Plains Archeological Society Bulletin 2:55-102.

1980

Who Were the Pastores? Floyd County Historical

of Michigan, Museum of Anthropology, Ann Arbor.

Taylor, A. J.
1980 A Survey of New Mexican Pastores in the Texas
Panhandle-Plains 1876-1886. Texas Historical Foundation, Austin.

Museum Newsletter 1 : 1-2.
1991

The 1975 Field School of the Texas Archeological
Society. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

Todd, L. C., J. L. Hofman, and C. B. Schultz
1990 Seasonality of the Scottsbluff and Lipscomb Bison
Bonebeds: Implications for Modeling Paleoindian
Subsistence. American Antiquity 55(4):813-827.
Tunnell, C. D.
1964 Two Burials from the Jim Arnold Site in Northwest
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
35:83-94.

60:57-106.
Word, J. H. and A. Fox
1975

The Codgell Burial in Floyd County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 46:1-63.

Wormington, H. M.
!957

Ancient Man in North America. Popular Series 4.
Denver Museum of Natural History, Denver.

The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas
and Northern Mexico
Solveig A. Turpin

ABSTRACT
This paper focuses on major behavioral trends and changes in the prehistoric and historic archeological
record of the Lower Pecos River region of Texas and northern Mexico. Of particular importance is the long record
of hunter-gatherer adaptations in the region, marked by spectacular prehistoric rock art styles and a commonality
in material culture dominated by well-preserved wood and plant artifacts from the dry rock shelters.

INTRODUCTION
The Lower Pecos region, the smallest of the
defined cultural regions in Texas, encompasses an
elliptical area that centers on the mouth of the
Pecos River and extends perhaps 150 km north and
south of the Rio Grande, from the vicinity of modern-day Sheffield to the Valle de la Babia in
Coahuila, Mexico (Figure 1). The east-west axis
roughly follows the Rio Grande from Del RioCiudad Acuna to beyond the historically famous
hamlet of Langtry.
Traditionally, the geographical boundaries of
the region have been defined by the extent of the
most distinctive of four prehistoric rock art styles,
the Pecos River style, and by a commonality in
material culture recovered from dry rock shelters,
the latter partly a product of preservation. The concept of a Lower Pecos cultural area is in fact a
construct based on the florescence of regionally
specific characteristics, such as the distinctive Pecos
River style pictographs and projectile points that
bear local names--Langtry, Val Verde, and
Pandale--between 5000 and 3000 years ago, during the Middle Archaic period. Before and after the
Middle Archaic, the Lower Pecos shares many of
its traits with adjacent regions, apparently affected
by cultural influences radiating from Texas and
northern Mexico. Thus, the trajectory of Lower
Pecos cultura! adaptations can be visualized as an
ellipse whose apogee is the Middle Archaic period.
Typically, hunter-gatherer adaptations are
strongly correlated to environmental factors, and
the Lower Pecos is no exception. The climatic se-

quence has been reconstructed from fauna (Dibble
and Lorrain 1968; Lundelius 1984); pollen (Bryant
1966, 1969; Story and Bryant 1966; Bryant and
Shafer 1977); macroflora (Dering 1979); coprolites
(Williams Dean 1978; Stock 1983); flood sequences
(Patton and Dibble 1982); and ethnohistory (Turpin
1987a). The cool mesic Late Pleistocene savanna,
capable of supporting herds of now-extinct
megafauna, succumbed to increasing aridity some
9000 years ago. Semi-desert conditions prevailed,
reaching their peak about 5000 years ago and relaxing around 3000 B.P. during a short but influential
mesic interlude. A return to aridity was again broken late in prehistory or early history, until the
fragile balance was tipped by the resurgence of the
drying trend, and the introduction of domestic herd
animals in the 1880s.
Topographically, the Lower Pecos region is
flat to rolling rangeland dissected by entrenching
tributaries to the three major rivers--the Devils, the
Pecos, and the Rio Grande, their confluences now
inundated by Amistad Reservoir. Although all were
(and are) important sources of water, and by
extension faunal and floral resources, the three
differ in potability. The saline Pecos, originally
called the Salado, the muddy Rio Grande, and the
clear, spring-fed Devils, were undoubtedly the
nucleus of prehistoric occupation but springs,
seeps, and tinajas (potholes) permitted exploitation
of upland and tributary resources that apparently
waxed and waned in intensity depending upon
climatic conditions. The poorly known southern
half of the Lower Pecos region, between the Rio
Grande and the Sierra del Carmen, is deficient in

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

542

Texas Archeological Society

0

10

50 km

Ozona ~
Lower Pecos
Cultural

Del Rio

Ciudad

Negras~

,Eagle

Pass

® Nueva Rosita
uiz ~

Sabinas

Figure 1. Map of the Lower Pecos cultural area with its southern limits undefined.

permanent water sources, forcing its inhabitants to
develop a different adaptive strategy.
Geologic factors that influenced prehistoric
occupation include the numerous rock shelters
hollowed from the sheer limestone cliffs (Figure
2), the copious quantities of lithic raw material
available as gravels or eroding chert beds, and the
strictures imposed on accessibility between upland
and riverine resources. The prehistoric settlement
pattern reflects the high incidence of rock shelters
on the Pecos River and the Rio Grande, and their
lesser presence on the Devils River where huge
open camps are found at the mouths of every
tributary. Erosion, exacerbated by over-grazing and
modern droughts, has reduced the soil cover in
historic times; the end result is evident in the
siltation of Amistad Reservoir. The modern flora

and fauna are similarly a
product of livestock husbandry, but the vegetational
communities retain the basic
components utilized during
much of prehistory.
Archeotogical research
in the Lower Pecos region
can be divided into three
eras: the antiquarian search
for museum specimens that
prevailed in the 1930s; the
salvage program in anticipation of the construction of
Amistad Reservoir (then
Diablo Reservoir) between
1958 and 1969; and the current resurgence of individual and privately-funded
research. The last 15 years
have seen rock shelter excavations and broad area
surveys, but the most recent
trend is a phenomena! interest in the diverse body of
Native American rock art
preserved in the dry shelters and overhangs. The
published and unpublished
information generated by 60
years of research is so abundant that the reader is often
directed to summary articles
rather than primary sources,

a lamentable practice that often leads to bibliographic drift, but one mandated by the number of
citable resources.
Over 275 radiocarbon dates contribute to one
of the most precise regional chronologies in Texas
(Table 1), although several nomenclatures have
been proposed (see Turpin 1991a). The one used
to guide this overview was first proposed by Dibble
(in Prewitt 1983) and later refined as more assays
were generated. The traditional quadrapartite
division into Paleoindian, Archaic, Late
Prehistoric, and Historic periods is expanded into
11 subperiods (including one phase and one
probable horizon) for the prehistoric era, leaving
the historic period intact.
The culture history of the Lower Pecos is a
microcosm of hunting and gathering societies

Turpin ~ The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico

543

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD, AURORA
SUBPERIOD, PRE-12000 B.P.
The first inhabitants of the Lower Pecos
region apparently arrived on the banks of
the Rio Grande sometime between 12,000
and 14,000 years ago, bearing a fully developed cultural system that centered on the
procurement of big game. Scattered and
burned horse, camel, bison, and bear bones
in the small site of Cueva Quebrada are the
first radiocarbon-dated evidence of
Paleoindian occupation of the region
(Lundelius 1984). Bone beds of equivalent
age at Bonfire Shelter (Figure 3) undoubtedly represent the intermittent slaughter and
butchering of elephant, camel, horse, and

Figure 2. A typical rock shelter overlooking the Rio Grande
(41VV656).

throughout the world, alternating between an
emphasis on a hunting economy to one dominated by gathering. The stamp of arid lands
adaptation is seen in the material culture, technology, and the settlement patterns, which are
aspects of prehistoric lifeways most influenced
by environment and economics. The excellent
preservation of normally perishable items, and
the diverse and elaborate body of art, both mural and mobiliary, takes us beyond the mundane
into the political, social, and religious spheres
of hunter and gatherer lifeways.
Two competing models of prehistoric
adaptation have been generated from two
different perspectives on the material record.
One school postulates a static Archaic continuum that endured for 9000 years (Kirkland
and Newcomb 1967; Shafer 1976, 1981, 1986;
Shafer and Bryant 1977); my perceptions are
one of both abrupt and gradual changes within
the parameters of hunter and gatherer society
(Turpin 1990a). These diametrically opposed
viewpoints are in part a function of research
focus. The first is derived from the natural
environment, and such material classes as food,
fiber, coprolites, and stone tools, and can be
theoretically described as an ecological,
functional, or adaptive model. The latter
perspective is conditioned by an emphasis on
less tangible items and processes, including rock
art, mortuary customs, and settlement patterns.

Table 1. Periods in the Chronology
of the Lower Pecos Region
Radiocarbon
Period

Subperiod

Paleoindian

< 12,000-9,800
Aurora

14,500-11,900

Bonfire

10,700-9,800

Late Paleoindian

9,400-9,000
Oriente

Early Archaic

9,4OO-8,80O
9,000-6,000

Viejo
Middle Archaic

8,900-5,500
6,000-3,000

Eagle Nest

5,500-4,1 O0

San Felipe

4,100-3,200

Late Archaic

3,000-1,000
Cibola

3,150-2,300

Flanders

2,300-?

Blue Hills

2,300-1,300

Late Prehistoric

Historic

Years B.P.

1,000-350
Flecha

1,320-450

Infierno

450-250
350-0

544

Texas Archeological Society
zational skills consistent with coordinated
group procurement strategies. More importantly, the big game hunting strategies and the
characteristic projectile point styles incorporate the Lower Pecos into the Paleoindian
sphere as it was expressed across North
America just prior to the extinction of many of
these species.

LATE PALEOINDIAN PERIOD,
ORIENTE SUBPERIOD
(9400 TO 8800 B.P.)
Although commonly called the Late
Paleoindian period because of continuities in
lithic technology, the Oriente period sees the
Figure 3. Excavation in the lowest bone beds at Bonfire
first tentative beginnings of the Archaic adapShelter (41VV218).
tation that was to become the hallmark of the
Lower Pecos region. Johnson (1964) first noticed the mixture of Archaic and Paleoindian
cultural traits at Devils Mouth where the economy
bison, but the absence of stone tools weakens the
was not noticeably oriented towards big game huntcase (Bement 1986; Dibble and Lorrain 1968). Although the perspective afforded by these two sites
ing. Broad resource procurement was evidenced at
Baker Cave in deposits of this age (Hester 1983),
is perforce limited, and perhaps biased, both are
compatible with the widely held concept of
and the fiber industry was apparently well underway (Andrews and Adovasio 1980), at least in northPaleoindians as big game hunters exploiting the
ern Mexico. These technological and economic
specialized environment of the terminal Pleistocene.
shifts are appropriate responses to the onset of the
long drying trend that Bryant (1966) called the
Stockton Stage.
PALEOINDIAN PERIOD, BONFIRE
SUBPERIOD (10,700 TO 9800 B.P.)
More definitive is the massive accumulation
of now-extinct bison associated with Folsom and
Plainview dart points in Bone Bed 2 at Bonfire
Shelter (Dibble and Lorrain t968). On at least three
occasions, herds totalling an estimated 120 animals
were driven over the cliff above the shelter, tumbling into the interior where they were butchered
and processed. Radiocarbon dates confirm an age
range centering on 10,000 B.P., concurrent with a
mesic period that Bryant (1966) called the Medina
stage. The flood sequence at Arenosa Shelter, near
the mouth of the Pecos River, shows a series of
fine-grained sedimentary layers indicative of a humid interlude predating 9500 B.P. (Patton and
Dibble 1982).
Bone Bed 2 at Bonfire Shelter is the oldest
known example of the jump technique of killing
herd animals, and this presumably implies organi-

EARLY ARCHAIC PERIOD, VIEJO
SUBPERIOD (8900 TO 5500 B.P.)
The Early Archaic period, or Viejo subperiod,
as currently defined, is far too long and amorphous
to be considered a meaningful cultural unit. Spanning some 3400 years, the period sees the entrenchment of many of the traits that sum to the Archaic
tradition that defines the Lower Pecos region. The
Viejo subperiod occupies the latter half of Bryant’s
(1966) Stockton Stage, the 5000-year long trend to
aridity that presumably conditioned the adaptive
strategies of Lower Pecos people. Localized phenomena, observed at Black Cave (Turpin 1982) and
Seminole Sink (Turpin 1988), suggest intermittent
periods of erosional intensity sometime prior to
6800 B.P., perhaps connected to the onset of the
drying trend (Turpin 1991a:28).

Turpin ~ The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico

During the Viejo subperiod, rock shelter habitation becomes the norm with sites such as Hinds
Cave yielding evidence of segmented space; that is,
the rock shelter has activity areas defined by interior burned rock middens, prickly pear floors, latrines, and perishable items (Lord 1984). Dietary
information gained from coprolite analysis implies
an extremely successful adaptation to an increasingly arid environment (Williams Dean 1978), presumably through a reliance on desert succulents.
Brown (1991:118) has summarized the evidence
for the introduction of sotol and agave (likely
lecheguilla) into rock shelter deposits during the
Early Archaic period.
These same plants are the basis of the Lower
Pecos fiber industry and the source of raw materials for clothing, matting, basketry, sandals, and
twine (Andrews and Adovasio 1980; McGregor
1992; Schuetz 1956, 1963). Commonalities with
the northern Mexican fiber assemblages, and continuity over time, led Adovasio (Andrews and
Adovasio 1980) to postulate a Coahuilan origin or
affiliation.
The projectile points considered characteristic
of this subperiod, although they bear localized
names such as Baker and Bandy, are widespread
throughout Central Texas where they are known as
Uvalde and Martindale (Turner and Hester 1993).
A number of other generic projectile point types,
called by descriptive terms such as Early Barbed,
Early Stemmed, and Early Corner-Notched, remain
ambiguously defined.
The one mortuary site of this age that has been
excavated (Turpin 1988) has cultural analogs in
Coahuila and the karst regions of Texas. A skeletal
population of 21 individuals recovered from a
vertical shaft cave, Seminole Sink, suggested that
the people experienced only temporary, perhaps
seasonal, dietary stress and little trauma (Marks et
al. 1988). However, dental pathologies were
common and were accompanied by early tooth loss
that probably resulted from a high intake of sugar
and carbohydrates.
The mixture of young and old, male and female, in this one site, hints at an egalitarian society
where all ages and both genders were accorded the
same treatment after death. The broad distribution
of this mortuary practice can be attributed to both
the physical convenience afforded by a natural tomb,
and the psychological value of returning the dead
to the earth (Turpin 1988).

545

Little else is known about the social structure
and world view of these Early Archaic people. Two
forms of portable art that characterize the Archaic
period as a whole may have their beginnings at this
time: painted pebbles and unbaked or poorly fired
clay figurines. Neither form of art is well-dated, but
the painted pebbles have been stylistically sequenced and placed within an Archaic context that
spans all the subdivisions (Parsons 1986; see also
Mock 1987). These flat, smooth river rocks are
systematically decorated with a limited number of
motifs that often portray human attributes (Parsons
1986; Mock 1987). In fact, the pebble often reflects
the organization of the human body with eyes in
the upper, narrower end, and identifiable genitalia,
usually female, in the lower, wider end. It has been
suggested that the pebble served as a substitute for
real people in curing and fertility rites or as personal, as opposed to public, ritual paraphenalia.
Clay figurines are less common but they too
are miniature humans, with pronounced female
sexual characteristics but headless (Shafer 1975;
Chandler et al. 1994). They are even more poorly
dated than the painted pebbles, in part due to their
rarity and in part due to poor provenience. They are
only included here because they, like the painted
pebbles, are Archaic phenomena of ambiguous age.

THE MIDDLE ARCHAIC PERIOD,
EAGLE NEST SUBPERIOD
(5500 TO 4100 B.P.)
About 5500 B.P., the beginnings of an insularity that reaches its peak in the subsequent San Felipe
subperiod are signalled by the appearance of
Pandale projectile points, a distinctly beveled style
with a limited regional distribution. This shift in
lithic technology coincided with the culmination of
Bryant’s (1966) Stockton Stage in an extremely
hot, dry interlude he called the Ozona Erosional
after disconformities in strata at Arenosa Shelter
(Dibble 1967) and the Devils Mouth site (Johnson
1964). At about the same time, Black Cave suffered another massive erosional event that flushed
the deposits, exposing Pleistocene-age eboulis
(Turpin 1982).
At Baker Cave, Brown (1991:123) observed a
shift to the labor-intensive processing of lecheguilla,
sotol, and yucca around 5000 B.P., resulting in

546

Texas Archeological Society

Turpin ~ The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico
what he called an economy of scale. Brown
(1991:123) suggests that considerable energy was
invested in food production as a least-risk response
to environmental deterioration. Implied are increased diet breadth, group mobility, and community size.

MIDDLE ARCHAIC PERIOD, SAN
FELIPE SUBPERIOD
(4100 TO 3200 B.P.)

547

and their redundancy evidences their role in ritual
performances.
Regionalization and intensified ritu!l activity
are an unlikely correlate to increased flooding of
the Pecos River (Patton and Dibble 1982), an environmental phenomenon probably related to the
denudation of the landscape during this hot, dry,
climatic interval (Figure 5). Component counts
(Marmaduke 1978) and relative frequencies of projectile point styles (Turpin 1990b) indicate two shifts
in the settlement pattern: increases in population
density along the rivers and in the number of upland sites presumably devoted to exploitation of
food resources.
Such a conjunction of events can parsimoniously be explained as a result of people adapting
their economic and social strategies to desertification of the natural environment. As upland water
sources dwindled, the general population concentrated along the three major rivers, occupying rock
shelters and open camps where their domestic debris accumulated rapidly. Desert succulents, the
mainstay of the diet, may well have increased at the
expense of grasses and trees, but the manner in
which they were obtained changed from band foraging to task-oriented collecting. Small groups
spread out across the landscape, gathering foodstuffs and returning them to the home base, thus
proliferating upland work stations and temporary
camps. The increase in population density, but not
numbers of people, presented social challenges that

Signs of increasing regionalization during the
San Felipe subperiod include the further refinement
of local projectile point styles, such as Langtry, Val
Verde, and Arenosa dart points, and the emergence
of the first and most complex of four prehistoric
pictograph styles, the Pecos River style (Figure 4).
These monumental polychrome pictographs rank
among the oldest, yet most elaborate, religious art
forms in the New World (Kirkland and Newcomb
1967; Turpin 1994a, 1994b). The central characters are shamans, the religious practicioners of
hunting and gathering societies throughout the
world. Anthropomorphic figures with animal characteristics such as feathers, wings, claws, fur, and
horns are equipped with atlatls, darts, fending
sticks, and enigmatic pouches that hang from their
elbows. The mountain lion, colloquially called panther, figures prominently in the Pecos River style
bestiary, which also includes deer, birds, fish, and
fantastic insects.
At least three primary tenets
of shamanism are expressed in the
art: the power of magical flight
(Turpin 1994a); the ability to assume the form of an animal familiar (Turpin 1994b); and the
concept of parallel supernatural
and natural worlds accessible
through a central axis (Turpin
1994a) or holes in the earth
(Turpin 1992a, 1992b). The size,
complexity, and accessibility of
the paintings indicate they were
produced by a group effort for
public consumption; their consistency in theme and style demonstrates that a unified belief system
Figure 5. Intermittent flooding of the Pecos River left a detailed stratigraphic
prevailed over the entire Lower
record at Arenosa Shelter (41VV99), excavated prior to Amistad Dam
Pecos area as currently defined;
closure.

548

Texas Archeological Society

were met by the institution of ritual communication
that was manifested in the rock art.

LATE ARCHAIC,
CIBOLA SUBPERIOD
(3150 TO 2300 B.P.)

bearing their characteristic arms. Ethnographic
sources of much later date describe coordinated
winter bison hunts near the mouth of the Pecos and
along the Devils River, so perhaps the in-migrations of the Late Archaic were seasonally scheduled events as well.
Based on the depiction of bison hunts and
atlatls in the miniature Red Linear pictographs, I
have tentatively correlated the paintings to the Late
Archaic intrusion of the bison hunters (Turpin
1984, 1990c). Using a much smaller sample of pictographs, Newcomb (Kirkland and Newcomb
1967) also attributed them to the Archaic period,
although Gebhard (1965) thought they were more
recent (ca. A.D. 900 to A.D. 1400) and perhaps related to Kokopelli, the hump-backed flute player of
the American Southwest. The one experimental radiocarbon assay, run on samples from one of the
presumed bison painted at Cueva Quebrada, produced a date of 1280 B.P. (Ilger et al. 1994), placing it within the closing centuries of the Late

The beginning of the Late Archaic period, aptly
named the Cibola subperiod, is signalled by abrupt
economic, technological, and site distribution
changes that in turn coincide with an apparent break
in the climatic trend toward aridity that transpired
some 3000 years ago. The rapid spread of cultural
traits that demonstrate spatial continuities meets
Willey and Phillips’ (1958) definition of a horizon.
In Bryant’s (1966) original climatic reconstruction,
this interlude was called the Frio Interval to recognize the resurgence of pollen types typical of cooler,
more mesic conditions. The faunal evidence from
Bonfire Shelter is incontrovertible. The uppermost
bone bed produced the estimated remains of approximately 800 modern bison, accompanied by broad-bladed dart
points usually considered to be Central
Texas types, and securely radiocarbondated to around 2600 years ago (Dibble
and Lorrain 1968). Bison bones have
also been recovered in lesser amounts
at Eagle Cave, Castle Canyon, Arenosa
Shelter, and Skyline Shelter in deposits
of approximately the same age. A tentative shift in settlement patterning is suggested by the distribution of characteristic projectile point styles such as
Marshall, Castroville, and Montell.
Relative percentages decrease in large
stratified rock shelters and increase at
the Devils Mouth site, an open terrace
camp, a trend that is consistent with expectations for an economic strategy that
centered on mobile food sources.
Dibble (Dibble and Lorrain 1968)
provided both environmental and culFigure 6. Forrest Kirkland’s rendition of the Red Linear rock art type
tural explanations for the evidence from
site (41VV201) in Seminole Canyon State Historical Park. Processions
Bonfire Shelter. In his model, cooler,
of headressed warriors are a key characteristic of this style. The group
wetter climatic conditions permitted the
at lower right apparently depicts a ritual connected with childbirth,
grasslands of the Great Plains to recoloanother common Red Linear rock art theme. Frost wedging has
nize the Lower Pecos, bringing with
seriously damaged this pane!, eliminating whole figures and their
them large herds of migratory game
context. Figures average less than 10 cm tall (reproduced courtesy of
the Texas Memorial Museum, University of Texas at Austin).
animals and their attendant hunters

Turpin ~ The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico

Archaic period but well beyond the end of the
Cibola subperiod.
Other favored themes in this style are processions of headdressed warriors sometimes apparently
involved in conflict with other males (Figure 6),
and deer hunting scenes that incorporate geometric
designs that may imply traps or nets. Several secluded sites are devoted to scenes of sexual intercourse, pregnancy, and birth, perhaps hinting that
the paintings were part of puberty rites that prepared the initiates for adult life. The Red Linear
artists were capable of endowing these tiny crude
stick figures with animation and vivacity not found
in any of the other Lower Pecos pictograph styles.
This artistic skill and the consistency in theme,
style, and minor details, displayed from the Devils
River to the Rio Grande west of the Pecos, suggest
that the conventions were developed in another medium, such as hide painting, and brought into the
Lower Pecos in fully developed form. Whether that
introduction coincided with the demonstrated movement of people off the Plains in Cibolo times remains hypothetical.
Although little research attention has been devoted to the issue, the changes in resource distribution and the influx of new people must have had a
fragmenting effect on the resident population
whether they coexisted, migrated, or were absorbed.
When the grasslands retreated, the vacuum was
filled by desert-adapted people, apparently with affiliations to northern Mexican groups.

THE LATE ARCHAIC PERIOD,
FLANDERS SUBPERIOD
(ca. 2300 B.P.)
The Flanders subperiod of the Late Archaic is
the most elusive time period in the regional chronology. The hallmark of the period, the Shumla
dart point style, has antecedents in Nuevo Leon and
Coahuila where it is found in deposits dating from
3100 to 1850 years ago, reaching its peak popularity about 2300 B.P. (Turpin 1991a). The few dates
available from rock shelter excavations north of the
Rio Grande are ambiguous. Bryant (1966) recognized a return to aridity that he called the Juno
Interval, so presumably the Flanders subperiod
people were practicioners of the ancient exploitation strategies of Early and Middle Archaic development. There can be little doubt that people using

549

Shumla dart points left a substantial material record
in many sites, stratigraphically above the Cibola
deposits, but the most prolific sites have been the
most poorly excavated. A reasonable hypothesis is
that northern Mexican people were able to expand
into the Lower Pecos once environmental conditions stabilized to their liking. Little more can be
said until excavations concentrate on deposits of
this age.

LATE ARCHAIC PERIOD,
BLUE HILLS SUBPERIOD
(2300 TO 1300 B.P.)
Compared to the regional insularity of the
Middle Archaic period and the distinctive spread of
the Cibola horizon, the Blue Hills period is diffuse.
The characteristic projectile points, primarily Ensor
and Frio, are shared across broad expanses of Texas
(see Prewitt, this volume). The fiber industry is
somewhat elaborated by the appearance of more
ornate painted mats as part of a mortuary complex
that is dominated by bundled burials. Although some
evidence suggests that bundled burials are a generalized Archaic trait, most of the datable examples
are of Blue Hills age (Turpin et al. 1986). Flexed
corpses, sometimes lashed into a fetal position, were
wrapped in mats, and tied into a compact package
that was then interred in dry rock shelter deposits.
Ornaments and items of clothing are sometimes
preserved and, on rare occasions, tissue, skin, hair,
and flesh are naturally mummified (Huebner 1995).
Contrary to expectations voiced by a number of
anthropologists, infants were apparently accorded
special treatment, their tiny bodies wrapped in rabbit skin robes, deer skins, and mats, and placed on
grass beds, often with their broken cradle boards.
Based on a single experimental radiocarbon
date (Ilger et al. 1994), it is possible that the Red
Linear pictographs, described in a preceding section, are contemporaenous. A response to the cyclical return to aridity may be mirrored in yet another
peak in the number of components (Marmaduke
1978) and projectile point frequencies (Turpin
1990a) attributable to this period. The number of
upland sites bearing Late Archaic points coupled
with an increase in the proportionate number of
unifaces, usually considered as vegetal material processing tools, has led to speculation that there was
an escalating reliance on desert plants. A higher

550

Texas Archeological Society

recovery of fish bones and scales in some shelter
deposits suggests exploitation of previously less
important food sources, but at other sites, such as
Skyline Shelter, riverine resources were always a
significant component of the diet.
The terminal Late Archaic blended into the
Late Prehistoric period with little evidence of severe
disjunctions in the cultural trajectory. Dart points
and arrow points coexist in strata dated to the transitional centuries, perhaps in part because these same
upper deposits are generally the most disturbed.

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD,
FLECHA SUBPERIOD
(1320 TO 450 B.P.)
The Late Prehistoric period is marked by
changes in artifact types, site types, settlement patterns, exploitation strategies, rock art styles, and
mortuary customs. The temptation to credit these
innovations to an influx of a singular people is
dampened by the lack of stratified or well-dated
single component sites that might coordinate or
sequence these events.
Sometime between A.D. 600 and A.D. 900,
the bow and arrow were adopted in the Lower
Pecos region, signalling the advent of the Flecha
subperiod (Turpin 1991a:Table 1.12). Unfortunately, the upper levels of most rock shelters are
highly disturbed, so it is difficult to distinguish
components based on arrow point styles, none of
which are unique to the Lower Pecos region.
Although the Late Prehistoric people continued to take advantage of the natural shelter offered
by caves and overhangs, they apparently began
processing desert succulents in a manner that left a
distinctive feature on open sites. Ring middens-crescentic accumulations of burned rock--consistently date to the Late Prehistoric period, although
some caution is introduced by the mixture of projectile point styles on these open sites and the common sense recognition that charcoal is less likely
to survive in older features. Brown (199 t:127) suggests that pit-baking ovens were relocated, moving
from rock shelters to open sites situated near stands
of plants and firewood where a temporary surplus
could be produced.
The technological and economic changes are
accompanied by the introduction of foreign burial
customs and fully developed art styles. Although

interment in rock shelter deposits continues, the
practice of bundling may have fallen into disuse
over time (Turpin 1991a:35). Two exhumed mummies date to this period; the earlier, an adult male
buried about 1150 years ago, was accorded the
typical Archaic mortuary treatment: flexed,
wrapped in mats, and tied into a package with a
long human hair rope (Turpin et al. 1986). Analysis of the preserved intestinal contents showed that
this individual had consumed a most eclectic diet
during his last days. The more recent burial, a prepubescent child, was laid, flexed, in a rock shelter
grave outlined by sotol stalks, cushioned by a grass
and prickly pear bed, and covered with an antelope
skin robe some 600 years ago. Huebner (1995) was
able to demonstrate that the child suffered from
severe malnutrition, verging on starvation. Yet a
third rock shelter burial produced another innovation that can be relatively dated to the Late Prehistoric period: a threaded and twined bullrush mat,
rolled like a carpet, was exhumed from a grave that
contained the seated and flexed remains of two
people. A similar mat was radiocarbon dated to 570
years ago, leading McGregor (1991) to consider
this weaving technique to be a Late Prehistoric
introduction to the Lower Pecos fiber industry.
A more drastic change in mortuary customs is
evidenced by the appearance of cairn burials, piles
of rocks usually built on high promontories or
points overlooking the canyons. Only one such
cairn has been excavated (Turpin 1982); it produced two dart points and two arrow points, mirroring the overlap of the two artifact forms so often
seen in rock shelter deposits. The presumed recent
age of these features is substantiated by their codistribution with tipi rings, a house style clearly
attributable to the Infierno phase (see below).
The latest mortuary practice documented by
radiocarbon dates is cremation and disposal in a
vertical shaft cave. The incinerated remains of an
adult male were dropped down the shaft at Seminole Sink where they lay atop the talus cone for
some 400 years (Turpin 1988). Technically, this
event falls within the Infierno phase time frame,
but there is no evidence to link the two beyond age.
The case for the migration of new people into
the Lower Pecos is furthered by the appearance of
two fully-developed pictograph styles--both
shared with western and southern desert areas-and a different set of petroglyph motifs related to a
series of sites that extend northwest across the

Turpin ~ The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico

Eldorado Divide. All are dated to the Late Prehistoric period by stylistic criteria; one experimental
radiocarbon date narrows the time frame of one
style, the Red Monochrome, to about A.D. 800.
The Red Monochrome style (Figure 7) consists of frontally posed, static, life-size human figures and realistic animals, such as dogs, turkeys,
catfish, deer, mountain lions, rabbits, and turtles,
painted, as the name suggests, in red pigment
(Turpin 1986a). A variation on the human figure is
nicknamed "lizard man" for the bent knees and
elbows. A most curious attribute is the common
depiction of protuberances or "buns" on the side
of the head. Single feather headdresses are common. Presumably female figures wear long skirts
but the males are often naked with pronounced
genitalia. Some are armed with bows; others are
impaled by arrows, an emphasis on conflict that
carries over into historic period pictographs that
show clear antecedents in the Red Monochrome
style (41VV205, Missionary Shelter [Turpin
[1987b, 1989:Figure 18-5]).
The two largest panels in this style line the
walls of low-lying shelters, above standing pools
of water, leading Kirkland (Kirkland and
Newcomb 1967) to name it the Flooded Shelter
style. The larger inventory of smaller sites known
to date shows a clear preference for isolated, often
high, shallow overhangs with little or no cultural
debris, as though the artists were avoiding the longoccupied shelters with their ornate Pecos River
style paintings. Most of the Red Monochrome sites
are near the mouth of the Pecos River, but some
examples are found on the Devils River, as far

551

north as the mouth of the Dry Devils.
Several Red Monochrome sites, including at
least one painted in black pigment, have been defined in the Big Bend area. Lowrance (1982) attributed them to Jumano artists, citing ethnohistoric
descriptions of clothing and hairstyles that could be
artistically rendered as "buns." The Jumanos, and
their allies, the Cibolos, were placed along the Rio
Grande, from La Junta to south of modern-day Del
Rio, by seventeenth century Spanish chroniclers, so
Lowrance’s (1982) hypothesis is not without merit.
Another intrusive art style, the Bold Line
Geometrics, is less securely dated to the Late Prehistoric period because its abstract iconography
provides few temporal clues (Turpin 1986b). Design motifs are variations on straight lines and
blank spaces that are combined into nested zigzags,
herringbones, cross-hatches, and blanket patterns
(Figure 8a-b). In the latter, diamond-shaped cells
are linked, forming a spider web design that uses
blank space as a design element. Many of the geometric pictographs are associated in some way with
water, painted surrounding seeps in the shelter
walls or, in the case of Parida Cave, above interior
springs. Again, most of the sites are found near the
mouth of the Pecos River, with a few aberrant examples recorded on the Devils River and Red Bluff
Creek. The Bold Line Geometrics are most clearly
affiliated with the generic Desert Abstract styles of
northern Mexico and the American Southwest,
perhaps identifying one source of the intrusive
traits of the Lower Pecos Late Prehistoric period.
Although petroglyphs are rare in the Lower
Pecos, the largest and most famous site, Lewis

Figure 7. Forrest Kirkland’s rendition of the Red Monochrome rock art type site (41VV78), which he called the Flooded
Shelter style. Note bow and arrow, protuberances over the ears of two figures, and the realistic animals (reproduced
courtesy of the Texas Memorial Museum, University of Texas at Austin).

552

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 8. Examples of the Bold Line Geometrics style pictographs: a, nested zigzag lines (41VV 138); b, blanket pattern
(41VV 187). No scale.

Canyon (Figure 9), also shows an iconographic
shift from curvilinear designs associated with freef!oating atlatls to abstract geometrics (Turpin
1993), dominated by what Newcomb (Kirkland and
Newcomb 1967) called the line-and-circle motif.
Although difficult to date, one of the later
petroglyphs appears to be an arrow point, suggesting a Flecha period age. A series of similar but
smaller petroglyph sites are found north of Lewis
Canyon, on the Eldorado Divide, but geometric
petroglyphs are also one of the most common artistic expressions in northern Mexico.

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD,
INFIERNO PHASE
(ESTIMATED 450 TO 250 B.P.)

The Infierno phase inventory consists of less
than a score of sites characterized by circles of
paired stones that were presumably pole supports
for brush or hide-covered structures (Figure 10),
and by a tool kit that is dominated by four artifact
types: small triangular stemmed arrow points,
steeply beveled end scrapers, four-beveled knives,
and plain ceramics. The type site, Infierno Camp,
contains over 100 rings; the lesser sites have as few
as one and as many as eight stone rings. In one
!ocale, a single ring sits beside eight oblong
cairns, presumably burial mounds. The
Infierno people exhibited a distinct preference for high promontories, usually overlooking springs or semi-permanent water
holes. These locations are usually reduced
to bedrock so the chances of recovering
stratified or datable materials are greatly reduced.
Only one tipi ring has been excavated
(Turpin and Bement 1989), and it produced
no materials suitable for radiocarbon dating. The site was selected because it overlooked an early Plains Indian rock art site
that presumably dated to about 1700. Among
the surface artifacts whose ages spanned the
entire spectrum of Lower Pecos prehistory
were a plainware sherd and a Guerrero arrow point, both indicative of protohistoric
Figure 9. Texas Archeological Society volunteers clearing dirt,
or early historic occupation. It is important
and recording buried petroglyphs at Lewis Canyon (41VV223).

Turpin -- The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico

553

and temporally limited, and its
tool kit and site features clearly
distinguish it from generic Late
Prehistoric assemblages.

HISTORIC PERIOD
(350 B.P. TO PRESENT)
Technically, the historic
period began in the Lower
Pecos region in 1590 when
Gaspar Castafio de Sosa, then
Lt. Governor in Nuevo Le6n,
and a contingent of some 160
to 170 souls crossed the Rio
Grande, somewhere near
Ciudad Acuna, en route from
Figure 10. Excavated tipi ring at Live Oak Creek (41VV828). The diameter of
Villa Almaden (Monclova) to
the stone ring is approximately 2.5 meters.
the Pecos Pueblo (Hammond
and Rey 1966; Schroeder and
Matson 1965). Undoubtedly,
to note that not one of the Infierno phase single
however, the native people had already experienced
component sites has yielded a single Europeanthe repercussions of the Spanish movement north,
derived historic artifact.
if only through the ripple effect as indigineous northThe rare ceramic sherds collected from Infierno
ern Mexican groups migrated to avoid slavery and
phase sites are poorly fired, calcite-tempered
disease (Hackett 1926, 1931; Steck 1932). Castafio,
brownwares of uncertain origin. They most strongly
like the many Spaniards that followed, found little
resemble sherds of native pottery recorded at the
but hardship in the Lower Pecos region. ExpediApache mission of San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz,
tions sent to explore the Rio Grande as a prelude to
abandoned in 1771 (Tunnell and Newcomb 1969).
settlement and the establishment of viable trade
A similar sherd was recovered from the Sotol site
routes brought back such discouraging reports
in Crockett County from a stratum that dated to the
(Bolton 1908; Castafieda 1938, 1946; Daniel 1955;
range between 460 and 340 years ago, the only
Weddle 1968) that colonizing missions were abanradiocarbon date even remotely attributable to
doned, and forays across the river often became
Infierno phase materials.
largely military manuevers in retaliation for" raids
The Infierno people clearly came into the
on communities in Coahuila and Nueva Vizcaya
Lower Pecos region late in prehistory. Seventeenth
(Bolton 1962; Weddle 1968).
century Spanish documents describe native northThe closest the Spanish ever came to estabern Mexican people travelling en masse to the mouth
lishing a physical presence in the Lower Pecos reof the Pecos River for annual bison hunts, perhaps
gion was an abortive attempt to found a presidio,
recording a cyclical round that predates European
Sacramento, on the San Diego River, south of
contact. Ethnohistoric references to bison hunting
Ciudad Acuna, ira 1737. Prior to its completion, the
in and around the region suggest that the Lower
presidio was removed to the Santa Rosa valley,
Pecos was again part of the great sea of grass that
near modern-day Muzquiz. Returned to the San
characterized the American frontier (Tul-pin 1987a),
Diego site in 1773, the presidio, renamed Agua
reverting to semi-desert only after the introduction
Verde, lasted only seven years before the troops
of livestock ira the late t 880s.
were removed to San Fernando de Austria
The Infierno phase is the only archeological
(Zaragoza) in 1780 (Moorhead 1975:226).
unit in the Lower Pecos that meets Willey and
After their first experiences with the arid mounPhillips" (1958) criteria for phases. It is spatially
tainous reaches of northern Mexico. including the

554

Texas Archeological Society

Lower Pecos region, the Spanish movement north
bifurcated, heading east through the gateway mission of San Juan Bautista and west through La
Junta, the confluence of the Mexican Conchos River
and the Rio Grande. The vast intervening area became known as the despoblado, or unpopulated
zone (Daniel 1955), despite the fact that it sheltered
refugee and renegade native populations for three
centuries. Spanish government and military reports
provide an inventory of native people (Bolton 1908;
Griffen 1969; Hackett 1926), and chronicle the immense changes that took place as population movements quickened and warfare intensified. In the
late seventeenth century, the Jumanos and Cibolos
are often mentioned as allies of the Spanish in the
general area of the Lower Pecos. By 1729, indigenous people and intrusive northern Mexico groups
alike were overrun by the Apaches, who were reportedly in complete control of the Rio Grande
(Weddle 1968:200). Their supremacy was shortlived, for the Comanches and their allies, the
Kiowas, came down out of the north, forcing the
Apaches into political and military limbo in the
mountains of northern Mexico. By the turn of the
century, beset by revolution and engaged in wars
on both continents, the Spanish empire was forced
to abandon its frontier, leaving its colonial population undefended.
With the coming of Anglo-American
sovereignty in the middle of the nineteenth century,
linking east and west became a priority that
depended upon the extermination of the erstwhile
Plains Indians that controlled much of the Desert
West. Mapping expeditions were followed by stage
and mail routes; trade caravans; freighters; cattle
drovers; and mineral exploration (Turpin 1989).
Fort Clark was established in 1852, squarely athwart
one of the well-traveled Comanche traces. In 1857,
Camp Hudson was built to protect a ford of the
Devils River that later came to be called Bakers
Crossing for one of the early settlers. After a hiatus
imposed by the Civil War, the U.S. military resumed
its attempt to eradicate the Native American
presence along the Rio Grande. Comanches and
Kiowas annually rode south to raid the settled
communities of northern Mexico, causing the
Mexican govermnent to complain bitterly to
Washington. Kickapoos carried on their undeclared
war against Texans from their secure base in the
mountains near Santa Rosa (Musquiz) until 1874
when U.S. troops illegally raided their villages in a

clear case of boundary transgression. Driven from
the American side, renegade Apaches took refuge
in the vast arid reaches of the Bols6n de Mapimf,
south of the Big Bend, where they were pursued by
Mexican troops as late as t881.
The completion of the southern transcontinental railroad in 1882 opened the Lower Pecos to
markets in the east and west. Small towns sprang
up around depots at sites that later gave their names
to projectile point styles: Langtry and Shumla.
Pioneer stockmen with their herds of sheep and
cattle colonized the marginal rangeland and forever
changed the face of the countryside. The very fact
that substantial herds of cattle found sufficient graze
agrees with the ethnohistoric record of bison hunting
in and south of the Lower Pecos, suggesting that
the great sea of grass that characterized the
American Frontier once again extended to and
below the Rio Grande (Turpin 1987a). The modern
environment is a product of historic land use
exacerbated by natural phenomena, such as the
famous droughts of the 1950s and the floods of
1954 and 1974.

HISTORIC PERIOD
ARCHEOLOGY
The historic Native American period is represented archeologically by one rock shelter, reported
in the 1940s (Kirkland 1942), a few scattered metal
arrow points, and 16 rock art sites that incorporate
Euro-American elements (Figure 11) or bear strong
affinities to defined Plains Indian styles (Turpin
1989; Turpin and Davis 1993). Tipi rings found
adjacent to some of the historic pictographs may
represent the living sites of the artists, but proof
awaits more temporally diagnostic artifacts and radiocarbon assays (Turpin and Bement 1989). An
internal chronology signalled by theme, style, and
iconographic details sequences the paintings and
elucidates a trend from initial curiosity to bitter
enmity (Turpin 1989). A change in site distributional patterns, shifting from deeply entrenched
canyons to open areas near accessible water
sources, can be attributed to the demands of horse
husbandry. The overall scarcity of sites is the
legacy of a period of social unrest wherein mobility often meant survival.
The historic Euro-American period has
attracted little scholarly attention. The construction

Turpin ~ The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico

555

Figure 11. Kirkland’s copy of historic pictographs at Meyers Springs in Terrell County
(41TE9). Typical themes are the thunderbird, horned headressed figures, horses, and
weapons. The group scene in the left center shows a horse in battle armor, placing it early in
the historic period, before the development of the "finest light cavalry in the world," the
mounted Plains wan’iors. The central rider is about 20 cm in length.

of the Southern Pacific Railroad left an
archeological trail that includes abandoned tracks
and tunnels, depots, graves, and work camps with
domestic, commercial, and industrial features
(Briggs 1974; Turpin 1995). The ranching era is
poorly represented by site survey data that records
rock shelter habitations (Turpin 1987c) and a few
early ranch headquarters (Turpin 1990d).
SUMMARY

The cultural trajectory of Lower Pecos
prehistory originates in stereotypic Paleoindian big
game hunters who apparently entered the region
some 12,000 to 14,000 years ago. Based on the two
known sites of this age, the economy was oriented
toward the procurement of megafauna such as
elephant, camel, horse, and bison. The later Folsom
and Plainview hunters had apparently perfected the
jump technique of bison hunting, suggesting
organizational skills consistent with group
procurement strategies that center upon migratory
herd animals.
The extinction of the large game herds and the
onset of a trend toward aridity triggered a transition

to Archaic lifeways about 9400 years ago. The
people apparently exploited a broader resource
base, developing a reliance on plant products, both
as food and as raw material for the burgeoning fiber
industry, while retaining established lithic
traditions. The transition culminated in a robust
adaptation that gives the outward but perhaps
misleading impression of great stability for a period
of some 4000 years. Rock shelters became the
nucleus of the settlement pattern, showing
differentiated activity areas of a domestic nature.
Mortuary customs included disposal of the dead in
convenient vertical shaft caves, regardless of age
or gender.
Then, about 5500 years ago, the cultural system began a series of internal adjustments, presumably in response to an increasingly arid
environment. The end result would be the consolidation of traits into the full-blown Archaic expression that defines the Lower Pecos as a distinct
cultural entity. A model that parsimoniously explains this development was formulated by analogy
to emerging complex societies documented
ethnohistorically and archeologically in arid lands
around the world.

556

Texas Archeological Society

In this model, changes in the distribution of
essential resources, most prominently potable
water, triggered responses in the settlement pattern
and procurement strategies, leading to a disproportionate concentration of people along the major
rivers. Aridity does not imply a shortage of food,
especially if desert succulents increase at the
expense of grasslands, but gathering and
processing of thorny plant foods and small
mammals requires specialized techniques and
knowledge. The responsibility for food procurement, especially hunting and gathering in the
uplands, would have been delegated to mobile task
groups who operated from these bases on the
rivers. Diversification broadened the diet to include
labor intensive processing of a wider range of
foodstuffs, activities that took place in open camps
and rockshelters as well.
New methods of social control were mandated
by the redistribution of human populations, who
were in effect circumscribed by the availability of
water. The inevitable tensions introduced by proximity elicited a restructing of society that was accompanied by the intensification of ritual that was,
in turn, manifested by the florescence of publicly
produced mural art. A common belief system, rooted
in the principles of shamanism and expressed in
cave paintings, held sway over the area that is now
defined as the Lower Pecos cultural region. This is
the apogee of the Lower Pecos cultural trajectory:
the consolidation of an ethnic identity that trembled
on the verge of societal complexity that was never
achieved, possibly for lack of the ability to generate an adequate surplus, the necessary and sufficient condition for sedentism.
Sometime around 3000 years ago, the insular
Lower Pecos cultural persona relaxed, perhaps disrupted by the advent of new people with a different economic strategy and social structure. A mesic
interlude permitted the grasslands of the Great
Plains to expand to the Rio Grande, drawing herds
of bison and their attendant hunters. Even episodic,
perhaps seasonal, influxes of people bearing a fully
developed cultural system of their own must have
had a perceptible effect on the resident population;
at present it can only be discerned in settlement
patterns, tool types, and possibly art styles.
The return to aridity and the retreat of the
grasslands created a vacuum filled by desert-adapted
people who came north across the Rio Grande from
northern Mexico. Soon, the Lower Pecos found

affinities with Central Texas, sharing in the generalized Late Archaic lithic assemblage while perfecting its fiber industry, retaining its characteristic
burial customs, and keeping a balance between
rockshelters and open campsite occupations. Measures of population density again rise, reaching and
exceeding the heights achieved during the Middle
Archaic peak, but the processes behind the increase
are less clear.
The Late Prehistoric period experienced a cultural upheaval, including changes in settlement patterns, site types, mortuary customs, art styles, and
artifact types. Pictograph styles show affinities with
northern Mexico and the Big Bend region of Texas;
lithic tool types are shared with the rest of Texas;
and mortuary customs appear to be introduced from
the north and northwest. Clearly, people, rather than
ideas, were on the move.
Late in prehistory, one intrusive group is identified by a distinctive artifact assemblage, including small arrow points and ceramics, a preference
for promontories with sweeping views, and residences that used paired stones as pole supports for
a thatch or hide cover. The people of the Infierno
phase may be precursors to ethnohistorically described bison hunters who again seasonally congregated at the mouth of the Pecos during yet another
mesic interlude.
The Spanish found little of value in the Lower
Pecos, isolating it as part of the great uninhabitable
desert of their northern frontier; but native peoples
found refuge in the rugged terrain. Indigenous
groups were soon replaced by Apaches who, in
turn, were driven south by the Comanches. Under
American hegemony, a concerted effort to clear the
way west resulted in the extirpation of native people
by the time the second transcontinental railroad
was completed in 1882.
The recent era has been largely dominated by
an economy based on animal husbandry, illustrating one reason why a hunting and gathering lifeway
was maintained over the millenia. The most modern methods can not wrest a surplus from the
indominable landscape of the Lower Pecos region,
the effects of a century of over-grazing have further
reduced the productive capabilities of these marginal lands, and siltation is reclaiming Amistad Reservoir 50 years ahead of schedule. The economic
hope of the region has turned to commercial wildlife exploitation and ecotourism-- a return to hunting and gathering.’?

Turpin ~ The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico

REFERENCES CITED
Andrews, R. L. and J. M. Adovasio
1980 Perishable Industries from Hinds Cave, Val Verde
County, Texas. Ethnology Monographs 5. Department of Anthropology, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh.
Bement, L. C.
1986 Excavation of the Late Pleistocene Deposits of Bonfire Shelter, Val Verde County, Texas. Archeology
Series 1. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bolton, H. E.
1908

Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1705.
Barnes and Noble, New York.

1962

Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century: Studies in
Spanish Colonial History and Administration.

557

Daniel, J. M., Jr.
1955 The Advance of the Spanish Frontier and the
Desploblado. Master’s thesis, Department of History, The University of Texas at Austin.
Dering, J. P.
1979 Pollen and Plant Macrofossil Vegetation Records
Recovered from Hinds Cave, Val Verde County,
Texas. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Dibble, D. S.
1967 Excavations at Arenosa Shelter, 1965-66. MS on
file, Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Dibble, D. S. and D. Lorrain
1968 Bonfire Shelter: A Stratified Bison Kill Site, Val
Verde County, Texas. Miscellanous Papers 1. Texas
Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin.

Russell and Russell, New York.

Briggs, A. K.
1974 The Archeology of 1882 Labor Camps on the Southern Pacific Railroad, Val Verde County, Texas.
Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Gebhard, D.
1965 Prehistoric Rock Paintings of the Seminole Canyon
Area, Val Verde County, Texas. Submitted to the
National Park Service by the University of California at Santa Barbara.
Griffen, W. B.

Brown, K. M.
1991 Prehistoric Economics of Bakers Cave: A Plan for
Research. In Papers on Lower Pecos Prehistory,
edited by S. A. Turpin, pp. 87-140. Studies in Archeology 8. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bryant, V. M., Jr.
1966 Pollen Analysis: Its Environmental and Cultural
Implications for the Amistad Reservoir Area.
Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.

1969

Culture Change and Shifting Populations in Central Northern Mexico. Anthropological Papers 13.
University of Arizona, Tucson.

Hackett, C. W. (editor)
1926 Historical Documents Relating to New Mexico,
Nueva Vizcaya, and Approaches Thereto in 1772.2
Vols. Carnegie Institute of Washington, Washington, D.C.
1931

Pichardo ’s Treatise on the Limits of Louisiana and
Texas, Volume 1. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Late Full-Glacial and Postglacial Pollen Analysis of
Texas Sediments. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Hammond, G. P. and A. Rey (editors)
1966 The Rediscovery of New Mexico, 1580-1594. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Castafieda, C. E.
1938 The Mission Era, The Missions at Work, 1731-1761.
Volume III of Our Catholic Heritage in Texas, 15191936. Von Boeckmann Jones, Austin.

Hartnady, P. W.
!988 Premature Tooth Loss in the Archaic Trans-Pecos
Region of South Texas. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of Arkansas,
Fayetteville.

1969

1946

The Mission Era, the Passing of the Missions, 17621782. Volume IV of Our Catholic Heritage in Texas,
1519-1936. Von Boeckmann Jones, Austin.

Chandler, C. K., T. R. Hester, and H. J. Shafer
1994 New Data on Clay Figurines from the Lower Pecos
Area, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 65:347-353.

Hester, T. R.
1983 Late Paleo-Indian Occupations at Baker Cave,
Southwestern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 53:101-120.
Huebner, J.
1995 Stable Isotope Analysis of Bone and Soft Tissues
from Four Mummies from the Eastern Chihuahua
Desert of Texas. Paper presented at the II World
Congress on Mummy Studies, Cartagena, Colombia.

558

Texas Archeological Society

Ilger, W. A., M. Hyman, and M. W. Rowe
1994

Radiocarbon Dates for a Red Linear Style Pictograph. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
65:336-346.

Mock, S. B.
1987 The Painted Pebbles of the Lower Pecos: A Study
of Medium, Form and Content. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas
at San Antonio.

Johnson, L.
1964

The Devil’s Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at

Moorhead, M.

Amistad Reservoir, Val Verde County, Texas. Ar-

1975

cheology Series 6. Department of Anthropology,

The Presidio, Bastion of the Spanish Borderlands.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

The University of Texas at Austin.
Kirkland, F.
1942

Historic Materials from Fielder Canyon Cave. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontologi-

Parsons, M.
1986 Painted Pebbles, Style and Chronology. In Ancient
Texans’, by H. J. Sharer, pp. 180-185. Texas Monthly
Press, Austin.

cal Society 14:16-71.
Kirkland, F. and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967

Patton, P. and D. S. Dibble
1982 Archeologic and Geomorphic Evidence for the

The Rock Art of Texas Indians. University of Texas

Paleohydrolic Record of the Pecos River in West

Press, Austin.

Texas. American Journal of Science 282:97-121.

Lord, K. J.

Prewitt, E. R.

1984

1983

The Zooarcheology of Hinds Cave (41VV546).
Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology,

Remote Sensing of Archeological Remains in the
Stockton Plateau Region of Texas: An Experiment
in Site Recognition and Prediction. Master’s thesis,

Texas A&M University, College Station.

Department of Anthropology, The University of
Lowrance, M.
1982

Texas at Austin.

Rock Art of Brewster County, Texas. The Artifact
20(1-4). E1 Paso Archeological Society, E1 Paso.

Schroeder, A. H. and D. S. Matson
1965

Lundelius, E.
1984

A Colony on the Move: Gaspar Castano de Sosa’s
Journal 1590-1591. School of American Research,
Salt Lake City.

A Late Pleistocene Mammalian Fauna from Cueva
Quebrada, Val Verde County, Texas. Special Publication of the Carnegie Museum of Natural History

Schuetz, M. K.

8:456-481. Carnegie Museum of Natural History,

1956

Pittsburgh.

An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Material.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 27:129160.

Marks, M. K., J. C. Rose, and E. L. Buie
1988

Bioarcheology of Seminole Sink. In Seminole Sink:

1963

Part III. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

Excavation of a Vertical Shafi Tomb, Val Verde
County, Texas, compiled by S. A. Turpin. Memoir
22. Plains Anthropologist 33(122), Part 2:75-118.

33:131-165.
Shafer, H. J.
1975

Marmaduke, W. S.
1978

Clay Figurines from the Lower Pecos Region, Texas.
American Antiquity 40(2): 148-158.

Prehistoric Culture in Trans-Pecos Texas: An Ecological Approach. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of

An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Material:

1976

Defining the Archaic: An Example from the Lower
Pecos Region, Texas. In The Texas Archaic: A Sym-

Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

posium, edited by T. R. Hester, pp. 1-9. Special
McGregor, R.

Report 2. Center for Archaeological Research, The

1991

University of Texas at San Antonio.

Threaded and Twined Matting: A Late Introduction
to the Lower Pecos Region. In Papers on Lower

1981

The Adaptive Technology of the Prehistoric Inhab-

Pecos Prehistory, edited by S. A. Turpin, pp. 141-

itants of Southwest Texas. Plains Anthropologist

148. Studies in Archeology 8. Texas Archeological

26(92): 129-138.

Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at

1986

Ancient Texans. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.

Austin.
1992

Prehistoric Basketry of the Lower Pecos, Texas.

Shafer, H. J. and V. M. Bryant, Jr.

Monographs in World Archaeology 6. Prehistory

1977

Press, Madison, Wisconsin.

Archeological and Botanical Studies at Hinds" Cave,
Val Verde County, Texas. Special Series 1. Anthropological Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.

Turpin m The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico

Steck,
1932 Forerunners of Captain de Leon’s Expedition to
Texas, 1670-1675. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 36(!):!-28.
Stock,
1983 The Prehistoric Diet of Hinds Cave, Val Verde
County, Texas. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station.

559

Turpin, S. A. (Continued)
1990a Rock Art and Its Contribution to Hunter Gatherer
Archaeology: A Case Study from the Lower Pecos
River Region of Southwest Texas and Northern
Mexico. Journal of Field Archaeology 17(3):26328!.
1990b Speculations on the Age and Origin of the Pecos
River Style. Atnerican Indian Rock Art !6:99-122.
1990c New Perspectives on the Red Linear Style Picto-

Story, D. A. and V. M. Bryant, Jr.
1966 A Preliminary Study of the Paleoecology of the
Atnistad Reservoir Area. Report to the National

graphs of the Lower Pecos River Region. Plains
Anthropologist 35(132):375-381.

1990d Taming the Devils Country. Heritage Magazine

Science Foundation by the University of Texas at
Austin.

8(2): 16-19. Texas Historical Foundation, Austin.

1991a Time Out of Mind: The Radiocarbon Chronology of
the Lower Pecos River Region. In Papers on Lower

Tunnell, C. D. and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1969 A Lipan Apache Mission, San Lorenzo de la Santa
Cruz 1761-1777. Bulletin 14. Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin.

Pecos Prehistory, edited by S. A. Turpin, pp. 1-49.
Studies in Archeology 8. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1993

1991b Sin Nombre and E1 Fortin: Pecos River Style Picto-

graphs in Northern Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 60:267-281.

The Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Second Edition. Gulf Publishing Company, Houston.

Turpin, S. A.
1982 Seminole Canyon: The Art and the Archeology. Research Report 83. Texas ArcheologicalSurvey, The
University of Texas at Austin.
1984

The Red Linear Style Pictographs of the Lower
Pecos River Region, Texas. Plains Anthropologist
29(105):181-198.

1986a Pictographs in the Red Monochrome Style in the
Lower Pecos River Region. Bulletin of the Texas
A rcheological Society 55:123-144.
1986b Toward a Definition of a Pictograph Style: The
Lower Pecos Bold Line Geometrics. Plains Anthropologist 31(112): 153-161.
1987a Ethnohistoric Observations of Bison in the Lower
Pecos River Region: Implications for Environmental Change. Plains Anthropologist 32(118):424-429.
1987b The Vanishing Rock Art of Texas Indians. Heritage
Magazine 5(1):36-43. Texas Historical Foundation,
Austin.
1987c Be It Ever So Humble: Rock Shelter Homes of
Early Settlers. Heritage Magazine 5(3):22-23. Texas
Historical Foundation, Austin.

1988

(compiler) Seminole Sink: Excavations of a Vertical
Shaft Tomb, Val Verde County, Texas. Memoir 22.

1992a More About Mortuary Practices in the Lower Pecos
River Region of Southwest Texas. Plains Anthropologist 37(138):7-17.
1992b Sacred Holes in the Ritual Landscape of the Lower

Pecos River Region. Plains Anthropologist
37(140):275-278.
1993

Hunting Camps and Hunting Magic: Petroglyphs of
the Eldorado Divide, West Texas. North American
Archaeologist 13(4):295-316.

1994a On a Wing and a Prayer: Flight Metaphors in Pecos
River Pictographs. In Shamanism and Rock Art in
North America, edited by S. A. Turpin, pp. 73-102.
Special Publication 1. Rock Art Foundation, Inc.,
San Antonio.
1994b The Were-Cougar Theme in Pecos River Style Art
and its Implications for Traditional Archeology. In
New Light on Old Art: Recent Advances in HunterGatherer Rock Art Research, edited by D. S. Whitley
and L. L. Loendorf, pp. 75-80. Monograph 36. Institute of Archaeology, University of California, Los
Angeles.
1995

41VV540: A Railroad Era Industrial Site in Val
Verde County, Texas. Cultural Resource Program
Report 95-1. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department,
Austin.

Plains Anthropologist 33(122), Part 2.

1989

The Iconography of Contact: Spanish Influences on
the Rock Art of the Middle Rio Grande. In
Columbian Consequences, Volume 1: Archaeological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands West, edited by D. H. Thomas, pp. 277-299.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Turpin, S. A. and L. C. Bement
1989 The Live Oak Hole Complex: Plains Indian Art and
Occupation in the Lower Pecos River Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59:65-82.

560

Texas Archeological Society

Turpin, S. A. and M. W. Davis
1993

The Devils River State Natural Area: The 1989 TAS
Field School. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 61 : 1-50.

Williams Dean, G.
1978 Ethnobotany and Cultural Ecology of Prehistoric
Man in Southwest Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University,
College Station.

Turpin, S. A., M. Henneberg, and D. K. Riskind
1986

Late Archaic Mortuary Practices in the Lower Pecos

Willey, G. R. and P. Phillips

River Region, Texas. Plains Anthropologist

1958

Weddle, R. S.
1968

San Juan Bautista: Gateway to Spanish Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Method and Theory in American Archaeology. The
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

31(I 14):295-315.

Zintgraff, J. W. and S. A. Turpin
1991

Pecos River Rock Art. McPherson Publishing Company, San Antonio.

COMMENTS

Many a Slip ’Twixt Cup and Lip: Correcting Perdiz
Statistics from the Buckhollow Site Report
LeRoy Johnson

Just before the report on the Buckhollow site
(Johnson 1994) went to press, the t-scores of Table
9 were reviewed and corrected--wrongly, as it
turned out. The calculator which was used had definitely gone quite bonkers, and had outlived its usefulness. Regrettably, that fact was not discovered
until after the "revised" table was published. It thus
falls upon me to offer a proper and corrected table
since copies of the Buckhollow site report have
been disseminated far afield. The data of Table 9
are important, for they test the significance of differences between pairs of dimensional means for
collections of Perdiz arrow points from three major archeological sites: Buckhollow, Las Haciendas, and Hinojosa.
Hopefully, the interested reader will review
the new table below. The null hypothesis of no real
difference between means is everywhere rejected
(even when c~ is .06 or .07), except where an (X)
appears in the table’s right-hand margin. For the
compared Perdiz points from Buckhollow and Las
Haciendas, differences between means that are not
considered significant are for variables H (mean
maximum length) and I (mean maximum width).
For H, the difference between means is only 1.4
mm, a small cipher, indeed. For I the difference is
merely 0.8 mm. It is likely that the lack of significance in differences is real, and not due to the
effects of undersampling (see totals in Johnson
1994:Table 8).
For the compared collections from Buckhollow
and Hinojosa, all pairs of means for which tests

were figured can be said to be significantly different. However, the means for variable J (mean maximum thickness), with a difference of 0.3 mm, give
borderline results.
For the collections of Perdiz points from Las
Haciendas and Hinojosa, pairs of means are significantly different except for variable J (mean maximum thickness) and variable K (mean stem width).
Given the lack of sizeable differences in these cases
(0.1 mm for both variables), it is unlikely that the
lack of significance would be remedied much by
increasing sample sizes.
In sum, it seems that Buckhollow and Las
Haciendas Perdiz points may be virtually identical
(as measured by the means) in terms of length and
maximum width. It is also likely that Las
Haciendas and Hinojosa Perdiz points share truly
similar means for maxiumum thickness and stem
width.

REFERENCES
Blalock, H. M., Jr,
1979 Social Statistics. 2nd Edition. McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York.
Johnson, L.
1994 The Life and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk As Seen
from the Buckhollow Encampment, Site 41KM16, of
Kimble County, Texas. Report 38. Office of the
State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

562

Texas Archeological Society

Revision of Table 9 (Johnson 1994:82).
Special Student’s t-statistic (Blalock 1979:formula 13.5), Perdiz arrowheads (Buckhollow, Las
Haciendas, and Hinojosa sites), for pairs of means for metric variables, including levels of
significance (two-tailed test); (÷) identifies larger mean of pair.

Difference

Approx

Between

Degrees

Significance

Freedom

Level

Means

Variable

t-Score

H. Mean Max. Length
1.4 mm
10.6 mm
9.2 mm

.9307

30

Buckh. (+) vs. Hinoj.

2.4770

45

.40 (X)
.02

Las Hac. (+) vs. Hinoj.

7.6247

57

.001

Buckh. (+) vs. Las Hac.

I. Mean Max. Width
0.8 mm

Buckh. vs. Las Hac. (+)

-1.4242

105

.20 (X)

1.9 mm

Buckh. (+) vs. Hinoj.

2.7897

65

.01

2.7 mm

Las Hac. (+) vs. Hinoj.

4.0651

66

.001

-1.9425

82

J. Mean Max. Thickness
0.2 mm

Buckh. vs. Las Hac. (+)

.10
(~ ca..06)
.I0

-1.8550

63

-.8445

37

.50 (X)

3.5494

77

.001

0.8 mm

Buckh. (+) vs. Las Hac.
Buckh. (+) vs. Hinoj.

2.2305

55

.05

0.1 mm

Las Hac. (+) vs. Hinoj.

.4549

36

.70 (X)

0.3 mm

Buckh. vs. Hinoj. (+)

0.1 mm

Las Hac. vs. Hinoj. (+)

(ct ca..07)

K. Mean Stem Width
0.6 mm

L. Mean Stem Length
Buckh. vs. Las Hac. (+)
Buckh. (+) vs. Hinoj.

-5.6251

63

.001

2.5 mm

4.5036

75

.001

5.2 mm

Las Hac. (+) vs. Hinoj.

13.7885

64

.001

2.7 mm

O. Mean Weight
0.3 g

Buckh. (+) vs. Las Hac.

2.0793

21

.05

0.5 g

Buckh. (+) vs. Hinoj.

3.6322

26

.01

2.9869

64

.01

0.2 g

Las Hac. (+) vs. Hinoj.

REVIEWS

Disease and Demography in the Americas, edited by John W. Verano and Douglas H. Ubelaker.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C., 1992. x + 294 pp., figures and plates.
Reviewed by Maynard B. Cliff, Geo-Marine, Inc.
The papers in this volume were originally
presented in 1989 at one of a series of scholarly
symposia held as a prelude to the Seeds of Change
exhibition at the National Museum of Natural
History, Smithsonian Institution. The exhibition, a
commemoration of the Columbus Quincentenary,
was intended to examine "the processes of encounter
and exchange set in motion by the Columbus
voyages of discovery" (Herman Viola, volume
Foreword). The symposium itself was entitled
"Disease and Demography in the Americas,
Changing Patterns Before and After 1492." The
editors state in the introduction to this volume that
the symposium was designed to stimulate discussion
and communication among researchers in skeletal
biology or paleopathology and demography since,
as they put it:
Much of the demographic literature depicts preEuropean contact America as a "disease-free
paradise," while the literature in physical anthropology and paleopathology regularly documents a variety of disease conditions in ancient
America. Conversely, demographic reconstructions from ancient samples seem at odds with
standard interpretations from ethnohistory and
demography. What is fact and what is theory?
(p. 1).

According to the editors, the symposium, and
the papers in this volume that resulted from it, was
designed to stimulate discussion between the different disciplines with the hope of clarifying the
issues involved. If by this is meant a better understanding of the complexity and variability inherent
in questions of Native American health and population demography, then these goals have been
achieved. However, if one is looking for consensus
of interpretation, or a reconciliation of competing

views, it will not be found here, a fact which the
editors readily admit (cf. Becker 1994). The first
day of the symposium dealt with questions of precontact health conditions, while on the second day
the symposium shifted to the important question of
population size and related demographic issues. The
organization of the symposium is loosely reflected
in the organization of the book, with Part 1 dealing
with "Disease before and after Contact" and Part 2
with "Population Size before and after Contact."
The papers in Part 1 are based largely on
bioarcheological and paleopathological studies of
Late Prehistoric and Early Historic skeletal populations from archeological contexts. As an introduction to these studies, Donald Ortner ("Skeletal
Paleopathology: Probabilities, Possibilities, and
Impossibilities") presents an overview of the nature
of paleopathological studies, together with a discussion of their strengths and limitations. He points
out that while skeletal remains can provide data on
chronic bacterial disease conditions, acute diseases,
such as the great epidemics of the post-contact period, leave at best nonspecific and indirect evidence in a skeletal sample. In particular, he notes
that "viral diseases such as smallpox and measles
had a particularly devastating effect on Native
American populations subsequent to A.D. 1500 but
there is no clear evidence of either disease in archeological skeletal samples" (p. 5). He does note,
however, that new techniques for extracting human
immuno.globulins and even viral DNA from archeological skeletal samples may change this situation
in the near future.
The rest of the papers in this section include
reviews of data from South America, southeastern
North America, northeastern North America, the
Midwest, the Great Plains, the Southwest, and
California. As Arthur Aufderheide states in his

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

564

Texas Archeological Society

summary to this section ("Summary on Disease
before and after Contact"), all of these papers
"clearly document the presence of malnutrition,
anemia, and a variety of tuberculoid, treponematoid,
and other infections as well as trauma and
degenerative conditions" (p. 165) in the New World
prior to the arrival of Europeans. Nevertheless, the
data suggest that most Native Americans had
developed a certain level of immunity to some of
these infections, such as tuberculosis and
treponematosis, with the result that they had become
chronic illnesses or even childhood diseases (such
as smallpox had become to the Europeans of this
time). On this basis, it is clear that the "concept of
a pristine, disease-free, pre-Columbian New World
environment is no longer credible" (p. 165).
However, the radical, and even catastrophic, nature
of the change in Native American health conditions
cannot be downplayed, even in regard to conditions
which may have been chronic prior to the contact
period (for example, the resurgence of tuberculosis
among nineteenth century Native Americans on
reservations is probably related to changes in
disease environment, rather than the introduction
of new strains).
Beyond this, however, the studies in Part 1
also highlight the great degree of variability in the
health conditions of Native American populations
prior to contact, and the differences in their response to the changes brought about by the Europeans during and after contact. In some areas, such as
Andean South America, the Southeast, the Northeast, and the Plains, population morbidity (i.e., the
rate of disease in a population) was increasing during the pre-Columbian period, presumably as a result of cultural changes, such as agricultural
intensification and dietary shifts, increasing population, and increasing sedentism, with accompanying side effects. Conditions such as these would
only have been made worse by the new, contactrelated changes. Stodder and Martin ("Health and
Disease in the Southwest before and after Contact") show that in other areas, such as the Southwest, isolated populations either postponed, or
escaped entirely, the infectious epidemics suffered
by their less fortunate neighbors. In his study of
several contemporary populations, Milner ("Disease and Sociopolitical Systems in Late Prehistoric
Illinois") shows that substantial differences in aboriginal health conditions enabled certain groups in
the Midwest to cope with new infections better

than others. Larsen and his colleagues ("Population
Decline and Extinction in La Florida") document
the rather rapid extinction of aboriginal social
groups in the Southeast. Owsley’s data
("Demography of Prehistoric and Early Historic
Northern Plains Populations") for the Northern
Plains indicates at least two waves of high mortality during the e~ly contact period, with some groups
(such as the Arikara) surviving to prosper, and succumbing to infectious disease and social disruption
only later. In Aufderheide’s words, all of these studies "clearly demonstrate the peril of extrapolating
isolated observations of disease-related demographic changes to the population of an entire region or even a continent" (pp. 165-166).
The papers in Part 2 rely largely on
ethnohistofical and historical data to examine the
question of how and why Native American population sizes changed as a result of European contact.
Ubelaker ("North American Indian Population Size:
Changing Perspectives") opens this section with a
review of previous attempts to estimate the aboriginal population of the New World prior to 1500,
along with a discussion of the methodologies used
by various researchers. In the summary to this section, Alfred W. Crosby ("Summary on Population
Size before and after Contact") notes that such estimates have ranged from a low of 8.4 million for the
total population of this hemisphere in 1492 (Kroeber
t939) to a high of 90-112 million (Dobyns 1983).
Ubelaker observes that his own most recent estimate for North America, based on figures prepared
for the Handbook of North American Indians
(Sturtevant 1978-), more than doubles Kroeber’s
estinaate but falls far short of Dobyns’.
Most of the rest of the papers in this part are
"case studies" which focus on aspects of the
demographic histories of specific areas, including:
lowland South America, highland South America,
the Caribbean, northern Mexico, southeastern North
America, northeastern North America, the Great
Plains, the Southwest, and the Northwest Coast of
North America. Once again, as was found in the
first set of papers, the view that emerges from all of
these regional studies is that although Native
American populations declined everywhere after
contact (sometimes catasrophically), the details of
decline differed enormously across space and
through time. As Crosby puts it, "there is no doubt
that the Euro- and Afro-Americans carried diseases
deadly to Indians, but said diseases did not rain

Reviews

down uniformly and all at once on all the original
peoples of the New World" (p. 278).
In the case of Amazonia, Meggers ("Prehistoric Population Density in the Amazon Basin")
compares archeological and ethnohistorical data and
concludes that early eyewitness estimates of high
population density are unreliable, and that the postcontact population decline which occurred there
(while severe) was less than has been previously
suggested. In other areas, where the natural and
cultural environment did allow large and dense precontact populations (such as Andean South
America, the Southwest, and the Caribbean), postcontact losses were far more severe and catastrophic.
The studies by Ubelaker, Snow ("Disease and Population Decline in the Northeast"), Trimble ("The
1832 Inoculation Program on the Missouri River"),
and Thornton ("Depopulation in the Southeast after
1492") show that even within limited regions, population histories were not uniform.
Disease-waves and their accompanying demographic declines occurred unevenly, at different
times to different groups, and affected groups differently. Boyd’s ("Population Decline from Two
Epidemics on the Northwest Coast") study of two
epidemic cases on the Northwest Coast show this
clearly. He contrasts the catastrophic Native
American population decline (approximately 87
percent) in the Lower Columbia drainage due to the
apparent presence of malaria after 1830, with the
effect of the 1862-1863 smallpox epidemic on the
Queen Charlotte Islands Haida (a nearly 60 percent
decline). In the former case, he notes that "socially,
after 1841, most Chinookan and Kalapuyan populations [of the Lower Columbia area] were approaching extinction as viable and ethnically
distinct entities" (p. 251). In contrast, the Haida
"regrouped and persisted in a few, fair-sized settlements" (p. 252), and have steadily recovered during the present century. Boyd concludes from these
cases that the effect which a newly introduced disease may have on a "virgin population" (i.e., one
not previously exposed to that infection and which
has no immunity to it) is strongly related to the type
of disease (whether its effects are deliberate and
cumulative, or sudden and discrete), and to cultural
practices (such as indigenous health care systems
and the ability of social systems to readjust after
severe perturbations).
In addition to the regional studies, Dobyns
("Native American Trade Centers as Contagious

565

Foci") contributes a pan-regional overview of the
potential role that trading centers played as loci for
the introduction and spread of new infectious diseases. Drawing on examples from the Great Plains
(the Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara), the Southwest
(Pecos, the Northern Panya, and Pueblo de los
Jumanos), the Southeast (the Eno and the
Ocaneechi), and the Northeast (the Wenro, Neutral,
and Huron), Dobyns argues that Native Americans
who were involved in trade, or resident at such
trading centers, were exposed to imported diseases
earlier and probably suffered more severe effects
from such diseases. The severity of these effects,
Dobyns feels, is reflected in the fact that in all cases
Native American "merchants abandoned hitherto
prosperous trading centers a year or so after a final
demoralizing epidemic disease episode" (p. 220).
Despite the lack of a single theoretical theme
or viewpoint to this book, as well as the fact that a
true consensus has yet to emerge regarding
questions of disease and demography raised by
these papers, the volume offers valuable insights
to anyone interested in the problems of Native
American disease and population decline. It is truly
interdisciplinary in that the papers draw on data
from archeology, paleopathology, ethnohistory,
and history. Although the focus is generally on
North America, it does provide some comparative
data regarding the population history of South
America, Mexico, and the Caribbean. All of the
individual papers are relatively short and can be
read or reread rapidly and, except for the
introduction and summaries by Ubelaker, Verano,
Aufderheide, and Crosby, each paper stands alone.
In addition, each paper is accompanied by its own
bibliography which allows the interested researcher
to seek out other references on particular topics or
areas without a great deal of effort. Likewise, the
book has an eight page index which also increases
its utility as a research tool. This volume will
certainly stand as an important resource for both
the interested lay-reader and the professional alike
for a long time to come.

REFERENCES
Becker, M. J.
1994

Review of Disease and Demography in the Americas, edited by J. W. Verano and D. H. Ubelaker.
American Antiquity 59(2):383-384.

566

Texas Archeological Society

Dobyns, H. F.

Sturtevant, W. C. (editor)

1983

1978- Handbook of North American Indians. 20 Vols.

Their" Number Became Thinned: Native American
Population Dynamics in Eastern North America.
University of Tennessee Press, Knoxville.

Kroeber, A. L.
1939

Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North
America. Publications in American Archaeology and
Ethnology 38:1-242. University of California, Berkeley.

Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

AUTHORS

Michael R. Bever, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas
Stephen L. Black, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin
Douglas K. Boyd, Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin
Maynard B. Cliff, Geo-Marine, Inc., Piano
Michael B. Collins, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin
G. Lain Ellis, Texas Historical Commission, Austin
Linda Wootan Ellis, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin
Ross C. Fields, Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin
Charles D. Frederick, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin
Thomas R. Hester, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Vance T. Holliday, Department of Geography, University of Wisconsin, Madison
Edward B. Jelks, Normal, Illinois
Eileen Johnson, Lubbock Lake Landmark, Museum of Texas Tech University, Lubbock
LeRoy Johnson, Texas Historical Commission, Austin
Christopher Lintz, TRC Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin
David J. Meltzer, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas
Myles Miller, Directorate of Environment, Headquarters, U.S. Army Air Defense Artillery Center
and Fort Bliss, Fort Bliss
Leland W. Patterson, Houston
Timothy K. Perttula, Texas Historical Commission, Austin
Elton R. Prewitt, Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin
Daniel J. Prikryl, Texas Water Development Board, Austin
Robert A. Ricklis, Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc., Corpus Christi
Solveig A. Turpin, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66 (1995)

