A Cultural Resources Background Review of
the Catarina Oil Storage Facility SPCC FRC
in Dimmit and La Salle Counties, Texas

Prepared for Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd.
San Antonio, Texas
by
David L. Nickels, Principal Investigator
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations
March 2012

Introduction
Flatrock Engineering and Environmental,
Ltd., requested a cultural resources
background review of the Catarina Oil
Storage Facility SPCC FRC in Dimmit and
La Salle counties, hereinafter occasionally
referred to as the Project Area (PA) (Figure
1). In March 2012, Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological Investigations (TAAI)
conducted a review of cultural resources
documented either on, or within one mile of
the PA, as well as other documents that
may be relative for significant cultural
resources to exist within the PA.

Figure 1. Location of Dimmit and La Salle counties
and the PA in Texas.

Dimmit County Prehistory and History
Indian artifacts found in Dimmit County indicate that the area has been occupied for about 11,000
years. Plentiful food sources such as wild game, fruits, seeds, and roots made the land hospitable.
Early technology included tools from wood and stone, woven basketry, sewed rabbitskin robes, and
a very effective weapon was the atlatl, a throwing stick that greatly increased the deadliness of their
spears (Hester 1984; Leffler 1996). Perhaps as early as 1,300 years ago, they learned to make pottery
and to hunt with bows and arrows. “During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the
Coahuiltecan Indians native to Dimmit County were squeezed out by other Indian who were
migrating into the area and by the Spanish, who were moving up from the south. Many of the
Coahuiltecans were taken to San Juan Bautista in Coahuila. Apaches and Comanches moved in to
take their place” (Leffler 1996).
“No permanent Spanish settlement seems to have been established in the future Dimmit County.
Beginning in the late 1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio
Road, a camino real, to and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. After the Mexican War of
Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage its citizens to settle in Texas.
Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and 1834 that included territory now in
Dimmit County. None of the recipients seems to have made use of the land, however. By 1836, when
Texas became independent from Mexico, the area remained populated almost solely by Indians”
(Leffler 1996).

1

Between the Texas Revolution and the Mexican War (1836–46), most of Dimmit County lay in the
disputed area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River, and it became a haven for desperate
characters until about 1865. Carrizo Springs was founded in 1865, with the new settlers who lived
in jacals or dugouts frequently being harrassed by hostile Indians and outlaws. Due in part to being
pursued by the Texas Rangers, and being decimated by disease, the Indians were forced to leave
Dimmit County by 1877, and in 1880 Carrizo Springs became the county seat for the newly formed
county. By 1880, cattle ranching was firmly established, and although sheep ranching was also an
important part of the economy at the time, by 1900 extended droughts and an increase in predators
combined to make sheep ranching a tough and dwindling business (Leffler 1996).
Although the residents of Dimmit County learned to cope with the sparse annual rainfall, artesian
wells ushered in an era of large vegetable truck farms in the 1890s, and Dimmit County became
known as part of the Texas Winter Garden Region, one of the most prolific vegetable-growing areas
in the country.
As with rest of the nation, the Great Depression many of the county’s farmers were forced to cut
back their once-lucrative vegetable production during the depression, and fell back on raising poultry,
hogs, and dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in the county in the
1950s certainly bolstered Dimmit County’s economy, and although large ranches lay claim to most
of the land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much a progressively increasing part
of the county’s development (Leffler 1996). in peanuts, beef cattle, vegetables, (mainly Irish potatoes
and spinach), cotton, and hogs (Ochoa 2012).

La Salle County Prehistory and History
Indian artifacts found in La Salle County indicate that the area has been occupied for about 11,000
years. Plentiful food sources such as wild game, fruits, seeds, and roots made the land hospitable.
Early technology included tools from wood and stone, woven basketry, sewed rabbitskin robes, and
a very effective weapon was the atlatl, a throwing stick that greatly increased the deadliness of their
spears (Leffler 1996). Perhaps as early as 1,300 years ago, they learned to make pottery and to hunt
with bows and arrows. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Coahuiltecan Indians
native to La Salle County were squeezed out by other Indians who were migrating into the area and
by the Spanish, who were moving up from the south. Many of the Coahuiltecans were taken to San
Juan Bautista in Coahuila. Apaches and Comanches moved in to take their place (Leffler 1996).
The earliest historic accounts of Native Americans in south Texas and perhaps the La Salle County
area, are those of Cabeza de Vaca. In the 1500s, Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts
of southeast and south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the huntergatherers of Texas and northern Mexico (e.g., Covey 1961). His account of his experiences in
1533–34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves to the easily
exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter, and summer, occasionally sending a hunting party
onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near each other in the
semiarid environs of south Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other succulents (Campbell and
2

Campbell 1981:13–37).
By the 1540s and 1550s, Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico with
thousands of cattle, and using Native Americans as slave labor. This encroachment by the Spanish
forced Native American groups from northern Mexico to flee into south Texas. Beginning in the late
1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio Road, a camino real, to
and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. In the 1700s and 1800s, there are documented accounts
of Spanish entradas passing through the area, but none have been noted to establish any sort of
permanent bases in present-day La Salle County (Chipman 1992)
After the Mexican War of Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage its
citizens to settle in Texas. Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and 1834 that
included territory now in La Salle County. None of the recipients seem to have made use of the land,
however. By 1836, when Texas became independent from Mexico, the area remained populated
almost solely by Indians (Leffler 1996).
Between the Texas Revolution and the Mexican War (1836–46), most of La Salle County lay in the
disputed area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River, and it became a haven for desperate
characters until about 1865. New settlers who lived in jacals or dugouts were frequently being
harassed by hostile Indians and outlaws. Due in part to being pursued by the Texas Rangers, and
otherwise being decimated by disease, the Indians were forced to leave La Salle County by 1877. By
1880, cattle ranching was firmly established, and although sheep ranching was also an important part
of the economy at the time, by 1900 extended droughts and an increase in predators combined to
make sheep ranching a tough and dwindling business (Leffler 1996).
As with rest of the nation, during the Great Depression many of the county’s farmers were forced to
cut back their once-lucrative vegetable production, and they fell back on raising poultry, hogs, and
dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in the county in the 1950s
certainly bolstered La Salle County’s economy, and although large ranches lay claim to most of the
land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much a progressively increasing part of the
county’s development (Leffler 1996).

Site Types That Could be Expected Within the Project Area

Prehistoric Open Campsites
Most numerous among the sites recorded in Dimmit and La Salle County are prehistoric open
campsites ranging in age from the Paleoindian period through the Historic period. Some of these
represent a single campfire where a very small group of Native Americans may have camped for one
night. Others are very large, covering very extensive areas representing large groups of people that
stayed for long periods, perhaps seasonally, with ancestral groups returning to these same campsites
over a period of several thousands of years. Cultural remains to be found at these large campsites
3

include among other items, an abundance of fire-cracked rocks representing multiple hearths, a wide
variety of chipped stone tools and the lithic debris that results from making them, ground and
smoothed stones used to grind nuts and seeds, faunal remains from terrestrial and aquatic animals
consumed, bone tools, pottery sherds, and mussel and snail shells. Open campsites occur in all types
of environments, whether that be in a plush riverine environment that offered a wide variety banquet
of plant and animal foodstuffs, or in the uplands away from flowing water sources. Seasonally, the
upland grasses, shrubs, and cacti offered a different food source that could be exploited such as
various grass seeds, mesquite beans, prickly pear pads and tunas, and agave hearts. In addition, at
various times, bison were known to graze on the northern South Texas Plains, and were highly sought
after for use as food, hides, and bone tools (Dillehay 1974).
Depending upon the integrity of these open campsites, archaeologists and the Texas Historical
Commission consider these as perhaps the most significant types of sites in regard to their ability to
contribute to our understanding of south Texas prehistory. A few of the desired ingredients that can
indicate significance include cultural material that is buried beneath the surface in a well-preserved,
stratified, and relatively undisturbed context. Although these situations most frequently occur within
stratified terrace deposits adjacent to streams, they can also occur in upland settings where the
landscape has been generally stable through time. Other ingredients that archaeologists look for in
potentially significant campsites include good organic preservation in the form of charcoal and/or
charred plant remains, faunal preservation, temporally diagnostic stone tools or ceramics, and intact
features such as hearths.
Prehistoric Lithic Scatters or Procurement Sites
Lithic scatters are the next most common type of archaeological site that could be expected along the
PA. These sites simply represent the chipped stone debris and broken tools that were left behind when
Native Americans made new tools or re-sharpened their old ones. The general absence of fire-cracked
rocks and other cultural material normally found at open campsites suggest that they did not camp
there, or remain there for any extended period of time ( However, small camp fires may have been
used to heat-treat chert or quartzite cobbles to make them more knappable). Yet, they were drawn
to these isolated locales because of the natural outcroppings or surface exposures of good quality raw
material such as chert or quartzite cobbles. Examples of chipped stone most commonly found at these
sites include cobbles with one or two flakes removed, called ‘tested cobbles’. That is, the Native
Americans knew from experience the quality of stone that could most easily be flaked and reduced
for stone tool production, so they ‘tested’ the cobble to judge whether it was usable or not. If the
quality was judged to be inferior, then the cobble was tossed aside. That is why the majority of tested
cobbles found on these sites are of poor quality, coarse-grained material. While the finished stone tool
products are carried away from these sites, what remains are those tools broken during the
manufacturing process, and the thousands of pieces of debitage in the form of flakes and angular
debris. Also unique to lithic scatters where large cobbles are present are snapped ‘quarry blanks’.
These are simply cobbles flakes on both sides, reducing the cobble into a transportable ‘blank’ that
can be used to further reduce it and make finished stone tools from the flakes taken off of it. The
unbroken quarry blanks are usually not found on these sites because they have been carried off,
presumably to areas of south Texas where raw material is not readily available. The snapped or
broken quarry blanks are of little or no use, so they are discarded and left behind.
4

Lithic scatters range in age from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods and can be found on
any landscape setting where gravels or cobbles have been exposed. Notably, gravel outcrops that
were exposed to the surface a few hundred or thousand years ago could be deeply buried today, and
the opposite could also be true; it all depends on the terrain setting and the dynamics of landscape
evolution through time. Most lithic scatters in Dimmit and La Salle counties have been documented
along upper stream terraces abutting the eroded upland slopes.
Prehistoric Quarries
Prehistoric quarries also can range in age from the Paleoindian through Historic periods, but differ
from lithic scatters in that at those sites Native Americans exploited loose gravels. But at times they
specifically sought quarry sites where raw material such as cherts or quartzites were not yet freed
from their parent geologic formation, and they had to be ‘quarried’. These types of sites are rare in
south Texas for two reasons: 1) the geological exposures generally do not present themselves, and
2) throughout Texas, even in central Texas, it is much easier to pick up gravels from the surface than
to try to mine them from hard rock. Quarried and chipped stone remains likely to be found at these
sites include large chunks of angular cherts or quartzites, as well as parent material detritus, and
flaking debris. Snapped quarry blanks can also be expected. Although a handful of prehistoric quarries
or procurement sites have been recorded in south Texas, they are rare.
Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens
There are no documented burned rock middens in either Dimmit or La Salle County. Burned rock
middens result from a series of multiple-use earth ovens that were constructed much like modern-day
roasting pits are dug into the earth for roasting a pig. With repetitive uses, as the larger rocks that
serve as heating elements in the earthen pit fracture and thus become less effective as a thermal
source, they are ‘pitched out’ around the edge of the pit. As the pit becomes unusable, another is dug
near by, and the procedure repeated. Over time, these multiple pits and the ‘pitched out’ fire-cracked
rocks coalesce together, obscuring each pit as indiscernible. (For a full discussion of the formation
of burned rock middens and their documented presence in Texas, see Leach and Bousman 2001;
Leach et al. 2001; Mauldin et al. 2003).
Prehistoric Burial and Cemetery Sites
Although not common, isolated prehistoric burials and cemeteries have been documented in south
Texas. Individual and isolated burials have been found in association with open campsites in both
upland settings as well as in alluvial terraces along streams, but the largest prehistoric cemetery found
in proximity to the PA is 41LK28, in Live Oak County.
Historic Sites
Although Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico by the mid-16th
century, and Spanish entradas began penetrating south Texas in the 1700s and 1800s, there is no
record of any sort of permanent structures in the area during those periods (Chipman 1992). The area
was generally not considered safe for settlement by whites until after the Civil War in 1865, and white
settlers then began establishing smaller ranches and farmlands.

5

Because of the vastness of the landscape and the relatively late settlement and development of south
Texas compared to east and central Texas and northern Mexico, historic sites are not abundant, but
they certainly do exist. The most common types to be encountered are related to ranching and
farming endeavors, or small communities from the 19th and 20th centuries. Site types most commonly
include farmsteads or ranches with corrals, cisterns, chimney and foundation remains from both main
houses and outbuildings, related trash dumps, an occasional family burial or cemetery, school houses,
churches, community buildings, and industry-related structures or construction projects. In general,
the in historic times the land has predominantly been used as ranchland pasture, with no development
other than associated ranching activities such as windmills, stock tanks, corrals, and sparsely scattered
outbuildings.

Cultural Resources Background Review

The research by TAAI included:
1) A review of the most current literature documenting the prehistory and history of the immediate
area
2) A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas to identify what
cultural resource surveys have been conducted, and what archaeological sites have been documented
within one mile of the project area
3) A search of various websites that offer old maps of the PA
4) A literature review of both published and unpublished reports and manuscripts that describe the
types of archaeological sites that have been documented, and thus provide insight as to the types of
sites that may be expected either in the PA, or immediately adjacent to it
5) A review of a local soils map in order to evaluate the potential for intact and buried cultural
materials either within or immediately adjacent to the PA.

Archaeological Atlas Site Results
Dimmit County Sites
Other than early work done by A. T. Jackson in 1932, perhaps the earliest systematic archaeological
survey in Dimmit County was conducted by members of the Carrizo Springs High School
Archeological Society in 1964 and 1965. Their work resulted in the documentation of 24
archaeological sites in the county, ranging in age from the Early Archaic through the Late Prehistoric
Toyah phase (Nunley and Hester 1966).
6

However, other surveys in the county since that time have resulted in a total of 153 archaeological
sites being documented in the county as of February 1, 2012. Of these, 99 are prehistoric open
campsites ranging in age from the Paleoindian through Late Prehistoric periods. Prehistoric burials
have been discovered at four of these campsites. Prehistoric lithic scatters and lithic procurement sites
account for 50 of those documented. Historic sites documented in the county include houses from
the 1800s built of stone (one with a cowboy burial), farmstead operations, and a railroad berm from
the 1800s. Other sites of interest include a carved Indian petroglyph, and other petroglyphs near
Campo de los Cuervos. The only designated State Archaeological landmark in the county is the
Dimmit County Courthouse (Atlas 2012).
La Salle County Sites
There are only 99 archaeological sites recorded within La Salle County, ranging in age from the
Paleoindian through the Historic periods. Of the 99 sites, 54 are prehistoric open campsites, and 45
are prehistoric lithic scatters. Historic components on these same prehistoric sites include historic
windmills and areas scattered glass and ceramic sherds, or in some cases there are large trash dumps.
One unique historic site is Fort Ewell (41LS19), an adobe structure located on the old Laredo to San
Antonio Road, and that served the U.S. Army from 1852-1854. The only State Archaeological
Landmark (SAL) recorded in La Salle County is the County Courthouse in Cotulla.
Archaeological Sites Within the Project Area
According to the Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites (Atlas 2012), no archaeological sites have been
documented within the PA. However, based upon the results of those surveys that have been
conducted in both Frio and La Salle counties, the absence of known sites within the PA is most
probably a lack of cultural surveys rather than the absence of archaeological sites.
The types of sites that can be expected within the PA has already been discussed above. Based upon
previous large-scale surveys in Dimmit and La Salle counties, a predictability model based upon
terrain type, streams and springs (to include currently flowing, intermittent, and active in prehistoric
times), geological formations, and soil types suggests that there is a high probability that deeply
buried, intact, and potentially significant prehistoric archaeological sites within the PA. The density
of sites is not surprising, as the area has been occupied to some extent for over 11,000 years. As the
paleoenvironment periodically shifted from hot and xeric to cool and moist, so too did the amount
of rainfall affecting stream flow and spring eruptions, erosion rates, areas of stable landscapes upon
which to camp, exposures or covering of gravels for making stone tools, vegetation, and game animal
diversity. All these factors influenced how prehistoric hunter-gatherers adapted and utilized the
landscape. By implication then, we may discover archaeological sites of a certain time period more
focused in certain discrete locales within the PA during other times periods.
Almost assuredly, a high percentage of these sites will be open campsites. As discussed above, they
will be manifested by the remains of hearth features, possible structures, both chipped and ground
stone tools, possibly faunal material, charcoal, charred plant remains, and pottery sherds. Next in
terms of site density will in all probability be lithic procurement sites and lithic scatters. These are
most commonly found in association with gravels eroding from cutbanks or upon the numerous high
7

ridges in the area. Other more rare prehistoric site types that can be expected include petroglyph
carvings, rockhelters, and burned rock middens, particularly closer to the more deeply incised valleys
associated with sandstone outcroppings.
Geology
An overlay of the PA on a geology map is shown in Figure 2. El Pico clay (Eep), Laredo Formation
(EL), Quaternary Alluvium (QAL), and Quaternary Terrace Deposits (Qt) are alluvial deposits, Late
Pleistocene to Eocene in age, but capable of relict stable landscapes that have the potential to
encapsulate deeply buried, well preserved, and stratified human occupation zones (the potential for
preservation of human occupations will be further discussed in the “Soils” section, below). In
addition, they contain both igneous and sedimentary rocks ideal for manufacturing stone tools and
used as heating elements in ancient hearth features (Barnes 1976). As such, this area is considered
to be a high probability area for discovering significant archaeological sites.

Figure 2. Project Area overlain on a geology map.

8

Soils
As Michael Collins states, “A site with stratified archeological and geological layers is referred to in
French as a gizemont...” “Gizemonts can form in caves, rockshelters, dunes, or any area of natural,
low-energy deposition. As a pracical manner, ... most gisemonts have formed in the alluvium of stream
valleys” (Collins 1995:374). Quite simply, a gizemont implies a well-stratified cultural component
(layer) sandwiched within a clearly defined, well-stratified and undisturbed geological, soil horizon.
It is from this basic concept that archaeologists begin to define what may be a highly significant site
compared to a surface site where there is an abundance of ‘really fine and collectible artifacts’, but
either on a heavily eroded surface or within turbated soils. By the very nature of the erosional
dynamics in south Texas, the most common archaeological sites occur on eroded surfaces where the
once in situ soils are either nonexistent, or are very shallow. In this case, repeated occupations on
these sites produce hundreds if not thousands of artifacts that are very attractive to collectors, but of
minimal research significance to the professional archaeologist. That is because the artifacts resulting
from repeated occupations become mixed both vertically and horizontally as the soils are eroded away.
Over time this creates what is called a ‘palimpsest” of occupations, where the remains of one
occupation collapse onto the one below it, and when this occurs in a continuum, there is no feasible
way to sort out which artifacts can be attributed to which occupation.
This same mixing of artifacts and occupations can also occur below the surface. This phenomena has
been most succinctly presented by myself and others in 1997. We present multiple scenarios for both
artifact accumulations as well as soils deposition and disturbance processes, and thus define the
geological contexts in which archaeologists can expect to uncover potentially significant sites versus
disturbed, and potentially non-significant sites. The following is from Houk, Bousman, Nickels, and
Tomka (1997:103-106).
“A great deal of recent literature discusses the formation processes involved in the creation of
archaeological sites and the post-depositional processes that disturb the context of materials on
archaeological sites (Waters 1992). These discussions are usually organized along process dimensions
(for good reasons), but another manner of organizing these discussions is by the results produced by
the various processes. Below is a brief discussion of the end-products created by various geologic
(deposition and erosion), pedeogenic (shrinking, swelling, and cracking) and biologic (burrowing, tree
fall) processes in terms of archaeological sites, features, and artifacts. The various end-products can
be grouped by primary and secondary contexts. It is entirely possible that individual sites will represent
multiple types of context expressed horizontally and vertically, and in various combinations”.
Primary Geological Contexts (Figure 3) include:
Good Geological Context - Archaeological materials are discarded in a geological context that covers
the materials in a geological context that covers the materials by low energy deposits which do not
move artifacts or materials in any appreciable manner. In some settings archaeological occupations or
components are separated by sterile deposits.

9

Good Surface Context - Archaeological materials (artifacts and features) from a single component are
discarded on a stable surface. These materials undergo little horizontal or vertical movement, with little
or no mixing with materials from other occupations or components.
Compressed Stratigraphy - Archaeological materials are discarded in very slowly accumulating
deposits, but in correct stratigraphic order, although the physical separation is noticeably less than
occurs in other sites with good geological contexts.
Surface Palimpsest - Artifacts and/or features from multiple occupations are discarded on a stable
surface (bedrock), and these materials are intermingled on this surface.
Secondary Geological Contexts (Figure 4) include:
Turbated Palimpsest - Archaeological materials are discarded on a stable surface, however pedogeological processes and biological activity below and on that surface move artifacts at various rates
in multiple directions.
Lag Palimpsest - Archaeological materials discarded in an accumulating depositional environment but
later usually either by wind or water erosion, artifacts from different occupations or components are
intermingled on erosional surfaces.
Mixed Context - Archaeological materials are discarded in an accumulating depositional environment,
but later, through rodent burrowing, tree falls, or other forms of bioturbation or soils processes,
materials are vertically mixed.
Redeposited Context - Archaeological deposits dicarded in an accumulating depositional environment
or on a stable surface, but by wind or water erosion, artifacts are transported and then redeposited in
another sedimentary unit.
Reversed Stratigraphy - Archaeological materials discarded in an accumulating depositional
environment or on a stable surface but later, either by wind or water erosion, artifacts are redeposited
in another sedimentary unit and in reversed chronological order. Reversed stratigraphy is then a subset
of materials in redeposited contexts.

10

Figure 3. Illustrations of primary/good geological contexts and implied potential for
significant archaeological deposits; A,B,C,D represent archaeological
events/occupations (adapted from Houk et al. 1997).

11

Figure 4. Illustrations of secondary/poor geological contexts and implied potential for
archaeological deposits (A,B,C,D represent archaeological events/occupations);
adapted from Houk et al. 1997.

12

In sum, soils are merely one indicator of the site types and density that can be expected across the PA.
However, a desktop review of the soil types and their proximity to streams, steeply sloping or broad
upland terrain, can be closely correlated with the scientific research potential in any given area. In that
regard, we present the soils maps for each of the five segments within the PA in Figures 5-8. The
potential significance is based upon the soils’ positioning on the landscape, the stratigraphy of each
soil type as described in local soils publications, and the potential for these soils to contain stratified
archaeological deposits before they migrate to an impenetrable underlying clay or bedrock of prePleistocene age.

Figure 5. Segment 1 soils map of the PA; high probability areas for significant archaeological sites
to exist are hatchmarked.

13

Figure 6. Segment 2 soils map of the PA; high probability areas for significant
archaeological sites to exist are hatchmarked.

Figure 7. Segment 3 soils map of the PA; high probability areas for significant
archaeological sites to exist are hatchmarked.
14

Figure 8. Segment 4 soils map of the PA; high probability areas for significant
archaeological sites to exist are hatchmarked.

Not surprisingly, terrain features can be correlated with soils and landscape evolution. That is, the
topography we see today is the product of once stable surfaces being eroded and molded though
erosion processes, or otherwise covered with gently aggrading and flood terrace deposits. By
implication then, there is a probability that those prehistoric stable surfaces could have been occupied
by Native Americans, and if evidence of their presence has not been eroded away, the evidence is
potentially well preserved in these deep soils. Accordingly, the high probability areas for significant
archaeological sites to exist as identified by hatchmarks in Figures 5-8 are further identified with
hatchmarks on topographic maps (Figures 9-12).

15

Figure 9. Segment 1 topographic map of the PA; high probability areas for
significant archaeological sites to exist are hatchmarked.

Figure 10. Segment 2 topographic map of the PA; high probability areas for
significant archaeological sites to exist are hatchmarked.
16

Figure 11. Segment 3 topographic map of the PA; high probability areas for
significant archaeological sites to exist are hatchmarked.

Figure 12. Segment 4 topographic map of the PA; high probability areas for
significant archaeological sites to exist are hatchmarked.
17

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations

As discussed above, there is a strong argument that potentially significant archaeological sites within
the Project Area would be negatively impacted by an oil spill. Negative impacts include the following:
1) The gently buried archaeological sites that have remained encapsulated for millennia in well
stratified gizements could be destroyed overnight if these sensitive areas are used as staging areas for
heavy equipment, or as storage yards for disaster preparedness and prevention sites
2) Of equal significance is the negative impact that involves the organic intrusion of oil that would
skew any attempt at dating prehistoric cultural materials such as charcoal from ancient hearths, faunal
remains, mussel shells, snail shells, and residue from fire-cracked rocks and ceramic vessels.
Accordingly, Tierras Antiguas recommends that in the event of a disaster, those areas identified with
hatchmarks in Figures 5-12 be protected. In this case, the areas identified as high probability for
significant archaeological sites to be extant (hatchmarked areas) totals 4,359.3 acres.

18

References Cited

Atlas
2012

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
February 29, 2012].

Barnes, V. E.
1976 Geologic Atlas of Texas: Crystal City-Eagle Pass Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern Texas.
Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Collins, M. B.
1995 Forty Years of Archaeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361–400.
Covey, C. (editor)
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier Books,
New York.
Dillehay, T.
1974

Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19(64):180–196.

Houk, B. A., C. B. Bousman, D. L. Nickels, and S. D. Tomka
1997 Chapter 6: Analysis and Research Issues. In Phase II Archaeological Investigations
at Lackland Air Force Base, San Antonio, Texas, pp. 103-146. Archaeological Survey
Report, No. 264, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at san
Antonio,
Leach, J. D., and C. B. Bousman
2001 Cultural and Secondary Formation Processes: On the Dynamic Accumulation of
Burned Rock Middens, Chapter 7. In Test Excavations at the Culebra Creek Site,
41BX126, San Antonio, Texas by D. L. Nickels, C. B. Bousman, J. D. Leach, and D.
A. Cargill, pp. 119-145. Archaeological Survey Report, No. 265, Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio and Archeological
19

Studies, Report 3, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of
Transportation, Austin.
Leach, J. D., D. L. Nickels, B. K. Moses, and R. Jones
2001 Appendix D. Estimating Rates of Burned Rock Discard: Results from an Experimental
Earth Oven. In Test Excavations at the Culebra Creek Site, 41BX126, San Antonio,
Texas by D. L. Nickels, C. B. Bousman, J. D. Leach, and D. A. Cargill, pp. 119-145.
Archaeological Survey Report, No. 265, Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio and Archeological Studies, Report 3,
Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.
Leffler, J.
1996

La Salle County. The New Handbook of Texas Online.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Mauldin, R. P., D. L. Nickels, and C. J. Broehm
2003 Archaeological Testing to Determine the National Register Eligibility Status of 18
Prehistoric Sites on Camp Bowie, Brown County, Texas. Archaeological Survey
Report, No. 334, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio and the Adjutant General’s Department of Texas, Department of Facilities and
Engineering Environmental Branch, Austin, Texas.

20

