A Cultural Resources Survey of the
OK16607-B Knowles Cellular Tower
Site, Beaver County, Oklahoma

Prepared for AARCHER, Inc.
Annapolis, Maryland
by
David L. Nickels, Principal Investigator
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations
Report #358
February 2015

Abstract
AARCHER, Inc., of Annapolis, Maryland contracted with Tierras Antiguas Archaeological
Investigations to conduct a cultural resources survey of the footprint and access right-of-way of
the proposed OK16607-B Knowles Cellular Tower site in northeastern Beaver County,
Oklahoma. The Federal Communications Commission’s Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
(PA; 47 CFR Part 1) requires that a cultural resources survey be conducted prior to such an
undertaking. No Antiquities Permit was required, but subsequent review of this archaeological
report was provided by the Oklahoma Historic Preservation Office. The total area to be impacted
is 10,000 square feet (<0.23 acres), in addition to a 20-foot wide Access/Utility Easement, and
three Guy Wire Anchor locations.
Tierras Antiguas conducted the survey on December 31, 2014 in accordance with Oklahoma
Archeological Survey (OAS) Standards. A thorough pedestrian survey of the surface area was
conducted before nine shovel tests were excavated. No cultural material was observed either on
the surface, or in any of the shovel tests.
As such, Tierras Antiguas Archaeology recommended that AARCHER, Inc. be allowed to
oversee development of the tract as planned. However, Tierras Antiguas further recommended
that if any previously undiscovered cultural resources were encountered during development,
work should immediately be halted in the vicinity until such finds could be examined and
evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological consultant, and by the
Oklahoma Historical Commission.
No artifacts were collected or curated during this project.

Acknowledgments
Three individuals who are greatly appreciated, and whose efforts contributed to the successful
planning, organization, and completion of this project are Mr. Jason Los, National Wireless
Program Manager at AARCHER, Inc., Mr. Chris Baker, Section 106 Manager at AARCHER,
Inc., and Mr. Robert Brooks, Federal Programs Reviewer at the Oklahoma Historical
Commission’s Office of Historic Preservation.
In addition, I express my thanks to Ms. Lisa Stambeck and Mr. Dave Jacobson at the Oklahoma
Archeological survey office in Norman for conducting a files search for surveys and sites that
existed within close proximity to the proposed tower site.

i

Table of Contents
Title
Page
Abstract.......................................................................................................................................i
Acknowledgments........................................................................................................................i
List of Figures............................................................................................................................ii
Introduction................................................................................................................................1
Project Environment....................................................................................................................2
Cultural Chronology....................................................................................................................4
Goals and Methods....................................................................................................................17
Results of the Investigations......................................................................................................19
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations..........................................................................23
References Cited........................................................................................................................24
Appendix A. Standard Soil Descriptions...............................................................................A-1

List of Figures
Figure
Page
1. Beaver County location in the Oklahoma Panhandle............................................................1
2. Project Area location on large topographic map...................................................................1
3. Project Area on local topographic map.................................................................................2
4. Soils map..............................................................................................................................4
5. Photograph of site setting...................................................................................................18
6. Locations of shovel tests.....................................................................................................20

List of Tables
1. Results of Shovel Testing...................................................................................................21

ii

Introduction
AARCHER, Inc. is
the consulting firm
employed to acquire
clearance for the
erection of the
OK16607-B
Knowles Cellular
Tower to be
constructed in
northeastern
BeaverCounty,
Oklahoma (Figures
1-3; see also cover
photo),
and
hereinafter
occasionally
referred to as the Figure 1. Location of the Project Area and Beaver County in the
Project Area (PA). Oklahoma Panhandle.
A A R C H E R
contracted
with
Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological
Investigations
(TAAI) to conduct
an archaeological
investigation of the
proposed tower
site. Although no
public funding was
involved in the
p r o p o s e d
development of the
property, the
F e d e r a l
Communications
Commission’s
Nationwide
Programmatic
Agreement (PA; 47 Figure 2. The Project Area on large USGS 7.5' topographic map.
1

CFR Part 1)
requires that a
c u l t u r a l
resources survey
be conducted
prior to such an
undertaking.
In December
2 0 14 , TAAI
co nduct ed a
review of
c u l t u r a l
resources
documented
either on, or
within one mile
of the PA, as
well as other
documents that
may be relative Figure 3. Project location on Knowles (1972) 7.5' USGS topographic map.
for significant
cultural resources to exist within the PA. The research by TAAI included:
1) A review of the most current literature documenting the prehistory and history of the
immediate area.
2) A literature review of both published and unpublished reports and manuscripts that describe
the types of archaeological sites that have been documented, and thus provide insight as to the
types of sites that may be expected either in the PA, or immediately adjacent to it.
3) A review of local soils maps in order to evaluate the potential for intact and buried cultural
materials either within or immediately adjacent to the PA. The proposed tower site is located in
a rural area of northeastern Beaver County that has apparently been used primarily as pasture.
In addition, researchers at the Oklahoma Archeological Survey Office in Norman were contacted
in order to provide TAAI with copies of any previously documented cultural resources surveys
and archaeological sites previously documented within 3/4-mile of the Project Area.

Project Environment
The Project Area lies within the northeastern portion of Beaver County, in the Oklahoma
2

Panhandle, within the Great Plains region, in the High Plains area. The topography of Beaver
County is generally an easterly sloping plain dissected by two major river valleys; the Cimarron
River and the Beaver River and the North Canadian River (also known as Beaver River or Beaver
Creek within the Oklahoma Panhandle). Major intermittent tributaries of the Cimarron River
include Horse Creek and Taintor Creek. Intermittent tributaries dissecting the county and draining
into the North Canadian during infrequent periods of heavy rainfall include Currumpa and
Ceinequilla de Burro (Burro Lake) creeks.
Elevation in Beaver County ranges from a high of about 2,770 feet in the northwest to about
2,170 feet in the southeast. The average annual rainfall is just over 19.3 inches, but this has varied
widely from year to year. Large fluctuations in temperature occur throughout the year, with
average daily maximum temperatures averaging about 90 degrees in July, to around 35 degrees
in January. The combination of variable rainfall and temperature patterns results in frequent
droughts as well as periods of abundant moisture (Allgood et al. 1962; Gould and Lonsdale
1926).
Soils
Ogallala formation soils, which include Richfield series loams, derived from weathered fluvial
deposits eroded from the Rocky Mountains during the Pliocene epoch cover most of Beaver
County. Later, eolian sands and silty loess covered much of the Ogallala formation during the
Quaternary period. Underlying the Ogallala formation are dissected and hilly beds of hardened
caliche, limy silt and sands, and some gravels. As shown in Figure 4, the OK16607-B Knowles
Tower and its three guy wire locations will impact Richland Series loamy soils, deep loams
commonly found on nearly level to gently sloping topography on the High Plains in this area of
Beaver County (Allgood et al. 1960; Gould and Lonsdale 1926; Websoil Survey Online 2015).
Richfield Series
Richfield and Richfield-Mansker loams and clay loams are commonly encountered on slopes
varying from 0 to 1 percent in degree. Because of its location on slopes, the nearly constant winds
across the Oklahoma Panhandle make it susceptible to erosion, particularly so if the grass cover
has been decimated by cultivation or overgrazing. These soils formed from the Ogallala
formation.
A typical soil pedon of Richfield loams and clay loams consist of dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2)
clay loam that exhibits a weak and sandy granular structure in the upper 7 inches (21 centimeters
[cm]).
From roughly 7 to 21 inches (21-56 cm) is dark brown (10YR 3/3) clay loam, with a blocky
structure and clay films on ped faces
From about 21- 36 inches (56-90 cm) one would expect to see pale brown (10YR 6/3) calcareous
clay loam in a blocky structure, with patchy clay film on some ped faces
From roughly 36-53 inches (90-135 cm) is commonly found pale brown (10YR 6/3) silty clay
3

loam that is massive in structure, with a few lime concretion nodules.

Figure 4. Soils map of the Project Area.

Cultural Chronology
Introduction
The regional literature can easily be misunderstood if the terms are not clearly defined. “The
Southern High Plains is the part of the High Plains that stretches southward from the Arkansas
River Valley in Colorado and Kansas to the Edwards Plateau in Texas” (Hughes 1991:4). When
referring to the Oklahoma and Texas High Plains, we are discussing the portion of the Southern
High Plains that are in the Oklahoma and Texas panhandles. When discussing the High Plains they
are often termed the North Plains and the South Plains; the North Plains referring to that area
north of the South Canadian River in Texas. Finally, depending on context, in some discussions
the terms Panhandle Plains may be used to denote the plains area encompassed by the politically
drawn Panhandle boundaries between Oklahoma and Texas (Hughes 1991:4-5).
4

The location of the survey area presumes cultural affinities conducive to influences from more
than one region. As will be discussed, cultural influences from the Jornada Mogollon area of
southeastern New Mexico, Puebloan societies from northern New Mexico and southern
Colorado, Plains Villagers from western Oklahoma, and Great Plains groups have all left their
mark on the Project Area at one time or another. This chapter provides a synopsis of
environmental and archaeological background information about the Southern Great Plains and
High Plains from the Paleoindian through Late Archaic periods. Then, beginning with the Late
Prehistoric period, the discussion becomes more focused on the probable cultural complexes that
would have influenced cultural remains to potentially be found within the Project Area.
The cultural chronology, defined by complex (in lieu of the terms phase, interval, or period) of
the North American High Plains has been synthesized by Hofman et al. (1989), and more recently,
the Southern High Plains by Hughes (1991), Johnson and Holliday (1995), and Boyd (1995;
1997). It should be noted that the Southern Great Plains complexes are defined by shifts in
climatic conditions and subsistence more so than changes in projectile point styles, which are
indicators of change elsewhere. The dates in the following discussion are primarily derived from
Hughes (1991), Johnson and Holliday (1986, 1995), Boyd (1995; et al. 1996), and Hofman et al.
(1989). All dates are approximate and given as years before present (B.P.).
Paleoindian Period
The Southern Great Plains were occupied by Clovis, Folsom and other complex peoples between
approximately 11,500-8000 B.P. (Hofman 1989:29-45). Johnson and Holliday (1995:522-526)
agree with this time frame on the Southern High Plains, and divide the period into the Clovis,
Folsom, Plainview, and Firstview cultures. During the Paleoindian interval, Hurt (1980) suggests
an association with the Southern Plains and Trans-Pecos regions.
In general the Paleoindian adaptation has been considered to be one of small bands of highly
nomadic, big-game hunters following herds of Late Pleistocene fauna, including mammoth,
mastodons, bison, camel, and horse, across North America (Black 1989). More recently,
emphasis has been placed on the wide diversity of plants and animals used for subsistence by these
early Americans (Black 1989; Collins and Brown 2000; Hester 1983), such as turtles and
tortoises, alligators, mice, badgers, and raccoons (Collins 1995:381), although they undoubtedly
hunted the large animals as well (Dibble and Lorraine 1968). Known Clovis sites include killsites,
quarries, caches, open campsites, ritual sites, and burials (Collins 1995:381-383; Hester
1995:433-436). A Folsom interval follows the Clovis, except perhaps in the Southern Great Plains
where a transitional complex of artifacts with dart points called “Goshen” may be present
(Hofman 1989:34; Irwin et al. 1973).
Johnson and Holiday (1995) place the Clovis culture at 11,500 - 11,000 B.P., followed by the
Folsom culture at 10,800 - 10,300 B.P. Around 11,000 B.P. the available evidence suggests “An
accelerated warming trend, greater seasonality, increased annual temperature fluctuation, and
wide-spread extinctions…” (Johnson and Holliday 1995:523). The Plainview culture recognized
on the Southern Plains occurs around 10,000 B.P., and consists primarily of Plainview points
associated with bison kills (e.g., Sellards et al. 1947; Johnson and Holliday 1980). Following
5

Plainview is Firstview. Radiocarbon dates obtained for the Firstview culture place it around 8600
B.P., but it may be present as early as 10,500 B.P. The Firstview point is diagnostic to this period,
and is most frequently associated with bison bone beds (Johnson and Holliday 1995:525-526).
One example is the Olsen Chubbock Site in eastern Colorado (Wheat 1972).
As the warming that marks the transition from Pleistocene to Holocene climates began to take
effect, prehistoric inhabitants adapted with changes in lifestyle. This climatic shift is also marked
by the decline and extinction of mammoth, mastodon, horse, camel, and giant bison (Bison
antiquus). Archaeological evidence suggests that after 8000 B.P., large gregarious game animals
were either extinct or otherwise extricated. Human hunters were forced to concentrate on deer,
antelope, and other medium-size or smaller game. Changes in subsistence required technological
shifts that mark the beginning of a new cultural period known as the Archaic.
Early Archaic Period
The Early Archaic on the Southern Great Plains is approximated at 8000-5000 B. P. (Hofman
1989), although Johnson and Holliday (1986) offer more fine-grained dates for the Llano
Estacado from the Lubbock Lake site of 8500-6400 B.P. An economic shift away from big game
hunting was necessary because of the extinction of large game animals. Hurt (1980) suggests that
the decline in the number of bison on the plains forced the inhabitants to broaden their diets to
pursue plants and animals which would produce the same amount of calories and protein with the
same or slightly more effort expended.
Hughes (1991) places the Early Archaic in the High Plains, which includes the Llano Estacado,
from about 7000- 4000 B.P. “…coinciding with the Altithermal Long Drought and characterized
by a pattern of localized foraging for wild plant food and small game replacing a pattern of
unrestricted bison hunting, as evidenced by the disappearance of bison kills, replacement of
stemless lance points with stemmed dart points, decreasing use of end scrapers, and increasing
use of gouges, grinding implements, hearth stones, and boiling pebbles” (Hughes 1991:15). Based
on the relative absence of Early Archaic sites on the High Plains during the 3,000-year
Altithermal, Hughes surmises that the High Plains may have been all but abandoned during that
time in favor of adjacent canyonlands water source areas to the west, east, and south - and more
so the distant Edwards Plateau and lower Pecos regions.
Middle Archaic Period
The Southern Plains Middle Archaic complex as derived from changes in climate and subsistence
is recognized generally as the period between 5000-3000 B.P. (Hofman 1989:45-47), and more
specifically as 6400-4500 B.P. on the Llano Estacado (Johnson and Holliday 1986:46). Hurt
(1980) posits that the quantity of diversified game animals on the Southern Great Plains
decreased, and thus lead to an intensified, narrower diet.
Hughes (1991) notes that the Pedernales points so commonly represented in Central Texas'
Middle Archaic, are absent during the Middle Archaic on the Southern High Plains. Although a
few sites with fire cracked rock hearths and boiling stones, and a few other diagnostics such as
Clear Fork gouges and Bulverede dart points have been recovered, the High Plains was all but
6

abandoned during the 3,000-year dry and warm Altithermal. One example of the effect of climatic
stress are the excavated wells at Mustang Springs (Meltzer and Collins 1987; Meltzer 1991).
Late Archaic Period
Hofman's (1989:45) synthesis places the Late Archaic on the Southern Plains as early as
3000-2000 B.P., and possibly later. Johnson and Holiday (1986:46) specify 4500-2000 B.P. as
the Late Archaic period on the Llano Estacado. Hurt (1980) asserts that bison began returning
to the Southern Great Plains area, and we see an increase in intensive processing of bison, as well
as mussel shells during the Late Archaic. However, by about 1450 B.P., bison had again
disappeared (Dillehay 1974).
Hughes places the beginning of the Southern High Plains Late Archaic at 4000 B. P., coinciding
with the beginning of our modern climatic period (Medithermal), and ending around 1750 B. P.,
(±200). “This substage is marked primarily by the use of various kinds of barbed dart points for
hunting bison and other large game” (Hughes 1991:20). Boyd (1997) has synthesized more recent
data and argues that the Late Archaic more convincingly should date to between ca. 3950 B.P.
to 1450 B.P. Late Archaic sites on the High Plains are prolific in quantity compared to the Early
or Middle Archaic, and nearly as prolific as those of the Neoindian period. Unfortunately there
is a paucity of published information on Late Archaic site excavations, and only a few have been
radiocarbon dated (Hughes 1991:20-21).
Hughes (1991) and Leonhardy (1966) attributed the Little Sunday and Summers complexes,
respectively, as Late Archaic. Boyd (1997:234-235) has reviewed the data which argue for the
existence of these complexes and argues that they both represent long-term and widespread
bison-hunting traditions. He further argues that the two complexes are very similar, should
therefore be combined semantically under the name “Little Sunday”, and should not be considered
as a cultural phase.
Although there is very little excavated evidence, it appears that around 4,000 years ago, near the
end of the dry Altithermal and the beginning of the Medithermal, groups began moving back onto
the High Plains in the Oklahoma and Texas panhandles, and Hurt (1980) further posits that
population on the western edge of the Edwards Plateau peaked during the Late Archaic with
groups moving into the area from Central Texas. Although wild plants were eaten, and both large
and small animals were hunted, bison were again exploited upon their return to the area during
this time. Hughes speculates that subsistence needs were met during seasonal rounds, and that
generally there were few changes in technology and lifeways during the Late Archaic. However,
he ventures that additional excavations and analysis should provide evidence for subtle, yet
marked variances during periodic mesic and xeric intervals (Hughes 1991:23-24).
Site types include open campsites, with base camps predominantly in sheltered, well-watered
areas, lookout sites, rock shelters, lithic quarries and workshops, arroyo bison kill sites, burial
sites, and possibly petroglyph sites. Features at these sites include hearths, sometimes with boiling
stones present, chipping stations, raw material for chipping and grinding stone caches, bedrock
mortars, and burials. Artifact types include projectile points, bifacial knives and drills, bifacial and
7

unifacial choppers, gravers, denticulates, a variety of scrapers, hammerstones, manos and metates,
grooved sandstone awl sharpeners, occasionally a stone bead or pendant, bone tools, gaming
pieces and pendants, and sometimes shell beads and pendants (Hughes 1991:22-23).
As Hughes emphasizes, using point types as chronological and cultural indicators on the High
Plains is problematic: “Most writers who have attempted to fit High Plains dart points into the
Texas typology…have found that their specimens seldom fall neatly into one type or another. The
High Plains specimens are often smaller than their counterparts in Central Texas, where many of
the types were established and where the Edwards chert is a more abundant and tractable material
than the materials generally available on the High Plains” (Hughes 1991:22). However, most of
the points found in the High Plains are similar to those found in Central and North Texas, as well
as Oklahoma: the Edgewood, Ellis, Marcos, and Palmillas. Also found are the Ensor, Trinity,
Williams, and Lange. Other projectile points found on the High Plains and apparently coming into
the area from elsewhere are Duncan and Hanna points from north of the High Plains, Augustin
and Pinto Basin points from the west, and Langtry and Paisano points from the south (Hughes
1991:22-23).
Late Prehistoric, Protohistoric, and Historic Cultural Contexts and Chronologies with the
Most Probable Influence on the Project Area
Late Prehistoric I Period (1450 - 850/750 BP)
According to Hughes (1991:24), Mogollon brownware pottery, Woodland cordmarked pottery,
and barbed arrow points first appeared on the High Plains around 1750 B. P. and mark the
beginning of the “Early Neoindian” substage. Hughes argues that the end of this stage occurred
around 850 B.P., “…between about A.D. 1000, when a Woodland/Village transition was taking
place in the northern part of the Panhandle Plains, and about A.D. 1200, when a
pit-to-surface-house transition was taking place on the southwestern part of the South Plains”
(Hughes 1991:24). Boyd (1997) basically agrees, and suggests reliable data places it between
1450 B.P. and possibly at late as 750 B.P. And, based on faunal remains, it appears that around
the beginning of this period the region had a considerably greater amount of moisture than what
we experience today (Hughes 1991:27).
Influences from the Plains that have been recognized in the Oklahoma and Texas panhandles
during the Late Prehistoric period are the Plains Woodland from about 2000-1150 B.P., and the
Plains Village from 1150-450 B.P. (Hofman 1989:61-90).
Plains Woodland Tradition - Lake Creek Complex
Plains Woodland
The term “Plains Woodland or Woodland” is commonly used to designate the period following
the Late Archaic on the Southern Great Plains. Among the Woodland tradition remains are
cord-marked, pointed base pottery, ground stone, horticultural tools such as stone hoes, dart and
arrow points that have been corner-notched, shell disc beads, and mound or tomb-like burials
(Vehik 1984). The Woodland tradition moved into the Great Plains and then northern Oklahoma
8

by about 1850-1650 B.P.; then into southern Oklahoma prior to about 1500 B.P. By about 1450
B.P. there is evidence of the tradition in the Panhandle Plains, coinciding with the disappearance
of the Late Archaic bison-hunting lifestyle. Then about 300 years later there is evidence of
agriculture in the region.
However, there are many unanswered questions regarding how and when the shift from an
Archaic lifestyle to that of Plains Woodland occurred. In the Oklahoma and Texas panhandles
there may be a transitional period from the Late Archaic to Late Prehistoric I periods during
which both periods are represented. The Plains Woodland influence is present in a complex
recognizable in the region as Lake Creek, yet evidence of both the Late Archaic and Plains
Woodland may occur on Lake Creek complex sites.
Lake Creek Complex ( ? - 850 BP)
The Lake Creek complex represents the influence of Plains Woodland in the Panhandle Plains
during the early part of the Late Prehistoric (LP I), and was first identified by Jack Hughes (1962,
1991). Although the distinctive Plains Woodland concoidal, or pointed base, large pots are
infrequently found on Lake Creek complex sites, so too are Late Archaic dart points of the Ellis
and Marcos variety, commonly found on Late Archaic bison hunter sites. Hughes (1991) submits
that because many Late Archaic stone tools are found on many early stage sites, the resulting
culture represents an adaptation of ideas and practices such as agriculture, rather than the
movement of a new group of people into the area (Hughes 1991:24-25). In sum, whether the
complex represents an Archaic-like different group of people, or cultural adaptation from western
Oklahoma Plains Woodland groups is debatable. Without further research, Boyd (1997:282)
suggests perhaps the latter.
A second research issue questions whether the Lake Creek complex in the Oklahoma and Texas
panhandles represents a distinct Plains Woodland group, or whether they are an extension of a
similar cultural group. Expectations are that Lake Creek sites will contain similarities to the Plains
Woodland sites in western Oklahoma (see, for example, Briscoe 1987) however; few sites in
Texas are reliably Lake Creek complex (Boyd 1997:281-295). As such, there seems to be some
speculation that Lake Creek may be simply an extension of western Oklahoma Plains Woodland.
Southern Jornada Mogollon Culture - Palo Duro Complex (1450-850 BP)
The second, early Late Prehistoric (LP I) complex recognized in the High Plains is the Palo Duro,
with strong Jornada Mogollon influence from southeastern New Mexico. Radiocarbon dates
obtained for the Palo Duro are most generally between 1450 and 850 B.P (Boyd 1995, 1997).
Willey and Hughes (1978) first identified the Palo Duro complex while excavating in Deadman's
Shelter in Mackenzie Reservoir in Tule Canyon, east of Tulia, in Swisher County, Texas.
Cruse (1989) then refined what comprises the complex during his excavations at the Palo Duro
“type site” - Kent Creek - south of Turkey, in Hall County, Texas so that we now believe that in
addition to Mogollon brownware, characteristic cultural remains recovered at Palo Duro complex
(see Figure 3-4) sites include deeply basal-notched Deadman’s arrow points, commonly found
with Scallorn-like arrow points, lined and unlined fireplaces, boiling pebbles, waste flakes, animal
9

bones, and human flexed skeletons accompanied by few personal possessions. Pithouses have
been found at the Kent Creek site (Cruse 1989) and possibly at Buffalo Lake (Hays 1986).
Another pithouse and storage pit site, Sam Wahl, also yielded a distinct Palo Duro component
(Boyd et al. 1990; Boyd 1995).
Palo Duro complex sites differ from Lake Creek phase sites in that they occur not only in terrace
settings, but also in the uplands, and along the upper reaches of the Red River and South
Canadian Canyonlands. Hughes (1991:27) speculates that the Palo Duro complex groups may
have derived as “intermediaries between Mogollon groups to the southwest on the Pecos River
and the Rio Grande and Woodland groups to the north on the Canadian River. If so, they may
have carried more important, but less tangible, items than Mogollon pots, such as ideas about
houses and horticulture”. Imbedded within this complex are the Querecho and Maljamar phases
(Hughes 1991:25-29).
Geographic Separations - Lake Creek and Palo Duro Complexes
Although Plains woodland cord-marked brownware sherds are commonly found in the Canadian
River drainages, they rarely occur in the Brazos and Red River drainages, and none have been
found south of the Prairie Dog Fork of the Brazos. On the other hand, Jornada Mogollon
brownware commonly occurs in the Brazos and Red River drainages, but rarely occurs along the
Canadian drainages. Thus, the dividing line between the Plains Woodland-influenced Lake Creek
complex and the Jornada Mogollon-influenced Palo Duro complex appears to be the drainage
divide between the Canadian and Red Rivers, and perhaps both groups met in the Panhandle
region (Boyd 1995).
Late Prehistoric II Period (850-350 BP)
The appearance of Washita, Harrelll, and Fresno arrowpoints around 850 B.P. mark the beginning
of the Late Prehistoric II period on the High Plains. Numerous changes occurred during this
period, but it abruptly ended in the 1600s when the horse was acquired by the Plains Indians
(Hughes 1991:30). The Late Prehistoric II period marks the shift from Plains Woodland arrow
points with barbs to those with side-notches and triangular shape, as well as “...expanded bison
hunting and corn-bean-squash horticulture, growing populations in many homesteads, hamlets,
and villages, increasing complexity in architecture and in stone, bone, shell, and ceramic
technology, intensified exploitation of the Alibates agate quarries, and a growing trade network,
especially with the Anasazi pueblos of northern New Mexico” (Hughes 1991:29-30).
Huebner (1991) suggests that the sudden return of bison to south and central Texas resulted from
a more xeric climate in the plains north of Texas, and increased grass in the Cross-Timbers and
Post Oak Savannah in north central Texas, forming a “bison corridor” into the South Texas Plains
along the eastern edge of the Edwards Plateau (Huebner 1991:354-355). However, Hurt (1980),
argues that the Late Neo-Indian period on the Southern Great Plains (ca. 950 - 450 B.P.) is
mirrored in the archaeological record by an absence of bison and vegetal matter, most likely due
to the increased alkalinity in the region's water sources.
South of the ridge dividing the South Canadian and Red River drainages, a transition from
10

corner-notched arrow points to side-notched triangular arrowpoints, and from pithouses to
surface houses occurred. About the same time, the Texas South Plains groups were experiencing
“...increased bison hunting, more numerous villages with more numerous and complex structures,
some technological innovations, and more Anasazi as well as Mogollon trade” (Hughes 1991:30).
Around 950 B.P., the side-notched triangular arrowpoints and the bifacial, four-beveled Harahey
knife accompanied bison hunters arriving on the High Plains (Sollberger 1971). Evidence of four
different complexes and foci from this period can be found on the Texas Panhandle Plains: the
Antelope Creek focus of the Plains Village tradition, the Ochoa phase of the Eastern Jornada
sequence, the Tierra Blanca (Apache) complex in the Panhandle Plains, and the Garza (Apache)
complex in the Texas South Plains (Hughes 1991:30). Also discussed is the wide-spread Toyah
phase.
Plains Village Tradition - Antelope Creek Focus (800-400 BP)
Beginning with its type site in the south side of the South Canadian River in Hutchinson County,
Texas (Krieger 1946), is the best documented focus on the Panhandle Plains. The Antelope Creek
focus dates from around 800 B.P. to around 400 B.P., and "is marked by an association of many
distinctive traits, including slab-house ruins, Borger Cordmarked pottery, triangular Washita,
Harrell, and Fresno arrowpoints, “guitar-pick” drills, large, thin end scrapers, big, thick, grinding
slabs with deep, oval basins, bison tibia, scapula, and rib tools, and mussel shell scrapers…”
(Hughes 1991:31). Other cultural remains found on these sites include beads and pendants made
from stone, bone, and shell, bone tools, stone shaft-smoothers and grooved awl sharpeners,
bifacial quarry blanks, large and thin oval-shaped knives, and siltstone elbow pipes (Lintz 1984;
Hughes 1991:32). Faunal and plant remains at Antelope Creek focus sites include crushed and
charred bison bone, numerous other small game species, corn, beans, squash and other wild plants
(Hughes 1991:32). Burials are usually flexed, and found in cache pits, under house floors, and in
individual graves (Hughes 1991:32).
The predominance of components dated with the radiocarbon method generally fall between 750
and 500 B.P. (Lintz 1978). Although reports of excavations have been published on dozens of
Antelope Creek focus sites, the reports are woefully inadequate (Hughes 1991:31). Although
most of the Antelope Creek focus sites are concentrated along the South Canadian River, they
are found throughout the Texas Panhandle High Plains, the Oklahoma Panhandle, and
northeastern New Mexico. Hughes (1991:31) speculates that perhaps the sites found on the tops
of mesas and buttes represent those occupied during the latter years of the focus for defense from
the Apaches, while those situated in generally indefensible areas may have been occupied during
the “pre-Apache” years.
The structures were very extensive, usually rectangular, and dug into the ground. They are called
slab ruins because of the stone slabs placed vertically around the subterranean earthern walls and
along an east-facing entry tunnel. They are frequently associated with large, bell-shaped storage
pits and trash dumps (Hughes 1991:31-32; Lintz 1984). In addition to slab ruins at isolated
homesteads, small hamlets, and villages, Antelope Creek sites consist of rockshelters, open
campsites, bison kills, and lithic quarries. Hughes (1991:31) opines that because of the
11

concentration of sites around the Alibates quarries, that they were likely mined extensively by
groups of the Antelope Creek focus.
As to the lineage of the Antelope Creek groups, Hughes (1991) offers that they may have derived
from the Woodland Village, Lake Creek complex, with influences from the Mogollon and
Anasazi. Evidence for intra-relations with outside groups is abundant: “Exotic items of many
kinds indicate a strong trade network, especially with the Anasazi Pueblos to the west; obsidian,
turquoise, painted pottery, and Olivella shell beads are some of the more common intrusives.
Without much doubt, Alibates agate was the principal export” (Hughes 1991:33). The presence
of bison and practiced horticulture hastened population growth during this period. As for the
demise of this focus, Hughes (1991:33) is of the opinion that there is considerable circumstantial
evidence to suggest that an Antelope Creek focus thus strengthened may have constituted a final
holdout of the Caddoan villagers on the High Plains until about the middle of the fifteenth
century, when increasingly hostile relationships with less sedentary trading, together with raiding
Apache immigrants forced a withdrawal to the northeast to join other Plains Caddoan relatives
in fortified villages on the Arkansas and Platte.
Ochoa Phase (650-500 BP)
Based upon the Puebloan pottery found in Ochoa phase sites on the South Plains, this phase dates
to between 650 and 500 B.P. Cultural remains from the Ochoa phase include “jacallike surface
houses with rock and adobe foundations, locally made Ochoa Indented Brown Ware, still more
kinds of intrusive wares, and side-notched triangular arrowpoints” (Hughes 1991:27-28). In
addition, there appears to be an increase in the exploitation of bison at these sites, using beveled
knives. There is also more Mogollon and Anasazi painted pottery on Ochoa phase sites than on
probable predecessor sites, i.e, Querecho and Maljamar sites.
Trade goods from all directions were entering the South Plains during this period, not only in the
form of Mogollon and Anasazi pottery from the western pueblos, but also in the form of
“...shell-tempered Nocona Plain from the Henrietta focus of East Texas (or Little Deer Brushed
from the Wheeler complex of western Oklahoma), and bone-tempered Leon Plain and Doss Red
Ware from the Toyah focus of Central Texas have been found at several sites, especially along
the eastern fringes of the Llano Estacado, but also far to the west in the valleys on the uplands”
(Hughes 1991:34). Notably, Hughes (1991:34) points out that the ending dates for Pueblo trade
pottery is about 100 to 150 years earlier on the New Mexico and Colorado sites than the
proposed ending date for Ochoa phase sites, and thus “If these dates are reliable, the Ochoa phase
may have been a holdout in the South Plains as the Antelope Creek focus was in the Panhandle
Plains”.
Finally, Hughes opines that the Ochoa phase on the South Plains may very well represent an
alliance of bison hunters; the Great Western Plains Kiowa who spoke Tanoan, and the Kiowa
Apache who spoke Athapascan. He also suggests the possibility that this alliance of warriors
forced Tanoan-speaking Pueblo groups from the South Plains back to the west, and Caddoan,
Plains/Woodland groups back eastward, thus leaving behind the cultural remains of the Apache.

12

Apache - Tierra Blanca Complex (500-350 BP)
The Tierra Blanca complex represents the Apache presence in the Panhandle Plains, with the type
sites being Tierra Blanca Ruin in Deaf Smith County, Texas (Holden 1931, Spielmann 1982,
1983), and the Fifth Green site in Randall County, Texas (Kalokowski n.d.). Based on C and D
glazewares found on the sites, and radiocarbon dates from two excavated sites (Canyon City Club
Cave - Hughes 1969; South Mouth Site - Katz and Katz 1976), it appears the Tierra Blanca
complex dates from about 500 B.P. to the Historic period, ca. 350 B.P. Tierra Blanca sites consist
of both large villages with stone foundations and jacallike structural remains, and small camps.
Cultural remains include “...triangular and side-notched Harrell, side-notched Washita, and
unnotched Fresno and Talco-like arrowpoints, and much Anasazi trade material, including many
sherds of glaze-polychrome and plain utility ware” (Hughes 1991:35; but, also see Boyd 1997),
called Tierra Blanca Plain (Habicht-Manche 1987). Tierra Blanca sites can be found in valleys,
on canyon rims, or on broad floodplains. Leading a semi-sedentary bison hunting and
corn-growing existence, Hughes asserts that the Querechos and Faraones observed by the
Coronado and Oñate expeditions in 1541 and 1601, respectively, were the groups whose cultural
remains we now identify as Tierra Blanca (Hughes 1991:35)
Although the above definition of Tierra Blanca is attributed to Hughes (1991), Boyd (1997)
reviewed the most recent published and unpublished data on likely Tierra Blanca components and
concluded that in most cases the data was insufficient to even moderately define the chronology
and associated Tierra Blanca assemblages. Specifically, “The Tierra Blanca complex is an
ill-defined, misunderstood concept, although a number of sites have been attributed to it…”
(Boyd 1997:368). Nevertheless, Boyd's review (1997:368-380) of 11 likely or possible Tierra
Blanca sites indicates that they date to between 800 and 250 BP, with no unique projectile point,
but with Harrell, Washita, Fresno, and Talco-like arrow points. Other artifacts include Puebloan
ceramics, brownwares, including micaceous plainware sherds, beveled knives, ground stone, and
occasionally historic metal.
Apache - Garza Complex (750-250 BP)
Based on glaze polychrome and radiocarbon dates, Hughes (1991) submits that the Garza
complex appears to date from ca. 650 to 250 B.P. Since Hughes’ evaluation, Boyd
(1997:380-486) has thoroughly reviewed the data from 29 Garza complex sites on the South
Plains and suggests that radiocarbon dates and temporal diagnostics indicate with caution that the
Garza Complex could have appeared as early as 750 B.P., and ended around 250 B. P. The Garza
site is located south of Post, Texas, in Garza County (Runkles 1964). Typically, Garza sites
include campsites with ephemeral tipi rings, rockshelters, bison processing sites, and burials
(Boyd 1997). Cultural remains found on Garza complex sites include “Harrell, Washita, Fresno,
and Talco-like arrowpoints, and by glaze polychrome and plain utility ware like that of the Tierra
Blanca complex, but do have two additional distinctive arrowpoint types, the base-notched Garza
and Lott points…” (Hughes 1991:36; Johnson et al. 1977).
Whether or not the Garza complex represents the protohistoric Apache is debatable. Baugh
(1986) has identified Garza arrowpoints within the Western Oklahoma Wheeler complex sites,
and Garza components likewise sometimes contain Wheeler complex Edwards Plain and Little
13

deer Plain and decorated pottery sherds. Baugh (1986) further argues that the circular ridge at
the Bridwell Site in Crosby County, Texas (Parker 1982) is a defensive structure akin to Wheeler
phase fortifications. Given these “cross cultural” similarities, Baugh thus “suggests that the Garza
complex may be a westward extension of the Wheeler complex”, a Caddoan-speaking group
(Hughes 1991:36). However, Garza burial data providing evidence of conflict is limited, the
Birdwell site is basically destroyed without being properly documented, and Boyd (1997:359;
2001:11) does not agree with Baugh’s interpretation. Hofman (1984), also disagrees with Baugh,
and thinks perhaps the pottery made by these people was a Southwestern Puebloan influence, not
Caddoan.
Toyah Phase (700-350 BP)
The Perdiz arrow point may best represent the appearance of a distinct culture, lasting for about
300 years, which archaeologists have labeled the Toyah phase. Jelks' (1962:86-90) Toyah traits
include: Perdiz and Cliffton arrow points, double-pointed and beveled knives, gravers, small drills,
stone side-scrapers, expedient scrapers, crude bifaces, bison bone scrapers, deer bone spatulates,
bone awls, Leon Plain and possibly intrusive pottery, ground stone, hematite pigment, worked
mussel shells, smoothed antler tines, pendants, tubular bone beads, fishhooks, and needles, along
with perishable wood and grass/mat items and expediently utilized flakes.
The argument that Toyah populations adapted to bison hunting is rather convincing in terms of
the artifacts. Bone implements and stone perforators were presumably used for penetrating hides,
while the commonly occurring stone endscrapers were thought to be used to prepare the hides
(Creel 1991). Johnson (1994) argues that the beveled knives and blades seen in south-central
Texas are the same as those seen in the archaeological record in western Oklahoma and Kansas,
and may temporally precede Toyah deposits in Texas. Following Johnson's (1994) proposal that
Toyah evolved from the Southern Plains or Southwest, (Boyd 1997:362) suggests that the
predecessors to the Toyah were Palo Duro complex peoples.
Protohistoric (450-300 BP)/Historic Periods
The end of the Late Prehistoric period and beginning of the Protohistoric/Historic periods in the
Oklahoma and Texas High Plains should be characterized by written accounts of European
contact with indigenous groups. Hester (1995:450-451) agrees with Adkins and Adkins
(1982:242) when he suggests that the indigenous groups may have been affected by European
influence but we are only able to observe the materials in the archaeological record because the
written accounts simply are not available. He would rather label this largely unknown period
“Protohistoric”. Hofman (1989:91) agrees that “The Protohistoric period is encompassed by the
time when there were limited European contacts with the area and brief records of these journeys,
but no proper history”.
The cultural context for the protohistoric and historic groups in the area of study is largely
conditioned by the presence of outside ethnic groups and regional power struggles. In his
discussion of the Garza and Tierra Blanca complexes, Boyd (1997) suggests that other than
increasing the exploitation of buffalo for trade, these groups perhaps were influenced only
minimally by European contact. He further wisely cautions (Boyd 1997:355) against neatly fitting
14

complexes into purely Late Prehistoric II, Protohistoric, or Historic. However four complexes
or phases have thus far been defined for the Southern Plains, and which may have influence upon
the archaeological remains that could be found within the Project Area: Edwards, Wheeler,
Wichita, and Henrietta.
Edwards Complex (450-300 BP)
The Edwards complex was first identified in western Oklahoma (Hofman 1984), with an
occupation from about 450 to 300 B.P. Cultural remains include Fresno, Washita, Harrell, and
Garza points, end and side scrapers, drills, bone tools, ground stones, and locally made Little
Plain and Edwards Plain ceramics (Boyd 1997:358). Following the Edwards complex is the
Wheeler complex.
Wheeler Complex (400-350 BP)
The Wheeler complex was also first identified in western Oklahoma (Bell et al. 1967), and based
upon the Puebloan ceramics pieces found on these sites, the complex dates from around 350 B.P.
to 250 B.P. The artifact assemblages of Edwards and Wheeler are similar, except Wheeler sites
tend to have fewer and less frequent intrusive ceramics and lithic material (Hofman 1989; Boyd
1997:359)
Protohistoric Wichita
This western Oklahoma group was entrenched in settlements and French trade along the Red
River in Oklahoma in the mid-18th century. Combined with the Comanche and Caddoans, their
trade network extended westward into the Texas Panhandle (Bell 1984; Hofman 1989; Perttula
1992).
Henrietta Complex
Perhaps evolving from the Plains Woodland tradition, the Henrietta complex apparently
transcends the Late Prehistoric II and Protohistoric periods, but “...is poorly understood” (Boyd
1997:360). Cultural remains from this complex include house depressions with support postholes,
storage pits, side-notched and stemmed arrow points, bone tools and beads, knives, scrapers and
drills, and Nocona Plain pottery, intrusive lithic material, pottery and stone tools, bison, deer and
fish faunal material, mussel shells, and human burials (Boyd 1997:360-361).
The Querechos-Teya Model
Habicht-Mauche's (1992) statement of the possible archaeological correlation between Neoindian,
Tierra Blanca complex with the Protohistoric, Querecho Apaches - and the Neoindian, Garza
complex with the Protohistoric Teya Apaches mentioned by Coronado in 1541 has been used as
a basis for the Querechos-Teya (Q-T) Model coined by Boyd (2001). Basically, Boyd submits
that the common assumption that the Querechos were actually a holdover of the Tierra Blanca
complex and that the Teyas were actually a holdover of the Garza complex may be somewhat
misguided. Boyd has no qualms that the general physiographic locations of these two sets of
groups correlate well, with the Tierra Blanca-Querecho set on the Llano Estacado north of the
Red River, and the Garza-Teya set situated in the Caprock Canyonlands to the southeast.

15

Additionally, all four groups were trading with the pueblos of New Mexico. However, the
archaeological data which supports the assumption that the Tierra Blanca and Garza complex
groups lived a very similar existence and traded with the same Pueblo groups, falls short of
teasing out any small variations between the two. The possibility that Garza and Tierra Blanca
groups fought with each other is not adequately supported by the archaeological record either.
In sum, the Q-T Model should be used as an impetus for designing future research questions
(Boyd 2001).
Historic Euroamerican Settlement
Prior to the Civil War (1860-1865) there were very few Euroamerican settlers in the Texas and
Oklahoma Panhandles. The few settlers that were present were associated either with trading
posts or military sites. The Civil War had little immediate effect in the area. However, following
the Civil War period there was renewed interest in establishing settlements in West Texas and the
Panhandle region (see for example, Barton 1998; Freeman 1990a, b).
Early settlers met with strong resistance from the indigeneous Comanche, Kiowa, and
Kiowa-Apache, who had occupied the area for between 200 and 500 years. In a series of battles
during the 1870s, most notably the Red River War, the US Army forcibly removed the Native
Americans to Oklahoma. These were the last incursions against the Indians in the Texas
Panhandle. Following these events, the Llano Estacado and Rolling Plains were settled rapidly.
At the same time, the exploitation and ultimate extermination of buffalo on the Plains in the 1870s
was carried out in earnest (Anderson 1974), and the vast grasslands were then further available
for cattle ranching (Rathjen 1975). Ranching activities then took hold in the region, followed by
farming. By the 1890s, a number of towns had developed. Early pioneers constructed
semi-subterranean dugout homes. These were inexpensive to construct, since they required less
wood than an above-ground structure. After around 1910, dugouts were gradually replaced by
more traditional, stone or wooden, above-ground houses (Spikes and Ellis 1952; Freeman 1990a,
b).
Beaver County, Oklahoma History
Prior to 1890, the area that is now Beaver County and the Oklahoma Panhandle was considered
by Anglo-Americans as a “No-Mans Land”. That is, before then, the Public Land Strip that is now
the Oklahoma Panhandle was part of “Comancheria” where the Comanches as “Lords of the
Plains” ruled over these lands for centuries (e. g., Fehrenbach 1991; Richardson 1996).
In the 1870s, 1880s, and 1890s, cattle ranching became the mainstay in the Public Land Strip area
that was to become Beaver County. At the time, cattle rancher pioneers in the Strip leased vast
acreage of free-range lands from what at that time was the Territory of Oklahoma. By the 1890s,
use of much of the Strip transitioned from cattle ranching to farming. Land offices established in
the area issued homestead grants to new settlers. Adding to that was the construction of a new
rail line through the Strip in 1901, which further attracted new settlers in what was to become
Beaver County. Although the Great Depression of 1929 and the Dust Bowl era forced several
landowners to abandon their farms and ranches on the High Plains, these resilient and hardy folks
16

responded by once again reclaiming the lands.
The Beaver County name was adopted because of the many beaver dams that existed along the
Beaver River. In 1886, Beaver County was formed as the “No-Mans Land” that encompassed the
entire Oklahoma Panhandle, while the political boundary area that we now accept as Beaver
County was chopped to the west to form Cimarron County and Texas County with the advent
of statehood for Oklahoma in 1907 (Beaver County 2015).
In 1906, the farming and ranching community of Knowles was originally named ‘Sands City’ after
Dr. A. J. Sands. With the advent of statehood a year later, the area became rapidly populated. In
1907, the community boasted of a grocery store, a hardware store, a livery stable, a blacksmith
shop, a two-story hotel, a real estate office, a print shop, a newspaper, a justice of the peace, and
a horse-drawn photo gallery. By 1911, there were 52 people in the community property and many
surrounding farms and ranches.
In 1912, when the downtown was re-located to be near the newly constructed Wichita Falls and
Northwestern Railway, the town’s name was changed to Knowles (after the postmaster and
Knowles family). Soon thereafter there were several churches, a new school, two new hotels, a
bank, a telephone company, a drugstore, two grain companies, a grain elevator, a broomcord
shed, an ice house, oil storage tanks and loading dock, stock pens, a newly drilled water well, and
a train depot. Unfortunately, as with most rural communities, the community of Knowles has
dwindled over the years. The Dust Bowl and Great Depression wreaked havoc, the school finally
closed in 1966, and the railroad shut down its line through the Panhandle in the early 1970s
(Knowles 2015).
Vast oil and gas was exploited in Beaver County in the 1950s. Today, the population of Knowles
is perhaps 50; although following a boom and bust cycle of oil and gas exploration, 60 years later,
Beaver County is once again experiencing a boom like no other previously seen, and is currently
a large producer of oil and gas (Beaver County 2015; Oklahoma History 2015).

Previous Archaeological Surveys and Sites within 3/4-mile of the Project Area
Under the direction of Ms. Lisa Stambeck at the Oklahoma Archeological survey office in
Norman, on January 21, 2015, Mr. Dave Jacobson conducted a files search for surveys and sites
that existed within 3/4-mile of the proposed tower site. They determined that there were no
documented surveys or sites within 3/4-mile.

Project Goals and Methods
Goals
The project goals focused on archaeological issues that could be addressed by the types of data
obtained through pedestrian survey, along with shovel testing. The topics addressed were site
17

type, distribution, density, size, depth, and stratigraphy. The theoretical framework was structured
around patterns of settlement, mobility, subsistence, and social systems for the region.
The goals of the project were to (1) locate and record any cultural artifacts in the project area
using a systematic survey methodology, (2) quantify site size, as well as depth, and stratigraphy,
and (3) place any diagnostic artifacts within the regional time frame.
Methods
Prior to the archaeological survey, the area to be impacted had been clearly delineated with survey
stakes (see for example, Figure 5), including the tower footprint area, the utility/access right-ofway, and the guy anchor locations. In Accordance with Oklahoma Archeological Survey (OAS)
Standards, a systematic and thorough pedestrian survey of the delineated tract was attempted, but
significantly inhibited by recent snow cover. Nevertheless, the archaeologist was able to expose
multiple areas across the cultivated Project Area’s surface by kicking/scraping the snow cover
aside.
Following that, nine shovel tests were excavated, 40-cm in diameter, in either 10-cm levels or by
soil zone/stratum. Soils matrices from the nine shovel tests (STs) were screened through 1/4-inch
wire mesh. In
accordance with
a designed
research plan, all
redundant
a r t i f a c t s
recovered from
shovel tests were
not to be
collected, but
were to be
placed in the
upper 10 cm of
the backfilled
shovel tests.
Excavations of
the shovel tests
were terminated
at 80 centimeters
below
the
surface (cmbs).
Figure 5. Northwest corner of the tower site (facing SE).

18

Results of the Investigations
Surface Examination and Shovel Testing
The tower footprint area, utility/access right-of-way, and guy locations appeared to have been
undisturbed by cultivation, but was instead historically used as ranchland pasture. Otherwise,
backdirt patches from small animal burrows was observed, and the sloping terrain suggested that
slope erosion has been a significant factor over the years. Although surface visibility was limited
due to snow cover at the time, frequent exposed patches by the archaeologist of the hummocky
surface revealed pale brown (10YR 6/3) sandy loam.
A total of nine shovel tests were placed within the tower’s footprint, access/utility easement from
Hwy 64, and the three guy locations (Figure 6). The results of all nine shovel tests were generally
generic in terms of soils, sediments, and inclusions by level.
That is, the upper circa 0-20 centimeters (cm) exhibited very sparse grass rootlets within pale
brown to dark grayish brown, crumbly and friable sandy clay loam. Below that, we observed dark
brown silty clay loam with occasional vertical cracking to 1/8" wide, underlain by pale brown silty
clay loam with few calcium carbonate fines and films, then very pale brown clay with tiny calcium
carbonate masses.
The results of shovel testing were recorded on standard shovel test forms, are on file at Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, and are available upon request. Table 1 presents the
results of shovel testing (ST) in centimeters below the surface (cmbs), with dry soil colors based
upon a Munsell color chart. Soils were evaluated based upon standard Soil Conservation Service
guidelines (see Appendix A). No cultural material was observed either on the surface or in any
of the nine shovel tests.

19

Figure 6. Locations of shovel tests on the Project Area (shovel tests are numbered 1 thru 9).

20

Table 1. Results of Shovel Testing.
ST 1

0-22 cmbs: Pale brown (10YR 6/3) fine to coarse sandy loam, friable; blocky, fine,
weak; few and sparse grass rootlets; calcium carbonate fines in lower portion; clear,
smooth lower boundary
22-65 cmbs: Light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) clay loam, firm; blocky, fine,
moderate; occasional calcareous fines <2 percent by volume, increasing slightly from
40 to 65 cmbs; clear, smooth lower boundary
65-80 cmbs: Brownish yellow (10YR 5/4) clay loam, firm; blocky, medium,
moderate; very few white (10YR 8/1) soft calcium carbonate masses <1 cm in size,
approximately <5 percent by volume.

ST 2

0-18 cmbs: Pale brown (10YR 6/3) fine to coarse sandy loam, friable; blocky, fine,
weak; few and sparse grass rootlets; calcium carbonate fines in lower portion; clear,
smooth lower boundary
18-70 cmbs: Light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) clay loam, firm; blocky, fine,
moderate; occasional calcareous fines <2 percent by volume, increasing slightly from
40 to 70 cmbs; clear, smooth lower boundary
70-80 cmbs: Brownish yellow (10YR 5/4) clay loam, firm; blocky, medium,
moderate; rare calcium carbonate fines and threads

ST3

0-20 cmbs: Pale brown (10YR 6/3) fine to coarse sandy loam, friable; blocky, fine,
weak; few and sparse grass rootlets; calcium carbonate fines in lower portion; clear,
smooth lower boundary
20-60 cmbs: Light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) clay loam, firm; blocky, fine,
moderate; calcareous fines and threads <2 percent by volume, but increasing slightly
from 40 to 60 cmbs; clear, smooth lower boundary
60-80 cmbs: Brownish yellow (10YR 5/4) clay loam, firm; blocky, medium,
moderate; rare calcium carbonate fines and threads; clay films on ped faces

ST 4

0-12 cmbs: Pale brown (10YR 6/3) fine to coarse sandy loam, friable; blocky, fine,
weak; few and sparse grass rootlets; calcium carbonate fines in lower portion; clear,
smooth lower boundary
12-55 cmbs: Light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) clay loam, firm; blocky, fine,
moderate; calcareous fines and threads <2 percent by volume; clear, smooth lower
boundary
55-80 cmbs: Brownish yellow (10YR 5/4) clay loam, firm; blocky, medium,
moderate; common calcium carbonate fines and threads; clay films on ped faces

ST 5

0-10 cmbs: Pale brown (10YR 6/3) fine to coarse sandy loam, friable; blocky, fine,
weak; few and sparse grass rootlets; clear, smooth lower boundary
10-50 cmbs: Light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) clay loam, firm; blocky, fine,

21

moderate; occasional calcareous fines <2 percent by volume; clear, smooth lower
boundary
50-80 cmbs: Brownish yellow (10YR 5/4) clay loam, firm; blocky, medium,
moderate; very few white (10YR 8/1) soft calcium carbonate masses <1 cm in size,
approximately <5 percent by volume.
ST 6

0-19 cmbs: Pale brown (10YR 6/3) fine to coarse sandy loam, friable; blocky, fine,
weak; few and sparse grass rootlets
19-65 cmbs: Light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) clay loam, firm; blocky, fine,
moderate; occasional calcareous fines increasing slightly from 45 to 65 cmbs; clear,
smooth lower boundary
65-80 cmbs: Brownish yellow (10YR 5/4) clay loam, firm; blocky, medium,
moderate; very rare white (10YR 8/1) soft calcium carbonate masses and rounded
limestone pebbles <1 cm in size.

ST 7

0-30 cmbs: Pale brown (10YR 6/3) fine to coarse sandy loam, friable; blocky, fine,
weak; few and sparse grass rootlets; calcium carbonate fines in lower portion; clear,
smooth lower boundary
30-70 cmbs: Light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) clay loam, firm; blocky, fine,
moderate; occasional calcareous fines <2 percent by volume, increasing slightly from
45 to 70 cmbs; clear, smooth lower boundary
70-80 cmbs: Brownish yellow (10YR 5/4) clay loam, firm; blocky, medium,
moderate; very few white (10YR 8/1) soft calcium carbonate masses <1 cm in size,
approximately <5 percent by volume.

ST 8

0-15 cmbs: Pale brown (10YR 6/3) fine to coarse sandy loam, friable; blocky, fine,
weak; few and sparse grass rootlets; calcium carbonate fines in lower portion; clear,
smooth lower boundary
15-65 cmbs: Light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) clay loam, firm; blocky, fine,
moderate; occasional calcareous fines <2 percent by volume, increasing slightly from
50 to 65 cmbs; clear, smooth lower boundary
65-80 cmbs: Brownish yellow (10YR 5/4) clay loam, firm; blocky, medium,
moderate; very few white (10YR 8/1) soft calcium carbonate masses <1 cm in size,
approximately <2 percent by volume.

ST 9

0-32 cmbs: Pale brown (10YR 6/3) fine to coarse sandy loam, friable; blocky, fine,
weak; few and sparse grass rootlets; calcium carbonate fines in lower portion; clear,
smooth lower boundary
32-70 cmbs: Light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4) clay loam, firm; blocky, fine,
moderate; occasional calcareous fines <2 percent by volume, increasing slightly from
40 to 65 cmbs; clear, smooth lower boundary

22

70-80 cmbs: Brownish yellow (10YR 5/4) clay loam, firm; blocky, medium,
moderate; very few white (10YR 8/1) soft calcium carbonate masses and rounded
limestone pebbles <1 cm in size, <2 percent by volume.

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
There are no documented prehistoric archaeological sites, no historic sites, nor historic markers
within 3/4-mile visual APE of the proposed OK16607-B Knowles Cell Tower site. A thorough
pedestrian survey of the surface within the Project Area was conducted, and nine shovel tests
were excavated. No evidence of either prehistoric or historic occupation was found either on or
below the surface. Therefore, we recommend that the project should proceed as currently
designed by the project sponsor. The project should be considered as having “no effect” on any
properties considered as eligible for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places or
inclusion in the State Archeological Landmarks Program. As such, the project should be allowed
to proceed without further archaeological work. However, if any cultural resources are
encountered during construction within the APE, work should immediately be halted in the
vicinity until such finds are examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified
archaeological consultant, and by the Oklahoma Historical Commission.

23

References Cited

Adkins, L., and R. A. Adkins
1982 A Thesaurus of British Archaeology. Published by David and Charles Publishers,
London.
Allgood, F. P., J. L. Bohl, and M. O. Mitchell
1962 Soil Survey of Beaver County, Oklahoma. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Oklahoma
Agricultural Experiment Station, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater.
Anderson, C. G.
1974 In Search of the Buffalo: The Story of J. Wright Mooar. Pioneer Book Publishers,
Inc., Seagraves, Texas.
Barton, B.
1998
1997

Head 'em Up, Move 'em Out: Life of Richard F. Tankersley. Rangel Printing
Company, San Angelo, Texas.
Ruckus Along the Rivers. Rangel Printing Company, San Angelo, Texas.

Baugh, T. G.
1986 Culture History and Protohistoric Societies in the Southern Plains. In Current
Trends in Southern Plains Archaeology, pp. 186-187,edited by T. G. Baugh.
Plains Anthropologist 31(114, Part 2) Memoir 21.
Beaver County
2015 Beaver County, Oklahoma. <genealogytrails.com/oka/beaver> Accessed January
15, 2015.
Bell, R. E.
1984

The Plains Villagers: The Washita River. In Prehistory of Oklahoma, edited by
R. E. Bell, pp. 307-324. Academic Press, New York.

Bell, R. E., E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb
1967 A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archaeology and Ethnohistory. Final report
submitted to the National Science Foundation.
Black, S. L.
1989

Environmental Setting. In From the Gulf Coast to the Rio Grande: Human
Adaptation in the Central, South, and Lower Pecos Texas, by T. R. Hester, S. L.
Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. J. Reinhard, and L. C. Bement,
pp. 5–17. Research Series No. 33. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

24

Boyd, D. K.
1995
1997

2001

The Palo Duro Complex:Redefining the Early Ceramic Period in the Caprock
Canyonlands. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:461-518.
Caprock Canyonlands Archeology: A Synthesis of the Late Prehistory and
History of Lake Alan Henry and the Texas Panhandle-Plains. Reports of
Investigations, Number 110. 2 Vols. Prewitt & Associates, Austin.
Querechos and Teyas: Protohistoric Hunters and Gatherers in the Texas
Panhandle-Plains, A.D. 1540-1700. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
72:5-22.

Boyd, D. K., J. T. Abbott, W. A. Bryan, C. M. Garvey, S. A. Tomka, and R. C. Fields
1990 Phase II Investigations at Prehistoric and Rock Art Sites, Justiceburg Reservoir,
Garza and Kent Counties, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Briscoe, J.
1987

Analysis of Cultural Materials from the Swift Horse Site, an Early Plains
Woodland Site on the Black Kettle National Grasslands, Roger Mills County,
Oklahoma. Briscoe Consulting Services, Butler, Oklahoma.

Brooks, R. L., and D. G. Wyckoff
1983 Oklahoma Archeology: A 1981 Perspective of the State’s Archeological
Resources, Their Significance, Their Problems and Some Proposed Solutions.
Archeological Survey Report Number 16. Oklahoma Archeological Survey,
Norman.
Collins, M. B.
1995 Forty Years of Archaeology in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:361–400.
Collins. M. B., and K. M. Brown
2000 The Gault Gizemont: Some Preliminary Observations. Current Archeology in
Texas 2(1):8-11.
Creel, D. G.
1991 Bison Hides in Late Prehistoric Exchange in the Southern Plains. American
Antiquity, pp. 40-49.
Cruse, J. B.
1989

Archeological Investigations at the Kent Creek Site (41HL66): Evidence of
Mogollon Influence on the Southern Plains. M.A. Thesis, Department of
Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station.

Dibble, D. S., and D. Lorrain
1968 Bonfire Shelter: A Stratified Bison Kill Site, Val Verde County, Texas.
Miscellaneous Papers 1. Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.

25

Dillehay, T.
1974

Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19(64):180–196.

Fehrenbach, T. R.
1991 Comanches: The Destruction of a People. De Capo Press, Inc., New York.
Freeman, M. D.
1990a Natural Resourced Exploitation and Development: Buffalo Hunting on the Rolling
Plains, 1874-1879. In Phase II Historical Investigations at Justiceburg Reservoir,
Garza and Kent Counties, Texas, pp. 7-49, by M. D. Freeman and D. K. Boyd.
Reports of Investigations, Number 72, Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
1990b Agriculture in Texas: Ranching on the Western Rolling Plains, 1877-1945. In
Phase II Historical Investigations at Justiceburg Reservoir, Garza and Kent
Counties, Texas, pp. 51-97, by M. D. Freeman and D. K. Boyd. Reports of
Investigations, Number 72, Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Gould, C. N. And J. T. Lonsdale
1926 Geology of Beaver County, Oklahoma. Bulletin No. 38. Oklahoma Geological
Survey, Norman.
Habricht-Manche, J. A.
1987 Southwestern Style Culinary Ceramics on the Southern Plains: A Case Study of
Technological Innovation and Cross-cultural Interaction. Plains Anthropologist
33(120):203-218.
Hays, J. S.
1986

An Archeological Survey of Portions of the Buffalo Lake National Wildlife
Refuge, Randall County, Texas. Report for the U.S. Department of the Interior,
Bureau of Reclamation, Southwest Region, Amarillo.

Hester, T. R.
1983 Late Paleoindian Occupations at Baker Cave, Southwestern Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 53:101-119.
1995 The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:427–459.
Hofman, J. L.
1984 The Western Protohistoric: A Summary of the Edwards and wheeler Complexes.
In Prehistory of Oklahoma, pp. 347-362, edited by R. E. Bell. Academic Press,
New York.
1989 Prehistoric Culture History-Hunters and Gatherers in the Southern Great Plain.
In From Clovis to Comanchero: Archeological Overview of the Southern Great
Plains, pp. 25-60, Arkansas Archeological Survey Research Series No. 35.

26

Hofman, J. L., R. L. Brooks, J. S. Hays. D. W. Owsley, R. L. Jantz, M. K. Marks, and M. H.
Manhein
1989 From Clovis to Comanchero: Archeological Overview of the Southern Great
Plains. Arkansas Archeological Survey Research Series No. 35, Fayettville.
Holden, W. C.
1931 Texas Tech Archeological Expedition, Summer 1930. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 3:43-52.
Huebner, J. A.
1991 Late Prehistoric Bison Populations in Central and Southern Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 36(137):343–358.
Hughes, J. T.
1962 Lake Creek: A Woodland site in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 32:55-74.
1991 Prehistoric Cultural Developments on the High Texas Plains. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 60:1-55 (1989 volume published in 1991).
Hurt, R. D.
1980

Archeological Investigations of Portions of the Middle Concho Valley.
Unpublished Masters Thesis, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

Irwin-Williams, C., H. Irwin, G. Agogino, and C. V. Haynes, Jr.
1973 Hell Gap:Paleo-Indian Occupation on the High Plains. Plains Anthropologist
18:40-53.
Jelks, E. B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect in Hill County,
Texas.Archeology Series, No. 5. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas,
Austin.
Johnson, L., Jr.
1994 The Reconstructed Crow Terminology of the Titanwatits, or Tonkawas, with
Inferred Social Correlates. Plains Anthropologist 39(150):377-413.
1995 Past Cultures and Climates at Jonas Terrace, 41ME29, Medina County, Texas.
Office of the State Archeologist, Report 40. Texas Department of Transportation
and Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Johnson, E., and V. T. Holliday
1980 A Plainview Kill/Butchering Locale on the Llano Estacado - the Lubbock Lake
Site. Plains Anthropologist 25(88):89-111.
1986 The Archaic Record at Lubbock Lake. Current Trends in Southern Plains
Archeology, edited by T. G. Baugh. Plains Anthropologist Memoir 22:7-54.
1995 Archeology and Late Quaternary Environments of the Southern High Plains.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:519-540.
27

Johnson, E., V. T. Holliday, M. J. Kaczor, and R. Stuckenrath
1977 The Garza Occupation at the Lubbock Lake Site. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 48:83-109.
Kalowkowski, H. P., Jr.
n.d.
Archeological Testing of the Fifth Green Site (A1363), Randall County, Texas.
Manuscript report on file at the Archeological Research Laboratory, Kilgore
Research Center, West Texas State University, Canyon.
Katz, S. R. and P. Katz
1976 Archeological Investigations in Lower Tule Canyon, Briscoe County, Texas.
Office of the State Archeologist Survey Report No. 16, Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.
Knowles
2015

Knowles, Oklahoma.
Http://geneaologytrails.com/oka/beaver/cities.html#knowles. <Accessed
January 15, 2015.

Leonhardy, F.
1966 Test Excavations in the Mangum Reservoir Area of Southwestern Oklahoma.
Contributions of the Museum of the Great Plains, No. 2. Lawton, OK.
Lintz, C. R.
1978
1984

Architecture and Radiocarbon Dating of the Antelope Creek Focus, A Test of
Campbell's Model. Plains Anthropologist 23(82):319-329.
Architecture and Community Variability Within the Antelope Creek Phase of the
Texas Panhandle. Doctoral Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University
of Oklahoma, Norman.

Meltzer, D. J.
1991 Altithermal Archaeology and Paleoecology at Mustang Springs, on the Southern
High Plains of Texas. American Antiquity 56:236-267.
Oklahoma History
2015 O k l a h o m a
History:
Exploring
Oklahoma
H i story.
Http://www.blogoklahoma.us/county.aspx?county=Beaver. <Accessed January
15, 2015>.
Parker, W.
1982

Archeology at the Bridwell Site. Crosby County Pioneer Museum, Crosbyton,
Texas.

Perttula, T. K.
1992 The Caddo Nation: Archaeological and Ethnohistoric Perspectives. University
of Texas Press, Austin.
28

Rathjen, F. W.
1973 The Texas Panhandle Frontier. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Richardson, R. N.
1996 The Comanche Barrier to South Plains Settlement. Eakin Press. Austin, TX.
Runkles, F. A.
1964 The Garza Site: A Neo-American Campsite near Post, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 35:101-125.
Sellards, E. H., G. L. Evans, and G. E. Meade
1947 Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Plainview, Texas. Bulletin of the
Geological Society of America 58:927-954.
Sollberger, J. B.
1971 A Technological Study of Beveled Knives. Plains
16(53):209-218.

Anthropologist

Sollberger, J. B., and T. R. Hester
1972 The Strohacker Site: A Review of Pre-Archaic Manifestations in Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 17(58):326–344.
Spielman, K. A.
1982 Inter-Societal Food Acquisition Among Egalitarian Societies: An Ecological
Analysis of Plains/Pueblo Interaction in the American Southwest. Ph.D.
Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Michigan.
1983 Late Prehistoric Exchange Between the Southwest and Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 28(102):257-272.
Spikes, N. W., and Ellis, T. A.
1952 A History of Crosby County. Higginson Book Company, Salem, Massachusetts.
Stanford, D. J.
1982 A Critical Review of Archaeological Evidence Relating to the Antiquity of Human
Occupation of the New World. In Plains Indian Studies: A Collection of Essays
in Honor of John C. Ewers and Waldo R. Wedel, edited by D. H. Ubelaker and
H. J. Viola. Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology 30:202-218, Washington,
D.C.
Vehik, S. C.
1984

The Woodland Occupations. In Prehistory of Oklahoma, pp. 175-197, edited
by R. E. Bell. Academic Press, Orlando.

29

Web Soil Survey Online
2015 Beaver County, Oklahoma.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx. <Accessed
January 19, 2015>.
Wheat, J. B.
1972

The Olsen-Chubbock Site. A Paleo-Indian Bison Kill. Memoirs 26. Society for
American Archaeology, Washington, D.C.

Willey, P. S. and J. T. Hughes
1978 The Deadman's Shelter Site. In Archeology at MacKenzie Reservoir, pp. 149-190,
edited by J. T. Hughes and P. S. Willey. Office of the State Archeologist urvey
Report 24, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

30

Appendix A. Standard Soil Descriptions for Shovel Tests and Backhoe Trenches.

A-1

