A Cultural Resources Background Review
of the 27029 Mineral Wells Cellular Tower
Site, Palo Pinto County, Texas

Prepared for
AARCHER, INC.
Annapolis, Maryland
by
David L. Nickels, Principal Investigator
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, LLC
November 2015

Introduction
Aarcher, Inc., requested a
cultural resources
background review of a
5,625 square-foot tower site
with a 20-foot wide
access/utility easement in
eastern Palo Pinto County,
and hereinafter occasionally
referred to as the Project
Area (PA) (Figures 1 - 3).
In November 2015, Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological
Investigations (TAAI)
conducted a review of
cultural resources
documented either on, or
within one mile of the PA,
as well as other documents
that may be relative for
significant
c u l t u r a l
res ources t o
exist within the
P A .
T h e
research by
TAAI included:

Figure 1. Location of Palo Pinto County and the 27029 Mineral
Wells Park tower site in Texas.

1) A review of
the most current
literature
documenting the
prehistory and
history of the
immediate area
2) A review of
the Texas
Historical
Commission’s
T e x a s
Archeological Figure 2. The Project Area on large USGS 7.5' topographic map.
1

Sites Atlas to identify what cultural resource surveys have been conducted, and what
archaeological sites have been documented within one mile of the PA
3) A search of various websites that offer old maps of the PA
4) A literature review of both published and unpublished reports and manuscripts that describe
the types of archaeological sites that have been documented, and thus provide insight as to the
types of sites that may be expected either in the PA, or immediately adjacent to it
6) A review of a local soils map in order to evaluate the potential for intact and buried cultural
materials either within or immediately adjacent to the PA.

Figure 3. Project Area on Mineral Wells East (1984) 7.5' USGS topographic map.
Archaeological Surveys, Known Archaeological Sites, Historical Markers, National
Register Properties, and Historic Structures within One-Half Mile
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archeological Sites (ATLAS
2015) indicated that no cultural resources surveys had been conducted within one mile of the
2

27029 Mineral Wells Park tower location, nor were there any documented archaeological sites,
Historic Markers, or National Register Historic Properties (NRHP) within one mile of the PA.

Soils
As shown in Figure 4, the 27029 Mineral Wells Park tower site lies within soils classified as
Truce fine sandy loam (43), normally found on gently sloping (1-3 percent) convex uplands in
eastern Palo Pinto County (Moore 1981; Websoil 2015). Typically, the upper 6 inches (15
centimeters [cm]) is acidic, brown sandy loam, but with an abrupt transition to pink loam from
6 to 7 inches (15-18 cm). From about 7 to 48 inches (18-122 cm), one could expect to observe
yellowish red clay, transitioning to brown, and then pale yellow clay. Below that is pale yellow
shaly clay interbedded with olive shaly clay and thin soft sandstone strata.
This soil classification suggests that the Project Area would be one where there is at best a
minimal potential for buried and significant cultural resources to be extant. A modern aerial
photograph shows that the Project Area lies within the cleared and manicured courtyard area of
an adjacent industrial building, and the utility/access right-of-way crosses through a bar ditch
(see cover photo and Figure 4).

Figure 4. Soils map of the Project Area.

3

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
On November 7, 2015 David Nickels of Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations
conducted an on-line review of the Archeological Site Atlas (Atlas) of the Texas State Historic
Preservation Office (SHPO) in accordance with Federal Communications Commission’s
Nationwide Programmatic Agreement (PA; 47 CFR Part 1). After reviewing the Atlas, Mr.
Nickels found that there are no known and documented archaeological sites, historic markers,
State Archeological Landmarks, or National Register Properties within one mile of the site
proposed for construction of the 27029 Mineral Wells Park tower site.
A review of soils maps both in hard copy and on-line revealed that the soils with any potential
to contain cultural resources are both shallow and acidic. A modern aerial photograph shows that
the Project Area lies within the cleared and manicured courtyard area of an adjacent industrial
building, and the utility/access right-of-way crosses through a bar ditch (see cover photo and
Figure 4).
Accordingly, any cultural resources that may be present have most probably been disturbed or
destroyed, and thus have little or no scientific research potential. Thus, it is the opinion of Mr.
Nickels that there is a very low probability for the existence of any known
undiscovered/unrecorded intact and significant archaeological resources on or near the Project
Area.
Accordingly, Mr. Nickels recommended that no further cultural resources investigations are
warranted at the site, and that construction of the 27029 Mineral Wells Park tower should be
allowed to proceed as planned.

4

References Cited
Atlas 2015

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
November 7, 2015].

Moore, J. D.
1981 Soil Survey of Palo Pinto County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with the Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station, College Station, Texas.
Web Soil Survey
2015 Palo Pinto County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed
November 7, 2015].

5

