A Cultural Resources Survey of the 3.1-Mile
Meiners Ranch Las C Pipeline in La Salle County,
Texas

Prepared for Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd.
San Antonio, Texas
by
David L. Nickels, Principal Investigator
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations
Archaeology Report # 224
April 2013

Abstract
Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd. of San Antonio, Texas contracted with Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations (TAAI) to conduct a pedestrian survey of the 3.1-mile
Meiners Ranch Las C Pipeline to be installed by Mockingbird Midstream Gas Services, L.L.C.
(Mockingbird) in northern La Salle County. The project was entirely privately funded, and the
properties across which the pipeline will cross are privately owned; therefore, no Texas
Antiquities Permit was required.
The proposed Meiners Ranch Las C Pipeline right-of-way was subjected to a pedestrian survey
by two archaeologists on August 25, 2012. Surface visibility ranged from 70 to 100-percent
along the right-of-way, and revealed predominantly mechanically disturbed surfaces due to
blading and land clearing. Particular attention was given to the pipeline’s crossing of Slaughter
Creek, where we conducted shovel testing. However, during the survey we discovered no
evidence of either prehistoric or historic cultural material either within or adjacent to the proposed
right-of-way. No artifacts were collected during this survey.
Accordingly, TAAI recommended that construction of the pipeline be allowed to proceed, with
no further archaeological investigations. However, Tierras Antiguas further recommended that
if any undiscovered cultural resources were encountered during development of the properties,
such finds should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any archaeological
consultant.

Acknowledgments
There are mainly four individuals who are greatly appreciated, and whose efforts contributed to
the successful planning, organization, and completion of this project. They are Ms. Judy Vader
and Mr. Ryan DeBarros, Project Managers at Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, and Mr.
Ronnie Glenewinkel and Mr. David Black, Environmental Coordinator and Permitting Specialist
at Mockingbird Midstream. All were extremely amiable and helpful throughout the project, and
their overall knowledge of the project contributed significantly to our understanding of the
project’s scope of work.
In addition, I express my sincere gratitude to Tierras Antiguas staff archaeologist Belisario Silva,
who worked hard, long hours, and expressed an attitude and work ethic that ensured this survey
was conducted in a thorough and professional manner.

Cover Photo: Meiners Ranch Las C Pipeline right-of-way from N3157682 E487540; facing
south..
i

Table of Contents
Title
Page
Abstract.......................................................................................................................................i
Acknowledgments........................................................................................................................i
List of Figures.............................................................................................................................ii
List of Tables...............................................................................................................................ii
Introduction................................................................................................................................1
Modern Setting...........................................................................................................................2
Paleoenvironment........................................................................................................................4
Cultural Chronology....................................................................................................................4
La Salle County Prehistory and History.......................................................................................9
Site Types to be Expected.........................................................................................................10
Atlas Review of Archaeological Sites and Historical Maps ........................................................13
Soils..........................................................................................................................................16
Survey Goals and Methodology.................................................................................................17
Results of the Investigations......................................................................................................18
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations..........................................................................19
References Cited........................................................................................................................20

List of Figures
Figure

Page

1. La Salle County and Project Area location...........................................................................1
2. Project Area on large topographic map................................................................................1
3. Project Area on local topographic map................................................................................2
4. Physiographic regions of Texas...........................................................................................3
5. Biotic provinces of Texas....................................................................................................3
6. South Texas cultural chronology.........................................................................................5
7. Soils along the Project Area..............................................................................................16
8. Photo of Slaughter Creek crossing....................................................................................18

List of Tables
Table
Page
1. Soils Dissected by the Meiners Ranch Las C Pipeline..........................................................18

ii

Introduction
Flatrock Engineering and
Environmental, Ltd., requested
a cultural resources background
review of the proposed Meiners
Ranch Las C Pipeline in
northern La Salle County, and
hereinafter occasionally referred
to as the Project Area (PA)
(Figures 1-3).
In August 2012, Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological
Investigations (TAAI)
conducted a review of cultural
resources documented either
on, or within one mile of the
PA, as well as other documents
that may be relative for
Figure 1. Location of La Salle County, and the Project Area
significant cultural resources to
in Texas.
exist within the PA.
B as e d u p o n
those reviews,
Tierras
Antiguas then
conducted a
field survey on
August 25,
2012 focusing
on those locales
where buried
and intact
prehistoric
deposits were
most likely to
exist.

Figure 2. Location of the Project Area on large topographic map.
1

Modern
Setting
Climate and
Vegetation
La Salle County
is located in
sout h -central
Texas near its
southern border
with Mexico
(see Figure 1).
Its current
political
boundary
encompasses
1,298 square
miles. The
generally flat to
rolling terrain
ranges in
elevation from
about 580-964
feet above mean
sea level. Clayey
and loamy soils
support the
growth of small
predominately
mesquite trees,
and thorny
scrub brush with
assorted cacti Figure 3. Project Area on Millett (1974) 7.5' USGS topographic map.
and grassy understory, but with all oak, pecan, and elm along the riverine environments such as
the Leona and Frio rivers (Ochoa 1996).
With its semi-arid environment, the county is generally frost-free from late-February through early
December, allowing for a 282-day growing season. The average annual rainfall is about 22 inches,
with most rainfall occurring in May and September. These peaks are the result of thunderstorms
bearing moist air from the Gulf of Mexico to the east, and the Pacific Ocean much farther to the
west. La Salle County is known as part of the Winter Garden Region for the vegetables grown
there (Ochoa 1996; Stevens and Arriaga 1985).

2

However, rainfall amounts vary
significantly from year to year, and the
high evapotranspiration effects in the
area effectively offset any beneficial
surplus of annual rainfall. This is
another reason irrigation systems are so
necessary, and commonly found in use
today throughout the area. Summers are
indeed hot and dry, with temperatures
consistently hovering above 1000F,
although humidity is generally low
compared to environments closer to the
Gulf Coast. Overall, the county’s
climate can be classified as subtropical
steppe.
Hydrology
The Nueces River and the Rio Grande
are the major southeasterly trending
rivers draining the South Texas region.
A subtle divide through the northeastern
portion of the counties causes numerous
intermittent creeks to flow north into Figure 4. Physiographic regions of Texas
the Nueces River, and numerous others (http://www.lib.utexas.edu/geo/pics/txphysio.jpg).
of the same type to drain southward
into the Rio Grande. Many drainages
intermittently flow into both. Although
there are many springs in south Texas,
very few are active due primarily to the
dip of the substrate shales which carry
these subterranean seeps to the south
and east. As a result, some of these
active seeps/springs can be found on the
Mexican side of the national border.
Ancient springs that may have existed in
the area at one time have likely
succumbed to overgrazing and
irrigation pumping during modern times
(Brune 1981). During our investigations
of the Project Area in August 2012, we
observed no flowing water or niche
pools.
Figure 5. Blair’s (1950) biotic provinces of Texas.

3

Flora and Fauna
The project area lies within the South Texas Plain/Brush Country vegetation area (Figure 4) as
defined by Gould (1975), and the regional flora of South Texas has been classified as being part
of the Tamaulipan biotic province extending out from northeast Mexico (Figure 5). This is the
only part of Texas where some vegetation exhibits growth throughout the year (Blair 1950).
Thorny brush is the dominant vegetation today, but this is a relatively recent occurrence, with a
mix of woody and grassland species providing a savanna environment during prehistoric times
(Archer 1995; Black 1989; Hester 1980; Inglis 1964). The original vegetation was an open
grassland mixed with brushy chaparral. Oaks, pecan, and ash were common along perennial
streams. Due in part to overgrazing and the exclusion of fire, the invasion of woody species has
changed the vegetation into “Texas brush country” dominated by mesquite, acacia, spiny
hackberry, brazil, whitebrush, lotebrush, and others (Diamond et al. 1987:203-221). On sandy
soils, the brush includes mesquite with mixed grasses. In contrast, clay soils support mesquite
(Proposis juliflora), various species of Acacia, and mimosa, granjeno or desert hackberry (Celtis
pallida), lignum vitae (Porliera angustifolia), cenizo (Leucophyllum texanum), white brush
(Aloysia texana), prickly pear (Opuntia lindheeimeri), tasajillo (Opuntia leptocaulis), and species
of Condalia and Castela (Blair 1950).
The South Texas Plains/Brush Country exhibits some of the greatest mammalian species diversity
in the state. Sixty-one species of mammals, 36 snakes, 19 lizards, and several species of turtles,
salamanders, and frogs are present in the region (Blair 1950). Approximately 50 species of fish
have been identified in the lower Rio Grande (Lee et al. 1980).

Paleoenvironment
The paleoenvironment of south Texas is as varied as the landscape, and the South Texas
Paleoclimatic record contains significant gaps primarily due to the scarcity of deep, finely
stratified, and well-dated deposits (Stahle and Cleaveland 1995:51). To date, the best record of
paleoenvironmental reconstruction in South Texas has been accomplished by Robinson (1982)
from analysis of phytoliths from three archaeological sites in Live Oak County. Overall, the data
there along with data from other sites in Texas suggest that the waning of the Pleistocene, or lateglacial period, marked a transition from a cooler, wetter environment to one that steadily grew
warmer and drier, and more seasonal, with intermittent moist periods through about 6,000 years
ago. Most researchers then generally agree that the period between 6,000 and 3,000 years ago
was much warmer and drier than today. Since that time, intermittent moist and dry intervals have
occurred over the past 3,000 years.
It is unlikely that the climate has changed significantly in the past few thousand years in the area
that would significantly induce vegetation changes. The greater changes have been induced by
human intervention through the clearing of wooded areas along the river and streams for
construction purposes, pumping more water for irrigation which has lowered water tables, and
overgrazing by livestock. Although there are still many seeps, springs, and streams in the area,
they most probably flowed with greater abundance during wetter intervals than exist at the
4

present time, providing an
a b u n d ant res o u r c e f o r
prehistoric occupants.

Cultural Chronology
The Project Area lies within the
South Texas Archaeological
region as defined by Hester
(1980, 1995, 2004; Figure 8).
Refining a cultural chronology
for south Texas is problematic,
due to the compressed nature of
the archaeological record and
the scarcity of stratified sites
excavated within the region.
The largest and most
informational cultural resources
survey in South Texas was that
conducted prior to development
of the Choke Canyon Reservoir
in Atascosa, Live Oak, and
McMullen counties (e.g. Hall et
al. 1986). Nevertheless, Hester
(1995:433) acknowledges the
paucity of information that
exists for south Texas and as
such offers only a “general
framework” for prehistoric
periods particular to the region
(Figure 6). All dates are given
as approximate years before
present (B.P.), i.e., before
1950.
Paleoindian (11,200 - 7950
B.P.)
This period is estimated at
between ca.11,200–7950 B.P.
in south Texas (Hester 1995;
2004). The Paleoindian period Figure 6. South Texas Archaeological region cultural
began toward the close of the chronology.
5

Pleistocene. Diagnostic artifacts of the early Paleoindian interval include Clovis and Folsom
projectile points. The wide distribution of Clovis-type points across most of North America and
even into Central America suggests a wide dispersal and interaction of the people who made
them. Other artifacts associated with the Clovis culture include bifaces and prismatic blades,
engraved stones, bone and ivory points, stone bolas, ochre, and shaft straighteners. During the
late Paleoindian interval, the first stemmed lanceolate points, such as Angostura, Golondrina, St.
Mary’s Hall, and Barber (among a few others) appear.
In general, the Paleoindian adaptation has been considered to be one of small bands of nomadic,
big-game hunters following herds of Late Pleistocene fauna, including mammoth, mastodons,
bison, camel, and horse, across North America (Black 1989). More recently, emphasis has been
placed on the wide diversity of plants and animals used for subsistence by these early Americans,
such as turtles and tortoises, alligators, mice, badgers, and raccoons, although they undoubtedly
hunted the large animals as well (Collins 1995:381). Known Clovis sites include killsites, quarries,
caches, open campsites, ritual sites, and burials (Hester 1995:433–436; 2004). A Folsom interval
follows the Clovis. Folsom artifacts are fairly common in south Texas; however, no camp sites
or killsites have been found south of a large workshop, Pavo Real (41BX52), in Bexar County
(Hester 1995:434–435; 2004). Most Paleoindian finds in south Texas have consisted of surface
lithic scatters on upland terraces and ridges (Black 1989).
As the warming that marks the transition from Pleistocene to Holocene climates began to take
effect in Texas, prehistoric inhabitants adapted with changes in lifestyle. This climatic shift is also
marked by the decline and extinction of mammoth, mastodon, horse, camel, and giant bison
(Bison antiquus). Large gregarious game animals were perhaps extinct in Texas. Human hunters
were forced to concentrate on deer, antelope, and other medium-size or smaller game. Changes
in the subsistence base required technological shifts that mark the beginning of a new cultural
period known as the Archaic.
Early Archaic (7950 - 4450 B.P.)
Hester (1995:436–438) identifies the Early Archaic, with Early Corner Notched and Early Basal
Notched dart points, as roughly dating between 7950 to 4450 B.P. The extinction of large herds
of megafauna and the changing climate at the beginning of the Holocene stimulated a behavioral
change by the Prehistoric inhabitants of south Texas (McKinney 1981). While the basic huntergatherer adaptation probably remained intact, an economic shift away from big game hunting was
necessary. In general, more intensive exploitation of local and smaller resources such as deer, fish,
and plant bulbs is indicated by greater densities of ground-stone artifacts, fire-cracked rock
cooking features, and more specialized tools. Weir (1976) speculates that Early Archaic groups
were small and highly mobile, an inference based on the fact that Early Archaic sites are thinly
distributed and that diagnostic projectile point types are seen across a wide area, including most
of Texas and northern Mexico. Story (1985) believes that population densities were low during
the Early Archaic, and that groups consisted of related individuals in small bands with “few
constraints on their mobility” (Story 1985:39). Their economy was based on the utilization of a
wide range of resources, especially such year-round resources as prickly pear and lechugilla, as
well as rodents, rabbits, and deer.
6

Middle Archaic (4450 - 2350 B.P.)
Hester (1995:438–441) suggests that the period between 4450 and 2350 B.P. reflects the Middle
Archaic in south Texas. The Middle Archaic appears to have been a time of increased population,
based on the large number of sites from this period (Story 1985:40; Weir 1976:125, 128). On the
South Texas Plains, exploitation of widely scattered, year-round resources such as prickly pear
continued (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13–15), as did hunting deer and rabbit. Weir (1976)
believes that the widely scattered bands prevalent in the Early Archaic now began to coalesce, at
least during the acorn-gathering season, into larger groups who shared the intensive work of
gathering and processing the acorn harvest (Weir 1976:126). Many researchers believe burned
rock middens are a result of this endeavor (Creel 1986; Prewitt 1991; Weir 1976). The common
presence of deer remains in burned rock middens encourages the view that deer processing took
place at burned rock midden sites. Bison bone is encountered in archaeological sites in south
Texas, at least occasionally, during all but the earliest part of the Middle Archaic (Dillehay 1974).
Cemeteries make their first appearance during this period, suggesting a movement toward less
mobility and perhaps territorialism. One of the earliest occurrences dating to the south Texas
Middle Archaic, is Loma Sandia in Live Oak County, which dates between ca. 2550 and 2750
B.P. (Taylor and Highley 1995).
Late Archaic (2350 - 1250 B.P.)
Hester believes the Late Archaic in south Texas may be defined as between 2350–1250 B.P,
Some researchers believe populations increased throughout the Late Archaic (Prewitt 1985),
while others feel populations remained the same or fell during this period (Black 1989:30).
Subsistence is assumed to have become less specialized on acorns, in favor of a broad spectrum
subsistence base (Black 1989:30). Story (1985:44–45) believes the presence of cemeteries
indicates that Late Archaic populations in central and south Texas were increasing and becoming
more territorial. Although inhabitants of the South Texas Plain near Brownsville and Rockport
had begun to make pottery by about 1750 B.P., the northern part of the plain was still “preceramic” until 1,000 years later (Story 1985:45–47). Late Archaic points tend to be much smaller
than Middle Archaic points.
Transitional Archaic (2250 - 1250 B.P.)
A late subperiod or interval of the Late Archaic is frequently referred to as the Terminal Archaic
or Transitional Archaic. Turner et al. (2011) cite data placing the Transitional Archaic as
2250–1250 B.P. Although Hester may lump current data into a Late Archaic period, he cautions
that more evidence will likely result in what may be termed as a “Terminal Archaic” period during
the latter part of the Late Archaic in south Texas. This Terminal Archaic period is represented
by diagnostics such as Ensor, Frio, and Matamoras points which appear to overlap the Late
Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods (Hester 1995:442;2004). Weir (1976) believes this marked
a transition period to localized area sites, a disappearance of burned rock middens and bison, and
a reappearance of highly mobile hunters and gatherers. Others (Black and McGraw 1985; Peter
1982; Skelton 1977) argue that in some locations burned rock middens did not disappear and sites
were more intensely occupied during the Transitional Archaic period.

7

Late Prehistoric (1250 - 420 B.P.)
The term “Late Prehistoric” is commonly used to designate the period following the Late Archaic
in south Texas. Generally, the Late Prehistoric period is thought of as spanning the period
between A. D. 700 - 1530 ([1250 - 420 B.P.] [Hester 1995; 2004]). A series of distinctive traits
mark the shift from the Archaic to the Late Prehistoric period, including the technological shift
to the bow and arrow and the introduction of pottery to central Texas and the northern South
Texas Plain (Black 1989:32; Story 1985:45–47). Two distinct phases recognized within the Late
Prehistoric are the Austin and Toyah. During the Austin phase, there appears to be a subtle
transition from expanding stem projectile points that may have been used as dart points, as well
as early arrow points. The most prevalent point found in Austin phase sites is the Scallorn arrow
point. Settlement shifts into rockshelters such as Scorpion Cave in Medina County (Highley et
al. 1978) and Classen Rockshelter in northern Bexar County (Fox and Fox 1967) have been
noted. Cemeteries from this period often reveal evidence of conflict (Black 1989:32).
Beginning rather abruptly at about 650 B.P., a shift in technology occurred. The Perdiz arrow
point may best represent the appearance of a distinct culture in south-central Texas lasting for
about 300 years, which archaeologists have labeled the Toyah phase. Hester (1995:444)
recognizes this phase as the “best documented Late Prehistoric pattern” throughout south Texas,
with dates ranging between ca. 650/700 to 300/350 B.P. (A.D. 1250/1300 to 1600/1650).
In addition to Perdiz points, evidence of a Toyah culture is manifested as bone-tempered pottery,
bone spatulates, awls, and beads, stone endscrapers, beveled knives, and expediently utilized
flakes. Briefly, expedient lithic technology involves removing flakes from a core in a nonstandard
manner; the purpose is to knock off sharp flakes for immediate use, selecting the ones that best
suit the need at the time. This technology differs from formal, standardized core reduction and
the manufacturing of formal, usually bifacial tools. Expedient lithic technology is a continent-wide
phenomonon indicative of increased sedentism, and is observed in Toyah assemblages in Texas.
Whether the Toyah phase seen in the south-central Texas archaeological record is a result of a
group of people moving into the region, or adapted technologies from the region’s periphery is
a matter of conjecture. Steele and Assad-Hunter (1986) argue for the occurrence of a distinct
change in diet between the Late Archaic and the Late Prehistoric components in two sites in the
Choke Canyon Reservoir area in south Texas. Analysis of the number of identified specimens
(NISP) shows a marked increase in artiodactyla elements present during the later part of the Late
Prehistoric, an increase largely due to the addition of bison to the “menu” (Steele and AssadHunter 1986:468).
Whether or not agriculture was practiced during this period in south Texas has not been
documented. There simply is not enough evidence to postulate there was ever a significant
presence of maize in the area. The later arrival of the Spanish during the later
Protohistoric/Historic period brought significant cultivars to south Texas.
Protohistoric/Historic (420 B.P. - present)
The end of the Late Prehistoric and beginning of the Historic period in south Texas is
characterized by written accounts of European contact with indigenous groups. The Protohistoric
8

period begins in 1528 when Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts of southeast and
south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the hunter-gatherers of Texas
and northern Mexico (e.g., Hallenbeck 1971). Cabeza de Vaca’s account of his stay with the
Miriami in 1533-34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves
to the easily exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter and summer, occasionally sending
a hunting party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near
each other in the semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other
succulents (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13-37).
Linguistically, early protohistoric accounts of the late 1500s indicate that a large group which
spoke Cohuilteco inhabited the area now known as south-central Texas. Coahuiltecan is a term
coined by Mexican linguists in the 1800s, and the name refers to the many small bands of Native
Americans who lived in northeastern Coahuila, Mexico and south Texas. The Coahuiltecans were
rapidly dispersed or killed during the Protohistoric period.
By the 1540s and 1550s Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico, with
several hundred thousand cattle, using Indian slaves as labor. Large mining ventures in northern
Mexico did the same. This encroachment from the south forced Native Americans to escape into
the south-central Texas region.
The period between de Vaca’s written account and the advent of Spanish missions in the late
1600s and early 1700s is referred to as the Protohistoric; a time when few, scant written
documents exist detailing Native American life outside the missions. The Historic period then, is
generally thought of as beginning in the 1700s.
Some 30 miles south of Eagle Pass, the Spanish established Mission San Juan Bautista in 1700
(now modern-day Guerrero). Early Spanish explorers then repeatedly traveled the Camino Real
enroute to newly established missions and settlements in today’s modern Texas throughout the
1700s and 1800s. Mexican families from across the river expanded into Texas, and these families
trace their roots to the early development of the area. In the ensuing years, lawlessness prevailed,
with saloons, gambling houses, outlaws, and slave hunters prevalent.

La Salle County Prehistory and History
Indian artifacts found in La Salle County indicate that the area has been occupied for about
11,000 years. Plentiful food sources such as wild game, fruits, seeds, and roots made the land
hospitable. Early technology included tools from wood and stone, woven basketry, sewed
rabbitskin robes, and a very effective weapon was the atlatl, a throwing stick that greatly
increased the deadliness of their spears (Leffler 1996). Perhaps as early as 1,300 years ago, they
learned to make pottery and to hunt with bows and arrows. During the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, the Coahuiltecan Indians native to La Salle County were squeezed out by
other Indian who were migrating into the area and by the Spanish, who were moving up from the
south. Many of the Coahuiltecans were taken to San Juan Bautista in Coahuila. Apaches and
9

Comanches moved in to take their place (Leffler 1996).
The earliest historic accounts of Native Americans in south Texas and perhaps the La Salle
County area, are those of Cabeza de Vaca. In the 1500s, Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca
traversed parts of southeast and south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling
among the hunter-gatherers of Texas and northern Mexico (e.g., Covey 1961). His account of
his experiences in 1533–34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether
themselves to the easily exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter, and summer,
occasionally sending a hunting party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many
groups would live near each other in the semiarid environs of south Texas to harvest prickly pear
pads and other succulents (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13–37).
By the 1540s and 1550s, Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico with
thousands of cattle, and using Native Americans as slave labor. This encroachment by the Spanish
forced Native American groups from northern Mexico to flee into south Texas. Beginning in the
late 1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio Road, a camino
real, to and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. In the 1700s and 1800s, there are
documented accounts of Spanish entradas passing through the area, but none have been noted
to establish any sort of permanent bases in present-day La Salle County (Chipman 1992)
After the Mexican War of Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage
its citizens to settle in Texas. Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and 1834
that included territory now in La Salle County. None of the recipients seem to have made use of
the land, however. By 1836, when Texas became independent from Mexico, the area remained
populated almost solely by Indians (Leffler 1996).
Between the Texas Revolution and the Mexican War (1836–46), most of La Salle County lay in
the disputed area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River, and it became a haven for
desperate characters until about 1865. New settlers who lived in jacals or dugouts were
frequently being harrassed by hostile Indians and outlaws. Due in part to being pursued by the
Texas Rangers, and being decimated by disease, the Indians were forced to leave La Salle County
by 1877. By 1880, cattle ranching was firmly established, and although sheep ranching was also
an important part of the economy at the time, by 1900 extended droughts and an increase in
predators combined to make sheep ranching a tough and dwindling business (Leffler 1996).
As with rest of the nation, during the Great Depression many of the county’s farmers were forced
to cut back their once-lucrative vegetable production, and they fell back on raising poultry, hogs,
and dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in the county in the 1950s
certainly bolstered La Salle County’s economy, and although large ranches lay claim to most of
the land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much a progressively increasing part
of the county’s development (Leffler 1996).

10

Site Types That Could be Expected Along the Project Area
Prehistoric Open Campsites
Most numerous among the sites recorded in La Salle County are prehistoric open campsites
ranging in age from the Paleoindian period through the Historic period (see Figure 6). Some of
these represent a single campfire where a very small group of Native Americans may have camped
for one night. Others are very large, covering very extensive areas representing large groups of
people that stayed for long periods, perhaps seasonally, with ancestral groups returning to these
same campsites over a period of several thousands of years. Cultural remains to be found at these
large campsites include among other items, an abundance of fire-cracked rocks representing
multiple hearths, a wide variety of chipped stone tools and the lithic debris that results from
making them, ground and smoothed stones used to grind nuts and seeds, faunal remains from
terrestrial and aquatic animals consumed, bone tools, pottery sherds, and mussel and snail shells.
Open campsites occur in all types of environments, whether that be in a plush riverine
environment that offered a wide variety banquet of plant and animal foodstuffs, or in the uplands
away from flowing water sources. Seasonally, the upland grasses, shrubs, cacti offered a different
food source that could be exploited such as various grass seeds, mesquite beans, prickly pear pads
and tunas, and agave hearts. In addition, at various times, bison were known to graze on the
northern South Texas Plains, and were highly sought after for use as food, hides, and bone tools
(Dillehay 1974).
Depending upon the integrity of these open campsites, archaeologists and the Texas Historical
Commission consider these as perhaps the most significant types of sites in regard to their ability
to contribute to our understanding of south Texas prehistory. A few of the desired ingredients
that can indicate significance include cultural material that is buried beneath the surface in a wellpreserved, stratified, and relatively undisturbed context. Although these situations most frequently
occur within stratified terrace deposits adjacent to streams, they can also occur in upland settings
where the landscape has been generally stable through time. Other ingredients that archaeologists
look for in potentially significant campsites include good organic preservation in the form of
charcoal and/or charred plant remains, faunal preservation, temporally diagnostic stone tools or
ceramics, and intact features such as hearths.
Prehistoric Lithic Scatters or Procurement Sites
Lithic scatters are the next most common type of archaeological site that could be expected along
the Meiners Ranch Las C Pipeline. These sites simply represent the chipped stone debris and
broken tools that were left behind when Native Americans made new tools or re-sharpened their
old ones. The general absence of fire-cracked rocks and other cultural material normally found
at open campsites suggest that they did not camp there, or remain there for any extended period
of time (However, small camp fires may have been used to heat-treat chert or quartzite cobbles
to make them more knappable). Yet, they were drawn to these isolated locales because of the
natural outcroppings or surface exposures of good quality raw material such as chert or quartzite
cobbles.

11

Examples of chipped stone most commonly found at these sites include cobbles with one or two
flakes removed, called ‘tested cobbles’. That is, the Native Americans knew from experience the
quality of stone that could most easily be flaked and reduced for stone tool production, so they
‘tested’ the cobble to judge whether it was useable or not. If the quality was judged to be inferior,
then the cobble was tossed aside. That is why the majority of tested cobbles found on these sites
are of poor quality, coarse-grained material. While the finished stone tool products are carried
away from these sites, what remains are those tools broken during the manufacturing process, and
the thousands of pieces of debitage in the form of flakes and angular debris. Also unique to lithic
scatters where large cobbles are present are snapped ‘quarry blanks’. These are simply cobbles
flakes on both sides, reducing the cobble into a transportable ‘blank’ that can be used to further
reduce it and make finished stone tools from the flakes taken off of it. The unbroken quarry
blanks are usually not found on these sites because they have been carried off, presumably to
areas of south Texas where raw material is not readily available. The snapped or broken quarry
blanks are of little or no use, so they are discarded and left behind.
Lithic scatters range in age from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods and can be found
on any landscape setting where gravels or cobbles have been exposed. Notably, gravel outcrops
that were exposed to the surface a few hundred or thousand years ago could be deeply buried
today, and the opposite could also be true; it all depends on the terrain setting and the dynamics
of landscape evolution through time. Most lithic scatters in La Salle County have been
documented along upper stream terraces abutting the eroded upland slopes.
Prehistoric Quarries and Procurement Sites
Prehistoric quarries and procurement also can range in age from the Paleoindian through Historic
periods, but differ from lithic scatters in that at those sites Native Americans exploited loose
gravels, but at times they specifically sought quarry sites where raw material such as cherts or
quartzites were not yet freed from their parent geologic formation, and they had to be ‘quarried’.
These types of sites are rare in south Texas for two reasons: 1) the geological exposures generally
do not present themselves, and 2) throughout Texas, even in central Texas, it is much easier to
pick up gravels from the surface than to try to mine them from hard rock. Quarried and chipped
stone remains likely to be found at these sites include large chunks of angular cherts or quartzites,
as well as parent material detritus, and flaking debris. Snapped quarry blanks can also be
expected. Although a handful of prehistoric quarries or procurement sites have been recorded in
south Texas, they are rare.
Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens
There are no documented burned rock middens in La Salle County. Burned rock middens result
from a series of multiple-use earth ovens that were constructed much like modern-day roasting
pits are dug into the earth for roasting a pig. With repetitive uses, as the larger rocks that serve
as heating elements in the earthen pit fracture and thus become less effective as a thermal source,
they are ‘pitched out’ around the edge of the pit. As the pit becomes unusable, another is dug
near by, and the procedure repeated. Over time, these multiple pits and the ‘pitched out’ fire12

cracked rocks coalesce together, obscuring each pit as indiscernible. (For a full discussion of the
formation of burned rock middens and their documented presence in Texas, see Leach and
Bousman 2001; Leach et al. 2001; Mauldin et al. 2003).
Prehistoric Burial and Cemetery Sites
Although not common, isolated prehistoric burials and cemeteries have been documented in south
Texas. Individual and isolated burials have been found in association with open campsites in both
upland settings as well as in alluvial terraces along streams, but the largest prehistoric cemetery
found in proximity to the Meiners Ranch Las C Pipeline is 41LK28, in Live Oak County.
Historic Sites
As discussed above in the Cultural Chronology portion of this report, although Spanish ranchers
had established large ranches in northern Mexico by the mid-16th century, and Spanish entradas
began penetrating south Texas in the 1700s and 1800s, there is no record of any sort of
permanent structures in the area during those periods (Chipman 1992), the area was generally not
considered safe for settlement by whites until after the Civil War in 1865, and white settlers then
began establishing smaller ranches and farmlands (Leffler 2011).
Because of the vastness of the landscape and the relatively late settlement and development of
south Texas compared to east and central Texas and northern Mexico, historic sites are not
abundant, but they certainly do exist. The most common types to be encountered are related to
ranching and farming endeavors, or small communities from the 19th and 20th centuries. Site types
most commonly include farmsteads or ranches with corrals, cisterns, chimney and foundation
remains from both main houses and outbuildings, related trash dumps, an occasional family burial
or cemetery, school houses, churches, community buildings, and industry-related structures or
construction projects.
In general, the area has apparently been historically used as ranchland pasture, with no
development other than associated ranching activities such as windmills, stock tanks, corrals, and
sparsely scattered outbuildings. In sum, there may be rare and isolated occurrences of early
ranching activities along the Meiners Ranch Las C Pipeline, but the expectations of encountering
any archaeological site of significance from the 1500s through the mid-1900s along those portions
of the pipeline were minimal.

Archaeological Atlas Site and Historic Map Results
We preface this section by stating that although it presents the number of sites and their types
documented within the county, the results simply provide the data that is available. In reality, the
number of documented sites and their types are very heavily skewed based upon the types of
cultural resource surveys, and the areas of those surveys. That said, the data that is available on
the Texas Atlas is only as good as the areas of south Texas that the surveys represent. Most of
13

south Texas has never been subjected to formal cultural resource surveys, so it is conceded that
the true character of the archaeological record is very poorly understood. Nevertheless, the few
surveys that have been accomplished provide at least some aspect of what the region looks like
from an archaeological perspective.
La Salle County and South Texas
Very few, and sparsely scattered archaeological surveys have been conducted in La Salle County.
As of April 7, 2013 there were 205 archaeological sites recorded within the county, and a large
number of those were found on pipeline surveys. Nevertheless, the time-diagnostic artifacts
discovered in La Salle County provide evidence that the landscape was occupied as early as
11,000 years before the present.
The site types are as varied as the landscape. Large open campsites with numerous hearths, or
campfires, a wide assortment of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and butchered
animal remains are most commonly located along stream or river terraces. Where gravels outcrop,
either along eroded streambeds, or on higher terrain where more ancient gravels are sometimes
exposed in isolated pockets, one can expect stone chipping stations, or prehistoric quarries (Atlas
2013).
Of the 205 sites, 88 are prehistoric open campsites, 1 is a lithic procurement site, and 113 are
prehistoric lithic scatters. The more significant and deeply buried open campsites with
archaeological research potential lie close to streams. Historic components on these same
prehistoric sites include historic windmills and areas of scattered glass and ceramic sherds, or in
some cases there are large trash dumps. One unique historic site is Fort Ewell (41LS19), an adobe
structure located on the old Laredo to San Antonio Road, and that served the U.S. Army from
1852-1854. The only State Archaeological Landmark (SAL) recorded in La Salle County is the
County Courthouse in Cotulla (Leffler 1996; Atlas 2013).
Finally, one of the more potentially significant archaeological sites in the south Texas
archaeological region is located in La Salle County; this being the Oulline Site (41LS3). The
Oulline Site covers approximately 40 acres, about eight miles north of Cotulla. Diagnostic
artifacts recovered from this large open campsite range in age from Paleoindian through the Late
Prehistoric periods, and demonstrate the potential for other significant archaeological sites to exist
in the area (Hester et al. 1969).
The PA lies to the west of a large archaeological survey conducted in anticipation of the
construction of the Choke Canyon Reservoir (e.g, Hall et al. 1981). During that survey conducted
in the 1980s, 116 prehistoric archaeological sites located in both Live Oak and McMullen
counties were documented, ranging in age from 350 years ago to 11,000 years ago. Through all
the periods of Choke Canyon's history, humans subsisted by hunting and gathering natural food
resources available in the area. Many of the prehistoric sites are situated on terrace deposits,
ridges, and ridge promontories overlooking streams in the upper reaches of second and third low
order tributaries.

14

In addition, archaeologists from the Center for Archaeological Research at the University of
Texas at San Antonio conducted archaeological investigations at eight historic sites at Choke
Canyon Reservoir. A number of different types of structures were investigated, the purpose being
to extract as much information as possible about architecture, lifestyles, and settlement patterns
during the last half of the 19th century within the reservoir. Artifacts recovered helped recreate
the life of the people, demonstrating how they met the challenges of living in a frontier area, and
how life changed after the Civil War and the coming of law and order, railroads, and modern
communications (Fox and Ward 1986).
Surveys and Sites within One Mile of the Project Area
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archeological sites indicated that
no professional archaeological surveys had been conducted within one mile (1,609 meters), and
there were no known archaeological sites within one mile. However, as shown in Figure 3,
Tierras Antiguas conducted a survey of both the Slaughter Ranch Lateral and the Shining Star
Lateral in June 2011. In neither case were any archaeological sites discovered within one mile of
the proposed Meiners Ranch Las C Pipeline (Nickels 2011a, b).
In August 2012 and again in March 2013, TAAI conducted a survey of the Frio Dilley
Interconnect and its subsequent re-alignment. However, once again, no archaeological sites were
discovered within one mile of the proposed Meiners Ranch Las C Pipeline (Nickels 2012, 2013).
Historic Maps
Because of the relatively low habitation in generally rural areas that the Meiners Ranch Las C
Pipeline passes through, little or no attention was given to early aerial photography. In lieu of this,
the oldest topographic map found of the area was a 1942 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers map of
the Dilley area (Map 2012). In that year, no historic structures were mapped either along, or in
close proximity to the proposed Meiners Ranch Las C Pipeline. In sum, the Meiners Ranch Las
C Pipeline appears to be in a rural area of La Salle County that was either void of structures, or
warranted little attention.
Although no historic structures are apparent along the proposed Meiners Ranch Las C Pipeline
right-of-way, the map is not exact by today’s standards, and it is possible that historic water
tanks, corrals, outbuildings other structures related to early ranching activities could be
encountered along the Project Area that do not appear on any old maps. Nevertheless, the lack
of comprehensive historic map and aerial information, coupled with the paucity of cultural
resources surveys within the area is possibly, and perhaps probably, why no information is
available regarding the presence of historic structures, ranching or industrial activities, or persons
of historic significance to the immediate area. Historic sites recorded in La Salle County consist
of local family cemeteries with just a few burials in each, house sites and farmsteads from as early
as the 1850s, and trash scatters. Technically, any structures old than 45 years are now considered
of interest by the Texas Historical Commission, and this should be considered when the Project
Area is developed.

15

Soils
Figure 7 depicts
the soils that
will to be
dissected by the
Meiners Ranch
Las C Pipeline.
It will cross
through five
different soil
types that offer
varying depths,
sedimentation
and deposition
rates. As such,
they likewise
imply the
potential for the
preservation of
intact cultural
resources to
exist. Table 1
lists the soils
that are to be
dissected by the
Meiners Ranch
Las C Pipeline
(Garbriel et al.
1994; Web Soil
Survey 2012).
The terrain and
soils existing in Figure 7. Soils to be dissected by the Meiners Ranch Las C Pipeline.
these upland
areas along the Meiners Ranch Las C Pipeline suggest for the most part, a minimal to moderate
probability for buried and intact archaeological deposits to exist. It is unlikely that significant sites
are extant in these upland areas. However, the potential terrace deposits along Slaughter Creek
definitely increase the possibility for deep and well stratified deposits.

16

Table 1. Soils to be Dissected by the Meiners Ranch Las C Pipeline.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Buried and Intact
Archaeological Potential

Brystal fine sandy loam
(ByB)

Deep loamy soils on convex-form
uplands

Minimal to Moderate to about
20 inches below the surface

Dilley fine sandy loam
(DLC)

Shallow loamy soils in upland areas

Minimal to 10 inches below
the surface

Duval loamy fine sand
(DsC)

Shallow soils on 0-5% slopes in the
uplands

Minimal to about 14 inches
below the surface

Poteet very fine sandy loam
(Pt)

Very deep loamy soils in narrow
drainageways on uplands

Minimal to Moderate to about
34 inches below the surface

Webb very fine sandy loam
(WCB)

Deep loamy soils on gently undulating
uplands

Minimal to about 14 inches
below the surface

Field Survey Goals and Methodology
Goals
The project goals focused on archaeological issues that could be addressed by the types of data
obtained through pedestrian survey, along with limited shovel testing. The topics addressed were
site type, distribution, density, size, depth, and stratigraphy. The theoretical framework is
structured around patterns of settlement, mobility, subsistence, and social systems for the South
Texas region.
The goals of the project were to:
1)

locate and record cultural locations and sites in the project area using a systematic
survey methodology;

2)

quantify site size, as well as depth, and stratigraphy; and,

3)

place any diagnostic artifacts within the regional time frame.

Methods and Levels of Effort
Two archaeologists conducted an intensive 100-percent pedestrian survey along the pipeline,
meandering back and forth across the 100-foot width of the right-of-way (ROW). Surface
visibility ranged from 50 to 100 percent. All cutbanks, and rodent and mammal backdirt piles
along the right-of-way were thoroughly examined. In accordance with a general “no collection”
policy, cultural material of a redundant nature, both prehistoric and historic, were not to be
17

collected. Instead, they were to be fully documented via sketches, field photographs, and copious
notes.
Exceptions were to be made for diagnostic artifacts, particularly those artifacts which could be
considered as significant to the interpretation of Texas prehistory, such as Early ArchaicPaleoindian transitional, or Paleoindian diagnostics. These were to be collected on a case-by-case
basis, and that decision was left up to the Principal Investigator and/or the Project Archaeologist.
Historic buildings, trash scatters, or other historic occurrences adjacent to the ROW were to be
documented with photographs and included in this report of investigations.
Shovel tests were dug in 20-centimeter (cm) levels, and all sediments were screened through 1/4inch wire mesh. Following our designed research plan, any artifacts recovered from shovel tests
were not to be collected, but were to be placed in the upper 20 cm of the backfilled shovel test.
The results of shovel testing were fully documented on Shovel Test forms (available upon request
from TAAI in Martindale, Texas).

Results of the Investigations
During the survey it
became readily apparent
that approximately 80
percent of the project’s
surface area was either
mechanically disturbed,
or deflated by artificial
processes. In that
regard,
the surface
visibility was generally
excellent in the uplands,
allowing for the
discovery of any artifacts
along the right-of-way
(see for example, cover
photo). Although four
shovel tests were
excavated to 60-70
centimeters below the Figure 8. Slaughter Creek crossing @N3157961 E478695 (NAD83)
s u r f a c e o n t h e facing west.
approaches to Slaughter
Creek, all revealed silty clay loam with yellowish brown clay mottling. In addition, the cutbanks
along Slaughter Creek were thoroughly examined, but no cultural materials were observed
(Figure 8). In sum, no evidence of either prehistoric or historic cultural material was observed
either on or below the surface along the entire right-of-way.
18

Survey Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations

The proposed Meiners Ranch Las C Pipeline right-of-way was subjected to a pedestrian survey
by two archaeologists on August 25, 2012. Surface visibility ranged from 70 to 100-percent
along the right-of-way, and revealed predominantly mechanically disturbed surfaces due to
blading and land clearing. Particular attention was given to the pipeline’s crossing of Slaughter
Creek, where we conducted shovel testing. However, during the survey we discovered no
evidence of either prehistoric or historic cultural material either within or adjacent to the proposed
right-of-way. No artifacts were collected during this survey.
Accordingly, TAAI recommends that construction of the pipeline be allowed to proceed, with no
further archaeological investigations. However, Tierras Antiguas further recommended that if any
undiscovered cultural resources were encountered during development of the properties, such
finds should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any archaeological consultant

19

References Cited
Archer, S.
1995

Tree-grass Dynamics in a Prosopis-thornscrub Savannah Parkland:
Reconstructing the Past and Predicting the Future. Ecoscience 2(1):84-99.

2012

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/.
[Accessed July 11, 2012].

2013

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/.
[Accessed April7, 2013].

Atlas

Black, S. L.
1989

Environmental Setting. In From the Gulf Coast to the Rio Grande: Human
Adaptation in the Central, South, and Lower Pecos, Texas, by T. R. Hester, S.
L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. J. Reinhard, and L. C.
Bement, pp. 5-17. Research Series No. 33, Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

Black, S. L., and A. J. McGraw
1985

The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change and Continuity in the
Upper Salado Creek Drainage, South-Central Texas. Archaeological Survey
Report, No. 100. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio.

Blair, W. F.
1950

The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-117.

Brune, G.
1981

Springs of Texas. Branch-Smith, Fort Worth.

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981

Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

Chipman, D. E.
1992

Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.

20

Collins, M. B.
2004

Archeology in Central Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, pp. 101-126. Edited
by T. K. Perttula. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

Covey, C. (editor)
1961

Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier
Books, New York.

Creel, D. G.
1986

A Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in West Central Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Arizona, Tucson.

Diamond, D.D., D. H. Riskind, and S. L. Orzell
1987

A Framework for Plant Community Classification and Conservation in Texas.
The Texas Journal of Science 39(3):203-221.

Dillehay, T.
1974

Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19(64):180–196.

Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986

Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon
Reservoir, Southern Texas. Choke Canyon Series, Volume 12. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Fox, A. A., and D. E. Fox
1967

The Classen Rockshelter, 41BX23. Manuscript on file. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Gabriel, W. J., D. Arriaga, and J. W. Stevens
1994

Soil Survey of La Salle County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, DC in cooperation with
the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station and the Texas State Soil and Water
Conservation Board. College Station, Texas.

Gould, F. W.
1975

Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. Texas Agricultural
Experimentation Station, College Station.

Hall, G. D., T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black
1981

The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir, Southern Texas: Results of
Phase II Archaeological Investigations. Choke Canyon Series: Volume 10.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
21

Hallenbeck, C.
1971

Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca: The Journey and Route of the First European
to Cross the Continent of North America, 1534-1536. Kennikat Press
Scholarly Reprints, Port Washington, New York.

Hester, T. R.
2004

The Prehistory of South Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, pp. 127-154.
Edited by T. K. Perttula. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

1995

The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:427-459.

1980

Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur Archaeologists.
Corona Press, San Antonio.

Hester, T. R., L. D. White, and J. White
1969

Archeological Materials from the Oulline Site (41LS3) and Other Sites in La
Salle County, Southwest Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. XXI, No.
2.

Highley, L., C. Graves, and G. Judson
1978

Archeological Investigations at Scorpion Cave (41ME7), Medina County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:139–194.

Inglis, J. M.
1964

A History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain. Bulletin #45. Texas Parks
and Wildlife Department, Austin.

Leach, J. D., and C. B. Bousman
2001

Cultural and Secondary Formation Processes: On the Dynamic Accumulation
of Burned Rock Middens, Chapter 7. In Test Excavations at the Culebra
Creek Site, 41BX126, San Antonio, Texas by D. L. Nickels, C. B. Bousman, J.
D. Leach, and D. A. Cargill, pp. 119-145. Archaeological Survey Report, No.
265, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio and Archeological Studies, Report 3, Environmental Affairs Division,
Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.

Leach, J. D., D. L. Nickels, B. K. Moses, and R. Jones
2001

Appendix D. Estimating Rates of Burned Rock Discard: Results from an
Experimental Earth Oven. In Test Excavations at the Culebra Creek Site,
41BX126, San Antonio, Texas by D. L. Nickels, C. B. Bousman, J. D. Leach,
and D. A. Cargill, pp. 119-145. Archaeological Survey Report, No. 265,
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio

22

Lee, D. S., C. R. Gilbert, C. H. Hocutt, R. E. Jenkins, P. E. McAllister, J. R. Stauffer, Jr.
1980

Atlas of North American Freshwater Fishers. North Carolina Biological
Survey Publication 1980-12, North Carolina State Museum of Natural History.

Leffler, J.
1996

La Salle County. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 4, pp. 83-86.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

2012

Dilley, Texas. 1942 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 1:62,500' topographic map.
Perry Castañeda Maps. Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed August 15,
2012].

Map

Mauldin, R. P., D. L. Nickels, and C. J. Broehm
2003

Archaeological Testing to Determine the National Register Eligibility Status
of 18 Prehistoric Sites on Camp Bowie, Brown County, Texas. Archaeological
Survey Report, No. 334, Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio and the Adjutant General’s Department of Texas,
Department of Facilities and Engineering Environmental Branch, Austin,
Texas.

McKinney, W. W.
1981

Early Holocene Adaptations in Central and Southern Texas: The Problem of
the Paleo-Indian-Archaic Transition. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 52:91–120.

Nickels, D. L.
2013

A Cultural Resources Survey of the Re-Aligned Frio Dilley Interconnect in
North-Central La Salle County, Texas. Interim Letter Report submitted to
Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd., San Antonio, TX by Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, TX (March 31, 2013).

2012

A Full Cultural Resources Background Review, and Field Survey of a Segment
of the Frio Dilley Interconnect Pipeline in Northern La Salle County, Texas.
Interim Letter Report Submitted to Flatrock Engineering and Environmental,
Ltd., San Antonio, TX by Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations,
Martindale, TX (August 25, 2012).

2011a A Cultural Resources Field Survey of the 3.1-Mile Slaughter Ranch Lateral
Line in La Salle County, Texas. Archaeological Report #46. Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, Texas.

23

2011b A Cultural Resources Field Survey of the 7.2-Mile Shining Star Lateral Line
in La Salle County, Texas. Archaeological Report #47. Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, Texas.
Perry Castañeda Library
2012

Perry Castañeda Maps. Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed July 15, 2012].

Peter, D. E.
1982

Alternative Perspectives on Burned Rock Middens, In Archaeological
Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, Vol. 2,
compiled and edited by T. R. Hays, pp. 20.1–20.15. Archaeology Program,
Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.

Prewitt, E. R.
1991

Burned Rock Middens: A Summary of Previous Investigations and
Interpretations. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An Archeological
Symposium, edited T. R. Hester, pp. 25–32. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Robinson, R. L.
1982

Biosilica Analysis of Three Prehistoric Archaeological Sites in the Choke
Canyon Reservoir, Live Oak County, Texas: Preliminary Summary of Climatic
Implications. In Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir,
South Texas: The Phase I Findings, edited by G. D. Hall, S. L. Black, and C.
Graves, pp. 597-610. Choke Canyon Series, No. 5. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Skelton, D. W.
1977

Archeological Investigations at the Fayette Power Project, Fayette County,
Texas. Research Report 60. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Stahle, D. W. , and M. K. Cleaveland
1995

Texas Paleoclimatic Data from Daily to Millennial Time Scales. In The
Changing Climate of Texas: Predictability and Implications for the Future,
edited by J. Norwine, J. R. Giardino, G. R. North, and J. B. Valdes, pp. 49-69.
GeoBooks, Texas A&M University, College Station.

Steele, D. G., and C. Assad Hunter
1986

Analysis of Vertebrate Faunal Remains from 41MC222 and 41MC296,
McMullen County, Texas. In The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon
Reservoir, Southern Texas: Results of Phase II Archaeological Investigations,
24

edited by G. D. Hall, T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black. Choke Canyon Series, No.
10. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Story, D. A.
1985

Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coastal Plain. In
Prehistoric Food Production in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp.
19–56. Anthropological Papers No. 75. Museum of Anthropology, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Taylor, A. J., and C. L. Highly
1995

Archaeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A
Prehistoric Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. 2 volumes. Studies in
Archeology No. 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.

Turner, E. S., T. R. Hester, and R. McReynolds
2011

Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Taylor Trade Publishing. New York.

Web Soil Survey
2012

Weir, F. A.
1976

La Salle County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx. [Accessed July 1,
2012].

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. Anthropology
Department, Washington State University.

25

