A Cultural Resources Survey of the 13.8-Mile
NHL Pearsall Pipeline from the Pistol Well Pad to the
NHL Pearsall Pad, Dimmit County, Texas

Prepared for Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd.
San Antonio, Texas
by
David L. Nickels, Principal Investigator
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations
Report #60
November 2011

Abstract
Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd. of San Antonio, Texas contracted with Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations (TAAI) to conduct a complete field survey of the 13.8mile NHL Pearsall Pipeline from the Pistol Well Pad to the NHL Pearsall Well Pad to be installed
by Mockingbird Midstream Gas Services, L.L.C. (Mockingbird) in north-central Dimmit County,
Texas. The project was entirely privately funded, and the properties across which the pipeline will
cross are privately owned; therefore, no Texas Antiquities Permit was required.
A 100-percent pedestrian survey with shovel testing along the 13.8-mile right-of-way was
conducted by four archaeologists during the period March 17-19, 2011. During the course of the
survey one previously undocumented prehistoric lithic scatter was discovered, along with one
isolated Clear Fork gouge. The only artifact collected during this survey was the Clear Fork
gouge. Following further examination in the laboratory, it was returned to the landowner.
In the opinion of Tierras Antiguas, the newly documented site does not possess the integrity that
warrants significance as outlined by the Antiquities Code of Texas. As such, Tierras Antiguas
recommended that the development of the NHL Pearsall Pipeline as currently aligned be allowed
to proceed as planned. However, Tierras Antiguas further recommended that if any additional,
undiscovered cultural resources were encountered during development, such finds should be
examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological consultant.

Acknowledgments
There are mainly four individuals who are greatly appreciated, and whose efforts contributed to
the successful planning, organization, and completion of this project. They are Mr. David Black,
Ms. Judy Vader, and Mr. Ryan DeBarros, Project Managers at Flatrock Engineering and
Environmental, and Mr. Ronnie Glenewinkel, Environmental Coordinator at Mockingbird
Midstream. All were extremely amiable and helpful throughout the project, and their overall
knowledge of the project contributed significantly to our understanding of the project’s scope of
work.
In addition, I express my sincere gratitude to Tierras Antiguas staff archaeologists Belisario Silva,
Karl Heubchen, Josh Hamilton, Joey Stahl, and Daniel Aylward, who worked hard, long hours,
and expressed an attitude and work ethic that ensured this survey was conducted in a thorough
and professional manner.

i

Table of Contents
Title
Page
Abstract.........................................................................................................................................i
Acknowledgments..........................................................................................................................i
List of Figures............................................................................................................. .................ii
List of Tables................................................................................................................................ii
Introduction..................................................................................................................................1
Modern Environmental Setting......................................................................................................2
Paleoenvironment.........................................................................................................................3
Cultural Chronology.....................................................................................................................4
Dimmit County Prehistory and History........................................................................................9
Site Types to be Expected.......................................................................................................10
Cultural Resources Background Review......................................................................................13
Soils............................................................................................................................................16
Survey Goals and Methodology.................................................................................................20
Results of the Investigations.......................................................................................................23
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations...........................................................................26
References Cited.........................................................................................................................27

List of Figures
Figure
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

Page

Dimmit County and project location.....................................................................................1
Pipeline on topographic maps..............................................................................................1
Physiographic regions of Texas............................................................................................3
Biotic provinces of Texas.....................................................................................................3
South Texas cultural chronology..........................................................................................5
Adjacent archaeological surveys.........................................................................................15
Soils map of western segment...........................................................................................18
Soils map of middle segment............................................................................................19
Soils map of eastern segment............................................................................................19
Topographic map with locations of shovel tests along Segment 1.......................................21
Topographic map with locations of shovel tests along Segment 2.....................................21
Topographic map with locations of shovel tests along Segment 3......................................22
Topographic map with locations of shovel tests along Segment 4......................................22
Topographic map with locations of shovel tests along Segment 5......................................23
Photograph of Clear Fork gouge......................................................................................24
41DM172 site map...........................................................................................................25

ii

List of Tables
Table
Page
1. Soils Dissected by the NHL Pearsall Pipeline..................................................................17

iii

Introduction
Flatrock Engineering and Environmental,
Ltd., requested a cultural resources
survey of the proposed 13.8-mile NHL
Pearsall Pipeline from the Pistol Well
Pad to the NHL Pearsall Well Pad, to be
installed by Mockingbird Midstream Gas
Services, L.L.C. (Mockingbird) in northcentral Dimmit County, Texas, and
hereinafter occasionally referred to as the
Project Area (PA) (Figures 1 and 2).
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological
Investigations (TAAI) conducted a 100percent pedestrian survey with intensive
shovel testing along the right-of-way
Figure 1. Location of Dimmit County and the Project
during the period 17-19 March, 2011.
Area in Texas.

Figure 2. Location of the NHL Pearsall Pipeline on Carrizo Springs East (1972),
Asherton (1982), and Asherton NW (1982) USGS 7.5' topographic maps.

1

Modern Environmental Setting
Climate and Vegetation
Dimmit county is located in south-central Texas near its southern border with Mexico (see Figure
1). Its current political boundary encompasses 1,307 square miles. The generally flat to rolling
terrain ranges in elevation from about 500-800 feet above mean sea level. Clayey and loamy soils
support the growth of small predominately mesquite trees, and thorny scrub brush with assorted
cacti and grassy understory.
With its semi-arid environment, the county is generally frost-free from mid-February through early
December, allowing for a 290-day growing season. The average annual rainfall is about 22 inches,
with most rainfall occurring in May and September. These peaks are the result of thunderstorms
bearing moist air from the Gulf of Mexico to the east, and the Pacific Ocean much farther to the
west. Dimmit County is known as part of the Winter Garden Region for the vegetables grown
there (Leffler 1996; Stevens and Arriaga 1985).
However, rainfall amounts vary significantly from year to year, and the high evapotranspiration
effects in the area effectively offset any beneficial surplus of annual rainfall. This is another reason
irrigation systems are so necessary, and commonly found in use today throughout the area.
Summers are indeed hot and dry, with temperatures consistently hovering above 1000F, although
humidity is generally low compared to environments closer to the Gulf Coast. Overall, the county’s
climate can be classified as subtropical steppe.
Hydrology
The Nueces River and the Rio Grande are the major southeasterly trending rivers draining the
South Texas region. A subtle divide through the northeastern portion of the county causes
numerous intermittent creeks to flow north into the Nueces River, and numerous others of the
same type to drain southward into the Rio Grande. Many drainages intermittently flow into both
rivers during infrequent seasonal periods of abundant rainfall. Although there are many springs in
Dimmit County, very few are active due primarily to the dip of the substrate shales which carry
these subterranean seeps to the south and east. As a result, some of these active seeps/springs can
be found on the Mexican side of the national border. Ancient springs that may have existed in the
area at one time have likely succumbed to overgrazing and irrigation pumping during modern times
(Brune 1981). During our investigation of the project area in March 2011, we observed no flowing
water or niche pools.
Flora and Fauna
The project area lies within the South Texas Plain/Brush Country vegetation area as defined by
Gould (1975), and the regional flora of South Texas has been classified as being part of the
Tamaulipan biotic province extending out from northeast Mexico (Figures 3 and 4). This is the
only part of Texas where some vegetation exhibits growth throughout the year (Blair 1950; Map
2011a). Thorny brush is the dominant vegetation today, but this is a relatively recent occurrence,
with a mix of woody and grassland species providing a savanna environment during prehistoric
times (Archer 1995; Black 1989; Hester 1980; Inglis 1964). The original vegetation was an open
2

grassland mixed with brushy chaparral.
Oaks, pecan, and ash were common
along perennial streams. Due in part to
overgrazing and the exclusion of fire, the
invasion of woody species has changed
the vegetation into “Texas brush
country” dominated by mesquite, acacia,
spiny hackberry, brazil, whitebrush,
lotebrush, and others (Diamond et al.
1987:203-221). On sandy soils, the brush
includes mesquite with mixed grasses. In
contrast, clay soils support mesquite
(Proposis juliflora), various species of
Acacia, and mimosa, granjeno or desert
hackberry (Celtis pallida), lignum vitae
(Porliera angustifolia), cenizo
(Leucophyllum texanum), white brush
(Aloysia texana), prickly pear (Opuntia
lindheeimeri), tasajillo (Opuntia
leptocaulis), and species of Condalia and
Castela (Blair 1950).
The South Texas Plains/Brush Country Figure 3. Physiographic regions of Texas
exhibits some of the greatest mammalian (http://www.lib.utexas.edu/geo/pics/txphysio.jpg)
species diversity in the state. Sixty-one
species of mammals, 36 snakes, 19
lizards, and several species of turtles,
salamanders, and frogs are present in the
region (Blair 1950). Approximately 50
species of fish have been identified in the
lower Rio Grande (Lee et al. 1980).

Paleoenvironment
The paleoenvironment of south Texas is
as varied as the landscape, and the South
Texas Paleoclimatic record contains
significant gaps primarily due to the
scarcity of deep, finely stratified, and
well-dated deposits (Stahle and
Cleaveland 1995:51). To date, the best
record of paleoenvironm ental Figure 4. Blair’s (1950) biotic provinces of Texas
(Map 2011a).
3

reconstruction in South Texas has been accomplished by Robinson (1982) from analysis of
phytoliths from three archaeological sites in Live Oak County. Overall, the data there along with
data from other sites in Texas suggest that the waning of the Pleistocene, or late-glacial period,
marked a transition from a cooler, wetter environment to one that steadily grew warmer and drier,
and more seasonal, with intermittent moist periods through about 6,000 years ago.
Most researchers then generally agree that the period between 6,000 and 3,000 years ago was
much warmer and drier than today. Since that time, intermittent moist and dry intervals have
occurred over the past 3,000 years.
It is unlikely that the climate has changed significantly in the past few thousand years in the area
that would significantly induce vegetation changes. The greater changes have been induced by
human intervention through the clearing of wooded areas along the river and streams for
construction purposes, pumping more water for irrigation which has lowered water tables, and
overgrazing by livestock. Although there are still many seeps, springs, and streams in the area, they
most probably flowed with greater abundance during wetter intervals than exist at the present time,
providing an abundant resource for prehistoric occupants.

Cultural Chronology
The project area lies within the South Texas Archaeological region as defined by Hester (1980,
1995, 2004; Figure 5). Refining a cultural chronology for south Texas is problematic, due to the
compressed nature of the archaeological record and the scarcity of stratified sites excavated within
the region. The largest and most informational cultural resources survey in South Texas was that
conducted prior to development of the Choke Canyon Reservoir in Atascosa, Live Oak, and
McMullen counties (e.g. Hall et al. 1986). Nevertheless, Hester (1995:433) acknowledges the
paucity of information that exists for south Texas and as such offers only a “general framework”
for prehistoric periods particular to the region (Figure 5). All dates are given as approximate years
before present (B.P.), i.e., before 1950.

Paleoindian (11,200 - 7950 B.P.)
This period is estimated at between ca.11,200–7950 B.P. in south Texas (Hester 1999). The
Paleoindian period began toward the close of the Pleistocene. Diagnostic artifacts of the early
Paleoindian interval include Clovis and Folsom projectile points. The wide distribution of Clovistype points across most of North America and even into Central America suggests a wide dispersal
and interaction of the people who made them. Other artifacts associated with the Clovis culture
include bifaces and prismatic blades, engraved stones, bone and ivory points, stone bolas, ochre,
and shaft straighteners. During the late Paleoindian interval, the first stemmed lanceolate points,
such as Angostura, Golondrina, St. Mary’s Hall, and Barber (among a few others) appear.
In general, the Paleoindian adaptation has been considered to be one of small bands of nomadic,
big-game hunters following herds of Late Pleistocene fauna, including mammoth, mastodons,
4

bison, camel, and horse, across
North America (Black 1989).
More recently, emphasis has been
placed on the wide diversity of
plants and animals used for
subsistence by these early
Americans, such as turtles and
tortoises, alligators, mice,
badgers, and raccoons, although
they undoubtedly hunted the
large animals as well (Collins
1995:381). Known Clovis sites
include killsites, quarries, caches,
open campsites, ritual sites, and
burials (Hester 1995:433–436).
A Folsom interval follows the
Clovis. Folsom artifacts are fairly
common in south Texas;
however, no camp sites or
killsites have been found south of
a large workshop, Pavo Real
(41BX52), in Bexar County
(Hester 1995:434–435). Most
Paleoindian finds in south Texas
have consisted of surface lithic
scatters on upland terraces and
ridges (Black 1989).
As the warming that marks the
transition from Pleistocene to
Holocene climates began to take
effect in Texas, prehistoric
inhabitants adapted with changes
in lifestyle. This climatic shift is
also marked by the decline and
ex tinction of mammoth,
mastodon, horse, camel, and
giant bison (Bison antiquus).
Large gregarious game animals
were perhaps extinct in Texas.
Human hunters were forced to
concentrate on deer, antelope,
and other medium-size or smaller
game. Changes in the subsistence

Figure 5. South Texas Archaeological region cultural
chronology.
5

base required technological shifts that mark the beginning of a new cultural period known as the
Archaic.
Early Archaic (7950 - 4450 B.P.)
Hester (1995:436–438) identifies the Early Archaic, with Early Corner Notched and Early Basal
Notched dart points, as roughly dating between 7950 to 4450 B.P. The extinction of large herds
of megafauna and the changing climate at the beginning of the Holocene stimulated a behavioral
change by the Prehistoric inhabitants of south Texas (McKinney 1981). While the basic huntergatherer adaptation probably remained intact, an economic shift away from big game hunting was
necessary. In general, more intensive exploitation of local and smaller resources such as deer, fish,
and plant bulbs is indicated by greater densities of ground-stone artifacts, fire-cracked rock
cooking features, and more specialized tools. Weir (1976) speculates that Early Archaic groups
were small and highly mobile, an inference based on the fact that Early Archaic sites are thinly
distributed and that diagnostic projectile point types are seen across a wide area, including most
of Texas and northern Mexico. Story (1985) believes that population densities were low during
the Early Archaic, and that groups consisted of related individuals in small bands with “few
constraints on their mobility” (Story 1985:39). Their economy was based on the utilization of a
wide range of resources, especially such year-round resources as prickly pear and lechugilla, as
well as rodents, rabbits, and deer.
Middle Archaic (4450 - 2350 B.P.)
Hester (1995:438–441) suggests that the period between 4450 and 2350 B.P. reflects the Middle
Archaic in south Texas. The Middle Archaic appears to have been a time of increased population,
based on the large number of sites from this period (Story 1985:40; Weir 1976:125, 128). On the
South Texas Plains, exploitation of widely scattered, year-round resources such as prickly pear
continued (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13–15), as did hunting deer and rabbit. Weir (1976)
believes that the widely scattered bands prevalent in the Early Archaic now began to coalesce, at
least during the acorn-gathering season, into larger groups who shared the intensive work of
gathering and processing the acorn harvest (Weir 1976:126). Many researchers believe burned
rock middens are a result of this endeavor (Creel 1986; Prewitt 1991; Weir 1976). The common
presence of deer remains in burned rock middens encourages the view that deer processing took
place at burned rock midden sites. Bison bone is encountered in archaeological sites in south
Texas, at least occasionally, during all but the earliest part of the Middle Archaic (Dillehay 1974).
Cemeteries make their first appearance during this period, suggesting a movement toward less
mobility and perhaps territorialism. One of the earliest occurrences dating to the south Texas
Middle Archaic, is Loma Sandia in Live Oak County, which dates between ca. 2550 and 2750 B.P.
(Taylor and Highley 1995).
Late Archaic (2350 - 1250 B.P.)
Hester believes the Late Archaic in south Texas may be defined as between 2350–1250 B.P, Some
researchers believe populations increased throughout the Late Archaic (Prewitt 1985), while others
feel populations remained the same or fell during this period (Black 1989:30). Subsistence is
assumed to have become less specialized on acorns, in favor of a broad spectrum subsistence base
(Black 1989:30). Story (1985:44–45) believes the presence of cemeteries indicates that Late
6

Archaic populations in central and south Texas were increasing and becoming more territorial.
Although inhabitants of the South Texas Plain near Brownsville and Rockport had begun to make
pottery by about 1750 B.P., the northern part of the plain was still “pre-ceramic” until 1,000 years
later (Story 1985:45–47). Late Archaic points tend to be much smaller than Middle Archaic points.
Transitional Archaic (2250 - 1250 B.P.)
A late subperiod or interval of the Late Archaic is frequently referred to as the Terminal Archaic
or Transitional Archaic. Turner and Hester (1993) cite data placing the Transitional Archaic as
2250–1250 B.P. Although Hester may lump current data into a Late Archaic period, he cautions
that more evidence will likely result in what may be termed as a “Terminal Archaic” period during
the latter part of the Late Archaic in south Texas. This Terminal Archaic period is represented by
diagnostics such as Ensor, Frio, and Matamoras points which appear to overlap the Late Archaic
and Late Prehistoric periods (Hester 1995:442). Weir (1976) believes this marked a transition
period to localized area sites, a disappearance of burned rock middens and bison, and a
reappearance of highly mobile hunters and gatherers. Others (Black and McGraw 1985; Peter
1982; Skelton 1977) argue that in some locations burned rock middens did not disappear and sites
were more intensely occupied during the Transitional Archaic period.
Late Prehistoric (1250 - 420 B.P.)
The term “Late Prehistoric” is commonly used to designate the period following the Late Archaic
in south Texas. Generally, the Late Prehistoric period is thought of as spanning the period between
A. D. 700 - 1530 ([1250 - 420 B.P.] [Hester 1995]). A series of distinctive traits mark the shift
from the Archaic to the Late Prehistoric period, including the technological shift to the bow and
arrow and the introduction of pottery to central Texas and the northern South Texas Plain (Black
1989:32; Story 1985:45–47). Two distinct phases recognized within the Late Prehistoric are the
Austin and Toyah. During the Austin phase, there appears to be a subtle transition from expanding
stem projectile points that may have been used as dart points, as well as early arrow points. The
most prevalent point found in Austin phase sites is the Scallorn arrow point. Settlement shifts into
rockshelters such as Scorpion Cave in Medina County (Highley et al. 1978) and Classen
Rockshelter in northern Bexar County (Fox and Fox 1967) have been noted. Cemeteries from this
period often reveal evidence of conflict (Black 1989:32).
Beginning rather abruptly at about 650 B.P., a shift in technology occurred. The Perdiz arrow
point may best represent the appearance of a distinct culture in south-central Texas lasting for
about 300 years, which archaeologists have labeled the Toyah phase. Hester (1995:444)
recognizes this phase as the “best documented Late Prehistoric pattern” throughout south Texas,
with dates ranging between ca. 650/700 to 300/350 B.P. (A.D. 1250/1300 to 1600/1650).
In addition to Perdiz points, evidence of a Toyah culture is manifested as bone-tempered pottery,
bone spatulates, awls, and beads, stone endscrapers, beveled knives, and expediently utilized
flakes. Briefly, expedient lithic technology involves removing flakes from a core in a nonstandard
manner; the purpose is to knock off sharp flakes for immediate use, selecting the ones that best
suit the need at the time. This technology differs from formal, standardized core reduction and the
manufacturing of formal, usually bifacial tools. Expedient lithic technology is a continent-wide
7

phenomonon indicative of increased sedentism, and is observed in Toyah assemblages in Texas.
Whether the Toyah phase seen in the south-central Texas archaeological record is a result of a
group of people moving into the region, or adapted technologies from the region’s periphery is
a matter of conjecture. Steele and Assad-Hunter (1986) argue for the occurrence of a distinct
change in diet between the Late Archaic and the Late Prehistoric components in two sites in the
Choke Canyon Reservoir area in south Texas. Analysis of the number of identified specimens
(NISP) shows a marked increase in artiodactyla elements present during the later part of the Late
Prehistoric, an increase largely due to the addition of bison to the “menu” (Steele and AssadHunter 1986:468).
Whether or not agriculture was practiced during this period in south Texas has not been
documented. There simply is not enough evidence to postulate there was ever a significant
presence of maize in the area. The later arrival of the Spanish during the later
Protohistoric/Historic period brought significant cultivars to south Texas.
Protohistoric/Historic (420 B.P. - present)
The end of the Late Prehistoric and beginning of the Historic period in south Texas is
characterized by written accounts of European contact with indigenous groups. The Protohistoric
period begins in 1528 when Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts of southeast and
south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the hunter-gatherers of Texas
and northern Mexico (e.g., Hallenbeck 1971). Cabeza de Vaca’s account of his stay with the
Miriami in 1533-34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves
to the easily exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter and summer, occasionally sending
a hunting party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near each
other in the semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other succulents
(Campbell and Campbell 1981:13-37).
Linguistically, early protohistoric accounts of the late 1500s indicate that a large group which
spoke Cohuilteco inhabited the area now known as south-central Texas. Coahuiltecan is a term
coined by Mexican linguists in the 1800s, and the name refers to the many small bands of Native
Americans who lived in northeastern Coahuila, Mexico and south Texas. The Coahuiltecans were
rapidly dispersed or killed during the Protohistoric period.
By the 1540s and 1550s Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico, with
several hundred thousand cattle, using Indian slaves as labor. Large mining ventures in northern
Mexico did the same. This encroachment from the south forced Native Americans to escape into
the south-central Texas region.
The period between de Vaca’s written account and the advent of Spanish missions in the late
1600s and early 1700s is referred to as the Protohistoric; a time when few, scant written
documents exist detailing Native American life outside the missions. The Historic period then, is
generally thought of as beginning in the 1700s.

8

Some 30 miles south of Eagle Pass, the Spanish established Mission San Juan Bautista in 1700
(now modern-day Guerrero). Early Spanish explorers then repeatedly traveled the Camino Real
enroute to newly established missions and settlements in today’s modern Texas throughout the
1700s and 1800s. Mexican families from across the river expanded into Texas, and these families
trace their roots to the early development of the area. In the ensuing years, lawlessness prevailed,
with saloons, gambling houses, outlaws, and slave hunters prevalent.

Dimmit County Prehistory and History
Other than early work done by A. T. Jackson in 1932, perhaps the earliest systematic
archaeological survey in Dimmit County was conducted by members of the Carrizo Springs High
School Archeological Society in 1964 and 1965. Their work resulted in the documentation of 24
archaeological sites in the county, ranging in age from the Early Archaic through the Later
Prehistoric Toyah phase (Nunley and Hester 1966).
Indian artifacts found in Dimmit County indicate that the area has been occupied for about 11,000
years. Plentiful food sources such as wild game, fruits, seeds, and roots made the land hospitable.
Early technology included tools from wood and stone, woven basketry, sewed rabbitskin robes,
and a very effective weapon was the atlatl, a throwing stick that greatly increased the deadliness
of their spears (Hester 1984; Leffler 1996). Perhaps as early as 1,300 years ago, they learned to
make pottery and to hunt with bows and arrows. “During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
the Coahuiltecan Indians native to Dimmit County were squeezed out by other Indian who were
migrating into the area and by the Spanish, who were moving up from the south. Many of the
Coahuiltecans were taken to San Juan Bautista in Coahuila. Apaches and Comanches moved in
to take their place” (Leffler 1996).
“No permanent Spanish settlement seems to have been established in the future Dimmit County.
Beginning in the late 1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio
Road, a camino real, to and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. After the Mexican War of
Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage its citizens to settle in
Texas. Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and 1834 that included territory
now in Dimmit County. None of the recipients seems to have made use of the land, however. By
1836, when Texas became independent from Mexico, the area remained populated almost solely
by Indians” (Leffler 1996).
Between the Texas Revolution and the Mexican War (1836–46), most of Dimmit County lay in
the disputed area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River, and it became a haven for
desperate characters until about 1865. Carrizo Springs was founded in 1865, with the new settlers
who lived in jacals or dugouts frequently being harrassed by hostile Indians and outlaws. Due in
part tobeing pursued by the Texas Rangers, and being decimated by disease, the Indians were
forced to leave Dimmit County by 1877, and in 1880 Carrizo Springs became the county seat for
the newly formed county. By 1880, cattle ranching was firmly established, and although sheep
ranching was also an important part of the economy at the time, by 1900 extended droughts and
9

an increase in predators combined to make sheep ranching a tough and dwindling business (Leffler
1996).
Although the residents of Dimmit County learned to cope with the sparse annual rainfall, artesian
wells ushered in an era of large vegetable truck farms in the 1890s, and Dimmit County became
known as part of the Texas Winter Garden Region, one of the most prolific vegetable-growing
areas in the country.
As with rest of the nation, the Great Depression many of the county’s farmers were forced to cut
back their once-lucrative vegetable production during the depression, and fell back on raising
poultry, hogs, and dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in the
county in the 1950s certainly bolstered Dimmit County’s economy, and although large ranches lay
claim to most of the land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much a progressively
increasing part of the county’s development (Leffler 1996).

Site Types That Could be Expected Along the NHL Pearsall Pipeline
Prehistoric Open Campsites
Most numerous among the sites recorded in Dimmit County are prehistoric open campsites
ranging in age from the Paleoindian period through the Historic period (see Figure 5). Some of
these represent a single campfire where a very small group of Native Americans may have camped
for one night. Others are very large, covering very extensive areas representing large groups of
people that stayed for long periods, perhaps seasonally, with ancestral groups returning to these
same campsites over a period of several thousands of years. Cultural remains to be found at these
large campsites include among other items, an abundance of fire-cracked rocks representing
multiple hearths, a wide variety of chipped stone tools and the lithic debris that results from
making them, ground and smoothed stones used to grind nuts and seeds, faunal remains from
terrestrial and aquatic animals consumed, bone tools, pottery sherds, and mussel and snail shells.
Open campsites occur in all types of environments, whether that be in a plush riverine environment
that offered a wide variety banquet of plant and animal foodstuffs, or in the uplands away from
flowing water sources. Seasonally, the upland grasses, shrubs, cacti offered a different food source
that could be exploited such as various grass seeds, mesquite beans, prickly pear pads and tunas,
and agave hearts. In addition, at various times, bison were known to graze on the northern South
Texas Plains, and were highly sought after for use as food, hides, and bone tools (Dillehay 1974).
Depending upon the integrity of these open campsites, archaeologists and the Texas Historical
Commission consider these as perhaps the most significant types of sites in regard to their ability
to contribute to our understanding of south Texas prehistory. A few of the desired ingredients that
can indicate significance include cultural material that is buried beneath the surface in a wellpreserved, stratified, and relatively undisturbed context. Although these situations most frequently
occur within stratified terrace deposits adjacent to streams, they can also occur in upland settings
where the landscape has been generally stable through time. Other ingredients that archaeologists
look for in potentially significant campsites include good organic preservation in the form of
10

charcoal and/or charred plant remains, faunal preservation, temporally diagnostic stone tools or
ceramics, and intact features such as hearths.
Prehistoric Lithic Scatters or Procurement Sites
Lithic scatters are the next most common type of archaeological site that could be expected along
the NHL Pearsall Pipeline. These sites simply represent the chipped stone debris and broken tools
that were left behind when Native Americans made new tools or re-sharpened their old ones. The
general absence of fire-cracked rocks and other cultural material normally found at open campsites
suggest that they did not camp there, or remain there for any extended period of time ( However,
small camp fires may have been used to heat-treat chert or quartzite cobbles to make them more
knappable). Yet, they were drawn to these isolated locales because of the natural outcroppings or
surface exposures of good quality raw material such as chert or quartzite cobbles.
Examples of chipped stone most commonly found at these sites include cobbles with one or two
flakes removed, called ‘tested cobbles’. That is, the Native Americans knew from experience the
quality of stone that could most easily be flaked and reduced for stone tool production, so they
‘tested’ the cobble to judge whether it was useable or not. If the quality was judged to be inferior,
then the cobble was tossed aside. That is why the majority of tested cobbles found on these sites
are of poor quality, coarse-grained material. While the finished stone tool products are carried
away from these sites, what remains are those tools broken during the manufacturing process, and
the thousands of pieces of debitage in the form of flakes and angular debris. Also unique to lithic
scatters where large cobbles are present are snapped ‘quarry blanks’. These are simply cobbles
flakes on both sides, reducing the cobble into a transportable ‘blank’ that can be used to further
reduce it and make finished stone tools from the flakes taken off of it. The unbroken quarry blanks
are usually not found on these sites because they have been carried off, presumably to areas of
south Texas where raw material is not readily available. The snapped or broken quarry blanks are
of little or no use, so they are discarded and left behind.
Lithic scatters range in age from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods and can be found
on any landscape setting where gravels or cobbles have been exposed. Notably, gravel outcrops
that were exposed to the surface a few hundred or thousand years ago could be deeply buried
today, and the opposite could also be true; it all depends on the terrain setting and the dynamics
of landscape evolution through time. Most lithic scatters in Dimmit County have been documented
along upper stream terraces abutting the eroded upland slopes.
Prehistoric Quarries and Procurement Sites
Prehistoric quarries and procurement also can range in age from the Paleoindian through Historic
periods, but differ from lithic scatters in that at those sites Native Americans exploited loose
gravels, but at times they specifically sought quarry sites where raw material such as cherts or
quartzites were not yet freed from their parent geologic formation, and they had to be ‘quarried’.
These types of sites are rare in south Texas for two reasons: 1) the geological exposures generally
do not present themselves, and 2) throughout Texas, even in central Texas, it is much easier to
pick up gravels from the surface than to try to mine them from hard rock. Quarried and chipped
stone remains likely to be found at these sites include large chunks of angular cherts or quartzites,
11

as well as parent material detritus, and flaking debris. Snapped quarry blanks can also be expected.
Although a handful of prehistoric quarries or procurement sites have been recorded in south Texas,
they are rare.

Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens
There are no burned rock middens in Dimmit County. Burned rock middens result from a series
of multiple-use earth ovens that were constructed much like modern-day roasting pits are dug into
the earth for roasting a pig. With repetitive uses, as the larger rocks that serve as heating elements
in the earthen pit fracture and thus become less effective as a thermal source, they are ‘pitched out’
around the edge of the pit. As the pit becomes unusable, another is dug near by, and the procedure
repeated. Over time, these multiple pits and the ‘pitched out’ fire-cracked rocks coalesce together,
obscuring each pit as indiscernible. (For a full discussion of the formation of burned rock middens
and their documented presence in Texas, see Leach and Bousman 2001; Leach et al. 2001;
Mauldin et al. 2003).
Prehistoric Burial and Cemetery Sites
Although not common, isolated prehistoric burials and cemeteries have been documented in south
Texas. Individual and isolated burials have been found in association with open campsites in both
upland settings as well as in alluvial terraces along streams, but the largest prehistoric cemetery
found in proximity to the NHL Pearsall Pipeline is 41LK28, in Live Oak County.
Historic Sites
As discussed above in the Cultural Chronology portion of this report, although Spanish ranchers
had established large ranches in northern Mexico by the mid-16th century, and Spanish entradas
began penetrating south Texas in the 1700s and 1800s, there is no record of any sort of permanent
structures in the area during those periods (Chipman 1992), the area was generally not considered
safe for settlement by whites until after the Civil War in 1865, and white settlers then began
establishing smaller ranches and farmlands (Leffler 2011).
Because of the vastness of the landscape and the relatively late settlement and development of
south Texas compared to east and central Texas and northern Mexico, historic sites are not
abundant, but they certainly do exist. The most common types to be encountered are related to
ranching and farming endeavors, or small communities from the 19th and 20th centuries. Site types
most commonly include farmsteads or ranches with corrals, cisterns, chimney and foundation
remains from both main houses and outbuildings, related trash dumps, an occasional family burial
or cemetery, school houses, churches, community buildings, and industry-related structures or
construction projects.
In general, the area has apparently been historically used as ranchland pasture, with no
development other than associated ranching activities such as windmills, stock tanks, corrals, and
sparsely scattered outbuildings. In sum, there may be rare and isolated occurrences of early
ranching activities along the NHL Pearsall Pipeline, but the expectations of encountering any
12

archaeological site of significance from the 1500s through the mid-1900s along those portions of
the pipeline were minimal.

Results of A Cultural Resources Background Review
The research by TAAI included:
1) A review of the most current literature documenting the prehistory and history of the immediate
area
2) A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas to identify what
cultural resource surveys have been conducted, and what archaeological sites have been
documented within one mile of the project area
3) A search of various websites that offer old maps of the PA
4) A literature review of both published and unpublished reports and manuscripts that describe the
types of archaeological sites that have been documented, and thus provide insight as to the types
of sites that may be expected either in the PA, or immediately adjacent to it
5) A review of a local soils map in order to evaluate the potential for intact and buried cultural
materials either within or immediately adjacent to the PA.

Archaeological Atlas Site and Historic Research Results
Even though only a handful of scattered archaeological surveys have been conducted in Dimmit
County (e.g., Nunley and Hester 1966), these very few surveys have identified over 160
archaeological sites. Archaeological remains such as Clovis, Folsom, and Plainview artifacts
indicate that the area was likely occupied by Native Americans as early as 11,000 years ago.
Without written or oral accounts before the 1700s, it is difficult to nearly impossible to truly say
what bands or tribes were within the modern political boundaries of Dimmit County before then.
Only cultural affiliations can be assigned to those groups, equating their technologies and apparent
lifestyles to the successive Paleo-Indian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric periods (Leffler and Long
2007). Archaeologists have documented an assundry of prehistoric archaeological sites, including
large open campsites that are most commonly located along stream or river terraces with
numerous campfires, where a wide variety of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and
butchered animal remains are found. Where gravels outcrop, either along eroded streambeds, or
on higher terrain where more ancient gravels are sometimes exposed in isolated pockets, one can
expect stone chipping stations, or prehistoric quarries.
Nevertheless, the lack of previously documented sites is thought to be a direct reflection of the
13

lack of cultural resource surveys near the PA that would have located sites, rather than the
probable non-existence of sites. In fact, the PA lies to the west of a large archaeological survey
conducted in anticipation of the construction of the Choke Canyon Reservoir (e.g., Hall et al.
1981).
During that survey conducted in the 1980s, 116 prehistoric archaeological sites located in both
Live Oak and McMullen counties were documented, ranging in age from 350 years ago to 11,000
years ago. Through all the periods of Choke Canyon's history, humans subsisted by hunting and
gathering natural food resources available in the area. Many of the prehistoric sites are situated on
terrace deposits, ridges, and ridge promontories overlooking streams in the upper reaches of
second and third low order tributaries, and provide evidence that there is a moderate to high
probability for archaeological sites to exist in relatively undisturbed sediments and soils along
certain areas of the Lammerts Lateral.
In addition, archaeologists from the Center for Archaeological Research at the University of Texas
at San Antonio conducted archaeological investigations at eight historic sites at Choke Canyon
Reservoir. A number of different types of structures were investigated, the purpose being to
extract as much information as possible about architecture, lifestyles, and settlement patterns
during the last half of the 19th century within the reservoir area. Artifacts recovered helped
recreate the life of the people, demonstrating how they met the challenges of living in a frontier
area, and how life changed after the Civil War and the coming of law and order, railroads, and
modern communications (Fox and Ward 1986).
A review of the online Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites (Atlas) indicated that there had been one
professional cultural resources survey conducted within one mile (1,609 meters) of the NHL
Pearsall Pipeline. It was a linear survey executed by PBS&J along the FM1557 right-of-way in
June 2007, resulting in the discovery of two archaeological sites within one mile of the NHL
Pearsall Pipeline (PA). The first is 41DM152, located only 60 meters west of the PA. The site is
described as a prehistoric lithic scatter, with one untypable dart point and chert flakes observed
on the surface. However, the construction of FM1557 had nearly destroyed the portion of the site
within the right-of-way so that no further archaeological investigations were warranted (Atlas
2011).
The second site recorded by PBS&J in 2007 is 41DM153. This site, located about 1,300 meters
southeast of the PA, is also described as a prehistoric lithic scatter, with a Refugio-like dart point,
a Clear Fork uniface, tested cobbles and flakes. As with 41DM152, the portion of this site that lay
within the right-of-way was also heavily disturbed by the construction of FM1557.
41DM51 is a large Archaic occupation site recorded by Dr. Tom Hester in 1966. It is located
approximately 500 meters to the west of the PA, also along FM1557. In 1964, Dr. Hester
collected a Tortugas, a Desmuke-like dart point, and various dart point fragments from the
exposed bar ditches on both sides of the highway (Atlas 2011).
In 1970, Dr. Hester, A. J. Hale, and Mr. and Mrs. C. D. Castellan recorded 41DM73, a large open
campsite in a flat, open pasture about 1,200 meters east of the PA. A Late Prehistoric occupation
is manifested by the presence of Scallorn, Perdiz, and triangular arrow points. However, a
14

Refugio-like dart point also infers an Archaic component (Atlas 2011).
In addition, as shown in Figure 6, five other pipelines are in close proximity to the NHL Pearsall.
In all cases, TAAI either conducted a field survey, or at the very least conducted a background
review to assess the archaeological potential along the alignments. The only evidence of cultural
material found during field surveys consisted of three isolated flakes along the NHL 3H pipeline.

Figure 6. Project Area and adjacent archaeological surveys.

Historic Site Potential
The earliest historic accounts of Native Americans in south Texas and perhaps the Dimmit County
area, are those of Cabeza de Vaca. In the 1500s, Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts
of southeast and south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the huntergatherers of Texas and northern Mexico (e.g., Covey 1961). His account of his experiences in
1533–34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves to the easily
exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter, and summer, occasionally sending a hunting
party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near each other
in the semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other succulents
(Campbell and Campbell 1981:13–37).
By the 1540s and 1550s, Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico with
15

thousands of cattle, and using Native Americans as slave labor. This encroachment by the Spanish
forced groups from northern Mexico to flee into south Texas. In the 1700s and 1800s, there are
documented accounts of Spanish entradas passing through the area, but none have been noted to
establish any sort of permanent structures (Chipman 1992).
A review of various sources reveals no evidence of historic sites within the PA, and no historic
archaeological sites are expected. The area has apparently been historically used as ranchland
pasture, with no development other than associated ranching activities such as windmills, stock
tanks, corrals, and sparsely scattered outbuildings.
Because of the relatively low habitation in generally rural areas that the NHL Pearsall Pipeline
passes through, little or no attention was given to early aerial photography. A standard source of
review is the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs available at the Perry
Casteñada Library at the University of Texas at Austin (Perry Casteñeda Library 2011). A second
standard research source consulted for old maps and aerial photographs is a very comprehensive
and large compilation of old maps and aerial photographs compiled by the Texas Department of
Transportation from dozens of historic archives throughout the state of Texas. In this case, a1939
U.S. Army Corps of engineers topographic maps of the Carrizo Springs and Asherton areas were
found. An examination of both revealed no historic structures within the NHL Pearsall right-ofway.
A third standard source for conducting historical research in Texas are the Handbook of Texas and
the Southwestern Historical Quarterly (TSHA Online 2011). Although several key words were
entered into the online search engines, nothing of historical significance could be linked with the
NHL Pearsall Pipeline project area.
Nevertheless, the lack of comprehensive historic map and aerial information, coupled with the
paucity of cultural resources surveys within the area is possibly, and perhaps probably, why no
information is available regarding the presence of historic structures, ranching or industrial
activities, or persons of historic significance to the immediate area. Technically, any structures old
than 45 years are now considered of interest by the Texas Historical Commission, and this should
be considered when the pipeline right-of-way is excavated. Historic sites recorded in Dimmit
County consist of local family cemeteries with just a few burials in each, house sites and
farmsteads from as early as the 1850s, and trash scatters.

Soils Maps
A review of county soils maps and publications both online and in hard copy format indicated that
the NHL Pearsall Pipeline was to dissect 19 different soil types or classifications. The
characteristics of these soil classifications offer varying depths, sedimentation, and deposition
rates, and some are in close proximity to streams. As such, they likewise imply the potential for
the preservation of intact cultural resources to exist. Figures 7-9 show the route of the pipeline
through these soil areas, and Table 1 lists the soils that are to be dissected by the NHL Pearsall
Pipeline (Gabriel et al. 1994; Web Soil Survey 2011).
16

In sum, the NHL Pearsall right-of-way was to pass through upland areas with soils and sediments
that are generally shallow, and if prehistoric archaeological sites did exist, the soils as mapped
suggested that any archaeological deposits were likely in a palimpsest (collapsed) or eroded state,
and thus offered little in the way of scientific significance. Nevertheless, without an on-the-ground
physical examination and shovel testing program, the true existence of deeply buried and intact
archaeological deposits that can be potentially significant to our understanding of Texas prehistory
could only be modeled and surmised. As such, Tierras Antiguas conducted a pedestrian survey and
shovel testing along the entire length of proposed right-of-way.
Table 1. Soils Dissected by the NHL Pearsall Pipeline.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Buried and Intact
Archaeological Potential

Brundage fine sandy loam (Br,
Bu)

Deep loamy soils on terraces
adjacent to small creeks

Moderate to High to about 26
inches below the surface

Brystal fine sandy loam (BxB,
ByB)

Deep loamy soils on convex-form
uplands

Minimal to Moderate to about 20
inches below the surface

Caid sandy loam (CaA, CaB)

Deep loamy soils on gently
sloping uplands

Moderate to about 46 inches
below the surface

Catarina clay (CGB)

Deep clayey soils on gently
sloping upland areas

Minimal to Moderate to about 26
inches below the surface

Chacon clay loam (ChA)

Deep clay loam soils on gently
sloping uplands

Minimal to Moderate to about 17
inches below the surface

Duval fine sandy loam (DvB)

Deep loamy soils on convex
uplands

Minimal to moderate to about 14
inches below the surface

Maverick clay loam (MKC)

Moderately deep clay loam on
ridges and summits on convex
interfluves

Minimal to Moderate to about 17
inches below the surface

Montell clay (MoA)

Deep clayey soils on gently
sloping upland areas

Minimal to about 19 inches below
the surface

Poteet fine sandy loam (Po)

Deep loamy soils in terraces
along weakly depressional
drainageways, frequently flooded

Moderate to about 24 inches
below the surface

Pryor sandy clay loam (PrB)

Moderately deep loamy soils on
gently undulating uplands

Minimal to moderate to about 9
inches below the surface

Randado fine sandy loam (RAC)

Shallow loam on gently sloping
ridges and interfluves

Minimal to about 8 inches below
the surface

Tonio fine sandy loam (TnB)

Deep loamy soil on gently
undulating uplands

Minimal to Moderate to about 30
inches below the surface

Uvalde silty clay loam (UdA)

Deep loamy soils on nearly level

Moderate to about 17 inches

17

uplands

below the surface

Verick fine sandy loam (VEC)

Shallow loamy soils in upland
areas

Minimal to about 10 inches below
the surface

Webb fine sandy loam (WbB)

Deep sandy loam on convex,
gently sloping uplands

Moderate to about 10 inches
below the surface

Zavco sandy clay loam (ZcB)

Deep loamy soil on gently sloping
uplands

Minimal to Moderate to about 16
inches below the surface

Figure 7. Soils to be dissected by construction of the western segment of the
NHL Pearsall Pipeline.

18

Figure 8. Soils to be dissected by construction of the middle segment of the
NHL Pearsall Pipeline.

Figure 9. Soils to be dissected by construction of the eastern segment of the
NHL Pearsall Pipeline.

19

Field Survey Goals and Methodology
Goals
The project goals focused on archaeological issues that could be addressed by the types of data
obtained through pedestrian survey, along with limited shovel testing. The topics addressed were
site type, distribution, density, size, depth, and stratigraphy. The theoretical framework is
structured around patterns of settlement, mobility, subsistence, and social systems for the South
Texas region.
The goals of the project were to:
1)
locate and record cultural locations and sites in the project area using a systematic
survey methodology;
2)
quantify site size, as well as depth, and stratigraphy; and,
3)
place any diagnostic artifacts within the regional time frame.

Methods and Levels of Effort
Four archaeologists conducted an intensive pedestrian survey of the entire 13.8 miles, with a total
of 224 shovel tests dug (Figures 10-14). Surface visibility ranged from 90 to 100 percent. All
cutbanks, and rodent and mammal backdirt piles were thoroughly examined. Shovel tests were dug
in 20-cm levels, and all sediments were screened through 1/4-inch wire mesh. The results of shovel
testing were fully documented on Shovel Test forms, are on file at the Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological Investigations office in Martindale, Texas, and may be made available upon
request.
All shovel test locations were documented with a hand-held GPS. In accordance with a general
“no collection” policy, cultural material of a redundant nature, both prehistoric and historic,
observed either on the surface or within shovel tests were not to be collected. Instead, they were
to be fully documented via sketches, field photographs, and copious notes. Following that they
were to be returned to the surface if surface finds, or to the top 10 cm of the shovel tests.
Exceptions were diagnostic artifacts, particularly those artifacts which could be considered as
significant to the interpretation of Texas prehistory, such as Early Archaic-Paleoindian
transitional, or Paleoindian diagnostics. These were to be collected on a case-by-case basis, and
that decision was left up to the Principal Investigator and/or the Project Archaeologist.
Historic buildings, trash scatters, or other historic occurrences within the ROW were to be
documented as archaeological sites. In addition, any potentially historic buildings 45 years or older
that were located adjacent to the pipeline were to be documented with photographs and included
in this report of investigations.

20

Figure 10. Shovel test locations along the western segment (Segment 1).

Figure 11. Shovel test locations along Segment 2.

21

Figure 12. Shovel test locations along Segment 3.

Figure 13. Shovel test locations along Segment 4.

22

Figure 14. Shovel test locations along the easternmost segment (Segment 5).

Results of the Investigations

Surface Examination and Shovel Testing
During the survey it became readily apparent that approximately 90 percent of the project’s surface
area was either mechanically disturbed, or deflated by artificial processes. However, the surface
visibility was excellent, allowing for the discovery of any artifacts along the right-of-way. As a
result, one archaeological site (41DM172) and one Isolated Find (IF) were documented, and they
are described below. The only artifact recovered from the 224 shovel tests was a broken tertiary
flake on Site 41DM172, and no artifacts were observed in the numerous cutbank exposures or
animal backdirt piles inspected.
Isolated Find - Clear Fork Gouge (UTM N3141032 E410117 - NAD83)
The single Isolated Find documented is a Clear Fork unifacial gouge made from fine-grained, finely
flaked, and probable heat treated tan chert, exhibiting heavy patina on its ventral and right lateral
dorsal surfaces (Figure 15). Its bit edge is slightly convex, and multiple irregular step fractures are
evidence of its use. The bit angle is approximately 38 degrees. It is a whole, unbroken specimen,
measuring 4.6 cm long, x 5.0 cm across its bit edge, x 2.1 cm thick at its thickest, distal portion.
Although it has been slightly and ephemerally polished from long exposure to the elements, minute
emphasized areas of polishing on raised ridges on its dorsal ridges, as well as its smooth ventral
surface could be from hafting. It was found on an eroded, hardpan red clay surface adjacent to a
23

two-track road (see Figure 10). Soils in the immediate area were <10 centimeters deep, with
fragmented caliche and ironstone inclusions. This artifact was collected in the field for further
examination, but was subsequently returned to the Briscoe Ranch property owners.
Clear Fork gouges may have been used as woodworking tools. Placing Clear Fork gouges within
a specific time period is difficult. Sue Turner and Tom Hester (1999:246-249) cite examples of
these tools that have come from Paleoindian through Middle Archaic contexts in south-central
Texas and the Trans-Pecos regions. However, Jack Hughes (1991:19) and Doug Boyd (1997:262264) surmise, citing several examples from the Texas Plains, that Clear Fork tools could have been
used from the Paleoindian through the Late Prehistoric periods.

Figure 15. Clear Fork gouge collected from the surface on the Briscoe
Ranch.

Archaeological Site 41DM172
Description
41DM172 (Figure 16) is a prehistoric lithic scatter of an Late Prehistoric age (1200-350 B.P.),
consisting of chert debitage and an arow point fragment. It is situated on a gentle upland slope, 120
meters southeast of El Barrosa Creek, an intermittent second-order tributary of the Nueces River.
Surface visibility was excellent in an eroded two-track road, as well within very sparse grass
bunches, small mesquite brush, and assorted cacti. Surface elevation at the site ranges from 674-676
feet above mean sea level (amsl). Soils on the site consist of Verick fine sandy loam (VEC), in situ
and colluvial sheet washed deposits commonly found on the uplands in Dimmit County (Stevens
and Arriaga 1985; Web Soil Survey 2011).

24

Levels of Effort and
Results
An inspection of the
surface suggests that the
s i t e
c o v e r s
approximately 400
square meters (Figure
16).
Artifacts
discovered on the
surface included three
non-heat treated small,
interior and exterior
chert flakes, and the
distal portion of a finely
flaked arrow point. No
firecracked rocks or
other artifacts were
observed.
Fine-grained chert
gravels were scattered
sporadically across the
site. Four shovel tests
were excavated
to
evaluate the horizontal
extent and vertical
integrity of the site. All
four revealed pale
brown sandy loam
ranging in depth from 38vm, underlain by
reddish brown claypan. Figure 16. 41DM172 site map.
The only subsurface
artifact recovered was a broekn interior chert flake in Shovel Test 1 between 0-8 cemtimeters below
the surface.
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
41DM appears to be a relatively small lithic scatter or chipping station where exposed upland
gravels were exploited during a temporary stopover to retool, and replace an arrow point broken
during use. Because natural erosional processes and the construction of a road and fenceline
through the site have heavily disturbed much of it, the overall integrity of this site is diminished. Our
assessment is thta the research value of this site is minimal, other than its positioning on the
landsdcape. Accordingly, it has little ability to contribute significantly to our understanding of this
area of south Texas prehistory. In view of this, Tierras Antiguas recommends construction of the
NHL Pearsall Pipeline be allowed to proceed through the site, with no further investigations.
25

Survey Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
A pedestrian survey with systematic shovel testing along the proposed 13.8-mile NHL Pearsall
Pipeline resulted in the discovery of one archaeological site and one Isolated Find. The
archaeological site (41DM172) is assessed as a generally surficial lithic scatter possessing little
scientific research potential. The Clear Fork gouge recorded as an Isolated Find is an excellent
example of lithic technology and usewear. However, its lone context on the landscape with no
corroborating temporally diagnostic artifacts or other cultural materials significantly diminishes its
significance. Accordingly, Tierras Antiguas recommends that the construction of the NHL Pearsall
Pipeline be allowed to proceed as planned. However, Tierras Antiguas further recommends that
if any additional, undiscovered cultural resources were encountered during development, such finds
should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological
consultant.

26

References Cited
Arbingast, S. A., L. G. Kennamer, R. H. Ryan, A. Lo, D. L. Karney, C. P. Zlatkovic, M. E.
Bonine, and R. G. Steele
1973 Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at Austin.
Archer, S.
1995

Tree-grass Dynamics in a Prosopis-thornscrub Savannah Parkland:
Reconstructing the Past and Predicting the Future. Ecoscience 2(1):84-99.

Atlas
2011

Black, S. L.
1989

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
November 11, 2011].

Environmental Setting. In From the Gulf Coast to the Rio Grande: Human
Adaptation in the Central, South, and Lower Pecos, Texas, by T. R. Hester, S.
L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. J. Reinhard, and L. C.
Bement, pp. 5-17. Research Series No. 33, Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

Black, S. L., and A. J. McGraw
1985 The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change and Continuity in the Upper
Salado Creek Drainage, South-Central Texas. Archaeological Survey Report,
No. 100. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Blair, W. F.
1950
Boyd, D. K.
1997

Brune, G.
1981

The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-117.
Caprock Canyonlands Archeology: A Synthesis of the Late Prehistory and
History of Lake Alan Henry and the Texas Panhandle-Plains. Reports of
Investigations, Number 110, 2 Volumes. Prewitt & Associates, Austin.

Springs of Texas. Branch-Smith, Fort Worth.

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Collins, M. B.
27

1995

Forty Years of Archaeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:361–400.

Covey, C. (editor)
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier
Books, New York.
Creel, D. G.
1986

A Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in West Central Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Arizona, Tucson.

Diamond, D.D., D. H. Riskind, and S. L. Orzell
1987 A Framework for Plant Community Classification and Conservation in Texas.
The Texas Journal of Science 39(3):203-221.
Dillehay, T.
1974

Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19(64):180–196.

Fox, A. A., and D. E. Fox
1967 The Classen Rockshelter, 41BX23. Manuscript on file. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Gould, F. W.
1975 Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. Texas Agricultural
Experimentation Station, College Station.
Hall, G. D., T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black
1986 The Prehistoric Site at Choke Canyon Reservoir, Southern Ttexas: Results of
Phase II Archaeological Investigations. Choke Canyon Series: Volume 10.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hallenbeck, C.
1971 Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca: The Journey and Route of the First European to
Cross the Continent of North America, 1534-1536. Kennikat Press Scholarly
Reprints, Port Washington, New York.
Hemphill, H.
2006 The Railroads of San Antonio. Maverick Publishing Co., San Antonio, TX.
Hester, T. R.
1984 Fragments, Flints, and Footprints: The Prehistory of Dimmit County. In Dimmit
County Mesquite Roots, Volume I, pp. 1-6, edited by L. K. Tidwell. Wind River
Press. Austin, TX.
1995 The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:427–459.
1980 Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur Archaeologists.
Corona Press, San Antonio.
Highley, L., C. Graves, and G. Judson
1978 Archeological Investigations at Scorpion Cave (41ME7), Medina County, Texas.
28

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:139–194.
Hughes, J. T.
1991 Prehistoric Cultural Developments on the High Texas Plains. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 60:1-55 (1989 volume published in 1991).
Inglis, J. M.
1964

A History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain. Bulletin #45. Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department, Austin.

Lee, D. S., C. R. Gilbert, C. H. Hocutt, R. E. Jenkins, P. E. McAllister, J. R. Stauffer, Jr.
1980 Atlas of North American Freshwater Fishers. North Carolina Biological Survey
Publication 1980-12, North Carolina State Museum of Natural History.
Leffler, J.
1996

Dimmit County. The New Handbook of Texas Online, Volume 6, pp. 864-866.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Leffler, J. J., and C. Long
1996 Webb County. The New Handbook of Texas Online, Volume 2, pp. 645-648.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
McKinney, W. W.
1981 Early Holocene Adaptations in Central and Southern Texas: The Problem of the
Paleo-Indian-Archaic Transition. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:91–120.
Map
2011a Biotic Provinces of Texas.
http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/landwater/land/maps/gis/map_downloads/images/p
wd_mp_e0100_1070ae_6.gif. [Accessed August 22, 2011].
2011b Carrizo Springs 1939. Perry Casteñeda Library Map Collection. Catarina
USACE Topographic Map. http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/topo [Accessed
August 22, 2011].
Nunley, P., and T. R. Hester
1966 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Dimmit County, Texas. The Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. XVIII, No. 3, pp. 233-253.
Peter, D. E.
1982

Alternative Perspectives on Burned Rock Middens, In Archaeological
Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, Vol. 2,
compiled and edited by T. R. Hays, pp. 20.1–20.15. Archaeology Program,
Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.

29

Prewitt, E. R.
1991 Burned Rock Middens: A Summary of Previous Investigations and
Interpretations. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An Archeological
Symposium, edited T. R. Hester, pp. 25–32. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Robinson, R. L.
1982 Biosilica Analysis of Three Prehistoric Archaeological Sites in the Choke Canyon
Reservoir, Live Oak County, Texas: Preliminary Summary of Climatic
Implications. In Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir,
South Texas: The Phase I Findings, edited by G. D. Hall, S. L. Black, and C.
Graves, pp. 597-610. Choke Canyon Series, No. 5. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Skelton, D. W.
1977 Archeological Investigations at the Fayette Power Project, Fayette County,
Texas. Research Report 60. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Stahle, D. W. , and M. K. Cleaveland
1995 Texas Paleoclimatic Data from Daily to Millennial Time Scales. In The Changing
Climate of Texas: Predictability and Implications for the Future, edited by J.
Norwine, J. R. Giardino, G. R. North, and J. B. Valdes, pp. 49-69. GeoBooks,
Texas A&M University, College Station.
Steele, D. G., and C. Assad Hunter
1986 Analysis of Vertebrate Faunal Remains from 41MC222 and 41MC296,
McMullen County, Texas. In The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas: Results of Phase II Archaeological Investigations, edited by G.
D. Hall, T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black. Choke Canyon Series, No. 10. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Stevens, J. W., and D. Arriaga
1985 Soil Survey of Dimmit and Zavala Counties. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C., in Cooperation with
the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, College Station, Texas.
Story, D. A.
1985

Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coastal Plain. In
Prehistoric Food Production in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 19–56.
Anthropological Papers No. 75. Museum of Anthropology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Taylor, A. J., and C. L. Highly
30

1995

Archaeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. 2 volumes. Studies in Archeology No. 20.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Turner, E. S., and T. R. Hester
1999 A Field Guide to the Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Gulf Publishing. Houston,
TX.
Web Soil Survey
2011 Dimmit and Zavala Counties, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed
November 1, 2011]
Weir, F. A.
1976

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. Anthropology
Department, Washington State University.

31

