A Cultural Resources Background Review
of the Proposed 25789 Grey Eagle-Williams
Cellular Tower Site, Odessa, Texas

Prepared for
AARCHER, INC.
Annapolis, Maryland
by
David L. Nickels, Principal Investigator
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, LLC
July 2015

Introduction
Aarcher, Inc., requested
a cultural resources
background review of
3,250 square feet in
south-central Ector
County, and hereinafter
occasionally referred to
as the Project Area (PA)
(Figures 1 - 3). In July
2015, Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological
Investigations (TAAI)
conducted a review of
cul t ural res ources
documented either on,
or within one mile of
the PA, as well as other
documents that may be
relative for significant
cultural resources to
exist within the PA. The
research by TAAI
included:
Figure 1. Location of Ector County and the 25789 Grey
Eagle-Williams Cellular Tower project in Texas.
1) A review of the
most current literature documenting the prehistory and history of the immediate area
2) A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas to identify
what cultural resource surveys have been conducted, and what archaeological sites have been
documented within one mile of the project area
3) A search of various websites that offer old maps of the PA
4) A literature review of both published and unpublished reports and manuscripts that describe
the types of archaeological sites that have been documented, and thus provide insight as to the
types of sites that may be expected either in the PA, or immediately adjacent to it
6) A review of a local soils map in order to evaluate the potential for intact and buried cultural
materials either within or immediately adjacent to the PA.

1

Figure 2. Project Area on large USGS 7.5' topographic map.

Figure 3. Project Area on Douro (1982) 7.5' USGS topographic map.

2

Archaeological Atlas Site Results
Surveys and Sites within One Mile of the Project Area
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archeological Sites (ATLAS
2015) indicates that there are no archaeological sites or historical markers within one mile of the
Project Area (see Figure 3). The only archaeological survey within one mile was a pipeline
survey conducted in 2000 for the Bureau of Land Management.

Soils
As shown in
Figure 4, the
25789 Grey
Eagle-Williams
Cellular Tower
is
to
be
constructed on
n ea r l y l e vel
Conger-Reagan
association
(CRA) loamy
clay that is
generally found
on convex
upland ridges in
this area of
Ector County
(Websoil 2015).
Typically, the
upper 6 inches Figure 4. Soils map of the Project Area.
(15 centimeters
[cm]) consists of brown calcareous loam. From 6 to 15 inches (15-38 cm) below the surface one
would expect to see pale brown calcareous loam. These two upper soil zones overlay strongly
cemented clays to about 35 inches (89 cm) below the surface, before giving way to weakly
cemented clays roughly 80 inches (203 cm) below the surface.
Notably, Conger-Reagan association (CRA) loamy clay has a high shrink-swell and vertical
cracking potential. In addition, the soils are commonly subjected to wind blowing and water
erosion. Further, soil scientists note that “The rooting zone is restricted by the shallow depth over
indurated caliche” (Watson 1978:8). These combined attributes suggest that any cultural
3

materials that may be present within Conger-Reagan association (CRA) soils are likely displaced
from their original contexts. As such, the nature of these soils suggest at best a minimal
probability for buried and intact archaeological deposits to exist within the proposed tower site
area.

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
The tract on which the 25789 Grey Eagle-Williams Cellular Tower is to be constructed is
privately owned, and there are no public funds involved in this development.
On July 19, 2015, David Nickels of Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations conducted
an on-line review of the Archeological Site Atlas (Atlas) of the Texas State Historic Preservation
Office (SHPO) in accordance with Federal Communications Commission’s Nationwide
Programmatic Agreement (PA; 47 CFR Part 1). After reviewing the Atlas, Mr. Nickels found
that there are no known and documented archaeological sites, or historic markers, or historic
landmarks within one mile of the property.
A modern aerial photograph and a detailed drawing of the proposed project were reviewed, as
were soils maps. Because of the shallow nature of the Conger-Reagan association (CRA) loamy
clay in the immediate area, any cultural resources that may be present have most probably been
disturbed, and thus have little or no scientific research potential. In addition, as shown in Figure
2, the tower location is remote from any present or possibly prehistoric water source. It is the
opinion of Mr. Nickels that there is a very low probability for the existence of any known
undiscovered/unrecorded intact archaeological resources on or near the Project Area. As such,
he recommended that no further cultural resources investigations are warranted at the proposed
tower site.

4

References Cited
Atlas
2015

Watson, L.
1978

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/
[Accessed July 19, 2015].

Soil Survey of Ector and Crane Counties, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with the Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station, College Station, Texas.

Web Soil Survey
2015 Ector County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed July
19, 2015].

5

