A Cultural Resources Survey of the 2.8Mile Ware Trunkline, La Salle County,
Texas

Prepared for Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd.
San Antonio, Texas
by
David L. Nickels, Principal Investigator
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations Report #77
January 2012

Abstract
Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd. of San Antonio, Texas contracted with Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations (TAAI) to conduct a cultural resources survey of the 2.8mile Ware Trunkline to be developed by Mockingbird Midstream Gas Services, L.L.C.
(Mockingbird) in east-central La Salle County, Texas. The project was entirely privately funded,
and the properties are privately owned; therefore, no Texas Antiquities Permit was required.
A full pedestrian survey of this upland area with shallow soils was conducted by two
archaeologists on July 15, 2011. The survey revealed that much of the pipeline right-of-way had
been mechanically disturbed in the recent past. No prehistoric or historic cultural materials were
observed either on the surface or in the numerous animal backdirt piles examined.
As such, Tierras Antiguas recommended that the development of the pipeline be allowed to
proceed as planned. However, Tierras Antiguas further recommended that if any additional,
undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during development, such finds should be
examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological consultant.

Acknowledgments
There are mainly four individuals who are greatly appreciated, and whose efforts contributed to
the successful planning, organization, and completion of this project. They are Mr. David Black,
Ms. Judy Vader, and Mr. Ryan Debarros, Project Managers at Flatrock Engineering and
Environmental, Ltd., and Mr. Ronnie Glenewinkel, Environmental Coordinator at Mockingbird
Midstream. All were extremely amiable and helpful throughout, and their overall knowledge of
the project contributed significantly to our understanding of the project’s scope of work.
In addition, I express my sincere gratitude to Tierras Antiguas staff archaeologist Belisario Silva,
who worked hard, long hours, and expressed an attitude and work ethic that ensured this survey
was conducted in a thorough and professional manner.

i

Table of Contents
Title
Page
Abstract.......................................................................................................................................i
Acknowledgments.......................................................................................................................i
List of Figures.......................................................................................................... ..................ii
List of Tables..............................................................................................................................ii
Introduction..................................................................................................................................1
Modern Environmental Setting......................................................................................................1
Paleoenvironment.......................................................................................................................4
Cultural Chronology...................................................................................................................4
La Salle County Prehistory and History......................................................................................9
Site types to be expected along the Ware Trunkline.................................................................10
Cultural Resources Background Review....................................................................................13
Soils..........................................................................................................................................15
Survey Goals and Methodology.................................................................................................16
Results of the Investigations.....................................................................................................16
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations......................................................................16
References Cited.......................................................................................................................17

List of Figures
Figure
Page
1. La Salle County and project location....................................................................................1
2 Project location in La Salle County.....................................................................................1
3. Project shown on Los Angeles topographic map...................................................................2
4. Physiographic regions of Texas............................................................................................3
5. Biotic provinces of Texas....................................................................................................3
6. South Texas cultural chronology.........................................................................................5
7. Soils map...........................................................................................................................15

ii

Introduction
Flatrock Engineering and
Environmental, Ltd., requested a
cultural resources survey of the 2.8mile Ware Trunkline in east-central La
S all e C ounty, proposed for
development by Mockingbird
Midstream Gas Services, L.L.C.
(Mockingbird), and
hereinafter
occasionally referred to as the Project
Area (PA) (Figures 1 - 3). Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations
(TAAI) conducted a pedestrian survey
of the pipeline right-of-way in July
2011.

Modern Environmental
Setting

Figure 1. Location of La Salle County and the Ware
Trunkline in Texas.

Climate and Vegetation
La Salle County is
located in south-central
Texas near its southern
border with Mexico (see
Figure 1). Its current
p o li t i cal boundary
encompasses 1,517
square miles. The
generally flat to rolling
t e r r a i n ranges in
elevation from about
600-800 feet above
mean sea level. Clayey
and loamy soils support
the growth of small
predominately mesquite
trees, and thorny scrub
brush with assorted cacti
and grassy understory.
Figure 2. Location of the Project Area in east-central La Salle
With its semi-arid County.
environment, the county
1

is generally frost-free
from mid-February
through early December,
allowing for about 288
growing season days.
The average annual
rainfall is about 22
inches, with most
rainfall occurring in
May and September.
These peaks are the
result of thunderstorms
bearing moist air from
the Gulf of Mexico to
the east, and the Pacific
Ocean much farther to
the west. La Salle
county is part of what is
known as the ‘Winter Figure 3. Project Area on USGS 7.5' Los Angeles (1974) quadrangle
Garden Region’ for the map.
vegetables grown there (Leffler 1996)
However, rainfall amounts vary significantly from year to year, and the high evapotranspiration
effects in the area effectively offset any beneficial surplus of annual rainfall. This is another
reason irrigation systems are so necessary, and commonly found in use today throughout the area.
Summers are indeed hot and dry, with temperatures consistently hovering above 1000F, although
humidity is generally low compared to environments closer to the Gulf Coast. Overall, the
climate can be classified as subtropical steppe.
Hydrology
The Nueces River and the Rio Grande are the major southeasterly trending rivers draining the
South Texas region. A subtle divide through the county causes numerous intermittent creeks to
flow south into the Nueces River, and others to drain toward the north, and into the Frio River.
Many drainages intermittently flow into both rivers during infrequent seasonal periods of
abundant rainfall. Although there are many springs in La Salle County, very few are active due
primarily to the dip of the substrate shales which carry these subterranean seeps to the south and
east. Ancient springs that may have existed in the area at one time have likely succumbed to
overgrazing and irrigation pumping during modern times (Brune 1981). During our investigation
of the project area in July 2011, we observed no water flowing, or niche pools.
Flora and Fauna
The project area lies within the South Texas Plain/Brush Country vegetation area as defined by
Gould (1975), and the regional flora of South Texas has been classified as being part of the
Tamaulipan biotic province extending out from northeast Mexico (Figures 4 and 5). This is the
only part of Texas where some vegetation exhibits growth throughout the year (Blair 1950; Map
2

2011). Thorny brush is the dominant
vegetation today, but this is a relatively
recent occurrence, with a mix of woody
and grassland species providing a
savanna environment during prehistoric
times (Archer 1995; Black 1989; Hester
1980; Inglis 1964).
The original vegetation was an open
grassland mixed with brushy chaparral.
Oaks, pecan, and ash were common
along perennial streams. Due in part to
overgrazing and the exclusion of fire,
the invasion of woody species has
changed the vegetation into “Texas
brush country” dominated by mesquite,
acacia, spiny hackberry, brazil,
whitebrush, lotebrush, and others
(Diamond et al. 1987:203-221). On
sandy soils, the brush includes mesquite
with mixed grasses. In contrast, clay
soils support mesquite (Proposis
juliflora), various species of Acacia,
and mimosa, granjeno or desert
hackberry (Celtis pallida), lignum vitae
(Porliera angustifolia),lindheeimeri),
tasajillo (Opuntia leptocaulis), and
species of Condalia and Castela (Blair
1950).

Figure 4. Physiographic regions of Texas
(http://www.lib.utexas.edu/geo/pics/txphysio.jpg)

The South Texas Plains/Brush Country
exhibits some of the greatest
mammalian species diversity in the
state. Sixty-one species of mammals,
36 snakes, 19 lizards, and several
species of turtles, salamanders, and
frogs are present in the region (Blair
1950). Approximately 50 species of
fish have been identified in the lower
Rio Grande (Lee et al. 1980).

Figure 5. Blair’s (1950) biotic provinces of Texas.
3

Paleoenvironment
The paleoenvironment of south Texas is as varied as the landscape, and the South Texas
Paleoclimatic record contains significant gaps primarily due to the scarcity of deep, finely
stratified, and well-dated deposits (Stahle and Cleaveland 1995:51). To date, the best record of
paleoenvironmental reconstruction in South Texas has been accomplished by Robinson (1982)
from analysis of phytoliths from three archaeological sites in Live Oak County. Overall, the data
there along with data from other sites in Texas suggest that the waning of the Pleistocene, or lateglacial period, marked a transition from a cooler, wetter environment to one that steadily grew
warmer and drier, and cenizo (Leucophyllum texanum), white brush (Aloysia texana), prickly
pear (Opuntia) more seasonal, with intermittent moist periods through about 6,000 years ago.
Most researchers then generally agree that the period between 6,000 and 3,000 years ago was
much warmer and drier than today. Since that time, intermittent moist and dry intervals have
occurred over the past 3,000 years.
It is unlikely that the climate has changed significantly in the past few thousand years in the area
that would significantly induce vegetation changes. The greater changes have been induced by
human intervention through the clearing of wooded areas along the river and streams for
construction purposes, pumping more water for irrigation which has lowered water tables, and
overgrazing by livestock. Although there are still many seeps, springs, and streams in the area,
they most probably flowed with greater abundance during wetter intervals than exist at the
present time, providing an abundant resource for prehistoric occupants.

Cultural Chronology
The Ware Trunkline lies within the South Texas Archaeological region as defined by Hester
(1980, 1995, 2004; Figure 6). Refining a cultural chronology for south Texas is problematic, due
to the compressed nature of the archaeological record and the scarcity of stratified sites
excavated within the region. Hester (1995:433) acknowledges the paucity of information that
exists for south Texas and as such offers only a “general framework” for prehistoric periods
particular to the region (Figure 6). All dates are given as approximate years before present (B.P.),
i.e., before 1950.
Paleoindian (11,200 - 7950 B.P.)
This period is estimated at between ca.11,200–7950 B.P. in south Texas (Hester 1995). The
Paleoindian period began toward the close of the Pleistocene. Diagnostic artifacts of the early
Paleoindian interval include Clovis and Folsom projectile points. The wide distribution of
Clovis-type points across most of North America and even into Central America suggests a wide

4

dispersal and interaction of the
people who made them. Other
artifacts associated with the
Clovis culture include bifaces
and prismatic blades, engraved
stones, bone and ivory points,
stone bolas, ochre, and shaft
straighteners. During the late
Paleoindian interval, the first
stemmed lanceolate points, such
as Angostura, Golondrina, St.
Mary’s Hall, and Barber (among
a few others) appear.
In general, the Paleoindian
adaptation has been considered
to be one of small bands of
nomadic, big-game hunters
following herds of Late
Pleistocene fauna, including
mammoth, mastodons, bison,
camel, and horse, across North
America (Black 1989). More
recently, emphasis has been
placed on the wide diversity of
plants and animals used for
subsistence by these early
Americans, such as turtles and
tortoises, alligators, mice,
badgers, and raccoons, although
they undoubtedly hunted the
large animals as well (Collins
1995:381). Known Clovis sites
include killsites, quarries,
caches, open campsites, ritual
sites, and burials (Hester
1995:433–436). A Folsom
interval follows the Clovis.
Folsom artifacts are fairly
common in south Texas;
however, no camp sites or
killsites have been found south
of a large workshop, Pavo Real Figure 6. South Texas cultural chronology.
(41BX52), in Bexar County
5

(Hester 1995:434–435). Most Paleoindian finds in south Texas have consisted of surface lithic
scatters on upland terraces and ridges (Black 1989).
As the warming that marks the transition from Pleistocene to Holocene climates began to take
effect in Texas, prehistoric inhabitants adapted with changes in lifestyle. This climatic shift is
also marked by the decline and extinction of mammoth, mastodon, horse, camel, and giant bison
(Bison antiquus). Large gregarious game animals were perhaps extinct in Texas. Human hunters
were forced to concentrate on deer, antelope, and other medium-size or smaller game. Changes
in the subsistence base required technological shifts that mark the beginning of a new cultural
period known as the Archaic.
Early Archaic (7950 - 4450 B.P.)
Hester (1995:436–438) identifies the Early Archaic, with Early Corner Notched and Early Basal
Notched dart points, as roughly dating between 7950 to 4450 B.P. The extinction of large herds
of megafauna and the changing climate at the beginning of the Holocene stimulated a behavioral
change by the Prehistoric inhabitants of south Texas (McKinney 1981). While the basic huntergatherer adaptation probably remained intact, an economic shift away from big game hunting
was necessary. In general, more intensive exploitation of local and smaller resources such as
deer, fish, and plant bulbs is indicated by greater densities of ground-stone artifacts, fire-cracked
rock cooking features, and more specialized tools. Weir (1976) speculates that Early Archaic
groups were small and highly mobile, an inference based on the fact that Early Archaic sites are
thinly distributed and that diagnostic projectile point types are seen across a wide area, including
most of Texas and northern Mexico. Story (1985) believes that population densities were low
during the Early Archaic, and that groups consisted of related individuals in small bands with
“few constraints on their mobility” (Story 1985:39). Their economy was based on the utilization
of a wide range of resources, especially such year-round resources as prickly pear and lechugilla,
as well as rodents, rabbits, and deer.
Middle Archaic (4450 - 2350 B.P.)
Hester (1995:438–441) suggests that the period between 4450 and 2350 B.P. reflects the Middle
Archaic in south Texas. The Middle Archaic appears to have been a time of increased
population, based on the large number of sites from this period (Story 1985:40; Weir 1976:125,
128). On the South Texas Plains, exploitation of widely scattered, year-round resources such as
prickly pear continued (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13–15), as did hunting deer and rabbit.
Weir (1976) believes that the widely scattered bands prevalent in the Early Archaic now began
to coalesce, at least during the acorn-gathering season, into larger groups who shared the
intensive work of gathering and processing the acorn harvest (Weir 1976:126). Many researchers
believe burned rock middens are a result of this endeavor (Creel 1986; Prewitt 1991; Weir 1976).
The common presence of deer remains in burned rock middens encourages the view that deer
processing took place at burned rock midden sites. Bison bone is encountered in archaeological
sites in south Texas, at least occasionally, during all but the earliest part of the Middle Archaic
(Dillehay 1974). Cemeteries make their first appearance during this period, suggesting a
movement toward less mobility and perhaps territorialism. One of the earliest occurrences dating
to the south Texas Middle Archaic, is Loma Sandia in Live Oak County, which dates between
6

ca. 2550 and 2750 B.P. (Taylor and Highley 1995).
Late Archaic (2350 - 1250 B.P.)
Hester believes the Late Archaic in south Texas may be defined as between 2350–1250 B.P,
Some researchers believe populations increased throughout the Late Archaic, while others feel
populations remained the same or fell during this period (Black 1989:30). Subsistence is
assumed to have become less specialized on acorns, in favor of a broad spectrum subsistence
base (Black 1989:30). Story (1985:44–45) believes the presence of cemeteries indicates that Late
Archaic populations in central and south Texas were increasing and becoming more territorial.
Although inhabitants of the South Texas Plain near Brownsville and Rockport had begun to
make pottery by about 1750 B.P., the northern part of the plain was still “pre-ceramic” until
1,000 years later (Story 1985:45–47). Late Archaic points tend to be much smaller than Middle
Archaic points.
Transitional Archaic (2250 - 1250 B.P.)
A late subperiod or interval of the Late Archaic is frequently referred to as the Terminal Archaic
or Transitional Archaic. Turner and Hester (1999) cite data placing the Transitional Archaic as
2250–1250 B.P. Although Hester may lump current data into a Late Archaic period, he cautions
that more evidence will likely result in what may be termed as a “Terminal Archaic” period
during the latter part of the Late Archaic in south Texas. This Terminal Archaic period is
represented by diagnostics such as Ensor, Frio, and Matamoras points which appear to overlap
the Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods (Hester 1995:442). Weir (1976) believes this
marked a transition period to localized area sites, a disappearance of burned rock middens and
bison, and a reappearance of highly mobile hunters and gatherers. Others (Black and McGraw
1985; Peter 1982; Skelton 1977) argue that in some locations burned rock middens did not
disappear and sites were more intensely occupied during the Transitional Archaic period.
Late Prehistoric (1250 - 420 B.P.)
The term “Late Prehistoric” is commonly used to designate the period following the Late Archaic
in south Texas. Generally, the Late Prehistoric period is thought of as spanning the period
between A. D. 700 - 1530 ([1250 - 420 B.P.] [Hester 1995]). A series of distinctive traits mark
the shift from the Archaic to the Late Prehistoric period, including the technological shift to the
bow and arrow and the introduction of pottery to central Texas and the northern South Texas
Plain (Black 1989:32; Story 1985:45–47). Two distinct phases recognized within the Late
Prehistoric are the Austin and Toyah. During the Austin phase, there appears to be a subtle
transition from expanding stem projectile points that may have been used as dart points, as well
as early arrow points. The most prevalent point found in Austin phase sites is the Scallorn arrow
point. Settlement shifts into rockshelters such as Scorpion Cave in Medina County (Highley et
al. 1978) and Classen Rockshelter in northern Bexar County (Fox and Fox 1967) have been
noted. Cemeteries from this period often reveal evidence of conflict (Black 1989:32).
Beginning rather abruptly at about 650 B.P., a shift in technology occurred. The Perdiz arrow
point may best represent the appearance of a distinct culture in south-central Texas lasting for
about 300 years, which archaeologists have labeled the Toyah phase. Hester (1995:444)
7

recognizes this phase as the “best documented Late Prehistoric pattern” throughout south Texas,
with dates ranging between ca. 650/700 to 300/350 B.P. (A.D. 1250/1300 to 1600/1650).
In addition to Perdiz points, evidence of a Toyah culture is manifested as bone-tempered pottery,
bone spatulates, awls, and beads, stone endscrapers, beveled knives, and expediently utilized
flakes. Briefly, expedient lithic technology involves removing flakes from a core in a
nonstandard manner; the purpose is to knock off sharp flakes for immediate use, selecting the
ones that best suit the need at the time. This technology differs from formal, standardized core
reduction and the manufacturing of formal, usually bifacial tools. Expedient lithic technology
is a continent-wide phenomonon indicative of increased sedentism, and is observed in Toyah
assemblages in Texas.
Whether the Toyah phase seen in the south-central Texas archaeological record is a result of a
group of people moving into the region, or adapted technologies from the region’s periphery is
a matter of conjecture. Steele and Assad-Hunter (1986) argue for the occurrence of a distinct
change in diet between the Late Archaic and the Late Prehistoric components in two sites in the
Choke Canyon Reservoir area in south Texas. Analysis of the number of identified specimens
(NISP) shows a marked increase in artiodactyla elements present during the later part of the Late
Prehistoric, an increase largely due to the addition of bison to the “menu” (Steele and AssadHunter 1986:468).
Whether or not agriculture was practiced during this period in south Texas has not been
documented. There simply is not enough evidence to postulate there was ever a significant
presence of maize in the area. The later arrival of the Spanish during the later
Protohistoric/Historic period brought significant cultivars to south Texas.
Protohistoric/Historic (420 B.P. - present)
The end of the Late Prehistoric and beginning of the Historic period in south Texas is
characterized by written accounts of European contact with indigenous groups. The Protohistoric
period begins in 1528 when Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts of southeast and
south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the hunter-gatherers of Texas
and northern Mexico (e.g., Hallenbeck 1971). Cabeza de Vaca’s account of his stay with the
Miriami in 1533-34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves
to the easily exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter and summer, occasionally
sending a hunting party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live
near each other in the semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other
succulents (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13-37).
Linguistically, early protohistoric accounts of the late 1500s indicate that a large group which
spoke Cohuilteco inhabited the area now known as south-central Texas. Coahuiltecan is a term
coined by Mexican linguists in the 1800s, and the name refers to the many small bands of Native
Americans who lived in northeastern Coahuila, Mexico and south Texas. The Coahuiltecans
were rapidly dispersed or killed during the Protohistoric period.

8

The period between de Vaca’s written account and the advent of Spanish missions in the late
1600s and early 1700s is referred to as the Protohistoric; a time when few, scant written
documents exist detailing Native American life outside the missions. The Historic period then,
is generally thought of as beginning in the 1700s.
Some 30 miles south of Eagle Pass, the Spanish established Mission San Juan Bautista in 1700
(now modern-day Guerrero). Early Spanish explorers then repeatedly traveled the Camino Real
enroute to newly established missions and settlements in today’s modern Texas throughout the
1700s and 1800s. Mexican families from across the river expanded into Texas, and these families
trace their roots to the early development of the area. In the ensuing years, lawlessness prevailed,
with saloons, gambling houses, outlaws, and slave hunters prevalent.

La Salle County Prehistory and History
Indian artifacts found in La Salle County indicate that the area has been occupied for about
11,000 years. Plentiful food sources such as wild game, fruits, seeds, and roots made the land
hospitable. Early technology included tools from wood and stone, woven basketry, sewed
rabbitskin robes, and a very effective weapon was the atlatl, a throwing stick that greatly
increased the deadliness of their spears (Leffler 1996). Perhaps as early as 1,300 years ago, they
learned to make pottery and to hunt with bows and arrows. During the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, the Coahuiltecan Indians native to La Salle County were squeezed out by
other Indian who were migrating into the area and by the Spanish, who were moving up from the
south. Many of the Coahuiltecans were taken to San Juan Bautista in Coahuila. Apaches and
Comanches moved in to take their place (Leffler 1996).
The earliest historic accounts of Native Americans in south Texas and perhaps the La Salle
County area, are those of Cabeza de Vaca. In the 1500s, Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca
traversed parts of southeast and south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling
among the hunter-gatherers of Texas and northern Mexico (e.g., Covey 1961). His account of
his experiences in 1533–34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether
themselves to the easily exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter, and summer,
occasionally sending a hunting party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many
groups would live near each other in the semiarid environs of south Texas to harvest prickly pear
pads and other succulents (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13–37).
By the 1540s and 1550s, Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico with
thousands of cattle, and using Native Americans as slave labor. This encroachment by the
Spanish forced Native American groups from northern Mexico to flee into south Texas.
Beginning in the late 1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio
Road, a camino real, to and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. In the 1700s and 1800s,
there are documented accounts of Spanish entradas passing through the area, but none have been
noted to establish any sort of permanent bases in present-day La Salle County (Chipman 1992)

9

After the Mexican War of Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage
its citizens to settle in Texas. Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and
1834 that included territory now in La Salle County. None of the recipients seem to have made
use of the land, however. By 1836, when Texas became independent from Mexico, the area
remained populated almost solely by Indians (Leffler 1996).
Between the Texas Revolution and the Mexican War (1836–46), most of La Salle County lay in
the disputed area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River, and it became a haven for
desperate characters until about 1865. New settlers who lived in jacals or dugouts were
frequently being harrassed by hostile Indians and outlaws. Due in part to being pursued by the
Texas Rangers, and being decimated by disease, the Indians were forced to leave La Salle County
by 1877. By 1880, cattle ranching was firmly established, and although sheep ranching was also
an important part of the economy at the time, by 1900 extended droughts and an increase in
predators combined to make sheep ranching a tough and dwindling business (Leffler 1996).
As with rest of the nation, during the Great Depression many of the county’s farmers were forced
to cut back their once-lucrative vegetable production, and they fell back on raising poultry, hogs,
and dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in the county in the
1950s certainly bolstered La Salle County’s economy, and although large ranches lay claim to
most of the land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much a progressively
increasing part of the county’s development (Leffler 1996).

Site Types That Could be Expected Along the Ware Trunkline
Prehistoric Open Campsites
Most numerous among the sites recorded in La Salle County are prehistoric open campsites
ranging in age from the Paleoindian period through the Historic period (see Figure 6). Some of
these represent a single campfire where a very small group of Native Americans may have
camped for one night. Others are very large, covering very extensive areas representing large
groups of people that stayed for long periods, perhaps seasonally, with ancestral groups returning
to these same campsites over a period of several thousands of years. Cultural remains to be found
at these large campsites include among other items, an abundance of fire-cracked rocks
representing multiple hearths, a wide variety of chipped stone tools and the lithic debris that
results from making them, ground and smoothed stones used to grind nuts and seeds, faunal
remains from terrestrial and aquatic animals consumed, bone tools, pottery sherds, and mussel
and snail shells. Open campsites occur in all types of environments, whether that be in a plush
riverine environment that offered a wide variety banquet of plant and animal foodstuffs, or in the
uplands away from flowing water sources. Seasonally, the upland grasses, shrubs, and cacti
offered a different food source that could be exploited such as various grass seeds, mesquite
beans, prickly pear pads and tunas, and agave hearts. In addition, at various times, bison were
known to graze on the northern South Texas Plains, and were highly sought after for use as food,
hides, and bone tools (Dillehay 1974).
10

Depending upon the integrity of these open campsites, archaeologists and the Texas Historical
Commission consider these as perhaps the most significant types of sites in regard to their ability
to contribute to our understanding of south Texas prehistory. A few of the desired ingredients
that can indicate significance include cultural material that is buried beneath the surface in a
well-preserved, stratified, and relatively undisturbed context. Although these situations most
frequently occur within stratified terrace deposits adjacent to streams, they can also occur in
upland settings where the landscape has been generally stable through time. Other ingredients
that archaeologists look for in potentially significant campsites include good organic
preservation in the form of charcoal and/or charred plant remains, faunal preservation,
temporally diagnostic stone tools or ceramics, and intact features such as hearths.
Prehistoric Lithic Scatters or Procurement Sites
Lithic scatters are the next most common type of archaeological site that could be expected
within the PA. These sites simply represent the chipped stone debris and broken tools that were
left behind when Native Americans made new tools or re-sharpened their old ones. The general
absence of fire-cracked rocks and other cultural material normally found at open campsites
suggest that they did not camp there, or remain there for any extended period of time (however,
small camp fires may have been used to heat-treat chert or quartzite cobbles to make them more
knappable). Yet, they were drawn to these isolated locales because of the natural outcroppings
or surface exposures of good quality raw material such as chert or quartzite cobbles. Examples
of chipped stone most commonly found at these sites include cobbles with one or two flakes
removed, called ‘tested cobbles’. That is, the Native Americans knew from experience the
quality of stone that could most easily be flaked and reduced for stone tool production, so they
‘tested’ the cobble to judge whether it was usable or not. If the quality was judged to be inferior,
then the cobble was tossed aside. That is why the majority of tested cobbles found on these sites
are of poor quality, coarse-grained material. While the finished stone tool products are carried
away from these sites, what remains are those tools broken during the manufacturing process,
and the thousands of pieces of debitage in the form of flakes and angular debris. Also unique to
lithic scatters where large cobbles are present are snapped ‘quarry blanks’. These are simply
cobbles flakes on both sides, reducing the cobble into a transportable ‘blank’ that can be used
to further reduce it and make finished stone tools from the flakes taken off of it. The unbroken
quarry blanks are usually not found on these sites because they have been carried off, presumably
to areas of south Texas where raw material is not readily available. The snapped or broken quarry
blanks are of little or no use, so they are discarded and left behind.
Lithic scatters range in age from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods and can be found
on any landscape setting where gravels or cobbles have been exposed. Notably, gravel outcrops
that were exposed to the surface a few hundred or thousand years ago could be deeply buried
today, and the opposite could also be true; it all depends on the terrain setting and the dynamics
of landscape evolution through time. Most lithic scatters in La Salle County have been
documented along upper stream terraces abutting the eroded upland slopes.
Prehistoric Quarries
Prehistoric quarries can also can range in age from the Paleoindian through Historic periods, but
differ from lithic scatters in that at those sites Native Americans exploited loose gravels, but at
11

times they specifically sought quarry sites where raw material such as cherts or quartzites were
not yet freed from their parent geologic formation, and they had to be ‘quarried’. These types
of sites are rare in south Texas for two reasons: 1) the geological exposures generally do not
present themselves, and 2) throughout Texas, even in central Texas, it is much easier to pick up
gravels from the surface than to try to mine them from hard rock. Quarried and chipped stone
remains likely to be found at these sites include large chunks of angular cherts or quartzites, as
well as parent material detritus, and flaking debris. Snapped quarry blanks can also be expected.
Although a handful of prehistoric quarries or procurement sites have been recorded in south
Texas, they are rare.
Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens
There are no documented burned rock middens in La Salle County. Burned rock middens result
from a series of multiple-use earth ovens that were constructed much like modern-day roasting
pits are dug into the earth for roasting a pig. With repetitive uses, as the larger rocks that serve
as heating elements in the earthen pit fracture and thus become less effective as a thermal source,
they are ‘pitched out’ around the edge of the pit. As the pit becomes unusable, another is dug
near by, and the procedure repeated. Over time, these multiple pits and the ‘pitched out’ firecracked rocks coalesce together, obscuring each pit as indiscernible. (For a full discussion of the
formation of burned rock middens and their documented presence in Texas, see Leach and
Bousman 2001; Leach et al. 2001; Mauldin et al. 2003).
Prehistoric Burial and Cemetery Sites
Although not common, isolated prehistoric burials and cemeteries have been documented in
south Texas. Individual and isolated burials have been found in association with open campsites
in both upland settings as well as in alluvial terraces along streams, but the largest prehistoric
cemetery found in proximity to the PA is 41LK28, in Live Oak County.
Historic Sites
As discussed above in the Cultural Chronology portion of this report, although Spanish ranchers
had established large ranches in northern Mexico by the mid-16th century, and Spanish entradas
began penetrating south Texas in the 1700s and 1800s, there is no record of any sort of
permanent structures in the area during those periods (Chipman 1992). The area was generally
not considered safe for settlement by whites until after the Civil War in 1865, and white settlers
then began establishing smaller ranches and farmlands (Leffler 1996).
Because of the vastness of the landscape and the relatively late settlement and development of
south Texas compared to east and central Texas and northern Mexico, historic sites are not
abundant, but they certainly do exist. The most common types to be encountered are related to
ranching and farming endeavors, or small communities from the 19th and 20th centuries. Site
types most commonly include farmsteads or ranches with corrals, cisterns, chimney and
foundation remains from both main houses and outbuildings, related trash dumps, an occasional
family burial or cemetery, school houses, churches, community buildings, and industry-related
structures or construction projects. In general, the area has been historically used predominantly
as ranchland pasture, with no development other than associated ranching activities such as
12

windmills, stock tanks, corrals, and sparsely scattered outbuildings. site of significance from the
1500s through the mid-1900s along the line were minimal.

Results of A Cultural Resources Background Review
The research by TAAI included:
1) A review of the most current literature documenting the prehistory and history of the
immediate area
2) A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas to identify
what cultural resource surveys have been conducted, and what archaeological sites have been
documented within one mile of the project area
3) A search of various websites that offer old maps of the PA
4) A literature review of both published and unpublished reports and manuscripts that describe
the types of archaeological sites that have been documented, and thus provide insight as to the
types of sites that may be expected either in the PA, or immediately adjacent to it
5) A review of a local soils map in order to evaluate the potential for intact and buried cultural
materials either within or immediately adjacent to the PA.

Archaeological Atlas Site Results
La Salle County
Very few, and sparsely scattered archaeological surveys have been conducted in La Salle County.
There are only 117 archaeological sites recorded within the county, and a large number of those
were found on pipeline surveys. Nevertheless, the time-diagnostic artifacts discovered in La Salle
County provide evidence that the landscape was occupied as early as 11,000 years before the
present.
The site types are as varied as the landscape. Large open campsites with numerous hearths, or
campfires, a wide assortment of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and butchered animal
remains are most commonly located along stream or river terraces. Where gravels outcrop, either
along eroded streambeds, or on higher terrain where more ancient gravels are sometimes exposed
in isolated pockets, one can expect stone chipping stations, or prehistoric quarries (Atlas 2011).
Of the 117 sites, 64 are prehistoric open campsites, and 48 are prehistoric lithic scatters. The
more significant and deeply buried open campsites with archaeological research potential lie close
to streams. Historic components on these same prehistoric sites include historic windmills and
13

areas of scattered glass and ceramic sherds, or in some cases there are large trash dumps. One
unique historic site is Fort Ewell (41LS19), an adobe structure located on the old Laredo to San
Antonio Road, and that served the U.S. Army from 1852-1854. The only State Archaeological
Landmark (SAL) recorded in La Salle County is the County Courthouse in Cotulla (Leffler 1996;
Atlas 2011).
Finally, one of the more potentially significant archaeological sites in the south Texas
archaeological region is located in La Salle County; this being the Oulline Site (41LS3). The
Oulline Site covers approximately 40 acres, about eight miles north of Cotulla, Diagnostic
artifacts recovered from this large open campsite range in age from Paleoindian through the Late
Prehistoric periods, and demonstrate the potential for other significant archaeological sites to exist
in the area (Hester et al. 1969).
The PA lies to the west of a large archaeological survey conducted in anticipation of the
construction of the Choke Canyon Reservoir (e.g, Hall et al. 1981). During that survey conducted
in the 1980s, 116 prehistoric archaeological sites located in both Live Oak and McMullen
counties were documented, ranging in age from 350 years ago to 11,000 years ago. Through all
the periods of Choke Canyon's history, humans subsisted by hunting and gathering natural food
resources available in the area. Many of the prehistoric sites are situated on terrace deposits,
ridges, and ridge promontories overlooking streams in the upper reaches of second and third low
order tributaries.
In addition, archaeologists from the Center for Archaeological Research at the University of Texas
at San Antonio conducted archaeological investigations at eight historic sites at Choke Canyon
Reservoir. A number of different types of structures were investigated, the purpose being to
extract as much information as possible about architecture, lifestyles, and settlement patterns
during the last half of the 19th century within the reservoir. Artifacts recovered helped recreate
the life of the people, demonstrating how they met the challenges of living in a frontier area, and
how life changed after the Civil War and the coming of law and order, railroads, and modern
communications (Fox and Ward 1986).
Surveys and Sites within One Mile of the Current Project Area
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archeological sites indicates that
no professional archaeological surveys had been conducted within one mile (1,609 meters).
However, as shown in Figure 3, TAAI conducted a survey of the Lizana Lateral in July 2011. One
isolated prehistoric find, and one multi-component site (41LS164) was documented along that
right-of-way. The assessment of 41LS164 was that it is non-significant to the prehistory and
history of Texas (Nickels 2011a). In addition, TAAI conducted a cultural resources background
review of the proposed Javelina Compressor Facility, and recommended that the 5-acre facility
be developed as planned, with no further archaeological investigations (Nickels 2011b).

14

Historic Site Potential
A standard source of research is the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs
available at the Perry Casteñada Library at the University of Texas at Austin (Perry Casteñeda
Library 2011). A second standard research source consulted for old maps and aerial photographs
was a very comprehensive and large compilation of old maps and aerial photographs compiled
by the Texas Department of Transportation from dozens of historic archives throughout the state
of Texas. In this case, the Ware Trunkline appears to be in a rural area of La Salle County that
either warranted little attention, or the area was void of historic structures.
Nevetheless, the lack of comprehensive historic map and aerial information, coupled with the
paucity of cultural resources surveys within the area is possibly, and perhaps probably, why no
information is available regarding the presence of historic structures, ranching or industrial
activities, or persons of historic significance to the immediate area. Historic sites recorded in La
Salle County consist of local family cemeteries with just a few burials in each, house sites and
farmsteads from as early as the 1850s, and trash scatters. Technically, any structures old than 45
years are now considered of interest by the Texas Historical Commission, and this should be
considered when the Project Area is developed.

Soils
As illustrated in Figure 7,
there is only one soil type
along the Project Area. In
this case, it is La Salle
clay (LAB), deep alluvial
clay that has formed on
gently undulating smooth
plains in this area of La
Salle County (Gabriel et
al. 1994; Web Soil
Survey 2011). There is at
best a minimal
probability that intact
archaeological deposits
exist within the La Salle
clay, and these would be
in the upper 24 inches.
Figure 7. Soils to be dissected by the Ware Trunkline.

15

Field Survey Goals, Methodology, and Levels of Effort
Goals
The project goals focused on archaeological issues that could be addressed by the types of data
obtained through pedestrian survey. The topics addressed were site type, distribution, density,
size, depth, and stratigraphy. The theoretical framework is structured around patterns of
settlement, mobility, subsistence, and social systems for the South Texas region.
The goals of the project were to:
1)

locate and record cultural locations and sites in the project area using a systematic survey
methodology;

2)

quantify site size, as well as depth, and stratigraphy; and,

3)

place any diagnostic artifacts within the regional time frame.

Methods and Levels of Effort
Two archaeologists conducted a general survey of the pipeline, meandering back and forth across
the right-of-way (see Figure 3). Surface visibility ranged from 80 to 100 percent, and all cutbanks,
and rodent and mammal backdirt piles were thoroughly examined..

Results of the Field Investigations
An inspection of the surface along the proposed right-of-way revealed predominately eroded,
deflated, and mechanically disturbed surfaces. No evidence of either prehistoric or historic
cultural materials was observed along the entire 2.8-mile right-of-way.

Ware Trunkline Survey Conclusions and Recommendations

In general, disturbed or deflated and shallow soils were prevalent across the entire length of the
pipeline, and no prehistoric or historic cultural material or features were observed. As such,
Tierras Antiguas recommends that the Ware Trunkline be allowed to be constructed as currently
planned, with no further archaeological investigations. However, Tierras Antiguas further
recommends that if any additional, undiscovered cultural resources were encountered during
development, such finds should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any
qualified archaeological consultant.
16

References Cited

Archer, S.
1995

Tree-grass Dynamics in a Prosopis-thornscrub Savannah Parkland:
Reconstructing the Past and Predicting the Future. Ecoscience 2(1):84-99.

2011

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
November 9, 2011].

Atlas

Black, S. L.
1989

Environmental Setting. In From the Gulf Coast to the Rio Grande: Human
Adaptation in the Central, South, and Lower Pecos, Texas, by T. R. Hester, S.
L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. J. Reinhard, and L. C.
Bement, pp. 5-17. Research Series No. 33, Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

Black, S. L., and A. J. McGraw
1985

The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change and Continuity in the Upper
Salado Creek Drainage, South-Central Texas. Archaeological Survey Report,
No. 100. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

Blair, W. F.
1950

The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-117.

Brune, G.
1981

Springs of Texas. Branch-Smith, Fort Worth.

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Collins, M. B.
1995 Forty Years of Archaeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:361–400.
Covey, C. (editor)
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier
Books, New York.
Creel, D. G.

17

1986

A Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in West Central Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Arizona, Tucson.

Diamond, D.D., D. H. Riskind, and S. L. Orzell
1987 A Framework for Plant Community Classification and Conservation in Texas.
The Texas Journal of Science 39(3):203-221.
Dillehay, T.
1974

Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19(64):180–196.

Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986 Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas. Choke Canyon Series, Volume 12. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Fox, A. A., and D. E. Fox
1967 The Classen Rockshelter, 41BX23. Manuscript on file. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Gabriel, W. J., D. Arriaga, and J. W. Stevens
1994 Soil Survey of La Salle County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, DC in cooperation with
the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station and the Texas State Soil and Water
Conservation Board. College Station, Texas.
Gould, F. W.
1975 Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. Texas Agricultural
Experimentation Station, College Station.
Hall, G. D., T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black
1981 The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir, Southern Texas: Results of
Phase II Archaeological Investigations. Choke Canyon Series: Volume 10.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hallenbeck, C.
1971 Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca: The Journey and Route of the First European to
Cross the Continent of North America, 1534-1536. Kennikat Press Scholarly
Reprints, Port Washington, New York.
Hester, T. R.
2004 The Prehistory of South Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, pp. 127-154. Edited
by T. K. Perttula. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
1995
1980

The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:427–459.
Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur Archaeologists.
Corona Press, San Antonio.

Hester, T. R., L. D. White, and J. White
18

1969

Archeological Materials from the Oulline Site (41LS3) and Other Sites in La
Salle County, Southwest Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. XXI, No.
2.

Highley, L., C. Graves, and G. Judson
1978 Archeological Investigations at Scorpion Cave (41ME7), Medina County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:139–194.
Inglis, J. M.
1964

A History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain. Bulletin #45. Texas Parks
and Wildlife Department, Austin.

Leach, J. D., and C. B. Bousman
2001 Cultural and Secondary Formation Processes: On the Dynamic Accumulation
of Burned Rock Middens, Chapter 7. In Test Excavations at the Culebra Creek
Site, 41BX126, San Antonio, Texas by D. L. Nickels, C. B. Bousman, J. D.
Leach, and D. A. Cargill, pp. 119-145. Archaeological Survey Report, No. 265,
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio
and Archeological Studies, Report 3, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Leach, J. D., D. L. Nickels, B. K. Moses, and R. Jones
2001 Appendix D. Estimating Rates of Burned Rock Discard: Results from an
Experimental Earth Oven. In Test Excavations at the Culebra Creek Site,
41BX126, San Antonio, Texas by D. L. Nickels, C. B. Bousman, J. D. Leach,
and D. A. Cargill, pp. 119-145. Archaeological Survey Report, No. 265, Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio
Lee, D. S., C. R. Gilbert, C. H. Hocutt, R. E. Jenkins, P. E. McAllister, J. R. Stauffer, Jr.
1980 Atlas of North American Freshwater Fishers. North Carolina Biological
Survey Publication 1980-12, North Carolina State Museum of Natural History.
Leffler, J.
1996

La Salle County. The New Handbook of Texas Online.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Map
2011

Biotic Provinces of Texas.
http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/landwater/land/maps/gis/map_downloads/images/p
wd_mp_e0100_1070ae_6.gif. [Accessed November 9, 2011].

Mauldin, R. P., D. L. Nickels, and C. J. Broehm
2003 Archaeological Testing to Determine the National Register Eligibility Status of
18 Prehistoric Sites on Camp Bowie, Brown County, Texas. Archaeological
Survey Report, No. 334, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio and the Adjutant General’s Department of Texas,
Department of Facilities and Engineering Environmental Branch, Austin,
Texas.
19

McKinney, W. W.
1981 Early Holocene Adaptations in Central and Southern Texas: The Problem of
the Paleo-Indian-Archaic Transition. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 52:91–120.
Nickels, D. L.
2011a A Cultural Resources Survey of the Ware Trunkline in La Salle County, Texas.
Interim Letter Report submitted to Flatrock Engineering and Environmental.
Ltd, San Antonio, Texas. July 16, 2011.
2011b A Cultural Resources Background Review of the 5-Acre Javelina Compressor
Facility in La Salle County, Texas. Prepared for Flatrock Engineering and
Environmental. Ltd, San Antonio, Texas. May 2011.
Perry Castañeda Library
2011 Perry Cesteñeda Maps. Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed November 9,
2011].
Peter, D. E.
1982

Alternative Perspectives on Burned Rock Middens, In Archaeological
Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, Vol. 2,
compiled and edited by T. R. Hays, pp. 20.1–20.15. Archaeology Program,
Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.

Prewitt, E. R.
1991 Burned Rock Middens: A Summary of Previous Investigations and
Interpretations. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An Archeological
Symposium, edited T. R. Hester, pp. 25–32. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Robinson, R. L.
1982 Biosilica Analysis of Three Prehistoric Archaeological Sites in the Choke
Canyon Reservoir, Live Oak County, Texas: Preliminary Summary of Climatic
Implications. In Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir,
South Texas: The Phase I Findings, edited by G. D. Hall, S. L. Black, and C.
Graves, pp. 597-610. Choke Canyon Series, No. 5. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Skelton, D. W.
20

1977

Archeological Investigations at the Fayette Power Project, Fayette County,
Texas. Research Report 60. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Stahle, D. W. , and M. K. Cleaveland
1995 Texas Paleoclimatic Data from Daily to Millennial Time Scales. In The
Changing Climate of Texas: Predictability and Implications for the Future,
edited by J. Norwine, J. R. Giardino, G. R. North, and J. B. Valdes, pp. 49-69.
GeoBooks, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Steele, D. G., and C. Assad Hunter
1986 Analysis of Vertebrate Faunal Remains from 41MC222 and 41MC296,
McMullen County, Texas. In The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas: Results of Phase II Archaeological Investigations, edited by
G. D. Hall, T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black. Choke Canyon Series, No. 10. Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Story, D. A.
1985

Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coastal Plain. In
Prehistoric Food Production in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp.
19–56. Anthropological Papers No. 75. Museum of Anthropology, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Taylor, A. J., and C. L. Highly
1995 Archaeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A
Prehistoric Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. 2 volumes. Studies in
Archeology No. 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Turner, E. S., and T. R. Hester
1999 A Field Guide to the Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Gulf Publishing.
Houston, TX.
Web Soil Survey
2011 La Salle County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed
November 9, 2011].
Weir, F. A.
1976

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. Anthropology
Department, Washington State University.
21

