A Cultural Resources Survey of the 1.7-Mile Bayou
Rouge South Lateral in Zavala County, Texas

Prepared for Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd.
San Antonio, Texas
by
David L. Nickels, Principal Investigator
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations
Archaeology Report # 241
July 2013

Abstract
Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd. of San Antonio, Texas contracted with Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations (TAAI) to conduct a pedestrian survey of the 1.7-mile
Bayou Rouge South Lateral to be installed by Mockingbird Midstream Gas Services, L.L.C.
(Mockingbird) in southwestern Zavala County. The project was entirely privately funded, and the
properties across which the pipeline will cross are privately owned; therefore, no Texas
Antiquities Permit was required.
The proposed Bayou Rouge South Lateral right-of-way was subjected to a pedestrian survey by
two archaeologists on November 30, 2012. Surface visibility ranged from 80 to 100-percent
along the right-of-way, and revealed predominantly mechanically disturbed surfaces due to
blading and land clearing. No evidence of cultural material was observed along the right-of-way.
Accordingly, TAAI recommended that construction of the Bayou Rouge South Lateral be
allowed to proceed, with no further archaeological investigations. However, Tierras Antiguas
further recommended that if any undiscovered cultural resources were encountered during
development of the properties, such finds should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas,
or by any archaeological consultant.

Acknowledgments
There are mainly four individuals who are greatly appreciated, and whose efforts contributed to
the successful planning, organization, and completion of this project. They are Ms. Judy Vader
and Mr. Ryan DeBarros, Project Managers at Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, and Mr.
Ronnie Glenewinkel and Mr. David Black, Environmental Coordinator and Permitting Specialist
at Mockingbird Midstream. All were extremely amiable and helpful throughout the project, and
their overall knowledge of the project contributed significantly to our understanding of the
project’s scope of work.
In addition, I express my sincere gratitude to Tierras Antiguas staff archaeologist Emory Worrell,
who worked hard, long hours, and expressed an attitude and work ethic that ensured this survey
was conducted in a thorough and professional manner.

Cover Photo: Bayou Rouge South Lateral right-of-way @N3169546 E415071 (NAD83); facing
east-northeast.

i

Table of Contents
Title
Page
Abstract.......................................................................................................................................i
Acknowledgments........................................................................................................................i
List of Figures.............................................................................................................................ii
List of Tables...............................................................................................................................ii
Introduction................................................................................................................................1
Modern Setting...........................................................................................................................2
Paleoenvironment........................................................................................................................4
Cultural Chronology....................................................................................................................4
Zavala County Prehistory and History.........................................................................................9
Site Types to be Expected.........................................................................................................10
Atlas Review of Archaeological Sites and Historical Maps ........................................................13
Soils..........................................................................................................................................14
Survey Goals and Methodology.................................................................................................16
Results of the Investigations......................................................................................................16
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations..........................................................................18
References Cited........................................................................................................................19

List of Figures
Figure

Page

1. Zavala County and Project Area location.............................................................................1
2. Project Area on large topographic map................................................................................1
3. Project Area on local topographic map................................................................................2
4. Physiographic regions of Texas...........................................................................................3
5. Biotic provinces of Texas....................................................................................................3
6. South Texas cultural chronology.........................................................................................5
7. Soils along the Project Area..............................................................................................14
8. Photo of right-of-way......................................................................................................17
9. Photo of drainage crossing..............................................................................................17

List of Tables
Table
Page
1. Soils Dissected by the Bayou Rouge South Lateral.............................................................15

ii

Introduction
Flatrock Engineering and
Environmental, Ltd., requested
a cultural resources background
review of the proposed Bayou
Rouge South Lateral in
southwestern Zavala County,
and hereinafter occasionally
referred to as the Project Area
(PA) (Figures 1-3).
In November 2012, Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological
Investigations (TAAI)
conducted a review of cultural
resources documented either
on, or within one mile of the
PA, as well as other documents Figure 1. Location of Zavala County, and the Project Area
that may be
in Texas.
r el a t i v e f o r
significant
c u l t u r a l
resources to
exist within the
PA.
Bas e d upon
those reviews,
Tierras
Antiguas then
conducted a
field survey on
November 30,
2012 focusing
on those locales
where buried
and intact
prehistoric
deposits were
most likely to Figure 2. Location of the Project Area on large topographic map.
exist.

i

Modern Setting
Climate and Vegetation
Zavala county is
located in southcentral Texas
near its southern
border with
Mexico (see
Figure 1). Its
current political
boun dary
encompasses
1,298 square
miles. The
generally flat to
rolling terrain
ranges
in
elevation from
about 580-964
feet above mean
sea level. Clayey
and loamy soils
s u p p o r t t h e Figure 3. Project Area on Crystal City (1972) 7.5' USGS topographic map.
growth of small
predominately mesquite trees, and thorny scrub brush with assorted cacti and grassy understory,
but with all oak, pecan, and elm along the riverine environments such as the Leona and Frio rivers
(Ochoa 1996).
With its semi-arid environment, the county is generally frost-free from late-February through early
December, allowing for a 282-day growing season. The average annual rainfall is about 22 inches,
with most rainfall occurring in May and September. These peaks are the result of thunderstorms
bearing moist air from the Gulf of Mexico to the east, and the Pacific Ocean much farther to the
west. Zavala county is known as part of the Winter Garden Region for the vegetables grown there
(Ochoa 1996; Stevens and Arriaga 1985).
However, rainfall amounts vary significantly from year to year, and the high evapotranspiration
effects in the area effectively offset any beneficial surplus of annual rainfall. This is another reason
irrigation systems are so necessary, and commonly found in use today throughout the area.
Summers are indeed hot and dry, with temperatures consistently hovering above 1000F, although
humidity is generally low compared to environments closer to the Gulf Coast. Overall, the
county’s climate can be classified as subtropical steppe.

2

Hydrology
The Nueces River and the Rio Grande
are the major southeasterly trending
rivers draining the South Texas region.
A subtle divide through the
northeastern portion of the counties
causes numerous intermittent creeks to
flow north into the Nueces River, and
numerous others of the same type to
drain southward into the Rio Grande.
Many drainages intermittently flow into
both. Although there are many springs
in south Texas, very few are active due
primarily to the dip of the substrate
shales which carry these subterranean
seeps to the south and east. As a result,
some of these active seeps/springs can
be found on the Mexican side of the
national border. Ancient springs that
may have existed in the area at one time
have likely succumbed to overgrazing
and irrigation pumping during modern
times (Brune 1981). During our Figure 4. Physiographic regions of Texas
investigations of the Project Area in (http://www.lib.utexas.edu/geo/pics/txphysio.jpg).
June 2012, we observed no flowing
water or niche pools.

Flora and Fauna
The project area lies within the South
Texas Plain/Brush Country vegetation
area (Figure 6) as defined by Gould
(1975), and the regional flora of South
Texas has been classified as being part
of the Tamaulipan biotic province
extending out from northeast Mexico
(Figure 5). This is the only part of
Texas where some vegetation exhibits
growth throughout the year (Blair
1950). Thorny brush is the dominant
vegetation today, but this is a relatively
recent occurrence, with a mix of woody
and grassland species providing a Figure 5. Blair’s (1950) biotic provinces of Texas
savanna environment during prehistoric (Map 2012).
3

times (Archer 1995; Black 1989; Hester 1980; Inglis 1964). The original vegetation was an open
grassland mixed with brushy chaparral. Oaks, pecan, and ash were common along perennial
streams. Due in part to overgrazing and the exclusion of fire, the invasion of woody species has
changed the vegetation into “Texas brush country” dominated by mesquite, acacia, spiny
hackberry, brazil, whitebrush, lotebrush, and others (Diamond et al. 1987:203-221). On sandy
soils, the brush includes mesquite with mixed grasses. In contrast, clay soils support mesquite
(Proposis juliflora), various species of Acacia, and mimosa, granjeno or desert hackberry (Celtis
pallida), lignum vitae (Porliera angustifolia), cenizo (Leucophyllum texanum), white brush
(Aloysia texana), prickly pear (Opuntia lindheeimeri), tasajillo (Opuntia leptocaulis), and species
of Condalia and Castela (Blair 1950).
The South Texas Plains/Brush Country exhibits some of the greatest mammalian species diversity
in the state. Sixty-one species of mammals, 36 snakes, 19 lizards, and several species of turtles,
salamanders, and frogs are present in the region (Blair 1950). Approximately 50 species of fish
have been identified in the lower Rio Grande (Lee et al. 1980).

Paleoenvironment
The paleoenvironment of south Texas is as varied as the landscape, and the South Texas
Paleoclimatic record contains significant gaps primarily due to the scarcity of deep, finely
stratified, and well-dated deposits (Stahle and Cleaveland 1995:51). To date, the best record of
paleoenvironmental reconstruction in South Texas has been accomplished by Robinson (1982)
from analysis of phytoliths from three archaeological sites in Live Oak County. Overall, the data
there along with data from other sites in Texas suggest that the waning of the Pleistocene, or lateglacial period, marked a transition from a cooler, wetter environment to one that steadily grew
warmer and drier, and more seasonal, with intermittent moist periods through about 6,000 years
ago. Most researchers then generally agree that the period between 6,000 and 3,000 years ago
was much warmer and drier than today. Since that time, intermittent moist and dry intervals have
occurred over the past 3,000 years.
It is unlikely that the climate has changed significantly in the past few thousand years in the area
that would significantly induce vegetation changes. The greater changes have been induced by
human intervention through the clearing of wooded areas along the river and streams for
construction purposes, pumping more water for irrigation which has lowered water tables, and
overgrazing by livestock. Although there are still many seeps, springs, and streams in the area,
they most probably flowed with greater abundance during wetter intervals than exist at the
present time, providing an abundant resource for prehistoric occupants.

Cultural Chronology
The Project Area lies within the South Texas Archaeological region as defined by Hester (1980,
1995, 2004; Figure 8). Refining a cultural chronology for south Texas is problematic, due to the
4

compressed nature of the
archaeological record and the
scarcity of stratified sites
excavated within the region.
T he l arges t and m os t
informational cultural resources
survey in South Texas was that
conducted prior to development
of the Choke Canyon Reservoir
in Atascosa, Live Oak, and
McMullen counties (e.g. Hall et
al. 1986). Nevertheless, Hester
(1995:433) acknowledges the
paucity of information that
exists for south Texas and as
such offers only a “general
framework” for prehistoric
periods particular to the region
(Figure 6). All dates are given as
approximate years before
present (B.P.), i.e., before 1950.
Paleoindian (11,200 - 7950
B.P.)
This period is estimated at
between ca.11,200–7950 B.P. in
south Texas (Hester 1995;
2004). The Paleoindian period
began toward the close of the
Pleistocene. Diagnostic artifacts
of the early Paleoindian interval
include Clovis and Folsom
projectile points. The wide
distribution of Clovis-type
points across most of North
America and even into Central
America suggests a wide
dispersal and interaction of the
people who made them. Other
artifacts associated with the
Clovis culture include bifaces
and prismatic blades, engraved
stones, bone and ivory points, Figure 6. South Texas Archaeological region cultural
stone bolas, ochre, and shaft chronology.
5

straighteners. During the late Paleoindian interval, the first stemmed lanceolate points, such as
Angostura, Golondrina, St. Mary’s Hall, and Barber (among a few others) appear.
In general, the Paleoindian adaptation has been considered to be one of small bands of nomadic,
big-game hunters following herds of Late Pleistocene fauna, including mammoth, mastodons,
bison, camel, and horse, across North America (Black 1989). More recently, emphasis has been
placed on the wide diversity of plants and animals used for subsistence by these early Americans,
such as turtles and tortoises, alligators, mice, badgers, and raccoons, although they undoubtedly
hunted the large animals as well (Collins 1995:381). Known Clovis sites include killsites, quarries,
caches, open campsites, ritual sites, and burials (Hester 1995:433–436; 2004). A Folsom interval
follows the Clovis. Folsom artifacts are fairly common in south Texas; however, no camp sites
or killsites have been found south of a large workshop, Pavo Real (41BX52), in Bexar County
(Hester 1995:434–435; 2004). Most Paleoindian finds in south Texas have consisted of surface
lithic scatters on upland terraces and ridges (Black 1989).
As the warming that marks the transition from Pleistocene to Holocene climates began to take
effect in Texas, prehistoric inhabitants adapted with changes in lifestyle. This climatic shift is also
marked by the decline and extinction of mammoth, mastodon, horse, camel, and giant bison
(Bison antiquus). Large gregarious game animals were perhaps extinct in Texas. Human hunters
were forced to concentrate on deer, antelope, and other medium-size or smaller game. Changes
in the subsistence base required technological shifts that mark the beginning of a new cultural
period known as the Archaic.
Early Archaic (7950 - 4450 B.P.)
Hester (1995:436–438) identifies the Early Archaic, with Early Corner Notched and Early Basal
Notched dart points, as roughly dating between 7950 to 4450 B.P. The extinction of large herds
of megafauna and the changing climate at the beginning of the Holocene stimulated a behavioral
change by the Prehistoric inhabitants of south Texas (McKinney 1981). While the basic huntergatherer adaptation probably remained intact, an economic shift away from big game hunting was
necessary. In general, more intensive exploitation of local and smaller resources such as deer, fish,
and plant bulbs is indicated by greater densities of ground-stone artifacts, fire-cracked rock
cooking features, and more specialized tools. Weir (1976) speculates that Early Archaic groups
were small and highly mobile, an inference based on the fact that Early Archaic sites are thinly
distributed and that diagnostic projectile point types are seen across a wide area, including most
of Texas and northern Mexico. Story (1985) believes that population densities were low during
the Early Archaic, and that groups consisted of related individuals in small bands with “few
constraints on their mobility” (Story 1985:39). Their economy was based on the utilization of a
wide range of resources, especially such year-round resources as prickly pear and lechugilla, as
well as rodents, rabbits, and deer.
Middle Archaic (4450 - 2350 B.P.)
Hester (1995:438–441) suggests that the period between 4450 and 2350 B.P. reflects the Middle
Archaic in south Texas. The Middle Archaic appears to have been a time of increased population,
based on the large number of sites from this period (Story 1985:40; Weir 1976:125, 128). On the
6

South Texas Plains, exploitation of widely scattered, year-round resources such as prickly pear
continued (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13–15), as did hunting deer and rabbit. Weir (1976)
believes that the widely scattered bands prevalent in the Early Archaic now began to coalesce, at
least during the acorn-gathering season, into larger groups who shared the intensive work of
gathering and processing the acorn harvest (Weir 1976:126). Many researchers believe burned
rock middens are a result of this endeavor (Creel 1986; Prewitt 1991; Weir 1976). The common
presence of deer remains in burned rock middens encourages the view that deer processing took
place at burned rock midden sites. Bison bone is encountered in archaeological sites in south
Texas, at least occasionally, during all but the earliest part of the Middle Archaic (Dillehay 1974).
Cemeteries make their first appearance during this period, suggesting a movement toward less
mobility and perhaps territorialism. One of the earliest occurrences dating to the south Texas
Middle Archaic, is Loma Sandia in Live Oak County, which dates between ca. 2550 and 2750
B.P. (Taylor and Highley 1995).
Late Archaic (2350 - 1250 B.P.)
Hester believes the Late Archaic in south Texas may be defined as between 2350–1250 B.P,
Some researchers believe populations increased throughout the Late Archaic (Prewitt 1985),
while others feel populations remained the same or fell during this period (Black 1989:30).
Subsistence is assumed to have become less specialized on acorns, in favor of a broad spectrum
subsistence base (Black 1989:30). Story (1985:44–45) believes the presence of cemeteries
indicates that Late Archaic populations in central and south Texas were increasing and becoming
more territorial. Although inhabitants of the South Texas Plain near Brownsville and Rockport
had begun to make pottery by about 1750 B.P., the northern part of the plain was still “preceramic” until 1,000 years later (Story 1985:45–47). Late Archaic points tend to be much smaller
than Middle Archaic points.
Transitional Archaic (2250 - 1250 B.P.)
A late subperiod or interval of the Late Archaic is frequently referred to as the Terminal Archaic
or Transitional Archaic. Turner et al. (2011) cite data placing the Transitional Archaic as
2250–1250 B.P. Although Hester may lump current data into a Late Archaic period, he cautions
that more evidence will likely result in what may be termed as a “Terminal Archaic” period during
the latter part of the Late Archaic in south Texas. This Terminal Archaic period is represented
by diagnostics such as Ensor, Frio, and Matamoras points which appear to overlap the Late
Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods (Hester 1995:442;2004). Weir (1976) believes this marked
a transition period to localized area sites, a disappearance of burned rock middens and bison, and
a reappearance of highly mobile hunters and gatherers. Others (Black and McGraw 1985; Peter
1982; Skelton 1977) argue that in some locations burned rock middens did not disappear and sites
were more intensely occupied during the Transitional Archaic period.

Late Prehistoric (1250 - 420 B.P.)
The term “Late Prehistoric” is commonly used to designate the period following the Late Archaic
in south Texas. Generally, the Late Prehistoric period is thought of as spanning the period
between A. D. 700 - 1530 ([1250 - 420 B.P.] [Hester 1995; 2004]). A series of distinctive traits
7

mark the shift from the Archaic to the Late Prehistoric period, including the technological shift
to the bow and arrow and the introduction of pottery to central Texas and the northern South
Texas Plain (Black 1989:32; Story 1985:45–47). Two distinct phases recognized within the Late
Prehistoric are the Austin and Toyah. During the Austin phase, there appears to be a subtle
transition from expanding stem projectile points that may have been used as dart points, as well
as early arrow points. The most prevalent point found in Austin phase sites is the Scallorn arrow
point. Settlement shifts into rockshelters such as Scorpion Cave in Medina County (Highley et
al. 1978) and Classen Rockshelter in northern Bexar County (Fox and Fox 1967) have been
noted. Cemeteries from this period often reveal evidence of conflict (Black 1989:32).
Beginning rather abruptly at about 650 B.P., a shift in technology occurred. The Perdiz arrow
point may best represent the appearance of a distinct culture in south-central Texas lasting for
about 300 years, which archaeologists have labeled the Toyah phase. Hester (1995:444)
recognizes this phase as the “best documented Late Prehistoric pattern” throughout south Texas,
with dates ranging between ca. 650/700 to 300/350 B.P. (A.D. 1250/1300 to 1600/1650).
In addition to Perdiz points, evidence of a Toyah culture is manifested as bone-tempered pottery,
bone spatulates, awls, and beads, stone endscrapers, beveled knives, and expediently utilized
flakes. Briefly, expedient lithic technology involves removing flakes from a core in a nonstandard
manner; the purpose is to knock off sharp flakes for immediate use, selecting the ones that best
suit the need at the time. This technology differs from formal, standardized core reduction and
the manufacturing of formal, usually bifacial tools. Expedient lithic technology is a continent-wide
phenomonon indicative of increased sedentism, and is observed in Toyah assemblages in Texas.
Whether the Toyah phase seen in the south-central Texas archaeological record is a result of a
group of people moving into the region, or adapted technologies from the region’s periphery is
a matter of conjecture. Steele and Assad-Hunter (1986) argue for the occurrence of a distinct
change in diet between the Late Archaic and the Late Prehistoric components in two sites in the
Choke Canyon Reservoir area in south Texas. Analysis of the number of identified specimens
(NISP) shows a marked increase in artiodactyla elements present during the later part of the Late
Prehistoric, an increase largely due to the addition of bison to the “menu” (Steele and AssadHunter 1986:468).
Whether or not agriculture was practiced during this period in south Texas has not been
documented. There simply is not enough evidence to postulate there was ever a significant
presence of maize in the area. The later arrival of the Spanish during the later
Protohistoric/Historic period brought significant cultivars to south Texas.
Protohistoric/Historic (420 B.P. - present)
The end of the Late Prehistoric and beginning of the Historic period in south Texas is
characterized by written accounts of European contact with indigenous groups. The Protohistoric
period begins in 1528 when Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts of southeast and
south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the hunter-gatherers of Texas
and northern Mexico (e.g., Hallenbeck 1971). Cabeza de Vaca’s account of his stay with the
Miriami in 1533-34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves
8

to the easily exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter and summer, occasionally sending
a hunting party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near
each other in the semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other
succulents (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13-37).
Linguistically, early protohistoric accounts of the late 1500s indicate that a large group which
spoke Cohuilteco inhabited the area now known as south-central Texas. Coahuiltecan is a term
coined by Mexican linguists in the 1800s, and the name refers to the many small bands of Native
Americans who lived in northeastern Coahuila, Mexico and south Texas. The Coahuiltecans were
rapidly dispersed or killed during the Protohistoric period.
By the 1540s and 1550s Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico, with
several hundred thousand cattle, using Indian slaves as labor. Large mining ventures in northern
Mexico did the same. This encroachment from the south forced Native Americans to escape into
the south-central Texas region.
The period between de Vaca’s written account and the advent of Spanish missions in the late
1600s and early 1700s is referred to as the Protohistoric; a time when few, scant written
documents exist detailing Native American life outside the missions. The Historic period then, is
generally thought of as beginning in the 1700s.
Some 30 miles south of Eagle Pass, the Spanish established Mission San Juan Bautista in 1700
(now modern-day Guerrero). Early Spanish explorers then repeatedly traveled the Camino Real
enroute to newly established missions and settlements in today’s modern Texas throughout the
1700s and 1800s. Mexican families from across the river expanded into Texas, and these families
trace their roots to the early development of the area. In the ensuing years, lawlessness prevailed,
with saloons, gambling houses, outlaws, and slave hunters prevalent.

Zavala County Prehistory and History
Indian artifacts found in Zavala County indicate that the area has been occupied for about 11,000
years, and one of the earliest known human habitation sites in Zavala County was found on the
Holdsworth Ranch northeast of Crystal City (Holdsworth 1986; Ochoa 1996). As well, many
archaeological sites with Archaic diagnostic artifacts have been collected across a wide and
diversified terrain in the county, to include uplands and stream terraces. Although the present-day,
semi-arid conditions persist across much of Zavala County, plentiful food sources such as wild
game, fruits, seeds, and roots were likely plentiful subsistence resources to prehistoric inhabitants.
The multiple Native American Indian groups who were present in the Zavala County area when
the Spanish entradas penetrated the region in the 1600s and 1700s were generically referred to
as Coahuiltecans. As discussed above, the nomenclature assigned to these groups derived moreso
from a quasi-common language than from any other kinship or close-knit tribal or band identity.
To repeat, this affiliation: Coahuiltecan is a term coined by Mexican linguists in the 1800s, and
9

the name refers to the many small bands of Native Americans who lived in northeastern Coahuila,
Mexico and south Texas. The Coahuiltecans were rapidly dispersed or killed during the
Protohistoric period.
Within the modern-day political confines of Zavala County, there are no known written records
that indicate there were any sort of permanent structures or habitation areas were established by
the Spaniards as they began traversing through the Zavala County area in the late 1600s.
Tonkawans, and Lipan and Mescalero Apaches were the more specifically named groups of
Native Americans who were known to have perhaps seasonally or less frequently occupied the
area in the 1700s. The old Spanish Road, or Camino Reale, coursed through modern-day Zavala
County, and one of the earliest Spanish encounters with a large ranchería, or Indian village, was
recorded by Spanish explorers near present-day La Pryor in 1716. The Camino Reale through
Zavala County was once again followed in 1836 as Mexican General Lopez de Santa Anna’s army
crossed the Nueces River near present-day Crystal City enroute to the Alamo in Bexár.
Following the newly established Mexico Republic’s revolution over Spanish rule in 1824, the
Mexican government realized that the vast, untamed, and generally uninhabited area north of the
Rio Grande somehow needed to be brought under control by the new Mexican government.
Although a few attempts to settle these lands were made by issuing Mexican land grants, the
attempts were short-lived, and in many cases pre-empted by the independence of Texas from
Mexico following the Battle of San Jacinto in 1836. Most of Zavala County lay in the disputed
area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River between the Texas Revolution and the
Mexican War (1836–46), and lawless in general prevailed. With a defensive posture ulterior
motive in mind, the Texas legislature established Zavala County in 1846. For a truly enjoyable
account of some of the earliest pioneer settlers in Zavala County, the reader is referred to the
memoirs of Ernest Holdsworth (2006).
Commercial and economic development in Zavala County was then spurred in the late 1800s by
the eventual diffusing of Indian raids, allowing for the expansion of cattle ranching throughout
the south Texas region. In 1884, the first of many artesian wells was drilled, and from that point
on, irrigated garden crops increased in ubiquity throughout south Texas and Zavala County. In
response, rail lines were constructed through Zavala County in the early 1900s in order to
transport the abundant crops of onions, spinach, grains, and fruits (Ochoa 1996). It was during
these flourishing times that Zavala County became known as a part of the “Winter Garden
Region”.

Site Types That Could be Expected Along the Project Area
Prehistoric Open Campsites
Most numerous among the sites recorded in Zavala County are prehistoric open campsites
ranging in age from the Paleoindian period through the Historic period (see Figure 6). Some of
these represent a single campfire where a very small group of Native Americans may have camped
for one night. Others are very large, covering very extensive areas representing large groups of
10

people that stayed for long periods, perhaps seasonally, with ancestral groups returning to these
same campsites over a period of several thousands of years. Cultural remains to be found at these
large campsites include among other items, an abundance of fire-cracked rocks representing
multiple hearths, a wide variety of chipped stone tools and the lithic debris that results from
making them, ground and smoothed stones used to grind nuts and seeds, faunal remains from
terrestrial and aquatic animals consumed, bone tools, pottery sherds, and mussel and snail shells.
Open campsites occur in all types of environments, whether that be in a plush riverine
environment that offered a wide variety banquet of plant and animal foodstuffs, or in the uplands
away from flowing water sources. Seasonally, the upland grasses, shrubs, cacti offered a different
food source that could be exploited such as various grass seeds, mesquite beans, prickly pear pads
and tunas, and agave hearts. In addition, at various times, bison were known to graze on the
northern South Texas Plains, and were highly sought after for use as food, hides, and bone tools
(Dillehay 1974).
Depending upon the integrity of these open campsites, archaeologists and the Texas Historical
Commission consider these as perhaps the most significant types of sites in regard to their ability
to contribute to our understanding of south Texas prehistory. A few of the desired ingredients
that can indicate significance include cultural material that is buried beneath the surface in a wellpreserved, stratified, and relatively undisturbed context. Although these situations most frequently
occur within stratified terrace deposits adjacent to streams, they can also occur in upland settings
where the landscape has been generally stable through time. Other ingredients that archaeologists
look for in potentially significant campsites include good organic preservation in the form of
charcoal and/or charred plant remains, faunal preservation, temporally diagnostic stone tools or
ceramics, and intact features such as hearths.
Prehistoric Lithic Scatters or Procurement Sites
Lithic scatters are the next most common type of archaeological site that could be expected along
the Bayou Rouge South Lateral. These sites simply represent the chipped stone debris and broken
tools that were left behind when Native Americans made new tools or re-sharpened their old
ones. The general absence of fire-cracked rocks and other cultural material normally found at
open campsites suggest that they did not camp there, or remain there for any extended period of
time (However, small camp fires may have been used to heat-treat chert or quartzite cobbles to
make them more knappable). Yet, they were drawn to these isolated locales because of the
natural outcroppings or surface exposures of good quality raw material such as chert or quartzite
cobbles.
Examples of chipped stone most commonly found at these sites include cobbles with one or two
flakes removed, called ‘tested cobbles’. That is, the Native Americans knew from experience the
quality of stone that could most easily be flaked and reduced for stone tool production, so they
‘tested’ the cobble to judge whether it was useable or not. If the quality was judged to be inferior,
then the cobble was tossed aside. That is why the majority of tested cobbles found on these sites
are of poor quality, coarse-grained material. While the finished stone tool products are carried
away from these sites, what remains are those tools broken during the manufacturing process, and
the thousands of pieces of debitage in the form of flakes and angular debris. Also unique to lithic
scatters where large cobbles are present are snapped ‘quarry blanks’. These are simply cobbles
11

flakes on both sides, reducing the cobble into a transportable ‘blank’ that can be used to further
reduce it and make finished stone tools from the flakes taken off of it. The unbroken quarry
blanks are usually not found on these sites because they have been carried off, presumably to
areas of south Texas where raw material is not readily available. The snapped or broken quarry
blanks are of little or no use, so they are discarded and left behind.
Lithic scatters range in age from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods and can be found
on any landscape setting where gravels or cobbles have been exposed. Notably, gravel outcrops
that were exposed to the surface a few hundred or thousand years ago could be deeply buried
today, and the opposite could also be true; it all depends on the terrain setting and the dynamics
of landscape evolution through time. Most lithic scatters in Dimmit and Zavala counties have been
documented along upper stream terraces abutting the eroded upland slopes.
Prehistoric Quarries and Procurement Sites
Prehistoric quarries and procurement also can range in age from the Paleoindian through Historic
periods, but differ from lithic scatters in that at those sites Native Americans exploited loose
gravels, but at times they specifically sought quarry sites where raw material such as cherts or
quartzites were not yet freed from their parent geologic formation, and they had to be ‘quarried’.
These types of sites are rare in south Texas for two reasons: 1) the geological exposures generally
do not present themselves, and 2) throughout Texas, even in central Texas, it is much easier to
pick up gravels from the surface than to try to mine them from hard rock. Quarried and chipped
stone remains likely to be found at these sites include large chunks of angular cherts or quartzites,
as well as parent material detritus, and flaking debris. Snapped quarry blanks can also be
expected. Although a handful of prehistoric quarries or procurement sites have been recorded in
south Texas, they are rare.
Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens
There are no documented burned rock middens Zavala County. Burned rock middens result from
a series of multiple-use earth ovens that were constructed much like modern-day roasting pits are
dug into the earth for roasting a pig. With repetitive uses, as the larger rocks that serve as heating
elements in the earthen pit fracture and thus become less effective as a thermal source, they are
‘pitched out’ around the edge of the pit. As the pit becomes unusable, another is dug near by, and
the procedure repeated. Over time, these multiple pits and the ‘pitched out’ fire-cracked rocks
coalesce together, obscuring each pit as indiscernible. (For a full discussion of the formation of
burned rock middens and their documented presence in Texas, see Leach and Bousman 2001;
Leach et al. 2001; Mauldin et al. 2003).
Prehistoric Burial and Cemetery Sites
Although not common, isolated prehistoric burials and cemeteries have been documented in south
Texas. Individual and isolated burials have been found in association with open campsites in both
upland settings as well as in alluvial terraces along streams, but the largest prehistoric cemetery
found in proximity to the Bayou Rouge South Lateral is 41LK28, in Live Oak County.

12

Historic Sites
As discussed above in the Cultural Chronology portion of this report, although Spanish ranchers
had established large ranches in northern Mexico by the mid-16th century, and Spanish entradas
began penetrating south Texas in the 1700s and 1800s, there is no record of any sort of
permanent structures in the area during those periods (Chipman 1992), the area was generally not
considered safe for settlement by whites until after the Civil War in 1865, and white settlers then
began establishing smaller ranches and farmlands (Leffler 2011).
Because of the vastness of the landscape and the relatively late settlement and development of
south Texas compared to east and central Texas and northern Mexico, historic sites are not
abundant, but they certainly do exist. The most common types to be encountered are related to
ranching and farming endeavors, or small communities from the 19th and 20th centuries. Site types
most commonly include farmsteads or ranches with corrals, cisterns, chimney and foundation
remains from both main houses and outbuildings, related trash dumps, an occasional family burial
or cemetery, school houses, churches, community buildings, and industry-related structures or
construction projects.
In general, the area has apparently been historically used as ranchland pasture, with no
development other than associated ranching activities such as windmills, stock tanks, corrals, and
sparsely scattered outbuildings. In sum, there may be rare and isolated occurrences of early
ranching activities along the Bayou Rouge South Lateral, but the expectations of encountering
any archaeological site of significance from the 1500s through the mid-1900s along those portions
of the pipeline were minimal.

Archaeological Atlas Site and Historic Map Results
We preface this section by stating that although it presents the number of sites and their types
documented within the county, the results simply provide the data that is available. In reality, the
number of documented sites and their types are very heavily skewed based upon the types of
cultural resource surveys, and the areas of those surveys. That said, the data that is available on
the Texas Atlas is only as good as the areas of south Texas that the surveys represent. Most of
south Texas has never been subjected to formal cultural resource surveys, so it is conceded that
the true character of the archaeological record is very poorly understood. Nevertheless, the few
surveys that have been accomplished provide at least some aspect of what the region looks like
from an archaeological perspective.
Zavala County
As of July 10, 2013 there were 430 archaeological sites recorded within the county. Of those, 330
are prehistoric open campsites with evidence that as a whole, open campsites in the county have
been occupied from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods. Notably, one of these has a
possible human burial on it, and mammoth bones or teeth have been found on three of these sites.
Two of the three sites with mammoth remains also have Plainview projectile points, and the third
has Archaic points. As with most of the region, many campsites are situated on stream terraces,
13

but there are also some in the uplands. Ninety-nine are classified as lithic scatters, and generally
these are located in the uplands and along stream cutbanks where gravels outcrop. They also
exhibit evidence of being used for the past 11,000 years. One rock shelter has been recorded in
the county, as has a single mussel shell midden. The rock shelter has carved petroglyphs as well
as pictographs painted with deep red iron pigments. Two of the six historic components in the
county are associated with John King Fisher, rancher, lawman, and outlaw of the 1800s. He is
said to have occupied the same rock shelter in which the petrographs and petroglyphs were found,
and his house site is also documented as an archaeological site. Other historic sites include 1800s
and 1900s artifact scatters, a circa 1930s concrete irrigation channel, and a World War II
internment camp in Crystal City (Atlas 2013).
Surveys and Sites within One Mile of the Project Area
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archeological sites indicated that
no professional archaeological surveys had been conducted within one mile (1,609 meters), and
there were no known archaeological sites within one mile. However, as shown in Figure 3,
Tierras Antiguas has conducted surveys of the Crystal City Lateral in April 2011, and the Dennis
Lateral in July 2012, resulting in the discovery of three archaeological sites. However, none were
within one mile of the proposed Bayou Rouge South Lateral (Nickels 2011, 2013).
Historic Maps
Because of the relatively low habitation in generally rural areas that the Bayou Rouge South
Lateral passes through, little or no attention was given to early aerial photography. In lieu of this,
the oldest topographic map found of the area was a 1949, 1:250,000 U.S. Geological Survey map
of the Crystal City area (Map 2012). Although no historic structures are apparent along the
proposed Bayou Rouge South Lateral right-of-way, the map is not exact by today’s standards,
and it is possible that historic water tanks, corrals, outbuildings other structures related to early
ranching activities could be encountered along the Project Area that do not appear on any old
maps. Technically, any structures older than 45 years are now considered of interest by the Texas
Historical Commission, and this would be considered during the survey.

Soils
Figure 7 depicts the soils that will be dissected by the Bayou Rouge South Lateral (Stevens and
Arriaga 1985; Web Soil Survey 2012). It will cross through six different soil types that offer
varying depths, sedimentation and deposition rates. As such, they likewise imply the potential for
the preservation of intact cultural resources to exist. Table 1 lists the soils that are to be dissected
by the Bayou Rouge South Lateral (Stevens and Arriaga 1985; Web Soil Survey 2012).
The terrain and soils existing in these upland areas along the Bayou Rouge South Lateral suggest
for the most part, a minimal to moderate probability for buried and intact archaeological deposits
to exist. It is unlikely that significant sites are extant in these upland areas. However, the right-ofway will also cross an upper tributary of Rocky Creek, where the likelihood for buried
archaeological deposits to be extant in potential terrace deposits is an unknown.
14

Figure 7. Soils to be dissected by the Bayou Rouge South Lateral.
Table 1. Soils to be Dissected by the Bayou Rouge South Lateral.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Buried and Intact
Archaeological Potential

Antosa-Bobilla association
(ABC)

Deep sandy soils on gently sloping
uplands

Moderate to about 30 inches
below the surface

Brystal fine sandy loam
(BxB)

Deep loamy soils on convex-form
uplands

Minimal to Moderate to about
20 inches below the surface

Caid sandy loam (CaB)

Deep loamy soils on gently sloping
uplands

Moderate to about 46 inches
below the surface

Cochina clay (Cm, Cn)

Deep clay on occasionally and frequently
flooded bottomlands

Minimal to about 24 inches
below the surface

Poteet fine sandy loam (Po)

Deep loamy soils in terraces along
weakly depressional drainageways,
frequently flooded

Moderate to about 24 inches
below the surface

15

Field Survey Goals and Methodology

Goals
The project goals focused on archaeological issues that could be addressed by the types of data
obtained through pedestrian survey, along with limited shovel testing if necessary. The topics
addressed were site type, distribution, density, size, depth, and stratigraphy. The theoretical
framework is structured around patterns of settlement, mobility, subsistence, and social systems
for the South Texas region.
The goals of the project were to:
1)
locate and record cultural locations and sites in the project area using a systematic
survey methodology;
2)
quantify site size, as well as depth, and stratigraphy; and,
3)
place any diagnostic artifacts within the regional time frame.

Methods and Levels of Effort
Two archaeologists conducted an intensive 100-percent pedestrian survey along the pipeline,
meandering back and forth across the 100-foot width of the right-of-way (ROW). Surface
visibility ranged from 80 to 100 percent. All cutbanks, and rodent and mammal backdirt piles
along the right-of-way were thoroughly examined. In accordance with a general “no collection”
policy, cultural material of a redundant nature, both prehistoric and historic, were not to be
collected. Instead, they were to be fully documented via sketches, field photographs, and copious
notes.
Exceptions were to be made for diagnostic artifacts, particularly those artifacts which could be
considered as significant to the interpretation of Texas prehistory, such as Early ArchaicPaleoindian transitional, or Paleoindian diagnostics. These were to be collected on a case-by-case
basis, and that decision was left up to the Principal Investigator and/or the Project Archaeologist.
Historic buildings, trash scatters, or other historic occurrences adjacent to the ROW were to be
documented with photographs and included in this report of investigations.

Results of the Investigations
During the survey it became readily apparent that approximately 90 percent of the project’s
surface area was either mechanically disturbed, or deflated by artificial processes. However, the
surface visibility was generally excellent, allowing for the discovery of any artifacts on the heavily
eroded surfaces (see for example, Figure 8). Although particular attention was given to the areas
in proximity to the tributaries of Pena Creek, which the desktop review indicated there may be
potentially deep terrace deposits, our on-the-ground survey revealed that the tributaries in this
area are both ephemeral and broad, exhibiting narrow incisions that have likely occurred within
16

historic times, and with
little evidence of terrace
building (see for
example, Figure 9). No
evidence of cultural
material was found
within the numerous
shallow cutbanks, nor
within the numerous
animal burrows and
backdirt piles examined
along the entire ROW.

Figure 8. Bayou Rouge South Lateral @N3169646 E416651
(NAD83); facing east.

Figure 9. Drainage crossing @N3169658 E415399 (NAD83); facing
north.

17

Survey Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
The proposed Bayou Rouge South Lateral right-of-way was subjected to a pedestrian survey by
two archaeologists on November 30, 2012. Surface visibility ranged from 80 to 100-percent along
the right-of-way, and revealed predominantly mechanically disturbed surfaces due to blading and
land clearing.
No evidence of cultural material was observed. Accordingly, TAAI recommends that construction
of the Bayou Rouge South Lateral be allowed to proceed as planned, with no further
archaeological investigations. However, Tierras Antiguas further recommends that if any
undiscovered cultural resources were encountered during development of the properties, such
finds should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any archaeological consultant.

18

References Cited

Atlas
2012
2013

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/
[Accessed November 21, 2012].
The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/
[Accessed July 10, 2013].

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Covey, C. (editor)
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier
Books, New York.
Fox, A. A., I. W. Cox, L. Highley, and D. Hafernick
1989 Archaeological and Historical Investigations at the Site of the New Bexar
County Justice Center in Downtown San Antonio, Texas. Archaeological
Survey Report No. 184. Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio.
Hester, T. R.
2004 The Prehistory of South Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, pp. 127-154.
Edited by T. K. Perttula. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
1995

The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:427–459.

1980

Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur Archaeologists.
Corona Press, San Antonio.

Holdsworth, E.
1986 Historical Notes on Zavala County. Zavala County Historical Commission,
Crystal City, Texas.
2006
Historical Noted on Zavala County, Texas: And the Story of a Pioneer
Family. Bob Kingsbury, Publisher.

19

Leffler, J. J.
2012

Big Wells. Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. ","
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/MM/hcm9.html (Accessed
October 1, 2012).

Map
2012

Batesville (1940). Perry Castañeda Library Map Collection.
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/topo. [Accessed October 1, 2012].

Nickels, D. L.
2011

A Cultural Resources Survey of the 8.3-Mile Crystal City Lateral Line in
Dimmit and Zavala Counties, Texas. Archaeology Report #63. Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, Texas.

2013

A Cultural Resources Survey of the 5.8-Mile Dennis Lateral in Dimmit and
Zavala Counties, Texas. Archaeology Report #216. Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, Texas.

Ochoa, R. E.
1996 Zavala County. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 6, pp. 1149-1151. The
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Odintz, M.
1996

Winter Garden Region. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 6, pp. 1026. The
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Stevens, J. W., and D. Arriaga
1985 Soil Survey of Dimmit and Zavala Counties. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C., in Cooperation with
the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, College Station, Texas.
Turner, S. E., T. R. Hester, and R. L. McReynolds
2011 Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.Taylor Trade Publishing, Lanham, Maryland.
Web Soil Survey
2012 Dimmit and Zavala Counties, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed
November 16, 2012].

20

