A Cultural Resources Field Survey of the 4.1-Mile
Cook Lateral Line in La Salle County, Texas

Prepared for Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd.
San Antonio, Texas
by
David L. Nickels, Principal Investigator
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations Report #45
August 2011

Abstract
Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd. of San Antonio, Texas contracted with Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations (TAAI) to conduct a cultural resources background
review and a field survey of a high probability area along the 4.1-mile Cook Lateral, to be
installed by Mockingbird Midstream Gas Services, L.L.C. (Mockingbird) in north-central La
Salle County, Texas. The project was entirely privately funded, and the properties across which
the pipeline will cross are privately owned; therefore, no Texas Antiquities Permit was required.
A 100-percent pedestrian survey with shovel testing of a high probability area along the 4.1 mile
right-of-way was conducted by two archaeologists on June 4, 2011, resulting in the discovery of
no archaeological sites or isolated finds. Accordingly, no artifacts were collected during this
project.
Therefore, Tierras Antiguas recommended that the development of the pipeline be allowed to
proceed as planned. However, Tierras Antiguas further recommended that if any additional,
undiscovered cultural resources were encountered during development, such finds should be
examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological consultant.

Acknowledgments
There are mainly four individuals who are greatly appreciated, and whose efforts contributed to
the successful planning, organization, and completion of this project. They are Mr. David Black,
Ms. Judy Vader, and Mr. Ryan DeBarros, Project Managers at Flatrock Engineering and
Environmental, Ltd., and Mr. Ronnie Glenewinkel, Environmental Coordinator at Mockingbird
Midstream. All were extremely amiable and helpful throughout the project, and their overall
knowledge of the project contributed significantly to our understanding of the project’s scope of
work.
In addition, I express my sincere gratitude to Tierras Antiguas staff archaeologist Belisario Silva,
who worked hard, long hours, and expressed an attitude and work ethic that ensured this survey
was conducted in a thorough and professional manner.

i

Table of Contents
Title
Page
Abstract.........................................................................................................................................i
Acknowledgments..........................................................................................................................i
List of Figures............................................................................................................. .................ii
List of Tables...............................................................................................................................iii
Introduction..................................................................................................................................1
Modern Environmental Setting.......................................................................................................1
Paleoenvironment.........................................................................................................................4
Cultural Chronology.....................................................................................................................4
La Salle County Prehistory and History........................................................................................9
Site Types to be Expected..........................................................................................................10
Cultural Resources Background Review....................................................................................13
Soils............................................................................................................................................15
Survey Goals and Methodology.................................................................................................16
Results of the Investigations.......................................................................................................18
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations........................................................................18
References Cited.........................................................................................................................19

List of Figures
Figure
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8
9.
10.

Page

La Salle County and project location....................................................................................1
Cook Lateral Line project shown on large topographic map..................................................1
Cook Lateral Line in proximity to creeks and Ranch Road 469............................................2
Cook Lateral on Burns Ranch topographic map....................................................................2
Physiographic regions of Texas................................................................................................3
Biotic provinces of Texas........................................................................................................3
South Texas cultural chronology..........................................................................................5
Soils map.............................................................................................................................15
Portion of Cook Lateral subjected to a full pedestrian survey................ ..............................17
Photo of Lewis Creek on Cook Lateral right-of-way..............................................................17

List of Tables
Table
Page
1. Soils Dissected by the Cook Latral........................................................................................16

ii

Introduction
Flatrock Engineering and
Environmental, Ltd., requested a cultural
resources background review of the
proposed 4.1-mile Cook Lateral right-ofway in north-central La Salle County, to
be installed by Mockingbird Midstream,
and hereinafter referred to as the Project
Area (PA) (Figures 1 - 4). Following the
background review, Flatrock then
requested a field cultural resources
survey of a high probability area along
the 4.1 miles. Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological Investigations (TAAI)
conducted a 100-percent pedestrian
survey with shovel testing along that
portion of right-of-way on June 4, 2011.

Figure 1. Location of La Salle County and the
Cook Lateral project in Texas.

Modern Environmental
Setting
Climate and Vegetation
La Salle county is located in
south-central Texas near its
southern border with Mexico
(see Figure 1). Its current
political boundary encompasses
1,517 square miles. The
generally flat to rolling terrain
ranges in elevation from about
600-800 feet above mean sea
level. Clayey and loamy soils
support the growth of small
predominately mesquite trees,
and thorny scrub brush with
assorted cacti and grassy
understory.

Figure 2. Cook Lateral Line on large topographic map.

With its semi-arid environment, the county is generally frost-free from mid-February through
1

early December, allowing for a
288-day growing season. The
average annual rainfall is about
22 inches, with most rainfall
occurring in May and September.
These peaks are the result of
thunderstorms bearing moist air
from the Gulf of Mexico to the
east, and the Pacific Ocean much
farther to the west. La Salle
County is known as part of the
Winter Garden Region for the
vegetables grown there (Leffler
1996; Gabriel et al. 1985).
However, rainfall amounts vary
significantly from year to year,
and the high evapotranspiration
effects in the area effectively
offset any beneficial surplus of annual rainfall. This is another reason irrigation systems are so
necessary, and commonly found in use today throughout the area. Summers are indeed hot and
d r y, w i t h t e m p e r a t u r e s Figure 3. Cook Lateral in proximity to Lewis and Slaughter
consistently hovering above Creeks, and Ranch Road 469.
1000F, although humidity is
generally low compared to
environments closer to the Gulf
Coast. Overall, the county’s
climate can be classified as
subtropical steppe.
Hydrology
The Nueces River and the Rio
Grande are the major
southeasterly trending rivers
draining the South Texas region.
A subtle divide through the
northeastern portion of the
Figure 4. Cook Lateral on Burns Ranch (1974) 7.5' USGS
county causes numerous
topographic map.
intermittent creeks to flow
north into the Nueces River, and
numerous others of the same
type to drain southward into the Rio Grande. Many drainages intermittently flow into both rivers
during infrequent seasonal periods of abundant rainfall. Although there are many springs in La
Salle County, very few are active due primarily to the dip of the substrate shales which carry these
2

subterranean seeps to the south and east.
As a result, some of these active
seeps/springs can be found on the
Mexican side of the national border.
Ancient springs that may have existed in
the area at one time have likely
succumbed to overgrazing and irrigation
pumping during modern times (Brune
1981). During our investigation of the
project area in June 2011, we observed
no flowing water or niche pools.
Flora and Fauna
The project area lies within the South
Texas Plain/Brush Country vegetation
area as defined by Gould (1975), and the
regional flora of South Texas has been
classified as being part of the
Tamaulipan biotic province extending
out from northeast Mexico (Figures 5
and 6). This is the only part of Texas
where some vegetation exhibits growth
throughout the year (Blair 1950; Map
2011a). Thorny brush is the dominant
vegetation today, but this is a relatively
recent occurrence, with a mix of woody Figure 5. Physiographic regions of Texas
and grassland species providing a (http://www.lib.utexas.edu/geo/pics/txphysio.jpg)
savanna environment during prehistoric
times (Archer 1995; Black 1989; Hester
1980; Inglis 1964). The original
vegetation was an open grassland mixed
with brushy chaparral. Oaks, pecan, and
ash were common along perennial
streams. Due in part to overgrazing and
the exclusion of fire, the invasion of
woody species has changed the
vegetation into “Texas brush country”
dominated by mesquite, acacia, spiny
hackberry, brazil, whitebrush, lotebrush,
and others (Diamond et al. 1987:203221). On sandy soils, the brush includes
mesquite with mixed grasses. In contrast,
clay soils support mesquite (Proposis
juliflora), various species of Acacia, and Figure 6. Blair’s (1950) biotic provinces of Texas.
3

mimosa, granjeno or desert hackberry (Celtis pallida), lignum vitae (Porliera angustifolia),
cenizo (Leucophyllum texanum), white brush (Aloysia texana), prickly pear (Opuntia
lindheeimeri), tasajillo (Opuntia leptocaulis), and species of Condalia and Castela (Blair 1950).
The South Texas Plains/Brush Country exhibits some of the greatest mammalian species diversity
in the state. Sixty-one species of mammals, 36 snakes, 19 lizards, and several species of turtles,
salamanders, and frogs are present in the region (Blair 1950). Approximately 50 species of fish
have been identified in the lower Rio Grande (Lee et al. 1980).

Paleoenvironment
The paleoenvironment of south Texas is The paleoenvironment of Texas is as varied as the
landscape, and the South Texas Paleoclimatic record contains significant gaps primarily due to
the scarcity of deep, finely stratified, and well-dated deposits (Stahle and Cleaveland 1995:51).
To date, the best record of paleoenvironmental reconstruction in South Texas has been
accomplished by Robinson (1982) from analysis of phytoliths from three archaeological sites in
Live Oak County. Overall, the data there along with data from other sites in Texas suggest that
the waning of the Pleistocene, or late-glacial period, marked a transition from a cooler, wetter
environment to one that steadily grew warmer and drier, and more seasonal, with intermittent
moist periods through about 6,000 years ago.
Most researchers then generally agree that the period between 6,000 and 3,000 years ago was
much warmer and drier than today. Since that time, intermittent moist and dry intervals have
occurred over the past 3,000 years.
It is unlikely that the climate has changed significantly in the past few thousand years in the area
that would significantly induce vegetation changes. The greater changes have been induced by
human intervention through the clearing of wooded areas along the river and streams for
construction purposes, pumping more water for irrigation which has lowered water tables, and
overgrazing by livestock. Although there are still many seeps, springs, and streams in the area,
they most probably flowed with greater abundance during wetter intervals than exist at the present
time, providing an abundant resource for prehistoric occupants.

Cultural Chronology
The Cook Lateral Line project lies within the South Texas Archaeological region as defined by
Hester (1980, 1995, 2004; Figure 7). Refining a cultural chronology for south Texas is
problematic, due to the compressed nature of the archaeological record and the scarcity of
stratified sites excavated within the region (e.g. Hall et al. 1986). Hester (1995:433) acknowledges
the paucity of information that exists for south Texas and as such offers only a “general
framework” for prehistoric periods particular to the region (Figure 7). All dates are given as
4

approximate years before present
(B.P.), i.e., before 1950.
Paleoindian (11,200 - 7950
B.P.)
This period is estimated at
between ca.11,200–7950 B.P. in
south Texas (Hester 1999). The
Paleoindian period began toward
the close of the Pleistocene.
Diagnostic artifacts of the early
Paleoindian interval include
Clovis and Folsom projectile
points. The wide distribution of
Clovis-type points across most of
North America and even into
Central America suggests a wide
dispersal and interaction of the
people who made them. Other
artifacts associated with the
Clovis culture include bifaces
and prismatic blades, engraved
stones, bone and ivory points,
stone bolas, ochre, and shaft
straighteners. During the late
Paleoindian interval, the first
stemmed lanceolate points, such
as Angostura, Golondrina, St.
Mary’s Hall, and Barber (among
a few others) appear.
In general, the Paleoindian
adaptation has been considered
to be one of small bands of
nomadic, big-game hunters
following herds of Late
Pleistocene fauna, including
mammoth, mastodons, bison,
camel, and horse, across North
America (Black 1989). More
recently, emphasis has been
placed on the wide diversity of
plants and animals used for
subsistence by these early

Figure 7. South Texas Archaeological region cultural
chronology.
5

Americans, such as turtles and tortoises, alligators, mice, badgers, and raccoons, although they
undoubtedly hunted the large animals as well (Collins 1995:381). Known Clovis sites include
killsites, quarries, caches, open campsites, ritual sites, and burials (Hester 1995:433–436). A
Folsom interval follows the Clovis. Folsom artifacts are fairly common in south Texas; however,
no camp sites or killsites have been found south of a large workshop, Pavo Real (41BX52), in
Bexar County (Hester 1995:434–435). Most Paleoindian finds in south Texas have consisted of
surface lithic scatters on upland terraces and ridges (Black 1989).
As the warming that marks the transition from Pleistocene to Holocene climates began to take
effect in Texas, prehistoric inhabitants adapted with changes in lifestyle. This climatic shift is also
marked by the decline and extinction of mammoth, mastodon, horse, camel, and giant bison
(Bison antiquus). Large gregarious game animals were perhaps extinct in Texas. Human hunters
were forced to concentrate on deer, antelope, and other medium-size or smaller game. Changes
in the subsistence base required technological shifts that mark the beginning of a new cultural
period known as the Archaic.
Early Archaic (7950 - 4450 B.P.)
Hester (1995:436–438) identifies the Early Archaic, with Early Corner Notched and Early Basal
Notched dart points, as roughly dating between 7950 to 4450 B.P. The extinction of large herds
of megafauna and the changing climate at the beginning of the Holocene stimulated a behavioral
change by the Prehistoric inhabitants of south Texas (McKinney 1981). While the basic huntergatherer adaptation probably remained intact, an economic shift away from big game hunting was
necessary. In general, more intensive exploitation of local and smaller resources such as deer, fish,
and plant bulbs is indicated by greater densities of ground-stone artifacts, fire-cracked rock
cooking features, and more specialized tools. Weir (1976) speculates that Early Archaic groups
were small and highly mobile, an inference based on the fact that Early Archaic sites are thinly
distributed and that diagnostic projectile point types are seen across a wide area, including most
of Texas and northern Mexico. Story (1985) believes that population densities were low during
the Early Archaic, and that groups consisted of related individuals in small bands with “few
constraints on their mobility” (Story 1985:39). Their economy was based on the utilization of a
wide range of resources, especially such year-round resources as prickly pear and lechugilla, as
well as rodents, rabbits, and deer.
Middle Archaic (4450 - 2350 B.P.)
Hester (1995:438–441) suggests that the period between 4450 and 2350 B.P. reflects the Middle
Archaic in south Texas. The Middle Archaic appears to have been a time of increased population,
based on the large number of sites from this period (Story 1985:40; Weir 1976:125, 128). On the
South Texas Plains, exploitation of widely scattered, year-round resources such as prickly pear
continued (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13–15), as did hunting deer and rabbit. Weir (1976)
believes that the widely scattered bands prevalent in the Early Archaic now began to coalesce, at
least during the acorn-gathering season, into larger groups who shared the intensive work of
gathering and processing the acorn harvest (Weir 1976:126). Many researchers believe burned
rock middens are a result of this endeavor (Creel 1986; Prewitt 1991; Weir 1976). The common
presence of deer remains in burned rock middens encourages the view that deer processing took
place at burned rock midden sites. Bison bone is encountered in archaeological sites in south
6

Texas, at least occasionally, during all but the earliest part of the Middle Archaic (Dillehay 1974).
Cemeteries make their first appearance during this period, suggesting a movement toward less
mobility and perhaps territorialism. One of the earliest occurrences dating to the south Texas
Middle Archaic, is Loma Sandia in Live Oak County, which dates between ca. 2550 and 2750
B.P. (Taylor and Highley 1995).
Late Archaic (2350 - 1250 B.P.)
Hester believes the Late Archaic in south Texas may be defined as between 2350–1250 B.P, Some
researchers believe populations increased throughout the Late Archaic (Prewitt 1985), while
others feel populations remained the same or fell during this period (Black 1989:30). Subsistence
is assumed to have become less specialized on acorns, in favor of a broad spectrum subsistence
base (Black 1989:30). Story (1985:44–45) believes the presence of cemeteries indicates that Late
Archaic populations in central and south Texas were increasing and becoming more territorial.
Although inhabitants of the South Texas Plain near Brownsville and Rockport had begun to make
pottery by about 1750 B.P., the northern part of the plain was still “pre-ceramic” until 1,000 years
later (Story 1985:45–47). Late Archaic points tend to be much smaller than Middle Archaic
points.
Transitional Archaic (2250 - 1250 B.P.)
A late subperiod or interval of the Late Archaic is frequently referred to as the Terminal Archaic
or Transitional Archaic. Turner and Hester (1993) cite data placing the Transitional Archaic as
2250–1250 B.P. Although Hester may lump current data into a Late Archaic period, he cautions
that more evidence will likely result in what may be termed as a “Terminal Archaic” period during
the latter part of the Late Archaic in south Texas. This Terminal Archaic period is represented by
diagnostics such as Ensor, Frio, and Matamoras points which appear to overlap the Late Archaic
and Late Prehistoric periods (Hester 1995:442). Weir (1976) believes this marked a transition
period to localized area sites, a disappearance of burned rock middens and bison, and a
reappearance of highly mobile hunters and gatherers. Others (Black and McGraw 1985; Peter
1982; Skelton 1977) argue that in some locations burned rock middens did not disappear and sites
were more intensely occupied during the Transitional Archaic period.

Late Prehistoric (1250 - 420 B.P.)
The term “Late Prehistoric” is commonly used to designate the period following the Late Archaic
in south Texas. Generally, the Late Prehistoric period is thought of as spanning the period
between A. D. 700 - 1530 ([1250 - 420 B.P.] [Hester 1995]). A series of distinctive traits mark
the shift from the Archaic to the Late Prehistoric period, including the technological shift to the
bow and arrow and the introduction of pottery to central Texas and the northern South Texas
Plain (Black 1989:32; Story 1985:45–47). Two distinct phases recognized within the Late
Prehistoric are the Austin and Toyah. During the Austin phase, there appears to be a subtle
transition from expanding stem projectile points that may have been used as dart points, as well
as early arrow points. The most prevalent point found in Austin phase sites is the Scallorn arrow
point. Settlement shifts into rockshelters such as Scorpion Cave in Medina County (Highley et
al. 1978) and Classen Rockshelter in northern Bexar County (Fox and Fox 1967) have been noted.
7

Cemeteries from this period often reveal evidence of conflict (Black 1989:32).
Beginning rather abruptly at about 650 B.P., a shift in technology occurred. The Perdiz arrow
point may best represent the appearance of a distinct culture in south-central Texas lasting for
about 300 years, which archaeologists have labeled the Toyah phase. Hester (1995:444)
recognizes this phase as the “best documented Late Prehistoric pattern” throughout south Texas,
with dates ranging between ca. 650/700 to 300/350 B.P. (A.D. 1250/1300 to 1600/1650).
In addition to Perdiz points, evidence of a Toyah culture is manifested as bone-tempered pottery,
bone spatulates, awls, and beads, stone endscrapers, beveled knives, and expediently utilized
flakes. Briefly, expedient lithic technology involves removing flakes from a core in a nonstandard
manner; the purpose is to knock off sharp flakes for immediate use, selecting the ones that best
suit the need at the time. This technology differs from formal, standardized core reduction and the
manufacturing of formal, usually bifacial tools. Expedient lithic technology is a continent-wide
phenomonon indicative of increased sedentism, and is observed in Toyah assemblages in Texas.
Whether the Toyah phase seen in the south-central Texas archaeological record is a result of a
group of people moving into the region, or adapted technologies from the region’s periphery is
a matter of conjecture. Steele and Assad-Hunter (1986) argue for the occurrence of a distinct
change in diet between the Late Archaic and the Late Prehistoric components in two sites in the
Choke Canyon Reservoir area in south Texas. Analysis of the number of identified specimens
(NISP) shows a marked increase in artiodactyla elements present during the later part of the Late
Prehistoric, an increase largely due to the addition of bison to the “menu” (Steele and AssadHunter 1986:468).
Whether or not agriculture was practiced during this period in south Texas has not been
documented. There simply is not enough evidence to postulate there was ever a significant
presence of maize in the area. The later arrival of the Spanish during the later
Protohistoric/Historic period brought significant cultivars to south Texas.
Protohistoric/Historic (420 B.P. - present)
The end of the Late Prehistoric and beginning of the Historic period in south Texas is
characterized by written accounts of European contact with indigenous groups. The Protohistoric
period begins in 1528 when Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts of southeast and
south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the hunter-gatherers of Texas
and northern Mexico (e.g., Hallenbeck 1971). Cabeza de Vaca’s account of his stay with the
Miriami in 1533-34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves
to the easily exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter and summer, occasionally
sending a hunting party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live
near each other in the semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other
succulents (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13-37).
Linguistically, early protohistoric accounts of the late 1500s indicate that a large group which
spoke Cohuilteco inhabited the area now known as south-central Texas. Coahuiltecan is a term
8

coined by Mexican linguists in the 1800s, and the name refers to the many small bands of Native
Americans who lived in northeastern Coahuila, Mexico and south Texas. The Coahuiltecans were
rapidly dispersed or killed during the Protohistoric period.
By the 1540s and 1550s Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico, with
several hundred thousand cattle, using Indian slaves as labor. Large mining ventures in northern
Mexico did the same. This encroachment from the south forced Native Americans to escape into
the south-central Texas region.
The period between de Vaca’s written account and the advent of Spanish missions in the late
1600s and early 1700s is referred to as the Protohistoric; a time when few, scant written
documents exist detailing Native American life outside the missions. The Historic period then,
is generally thought of as beginning in the 1700s.
Some 30 miles south of Eagle Pass, the Spanish established Mission San Juan Bautista in 1700
(now modern-day Guerrero). Early Spanish explorers then repeatedly traveled the Camino Real
enroute to newly established missions and settlements in today’s modern Texas throughout the
1700s and 1800s. Mexican families from across the river expanded into Texas, and these families
trace their roots to the early development of the area. In the ensuing years, lawlessness prevailed,
with saloons, gambling houses, outlaws, and slave hunters prevalent.

La Salle County Prehistory and History
Indian artifacts found in La Salle County indicate that the area has been occupied for about 11,000
years. Plentiful food sources such as wild game, fruits, seeds, and roots made the land hospitable.
Early technology included tools from wood and stone, woven basketry, sewed rabbitskin robes,
and a very effective weapon was the atlatl, a throwing stick that greatly increased the deadliness
of their spears (Leffler 1996). Perhaps as early as 1,300 years ago, they learned to make pottery
and to hunt with bows and arrows. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the
Coahuiltecan Indians native to La Salle County were squeezed out by other Indian who were
migrating into the area and by the Spanish, who were moving up from the south. Many of the
Coahuiltecans were taken to San Juan Bautista in Coahuila. Apaches and Comanches moved in
to take their place (Leffler 1996).
The earliest historic accounts of Native Americans in south Texas and perhaps the La Salle
County area, are those of Cabeza de Vaca. In the 1500s, Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca
traversed parts of southeast and south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling
among the hunter-gatherers of Texas and northern Mexico (e.g., Covey 1961). His account of his
experiences in 1533–34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether
themselves to the easily exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter, and summer,
occasionally sending a hunting party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many
groups would live near each other in the semiarid environs of south Texas to harvest prickly pear
9

pads and other succulents (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13–37).
By the 1540s and 1550s, Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico with
thousands of cattle, and using Native Americans as slave labor. This encroachment by the Spanish
forced Native American groups from northern Mexico to flee into south Texas. Beginning in the
late 1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio Road, a camino
real, to and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. In the 1700s and 1800s, there are
documented accounts of Spanish entradas passing through the area, but none have been noted to
establish any sort of permanent bases in present-day La Salle County (Chipman 1992)
After the Mexican War of Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage
its citizens to settle in Texas. Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and 1834
that included territory now in La Salle County. None of the recipients seem to have made use of
the land, however. By 1836, when Texas became independent from Mexico, the area remained
populated almost solely by Indians (Leffler 1996).
Between the Texas Revolution and the Mexican War (1836–46), most of La Salle County lay in
the disputed area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River, and it became a haven for
desperate characters until about 1865. New settlers who lived in jacals or dugouts were frequently
being harrassed by hostile Indians and outlaws. Due in part tobeing pursued by the Texas Rangers,
and being decimated by disease, the Indians were forced to leave La Salle County by 1877. By
1880, cattle ranching was firmly established, and although sheep ranching was also an important
part of the economy at the time, by 1900 extended droughts and an increase in predators combined
to make sheep ranching a tough and dwindling business (Leffler 1996).
As with rest of the nation, the Great Depression many of the county’s farmers were forced to cut
back their once-lucrative vegetable production during the depression, and fell back on raising
poultry, hogs, and dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in the
county in the 1950s certainly bolstered La Salle County’s economy, and although large ranches
lay claim to most of the land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much a
progressively increasing part of the county’s development (Leffler 1996).

Site Types That Could be Expected Along the Cook Lateral Line
Prehistoric Open Campsites
Most numerous among the sites recorded in La Salle County are prehistoric open campsites
ranging in age from the Paleoindian period through the Historic period (see Figure 3). Some of
these represent a single campfire where a very small group of Native Americans may have
camped for one night. Others are very large, covering very extensive areas representing large
groups of people that stayed for long periods, perhaps seasonally, with ancestral groups returning
to these same campsites over a period of several thousands of years. Cultural remains to be found
at these large campsites include among other items, an abundance of fire-cracked rocks
10

representing multiple hearths, a wide variety of chipped stone tools and the lithic debris that
results from making them, ground and smoothed stones used to grind nuts and seeds, faunal
remains from terrestrial and aquatic animals consumed, bone tools, pottery sherds, and mussel and
snail shells. Open campsites occur in all types of environments, whether that be in a plush riverine
environment that offered a wide variety banquet of plant and animal foodstuffs, or in the uplands
away from flowing water sources. Seasonally, the upland grasses, shrubs, cacti offered a different
food source that could be exploited such as various grass seeds, mesquite beans, prickly pear pads
and tunas, and agave hearts. In addition, at various times, bison were known to graze on the
northern South Texas Plains, and were highly sought after for use as food, hides, and bone tools
(Dilley 1974).
Depending upon the integrity of these open campsites, archaeologists and the Texas Historical
Commission consider these as perhaps the most significant types of sites in regard to their ability
to contribute to our understanding of south Texas prehistory. A few of the desired ingredients that
can indicate significance include cultural material that is buried beneath the surface in a wellpreserved, stratified, and relatively undisturbed context. Although these situations most frequently
occur within stratified terrace deposits adjacent to streams, they can also occur in upland settings
where the landscape has been generally stable through time. Other ingredients that archaeologists
look for in potentially significant campsites include good organic preservation in the form of
charcoal and/or charred plant remains, faunal preservation, temporally diagnostic stone tools or
ceramics, and intact features such as hearths.
Prehistoric Lithic Scatters or Procurement Sites
Lithic scatters are the next most common type of archaeological site that could be expected along
the Cook Lateral Line. These sites simply represent the chipped stone debris and broken tools that
were left behind when Native Americans made new tools or re-sharpened their old ones. The
general absence of fire-cracked rocks and other cultural material normally found at open
campsites suggest that they did not camp there, or remain there for any extended period of time
( However, small camp fires may have been used to heat-treat chert or quartzite cobbles to make
them more knappable). Yet, they were drawn to these isolated locales because of the natural
outcroppings or surface exposures of good quality raw material such as chert or quartzite cobbles.
Examples of chipped stone most commonly found at these sites include cobbles with one or two
flakes removed, called ‘tested cobbles’. That is, the Native Americans knew from experience the
quality of stone that could most easily be flaked and reduced for stone tool production, so they
‘tested’ the cobble to judge whether it was useable or not. If the quality was judged to be inferior,
then the cobble was tossed aside. That is why the majority of tested cobbles found on these sites
are of poor quality, coarse-grained material. While the finished stone tool products are carried
away from these sites, what remains are those tools broken during the manufacturing process, and
the thousands of pieces of debitage in the form of flakes and angular debris. Also unique to lithic
scatters where large cobbles are present are snapped ‘quarry blanks’. These are simply cobbles
flakes on both sides, reducing the cobble into a transportable ‘blank’ that can be used to further
reduce it and make finished stone tools from the flakes taken off of it. The unbroken quarry blanks
are usually not found on these sites because they have been carried off, presumably to areas of
south Texas where raw material is not readily available. The snapped or broken quarry blanks are
of little or no use, so they are discarded and left behind.
11

Lithic scatters range in age from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods and can be found
on any landscape setting where gravels or cobbles have been exposed. Notably, gravel outcrops
that were exposed to the surface a few hundred or thousand years ago could be deeply buried
today, and the opposite could also be true; it all depends on the terrain setting and the dynamics
of landscape evolution through time. Most lithic scatters in La Salle County have been
documented along upper stream terraces abutting the eroded upland slopes.
Prehistoric Quarries and Procurement Sites
Prehistoric quarries and procurement also can range in age from the Paleoindian through Historic
periods, but differ from lithic scatters in that at those sites Native Americans exploited loose
gravels, but at times they specifically sought quarry sites where raw material such as cherts or
quartzites were not yet freed from their parent geologic formation, and they had to be ‘quarried’.
These types of sites are rare in south Texas for two reasons: 1) the geological exposures generally
do not present themselves, and 2) throughout Texas, even in central Texas, it is much easier to
pick up gravels from the surface than to try to mine them from hard rock. Quarried and chipped
stone remains likely to be found at these sites include large chunks of angular cherts or quartzites,
as well as parent material detritus, and flaking debris. Snapped quarry blanks can also be
expected. Although a handful of prehistoric quarries or procurement sites have been recorded in
south Texas, they are rare.
Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens
There are no burned rock middens in La Salle County. Burned rock middens result from a series
of multiple-use earth ovens that were constructed much like modern-day roasting pits are dug into
the earth for roasting a pig. With repetitive uses, as the larger rocks that serve as heating elements
in the earthen pit fracture and thus become less effective as a thermal source, they are ‘pitched
out’ around the edge of the pit. As the pit becomes unusable, another is dug near by, and the
procedure repeated. Over time, these multiple pits and the ‘pitched out’ fire-cracked rocks
coalesce together, obscuring each pit as indiscernible. (For a full discussion of the formation of
burned rock middens and their documented presence in Texas, see Leach and Bousman 2001;
Leach et al. 2001; Mauldin et al. 2003).
Prehistoric Burial and Cemetery Sites
Although not common, isolated prehistoric burials and cemeteries have been documented in south
Texas. Individual and isolated burials have been found in association with open campsites in both
upland settings as well as in alluvial terraces along streams, but the largest prehistoric cemetery
found in proximity to the Cook Lateral is 41LK28, in Live Oak County.
Historic Sites
As discussed above in the Cultural Chronology portion of this report, although Spanish ranchers
had established large ranches in northern Mexico by the mid-16th century, and Spanish entradas
began penetrating south Texas in the 1700s and 1800s, there is no record of any sort of permanent
structures in the area during those periods (Chipman 1992), the area was generally not considered
safe for settlement by whites until after the Civil War in 1865, and white settlers then began
establishing smaller ranches and farmlands (Leffler 2011).
12

Because of the vastness of the landscape and the relatively late settlement and development of
south Texas compared to east and central Texas and northern Mexico, historic sites are not
abundant, but they certainly do exist. The most common types to be encountered are related to
ranching and farming endeavors, or small communities from the 19th and 20th centuries. Site types
most commonly include farmsteads or ranches with corrals, cisterns, chimney and foundation
remains from both main houses and outbuildings, related trash dumps, an occasional family burial
or cemetery, school houses, churches, community buildings, and industry-related structures or
construction projects. In general, the area has apparently been historically used as ranchland
pasture, with no development other than associated ranching activities such as windmills, stock
tanks, corrals, and sparsely scattered outbuildings.
In sum, there could be rare and isolated occurrences of early ranching activities along the Cook
Lateral, but the expectations of encountering any archaeological site of significance from the
1500s through the mid-1900s along those portions of the pipeline were minimal.

Results of A Cultural Resources Background Review
The research by TAAI included:
1) A review of the most current literature documenting the prehistory and history of the immediate
area
2) A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas to identify
what cultural resource surveys have been conducted, and what archaeological sites have been
documented within one mile of the project area
3) A search of various websites that offer old maps of the PA
4) A literature review of both published and unpublished reports and manuscripts that describe
the types of archaeological sites that have been documented, and thus provide insight as to the
types of sites that may be expected either in the PA, or immediately adjacent to it
5) A review of a local soils map in order to evaluate the potential for intact and buried cultural
materials either within or immediately adjacent to the PA.

13

Archaeological Atlas Site Results

La Salle County
Very few, and sparsely scattered archaeological surveys have been conducted in La Salle County.
There are only 99 archaeological sites recorded within the county, and a large number of those
were found on pipeline surveys. Nevertheless, the time-diagnostic artifacts discovered in La Salle
County provide evidence that the landscape was occupied as early as 11,000 years before the
present.
The site types are as varied as the landscape. Large open campsites with numerous hearths, or
campfires, a wide assortment of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and butchered animal
remains are most commonly located along stream or river terraces. Where gravels outcrop, either
along eroded streambeds, or on higher terrain where more ancient gravels are sometimes exposed
in isolated pockets, one can expect stone chipping stations, or prehistoric quarries (Atlas 2011).
Of the 99 sites, 54 are prehistoric open campsites, and 45 are prehistoric lithic scatters. The more
significant and deeply buried open campsites with archaeological research potential lie close to
streams. Historic components on these same prehistoric sites include historic windmills and areas
of scattered glass and ceramic sherds, or in some cases there are large trash dumps. One unique
historic site is Fort Ewell (41LS19), an adobe structure located on the old Laredo to San Antonio
Road, and that served the U.S. Army from 1852-1854. The only State Archaeological Landmark
(SAL) recorded in La Salle County is the County Courthouse in Cotulla (Leffler 1996; Atlas
2011).
Surveys and Sites within One Mile of the Cook Lateral
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archeological sites indicates that
no professional archaeological surveys have been conducted within one mile, but there is one
archaeological site approximately one mile south of the extreme southern end of the proposed
Cook Lateral right-of-way. It is a very large prehistoric open campsite (41LS18) situated on a
knoll, low ridge, and a valley along Cibolo Creek. In addition to multiple hearths and formal stone
tools, diagnostics include Perdiz, Ensor, Tortugas, Abosolo, Catan, and Alba arrow and dart
points. These suggest a repeated and long-term occupation at this locale from the Middle Archaic
through the Late Prehistoric periods, perhaps over the past 4,000 years.
In addition to cultural resources surveys documented on the Texas Atlas, three professional
surveys have been conducted within one mile of the Cook Lateral (see Figure 4). High probability
areas of the Shining Star Lateral and the Slaughter Ranch Lateral were surveyed by Tierras
Antiguas in June 2011. No evidence of either prehistoric or historic cultural material was
discovered either on or below the surface during those two investigations (Nickels 2011a,b). The
entire JEA Trunkline was surveyed by TAAI in February 2011. Although three prehistoric
archaeological sites were discovered along the JEA right-of-way, none were within one mile of
the Cook Lateral (Nickels 2011c).

14

Old Maps and Aerial Photographs
Because the area has apparently been historically used as ranchland pasture, with no development
other than associated ranching activities, no maps or aerial photographs dating before 1969 were
found in the usual reliable online databases.

Soils Maps
The Cook Lateral crosses through seven different soil types that offer varying depths,
sedimentation and deposition rates, and some are in close proximity to streams. As such, they
likewise imply the potential for the preservation of intact cultural resources to exist. (Gabriel et
al. 1994; Web Soil Survey 2011). The soils as mapped are shown in Figure 8, and Table 1 then
presents a brief description of each type, and their potential to contain deeply buried and intact
cultural deposits. In sum, the Cook Lateral right-of-way was to pass through upland areas with
soils and sediments that are generally shallow, and if prehistoric archaeological sites did exist, the
soils as mapped suggested that any archaeological deposits were likely in a palimpsest (collapsed)
or eroded state, and thus offered little in the way of scientific significance. However, the right-ofway was also to cross potential terrace deposits that have a moderate to high probability of
containing deeply buried and intact archaeological deposits that can be potentially significant to
our understanding of Texas prehistory. As such, Tierras Antiguas recommended a pedestrian
survey and shovel testing be conducted along a portion of the proposed lateral.

Figure 8. Soils to be dissected by the Cook Lateral.
15

Table 1. Soils Dissected by the Cook Lateral.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Buried and Intact
Archaeological Potential

Brystal fine sandy loam
(BZB)

Deep loamy soils on convex-form uplands

Minimal to Moderate

Caid sandy loam (CBB)

Deep loamy soils on gently undulating
uplands

Minimal to Moderate

Duval loamy fine sand (DsC)

Shallow soils on 0-5% slopes in the
uplands

Minimal

Duval fine sandy loam
(DVC)

Deep loamy soils on gently undulating
uplands

Minimal to Moderate

Poteet fine sandy loam (Pt)

Deep loams and clays along drainageways

Moderate

W ebb fine sandy loam
(W CB)

Deep loamy soils on gently undulating
uplands

Minimal to Moderate

Zavco sandy clay loam
(ZVB)

Deep loamy soil on gently sloping uplands

Minimal to Moderate

Field Survey Goals and Methodology
Goals
The project goals focused on archaeological issues that could be addressed by the types of data
obtained through pedestrian survey, along with limited shovel testing. The topics addressed were
site type, distribution, density, size, depth, and stratigraphy. The theoretical framework is
structured around patterns of settlement, mobility, subsistence, and social systems for the South
Texas region.
The goals of the project were to:
1)
locate and record cultural locations and sites in the project area using a systematic
survey methodology;
2)

quantify site size as well as depth, and stratigraphy; and,

3)

place any diagnostic artifacts within the regional time frame.

Methods and Levels of Effort
Two archaeologists conducted an intensive pedestrian survey of a high probability portion of the
4.1-mile right-of-way (ROW) along Lewis Creek (Figure 9), meandering back and forth across the
100-foot wide corridor. Surface visibility ranged from 80 to 100 percent, and all cutbanks, and
rodent and mammal backdirt piles were thoroughly examined (Figure 10). Four shovel tests were
dug in 20-cm levels, and all sediments and soils screened through 1/4-inch wire mesh.
16

In accordance with a general “no
collection” policy, cultural
material of a redundant nature,
both prehistoric and historic,
observed were not to be
collected. Instead, they were to be
fully documented via sketches,
field photographs, and copious
notes, and their locations
recorded with a hand-held GPS.
Following that, they were to be
returned to the surface if surface
finds, or to the top 10 cm of any
shovel tests excavated.
Exceptions were diagnostic
artifacts, particularly those Figure 9. Portion of Cook Lateral subjected to a full
artifacts which could be pedestrian survey.
considered as significant to the
interpretation of Texas
prehistory, such as Early ArchaicPaleoindian
transitional, or
Paleoindian diagnostics. These
were to be collected on a case-bycase basis, and that decision was
left up to the Principal
Investigator and/or the Project
Archaeologist.
Historic buildings, trash scatters,
or other historic occurrences
within the ROW were to be
documented as archaeological
sites. In addition, any potentially
historic buildings 45 years or
Figure 10. Lewis Creek on Cook Lateral right-of-way; facing
older that were located adjacent
west.
to the ROW were to be
documented with photographs and included in the report of investigations.
Sites were to be mapped using a pace-and-compass method, as well as a GPS. Field notes were to
be made about each site and sketch maps were drawn. Representative artifacts on each site were
to be gathered and photographed.

17

Results of the Field Investigations

Surface Examination
During the survey it became readily apparent that approximately 80 percent of the project’s surface
area was either disturbed or deflated by natural processes. Sparse to dense vegetation throughout
much of the portion surveyed consisted of small mesquite trees, shrubs, mesquite brush, and native
grasses. At its juncture with the Cook Lateral, Lewis Creek is a shallow cut, with no terrace
development, and a broad floodplain (see Figure 10). No cultural material was found in any of the
four shovel tests excavated.
No archaeological sites were found along the portion of the right-of-way examined, and no
evidence of isolated prehistoric or historic finds (IF) was observed during the survey.

Survey Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
A background review of the proposed 4.1-mile Cook Lateral indicated a potentially discrete area
along Lewis Creek where soils and possible terrace deposits suggested a moderate to high
probability for deeply buried, stratified, and intact prehistoric cultural deposits to be extant. As
such, Tierras Antiguas recommended an investigation of that area with a field survey. A 100percent pedestrian survey along that portion of the right-of-way was conducted by two
archaeologists on June 4, 2011. As a result, no evidence of cultural material was discovered.
Therefore, Tierras Antiguas recommended that the Cook Lateral be allowed to be constructed as
currently designed. However, Tierras Antiguas further recommended that if any additional,
undiscovered cultural resources were encountered during development, such finds should be
examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological consultant.

18

References Cited
Arbingast, S. A., L. G. Kennamer, R. H. Ryan, A. Lo, D. L. Karney, C. P. Zlatkovic, M. E.
Bonine, and R. G. Steele
1973

Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at Austin.

Archer, S.
1995

Tree-grass Dynamics in a Prosopis-thornscrub Savannah Parkland:
Reconstructing the Past and Predicting the Future. Ecoscience 2(1):84-99.

2011

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
March 23, 2010].

Atlas

Black, S. L.
1989

Environmental Setting. In From the Gulf Coast to the Rio Grande: Human
Adaptation in the Central, South, and Lower Pecos, Texas, by T. R. Hester, S.
L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. J. Reinhard, and L. C.
Bement, pp. 5-17. Research Series No. 33, Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

Black, S. L., and A. J. McGraw
1985

The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change and Continuity in the Upper
Salado Creek Drainage, South-Central Texas. Archaeological Survey Report,
No. 100. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

Blair, W. F.
1950

The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-117.

Brune, G.
1981

Springs of Texas. Branch-Smith, Fort Worth.

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Collins, M. B.
1995 Forty Years of Archaeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:361–400.

19

Covey, C. (editor)
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier
Books, New York.
Creel, D. G.
1986

A Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in West Central Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Arizona, Tucson.

Diamond, D.D., D. H. Riskind, and S. L. Orzell
1987 A Framework for Plant Community Classification and Conservation in Texas.
The Texas Journal of Science 39(3):203-221.
Dillehay, T.
1974

Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19(64):180–196.

Fox, A. A., and D. E. Fox
1967 The Classen Rockshelter, 41BX23. Manuscript on file. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Gabriel, W. J., D. Arriaga, and J. W. Stevens
1994 Soil Survey of La Salle County. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, Washington, D.C., in Cooperation with the Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station, College Station, Texas.
Gould, F. W.
1975 Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. Texas Agricultural
Experimentation Station, College Station.
Hall, G. D., T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black
1986 The Prehistoric Site at Choke Canyon Reservoir, Southern Ttexas: Results of
Phase II Archaeological Investigations. Choke Canyon Series: Volume 10.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hallenbeck, C.
1971 Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca: The Journey and Route of the First European to
Cross the Continent of North America, 1534-1536. Kennikat Press Scholarly
Reprints, Port Washington, New York.
Hester, T. R.
1995 The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:427–459.
1980 Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur Archaeologists.
Corona Press, San Antonio.
Highley, L., C. Graves, and G. Judson
1978 Archeological Investigations at Scorpion Cave (41ME7), Medina County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:139–194.
20

Inglis, J. M.
1964

A History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain. Bulletin #45. Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department, Austin.

Lee, D. S., C. R. Gilbert, C. H. Hocutt, R. E. Jenkins, P. E. McAllister, J. R. Stauffer, Jr.
1980 Atlas of North American Freshwater Fishers. North Carolina Biological Survey
Publication 1980-12, North Carolina State Museum of Natural History.
Leffler, J.
1996

La Salle County. The New Handbook of Texas Online.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Leffler, J. J., and C. Long
1996 Webb County. The New Handbook of Texas Online, Volume 2, pp. 645-648.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
McKinney, W. W.
1981 Early Holocene Adaptations in Central and Southern Texas: The Problem of the
Paleo-Indian-Archaic Transition. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:91–120.
Map
2011a Biotic Provinces of Texas.
http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/landwater/land/maps/gis/map_downloads/images/p
wd_mp_e0100_1070ae_6.gif. Accessed July 31, 2011.
2011b Artesia Wells. Perry Casteñeda Library Map Collection. Big Wells USACE
Topographic Map. http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/topo [Accessed July 24,
2011].
Nickels, D. L.
2011a A Cultural Resources Survey of the Shining Star Lateral in La Salle County,
Texas. Letter Report submitted to Flatrock Engineering and Environmental,
Ltd., San Antonio, Texas by Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations,
Martindale, Texas. June 4, 2011.
2011b A Cultural Resources Survey of the Slaughter Ranch Lateral in La Salle County,
Texas. Letter Report submitted to Flatrock Engineering and Environmental,
Ltd., San Antonio, Texas by Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations,
Martindale, Texas. June 5, 2011.
2011c Interim Report of a Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed JEA Trunkline.
Submitted to Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd., San Antonio, Texas
by Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, Texas. February
16, 2011.
Peter, D. E.
1982

Alternative Perspectives on Burned Rock Middens, In Archaeological
Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, Vol. 2,
21

compiled and edited by T. R. Hays, pp. 20.1–20.15. Archaeology Program,
Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.
Prewitt, E. R.
1991

Burned Rock Middens: A Summary of Previous Investigations and
Interpretations. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An Archeological
Symposium, edited T. R. Hester, pp. 25–32. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Robinson, R. L.
1982

Biosilica Analysis of Three Prehistoric Archaeological Sites in the Choke
Canyon Reservoir, Live Oak County, Texas: Preliminary Summary of Climatic
Implications. In Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir,
South Texas: The Phase I Findings, edited by G. D. Hall, S. L. Black, and C.
Graves, pp. 597-610. Choke Canyon Series, No. 5. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Skelton, D. W.
1977

Archeological Investigations at the Fayette Power Project, Fayette County,
Texas. Research Report 60. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Stahle, D. W. , and M. K. Cleaveland
1995

Texas Paleoclimatic Data from Daily to Millennial Time Scales. In The
Changing Climate of Texas: Predictability and Implications for the Future,
edited by J. Norwine, J. R. Giardino, G. R. North, and J. B. Valdes, pp. 49-69.
GeoBooks, Texas A&M University, College Station.

Steele, D. G., and C. Assad Hunter
1986

Analysis of Vertebrate Faunal Remains from 41MC222 and 41MC296,
McMullen County, Texas. In The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas: Results of Phase II Archaeological Investigations, edited by G.
D. Hall, T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black. Choke Canyon Series, No. 10. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Story, D. A.
1985

Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coastal Plain. In
Prehistoric Food Production in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 19–56.

22

Anthropological Papers No. 75. Museum of Anthropology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Taylor, A. J., and C. L. Highly
1995

Archaeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. 2 volumes. Studies in Archeology No. 20.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Texas GLO
2011

Presidio Crossing Map.
<http://wwwdb.glo.state.tx.us/central/arcmap/ArcMapsXoomer.cfm>[Accessed
January 13, 2011].

Turner, E. S., and T. R. Hester
1999

A Field Guide to the Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Gulf Publishing. Houston,
TX.

Web Soil Survey
2011

Weir, F. A.
1976

La Salle County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed April
11, 2011]

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. Anthropology
Department, Washington State University.

23

