A Cultural Resources Background Review
of the 26405 Sycamore McCart Repl
Monopole Site, Tarrant County, Texas

Prepared for
AARCHER, INC.
Annapolis, Maryland
by
David L. Nickels, Principal Investigator
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, LLC
September 2015

Introduction
Aarcher, Inc., requested a
cultural resources
background review of a 560
square-foot tower site in
southwestern Tarrant
County, and hereinafter
occasionally referred to as
the Project Area (PA)
(Figures 1 - 3).
In September 2015, Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological
Investigations (TAAI)
conducted a review of
cultural resources
documented either on, or
within one mile of the PA,
as well as other documents
that may be relative for
significant cultural
reso u rces to
exist within the
P A .
T h e
research by
TAAI included:

Figure 1. Location of Tarrant County and the Sycamore
Monopole site in Texas.

1) A review of
the most current
literature
documenting the
prehistory and
history of the
immediate area
2) A review of
the Texas
Historical
Commission’s
T e x a s
Archeological
Sites Atlas to
identify what Figure 2. The Project Area on large USGS 7.5' topographic map.
1

cultural resource surveys have been conducted, and what archaeological sites have been
documented within one mile of the PA
3) A search of various websites that offer old maps of the PA
4) A literature review of both published and unpublished reports and manuscripts that describe
the types of archaeological sites that have been documented, and thus provide insight as to the
types of sites that may be expected either in the PA, or immediately adjacent to it
6) A review of a local soils map in order to evaluate the potential for intact and buried cultural
materials either within or immediately adjacent to the PA.

Figure 3. Project Area on Fort Worth (1982) 7.5' USGS topographic map.

Archaeological Surveys, Known Archaeological Sites, Historical Markers, National
Register Properties, and Historic Structures within One-Half Mile
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archeological Sites (ATLAS
2

2015) indicated that no cultural ressources surveys had been conducted within one mile of the
26405 Sycamore McCart Repl Monopole location, nor were there any documented
archaeological sites, Historic Markers, or National Register Historic Properties (NRHP) within
one mile of the PA.

Soils
As shown in Figure 4, the 26405 Sycamore McCart Repl Monopole site lies within soils classified
as Sanger-Urban Land Complex (67), normally found on gently sloping uplands in this area of
Tarrant County (Ressell 1981; Websoil 2015).
This soil complex suggests that the Project Area would be one where there is a very minimal
potential for buried and significant cultural resources to be extant. Typically, the Sanger soils
which make up roughly 45 to 70 percent of this complex are moderately alkaline, clay and silty
clay vertisols that are subject to significant vertical cracking, swelling and shrinkage which causes
artifacts to be vertically displaced. Calcium carbonate masses and limestone fragments are
common 20 inches below the surface. In addition, the Urban land part of this complex signifies
that much of it is covered by individual dwellings, apartments, small businesses, and adjoining
parking lots, driveways, streets, etc. to the extent that soils identification was not possible. A
modern aerial photograph shows that the Project Area now lies within a complex of office
buildings, warehouses, and parking lots (see cover photo).

Figure 4. Soils map of the Project Area.
3

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
On September 24, 2015 David Nickels of Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations
conducted an on-line review of the Archeological Site Atlas (Atlas) of the Texas State Historic
Preservation Office (SHPO) in accordance with Federal Communications Commission’s
Nationwide Programmatic Agreement (PA; 47 CFR Part 1). After reviewing the Atlas, Mr.
Nickels found that there are no known and documented archaeological sites, historic markers,
State Archeological Landmarks, or National Register Properties within one mile of the site
proposed for construction of the 26405 Sycamore McCart Repl Monopole.
A review of soils maps both in hard copy and on-line revealed that the soils are calcareous
vertisols subject to periodic swelling, shrinking, and vertical cracking. A modern aerial
photograph and a detailed drawing of the proposed project were also reviewed. Roughly 95
percent of the access right-of-way and utility easement to the monopole site have been paved over
(see cover photo). Otherwise, because of previous construction within and immediately adjacent
to the actual monopole footprint, any cultural resources that may be present have most probably
been disturbed or destroyed, and thus have little or no scientific research potential. Thus, it is the
opinion of Mr. Nickels that there is a very low probability for the existence of any known
undiscovered/unrecorded intact and significant archaeological resources on or near the Project
Area.
Accordingly, Mr. Nickels recommended that no further cultural resources investigations are
warranted at the monopole site, and that construction of the 26405 Sycamore McCart Repl
Monopole should be allowed to proceed as planned.

4

References Cited
Atlas 2015

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
September 24, 2015].

Ressel, D. D.
1981 Soil Survey of Tarrant County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station, College Station, Texas. with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station,
College Station, Texas.
Web Soil Survey
2015 Tarrant County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed
September 24, 2015].

5

