A Cultural Resources Survey of the 1.6Mile Coleman B Lateral in Zavala County,
Texas

Prepared for Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd.
San Antonio, Texas
by
David L. Nickels, Principal Investigator
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations
Archaeology Report # 312
May 2014

Abstract
Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd. of San Antonio, Texas contracted with Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations (TAAI) to conduct a pedestrian survey of the 1.6-mile
Coleman B Lateral to be installed by Mockingbird Midstream Gas Services, L.L.C.
(Mockingbird) in southeastern Zavala county. The project was entirely privately funded, and the
properties across which the pipeline will cross are privately owned; therefore, no Texas
Antiquities Permit was required.
The right-of-way was subjected to a full pedestrian survey by two archaeologists on May 20,
2014. Our observations were that the majority of the right-of-way had been heavily disturbed by
the blading of ranch roads, fence building, and brush clearing as part of ranch management. The
only cultural materials observed were on archaeological site 41ZV532, a prehistoric open
campsite. In its heavily disturbed condition, our assessment is that the site does not possess the
potential to make a significant contribution to our understanding of south Texas prehistory.
As such, Tierras Antiguas recommended that the construction of the Coleman B Lateral as it is
currently aligned be allowed to proceed as planned. However, Tierras Antiguas further
recommended that if any undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during development
along the entire length of the lateral, such finds should be examined and evaluated by Tierras
Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological consultant.

Acknowledgments
There are mainly four individuals who are greatly appreciated, and whose efforts contributed to
the successful planning, organization, and completion of this project. They are Ms. Judy Vader
and Mr. Ryan DeBarros, Project Managers at Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, and Mr.
Ronnie Glenewinkel and Mr. David Black, Environmental Coordinators at Mockingbird
Midstream. All were extremely amiable and helpful throughout the project, and their overall
knowledge of the project contributed significantly to our understanding of the project’s scope
of work.
In addition, I express my sincere gratitude to Tierras Antiguas staff archaeologist Emory Worrell,
who worked hard, long hours, and expressed an attitude and work ethic that ensured this survey
was conducted in a thorough and professional manner.

Cover photo: Selected artifacts observed at 41ZV532.

i

Table of Contents
Title
Page
Abstract.......................................................................................................................................i
Acknowledgments........................................................................................................................i
List of Figures........................................................................................................... .................ii
List of Tables...............................................................................................................................ii
Introduction................................................................................................................................1
Modern Environmental Setting....................................................................................................2
Paleoenvironment........................................................................................................................5
Cultural Chronology....................................................................................................................5
Zavala County Prehistory and History......................................................................................10
Site Types to be Expected.........................................................................................................11
Atlas Review of Archaeological Sites ......................................................................................14
Soils..........................................................................................................................................16
Survey Goals and Methodology................................................................................................17
Results of the Investigations......................................................................................................18
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations...........................................................................21
References Cited........................................................................................................................22

List of Figures
Figure
Page
1. Zavala County and project location......................................................................................1
2. Coleman B Lateral on large topographic map.......................................................................1
3. Coleman B Lateral on local topographic map.......................................................................2
4. Physiographic regions of Texas...........................................................................................3
5. Biotic provinces of Texas....................................................................................................4
6. South Texas cultural chronology.........................................................................................6
7. Coleman B Lateral soils.....................................................................................................16
8. Photo of right-of-way........................................................................................................18
9. 41ZV532 site map...............................................................................................................19
10. Shovel testing at 41ZV532................................................................................................20
11. Selected artifacts at 41ZV532............................................................................................21

List of Tables
Table
Page
1. Soils Dissected by the Coleman B Lateral.........................................................................17

ii

Introduction
Flatrock Engineering and
Environmental, Ltd., requested
a cultural resources background
review of the Coleman B
Lateral in southeastern Zavala
County, hereinafter occasionally
referred to as the Project Area
(PA) (Figures 1-3).
In May 2014, Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological Investigations
(TAAI) conducted a review of
cultural resources documented
either on, or within one mile of
the PA, as well as other
documents that may be relative
for significant cultural resources
Figure 1. Location of Zavala County, and the Coleman B
to exist within the PA. Based
Lateral project in Texas.
upon
that
review, Tierras
Antiguas then
conducted a full
field survey on
May 20, 2014,
resulting in the
discovery of two
isolated pieces
of presumably
prehistoric
chipped stone.

Modern
Environmen
-tal Setting
Climate and
Vegetation
Zavala county is Figure 2. Coleman B Lateral on large topographic map.
located in south1

central Texas
near its southern
border with
Mex ico (see
Figure 1). Its
current political
bound ary
encompasses
1,298 square
miles. The
generally flat to
rolling terrain
ranges
in
elevation from
about 580-964
feet above mean
sea level. Clayey
and loamy soils
support the
growth of small
predominately Figure 3. Location of the Coleman B Lateral on West Ranch 7.5' USGS
mesquite trees, topographic map.
and thorny scrub
brush with assorted cacti and grassy understory, but with all oak, pecan, and elm along the
riverine environments such as the Leona and Frio rivers (Ochoa 1996).
With its semi-arid environment, the county is generally frost-free from late-February through
early December, allowing for a 282-day growing season. The average annual rainfall is about 22
inches, with most rainfall occurring in May and September. These peaks are the result of
thunderstorms bearing moist air from the Gulf of Mexico to the east, and the Pacific Ocean much
farther to the west. Zavala county is known as part of the Winter Garden Region for the
vegetables grown there (Ochoa 1996; Stevens and Arriaga 1985).
However, rainfall amounts vary significantly from year to year, and the high evapotranspiration
effects in the area effectively offset any beneficial surplus of annual rainfall. This is another
reason irrigation systems are so necessary, and commonly found in use today throughout the area.
Summers are indeed hot and dry, with temperatures consistently hovering above 1000F, although
humidity is generally low compared to environments closer to the Gulf Coast. Overall, the
county’s climate can be classified as subtropical steppe.
Hydrology
The Nueces River and the Rio Grande are the major southeasterly trending rivers draining the

2

South Texas
region. A subtle
divide through
the northeastern
portion of the
counties causes
numerous
intermittent
creeks to flow
north into the
Nueces River,
and numerous
others of the
same type to
drain southward
into the Rio
Grande. Many
drainages
intermittently
flow into both
rivers during
infrequent
seasonal periods
o f abun dant
r a i n f a l l .
Although there
are
many
springs in
Zavala County,
very few are
active due
primarily to the
d i p o f t h e Figure 4. Physiographic regions of Texas
substrate shales (http://www.lib.utexas.edu/geo/pics/txphysio.jpg)
which carry
these subterranean seeps to the south and east. As a result, some of these active seeps/springs can
be found on the Mexican side of the national border. Ancient springs that may have existed in
the area at one time have likely succumbed to overgrazing and irrigation pumping during modern
times (Brune 1981). During our investigation of the Project Area in May 2012, we observed no
flowing water or niche pools.
Flora and Fauna
The project area lies within the South Texas Plain/Brush Country vegetation area as defined by
Gould (1975), and the regional flora of South Texas has been classified as being part of the
3

Tam aulipan bi ot i c
province extending out
from northeast Mexico
(Figures 4 and 5). This
is the only part of Texas
where some vegetation
exhibits growth
throughout the year
(Blair 1950; Map
2012a). Thorny brush is
the dominant vegetation
today, but this is a
relatively recent
occurrence, with a mix
of woody and grassland
species providing a
savanna environment
during prehistoric times
(Archer 1995; Black
1989; Hester 1980;
Inglis 1964). The
original vegetation was
an open grassland mixed
with brushy chaparral. Figure 5. Blair’s (1950) biotic provinces of Texas (Map 2014).
Oaks, pecan, and ash
were common along
perennial streams. Due in part to overgrazing and the exclusion of fire, the invasion of woody
species has changed the vegetation into “Texas brush country” dominated by mesquite, acacia,
spiny hackberry, brazil, whitebrush, lotebrush, and others (Diamond et al. 1987:203-221). On
sandy soils, the brush includes mesquite with mixed grasses. In contrast, clay soils support
mesquite (Proposis juliflora), various species of Acacia, and mimosa, granjeno or desert
hackberry (Celtis pallida), lignum vitae (Porliera angustifolia), cenizo (Leucophyllum texanum),
white brush (Aloysia texana), prickly pear (Opuntia lindheeimeri), tasajillo (Opuntia
leptocaulis), and species of Condalia and Castela (Blair 1950).
The South Texas Plains/Brush Country exhibits some of the greatest mammalian species
diversity in the state. Sixty-one species of mammals, 36 snakes, 19 lizards, and several species
of turtles, salamanders, and frogs are present in the region (Blair 1950). Approximately 50
species of fish have been identified in the lower Rio Grande (Lee et al. 1980).

4

Paleoenvironment
The paleoenvironment of south Texas is as varied as the landscape, and the South Texas
Paleoclimatic record contains significant gaps primarily due to the scarcity of deep, finely
stratified, and well-dated deposits (Stahle and Cleaveland 1995:51). To date, the best record of
paleoenvironmental reconstruction in South Texas has been accomplished by Robinson (1982)
from analysis of phytoliths from three archaeological sites in Live Oak County. Overall, the data
there along with data from other sites in Texas suggest that the waning of the Pleistocene, or lateglacial period, marked a transition from a cooler, wetter environment to one that steadily grew
warmer and drier, and more seasonal, with intermittent moist periods through about 6,000 years
ago. Most researchers then generally agree that the period between 6,000 and 3,000 years ago
was much warmer and drier than today. Since that time, intermittent moist and dry intervals have
occurred over the past 3,000 years.
It is unlikely that the climate has changed significantly in the past few thousand years in the area
that would significantly induce vegetation changes. The greater changes have been induced by
human intervention through the clearing of wooded areas along the river and streams for
construction purposes, pumping more water for irrigation which has lowered water tables, and
overgrazing by livestock. Although there are still many seeps, springs, and streams in the area,
they most probably flowed with greater abundance during wetter intervals than exist at the
present time, providing an abundant resource for prehistoric occupants.

Cultural Chronology
The Project Area lies within the South Texas Archaeological region as defined by Hester (1980,
1995, 2004; Figure 6). Refining a cultural chronology for south Texas is problematic, due to the
compressed nature of the archaeological record and the scarcity of stratified sites excavated
within the region. The largest and most informational cultural resources survey in South Texas
was that conducted prior to development of the Choke Canyon Reservoir in Atascosa, Live Oak,
and McMullen counties (e.g. Hall et al. 1986). Nevertheless, Hester (1995:433) acknowledges
the paucity of information that exists for south Texas and as such offers only a “general
framework” for prehistoric periods particular to the region (Figure 6). All dates are given as
approximate years before present (B.P.), i.e., before 1950.
Paleoindian (11,200 - 7950 B.P.)
This period is estimated at between ca.11,200–7950 B.P. in south Texas (Hester 1995). The
Paleoindian period began toward the close of the Pleistocene. Diagnostic artifacts of the early
Paleoindian interval include Clovis and Folsom projectile points. The wide distribution of
Clovis-type points across most of North America and even into Central America suggests a wide
dispersal and interaction of the people who made them. Other artifacts associated with the Clovis
culture include bifaces and prismatic blades, engraved stones, bone and ivory points, stone bolas,
ochre, and shaft straighteners. During the late Paleoindian interval, the first stemmed lanceolate
5

points, such as Angostura,
Golondrina, St. Mary’s Hall,
and Barber (among a few
others) appear.
In general, the Paleoindian
adaptation has been considered
to be one of small bands of
nomadic, big-game hunters
following herds of Late
Pleistocene fauna, including
mammoth, mastodons, bison,
camel, and horse, across North
America (Black 1989). More
recently, emphasis has been
placed on the wide diversity of
plants and animals used for
subsistence by these early
Americans, such as turtles and
tortoises, alligators, mice,
badgers, and raccoons, although
they undoubtedly hunted the
large animals as well (Collins
1995:381). Known Clovis sites
include killsites, quarries,
caches, open campsites, ritual
sites, and burials (Hester
1995:433–436). A Folsom
interval follows the Clovis.
Folsom artifacts are fairly
common in south Texas;
however, no camp sites or
killsites have been found south
of a large workshop, Pavo Real
(41BX52), in Bexar County
(Hester 1995:434–435). Most
Paleoindian finds in south
Texas have consisted of surface
lithic scatters on upland
terraces and ridges (Black
1989).
As the warming that marks the
Figure 6. South Texas Archaeological region cultural
transition from Pleistocene to
chronology.
6

Holocene climates began to take effect in Texas, prehistoric inhabitants adapted with changes
in lifestyle. This climatic shift is also marked by the decline and extinction of mammoth,
mastodon, horse, camel, and giant bison (Bison antiquus). Large gregarious game animals were
perhaps extinct in Texas. Human hunters were forced to concentrate on deer, antelope, and other
medium-size or smaller game. Changes in the subsistence base required technological shifts that
mark the beginning of a new cultural period known as the Archaic.
Early Archaic (7950 - 4450 B.P.)
Hester (1995:436–438) identifies the Early Archaic, with Early Corner Notched and Early Basal
Notched dart points, as roughly dating between 7950 to 4450 B.P. The extinction of large herds
of megafauna and the changing climate at the beginning of the Holocene stimulated a behavioral
change by the Prehistoric inhabitants of south Texas (McKinney 1981). While the basic huntergatherer adaptation probably remained intact, an economic shift away from big game hunting
was necessary. In general, more intensive exploitation of local and smaller resources such as
deer, fish, and plant bulbs is indicated by greater densities of ground-stone artifacts, fire-cracked
rock cooking features, and more specialized tools. Weir (1976) speculates that Early Archaic
groups were small and highly mobile, an inference based on the fact that Early Archaic sites are
thinly distributed and that diagnostic projectile point types are seen across a wide area, including
most of Texas and northern Mexico. Story (1985) believes that population densities were low
during the Early Archaic, and that groups consisted of related individuals in small bands with
“few constraints on their mobility” (Story 1985:39). Their economy was based on the utilization
of a wide range of resources, especially such year-round resources as prickly pear and lechugilla,
as well as rodents, rabbits, and deer.
Middle Archaic (4450 - 2350 B.P.)
Hester (1995:438–441) suggests that the period between 4450 and 2350 B.P. reflects the Middle
Archaic in south Texas. The Middle Archaic appears to have been a time of increased
population, based on the large number of sites from this period (Story 1985:40; Weir 1976:125,
128). On the South Texas Plains, exploitation of widely scattered, year-round resources such as
prickly pear continued (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13–15), as did hunting deer and rabbit.
Weir (1976) believes that the widely scattered bands prevalent in the Early Archaic now began
to coalesce, at least during the acorn-gathering season, into larger groups who shared the
intensive work of gathering and processing the acorn harvest (Weir 1976:126). Many researchers
believe burned rock middens are a result of this endeavor (Creel 1986; Prewitt 1991; Weir 1976).
The common presence of deer remains in burned rock middens encourages the view that deer
processing took place at burned rock midden sites. Bison bone is encountered in archaeological
sites in south Texas, at least occasionally, during all but the earliest part of the Middle Archaic
(Dillehay 1974). Cemeteries make their first appearance during this period, suggesting a
movement toward less mobility and perhaps territorialism. One of the earliest occurrences dating
to the south Texas Middle Archaic, is Loma Sandia in Live Oak County, which dates between
ca. 2550 and 2750 B.P. (Taylor and Highley 1995).
Late Archaic (2350 - 1250 B.P.)
Hester believes the Late Archaic in south Texas may be defined as between 2350–1250 B.P,
7

Some researchers believe populations increased throughout the Late Archaic (Prewitt 1985),
while others feel populations remained the same or fell during this period (Black 1989:30).
Subsistence is assumed to have become less specialized on acorns, in favor of a broad spectrum
subsistence base (Black 1989:30). Story (1985:44–45) believes the presence of cemeteries
indicates that Late Archaic populations in central and south Texas were increasing and becoming
more territorial. Although inhabitants of the South Texas Plain near Brownsville and Rockport
had begun to make pottery by about 1750 B.P., the northern part of the plain was still “preceramic” until 1,000 years later (Story 1985:45–47). Late Archaic points tend to be much smaller
than Middle Archaic points.
Transitional Archaic (2250 - 1250 B.P.)
A late subperiod or interval of the Late Archaic is frequently referred to as the Terminal Archaic
or Transitional Archaic. Turner et al. (2011) cite data placing the Transitional Archaic as
2250–1250 B.P. Although Hester may lump current data into a Late Archaic period, he cautions
that more evidence will likely result in what may be termed as a “Terminal Archaic” period
during the latter part of the Late Archaic in south Texas. This Terminal Archaic period is
represented by diagnostics such as Ensor, Frio, and Matamoras points which appear to overlap
the Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods (Hester 1995:442). Weir (1976) believes this
marked a transition period to localized area sites, a disappearance of burned rock middens and
bison, and a reappearance of highly mobile hunters and gatherers. Others (Black and McGraw
1985; Peter 1982; Skelton 1977) argue that in some locations burned rock middens did not
disappear and sites were more intensely occupied during the Transitional Archaic period.
Late Prehistoric (1250 - 420 B.P.)
The term “Late Prehistoric” is commonly used to designate the period following the Late Archaic
in south Texas. Generally, the Late Prehistoric period is thought of as spanning the period
between A. D. 700 - 1530 ([1250 - 420 B.P.] [Hester 1995]). A series of distinctive traits mark
the shift from the Archaic to the Late Prehistoric period, including the technological shift to the
bow and arrow and the introduction of pottery to central Texas and the northern South Texas
Plain (Black 1989:32; Story 1985:45–47). Two distinct phases recognized within the Late
Prehistoric are the Austin and Toyah. During the Austin phase, there appears to be a subtle
transition from expanding stem projectile points that may have been used as dart points, as well
as early arrow points. The most prevalent point found in Austin phase sites is the Scallorn arrow
point. Settlement shifts into rockshelters such as Scorpion Cave in Medina County (Highley et
al. 1978) and Classen Rockshelter in northern Bexar County (Fox and Fox 1967) have been
noted. Cemeteries from this period often reveal evidence of conflict (Black 1989:32).
Beginning rather abruptly at about 650 B.P., a shift in technology occurred. The Perdiz arrow
point may best represent the appearance of a distinct culture in south-central Texas lasting for
about 300 years, which archaeologists have labeled the Toyah phase. Hester (1995:444)
recognizes this phase as the “best documented Late Prehistoric pattern” throughout south Texas,
with dates ranging between ca. 650/700 to 300/350 B.P. (A.D. 1250/1300 to 1600/1650).
In addition to Perdiz points, evidence of a Toyah culture is manifested as bone-tempered pottery,
8

bone spatulates, awls, and beads, stone endscrapers, beveled knives, and expediently utilized
flakes. Briefly, expedient lithic technology involves removing flakes from a core in a
nonstandard manner; the purpose is to knock off sharp flakes for immediate use, selecting the
ones that best suit the need at the time. This technology differs from formal, standardized core
reduction and the manufacturing of formal, usually bifacial tools. Expedient lithic technology
is a continent-wide phenomonon indicative of increased sedentism, and is observed in Toyah
assemblages in Texas.
Whether the Toyah phase seen in the south-central Texas archaeological record is a result of a
group of people moving into the region, or adapted technologies from the region’s periphery is
a matter of conjecture. Steele and Assad-Hunter (1986) argue for the occurrence of a distinct
change in diet between the Late Archaic and the Late Prehistoric components in two sites in the
Choke Canyon Reservoir area in south Texas. Analysis of the number of identified specimens
(NISP) shows a marked increase in artiodactyla elements present during the later part of the Late
Prehistoric, an increase largely due to the addition of bison to the “menu” (Steele and AssadHunter 1986:468).
Whether or not agriculture was practiced during this period in south Texas has not been
documented. There simply is not enough evidence to postulate there was ever a significant
presence of maize in the area. The later arrival of the Spanish during the later
Protohistoric/Historic period brought significant cultivars to south Texas.
Protohistoric/Historic (420 B.P. - present)
The end of the Late Prehistoric and beginning of the Historic period in south Texas is
characterized by written accounts of European contact with indigenous groups. The Protohistoric
period begins in 1528 when Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts of southeast and
south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the hunter-gatherers of Texas
and northern Mexico (e.g., Hallenbeck 1971). Cabeza de Vaca’s account of his stay with the
Miriami in 1533-34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves
to the easily exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter and summer, occasionally
sending a hunting party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live
near each other in the semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other
succulents (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13-37).
Linguistically, early protohistoric accounts of the late 1500s indicate that a large group which
spoke Cohuilteco inhabited the area now known as south-central Texas. Coahuiltecan is a term
coined by Mexican linguists in the 1800s, and the name refers to the many small bands of Native
Americans who lived in northeastern Coahuila, Mexico and south Texas. The Coahuiltecans
were rapidly dispersed or killed during the Protohistoric period.
By the 1540s and 1550s Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico, with
several hundred thousand cattle, using Indian slaves as labor. Large mining ventures in northern
Mexico did the same. This encroachment from the south forced Native Americans to escape into
the south-central Texas region.
9

The period between de Vaca’s written account and the advent of Spanish missions in the late
1600s and early 1700s is referred to as the Protohistoric; a time when few, scant written
documents exist detailing Native American life outside the missions. The Historic period then,
is generally thought of as beginning in the 1700s.
Some 30 miles south of Eagle Pass, the Spanish established Mission San Juan Bautista in 1700
(now modern-day Guerrero). Early Spanish explorers then repeatedly traveled the Camino Real
enroute to newly established missions and settlements in today’s modern Texas throughout the
1700s and 1800s. Mexican families from across the river expanded into Texas, and these families
trace their roots to the early development of the area. In the ensuing years, lawlessness prevailed,
with saloons, gambling houses, outlaws, and slave hunters prevalent.

Zavala County Prehistory and History
Indian artifacts found in Zavala County indicate that the area has been occupied for about 11,000
years, and one of the earliest known human habitation sites in Zavala County was found on the
Holdsworth Ranch northeast of Crystal City (Holdsworth 1986; Ochoa 1996). As well, many
archaeological sites with Archaic diagnostic artifacts have been collected across a wide and
diversified terrain in the county, to include uplands and stream terraces. Although the presentday, semi-arid conditions persist across much of Zavala County, plentiful food sources such as
wild game, fruits, seeds, and roots were likely plentiful subsistence resources to prehistoric
inhabitants.
The multiple Native American Indian groups who were present in the Zavala County area when
the Spanish entradas penetrated the region in the 1600s and 1700s were generically referred to
as Coahuiltecans. As discussed above, the nomenclature assigned to these groups derived
moreso from a quasi-common language than from any other kinship or close-knit tribal or band
identity. To repeat, this affiliation: Coahuiltecan is a term coined by Mexican linguists in the
1800s, and the name refers to the many small bands of Native Americans who lived in
northeastern Coahuila, Mexico and south Texas. The Coahuiltecans were rapidly dispersed or
killed during the Protohistoric period.
Within the modern-day political confines of Zavala County, there are no known written records
that indicate there were any sort of permanent structures or habitation areas established b y the
Spaniards as they began traversing through the Zavala County area in the late 1600s. Tonkawans,
and Lipan and Mescalero Apaches were the more specifically named groups of Native
Americans who were known to have perhaps seasonally or less frequently occupied the area in
the 1700s. The old Spanish Road, or Camino Reale, coursed through modern-day Zavala County,
and one of the earliest Spanish encounters with a large ranchería, or Indian village, was recorded
by Spanish explorers near present-day La Pryor in 1716. The Camino Reale through Zavala
County was once again followed in 1836 as Mexican General Lopez de Santa Anna’s army
crossed the Nueces River near present-day Crystal City enroute to the Alamo in Bexar.

10

Following the newly established Mexico Republic’s revolution over Spanish rule in 1824, the
Mexican government realized that the vast, untamed, and generally uninhabited area north of the
Rio Grande somehow needed to be brought under control by the new Mexican government.
Although a few attempts to settle these lands were made by issuing Mexican land grants, the
attempts were short-lived, and in many cases pre-empted by the independence of Texas from
Mexico following the Battle of San Jacinto in 1836. Most of Zavala County lay in the disputed
area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River between the Texas Revolution and the
Mexican War (1836–46), and lawless in general prevailed. With a defensive posture ulterior
motive in mind, the Texas legislature established Zavala County in 1846. For a truly enjoyable
account of some of the earliest pioneer settlers in Zavala County, the reader is referred to the
memoirs of Ernest Holdsworth (2006).
Commercial and economic development in Zavala County was then spurred in the late 1800s by
the eventual diffusing of Indian raids, allowing for the expansion of cattle ranching throughout
the south Texas region. In 1884, the first of many artesian wells was drilled, and from that point
on, irrigated garden crops increased in ubiquity throughout south Texas and Zavala County. In
response, rail lines were constructed through Zavala County in the early 1900s in order to
transport the abundant crops of onions, spinach, grains, and fruits (Ochoa 1996). It was during
these flourishing times that Zavala County became known as a part of the “Winter Garden
Region”.

Site Types That Could be Expected Along the Coleman B Lateral
Prehistoric Open Campsites
Most numerous among the sites recorded in Zavala County are prehistoric open campsites
ranging in age from the Paleoindian period through the Historic period (see Figure 6). Some of
these represent a single campfire where a very small group of Native Americans may have
camped for one night. Others are very large, covering very extensive areas representing large
groups of people that stayed for long periods, perhaps seasonally, with ancestral groups returning
to these same campsites over a period of several thousands of years. Cultural remains to be found
at these large campsites include among other items, an abundance of fire-cracked rocks
representing multiple hearths, a wide variety of chipped stone tools and the lithic debris that
results from making them, ground and smoothed stones used to grind nuts and seeds, faunal
remains from terrestrial and aquatic animals consumed, bone tools, pottery sherds, and mussel
and snail shells. Open campsites occur in all types of environments, whether that be in a plush
riverine environment that offered a wide variety banquet of plant and animal foodstuffs, or in the
uplands away from flowing water sources. Seasonally, the upland grasses, shrubs, cacti offered
a different food source that could be exploited such as various grass seeds, mesquite beans,
prickly pear pads and tunas, and agave hearts. In addition, at various times, bison were known
to graze on the northern South Texas Plains, and were highly sought after for use as food, hides,
and bone tools (Dillehay 1974).
Depending upon the integrity of these open campsites, archaeologists and the Texas Historical
11

Commission consider these as perhaps the most significant types of sites in regard to their ability
to contribute to our understanding of south Texas prehistory. A few of the desired ingredients
that can indicate significance include cultural material that is buried beneath the surface in a
well-preserved, stratified, and relatively undisturbed context. Although these situations most
frequently occur within stratified terrace deposits adjacent to streams, they can also occur in
upland settings where the landscape has been generally stable through time. Other ingredients
that archaeologists look for in potentially significant campsites include good organic
preservation in the form of charcoal and/or charred plant remains, faunal preservation,
temporally diagnostic stone tools or ceramics, and intact features such as hearths.
Prehistoric Lithic Scatters or Procurement Sites
Lithic scatters are the next most common type of archaeological site that could be expected along
the Richter Lateral Extension. These sites simply represent the chipped stone debris and broken
tools that were left behind when Native Americans made new tools or re-sharpened their old
ones. The general absence of fire-cracked rocks and other cultural material normally found at
open campsites suggest that they did not camp there, or remain there for any extended period of
time (However, small camp fires may have been used to heat-treat chert or quartzite cobbles to
make them more knappable). Yet, they were drawn to these isolated locales because of the
natural outcroppings or surface exposures of good quality raw material such as chert or quartzite
cobbles.
Examples of chipped stone most commonly found at these sites include cobbles with one or two
flakes removed, called ‘tested cobbles’. That is, the Native Americans knew from experience the
quality of stone that could most easily be flaked and reduced for stone tool production, so they
‘tested’ the cobble to judge whether it was useable or not. If the quality was judged to be inferior,
then the cobble was tossed aside. That is why the majority of tested cobbles found on these sites
are of poor quality, coarse-grained material. While the finished stone tool products are carried
away from these sites, what remains are those tools broken during the manufacturing process,
and the thousands of pieces of debitage in the form of flakes and angular debris. Also unique to
lithic scatters where large cobbles are present are snapped ‘quarry blanks’. These are simply
cobbles flakes on both sides, reducing the cobble into a transportable ‘blank’ that can be used
to further reduce it and make finished stone tools from the flakes taken off of it. The unbroken
quarry blanks are usually not found on these sites because they have been carried off, presumably
to areas of south Texas where raw material is not readily available. The snapped or broken quarry
blanks are of little or no use, so they are discarded and left behind.
Lithic scatters range in age from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods and can be found
on any landscape setting where gravels or cobbles have been exposed. Notably, gravel outcrops
that were exposed to the surface a few hundred or thousand years ago could be deeply buried
today, and the opposite could also be true; it all depends on the terrain setting and the dynamics
of landscape evolution through time. Most lithic scatters in Zavala County have been
documented along upper stream terraces abutting the eroded upland slopes.

12

Prehistoric Quarries and Procurement Sites
Prehistoric quarries and procurement also can range in age from the Paleoindian through Historic
periods, but differ from lithic scatters in that at those sites Native Americans exploited loose
gravels, but at times they specifically sought quarry sites where raw material such as cherts or
quartzites were not yet freed from their parent geologic formation, and they had to be ‘quarried’.
These types of sites are rare in south Texas for two reasons: 1) the geological exposures generally
do not present themselves, and 2) throughout Texas, even in central Texas, it is much easier to
pick up gravels from the surface than to try to mine them from hard rock. Quarried and chipped
stone remains likely to be found at these sites include large chunks of angular cherts or
quartzites, as well as parent material detritus, and flaking debris. Snapped quarry blanks can also
be expected. Although a handful of prehistoric quarries or procurement sites have been recorded
in south Texas, they are rare.
Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens
There are no documented burned rock middens in Zavala County. Burned rock middens result
from a series of multiple-use earth ovens that were constructed much like modern-day roasting
pits are dug into the earth for roasting a pig. With repetitive uses, as the larger rocks that serve
as heating elements in the earthen pit fracture and thus become less effective as a thermal source,
they are ‘pitched out’ around the edge of the pit. As the pit becomes unusable, another is dug
near by, and the procedure repeated. Over time, these multiple pits and the ‘pitched out’ firecracked rocks coalesce together, obscuring each pit as indiscernible. (For a full discussion of the
formation of burned rock middens and their documented presence in Texas, see Leach and
Bousman 2001; Leach et al. 2001; Mauldin et al. 2003).
Prehistoric Burial and Cemetery Sites
Although not common, isolated prehistoric burials and cemeteries have been documented in
south Texas. Individual and isolated burials have been found in association with open campsites
in both upland settings as well as in alluvial terraces along streams, but the largest prehistoric
cemetery found in proximity to the Coleman B Lateral is 41LK28, in Live Oak County.
Historic Sites
As discussed above in the Cultural Chronology portion of this report, although Spanish ranchers
had established large ranches in northern Mexico by the mid-16th century, and Spanish entradas
began penetrating south Texas in the 1700s and 1800s, there is no record of any sort of
permanent structures in the area during those periods (Chipman 1992), the area was generally
not considered safe for settlement by whites until after the Civil War in 1865, and white settlers
then began establishing smaller ranches and farmlands (Leffler 1996).
Because of the vastness of the landscape and the relatively late settlement and development of
south Texas compared to east and central Texas and northern Mexico, historic sites are not
abundant, but they certainly do exist. The most common types to be encountered are related to
ranching and farming endeavors, or small communities from the 19th and 20th centuries. Site
types most commonly include farmsteads or ranches with corrals, cisterns, chimney and
13

foundation remains from both main houses and outbuildings, related trash dumps, an occasional
family burial or cemetery, school houses, churches, community buildings, and industry-related
structures or construction projects.
In general, the area has apparently been historically used as ranchland pasture, with no
development other than associated ranching activities such as windmills, stock tanks, corrals, and
sparsely scattered outbuildings. In sum, there may be rare and isolated occurrences of early
ranching activities along the Trailer East Trunkline, but the expectations of encountering any
archaeological site of significance from the 1500s through the mid-1900s along those portions
of the pipeline were minimal.

Archaeological Atlas Site Results
Zavala County
As of May 28, 2014 there were 444 archaeological sites recorded within the county. Of those,
331 are prehistoric open campsites with evidence that as a whole, open campsites in the county
have been occupied from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods. Notably, one of these has
a possible human burial on it, and mammoth bones or teeth have been found on three of these
sites. Two of the three sites with mammoth remains also have Plainview projectile points, and
the third has Archaic points. As with most of the region, many campsites are situated on stream
terraces, but there are also some in the uplands. One-hundred-one sites are classified as lithic
scatters, and generally these are located in the uplands and along stream cutbanks where gravels
outcrop. They also exhibit evidence of being used for the past 11,000 years. One rock shelter has
been recorded in the county, as has a single mussel shell midden. The rock shelter has carved
petroglyphs as well as petrographs painted with deep red iron pigments. Two of the 11 historic
components in the county are associated with John King Fisher, rancher, lawman, and outlaw
of the 1800s. He is said to have occupied the same rock shelter in which the petrographs and
petroglyphs were found, and his house site is also documented as an archaeological site. Other
historic sites include 1800s and 1900s artifact scatters, and a World War II internment camp in
Crystal City (Atlas 2014).
Surveys and Sites within One Mile of the Coleman B Lateral
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archeological sites indicated that
one professional archaeological survey had been conducted within one mile. In 2013,
archaeological sites 41ZV530 and 41ZV531 were documented during the survey of a well pad
and access road. 41ZV530 is a prehistoric open campsite of an unknown age, situated on the
eastern edge of Loma Vista Creek. Artifacts observed within the surveyed right-of-way included
cores, utilized flakes, lithic debitage, and scattered fire-cracked rocks. 41ZV531 is a prehistoric
lithic scatter of an unknown age where the occupants exploited exposed gravels along a slope
and ridge just west of Loma Vista Creek (Atlas 2014).
In addition to that survey, as shown in Figure 3, TAAI conducted a survey of the Whitetail Dilley
Interconnect in June 2012 (Nickels 2013a), the Howett South Lateral in October 2012 (Nickels
14

2013b), the Howett South Lateral Extension in January 2013 (Nickels 2013c), and the Tidwell
A Lateral in 2014 (Nickels 2014). No archaeological sites were found within one mile of the
proposed Coleman B Lateral during any of these four surveys.
Historic Site Potential
The earliest historic accounts of Native Americans in south Texas and perhaps the Zavala County
area, are those of Cabeza de Vaca. In the 1500s, Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts
of southeast and south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the huntergatherers of Texas and northern Mexico (e.g., Covey 1961). His account of his experiences in
1533–34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves to the
easily exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter, and summer, occasionally sending
a hunting party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near
each other in the semiarid environs of south Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other
succulents (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13–37).
By the 1540s and 1550s, Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico with
thousands of cattle, and using Native Americans as slave labor. This encroachment by the
Spanish forced groups from northern Mexico to flee into south Texas. In the 1700s and 1800s,
there are documented accounts of Spanish entradas passing through the area, but none have been
noted to establish any sort of permanent bases in present-day Zavala County (Chipman 1992).
It was not until about 1865, that the surrounding frontier hinterlands that are now politically
known as Zavala County were considered safe enough for white settlers to begin establishing
smaller ranches and farmlands without complete annihilation by the many roving bands of angry
Comanche raiders from the north, as well as other displaced Native American groups (Leffler
1996). In sum, there may be rare and isolated occurrences of early ranching activities along the
Richter Lateral, but the expectations of encountering any archaeological site of significance from
the 1500s through the mid-1900s along the line are minimal.
Old Maps, Aerial Photographs, Historic Research
A standard source of review is the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs
available at the Perry Castañeda Library at the University of Texas at Austin (Perry Castañeda
Library 2014). Although this source would normally prove invaluable for researching the
possibility of, and potential for, historic sites and structures to exist within one mile of a project
area, in this case the only old map found was a 1940, 1:62,500' U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
Tactical Map of the Batesville area that revealed no structures within or adjacent to the Coleman
B Lateral route.
Nevertheless, the lack of comprehensive historic map and aerial information, coupled with the
paucity of cultural resources surveys within the area is possibly, and perhaps probably, why no
information is available regarding the presence of historic structures, ranching or industrial
activities, or persons of historic significance to the immediate area. Technically, any structures
old than 45 years are now considered of interest by the Texas Historical Commission, and this
should be considered when the pipeline right-of-way is excavated.

15

Soils

Figure 7 depicts the soils along the Coleman B Lateral, and Table 1 lists the soils that are to be
dissected (Stevens and Arriaga 1985; Web Soil Survey 2014). It will cross through six soil types
that offer varying depths, sedimentation and deposition rates. As such, they likewise imply the
potential for the preservation of intact cultural resources to exist. The terrain and soils existing
in these upland areas along the Coleman B Lateral suggest for the most part, a minimal to
moderate probability for buried and intact archaeological deposits to exist. It is unlikely that
significant sites are extant in these upland areas. However, there exists a much greater potential
for buried and intact archaeological deposits to exist along Loma Vista Creek. Therefore, without
a pedestrian survey the potential for significant archaeological sites can only be surmised.

Figure 7. Soils to be dissected by the Coleman B Lateral.

16

Table 1. Soils Along the Coleman B Lateral.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Buried and Intact
Archaeological Potential

Brystal fine sandy loam
(ByB)

Deep loamy soils on convex-form uplands

Minimal to Moderate to about
20 inches below the surface

Poteet fine sandy loam (Po)

Deep loamy soils in terraces along weakly
depressional drainageways, frequently
flooded

Moderate to about 24 inches
below the surface

Randado fine sandy loam
(RAC)

Shallow loam on gently sloping ridges
and interfluves

Minimal to about 8 inches
below the surface

Verick fine sandy loam
(VEC)

Shallow loamy soils in upland areas

Minimal to about 10 inches
below the surface

W ebb fine sandy loam
(W EB)

Deep loamy soils on gently undulating
uplands

Minimal to moderate to about
13 inches below the surface

Yologo-Hindes association
(YHD)

Shallow to moderately deep very gravelly
soils on undulating slopes

Minimal to about 10 inches
below the surface

Field Survey Goals and Methodology
Goals
The project goals focused on archaeological issues that could be addressed by the types of data
obtained through pedestrian survey, along with limited shovel testing. The topics addressed were
site type, distribution, density, size, depth, and stratigraphy. The theoretical framework is
structured around patterns of settlement, mobility, subsistence, and social systems for the South
Texas region.
The goals of the project were to:
1)

locate and record cultural locations and sites in the project area using a systematic
survey methodology;

2)

quantify site size, as well as depth, and stratigraphy; and,

3)

place any diagnostic artifacts within the regional time frame.

Methods and Levels of Effort
Two archaeologists conducted an intensive pedestrian survey of the proposed right-of-way.
Surface visibility ranged from 80 to 100 percent. All cutbanks, and rodent and mammal backdirt
piles were thoroughly examined. In accordance with a general “no collection” policy, cultural
17

material of a redundant nature, both prehistoric and historic, were not to be collected. Instead,
they were to be fully documented via sketches, field photographs, and copious notes.
Exceptions were to be made for diagnostic artifacts, particularly those artifacts which could be
considered as significant to the interpretation of Texas prehistory, such as Early ArchaicPaleoindian transitional, or Paleoindian diagnostics. These were to be collected on a case-bycase basis, and that decision was left up to the Principal Investigator and/or the Project
Archaeologist. Historic buildings, trash scatters, or other historic occurrences adjacent to the
ROW were to be documented with photographs and included in this report of investigations.

Results of the
Investigations

During the survey it became
readily apparent that
approximately 80 percent of the
project’s surface area was
either mechanically disturbed,
or deflated by artificial
processes. However, the
surface visibility was excellent,
allowing for the discovery of
any artifacts along the right-ofway (see for example, Figure
8).
Our on-the-ground field
investigations revealed that the
actual terrain stream features
were very different from what
they appeared to represent on
topographic maps and aerial
photographs. That is, the terrain
and streams that we had
targeted for shovel testing
during our desktop review were
actually deflated and broad Figure 8. Right-of-way from N3186783 E445043
slopes, with very ephemeral and (NAD83); facing north-northeast.
broad swales, and with no The
exception was along Loma Vista Creek, where archaeological site 41ZV532 was documented,
and where the only cultural materials were observed (described below).

18

41ZV532
Description
41LZV532 (Figures 9
and 10) is a prehistoric
open campsite situated
on a gently sloping T-1
terraces on the south
side of Loma Vista
Creek, a second order
tributary of the Nueces
River. The northern
edge of the site borders
Loma Vista Creek,
where moderately dense
riverine-like vegetation
consists of oaks and
cedars, with thorny
brush and herbaceous
weedy understory. The
site proper has been
mechanically cleared of
vegetation, save for
scattered mesquite
mottes. Abundant chert
and fine quartzite
gravels are exposed
acro s s a he a v il y
deflated fine sandy
loam and clay surface
immediately upslope to
the south of the site.
S u rface vi s i b i l i t y
averaged approximately
90 percent across the Figure 9. 41LZV532 site map.
site’s surface. Surface elevation at the site ranges from 722-726 feet above mean sea level (amsl).
Soils on the site are mapped as Poteet fine sandy loam, frequently flooded (Po).
Levels of Effort and Results
A thorough examination of the heavily disturbed surface was conducted, and animal backdirt
piles were examined. The sparsely scattered artifacts are dispersed on heavily eroded, shallow,
and deflated soils over clay hardpan across an area of about 3,000 square meters. Artifacts
observed on the surface included two untypable dart points, a unifacial side scraper, primary and
secondary flakes, and widely scattered fire-cracked rocks (see Figure 11 for examples). The
19

a r t i f a c t s
appeared to be
w i t h o u t
inclusions, and
were not heat
t r eat ed. The
large quantities
of cobbles and
g r a v e l s
immediately
south of the site
appeared to be
predominantly
chert, but with
some quartzites,
and all were
generally finegrained. No
cultural material
was found in any Figure 10. Shovel testing on 41ZV532 ; facing south.
of the six shovel
tests excavated on the site. In general, pale brown silty loam overlay red claypan between 20-30
centimeters below the surface.
Site Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
This site appears to have been a relatively small open campsite tethered to what was most likely
a spring-fed and flowing Loma Vista Creek during unknown periods in prehistory. Although the
bifaces documented are not typable because of their fragmented nature, the flaking patterns and
overall morphology suggest Middle Archaic occupation(s). Although the site proper is located
on a very gently sloping lower terrace along the creek, immediately south of the site the terrain
slopes upward, exposing carpet gravels consisting of fine-grained chert. In sum, this site was
ideally located in an area where fresh water and potential riverine resources such as fish, mussels,
turtles, and seasonal fruits and nuts would likely been easily accessible. In addition,the adjacent
uplands offered easily exploitable raw materials for the manufacturing of stone tools, as well as
access to upland game animals and plant foods.
In our assessment, the site is generally mechanically disturbed, and otherwise has shallow and
eroded soils. In view of this, Tierras Antiguas recommends that construction of the Coleman B
Lateral as currently planned be allowed to proceed through the site, with no further
archaeological investigations.

20

Figure 11. Selected artifacts on the surface at 41ZV532: left to right - unifacial sidescraper,
untypable biface fragment (proximal portion), untypable biface fragment (distal portion), tertiary
biface manufacturing flake, secondary core reduction flake.

Survey Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations

The Coleman B Lateral right-of-way was subjected to a full pedestrian survey by two
archaeologists on May 20, 2014. Our observations were that the majority of the right-of-way had
been heavily disturbed by the blading of ranch roads, fence building, and brush clearing as part
of ranch management. The only evidence of cultural material observed either on the surface, or
within the numerous shallow cutbanks and animal backdirt piles examined was on prehistoric
archaeological site 41ZV532. The site is assessed as surficial, heavily disturbed, and nonsignificant. Accordingly, TAAI recommends that construction of the Coleman B Lateral be
allowed to proceed, with no further archaeological investigations. However, Tierras Antiguas
further recommends that if any undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during
development of the properties, such finds should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas,
or by any archaeological consultant.
No artifacts were collected during this survey.

21

References Cited
Atlas
2014

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/. [Accessed
May 15, 2014].

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Covey, C. (editor)
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier
Books, New York.
Fox, A. A., I. W. Cox, L. Highley, and D. Hafernick
1989

Archaeological and Historical Investigations at the Site of the New Bexar County
Justice Center in Downtown San Antonio, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report
No. 184. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

Garza, A. A., and C. Long
2011

Zavala County. The New Handbook of Texas, pp. 1143-1145. Texas State
Historical Commission, Austin.

Hester, T. R.
1995 The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:427–459.
1980

Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur Archaeologists.
Corona Press, San Antonio.

Holdsworth, E.
1986

Historical Notes on Zavala County. Zavala County Historical Commission,
Crystal City, Texas.

2006

Historical Notes on Zavala County, Texas: And the Story of a Pioneer Family.
Bob Kingsbury, Publisher.
22

Leffler, J. J.
1996

Big Wells. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 1, pg. 542. The Texas State
Historical Association, Austin.

Nickels, D. L.
2013a A Cultural Resources Survey of the 13.5-Mile Dilley Whitetail Interconnect in
Zavala County, Texas. Archaeology Report #205. Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, Texas.
2013b A Cultural Resources Survey of the 2.4-Mile Howett South Lateral in Zavala
County, Texas. Archaeology Report #229. Tierras Antiguas Archaeological
Investigations, Martindale, Texas.
2013c A Cultural Resources Survey of the 1,410-Meter Howett South Lateral Extension
in Zavala County, Texas. Archaeology Report #264. Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, Texas.
2014

A Cultural Resources Survey of the 1.35-Mile Tidwell A Lateral in Zavala
County, Texas. Archaeology Report #311. Tierras Antiguas Archaeological
Investigations, Martindale, Texas.

Ochoa, R. E.
1996

Zavala County. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 6, pp. 1149-1151. The
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Perry Castañeda Map Collection.
2014

1940 Batesville topographic map. Perry Castañeda Library Map Collection.
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/topo [Accessed May 15, 2014].

Stevens, J. W., and D. Arriaga
1985

Soil Survey of Dimmit and Zavala Counties. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C., in Cooperation with
the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, College Station, Texas.

Turner, S. E., T. R. Hester, and R. L. McReynolds
2011

Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Taylor Trade Publishing. Lanham, Maryland.

Web Soil Survey
2014

Dimmit and Zavala Counties, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed May 15,
2014].
23

