A Cultural Resources Background Review
of the 27072 Bulldogs Monopole Site,
Hidalgo County, Texas

Prepared for
AARCHER, INC.
Annapolis, Maryland
by
David L. Nickels, Principal Investigator
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, LLC
November 2015

Introduction
Aarcher, Inc., requested a
cultural resources
background review of a
2,500 square-foot tower site
in southern Hidalgo
County, and hereinafter
occasionally referred to as
the Project Area (PA)
(Figures 1 - 3).
In November 2015, Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological
Investigations (TAAI)
conducted a review of
cultural resources
documented either on, or
within one mile of the PA,
as well as other documents
that may be relative for
significant cultural
resources to
exist within the
P A.
Th e
research by
TAAI included:

Figure 1. Location of Hidalgo County and the 27072 Bulldogs
Monopole site in Texas.

1) A review of
the most current
literature
documenting the
prehistory and
history of the
immediate area
2) A review of
the Texas
Historical
Commission’s
T e x a s
Archeological
Sites Atlas to
identify what Figure 2. The Project Area on large USGS 7.5' topographic map.
1

cultural resource surveys have been conducted, and what archaeological sites have been
documented within one mile of the PA
3) A search of various websites that offer old maps of the PA
4) A literature review of both published and unpublished reports and manuscripts that describe
the types of archaeological sites that have been documented, and thus provide insight as to the
types of sites that may be expected either in the PA, or immediately adjacent to it
6) A review of a local soils map in order to evaluate the potential for intact and buried cultural
materials either within or immediately adjacent to the PA.

Figure 3. Project Area on Pharr (2002) 7.5' USGS topographic map.

Archaeological Surveys, Known Archaeological Sites, Historical Markers, National
Register Properties, and Historic Structures within One-Half Mile
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archeological Sites (ATLAS
2

2015) indicated that no cultural ressources surveys had been conducted within one mile of the
27072 Bulldogs Monopole location, nor were there any documented archaeological sites,
Historic Markers, or National Register Historic Properties (NRHP) within one mile of the PA.

Soils
As shown in Figure 4, the 27072 Bulldogs Monopole site lies within soils classified as HidalgoUrban land Complex (31), normally found on gently sloping (1-3 percent) uplands in this area
of Hidalgo County (Jacobs 1981; Websoil 2015).
This soil complex suggests that the Project Area would be one where there is a very minimal
potential for buried and significant cultural resources to be extant. Typically, the upper 11 inches
(28 centimeters [cm]) of the Hidalgo soils which make up roughly 35 to 80 percent of this
complex are calcareous, sandy clay loam vertisols with high lime content, and that are subject
to significant vertical cracking, swelling and shrinkage which causes artifacts to be vertically
displaced. From 11 to 38 inches (28-97 cm) is calcareous sandy clay loam, once again with high
lime content. A modern aerial photograph shows that the Project Area now lies within a plowed
field, within a whitish area that suggests that plowing has brought up the underlying lime/caliche
in the immediate area of the tower footprint and utility/access right-of-way (see cover photo and
Figure 4).

Figure 4. Soils map of the Project Area.
3

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
On November 7, 2015 David Nickels of Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations
conducted an on-line review of the Archeological Site Atlas (Atlas) of the Texas State Historic
Preservation Office (SHPO) in accordance with Federal Communications Commission’s
Nationwide Programmatic Agreement (PA; 47 CFR Part 1). After reviewing the Atlas, Mr.
Nickels found that there are no known and documented archaeological sites, historic markers,
State Archeological Landmarks, or National Register Properties within one mile of the site
proposed for construction of the 27072 Bulldogs Monopole site.
A review of soils maps both in hard copy and on-line revealed that the soils are calcareous
vertisols subject to periodic swelling, shrinking, and vertical cracking. A modern aerial
photograph shows that the Project Area and utility/access right-of-way now lies within a plowed
field, within a whitish area that suggests that plowing has brought up the underlying lime/caliche
in the immediate area (see cover photo and Figure 4). Accordingly, any cultural resources that
may be present have most probably been disturbed or destroyed, and thus have little or no
scientific research potential. Thus, it is the opinion of Mr. Nickels that there is a very low
probability for the existence of any known undiscovered/unrecorded intact and significant
archaeological resources on or near the Project Area.
Accordingly, Mr. Nickels recommended that no further cultural resources investigations are
warranted at the monopole site, and that construction of the 27072 Bulldogs Monopole should
be allowed to proceed as planned.

4

References Cited
Atlas 2015

Jacobs, J. L.
1981

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
November 7, 2015].

Soil Survey of Hidalgo County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station, College Station, Texas.

Web Soil Survey
2015 Tarrant County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed
November 7, 2015].

5

