A Cultural Resources Background Review and
Field Survey of the 12.7-Mile Strait Lateral
Pipeline Right-of-Way in Northeastern Dimmit
County, Texas

Prepared for Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd.
San Antonio, Texas
by
David L. Nickels, Principal Investigator
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations
Archaeology Report #84
February 2012

Abstract
Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd. of San Antonio, Texas contracted with Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations (TAAI) to conduct a background review of the 12.7-mile
Strait Lateral in October 2010. TAAI then conducted a field survey of selected moderate and high
probability areas along the lateral in July 2011. The project was entirely privately funded, and the
properties across which the pipeline will cross are privately owned; therefore, no Texas Antiquities
Permit was required.
The pedestrian survey along selected portions of the right-of-way was conducted by two
archaeologists on July 23, 2011. During the course of the survey a prehistoric lithic scatter and one
prehistoric isolated find were documented. In the opinion of Tierras Antiguas, the newly
documented site and the isolated find do not possess the integrity that warrant significance. As
such, Tierras Antiguas assessed that the development of the Strait Lateral did not impact
potentially significant cultural deposits. No artifacts were collected during this survey.

Acknowledgments
There are mainly four individuals who are greatly appreciated, and whose efforts contributed to
the successful planning, organization, and completion of this project. They are Mr. David Black,
Ms. Judy Vader, and Mr. Ryan DeBarros, Project Managers at Flatrock Engineering and
Environmental, and Mr. Ronnie Glenewinkel, Environmental Coordinator at Mockingbird
Midstream. All were extremely amiable and helpful throughout the project, and their overall
knowledge of the project contributed significantly to our understanding of the project’s scope of
work.
In addition, I express my sincere gratitude to Tierras Antiguas staff archaeologist Belisario Silva,
who worked hard, long hours, and expressed an attitude and work ethic that ensured this survey
was conducted in a thorough and professional manner.

i

Table of Contents
Title
Page
Abstract.........................................................................................................................................i
Acknowledgments..........................................................................................................................i
List of Figures............................................................................................................. .................ii
List of Tables................................................................................................................................ii
Introduction..................................................................................................................................1
Modern Environmental Setting......................................................................................................2
Paleoenvironment.........................................................................................................................4
Cultural Chronology.....................................................................................................................5
Dimmit County Prehistory and History.......................................................................................10
Site Types to be Expected...........................................................................................................11
Cultural Resources Background Review......................................................................................14
Soils............................................................................................................................................17
Survey Goals and Methodology.................................................................................................19
Results of the Investigations.......................................................................................................20
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations...........................................................................22
References Cited.........................................................................................................................23

List of Figures
Figure
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Page

Dimmit County and project location.....................................................................................1
Strait Lateral location in Dimmit County..............................................................................1
Strait Lateral on large topographic maps..............................................................................2
Physiographic regions of Texas............................................................................................4
Biotic provinces of Texas.....................................................................................................4
South Texas cultural chronology..........................................................................................7
Soils map in the western portion of the Project Area.........................................................18
Soils map in the middle portion of the Project Area...........................................................18
Soils map in the northeastern portion of the Project Area..................................................19
Locations of Isolated Find and Site 41DM181...................................................................20
41DM181 site map.............................................................................................................21
Photo of 41DM181............................................................................................................21

List of Tables
Table
Page
1. Soils Dissected by the Strait Lateral....................................................................................17

ii

Introduction
Flatrock Engineering and Environmental
is the consulting firm employed to
manage the installation of the Strait
Lateral Gas Pipeline in northeastern
Dimmit County, hereinafter occasionally
referred to as the Project Area (PA)
(Figures 1-3). In October 2010, Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations
(TAAI) conducted a review of cultural
resources documented either on, or
within one mile of the PA, as well as
other documents that may be relative for
significant cultural resources to exist
within the PA. The research by TAAI
included:
1) A review of the most
current literature
documenting the
prehistory and history of
the immediate area

Figure 1. Location of Dimmit County and the
Strait Lateral project in Texas.

2) A review of the Texas
Historical Commission’s
Texas Archeological
Sites Atlas to identify
what cultural resource
surveys have been
conducted, and what
archaeological sites have
been documented within
one mile of the project
area
3) A search of various
websites that offer old Figure 2. Location of the Strait Lateral pipeline in Northeastern
maps of the PA
Dimmit County (USGS 7.5' Big Wells, Las Vegas, and Snake
Creek topographic maps).
4) A literature review of
both published and unpublished reports and manuscripts that describe the types of archaeological
sites that have been documented, and thus provide insight as to the types of sites that may be
expected either in the PA, or immediately adjacent to it
1

6) A review of the Geologic Atlas, as well as a local soils map in order to evaluate the potential
for intact and buried cultural materials either within or immediately adjacent to the PA.
In July 2012, Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd., then requested a cultural resources
survey of selected areas along the pipeline that was installed by Mockingbird Midstream Gas
Services, L.L.C. (Mockingbird) (see Figure 3). Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations
(TAAI) conducted a pedestrian survey of these selected areas along the right-of-way on July 23,
2011.

Figure 3. Strait Lateral pipeline project shown on Big Wells, Las Vegas, and Snake Creek USGS
7.5' topographic maps; moderate to high probability for prehistoric archaeological sites in blue.

Modern Environmental Setting
Climate and Vegetation
Dimmit county is located in south-central Texas near its southern border with Mexico (see Figure
1). Its current political boundary encompasses 1,307 square miles. The generally flat to rolling
terrain ranges in elevation from about 500-800 feet above mean sea level. Clayey and loamy soils
support the growth of small predominately mesquite trees, and thorny scrub brush with assorted
cacti and grassy understory.

2

With its semi-arid environment, the county is generally frost-free from mid-February through early
December, allowing for a 290-day growing season. The average annual rainfall is about 22 inches,
with most rainfall occurring in May and September. These peaks are the result of thunderstorms
bearing moist air from the Gulf of Mexico to the east, and the Pacific Ocean much farther to the
west. Dimmit County is known as part of the Winter Garden Region for the vegetables grown
there (Leffler 1996; Stevens and Arriaga 1985).
However, rainfall amounts vary significantly from year to year, and the high evapotranspiration
effects in the area effectively offset any beneficial surplus of annual rainfall. This is another reason
irrigation systems are so necessary, and commonly found in use today throughout the area.
Summers are indeed hot and dry, with temperatures consistently hovering above 1000F, although
humidity is generally low compared to environments closer to the Gulf Coast. Overall, the county’s
climate can be classified as subtropical steppe.
Hydrology
The Nueces River and the Rio Grande are the major southeasterly trending rivers draining the
South Texas region. A subtle divide through the northeastern portion of the county causes
numerous intermittent creeks to flow north into the Nueces River, and numerous others of the
same type to drain southward into the Rio Grande. Many drainages intermittently flow into both
rivers during infrequent seasonal periods of abundant rainfall. Although there are many springs in
Dimmit County, very few are active due primarily to the dip of the substrate shales which carry
these subterranean seeps to the south and east. As a result, some of these active seeps/springs can
be found on the Mexican side of the national border. Ancient springs that may have existed in the
area at one time have likely succumbed to overgrazing and irrigation pumping during modern times
(Brune 1981). During our investigation of the project area in July 2011, we observed no flowing
water or niche pools.
Flora and Fauna
The project area lies within the South Texas Plain/Brush Country vegetation area as defined by
Gould (1975), and the regional flora of South Texas has been classified as being part of the
Tamaulipan biotic province extending out from northeast Mexico (Figures 4 and 5). This is the
only part of Texas where some vegetation exhibits growth throughout the year (Blair 1950; Map
2011a). Thorny brush is the dominant vegetation today, but this is a relatively recent occurrence,
with a mix of woody and grassland species providing a savanna environment during prehistoric
times (Archer 1995; Black 1989; Hester 1980; Inglis 1964). The original vegetation was an open
grassland mixed with brushy chaparral. Oaks, pecan, and ash were common along perennial
streams. Due in part to overgrazing and the exclusion of fire, the invasion of woody species has
changed the vegetation into “Texas brush country” dominated by mesquite, acacia, spiny
hackberry, brazil, whitebrush, lotebrush, and others (Diamond et al. 1987:203-221). On sandy
soils, the brush includes mesquite with mixed grasses. In contrast, clay soils support mesquite
(Proposis juliflora), various species of Acacia, and mimosa, granjeno or desert hackberry (Celtis
pallida), lignum vitae (Porliera angustifolia), cenizo (Leucophyllum texanum), white brush
(Aloysia texana), prickly pear (Opuntia lindheeimeri), tasajillo (Opuntia leptocaulis), and species
3

of Condalia and Castela (Blair 1950).
The South Texas Plains/Brush Country
exhibits some of the greatest mammalian
species diversity in the state. Sixty-one
species of mammals, 36 snakes, 19
lizards, and several species of turtles,
salamanders, and frogs are present in the
region (Blair 1950). Approximately 50
species of fish have been identified in the
lower Rio Grande (Lee et al. 1980).

Paleoenvironment
The paleoenvironment of south Texas is
as varied as the landscape, and the South
Texas Paleoclimatic record contains
significant gaps primarily due to the
scarcity of deep, finely stratified, and
well-dated deposits (Stahle and
Cleaveland 1995:51). To date, the best Figure 4. Physiographic regions of Texas
record of paleoenvironmental (http://www.lib.utexas.edu/geo/pics/txphysio.jpg)
reconstruction in South Texas has been
accomplished by Robinson (1982) from
analysis of phytoliths from three
archaeological sites in Live Oak County.
Overall, the data there along with data
from other sites in Texas suggest that the
waning of the Pleistocene, or late-glacial
period, marked a transition from a
cooler, wetter environment to one that
steadily grew warmer and drier, and
more seasonal, with intermittent moist
periods through about 6,000 years ago.
Most researchers then generally agree
that the period between 6,000 and 3,000
years ago was much warmer and drier
than today. Since that time, intermittent
moist and dry intervals have occurred
over the past 3,000 years.
Figure 5. Blair’s (1950) biotic provinces of Texas
(Map 2012).
4

It is unlikely that the climate has changed significantly in the past few thousand years in the area
that would significantly induce vegetation changes. The greater changes have been induced by
human intervention through the clearing of wooded areas along the river and streams for
construction purposes, pumping more water for irrigation which has lowered water tables, and
overgrazing by livestock. Although there are still many seeps, springs, and streams in the area, they
most probably flowed with greater abundance during wetter intervals than exist at the present time,
providing an abundant resource for prehistoric occupants.

Cultural Chronology
The Project Area lies within the South Texas Archaeological region as defined by Hester (1980,
1995, 2004; Figure 6). Refining a cultural chronology for south Texas is problematic, due to the
compressed nature of the archaeological record and the scarcity of stratified sites excavated within
the region. The largest and most informational cultural resources survey in South Texas was that
conducted prior to development of the Choke Canyon Reservoir in Atascosa, Live Oak, and
McMullen counties (e.g. Hall et al. 1986). Nevertheless, Hester (1995:433) acknowledges the
paucity of information that exists for south Texas and as such offers only a “general framework”
for prehistoric periods particular to the region (Figure 6). All dates are given as approximate years
before present (B.P.), i.e., before 1950.
Paleoindian (11,200 - 7950 B.P.)
This period is estimated at between ca.11,200–7950 B.P. in south Texas (Hester 1999). The
Paleoindian period began toward the close of the Pleistocene. Diagnostic artifacts of the early
Paleoindian interval include Clovis and Folsom projectile points. The wide distribution of Clovistype points across most of North America and even into Central America suggests a wide dispersal
and interaction of the people who made them. Other artifacts associated with the Clovis culture
include bifaces and prismatic blades, engraved stones, bone and ivory points, stone bolas, ochre,
and shaft straighteners. During the late Paleoindian interval, the first stemmed lanceolate points,
such as Angostura, Golondrina, St. Mary’s Hall, and Barber (among a few others) appear.
In general, the Paleoindian adaptation has been considered to be one of small bands of nomadic,
big-game hunters following herds of Late Pleistocene fauna, including mammoth, mastodons,
bison, camel, and horse, across North America (Black 1989). More recently, emphasis has been
placed on the wide diversity of plants and animals used for subsistence by these early Americans,
such as turtles and tortoises, alligators, mice, badgers, and raccoons, although they undoubtedly
hunted the large animals as well (Collins 1995:381). Known Clovis sites include killsites, quarries,
caches, open campsites, ritual sites, and burials (Hester 1995:433–436). A Folsom interval follows
the Clovis. Folsom artifacts are fairly common in south Texas; however, no camp sites or killsites
have been found south of a large workshop, Pavo Real (41BX52), in Bexar County (Hester
1995:434–435). Most Paleoindian finds in south Texas have consisted of surface lithic scatters on
upland terraces and ridges (Black 1989). As the warming that marks the transition from
Pleistocene to Holocene climates began to take effect in Texas, prehistoric inhabitants adapted
with changes in lifestyle. This climatic shift is also marked by the decline and extinction of
5

mammoth, mastodon, horse, camel, and giant bison (Bison antiquus). Large gregarious game
animals were perhaps extinct in Texas. Human hunters were forced to concentrate on deer,
antelope, and other medium-size or smaller game. Changes in the subsistence base required
technological shifts that mark the beginning of a new cultural period known as the Archaic.
Early Archaic (7950 - 4450 B.P.)
Hester (1995:436–438) identifies the Early Archaic, with Early Corner Notched and Early Basal
Notched dart points, as roughly dating between 7950 to 4450 B.P. The extinction of large herds
of megafauna and the changing climate at the beginning of the Holocene stimulated a behavioral
change by the Prehistoric inhabitants of south Texas (McKinney 1981). While the basic huntergatherer adaptation probably remained intact, an economic shift away from big game hunting was
necessary. In general, more intensive exploitation of local and smaller resources such as deer, fish,
and plant bulbs is indicated by greater densities of ground-stone artifacts, fire-cracked rock
cooking features, and more specialized tools. Weir (1976) speculates that Early Archaic groups
distributed and that diagnostic projectile point types are seen across a wide area, including most
of Texas and northern Mexico. Story (1985) believes that population densities were low during
the Early Archaic, and that groups consisted of related individuals in small bands with “few
constraints on their mobility” (Story 1985:39). Their economy was based on the utilization of a
wide range of resources, especially such year-round resources as prickly pear and lechugilla, as
well as rodents, rabbits, and deer.
Middle Archaic (4450 - 2350 B.P.)
Hester (1995:438–441) suggests that the period between 4450 and 2350 B.P. reflects the Middle
Archaic in south Texas. The Middle Archaic appears to have been a time of increased population,
based on the large number of sites from this period (Story 1985:40; Weir 1976:125, 128). On the
South Texas Plains, exploitation of widely scattered, year-round resources such as prickly pear
continued (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13–15), as did hunting deer and rabbit. Weir (1976)
believes that the widely scattered bands prevalent in the Early Archaic now began to coalesce, at
least during the acorn-gathering season, into larger groups who shared the intensive work of
gathering and processing the acorn harvest (Weir 1976:126). Many researchers believe burned
rock middens are a result of this endeavor (Creel 1986; Prewitt 1991; Weir 1976). The common
presence of deer remains in burned rock middens encourages the view that deer processing took
place at burned rock midden sites. Bison bone is encountered in archaeological sites in south
Texas, at least occasionally, during all but the earliest part of the Middle Archaic (Dillehay 1974).
Cemeteries make their first appearance during this period, suggesting a movement toward less
mobility and perhaps territorialism. One of the earliest occurrences dating to the south Texas
Middle Archaic, is Loma Sandia in Live Oak County, which dates between ca. 2550 and 2750 B.P.
(Taylor and Highley 1995).

6

Late Archaic (2350 - 1250 B.P.)
Hester believes the Late Archaic
in south Texas may be defined as
between 2350–1250 B.P, Some
researchers believe populations
increased throughout the Late
Archaic (Prewitt 1985), while
others feel populations remained
the same or fell during this period
(Black 1989:30). Subsistence is
assumed to have become less
specialized on acorns, in favor of
a broad spectrum subsistence
base (Black 1989:30). Story
(1985:44–45) believes the
presence of cemeteries indicates
that Late Archaic populations in
central and south Texas were
increasing and becoming more
territorial. Although inhabitants
of the South Texas Plain near
Brownsville and Rockport had
begun to make pottery by about
1750 B.P., the northern part of
the plain was still “pre-ceramic”
until 1,000 years later (Story
1985:45–47). Late Archaic points
tend to be much smaller than
Middle Archaic points.
Transitional Archaic (2250 1250 B.P.)
A late subperiod or interval of the
Late Archaic is frequently
referred to as the Terminal
Archaic or Transitional Archaic.
Turner and Hester (1993) cite
data placing the Transitional
Archaic as 2250–1250 B.P.
Although Hester may lump
current data into a Late Archaic
period, he cautions that more
evidence will likely result in what Figure 6. South Texas Archaeological region cultural
may be termed as a “Terminal chronology.
7

Archaic” period during the latter part of the Late Archaic in south Texas. This Terminal Archaic
period is represented by diagnostics such as Ensor, Frio, and Matamoras points which appear to
overlap the Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods (Hester 1995:442). Weir (1976) believes
this marked a transition period to localized area sites, a disappearance of burned rock middens and
bison, and a reappearance of highly mobile hunters and gatherers. Others (Black and McGraw
1985; Peter 1982; Skelton 1977) argue that in some locations burned rock middens did not
disappear and sites were more intensely occupied during the Transitional Archaic period.
Late Prehistoric (1250 - 420 B.P.)
The term “Late Prehistoric” is commonly used to designate the period following the Late Archaic
in south Texas. Generally, the Late Prehistoric period is thought of as spanning the period between
A. D. 700 - 1530 ([1250 - 420 B.P.] [Hester 1995]). A series of distinctive traits mark the shift
from the Archaic to the Late Prehistoric period, including the technological shift to the bow and
arrow and the introduction of pottery to central Texas and the northern South Texas Plain (Black
1989:32; Story 1985:45–47). Two distinct phases recognized within the Late Prehistoric are the
Austin and Toyah. During the Austin phase, there appears to be a subtle transition from expanding
stem projectile points that may have been used as dart points, as well as early arrow points. The
most prevalent point found in Austin phase sites is the Scallorn arrow point. Settlement shifts into
rockshelters such as Scorpion Cave in Medina County (Highley et al. 1978) and Classen
Rockshelter in northern Bexar County (Fox and Fox 1967) have been noted. Cemeteries from this
period often reveal evidence of conflict (Black 1989:32).
Beginning rather abruptly at about 650 B.P., a shift in technology occurred. The Perdiz arrow
point may best represent the appearance of a distinct culture in south-central Texas lasting for
about 300 years, which archaeologists have labeled the Toyah phase. Hester (1995:444)
recognizes this phase as the “best documented Late Prehistoric pattern” throughout south Texas,
with dates ranging between ca. 650/700 to 300/350 B.P. (A.D. 1250/1300 to 1600/1650).
In addition to Perdiz points, evidence of a Toyah culture is manifested as bone-tempered pottery,
bone spatulates, awls, and beads, stone endscrapers, beveled knives, and expediently utilized
flakes. Briefly, expedient lithic technology involves removing flakes from a core in a nonstandard
manner; the purpose is to knock off sharp flakes for immediate use, selecting the ones that best
suit the need at the time. This technology differs from formal, standardized core reduction and the
manufacturing of formal, usually bifacial tools. Expedient lithic technology is a continent-wide
phenomonon indicative of increased sedentism, and is observed in Toyah assemblages in Texas.
Whether the Toyah phase seen in the south-central Texas archaeological record is a result of a
group of people moving into the region, or adapted technologies from the region’s periphery is
a matter of conjecture. Steele and Assad-Hunter (1986) argue for the occurrence of a distinct
change in diet between the Late Archaic and the Late Prehistoric components in two sites in the
Choke Canyon Reservoir area in south Texas. Analysis of the number of identified specimens
(NISP) shows a marked increase in artiodactyla elements present during the later part of the Late
Prehistoric, an increase largely due to the addition of bison to the “menu” (Steele and AssadHunter 1986:468).
8

Whether or not agriculture was practiced during this period in south Texas has not been
documented. There simply is not enough evidence to postulate there was ever a significant
presence of maize in the area. The later arrival of the Spanish during the later
Protohistoric/Historic period brought significant cultivars to south Texas.
Protohistoric/Historic (420 B.P. - present)
The end of the Late Prehistoric and beginning of the Historic period in south Texas is
characterized by written accounts of European contact with indigenous groups. The Protohistoric
period begins in 1528 when Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts of southeast and
south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the hunter-gatherers of Texas
and northern Mexico (e.g., Hallenbeck 1971). Cabeza de Vaca’s account of his stay with the
Miriami in 1533-34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves
to the easily exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter and summer, occasionally sending
a hunting party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near each
other in the semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other succulents
(Campbell and Campbell 1981:13-37).
Linguistically, early protohistoric accounts of the late 1500s indicate that a large group which
spoke Cohuilteco inhabited the area now known as south-central Texas. Coahuiltecan is a term
coined by Mexican linguists in the 1800s, and the name refers to the many small bands of Native
Americans who lived in northeastern Coahuila, Mexico and south Texas. The Coahuiltecans were
rapidly dispersed or killed during the Protohistoric period.
By the 1540s and 1550s Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico, with
several hundred thousand cattle, using Indian slaves as labor. Large mining ventures in northern
Mexico did the same. This encroachment from the south forced Native Americans to escape into
the south-central Texas region.
The period between de Vaca’s written account and the advent of Spanish missions in the late
1600s and early 1700s is referred to as the Protohistoric; a time when few, scant written
documents exist detailing Native American life outside the missions. The Historic period then, is
generally thought of as beginning in the 1700s.
Some 30 miles south of Eagle Pass, the Spanish established Mission San Juan Bautista in 1700
(now modern-day Guerrero). Early Spanish explorers then repeatedly traveled the Camino Real
enroute to newly established missions and settlements in today’s modern Texas throughout the
1700s and 1800s. Mexican families from across the river expanded into Texas, and these families
trace their roots to the early development of the area. In the ensuing years, lawlessness prevailed,
with saloons, gambling houses, outlaws, and slave hunters prevalent.

9

Dimmit County Prehistory and History
Other than early work done by A. T. Jackson in 1932, perhaps the earliest systematic
archaeological survey in Dimmit County was conducted by Thomas Hester and Parker Nunley in
1964 and 1965. Their work resulted in the documentation of 24 archaeological sites in the county,
ranging in age from the Early Archaic through the Late Prehistoric Toyah phase (Nunley and
Hester 1966).
Indian artifacts found in Dimmit County indicate that the area has been occupied for about 11,000
years. Plentiful food sources such as wild game, fruits, seeds, and roots made the land hospitable.
Early technology included tools from wood and stone, woven basketry, sewed rabbitskin robes,
and a very effective weapon was the atlatl, a throwing stick that greatly increased the deadliness
of their spears (Hester 1984; Leffler 1996). Perhaps as early as 1,300 years ago, they learned to
make pottery and to hunt with bows and arrows. “During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
the Coahuiltecan Indians native to Dimmit County were squeezed out by other Indian who were
migrating into the area and by the Spanish, who were moving up from the south. Many of the
Coahuiltecans were taken to San Juan Bautista in Coahuila. Apaches and Comanches moved in
to take their place” (Leffler 1996).
“No permanent Spanish settlement seems to have been established in the future Dimmit County.
Beginning in the late 1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio
Road, a camino real, to and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. After the Mexican War of
Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage its citizens to settle in
Texas. Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and 1834 that included territory
now in Dimmit County. None of the recipients seems to have made use of the land, however. By
1836, when Texas became independent from Mexico, the area remained populated almost solely
by Indians” (Leffler 1996).
Between the Texas Revolution and the Mexican War (1836–46), most of Dimmit County lay in
the disputed area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River, and it became a haven for
desperate characters until about 1865. Carrizo Springs was founded in 1865, with the new settlers
who lived in jacals or dugouts frequently being harrassed by hostile Indians and outlaws. Due in
part tobeing pursued by the Texas Rangers, and being decimated by disease, the Indians were
forced to leave Dimmit County by 1877, and in 1880 Carrizo Springs became the county seat for
the newly formed county. By 1880, cattle ranching was firmly established, and although sheep
ranching was also an important part of the economy at the time, by 1900 extended droughts and
an increase in predators combined to make sheep ranching a tough and dwindling business (Leffler
1996).
Although the residents of Dimmit County learned to cope with the sparse annual rainfall, artesian
wells ushered in an era of large vegetable truck farms in the 1890s, and Dimmit County became
known as part of the Texas Winter Garden Region, one of the most prolific vegetable-growing
areas in the country.

10

As with rest of the nation, the Great Depression many of the county’s farmers were forced to cut
back their once-lucrative vegetable production during the depression, and fell back on raising
poultry, hogs, and dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in the
county in the 1950s certainly bolstered Dimmit County’s economy, and although large ranches lay
claim to most of the land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much a progressively
increasing part of the county’s development (Leffler 1996).

Site Types That Could be Expected Along the Strait Lateral
Prehistoric Open Campsites
Most numerous among the sites recorded in Dimmit County are prehistoric open campsites
ranging in age from the Paleoindian period through the Historic period (see Figure 6). Some of
these represent a single campfire where a very small group of Native Americans may have camped
for one night. Others are very large, covering very extensive areas representing large groups of
people that stayed for long periods, perhaps seasonally, with ancestral groups returning to these
same campsites over a period of several thousands of years. Cultural remains to be found at these
large campsites include among other items, an abundance of fire-cracked rocks representing
multiple hearths, a wide variety of chipped stone tools and the lithic debris that results from
making them, ground and smoothed stones used to grind nuts and seeds, faunal remains from
terrestrial and aquatic animals consumed, bone tools, pottery sherds, and mussel and snail shells.
Open campsites occur in all types of environments, whether that be in a plush riverine environment
that offered a wide variety banquet of plant and animal foodstuffs, or in the uplands away from
flowing water sources. Seasonally, the upland grasses, shrubs, cacti offered a different food source
that could be exploited such as various grass seeds, mesquite beans, prickly pear pads and tunas,
and agave hearts. In addition, at various times, bison were known to graze on the northern South
Texas Plains, and were highly sought after for use as food, hides, and bone tools (Dillehay 1974).
Depending upon the integrity of these open campsites, archaeologists and the Texas Historical
Commission consider these as perhaps the most significant types of sites in regard to their ability
to contribute to our understanding of south Texas prehistory. A few of the desired ingredients that
can indicate significance include cultural material that is buried beneath the surface in a wellpreserved, stratified, and relatively undisturbed context. Although these situations most frequently
occur within stratified terrace deposits adjacent to streams, they can also occur in upland settings
where the landscape has been generally stable through time. Other ingredients that archaeologists
look for in potentially significant campsites include good organic preservation in the form of
charcoal and/or charred plant remains, faunal preservation, temporally diagnostic stone tools or
ceramics, and intact features such as hearths.
Prehistoric Lithic Scatters or Procurement Sites
Lithic scatters are the next most common type of archaeological site that could be expected along
the Strait Lateral. These sites simply represent the chipped stone debris and broken tools that were
left behind when Native Americans made new tools or re-sharpened their old ones. The general
absence of fire-cracked rocks and other cultural material normally found at open campsites suggest
11

that they did not camp there, or remain there for any extended period of time ( However, small
camp fires may have been used to heat-treat chert or quartzite cobbles to make them more
knappable). Yet, they were drawn to these isolated locales because of the natural outcroppings or
surface exposures of good quality raw material such as chert or quartzite cobbles.
Examples of chipped stone most commonly found at these sites include cobbles with one or two
flakes removed, called ‘tested cobbles’. That is, the Native Americans knew from experience the
quality of stone that could most easily be flaked and reduced for stone tool production, so they
‘tested’ the cobble to judge whether it was useable or not. If the quality was judged to be inferior,
then the cobble was tossed aside. That is why the majority of tested cobbles found on these sites
are of poor quality, coarse-grained material. While the finished stone tool products are carried
away from these sites, what remains are those tools broken during the manufacturing process, and
the thousands of pieces of debitage in the form of flakes and angular debris. Also unique to lithic
scatters where large cobbles are present are snapped ‘quarry blanks’. These are simply cobbles
flakes on both sides, reducing the cobble into a transportable ‘blank’ that can be used to further
reduce it and make finished stone tools from the flakes taken off of it. The unbroken quarry blanks
are usually not found on these sites because they have been carried off, presumably to areas of
south Texas where raw material is not readily available. The snapped or broken quarry blanks are
of little or no use, so they are discarded and left behind.
Lithic scatters range in age from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods and can be found
on any landscape setting where gravels or cobbles have been exposed. Notably, gravel outcrops
that were exposed to the surface a few hundred or thousand years ago could be deeply buried
today, and the opposite could also be true; it all depends on the terrain setting and the dynamics
of landscape evolution through time. Most lithic scatters in Dimmit County have been documented
along upper stream terraces abutting the eroded upland slopes.
Prehistoric Quarries and Procurement Sites
Prehistoric quarries and procurement also can range in age from the Paleoindian through Historic
periods, but differ from lithic scatters in that at those sites Native Americans exploited loose
gravels, but at times they specifically sought quarry sites where raw material such as cherts or
quartzites were not yet freed from their parent geologic formation, and they had to be ‘quarried’.
These types of sites are rare in south Texas for two reasons: 1) the geological exposures generally
do not present themselves, and 2) throughout Texas, even in central Texas, it is much easier to
pick up gravels from the surface than to try to mine them from hard rock. Quarried and chipped
stone remains likely to be found at these sites include large chunks of angular cherts or quartzites,
as well as parent material detritus, and flaking debris. Snapped quarry blanks can also be expected.
Although a handful of prehistoric quarries or procurement sites have been recorded in south Texas,
they are rare.
Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens
There are no documented burned rock middens in Dimmit County. Burned rock middens result
from a series of multiple-use earth ovens that were constructed much like modern-day roasting pits
are dug into the earth for roasting a pig. With repetitive uses, as the larger rocks that serve as
12

heating elements in the earthen pit fracture and thus become less effective as a thermal source, they
are ‘pitched out’ around the edge of the pit. As the pit becomes unusable, another is dug near by,
and the procedure repeated. Over time, these multiple pits and the ‘pitched out’ fire-cracked rocks
coalesce together, obscuring each pit as indiscernible. (For a full discussion of the formation of
burned rock middens and their documented presence in Texas, see Leach and Bousman 2001;
Leach et al. 2001; Mauldin et al. 2003).
Prehistoric Burial and Cemetery Sites
Although not common, isolated prehistoric burials and cemeteries have been documented in south
Texas. Individual and isolated burials have been found in association with open campsites in both
upland settings as well as in alluvial terraces along streams, but the largest prehistoric cemetery
found in proximity to the Strait Lateral is 41LK28, in Live Oak County.
Historic Sites
As discussed above in the Cultural Chronology portion of this report, although Spanish ranchers
had established large ranches in northern Mexico by the mid-16th century, and Spanish entradas
began penetrating south Texas in the 1700s and 1800s, there is no record of any sort of permanent
structures in the area during those periods (Chipman 1992), the area was generally not considered
safe for settlement by whites until after the Civil War in 1865, and white settlers then began
establishing smaller ranches and farmlands (Leffler 2011).
Because of the vastness of the landscape and the relatively late settlement and development of
south Texas compared to east and central Texas and northern Mexico, historic sites are not
abundant, but they certainly do exist. The most common types to be encountered are related to
ranching and farming endeavors, or small communities from the 19th and 20th centuries. Site types
most commonly include farmsteads or ranches with corrals, cisterns, chimney and foundation
remains from both main houses and outbuildings, related trash dumps, an occasional family burial
or cemetery, school houses, churches, community buildings, and industry-related structures or
construction projects.
In general, the area has apparently been historically used as ranchland pasture, with no
development other than associated ranching activities such as windmills, stock tanks, corrals, and
sparsely scattered outbuildings. In sum, there may be rare and isolated occurrences of early
ranching activities along the Strait Lateral, but the expectations of encountering any archaeological
site of significance from the 1500s through the mid-1900s along those portions of the pipeline
were minimal.

13

Results of A Cultural Resources Background Review
The research by TAAI included:
1) A review of the most current literature documenting the prehistory and history of the immediate
area
2) A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas to identify what
cultural resource surveys have been conducted, and what archaeological sites have been
documented within one mile of the project area
3) A search of various websites that offer old maps of the PA
4) A literature review of both published and unpublished reports and manuscripts that describe the
types of archaeological sites that have been documented, and thus provide insight as to the types
of sites that may be expected either in the PA, or immediately adjacent to it
5) A review of a local soils map in order to evaluate the potential for intact and buried cultural
materials either within or immediately adjacent to the PA.

Archaeological Atlas Site and Historic Research Results
Even though only a handful of scattered archaeological surveys have been conducted in Dimmit
County (e.g., Nunley and Hester 1966), these very few surveys have identified over 160
archaeological sites. Archaeological remains such as Clovis, Folsom, and Plainview artifacts
indicate that the area was likely occupied by Native Americans as early as 11,000 years ago. The
site types are as varied as the landscape. Large open campsites with numerous hearths, or
campfire, a wide assortment of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and butchered animal
remains are most commonly located along stream or river terraces. In a few instances, prehistoric
burials have been found in these same locations, and in one case the grave of a nameless cowboy
was discovered on a small sandy hill in the uplands. Where gravels outcrop, either along eroded
streambeds, or higher on higher terrain where more ancient gravels are sometimes exposed in
isolated pockets, one can expect stone chipping stations, or prehistoric quarries.
Without written or oral accounts before the 1700s, it is difficult to nearly impossible to truly say
what bands or tribes were within the modern political boundaries of Dimmit County before then.
Only cultural affiliations can be assigned to those groups, equating their technologies and apparent
lifestyles to the successive Paleo-Indian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric periods (Leffler and Long
1996). Archaeologists have documented an assundry of prehistoric archaeological sites, including
large open campsites that are most commonly located along stream or river terraces with
numerous campfires, where a wide variety of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and
butchered animal remains are found. Where gravels outcrop, either along eroded streambeds, or
on higher terrain where more ancient gravels are sometimes exposed in isolated pockets, one can
expect stone chipping stations, or prehistoric quarries.
14

Nevertheless, the lack of previously documented sites is thought to be a direct reflection of the
lack of cultural resource surveys near the PA that would have located sites, rather than the
probable non-existence of sites. In fact, the PA lies to the west of a large archaeological survey
conducted in anticipation of the construction of the Choke Canyon Reservoir (e.g., Hall et al.
1986).
During that survey conducted in the 1980s, 116 prehistoric archaeological sites located in both
Live Oak and McMullen counties were documented, ranging in age from 350 years ago to 11,000
years ago. Through all the periods of Choke Canyon's history, humans subsisted by hunting and
gathering natural food resources available in the area. Many of the prehistoric sites are situated on
terrace deposits, ridges, and ridge promontories overlooking streams in the upper reaches of
second and third low order tributaries, and provide evidence that there is a moderate to high
probability for archaeological sites to exist in relatively undisturbed sediments and soils along
certain areas of the Strait Lateral.
In addition, archaeologists from the Center for Archaeological Research at the University of Texas
at San Antonio conducted archaeological investigations at eight historic sites at Choke Canyon
Reservoir. A number of different types of structures were investigated, the purpose being to
extract as much information as possible about architecture, lifestyles, and settlement patterns
during the last half of the 19th century within the reservoir area. Artifacts recovered helped
recreate the life of the people, demonstrating how they met the challenges of living in a frontier
area, and how life changed after the Civil War and the coming of law and order, railroads, and
modern communications (Fox and Ward 1986).
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archaeological sites indicated that
no documented cultural resources surveys had been conducted within one mile of the PA, nor are
any archaeological sites, cemeteries, or sites of historical significance known to exist either within
the PA, or within one mile (Atlas 2010). However, TAAI surmised that this was likely due to the
lack of cultural resource surveys near the Strait Lateral that would have located sites, rather than
the probable existence of sites.

Old Maps and Historical Research
Because of the relatively low habitation in generally rural areas that the Strait Lateral pipeline
passes through, little or no attention was given to early aerial photography. In lieu of this, the
oldest topographic map found of the Big Wells area was a 1939-40 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
map. No structures or cemeteries were mapped along that portion of the proposed Strait Lateral
at that time (Maps 2010a). Thus, no historic archaeological sites were to be expected to be
encountered along the route either to the south of Big Wells, nor along Highway 85 some eight
miles east and east-northeast of Big Wells. The next map available for review of the Big Wells area
was a 1972, 7.5' USGS topographic map (Maps 2010b). In 1972, there is a structure shown on
the south edge of the pipeline right-of way as it crosses FM1867; that would be on the
southeastern corner of this intersection. Technically, any structures old than 45 years are now
considered of interest by the Texas Historical Commission, and this should be considered when
the pipeline right-of-way is excavated.
15

The Strait Lateral then continues to the northeast along Highway 85, and the earliest topographic
map for that area is a Las Vegas USGS topographic dated 1974 (Maps 2010c). A review of this
map indicated that there were no historic structures in the right-of-way, extending several miles
along Highway 85 to near the Dimmit - La Salle County line. Once again, no historic
archaeological sites were to be expected to be encountered along this portion of the route.
For mapping purposes, the final approximately ¼-mile of the Strait Lateral extends onto the Snake
Creek USGS topographic map. A review of a 1974 Snake Creek topographic map indicated that
this final segment was once again, rural, with no indications of any historic structures evident in
the pipeline right-of-way (Maps 2010d).
The earliest historic accounts of Native Americans in south Texas and perhaps the Dimmit County
area, are those of Cabeza de Vaca. In the 1500s, Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts
of southeast and south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the huntergatherers of Texas and northern Mexico (e.g., Covey 1961). His account of his experiences in
1533–34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves to the easily
exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter, and summer, occasionally sending a hunting
party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near each other
in the semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other succulents
(Campbell and Campbell 1981:13–37).
By the 1540s and 1550s, Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico with
thousands of cattle, and using Native Americans as slave labor. This encroachment by the Spanish
forced groups from northern Mexico to flee into south Texas. In the 1700s and 1800s, there are
documented accounts of Spanish entradas passing through the area, but none have been noted to
establish any sort of permanent bases in present-day Dimmit County (Chipman 1992).
It was not until about 1865, that Dimmit County and the surrounding frontier hinterlands were
considered safe enough for white settlers to begin establishing smaller ranches and farmlands
without complete annihilation by the many roving bands of angry Comanche raiders from the
north, as well as other displaced Native American groups. More definitively, the city of Big Wells
was one of a focused loci of several land-development projects in Dimmit County between 1909
and 1917 that never really resulted in any significant population into the rural areas outside of Big
Wells (Leffler 2010).
In sum, there may be rare and isolated occurrences of early ranching activities along the Strait
Lateral pipeline, but the expectations of encountering any archaeological site of significance from
the 1500s through the mid-1900s along the Strait Lateral line are minimal.

16

Soils Maps
As expected across a several-mile pipeline route, the Strait Lateral crosses a multitude of different
soil types that offer varying depths, sedimentation and deposition rates, and are in close proximity
to streams. As such, they likewise imply the potential for the preservation of intact cultural
resources to exist. Table 1 lists the soils that are intersected by the Strait Lateral, and Figures 7-9
show the route of the pipeline through these soil areas (Stevens and Arriaga 1985).
Table 1. Predominate Soils Dissected by the Strait Lateral Pipeline.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Buried and Intact
Archaeological Potential

Brundage fine sandy loam
(Br, Bu)

Deep loamy soils on terraces adjacent to
small creeks

Moderate to High to about 26
inches below the surface

Brystal fine sandy loam
(BxB, ByB)

Deep loamy soils on convex-form uplands

Minimal to Moderate to about
20 inches below the surface

Catarina clay (CGB)

Deep clayey soils on gently sloping
upland areas

Minimal to Moderate to about
26 inches below the surface

Chacon clay loam (Cha,
Chb)

Deep clayey soils on gently sloping
upland areas

Minimal to Moderate to about
17 inches below the surface

Dilley fine sandy loam
(DFC)

Shallow soils on upland areas

Minimal to 10 inches below
the surface

Duval fine sandy loam
(DYB)

Deep loamy soils on gently undulating
uplands

Minimal to moderate to about
38 inches below the surface

Pryor sandy loam (PrB, PyB)

Moderately deep loamy soils on gently
undulating uplands

Minimal to moderate to about
9 inches below the surface

Randado fine sandy loam
(RAC)

Shallow loam on gently sloping ridges
and interfluves

Minimal to about 8 inches
below the surface

Tonio fine sandy loam
(TOB)

Deep loamy soil on gently undulating
uplands

Minimal to Moderate to about
30 inches below the surface

Webb fine sandy loam
(WEB)

Deep loamy soils on gently undulating
uplands

Minimal to moderate to about
13 inches below the surface

17

Figure 7. Soils in the western portion of the Strait Lateral.

Figure 8. Soils in the middle portion of the Strait Lateral.

18

Figure 9. Soils in the northeastern portion of the Strait Lateral.

Field Survey Goals and Methodology
Goals
The project goals focused on archaeological issues that could be addressed by the types of data
obtained through pedestrian survey, along with limited shovel testing. The topics addressed were
site type, distribution, density, size, depth, and stratigraphy. The theoretical framework is
structured around patterns of settlement, mobility, subsistence, and social systems for the South
Texas region.
The goals of the project were to:
1)

locate and record cultural locations and sites in the project area using a systematic
survey methodology;

2)

quantify site size, as well as depth, and stratigraphy; and,

3)

place any diagnostic artifacts within the regional time frame.

19

Methods and Levels of Effort
Two archaeologists conducted a pedestrian survey of selected portions of the Strait Lateral as
shown in Figure 3 on July 23, 2011. By then, the pipeline had already been installed and surface
visibility ranged from 90 to 100 percent. All cutbanks, and rodent and mammal backdirt piles along
the right-of-way were thoroughly examined, as well the recently excavated and evenly spread
backdirt from pipeline construction. In accordance with a general “no collection” policy, cultural
material of a redundant nature, both prehistoric and historic, were not to be collected. Instead, they
were to be fully documented via sketches, field photographs, and copious notes.
Exceptions were to be made for diagnostic artifacts, particularly those artifacts which could be
considered as significant to the interpretation of Texas prehistory, such as Early ArchaicPaleoindian transitional, or Paleoindian diagnostics. These were to be collected on a case-by-case
basis, and that decision was left up to the Principal Investigator and/or the Project Archaeologist.
Historic buildings, trash scatters, or other historic occurrences adjacent to the ROW were to be
documented with photographs and included in this report of investigations.

Results of the
Investigations

Surface Examination
and Shovel Testing
During the survey it
became readily apparent
that approximately 90
percent of the project’s
surface area was
mechanically disturbed by
the installation of the
pipeline. However, that
provided for excellent
surface visibility, and
allowed for the potential
discovery of any artifacts
that may have been
unearthed along the
right-of-way. The only
evidence of cultural
material observed
consisted of a prehistoric Figure 10. Location of Isolated Find and 41DM181 on Las Vegas
lithic scatter and a (1974) 7.5' USGS topographic map.

20

prehistoric isolated piece of lithic debitage near Espio Creek (Figure 10). The prehistoric lithic
scatter has been assigned trinomial 41DM181.

41DM181
41DM181 (Figures 11
and 12) is a prehistoric
lithic scatter located
along the eastern edge of
Es p io C reek. The
majority of the site has
been cleared and the
Strait Lateral had been
installed through the site
upon our documentation
of the site in July 2012.
Large elms and mesquite
trees with assorted brush
and herbaceous weedy
understory is present on
the southern boundary of
the site in the uncleared
area (see Figure 12).
Surface visibility in July
2011 on the cleared
right-of-way was
excellent. Soil on the site
consists of Webb fine
sandy loam (WEB), deep
loamy soils found on
gently undulating uplands
in this area of Dimmit
County (Stevens and
Arriaga 1985). There is a
minimal to moderate
potential for deeply
buried, intact, and
potentially significant
cultural materials to exist
at this locale within these
soils.

Figure 11. 41DM181 site map.

Figure 12. Photo of 41DM181; facing southeast
21

A systematic pedestrian surface survey revealed a heavily disturbed and scattered area of
prehistoric debitage scattered across an area of roughly 450 square meters (see Figure 11). As a
whole, artifacts at 41DM181 suggest that they are from a temporary occupation along the east
edge of Espio Creek where lithic reduction and tool manufacturing took place. Without the
discovery of temporally diagnostic artifacts, the time period of this temporary occupation remains
an unknown. Although interesting for its location on the landscape and the prehistory in this part
of Dimmit County, its cultural resources research value is considered minimal, and Tierras
Antiguas assesses the site as non-significant.

Isolated Find
Other than those artifacts observed on site 41DM181, the only artifact observed along those
portions of the Strait Lateral subjected to a surface examination was a non-heated chert exterior
flake. It was found on an eroded and heavily disturbed slope west of Espio Creek (see Figure 10),
and is considered to be a non-significant find.

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
A pedestrian survey of selected areas along the Strait Lateral revealed no evidence of cultural
material other than a prehistoric lithic scatter and one isolated prehistoric piece of lithic debitage.
The lithic scatter was documented as 41DM181, and although interesting for its location on the
landscape and the prehistory in this part of Dimmit County, its cultural resources research value
is considered minimal, and Tierras Antiguas assesses the site as non-significant. In addition, the
single, isolated flake is also considered as non-significant.
Accordingly, Tierras Antiguas’ assessment is that the construction of the Strait lateral did not
impact any significant archaeological deposits. However, Tierras Antiguas recommends that if any
additional, undiscovered cultural resources are encountered during any further development along
this right-of-way, such finds should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any
qualified archaeological consultant.

22

References Cited

Arbingast, S. A., L. G. Kennamer, R. H. Ryan, A. Lo, D. L. Karney, C. P. Zlatkovic, M. E.
Bonine, and R. G. Steele
1973

Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at Austin.

Archer, S.
1995

Tree-grass Dynamics in a Prosopis-thornscrub Savannah Parkland: Reconstructing
the Past and Predicting the Future. Ecoscience 2(1):84-99.

2010

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
October 1, 2010].

Atlas

Black, S. L.
1989

Environmental Setting. In From the Gulf Coast to the Rio Grande: Human
Adaptation in the Central, South, and Lower Pecos, Texas, by T. R. Hester, S. L.
Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. J. Reinhard, and L. C. Bement, pp.
5-17. Research Series No. 33, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Black, S. L., and A. J. McGraw
1985

The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change and Continuity in the Upper
Salado Creek Drainage, South-Central Texas. Archaeological Survey Report, No.
100. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Blair, W. F.
1950

The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-117.

Boyd, D. K.
1997

Caprock Canyonlands Archeology: A Synthesis of the Late Prehistory and History
of Lake Alan Henry and the Texas Panhandle-Plains. Reports of Investigations,
Number 110, 2 Volumes. Prewitt & Associates, Austin.

Brune, G.
1981

Springs of Texas. Branch-Smith, Fort Worth.

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981

Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

23

Chipman, D. E.
1992

Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Collins, M. B.
1995

Forty Years of Archaeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361–400.

Covey, C. (editor)
1961

Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier Books,
New York.

Creel, D. G.
1986

A Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in West Central Texas. Unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Arizona, Tucson.

Diamond, D.D., D. H. Riskind, and S. L. Orzell
1987

A Framework for Plant Community Classification and Conservation in Texas. The
Texas Journal of Science 39(3):203-221.

Dillehay, T.
1974

Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19(64):180–196.

Fox, A. A., and D. E. Fox
1967

The Classen Rockshelter, 41BX23. Manuscript on file. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Gabriel, W. J., D. Arriage, and J. W. Stephens
1994

Soil Survey of La Salle County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C., in Cooperation with the Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station, College Station, Texas.

Gould, F. W.
1975

Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. Texas Agricultural
Experimentation Station, College Station.

Hall, G. D., T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black
1986

The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir, Southern Ttexas: Results of
Phase II Archaeological Investigations. Choke Canyon Series: Volume 10. Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

24

Hallenbeck, C.
1971

Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca: The Journey and Route of the First European to
Cross the Continent of North America, 1534-1536. Kennikat Press Scholarly
Reprints, Port Washington, New York.

Hester, T. R.
2004

The Prehistory of South Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, pp. 127-154. Edited
by T. K. Perttula. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

1995

The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:427–459.

1984

Fragments, Flints, and Footprints: The Prehistory of Dimmit County. In Dimmit
County Mesquite Roots, Volume I, pp. 1-6, edited by L. K. Tidwell. Wind River
Press. Austin, TX.

1980

Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur Archaeologists.
Corona Press, San Antonio.

Hester, T. R., L. D. White, and J. White
1969

Archeological Materials from the Oulline Site (41LS3) and Other Sites in La Salle
County, Southwest Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. XXI, No. 2.

Highley, L., C. Graves, and G. Judson
1978

Archeological Investigations at Scorpion Cave (41ME7), Medina County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:139–194.

Hughes, J. T.
1991

Prehistoric Cultural Developments on the High Texas Plains. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 60:1-55 (1989 volume published in 1991).

Inglis, J. M.
1964

A History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain. Bulletin #45. Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department, Austin.

Leach, J. D., and C. B. Bousman
2001

Cultural and Secondary Formation Processes: On the Dynamic Accumulation of
Burned Rock Middens, Chapter 7. In Test Excavations at the Culebra Creek Site,
41BX126, San Antonio, Texas by D. L. Nickels, C. B. Bousman, J. D. Leach, and
D. A. Cargill, pp. 119-145. Archaeological Survey Report, No. 265, Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio and
Archeological Studies, Report 3, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.

25

Leach, J. D., D. L. Nickels, B. K. Moses, and R. Jones
2001

Appendix D. Estimating Rates of Burned Rock Discard: Results from an
Experimental Earth Oven. In Test Excavations at the Culebra Creek Site,
41BX126, San Antonio, Texas by D. L. Nickels, C. B. Bousman, J. D. Leach, and
D. A. Cargill, pp. 119-145. Archaeological Survey Report, No. 265, Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio

Lee, D. S., C. R. Gilbert, C. H. Hocutt, R. E. Jenkins, P. E. McAllister, J. R. Stauffer, Jr.
1980

Atlas of North American Freshwater Fishers. North Carolina Biological Survey
Publication 1980-12, North Carolina State Museum of Natural History.

Leffler, J.
1996a Dimmit County. The New Handbook of Texas Online, Volume 2, pp. 645-648.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
1996b La Salle County. The New Handbook of Texas Online, Volume 4, pp. 83-86.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Mauldin, R. P., D. L. Nickels, and C. J. Broehm
2003 Archaeological Testing to Determine the National Register Eligibility Status of
18 Prehistoric Sites on Camp Bowie, Brown County, Texas. Archaeological
Survey Report, No. 334, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio and the Adjutant General’s Department of Texas,
Department of Facilities and Engineering Environmental Branch, Austin, Texas.
McKinney, W. W.
1981 Early Holocene Adaptations in Central and Southern Texas: The Problem of the
Paleo-Indian-Archaic Transition. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:91–120.
Map
2012

Biotic Provinces of Texas.
http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/landwater/land/maps/gis/map_downloads/images/p
wd_mp_e0100_1070ae_6.gif. [Accessed February 1, 2012].

2010a Perry Casteñeda Library Map Collection. Big Wells 1939-1940 USACE
Topographic Map. http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/topo [Accessed October 11,
2010].
2010b Perry Casteñeda Library Map Collection. Big Wells 1972 7.5' USGS Topographic
Map http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/topo/texas [Accessed October 11, 2010]
2010c Perry Casteñeda Library Map Collection. Las Vegas 1974 USGS Topographic
Map http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/topo/texas [Accessed October 11, 2010]

26

2010d

Perry Casteñeda Library Map Collection. Snake Creek 1974 USGS
Topographic Map http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/topo/texas [Accessed
October 11, 2010]

Nickels, D. L.
2011 Letter Report submitted to Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd., by
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, Martindale Texas (April 7, 2011).
Nunley, P., and T. R. Hester
1966 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Dimmit County, Texas. The Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. XVIII, No. 3, pp. 233-253.
Peter, D. E.
1982

Alternative Perspectives on Burned Rock Middens, In Archaeological
Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, Vol. 2,
compiled and edited by T. R. Hays, pp. 20.1–20.15. Archaeology Program,
Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.

Prewitt, E. R.
1991 Burned Rock Middens: A Summary of Previous Investigations and Interpretations.
In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An Archeological Symposium, edited T.
R. Hester, pp. 25–32. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Robinson, R. L.
1982 Biosilica Analysis of Three Prehistoric Archaeological Sites in the Choke Canyon
Reservoir, Live Oak County, Texas: Preliminary Summary of Climatic
Implications. In Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir, South
Texas: The Phase I Findings, edited by G. D. Hall, S. L. Black, and C. Graves, pp.
597-610. Choke Canyon Series, No. 5. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Skelton, D. W.
1977 Archeological Investigations at the Fayette Power Project, Fayette County, Texas.
Research Report 60. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Stahle, D. W. , and M. K. Cleaveland
1995 Texas Paleoclimatic Data from Daily to Millennial Time Scales. In The Changing
Climate of Texas: Predictability and Implications for the Future, edited by J.
Norwine, J. R. Giardino, G. R. North, and J. B. Valdes, pp. 49-69. GeoBooks,
Texas A&M University, College Station.

27

Steele, D. G., and C. Assad Hunter
1986 Analysis of Vertebrate Faunal Remains from 41MC222 and 41MC296, McMullen
County, Texas. In The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir, Southern
Texas: Results of Phase II Archaeological Investigations, edited by G. D. Hall, T.
R. Hester, and S. L. Black. Choke Canyon Series, No. 10. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Stevens, J. W., and D. Arriaga
1985 Soil Survey of Dimmit and Zavala Counties. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C., in Cooperation with
the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, College Station, Texas.
Story, D. A.
1985

Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coastal Plain. In
Prehistoric Food Production in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 19–56.
Anthropological Papers No. 75. Museum of Anthropology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Taylor, A. J., and C. L. Highly
1995 Archaeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. 2 volumes. Studies in Archeology No. 20.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Turner, S. E., T. R. Hester, and R. L. McReynolds
2011 Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Gulf Publishing Co., Houston, Texas.
Web Soil Survey
2012 D i m m i t
a n d
Z a v a l a
C o u n t i e s , T e x a s .
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed February
16, 2012]
Weir, F. A.
1976

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. Anthropology
Department, Washington State University.

28

