A Cultural Resources Survey of the 420-Meter
Whitecotton Unit C 1H Pipeline in NorthCentral Dimmit County, Texas

Prepared for Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd.
San Antonio, Texas
by
David L. Nickels, Principal Investigator
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations
Archaeology Report #78
January 2012

Abstract
Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd. of San Antonio, Texas contracted with Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations (TAAI) to conduct a complete field survey of the 420meter Whitecotton Unit C 1H pipeline to be installed by Mockingbird Midstream Gas Services,
L.L.C. (Mockingbird) in north-central Dimmit County, Texas. The project was entirely privately
funded, and the properties across which the pipeline will cross are privately owned; therefore, no
Texas Antiquities Permit was required.
A pedestrian survey along the 420-meter right-of-way was conducted by two archaeologists on
July 18, 2011. During the course of the survey an early 1900s historic trash scatter was
documented. In the opinion of Tierras Antiguas, the newly documented site does not possess the
integrity that warrants significance. As such, Tierras Antiguas recommended that the development
of the Whitecotton Unit C 1H pipeline as currently aligned be allowed to proceed as planned.
However, Tierras Antiguas further recommended that if any additional, undiscovered cultural
resources were encountered during development, such finds should be examined and evaluated
by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological consultant. No artifacts were collected
during this survey.

Acknowledgments
There are mainly four individuals who are greatly appreciated, and whose efforts contributed to
the successful planning, organization, and completion of this project. They are Mr. David Black,
Ms. Judy Vader, and Mr. Ryan DeBarros, Project Managers at Flatrock Engineering and
Environmental, and Mr. Ronnie Glenewinkel, Environmental Coordinator at Mockingbird
Midstream. All were extremely amiable and helpful throughout the project, and their overall
knowledge of the project contributed significantly to our understanding of the project’s scope of
work.
In addition, I express my sincere gratitude to Tierras Antiguas staff archaeologist Belisario Silva,
who worked hard, long hours, and expressed an attitude and work ethic that ensured this survey
was conducted in a thorough and professional manner.

i

Table of Contents
Title
Page
Abstract.........................................................................................................................................i
Acknowledgments..........................................................................................................................i
List of Figures............................................................................................................. .................ii
List of Tables................................................................................................................................ii
Introduction..................................................................................................................................1
Modern Environmental Setting......................................................................................................2
Paleoenvironment.........................................................................................................................4
Cultural Chronology.....................................................................................................................4
Dimmit County Prehistory and History........................................................................................9
Site Types to be Expected...........................................................................................................10
Cultural Resources Background Review......................................................................................13
Soils............................................................................................................................................16
Survey Goals and Methodology.................................................................................................17
Results of the Investigations.......................................................................................................18
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations...........................................................................24
References Cited.........................................................................................................................25

List of Figures
Figure
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

Page

Dimmit County and project location.....................................................................................1
Whitecotton Unit C 1H pipeline location in Dimmit County................................................1
Whitecotton Unit C 1H pipeline on large topographic maps................................................2
Physiographic regions of Texas............................................................................................3
Biotic provinces of Texas.....................................................................................................3
South Texas cultural chronology..........................................................................................6
Previous surveys and background reviews.........................................................................15
Soils map of the Project Area.............................................................................................16
41DM176 site map.............................................................................................................18
Photo of 41DM176............................................................................................................19
Photo of shotgun shell base and rifle cartridge...................................................................19
Photo of ceramics at 41DM176.........................................................................................20
Photo of bottle glass sherds at 41DM176..........................................................................23

List of Tables
Table
Page
1. Soils Dissected by the Whitecotton Unit C 1H Pipeline......................................................17

ii

Introduction
Flatrock Engineering and
Environmental, Ltd., requested a cultural
resources survey of the proposed 420meter Whitecotton Unit C 1H pipeline,
to be installed by Mockingbird
Midstream Gas Services, L.L.C.
(Mockingbird) in north-central Dimmit
County, Texas, and
hereinafter
occasionally referred to as the Project
Area (PA) (Figures 1-3). Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations
(TAAI) conducted a pedestrian survey
along the right-of-way on July 18, 2011.
Figure 1. Location of Dimmit County and the Project
Area in Texas.

Modern
Environmental
Setting
Climate
and
Vegetation
Dimmit county is
located in south-central
Texas near its southern
border with Mexico (see
Figure 1). Its current
political boundary
encompasses 1,307
square miles. The
generally flat to rolling
t errai n ranges i n
elevation from about
500-800 feet above
mean sea level. Clayey
Figure 2. Location of the Whitecotton Unit C 1H pipeline in Dimmit
and loamy soils support
County.
the growth of small
predominately mesquite trees, and thorny scrub brush with assorted cacti and grassy understory.
With its semi-arid environment, the county is generally frost-free from mid-February through
1

early December, allowing for a 290-day
growing season. The average annual
rainfall is about 22 inches, with most
rainfall occurring in May and September.
These peaks are the result of
thunderstorms bearing moist air from the
Gulf of Mexico to the east, and the
Pacific Ocean much farther to the west.
Dimmit County is known as part of the
Winter Garden Region for the vegetables
grown there (Leffler 1996; Stevens and
Arriaga 1985).
However, rainfall amounts vary
significantly from year to year, and the
high evapotranspiration effects in the
area effectively offset any beneficial
surplus of annual rainfall. This is another
reason irrigation systems are so
necessary, and commonly found in use
today throughout the area. Summers are
indeed hot and dry, with temperatures
consistently hovering above 1000F,
although humidity is generally low Figure 3. Whitecotton Unit C 1H pipeline on large
compared to environments closer to the topographic map.
Gulf Coast. Overall, the county’s
climate can be classified as subtropical steppe.
Hydrology
The Nueces River and the Rio Grande are the major southeasterly trending rivers draining the
South Texas region. A subtle divide through the northeastern portion of the county causes
numerous intermittent creeks to flow north into the Nueces River, and numerous others of the
same type to drain southward into the Rio Grande. Many drainages intermittently flow into both
rivers during infrequent seasonal periods of abundant rainfall. Although there are many springs
in Dimmit County, very few are active due primarily to the dip of the substrate shales which carry
these subterranean seeps to the south and east. As a result, some of these active seeps/springs can
be found on the Mexican side of the national border. Ancient springs that may have existed in the
area at one time have likely succumbed to overgrazing and irrigation pumping during modern
times (Brune 1981). During our investigation of the project area in March 2011, we observed no
flowing water or niche pools.

2

Flora and Fauna
The project area lies within the South
Texas Plain/Brush Country vegetation
area as defined by Gould (1975), and the
regional flora of South Texas has been
classified as being part of the
Tamaulipan biotic province extending
out from northeast Mexico (Figures 4
and 5). This is the only part of Texas
where some vegetation exhibits growth
throughout the year (Blair 1950; Map
2011a). Thorny brush is the dominant
vegetation today, but this is a relatively
recent occurrence, with a mix of woody
and grassland species providing a
savanna environment during prehistoric
times (Archer 1995; Black 1989; Hester
1980; Inglis 1964). The original
vegetation was an open grassland mixed
with brushy chaparral. Oaks, pecan, and
ash were common along perennial
streams. Due in part to overgrazing and
the exclusion of fire, the invasion of Figure 4. Physiographic regions of Texas
woody species has changed the (http://www.lib.utexas.edu/geo/pics/txphysio.jpg)
vegetation into “Texas brush country”
dominated by mesquite, acacia, spiny
hackberry, brazil, whitebrush, lotebrush,
and others (Diamond et al. 1987:203221). On sandy soils, the brush includes
mesquite with mixed grasses. In contrast,
clay soils support mesquite (Proposis
juliflora), various species of Acacia, and
mimosa, granjeno or desert hackberry
(Celtis pallida), lignum vitae (Porliera
angustifolia), cenizo (Leucophyllum
texanum), white brush (Aloysia texana),
prickly pear (Opuntia lindheeimeri),
tasajillo (Opuntia leptocaulis), and
species of Condalia and Castela (Blair
1950).
The South Texas Plains/Brush Country
exhibits some of the greatest mammalian Figure 5. Blair’s (1950) biotic provinces of Texas
species diversity in the state. Sixty-one (Map 2011a).
3

species of mammals, 36 snakes, 19 lizards, and several species of turtles, salamanders, and frogs
are present in the region (Blair 1950). Approximately 50 species of fish have been identified in
the lower Rio Grande (Lee et al. 1980).

Paleoenvironment
The paleoenvironment of south Texas is as varied as the landscape, and the South Texas
Paleoclimatic record contains significant gaps primarily due to the scarcity of deep, finely
stratified, and well-dated deposits (Stahle and Cleaveland 1995:51). To date, the best record of
paleoenvironmental reconstruction in South Texas has been accomplished by Robinson (1982)
from analysis of phytoliths from three archaeological sites in Live Oak County. Overall, the data
there along with data from other sites in Texas suggest that the waning of the Pleistocene, or lateglacial period, marked a transition from a cooler, wetter environment to one that steadily grew
warmer and drier, and more seasonal, with intermittent moist periods through about 6,000 years
ago.
Most researchers then generally agree that the period between 6,000 and 3,000 years ago was
much warmer and drier than today. Since that time, intermittent moist and dry intervals have
occurred over the past 3,000 years.
It is unlikely that the climate has changed significantly in the past few thousand years in the area
that would significantly induce vegetation changes. The greater changes have been induced by
human intervention through the clearing of wooded areas along the river and streams for
construction purposes, pumping more water for irrigation which has lowered water tables, and
overgrazing by livestock. Although there are still many seeps, springs, and streams in the area,
they most probably flowed with greater abundance during wetter intervals than exist at the present
time, providing an abundant resource for prehistoric occupants.

Cultural Chronology
The project area lies within the South Texas Archaeological region as defined by Hester (1980,
1995, 2004; Figure 6). Refining a cultural chronology for south Texas is problematic, due to the
compressed nature of the archaeological record and the scarcity of stratified sites excavated within
the region. The largest and most informational cultural resources survey in South Texas was that
conducted prior to development of the Choke Canyon Reservoir in Atascosa, Live Oak, and
McMullen counties (e.g. Hall et al. 1986). Nevertheless, Hester (1995:433) acknowledges the
paucity of information that exists for south Texas and as such offers only a “general framework”
for prehistoric periods particular to the region (Figure 6). All dates are given as approximate years
before present (B.P.), i.e., before 1950.

4

Paleoindian (11,200 - 7950 B.P.)
This period is estimated at between ca.11,200–7950 B.P. in south Texas (Hester 1999). The
Paleoindian period began toward the close of the Pleistocene. Diagnostic artifacts of the early
Paleoindian interval include Clovis and Folsom projectile points. The wide distribution of Clovistype points across most of North America and even into Central America suggests a wide
dispersal and interaction of the people who made them. Other artifacts associated with the Clovis
culture include bifaces and prismatic blades, engraved stones, bone and ivory points, stone bolas,
ochre, and shaft straighteners. During the late Paleoindian interval, the first stemmed lanceolate
points, such as Angostura, Golondrina, St. Mary’s Hall, and Barber (among a few others) appear.
In general, the Paleoindian adaptation has been considered to be one of small bands of nomadic,
big-game hunters following herds of Late Pleistocene fauna, including mammoth, mastodons,
bison, camel, and horse, across North America (Black 1989). More recently, emphasis has been
placed on the wide diversity of plants and animals used for subsistence by these early Americans,
such as turtles and tortoises, alligators, mice, badgers, and raccoons, although they undoubtedly
hunted the large animals as well (Collins 1995:381). Known Clovis sites include killsites,
quarries, caches, open campsites, ritual sites, and burials (Hester 1995:433–436). A Folsom
interval follows the Clovis. Folsom artifacts are fairly common in south Texas; however, no camp
sites or killsites have been found south of a large workshop, Pavo Real (41BX52), in Bexar
County (Hester 1995:434–435). Most Paleoindian finds in south Texas have consisted of surface
lithic scatters on upland terraces and ridges (Black 1989). As the warming that marks the
transition from Pleistocene to Holocene climates began to take effect in Texas, prehistoric
inhabitants adapted with changes in lifestyle. This climatic shift is also marked by the decline and
extinction of mammoth, mastodon, horse, camel, and giant bison (Bison antiquus). Large
gregarious game animals were perhaps extinct in Texas. Human hunters were forced to
concentrate on deer, antelope, and other medium-size or smaller game. Changes in the subsistence
base required technological shifts that mark the beginning of a new cultural period known as the
Archaic.
Early Archaic (7950 - 4450 B.P.)
Hester (1995:436–438) identifies the Early Archaic, with Early Corner Notched and Early Basal
Notched dart points, as roughly dating between 7950 to 4450 B.P. The extinction of large herds
of megafauna and the changing climate at the beginning of the Holocene stimulated a behavioral
change by the Prehistoric inhabitants of south Texas (McKinney 1981). While the basic huntergatherer adaptation probably remained intact, an economic shift away from big game hunting was
necessary. In general, more intensive exploitation of local and smaller resources such as deer, fish,
and plant bulbs is indicated by greater densities of ground-stone artifacts, fire-cracked rock
cooking features, and more specialized tools. Weir (1976) speculates that Early Archaic groups
were small and highly mobile, an inference based on the fact that Early Archaic sites are thinly

5

distributed and that diagnostic
projectile point types are seen
across a wide area, including
most of Texas and northern
Mexico. Story (1985) believes
that population densities were
low during the Early Archaic,
and that groups consisted of
related individuals in small bands
with “few constraints on their
mobility” (Story 1985:39). Their
economy was based on the
utilization of a wide range of
resources, especially such yearround resources as prickly pear
and lechugilla, as well as rodents,
rabbits, and deer.
Middle Archaic (4450 - 2350
B.P.)
Hester (1995:438–441) suggests
that the period between 4450 and
2350 B.P. reflects the Middle
Archaic in south Texas. The
Middle Archaic appears to have
been a time of increased
population, based on the large
number of sites from this period
(Story 1985:40; Weir 1976:125,
128). On the South Texas Plains,
exploitation of widely scattered,
year-round resources such as
prickly pear continued (Campbell
and Campbell 1981:13–15), as
did hunting deer and rabbit. Weir
(1976) believes that the widely
scattered bands prevalent in the
Early Archaic now began to
coalesce, at least during the
acorn-gathering season, into
larger groups who shared the
intensive work of gathering and
processing the acorn harvest Figure 6. South Texas Archaeological region cultural
(W ei r 1976: 126). M any chronology.
6

researchers believe burned rock middens are a result of this endeavor (Creel 1986; Prewitt 1991;
Weir 1976). The common presence of deer remains in burned rock middens encourages the view
that deer processing took place at burned rock midden sites. Bison bone is encountered in
archaeological sites in south Texas, at least occasionally, during all but the earliest part of the
Middle Archaic (Dillehay 1974). Cemeteries make their first appearance during this period,
suggesting a movement toward less mobility and perhaps territorialism. One of the earliest
occurrences dating to the south Texas Middle Archaic, is Loma Sandia in Live Oak County,
which dates between ca. 2550 and 2750 B.P. (Taylor and Highley 1995).
Late Archaic (2350 - 1250 B.P.)
Hester believes the Late Archaic in south Texas may be defined as between 2350–1250 B.P, Some
researchers believe populations increased throughout the Late Archaic (Prewitt 1985), while
others feel populations remained the same or fell during this period (Black 1989:30). Subsistence
is assumed to have become less specialized on acorns, in favor of a broad spectrum subsistence
base (Black 1989:30). Story (1985:44–45) believes the presence of cemeteries indicates that Late
Archaic populations in central and south Texas were increasing and becoming more territorial.
Although inhabitants of the South Texas Plain near Brownsville and Rockport had begun to make
pottery by about 1750 B.P., the northern part of the plain was still “pre-ceramic” until 1,000 years
later (Story 1985:45–47). Late Archaic points tend to be much smaller than Middle Archaic
points.
Transitional Archaic (2250 - 1250 B.P.)
A late subperiod or interval of the Late Archaic is frequently referred to as the Terminal Archaic
or Transitional Archaic. Turner and Hester (1993) cite data placing the Transitional Archaic as
2250–1250 B.P. Although Hester may lump current data into a Late Archaic period, he cautions
that more evidence will likely result in what may be termed as a “Terminal Archaic” period during
the latter part of the Late Archaic in south Texas. This Terminal Archaic period is represented by
diagnostics such as Ensor, Frio, and Matamoras points which appear to overlap the Late Archaic
and Late Prehistoric periods (Hester 1995:442). Weir (1976) believes this marked a transition
period to localized area sites, a disappearance of burned rock middens and bison, and a
reappearance of highly mobile hunters and gatherers. Others (Black and McGraw 1985; Peter
1982; Skelton 1977) argue that in some locations burned rock middens did not disappear and sites
were more intensely occupied during the Transitional Archaic period.
Late Prehistoric (1250 - 420 B.P.)
The term “Late Prehistoric” is commonly used to designate the period following the Late Archaic
in south Texas. Generally, the Late Prehistoric period is thought of as spanning the period
between A. D. 700 - 1530 ([1250 - 420 B.P.] [Hester 1995]). A series of distinctive traits mark
the shift from the Archaic to the Late Prehistoric period, including the technological shift to the
bow and arrow and the introduction of pottery to central Texas and the northern South Texas
Plain (Black 1989:32; Story 1985:45–47). Two distinct phases recognized within the Late
Prehistoric are the Austin and Toyah. During the Austin phase, there appears to be a subtle
transition from expanding stem projectile points that may have been used as dart points, as well
as early arrow points. The most prevalent point found in Austin phase sites is the Scallorn arrow
7

point. Settlement shifts into rockshelters such as Scorpion Cave in Medina County (Highley et
al. 1978) and Classen Rockshelter in northern Bexar County (Fox and Fox 1967) have been noted.
Cemeteries from this period often reveal evidence of conflict (Black 1989:32).
Beginning rather abruptly at about 650 B.P., a shift in technology occurred. The Perdiz arrow
point may best represent the appearance of a distinct culture in south-central Texas lasting for
about 300 years, which archaeologists have labeled the Toyah phase. Hester (1995:444)
recognizes this phase as the “best documented Late Prehistoric pattern” throughout south Texas,
with dates ranging between ca. 650/700 to 300/350 B.P. (A.D. 1250/1300 to 1600/1650).
In addition to Perdiz points, evidence of a Toyah culture is manifested as bone-tempered pottery,
bone spatulates, awls, and beads, stone endscrapers, beveled knives, and expediently utilized
flakes. Briefly, expedient lithic technology involves removing flakes from a core in a nonstandard
manner; the purpose is to knock off sharp flakes for immediate use, selecting the ones that best
suit the need at the time. This technology differs from formal, standardized core reduction and the
manufacturing of formal, usually bifacial tools. Expedient lithic technology is a continent-wide
phenomonon indicative of increased sedentism, and is observed in Toyah assemblages in Texas.
Whether the Toyah phase seen in the south-central Texas archaeological record is a result of a
group of people moving into the region, or adapted technologies from the region’s periphery is
a matter of conjecture. Steele and Assad-Hunter (1986) argue for the occurrence of a distinct
change in diet between the Late Archaic and the Late Prehistoric components in two sites in the
Choke Canyon Reservoir area in south Texas. Analysis of the number of identified specimens
(NISP) shows a marked increase in artiodactyla elements present during the later part of the Late
Prehistoric, an increase largely due to the addition of bison to the “menu” (Steele and AssadHunter 1986:468).
Whether or not agriculture was practiced during this period in south Texas has not been
documented. There simply is not enough evidence to postulate there was ever a significant
presence of maize in the area. The later arrival of the Spanish during the later
Protohistoric/Historic period brought significant cultivars to south Texas.
Protohistoric/Historic (420 B.P. - present)
The end of the Late Prehistoric and beginning of the Historic period in south Texas is
characterized by written accounts of European contact with indigenous groups. The Protohistoric
period begins in 1528 when Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts of southeast and
south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the hunter-gatherers of Texas
and northern Mexico (e.g., Hallenbeck 1971). Cabeza de Vaca’s account of his stay with the
Miriami in 1533-34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves
to the easily exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter and summer, occasionally
sending a hunting party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live
near each other in the semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other
succulents (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13-37).

8

Linguistically, early protohistoric accounts of the late 1500s indicate that a large group which
spoke Cohuilteco inhabited the area now known as south-central Texas. Coahuiltecan is a term
coined by Mexican linguists in the 1800s, and the name refers to the many small bands of Native
Americans who lived in northeastern Coahuila, Mexico and south Texas. The Coahuiltecans were
rapidly dispersed or killed during the Protohistoric period.
By the 1540s and 1550s Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico, with
several hundred thousand cattle, using Indian slaves as labor. Large mining ventures in northern
Mexico did the same. This encroachment from the south forced Native Americans to escape into
the south-central Texas region.
The period between de Vaca’s written account and the advent of Spanish missions in the late
1600s and early 1700s is referred to as the Protohistoric; a time when few, scant written
documents exist detailing Native American life outside the missions. The Historic period then,
is generally thought of as beginning in the 1700s.
Some 30 miles south of Eagle Pass, the Spanish established Mission San Juan Bautista in 1700
(now modern-day Guerrero). Early Spanish explorers then repeatedly traveled the Camino Real
enroute to newly established missions and settlements in today’s modern Texas throughout the
1700s and 1800s. Mexican families from across the river expanded into Texas, and these families
trace their roots to the early development of the area. In the ensuing years, lawlessness prevailed,
with saloons, gambling houses, outlaws, and slave hunters prevalent.

Dimmit County Prehistory and History
Other than early work done by A. T. Jackson in 1932, perhaps the earliest systematic
archaeological survey in Dimmit County was conducted by members of the Carrizo Springs High
School Archeological Society in 1964 and 1965. Their work resulted in the documentation of 24
archaeological sites in the county, ranging in age from the Early Archaic through the Late
Prehistoric Toyah phase (Nunley and Hester 1966).
Indian artifacts found in Dimmit County indicate that the area has been occupied for about 11,000
years. Plentiful food sources such as wild game, fruits, seeds, and roots made the land hospitable.
Early technology included tools from wood and stone, woven basketry, sewed rabbitskin robes,
and a very effective weapon was the atlatl, a throwing stick that greatly increased the deadliness
of their spears (Hester 1984; Leffler 1996). Perhaps as early as 1,300 years ago, they learned to
make pottery and to hunt with bows and arrows. “During the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, the Coahuiltecan Indians native to Dimmit County were squeezed out by other Indian
who were migrating into the area and by the Spanish, who were moving up from the south. Many
of the Coahuiltecans were taken to San Juan Bautista in Coahuila. Apaches and Comanches
moved in to take their place” (Leffler 1996).
“No permanent Spanish settlement seems to have been established in the future Dimmit County.
9

Beginning in the late 1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio
Road, a camino real, to and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. After the Mexican War of
Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage its citizens to settle in
Texas. Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and 1834 that included territory
now in Dimmit County. None of the recipients seems to have made use of the land, however. By
1836, when Texas became independent from Mexico, the area remained populated almost solely
by Indians” (Leffler 1996).
Between the Texas Revolution and the Mexican War (1836–46), most of Dimmit County lay in
the disputed area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River, and it became a haven for
desperate characters until about 1865. Carrizo Springs was founded in 1865, with the new settlers
who lived in jacals or dugouts frequently being harrassed by hostile Indians and outlaws. Due in
part tobeing pursued by the Texas Rangers, and being decimated by disease, the Indians were
forced to leave Dimmit County by 1877, and in 1880 Carrizo Springs became the county seat for
the newly formed county. By 1880, cattle ranching was firmly established, and although sheep
ranching was also an important part of the economy at the time, by 1900 extended droughts and
an increase in predators combined to make sheep ranching a tough and dwindling business
(Leffler 1996).
Although the residents of Dimmit County learned to cope with the sparse annual rainfall, artesian
wells ushered in an era of large vegetable truck farms in the 1890s, and Dimmit County became
known as part of the Texas Winter Garden Region, one of the most prolific vegetable-growing
areas in the country.
As with rest of the nation, the Great Depression many of the county’s farmers were forced to cut
back their once-lucrative vegetable production during the depression, and fell back on raising
poultry, hogs, and dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in the
county in the 1950s certainly bolstered Dimmit County’s economy, and although large ranches
lay claim to most of the land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much a
progressively increasing part of the county’s development (Leffler 1996).

Site Types That Could be Expected Along the Whitecotton Unit C 1H
Pipeline
Prehistoric Open Campsites
Most numerous among the sites recorded in Dimmit County are prehistoric open campsites
ranging in age from the Paleoindian period through the Historic period (see Figure 6). Some of
these represent a single campfire where a very small group of Native Americans may have
camped for one night. Others are very large, covering very extensive areas representing large
groups of people that stayed for long periods, perhaps seasonally, with ancestral groups returning
to these same campsites over a period of several thousands of years. Cultural remains to be found
at these large campsites include among other items, an abundance of fire-cracked rocks
representing multiple hearths, a wide variety of chipped stone tools and the lithic debris that
10

results from making them, ground and smoothed stones used to grind nuts and seeds, faunal
remains from terrestrial and aquatic animals consumed, bone tools, pottery sherds, and mussel and
snail shells. Open campsites occur in all types of environments, whether that be in a plush riverine
environment that offered a wide variety banquet of plant and animal foodstuffs, or in the uplands
away from flowing water sources. Seasonally, the upland grasses, shrubs, cacti offered a different
food source that could be exploited such as various grass seeds, mesquite beans, prickly pear pads
and tunas, and agave hearts. In addition, at various times, bison were known to graze on the
northern South Texas Plains, and were highly sought after for use as food, hides, and bone tools
(Dillehay 1974).
Depending upon the integrity of these open campsites, archaeologists and the Texas Historical
Commission consider these as perhaps the most significant types of sites in regard to their ability
to contribute to our understanding of south Texas prehistory. A few of the desired ingredients that
can indicate significance include cultural material that is buried beneath the surface in a wellpreserved, stratified, and relatively undisturbed context. Although these situations most frequently
occur within stratified terrace deposits adjacent to streams, they can also occur in upland settings
where the landscape has been generally stable through time. Other ingredients that archaeologists
look for in potentially significant campsites include good organic preservation in the form of
charcoal and/or charred plant remains, faunal preservation, temporally diagnostic stone tools or
ceramics, and intact features such as hearths.
Prehistoric Lithic Scatters or Procurement Sites
Lithic scatters are the next most common type of archaeological site that could be expected along
the Whitecotton Unit C 1H pipeline. These sites simply represent the chipped stone debris and
broken tools that were left behind when Native Americans made new tools or re-sharpened their
old ones. The general absence of fire-cracked rocks and other cultural material normally found
at open campsites suggest that they did not camp there, or remain there for any extended period
of time ( However, small camp fires may have been used to heat-treat chert or quartzite cobbles
to make them more knappable). Yet, they were drawn to these isolated locales because of the
natural outcroppings or surface exposures of good quality raw material such as chert or quartzite
cobbles.
Examples of chipped stone most commonly found at these sites include cobbles with one or two
flakes removed, called ‘tested cobbles’. That is, the Native Americans knew from experience the
quality of stone that could most easily be flaked and reduced for stone tool production, so they
‘tested’ the cobble to judge whether it was useable or not. If the quality was judged to be inferior,
then the cobble was tossed aside. That is why the majority of tested cobbles found on these sites
are of poor quality, coarse-grained material. While the finished stone tool products are carried
away from these sites, what remains are those tools broken during the manufacturing process, and
the thousands of pieces of debitage in the form of flakes and angular debris. Also unique to lithic
scatters where large cobbles are present are snapped ‘quarry blanks’. These are simply cobbles
flakes on both sides, reducing the cobble into a transportable ‘blank’ that can be used to further
reduce it and make finished stone tools from the flakes taken off of it. The unbroken quarry blanks
are usually not found on these sites because they have been carried off, presumably to areas of
11

south Texas where raw material is not readily available. The snapped or broken quarry blanks are
of little or no use, so they are discarded and left behind.
Lithic scatters range in age from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods and can be found
on any landscape setting where gravels or cobbles have been exposed. Notably, gravel outcrops
that were exposed to the surface a few hundred or thousand years ago could be deeply buried
today, and the opposite could also be true; it all depends on the terrain setting and the dynamics
of landscape evolution through time. Most lithic scatters in Dimmit County have been
documented along upper stream terraces abutting the eroded upland slopes.
Prehistoric Quarries and Procurement Sites
Prehistoric quarries and procurement also can range in age from the Paleoindian through Historic
periods, but differ from lithic scatters in that at those sites Native Americans exploited loose
gravels, but at times they specifically sought quarry sites where raw material such as cherts or
quartzites were not yet freed from their parent geologic formation, and they had to be ‘quarried’.
These types of sites are rare in south Texas for two reasons: 1) the geological exposures generally
do not present themselves, and 2) throughout Texas, even in central Texas, it is much easier to
pick up gravels from the surface than to try to mine them from hard rock. Quarried and chipped
stone remains likely to be found at these sites include large chunks of angular cherts or quartzites,
as well as parent material detritus, and flaking debris. Snapped quarry blanks can also be
expected. Although a handful of prehistoric quarries or procurement sites have been recorded in
south Texas, they are rare.
Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens
There are no burned rock middens in Dimmit County. Burned rock middens result from a series
of multiple-use earth ovens that were constructed much like modern-day roasting pits are dug into
the earth for roasting a pig. With repetitive uses, as the larger rocks that serve as heating elements
in the earthen pit fracture and thus become less effective as a thermal source, they are ‘pitched
out’ around the edge of the pit. As the pit becomes unusable, another is dug near by, and the
procedure repeated. Over time, these multiple pits and the ‘pitched out’ fire-cracked rocks
coalesce together, obscuring each pit as indiscernible. (For a full discussion of the formation of
burned rock middens and their documented presence in Texas, see Leach and Bousman 2001;
Leach et al. 2001; Mauldin et al. 2003).
Prehistoric Burial and Cemetery Sites
Although not common, isolated prehistoric burials and cemeteries have been documented in south
Texas. Individual and isolated burials have been found in association with open campsites in both
upland settings as well as in alluvial terraces along streams, but the largest prehistoric cemetery
found in proximity to theZientek Lateral pipeline is 41LK28, in Live Oak County.
Historic Sites
As discussed above in the Cultural Chronology portion of this report, although Spanish ranchers
had established large ranches in northern Mexico by the mid-16th century, and Spanish entradas
12

began penetrating south Texas in the 1700s and 1800s, there is no record of any sort of permanent
structures in the area during those periods (Chipman 1992), the area was generally not considered
safe for settlement by whites until after the Civil War in 1865, and white settlers then began
establishing smaller ranches and farmlands (Leffler 2011).
Because of the vastness of the landscape and the relatively late settlement and development of
south Texas compared to east and central Texas and northern Mexico, historic sites are not
abundant, but they certainly do exist. The most common types to be encountered are related to
ranching and farming endeavors, or small communities from the 19th and 20th centuries. Site types
most commonly include farmsteads or ranches with corrals, cisterns, chimney and foundation
remains from both main houses and outbuildings, related trash dumps, an occasional family burial
or cemetery, school houses, churches, community buildings, and industry-related structures or
construction projects.
In general, the area has apparently been historically used as ranchland pasture, with no
development other than associated ranching activities such as windmills, stock tanks, corrals, and
sparsely scattered outbuildings. In sum, there may be rare and isolated occurrences of early
ranching activities along the Whitecotton Unit C 1H pipeline, but the expectations of
encountering any archaeological site of significance from the 1500s through the mid-1900s along
those portions of the pipeline were minimal.

Results of A Cultural Resources Background Review
The research by TAAI included:
1) A review of the most current literature documenting the prehistory and history of the immediate
area
2) A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas to identify
what cultural resource surveys have been conducted, and what archaeological sites have been
documented within one mile of the project area
3) A search of various websites that offer old maps of the PA
4) A literature review of both published and unpublished reports and manuscripts that describe
the types of archaeological sites that have been documented, and thus provide insight as to the
types of sites that may be expected either in the PA, or immediately adjacent to it
5) A review of a local soils map in order to evaluate the potential for intact and buried cultural
materials either within or immediately adjacent to the PA.

13

Archaeological Atlas Site and Historic Research Results
Even though only a handful of scattered archaeological surveys have been conducted in Dimmit
County (e.g., Nunley and Hester 1966), these very few surveys have identified over 160
archaeological sites. Archaeological remains such as Clovis, Folsom, and Plainview artifacts
indicate that the area was likely occupied by Native Americans as early as 11,000 years ago.
Without written or oral accounts before the 1700s, it is difficult to nearly impossible to truly say
what bands or tribes were within the modern political boundaries of Dimmit County before then.
Only cultural affiliations can be assigned to those groups, equating their technologies and
apparent lifestyles to the successive Paleo-Indian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric periods (Leffler
and Long 2007). Archaeologists have documented an assundry of prehistoric archaeological sites,
including large open campsites that are most commonly located along stream or river terraces
with numerous campfires, where a wide variety of stone tools, grinding stones, pottery sherds, and
butchered animal remains are found. Where gravels outcrop, either along eroded streambeds, or
on higher terrain where more ancient gravels are sometimes exposed in isolated pockets, one can
expect stone chipping stations, or prehistoric quarries.
Nevertheless, the lack of previously documented sites is thought to be a direct reflection of the
lack of cultural resource surveys near the PA that would have located sites, rather than the
probable non-existence of sites. In fact, the PA lies to the west of a large archaeological survey
conducted in anticipation of the construction of the Choke Canyon Reservoir (e.g., Hall et al.
1981).
During that survey conducted in the 1980s, 116 prehistoric archaeological sites located in both
Live Oak and McMullen counties were documented, ranging in age from 350 years ago to 11,000
years ago. Through all the periods of Choke Canyon's history, humans subsisted by hunting and
gathering natural food resources available in the area. Many of the prehistoric sites are situated
on terrace deposits, ridges, and ridge promontories overlooking streams in the upper reaches of
second and third low order tributaries, and provide evidence that there is a moderate to high
probability for archaeological sites to exist in relatively undisturbed sediments and soils along
certain areas of the Whitecotton Unit C 1H pipeline.
In addition, archaeologists from the Center for Archaeological Research at the University of Texas
at San Antonio conducted archaeological investigations at eight historic sites at Choke Canyon
Reservoir. A number of different types of structures were investigated, the purpose being to
extract as much information as possible about architecture, lifestyles, and settlement patterns
during the last half of the 19th century within the reservoir area. Artifacts recovered helped
recreate the life of the people, demonstrating how they met the challenges of living in a frontier
area, and how life changed after the Civil War and the coming of law and order, railroads, and
modern communications (Fox and Ward 1986).
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Atlas of Texas Archeological sites indicated that
there were no cultural resources surveys recorded within one mile of the PA, nor had any
archaeological sites been documented within one mile of the PA (Atlas 2011). However, as shown
14

in Figure 7, the Gonzalez Lateral courses near the northern end of the Whitecotton Unit C 1H
pipeline. When TAAI conducted a cultural resources background review of the Gonzales Lateral
route in June 2011, no archaeological sites were within one mile, and no field investigations were
recommended (Nickels 2011a).
TAAI conducted a full pedestrian survey of the Pistol Lateral in March 2011, resulting in the
discovery of no cultural material (Nickels 2011b). In May 2011, Tierras Antiguas conducted a
background review of the Whitecotton Lateral and recommended a pedestrian survey of the entire
length of the right-of-way, with shovel testing in selected areas at the discretion of the Principal
Investigator/Project Archaeologist in the field (Nickels 2011c); approval of that survey is pending.

Historic Site Potential
The earliest historic
accounts of Native
Americans in south
Texas and perhaps the
Dimmit County area, are
those of Cabeza de Vaca.
In the 1500s, Spanish
explorer Cabeza de Vaca
traversed parts of
southeast and south
Texas and left a diary of
his five years spent
traveling among the
hunter-gatherers of Texas
and northern Mexico
(e.g., Covey 1961). His
account of his
experiences in 1533–34
indicates that groups of
Native Americans would
normally tether
themselves to the easily
exploitable riverine
environments in the fall,
winter, and summer,
occasionally sending a
hunting party onto the
grasslands to hunt deer.
In the summer, many
groups would live near Figure 7. Previous archaeological surveys and background reviews.
each other in the semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other
succulents (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13–37).
15

By the 1540s and 1550s, Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico with
thousands of cattle, and using Native Americans as slave labor. This encroachment by the Spanish
forced groups from northern Mexico to flee into south Texas. In the 1700s and 1800s, there are
documented accounts of Spanish entradas passing through the area, but none have been noted to
establish any sort of permanent structures (Chipman 1992).
Because of the relatively low habitation in generally rural areas that the Whitecotton Unit C 1H
pipeline passes through, little or no attention was given to early aerial photography. A standard
source of review is the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs available at the
Perry Casteñada Library at the University of Texas at Austin (Perry Casteñeda Library 2011). A
second standard research source consulted for old maps and aerial photographs is a very
comprehensive and large compilation of old maps and aerial photographs compiled by the Texas
Department of Transportation from dozens of historic archives throughout the state of Texas.
In this case, a 1939 Carrizo Springs U.S. Army Corps of engineers topographic map was found.
This map shows one structure
existing approximately 250
meters south of the Whitecotton
Unit C 1H pipeline at that time.
Technically, any structures old
than 45 years are now
considered of interest by the
Texas Historical Commission,
and this should be considered
when the lateral is constructed.

Soils Maps
The Whitecotton Unit C 1H
pipeline is to be excavated
through two soil types. Table 1
lists the soils that will be
impacted, and Figure 8 shows
these soil areas (Stevens and
Arriaga 1985). None of the soil
types have a high probability of
containing deeply buried and
intact archaeological deposits. In
addition, the location of the
Whitecotton Unit C 1H pipeline
is remote from modern or relict
stream streams, suggesting that
the probability of encountering Figure 8. Soils dissected by the Whitecotton Unit C 1H
prehistoric open campsites with pipeline.
16

high integrity is unlikely.
Table 1. Soils Dissected by the Whitecotton Unit C 1H pipeline.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Buried and Intact
Archaeological Potential

Montell clay (MoA)

Deep clay on nearly level uplands

Minimal to about 17 inches below
the surface

Pryor sandy clay loam (PyB)

Moderately deep loamy soils on
gently undulating uplands

Minimal to moderate to about 9
inches below the surface

Field Survey Goals and Methodology
Goals
The project goals focused on archaeological issues that could be addressed by the types of data
obtained through pedestrian survey, along with limited shovel testing. The topics addressed were
site type, distribution, density, size, depth, and stratigraphy. The theoretical framework is
structured around patterns of settlement, mobility, subsistence, and social systems for the South
Texas region.
The goals of the project were to:
1)
locate and record cultural locations and sites in the project area using a systematic
survey methodology;
2)
quantify site size, as well as depth, and stratigraphy; and,
3)
place any diagnostic artifacts within the regional time frame.

Methods and Levels of Effort
Two archaeologists conducted a pedestrian survey of the Whitecotton Unit C 1H pipeline on July
18, 2011. Surface visibility ranged from 90 to 100 percent. All cutbanks, and rodent and mammal
backdirt piles were thoroughly examined. In accordance with a general “no collection” policy,
cultural material of a redundant nature, both prehistoric and historic, were not to be collected.
Instead, they were to be fully documented via sketches, field photographs, and copious notes.
Exceptions were diagnostic artifacts, particularly those artifacts which could be considered as
significant to the interpretation of Texas prehistory, such as Early Archaic-Paleoindian
transitional, or Paleoindian diagnostics. These were to be collected on a case-by-case basis, and
that decision was left up to the Principal Investigator and/or the Project Archaeologist.
Historic buildings, trash scatters, or other historic occurrences within the ROW were to be
documented as archaeological sites. In addition, any potentially historic buildings 45 years or
older that were located adjacent to the pipeline were to be documented with photographs and
17

included in this report of investigations.

Results of the Investigations
Surface Examination and Shovel Testing
During the survey it became readily apparent that approximately 90 percent of the project’s
surface area was either mechanically disturbed, or deflated by artificial processes. However, the
surface visibility was excellent, allowing for the potential discovery of any artifacts along the
right-of-way. The only evidence of cultural material observed consisted of an historic trash scatter
that has been assigned trinomial 41DM176.

41DM176
Description
41DM176 (Figures 9 and
10) is an early 20th
century historic trash
scatter located along a
two-track road on a gentle
upland sideslope.
Secondary growth
mesquite trees are
prevalent across the area,
with prickly pear patches
and sparse bunch grasses
as understory. Surface
visibility in July 2011
was excellent. Soils on
the site consist of Pryor
sandy loam (PyB),
moderately deep loamy
soils commonly found on
gently undulating uplands
in this area of Dimmit
County (Stevens and
Arriaga 1985).
However, in this specific
area, the sandy loam was
very shallow and eroded,
wi t h hard claypan
exposed to the surface.

Figure 9. Site map, 41DM176.
18

The site’s locale is 1,750
meters southwest of
Soldier Slough, a first
order tributary of the
Nueces River.
Levels of Effort and
Results
A systematic pedestrian
surface survey revealed a
heavily disturbed and
scattered area of historic
glass, ceramic, and metal
artifacts that were the
remains of a small trash
dump. Artifacts were
scattered across an area
of roughly 4,200 square
Figure 10. Photo of 41DM176; facing north.
meters (see Figure 9).
Selected artifacts observed on the site are shown in Figures 11-13.
Shotgun Shell Base (Figure 11a)
This .12-gauge shotgun shell
bears a “WINCHESTER, NO.
12, NUBLACK” headstamp.
These shotshell cartridges were
made with a brass base and black
paper. This headstamp was used
for .12-gauge shotgun shells
between 1905 and 1938
(Winchester Nublack 2012).
Spent Rifle Cartridge (Figure
11b)
This center-fire rifle cartridge
headstamped “.25 06 REM WWSUPER” was manufactured by
the Western Cartridge Company.
Although center fire cartridges
were developed in the late
1850s, and the Western
Cartridge Company was founded
in 1898, it was not until World
War I that Frankford Arsenal
developed an experimental Figure 11. Shotgun shell base and rifle cartridge.
19

.25-06. Western then later produced 3 billion rounds of ammunition in World War II (Logan
1959; Nebraskaland 2012; Remington 2012; Western Cartridge Company 2012; Scott et al. 2000).
In sum then, it appears that this specimen was likely manufactured after 1914.
Whiteware Sherd with Maker’s Mark (Figure 12a)
A whiteware sherd with a partial maker’s mark was also discovered (Figure 12a). The letters
“...ERM..” are stamped in blue under a clear glaze. Although this specimen is not porcelain, the
letters most probably are part of the word “GERMANY”, part of a stamp used by the Erdmann
Schlegelmilch Porcelain Factory in East Germany. They stamped this label on their products from
1900 through the 1920s (Kovel and Kovel 1986:140, Plate A).
Stoneware Sherd (Figure 12b)
Shown at Figure 12b is a stoneware body sherd. Stoneware is a utilitarian ware and was
commonly used in Texas kitchens and dairies from 1860 through 1950 (Greer 1981:13-26). This
particular specimen has an Albany slipped interior and a Bristol glazed exterior. Vessels with an
Albany (brown) slip on the inside and Bristol (white) glaze on the outside were generally made
between 1880 and 1920. Bristol glaze on both the interior and exterior then became the dominant
type of stoneware used after 1920, and through about 1950 (Greer 1981:212).

Figure 12. Examples of ceramics observed on 41DM176.

20

Earthenware Sherd (Figure 12c)
This specimen is a tan, highly fired body sherd exhibiting parallel painted lines with a thin glaze
both on its interior, and over the exterior painted lines. Generically, the term earthenware can be
applied to a variety of baked clay wares. In this case, we apply the term to apparent flower pots
or utilitarian vessels that could have been produced from the 1920s through today.
Hand Painted Ceramic Sherd (Figure 12d)
Although very small, the specimen shown in Figure 12d appears to be part of a dinner plate or
bowl with hand-painted designs in light green, tan, and brown paint overlain by a clear glazed
interior. It also exhibits a white, glazed exterior. Polychrome painted table settings such as this
with “red, black, and some lighter shades of blue and green” became popular during the 1830s.
By the 1840s, common designs included sprigs, often combined with the cut sponge technique.
These motifs were superceded in the 1870s by large floral designs (Miller 1991:8), popular
through about 1900.
Whiteware Plate Sherd (Figure 12e)
About a dozen undecorated whiteware sherds were observed on the site. Shown at Figure 12e is
what is likely a base fragment of a plate. Whiteware is a highly fired refined clay with a vitreous
surface. Whiteware was commonly imported to America from Britain during the 1800s, but the
demand for the undecorated type increased significantly in America by 1860. This type then
became a common tableware setting for middle class families in this area of Texas after the
1860s, replacing pewter and wooden wares (Fox et al. 1989:45), and are still being produced
today (Miller 1991).

Bottle Glass
Finding a piece of bottle or jar glass, or dinnerware glass with a maker's mark on it is always
helpful in determining its approximate date and place of manufacture, as well as its likely
contents. However, there are many other characteristics that can provide clues as to the probable
age and contents of bottles, such as mold seams and scars from the manufacturing process,
labeling, closure types, and glass color. As technology and customer desires changed through the
years, so too did the manufacturing of bottles. It is these discriminators that allow archaeologists
to approximate their age. Primary reference sources used for the bottle glass analysis were
Munsey (1970) and Toulouse (1971). Other specific references are cited within the following text.
In the 1700s bottles were generally hand blown (thus no mold seams). The lip was then crudely
applied in a separate action. Although a lipping tool was used in the production of this piece, it
is considered to be an applied finish and not a "true" tooled finish. A tooled finish employed the
use of a mold, which incorporated the forming, or at least the pre-forming, of the finish within the
mold. After removal from the mold, the bottle was then "tooled" of its remaining imperfections.
This applied and crudely tooled finish, typically just called an 'applied' finish, was placed and
shaped on the neck, after the removal from the blowpipe (Lindsey 2011). After 1850, finishing
tools which smoothed the inside and top of the lip were commonly used.

21

The year 1904 marked a significant change from hand-blown bottles to automatic bottle-making
machines. Another technological advancement allowed for the common manufacture of screw-top
bottles and jars. Although screw top bottles had been used prior to the 1800s, they were
considered specialty items and were not common until about 1924 (Polak 1997:24). Various
labeling and decorative techniques such as raised lettering and etching (frosting) were also used
beginning in the 1880s.
Additives caused glass colors to change through time. Aqua, amber, olive green, and brown are
natural colors produced in glass manufacture. However, before 1880, the predominate colors of
bottles glass were shades of green and blue. The standard, natural color of most cheap bottles
produced since the beginning of making glass, until about 1900 (and even somewhat later for
medicine bottles) was aqua, with varying hues of green and blue. Glass is a mixture of lime, soda,
and sand with traces of iron oxides. When molten, the iron oxides in the sand cause a chemical
which produces the aqua color (Munsey 1970:69; Kendrick 1966:53).
With the exception of "black" glass, glass color was not an important consideration until around
1880 when food manufacturers began adding manganese to the glass as a decolorizer. After
exposure to the sun's ultra-violet rays the manganese would change the color of the glass to
amethyst or purple. Manganese worked fine until the outbreak of World War I in 1915 caused
another defining temporal characteristic to occur in bottles. Prior to 1915, Germany was a main
supplier of manganese. When the war broke out, the supply of manganese was no longer available
to the bottle makers and they resorted to using selenium as a decolorizing agent. Selenium causes
the glass to turn an amber color when exposed to sunlight (Munsey 1970:55; Kendrick 1966:53).
By about 1930 the glass manufacturing process was refined so that neither manganese nor
selenium had to be used, resulting in clear glass with no hue. In addition, milk glass was
commonly used in the production of cosmetic and toiletry bottles, and ointment/cream jars, from
the 1870s to the mid-20th century (Lindsey 2011).
Green Bottle Glass (Figure 13a)
A thick, dark green bottle neck sherd is shown in Figure 13a. No mold seams or other potentially
temporally diagnostic are present on the specimen. Although admittedly problematic using only
color and thickness as an indicator of age, the surmised age of manufacture of this bottle would
have been roughly between 1880 and 1920.
Purple Bottle Glass Bases (Figures 13b and c)
Two purple, rectangular bottle bases are shown in Figures 13b and c. Both exhibit evidence of
having been manufactured in a modern machine mold (post-1903), and the larger specimen
(Figure 13c) has a raised, molded starburst on its side. Raised, molded patterns such as this were
common following modern machine manufacturing technology, and are very common on
Depression glass. In sum, these two pieces were likely manufactured sometime between 1903 and
perhaps 1950.

22

Figure 13. Selected bottle glass sherds at 41DM176.
Light Green Bottle Glass Sherd (Figure 13d)
Shown in Figure 13d is a light green, rectangular bottle sherd with a molded and raised letter “L”.
All of the attributes that can be observed on this specimen suggest a post-1903 to perhaps 1950
period of manufacture.
Aqua Medicine Bottle Neck (Figure 13e)
An aqua-colored medicine bottle neck and lip is shown as Figure 13e. It has no neck mold seams,
but a finely tooled, applied lip. In sum, all of these attributes suggest a period of manufacture
roughly between 1880 and 1920.
Clear Glass Screw Top Sherd (Figure 13f)
A heavily patinated, clear glass, wide-mouth bottle neck with a slight amethyst hue is shown in
Figure 13f. The combined attributes of a screw top and amethyst hue suggest a period of
manufacture between 1903 and 1914.

23

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
As a whole, artifacts at 41DM176 suggest that they are from a household that was occupied
roughly between 1900 and perhaps as late as 1930; where that home site is located is unknown.
Although interesting for its location on the landscape and the history of early 20th century
occupation in this part of Dimmit County, its cultural resources research value is considered
minimal, and Tierras Antiguas assesses the site as non-significant.

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
A full pedestrian survey of the Whitecotton Unit C 1H pipeline revealed no evidence of cultural
material other than an historic trash scatter with glass, ceramics, and metal artifacts that suggest
they were deposited there sometime between 1900 and 1930. This scatter was fully documented
as 41DM176, and although interesting for its location on the landscape and the history of early
20th century occupation in this part of Dimmit County, its cultural resources research value is
considered minimal, and Tierras Antiguas assesses the site as non-significant.
Accordingly, Tierras Antiguas recommends that the construction of the Whitecotton Unit C 1H
pipeline be allowed to proceed as planned. However, Tierras Antiguas further recommends that
if any additional, undiscovered cultural resources were encountered during development, such
finds should be examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological
consultant.

24

References Cited
Arbingast, S. A., L. G. Kennamer, R. H. Ryan, A. Lo, D. L. Karney, C. P. Zlatkovic, M. E.
Bonine, and R. G. Steele
1973 Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Archer, S.
1995

Tree-grass Dynamics in a Prosopis-thornscrub Savannah Parkland:
Reconstructing the Past and Predicting the Future. Ecoscience 2(1):84-99.

Atlas
2011

Black, S. L.
1989

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
November 11, 2011].

Environmental Setting. In From the Gulf Coast to the Rio Grande: Human
Adaptation in the Central, South, and Lower Pecos, Texas, by T. R. Hester, S.
L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. J. Reinhard, and L. C.
Bement, pp. 5-17. Research Series No. 33, Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

Black, S. L., and A. J. McGraw
1985 The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change and Continuity in the Upper
Salado Creek Drainage, South-Central Texas. Archaeological Survey Report,
No. 100. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Blair, W. F.
1950
Boyd, D. K.
1997

Brune, G.
1981

The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-117.
Caprock Canyonlands Archeology: A Synthesis of the Late Prehistory and
History of Lake Alan Henry and the Texas Panhandle-Plains. Reports of
Investigations, Number 110, 2 Volumes. Prewitt & Associates, Austin.
Springs of Texas. Branch-Smith, Fort Worth.

Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Collins, M. B.
1995 Forty Years of Archaeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
25

Archeological Society 66:361–400.
Covey, C. (editor)
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Collier
Books, New York.
Creel, D. G.
1986

A Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in West Central Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Arizona, Tucson.

Diamond, D.D., D. H. Riskind, and S. L. Orzell
1987 A Framework for Plant Community Classification and Conservation in Texas.
The Texas Journal of Science 39(3):203-221.
Dillehay, T.
1974

Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19(64):180–196.

Fox, A. A., and D. E. Fox
1967 The Classen Rockshelter, 41BX23. Manuscript on file. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Fox, a. A., I. W. Cox, L. Highley, and D. Hafernik
1989 Archaeological and Historical Investigations at the Site of the New Bexar
County Justice Center in Downtown San Antonio, Texas. Archaeological
Survey Report, No. 184, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.
Gould, F. W.
1975 Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. Texas Agricultural
Experimentation Station, College Station.
Greer, G. H.
1981

American Stonewares, The Art and Craft of Utilitarian Potters. Schiffer
Publishing, Exton, England.

Hall, G. D., T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black
1986 The Prehistoric Site at Choke Canyon Reservoir, Southern Ttexas: Results of
Phase II Archaeological Investigations. Choke Canyon Series: Volume 10.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hallenbeck, C.
1971 Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca: The Journey and Route of the First European to
Cross the Continent of North America, 1534-1536. Kennikat Press Scholarly
Reprints, Port Washington, New York.
Hemphill, H.
2006 The Railroads of San Antonio. Maverick Publishing Co., San Antonio, TX.
Hester, T. R.
1984 Fragments, Flints, and Footprints: The Prehistory of Dimmit County. In Dimmit
26

1995
1980

County Mesquite Roots, Volume I, pp. 1-6, edited by L. K. Tidwell. Wind
River Press. Austin, TX.
The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:427–459.
Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur Archaeologists.
Corona Press, San Antonio.

Highley, L., C. Graves, and G. Judson
1978 Archeological Investigations at Scorpion Cave (41ME7), Medina County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:139–194.
Hughes, J. T.
1991 Prehistoric Cultural Developments on the High Texas Plains. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 60:1-55 (1989 volume published in 1991).
Inglis, J. M.
1964

A History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain. Bulletin #45. Texas Parks
and Wildlife Department, Austin.

Kendrick, G.
1966 The Antique Bottle Collector. Edward Brothers, Inc., Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Kovel, R., and T. Kovel
1986 Kovels’ New Dictionary of Marks: Pottery and Porcelain 1850 to the Present.
Crown Publisher’s Inc., New York.
Lee, D. S., C. R. Gilbert, C. H. Hocutt, R. E. Jenkins, P. E. McAllister, J. R. Stauffer, Jr.
1980 Atlas of North American Freshwater Fishers. North Carolina Biological
Survey Publication 1980-12, North Carolina State Museum of Natural History.
Leffler, J.
1996

Dimmit County. The New Handbook of Texas Online, Volume 6, pp. 864-866.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Leffler, J. J., and C. Long
1996 Webb County. The New Handbook of Texas Online, Volume 2, pp. 645-648.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Lindsey, B.
2011 Historic Glass Bottle Identification & Information Website.
www.blm.gov/historic_bottles.htm. [Accessed December 19, 2011].
Logan, H. C.
1959 Cartridges: A Pictorial Digest of Small Arms Ammunition. Bonanza Books,
New York.
McKinney, W. W.
27

1981

Early Holocene Adaptations in Central and Southern Texas: The Problem of
the Paleo-Indian-Archaic Transition. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 52:91–120.

Map
2011a Biotic Provinces of Texas.
http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/landwater/land/maps/gis/map_downloads/images/p
wd_mp_e0100_1070ae_6.gif. [Accessed August 22, 2011].
2011b Carrizo Springs 1939. Perry Casteñeda Library Map Collection. Catarina
USACE Topographic Map. http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/topo [Accessed
August 22, 2011].
Miller, G. L.
1991 A Revised Set of CC Index Values for Classification and Economic Scaling of
English Ceramics from 1787 to 1880. Historical Archaeology 25(1):1-25.
Munsey, C.
1970

The Illustrated Guide to Collecting Bottles. Hawthorn Books, Inc., New York.

Nickels, D. L.
2011a A Cultural Resources Background Review of the 1.8-Mile Gonzalez Lateral in
North-Central Dimmit County, Texas. Submitted to Flatrock Engineering and
Environmenmtal, Ltd. June 2011.
2011b A Cultural Resources Survey of the 4-Mile Pistol Lateral and Upper NHL
Pearsall Pipeline, Dimmit County, Texas. Archaeology Report #61. Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, Texas.
2011c A Cultural Resources Background Review of the 1.3-Mile Whitecotton Lateral
Line in North-Central Dimmit County, Texas. Submitted to Flatrock
Engineering and Environmenmtal, Ltd. May 2011.
Nunley, P., and T. R. Hester
1966 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Dimmit County, Texas. The Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. XVIII, No. 3, pp. 233-253.
Peter, D. E.
1982

Polak, M.
1997

Alternative Perspectives on Burned Rock Middens, In Archaeological
Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, Vol. 2,
compiled and edited by T. R. Hays, pp. 20.1–20.15. Archaeology Program,
Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.

Bottles Identification and Price Guide. Avon Books. New York.
28

Prewitt, E. R.
1991 Burned Rock Middens: A Summary of Previous Investigations and
Interpretations. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An Archeological
Symposium, edited T. R. Hester, pp. 25–32. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Remington
2011

.25-06 Remington. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/.25-06_Remington. [Accessed
January 10, 2012].

Robinson, R. L.
1982 Biosilica Analysis of Three Prehistoric Archaeological Sites in the Choke
Canyon Reservoir, Live Oak County, Texas: Preliminary Summary of Climatic
Implications. In Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir,
South Texas: The Phase I Findings, edited by G. D. Hall, S. L. Black, and C.
Graves, pp. 597-610. Choke Canyon Series, No. 5. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Scott, D. D., R. A. Fox, Jr., M. A. Connor, and D. Harmon
2000 Archaeological Perspectives on the Battle of the Little Bighorn. University of
Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Skelton, D. W.
1977 Archeological Investigations at the Fayette Power Project, Fayette County,
Texas. Research Report 60. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Stahle, D. W. , and M. K. Cleaveland
1995 Texas Paleoclimatic Data from Daily to Millennial Time Scales. In The
Changing Climate of Texas: Predictability and Implications for the Future,
edited by J. Norwine, J. R. Giardino, G. R. North, and J. B. Valdes, pp. 49-69.
GeoBooks, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Steele, D. G., and C. Assad Hunter
1986 Analysis of Vertebrate Faunal Remains from 41MC222 and 41MC296,
McMullen County, Texas. In The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas: Results of Phase II Archaeological Investigations, edited by
G. D. Hall, T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black. Choke Canyon Series, No. 10. Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Stevens, J. W., and D. Arriaga
1985 Soil Survey of Dimmit and Zavala Counties. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C., in Cooperation
29

with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, College Station, Texas.
Story, D. A.
1985

Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coastal Plain. In
Prehistoric Food Production in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp.
19–56. Anthropological Papers No. 75. Museum of Anthropology, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Taylor, A. J., and C. L. Highly
1995 Archaeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A
Prehistoric Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. 2 volumes. Studies in
Archeology No. 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Toulouse, J. H.
1971 Bottle Makers and Their Marks. Thomas Nelson Inc., New York.
Turner, E. S., and T. R. Hester
1993 A Field Guide to the Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Gulf Publishing.
Houston, TX.
Web Soil Survey
2011 Dimmit and Zavala Counties, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed
November 1, 2011]
Weir, F. A.
1976

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. Anthropology
Department, Washington State University.

Western Cartridge Company
2011 Western Cartridge Company History.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Western_Cartridge_Company. [Accessed January
10, 2012].
Winchester Nublack
2011 Winchester Shotshell Headstamps.
http://members.shaw.ca/cartridge-corner/winch1.htm. [Accessed January 10,
2012].

30

31

