A Cultural Resources
Background Review of the
71-Mile Choke Canyon Gas
Pipeline in South Texas

Prepared for Flatrock Engineering and Environmental
San Antonio, Texas
by
David L. Nickels, Principal Investigator
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations
Letter Report # 2012-8
March 2012

Introduction
In March 2012, Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological
Inves t i gations (TAAI)
conducted a review of cultural
resources documented either
on, or within one mile of the
proposed 71-mile Choke
Canyon Gas Pipeline to be
constructed through McMullen,
Live Oak, and Bee counties in
south-central Texas, and
hereinafter referred to as the
Project Area (PA) (Figures 1
and 2). The review was
r e q u e s t ed by F l a t r o c k
Engineering
and
Environmental, Ltd. The
research by TAAI included:
Figure 1. Location of the Choke Canyon Gas Pipeline project
1) A review of the most current in Texas.
literature documenting the prehistory and history of the immediate area
2) A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas to identify
what cultural resource surveys have been conducted, and what archaeological sites have been
documented within at least one mile of the project area
3) A search of various websites that offer old maps of the PA
4) A literature review of both published and unpublished reports and manuscripts that describe
the types of archaeological sites that have been documented, and thus provide insight as to the
type of sites that may be expected either in the PA, or immediately adjacent to it
5) A review of local soils maps in order to evaluate the potential for intact and buried cultural
materials within or immediately adjacent to the PA

-1-

Figure 2. The Choke Canyon Gas Pipeline on large topographic map.

Cultural Chronology
The Choke Canyon Gas Pipeline project lies within the South Texas archaeological region as
defined by Hester (1980, 1995, 2004; Figure 5). Refining a cultural chronology for south Texas
is problematic, due to the compressed nature of the archaeological record and the scarcity of
stratified sites excavated within the region. Hester (1995:433) acknowledges the paucity of
information that exists for south Texas and as such offers only a “general framework” for
prehistoric periods particular to the region (Figure 3). All dates are given as approximate years
before present (B.P.), i.e., before 1950.
Paleoindian (11,200 - 7950 B.P.)
This period is estimated at between ca.11,200–7950 B.P. in south Texas (Hester 1995). The
Paleoindian period began toward the close of the Pleistocene. Diagnostic artifacts of the early
Paleoindian interval include Clovis and Folsom projectile points. The wide distribution of Clovistype points across most of North America and even into Central America suggests a wide dispersal
-2-

and interaction of the people
who made them. Other artifacts
associated with the Clovis
culture include bifaces and
prismatic blades, engraved
stones, bone and ivory points,
stone bolas, ochre, and shaft
straighteners. During the late
Paleoindian interval, the first
stemmed lanceolate points, such
as Angostura, Golondrina, St.
Mary’s Hall, and Barber (among
a few others) appear.
In general, the Paleoindian
adaptation has been considered
to be one of small bands of
nomadic, big-game hunters
following herds of Late
Pleistocene fauna, including
mammoth, mastodons, bison,
camel, and horse, across North
America (Black 1989). More
recently, emphasis has been
placed on the wide diversity of
plants and animals used for
subsistence by these early
Americans, such as turtles and
tortoises, alligators, mice,
badgers, and raccoons, although
they undoubtedly hunted the
large animals as well (Collins
1995:381). Known Clovis sites
include killsites, quarries, caches,
open campsites, ritual sites, and
burials (Hester 1995:433–436).
A Folsom interval follows the
Clovis. Folsom artifacts are fairly
common in south Texas;
however, no camp sites or
killsites have been found south of
a large workshop, Pavo Real
(41BX52), in Bexar County (Hester Figure 3. South Texas Archaeological region chronology
1995:434–435). Most
-3-

Paleoindian finds in south Texas have consisted of surface lithic scatters on upland terraces and
ridges (Black 1989).
As the warming that marks the transition from Pleistocene to Holocene climates began to take
effect in Texas, prehistoric inhabitants adapted with changes in lifestyle. This climatic shift is also
marked by the decline and extinction of mammoth, mastodon, horse, camel, and giant bison (Bison
antiquus). Large gregarious game animals were perhaps extinct in Texas. Human hunters were
forced to concentrate on deer, antelope, and other medium-size or smaller game. Changes in the
subsistence base required technological shifts that mark the beginning of a new cultural period
known as the Archaic.
Early Archaic (7950 - 4450 B.P.)
Hester (1995:436–438) identifies the Early Archaic, with Early Corner Notched and Early Basal
Notched dart points, as roughly dating between 7950 to 4450 B.P. The extinction of large herds
of megafauna and the changing climate at the beginning of the Holocene stimulated a behavioral
change by the Prehistoric inhabitants of south Texas (McKinney 1981). While the basic huntergatherer adaptation probably remained intact, an economic shift away from big game hunting was
necessary. In general, more intensive exploitation of local and smaller resources such as deer, fish,
and plant bulbs is indicated by greater densities of ground-stone artifacts, fire-cracked rock
cooking features, and more specialized tools. Weir (1976) speculates that Early Archaic groups
were small and highly mobile, an inference based on the fact that Early Archaic sites are thinly
distributed and that diagnostic projectile point types are seen across a wide area, including most
of Texas and northern Mexico. Story (1985) believes that population densities were low during
the Early Archaic, and that groups consisted of related individuals in small bands with “few
constraints on their mobility” (Story 1985:39). Their economy was based on the utilization of a
wide range of resources, especially such year-round resources as prickly pear and lechugilla, as
well as rodents, rabbits, and deer.
Middle Archaic (4450 - 2350 B.P.)
Hester (1995:438–441) suggests that the period between 4450 and 2350 B.P. reflects the Middle
Archaic in south Texas. The Middle Archaic appears to have been a time of increased population,
based on the large number of sites from this period (Story 1985:40; Weir 1976:125, 128). On the
South Texas Plains, exploitation of widely scattered, year-round resources such as prickly pear
continued (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13–15), as did hunting deer and rabbit. Weir (1976)
believes that the widely scattered bands prevalent in the Early Archaic now began to coalesce, at
least during the acorn-gathering season, into larger groups who shared the intensive work of
gathering and processing the acorn harvest (Weir 1976:126). Many researchers believe burned
rock middens are a result of this endeavor (Creel 1986; Prewitt 1991; Weir 1976). The common
presence of deer remains in burned rock middens encourages the view that deer processing took
place at burned rock midden sites. Bison bone is encountered in archaeological sites in south
Texas, at least occasionally, during all but the earliest part of the Middle Archaic (Dillehay 1974).
Cemeteries make their first appearance during this period, suggesting a movement toward less
mobility and perhaps territorialism. One of the earliest occurrences dating to the south Texas
Middle Archaic, is Loma Sandia in Live Oak County, which dates between ca. 2550 and 2750 B.P.
-4-

(Taylor and Highley 1995).
Late Archaic (2350 - 1250 B.P.)
Hester believes the Late Archaic in south Texas may be defined as between 2350–1250 B.P, Some
researchers believe populations increased throughout the Late Archaic (Prewitt 1985), while others
feel populations remained the same or fell during this period (Black 1989:30). Subsistence is
assumed to have become less specialized on acorns, in favor of a broad spectrum subsistence base
(Black 1989:30). Story (1985:44–45) believes the presence of cemeteries indicates that Late
Archaic populations in central and south Texas were increasing and becoming more territorial.
Although inhabitants of the South Texas Plain near Brownsville and Rockport had begun to make
pottery by about 1750 B.P., the northern part of the plain was still “pre-ceramic” until 1,000 years
later (Story 1985:45–47). Late Archaic points tend to be much smaller than Middle Archaic points.
Transitional Archaic (2250 - 1250 B.P.)
A late subperiod or interval of the Late Archaic is frequently referred to as the Terminal Archaic
or Transitional Archaic. Turner and Hester (1993) cite data placing the Transitional Archaic as
2250–1250 B.P. Although Hester may lump current data into a Late Archaic period, he cautions
that more evidence will likely result in what may be termed as a “Terminal Archaic” period during
the latter part of the Late Archaic in south Texas. This Terminal Archaic period is represented by
diagnostics such as Ensor, Frio, and Matamoras points which appear to overlap the Late Archaic
and Late Prehistoric periods (Hester 1995:442). Weir (1976) believes this marked a transition
period to localized area sites, a disappearance of burned rock middens and bison, and a
reappearance of highly mobile hunters and gatherers. Others (Black and McGraw 1985; Peter
1982; Skelton 1977) argue that in some locations burned rock middens did not disappear and sites
were more intensely occupied during the Transitional Archaic period.
Late Prehistoric (1250 - 420 B.P.)
The term “Late Prehistoric” is commonly used to designate the period following the Late Archaic
in south Texas. Generally, the Late Prehistoric period is thought of as spanning the period between
A. D. 700 - 1530 ([1250 - 420 B.P.] [Hester 1995]). A series of distinctive traits mark the shift
from the Archaic to the Late Prehistoric period, including the technological shift to the bow and
arrow and the introduction of pottery to central Texas and the northern South Texas Plain (Black
1989:32; Story 1985:45–47). Two distinct phases recognized within the Late Prehistoric are the
Austin and Toyah. During the Austin phase, there appears to be a subtle transition from expanding
stem projectile points that may have been used as dart points, as well as early arrow points. The
most prevalent point found in Austin phase sites is the Scallorn arrow point. Settlement shifts into
rockshelters such as Scorpion Cave in Medina County (Highley et al. 1978) and Classen
Rockshelter in northern Bexar County (Fox and Fox 1967) have been noted. Cemeteries from this
period often reveal evidence of conflict (Black 1989:32).
Beginning rather abruptly at about 650 B.P., a shift in technology occurred. The Perdiz arrow
point may best represent the appearance of a distinct culture in south-central Texas lasting for
about 300 years, which archaeologists have labeled the Toyah phase. Hester (1995:444)
recognizes this phase as the “best documented Late Prehistoric pattern” throughout south Texas,
-5-

with dates ranging between ca. 650/700 to 300/350 B.P. (A.D. 1250/1300 to 1600/1650).
In addition to Perdiz points, evidence of a Toyah culture is manifested as bone-tempered pottery,
bone spatulates, awls, and beads, stone endscrapers, beveled knives, and expediently utilized
flakes. Briefly, expedient lithic technology involves removing flakes from a core in a nonstandard
manner; the purpose is to knock off sharp flakes for immediate use, selecting the ones that best
suit the need at the time. This technology differs from formal, standardized core reduction and the
manufacturing of formal, usually bifacial tools. Expedient lithic technology is a continent-wide
phenomonon indicative of increased sedentism, and is observed in Toyah assemblages in Texas.
Whether the Toyah phase seen in the south-central Texas archaeological record is a result of a
group of people moving into the region, or adapted technologies from the region’s periphery is
a matter of conjecture. Steele and Assad-Hunter (1986) argue for the occurrence of a distinct
change in diet between the Late Archaic and the Late Prehistoric components in two sites in the
Choke Canyon Reservoir area in south Texas. Analysis of the number of identified specimens
(NISP) shows a marked increase in artiodactyla elements present during the later part of the Late
Prehistoric, an increase largely due to the addition of bison to the “menu” (Steele and AssadHunter 1986:468).
Whether or not agriculture was practiced during this period in south Texas has not been
documented. There simply is not enough evidence to postulate there was ever a significant
presence of maize in the area. The later arrival of the Spanish during the later
Protohistoric/Historic period brought significant cultivars to south Texas.
Protohistoric/Historic (420 B.P. - present)
The end of the Late Prehistoric and beginning of the Historic period in south Texas is
characterized by written accounts of European contact with indigenous groups. The Protohistoric
period begins in 1528 when Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts of southeast and
south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the hunter-gatherers of Texas
and northern Mexico (e.g., Hallenbeck 1971). Cabeza de Vaca’s account of his stay with the
Miriami in 1533-34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves
to the easily exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter and summer, occasionally sending
a hunting party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near each
other in the semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other succulents
(Campbell and Campbell 1981:13-37).
Linguistically, early protohistoric accounts of the late 1500s indicate that a large group which
spoke Cohuilteco inhabited the area now known as south-central Texas. Coahuiltecan is a term
coined by Mexican linguists in the 1800s, and the name refers to the many small bands of Native
Americans who lived in northeastern Coahuila, Mexico and south Texas. The Coahuiltecans were
rapidly dispersed or killed during the Protohistoric period.
By the 1540s and 1550s Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico, with
several hundred thousand cattle, using Indian slaves as labor. Large mining ventures in northern
-6-

Mexico did the same. This encroachment from the south forced Native Americans to escape into
the south-central Texas region.
The period between de Vaca’s written account and the advent of Spanish missions in the late
1600s and early 1700s is referred to as the Protohistoric; a time when few, scant written
documents exist detailing Native American life outside the missions. The Historic period then, is
generally thought of as beginning in the 1700s.
Some 30 miles south of Eagle Pass, the Spanish established Mission San Juan Bautista in 1700
(now modern-day Guerrero). Early Spanish explorers then repeatedly traveled the Camino Real
enroute to newly established missions and settlements in today’s modern Texas throughout the
1700s and 1800s. Mexican families from across the river expanded into Texas, and these families
trace their roots to the early development of the area. In the ensuing years, lawlessness prevailed,
with saloons, gambling houses, outlaws, and slave hunters prevalent.

Site Types to be Expected Along the Choke Canyon Gas Pipeline
Prehistoric Open Campsites
Most numerous among the sites recorded in McMullen, Live Oak, and Bee counties are prehistoric
open campsites ranging in age from the Paleoindian period through the Historic period (see Figure
3). Some of these represent a single campfire where a very small group of Native Americans may
have camped for one night. Others are very large, covering very extensive areas representing large
groups of people that stayed for long periods, perhaps seasonally, with ancestral groups returning
to these same campsites over a period of several thousands of years. Cultural remains to be found
at these large campsites include among other items, an abundance of fire-cracked rocks
representing multiple hearths, a wide variety of chipped stone tools and the lithic debris that results
from making them, ground and smoothed stones used to grind nuts and seeds, faunal remains from
terrestrial and aquatic animals consumed, bone tools, pottery sherds, and mussel and snail shells.
Open campsites occur in all types of environments, whether that be in a plush riverine environment
that offered a wide variety banquet of plant and animal foodstuffs, or in the uplands away from
flowing water sources. Seasonally, the upland grasses, shrubs, cacti offered a different food source
that could be exploited such as various grass seeds, mesquite beans, prickly pear pads and tunas,
and agave hearts. In addition, at various times, bison were known to graze on the northern South
Texas Plains, and were highly sought after for use as food, hides, and bone tools (Dillehay 1974).
Depending upon the integrity of these open campsites, archaeologists and the Texas Historical
Commission consider these as perhaps the most significant types of sites in regard to their ability
to contribute to our understanding of south Texas prehistory. A few of the desired ingredients that
can indicate significance include cultural material that is buried beneath the surface in a well-7-

preserved, stratified, and relatively undisturbed context. Although these situations most frequently
occur within stratified terrace deposits adjacent to streams, they can also occur in upland settings
where the landscape has been generally stable through time. Other ingredients that archaeologists
look for in potentially significant campsites include good organic preservation in the form of
charcoal and/or charred plant remains, faunal preservation, temporally diagnostic stone tools or
ceramics, and intact features such as hearths.
Prehistoric Lithic Scatters or Procurement Sites
Lithic scatters are the next most common type of archaeological site that can be expected along
the Choke Canyon Gas Pipeline. These sites simply represent the chipped stone debris and broken
tools that were left behind when Native Americans made new tools or re-sharpened their old ones.
The general absence of fire-cracked rocks and other cultural material normally found at open
campsites suggest that they did not camp there, or remain there for any extended period of time
( However, small camp fires may have been used to heat-treat chert or quartzite cobbles to make
them more knappable). Yet, they were drawn to these isolated locales because of the natural
outcroppings or surface exposures of good quality raw material such as chert or quartzite cobbles.
Examples of chipped stone most commonly found at these sites include cobbles with one or two
flakes removed, called ‘tested cobbles’. That is, the Native Americans knew from experience the
quality of stone that could most easily be flaked and reduced for stone tool production, so they
‘tested’ the cobble to judge whether it was useable or not. If the quality was judged to be inferior,
then the cobble was tossed aside. That is why the majority of tested cobbles found on these sites
are of poor quality, coarse-grained material. While the finished stone tool products are carried
away from these sites, what remains are those tools broken during the manufacturing process, and
the thousands of pieces of debitage in the form of flakes and angular debris. Also unique to lithic
scatters where large cobbles are present are snapped ‘quarry blanks’. These are simply cobbles
flakes on both sides, reducing the cobble into a transportable ‘blank’ that can be used to further
reduce it and make finished stone tools from the flakes taken off of it. The unbroken quarry blanks
are usually not found on these sites because they have been carried off, presumably to areas of
south Texas where raw material is not readily available. The snapped or broken quarry blanks are
of little or no use, so they are discarded and left behind.
Lithic scatters range in age from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods and can be found
on any landscape setting where gravels or cobbles have been exposed. Notably, gravel outcrops
that were exposed to the surface a few hundred or thousand years ago could be deeply buried
today, and the opposite could also be true; it all depends on the terrain setting and the dynamics
of landscape evolution through time. Most lithic scatters in the McMullen, Live Oak, and Bee
County areas have been documented along upper stream terraces abutting the eroded upland
slopes.
Prehistoric Quarries
Prehistoric quarries can also range in age from the Paleoindian through Historic periods, but differ
from lithic scatters in that at those sites Native Americans exploited loose gravels, but at times they
-8-

specifically sought quarry sites where raw material such as cherts or quartzites were not yet freed
from their parent geologic formation, and they had to be ‘quarried’. These types of sites are rare
in south Texas for two reasons: 1) the geological exposures generally do not present themselves,
and 2) throughout Texas, even in central Texas, it is much easier to pick up gravels from the
surface than to try to mine them from hard rock. Quarried and chipped stone remains likely to be
found at these sites include large chunks of angular cherts or quartzites, as well as parent material
detritus, and flaking debris. Snapped quarry blanks can also be expected. Although a handful of
prehistoric quarry sites have been recorded in south Texas, they are rare.
Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens
The documentation of burned rock middens is rare in McMullen, Live Oak, and Bee counties.
Burned rock middens result from a series of multiple-use earth ovens that were constructed much
like modern-day roasting pits are dug into the earth for roasting a pig. With repetitive uses, as the
larger rocks that serve as heating elements in the earthen pit fracture and thus become less
effective as a thermal source, they are ‘pitched out’ around the edge of the pit. As the pit becomes
unusable, another is dug near by, and the procedure repeated. Over time, these multiple pits and
the ‘pitched out’ fire-cracked rocks coalesce together, obscuring each pit as indiscernible. (For a
full discussion of the formation of burned rock middens and their documented presence in Texas,
see Leach and Bousman 2001; Leach et al. 2001; Mauldin et al. 2003).
Prehistoric Burial and Cemetery Sites
Although not common, isolated prehistoric burials and cemeteries have been documented in south
Texas. Individual and isolated burials have been found in association with open campsites in both
upland settings as well as in alluvial terraces along streams, but the largest prehistoric cemetery
found in close proximity to the Choke Canyon Gas Pipeline is 41LK28, in Live Oak County.
Historic Sites
As discussed above in the Cultural Chronology portion of this report, although Spanish ranchers
had established large ranches in northern Mexico by the mid-16th century, and Spanish entradas
began penetrating south Texas in the 1700s and 1800s, there is no record of any sort of permanent
structures in the area during those periods (Chipman 1992), the area was generally not considered
safe for settlement by whites until after the Civil War in 1865, and white settlers then began
establishing smaller ranches and farmlands (Bauer 1996; Leffler 1996a, b; Leffler and Long 1996).
Because of the vastness of the landscape and the relatively late settlement and development of
south Texas compared to east and central Texas and northern Mexico, historic sites are not
abundant, but they certainly do exist. The most common types to be encountered are related to
ranching and farming endeavors, or small communities from the 19th and 20th centuries. Site types
most commonly include farmsteads or ranches with corrals, cisterns, chimney and foundation
remains from both main houses and outbuildings, related trash dumps, an occasional family burial
or cemetery, school houses, churches, community buildings, and industry-related structures or
construction projects.

-9-

Archaeological Atlas Site Results
We preface this section by stating that although it presents the number of sites and their types
documented within each of the three counties, the results simply provide the data that is available.
In reality, the number of documented sites and their types are very heavily skewed based upon the
types of cultural resource surveys, and the areas of those surveys. That said, the data that is
available on the Texas Atlas is only as good as the areas of south Texas that the surveys represent.
Most of south Texas has never been subjected to formal cultural resource surveys, so it is
conceded that the true character of the archaeological record is very poorly understood.
Nevertheless, the few surveys that have been accomplished provide at least some aspect of what
the region looks like from an archaeological perspective. A review of the Texas Atlas indicates that
there are 117 known archaeological sites within one mile of the Choke Canyon Gas Pipeline.
McMullen County
There are 225 documented archaeological sites in McMullen County. Of those, 147 are prehistoric
open campsites with evidence that as a whole, open campsites in the county have been occupied
from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods. As with most of the region, many campsites are
situated on stream terraces, but there are also some in the uplands. Fifty-nine sites are classified
as lithic scatters, and generally these are located in the uplands and along stream cutbanks where
gravels outcrop. They also exhibit evidence of being used for the past 11,000 years. One quarry
site has been recorded in the county, as has a single sandstone burned rock midden. The only
prehistoric burial noted was found at one of the open campsites. Historic sites consist of local
family cemeteries with just a few burials in each, house sites and farmsteads from as early as the
1850s, and trash scatters.
Live Oak County
Out of the 304 documented archaeological sites in Live Oak County, 213 have cultural remains
that indicate they were used in prehistory as open campsites, and they have been found in both
upland and stream terrace settings. Temporally diagnostic artifacts found at these sites further
indicate that Live Oak County was occupied from the Paleoindian through Historic periods. There
are also 70 lithic scatters documented in the county, and once again the diagnostics found at these
sites indicate that the landscape was widely exploited from the Paleoindian through Historic
periods. A unique site that is not often documented in south Texas is the existence of a vertical
alignment os stone slabs that in other regions of Texas are remnants of prehistoric structures (e.g.,
Lintz 1984). Prehistoric burials have also been documented. A single prehistoric burial discovered
at one site had a bone awl in the cranium area of the skeleton, and Archaic dart points were found
in direct association. Perhaps the best documented prehistoric cemetery in south Texas is the Loma
Sandia Cemetery (41LK28), a State Archaeological Landmark burial ground (Taylor and Highley
1995). Historic sites documented in the county include a single grave, houses and outbuildings
associated with 19th and 20th century farmsteads, a rock wall, trash dumps and surface scatters,
cattle dipping vats, and corrals. In addition Fort Merrill (41LK276), in use from 1850-1855 by the
U.S. Army is listed as a State Archaeological Landmark.

-10-

Bee County
As of March 19, 2012 there were only 18 archaeological sites recorded within all of Bee County.
Despite the few numbers, a review of the projectile points that have been recovered from the 12
prehistoric open campsites indicates that Bee County has been occupied periodically through time
over the past 9,500 years. The best documented site in Bee County is 41BE2, the Berclair Terrace
Site, where deeply buried Paleoindian materials have been recovered in association with
Pleistocene fauna (Bousman et al. 2004; Nash 2001; Hester 1977; Sellards 1940). Four prehistoric
lithic scatters have been documented in Bee County, along with four historic components; these
being a circa 1880s lime kiln, the Gulf, Western Texas and Pacific Railway terminal, and two early
1900s farmsteads. Finally, the Bee County Courthouse in Beeville is listed as a State
Archaeological Landmark.

Archaeological Sites within at Least One Mile of the Proposed Choke Canyon Gas Pipeline
Because of the length of this pipeline, it is necessary to display its length in 11 segments, with 11
separate topographic maps, beginning on the western portion of the pipeline, and progressing from
the west to its southeastern terminus east of Three Rivers (Figures 4-14), with brief discussions
of cultural resources relative to each particular segment. As stated above, there are 117 known
archaeological sites within one mile of the proposed right-of-way.

-11-

Segment 1 - Figure 4
As shown in Figure 4, there are four documented archaeological sites within at least one mile of
Segment 1 of the proposed pipeline. Three are prehistoric open campsites, and the fourth is a
prehistoric lithic scatter. The time periods of occupation of these are unknown, except that the
possible Nueces tool at 41MC587 suggests a Middle to Late Archaic occupation. As will be
discussed below, the paucity of known sites along this segment of the proposed Choke Canyon
Gas Pipeline is likely a reflection of the lack of cultural resource surveys rather than the absence
of archaeological sites that truly exist.

Figure 4. Known archaeological sites along Segment 1 of the pipeline.

-12-

Segment 2 - Figure 5
As shown in Figure 5, there is one documented archaeological site within at least one mile of
Segment 1 of the proposed pipeline. It is 41MC406, a prehistoric lithic scatter of an unknown age.
As stated above, absence of known sites is likely a reflection of the lack of cultural resource
surveys rather than the absence of archaeological sites that truly exist.

Figure 5. Known archaeological site along Segment 2 of the pipeline.
Segment 3 - Figure 6
Segment 3 of the pipeline is shown in Figure 6. The large number of sites along this segment were
documented during systematic professional surveys that have been conducted in the area. This
clearly demonstrates the ubiquity of archaeological sites that are likely present along the entire
length of the Choke Canyon Gas Pipeline right-of-way, but due to lack of a systematic professional
cultural resource survey, they have not been recorded. It is noted that there are 13 known
archaeological sites along this segment that will be directly impacted by construction of the
pipeline as planned.

-13-

Seven of these 13 sites were re-visited and re-evaluated by Tierras Antiguas in June 2011 to assess
their integrity and potential significance. Six of the seven (41MC96, 41MC97, 41MC98,
41MC112, 41MC113, and 41MC114) were determined to be either surficial surface scatters,
shallowly buried, and/or heavily disturbed. As such, Tierras Antiguas advised that construction of
the pipeline through those sites be allowed to proceed as planned.
However, testing at Site 41MC1 indicated that although its surface was heavily disturbed in some
areas, there appeared to be deeply buried deposits that could date to the Late Paleoindian period
(ca. 8,800 to 9,500 years ago). Therefore, Tierras Antiguas recommended that this site be avoided
during construction of the pipeline.
In addition, two previously undiscovered archaeological sites were documented (not shown in
Figure 6). The first site is a collapsed house and privy. The second is a trash dump. Both sites
appear to be related, and artifacts found at both sites suggest a ca. 1940-1960 period of
occupation. Finally, two isolated prehistoric pieces of lithic debitage were also found (Nickels
2011).

Figure 6. Known archaeological sites along Segment 3 of the pipeline.

-14-

-15-

Segment 4 - Figure 7
Segment 4 of the pipeline is shown in Figure 7. Once again, the large number of known sites in this
area are a direct result of systemaic professional surveys, and as previously stated, there is most
probably a high number of undocumented sites that will be impacted by construction of the Choke
Canyon Gas Pipeline.

Figure 7. Known archaeological site along Segment 4 of the pipeline.

-16-

Segment 5 - Figure 8

Figure 8. Segment 5 of the pipeline.
-17-

Although there are no archaeological sites documented along Segemnt 5 of the proposed rightof-way, the terrain features suggest a moderate to high probability that there are multiple sites
either within or adjacent to the right-of-way.

Segment 6 - Figure 9
Once again, as with the high ubiquity of known archaeological sites as shown in Figures 6 and 7,
there is a nuclei of sites near Segment 6 of the pipeline right-of-way (Figure 9). And once again,
this is a direct reflection of professional archaeological surveys that have been conducted in a
relatively small area near Segment 6. This relatively small surveyed area demonstrates the high
likelihood that Segment 6 of the proposed pipeline will impact multiple archaeological sites of
unknown significance.

Figure 9. Known archaeological sites along Segment 6 of the pipeline.

-18-

Segment 7 - Figure 10
As shown in Figure 10, there are 12 known archaeological sites within close proximity to the
proposed Choke Canyon Gas Pipeline. Notably, one of those is a prehistoric site that has a burial
on it, and one of those has possible Paleoindian-age artifacts. Both are highly significant sites, and
demonstrate the potential for other highly significant sites to exist within the proposed Choke
Canyon Gas Pipeline right-of-way. Notably, the proposed right-of-way will directly adversely
impact Site 41LK306.

-19-

Figure 10. Known archaeological sites along Segment 7 of the pipeline.
Segment 8 - Figure 11

As shown in Figure 11, there are 17 known archaeological sites within one mile of the proposed
Choke Canyon Gas Pipeline. Most importantly, construction of the pipeline as currently aligned
will adversely impact six of those sites.

-20-

Figure 11. Known archaeological sites along Segment 8 of the pipeline.

-21-

Segment 9 - Figure 12
Although no documented archaeological sites are known to exist along Segment 9 of the proposed
pipeline, the terrain suggests that there are an unknown number of sites that likely exist, and
without a cultural resources survey, their specific locations and research potential remains an
unknown.

Figure 12. Segment 9 of the proposed Choke Canyon Gas Pipeline right-of-way.

Segment 10 - Figure 13
As with Segment 9, there are no known archaeological sites along Segment 10 of the proposed
right-of-way. Although the terrain across which Segment 10 will dissect is predominately uplands,
and the potential for deeply buried and significant cultural materials is likely moderate at best,
without an archaeological investigation of these areas, that potential remains an unknown.

-22-

Figure 13. Segment 10 of the proposed Choke Canyon Gas Pipeline right-of-way.

Segment 11 - Figure 14
Akin to Segments 9 and 10 (Figures 12 and 13), there are no known archaeological sites along
Segment 11 of the proposed pipeline. Likewise, the terrain along Segment 11 is predominately
uplands, and the potential for deeply buried and significant cultural materials is likely moderate at
best. However, without an archaeological survey, the ubiquity of archaeological sites and their
scientific research potential will remain an unknown.

-23-

Figure 14. Segment 11 of the proposed Choke Canyon Gas Pipeline right-of-way.

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
From this preliminary cultural resources background review, it is clear that the proposed Choke
Canyon Gas Pipeline right-of-way will encounter previously documented archaeological sites, as
well as others that are as yet undocumented. Some of those may be heavily disturbed and/or
redundant site types, and as such have little to contribute to the prehistory of south Texas. These
sites should be considered as non-significant, and should not impede the pipeline’s construction
as planned. However, it is also clear from this review that there is a moderate to high probability
that archaeological sites of significance lie in the planned right-of-way.
The vast majority of the right-of-way has never been subjected to a cultural resources survey, and
therefore the number of undocumented sites, as well as their potential significance along the rightof-way are unknowns. In addition, the few surveys that have been conducted were accomplished
in the 1970s and 1980s, under far less stringent standards that are currently prescribed by the
Texas Historical Commission (THC) and the Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA). Although
the number of sites and their potential significance can be modeled, because of the scant few
-24-

professional surveys that have been conducted in this area of south Texas to date under less
stringent standards, such models are considered unreliable.
In sum, it appears that the pipeline is to be routed through some areas that may be sensitive to
archaeological deposits. To be sure of our desktop assessment, Tierras Antiguas recommends that
a full pedestrian survey, with shovel testing in moderate and high probability areas, be conducted
along the Choke Canyon Gas Pipeline right-of-way.

-25-

References Cited

Atlas
2011
Bauer, G.
1996

Black, S. L.
1989

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
August 11, 2011].

Bee County. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 1, pp. 459-461.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Environmental Setting. In From the Gulf Coast to the Rio Grande: Human
Adaptation in the Central, South, and Lower Pecos, Texas, by T. R. Hester, S.
L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. J. Reinhard, and L. C.
Bement, pp. 5-17. Research Series No. 33, Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

Black, S. L., and A. J. McGraw
1985 The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change and Continuity in the Upper
Salado Creek Drainage, South-Central Texas. Archaeological Survey Report,
No. 100. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Bousman, C. B., B. W. Baker, and A. C. Kerr
2004 Paleoindian Archeology in Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, edited by T. K.
Perttula, pp. 15-97. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Collins, M. B.
1995 Forty Years of Archaeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:361–400.
Creel, D. G.
1986

A Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in West Central Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Arizona, Tucson.
-26-

Dillehay, T.
1974

Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19(64):180–196.

Fox, A. A., and D. E. Fox
1967 The Classen Rockshelter, 41BX23. Manuscript on file. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986 Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas; Choke Canyon Series: Volume 12. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hall, G. D, S. L. Black, and C. Graves
1981 Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5: Archaeological Investigations at Choke
Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase I Findings. Choke Canyon Series:
Volume 5. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Hallenbeck, C.
1971 Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca: The Journey and Route of the First European
to Cross the Continent of North America, 1534-1536. Kennikat Press
Scholarly Reprints, Port Washington, New York.
Hester, T. R.
2004 The Prehistory of South Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, pp. 127-154.
Edited by T. K. Perttula. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
1995 The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:427–459.
1984 Fragments, Flints, and Footprints: The Prehistory of Dimmit County. In
Dimmit County Mesquite Roots, Volume I, pp. 1-6, edited by L. K. Tidwell.
Wind River Press. Austin, TX.
1980 Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur Archaeologists.
Corona Press, San Antonio.
1977 Late Pleistocene Aboriginal Adaptations in Texas. Papers on Paleo-Indian
Archaeology in Texas: 1, pp. 1-14. Special Report 3, Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Highley, L., C. Graves, and G. Judson
1978 Archeological Investigations at Scorpion Cave (41ME7), Medina County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:139–194.
Leach, J. D., and C. B. Bousman
2001 Cultural and Secondary Formation Processes: On the Dynamic Accumulation
of Burned Rock Middens, Chapter 7. In Test Excavations at the Culebra
-27-

Creek Site, 41BX126, San Antonio, Texas by D. L. Nickels, C. B. Bousman, J.
D. Leach, and D. A. Cargill, pp. 119-145. Archaeological Survey Report, No.
265, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio and Archeological Studies, Report 3, Environmental Affairs Division,
Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.
Leach, J. D., D. L. Nickels, B. K. Moses, and R. Jones
2001 Appendix D. Estimating Rates of Burned Rock Discard: Results from an
Experimental Earth Oven. In Test Excavations at the Culebra Creek Site,
41BX126, San Antonio, Texas by D. L. Nickels, C. B. Bousman, J. D. Leach,
and D. A. Cargill, pp. 119-145. Archaeological Survey Report, No. 265,
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio
and Archeological Studies, Report 3, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Leffler, J.
1996a Live Oak County. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 4, pp. 242-245.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
1996b McMullen County. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 4, pp. 437-440.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Leffler, J. J., and C. Long
1996 Webb County. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 2, pp. 645-648.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Mauldin, R. P., D. L. Nickels, and C. J. Broehm
2003 Archaeological Testing to Determine the National Register Eligibility Status
of 18 Prehistoric Sites on Camp Bowie, Brown County, Texas. Archaeological
Survey Report, No. 334, Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio and the Adjutant General’s Department of Texas,
Department of Facilities and Engineering Environmental Branch, Austin,
Texas.
McKinney, W. W.
1981 Early Holocene Adaptations in Central and Southern Texas: The Problem of
the Paleo-Indian-Archaic Transition. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 52:91–120.
Nash, S. R.
2001

The Buckner Ranch Site (41BE2): A Re-examination of the Data from 19381941 Texas Memorial Museum Investigations. Unpublished Master’s Thesis,
University of Texas at Austin.

-28-

Nickels, D. L.
2011 Interim Report of a Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed Kuykendall San Miguel Crossing Pipeline Right-of-Way. Letter report submitted to
Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd., by Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, Texas. June 11, 2011.
Peter, D. E.
1982

Alternative Perspectives on Burned Rock Middens, In Archaeological
Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, Vol. 2,
compiled and edited by T. R. Hays, pp. 20.1–20.15. Archaeology Program,
Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.

Prewitt, E. R.
1991 Burned Rock Middens: A Summary of Previous Investigations and
Interpretations. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An Archeological
Symposium, edited T. R. Hester, pp. 25–32. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
1985 From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 54:201-238.
Sellards, E. H.
1940 Pleistocene Artifacts and Associated Fossils from Bee County, Texas (with
Notes on Artifacts by T. N. Campbell, and Notes on Terrace Deposits by Glen
L. Evans). Bulletin of the Geological Society of America 51:1627-1658.
Skelton, D. W.
1977 Archeological Investigations at the Fayette Power Project, Fayette County,
Texas. Research Report 60. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Steele, D. G., and C. Assad Hunter
1986 Analysis of Vertebrate Faunal Remains from 41MC222 and 41MC296,
McMullen County, Texas. In The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon
Reservoir, Southern Texas: Results of Phase II Archaeological Investigations,
edited by G. D. Hall, T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black. Choke Canyon Series, No.
10. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Stevens, J. W., and D. Arriaga
1985 Soil Survey of Dimmit and Zavala Counties. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C., in Cooperation
with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, College Station, Texas.

-29-

Story, D. A.
1985

Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coastal Plain. In
Prehistoric Food Production in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp.
19–56. Anthropological Papers No. 75. Museum of Anthropology, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Taylor, A. J., and L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Volume I. Studies in
Archaeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Turner, E. S., and T. R. Hester
1993 A Field Guide to the Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Gulf Publishing.
Houston, TX.
Weir, F. A.
1976

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. Anthropology
Department, Washington State University.

-30-

