Archeological Survey of the Lakeline Boulevard Extension and
Improvement Project, Williamson County, Texas

Texas Antiquities Permit # 3678

Prepared for:

aci consulting, a division of aci group, LLC,
1001 Mopac Circle Suite 100
Austin, Texas 78746

For:
Williamson County, Texas

By:
Ron Ralph, RPA and Sean R. Nash, RPA

Principal Investigator: Sean R. Nash, RPA

Reports of Investigations, Volume II, Number 9

Archeological and Cultural Sciences Group
Spicewood, Texas
April 2005

TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................................. 1
INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................................. 4
POTENTIAL IMPACTS..................................................................................................................... 4
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND ........................................................................................ 5
Physiography ................................................................................................................... 5
Flora and Fauna ............................................................................................................... 5
Geology and Soils............................................................................................................ 6
PREHISTORIC BACKGROUND .................................................................................................. 6
Paleoindian (Before 8800 B.P.)................................................................................... 7
Archaic (8800-1300 B.P.) ........................................................................................... 7
Late Prehistoric (1300 - ca.500 B.P., or contact) ........................................................ 8
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND ..................................................................................................... 9
PREVIOUSLY RECORDED ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES ........................................... 11
METHODS ............................................................................................................................................. 14
Pedestrian Survey .......................................................................................................... 14
Shovel and Backhoe Testing ......................................................................................... 15
RESULTS OF FIELD INVESTIGATIONS .............................................................................. 15
Pedestrian Survey Results ............................................................................................. 15
PREVIOUSLY RECORDED SITES ........................................................................................... 22
NEWLY RECORDED SITES ......................................................................................................... 22
SHOVEL TESTING AND BACKHOE TRENCHING RESULTS ................................. 22
Backhoe Trench Test Results ........................................................................................ 22
Shovel Test Results ....................................................................................................... 22
CONCLUSIONS ................................................................................................................................... 23
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................................... 23
REFERENCES CITED...................................................................................................................... 24

ii

Archaeological Survey of the Lakeline Boulevard Extension and
Improvement Project, Williamson County, Texas

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Archaeological and Cultural Sciences Group (ACSG) conducted an intensive
archaeological survey of the Lakeline Boulevard Extension and Improvement Project in
southwestern Williamson County, Texas, on February 11, 2005 (Figure 1). Lakeline
Boulevard will be extended from the present terminus of Neenah Avenue just northwest
of the City of Austin Park and Ride facility, eastward across the Austin and Northwest
Railroad, and will then join a second leg of Neenah Road. This leg extends a short ways
east and west from an intersection with Parmer Lane extension (Figure 2). The project
area consists of the 120-ft-wide, 1.4-mile-long right-of-way (ROW) of the proposed
Lakeline Boulevard alignment. Funding for this project comes solely from Williamson
County.
A records search was conducted at the Texas Archaeological Research Laboratory
(TARL) and the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) Texas Archaeological Sites Atlas
in order to locate nearby previously recorded historic and prehistoric cultural resources.
Research indicated there are no recorded sites within the project area. Eight previously
recorded archaeological sites were found; all eight less than 1000 meters from the project
area.
A 100% pedestrian survey of the entire project area was performed. Shovel testing was
performed in areas where soil appeared to exceed 10 cm thick. However, depth never
exceeded 10 cm in any of the shovel tests. All shovel tests performed within the ROW of
the Lakeline Boulevard Improvement Project tested negative for cultural materials. No
significant drainages cross the project area and no alluvium or deep soils were discovered
during the survey. Backhoe trenching was not performed during the archaeological
survey because of the shallow soils and sediments in the ROW.
No new archaeological sites were recorded within the ROW. A remnant low, native
stone wall was noted south of an existing ranch house and within the project area, but
was not recorded as an archaeological site. A short section of the 1941 narrow gauge
railroad bed was noted immediately east of the present Austin and Northwest Railroad.
This is probably an extension of site 41WM893 recorded in 1996 by Prewitt and
Associates. Cultural materials noted in the ROW were consistently modern, scattered
and confined to the ground surface.
It is ACSG’s recommendation that construction of the Lakeline Boulevard Extension and
Improvement Project be allowed to begin without delay. This report follows the Council
of Texas Archeologists (CTA) guidelines and is designed to satisfy State and Federal
laws and regulations. The findings of the cultural resource survey, the records search,
along with a brief environmental note including soils data, along with a cultural resources
assessment and recommendations are presented below.

Lakeline Blvd.
Lakeline
Blvd.ROW
ROW

Lakeline Blvd. ROW

Figure 1. (Top) Location of project area withim Texas, (bottom) location of project area within
Williamson County.

2

This page is intentionally left blank

INTRODUCTION
Archaeological and Cultural Sciences Group (ACSG) conducted an intensive
archaeological survey of the Lakeline Boulevard Extension and Improvement Project in
southwestern Williamson County, Texas, on February 11, 2005. Lakeline Boulevard will
be extended from the present terminus of Neenah Avenue, just northwest of the City of
Austin Park and Ride facility, eastward across the Austin and Northwest Railroad to
connect with another leg of Neenah Road. This second leg extends a short ways west
from an intersection with the new Parmer Lane extension. The project area consists of
the 120-ft-wide, 1.4-mile-long ROW (40.1 acres) for the proposed Lakeline Boulevard
alignment (Figures 1 and 2). Funding for this project comes solely from the Williamson
County Road Bond Program.
As a political subdivision of the State of Texas, Williamson County is obligated to
comply with the Texas Antiquities Act and the Rules of Practice and Procedure for the
Texas Antiquities Act. These rules are interpreted and enforced primarily by the Texas
Historical Commission (THC). An initial scope of work was formulated to comply with
the Texas Antiquities code. The stated goal of the Antiquities Code of Texas is, “to
locate, protect, and preserve all sites, objects, buildings…, and locations of historical,
archaeological, educational, or scientific interest, including but not limited to prehistoric
and historical American Indian or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites,
archaeological sites of every character…within the jurisdiction of the State of Texas.”
The THC approved this initial scope of work and Texas Antiquities Permit #3678 was
issued to Sean R. Nash as principal investigator for Archaeological and Cultural Sciences
Group (ACSG).

PROJECT AREA
The project area for this project consists of the 120-ft-wide, 1.4-mile-long ROW for the
proposed east-west alignment. The total project area is approximately 40 acres.

POTENTIAL IMPACTS
Road construction will impact all surface areas within the project area. Impact to
bedrock is anticipated throughout the project area because it is located in an upland
setting. Deeper sediments, usually found along intermittent streams, are not present and
will not be impacted by this project.

4

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
Physiography
The property is located at the intersection of three physiographic provinces: the Lampasas
Cut Plain, the Blackland Prairie, and the Edwards Plateau (Barnes 1974). A rich ecotone
at this intersection encompasses the property. The property lies within the Lampasas Cut
Plain, which is characterized in the area of the project by rolling limestone uplands
dissected by broad, shallow valleys (Johnson 1931). Garner and Young (1976) define
this area as a part of the Edwards Plateau Physiographic Province and do not define the
Lampasas Cut Plain as a separate province. People living on the property would find any
of these physiographic areas and their biomes within easy reach (Collins 1998:6).
Although the property is within the upper reaches of the Brazos River drainage system,
the Colorado River and its distinct resources lie only about 15 km southwest of the
project area.
Williamson County is divided into two physiographic regions by the Balcones
Escarpment, which bisects the county along its north-south axis. On the western side of
the escarpment, the landform is characterized by rolling limestone uplands with an
average elevation of 850 ft above mean sea level (AMSL). The vegetation within the
region consists of live oak, mesquite, Ashe juniper, prickly pear cactus, and tall and mid
grasses. The land is used primarily for livestock, but some agriculture takes place along
the eastern edge of the region. The mineral resources within the region are an important
asset for the county economy. Limestone quarrying and the production of quick lime
have been significant industries in southwestern Williamson County and northern Travis
County since the 1850s. Companies, like the Austin White Lime Company, have
prospered from the abundant limestone in the region. On the eastern side of the
escarpment, the physiographic province is characterized by nearly level to gently rolling
blackland prairies with an average elevation of 600 ft AMSL. This region has been
extensively cultivated. However, areas along the rivers, creeks, and drainages contain
riparian forests of hackberry, cottonwood, elm, walnut, and pecan. Approximately 30
percent of the land is prime farmland (Odintz 2002).
The proposed project area lies south of both South Brushy Creek, a tributary of the San
Gabriel, and Lake Creek, a tributary of Brushy Creek. Brushy Creek converges with the
South Fork of the San Gabriel River immediately east of the City of Round Rock, Texas.
Flora and Fauna
Upland soils are thin to non-existent and support a live oak savanna. Ashe juniper, live
oak, pecan, agarita, and prickly pear cactus are common. Blair’s (1950) Texan and
Balconian biotic provinces meet in the area of the property and the flora and fauna of
both provinces can be found. During the survey, deer and jackrabbits were observed
within the project area.
5

Geology and Soils
The underlying geologic formation within the project area consists of Lower Cretaceous
Georgetown Formation undivided (Kdg), which outcrops on the surface of the uplands.
In certain areas, a marly limestone can be found as bedrock.
Four soils have developed in the area.
Crawford clay 1 to 3 percent slopes (CfB), will range from 20 to50 acres in size, and is
representative of this series. The Crawford series consists of well-drained, moderately
deep, noncalcareous, clay soils that developed over hard limestone. In a representative
profile, the surface layer is about 14 inches of dark-brown neutral clay. The next layer,
about 12 inches thick, is reddish brown neutral clay. The next lower layer, which extends
to a depth of about 32 inches, is reddish-brown neutral clay. Bedrock is hard limestone.
Crawford soils crack when dry and are very slowly permeable when wet.
Doss silty clay 1 to 5 percent slopes (DoC), ranges from 10 to 50 acre irregularly shaped
uplands areas with a typical dark grayish brown silty clay surface layer to about 9 inches
and a subsoil to 19 inches of brown silty clay loan. This soil overlays a weakly cemented
limy earth interbedded with limestone fragments.
Eckrant extremely stony clay (EeB), which consists of soil that has a stony, very dark
gray clay surface layer about 11 inches thick…about 25 percent of the surface is covered
with fragments of limestone.
Georgetown stony clay loam (GsB), which is described as having a “brown stony clay
loam surface layer about 7 inches thick and few to common stones on or near the
surface,” and the “subsoil, which extends down to a depth of about 35 inches, is neutral,
reddish brown clay in the upper part and slightly acid, reddish brown cobbly clay in the
lower part;” (United States Department of Agriculture 1983).
PREHISTORIC BACKGROUND
The property falls within the Central Texas archaeological area (Prewitt 1981:71).
Prehistoric archaeological sites in Central Texas represent continuous human occupation
starting around 11,500 years ago. Throughout its occupation, hunting and gathering is
believed to be the exclusive resource procurement strategy of prehistoric Central Texans.
Sites have been interpreted to represent relatively short-term occupations. Deeper sites
with large amounts of cultural materials are thought to be camps that were returned to
through the years possibly on a regular basis.
Michael B. Collins (1995) authored a recent synthesis of Central Texas archaeology. The
cultural history summarized here is based in large part on his synthesis. Collins has
divides the prehistory of Central Texas into 3 time periods: (1) the Paleoindian, (2) the
Archaic, and (3) the Late Prehistoric. Each of these has further been divided into
subperiods, such as early and late. Smaller units of time referred to as “style intervals”
are used to coincide with the interval of use of a particular point style or group of point
6

styles. These style intervals can overlap each other or extend over more than one
subperiod. Most, however, can be used to subdivide the subperiods. Information
pertaining to burned rock middens, specifically, is based primarily on Black’s (1997)
research.
Paleoindian (Before 8800 B.P.)
The evidence (e.g., Meltzer 1993) no longer supports the long held belief that North
American Paleoindians could be characterized as nomadic bands of big game hunters.
Big game hunting is indicated, particularly in association with Folsom. However, a more
generalized hunting and gathering subsistence is now evidenced at Paleoindian sites
across Texas and the rest of North America (e.g., Burger Bluff [41GD30] and Baker
Cave). The relatively mesic conditions that prevailed from about 11,500 B.P. allowed for
a high biomass in central Texas and the surrounding regions (Collins 1995).
Clovis and Folsom style intervals divide Collins’ early Paleoindian period (11,20010,000 B.P.). Clovis is the earliest recognized cultural horizon in central Texas. Clovis
is securely dated to between 11,200 and 10,900 B.P. in radiocarbon years. The WilsonLeonard, Gault, and Pavo Real sites have recently added new data to the study of these
early peoples of what is now Texas. Kincaid Rockshelter and Horn Shelter sites also
have documented Clovis components. Clovis artifacts include prismatic blades, engraved
stones, bola stones and the unique Clovis point (Collins 1995). Clovis points are usually
lanceolate, fluted projectile or lance points (Collins 1998).
The Folsom style interval is not as securely dated, and appears to overlap with Clovis.
The finely retouched and fluted Folsom points are one of the most easily recognized
points made in the Americas. In Folsom times, more than at any other interval, people
were specialized hunters. Bison kills with associated Folsom points remain the typical
Folsom site type. The postulated style intervals following Folsom, known as Plainview
and Dalton-San Patrice, are not well known or clearly defined. However, evidence from
sites containing components related to them, such as Horn Shelter 2, indicate an Archaiclike hunter-gatherer lifeway (Redder 1985).
Wilson, Golondrina-Barber, and St. Mary’s Hall style intervals make up Collins’ (1995)
late Paleoindian subperiod. This subperiod is characterized as intermediate or transitional
between Paleoindian and Archaic (Collins 1998:63-4). Burned rock features have been
found associated with all three style intervals of this subperiod, but they are substantially
smaller and less frequent than in the Archaic (Collins 1995).
Archaic (8800-1300 B.P.)
The mesic conditions of the Paleoindian period come to an end during the early subperiod
of the Archaic. With the exception of the Bell-Andice-Calf Creek interval of the middle
Archaic subperiod, this was a more xeric time for Central Texas and the surrounding
regions. A jump in the number of ground stone tools, specifically manos and matates
suggests an increased reliance on plant resources (Collins 1995). Central Texas Archaic
7

sites are characterized by accumulations of heat altered rock, including those known as
burned rock middens.
Three subperiods have been defined for the Central Texas Archaic: (1) early, (2) middle,
and (3) late (Johnson and Goode 1994, Collins 1995). Early Archaic sites (8800-6000
B.P.) are recognized by the presence of Angostura, Early Split Stem, and MartindaleUvalde points. Unifacial Clear Fork tools and Guadalupe bifaces are found in early
Archaic sites along with ground stone tools and other bifacial and unifacial implements.
Early Archaic earth ovens and accumulations of burned rock are found primarily on the
better-watered portions of the Edward’s plateau, in Live Oak savanna habitats. These
earth ovens and accumulations of burned rock have been considered the technological
antecedents of the classic burned rock middens (Collins 1995). However, at Ft. Hood
seven burned rock middens were carefully dated using AMS. The features spanned from
5500 BC (early Archaic) to 1400 AD (Quigg and Ellis 1994). Two others burned rock
middens in Kerr County have been dated to the early Archaic (Luke 1980). It is possible
that these reported early burned rock ovens and accumulations may represent the same
phenomenon in a different form or stage of development (e.g., incipient).
During the first interval (6000-5000 B.P.) of the middle Archaic subperiod the climate is
somewhat more mesic. Bison populations soared. The technically impressive BellAndice-Calf Creek points were likely made primarily for killing these Bison (Johnson
and Goode 1994). By 5000 B.P., the Bison had dwindled and the climate had become
more xeric again. Burned rock middens were likely used to cook sotol and other
xerophytes that thrived during these dry years (Johnson and Goode 1994:26). The last
thousand years of the middle Archaic (5000-4000 B.P.) are divided into two style
intervals, Taylor and Nolan-Travis.
The late Archaic (4000-1300 B.P.) began during the driest time central Texans had ever
experienced. There was, however, a steady increase in effective moisture until it peaked
in the later part of the late Archaic (Collins 1995). With the increase in effective
moisture came the return of Bison. Six style intervals are recognized for the late Archaic:
(1) Bulverde, (2) Pedernales-Kinney, (3) Lange-Marshall-Williams, (4) Marcos-MontellCastroville, (5) Ensor-Frio-Fairland, and (6) Darl.
Late Prehistoric (1300 - ca.500 B.P., or contact)
The beginning of the late Prehistoric period is defined primarily by the introduction of the
bow and arrow. Pottery was also introduced during this time, but unlike many areas in
Texas and the rest of the New World, farming strategies prevailed (Collins 1995). Many
documented instances of arrow wounds are recorded during this period (Prewitt 1974).
The late Prehistoric is divided into early and late subperiods (Jelks 1962). Each
subperiod has a single style interval. The early subperiod is represented by the Austin
style interval and the late subperiod by the Toyah interval (Collins 1995). Scallorn and
Edwards points are diagnostic of the early subperiod and Perdiz is representative of the
Toyah archaeological manifestation.
8

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
Historic exploration and settlement of the Williamson County area began in the late
seventeenth and early eighteenth century when Spanish explorers traveled through the
region searching for better routes to the missions in East Texas. Captain Alonso De León
followed the Camino Real from San Antonio to Bastrop several times during the 1680s,
and, at least once, he traveled on the Camino de Arriba, which crossed Brushy Creek and
the San Gabriel River. In 1716, Louis Juchereau de St. Denis, a French explorer, and
Captain Domingo Ramon, a Spanish explorer, led an expedition through the area and
camped on the banks of Brushy Creek and the San Gabriel River. They named them
Arroyo do las Bendítas Ánimas and Rio de San Xavier, respectively. In 1721, Marques
de Aguayo led a large group of soldiers, livestock, and provisions through present-day
Williamson County to replenish supplies at the eastern missions (The City of Round
Rock 1998a). In the mid-eighteenth century, the San Xavier missions were established
along the San Gabriel River, just east of the Williamson/Milam County line. By 1753,
drought and disease made the missions uninhabitable and Spanish influence in the area
declined (Odintz 2002).
Anglo-American influence in the area began with a series of land grants from the
Mexican government in the late-eighteenth and early-nineteenth century. In 1835,
continual attacks by indigenous peoples prompted Captain John J. Tumlinson and his
company of Texas Rangers to construct a fort and Indian lookout near the headwaters of
Brushy Creek, in southwestern Williamson County. Tumlinson Fort, as it was called,
was abandoned in 1836 when General Santa Ana invaded Texas (Odintz 2002).
Following the defeat of General Santa Ana by Texas republican forces at the Battle of
San Jacinto, several veterans of the battle settled in Williamson County. In 1838, Dr.
Thomas Kenney and his family built a fort on Brushy Creek, in what is now eastern
Williamson County. Kenney’s Fort, became the first civilian settlement in Williamson
County. By the 1840s, several settlements existed along Brushy Creek. However, battles
with the indigenous population were a frequent problem, and numerous settlers, including
Kenney, were killed by Indians. By 1846, the Indian resistance has weakened, and
settlers moved into the region in increasing numbers. In 1848, the Texas legislature
established Williamson County, naming it after Robert Williamson, a Milam County
Judge and state senator.
By 1850, the county had a population of 1,379 whites and 155 slaves. Most of the
population was located in the eastern part of the county on Brushy Creek and the San
Gabriel (Odintz 2002), but a few families were living in the western half.
During the 1850’s and 1860’s, towns, lumber mills, and tanneries sprang up around the
county. However, the county remained for the most part rural and agricultural. The
majority of the families lived on subsistence farms in log houses and raised corn. During
the 1850s and early 1860s, the slave population increased and the agricultural patterns
within the county became more diverse. Wheat and corn were the predominant crops in
the blackland prairies, and cattle and sheep ranching was widespread throughout the
9

county, but particularly widespread in the hilly regions west of the Balcones Escarpment
(Nash et al. 2002). Cotton was introduced in 1850s, but it was not a significant cash
crop.
The economy of Williamson County slumped during the Civil War, but picked up again
in the 1870s with the growth of the cattle and sheep industry and the expansion of cotton
farming. The cattle industry was sustained by the Chisolm trail, which was established in
1864 and passed close to Round Rock. Many cattle drives passed through or originated
in Williamson County. The 1870s and 1880s was also marked by the arrival of railroads
to Williamson and Travis County. Towns like McNeil developed as important railway
hubs (Odintz 2002).
In 1876, the International and Great Northern Railroad built a section of track between
Rockdale and Austin. In 1882, Austin and Northwestern Railroad built a section of track
between Austin and Burnet. The community of McNeil developed at the intersection of
these two tracks. The community was named for George McNeil, a section foreman for
the Austin and Northwestern Railroad. In the 1880s, McNeil became the base of
operations for the Austin White Lime Company. By the 1890’s, the community had a
hotel, general store, and a population of 200 (Smyrl 2002; Austin History Center 2001).
A second community, just to the south, was much closer to the project area. Rutledge
was named after a family that lived in the Pond Springs area on the stage line from
Austin to Burnet. When the Austin and Northwestern Railroad was constructed in 1882,
a new Rutledge was organized on the line about a mile to the east. This town became a
section house for railroad crews. Soon, a blacksmith shop, general store and post office,
a cedar yard and a local stone quarry completed the community. The post office closed
in 1908 and the railroad crews were removed shortly thereafter. In 1941, a narrow gauge
spur line was built from Rutledge to the new dam site on the Colorado River and
construction of the Mansfield Dam was begun. Stone fill for the dam was transported by
rail along this spur and the line removed upon completion.
By the early-twentieth century, cotton farming had preceded the cattle industry. With the
dramatic growth in cotton farming, a shift in farm tenancy developed. As late as 1880,
77 percent of the farms were still worked by owners. By 1890, 43 percent of the farms
were worked by owners. By 1930, only 29 percent of the farms were worked by owners.
The tenancy rates continued to drop during the Great Depression (Odintz 2002).
Between 1910 and 1920, many Mexican families fled the Mexican Civil War and
immigrated to Williamson County and Travis County. Many of these immigrants settled
in the community of McNeil and worked for the Austin White Lime Company. They
lived on half-acre lots that they rented from the company. The houses were very simple
and lacked indoor plumbing, electricity, or telephone service. Most of the families raised
chickens, cows, pigs, and vegetables. During cotton season, women, children, and some
of the men of McNeil were hired to pick cotton on local farms at $2 per hundred pounds.
Following World War II, the Mexican population in McNeil declined when many of the
10

families moved to Round Rock where they could own their own homes (The City of
Round Rock 1998b).
The cotton industry suffered economically during the 1920s from the effects of soil
depletion, falling prices brought on by overproduction, and the boll weevil infestation.
The Great Depression of the 1930s worsened the economic situation and encouraged
farmers to shift away from cotton to livestock. Cotton production was reduced by nearly
half, while sorghum and wheat became important crops. Along with cattle and sheep,
poultry farming intensified (Odintz 2002).
Significant population and economic changes occurred in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s.
The construction and expansion of roads throughout the undeveloped areas of
Williamson County meant urban populations now had easier access to the Hill Country
and vice versa. The consolidation of rural schools also meant children could now attend
schools outside of their rural communities. Small communities like McNeil were no
longer isolated enclaves.
Suburbanization in areas bordering Austin caused the population of Williamson County
to boom in the 1970s and 1980s. In 1970, the population of Williamson County was
37,305. By 1982, the population had grown to over 85,700 (Odintz 2002). A pattern of
absentee ownership and of non-agricultural use of the land also intensified following
World War II. The community of McNeil dwindled when residents moved to nearby
Austin, Round Rock, and Cedar Park. By 1990, only a few dozen people remained in
McNeil.

PREVIOUSLY RECORDED ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES
There are no recorded archaeological sites located within the proposed ROW, but there
are eight previously recorded sites located within a kilometer of the ROW. These are
sites 41WM559, 563, 564, 566, 713, 892, 893, and 896.
Site 41WM559 is the Pavo Blanco Site. The site is located northeast of the project area
on the Avery Ranch golf course. It sprawls across 127 acres of uplands above the
confluence of South Brushy creek (to the west) and two of its tributaries. A variety of
projectile points representing several cultures spanning thousands of years (Paleoindian
to Late Prehistoric) were found both on the ground surface an in test excavations
conducted by SWCA, Inc. in October 2000. The site has been known as a major
prehistoric locale since it was first recorded in 1984 by Sandra Hannum and Pat
Mercado-Allinger for Prewitt and Associates (Mercado-Allinger and Ragsdale 1984).
The site is now buried beneath a golf course. When the site was first found by recording
archaeologists, it was covered in an oak-juniper woodland with persimmon, mixed cacti,
grasses and forbs in increasingly xeric bands away from the creek and wetlands. Eckrant
series silt-clay loams dominate the somewhat eroded uplands. Test excavations showed
pockets of midden extended greater than a meter below the ground surface. One large
11

burned rock midden was the dominant cultural feature (41WM599c). Site testing
resulted in this portion of the site being recommended for inclusion in the National
Register of Historic Places. A preservation plan written by SWCA, Inc. was approved by
the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers in which the heart of the site would be buried by up to
a meter and a half of clean fill and the area stabilized by planting a hybrid Bermuda grass
(Miller et al., 2002).
Site 41WM563 is part of the Rutledge Community, a historic home site on the north side
of the rail line. The site was recorded in 1986 by Prewitt and Associates as the Petri
house. Karl Petri evidently owned it in 1899 during the early railroad times selling the
section houses to the Warren family next door in 1922. The site may be eligible for
inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places according to the archaeological
assessment. Additional testing was recommended at the time.
Site 41WM564 is an historic Estepps/Warren home site in Rutledge. Recorded in 1984
by Price, Mercado-Allinger and Fields with Prewitt and Associates, Inc., this series of
stone and concrete foundations, walkways, wind mill, barn and other outbuildings lies on
the north side of the rail road just east of the Petri house. The Warren family evidently
acquired the property in 1907 from the Estepp family, original settlers in the 1880s. The
house foundation probably represents construction of the Warren home in 1918 while the
stone foundation to the north is the earlier residence.
Although the last house was demolished in 1964 according to informants, further work
was recommended to determine if the site is eligible for nomination to the National
Register of Historic Places. Archaeological site testing and detailed mapping were
suggested data collecting tools.
Site 41WM566 overlaps the Pavo Blanco Site (41WM559) and is subsumed under that
site number. This historic component is the remains of the West-Adkisson Cabin and
Farm. Jackson conducted data recovery excavations and detailed mapping of site for
Prewitt and Associates in the late 1980s. A total of 11 excavation units around the cabin
and 7 in the vicinity of the barn were dug to recover a sample of the material culture. In
addition, a surface collection was made, recovered artifacts described, and a conjectural
reconstruction of the cabin offered in the final report (Jackson 1986).
The site was a pioneer farmstead occupied from the middle 1850s until 1913. The log
cabin home apparently stood until 1949 when it was dismantled.
Site 41WM713 is a historic farmstead surrounding a log cabin. It was investigated
Klament and Hannum for Prewitt and Associates, Inc. in 1986 (project 86010) after
initial documentation by Joe and Martha Doty Freeman. Although heavily disturbed, the
site was well defined with many features. The log cabin, approx. 5 by 5.5 m (16 by 18 ft)
in size, has an additional projecting sill extending approx. 3 m (10 ft) out from the front
side. The cabin is constructed of square cut, square notched oak logs with hand-adzed
face and sawn ends. Chinking consists of local limestone with lime sand mortar. A stone
chimney, constructed of cut limestone blocks (chisel marks visible on the cut stone), is on
12

the west side. Apparently the existing stone chimney post dates the original structure.
Joe Freeman noted the stone chimney and 2 windows on the west side of the structure
date to the 1930s). The original structure had only 3 openings; on the south, east and
north sides.
When the cabin was remodeled, a new door opening, openings for new windows and a
new stone chimney was cut in. The inside was totally remodeled, the log walls were
covered with tongue and groove boards, then fiberboard, sheetrock, and finally paneling.
A wood floor was put in, newer window frames and sills were installed, as were electrical
outlets. A few concrete footings or beams were noted associated with the newer addition
to the structure.
Three rock-lined gardens flank the south side of the cabin; one a circular alignment of
small/medium limestone boulders, filled with soil, with flowers, another consists of an
ovoid alignment of cut limestone blocks (chisel marks visible) surrounding a large cedar
tree and mountain laurel. The last is a linear rock alignment of smaller limestone rocks
possibly rectangular in shape. Also surrounding the cabin are stands of ornamental
vegetation, including fig trees, ornamental cedar, rose bushes, and various cactus. A
filled-in depression north of the cabin is most likely the hand-dug well location.
About 50 m from the log cabin is a ca. north/south rock alignment of natural chunks of
weathered limestone approx. 71 m long. From the southern end of this alignment is
another rock alignment that runs roughly east/west for 114 m. Near the end of this
feature is a 2 by 3 m pile of rocks. These alignments possibly represent remnants of
stone walls but at the least represent field clearing activities.
By 1986, the site had been bulldozed and nothing of architectural value was left standing.
The site was then recorded, but recommendations for further work or preservation were
deemed not warranted.
Site 41WM892 is the Cedar Choppers Site was first recorded by Prewitt and Associates
in 1986 under Antiquities Permit #1725. This historic locality had many surface features
and artifacts such as stone walls, stone alignments, foundations, metal, glass, pottery and
recent perishable materials scattered over a 150 by 200 meter area in three distinct
clusters. One feature, a possible dugout, was supposedly occupied at one time by an
early Negro inhabitant according to informants.
In 2002, the site was reinvestigated by SWCA Environmental Consultants during a larger
assessment of a proposed residential development and attendant small pond (Barile
2000). The site was reevaluated and found to have insufficient value to warrant
additional investigation or protection. It was not determined eligible for inclusion on the
National Register nor was it recommended as a State Archaeological Landmark.
Site 41WM893 is the bed for the narrow gauge railroad that transported material for the
construction of the Mansfield Dam (then called Marshall Ford). Built in 1937 and used
through 1941, the railroad brought a short respite in railroad activity that lasted till the
13

last material was hauled from the Llano area to the dam site. The site was recorded in
1996 by Blake, Baker and Killian for Prewitt and associates under TAC permit #1725
(Williams et al., 1996).
Site 41WM896 is the Rhodes Farmstead, a ca 1937-1945 suite of farmstead features
predating the newer State Dairy and Hog Farm. Early features include a concrete stock
tank, a sheep dip tank, a capped and cased well-head, a collapsed septic system and
several concentrations of late historic artifacts. The site was not recommended for State
Archaeological Landmark or National Register status (Williams et al., 1996).

METHODS
A 100% pedestrian survey was conducted for Williamson County to “identify obvious or
well known properties” and “areas where certain kinds of properties are likely to occur”
[36 CFR § 64] (Derry et. al. 1985, King et. al. 1977). These include both historic and
prehistoric aged properties. A thorough record search was completed in order to
determine: (1) if there were any recorded sites within the project area; and (2) the nature
of the recorded sites in the general area. Based on this data, a strategy for an intensive
archaeological survey of the project area was devised. The survey strategy included a
100% pedestrian survey and shovel testing.
Sites as defined by Hester et al. (1997:42) are “any discrete bounded location where
humans lived, worked, or carried out a task - and where evidence of their behavior can be
recovered by the archaeologist.” For practical purposes, any area where three or more
artifacts were found within a 10-m diameter was defined as a site and would be recorded.
Isolated artifacts would be plotted on a USGS 7.5’ topographic map.
Pedestrian Survey
A strategy of using a zigzag transect between the north and south boundaries of the 120foot ROW was determined to be the best way to discover any sites in the project area.
Transects were walked across the entire project area using a GPS route and tracking to
insure complete coverage. Overall good ground visibility in the project area allowed for
a confident appraisal of the open upland areas. Wooded areas had only fair to poor
ground visibility; openings with better visibility within the poor visibility areas received
additional attention. If an artifact were found, the surrounding area would be cleared and
carefully searched. Notes were taken describing topographic conditions, environmental
indicators, and any other factors affecting the survey. Furthermore, photographs were
taken of environmental settings, cultural features, and any artifacts encountered during
the survey. All naturally exposed profiles, including railroad grades and cuts, were
closely examined during the pedestrian survey of the proposed ROW.

14

Shovel and Backhoe Testing
The minimum survey standards for Texas, as implemented by the THC, require at least
16 shovel tests per mile in a linear project, unless the geomorphology or terrain
conditions demonstrate that this number is unnecessary. Based on the background
research, a scope of work was formulated to account for the lack of deep soils and
sediments within the project area. The subsequent pedestrian survey results confirmed
that the project area is located in an upland setting with heavily degraded surfaces and
exposed limestone bedrock. With this in mind, shovel tests were conducted at the
Principal Investigator’s discretion. In addition, a large portion of the project area is
located in heavily disturbed areas bounding existing roads, the City of Austin Park and
Ride facility, and the Austin and Northwest Railroad.
Shovel tests were placed in areas where the soils and sediments appeared to exceed 10
cm in depth. In order to confirm shallow depths, some shovel tests were also placed in
areas that contained thin soils. Areas where soil profiles were naturally exposed through
erosion were also examined. Shovel tests were approximately 30 cm in diameter and dug
to bedrock or sterile clay. Shovel test locations were mapped by GPS (Figure 3). Notes
were taken describing the zone, depth, soils, stratigraphy, and the presence or absence of
artifacts. Shovel test data is presented in Appendix 1.
Three intermittent drainages within the project area exhibit erosion balanced by
deposition and do not present a favorable environment for the preservation of
archaeological sites. Shovel tests executed near the drainages revealed fractured
limestone bedrock near the surface. Fractured bedrock is also exposed in the drainage
channel. Backhoe test trenches were not conducted during the archaeological survey
because the drainages lacked any alluvial deposits and no other deep sediments were
found.

RESULTS OF FIELD INVESTIGATIONS
Pedestrian Survey Results
The project crosses undeveloped uplands in an east/west direction. The soils are heavily
degraded or, in many cases, non-existent. Limestone bedrock outcrops on the surface,
and karst features are ubiquitous within the project area. The proposed ROW crosses
open pastures for the most part with some oak-juniper woodlands interspersed. Much of
the pastureland appears to have been mechanically cleared and perhaps plowed in the last
20 or so years.
The majority of the vegetation within the project area consists of scattered Ashe juniper,
oaks, hackberry, and prickly pear cactus with very little ground cover due to overgrazing.
Much of the prickly pear has been recently cropped by lean cattle. Surface visibility is
15

Proposed Lakeline Blvd. ROW

ST 3
ST 7

ST 1

ST 2

ST 11
ST 10

ST 12

ST 4
ST 9

ST 6

ST 5

ST 8

MILES

Figure 3. Lakeline Blvd. project area showing shovel test locations.

16

often good to excellent due to numerous patches of exposed soil and degrading bedrock.
However, in the westernmost section of the project area, the Eckrant extremely stony clay
(EeB), although thin, supports a tall grass biome interspersed with lush prickly pear.
Visibility in this portion of the project area was poor due to the profuse vegetation.
The survey began at the western end of the project area. The first section of the ROW
surveyed started at the existing eastern end of Neenah Avenue (which is an extension of
Lakeline Boulevard) and ended at the Austin and Northwestern Railroad (east).
Photographs were taken of the deep grass and overgrown limestone terrain (Figure 4).
This segment continued some 2500 feet (750 meters) east before it crossed the tracks just
past a metal-pole support for a high voltage electrical line.
The survey resumed at the east end of the project area where Parmer Lane extension
(FM734) crosses the east leg of Neenah. The survey proceeded from the fenced western
terminus of the paved boulevard.
This segment is open pasture, well-cropped, providing better than 50% visibility of the
ground surface (Figure 5). Soils are clay loams with limestone outcrops in several places.
Fractured cobbles of Georgetown chert litter the surface indicative of plowing or
mechanical clearing to remove unwanted brush, shrubs and trees. Depressions indicate
where larger trees have toppled, although some may indicate filled karst features. There
are a few identifiable low push piles usually found against the relatively undisturbed
thicker woodlands. Flakes or worked chert were not observed at any point along this
segment.
The zigzag path continued through a wooded area to a fence corner. Within the wooded
area thin soils and exposed bedrock supported oak and hackberry with little understory
and ground cover . The fence was followed west - northwest to the occupied ranch house
just outside the ROW. The owner discussed the property, the lack of Indian sites, and his
recent tenure at this newly constructed ranch house. Continuing west within the wooded
area, exposed limestone bedrock was even more prevalent. A low rock wall now only a
few courses high was noted to the south of the centerline (Figure 6). This native
limestone fence runs east/west here but turns south at a right angle after a short while.
Several waypoints were taken to provide a starting point for future mapping of this
feature. Historic artifacts were not associated with the wall.
This collapsed rock wall is probably associated with early occupants of this ranch land,
perhaps with Karl Petri (41WM563) or the Estepps property (41WM564) to the south and
is important only in that it might show a previous property corner or indicate how the
earlier owners pastured their land in the late 1800s. It is not associated at this time with
any particular owner and is not considered an archaeological site.
After crossing two fences, the survey terminated on the railroad track. From this point,
the City of Austin Park and Ride facility was clearly visible to the southwest. The survey
turned around at this point and, after re-crossing the fence, an old railroad grade was
17

Figure 4. Western end of project area showing the tall grasses on thin soils over bedrock.

18

Figure 5. Western portion of project area showing (top) environment and (bottom) ground
visibility.

19

Figure 6. A historic rock wall was found running east to west across the ROW.

noted that roughly parallels the existing track (Figure 7). This berm is low, perhaps no
more than 50cm high, and narrow, perhaps no more than 2m across the flat top of the
grade. Construction might have been by Fresno plow with a slight swale or ditch along
the west side. It is probable that this grade is a northern extension of a narrow gauge line
built in 1937 to haul material for the Mansfield Dam. It has been recorded previously as
41WM893. The track continues north and south from this point and was defined by the
two waypoints. This section of the narrow gauge was not recorded as an archaeological
site, but the information was submitted to TARL as an addendum to the existing site
form.
One isolated tested cobble was noted to the east of the railroad grade. It has had several
flakes taken off two edges giving a rough, sinuous edged pointed tool that showed no use
modification. Several minutes were spent searching for other biface-like cores and
detached flakes, but the search was unsuccessful. It was concluded that prehistoric use of
this area was extremely light with no definable features or concentrations of worked lithic
materials.

20

New Railroad Grade

Old Railroad Grade

Figure 7. An old railroad grade was found paralleling the new railroad tracks.

21

The survey continues in a zigzag fashion back to the east were several more piles of
limestone were encountered. These appear to have been removed historically by ranchers
trying to add more grassland. There is a light veneer of historic trash, mostly metal
bands, cans and wire, over the whole area. There were no historic or prehistoric features
or diagnostic artifacts found during the survey. Continuous shovel tests (N=12) showed
clay loams mantle Cretaceous limestone, probably Georgetown Formation. Deep soils
and sandy loam soils were not encountered.

PREVIOUSLY RECORDED SITES
There are no previously recorded sites within or near the project area

NEWLY RECORDED SITES
There were no archaeological sites recorded during this survey.

SHOVEL TESTING AND BACKHOE TRENCHING RESULTS
Backhoe Trench Test Results
The pedestrian survey and shovel test results revealed poor depositional environments, in
which stream terrace development and the preservation of archaeological deposits were
impeded by erosion. No alluvial deposits deeper than 1 m were located within the
floodplains of the three ephemeral tributaries. Therefore, backhoe trenching was not
performed during the archaeological survey.
Shovel Test Results
Because the majority of the project area contains exposed bedrock and thin soils, shovel
tests were conducted at the discretion of the Principal Investigator. In this case, shovel
tests were executed at random intervals wherever the soils or sediments appeared to
exceed 10 cm in depth. Shovel test were uniformly shallow and did not produce evidence
of buried cultural resources. Neither did they indicate the presence of stratified soils or
soil horizons. Shovel test data is presented in Appendix 1.
The majority of the shovel test profiles are lacking the upper levels that are described by
the USDA SCS. The soils within the project area are eroded and not conducive to
preserving archaeological sites. Any sites found within the project area or in the
immediate vicinity would likely be surficial, and components would be compressed
within a few centimeters of the surface or mixed and resting on the surface. Only
structured sites, like burned rock middens, or surficial lithic scatters would likely be
22

encountered in these settings. Any sites of this nature would have been most likely
disturbed by contour plowing, grazing, brush fires, or other ranching activities.

CONCLUSIONS
Within the permit area of the project, a thorough intensive survey has been completed.
Results of a careful 100% pedestrian survey and shovel testing indicate that there is no
significant cultural resource within the ROW of the proposed Lakeline Boulevard
Extension and Improvement Project. Because the majority of the project area contains
exposed bedrock and thin, degrading soils, shovel tests were conducted at the discretion
of the Principal Investigator. In this case, shovel tests were executed at random intervals
over the project area. The USDA SCS reports that Crawford, Doss, Eckland and
Georgetown are the predominant soil types within the project area, and the shovel test
results confirm this. However, in these upland areas, the shovel test profiles lack a
surface layer, suggesting that the upland surfaces are actively eroding. In addition, the
abundance and density of stones on the surface suggests a degrading and disturbed
environment. No backhoe testing was executed due to the lack of significant alluvial
deposits.
No sites were found within the project area. The one cultural feature, a remnant low
native limestone wall, was not associated with historic artifacts and was not considered
an archaeological site by this survey.

RECOMMENDATIONS
No further work is warranted. It is ACSG’s recommendation that construction of the
Lake Boulevard Extension and Improvement Project be allowed to begin without delay at
this time. If any cultural remains are encountered during construction, all work should
cease, and an ACSG professional archaeologist should be called to assess the site. If the
site is assessed to be significant, further consultation with the THC should be pursued.

23

REFERENCES CITED

Austin History Center
2001
“Just outside Austin: Rural Travis County Communities: North Austin.”
Austin Treasures: Online Exhibits from the Austin History Center. Austin
History Center. <http://www.ci.austin.tx.us/library/ahc/outside/north.htm>
[Accessed Wed Jan 8 13:29:32 US/Central 2003].
Barile, Kerri S.
2000
History of the Central Texas Cedar Industry: Architectural and
Archaeological Documentation of the Cedar Choppers Site, 41WM892,
Williamson County, Texas. SWCA Cultural Resource Report No. 02-318.
Barnes, Virgil E.
1974
Geological Atlas of Texas: Austin Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology,
University of Texas at Austin. Austin.
Black, S. L.
1997
Oven Cookery at the Honey Creek Site. In Hot Rock Cooking on the
GreaterEdwards Plateau: Four Burned Rock Midden Sites in West Central
Texas, by S. L. Black, L. W. Ellis, D. G. Creel, and G. T. Good, pp. 255-268.
Studies in Archeology 22. Texas Archaeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin. Archeology Studies Program Report 2.
Environmental AffairsDepartment, Texas Department of Transportation,
Austin.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2(1): 93-117.
City of Round Rock
1998a “An ongoing History: Chronological History.” The Historic Round Rock
Collection. City of Round Rock: Planning and Community Development.
<http://www.ci.roundrock.tx.us/planning/rrcollection/chronology/chronology.
html> [Accessed Wed Jan 8 13:54:08 US/Central 2003].
1998b

“Oral Histories in the Round Rock Public Library: History of Lorenzo Rubio
and His Family.” The Historic Round Rock Collection. City of Round Rock:
Planning and Community Development. http://www.ci.roundrock.tx.us/planning/rrcollection/legends/interviews/rubio_interview/>
[Accessed Wed Jan 8 14:37:45 US/Central 2003].

Collins, Michael B.
24

1995

Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archaeological Society 66:361-400.

1998

Wilson-Leonard: An 11,000-year Archaeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers
in Central Texas. Studies in Archaeology 31. Texas Archaeological
ResearchLaboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Hester, Thomas R., Harry J. Shafer, and Kenneth L. Feder
1997
Field Methods in Archaeology. Mayfield Publishing. Mountain View.
Jackson, Jack M.
1985
Archeological Investigations at the West-Adkisson Cabin Site, 41WM566.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Report of Investigations #46.
Jelks, E. B.
1962
The Kyle Site, a Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County, Texas.
Archaeological Series 5. The University of Texas at Austin.
Johnson, L., Jr, and G. T. Goode
1994
A New Try at Dating and Characterizing Holocene Climates, as well
asArchaeological Periods, on the Edwards Plateau. Bulletin of the
TexasArchaeological Society 65:1-51.
King, T. F.
1977
The Archaeological Survey: Methods and Usage. Heritage Conservation and
Recreation Service, U. S. Department of the Interior, Washington, D. C.
Luke, C. J.
1980
Continuing Archaeology on State Highway 16: The Shep Site (41KR109) and
the Wounded Eye Site (41KR107). Publications in Archaeology 19. State
Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.
Meltzer, D. J.
1993
Is There a Clovis Adaptation? In From Kostenki to Clovis, edited by O. Soffer
and N. D. Praslov, pp. 293-310. Plenium, New York.
Mercado-Allinger, Patricia and Crystal Sasse Ragsdale
1984
Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources, Jamail Property
Development, Williamson County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates Report
No.28.
Miller, Kevin A., Kerri S. Barile, Doug Drake, Jon C. Lohse, and Dr. Brett A. Houk
2002
Archaeological Survey and Testing for the Proposed Avery Ranch Golf
Course, Williamson County, Texas. SWCA Cultural Resource Report No. 00322. Austin, Texas.
25

Nash, Sean R., Gregory D. Staples, and Martha Doty Freeman.
2002
Cultural Resource Survey of the Parmer Lane Extension Project, FM 1431FM 2243, Williamson County, Texas. Reports of Investigations, Number 13.
Archaeological and Cultural Sciences Group. Austin, Texas.
Nash, Sean R. and Gregory D. Staples
2002
Archaeological Survey of the US 79 Improvement Project, Williamson
County, Texas. Reports of Investigations, Number 20. Archaeological and
Cultural Sciences Group. Austin, Texas
2002

Archaeological Survey of the Wyoming Springs Road Improvements Project,
RM 620 to CR 172, Williamson County, Texas. Archaeological and Cultural
Sciences Group Report of Investigations No. 26. Austin, Texas.

Odintz, Mark
2002
"Williamson County." The Handbook of Texas Online.
<http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/view/WW/hcw11.html
> [Accessed Wed Jan 8 13:19:55 US/Central 2003].
Prewit, E. R.
1974
Archaeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson County,
Texas. Research Report 49. Texas Archaeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
1981

Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological
Society 52:65-89.

Redder, A. J.
1985
Horn Shelter Number 2: The South End, a Preliminary Report. Central Texas
Archeologist 10:38-65.
Smyrl, Vivian Elizabeth
2002
"McNeil, TX." The Handbook of Texas Online.
<http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/view/MM/hnm27.html
> [Accessed Wed Jan 8 13:20:47 US/Central 2003].
Thompson, Karen R.
2002
"Tumlinson Fort." The Handbook of Texas Online.
<http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/view/TT/uet5.html>
[Accessed Wed Jan 8 13:15:34 US/Central 2003].
U.S. Department of Agriculture
26

1983

Soil Survey of Williamson County, Texas. U.S. Government Printing Office.
Washington D.C.

Williams, Diane E., Martha Doty Freeman, Marie E. Blake, Karl W. Kibler, and Paul
Maslyk
1996

Cultural Resources Survey of the Leander Rehabilitation Center, Williamson
County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., TAC permit 1725.

27

APPENDIX 1 – Summary Results of Formal Shovel Tests

28

Appendix 1: Summary Results of Formal Shovel Tests

Artifacts
Shovel

UTM

Observed

Coordinates Level/Depth* Matrix
Zone 14
0-9 cmbs
Black humic clay loam over limestone near recently
E 617196
deceased cow in woods beside pasture.
N 3373422
ST2
Zone 14
0-5 cmbs
Thin veneer of black clay over limestone at dogleg in
E 617125
fence near centerline for the proposed ROW
N 3373327
ST3
Zone 14
0-5 cmbs
Exposed limestone beside rock wall
E 616916
N 3373137
ST4
Zone 14
0-2 cmbs
Thin veneer of clay over bedrock
E 616869
N 3373123
ST5
Zone 14
0-1 cmbs
Bedrock
E 616873
N 3373059
ST6
Zone 14
0-8 cmbs
Black clay loam over limestone bedrock at corner
E 616696
of fence and centerline of ROW
N 3373015
ST7
Zone 14
0-2 cmbs
Gravel in built-up old railroad grade
E 616381
N 3373006
ST8
Zone 14
0-5 cmbs
Gravel in built-up old railroad grade
E 616416
N 3372926
ST9
Zone 14
0-10 cmbs
Thin dark brown clay loam pasture at fence line and
E 616719
centerline of ROW
N 3373050
ST10
Zone 14
0-10 cmbs
Black loamy clay in wooded area near Burgess
E 616750
Carter plastic survey cap.
N 3373073
ST11
Zone 14
0-2 cmbs
Bedrock on surface near rock wall
E 616617
N 3373150
ST12
Zone 14
0-25 cmbs
Black clay loam covered in dense deep grass at
E 616201
west end of the project area. Gravel on bottom.
N 3372820
* Level/depth in this column represents the maximum depth of each shovel test.
Test
ST1

29

or Collected
None

None

None

None

None

None

None

None, tested
core on the
surface
None

None

None

