Cultural Resources Assessment for the
Wind Energy Transmission of Texas (WETT)
CCN1 345kV Transmission Line Project
Cottonwood to Dermott
Dickens, Kent and Scurry Counties, Texas
Final Report
August 2011
Prepared for:
kp environmental, LLC
2387 Montgomery Avenue
Cardiff by the Sea, CA 92007
&
Wind Energy Transmission Texas, LLC
210 Barton Springs Road, Suite 150
Austin, TX 78704
Prepared by:
aci consulting
1001 Mopac Circle, Suite 100
Austin, Texas 78746
By:
Jennifer Hatchett Kimbell, MA, RPA
Robin Benson Barnes, PhD
Ann M. Scott, PhD, RPA

This page intentionally left blank

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY
Over 15 days in February, March, and April of 2011, archeologists from aci consulting
conducted a pedestrian survey of the proposed route for a 345-kV transmission line in Dickens,
Kent, and Scurry Counties, Texas, for Wind Energy Transmission of Texas (WETT). The Area
of Potential Effect (APE) that was investigated includes a 74-mile-long and 160-foot-wide
proposed right-of-way (ROW) as well as associated “pull sites” outside of the proposed ROW
(approximately 1550 acres). The crew recorded four cultural resource localities and ten sites
(41DK29, 41DK30, 41DK31, 41DK32, 41DK33, 41KT166, 41KT167, 41KT168, 41KT169,
41KT170) of which five are prehistoric and five historic. Based on the pedestrian survey, aci
consulting recommended that WETT avoid impacts to a historic half-dugout house (41KT170)
and a historic truss bridge (41KT169) as well as minimize impacts to one lithic scatter
(41KT166). WETT designed a reroute to avoid impacts to 41KT170, and has indicated
willingness to avoid damaging the historic truss bridge (41KT169) and the lithic scatter
(41KT166) by spanning these areas. Because these measures will be taken, aci consulting
does not recommend further archeological investigation of the areas surveyed. A plan for
dealing with unanticipated discoveries will be developed with WETT for implementation during
clearing and construction for the transmission line. The recorded sites have been registered with
the Texas Archeological Research Lab (TARL). This was a non-collection survey, so there are
no artifacts requiring curation. Jenni Hatchett Kimbell served as Project Archeologist, and Ann
M. Scott served as the Principal Investigator.

i

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The project archeologist would like to express her appreciation to the ten crew members who
worked tirelessly and cheerfully to complete this project: Preston Beecher, Rhiana Casias,
Kenneth Fleming III, Cesario Guerra, Weldon Hammond, Tess Noble, Rosemarie Pavel, Sophia
Salgado, Steven Schooler, and Keith SoRelle. The individuals on this crew were not only
diligent workers but were also a true pleasure to work with. Rosemarie Pavel also assisted in
data entry following the field effort, and her aid and attention to detail are much appreciated.
Robin Benson Barnes authored much of the background portion of this report and provided
many hours of additional labor in various aspects of this project. Ann Scott provided guidance
with all aspects of the project.
Thanks are also due to Robbie Trcka of Western Data Systems in Austin, who provided longdistance assistance with technical aspects of the handheld Trimble GPS units. Charlie Roberts,
GIS specialist at aci consulting, spent many hours organizing digital data following the field
effort and creating some of the maps for this report, and his work is also very much appreciated.
Hailey Brown from kp environmental coordinated access as well as logistics for the field effort.
Rachel Clark and Shannon Bottenberg, also from kp environmental, provided much of the
mapping and coordination that made the field work run smoothly. Finally, the landowners with
whom we interacted treated us with the graciousness one should be able to expect in West
Texas, thus making the fieldwork both simpler and more pleasant than it could have been.

ii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.0 INTRODUCTION
1
1.1 Physiography.......................................................................................................................3
1.2 Geology and Soils ...............................................................................................................6
1.3 Flora and Fauna ..................................................................................................................6
2.0 REGIONAL HISTORY AND CULTURE CHRONOLOGY
7
2.1 Prehistoric Background and Previous Investigations ..........................................................7
2.2 Historic Background and Previous Investigations ...............................................................8
2.3 Previous Investigations in the Project Area.........................................................................9
3.0 SURVEY METHODOLOGY
10
4.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATION
12
Localities: ................................................................................................................................12
Sites: .......................................................................................................................................12
5.0 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
6.0 REFERENCES CITED
Appendix 1: Detailed Site Maps
Appendix 2: Shovel Test Forms
Appendix 3: Emergency Procedures for Post-Review Discoveries

27
29

List of Tables
Table 1.Regional Prehistoric Chronology of the Caprock Canyonlands………………….…8
Table 2 Summary of Recommendations for Sites ………………..…………………………….27

Figure 1. WETT CCN1 Route in Dickens, Kent, and Scurry Counties, Texas.......................2
Figure 2. Ecoregions of the Study Area...................................................................................4
Figure 3: A flat, featureless portion of the project area, characteristic of the ......................5
Flat Tablelands and Valleys ecoregion.....................................................................................5
Figure 4: A rugged portion of the project area, characteristic of the Caprock .....................5
Canyons, Badlands, and Breaks ecoregion. ............................................................................5
Figure 5. Overview of Archeological Resources along CCN1 Route. .................................13
Figure 6: Representative sample of lithic material from 41KT166. ......................................15
Figure 7: Stratigraphy along the Salt Fork of the Brazos; white bands are gypsum .........16
deposits. Site 41KT167 is located on top of the escarpment. ..............................................16
Figure 8: Gypsum dome on plateau above the Salt Fork of the Brazos, near site 41KT167.
....................................................................................................................................................16
Figure 9: Representative sample of artifacts from 41KT167. ...............................................17
Figure 10: Artifacts found at 41KT168.
Figure 11: Unidentifiable point base found at
41KT168. ....................................................................................................................................18
iii

Figure 12: Location of 41KT168...............................................................................................18
Figure 13: Portion of 41DK30...................................................................................................20
Figure 14: Glass bottles from 41DK30. ...................................................................................20
Figure 15: Sun-colored amethyst glass found at 41DK30. ...................................................21
Figure 16: Setting of 41DK32. ..................................................................................................22
Figure 17: Historic Warren truss bridge (41KT169). ..............................................................23
Figure 18: Half-dugout house (41KT170), photo facing east. ...............................................25
Figure 19: Cistern associated with half-dugout house (41KT170). ......................................25
Figure 20: Interior view of half-dugout house (41KT170)......................................................26

iv

1.0 INTRODUCTION
Wind Energy Transmission of Texas (WETT) has received approval from the Public Utilities
Commission (PUC) of Texas for the construction of 74 miles of 345-kV transmission lines
(Cottonwood to Dermott) in Dickens, Kent, and Scurry Counties, Texas as part of the
Competitive Renewable Energy Zones (CREZ) initiative (Figure 1). TRC Environmental
Corporation (TRC) completed an environmental assessment and alternative routing study,
including desktop review of known archeological sites, for this project in June 2010 (TRC
Environmental Corporation:2010). While reviewing available information for this study, TRC
identified 57 previously-recorded archeological sites within the study area where potential routes
would be further evaluated. Only one of these sites is near the proposed area of potential effect
(APE) of the selected route. TRC also conducted a probability study, which defines portions of
the APE as high, moderate, or low probability for the presence of archeological resources.
These designations were based on surface slope and distance from water sources as identified
on topographical maps and aerial photographs using GIS modeling. Of the 74 miles of ROW,
TRC determined that the high and moderate probability areas included 21.72 miles and 19.02
miles, respectively. In January 2011, an archeologist from aci consulting conducted an
informal, on-the-ground reconnaissance of approximately 40% of the project APE. Based on the
probability model and the informal reconnaissance, archeologists from aci consulting
developed a research design for completing a 100% pedestrian survey of the project APE in
accordance with Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA) guidelines in order to minimize potential
impacts to cultural resources from project implementation.
The transmission line project includes a proposed 74-mile-long and 160-foot-wide right-of-way
(ROW). However, the only ground-disturbing activities associated with construction and
operation of the project will occur at the locations of transmission line towers, pull sites
(locations where machinery will be set up for pulling cable through the tower structures at points
where the line changes direction), new access roads, and certain locations where trees and
shrubs will need to be removed by the roots. Because the engineering design of the project is
not complete and the exact tower locations have not yet been finalized, the extent of all grounddisturbing activities has not yet been determined. WETT engaged aci consulting to survey the
entire ROW for this specific project and not just the locations of ground disturbing activities. If
additional areas of disturbance, outside the ROW, are required for pull sites and access roads
that were not surveyed as part of this APE, they will be surveyed under a separate field effort
once their proposed locations are established.
During two field sessions (February 21-March 4 and April 6-8, 2011), a crew of archeologists
from aci consulting conducted pedestrian survey of the entire 74-mile-long proposed ROW as
well as adjacent areas that would be used as pull sites. Other pull sites and access roads may
require a separate field effort. The crew excavated 665 shovel tests within previously-defined
areas of moderate and high probability for archeological remains and in areas determined as
high probability during the field effort. The crew documented 14 areas of archeological interest
and recorded ten of these as archeological sites, based on the site definition provided below
(see page 10).
1

Figure 1: WETT CCN1 Cottonwood to Dermott
FLOYD

MOTLEY

COTTLE

CROSBY

DICKENS

KING

GARZA

KENT

STONEWALL

Tulsa

Albuquerque

OK
OK

Oklahoma City

NM
NM

Fort Worth Dallas
El Paso

Arlington
20

10

Austin

TX
TX

Corpus Christi

This map is intended for planning purposes only.
Base mapping compiled from best available
information. All map data should be considered
preliminary and all boundaries and designations
are subject to confirmation.
This map is
conceptual in nature and does not represent any
regulatory approval. Plan is subject to change.

0

2.5

0 2.5 5
1:550,000

5

10
10

15

15
Kilometers
20

LA
LA

San Antonio

SCURRY

BORDEN

AR
AR

Miles
20
WETT CCN1 Route

Houston

Based on potential significance, aci consulting has recommended that WETT avoid impacts to
two of these sites that are potentially eligible for listing on the NRHP. Two sites of extremely
limited potential for yielding significant information were categorized as not eligible for listing on
the NRHP and no further work was recommended. Six sites extend beyond the APE, however,
the portion within the ROW does not contribute to the significance of the site and no further work
was recommended aci consulting does not recommend further archeological investigation for
this portion of the WETT project as long as the avoidance strategies and recommendations
presented in this report can be met.

1.1 Physiography
The project area lies in a region in between the flat, nearly featureless plain of the Llano
Estacado or High Plains to the west and the undulating hills of a region called the Lower Plains
or Rolling Plains to the east. Boyd (1995) has called this region the Caprock Canyonlands, and
it is referred to in the Ecoregions of Texas (Griffin et al. 2007) as the Southwestern Tablelands.
The rugged terrain of this region has been formed by the headward stream erosion of the Llano
Estacado by the Canadian, Red, Brazos, and Colorado Rivers. Alternating layers of erosionresistant caliche and sandstone and erosion-prone layers of shales, mudstones, siltstones, and
clays have determined the shape of the landscape.
The CCN1 route crosses alternately and dramatically through areas of what is referred to as the
Flat Tablelands and Valleys and what is known as the Caprock Canyons, Badlands, and
Breaks, the combination of which comprises the Southwestern Tablelands (Figure 2). The Flat
Tablelands represent smooth, flat surfaces surrounded by the eroded, rugged terrain of the
Caprock Canyons, Badlands, and Breaks. This region is transitional between the semiarid
climate to the west and subhumid climate to the east. The collision of the arid air in the west
with humid air coming from the Gulf of Mexico to the east results in thunderstorms and at times,
tornadoes (Griffin et al. 2007:28-30).
The Flat Tablelands and Valleys are characterized by gently rolling valleys and plains dissected
by broad, sandy channels of meandering rivers (Figure 3). Steep canyons, escarpments,
rounded badlands, and dissected river breaks characterize the Caprock Canyons (Figure 4).
Water sources include intermittent and spring-fed streams (Griffin et al. 2007).

3

Figure 2: Ecoregions of the Study Area
COTTLE

MOTLEY

FLOYD

70

82

KING

DICKENS

CROSBY

70

208

380

GARZA

KENT

STONEWALL

70

84

208

WETT CCN1 Route
Caprock Canyons, Badlands, and Breaks

SCURRY

BORDEN

Flat Tablelands and Valleys
Llano Estacado
This map is intended for planning purposes only.
Base mapping compiled from best available
information. All map data should be considered
preliminary and all boundaries and designations
are subject to confirmation.
This map is
conceptual in nature and does not represent any
regulatory approval. Plan is subject to change.

0
0

5
5

1:550,000
Data Source: Griffith et al., 2007.

Miles
20

10
10

Kilometers
20

Figure 3: A flat, featureless portion of the project area, characteristic of the
Flat Tablelands and Valleys ecoregion.

Figure 4: A rugged portion of the project area, characteristic of the Caprock
Canyons, Badlands, and Breaks ecoregion.
5

1.2 Geology and Soils
The Flat Tablelands geology is characterized by Pleistocene-aged Blackwater Draw Formation
sand and gravel or sheets of eolian sand underlain by undissected Triassic or Permian red beds
or disjunct sections of Ogallala caprock. The Ogallala Formation consists of Miocene and
Pliocene siltstone, conglomerate sandstone, and limey caprock. The Triassic bedrock consists
of mudstones, sandstones and shales of the Dockum Group. The Permian bedrock consists of
Quartermaster Group red claystone, sandstone, and gypsum beds. Whitehorse sandstone
characterizes the Late Permian bedrock. The polygons of the Flat Tablelands are bordered by
the dissected topography of the Caprock Canyons and Badlands, and to the east, the
mudstones and sandstones of the Lower Plains. (Griffin et al. 2007:28-30) The sediments of
the Flat Tablelands are fine sandy loams or silt loams derived from Permian sedimentary rocks
as well as waterborne or air borne sediments.
The eroded Caprock Canyonlands that surround the smooth areas of the Flat Tablelands
consist of erosion-resistant Ogallala Formation caprock at the surface, slopes of softer, more
erosion-prone Dockum Formation Triassic shales, mudstones, and sandstones, and a base of
Permian red beds. These Permian red beds often have embedded deposits of white gypsum
along with salts and evaporates. These deposits can dissolve to form caverns and sink holes.
The surficial sediments consist of Holocene loamy colluvium, sandy loam colluvium, and
residuum. The lower geologic formations are essentially the eroded and dissected formations of
the Flat Tablelands. The badlands of the Caprock Canyons are highly eroded leading to high
sediment loads in rivers and streams (Griffin et al. 2007).

1.3 Flora and Fauna
Before European settlement, midgrasses such as sideoats grama, little and sand bluestem,
yellow Indiangrass, western wheatgrass, and switchgrass grew in the native prairies. Some
fragments of the native prairie are still present in the region. Buffalograss, blue and hairy grama,
tobosa, and purple threeawn dominate the existing grazed prairies. Shrubs include mesquite
and lotebush. Riparian vegetation includes elm, cottonwood, hackberry, sandbar willow,
skunkbush sumac, sand sagebrush, and Chickasaw plum. Invasive saltcedar and Russian olive
also grow in riparian environments. Cropland is a major component of the current landscape.
Cotton, sorghum, corn, and wheat are common crops.
The escarpments of the Caprock Canyons are home to redberry juniper, skunkbush sumac,
mountain mahogany, Chickasaw plum, grape, and clematis. Mohr and Havard shin oak are
found on the benches. Cottonwood, willow, elm, and hackberry, along with invasive saltcedar,
are found in the riparian woodlands. The badlands are home to cacti, yucca, ephedra and sand
sagebrush. Blue grama and buffalo grass dominate the grasslands (Griffin el al. 2007).
Because this region is relatively sparsely settled, it is home to a range of wildlife. Mule and
white-tailed deer, Rio Grande turkey, pronghorn, bobcat, and mountain lion can all be found in
this region, and the Mississippi kite has been pushed into this area by the expansion of
agriculture and the invasion of saltcedar in its native prairies (Griffin et al. 2007)
6

2.0 REGIONAL HISTORY AND CULTURE CHRONOLOGY
2.1 Prehistoric Background and Previous Investigations
The project area lies within the Caprock Canyonlands region of Texas as defined by Pertulla
(2004:7). The most comprehensive studies of Caprock Canyonlands archeology were
conducted by Prewitt & Associates, Inc before the construction of Lake Alan Henry (Justiceburg
Reservoir). These projects are located near the current project area in Garza and Kent counties.
Boyd (1994, 2004) and Boyd et al. (1989, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1997) provide a
synthesis of the prehistory of the region.
In short, the Paleoindian and Early and Middle Archaic are not well represented in the Caprock
Canyonlands. The geomorphological analysis at Lake Alan Henry found very few intact deposits
of this age (Boyd 1994), most likely because of the rapid erosion and retreat of the canyon rim
and valley walls. Sites with early dates are more likely to be found in uplands above the canyon
rim.
The preponderance of prehistoric archeological material at Lake Alan Henry dates to the Late
Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods (Boyd 1994:7). The Caprock Canyonlands region along the
Caprock Escarpment is well watered in comparison to the Llano Estacado and the Rolling
Plains. The Rolling Plains have water, but much of the water is not potable. In this arid region,
water is the key to survival. The spring-fed creeks and rugged topography are also home to
more diverse and predictably available floral and faunal resources when compared to the
neighboring ecoregions.
No Late Archaic (2000 B.C.-A.D. 500) cultural phases have been defined for the region,
although Late Archaic sites are common. Boyd (1994:7) suggests that the Late Archaic in the
Lower Plains may be similar to the Summers complex in southwestern Oklahoma. Similarities to
the Late Archaic material in Central Texas and the Panhandle have also been noted.
Following the Late Archaic, Boyd (1997) has defined a regional cultural complex unique to the
Caprock Canyons which occurred during the Late Prehistoric I which he has named the Palo
Duro Complex. This complex dates from A.D. 500 to A.D. 1100/1200. Archeological evidence
indicates that the Palo Duro peoples were semisedentary. Site types include residential bases,
open camps, and rockshelters. The residential base camps include habitation structures,
storage pits, plant processing tools, and in some cases, baking pits. The subsistence base was
broad and included plant processing and the hunting of primarily deer and wild game although
some evidence of bison hunting has been found. The Palo Duro peoples were in contact with
the Lake Creek or Plains Woodland groups to the north, the Jornada Mogollon to the west, and
the Blow Out Mountain peoples to the south and southeast. Human burials show evidence of
violence during the Late Prehistoric.
The Garza complex and historic Plains Indian occupations mark the Late Prehistoric II (A.D.
1100/1200 until European contact) (Boyd 1994:8). Garza complex, which is not yet well
understood, is characterized by a nomadic bison-hunting subsistence strategy. Historic records
and rock art sites mark the impact of the Plains Indians in the region.
7

Table 1.Regional Prehistoric Chronology of the Caprock Canyonlands (adapted from Boyd 2004:299)
Period
Date Range
Cultures
Historic
Protohistoric

Comanches, Apaches, Teyas
A.D. 1100/1200-1950
Tierra Blanca Complex

Late
Prehistoric II

A.D.1100/1200-

Garza Complex
Palo Duro Complex

Late
Prehistoric I

A.D. 500-1100/1200

Lake Creek Complex
Little Sunday Complex,

Late Archaic

2000 B.C.-A.D. 500

Summers Complex

Middle Archaic

4000-2000 B.C.

undefined

2.2 Historic Background and Previous Investigations
The historic period in the study area began with Spanish contact in the mid-sixteenth century.
Francisco Vasquez de Coronado’s 1541 entrada is thought to have passed near the
northwestern edge of the project area in Blanco Canyon (Morris 1997). Throughout the
seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries, ciboleros (Hispanic bison hunters) and
comancheros (Hispanic New Mexican traders) shared the region with historic Plains Indian
groups including the Plains Apache and Comanche (Morris 1997; Carlson 1998; La Vere 2004;
Hämäläinen 2008).
As part of the Lake Alan Henry project, Freeman (1990) provided the historic context for the
region, which is also summarized by Boyd et al. (1994). The primary historic pursuits in the
Rolling Plains were ranching and agriculture with a predominance of ranching. Ranching began
in the region in the 1870s, and ranching activities increased greatly in volume during the 1880s
because of favorable markets and weather. Individuals and companies leased land from the
State of Texas. While some families moved to the region, most of the ranchers were single men.
Ranch buildings consisted of central ranch headquarters and dispersed shelters, primarily
dugouts, on the range. Initially most goods were procured from buffalo outposts to the north.
Later, Colorado City became the primary supplier to a twenty-seven-county region in west
Texas.
Blizzards, drought, and the Panic of 1893 resulted in a ranching bust. Colorado City never
recovered from this downturn. In 1895, the Four Section Act was created in order to encourage
permanent settlement in homestead tracts. Instead of immediately resulting in a surge in
homesteading the act drove ranchers who had previously leased land to adopt innovative
accounting techniques in order to control sections and pay taxes. However, homesteading
8

gradually gained a foothold in the region. This closed range policy resulted in the construction of
homesteads and headquarters supported by line camps, which were, again, primarily dugouts.
Temporary headquarters were often built before the construction of wood frame or rock houses.
Supporting structures included: fences, corrals, wells, wind mills, water tanks, and stock ponds.
Outbuildings included tack rooms and covered sheds to protect livestock from severe weather.

2.3 Previous Investigations in the Project Area
Prior to the initiation of this cultural resources assessment, as part of the environmental
assessment completed in order to choose the route for the transmission line, a database review
of a ten-mile-wide corridor encompassing the preferred route and the alternatives was
completed by TRC Environmental Corporation (2010:3.29-3.33). The Texas Historical
Commission’s (THC) Archeological Sites Atlas was consulted in order to identify previouslyrecorded archeological sites, historic properties, standing structures, and historic cemeteries.
Fifty-seven previously recorded sites were identified. Records indicated that three sites have
definitive ties to specific cultural periods. An additional five sites were considered to have the
potential for significant archeological data based on the presence of buried deposits in four
instances and the likelihood of a prehistoric/protohistoric Plains village in a fifth. One site is a
historic cemetery.
In December of 2010, aci consulting performed a subsequent search of the THC Archeological
Sites Atlas and files at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in order to confirm site
locations and ensure that additional sites had not been recorded along the transmission line
route. Only one site within the ten-mile corridor assessed by TRC Environmental Corporation
was found to be within the project APE. Site 41DK17, in Dickens County, was recorded in 1967
and represents a prehistoric site with unusual depth containing Washita, Harrell, Fresno, and
Garza points along with snub-nosed scrapers, beveled knives, and brownware sherds. This site
is located approximately 160 m (525 ft) west of the WETT CCN1 centerline.

9

3.0 SURVEY METHODOLOGY
Archeologists from aci consulting followed the CTA guidelines for archeological survey for the
100% pedestrian survey of the project APE. A combination of surface inspection and subsurface
testing was employed in an effort to identify all cultural resources within the project APE, and all
fieldwork was supervised by an archeologist who met the U.S. Secretary of the Interior’s
Professional Qualification Standards for Archeology and the requirements for Principal
Investigator defined in the Texas Administrative Code, Title 13, Part II, Chapter 26.
The portions of the APE defined by TRC as high and moderate probability were investigated
through both surface examination and shovel testing at a frequency of no less than 16 shovel
tests per linear mile where surface visibility was less than 30% and/or there was a probability for
buried deposits. Portions of the APE determined by TRC to have low probability of containing
cultural resources were investigated through surface examination with shovel testing at the
discretion of the field director based on topography and surface conditions. To ensure the
greatest likelihood of discovering any existing cultural resources, the ROW was divided into
either two or three parallel transects, dependent upon vegetation and field conditions. One field
technician walked each transect while scanning the ground for evidence of human activity. In
portions of the ROW that warranted shovel testing, these tests were excavated at 100-m (just
less than 330 ft) intervals, unless shorter or longer intervals were more appropriate based on
surface visibility or landforms. Shovel tests measured at least 30 cm in diameter and were
excavated in levels no greater than 20 cm (8 in) thick. Shovel tests were excavated to the
bottom of Holocene deposits, when possible, and all soil was screened through ¼-in wire mesh.
When artifacts were discovered on the surface or when a shovel test yielded one or more
artifacts, a combination of surface examination and additional shovel testing was used when
appropriate to define site boundaries. If a site extended beyond the limits of the project APE, no
shovel tests were excavated outside that boundary. Each site was recorded on a State of Texas
Archeological Data Site Form. A handheld GPS unit with sub-meter accuracy was used to
record the locations of all shovel tests as well as site boundaries and other features of cultural
resource interest. Since this pedestrian survey was a non-collection field effort, no artifacts will
require curation. Any diagnostic artifacts recovered from the field survey were documented in
the field through photography and expedient sketching to allow for any future comparative
studies.
For purposes of this survey, the crew defined any group of two or more surface or subsurface
artifacts within a 10-meter (32-foot) radius as a locality. In order to warrant designation as an
archeological site, a locality had to contain a certain number of cultural materials or features
older than 50 years within a given area. The definition of an archeological site used for this
survey was: (1) five or more surface artifacts within a 15-meter radius (just under 50 feet) or (2)
a single cultural feature, such as a hearth or midden, observed on the surface or exposed in a
shovel test, or (3) a positive shovel test containing at least three artifacts within a given 10-cm
(4-in) level, or (4) a positive shovel test containing at least five total artifacts, or (5) two positive
shovel tests located within 30 meters (98 feet) of each other.
10

Each shovel test was documented on a purpose-designed form, which included spaces for
notes on topography, vegetation, soil, gravels or other non-cultural inclusions, and numbers and
types of artifacts located. Additional documentation included a daily field journal kept by the
project archeologist, photo logs, notes on the topography and vegetation of each parcel
surveyed, digital photographs, and sketches of particular artifacts for purposes of identification.

11

4.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATION
During pedestrian survey of the proposed Cottonwood to Dermott transmission line route for
Wind Energy Transmission of Texas (WETT), the field crew discovered fourteen archeological
resources including four prehistoric localities and ten archeological sites, as well as several
isolated surface artifacts (Figure 5). Of the sites, five were prehistoric (of unknown age), and five
were historic.

Localities:
FCR Scatter 1: This scatter comprises a few fragments of fire-cracked rock (FCR) spread over
an area approximately 2 m (6.5 ft) in diameter. The locality is situated on a bluff overlooking a
creek channel to the west and north. Surface visibility was about 75%, and a careful surface
inspection yielded no additional cultural materials. Two shovel tests near the scatter revealed no
subsurface cultural material.
FCR Scatter 2: A scatter of four fragments of fire-cracked rock was visible on the surface within
an area approximately 15 m (49 ft) in diameter. The scatter was found on a nearly-level
floodplain about 5 m (16 ft) south of a dry tributary. Surface visibility ranged between 50 and
60%. Two shovel tests were excavated to approximately 60 cm (2 ft) but did not yield
subsurface cultural material. The field crew also carefully examined the surface in a 25-meter
radius (82 ft) and did not find additional significant cultural indicators.
Lithic Scatter 1: This scatter includes three flakes and a core and covers an area of
approximately 3 m (10 ft) in diameter. This area was characterized by surface visibility of 10 to
15%, so six shovel tests were excavated to 10 to 15 cm (4 to 6 in) in depth and were terminated
when they began to produce significant quantities of calcium carbonate nodules; these shovel
tests yielded no subsurface cultural material, and the scatter appears to be isolated.
Lithic Scatter 2: This scatter is characterized by four coarse-grained quartzite flakes on the
surface. Three shovel tests came up negative for cultural material and revealed significant
quantities of calcium carbonate nodules by 10 cm (4 in) below the surface. Surface visibility was
near 100% but extensive surface examination revealed no other cultural material within the
ROW.

Sites:
41DK29:
Site Description: This prehistoric fire-cracked rock scatter is located on a slight slope on a bluff
north of the city of Dickens and approximately 450 m east of an intermittent tributary of Croton
Creek (Figure A1:1). The site measures approximately 11 m (36 ft) from the southwest to the
northeast and 6 m (20 ft) from northwest to southeast. The scatter lies in little-used pasture with
knee-high grasses and clumps of juniper and mesquite. Surface visibility was 75%. Four shovel
tests reached calcium carbonate nodules at an average of 20 cm (8 in) below the surface. The
soil was a fine sandy loam of the Veal series, with some very small gravels intermixed.
12

Figure 5: Overview of Archeological Resources on CCN1
COTTLE

MOTLEY

FLOYD

41DK32

41DK31

41DK30
41DK29
CROSBY

KING

DICKENS

Lithic Scatter 1
41DK33
FCR Scatter 1
41KT169
41KT166 41KT168

FCR Scatter 2

41KT167
Lithic Scatter 2

GARZA

STONEWALL

KENT

41KT170

WETT CCN1 Route
Archeological Resources

BORDEN

Sites

SCURRY

Localities

This map is intended for planning purposes only.
Base mapping compiled from best available
information. All map data should be considered
preliminary and all boundaries and designations
are subject to confirmation.
This map is
conceptual in nature and does not represent any
regulatory approval. Plan is subject to change.

0

0

5

5

Miles
20

10

10

Kilometers
20

1:550,000

* This map is confidential and not for public dissemination

Cultural Material: A sparse scatter of fire-cracked rock was the only evidence of cultural material
that was observed, despite extensive surface examination. The scatter lacked any observable
pattern, and the fire-cracked rock may have eroded down from a site at a higher elevation
outside the ROW. Shovel tests within the scatter yielded no subsurface cultural deposits.
Assessment: This scatter qualifies as a site based on the density of cultural material observed,
but it lacks integrity and has little to no potential to yield important information. There were no
temporally-diagnostic artifacts recovered, and the fire-cracked rock that was present did not
represent a discrete activity area. Further archeological investigation would be unlikely to yield
important additional information. Therefore, this site is recommended as not eligible for the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) due to the lack of cultural inclusions.
41DK33:
Site Description: This prehistoric site was characterized by the presence of several poor-quality
quartzite flakes and flake fragments and a couple of fragments of fire-cracked rock on the
surface of a terrace above and about 80 m (262 ft) south of a steep-walled ravine. The densest
portion of this sparse scatter covers an area approximately 10 m (33 ft) in diameter, although
flake fragments were found up to 20 m (66 ft) away from the center (Figure A1:2). The area is
clearly eroded, so any artifacts are likely to be out of their primary context. The site is located in
a pasture of knee-high grasses, and surface visibility was approximately 30%. Soils here are
shallow, with sandy clay overlying dense clay loam at about 20 cm below the surface.
Cultural Material: The only evidence of human occupation in this area was in the form of a
scatter of flakes and fire-cracked rock. Although the types of artifacts found are characteristic of
short-term campsites, there was no observable pattern to the scatter of artifacts. Three shovel
tests revealed no subsurface cultural material, and careful surface examination revealed no
additional artifacts within the ROW.
Assessment: Site 41DK33 lacks discrete cultural features and temporally-diagnostic artifacts.
Additional investigation is not warranted, due to the lack of subsurface deposits and the
disturbed nature of the sediments. Therefore, the site is recommended as not eligible for the
NRHP since it lacks significance within the APE.
41KT166:
Site Description: This site is an extensive prehistoric scatter of lithic debitage and fire-cracked
rock, located on a terrace just above and south of a floodplain (Figure A1:3). The environment is
a heavily-utilized pasture with short-cropped grasses and sparse small mesquite and yucca, and
surface visibility ranges between 50 and 75%. A dirt road runs just west of, and parallel to, the
ROW and has contributed to ground disturbance in the area. The surface scatter follows the
curve of the terrace to the north and west out of the ROW. Shovel tests reached significant
quantities of calcium carbonate nodules at between 10 and 15 cm (4 to 6 in) below the surface,
and the soil is a silty clay loam of the Weymouth series.

14

Cultural Material: Debitage (Figure 6) and fire-cracked rock litter an area about 65 to 70 m (213
to 230 ft) long and extend beyond the width of the ROW, and artifacts have been washed down
and deposited on the slope below the ridge. Two of the six shovel tests excavated in association
with this site each yielded one fragment of debitage at approximately 10 cm (4 in) below the
surface. The materials found at the site are typical of prehistoric campsites, but no discrete
cultural features were present.
Assessment: Of the prehistoric sites located during this field effort, this site was the most intact
and best preserved, although it lacks intact buried deposits and temporally- or culturallydiagnostic materials. The site extends beyond the APE. The portion of the site within the APE
did not have the integrity to contribute to the overall eligibility of the site. Therefore, NRHP
eligibility for 41KT166 remains unknown.
Minimizing impact by spanning the site is
recommended.

Figure 6: Representative sample of lithic material from 41KT166.
41KT167:
Site Description: This lithic scatter is located on a plateau above (and south of) the Salt Fork of
the Brazos River (Figure A1:4). The dramatic cutbank reveals alternating strata of red sandy
clay and five-to-ten-centimeter-thick (2 to 4 in) gypsum deposits (Figure 7). In places on the
surface, the gypsum has created domes measuring up to about 4 m (13 ft) in diameter, which
creates an interesting landscape (Figure 8). Vegetation is relatively sparse but includes short
grasses, yucca, and some mesquite. South of the site, the surface becomes smoother, with
some soil deposition and increasingly dense vegetation. The scatter runs approximately 50 m
(164 ft) from north to south and covers the entire width of the proposed ROW, but much of the
15

ground is sloping, so portions of the scatter are likely out of primary context. Shovel tests up to
40 cm (1.3 ft) deep yielded no subsurface deposits.

Figure 7: Stratigraphy along the Salt Fork of the Brazos; white bands are gypsum
deposits. Site 41KT167 is located on top of the escarpment.

Figure 8: Gypsum dome on plateau above the Salt Fork of the Brazos, near site 41KT167.
Cultural Material: The artifacts located at this site are consistent with a lithic workshop or a
campsite (Figure 9). Lithic flakes, cores, and core fragments indicate the process of lithic
16

reduction at this location but no discrete cultural features exist within the ROW. Most of the
flakes that were present were secondary or tertiary flakes, indicating that this site most likely did
not serve as a primary lithic reduction or procurement area. No significant artifacts were found
within the APE.

Figure 9: Representative sample of artifacts from 41KT167.
Assessment: Site 41KT167 extends beyond the APE, is heavily eroded, and no intact cultural
features were found. The portion of the site within the APE did not have the integrity to
contribute to the overall eligibility of the site due to lack of intact features or discrete stratigraphic
contexts. No further archeological investigation is warranted within the APE. Eligibility for
inclusion in the NRHP could not be determined since the site is not contained within the ROW.
41KT168:
Site Description: This site was indicated by 5 flakes and 1 point base or drill fragment (Figures
10, 11) on a flat ridge approximately 50 m (164 ft) wide with tributary channels to the east and
west (Figure 12, Figure A1:5). Vegetation in the area includes bunchgrasses, yucca, and
mesquite, and surface visibility averaged 30%. Shovel testing to an average depth of 40 cm (16
in) below the surface did not reveal subsurface cultural material in any of four shovel tests.

17

Figure 10: Artifacts found at 41KT168.
41KT168.

Figure 11: Unidentifiable point base found at

Figure 12: Location of 41KT168.

18

Cultural Material: This site yielded five fragments of lithic debitage and one projectile point base,
but no cores or primary reduction flakes were seen. The point fragment is crudely flaked and
has a convex base with rounded shoulders, it appears to have broken during the manufacturing
process since the edges are unfinished. There were no observable discrete cultural features to
indicate a campsite or a dedicated activity area.
Assessment: No further archeological investigation is recommended for site 41KT168 within the
ROW since it lacks temporally-diagnostic features, buried deposits, or discrete activity areas
and has little potential to yield important information. It is unknown whether or not site 41KT168
is potentially eligible for inclusion in the NRHP since the site extends outside of the ROW. The
area within the APE did not yield any culturally significant materials to contribute to the
determination of eligibility for listing on the NRHP.
41DK30:
Site Description: Fragments of glass, ceramic, and metal within a stand of shin oak on a sandy
dune indicate the presence of a historic site at this location (Figure 13, Figure A1:6)). The
environment is slightly rolling with low sand dunes and vegetation includes knee-high grasses
between stands of shin oak. Surface visibility among the oak scrub ranges between 30 and
70%, with much of the ground surface covered in oak leaves. An intermittent tributary of Upper
Little Croton Creek runs about 750 m (just over half a mile) east of the site. Two shovel tests
through the fine sand of the dune revealed no subsurface deposits.
Cultural Material: The site appears to date to the early-to-mid twentieth century and the remains
of what appear to be bed springs as well as enameled metal cooking pots and bowls suggest a
campsite or residence. Glassware found at the site includes vials and bottles (Figure 14) as well
as some sun-colored amethyst (Figure 15) which typically dates to between 1890 and 1920
(Lindsey 2010). Extensive surface examination did not reveal the presence of a house
foundation or any building remains within the ROW. The site extends across the width of the
ROW and stretches over 140 m (460 feet) from north to south within the ROW.

19

Figure 13: Portion of 41DK30.

Figure 14: Glass bottles from 41DK30.

20

Figure 15: Sun-colored amethyst glass found at 41DK30.
Assessment: Site 41DK30 lacks association with structural remains or other discrete features.
While it appears to represent an area that was occupied for some time, the site lacks integrity,
as the artifacts have likely been shifted by the movement of the sands below. It is unlikely that
further archeological investigation within the ROW would contribute to an evaluation of eligibility
for listing on the NRHP, therefore, no further work is recommended within the APE.. Site
41DK30 extends beyond the APE therefore the sites NRHP eligibility cannot be assessed.
41DK31:
Site Description: This smaller historic scatter is located on another sandy dune covered with
shin oak (Figure A1:7). The environment is a hummocky pasture with knee-high grasses and
large clumps of shin oak. Leaf litter has reduced surface visibility to 0 to 10%. The soil is aeolian
sand overlying sands of the Brownfield-Nobscot association. Three shovel tests reached an
average of 80 cm (32 in) below the surface before encountering a dense sandy loam.
Cultural Material: The site appears to date to the mid-twentieth century and includes a large
amount of metal and glass. One shovel test yielded a single unidentified metal fragment at
about 30cmbs. Two other shovel tests were negative for cultural material. There is no evidence
of an associated structure within the ROW, and the scatter probably represents one or more
episodes of trash dumping.
Assessment: The lack of associated structural remains and the limited assortment of artifacts
indicate that the materials at this site were likely brought here from their primary context for
disposal. No discrete cultural features could be discerned and the potential that the site within
the APE could contribute significant information for the evaluation of eligibility for listing on the
NRHP is minimal. Therefore, it is recommended that no other archeological investigation is
necessary. It is unknown whether 41DK31 is eligible for inclusion in the NRHP since it extends
beyond the APE.

21

41DK32:
Site Description: This historic scatter lies just north of a low sand dune covered in shin oak
(Figure 16, Figure A1:8). The pasture in which the site is located is hummocky with numerous
sand dunes covered with shin oak separated by stretches of knee-high grass. The ROW in this
area runs parallel to and almost abuts Hwy 70. Four shovel tests through the overlying sand
reached between 80 and 100 cm (32 to 70 in) below the surface before encountering a soil
change.

Figure 16: Setting of 41DK32.
Cultural Material: This site is comprised of an extensive scatter of ceramic and glass with a
small amount of metal, tentatively dated to the early-to-mid twentieth century. The types of
artifacts found, such as a doorknob and what may be part of a ceramic soap dish, suggest the
presence of a structure nearby, but shovel testing and surface inspection failed to locate any
such remains. The scatter is approximately 28 meters in diameter and extends across much of
the ROW and out of the ROW to the east. Two shovel tests associated with the scatter yielded
subsurface remains at approximately 40 cmbs but artifacts could easily have shifted downward
due to the sandiness of the soil. These buried deposits do not appear to represent a separate
occupation period or activity area.
Assessment: The lack of discrete cultural features or associated structural remains within the
ROW limits the potential of site 41DK32 to contribute to the overall significance of the site and
eligibility of the site for listing on the NRHP. Therefore, no further archeological investigation is
warranted within the APE. It is unknown whether this site is eligible for inclusion in the NRHP
since it extends beyond the APE.

22

41KT169:
Site Description: A late-nineteenth- to early-twentieth-century Warren truss bridge spans a
tributary of Red Mud Creek in the ROW in Kent County (Figure 17, Figure A1:9). The bridge
apparently once made up a portion of County Road 241, which now ends at either side of the
bridge, although maps still show the road as continuous. The creek runs about 6 m (20 ft) below
the terraces on which the bridge footings rest. The surrounding land is rolling pasture with
dense bunches of knee-high grass and clumps of mesquite; surface visibility is poor overall,
averaging less than 10%. The soil is a Quinlan series sandy loam.

Figure 17: Historic Warren truss bridge (41KT169).
Cultural Material: The 30-meter-long (98 ft) bridge is constructed of metal trusses and wooden
slats supported on concrete footings. The wooden slats are in relatively poor condition, but the
metal trusses and the footings are intact. No associated cultural material was located, despite
intensive surface examination.
Assessment: Bridges of this type, characterized by the pattern of equilateral triangles that form
the trusses, have been in use since the mid-nineteenth century, and archival research would be
necessary to properly assess the significance of this bridge. Warren truss bridges are relatively
common in general, but the bridge may include unusual or distinctive characteristics. It is also
relatively well preserved and maintains a relatively high degree of contextual integrity.
Therefore, 41KT169 is potentially eligible for listing on the NRHP. It is recommended that
WETT avoid and protect this bridge.

23

41KT170:
Site Description: According to local informants, this half-dugout house was built in the 1920s or
1930s and abandoned in the 1960s. The house is located at the intersection of County Road
346 and a private road, and it is surrounded by contoured cotton fields (Figure A1:10). The
surrounding landscape is very flat, and the closest water source is an intermittent stream
approximately 1.5 km (just under 1 mile) to the south. Surrounding the house, the fine sandy
loams of the Cobb and Miles series support the growth of tall grasses and weeds. Surface
visibility in the vegetated areas near the structure was less than 10%, but in the surrounding
cotton fields it approached 100% at the time of the field investigation.
Cultural Material: The house is excavated into the ground and has an intact stone
superstructure and a milled lumber roof covered with steel roofing panels (Figure 18). The
house measures approximately 11 by 9 m (36 by 30 ft) and is divided into four rooms with a
stairway leading to the ground level exterior on the northwest side and another, covered,
entryway on the southeast corner. A brick-lined cistern is located near the southwest corner of
the house, with a drainpipe leading from the roofline (Figure 19). A wooden and corrugated
metal shed south of the structure may have provided storage space or a pen for small animals.
The house was wired for electricity and a refrigerator and stove are still present inside. A plot of
land measuring approximately 130 by 86 m (427 by 282 ft) appears to have been largely
undisturbed since the abandonment of the house and may retain some elements of the original
landscape in which the house was constructed. A large tree north of the house appears to have
been planted and marks the northern boundary of the preserved portion of the landscape. The
entire vegetated area surrounding the structure is littered with cultural material dating from the
early twentieth century to the present day, including tires, a washing machine, bricks, and metal
scrap. Since the house is so near to a public road, it has been used as a trash dump and is
apparently still the site of periodic beer-drinking episodes.

24

Figure 18: Half-dugout house (41KT170), photo facing east.

Figure 19: Cistern associated with half-dugout house (41KT170).

25

Figure 20: Interior view of half-dugout house (41KT170).
Assessment: The house may meet the qualifications for listing in the National Register of
Historic Places based on its integrity and the fact that it represents a relatively unusual
combination of common architectural features and a semi-subterranean context; however,
archival research would be required to determine the site’s eligibility. The principal investigator
and project archeologist recommended that WETT avoid impacting the structure, and WETT
designed a reroute to the ROW to accommodate the recommendation. A revisit in April 2011
surveyed the reroute, which passes to the west of the structure and its surrounding yard and
found no cultural material. Should future projects threaten to negatively impact the structure or
its surrounding, preserved, landscape, aci recommends a detailed investigation by an
architectural historian as well as archival research to determine the site’s historic significance.

26

5.0 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Archeologists from aci consulting conducted intensive pedestrian survey of a 74-mile long and
160-foot-wide proposed right-of-way (ROW) as well as associated “pull sites” outside of the
proposed ROW (approximately 1550 acres) for the WETT CC1 Cottonwood to Dermott
transmission line project. Ten previously-unrecorded archeological sites and an additional four
localities were documented as a result of the survey. However, none of the prehistoric sites and
only two of the historic sites offer the potential for yielding valuable information within the ROW.
Most of the sites represented scatters of either prehistoric lithic debitage and fire-cracked rock
or fragments of historic material with poor contextual integrity. In many cases, the primary
context of the artifacts was unclear, as the survey located no intact prehistoric features and two
historic structures (41KT169 and 41KT170).
Based on the pedestrian survey, aci consulting recommended that WETT avoid impacts to the
historic half-dugout house (41KT170) and a historic truss bridge (41KT169) as well as minimize
impacts to one lithic scatter (41KT166). WETT designed a reroute to avoid impacts to
41KT170, and has indicated willingness to avoid damaging the historic truss bridge (41KT169)
and the lithic scatter (41KT166) by spanning these areas. Because these measures will be
taken, aci consulting does not recommend further archeological investigation of the areas
surveyed.
It must be noted, however, that no level of survey intensity can be guaranteed to locate all
cultural features within a project area. Therefore, should previously-unrecorded cultural
resources be discovered during the course of clearing or construction for this project WETT will
contact the Texas Historical Commission of the inadvertent discoveries.
Table 2 Summary of Recommendations for Sites
Site Number

Site Type

Eligibility Status

Recommendations

41DK29

Prehistoric fire cracked
rock scatter

Not eligible

No further work

41DK33

Prehistoric fire cracked
rock and lithic scatter

Not eligible

No further work

41KT166

Prehistoric fire cracked
rock and lithic scatter

Not fully assessed;
portion within ROW
does not contribute to
eligibility

Minimize impacts by
spanning

41KT167

Prehistoric lithic
workshop or campsite

Not fully assessed;
portion within ROW
does not contribute to
eligibility

No further work

27

41KT168

Prehistoric lithic scatter

Not fully assessed;
portion within
ROWdoes not
contribute to eligibility

No further work

41DK30

Historic artifact scatter

Not fully assessed;
portion within
ROWdoes not
contribute to eligibility

No further work

41DK31

Historic artifact scatter

Not fully assessed;
portion within
ROWdoes not
contribute to eligibility

No further work

41DK32

Historic artifact scatter

Not fully assessed;
portion within
ROWdoes not
contribute to eligibility

No further work

41KT169

Late 19th or early 20th
century Warren truss
bridge

Potentially eligible

Avoid
impact
spanning

41KT170

Historic (1920s-19602)
dugout

Potentially eligible

Site will be preserved
and protected through
a re-route.

28

by

6.0 REFERENCES CITED
Boyd, Douglas K.
1994 Introduction and Environmental and Archeological Background. In Data Recovery
at Lake Alan Henry (Justiceburg Reservoir), Garza and Kent Counties, Texas:
Phase III, Season 3 by Douglas K. Boyd, Jay Peck, Steve A. Tomka, Karl W.
Kibler, and Martha Doty Freeman. Reports of Investigations, No. 93. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin, TX.
Boyd, Douglas K.
2004 The Palo Duro Complex in The Prehistory of Texas, edited by Timothy K.
Perttula. Texas A&M University Press, College Station, Texas.
Boyd, Douglas K., James T. Abbott, William A. Bryan, Colin M. Garvey, Steve A. Tomka, and
Ross. C. Fields
1990 Phase II Investigations at Prehistoric and Rock Art Sites, Justiceburg Reservoir,
Garza and Kent Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 71. 2 vols.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Boyd, Douglas K., C. Britt Bousman, and Martha Doty Freeman
1991 Archeological Survey of Wildlife Mitigation Lands, Justiceburg Reservoir, Garza
County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 79. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.
Boyd, Douglas K., Martha Doty Freeman, Michael D. Blum, Elton R. Prewitt, and J. Michael
Quigg
1989 Phase I Cultural Resources Investigations at Justiceburg Reservoir on the
Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos River, Garza and Kent Counties, Texas.
Reports of Investigations No. 66, 2 vols. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Boyd, Douglas K., Jay Peck, Steve A. Tomka, and Karl W. Kibler
1993 Data Recovery at Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan Henry), Garza and Kent
Counties, Texas: Phase III, Season 2. Reports of Investigations No. 88. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Boyd, Douglas K., Steve A. Tomka, and Martha Doty Freeman
1997 Caprock Canyonlands Archeology: A Synthesis of the Late Prehistory and
History of Lake Alan Henry and the Caprock Escarpment. 2 vols. Report of
Investigations No. 110. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Boyd, Douglas K., Steve A. Tomka, C. Britt Bousman, Karen M. Gardner, and Martha Doty
Freeman
1992 Data Recovery at Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake Alan Henry), Garza and Kent
Counties, Texas: Phase III, Season 1. Reports of Investigations No. 84. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin
Carlson, Paul H.
1998 The Plains Indians. Texas A&M University Press, College Station, Texas.

29

Freeman, Martha Doty
1990 Agriculture in Texas: Ranching on the Western Rolling Plains, 1877-1945.
Chapter 3 in Phase II Historical Investigations at the Justiceburg Reservoir,
Garza and Kent Counties, Texas, by Martha Doty Freemans and Douglas K.
Boyd. Reports of Investigations No. 72. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Griffith, Glenn, Sandy Bryce, James Omernik, and Anne Rogers
2007 Ecoregions of Texas. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, Austin,
Texas.
Hämäläinen, Pekka.
2008 The Comanche Empire. Yale University Press, New Haven, Connecticut.
La Vere, David.
2004 The Texas Indians. Texas A&M University Press, College Station, Texas.
Lindsey, Bill.
2010. Bottle Dating. In Historic Glass Bottle Identification and Information Website.
Electronic document, http//www.sha.org/bottle/dating.htm, accessed May 2011.
Morris, John Miller.
1997 El Llano Estacado: Exploration and Imagination on the High Plains of Texas and
New Mexico, 1536-1860. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Norment, Aaron R., Virginia L. Hatfield, and Douglas K. Boyd
2009 Archeological Survey of the Proposed Lake Alan Henry to Lubbock Pipeline,
Garza, Lynn, and Lubbock Counties, Texas. Technical Report No. 84. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.
Perttula, Timothy K.
2004

An Introduction to Texas Prehistoric Archeology in The Prehistory of Texas,
edited by Timothy K. Perttula. Texas A&M Press, College Station, Texas.

TRC Environmental Corporation
2010 Alternative Routing Study and Environmental Assessment for Wind Energy
Transmission Texas, LLC’s Proposed Cottonwood to Dermott 345kV
Transmission Line Project in Dickens, Kent, and Scurry Counties, Texas. TRC
Environmental Corporation, Houston, Texas.

30

Appendix 1: Detailed Site Maps

31

A1:1 Site 41DK29

41DK29

Archeological Sites
This map is intended for planning purposes only.
Base mapping compiled from best available
information. All map data should be considered
preliminary and all boundaries and designations
are subject to confirmation.
This map is
conceptual in nature and does not represent any
regulatory approval. Plan is subject to change.

300

150

0

300
Feet

1:3,600

CCN1 Centerline
CCN1 ROW

1 inch equals 300 Feet

Negative Shovel Test
Positive Shovel Test

A1:2 Site 41DK33

41DK33

Archeological Sites
This map is intended for planning purposes only.
Base mapping compiled from best available
information. All map data should be considered
preliminary and all boundaries and designations
are subject to confirmation.
This map is
conceptual in nature and does not represent any
regulatory approval. Plan is subject to change.

300

150

0

300
Feet

1:3,600

CCN1 Centerline
CCN1 ROW

1 inch equals 300 Feet

Negative Shovel Test
Positive Shovel Test

A1:3 Site 41KT166

41KT166

Archeological Sites
This map is intended for planning purposes only.
Base mapping compiled from best available
information. All map data should be considered
preliminary and all boundaries and designations
are subject to confirmation.
This map is
conceptual in nature and does not represent any
regulatory approval. Plan is subject to change.

300

150

0

300
Feet

1:3,600

CCN1 Centerline
CCN1 ROW

1 inch equals 300 Feet

Negative Shovel Test
Positive Shovel Test

A1:4 Site 41KT167

41KT167

Archeological Sites
This map is intended for planning purposes only.
Base mapping compiled from best available
information. All map data should be considered
preliminary and all boundaries and designations
are subject to confirmation.
This map is
conceptual in nature and does not represent any
regulatory approval. Plan is subject to change.

300

150

0

300
Feet

1:3,600

CCN1 Centerline
CCN1 ROW

1 inch equals 300 Feet

Negative Shovel Test
Positive Shovel Test

A1:5 Site 41KT168

41KT168

Archeological Sites
This map is intended for planning purposes only.
Base mapping compiled from best available
information. All map data should be considered
preliminary and all boundaries and designations
are subject to confirmation.
This map is
conceptual in nature and does not represent any
regulatory approval. Plan is subject to change.

300

150

0

300
Feet

1:3,600

CCN1 Centerline
CCN1 ROW

1 inch equals 300 Feet

Negative Shovel Test
Positive Shovel Test

A1:6 Site 41DK30

41DK30

Archeological Sites
This map is intended for planning purposes only.
Base mapping compiled from best available
information. All map data should be considered
preliminary and all boundaries and designations
are subject to confirmation.
This map is
conceptual in nature and does not represent any
regulatory approval. Plan is subject to change.

300

150

0

300
Feet

1:3,600

CCN1 Centerline
CCN1 ROW

1 inch equals 300 Feet

Negative Shovel Test
Positive Shovel Test

A1:7 Sites 41DK31 and 41DK32

41DK32

41DK31

Archeological Sites
This map is intended for planning purposes only.
Base mapping compiled from best available
information. All map data should be considered
preliminary and all boundaries and designations
are subject to confirmation.
This map is
conceptual in nature and does not represent any
regulatory approval. Plan is subject to change.

300

150

0

300
Feet

1:3,600

CCN1 Centerline
CCN1 ROW

1 inch equals 300 Feet

Negative Shovel Test
Positive Shovel Test

A1:8 Site 41KT 169

41KT169

Archeological Sites
This map is intended for planning purposes only.
Base mapping compiled from best available
information. All map data should be considered
preliminary and all boundaries and designations
are subject to confirmation.
This map is
conceptual in nature and does not represent any
regulatory approval. Plan is subject to change.

300

150

0

300
Feet

1:3,600

CCN1 Centerline
CCN1 ROW

1 inch equals 300 Feet

Negative Shovel Test
Positive Shovel Test

A1:9 Site 41KT 170

41KT170

Archeological Sites
This map is intended for planning purposes only.
Base mapping compiled from best available
information. All map data should be considered
preliminary and all boundaries and designations
are subject to confirmation.
This map is
conceptual in nature and does not represent any
regulatory approval. Plan is subject to change.

300

150

0

300
Feet

1:3,600

CCN1 Centerline
CCN1 ROW

1 inch equals 300 Feet

Negative Shovel Test
Positive Shovel Test

Appendix 2: Shovel Test Forms

Shovel Tests
Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-10

ks05

negative

dead grass 30%

0-20

7.5YR6/6

reddish yellow

sandy
loam

less than
5% chert
pebbles

some grass; 5% slope, 30% visibility. No recover

1-10

ks05

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/6

red

loamy
sand

0-10%

change to redder soil; no recovery

1-10

ks05

negative

N/A

40-60

2.5YR4/6

red

loamy
sand

0-10%

some caliche fragments, no recovery

1-10

ks06

negative

?

0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
loam

less than
5%

0% slope, 10% visibility, no recovery

1-10

ks06

negative

?

20-40

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
clay

less than
5%

about 40cm the sandy clay is more clay

1-10

ks06

negative

?

40-50

2.5YR4/6

red

clay

0%

hard red clay at 45cm, no recovery

1-10

ks08

negative

20% dead grass

0-20

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

rt; flat; inclusions of red clay chunks begin around
10cm depth; no recovery

1-10

ks08

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/6 and 7.5YR3/4 strong brown and
dark brown

sandy
loam,
sandy
clay

less than
5%

clay inclusions increased deeper until terminated at
compct clay layer of 40cm; no recovery. Note: Tess
excavated this shovel test, but it had already been
plotted as KS8, so the name stayed the same.

Page 1 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-10

ks09

negative

1-10

ks09

1-10

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

dead grass, small 0-20
shrubs 80%

5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

5-10%

5% slope, 20% visibility, no recovery

negative

N/A

5YR4/6

strong brown

clay

less than
5%

hard red clay at 30cm, no recovery

ks10

negative

dead grass, some 0-20
tree limbs

7.5YR6/3

light brown

sandy
loam

0-5%

0% slope, 15% visibility, no recovery

1-10

tn05

negative

N/A

40-43

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

sandy
clay and
caliche

less than no recovery; 43cm began to see dark gray-black
10% chert inclusions in clay and beige to yellowish caliche;
pebbles
terminated due to degraded bedrock

1-10

tn05

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

sandy
clay

less than no recovery
10% chert
pebbles

1-10

tn05

negative

10% dead grass

0-20

7.5YR5/6 and 7.5YR3/4 strong brown and
dark brown

sand and almost
sandy
none
clay

15% downhill slope near wash; mostly cleared with
some short grasses and brush; no recover; soil change
at 8cm

1-10

tn06

negative

N/A

40-55

7.5YR4/4 and 7.5YR3/4 brown

sandy
almost
loam and none
sandy
clay

at depth of 55cm begin to see super-compact clay
steadily throughout with inclusions of beige to yellow
and black; terminated due to degraded bedrock

1-10

tn06

negative

60% dead grass

0-20

7.5YR4/4 and 7.5YR3/4 brown

sandy
almost
loam and none
sandy
clay

nearly flat RT; steadily throughout are blocky
inclusions of red clay

20-30

Page 2 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

1-10

tn06

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/4 and 7.5YR3/4 brown

sandy
almost
loam and none
sandy
clay

blocks of red clay increasing in matrix

1-101

cg49

negative

25% short grass, 0-20
shrub brush

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

silty clay 50%

shovel test on possible site, tested cobbles throughout
on high ground. No artifacts, CaCo3 15%

1-101

cg49

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

silty clay 25%

no artifacts. CaCo3 10%. Hard/dry/clay soil.

1-101

cg50

N/A

20-30

5YR3/4

dark reddish bown

silty clay 30%

CaCo3 40%. Hard/dry/compact soil. No artifacts

1-101

cg50

25% short grass, 0-20
shrub brush

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

silty clay 20%

no artifacts. Down slope from high ground. CaCo3
25% hard/dry/compact soil

1-101

kf60

99% grassy field 0-30

5YR4/4

reddish brown

silty loam 100%

STP located slightly on a slightly elevated surface with
gravels

1-101

wh42

patchy grass

0-15

5YR3/4

silty clay 10%

gently sloping; 1 flake (chert) from upper 10cm

1-101

wh42

N/A

15-20

5YR3/4

caliche

gravels 5cm on top of caliche

negative

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

50%

Page 3 of 167

Parcel

ST #

1-101

1-101

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

wh43

N/A

20-25

5YR3/4

0%

wh43

10% patchy grass 0-20

5YR3/4

silty clay 0%

1 flake on surface (grainy quartzite); no subsurface

no comments

caliche
1-101

wh44

10% patchy grass 0-20

5YR3/4 with caliche
mottles

silty clay 20%

gentle slope; no artifacts

1-101

wh44

N/A

20-40

5YR3/4

caliche

caliche @ 35cmbs

1-107

cg29

negative

N/A

40-50

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
0%
clay, clay

between 40-50cm, soil sandy clay becomes clay. No
artifacts

1-107

cg29

negative

50% knee-high
grass, weeds

0-20

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

0%

grassy pasture, 50% surface visibility. No artifacts.
Dry, sandy soil

1-107

cg29

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
clay

0%

soil contains more clay and is moist. No artifacts.

1-107

ks66

negative

dead grass, trees, 0-20
mequite

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sand

less than
5%

no slope, 10% visibility. No recovery

50%

Page 4 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-107

ks66

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sand

less than
5%

no change in soil. No recovery

1-107

ks66

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sand

less than
5%

no change in soil. No recovery

1-107

ks66

negative

N/A

60-80

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sand

less than
5%

no change in soil. No recovery

1-107

pb56

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

0%

terminated due to compact soil

1-107

pb56

negative

short grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

0%

no slope, 30% ground cover (parcel 1-107) open field
near end of parcel

1-107

pb57

negative

N/A

30-60

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
0%
clay loam

terminated due to clay

1-107

pb57

negative

N/A

10-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
0%
clay loam

10cm down strata change to sandy clay

1-107

pb57

negative

grass

0-10

7.5YR5/4

brown

sandy silt 0%
loam

no slope, 80% surface visibility. Open field next to
mesquite forest

Page 5 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-107

rc06

negative

45%

0-60

5YR5/4

reddish brown

sand

0%

0% slope, 50% surface visibility. Low grasses, small
shrubs and trees. Negative

1-107

rc06

negative

N/A

60-80

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sand
loam

0%

negative

1-107

rc29

negative

30%

0-60

5YR5/4

reddish brown

sand

0%

at base of slope. Next to slope of river. Low grasses.
10% slope. 80% visibility. Negative

1-107

rc29

negative

N/A

?

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sand
loam

0%

negative

1-107

rp61

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/6

yellowish red

sand

0%

no comments

1-107

rp61

negative

80% short grass

0-20

5YR5/6

yellowish red

sand

0%

flat, lightly wooded pastureland featuring loose sandy
soil of uniform color

1-107

rp61

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR5/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

0%

ended at clay

1-107

ss38

negative

50% dead grass, 0-30
short bushes

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

0%

sandy loam gets very compact starting at 30cm. Slight
incline to E, SE. small ridge to SW approx. 10m away
No cultural material observed.

Page 6 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-107

ss38

negative

N/A

30-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

clay

0%

no comments

1-107

ss39

negative

65% short dead
grass and trees

0-10

7.5YR4/6

reddish brown

very
sandy
loam

0%

very sandy, easy/loose. Grassy field with sparse trees
and mesquite bushes fairly flat. Small dip to S approx
50m. Loose humic layer. No cultural material
observed.

1-107

ss39

negative

N/A

10-80

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

0%

no cultural material observed.

1-107

tn67

negative

40% tufts of
short grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

almost
none

nearly flat plateau; decent surface visibility through
grassy tufts- 35% overall; no recovery; soil extremely
dry and hard-packed for first 15cm

1-107

tn67

negative

N/A

20-35

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

less than
5%

no recovery; terminated due to extremely hard-packed
clay

1-107

tn68

negative

30% tufts of
knee-high grass

0-20

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sand

almost
none

nearly flat plateau; decent surface visibility through
grass tufts approx 45% overall; no recovery

1-107

tn68

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

loamy
sand

almost
none

no recovery; wetter than sand above

1-107

tn68

negative

N/A

40-46

7.5YR4/6, 5YR4/6

strong brown,
yellowish red

loamy
sand,
sandy
clay

no recovery; terminated due to sub-soil hard-packed
almost
red clay
none,
approx.
5%
carbonates

Page 7 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-11

ks07

negative

60% shrubs and
grass

0-20

7.5YR5/4

brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

5% slope, 20% visibility, no recovery

1-11

ks07

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR5/4

brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

no recovery

1-11

ks07

negative

N/A

40-50

2.5YR3/6

dark red

clay

0%

45cm changes to hard red clay, no recovery

1-11

tn07

negative

N/A

40-58

7.5YR5/6 and 7.5YR3/4 strong brown and
dark brown

loamy
0-30%
sand and chert
sandy
pebbles
clay

clay blocks become steadily more abundant deeper
until about 58cm when clay becomes matrix with
black-beige-yellow inclusions; terminated due to
degraded bedrock

1-11

tn07

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR5/6 and 7.5YR3/4 strong brown and
dark brown

loamy
0-10%
sand and chert
sandy
pebbles
clay

at about 18cm soil begins to have blocky clay with
loamy sand matrix

1-11

tn07

negative

40% dead grass

0-20

7.5YR5/6

loamy
sand

0-10%
chert
pebbles

fp; no recovery

1-11

tn08

negative

N/A

60-70

7.5YR5/4 and 7.5YR3/4 brown and dark
brown

sand,
sandy
loam

almost
none

no recovery; terminated due to sub-soil red clay at
69cm- super compact

1-11

tn08

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR5/4

sand

almost
none

no recovery

strong brown

brown

Page 8 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-11

tn08

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR5/4

brown

sand

almost
none

no recovery

1-11

tn08

negative

60% leaf litter

0-20

7.5YR5/4

brown

sand

almost
none

fp; flat; near a stand of trees; no recovery; some rodent
moved disturbance about 10m to the SW

1-11

tn09

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

no recovery

1-11

tn09

negative

10% dead grass

0-20

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

fp; flat; no recovery; in an area with knee-high grasses

1-11

tn09

negative

N/A

40-56

7.5YR4/6 and 7.5YR3/4 strong brown and
dark brown

sandy
loam,
sandy
clay

less than
5%

terminated due to hitting super compact sub-soil clay
layer at 56cm; no recovery

1-11

tn10

negative

N/A

60-66

7.5YR4/4 (dry) and
7.5YR3/4

brown and dark
brown

sandy
less than
loam and 5%
sandy
clay

no recovery; aroudn 60cm- began to see more red clay
content but did not hit super compact clay layer until
66cm; terminated due to sub-soil clay

1-11

tn10

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

no recovery

1-11

tn10

negative

95% leaf litter

0-20

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

small mound less than 1m in height with stand of pin
oak in an otherwise open field- probably caused by
human disturbance; no recovery

Page 9 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-11

tn10

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

no recovery

1-11

tn11

negative

30% dead grass

0-20

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

fp; flat; grasses knee-high; no recovery

1-11

tn11

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

no recovery

1-11

tn11

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

no recovery

1-11

tn11

negative

N/A

60-76

7.5YR4/4 (dry) and
7.5YR3/4

brown and dark
brown

sandy
less than
loam and 5%
sandy
clay

no recovery; terminated due to sub-soil clay; clay in
this ST has more water content and is softer relative to
other tests in the area

1-110

cg15

negative

N/A

20-50

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

silty clay 0%

soil contains CaCO3. no artifacts. Dry soil.

1-110

cg15

negative

75% chest high
grass

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

silty clay 0%

on top of ridge after crossing ravine. 25% surface
visibility. Sunflowers, tall grass, thorn brush. No
artifacts. Dry soil.

1-110

cg24

negative

75% waist high
grass, thorn
scrub, cedar

0-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay 50%
loam

no artifacts. Downslope from steep bluffs. 25% surfac
visibility. Prickly pear, cedar, short and tall grass, 25%
slope. CaCO3 present throughout level- 50%, dry soil.

Page 10 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-110

cg25

negative

75% tall and
short grass

0-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay 25%

on top of ridge/bluff. 25% surface visibility. Thorn
scrub, cedar, waist-high grass, short grass. No artifacts
CaCO3- 15%

1-110

cg26

negative

90% short grass, 0-30
prickly pear,
sunflowers

2.5YR4/6

red

silty clay less than
5%

grass prairie, slope 15%, no artifacts. Mesquite,
prickly pear, thorn scrub, short grass, sunflowers.
CaCO3- 20%. Dry soil.

1-110

cg27

negative

50% short grass, 0-30
sotol, prickly
pear

2.5YR4/6

red

silty clay 0%

10% slope, grassy field, sotol, sunflower, cedar,
prickly pear. CaCO3 15%. Dry soil, no artifacts.

1-110

cg28

negative

25% short grass

0-20

2.5YR5/6

red

silty sand 0%

on hilltop, sparse grass, sotol, cedar. High percentage
of gypsum on surface 25-50%. Hard/compact/platey
soil- 50% gypsum. Too compact to dig.

1-110

cg64

negative

85% short grass, 0-30
prickly pear,
thorn scrub

2.5YR3/6

dark red

clay

no artifacts. 15% surface visibility. Mesquite, cholla,
prickly pear cactus. Clay soil. Dry soil.

1-110

kf58

negative

N/A

30-40

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

silty clay 0%
loam

no comments

1-110

kf58

negative

95% grassy
field

0-30

7.5YR6/6

reddish yellow

silty loam 0%

STP located on ridge top with an eroding surface. Two
track 30m SW. 60% surface visibiity, zero artifacts
unearthed.

1-110

kf59

negative

100% grassy
field with
sunflowers

0-30

5YR5/6

yellowish red

silty loam 90%

STP located next to eroded slope, 30m N is a two
track, 10% surface visibility. Zero artifacts collected.

0%

Page 11 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-110

ks60

negative

dead grass,
mesquite 50%

0-20

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
10%
clay loam

red triassic sands. 10% down to NE. 50% visibility.
Hard red clay at 20cm. No recovery

1-110

ks67

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/6

red

clay
loam to
clay

traces of CaCO3 at 20-30cm. ST terminated because
of hard red clay at 40cm. No recovery.

1-110

ks67

negative

dead grass,
prickly pear,
sunflower 95%

0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

clay loam less than
5%

no slope, 5% visibility, no recovery

1-110

ks68

negative

dead grass,
0-20
mesquite, prickly
pear 70%

2.5YR4/6

red

silty clay 15%
loam

5% slope down to N, 30# visibility. 30m S of a large
bluff. ST terminated because of high density of gravel
at 20cm. No recovery

1-110

ks69

negative

N/A

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy silt 15%
loam

ST terminated because of high density of gravel at
40cm. No recovery.

1-110

ks69

negative

dead grass,
0-20
yucca, sunflower
90%

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy silt less than
loam
5%

no slope. 10% visibility. No recovery

1-110

ks70

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay

less than
5%

ST terminated because of hard red clay at 30cm. No
recovery.

1-110

ks70

negative

dead grass,
mesquite,
sunflower 95%

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay loam less than
5%

no slope. 5% visibility. 10m N of a small creek. No
recovery

20-40

%Gravels Comments

less than
5%

Page 12 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-110

pb53

negative

N/A

20-50

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
loam clay

terminated due to clay

1-110

pb53

negative

N/A

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam
clay

0%

no slope, less than 5% surface visibility. Ridge top
between two large ravines

1-110

pb54

negative

grass, cacti,
juniper

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

less than
5%

30% surface visibility, less than 5% slope towards E.
outside of transect due to large bluff

1-110

pb54

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

0%

terminated due to CaCO3

1-110

pb55

negative

tall grass, cacti

0-20

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

sandy silt 0%
loam

10% slope, 25% surface visibility. Eroded slope 10m N

1-110

pb55

negative

N/A

40-70

5YR5/3

reddish brown

sandy silt 0%
loam

terminated due to CaCO3

1-110

pb55

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/3

reddish brown

sandy silt 0%
loam

no comments

1-110

pb60

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

terminated due to CaCO3

0%

Page 13 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-110

pb60

negative

1-110

rc50

1-110

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

grass, sunflowers 0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

0%

no slope. Less than 5% surface visibility. Next to large
mesquite tree surrounded by sunflowers

negative

45% grasses

0-10

5YR5/6

yellowish red

sand
loam

70%

15% slope, 45% surface visibility. Grasses and low
shrubs. At base of ridge and slope center line is top of
ridge on steep slope.

rc51

negative

N/A

40-50

2.5YR4/4

reddish brown

clay

0%

negative.

1-110

rc51

negative

55% grasses

0-40

2.5YR4/6

red

silty clay 0%

no slope, 30% visibility. Grasses and small shrubs.
Negative.

1-110

rc52

negative

60% grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay

0%

no slope, 10% surface visibility. Grasses, small trees
and shrubs. Negative

1-110

rc53

negative

60% sunflowers

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay 0%

10% slope, 10% surface visibility. Sunflowers (devil
plant!) grasses and small shrub and trees. Negative

1-110

rc53

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay

1-110

rc54

negative

50% grass

0-80

2.5YR4/8

red

silty clay 0%

calcium
negative.
carbonate

2% slope, 20% surface visibility. Grasses, small trees
and shrubs. At base of slope. Negative

Page 14 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-110

rc55

negative

10%

0-15

2.5YR4/8

red

silty clay 0%

no slope, 99% surface visibility. Low shrubs, gypsum
outcrops. Edge of bluff. Negative.

1-110

rc55

negative

N/A

15+

2.5YR4/8

red

gypsum
lens

0%

no comments

1-110

rp55

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/6

red

silt

2%

no comments

1-110

rp55

negative

80% short grass

0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

silt

2%

1-110

rp55

negative

N/A

40-60

2.5YR4/6

red

silt

2%

gorge #1 to the S, E, and W; upland area continues to
the N. Heavily eroded ridges and cliffs, very few rock
present. Silt on sparse upland areas and sand at bottom
of ravines. We dug shovel tests whenever possible, as
most of the landforms are quite ve
no comments

1-110

rp55

negative

N/A

60-70

2.5YR4/6

red

silt

2%

soil becomes even looser further down. (see photo,
camera 8)

1-110

rp56

negative

30% grass

0-10

2.5YR4/6

red

silt clay

90%

ridge running N-S parallels line/is W and perhaps
center of ROW. (see photo for ravine and gravels)
stopped at 100% pebble-sized gravels. Update: we
climbed cliff to inspect and dig 2 tests; negative.

1-110

rp57

negative

20% grass and
cacti

0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

silt

5%

N of ridge, gently slopes downward to the N, loose silt
ending at clay of same color

Page 15 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-110

rp57

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/6

red

silt

0%

clay content increases with increasing depth.

1-110

rp57

negative

N/A

40-50

2.5YR4/6

red

silt

0%

ended at clay

1-110

rp58

negative

90% grass and
sunflowers

0-10+

2.5YR4/6

red

clay

0%

blocky chunks of clay at surface; mild slope to the N.

1-110

rp59

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/6

red

silty clay 0%

ended at clay.

1-110

rp59

negative

100% sunflowers 0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

silt

0%

loose reddish brown silt. Small upland to the E.
continues to slope down to the N.

1-110

rp60

negative

80% sunflowers
and grass

0-10+

2.5YR4/6

red

clay

0%

clay at surface, passed some gysum formations on top
of surface clay. Lowland and possible drainage area.
Clay very compact.

1-110

ss21

negative

N/A

30-40

5YR5/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

less than
5%

terminated due to CaCO3 at 40cm. No cultural
material present.

1-110

ss21

negative

45% short grass

0-30

5YR5/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

less than
5%

ridges located to N and NE. 100m S of oil pad.

Page 16 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-110

ss22

negative

1-110

ss23

1-110

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

95% loose, dead, 0-40
long grass

5YR4/4

reddish brown

compact 5%
sandy
clay loam

dead grass, mesquite brush, short trees (cyprus)
CaCO3 present at 30-40cm. No cultural material
present

negative

85% short grass, 0-30
yucca

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

90%

slope decline to N, NE. Incline to S. Terminated due to
high density of gravel. No cultural material observed.

ss24

negative

85% knee high 0-40
loose dead grass

5YR4/4

reddish brown

compact
sandy
loam

less than
5%

approx. 100-150m S of parcel. Cactus, sunflower,
mesquite. Slight incline to S; decline to N. No cultura
material observed. Terminated due to large root.

1-110

ss51

negative

75% short grass

0-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

5%

located on ridge with extreme slope in all directions.
Large hill/ridge approx. 150-250m to N. CaCO3
present at 30-40cm. No cultural material observed.
(reference camera B frame 16)

1-110

tn62

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
almost
silty loam none

no recovery; soil somewhat looser and more wet

1-110

tn62

negative

100% tufts of
knee-high grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
almost
silty loam none

nearly flat ridge top between 2 mountainous ravines;
maybe 5% surface visibility through sparse mesquite
and tufty grasses; soil extremely dry and hardened; no
recovery

1-110

tn62

negative

N/A

40-47

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
30%
no recovery; carbonates first appear around 35cm
silty loam carbonates depth; terminated due to appearance of carbonate
nodules

1-110

tn63

negative

N/A

20-32

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

almost all no recovery; terminated at the carbonates nodule layer
carbonates

Page 17 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-110

tn63

negative

1-110

tn64

1-110

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

85% short knee- 0-20
high grass

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

negative

100% short
grass/cedar

0-4

5YR4/6, 7.5YR4/6

yellowish red, strong sandy
brown
loam,
sandy
clay

20%
quartz
and
sandstone
pebbles
10%
pebbles,
10%
carbonates

tn65

negative

100% short
grass/cedar

0-18

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

almost all about 10% slope to the N; little ground visibility due
carbonates to cedar and grass coverage approx 10%; carbonates
with 2cm of surface; no recovery; terminated due to
carbonate nodules layer

1-110

tn66

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

almost
none

1-110

tn66

negative

N/A

40-55

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

almost all soil very dry and compact last 10cm; no recovery;
carbonates terminated due to nodules of carbonates layer

1-110

tn66

negative

95% short
grass/cedar

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

almost
none

1-110

wh53

negative

eroded cactus
gravelly

0-10

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

silty clay 0%

45 degree slope, exposed clay highly eroded

1-110

wh57

negative

grass lumps,
juniper

0-20

5YR5/4

reddish brown

sandy
0%
silty clay
with
CaCO3

prior to this test all area surveyed has been
exposed/eroded, 20% slope or better. Soil is a compact
sandy clay with 70% GSV. No artifacts

nearly flat ridge top between ravines; soil extremely
dry and hardened; little surface visibility through short
knee-high grass; no recovery

flat bench downslope from TN63; little ground
visibility due to cedar and grass coverage approx. 5%;
no recovery; terminated due to hard-packed clay layer

no recoery; carbonates appear around 28cm.

slightly sloping bench- 5%; poor surface visibility of
about 10% due to grasses and cedars; no recovery

Page 18 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-110

wh58

negative

grass lumps,
juniper

0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

silty clay 50%
with
gravels

flat surface on top of small, HIGH ridge. GSV 70%, 010 silty clay very fine, compact clay at 10cm

1-110

wh59

negative

grass, sunflower, 0-20
juniper

5YR5/4

reddish brown

silty clay 0%

0-10- fine windblown silty clay with slight humic
layer. Caliche gravels at 20cmbs

1-110

wh59

negative

N/A

20-25

5YR5/4

reddish brown

silty clay 40%
with
CaCO3

very compact after slight humic layer. Terminated at
25cmbs. All clay. GSV was 20%. No artifacts

1-110

wh60

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/8

yellowish red

silty clay 0%

GSV was 20-60% depending on where you looked.
Flat ground, no artifacts recovered

1-110

wh60

negative

0-20
low grass,
sunflower,
juniper, mesquite

5YR5/8

yellowish red

silty loam 0%

compact soil, but easily excavated. Fine silty loam
15cmbs, a soil change occurs to a silty clay.
Terminated at 40cmbs CaCO3 about 15% appears

1-110

wh61

negative

sparse grass,
cedar

0-20

5YR5/8

yellowish red

fine silty 0%
clay

10 degree slope N/S, GSV 60%, no artifacts,
consistent soil until 15cmbs. CaCO3 was encountered
dug to 20cmbs. No artifacts.

1-110

wh62

negative

grass lumps,
juniper

0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

silty clay 60%

talus just to the E approx. 20m. Gentle slope at base of
hill. GSV approx. 40%. Terminated due to graves at
20cm

1-116

kf50

negative

95% grassy with 0-30
mesquite

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

compact 100%
silty loam

STP located 100m S of South Sage Creek with 70%
surface visibility and zero artifacts unearthed

Page 19 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-116

kf54

negative

100% grassy
field

0-40

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
loam

0%

1-116

kf54

negative

N/A

40-50

7.5YR2/3

dark brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

1-116

kf69

negative

100% open
grassy field

0-30

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

STP located in an open ag field 500m N of large
gorge. Ankle-high grassy field with 10% surface
visibility and zero artifacts recovered.

1-116

kf70

negative

100% gravels

0-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty loam 100%

STP located next to eroding bluff with gravels
throughout strat and surface. 100% surface visibility
and zero artifacts found

1-116

kf71

negative

95% grassy with 0-30
mesquite

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty loam 100%

gravels at 30cmbs with 30% surface visibility. STP
located 100m N of South Sage Creek and zero artifacts

1-116

pb47

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

0%

terminated due to compace soil.

1-116

pb47

negative

1ft. Grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

0%

no slope, no surface visibility.

1-116

pb48

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
clay

0%

no comments

200m W of farm, possible ag field, zero surface
visibility and zero artifacts

Page 20 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-116

pb48

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
clay

0%

no comments

1-116

pb48

negative

grass

0-20

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
clay

0%

no slope; 30% surface visibility; open field with
terracing (grassy agriculture)

1-116

pb58

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

0%

terminated due to compact soil

1-116

pb58

negative

tall grass,
0-20
sunflower, brush

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

0%

10% slope toward north; less than 5% surface visibility

1-116

pb59

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

terminated due to CaCO3

1-116

pb59

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

no comments

1-116

pb59

negative

tall grass,
mesquite brush

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

no surface visibility, less than 5% slope toward N

1-119

pb71

negative

50% short grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

0%

10% slope toward W. 50% surface visibility. Grassy
clearing between two plowed fields next to dirt pile
about 2m high. Terminated due to compact soil.

Page 21 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-119

rp68

negative

20% short grass

0-20

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
clay

0%

1-121

pb41

negative

tall grass 4ft high 0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
less than
loam clay 5%

10% slope toward W. no surface visibility

1-121

pb41

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
0%
loam clay

terminated due to CaCO3 and compact soil

1-121

pb42

negative

tall grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
less than
loam clay 5%

no slope and 20% surface visibility

1-121

pb42

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
0%
clay loam

terminated due to clay and traces of CaCO3

1-121

pb43

negative

tall grass

0-20

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
less than
loam clay 5%

no slope. 5% surface visibility.

1-121

pb43

negative

N/A

20-30

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

sand
0%
loam clay

terminated due to clay

1-121

ss40

negative

85% waist high
grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

compact 5%
sandy
clay loam

small plow ridge to the west. Fence and beginning of
higher concentration of mesquite trees 5m to the east.
Small amounts of CaCO3 present at 20cm. No
cultural material observed.

end of plowed field (see Trimble pt "N reroute plowed
field"). Dugout house to the SW. Very compact sandy
clay increasing in clay content with depth. Stopped at
clay.

Page 22 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-121

ss40

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay

0%

no comments

1-121

ss41

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay

0%

no comments

1-121

ss41

negative

90% waist-high
ground

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

compact 5%
sandy
clay loam

extremely similar to SS40. plow ridge to N 30m and a
second coming from W curving S of STP. No cultural
material observed

1-121

ss42

negative

98% tall grass
sunflowers

0-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

very
5%
compact
sandy
clay loam

20m S of fallen deer blind. Gate entrance 30-50m SE.
standing deer blind approx 100m SE on other side of
fence.

1-121

ss42

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay

0%

no cultural material observed.

1-123

ks54

negative

dead grass,
mesquite 95%

0-20

5YR4/3

reddish brown

sandy
loam

30%

5% slope downward to the N. 5% visibility. High
amount of CaCO3 (80%) in sediment. Caliche at
20cm. No recovery.

1-123

ks55

negative

N/A

20-40

10YR8/1

white

sandy
loam

20%

decline in CaCO3 in sediment. Gray bands of sand
start appearing at 40cm. No recovery.

1-123

ks55

negative

dead grass,
sunflower,
yucca, mesquite
70%

0-20

7.5YR5/3

brown

sandy silt 25%
loam

no slope, 30% visibility. High amount of CaCO3 in
sediment 15%. No recovery.

Page 23 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-123

ks55

negative

N/A

40-50

10YR8/1

white

sandy
loam

10%

1-123

ks56

negative

dead grass,
0-20
cholla, mesquite
85%

red triassic color

red

sandy silt 10%
loam

high in CaCO3 (20%) of sediment. 15% visibility. 5%
slope down to N. ST dug 30m farther because of slope
after the creek. No recovery.

1-123

ks56

negative

N/A

20-40

red triassic color

red

sandy silt 15%
loam

high in CaCO3 (15% of sediment)

1-123

ks56

negative

N/A

40-50

red triassic color

red

sandy
loam

high in CaCO3 (25% of sediment) caliche at 50cm.
No recovery

1-123

ks58

negative

dead grass,
0-20
prickly pear,
mesquite, cholla
75%

5YR4/4

reddish brown

clay
5-10%
loam-clay

no slope, 25% visibility. Very hard compact top soil
followed by clay. Soil is very dry. No recovery

1-123

ks59

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR4/4

reddish brown

loamy
sand

5%

ST terminated because of caliche after lighter gray
sediment at 50cm. No recovery

1-123

ks59

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

loamy
sand

5%

change to lighter gray sediment at 35cm. No recovery

1-123

ks59

negative

dead grass,
0-20
yucca, mesquite,
sunflowers 80%

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

15%

15% slope downward to the NW. 20% visibility. No
recovery

20%

mostly gray bands of sand. Significantly less CaCO3.
caliche at 50cm. No recovery.

Page 24 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-123

pb44

negative

short grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

less than
5%

0% slope, 10% ground visibility

1-123

pb44

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

0%

terminated due to CaCO3

1-123

pb45

negative

short grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

0%

0% slope, less than 5% visibility

1-123

pb45

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

0%

terminated due to CaCO3

1-123

pb46

negative

tall grass 2ft

0-30

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

0%

0% slope, less than 5% visibility, terminated due to
CaCO3

1-123

rc40

negative

60% grasses

0-20

5YR4/3

reddish brown

compact
clay

0%

15% slope. 55% surface visibility. Low grasses, small
shrubs and cacti. Negative.

1-123

rc41

negative

75% grasses

0-20

5YR4/3

reddish brown

compact
clay

0%

0% slope. 25% surface visibility. Low grasses, small
trees and shrubs. Cacti (in my leg!!) Negative

1-123

rc42

negative

70% grasses

0-20

5YR4/3

reddish brown

compact
clay

0%

10% slope, 55% surface visibility. Low grasses, small
trees and shrubs, cacti (still in my leg!!) negative

Page 25 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-123

rc43

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/4

reddish brown

sand
60%
w/caliche

negative

1-123

rc43

negative

60% grasses

0-20

5YR5/4

reddish brown

sand
loam

10%

50% slope, 50% surface visibility. Low grasses, small
shrubs, cacti. Near creek (on slope into flood plain)
negative

1-123

rc44

negative

55% grass

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

compact
clay

1%

10% slope, 10% surface visibility. Tall grasses, small
trees and shrubs, cacti, negative

1-123

rc45

negative

55% grass

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

clay loam 10%

45% slope, 15% surface visibility. Tall grasses, small
trees and shrubs, cacti. Negative. Near creek

1-123

rc45

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

clay

negative

1-123

rc46

negative

55% grass

0-20

10YR5/3

brown

clay loam 5%

20% slope. 15% surface visibility. Tall grass, thorn
bushes, small trees and shrubs. Negative

1-123

rc46

negative

N/A

20-40

10YR5/3

brown

compact 10%
clay loam

negative.

1-123

rp45

negative

80% short grass

0-15

5YR4/4

reddish brown

silty clay 10%

rolling prairie, possible drainage running NE-SW.
very compact clay-rich soil with calcium carbonate
inclusions

0%

Page 26 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-123

rp46

negative

80% sunflowers
and grass

0-15

5YR4/4

reddish brown

silty clay 0%

very compact soil. Approx 5m W of parallel property
boundary line. Ended at 5YR4/2 dark reddish gray
clay.

1-123

rp47

negative

70% short grass

0-10

5YR4/4

reddish brown

clay

5%

clay with traces of silt and calcium carbonate. Very
compact and chunky; does not go through screen.
Ended at 5YR4/2 clay.

1-123

rp48

negative

80% sunflowers
and grass

0-10

5YR4/4

reddish brown

silty clay 0%

clay with traces of silt and calcium carbonate. Very
compact and chunky; does not go through screen.
Ended at 5YR4/2 clay.

1-123

rp49

negative

20% spiny things 0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay 0%
loam

Flat, eroded by cattle, creek approx. 30m to the S
(running E-W) very compact clay-rich soil. Stopped a
clay.

1-123

rp49

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay 0%

no comments

1-123

rp50

negative

100% medium
grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay 5%
loam

southern end of hilltop, slopes to the S, very compact
clay-rich soil with pebble to cobble-sized gravels.

1-123

rp50

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay 5%

no comments

1-123

ss45

negative

60% short grass

0-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

extremely 5%
compact
sandy
loam

standing windmill to NE across fence line. Flat field
with short grass, mesquite, and sunflowers. CaCO3
present at 10cm. No cultural material observed.

Page 27 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-123

ss46

negative

70% short grass

0-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

extremely 3%
compact
sandy
loam

down slope approx. 50m to W. Terminated due to
presence of caliche at 20cm. No cultural material
observed.

1-123

ss47

negative

70% short grass, 0-40
mesquite brush

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
3%
clay loam

Very compact. CaCO3 present almost immediately
under grass and few cm. 2 deer blinds 100-150m E.
Oil pump to NE. fence line and electric lines 100150m N. No cultural material observed.

1-125

jk12

negative

N/A

20-30

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

dry
5%
compact
clay loam

compact clay loam continues. Terminated due to
continued gravels and clay. No cultural material.

1-125

jk12

negative

100% short
grasses

0-20

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

dry
5%
compact
clay loam

1-125

jk13

negative

100% short
grasses

0-20

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

dry
0%
compact
clay loam

on gentle slope- pasture of short grasses (ankle-high),
sunflowers, some mesquite, sparse juniper. Soil is very
compact, dry, slightly loamy clay. Few tiny pebbles in
upper 10cm, mid-sized gravels below 10cm. No
cultural material
on low hilltop. Pasture with short grasses, sparse
mesquite and juniper. Soil is reddish, dry clay loam.
Thin grass roots in upper 15cm. No cultural material.

1-125

jk13

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

dry
1%
compact
clay loam

soil is pretty homogeneous. Few CaCO3 gravels
showing up at 30cmbs. Terminated due to continued
red clay and CaCO3. no cultural material.

1-125

jk14

negative

N/A

20-30

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

sparse CaCO3 gravels begin at 28cmbs. Terminated
due to hard clay, some CaCO3. no cultural material.

1-125

jk14

negative

100% anklehigh grass

0-20

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

very dry, 1%
compact
slightly
loamy
clay
very dry, 0%
compact
slightly
loamy
clay

in relatively level pasture. Ankle-high grasses, some
mesquite, sunflowers. Soil is very dry, compact. No
cultural material.

Page 28 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-125

jk15

negative

75% very short
grasses

0-15

7.5YR4/4

brown

very dry, 50%
compact
clay loam

1-125

kf72

negative

90% grass cover 0-30

10YR6/2

light brownish gray

silty loam 100%

1-125

kf73

negative

50% grass cover 0-30

10YR6/2

light brownish gray

silty loam 75%

STP located on ridgetop with 10% surface visibility
and ankle high grass. Zero artifacts associated with
STP.

1-125

kf74

negative

80% grassy field 0-30

10YR5/4

yellowish brown

sandy
loam

50%

STP located on hillside with ankle-high grass and 30%
surface visibility. Large stones litter surface from
eroding hillside, bedrock at 30cmbs.

1-125

kf75

negative

10% grassy
coverage

0-30

10YR5/4

yellowish brown

sandy
loam

100%

STP located on ridgetop with gravel and large stones
littering surface. 80% surface visibility and bedrock at
30cmbs. Zero artifacts collected.

1-125

kf76

negative

80% grassy
coverage

0-30

10YR5/4

yellowish brown

sandy
loam

40%

STP located in a small gorge between two hillsides.
Large stones litter surface from both eroding hillsides.
10% surface visibility and zero artifacts collected.

1-125

kf77

negative

75% grassy
coverage

0-30

10YR5/4

yellowish brown

sandy
loam

50%

STP located on ridge top with gravel and large stones
on surface. 30% surface visibility and bedrock at
30cmbs, zero artifacts collected.

1-125

kf78

negative

45% grassy
coverage with
mesquite

0-30

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

silty loam 75%

on low hilltop with slight slope down to S. In pasture
of very short grasses, sparse mesquite, cholla, juniper.
Gravels (small, rounded) about 3-4cmbs- very hard to
dig. Terminated at 15cmbs due to gravels. No cultural
material
STP located on ridgetop with 10% surface visibility
and ankle high grass. Zero artifacts associated with
STP.

STP located on a 10 degree slope with CaCO3 at
30cmbs. 20% surface visibility and gravels throughout
surface, zero artifacts collected.

Page 29 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-125

kf79

negative

90% grassy
coverage

0-30

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

compact 90%
silty loam

STP located ankle-high grassy field with no surface
visibility. Gravels throughout all strats with no
artifacts collected

1-125

kf80

negative

90% grassy
coverage

0-30

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

compact 90%
silty loam

STP located ankle-high grassy field with no surface
visibility. Gravels throughout all strats with no
artifacts collected

1-125

kf81

negative

45% grassy
coverage with
shrubs

0-30

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

compact 90%
silty loam

STP located on a 10 degree slope with gravels
throughout surface and strat. No artifacts collected.

1-125

ks71

negative

90% sunflower,
dead grass

0-20

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay loam less than
5%

no slope, 10% surface visibility. Hard compact soil.
No recovery.

1-125

ks71

negative

N/A

20-30

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay loam less than
5%

compaction increases with depth. ST terminated
because of hard compact clay 10cm. No recovery

1-125

ks72

negative

N/A

40-60

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
loam

20%

ST terminated because of caliche at 60cm. No
recovery.

1-125

ks72

negative

90% dead grass, 0-20
shrubs, yucca

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

10-15%

no slope, 10% visibility, 5% caliche. No recovery

1-125

ks72

negative

N/A

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

15-20%

small nodule of caliche 10%. No recovery

20-40

%Gravels Comments

Page 30 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-125

ks73

negative

1-125

ks74

1-125

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

80% dead grass, 0-15
small shrubs

2.5YR3/6

dark red

silty loam 40%

no slope, 20% visibility. High amount of gravel, some
caliche at surface. ST terminated because of high
amount of gravel and increasing caliche. No recovery.

negative

80% dead grass, 0-20
yucca

2.5YR3/6

dark red

silty loam 10%

no slope. 20% visibility. Gravel and caliche nodules at
5cm. No recovery.

ks74

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/6

dark red

silty loam 10%

ST terminated because of high amount of caliche at
40cm. No recovery.

1-125

ks75

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay loam less than
5%

ST terminated due to caliche bedrock at 40cm. No
recovery.

1-125

ks75

negative

95% dead grass, 0-20
yucca.

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay loam less than
5%

no slope, 5% visibility, little to no gravel. No recovery

1-125

ks76

negative

75% dead grass, 0-10
mesquite, cholla

5YR4/6

yellowish red

loamy
sand

50%

5% slope down to N, 25% visibility. Rolling grassland
with scattered mesquite. No recovery.

1-125

ks77

negative

N/A

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay

less than
5%

increase of clay with depth. No recovery.

1-125

ks77

negative

85% dead grass, 0-20
mesquite, prickly
pear, cholla

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay loam 5-10%

20-30

%Gravels Comments

no slope, 15% visibility, flat grassland with scattered
mesquite. No recovery.

Page 31 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-125

ks78

negative

1-125

ks78

1-125

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

70% dead grass, 0-20
mesquite, cholla

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay loam 20%

10% slope down to NW. 30% visibility. Rolling
grassland with scattered mesquite. Good surface
visibility with lots of surface gravel. No recovery.

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay
25%
loam and
clay

increase of clay and gravel with depth. No recovery.

ks79

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sand

5%

ST terminated because of bedrock at 60cm. No
recovery.

1-125

ks79

negative

65% dead grass, 0-20
juniper, mesquite

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

loamy
sand

5%

5% slope down to W. 35% visibility. 10m to the E of a
ravine that flows into a dry creek bed. No recovery

1-125

ks79

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sand

5%

soil change to sand. No recovery

1-125

pb61

negative

short grass,
sunflower

0-20

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

0%

no slope, 30% visibility. E of mesquite tree (2m)

1-125

pb61

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
less than
loam clay 5%

terminated due to compact soil

1-125

pb62

negative

short grass,
sunflower

0-20

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
less than
loam clay 5%

no slope, 10% surface visibility.

Page 32 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-125

pb62

negative

N/A

20-30

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
loam clay

terminated due to compact clay

1-125

pb63

negative

N/A

40-60

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
less than
loam clay 5%

terminated due to CaCO3

1-125

pb63

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
less than
loam clay 5%

no comments

1-125

pb63

negative

short grass, cacti 0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
10%
loam clay

no slope, less than 5% surface visibility

1-125

pb64

negative

grass, cacti

0-20

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

15%

20% slope towards W. Less than 5% surface visibility

1-125

pb64

negative

N/A

20-30

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

10%

terminated due to CaCO3

1-125

pb65

negative

N/A

40-50

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

terminated due to CaCO3

1-125

pb65

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

no comments

%Gravels Comments

Page 33 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-125

pb65

negative

grass, cacti

0-20

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

10% slope towards W. 5% surface visibility

1-125

pb66

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

0%

terminated due to CaCO3

1-125

pb66

negative

grass (short and
tall)

0-20

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

0%

20% slope toward S. Less than 5% surface visibility.

1-125

pb67

negative

short grass, cacti 0-20

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

sandy
30%
loam clay

20% slope toward N. Less than 5% surface visibility.
Surrounded by large bunches of cacti and numerous
mesquite trees.

1-125

pb67

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

sandy
30%
loam clay

soil hard and clump. Terminated due to hard clay.

1-125

pb68

negative

short grass

0-20

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

sandy
15%
loam clay

15% slope towwards N. Less than 5% surface
visibility. Surrounded by moderate batches of cacti
and mesquite has thinned out but still present.

1-125

pb69

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/3

reddish brown

sandy
20%
loam clay

terminated due to compact soil.

1-125

pb69

negative

short grass

0-20

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

sandy
20%
loam clay

no slope, no surface visibility, no cacti, but mesquite
trees are thick.

Page 34 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-125

pb70

negative

short grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
40%
loam clay

15% slope towards S. Less than 5% surface visibility.
Located 5m S of surface find #1. 8m away from large
ravine near possible rock shelter.

1-125

rc56

negative

30% low grasses 0-20

5YR6/3

light reddish brown

clay loam 10%

5% slope to the W into drainage. 70% surface
visibility. Negative. Low grasses

1-125

rc56

negative

N/A

calcium carbonate

N/A

calcium N/A
carbonate

same as above

1-125

rc57

negative

45% low grasses 0-4 bedrock

5YR6/3

light reddish brown

clay loam 90%

20% slope to the N-NE. 50% surface visibility, low
grasses, small shrubs. Negative. Drainage to N and E.

1-125

rc58

negative

70% low grass

0-25

5YR4/3

reddish brown

clay loam 0%

5% slope to the N. 70% surface visibility. Low
grasses. Negative.

1-125

rc58

negative

N/A

25-35

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

angular
clay

same as above.

1-125

rc59

negative

70% low grass

0-10

5YR4/3

reddish brown

clay loam 0%

2% slope to the N. 70% surface visibility. Low
grasses. Negative.

1-125

rc59

negative

N/A

10-30

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

angular
clay

same as above

20-30

%Gravels Comments

0%

0%

Page 35 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-125

rc60

negative

70% low grass

0-10

5YR4/3

reddish brown

clay loam 0%

2% slope to the N. 70% surface visibility. Low
grasses. Negative.

1-125

rc60

negative

N/A

10-30

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

angular
clay

same as above

1-125

rc61

negative

70% low grass

0-20

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

compact 10%
sandy
clay loam

20% slope to the NW. 40% surface visibility. Lowlying grasses and small shrubs. Near base of hill
descending into lower terrace. Negative.

1-125

rc61

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

sandy
clay

10%

same as above

1-125

rc62

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

angular
clay

10%

same as above

1-125

rc62

negative

85% grasses

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

clay
loam (015) and
clay

10%

5% slope to the NW. 20% surface visibility. Grasses,
tall weeds, shrubs, and small trees with some cacti.
Descending into lower terrace. Negative.

1-125

rc63

negative

70% low grasses 20-60

5YR4/4

reddish brown

1-125

rc63

negative

70% low grasses 0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

20-35cm 20%
clay
loam 3550
angular
clay loam 20%

0%

2% slope to the SE coming up small rise. 35% surface
visibility. Grasses and tall weeds in clearing. Negative

2% slope SE. coming up a small rise. 35% surface
visibility. Grass and tall weed clearing. Negative.

Page 36 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-125

rc64

negative

1-125

rc64

1-125

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

70% low grasses 0-20

5YR5/4

reddish brown

clay loam 35%

20% slope to ditch in the N. Pic C3. 40% surface
visibility. Grasses, shrubs, small trees near ditch.
Negative.

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/4

reddish brown

20-30
angular
clay

35%

same as above

rc65

negative

70% grasses

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

angular
clay

0%

sunflower hell! Tall weeds, small shrubs. Near bank of
drainage to N.

1-125

rc66

negative

70% grasses

0-20

5YR5/4

brown

clay loam 0%

25% slope to the SW toward drainage. 60% surface
visibility. Low grasses, tall weeds. Small shrubs,
ascending to high terrace. Negative.

1-125

rc66

negative

N/A

20-60

5YR5/4

brown

30-50
angular
clay

0%

same as above

1-125

rc67

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR5/4

brown

clay
loam,
CaCO3

70%

same as above

1-125

rc67

negative

60% low grasses 0-20

7.5YR5/4

brown

clay loam 25%

20% slope to the SW-S. low grasses to some tall
weeds. Clearing near road. Negative

1-125

rc68

negative

N/A

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

angular
clay

pushpiles of brush scattered throughout area indicates
clearing

20-40

%Gravels Comments

70%

Page 37 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-125

rc68

negative

1-125

rc69

1-125

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

30% low patchy 0-20
grass

0-5 2.5YR4/4, 5-20
2.5YR3/4

reddish brown, dark clay
reddish brown
loam,
angular
clay

70%

30% slope to the NE down onto lower terrace. Low
grasses and weeds. Some washout areas with gravel
exposed on the surface. Negative

negative

45% grasses

0-20

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

angular
clay

2%

tall sunflowers and grasses. Little to no slope. Basin
bottom? Very flat. Some cacti.

rc70

negative

60% grass

0-20

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

angular
clay

80%

on bottom terrace of drainage at base of slope. Near
drainage. No slope. Sunflowers and grasses.

1-125

rp63

negative

80% mesquite,
cacti, grass

0-10

7.5YR6/6

reddish yellow

silty clay 40%

1-125

rp64

negative

100% grass and
sunflowers

0-20

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

silty clay 15%
very gently sloping; low visibility due to mesquite,
carbonates sunflowers, and prickly pear; clay very blocky and
compact. Stopped at darker, thick, even more compact
clay.

1-125

rp65

negative

80% short grass
and mesquite

0-15

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

silty clay 5%
pebbles

same as above

1-125

rp66

negative

N/A

20-30

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

silty clay less than
5%

stopped at thick waxy hard clay of same color

1-125

rp66

negative

50% short grass

0-20

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

silty clay less than
5%

fairly flat with short grass; very compact blocky clay
with a pinch of silt and a few calcium carbonate
pebbles

sloping gently downward from hilltop to the N. mostly
clumpy clay and gravel with small % of silt mostly at
surface. Stopped at 100% gravels.

Page 38 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-125

rp67

negative

90% short grass

0-10

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

silty clay 90%
gravels

flat mostly open. Stopped at 100% gravels

1-125

rs01

negative

grass, sunflower, 0-40
mesquite, all
thorny, 90%

10YR3/2

very dark grayish
brown

clay

0%

very slight N-facing slope/scrub flatland. Very dense,
firm clay. Basal clay at 40cm.

1-125

rs02

negative

grass, sunflower, 0-20
yucca, 90%.
Numerous large
brush piles about.

10YR5/3

brown

clay loam 5%

1-125

rs02

negative

N/A

20-40

10YR5/3

brown

clay loam 10%

increasing gravels with depth. Minor arroyo cut
immediately to E shows gravel exposures and suggest
this low-lying, relatively flat expanse may be crisscrossed by buried, braided paleo-channels (two fossil
oyster shells)
no comments

1-125

rs02

negative

N/A

40-50

10YR5/3

brown

clay

20%

no comments

1-125

rs03

negative

N/A

20-45

10YR4/3

brown

clay

15%

no comments

1-125

rs03

negative

grass, dense
sunflower 80%

0-20

10YR4/3

brown

clay loam 5%

1-125

rs04

negative

N/A

20-30

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown loamy
clay

20%

minor gravel content. Located directly W (30m) from
low gravel hammock that rises 3-4ft above
surrounding terrain.

no comments

Page 39 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-125

rs04

negative

1-125

rs05

1-125

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

grass, much less 0-20
dense sunflower,
few trees/bushes
50%

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown loamy
clay

negative

grasses 50%

0-20

7.5YR5/4

rs06

negative

N/A

15-30

1-125

rs06

negative

grass/sunflower
80%

1-125

ss52

negative

1-125

ss52

1-125

1-125

%Gravels Comments
10%

near crest of gently rollin, open terrain. Increasingly
gravelly with depth- one fossil oyster shell. Terminated
due to gravels.

brown

silty clay 33%

just below crest of slight landform swell, with gravelly
surface. Some soil present, but very gravelly, and
clearly formed from aeolian deposition and/or residual
in situ development

10YR5/6

yellowish brown

stiff clay 0%

no comments

0-15

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown silty clay 10%

distinct chane at 15cm to stiff yellowish-brown clay
with no appreciable gravel content. Located on SE
flank of a gravel hammock about 4m high

30% short grass

0-10

10YR6/3

pale brown

sandy
loam

fairly flat region. Approx. 100m N of truck trail.
Terminated due to high concentration of CaCO3 at
20cm. No cultural material observed.

negative

N/A

10-30

10YR6/3

pale brown

ss53

negative

15% short grass

0-20

10YR5/2

grayish brown

0%
sandy
loam
with
CaCO3
inclusion
sandy
70%
loam

ss54

negative

15% short grass

0-20

10YR5/3

brown

sandy
loam

5%

5%

no comments

high gravel density. Terminated at 20cm due to
bedrock. STP located on ridge. Steep decline to N and
E. CaCO3 present. No cultural material observed.

slight incline to W. Decline to E and S. CaCO3
nodules present immediately. No cultural material
observed.

Page 40 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-125

ss55

negative

N/A

10-30

7.5YR4/2

brown

very
compact
clay

0%

1-125

ss55

negative

90% short grass

0-10

7.5YR4/2

brown

sandy
less than
clay loam 5%

fairly flat region. Reached clay at 10cm. No cultural
material observed.

1-125

ss56

negative

N/A

10-30

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

very
compact
clay

fence line/gate approx. 30 S.

1-125

ss56

negative

98% short grass

0-10

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

compact less than
sandy
5%
clay loam

6ft pile of brush/debris. 5m SW. fairly level area.
Reached clay at 20cm. No cultural material observed.

1-125

ss57

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/3

brown

compact
clay

no comments

1-125

ss57

negative

80% loose, dead 0-20
grass

7.5YR4/3

brown

extremely less than
compact 5%
sandy
clay loam

large pile of debris/brush 10m N of STP. Large
hill/ridge approx 150-200m S. Hit CaCO3 between 20
30cm. No cultural material observed.

1-125

ss58

negative

N/A

40-50

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

clay

0%

no comments

1-125

ss58

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

0%

0%

no comments

Page 41 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-125

ss58

negative

70% short grass
and sunflowers

0-20

7.5YR5/4

brown

sandy
less than
clay loam 5%

slightly hilly area. Surrounded by mesquite trees. Dead
sunflowers also surround. Game trails directly to W
and S. CaCO3 present at 40cm. No cultural material
observed.

1-125

ss59

negative

N/A

10-20

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay

no comments

1-125

ss59

negative

60% sunflowers, 0-10
alive and dead

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

sandy
less than
clay loam 5%

wash out/gully located 70m to E. large hill to far W.
abundant sunflowers and sparse mesquite surround
STP. Hit clay very quickly. No cultural material
observed.

1-125

ss60

negative

80% short grass

0-20

7.5YR4/3

brown

sandy
loam

slight incline to N. Ravine (photo C6) to EW running
diagonally SW to NE. bigger open field. Large pile of
debris/brush to W. sparse sunflowers and mesquite.
High concentration of gravel.

1-125

ss60

negative

N/A

20-50

7.5YR4/3

brown

sandy
70%
clay loam

terminated due to high concentration of gravel.
Difficult to get through. Possible presence of CaCO3
at 30cm. No cultural material observed.

1-125

ss61

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR4/4

reddish brown

clay

no comments

1-125

ss61

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
50%
clay loam

no comments

1-125

ss61

negative

60% short grass

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
50%
clay loam

slight inclue to N approx 20-30m. Few mesquite trees.
Sparse sunflowers. Fairly open field otherwise. No
cultural material observed.

0%

70%

0%

Page 42 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-125

ss62

negative

20% dirt patch
with short grass
surrounding

0-20

2.5YR3/2

dusky red

clay

15%

almost immediately hit clay. Dry, soft soil sitting on
top. Located directly N of hill line/ridge. Abundant
sunflowers. 2 piles of debris/brush. (1 to W; 1 to E) no
cultural material observed.

1-125

ss63

negative

30% short grass
and dead
sunflower

0-20

2.5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay

less than
5%

offset 20m due to wash out. STP located between two
drainage ditches to N and S. See photos C7 and C8.
Mesquite and sunflowers surround area, fairly flat. No
cultural material observed.

1-125

tn70

negative

100% short knee- 0-20
high
grass/sunflower

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

dry
sandy
loam

no slope; flat ridge top; less than 5% surface visibility
through grasses; no recovery

1-125

tn70

negative

N/A

20-33

5YR3/4, 2.5YR2.5/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam,
loamy
clay

less than
5% quartz
and
limestone
pebbles
less than
5% quartz
and
limestone

1-125

tn71

negative

N/A

20-42

2.5YR3/4, 2.5YR4/6

1-125

tn71

negative

100% knee-high 0-20
short
grass/sunflower

2.5YR3/4

fdark reddish brown, sandy
red
loam,
sandy
loamy
clay
dark reddish brown dry
sandy
loam

1-125

tn72

negative

85% short knee- 0-20
high grass/cacti

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

1-125

tn73

negative

75% short knee- 0-20
high grass/cacti

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
loam

carbonates visible in clay layer; no recovery;
terminated due to clay

10% and loam slightly less compact with depth- soil change at
30%
42cm; carbonates within clay in layers; terminated due
carbonates to clay

10% chert
and
limestone
and
quartzite
increasing
from 55%
carbonates

beginning of about 2% downhill slope southward;
same vegetation as TN70 but more sunflower; no
recovery

carbonates visible at surface- dug to 20cm before
hitting nodules of limestone; about 3% slope downhill
to SW; slightly more visibility as dug within a
clearing; terminated due to degraded bedrock.

25%
same vegetation as above- slightly greater ground
carbonates visibility; about 1% slope downhill to SW; no recovery

Page 43 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-125

tn73

negative

N/A

20-33

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy

no recovery; carbonates at surface- carbonates nodules
40%
carbonates (fist-size) at depth of 33cm; terminated due to
degraded bedrock

1-125

tn74

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR2.5/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

5% quartz no recovery; carbonates appear around 40cm
and chert
pebbles

1-125

tn74

negative

90% short knee- 0-20
high
grass/cacti/sunflo
wers

2.5YR2.5/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

5% quartz less than 2% slope downhill to the W; once again very
and chert poor ground visibility due to vegetation; no recovery
pebbles

1-125

tn74

negative

N/A

40-45

2.5YR2.5/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

35%
no recovery; terminated due to degraded bedrock
carbonates

1-125

tn75

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR2.5/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

5%

1-125

tn75

negative

100% short knee- 0-20
high
grass/cacti/sunflo
wers

2.5YR2.5/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

5% quartz same vegetation as above but with less clearings and
and chert lower ground visibility; slight slope downhill to the
pebbles
SE; no recovery

1-125

tn75

negative

N/A

40-48

2.5YR2.5/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

15%
no recovery; carbonates appear around 45cm;
carbonates terminated due to degraded bedrock

1-125

tn76

negative

85% short
grass/cacti

0-18

2.5YR2.5/4, 2.5YR4/6

dark reddish brown, dry
sandy
red
loam,
sandy
clay

15%
chert/quart
z, 5%
carbonates

no recovery

about 3% slope downhill to the NW; about 10-15%
ground visibility in small clearings amongst moderate
mesquite and cacti; terminated due to basal clay; no
recovery

Page 44 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-125

tn77

negative

90% short
grass/cacti

0-20

2.5YR2.5/4

dark reddish brown

dry
sandy
loam

about 1% slope downhill to the NE; same vegetation
25%
chert/quart as above, though sparser with more clearings covered
z gravels in short grass tufts; soil extremely dry and compact; no
recovery

1-125

tn77

negative

N/A

20-36

2.5YR2.5/4, 2.5YR4/6

dark reddish brown, sandy
red
loam,
sandy
clay

35%
no recovery; terminated due to basal clay
gravels,
15%
carbonates

1-125

tn78

negative

N/A

20-31

2.5YR2.5/4, 2.5YR4/6

dark reddish brown, sandy
red
loam,
sandy
clay

5%
no recovery; terminated due to basal clay.
gravels,
10%
carbonates

1-125

tn78

negative

80% short
grass/cacti

0-20

2.5YR2.5/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

15%
flat ridge top about 50m NE of drainage; sparse
quartz/che mesquite and cacti with short grass and knee-high
rt gravels tufts; no recovery.

1-125

tn79

negative

N/A

20-28

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

loamy
5%
no recovery; terminated due to bedrock.
silty sand chert/quart
z gravels

1-125

tn79

negative

0-20
75% short
grass/cacti/thorny
brush

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

loamy
5%
ridge above drainage- aboove 4% slope uphill to the E
silty sand chert/quart moderate low thorny brush coveragea nd short kneez gravels high grasses; about 25% ground visibility; exposed
bedrock at surface.

1-125

wh63

negative

sparse knee-high 0-30
grass

10YR6/2

light brownish gray

fine silty 85%
loam

20 degree slope, 70%GSV, rocky standstone gravels
with sparse matrix. Gravels greater than 10cm

1-125

wh64

negative

N/A

10YR6/2

light brownish gray

loose
30%
silty loam

hardpan sandstone gravels at 35-40cmbs

20-40

Page 45 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-125

wh64

negative

N/A

0-20

10YR6/2

light brownish gray

compact 85%
silty loam

after 20cm the gravels went to 30%, loose silty soils
with small gravels were encountered. 15 degree slope.
Very fine and loose.

1-125

wh65

negative

N/A

20-30

7.5YR

?

compact 20%
silty clay
loam

CaCO3 25cmbs. Terminated at 30cmbs.

1-125

wh65

negative

ankle-high grass 0-20

7.5YR

?

compact 20%
silty clay
loam

gentle slope at base of hill. 30%GSV. Rolling hills to
the S. impact from farming/landclearing.

1-125

wh66

negative

ankle-high grass 40-60

10YR6/6

brownish yellow

fine silty 20%
loam

terminated at 60cmbs. Nice digging, might as well get
a deep one in! (most of this hilly area will be eroded
and limited to surface [sic])

1-125

wh66

negative

N/A

10YR6/6

brownish yellow

loose
15-20%
silty loam

nice, loose soil. Not terminated until 60cmbs. 15
degree slope [sic] CaCO3

1-125

wh66

negative

ankle-high grass 0-20

10YR6/6

brownish yellow

loose
20%
silty loam

cedar and sotol about every 10m. Nice hilltop.
30%GSV. Finger ridge with steep dropoffs to the S
and W and E. CaCO3 apparent in upper 10-15cm
becoming more prevalent with depth.

1-125

wh67

negative

ankle-high grass 0-20

5YR5/4

reddish brown

compact 40%
silty clay
with
CaCO3

heavily eroded finger ridge at base of 20m tall, pointed
hill. Lots of erosion cuts all around on slight, flat area
sparse 4ft high hardwood everygreen mix and 10m
apart

1-125

wh67

negative

ankle-high grass 20-30

5YR5/4

reddish brown

silty clay 5%
with
CaCO3
and
sandstone

GSV about 40%, sotol (burned hardwood stumps to
the N.) terminated at 30cmbs due to sandstone.

20-40

%Gravels Comments

Page 46 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-125

wh68

negative

low grass

0-20

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

very
5%
comact
silty clay

flat sided roadbed with drainage about 200m to the S.
Windmill/tank about 125m to the W. GSV about 40%.

1-125

wh69

negative

low grass,
mesquite and
sunflower

0-20

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

very
70%
comact
silty clay

gentle slope up to the N. 40%GSV, no artifacts, lots of
surface and subsurface gravels (from 5mm to 5cm)
insanely compact

1-125

wh69

negative

low grass,
mesquite and
sunflower

20-25

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

very
20%
comact
silty clay

drop in gravels, increase in clay (lots of polish on soil,
hardpan terminated.

1-125

wh70

negative

0-20
low grass with
sparse hardwoods

5YR5/6

yellowish red

very
5%
comact
silty clay

low spot in old creekbed/drainage. Flat area with
sloped sides 10m to the S and 20m to the N. 25%GSV
No artifacts.

1-125

wh70

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/6

yellowish red

compact 20%
silty clay

uniform shiny silty clay. Subsoil is a gravel lens @
37cmbs. Terminated at 40.

1-13

jk01

negative

N/A

40-55

7.5YR5/4 (dry) to 5255cm then 7.5YR5/6

brown

0%

homogeneous sand continues to about 52cmbs. Below
that, dense, very hard, slightly sand clay- slightly
moist. No inclusions, no cultural material.

1-13

jk01

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR5/4 (dry)

brown

sand to
52- clay
with
some
sand
sand,
drier
than
above

0%

homogeneous sand, no inclusions. No cultural materia

1-13

jk01

negative

80% leaf litter

0-20

7.5YR4/3 (moist)

brown

slight
moistslightly
loamy
sand

0%

ST is in a large shin oak patch- oaks about wait-high.
Ground almost entirely covered in oak leaves. Surface
flat. Roots in upper 25-30cm. No inclusions, no
cultural material.

Page 47 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-13

kf01

negative

N/A

50-60

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

0%

no comments

1-13

kf01

negative

80%

0-20

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown sandy
loam

5%

STP located 60m East of Highway 70

1-13

kf01

positive

30%

0-50

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown sandy
loam

10%

1 ceramic door knob and one glass shard found @
40cmbs

1-13

kf01

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay

0%

no comments

1-13

ks10

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR6/4

light brown

sand

5-10%

soil contains small trigs and dead leaves, no recovery

1-13

ks10

negative

N/A

60-80

7.5YR6/4

light brown

sand

less than
5%

same soil throughout, no recovery

1-13

ks10

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR6/4

light brown

sand

5-10%

soil contains small trigs and dead leaves, no recovery

1-13

ss01

negative

N/A

60-70

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay

0%

no comments

Page 48 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-13

ss01

negative

70%

0-60

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown sandy
loam

70%

close proximity to dense brush and mesquite.
Agriculture present

1-13

tn12

negative

N/A

60-78

7.5YR4/6, 7.5YR3/4

strong brown, dark
brown

loamy
sand,
sandy
clay

almost
none

no recovery; terminated due to compact sub-soil clay
layer

1-13

tn12

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

loamy
sand

almost
none

no recovery

1-13

tn12

negative

5% dead grass

0-20

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

loamy
sand

less than
5%

fp; flat; area around is sparsely wooded with knee-high
grasses; fallen tree stand (modern) 3m SW; no recover

1-13

tn12

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

loamy
sand

almost
none

no recovery

1-13

tn13

negative

40% short grass

0-20

7.5YR5/8

strong brown

loamy
sand

almost
none

b; flat; located 10ft E of fence delineating ROW; no
recovery

1-13

tn13

negative

N/A

20-32

7.5YR5/8, 7.5YR3/4

strong brown, dark
brown

loamy
sand,
sandy
clay

almost
none

no recovery; terminated due to compact sub-soil clay
layer

1-132

cg61

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/3

brown

silty clay 0%

heavily bioturbated-roots. No artifacts. No change in
soil texture/color from previous level.

Page 49 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-132

cg61

negative

1-132

cg62

1-132

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

90% short grass, 0-20
sunflowers,
mesquite

7.5YR4/3

brown

silty clay 0%

flat grassy pasture with prickly pear, mesquite and
sunflowers. 10% surface visibility, downslope from
plowed field. No artifacts. Hard/dry soil.

negative

90% short grass, 0-20
prickly pear,
mesquite

10YR3/2

very dark grayish
brown

silty clay 0%

flat grassy pasture with prickly pear, mesquite,
sunflowers, 10% surface visibility. No artifacts.
Hard/dry soil.

cg62

negative

N/A

20-30

10YR3/2

very dark grayish
brown

silty clay 0%

no artifacts. No change in soil texture/color from
previous level. Very hard/dry soil.

1-132

rc47

negative

45% low grass

0-20

7.5YR5/4

brown

clay loam 15%

5% slope, 25% surface visibility. Low grasses, small
shrubs. Negative.

1-132

rc47

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR5/4

brown

clay

20%

negative.

1-132

rc48

negative

40% grass

0-20

7.5YR5/4

brown

clay

10%

5% slope, 25% surface visibility, low grasses, small
shrubs, negative

1-132

rc49

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR5/4

brown

clay with 15%
caliche

negative

1-132

rc49

negative

40% grass

0-20

7.5YR5/4

brown

clay

25% slope 25% surface visibility. Low grasses, small
shrubs. Negative.

10%

Page 50 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-132

rp51

negative

1-132

rp52

1-132

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

100% short grass 0-10

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay 0%

cow pasture. Extremely compact silty clay for a few
cm, then calcium carbonate, hardened into a white
layer. W of 2127.

negative

N/A

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay 20%

from 10-25cmbs silty clay is mottled with white
(calcium carbonate)

rp52

negative

90% short grass, 0-20
yucca

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay 0%

no comments

1-132

rp53

negative

100% short grass 0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay 0%

very compact silty loam mottled with white. Still flat
parcel.

1-132

rp53

negative

N/A

20-25

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay 0%

ended at clay

1-132

tn61

negative

100% short
grass and leaf
litter

0-20

10YR4/3

brown

sandy
loam

15%

nearly flat ridge-top about 20m NE of a stock tank; no
surface visibility through knee-high grass; several
hardwoods with 20m radius; no recovery

1-132

tn61

negative

N/A

20-40

10YR4/3

brown

sandy
loam

20%

no recovery; terminated due to carbonate nodule layer

1-132

wh54

negative

N/A

20-30

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

clay/silty 0%
clay

20-25

%Gravels Comments

hard clay/silty clay at 20cm. No recovery

Page 51 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-132

wh54

negative

sparse grass
ankle high

0-20

7.5YR4/4

brown

silty clay less than
5%

gentle slope with creek to the W. Long grass
20%GSV. Dry humic layer approx 8cm

1-132

wh55

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR3/3

dark brown

silty clay 0%

clay terminated at 40. CaCO3 appearing with gravels.
Less than 10cm fewer than 25% gravels. No artifacts.

1-132

wh55

negative

ankle high grass 0-20

7.5YR5/3

brown

silty clay 0%

gentle slope, GSV 30%, sunflowers, mesquite. 010cm, 10-35cm DK brown compact silty sand

1-132

wh56

negative

edge of cattle pen 0-20

7.5YR4/4

brown

silty clay 0%

last 75m to the N was bypassed due to cattle pen
(camera C photo 10 and 11) This unit is probably
eroded due to cattle activity

1-135

ks61

negative

N/A

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

?

less than
5%

ST terminated because of hard brown clay at 40cm.
No recovery

1-135

ks61

negative

dead grass,trees, 0-20
plant thickets
90%

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

?

5%

no slope, 10% visibility. No recovery

1-135

ks62

negative

N/A

7.5YR4/3

brown

clay
5%
loam-clay

high in CaCO3. ST terminated because of dark brown
clay at 35cm. No recovery

1-135

ks62

negative

dead grass,
0-20
sunflowers, trees
95%

7.5YR4/3

brown

clay loam 5%

no slope, 5% visibility, high in CaCO3 (25% of
sediment) no recovery

20-40

20-35

%Gravels Comments

Page 52 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-135

ks63

negative

N/A

20-30

7.5YR4/3

brown

clay

less than
5%

1-135

ks63

negative

dead grass,
0-20
sunflowers 100%

7.5YR4/3

brown

clay loam 5%

no slope, no visibility, some traces of CaCO3 (1-5%)
no recovery

1-135

ks64

negative

dead grass,
sunflowers,
mesquite 90%

0-20

7.5YR4/3

brown

clay loam 5%

no slope, 10% visibility. No recovery

1-135

ks64

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/3

brown

clay

small amounts of CaCO3 present. ST terminated
because of hard dark brown clay. No recovery.

1-135

ss48

negative

30% short grass, 0-40
some bare
patches

7.5YR4/3

brown

sandy
5%
clay loam

tall mesquite. Flat surface. CaCO3 pockets starting at
20-30cm. No cultural material observed.

1-135

ss48

negative

N/A

40-50

7.5YR4/3

brown

clay

no comments

1-135

ss49

negative

95% loose dead
grass

0-30

7.5YR4/3

brown

sandy
3%
clay loam

mesquite. Flat. Same as SS48. no cultural material
observed.

1-135

ss49

negative

N/A

30-40

7.5YR4/3

brown

clay

no comments

5%

0%

0%

ST terminated because of hard dark brown clay at
30cm. No recovery

Page 53 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-135

ss50

negative

1-136

jk10

1-136

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

50% short grass, 0-10
small bushes

7.5YR4/3

brown

sandy
clay

70%

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/3

brown

silty loam less than
1%

soil pretty homogeneous. Small, rounded gravels
continue in very small quantities. No cultural material.

jk10

negative

N/A

40-50

7.5YR4/3

brown

silty loam less than
1%

soil continues the same as above. No cultural material.

1-136

jk10

negative

100% dead
grasses

0-20

7.5YR4/3

brown

silty
loam,
slightly
sandy

very little slope to surface. No surface visibility, area
covered in grasses, forbs, sparse mesquite, prickly
pear, less than 1% small, rounded gravels in matrix.
No cultural material.

1-136

jk11

negative

100% dead
grasses

0-20

7.5YR4/3

brown

1-136

jk11

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

silty
0%
loam (1520cmbs
mottled
with clay
clay loam 0%

very little slope to surface. Surface covered with
grasses, forbs, sparse mesquite, prickly pear. Soil very
cloddy and dry near surface. Silty loam but mottled
with clay loam at 15-20cmbs. No inclusions. No
cultural material
mottling continues to 20-25cmbs with clay loam
becoming dominant. Couple of small gravels.
Terminated due to presence of hard clay (presume old)

1-136

kf55

negative

95% grass field

0-30

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

compact
sandy
loam

STP offset 30m W of CR2127, possible disturbed due
to CaCO3 at 20cmbs. 10% surface visibility and zero
artifacts unearthed and two track runs parallel to the
W 5m.

1-136

kf55

negative

N/A

30-40

7.5YR4/3

brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

less than
1%

10%

STP terminated due to high density of gravel and
stones approx. 10cm wide. CaCO3 present. Slight
decline to the W; slight incline to E. No cultural
material observed.

no comments

Page 54 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-136

kf56

negative

95% grass field

0-30

7.5YR4/3

brown

sandy
clay

5%

1-136

kf57

negative

95% grass field

0-40

7.5YR4/3

brown

compact 0%
sandy
clay loam

1-136

pb49

negative

thick long grass

0-20

10YR3/4

less than
dark yellowish brown sandy
loam clay 5%

no slope, no surface visibility, next to brush pile, hit
CaCO3 at 10cm

1-136

pb49

negative

N/A

40-50

10YR3/4

less than
dark yellowish brown sandy
loam clay 5%

disturbed due to two-track running parallel to STP.
Terminated due to CaCO3

1-136

pb49

negative

N/A

20-40

10YR3/4

dark yellowish brown sandy
loam

less than
5%

no comments

1-136

pb50

negative

long grass,
sunflower

0-20

10YR3/4

dark yellowish brown sandy
loam

less than
5%

no slope, less than 5% surface visibility. Near fallen
tress approx. 5m W and 1m S.

1-136

pb50

negative

N/A

40-60

10YR3/4

0%
dark yellowish brown sandy
loam clay

terminated due to CaCO3

1-136

pb50

negative

N/A

20-40

10YR3/4

dark yellowish brown sandy
0%
loam clay

no comments

very compact sandy clay loam with 30% surface
visibility and zero artifacts associated with STP.

very compact sandy clay loam with traces of CaCO3,
some surface visibility: about 25%. Zero artifacts
associated with STP.

Page 55 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-14

jk02

positive

N/A

20-40

7.5YR5/4

brown

sandslightly
damp

0%

very sparse roots. Unidentified metal fragment at abou
30cmbs. Soil is homogenous sand.

1-14

jk02

negative

100% oak leaves 0-20

7.5YR5/4

brown

sandslightly
damp

0%

on dune covered with shin oaks, thick layer of leaves
on surface. Near surface scatter of recent historic trash
glass, metal- no cultural material subsurface. Roots in
upper 20cm

1-14

jk02

negative

N/A

60-70

7.5YR5/4

brown

sandslightly
damp

0%

soil is homogeneous sand; no inclusions, no cultural
material

1-14

jk02

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR5/4

brown

sandslightly
damp

0%

homogenous sand- no cultural material.

1-14

kf02

positive

30%

0-70

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown sandy
loam

15%

1 glass shard associated with STP, with whiteware
scattered on surface. No visible structure associated
with artifacts. Located 60m East of Highway 70 in a
grassy field.

1-14

kf02

negative

N/A

70-80

5YR4/6

yellowish red

0%

no comments

1-14

kf03

negative

high grass with
mesquite

0-50

10YR3/4

dark yellowish brown compact
sandy
loam

0%

STP is located 60m E of drainage ditch, with high
grass and mesquite trees

1-14

kf03

negative

N/A

50-60

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

0%

no comments

clay

sandy
clay

Page 56 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-14

kf04

negative

N/A

40-50

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

1-14

kf04

negative

high grass field
with mesquite

0-40

7.5YR4/4

brown

compact
sandy
loam

75%

STP located 35m SE of standing historic structure,
zero artifact recovered. High grass with mesquite trees

1-14

kf05

negative

grassy field

0-20

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
loam

10%

open grassy field with a transmission generator station
100m SE of STP.

1-14

kf05

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

clay

0%

no comments

1-14

kf06

negative

grassy field with 0-30
mesquite

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
5%
clay loam

open grassy field with 40% surface visibility. No
artifacts.

1-14

kf07

negative

open grassy field 0-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

open grassy field with 20% surface visibility. No
artifacts.

1-14

kf51

positive

34%

0-30

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown sandy
loam

0%

1 small glass shard found in first 30cm of STP

1-14

kf51

negative

N/A

30-60

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown sandy
loam

0%

no comments

%Gravels Comments

Page 57 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-14

kf51

negative

N/A

60-70

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay

0%

no comments

1-14

kf52

positive

30%

0-50

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown sandy
loam

10%

1 ceramic door knob and one glass shard found @
40cmbs

1-14

kf52

negative

N/A

50-60

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

0%

no comments

1-14

kf53

negative

grassy with thick 0-100
brush

10YR5/4

yellowish brown

sandy

0%

STP is located 20m S of positive AS-2, zero artifacts
recovered from AS-3. Possible boundary at historic
site.

1-14

ks11

negative

N/A

60-80

5YR5/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

more clumps of reddish brown sandy clay loam.
Shovel test TN 14 10m to the west. Shovel test JK2
10m to the south.

1-14

ks11

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

sand

less than
5%

at 60cm clumps of reddish brown sand, clay loam
starts appearing; no recovery

1-14

ks11

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

sand

less than
5%

no change in soil

1-14

ks11

negative

dead grass,
leaves, small
shrubs

0-20

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

sand

less than
5%

0% slope, 20% visibility. Scatter of rusted cans, glass
jars, and possible oil barrels, mattress springs, a
bucket, and vehicle exhaust pipe. All southwest of ST
KS11.

Page 58 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-14

ss02

negative

N/A

50-60

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay

0%

no comments

1-14

ss02

negative

60%

0-50

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown sandy
loam

5%

STP approx. 5m W of vehicle trail and approx. 30m S
of slight incline. No cultural material observed.

1-14

ss03

negative

5%

0-80

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown sandy
loam

0%

STP in open, grassy field. No cultural material
observed.

1-14

ss04

negative

7%

0-40

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown sandy
loam

11%

round, smooth stones present (ranging from 1-3cm.)
Electric power station approx. 50m SE of STP. No
cultural material observed.

1-14

ss04

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay

0%

no comments

1-14

ss05

negative

short grass

0-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
3%
clay loam

very compact silty clay loam. No cultural material
observed.

1-14

ss06

negative

waist-high grass 0-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
3%
clay loam

STP on slight slope. Standing structures approx. 100150m to the W. no cultural material observed.

1-14

tn14

negative

N/A

7.5YR 5/4

brown

sand

no recovery

20-40

None

Page 59 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-14

tn14

negative

100% leaf litter

0-20

7.5YR4/2 and 7.5YR5/4 brown

sandy
less than
loam and 10%
sand

10% slope on the Historic Trash Scatter; no recovery;
change in soil at 10-15cm

1-14

tn14

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR 5/4

brown

sand

None

no recovery

1-14

tn14

negative

N/A

60-80

7.5YR 5/4

brown

sand

None

no recovery

1-14

tn14

negative

N/A

80-100

7.5YR 5/4

brown

sand

None

no recovery; terminated at 1m; last 20cm contained
compacted accretions of sand that were whiter in color
than the rest

1-16

kf08

negative

grassy field with 0-30
mesquite

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

compact
sandy
loam

0%

grass field with 5% visibility. Zero artifacts found.

1-16

kf08

negative

N/A

30-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

1-16

kf09

negative

N/A

30-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

1-16

kf09

negative

grassy field with 0-30
thick brush

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

sandy
loam

grassy field with thick brush. 10% visibility and zero
artifacts found.

%Gravels Comments

0%

Page 60 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-16

ss07

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay

0%

1-16

ss07

negative

open grassy field 0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
4%
clay loam

crossed over barbed fence then parcel 1-14 about 30m
S. electric post approx 50-100m to E of STP. No
cultural material observed

1-16

ss08

negative

N/A

30-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay

0%

no comments

1-16

ss08

negative

tall grass, 90%
ground cover,
short trees,
prickly pear

0-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

3%

STP 5m S of dead tree. Denser vegetation. Spiny, dead
trees. Electric pole to the E. no cultural material
observed.

1-16

ss09

negative

N/A

30-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay

0%

property fence approx. 50m S and border of parcel 117A. No cultural material observed.

1-16

ss09

negative

tall grass

0-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

0%

1-17A

kf10

negative

grassy field

0-40

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

sandy
loam

0%

moved STP 4m E from original spot due to ant trail
and ant next. Crossed over dry creek approx. 100150m N of STP. Hunting stand to E 50-100m. Small
hunting cage/scale located directly N as well a wellused road by the land owner
grassy field with 10% surface visibility and zero
artifacts found.

1-17A

kf10

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

no comments

Page 61 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-17A

ss10

negative

N/A

30-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay

0%

no comments

1-17A

ss10

negative

short, dry grass

0-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

2%

electric pole approx. 50-100m E. fence and border of
parcel 1-17B approx. 50m S. fallen windmill to the SE
in parcel 1-17B. No cultural material observed.

1-17B

kf11

positive

grassy field

0-30

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

sandy
loam

15%

10% surface visibility with 1 lithic flake found at
20cmbs (debitage)

1-17B

kf11

negative

N/A

30-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

1-17B

ss11

negative

N/A

30-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay

0%

no comments

1-17B

ss11

negative

short grass

0-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

60%

higher concentration of gravel at 10cm depth.
Household to NE of STP. No cultural material
observed.

1-18

kf12

negative

dirt field with
yucca plants

0-30

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

compact
sandy
loam

10%

open dirt field with 80% surface visibility and zero
artifacts found

1-18

kf12

negative

N/A

30-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

Page 62 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-18

kf13

negative

dirt field with
brush

0-80

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown sandy
loam

0%

30% surface visibility and zero artifacts found

1-18

kf13

negative

N/A

80-100

7.5YR3/3

dark brown

compact
sandy
loam

0%

no comments

1-18

ss12

negative

N/A

10-30

5YR4/3

reddish brown

clay

0%

very compact

1-18

ss12

negative

patched grass

0-10

7.5YR4/4

brown

compact
coarse
sandy
clay

2%

plowzone 0-10cm. Compact. 55% visibility. No
cultural material observed.

1-2

cg01

negative

N/A

30-40

10YR2/1

black

clay

0%

dark clay (10YR2/1) no artifacts

1-2

cg01

negative

50%

0-10

10YR4/2

dark grayish brown

sandy/cla 0%
y

dark brown sandy clay soil, no artifacts, 50-75%
surface visibility 5% slope

1-2

cg01

negative

N/A

20-30

2.5YR3/6

orange/red

sandy/cla 0%
y

orange/red (2.5YR3/6 sand clay transition to dark,
almost black clay (10YR2/1) no artifacts

1-2

cg02

negative

90%

0-20

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
0%
clay/clay

20-30% slope, 10% surface visibility orange/red sandy
clay no artifacts

Page 63 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-2

cg03

negative

N/A

40-50

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
clay

5%

no artifacts, orange/red sandy soil orange/red clay

1-2

cg03

negative

75%

0-20

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sand

5%

0% slope, 10-15% surface visibility no artifacts,
orange/red sandy soil

1-2

cg03

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sand

5%

no artifacts, orange/red sandy soil

1-2

cg04

negative

90%

0-20

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sand

5%

0% slope, 5-10%surface visibility no artifacts,
orange/red sandy soil

1-2

cg04

negative

N/A

40-60

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
clay

5%

no artifacts, orange/red sandy soil to orange/red clay

1-2

cg04

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sand

5%

no artifacts, orange/red sandy soil

1-2

wh01

negative

low grass
exposes soil

0-20

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

sandy
15%
clay loam

gentle slope 5-10 degrees, 50% visibility, no artifacts
visible on surface or artifacts a few large gravels
(+10cm) non-cultural

1-2

wh01

negative

N/A

20-35

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

sandy
5%
clay loam

soils 0-12cm plow zone with some mottling (a pale
yellow amorphous dime-size smear) 7.5YR3/4 dark
brown sandy clay loam

Page 64 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-2

wh01

negative

N/A

25-35

5YR3/4

dark yellowish brown clay

0%

12-25 7.5YR3/4 sandy clay loam, 25-35 5YR3/4 dark
reddish brown sandy clay loam and clay

1-2

wh02

negative

low grass
exposes soil

0-30

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
loam

10%

HS backside of hill 10 degree slop (the ridgetop
between wh1 and wh2 we walked over, lots of
gravels. This ST is probably the gravel washed down
fom the RT to the West.

1-2

wh02

negative

N/A

30-35

5YR 3/4

dark reddish brown

silty
0%
clay/clay

very compact

1-2

wh03

negative

?

20-30

2.5YR5/6

red

moist
5%
course
clay loam

loose soil throughout until indistinct boundary at
35cmbs

1-2

wh03

negative

?

30-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay
0%
loam/clay

flat base of N/S slope (bench-like)

1-2

wh03

negative

?

0-20

2.5YR5/6

red with mottling

loose dry 10%
sandy
clay loam

surface is short grass covered with some sparse woody
plants

1-2

wh04

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/6

yellowish red

moist
0%
sandy
clay loam

soil became more moist as the unit went down and the
sandy portion became more coarse

1-2

wh04

negative

low grass with
sparse 2ft grass
clumps

0-20

7.5YR4/4

brown

silty sand 5%

flat. Approximately 50 yards west of frencline 1-3,
50% surface visibility. Loose topsoil. No artifacts

Page 65 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-2

wh04

negative

N/A

40-70

5YR3/4

reddish brown

very
0%
compact
clay loam

1-20

cg13

negative

N/A

40-60

10YR4/6

dark yellowish brown sand

5-10%

no artifacts, sandy soil continues

1-20

cg13

negative

75%

0-20

10YR4/6

dark yellowish brown sand

5-10%

15-25% slope, 15% surface visibility. No artifacts

1-20

cg13

negative

N/A

20-40

10YR4/6

dark yellowish brown sand

5-10%

no artifacts, sandy soil continues

1-20

cg13

negative

N/A

60-70

10YR4/6

dark yellowish brown sand

5-10%

no artifacts, sandy soil continues further below 70cm

1-20

cg14

negative

N/A

20-40

10YR4/6

dark yellowish brown sand

5-10%

no artifacts, sandy soil

1-20

cg14

negative

N/A

40-60

10YR4/6 and 2.5YR3/6 dark yellowish
sand
brown and 2.5YR3/6

5%

no artifacts, 10YR4/6 color soil grading into 2.5YR3/6

1-20

cg14

negative

N/A

60-70

10YR4/6 and 2.5YR3/6 dark yellowish
sandy
brown and 2.5YR3/6 clay

0%

no artifacts, sandy soil becoming more clay-like

interface at clay was distinct

Page 66 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-20

cg14

negative

75%

0-20

10YR4/6

dark yellowish brown sand

10%

10-15% slope, 15% surface visibility, no artifacts

1-20

pb08

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR6/3

light brown

sandy

0%

no comments

1-20

pb08

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy

20-30%

lots of smaller gravel

1-20

pb08

negative

brush

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy

30%

15% slope, 80% surface visibility

1-20

pb09

negative

trees leaves grass 0-20

10YR3/3

dark brown

sandy

0%

ground covered with leaves and short grass. Soil
clump. 0% slope

1-20

pb09

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy

0%

soil clumpy

1-20

pb09

negative

N/A

40-60

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy

0%

soil much finer

1-20

rc01

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay

2%

negative

Page 67 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-20

rc01

negative

20%

0-20

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

1%

10% slope; 20% visibility, negative, grasses and trees

1-20

rc02

negative

N/A

60-80

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay

20%

negative

1-20

rc02

negative

20%

0-20

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

0%

0% slope, 10% visibility, no recovery

1-20

rc02

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

5%

negative

1-20

rc02

negative

N/A

40-60

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay loam 5%

negative

1-20

rp09

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
5%
clay loam

no comments

1-20

rp09

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

1-20

rp09

negative

50% tall grass

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
5%
clay loam

just W of existing N-S transmission line. Dead
mesquite, sunflowers, and grass. Dark reddish-brown
sandy damp loose soil.

Page 68 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-20

rp09

negative

N/A

60+

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay

0%

no comments

1-20

rp10

negative

N/A

60-80

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sand

5%

no comments

1-20

rp10

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sand

5%

no comments

1-20

rp10

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sand

5%

no comments

1-20

rp10

negative

100% tufts of
grass

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sand

5%

flat ground, thorny bushes, yucca, and tufts of native
grasses. Very deep sand deposits ending in wet and
compact clay

1-20

rp10

negative

N/A

80+

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay

0%

no comments

1-20

rp29

negative

N/A

60-80

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

1-20

rp29

negative

60% grass

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

fewer than 200m from last point on transect since it's
the last point and we squeezed in one more in good
faith whilst waiting for rest of crew. Loose sandy clay
loam--damp

Page 69 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-20

rp29

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

1-20

rp29

negative

N/A

80+

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay

0%

no comments

1-20

rp29

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

1-20

wh12

negative

low grass

0-20

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

clay/silty 0%
clay

slight humic layer, flat, grassy ground over 10%
visibility no artifacts

1-20

wh13

negative

low grass, mixed 0-20
hardwood shrubs

5YR4/6

yellowish red

compact 0%
clay/silty
clay

slight humic layer; dirt two track road 5m to the S,
clay bed. 10% visibility; no artifacts

1-22

pb14

negative

grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

0%

5% slope. 70% surface visibility

1-22

pb14

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

0%

no comments

1-22

pb14

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

0%

no comments

%Gravels Comments

Page 70 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-22

pb15

negative

grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

?

?

50% surface visibility. No slope

1-22

pb15

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

?

?

no comments

1-22

pb15

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR4/6

yellowish red

?

?

no comments

1-22

pb15

negative

N/A

60-75

5YR4/6

yellowish red

?

?

no comments

1-22

pb16

negative

patchy grass

0-20

5YR 5/8

yellowish red

sandy
clay

30%

0% slope. 20% surface visibility. Clay at 20cm

1-22

wh19

negative

ankle-high
grassy field

0-20

5YR5/8

brown

compact 30%
silty clay
loam

4cm humic later with gravel lens just below. Compact
silty clay throughout. High visibility about 80%.
Aeoliar deflation

1-22

wh19

negative

N/A

20-35

5YR5/8

yellowish brown

compact greater
clay/clay than 5%
loam

compact silty clay/clay loam hard interface at 25cmbs

1-22

wh20

negative

sparse low grass 0-20

5YR4/6

dark reddish brown

compact
silty
sandy
clay

flat surface, large blowout (150m E/W 300 N/S) to the
East outside ROW. 80% visibility short grass open
field.

greater
than 5%

Page 71 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-22

wh20

negative

N/A

20-40

?

?

compact

0%

1-22

wh21

negative

sparse grass

0-20

5YR4/6

dark reddish brown

clay/silty 20% less highly eroded clay/silty clay surface. 50% visibility,
clay
than 10cm drainage with histroric scatter about 30m North
terminated at 20cmbs

1-23

pb17

negative

patchy grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

1-23

wh22

negative

clumpy grass

0-20

5YR4/6

dark reddish brown

wet
0%
clay/sand
y clay

low spot on N/E corner of pulloff 0% visibility on
surface, no artifacts

1-24

wh23

negative

terraced grassy

0-20

5YR4/6

dark reddish brown

wet
less than
sandy
5%
clay/clay

pulloff site, North end, gentle terraced slop, clay at
surface, no recovery.

1-25

pb18

negative

N/A

20-40

10YR3/3

dark brown

sandy
clay

0%

change in soil composition

1-25

pb18

negative

N/A

40-60

?

?

sandy
clay

0%

no comments

1-25

pb18

negative

N/A

60-75

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
clay

0%

no comments

0%

compact soil throughout, interface was not distinct but
at about 35cmbs

40%? Gravels 5m south. Clay, terracing, pull site

Page 72 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-25

pb18

negative

grass

0-20

?

?

sandy
clay

0%

1-25

wh24

negative

sparse grass

0-15

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

silty sand less than
30%

15-20 degree slop, 70% surface visibility, lots of
erosion, ie surface gravels from peasize to 10cm

1-25

wh24

negative

N/A

15-25

5YR5/6

yellowish red

sandy
less than
clay and 5%
clay loam

abrupt interface between the upper subsoil
(plowzone?) evidence in field of past terracing, berms
are low..

1-25

wh25

negative

ankle-high grass 0-75

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown silty sand less than
10%

10 degree slope, 20% surface visibility, lots of topsoil
(deep) and less than 10cm pebbles to pea-sized

1-25

wh25

negative

N/A

75-80

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
and clay

less than
5%

abrupt interface at 75cmbs, no artifacts recovered

1-25

wh26

negative

N/A

0-50

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
clay

less than
5%

flat area, 40% surface visibility. Sparse (20m apart)
juniper. Ankle-high grass.

1-26

pb19

negative

N/A

20-35

5YR 4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

30%

terminated due to CaCO3

1-26

pb19

negative

gravel grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

?

30%

10% slope. 10% surface visibility. Covered in small
gravel (less than 5cm)

30% surface visibility. 20% slope.

Page 73 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-26

pb20

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
clay

0%

no comments

1-26

pb20

negative

patchy grass and 0-20
gravel

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
clay

15%

0% slope. 20% surface visibility. Next to draw.

1-26

pb20

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
clay

0%

no comments

1-26

pb21

negative

patchy grass

0-20

5YR5/8

yellowish red

sandy
clay

0%

80% surface visibility. Compact clay 20cm deep. 10%
slope.

1-26

rc08

negative

grass 80%

0-100

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sand

0%

5% slope. 20% surface visibility. Negative. Grass and
low shrubs

1-26

rc09

negative

grass 80%

0-20

2.5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

sand
loam

5%

45% slope. 25% surface visibility. Negative. Grass
and low shrubs

1-26

rc09

negative

grass 80%

20-40

5YR4/3

reddish brown

sand

20%

negative

1-26

rc09

negative

grass 80%

40-60

5YR4/3

reddish brown

sand

80%

large gravels. Negative

Page 74 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-26

tn20

negative

100% leaf litter

0-20

7.5YR3/3

dark brown

sandy
loam,
sandy
clay

less than
5%

flat; fp; area moderated wooded with hardwood trees;
humic layer very dry; no recovery; soil change occurs
at about 12cm

1-26

tn20

negative

N/A

20-28

2.5YR2.5/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
clay

less than
5%

no recovery; terminated due to reaching compact subsoil clay layer

1-26

tn21

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/3

brown

wet sand almost
none

no recovery

1-26

tn21

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR4/3

brown

wet sand less than
5%

no recovery; gravel content increases with depth

1-26

tn21

negative

N/A

60-80

7.5YR4/3

brown

wet sand 5-10%

no recovery; gravel content continues to increase with
depth

1-26

tn21

negative

N/A

80-83

2.5YR2.5/4

dark reddish brown

wet
sandy
clay

almost
none

no recovery; terminated due to reaching sub-soil clay.
(clay wetter here than elsewhere)

1-26

tn21

negative

30% knee-high
grass

0-20

7.5YR4/3

brown

wet sand almost
none

flat; fp; clearing surrounded on all sides by hardwood
trees; sand extremely wet; no recovery

1-26

wh14

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

?

no artifacts

?

Page 75 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-26

wh14

negative

sparse grass

0-20

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

loose
silty
sand

less than
5%

20% slope, surface visibility is 80%. Very eroded
hilltop 30m to the west.

1-26

wh14

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR4/6

yellowish red

compact
sandy
clay

0%

strong interface@ 44cmbs

1-26

wh26

negative

?

50-55

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

clay and 0%
clay loam

very compact at 40 mottled clay with some 2.5YR3/4
(approx. 20%) intermixed

1-26

wh27

negative

?

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sand and ?
clay

FP area is a serries of arroyos for about 50m N/S. clay
at surface. Very eroded.

1-28

ss13

negative

70% waist high 0-35
bushes- low grass

2.5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

1%

associated with historic scatter (15m east). East of
slight incline. About 15m W of electric post. No
cultural material observed in STP

1-28

wh15

negative

sparse woody

0-20

7.5YR4/4

brown

compact
sand
easily
sifted

5%

associated with historic scatter #1. slight hilltop near
historic scatter, E/W fenceline about 25m to the S.
90% visibility, no artifacts.

1-28

wh15

negative

N/A

20-35

2.5YR 4/4

reddish brown

1-31

cg17

negative

N/A

20-40

10YR5/3

brown

compact ?
sand
easily
sifted,
clay
silty sand less than
5%

interface was strong at 30

continued concentration of CaCO3- 25-30%. No
artifacts.

Page 76 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-31

cg17

negative

25% short grass

0-20

10YR5/3

brown

silty sand less than
5%

30% slope, 75% surface visibility. Shovel test at
presence of FCR. High concentration of CaCO3-- 1520%continued concentration of CaCO3--25-30%. No
artifacts

1-31

cg18

negative

90% mix of
shrubs

40-50

10YR5/3

brown

sandy
0%
silty loam

no artifacts. CaCO3 less than 5%

1-31

cg18

negative

90% mix of
shrubs

0-20

10YR5/3

brown

sandy
0%
silty loam

10% slope, 10% surface visibility. Small clots of
darker soil. No artifacts.

1-31

cg18

negative

90% mix of
shrubs

20-40

10YR5/3

brown

sandy
0%
silty loam

darker soil than previous level. No artifacts. Small
concentration of CaCO3 less than 5%

1-31

cg19

negative

95% knee-high
grass

20-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

silty clay 0%
loam

no artifacts. Moist soil

1-31

cg19

negative

95% knee-high
grass

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

silty clay 0%
loam

0% slope, 5% surface visibility. No artifacts. Moist soi

1-31

jk03

negative

100% dead
grasses

0-20

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

slightly
moist
sandy
loam

30%
caliche
gravels

relatively flat area covered with dead grasses and
forbs, some juniper, mesquite. Fist-sized caliche
gravels almost immediately below surface. No cultural
material.

1-31

jk03

negative

N/A

20-25

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

slightly
moist
sandy
loam

50%
caliche
gravels

no cultural material. Terminated at 25cmbs due to
large caliche gravels.

Page 77 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-31

jk04

negative

100% dead
grasses

0-20

7.5YR3/3

dark brown

slightly
moist
sandy
loam

0%

surface slopes gently down to east. Sparse mesquite,
dead grasses, juniper, yucca. No inclusions, no
cultural material

1-31

jk04

negative

N/A

40-50

7.5YR3/3

dark brown

slightly
moist
sandy
loam

about 1%
above
50cmbs

no inclusions. No cultural material. Terminated at
50cmbs due to hitting caliche.

1-31

jk04

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR3/3

dark brown

slightly
moist
sandy
loam

less than
1%

no inclusions. No cultural material

1-31

kf14

negative

90% dirt w/10% 0-40
grass

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown sandy
loam

20%

80% surface visibility with CaCO3 at 40cmbs and
zero artifacts found

1-31

kf15

negative

grassy
0-40
w/mesquite 70%

10YR3/2

very dark grayish
brown

compact
sandy
loam

40%

40% surface visibility with CaCO3 at 40cmbs and
zero artifacts found

1-31

kf16

negative

N/A

60-70

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

sandy
?
clay loam

1-31

kf16

negative

N/A

50-60

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown sandy
loam

?

no comments

1-31

kf16

negative

open grassy area 0-30
30%

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown compact
sandy
loam

0%

70% surface visibility with clay at 70cmbs and zero
artifacts found

no comments

Page 78 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-31

ks13

negative

N/A

40-50

7.5YR6/4

light brown

sandy silt 5-10%
loam

ST KS13 terminated due to high CaCO3 content, no
recovery

1-31

ks13

negative

knee-high
0-20
shrubs, dead
grass, short trees
75%

7.5YR6/4

light brown

sandy silt 10%
loam

10% slope, 20% visibility, high in CaCO3- 10% of
sediment, no recovery

1-31

ks13

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR6/4

light brown

sandy silt 10%
loam

sediment increasing in CaCO3 content (10-25%), no
recovery

1-31

ks14

negative

N/A

60-67

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
less than
silty loam 5%

small amount of CaCO3 present. No recovery

1-31

ks14

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
less than
silty loam 5%

no recovery

1-31

ks14

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
less than
silty loam 5%

no recovery

1-31

ks14

negative

dead grass, short 0-20
trees 80%

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
less than
silty loam 5%

0% slope. 10% visibility. No recovery

1-31

ks15

negative

N/A

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

clay

terminated due to dark brown clay at 20cm; no
recovery

20-30

%Gravels Comments

?

Page 79 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-31

ks15

negative

dead brush and
mesquite trees
95%

0-20

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

sandy
less than
clay loam 5%

0% slope, 5% visibility; no recovery

1-31

pb11

negative

patchy grass

0-20

10YR6/3

pale brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

15m N of FCR scatter #2. 0% slope. 95% visibility

1-31

pb12

negative

N/A

20-40

10YR3/2

very dark grayish
brown

sandy
loam

0%

terminated due to CaCO3

1-31

pb12

negative

grass, cacti

0-20

10YR3/2

very dark grayish
brown

sandy
loam

0%

no slope or visibility

1-31

pb13

negative

N/A

40-50

10YR3/1

very dark gray

sandy
clay

?

no comments

1-31

pb13

negative

N/A

20-40

10YR3/1

very dark gray

sandy
loam

?

no comments

1-31

pb13

negative

tall grass

0-20

10YR3/6

dark yellowish brown sandy
loam

0%

no slope or visibility

1-31

ss14

negative

70% knee-high
sparse grass SE
of short bush

0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

0%

20m W of property fence. Top of slight hill. Open
grass field with sparse shoulder high (5'3") bushes.
Heavily terraced. No cultural material observed.
Associated with 2 ceramic sherds on surface.

clay

%Gravels Comments

Page 80 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-31

tn15

negative

N/A

60-70

7.5YR5/4

brown

loamy
sand

almost
none

terminated once soil stopped having potential for FCR
and I could no longer reach bottom. 80m S/SE of FCR
scatter #2

1-31

tn15

negative

80% oak leaf
litter

0-20

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
loam

less than
10%

10% RT; pin-oak and cedars in area but not heavily
wooded; top 10cm soil is very dry and compact; no
recovery

1-31

tn15

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR5/4

brown

loamy
sand

less than
5%

no recovery; soil change occurs 15-22cm

1-31

tn15

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR5/4

brown

loamy
sand

less than
5%

less and less gravel; but small quartz pebbles; no
recovery

1-31

tn16

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

very
compact
sandy
loam

5%

soil very hard- but not as hard as at surface; no
recovery

1-31

tn16

negative

N/A

40-56

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

sandy
loam

less than 5 at about 50cm, soil became looser, lighter in color and
began to see many carbonates; no recovery; terminated
due to degraded bedrock

1-31

tn16

negative

95% short knee- 0-20
high grass

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

very
compact
sandy
loam

10%

rt; flat; area contains moderate cedar coverage; no
recovery

1-31

tn17

negative

95% short and
shoulder-high
grass

7.5YR3/3

dark brown

sandy
loam

almost
none

rt; flat; area sparsely covered with mesquite with kneeshoulder high and short grasses; no recovery

0-20

Page 81 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-31

tn17

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR3/3

dark brown

sandy
loam

almost
none

no recovery

1-31

tn17

negative

N/A

40-52

7.5YR2.5/3

very dark brown

sandy
clay

almost
none

no recovery; small nodules (less than 1cm) of
carbonates mixed in with clay; terminated due to subsoil clay layer

1-31

wh16

negative

almost barren

?

2.5YR4/6

red

loose
surface,
compact
depth

?

top of slight, wide hill, heavily terraced, 90%
visibility, ankle high grasses, with cedar mix/thorny
hardwood shrub.. Very sparse. 5m NW of 2 ceramic
sherds on surface

1-37A

cg16

negative

N/A

40-60

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

dry
sandy
loam

less than
5%

no artifacts. Continues sparse presence of CaCO3

1-37A

cg16

negative

N/A

60-70

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

dry
sandy
loam

0%

no artifacts. CaCO3 specks. Specks of dark soil
2.5YR5/1

1-37A

cg16

negative

50% short grass

0-20

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

dry
sandy
loam

20%

10-15% slope, 50% surface visibility. Modern trash:
metal fragments, glass

1-37A

cg16

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

dry
sandy
loam

less than
5%

no artifacts at this level. Presence of CaCO3 in soil

1-37A

ks12

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

no recovery

Page 82 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-37A

ks12

negative

yucca, dead
grass 75%

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

5% slope, 25% visibility, no recovery

1-37A

ks12

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

10-15%

10-15% gravel at 50-60cm, caliche filaments at 30cm,
no recovery

1-37A

ks12

negative

N/A

60-65

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

10-15%

terminated due to presence of caliche gravels

1-37A

pb10

negative

patchy grass

0-50

7.5YR4/3

brown

compact
sandy
loam

15%

5% slope. 90% visibility. Terminated due to CaCO3

1-4

cg05

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
clay

0%

no artifacts, sandy 10YR3/4 grades into clay 2.5YR3/4

1-4

cg05

negative

100%

0-20

10YR3/4

dark yellowish brown sand

0%

less than 5% slope, 0% surface visibility. No artifacts

1-4

cg06

negative

100%

0-20

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sand

5%

no artifacts, sandy orange/red soil 0%surface visibility

1-4

cg06

negative

N/A

30-40

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
clay

0%

no artifacts, sandy orange/red soil grades to orange/red
clay soil

Page 83 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-4

wh05

negative

N/A

30-35

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

compact 0%
silty sand

1-4

wh05

negative

ankle high grass 0-30

7.5YR4/4

dark yellowish brown loose
sandy
loam

5%

gentle slope

1-4

wh06

negative

ankle to knee
high grass

0-25

7.5YR4/4

dark yellowish brown sandy
compact
coarse

5%

flat area (bench) out S/W side of hill. Low visibility o
ground surface (poor, maybe 5/10%) no artifacts

1-4

wh06

negative

N/A

25-30

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

compact 0%
silty
clay/clay

very hard interface this parcel may have been deep
disk plowed at some time in the past.

1-4

wh07

negative

knee-high grass

0-10

2.5YR4/6

red

clay

5%

slight slope to the S, 70% grass-covered, 30%
visibility, no artifacts

1-42

rc03

negative

100% low grass

0-20

5YR4/3

reddish brown

clay

0%

parallel highway. 20% surface visibility. 0% slope.
Negative. Low grasses and small trees.

1-42

rc04

negative

100% low grass

0-20

5YR4/3

reddish brown

siltly clay 0%

parallel highway. 20% surface visibility. 0% slope.
Negative.

1-42

rc04

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/3

reddish brown

siltly clay 0%

negative

very hard interface @30cmbs coarse sandy clay/clay

Page 84 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-42

rc04

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay

0%

negative

1-42

rc05

negative

N/A

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay

0%

paralleling highway. 20% surface visibility. 0% slope.
Cow rest spot. Negative

1-42

wh17

negative

N/A

20-27

5YR4/3

reddish brown

silty
?
clay,
clay/silty
clay

10-12ft tall hardwood, scrubby growth every 5m
(spread spart)

1-42

wh17

negative

knee high sparse 0-20
grass

5YR4/3

reddish brown

compact 0%
througho
ut unit

very flat, lots of modern road garbage. 20% GSV. No
artifacts collected

1-42

wh18

negative

N/A

5YR4/3

reddish brown

silty clay ?
(compact)
, silty
clay/clay

soil was very homogeneous, with slight humic layer
over compact soils and subsoils. Hardpack at 30cmbs

1-42

wh18

negative

ankle high grass 0-20
(sparse)

5YR4/3

reddish brown

silty clay ?
(compact)

very flat, 30%GSV, no artifacts collected. Very
shrubby, patchy hardwood 5m intervals

1-44

cg20

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

no artifacts. Soil becomes more loamy.

1-44

cg20

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
less than
clay loam 5%

20-35

less than
5%

no artifacts. Soil becomes more clay.

Page 85 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-44

cg20

negative

90% knee-high
grass

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sand

0%

1-44

cg21

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
15%
clay, clay

no artifacts. CaCO3 granules throughout. Reached
hard clay soil.

1-44

cg21

negative

95% knee-high
grass

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sand

10% slope, 5% surface visibility. No artifacts. Gravel
on surface, moist sandy soil.

1-44

rp11

negative

N/A

20-30

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
10%
clay loam

ended at clay

1-44

rp11

negative

80% short grass

0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
5%
clay loam

field W of 70. Red clay-rich soil with river pebbles.
Flat.

1-44

rp12

negative

80% short grass

0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
10%
clay loam

field W of 70. Red clay-rich soil with river pebbles.
Flat.

1-44

rp12

negative

N/A

20-30

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
10%
clay loam

ended at clay

1-44

rp13

negative

N/A

20-25

2.5YR4/6

red

clay

ended at clay.

15%

15%

5% slope, 10% surface visibility. No artifacts. Moist
sandy soil

Page 86 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-44

rp13

negative

1-45

rp14

1-45

rp14

1-46

Not a s positive

1-47

cg22

1-47

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

100% short grass 0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
15%
clay loam

same reddish sandy clay loam with river pebbles. Flat.

negative

75% short grass

0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
5%
clay loam

flat, just S of a 1m high hill (windbreak? Property
boundary? Terracing?) that runs E-W. Sandy soil has
very high clay content and sparse river pebbles. W of
70.

negative

N/A

20-30

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
clay

5%

stopped at compact clay

10% brush, very surface
short grass

N/A

N/A

N/A

90%

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
less than
clay loam 5%

2 x 2cm ceramic whiteware. Upland area approx. 60m
W of 70. No other artifacts present-- gravel and calich
covers hilltop, along with yucca and mesquite. Large
irregularly shaped blocks of conglomerate (cobbles
and pebbles)(non cultural)
no artifacts. Reached hard clay level

cg22

negative

80% knee-high
grass

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy

1-47

cg23

negative

90% waist-high
grass

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy silt 15%
loam

shovel test near possible historical structure. Historical
structure approx. 20m W of ROW. No artifacts,
garmin point 57

1-47

cg23

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy silt 80%
loam

high concentration of gravel. No artifacts

10%

25% slope, 20% surface visibility, no artifacts. Moist
sandy soil

Page 87 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-5

cg07

negative

N/A

40-50

2.5YR3/6

dark red

clay

less than
5%

no artifacts, reached hard clay at approx. 50cm

1-5

cg07

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
clay

0%

no artifacts, orange/red sandy clay grading to
orange/red clay

1-5

cg07

negative

90%

0-20

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sand

less than
5%

5-10% slope, 10% surface visibility, no artifacts,
parcel 1-4

1-5

cg08

negative

N/A

20-30

2.5YR3/6

dark red

clay

0%

reached hard clay at 30cm, no artifacts

1-5

cg08

negative

50%

0-20

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
clay

0%

10% slope, 50% surface visibility, no artifacts

1-5

cg09

negative

N/A

40-60

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
clay

0%

reached hard clay at approx. 60cm. No artifacts.

1-5

cg09

negative

100%

0-20

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy

0%

no slop, orange/red soil 2.5YR3/6

1-5

cg09

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
clay

0%

orange/red sandy soil grading to orange/red clay soil

Page 88 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-5

cg10

negative

90%

0-20

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sand

less than
5%

no slope, less than 10% surface visibility, no artifacts

1-5

cg10

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sand

less than
5%

presence of orange/red soil 2.5YR3/6. no artifacts

1-5

cg10

negative

N/A

40-50

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
clay

less than
5%

reached 50cm, stopped at hard clay, no artifacts

1-5

cg12

negative

10%

0-15

2.5YR3/6

dark red

clay

0%

found debitage on surface but 10m outside ROW, so
this test was to determine if anything cultural was on
ROW

1-5

wh08

negative

N/A

25-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay
?
loam and
silty clay

1-5

wh08

negative

knee-high grass

0-20

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
clay,
compact
and moist

1-5

wh08

negative

N/A

20-30

7.5YR4/4

brown

compact, ?
moist
sandy
clay

no comments

1-5

wh09

negative

?

0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

loose
0%
silty
sandy
clay loam

no comments

no comments

less than flat rise dropping into plowed field area to the west,
5%
poor surface visibility (5-10%) no artifacts
greater
than 10cm

Page 89 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-5

wh09

negative

N/A

60-75

2.5YR4/6

red

silty
0%
sandy
clay loam

terminated at 75 (end of arm's reach)

1-5

wh09

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/6

red

compact 0%
silty
sandy
clay loam

no comments

1-5

wh09

negative

N/A

40-60

2.5YR4/6

red

compact 0%
silty
sandy
clay loam

no comments

1-5

wh10

negative

tall flat grass

0-20

7.5YR 4/4

brown

1-5

wh10

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR 4/4

brown

loose
upper
5cm,
compact
below
compact
silty
sandy
clay

1-5

wh10

negative

N/A

40-45

2.5YR4/6

red

silty
sandy
clay

1-5

wh11

negative

minimal farm
equipment pkng

0-10

2.5YR 4/6

red

compact 5%
clay
sand/clay
loam

flat, slight humic layer 0-3cm loose soil from
animal/human/farming equipment, below is very
compact sandy clay/sandy clay loam

1-52

ss15

negative

96% visibility.
0-60
Knee-high grass
waist high shrubs

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

approximately 60m S of fence; 15m E of fence. Open
grassy field. Very compact starting at 40cm. Higher
percentage of gravel starting at 50cm. No cultural
material observed.

5%

0 slope. Cow bedding area, very compact uniform
colour and texture throughout level

less than
5% chert
pebbles

same as above

0%

distrinct interface but clay did appear with a slight lens
of sandy clay just at 40cmbs turning into silty hard cla

20%

Page 90 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-52

ss15

negative

N/A

60-70

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

clay

0%

no comments

1-52

ss16

negative

90% visibility.
Short grass

0-40

2.5YR2.5/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

9%

open grassy field. Slight incline to E. fence still 15m to
the W. sparse yucca and mesquite bush. No cultural
material observed.

1-52

ss16

negative

N/A

40-50

2.5YR2.5/4

dark reddish brown

clay

0%

no comments

1-52

tn18

negative

100% knee-high 0-20
grass

7.5YR3/3

dark brown

sandy
less than
loam clay 5%

flat; fp; area sparse in mesquite and yucca coverage;
no recovery

1-52

tn18

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR3/3 dry,
2.5YR2.5/4

dark brown, dark
reddish brown

less than
5%,
almost
none

no recovery; terminated due to hitting compact subsoil clay layer

1-52

tn19

negative

N/A

20-43

7.5YR3/3, 2.5YR2.5/4

dark brown, dark
reddish brown

sandy
loamy
clay,
sandy
clay
sandy
loam,
sandy
clay

less than
5%,
almost
none

no recovery; terminated due to sub-soil clay layer

1-52

tn19

negative

100% knee-high 0-20
grass

7.5YR3/3

dark brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

flat; fp; area sparse in mesquite and yucca coverage;
no recovery

1-52

tn69

negative

100% knee-high 0-20
grass

7.5YR3/4 dry

dark brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

flat; fp; area sparse in mesquite and yucca; no recovery

Page 91 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-52

tn69

negative

N/A

40-45

2.5YR2.5/4 dry

dark reddish brown

sandy
clay

almost
none

no recovery; terminated due to sub-soil clay layer

1-52

tn69

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR3/4 dry, 7.5YR4/6 dark brown, strong
brown

sand

less than
5%

no recovery; soil change occurs at the end of the level

1-53

jk05

negative

N/A

20-30

7.5YR3/3 (20-30cmbs)
and 7.5YR3/2

dark brown

1-5%

thin lens of small gravels at about 20cmbs, mottled
with darker clay at around 20cmbs. More clay with
some CaCO3 filaments at 30cmbs. No inclusions. No
cultural material.

1-53

jk05

negative

100% knee-high 0-20
grasses and forbs

7.5YR3/3

dark brown

slightly
moist,
compact
sandy
loam
moist
sandy
loam

less than
1%

surface is flat, no visibility, grass roots in upper 10cm.
Very few gravels. No inclusions. No cultural material.

1-53

kf21

negative

N/A

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

compact 0%
sandy
clay loam

no comments

1-53

kf21

negative

70% open grassy 0-40
field

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

50% surface visibility with zero artifacts found

1-53

ks19

negative

mequite trees
and short dead
grass 95%

0-20

5YR5/6

yellowish red

sandy
less than
clay loam 5%

no slope, 5% visibility. Small bone (1-2cm) bone scrap
(3 pieces). No recovery

1-53

ks19

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/6

yellowish red

sandy
less than
clay loam 5%

similar soil. No bone scrap. No recovery

40-50

0%

Page 92 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-53

ks19

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR5/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

15%

soil change of more sand and less clay. Small deposit
of CaCO3 at 57-59cm. No recovery

1-53

rc07

negative

N/A

40-60

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
clay

5%

negative

1-53

rc07

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

5%

negative

1-53

rc07

negative

75% grasses

0-20

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

0%

10% slope. 25% surface visibility. Negative. Grasses
and small shrubs.

1-54

kf17

negative

grassy field
w/mesquite

0-30

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

90%

80% surface visibility with 20% slope and zero
artifacts found. Bedrock at 30cmbs. 200m W of duck
creek

1-54

kf18

negative

grassy field
w/mesquite

0-30

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

90%

80% surface visibility with 10% and zero artifacts
found

1-54

kf19

negative

N/A

10-30

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

1-54

kf19

negative

90% open grassy 0-10
field

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

20% surface visibility with zero artifacts recovered

0%

Page 93 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-54

kf20

negative

1-54

kf20

1-54

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

20% open grassy 0-50
field

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

moist
sandy
loam

2%

negative

N/A

5YR4/6 mottled with
5YR5/8

yellowish red

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

ks16

negative

95% dead grass, 0-20
mequite trees

7.5YR4/3

brown

silt loam

less than
5%

no slope. 5% visibility. No recovery. On top of a bank
10m from the edge of a creek

1-54

ks16

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/3

brown

silt loam

less than
5%

isolated animal bone at 30cm

1-54

ks16

negative

N/A

60-75

7.5YR4/3

brown

silt loam

less than
5%

soil consistent throughout shovel test. No recovery

1-54

ks16

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR4/3

brown

silt loam

less than
5%

no recovery

1-54

ks17

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

sandy silt 50%
loam

ST terminated because of high amount of chert pebble
gravel. No recovery

1-54

ks17

negative

dead grass 80%

0-20

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

sandy silt 40%
loam

no slope, 20% visibility. High amount of chert
pebbles. No recovery

50-60

10% surface visibility with zero artifacts collected.
STP located 35m NE of small historic wooden house

Page 94 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-54

ks18

negative

1-54

ks18

1-60

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

dead grass knee- 0-20
high 80%

5YR5/8

yellowish red

clay loam 15%

no slope, 20% visibility. No recovery

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR5/8

yellowish red

clay

ST terminate because of high concentration of red
clay. No recovery

cg30

negative

95% waist-high
grass

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no slope, 5% surface visibility. No artifacts. Grass
field- pasture, dry soil

1-60

cg30

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/4-5YR4/6

dark reddish brown
to yellowish red

clay loam less than
5%

no artifacts. Darker soil 5YR3/4 grades into lighter
5YR4/6

1-60

cg31

negative

90% waist-high
grass

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

loamy
sand

15%

5-10% slope, 10% surface visibility. Pasture. Gravel
on surface, CaCO3, dry soil. No artifacts.

1-60

cg31

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

loamy
sand

10%

increase in CaCO3- 20%. Soil color remains the same.
No artifacts. Old abandoned car and truck W of ROW.

1-60

kf22

negative

100% grassy
field

0-40

7.5YR3/3

dark brown

compact
sandy
loam

0%

STP located 60m S of FM1302 in a high grassy ag
field with livestock present. Zero surface visibility and
no artifacts collected

1-60

kf22

negative

N/A

40-50

7.5YR4/3

brown

sandy
n
clay loam

less than
5%

at 40cmbs large amounts of CaCO3

Page 95 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-60

kf23

negative

100% grassy
field

0-30

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
3%
clay loam

high grassy ag field with livestock present. No surface
visibility, very shallow sub-surface at 30cmbs

1-60

kf23

negative

N/A

30-40

7.5YR4/4

brown

clay

0%

no comments

1-61

cg32

negative

100% tall grass

0-20

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

sandy
clay

less than
5%

no slope, no surface visibility. Tall grass-shoulder
high, sunflowers. No artifacts, soil becomes more clay
further down

1-61

cg32

negative

N/A

20-30

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

clay loam 0%

no artifacts reached hard to dig clay soil

1-61

cg33

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR2.5/1

black

clay

no artifacts. Reached clay. Moist soil

1-61

cg33

negative

100%

0-20

5YR2.5/1

black

clay loam 0%

no artifacts, 5% slope, no surface visibility. Tall grasschest high, grass pasture. Moist soil.

1-61

cg34

negative

100% knee-high 0-30
grass

5YR3/4

red

clay

0%

no slope, no surface visibility. Knee-high grass.
Reached clay

1-61

cg35

negative

5% plowed field 0-40

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
loam

0%

shovel test around possible stone tool on terrace. No
artifacts. 25% slope, 95% surface visibility. Plowed
field

0%

Page 96 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-61

cg35

negative

N/A

40-50

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
0%
clay loam

no artifacts. Change in soil color from around 40-40cm

1-61

kf24

negative

100% grassy
field

0-30

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

clay

5%

high grassy ag field with no surface visibility, zero
artifacts recovered

1-61

kf25

negative

N/A

0-40

7.5YR3/3

dark brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

high grassy ag field with zero surface visibility and
zero artifacts recovered

1-61

kf25

negative

N/A

40-50

7.5YR2.5/2

very dark brown

clay

5%

no comments

1-61

kf26

negative

100% grassy
field

0-30

7.5YR2.5/2

very dark brown

clay

3%

high grassy ag field with no surface visibility, zero
artifacts recovered

1-61

kf27

positive

100% grassy
field

0-40

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
loam

5%

plowed ag field with total surface visibility. Small
lithic scatter with 2 pieces of debitage. Zero artifacts
recover below surface

1-61

kf27

negative

N/A

40-50

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
?
clay loam

no comments

1-64

rc14

negative

80% grasses

0-30

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay

5% slope, 0% surface visibility. Near creek. Negative

0%

Page 97 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-64

rc15

negative

80% grasses

0-20

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

sandy
clay

0%

0% slope. 0% surface visibility. Terraced ag field

1-64

rc15

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay

0%

negative

1-64

wh30

negative

knee-high grass

0-20

mottled 7.5YR3/4 and
10YR4/4

brown and dark
yellowish brown

?

?

0% slope, 50% visibility. No gravels, soil has very
compact in both upper deposits and the subsoil. No
artifacts. Terminated 5cm into subsoil.

1-64

wh30

negative

N/A

20-25

2.5YR6/4

light reddish brown

silty
?
clay/clay

no comments

1-64

wh31

negative

N/A

0-25

7.5YR4/4

brown

silty clay ?
loam

5 degree slope (terraced field) terminated at 25cmbs
due to previous agriculture/erosion. Subsoil with sligh
humic layer. 25% visibility very compact.

1-65B

rc10

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
clay

negative

1-65B

rc10

negative

80% hay

0-20

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay
0%
loam/clay

0% slope. 10% surface vis. Negative. Old ag field.

1-65B

rc11

negative

80% hay

0-30

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
clay

0% slope. 10% surface vis. Negative. Old ag fiel.

0%

0%

Page 98 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-65B

rc12

negative

70% hay

0-30

5YR4/4

reddish brown

compact
clay

0%

0% slope. 20% surface vis. Negative. Old ag field.

1-65B

rc13

negative

10% low grasses 0-20

5YR3/2

dark reddish brown

silty clay 0%
(compact)

0 slope. 90% surface vis. Negative. Floodplain for
nearby creek.

1-65B

rc13

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/3

reddish brown

compact
clay

0%

negative.

1-65B

wh28

negative

N/A

20-40

?

?

?

?

no comments

1-65B

wh28

negative

N/A

40-60

10YR6/4

light yellowish brown caliche

?

very abrupt interface at 50cm, unit went down to a
hard and very finegrained caliche

1-65B

wh28

negative

mowed edge of
field

0-20

7.5YR4/4

brown

silty
sandy
loam

less than
5%

30% visibility, flat, no artifacts

1-65B

wh29

negative

N/A

0-15

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

?

?

1-65B

wh29

negative

?

15-20

10YR4/4

dark yellowish brown silty
?
clay/clay

0% slope, 70% visibility. Humic layer is a fine silty
clay and 3cm in depth. 3-15cmbs is a compact silty
clay that's almost black. at 15cmbs a subsoil is hit
that's also a compact light coloured silty clay.
Terminated No artifacts
no comments

Page 99 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-7

pb01

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
clay

0%

no comments

1-7

pb01

negative

0%

0-20

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
clay

0%

cow pasture, intersection of 70 and 193

1-7

pb01

negative

N/A

40-50

2.5YR4/8

red

clay

0%

no comments

1-7

pb02

negative

0%

0-20

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
clay

0%

open field

1-7

pb02

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
clay

0%

no comments

1-7

pb02

negative

N/A

40-50

2.5YR4/8

red

clay

0%

no comments

1-7

pb03

negative

N/A

40-50

2.5YR4/8

red

clay

0%

no comments

1-7

pb03

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
clay

0%

no comments

Page 100 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-7

pb03

negative

0%

0-20

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
clay

0%

open field

1-7

pb04

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/8

red

clay

0%

clay very compacted (automobile traffic)

1-7

pb04

negative

0%

0-20

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
clay

0%

no comments

1-7

pb05

negative

tall grass

20-40

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
clay

0%

no comments

1-7

pb05

negative

tall grass

0-20

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
clay

0%

taller grass (hay)

1-7

pb05

negative

tall grass

40-60

2.5YR4/8

red

clay

0%

no comments

1-7

pb06

negative

N/A

40-60

10YR3/6

dark yellowish brown clay

0%

no comments

1-7

pb06

negative

N/A

20-40

10YR3/6

dark yellowish brown sandy
clay

0%

no comments

Page 101 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-7

pb06

negative

tall grass

0-20

10YR3/6

dark yellowish brown sandy
clay

0%

tall grass (hay)

1-7

pb07

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
clay

0%

no comments

1-7

pb07

negative

tall grass

0-20

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
clay

0%

tall grass

1-7

pb07

negative

N/A

40-60

2.5YR4/8

red

clay

0%

no comments

1-7

rp01

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

1-7

rp01

negative

N/A

40-60

2.5YR4/8

red

clay

no comments

1-7

rp01

negative

0%

0-20

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
0%
clay loam

recently used cow pasture, compact soil with high clay
content. Northernmost portion of ROW covered in
hay bales and not accessible. North of 193

1-7

rp02

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
0%
clay loam

wet-nearing water table?

0%

Page 102 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-7

rp02

negative

N/A

40+

2.5YR4/8

red

clay

0%

1-7

rp02

negative

0%

0-20

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
5%
clay loam

cow pasture, high clay content, damp sand

1-7

rp03

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
2%
clay loam

just North of 193, trampled cow pasture, jeep trail
running N-S across ROW, soil has high clay content

1-7

rp03

negative

0%

0-20

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
2%
clay loam

just North of 193, trampled cow pasture, jeep trail
running N-S across ROW, soil has high clay content

1-7

rp03

negative

N/A

40+

2.5YR4/8

red

clay

0%

just North of 193, trampled cow pasture, jeep trail
running N-S across ROW, soil has high clay content

1-7

rp04

negative

N/A

30+

2.5YR4/8

red

clay

0%

just North of 193, trampled cow pasture, jeep trail
running N-S across ROW, soil has high clay content

1-7

rp04

negative

25% dead grass

0-20

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
clay
loam

5%

just North of 193, trampled cow pasture, jeep trail
running N-S across ROW, soil has high clay content

1-7

rp04

negative

N/A

20-30

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
0%
clay loam

just North of 193, trampled cow pasture, jeep trail
running N-S across ROW, soil has high clay content

compact clay

Page 103 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-7

rp05

negative

5% trampled
grass

0-20

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
5%
clay loam

trampled and compact sandy clay

1-7

rp05

negative

N/A

20-30

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
5%
clay loam

no comments

1-7

rp05

negative

N/A

30+

2.5YR4/8

red

clay

0%

no comments

1-7

rp06

negative

100% trampled
grass

0-20

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

1-7

rp06

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

1-7

rp06

negative

N/A

40+

2.5YR3/6

dark red

clay

no comments

1-7

rp07

negative

80% grass

0-20

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
5%
clay loam

grassy and recently used cow pasture nearing N-S
existing transmission line. Wet sandy clay, difficult to
screen

1-7

rp07

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

%Gravels Comments

0%

Page 104 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-7

rp07

negative

N/A

40+

2.5YR4/8

red

clay

0%

1-7

rp08

negative

90% grass

0-20

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
0%
clay loam

easternmost portion of parcel 1-7, a cow pasture and
same damp sandy clay

1-7

rp08

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

1-7

rp08

negative

N/A

40+

2.5YR4/8

red

clay

0%

no comments

1-71

jk06

negative

70% short
grasses

0-20

5YR5/6 matrix, 5Y7/1
band at 150cmbs

yellowish red, light
gray

dry silty
loam

1-71

jk06

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/6, 5Y7/1 below
30cmbs

yellowish red, light
gray

few small
caliche,
less than
1%, small
rounded
less than
1%

1-71

ks31

negative

dead grass,
mesquite trees
90%

0-20

5YR5/8

yellowish red

slightly
moist
silty
loam,
pockets
clay loam 5-10%

very slight slope to S- ST is near very sparse suface
scatter of FCR and 2 crummy flakes. In grassy field
(buffalo grass) with sparse mesquite, agarita, etc. At
15cmbs narrow band of pale green-gray. Soil is
otherwise pretty homogeneous Gray green stuff
silty loam resumes below band of gray. Small pockets
of sand. At 30cmbs, begin wide band of gray material
5Y7/1). Terminated due to since that gray material is
OLD

1-71

ks32

negative

dead grass, lots
of gravel 70%

0-10

5YR5/6

yellowish red

silty clay 80%
loam

no comments

10% slope to the S, 10% visibility. ST terminated
because of caliche at 20cm. No recovery.

10% slope to the N. 30% visibility. ST terminated due
to high percentage of gravel. No recovery.

Page 105 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-71

ks33

negative

1-71

pb22

1-71

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

dead grass,
0-15
cactus, mesquite
75%

5YR5/8

yellowish red

silty clay 50%
loam

5% slope to NW, 25% visibility. ST terminated
because of high percentage of gravel. No recovery

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

0%

no comments

pb22

negative

patchy grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

0%

10% slope. 50% surface visibility

1-71

pb22

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

0%

terminated due to CaCO3

1-71

pb23

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

?

?

terminated due to CaCO3

1-71

pb23

negative

patchy grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

0%

15% slope. 20% surface visibility

1-71

pb51

negative

N/A

20-30

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
clay

80%

terminated due to bedrock

1-71

pb51

negative

gravel/patchy
brush

0-20

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
clay

80%

flat surface on the edge of steep slope. 40% slope. 90%
surface visibility

%Gravels Comments

Page 106 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-71

pb52

negative

patchy grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

less than
5%

60% surface visibility. 10% slope.

1-71

pb52

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

0%

terminated due to CaCO3

1-71

pb52

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

0%

no comments

1-71

rp23

negative

100% short grass 0-10

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
clay

25%

mostly clay, argillic, compact. Stopped at caliche

1-71

rp24

negative

80% short grass

0-10

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
clay

25%

5-10m west of ROW were 2 additional flakes
(quartzite)

1-71

rp25

negative

50% short grass

0-15

2.5YR5/8

red

clay loam 15%

flat upland area north of Keith's test at surfakes flakes
and north of jenni's test. Compact clay rich soil. Ended
at caliche

1-71

rp26

negative

60% short grass

0-20

2.5YR5/8

red

clay loam 5%

flat, clay-rich soil, slopes to ravine to the north.
Stopped at caliche

1-71

rp26

negative

N/A

20-30

2.5YR4/6

red

clay loam 5%

no comments

Page 107 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-71

rp27

negative

80% grass

0-15

2.5YR4/6

red

clay loam 50%

flat area, very compact soil with pebble to cobble-sized
gravels. Stopped at caliche

1-71

rp28

negative

95% grass

0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

clay loam 10%

land slopes gently to the north. Very compact and clay
rich soil.

1-71

rp28

negative

N/A

20-30

2.5YR4/6

red

clay

stopped at caliche

1-71

ss17

negative

sparse grass
heavy gravel
10%

0-30

5YR5/2

reddish gray

high concentration of gravel. Located on small hill. Hi
gh incline to southeast. Slope declination to North,
NW, and South. Fence approx. 20m west.

1-71

ss17

negative

N/A

30-40

5YR4/2

dark reddish gray

21%
sandy
loam
with
CaCO3
inclusion
0%
clay

1-71

ss18

negative

sparse, short
grass 10%

0-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

3%

CaCO3 present close to surface (5-10cm). No cultural
material observed.

1-71

ss19

negative

knee-high shrubs 0-30
75%

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

20%

extremely compact. Flat open field. 10m west of farm
road. Eventual downward slope to west and south.
Heavily used area. Stopped due to difficulty getting
through compact soil. No cultural material observed.

1-71

ss20

negative

N/A

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay

0%

approximately 50m-100m north of tributary. 10m
south of fence line. Tall ridge to east. CaCO3 present
at 30cm. No cultural material observed.

40-50

%Gravels Comments

5%

high concentration of gravel. Located on small hill. Hi
gh incline to southeast. Slope declination to North,
NW, and South. Fence approx. 20m west.

Page 108 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-71

ss20

negative

1-71

tn22

1-71

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

low grass,
0-40
cactus, mesquite
bush 40%40%

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

5%

30m north of road. Down slope to the north. High
concentration of gravel. Larger stones (approx. 20cm
in width) found at 20cm deep. Hit caliche bedrock at
30cm. No cultural material observed.

negative

N/A

40-48

7.5YR4/2

brown

sandy
loam

about
10%

terminated due to carbonate nodules, no recovery

tn22

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/3 and 7.5YR4/2

dark reddish brown
and brown

sandy
loam

about 5% soil change around 30cm with more carbonates
and about increasing with depth; no recovery
10%

1-71

tn22

negative

85% knee-high
grass

0-20

5YR3/3 (dry)

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

about 5%

1-71

tn23

negative

45% short grass

0-16

2.5YR3/2 (dry) and
2.5YR5/1

dusky red and
reddish gray

sandy
about
loam and 15% and
sandy
60%
clay

RT; area along a ridge sloping about 2% to the NE; no
recovery; terminated due to hitting sub-soil clay;
carbonates visible in first few cm, but increase with
depth

1-71

tn24

negative

20% short grass
tufts

0-20

5YR3/3 (dry) and
7.5YR4/3

dark reddish brown
and brown

sandy
loam and
sandy
clay

about 5%
and
almost
none

RT; area along ridge sloping slightly upward to NNE;
no recovery; clay layer begins within 5cm of the
surface and becomes compact at 20cm

1-71

tn25

negative

N/A

20-38

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
loam

80%
no recovery; terminated due to hitting caliche layer of
sandstone white-gray gravels less than 2cm
pebbles

1-71

tn25

negative

45% short grass
tufts

0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
loam

40%
gently sloping hillside with 10% grade; no recovery;
sandstone gravels increase with depth
pebbles

RT; placed here despite LPA because it's near a
tributary; no recover

Page 109 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-73A

ks20

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR5/3

brown

sandy
loam

10-15%

at 60cm high amount of CaCO3-30% of sediment. No
recovery

1-73A

ks20

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR5/3

brown

sandy
loam

5-10%

CaCO3 in small concentrations- 5%

1-73A

ks20

negative

dead grass, small 0-20
mesquite

7.5YR5/3

brown

sandy
loam

5-10%

5% slope, 10% visibility, CaCO3 in small
conventration 5%. No recovery

1-73A

ks21

negative

dead grass, dead 0-30
sunflowers 90%

5YR4/6

strong brown

mud

20-30%

near a pond 15m away, possible playa. Hard mud and
gravel, 0% slope, 10% visibility

1-73A

rp15

negative

25% short grass
and sunflower

2.5YR4/6

red

silty clay 25%

argillic soil, between 2 hills of gravel on an upland
area. Only patch of soil within 100m radius that does
not have gravel at surface (old gravel quarry nearby)
stopped at red caliche

1-73A

rp17

negative

100% short
0-5
grass and shrubs

2.5YR4/6

red

silty clay 90%

approx. 40m N of circular water feature (not sure if
man-made or playa) Gentle slope upwards from water,
cobble-sized rocks at surface

1-73B

?

negative

50% grass

0-15

2.5YR4/6

red

silty clay 50%

continuing N, this test is on the top of a rolling hill,
heavily eroded, with gravel on surface and throughout
Stopped at compact and thick red clay

1-73B

ks22

negative

dead grass 95%

0-30

2.5YR5/6

red

sandy
loam

5% slope, 5% visibility. ST terminated because of high
concentration of gravel. No recovery

0-10

40%

Page 110 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-73B

ks23

negative

1-73B

ks24

1-73B

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

dead grass, small 0-30
mesquite

2.5YR5/6

red

mud

20%

negative

dead grass,
mesquite trees
95%

0-20

5YR4/6

strong brown

clay loam 15%

5% S to the N. 5% visibility. Very hard top soil, some
CaCO3, no recovery

ks24

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy silt 20%
loam

increasing amount of CaCO3 and gravel. ST
terminated because of this. No recovery

1-73B

ks25

negative

dead grass 65%

0-20

5YR5/8

yellowish red

clay

40%

no slope, 35% visibility. ST is 10m S of artifact (GPS
21) ST terminated because of high concentration of
gravel. No recovery

1-73B

ks26

negative

dead grass 65%

0-20

5YR5/8

yellowish red

clay

40%

no slope, 35% visibility. ST is 5m W of artifact (GPS
21) ST terminated because of high percentage of
gravel. No recovery

1-73B

ks27

negative

dead grass, dead 0-20
sunflowers 95%

5YR5/8

yellowish red

clay

less than
5%

no slope, 5% visibility. ST terminated because of hard
red clay. About 70m N of a ravine. No recovery

1-73B

ks28

negative

dead grass, small 0-20
mesquite trees
85%

5YR5/8

yellowish red

clay loam 10%

no slope, 15% visibility. 15% visibility. 10m S of
(potter formation) quartzite found on surface. (3
flakes) and a core. (Possible lithic reduction site.) No
recovery

1-73B

ks29

negative

dead grass
mesques tree
85%

5YR5/8

yellowish red

clay loam 10%

no slope, 15% visibility. 10m E of (Potter formation)
quartzite (3 flakes and a core)

0-20

on top of slope to the S. 5% visibility. Hard red mud.
No recovery.

Page 111 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-73B

ks30

negative

dead grass,
mesquite trees
70%

0-20

5YR5/6

yellowish red

sandy
10%
clay loam

no slope, 30% visibility. 2 flakes (1 chert, 1 quartzite)
found on surface. No subsurface artifacts. No recovery

1-73B

ks30

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/6

yellowish red

clay loam 15%

shovel test terminated because of caliche at 40cm. No
recovery

1-73B

ks57

negative

80% dead grass

0-10

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

20%

5% slope, 20% visibility. Hit bedrock at 10cm. No
recovery.

1-73B

Lithic S positive

75% grass and
small shrubs

surface

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

3 flakes and a core in 2m radius. Flat upland area
north of ravine.

1-73B

rp16

negative

25% short grass

0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

silty clay 50%

approx. 20-30m N of flake (Garmin pt #22)

1-73B

rp18

positive

25% grass, cacti, N/A
brush

N/A

N/A

N/A

approx.
100%

FCR at surface approx. 5m x 3m. Keith and I carefully
searched vicinity but no artifacts present. W edge of
TOW on upland area

1-73B

rp19

negative

80% grass/brush N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

100%

100m N of FCR. Surface inspection, as unaable to dig
thru gravel

1-73B

rp20

negative

80% short grass

2.5YR4/6

red

silty clay 25%

0-20

%Gravels Comments

approx. 10 degree slope downwards going N. still an
upland area. Soil compact and reddish brown. Ended
at caliche

Page 112 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-73B

rp21

negative

75% grass and
small shrubs

0-15

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
clay

25%

mostly clay, argillic, compact. Stopped at caliche

1-73B

rp22

negative

75% grass and
small shrubs

0-15

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
clay

25%

mostly clay, argillic, compact. Stopped at caliche

1-73B

rp62

negative

85% medium
grass

0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
clay

5%

1-74

cg36

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
5%
clay loam

10m west of surface find-- 2cmx2cm chert flake found
yesterday (Garmin pt #21.) We found additional
artifacts outside ROW to the east including a quartzite
flake, a hammerstone, and 2 additional flakes. After
digging 3 shovel tests surrounding the find a
CaCO3 in small concentrations- 5%. Soil soil.
Reached hard to dig soil, no artifacts

1-74

cg36

negative

90% waist-high
grass

0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
5%
clay loam

25% slope, 10% surface visibility. No artifacts. Dry
soil, down slope from hill

1-74

cg37

negative

50% short grass

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no slope, half surface visibility. Short grass mixed with
sunflowers. Dry, hard to dig soil. No artifacts

1-74

cg37

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no artifacts, reached very hard to dig soil. Very dry,
compact

1-74

cg38

negative

75% short grass
and tall weeds

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
5%
clay loam

no slope, 25% surface visibility. Root plow zone.
CaCO3 less than 5%. Hard, compact soil. No artifacts

Page 113 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-74

cg38

negative

N/A

0-30

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

very hard compact soil. No artifacts.

1-74

cg39

negative

25% short grass

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no slope. Less than 5% surface visibility. No artifacts.
Root plow zone. Semi-moist soil.

1-74

cg39

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay loam 0%

no artifacts. Presence of bull, cut shovel test short!

1-74

cg40

negative

25% short grass

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

silty clay 0%
loam

no slope, 75% surface visibility, grassy field, root
plowed zone, dry soil, no artifacts

1-74

cg40

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay loam 0%

soil becomes more moist and more clay-like. Hard to
dig soil.

1-74

cg41

negative

75% short grass

0-20

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay loam less than
5%

10% slope, 25% surface visibility. No artifacts, root
plowed zone in grassy field. Semi-moist soil

1-74

cg41

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay loam less than
5%

soil becomes more clay-like and compact

1-74

cg42

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay loam 0%

no artifacts, soil becomes hard and compact

Page 114 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-74

cg42

negative

75% short grass

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay loam 0%

15% slope, 25% surface visibility, no artifacts, flood
plain zone, grass field, dry soil

1-74

kf28

negative

90% gravel with 0-30
mesquite

5YR5/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

STP located 60m N of FM2794 with 80% surface
visibility and zero artifacts collected

1-74

kf29

negative

N/A

30-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

1-74

kf29

negative

100% grassy
field

0-30

5YR5/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

30%

80% surface visibility with zero artifacts collected

1-74

kf30

negative

100% grassy
field

0-30

5YR5/4

reddish brown

compact
sandy
clay

50%

80% surface visibility with zero artifacts collected

1-74

kf31

negative

100% grassy
field

0-40

5YR5/4

reddish brown

compact
sandy
clay

20%

80% surface visibility with zero artifacts collected

1-74

kf32

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR3/2

dark reddish brown

compact
sandy
clay

0%

no comments

1-74

kf32

negative

100% grassy
field

0-40

5YR5/4

reddish brown

compact
sandy
loam

5%

open ag field with livestock present. 80% surface
visibility with zero artifacts collected

100%

Page 115 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-74

kf33

negative

N/A

30-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

compact
sandy
clay

0%

no comments

1-74

kf33

negative

open grassy field 0-30

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

compact
sandy
loam

10%

open ag field with livestock present. 80% surface
visibility with piles of tree clearing. Zero artifacts
collected

1-74

kf34

negative

open grassy field 0-30

5YR4/4

reddish brown

compact
sandy
clay

5%

open ag field with livestock present. 80% surface
visibility with piles of tree clearing. Zero artifacts
collected

1-74

kf35

negative

open grassy field 0-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

3%

open ag field with livestock present. 80% surface
visibility with piles of tree clearing. Zero artifacts
collected

1-74

kf35

negative

N/A

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

1-76A

cg43

negative

100% waist-high 0-20
grass and
sunflowers

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay loam 0%

no surface visibility, grassy hillside. No artifacts. Semi
moist soil.

1-76A

cg43

negative

N/A

5YR4/6

yellowish red

clay loam 0%

soil drier in this level. No artifacts

1-76A

cg44

negative

100% knee-high 0-20
grass, sotol

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

silty loam 0%

no surface visibility, 15% slope, grassy hillside, no
artifacts, semi-moist soil

40-50

20-40

Page 116 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-76A

cg44

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay loam 0%

no artifacts. Dry soil. Compact

1-76A

cg45

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

silty clay less than
loam
5%

no artifacts. Dry soil.

1-76A

cg45

negative

75% waist-high 0-20
grass, sunflowers

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

silty clay less than
loam
5%

15% slope, 25% surface visibility. Hillside ridge. Dry
soil. No artifacts.

1-76A

cg45

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

silty clay 0%
loam

no artifacts. Dry compact soil.

1-76A

cg46

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay loam 0%

no artifacts. Dry, compact soil

1-76A

cg46

negative

100% short
0-20
grass, tall weeds

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay loam 0%

ridge top, 0% surface visibility, crossed ravine from
last shovel test. No artifacts, semi-moist soil

1-76A

cg47

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
clay

no artifacts, dry soil, less than 5% CaCO3

1-76A

cg47

negative

75% waist-high
grass and weeds

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay loam 0%

less than
5%

ridge top, 25% surface visibility, no artifacts, semimoist soil

Page 117 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-76A

cg47

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
clay

0%

1-76A

cg48

negative

75% short grass, 0-30
tall weeds

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay
0%
loam-clay

no artifacts, 25% surface visibility. Next to fence-line.
Semi-moist caly soil next to plow field

1-76A

kf36

negative

N/A

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

compact
sandy
clay

0%

no comments

1-76A

kf36

negative

95% grassy field 0-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

0%

STP located 20m N of FM261 and 30m W of Glass
White River with 80% surface visibility and zero
artifacts recovered

1-76A

kf37

negative

N/A

5YR4/6

yellowish red

compact
sandy
clay

0%

no comments

1-76A

kf37

negative

95% grassy field 0-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

0%

80% surface visibility with zero artifacts recovered

1-76A

kf38

negative

95% grassy field 0-100

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

100%

STP had gravels from (0-100cmbs) with 80% surface
visibility and zero artifacts unearthed

1-76A

kf39

negative

100% grassy
field with
sunflowers

7.5YR3/3

dark brown

clay loam 0%

30-40

30-40

0-30

no artifacts, soil becomes more sandy, semi-moist

STP located in small patch of sunflowers with 0%
surface visibility and zero artifacts recovered.

Page 118 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-76A

kf40

negative

N/A

30-40

7..5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

1-76A

kf40

negative

95% open grassy 0-30
field with
sunflowers

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
loam

0%

STP located 60m N of Glass White River with 0
surface visibility. Knee high grass with mix shrub and
zero artifacts unearthed.

1-76A

kf41

negative

95% open grassy 0-100
field

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
loam

0%

STP located 200m S of Glass White River in a small
canyon with no surface visibility and zero artifacts
collected

1-76A

kf42

negative

N/A

0-30

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

45% surface visibility with zero artifacts found.

1-77

rc16

negative

75% grass

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

0% slope. 20% surface visibility. Negative. Near creek
cut banked edge. Grasses and small shrubs

1-77

rc16

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay

0%

negative

1-77

rc17

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

clay

0%

negative

1-77

rc17

negative

60% grass

0-20

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

clay
loam

0%

0% slope. 30% surface visibility. Grasses and low
shrubs. Near creek bank. Negative

%Gravels Comments

Page 119 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-77

rc18

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay

0%

negative

1-77

rc18

negative

60% grass

0-20

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay

0%

0% slope. 30% surface visibility. Grasses and low
shrubs. Negative

1-77

rc19

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay with 5%
caliche

negative

1-77

rc19

negative

40% grass

0-20

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

sandy
20%
clay loam

15% slope. 40% surface visibility. Negative. Grasses
and low shrubs. Near creek bank.

1-77

rc20

negative

90% grass

0-20

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

sandy
clay

0%

edge of creek bank 0% slope. 10% surface visibility.
Grasses and low shrubs. Negative

1-77

rc20

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay

0%

negative

1-77

rc21

negative

N/A

?

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay

0%

negative

1-77

rc21

negative

90% grass

0-20

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay loam 0%

0% slope. 10% surface visability. Grasses and low
shrubs. Negative

Page 120 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-77

wh32

negative

N/A

18-34

7.5YR4/3

brown

compact 0%
silty clay

slight solour change, but not enough to munsell.
Extremely tough digging CaCO3 was noted the upper
0-18cm may have been a root zone?

1-77

wh32

negative

sparse ankle high 0-18

7.5YR4/3

brown

compact 0%
silty clay

flat top of east side of hill, dropoff to creek 5m to the
E. 70% surface visibility; no artifacts were seen.

1-77

wh33

negative

N/A

30-70

7.5YR5/4

brown

coarse
20%
sand with
gravels

no comments

1-77

wh33

negative

sparse eroded
ankle-high

0-17

7.5YR5/4

brown

compact
silty
sandy
clay

1-77

wh33

negative

N/A

17-30

7.5YR5/4

brown

1-77

wh34

negative

waist-high grass 0-30
and hardwoods

7.5YR4/4

brown

compact less than
silty
5%
sandy
clay with
gravel
hard
0%
compact
silty clay

odd. Maybe an old stream bed that had been filled, this
ST was put in on a prominent landform about 37m
from RC19 hard slope about 20 degrees 5m E to
streambed. 2 flakes were notes between these tests. No
artifacts were recovered from either ST 65V 80%
prominent land form about 37m from RC19 hard slope
about 20 degrees 5m E to stream bed. 2 flakes were
noted in between teses tests. No artifacts recovered.

1-77

wh35

negative

ankle-high grass 0-30

7.5YR4/4

brown

hard
0%
compact
silty clay

flat area, N of eroded cut/bank under powerline
running E/W. 20% 65V. No recover

1-77

wh36

negative

ankle-high grass 0-20

5YR5/6

yellowish red

compact 0%
silty sand

10 degree slope, arroyo to the west 15m

0%

after walking over hill, 1 piece of FCR and 1 large
biface were seen on surface (photo taken number 6)
see drawing on back

Page 121 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-77

wh36

negative

N/A

20-35

7.5YR7/4

pink

silty
sandy
clay and
caliche

0%

caliche terface at 30cm. Mottled with upper soils (50%
max) solide at 35

1-78B

rc22

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/4

reddish brown

clay

0%

negative.

1-78B

rc22

negative

15% grass

0-20

5YR5/4

reddish brown

clay loam 0%

10% slope. 60% surface visibility. Low grasses and
shrubs. At edge of washout bank. Negative.

1-78B

rc23

negative

95% grass

0-30

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay

0% slope. 10% surface visibility. Grasses and low
shrubs. At edge of slope into washout. Negative.

1-78B

rc24

negative

80% grass

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay loam 0%

30% slope into washout. 50% surface visibility. Low
grasses and shrubs. In flood area of washout. Negative

1-78B

rc24

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay

0%

negative

1-78B

rc25

negative

N/A

60-80

5YR5/4

reddish brown

compact
sand

5%

negative

1-78B

rc25

?

15%grass

0-60

5YR5/4

reddish brown

sand
loam

2%

FCR site atop bluff overlooking creek to the west and
north. Low grasses. 20% slope. 75% surface visibility.
Negative.

0%

Page 122 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-78B

rc26

negative

80% grass

0-40

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay

0%

10% slope. 20% surface visibility. Tall grasses and
small trees and shrubs. Negative.

1-78B

rc27

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/4

reddish brown

clay

5%

negative.

1-78B

rc27

negative

55% grass

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
2%
clay loam

25% slope. 50% surface visibility. Grasses and small
shrubs next to creek. Floodplain drop-off. Negative.

1-78B

rc28

negative

80% grass

0-40

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay

0%

45% slope. 20% surface visibility. Grasses. Small and
large trees, small shrubs. Negative. On slope leading to
creek.

1-78B

wh37

negative

ankle-high grass 0-20

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

silty
sandy
clay

0%

silty sandy clay upper 15cm 15-60cm homogeneous
silty clay same colour, just a texture change

1-78B

wh37

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

silty
0%
sandy
clay and
silty clay

no comments

1-78B

wh37

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

silty
0%
sandy
clay and
silty clay

caliche mottles (50% mix) at 55-60cm terminated at 60

1-78B

wh38

negative

ankle-high grass 0-20

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

silty
sandy
clay

fine-textured, but compact soils. A burned rock scatter
is about 3m east.

less than
5%

Page 123 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-78B

wh38

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

silty
less than
sandy
5%
clay with
caliche

at 30cm caliche mottling became present and at 40
was hardpan

1-78B

wh39

negative

low grasses

0-20

5YR4/3

reddish brown

compact 0%
silty clay

bench on 5 degree slope on hill, GSV 25% 5cm humic
layer. At 35cmbs shovel test terminated at gravels.

1-78B

wh39

negative

N/A

20-35

5YR4/3

reddish brown

compact 90%
silty clay gravels at
35cmbs

this test was a homogeneous silty clay, very compact.
Terminated when gravels at 10cm were found. No
artifacts.

1-78B

wh40

negative

N/A

25+

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay 0%

this [sic] consisted of 70% burned sandstone. 30%
limestone (or sedimentary rock) approx. 40 pieces
most 10cm in diameter. 3 bigger than 10cm, 20 more
pieces smaller

1-78B

wh40

negative

low grass

0-25

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay 0%

this test was dug on a 5-10 degree slope approx. 5m E
of a small (2m E/W 1m N/S) burned rock cluster

1-78B

wh41

negative

low grass

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

silty clay 0%
very
compact

this ST is on a bench overlooking the drainage 50-75m
to the N/NE. the soil is a homogeneous silty clay with
a 5cm humic zone. Terminated at hardpan silty clay
20cmbs

1-80

pb24

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR3/3

dark brown

sandy
loam

0%

terminated due to compact clay

1-80

pb24

negative

grass cover

0-20

7.5YR3/3

dark brown

sandy
loam

0%

0% surface visibility 0% slope grass clearing

Page 124 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-80

pb25

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
loam

0%

terminated due to CaCO3

1-80

pb25

negative

grass cover

0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

sandy
loam

0%

50% visibility less than 5% slope toward southeast

1-80

ss25

negative

short, sparse
grass 8%

0-30

5YR5/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

10%

residential home 50-100m SW. CaCO3 at 30cm. In
open patch. Bare ground, sparse grass. Enclosed by
mequite. No cultural material observed. Larger conten
of gravel at 20-30cm.

1-80

ss26

negative

short grass 90%

0-40

5YR5/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

3%

mesquite bushes. STP associated with isolated fine
(white flake)1. stopped at presence of CaCO3. no
cultural material observed.

1-80

tn26

negative

N/A

20-26

2.5YR6/4

light reddish brown

very dry
loamy
sand

less than no recovery; terminated due to sub-soil caliche layer5% quartz very compact developing sandstone layers with pinkish
and sandy powdery caliche

1-80

tn26

negative

10% brush grass 0-20

2.5YR4/6

red

loamy
sand

30%
mostly level. Approx 3% to the ES; good surface
sandstone visibility approx 90%; ridgetop in HPA; no recovery
and quartz

1-80A

pb19

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/3

reddish brown

sandy
0%
loam clay

terminated due to clay

1-80A

pb19

negative

grass

0-20

5YR4/3

reddish brown

sandy
loam

no surface visibility. No slope

less than
5%

Page 125 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-80A

pb26

negative

grass cover
(knee-high)

0-20

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

0%

0% visibility 0% slope

1-80A

pb26

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

0%

no comments

1-80A

pb27

negative

short grass

0-30

5YR4/3

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

0% slope less than 5% visibility. Terminated due to
compact clay

1-80A

pb28

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR4/3

reddish brown

sandy
0%
loam clay

terminated due to clay

1-80A

pb28

negative

grass

0-20

5YR4/3

reddish brown

sandy
loam

0%

0% slope. Less than 5% surface visibility

1-80A

pb28

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/3

reddish brown

sandy
loam

0%

no comments

1-80A

pb30

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
clay

10%

no comments

1-80A

pb30

negative

N/A

40-60

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
less than
loam clay 5%

terminated due to clay

Page 126 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-80A

pb30

negative

grass

0-20

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
clay

10%

less than 5% surface visibility. 20% slope. Next to
tributary

1-80A

pb31

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
loam

0%

terminated due to CaCO3

1-80A

pb32

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

0%

terminated due to CaCO3

1-80A

pb32

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

less than
5%

no comments

1-80A

pb32

negative

patchy grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

less than
5%

40% surface visibility. 10% slope toward E. 5m S of
FCR

1-80A

pb33

negative

patchy grass

0-20

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
loam

10%

40% surface visibility. 45% slope toward W. Very
edge of large tributary

1-80A

ss27

negative

70% big
mesquite trees
and waist-tall
grass

0-30

5YR4/2

dark reddish gray

sandy
3%
clay loam

bigger mesquite trees. Fence 10m west. No cultural
material observed.

1-80A

ss27

negative

N/A

30-40

5YR3/2

dark reddish brown

clay

no comments

0%

Page 127 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-80A

ss28

negative

93% tall grass
and mesquite
trees

0-30

5YR3/2

dark reddish brown

sandy
3%
clay loam

1m east of game trail. No cultural material observed

1-80A

ss28

negative

N/A

30-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

clay

0%

no comments

1-80A

ss29

negative

N/A

30-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

clay

0%

no comments

1-80A

ss29

negative

90% mesquite
trees and kneehigh grass

0-30

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
3%
clay loam

located 1 meter east of game trail. 10 meters east of
fence. Oil pump 100m-200m to NW. no cultural
material observed.

1-80A

ss30

negative

85% short grass, 0-50
cactus, mesquite
trees

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
3%
clay loam

slight downward slope to east. Hunting stand to SE,
approx 100-150m. Stopped due to CaCO3 present at
40m. No cultural material observed.

1-80A

ss31

negative

80% short grass, 0-40
mesquite trees

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
5%
clay loam

slight downward slope to the east. Calcium carbonate
presents at 20cm. No cultural material observed.

1-80A

ss31

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR4/4

reddish brown

clay

no comments

1-80A

tn27

negative

90% short grass

0-20

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

sandy
less than
loam
5%
(compact)

%Gravels Comments

0%

fairly level ridge top with slight SE slope; no recover

Page 128 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-80A

tn27

negative

N/A

20-28

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

sandy
less than
loam
5%
(compact)

1-80A

tn28

negative

100% knee-high 0-20
grass

7.5YR3/2 and 5YR3/3

dark brown and dark sandy
reddish brown
loam and
sandy
clay

less than
5% and
almost
none

mostly level ridgetop with about 2-3% slope SE;
ground visibility very poor-covered in dead grass.
Brush is more moderately covering. Soil change
occurs at about 4cm here.

1-80A

tn28

negative

N/A

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

sandy
clay

almost
none

no comments

1-80A

tn29

negative

100% short grass 0-14

5YR3/4 and 5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam,
sandy
clay

less than
5%, 20%
CaCO3

ridge top- nearly flat; no surface visibility because
covered in small grass; no recovery; soil becomes
harder with higher clay content as depth increases;
terminated due to compact subsoil clay

1-80A

tn30

negative

N/A

20-26

5YR3/4 and 2.5YR6/4

dark reddish brown
and light reddish
brown

sandy
loam,
caliche

less than no recovery; carbonates first appeared around 18cm
5%,
and increased with depth; at 26cm-nodules were
almost all present and so terminated due to degraded bedrock

1-80A

tn30

negative

95% short grass

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

ridge top- nearly flat; short grass covering most ground
but less mesquite; no recovery

1-80A

tn31

negative

30% short grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

about 5%

sloping hillside toward #; roughly 20m W of tributary;
slope is 20%; about 70% surface visibility with grass
covering rest; no recovery

1-80A

tn31

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/6 and 5YR5/6

yellowish red

sandy
about 5%, carbonates begin to appear around 15cm depth
loam,
almost all increasing in size and number thereafter; terminated
sandy
CaCO3
due to hitting carbonate nodules in compacted soil.
clay loam

20-33

%Gravels Comments
no recovery; at about 25cm, nodules of carbonates
bean to appear indicating bedrock; terminated due to
degrading bedrock

Page 129 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-82

jk07

positive

50% short
grasses and

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

1-82

jk07

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

1-82

jk08

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR4/4

reddish brown

silty loam 0-15cmbs
about
10%. 1520cmbs
about
silty loam about
50%
small
caliche
nodules
slightly 20%
moist
small
silty loam caliche
nodules

1-82

jk08

positive

N/A

20-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

slightly 20%
moist
small
silty loam caliche
nodules

FLAKE at about 25cmbs (tertiary 2x3cm). Caliche
nodules continue

1-82

jk08

negative

80% shortcropped grasses

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

1-82

jk09

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR4/4

reddish brown

ST is on flat spot north of ravine- everything else
nearby to south looked eroded. Ground slopes very
slightly down to the east. Cattle pasture with mesquite
yucca, grasses. Near occupied house that is outside
ROW Small rounded gravels/quartzite etc at
same as above-caliche increases gradually with depth.
No cultural material

1-82

jk09

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

1-82

jk09

negative

80% shortcropped grasses

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

slightly 5% small
moist
rounded
silty loam pebbles at
5cmbssmall
silty loam about
25%
small
caliche
nodules
silty loam about
20%
small
caliche
nodules
silty loam less than
1% small
pebbles at
10cmbs.
20%

ST places in scatter of debitage and for that extends
along a ridge (see site form) FLAKE at 10cmbs(tertiary flake- 5cmx8cm) large amount of caliche
below 15cmbs
continued through caliche nodules to make sure
caliche was not just a thin washed-in deposit.
Terminated at 40cmbs due to increased presence of
caliche. Color grades-more reddish with depth
caliche nodules continue but decrease after about
50cmbs. Terminated due to continued caliche. Soil
slightly drier with increased depth

no comments

10m north of JK8. on flat spot ground slopes very
slightly down to the east. Cattle pasture with mesquite
yucca, grasses. Near occupied house that is outside
ROW. Thin lens of tiny rounded pebbles (quartzite,
etc) at 10cmbs

Page 130 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-82

jk09

negative

N/A

60-70

5YR4/4

reddish brown

1-82

ks34

negative

dead grass,
0-20
cactus, mesquite
70%

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty loam about
30%
small
caliche
nodules
sandy
5-10%
loam

1-82

ks34

negative

N/A

60-70

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

10-15%

CaCO3 15% of sediment. No recovery.

1-82

ks34

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

10-15%

small amount of CaCO3. no recovery

1-82

ks34

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

10%

small amount of CaCO3. no recovery

1-82

ks35

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy silt 20%
loam

ST terminated because of caliche at 30cm. No recovery

1-82

ks35

negative

dead grass,
mesquite 60%

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy silt 15%
loam

about 5% slope and 10% visibility. Very compact
sediment. No recovery.

1-82

ks36

positive

dead grass,
mesquite 50%

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy silt 20%
loam

5% slope to the north. 50% visibility. Lithic scatter on
the surface consisting of worked quartzite and chert
(various chert types) at 10cm worked chert (3x2cm)
piece

same as above. Caliche increases gradually with depth
No cultural material. Terminated at 70cmbs due to
continued/increased presence of caliche.

5% slope, 30% visibility. Small amount of CaCO3. no
recovery.

Page 131 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-82

ks37

negative

dead grass,
mesquite 50%

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
15%
silty loam

5% slope to the NE. 50% visibility. Lithic scatter on
surface. No subsurfac lithics. Litchic scatter to the N to
NW- possible SE boundary of site. No recovery.

1-82

ks38

negative

dead grass,
mesquite trees
85%

0-20

5YR5/8

yellowish red

sandy
10%
silty loam

0% slope and 15% visibility. No recovery

1-82

ks38

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR5/8

yellowish red

sandy
20%
silty loam

ST terminated because of caliche at 60cm. No
recovery.

1-82

ks38

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/8

yellowish red

sandy
15%
silty loam

small traces of CaCO3. no recovery

1-82

ks39

negative

dead grass,
yucca 70%

0-10

5YR4/4

reddish brown

silt loam

5% slope to the SE, 30% visibility. ST terminated
because of high density of gravel. No recovery

1-82

ks40

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy silt 20%
loam

ST terminated because of caliche at 40cm. No recovery

1-82

ks40

negative

dead grass,
mesquite 70%

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

silt loam

35%

ST 7m E of ST JK8 (garmin 74) 15% slope to SE.
30% visibility. No recovery

1-82

pb31

negative

grass

0-20

2.5YR3/6

dark red

sandy
loam

less than
5%

10% slope toward W. 30% surface visibility next to
large tributary

90%

Page 132 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-82

pb33

negative

N/A

40-60

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
loam

10%

no comments

1-82

pb33

negative

N/A

60-80

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
loam

10%

terminated due to depth

1-82

pb34

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
loam

10%

no comments

1-82

pb34

negative

patchy grass

0-20

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
loam

25%

70% surface visibility. 20% slope toward W

1-82

pb34

negative

N/A

40-60

2.5YR4/8

red

sandy
loam

10%

no comments

1-82

pb35

negative

patchy grass

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

40% surface visibility. 10% slope toward E.

1-82

pb35

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

0%

terminated due to CaCO3

1-82

pb36

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

0%

terminated due to CaCO3

Page 133 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-82

pb36

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

no comments

1-82

pb36

negative

patchy grass

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

10%

50% surface visibility. 5% slope toward E.

1-82

pb37

negative

patchy grass

0-20

7.5YR4/3

brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

no comments

1-82

pb37

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/3

brown

sandy
loam

0%

no comments

1-82

pb37

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR4/3

brown

sandy
loam

0%

terminated due to compact soil

1-82

pb38

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

less than
5%

terminated due to CaCO3

1-82

pb38

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

less than
5%

no comments

1-82

pb38

negative

grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

10%

10% slope towards SW. 10% surface visibility.

Page 134 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-82

pb39

negative

grass

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

0%

10% slope towards north. Less than 5% surface
visibility.

1-82

pb39

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

0%

no comments

1-82

pb39

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

0%

terminated due to CaCO3

1-82

rp30

negative

100% grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
2%
clay loam

flat pasture with dead mesquite. Compact clay-rich soi

1-82

rp30

negative

N/A

20-35

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

0%

ended at caliche

1-82

rp31

negative

N/A

20-25

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
0%
clay loam

ended at caliche

1-82

rp31

negative

100% closelycropped grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
0%
clay loam

very compact soil in pasture. Charcoal layer at 15cmbs

1-82

rp32

negative

N/A

20-25

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

ended at caliche

30%

Page 135 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-82

rp32

negative

80% grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

30%

1-82

rp33

negative

N/A

20-35

2.5YR5/6

red

silty loam 20%

chunky with pebble-sized gravels. Stopped at caliche

1-82

rp33

negative

20% grass

0-20

2.5YR5/6

red

silty loam 10%

compact, upland area, pastureland, short grass, yucca,
mesquite

1-82

rp34

negative

20% grass

0-20

2.5YR5/6

red

silty loam 10%

(Western edge of ROW, W of RP33)

1-82

rp34

negative

N/A

20-35

2.5YR5/6

red

silty loam 20%

chunky with pebble-sized gravels. Stopped at caliche

1-82

rp35

negative

0

0-5

2.5YR5/6

red

silty loam 90%

ravine to the north 15m. Stopped at caliche.

1-82

rp36

negative

15% grass

0-15

2.5YR5/6

red

silty loam 5%

pasture, mesquite trees, very compact soil. Terminated
due to bull(s)!

1-82

rp37

negative

20% grass

0-20

2.5YR5/6

red

silty loam 5%

met with other crew, 1-82 complete!

about 35m north of ridge (positive) pebbles and
cobbles throughout. Slopes downward to the east.
Ended at caliche

Page 136 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-82

rp37

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR5/6

red

silty loam 5%

ended at caliche

1-82

ss32

negative

60% short grass, 0-65
mesquite brush

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

25%

1m E of game trail. On hill with tributary to E. slope
of about 70 degrees to the SE. CaCO3 inclusion at
approx. 30cm. No cultural material observed

1-82

ss33

negative

20% short grass

0-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

45%

associated with first flake fine. Out of context STP due
to being dug within eroded/weathered section. Poor
spot. No cultural material observed.

1-82

ss34

negative

75% short grass, 0-70
mesquite brush

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

20%

associated with lithic scatter 1 on ridge with tributary
to W and E. 2m N of ss33. no cultural material
observed.

1-82

ss35

negative

85% knee-high
grass

0-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

5%

very slight incline to the E. gradual decline to the S.
CaCO3 present at 30cm. No cultural material
observed.

1-82

ss36

negative

90% short
0-50
grasses, mesquite

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

5%

old abandoned bridge to NW. flood bank?/tributary to
N, at about 50-100m wide (N to S); tributary to E with
exposed stratigraphy. CaCO3 at 30cm. No cultural
material observed.

1-82

tn32

negative

N/A

40-54

5YR4/6 and 2.5YR6/4

yellowish red and
light reddish brown

1-82

tn32

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
almost all
loam,
carbonate
sandy
clay/calic
he
sandy
5%
loam

terminated due to super compact caliche/clay mix; no
recovery

no recovery; sandy loam increasingly compact with
depth

Page 137 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-82

tn32

negative

60% short grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

5%

1-82

tn33

negative

N/A

20-43

5YR4/6, 5YR6/6

yellowish red,
reddish yellow

sandy
5%,
no recovery; terminated due to hitting compact sandy
loam,
almost all loam with caliche and carbonate nodules- soil change
caliche/sa carbonates occurs about 40cm
ndy loam

1-82

tn33

negative

70% short grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

5%

nearly flat ridge top 20m W of tributary channel.
Mostly short grasses causing poor ground visibility, no
recovery

1-82

tn34

negative

0%

0-8

5YR4/6

yellowish red

loamy
sand

10%
quartz
pebbles

no recovery; site discussed in notes; terminated due to
bedrock

1-82

tn35

negative

70% short grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

10%
quartz
pebbles

flat ridge top approximately 25m SW of main
tributary channel; ground mostely covered in short to
knee high grass- less than 10% visibility

1-82

tn35

negative

N/A

20-34

5YR4/6, 5YR5/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam,
caliche

less than no recovery; terminated due to sub-soil carbonate
5%,
nodules layer
almost all
carbonates

1-82

tn36

negative

100% knee high 0-20
grass

7.5YR3/4, 5YR4/3

dark brown, reddish sandy
brown
loam

15, 40%

mostly flat flood plain; almost no surface visibility3%; no recovery

1-82

tn36

negative

N/A

5YR3/4, 5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

40, 70%

soil change occurs aruond25cm; no recovery;
terminated due to compact sub-soil clay layer

20-29

sandy
loam,
sandy
clay

ridge top above ravine; flat; placed within area
containing burned rock surface scatter; no recovery

Page 138 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-82

tn37

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/4

reddish brown

loamy
sand

less than
5%

1-82

tn37

negative

N/A

60-78

5YR4/4

reddish brown

loamy
sand

30%
no recovery; terminated due to sub-surface caliche
carbonates layer; carbonates appear around 40cm

1-82

tn37

negative

40% short grass

0-20

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

loamy
sand

less than
5%

located near ridge top- about 8m W of JK8; tested for
western site expansion; no recovery

1-82

tn37

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR4/4

reddish brown

loamy
sand

10%

no recovery

1-82?

pb33

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/8

re

sandy
loam

10%

no comments

1-89

ks41

negative

dead grass,
mesquite 65%

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty loam 30%

in between two hillsides to the W and E. no slope, 35%
visibility, no recovery

1-89

ks41

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty loam 35%

increase in gravel. No recovery

1-89

ks41

negative

N/A

60-70

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty loam 40%

increase in gravel. No recovery

no recovery

Page 139 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-89

ks41

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty loam 30%

no reocvery

1-89

ks42

negative

dead grass, trees 0-20
95%

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
less than
clay loam 5%

no slope, 5% visibility, very compact soil, trees 1020ft tall. No recovery

1-89

ks42

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
less than
clay loam 5%

no recovery

1-89

ks42

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
5-10%
clay loam

hard brown clay at 57cm. No recovery.

1-89

ks43

negative

patches of grass, 0-20
yucca 25%

7.5YR6/6

reddish yellow

sand

less than
5%

no slope. 75% visibility. ST appears to be on what
used to be a river. There is a creek 40m S. no recovery

1-89

ks43

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR6/6

reddish yellow

sand

less than
5%

no recovery

1-89

ks43

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR6/6

reddish yellow

sand

less than
5%

no recovery

1-89

ks43

negative

N/A

60-80

7.5YR6/6

reddish yellow

sand

less than
5%

sand throughout the entire ST. no recovery

Page 140 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-89

ks44

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

slight change in soil around 40cm to more sand, no
recovery

1-89

ks44

negative

N/A

60-70

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

no recovery

1-89

ks44

negative

90% dead grass 0-20
small shrubs and
trees

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
less than
clay loam 5%

0% slope, 10% visibility, no recovery

1-89

ks44

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
1000%
clay loam

no recovery

1-89

ks45

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

15%

larger gravel size (2cm-5cm); no recovery

1-89

ks45

negative

N/A

60-70

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

15%

no recovery

1-89

ks45

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

no recovery

1-89

ks45

negative

dead grass,
sunflowers,
mesquite 95%

0-20

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

0% slope, 5% visibility; no recovery

Page 141 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-89

ks46

negative

1-89

ks46

1-89

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

dead grass, trees, 0-20
sunflowers 5%

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy silt less than
loam
5%

0% slope, 5% visibility; no recovery

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy silt less than
loam
5%

no recovery

ks46

negative

N/A

40-50

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
less than
silty loam 5%

very compact soil throughout ST; no recovery

1-89

ks47

negative

N/A

20-30

7.5YR3/4

brown

clay

ST terminated- abrupt boundary of hard darker clay at
30cm; no recovery

1-89

ks47

negative

dead grass, trees, 0-20
sunflowers, 90%

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
less than
clay loam 5%

0% slope; 10% visibility; no recovery

1-89

ks48

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

loamy
sand

less than
5%

10% slope to the N; 20% visibility; no recovery

1-89

ks48

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

loamy
sand

less than
5%

no recovery

1-89

ks48

negative

dead grass,
mesquite 80%

0-20

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

loamy
sand

less than
5%

10% slope to the N 20% visibility; no recovery

%Gravels Comments

less than
5%

Page 142 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-89

ks49

negative

dead grass and
mesquite 85%

0-20

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

sandy
less than
clay loam 5%

0% slope, 15% visibility, no recovery

1-89

ks49

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

sandy
less than
clay loam 5%

no recovery

1-89

ks49

negative

N/A

40-50

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

sandy
less than
clay loam 5%

small amount of CaCO3 present. No recovery

1-89

ks50

negative

dead grass,
mesquite 40%

0-8

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

sandy silt 90%
loam

0% slope, 60% visibility. About 30m N there is an
abrupt increase of gravel. Terminated because of high
density of gravel. No recovery

1-89

ks51

negative

dead grass,
mesquite 30%

0-20

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

0% slope, 70% visibility. Thin layer of red sediment
on top of caliche at 15cm; no recovery

1-89

ks52

negative

dead grass

0-15

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy silt ?
loam and
clay

0% slope, 35% visibility; ST terminated because at
15cm there is a layer of mud that might be a
conglomerate; no recovery; modern trash heap 15m to
the W (GPS 103)

1-89

ks53

negative

dead grass,
yucca, cholla,
sunflowers 70%

0-20

5YR5/6

yellowish red

sandy silt 15%
loam

10% slope to the north. Start of a slope for a hill. The
hill contains a high concentration of gravel. ST
terminated because of high density of gravel. No
recovery

1-89

ks65

negative

70% dead grass
mesquite 75%

0-20

5YR5/4

reddish brown

loamy
sand

no slope. 25% visibililty. No recovery

?

10%

Page 143 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-89

ks65

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR5/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

less than
5%

very compact sandy loam. No recovery

1-89

ks65

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/4

reddish brown

loamy
sand

5%

decrease in gravel. Slow change of soil to more red.
No recovery

1-89

pb40

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

10%

no comments

1-89

pb40

negative

N/A

40-70

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

10%

no comments

1-89

pb40

negative

tall grass

0-20

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam

15%

parcel 1-89. 40% surface visibility. No slope

1-89

rp38

negative

60% short grass

0-40

5YR5/6

yellowish red

silty loam 80%

side of hill. Gentle slope to W. yucca and mesquite.
Ended at caliche

1-89

ss37

negative

70% short grass, 0-80
mesquite trees

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
loam

20%

larger hills/uplifts to N and NW. agriculture/boar
present. No cultural material observed.

1-89

tn38

negative

70% short
grass/leaf litter

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
loam

10%

2% Nwerly slope on a slightly sloping flood plain;
about 30% ground visibility- hardwood trees so a good
deal of leaf litter; no recovery

0-20

Page 144 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-89

tn38

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/4

brown

loamy
sand

10%

1-89

tn38

negative

N/A

40-55

7.5YR4/4, 7.5YR6/4

brown, light brown

loamy
sand,
caliche/lo
amy sand

less than no recovery; terminated due to caliche nodules; first
5%,
carbonates appear around 48cm
almost all
carbonates

1-89

tn39

negative

95% short
grass/leaf litter

0-20

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
loam

about
15%

1-89

tn39

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
20%
loam
(compact)

1-89

tn39

negative

N/A

40-58

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
50%
no recovery; terminated due to hitting nodules of
loam
almost all carbonates layer; first carbonates appear around 50cm
(compact) carbonates depth

1-89

tn40

negative

N/A

40-50

7.5YR4/4 and 5YR7/3

brown and pink

sandy
about
no recovery; terminated due to layer of caliche
loam/cali 20% and
che
almost all
carbonates

1-89

tn40

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
about 10% no recovery; soil becomes very compact around 23cm
loam
(compact)

1-89

tn40

negative

50% short grass
and leaf litter

0-20

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
loam

soil begins to get sandier with depth; no recovery

nearly flat flood plain with about 20% surface
visibility due to leaf litter from numrous hardwoods;
no recovery

no recovery; soil becomes more compact with depth
but little color change

about 10% nearly flat flood plain with about 30% ground
visibility and sparse hardwood/short knee-high grass
coverage; no recovery

Page 145 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-89

tn41

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

sandy
45%
no recovery; around 32cm soil becomes very dry and
clay (dry) carbonates contains carbonate particles; terminated due to supercompact clay with carbonate nodules

1-89

tn41

negative

95% short grass

0-20

7.5YR4/3

brown

sandy
loam

15%
nearly flat ridge top 2m W of stream bed and about
sandstone 40m S of main tributary; lightly moderate hardwood
and quartz coverage; no recovery

1-89

tn42

negative

N/A

40-48

7.5YR4/6 and 7.5YR7/3 strong brown and
pink

25%carbo no recovery; carbonates appear around beginning of
nates and level; terminated due to carbonate nodules in lighter,
almost all less compact matrix
carbonates

1-89

tn42

negative

95% short grass

0-20

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
loam
(compact)
and
caliche
sandy
loam

1-89

tn42

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
10%
no recovery; soil exhibits no color change but become
loam
sandstone very compact around 25cm in depth
(compact) and quartz

1-89

tn43

negative

95% short grass

0-20

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
loam

less than
5%

nearly flat ridge top; lightly moderate cactus and
mesquite coverage; about 35% surface visibility with
short grass; no recovery

1-89

tn43

negative

N/A

20-35

7.5YR4/4 and 7.5YR3/4 brown and dark
brown

tn44

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR3/4

almost
none and
about
10%
carbonates
less than
5%

no recovery; soil becomes very compact within 10cm
of surface; terminated due to very dry, hard-packed,
darker brown sub-soil clay layer

1-89

sandy
loam
(compact)
and
sandy
sandy
loam
(compact)

dark brown

%Gravels Comments

10%
nearly flat ridge top; lightly moderate hardwood and
sandstone mesquite coverage; about 35% surface visibility with
and quartz short grass; no recovery

no recovery; soil very dry and compact

Page 146 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-89

tn44

negative

N/A

40-53

7.5YR3/3

dark brown

sandy
about
no recover; clay first appears around 40cm depth;
clay (dry) 20%
terminated due to extremely compact sub-soil clay
carbonates clayer with about 20% carbonates

1-89

tn44

negative

100% short grass 0-20

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

sandy
less than
loam
5%
(compact)

nearly flat ridge top; lightly moderate scrubby cover
with almost no ground visibility due to short grass
(less than 10%); no recovery

1-89

tn45

negative

100% short grass 0-20

7.5YR3/2 and 7.5YR3/4 dark brown

clearing on ridge top; about 10% surface visibility due
to short grass; thin layer (2cm) of hard-packed sandy
loam atop very dry clay; no recovery; terminated after
first level due to continuation of clay layer

1-89

tn46

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/4

brown

almost
sandy
none
loamy
clay and
sandy
clay (dry)
sand
almost
none

1-89

tn46

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR5/4

brown

sand

almost
none

no recovery

1-89

tn46

negative

5% short grass

0-20

5YR5/4

brown

loamy
sand

almost
none

top of a sandy saddle above ridge clearing where
TN45 was; knee-high scrub brush covering 20% of
small 10-12m hill; no recovery

1-89

tn46

negative

N/A

60-80

5YR6/4

light brown

sand

almost
none

no recovery; sand very dry with color change occuring
around 65cm

1-89

tn46

negative

N/A

80-100

5YR6/4

light brown

sand

almost
none

no recovery; terminated at depth of 1m

no recovery

Page 147 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-89

tn47

negative

95% short grass

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

less than
5% and
10%

1-89

tn47

negative

N/A

20-33

2.5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

sandy
loam
(compact)
and
sandy
sandy
clay
(compact)

1-89

tn48

negative

10% short grass

0-20

1-89

tn49

negative

95% short grass

0-20

1-89

tn49

negative

N/A

20-39

1-89

tn50

negative

N/A

20-46

1-89

tn50

negative

80% short grass

0-20

50%
2.5YR4/6 and 2.5YR7/1 red and light reddish dried
carbonates
gray
sandy
loam and and
almost all
caliche
carbonates
less than
2.5YR4/6 and 5YR3/3 red and dark reddish sandy
loam and 5% and
brown
10%
sandy
carbonates
loamy
clay
10%carbo
5YR3/3
dark reddish brown sandy
nes
loamy
clay and
sandy
clay (dry)
less than
sandy
5YR4/6 and 7.5YR4/6 yellowish red and
loam and 5% and
45%
sandy
clay/calic carbonates
he
5YR4/6
yellowish red and
sandy
less than
strong brown
loam
5%

1-89

tn51

negative

N/A

20-28

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
clay

nearly flat ridge; about 30% surface visibility with
short grass and light hardwood and mesquite coverage
no recovery

10%
no recovery; terminated when significant amount of
carbonates carbonates appeared in very compact and dry darker
brown clay

about 30m diamter 1-1.5m high hilltop rising from
ridge; almost 100% surface visibility; terminated after
first level despite hitting caliche within 2cm to ensure
that continuation of the gypsum layer
nearly flat ridge with about 10% surface visibility
overall; lightly moderate hardwood and mesquite
coverage; soil change occurs about 5cm; no recovery

no recovery; terminated due to carbonates in hardpacked dry clay

clay chunks begin appearing around 30-35cm; no
recovery; terminated when hard-packed clay layer
began showing caliche.

nearly flat ridge; short grass and sparse hardwoods and
mesquite give surface visibility of around 30% overall
no recovery; soil in first 10cm extremely packed.

approx.
no recovery; clay began to appear near beginning of
40%
level; terminated when clay layer became hard-packed
carbonates and showed significant carbonates

Page 148 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-89

tn51

negative

95% short grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

less than
5%

10% slope about 5m S of top of ridge; surface
visibility of about 40%- rest obscured by short grass,
hardwoods, and small brush; no recovery

1-9

ks01

negative

N/A

60-80

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

sandy
loam

5-10%

no change in soil; negative

1-9

ks01

negative

small
grass/bushes
100%

0-20

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

sandy
loam

0-5%

0% slope, no surface visibility; no recovery

1-9

ks01

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

sandy
loam

0%

no recovery

1-9

ks01

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

sandy
loam

0-5%

no recovery

1-9

ks02

negative

N/A

60-80

5YR5/4

brown

sandy
clay

30-40%

negative

1-9

ks02

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR5/4

brown

sandy
clay

10-20%

less clay and more sand at 45cm; start of more gravel;
no recovery

1-9

ks02

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/4

brown

clay sand 0-5%

clay around 30-40cm; no recovery

Page 149 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-9

ks02

negative

small
grass/bushes

0-20

5YR5/6

strong brown

sandy
clay

0-5%

0% clope, no surface visibility; no recovery

1-9

ks03

negative

shrubs and grass 0-20
100%

7.5YR3/2

dark brown

sandy
loam

0%

0% slope, 0% visibility same roots 6cm diameter

1-9

ks03

negative

N/A

60-80

7.5YR3/1

very dark gray

sandy
loam

0%

no recovery

1-9

ks03

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR3/1

very dark gray

sandy
loam

0%

soil slightly darker; no recovery

1-9

ks03

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR3/1

very dark gray

sandy
loam

0%

no recovery

1-9

ks04

negative

30% dead grass

0-20

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
loam

rt; no recovery; knee-high grasses all around

1-9

ks04

negative

N/A

60-70

7.5YR3/3 to 7.5YR3/4

dark brown

sandy
clay

5-10%
small
chert and
limestone
pebbles
less than
5% chert
pebbles

1-9

ks04

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR3/3 to 7.5YR3/4

dark brown

sandy silt less than
loam to 5% chert
sandy
pebbles
clay

not uniformly compact clay with inclusions of
sandstone and bedrock- more beige to yellow in color;
no recovery; terminated due to bedrock

soil grayer at top of level with more red towards
bottom. Redder material has higher clay content; no
recovery

Page 150 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-9

ks04

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/4

brown

sandy
loam

no recovery; soil change at 38cm

1-9

tn01

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR5/8

strong brown

sandy
loam

5-10%
small
chert and
limestone
pebbles
less than
1%

1-9

tn01

negative

0%

0-20

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

sand

less than
1%

flat; no recovery

1-9

tn01

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR5/8

strong brown

sandy
loam

less than
1%

no recovery

1-9

tn01

negative

N/A

60-78

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

sandy
clay

less than
1%

terminated due to clay

1-9

tn02

negative

N/A

60-80

7.5YR4/4

brown

sand

5-10%
limestone
gravels

no recovery; soil change occurs at 78cm

1-9

tn02

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

loamy
sand

less than
1%

no recovery

1-9

tn02

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

loamy
sand

less than
1%

no recovery; switch in soil type occurred approx.
35cm; no recovery

no recovery

Page 151 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-9

tn02

negative

80% dead grass

0-20

7.5YR3/3

dark brown

sandy
loam

less than
1%

flat; surface visible once grass litter cleared away; no
recovery

1-9

tn02

negative

N/A

80-95

7.5YR5/2

brown

sandy
clay

5-10%

no recovery; termated at 1m because could no longer
reach

1-9

tn03

negative

N/A

60-77

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
clay

almost
none

soil change at about 75cm from lighter caliche/sand to
reddish sandy clay; terminated due to clay

1-9

tn03

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

loamy
about
sand/calic 10%
he
limestone

soil change approx. 60cm; inclusions of crumbling
limestone caliche

1-9

tn03

negative

80% dead grass

0-20

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

sandy silt less than
loam
10%

bottom of slight uphill slope covered in woody shrubs
no recovery

1-9

tn03

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

sandy silt less than
loam
10%

no recovery

1-9

tn04

negative

0%

0-20

5YR5/6

yellowish red

sand

1-9

tn04

negative

N/A

80-100

7.5YR6/6

reddish yellow

caliche

less than
1% small
chert
pebbles
(2cm or
caliche

RT; located on what may be an overgrown path
because all around ground is covered in knee-high
grasses; no recovery

no recovery; terminated at 1m

Page 152 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-9

tn04

negative

N/A

60-80

7.5YR6/6

reddish yellow

1-9

tn04

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR5/6

yellowish red

1-9

tn04

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/6

yellowish red

1-93

kf43

negative

N/A

40-50

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

loamy
less than
sand/calic 1% small
he
chert
pebbles
(2cm or
loamy
less than
sand
1% small
chert
pebbles
(2cm or
loamy
less than
sand
1% small
chert
pebbles
(2cm or
sandy
0%
clay loam

1-93

kf43

negative

100% open ag
field

0-40

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

silty loam 0%

open ag field with no livestock present, possible
plowed field. 100% surface visibility and zero artifacts
collected

1-93

kf44

negative

N/A

50-60

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

1-93

kf44

negative

100% open ag
field

0-50

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

silty loam 0%

open ag field with no livestock present, possible
plowed field. 100% surface visibility and zero artifacts
collected

1-93

kf45

negative

N/A

30-40

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

sandy
0%
clay loam

no comments

no recovery; change to caliche at approx 72cm

no recovery

no recovery

no comments

Page 153 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-93

kf45

negative

100% open ag
field

0-30

7.5YR3/4

dark brown

silty loam 0%

STP located on S end of ag field with 100% surface
visibility and zero artifacts unearthed

1-93

kf46

negative

100% sand bank 0-100

7.5YR6/6

reddish yellow

sandy

0%

STP offset next to sand due with 30% slope and 200m
S of river. 80% surface visibility and zero artifacts
collected.

1-93

kf47

negative

100% red dirt

0-40

5YR5/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

90%

STP located on a small bluff overlooking Salt Fork
Brazos River with 90% surface visibility. A small
lithic scatter surrounding STP, but no artifacts
recovered in STP. Term due to bedrock at 40cmbs

1-93

kf48

negative

N/A

50-60

5YR5/6

yellowish red

compact
sandy
loam

0%

Terminated due to CaCO3 at 50cmbs with 80%
surface visibility and zero artifacts recovered

1-93

kf48

negative

95% grassy field 0-50
with mesquite

5YR5/6

yellowish red

compact
sandy
loam

0%

no comments

1-93

kf49

negative

N/A

5YR4/6

yellowish red

compact 0%
silty loam

no comments

1-93

kf49

negative

90% grassy field 0-30
with sunflower
and mesquite

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty loam 100%

Terminated due to large deposit of gravel at 40cmbs,
surface visibility is 80% and zero artifacts unearthed.

1-93

rc30

negative

20% weeds

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

silty clay 5%

no slope, 85% surface visibility. Old ag field. Negative

30-40

0-20

%Gravels Comments

Page 154 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-93

rc30

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay loam 5%

negative

1-93

rc30

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay

negative

1-93

rc31

negative

20% weeds

0-60

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

silty clay 0%

no slope, 85% surface visibility. Old ag field. Negative

1-93

rc31

negative

N/A

60-80

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay

negative

1-93

rc32

negative

20% weeds

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

silty clay 0%

no slope. 85% surface visibility. Old ag field. Negative

1-93

rc32

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay

0%

negative

1-93

rc33

negative

90% grass

0-80

5YR4/4

reddish brown

sandy
clay

0%

45% slope. 20% surface visibility. Tall grasses and
small shrubs. Negative. Associated with lithic scatter
#4

1-93

rc34

negative

2% grass patches 0-15

5YR5/6

yellowish red

silty clay 20%

10%

0%

10% slope. 100% surface visibility. Patches of grass,
small shrubs. Gypsum deposits exposed. Near edge of
high bank

Page 155 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-93

rc34

negative

N/A

15

gypsum deposit

N/A

N/A

0%

no comments

1-93

rc35

negative

80% grass

0-20

5YR4/4

reddish brown

clay

0%

10% slope. 10% surface visibility. Grasses, small
trees, and shrubs.

1-93

rc36

negative

70% grass

0-80

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sand
loam

50%

40% slope. 25% surface visibility. Low grasses and
shrubs. At base of hill. Negative.

1-93

rp39

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay

0%

no comments

1-93

rp39

negative

40% sunflowers

0-20

5YR5/6

yellowish red

silty clay 0%

field. Chunk and compact high-clay content. Flat,
previously plowed. Core found 200m N on road

1-93

rp40

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR5/6

yellowish red

silty clay 0%

no comments

1-93

rp40

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/6

yellowish red

silty loam 0%

no comments

1-93

rp40

negative

40% grass

0-20

5YR5/6

yellowish red

silty loam 0%

field. Silty, wet, loose soil. Ended at clay

Page 156 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-93

rp41

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

silty clay 10%

no comments

1-93

rp41

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/6

yellowish red

silty loam 10%

no comments

1-93

rp41

positive

80% grass and
sunflower

0-20

5YR5/6

yellowish red

silty loam 0%

green historic glass shard 1cm x 1cm (base of bottle?)
at surface. No other artifacts-- may have moved
(plowed field) ended at clay

1-93

rp42

negative

15% dry grass

0-20

5YR5/6

yellowish red

silty clay 80%

western boundary of sit, 5m from core(on surface) to E
slopes upward and to N approx. 60m is ravine and
creek

1-93

rp42

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/6

yellowish red

silty clay 100%

chunks of gypsum throughout

1-93

rp42

negative

N/A

40-50

5YR5/6

yellowish red

silty clay 100%

ended at green mineral

1-93

rp43

negative

50% grass

0-20

5YR5/6

yellowish red

silty clay 0%

negative test; end of site. Still an upland area, sloping
down to the E. Gypsum-rich soil. Stopped at caliche.

1-93

rp44

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

clay

no comments

0%

Page 157 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-93

rp44

negative

90% grass and
sunflowers

0-20

5YR5/6

yellowish red

silty clay 0%

clumpy and compact clay-rich soil in flat pastureland
with mesquite

1-96

cg51

negative

N/A

40-50

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

silty sand 50%

larger-irregular-shaped cobbles mixerd with pea-sized
gravels. No artifacts. Very dry soil.

1-96

cg51

negative

75% short and
waist high grass

0-20

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

silty sand 50%

down slope from access road. 25%- hillside surface
visibility, gravels throughout surface. Very dry,
powdery soil. No artifacts. Scrub brush and cholla
cactus.

1-96

cg51

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

silty sand 50%

large/golf ball-sized cobbles mixed with smaller peasized gravels. No artifacts. Very dry soil.

1-96

cg52

negative

90% knee-high 0-20
grass and prickly
pear

2.5YR4/8

red

silty loam 0%

hill top among prickly pear and mesquite. 10% surface
visibility. Very dry silty soil. No artifacts

1-96

cg52

negative

N/A

20-30

2.5YR4/8

red

silty loam 0%

platey/consolidated dirt clots with CaCO3 specks.
Reached hard/consolidated soil.

1-96

cg53

negative

75% short and
knee-high grass

0-20

2.5YR4/8

red

silty loam 0%

downhill in basin. 25% surface visibility. Sotol,
mesquite and sunflowers. Dry/powdery soil. No
artifacts.

1-96

cg53

negative

N/A

20-40

2.5YR4/8

red

silty loam 0%

dry/powdery soil. No artifacts. No change in soil
type/texture/color

Page 158 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-96

cg53

negative

N/A

40-70

2.5YR4/8

red

silty loam 0%

no artifacts. No change in soil from previous levels.

1-96

cg54

negative

75% waist high
weeds, prickly
pear

0-20

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

silty clay 0%

no artifacts. Hilltop among prickly pear fields and
mesquite, sunflowers. Dry powdery soil. Bioturbationroots.

1-96

cg54

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

silty clay less than
5%

no artifacts. Reached hard/consolidated soil.
Dry/powdery soil.

1-96

cg55

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay less than
5%

CaCO3 less than 5%. No change from previous level,
reached harder consolidated soil. Tap root.

1-96

cg55

negative

100% knee-high 0-20
grass

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay less than
5%

15% slope, no surface visibility. Downslope from hill.
Prickly pear patches, mesquite, cedars, grass roots. No
artifacts. Dry soil.

1-96

cg56

negative

85% short grass, 0-20
mesquite, cedar

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay 10%

downslope from eroding hillside, 25% slope. 15%
surface visibility, large boulders 2-40m SW from test
pit. Cedar, mesquite, prickly pear, thorn scrub. No
artifacts, dry silty soil, platey CaCO3 deposits 25%

1-96

cg56

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay less than
5%

platey, consolidated soil and CaCO3 deposits. No
artifacts. Reached compact soil.

1-96

cg57

negative

N/A

20-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay 0%

shovel test obstructed by large rock below surface. No
artifacts. Dry silty soil.

Page 159 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-96

cg57

negative

1-96

cg58

1-96

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

85% short grass, 0-20
thorn scrub,
cedar

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty clay less than
5%

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR6/1, 2.5YR4/4

gray, reddish brown silty loam 0%

gray soil layer followed by reddish brown layer. Soil i
platey and dry. No artifacts.

cg58

negative

15% short grass

0-20

5YR4/6, 5YR6/1

yellowish red, gray

silty loam less than
5%

1-96

cg59

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty loam less than
5%

approx. 10m from TN58 SW direction in lithic scatter
area. 85% surface visibility. Cedar, thornscrub, short
grass. Downslope from eroding hill. Gray soil
inclusion 5YR6/1 approx. 10%. No artifacts.
Associated with lithic scatter #5
white crystalline inclusion in soil, powdery when
broken up. Soil becomes more solid and rock-like. Dry
soil. Soil becomes more compact. No artifacts

1-96

cg59

negative

75% short and
tall grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty loam less than
5%

downslope from rolling hills, 25% surface visibility.
Cedars, mesquite, thornscrub. No artifacts, dry silty
soil

1-96

cg60

negative

75% short grass, 0-20
cypress

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty loam 25%

ridge, cedar, thornbrush, prickly pear gravel on
surface. Soil compact and rock-like. No further
digging due to large rocks below surface. No artifacts.

1-96

kf61

negative

99% grassy field 0-30

5YR4/4

reddish brown

silty loam 0%

STP located on terrace. Terminated at 40cmbs due to
compact soil. 10% surface visibility and zero artifacts
unearthed.

1-96

kf61

negative

N/A

5YR4/4

reddish brown

very
compact
silty
loam
with

30-40

%Gravels Comments

0%

upslope (25%) from ravine/gulley, 15% surface
visibility, cedar, thorn scrub and sotol. No artifacts.
Dry silty soil

no comments

Page 160 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-96

kf62

negative

1-96

kf63

1-96

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

99% grassy field 0-30

5YR4/4

reddish brown

very
100%
compact
silty loam

extremely compact soil with gravels throughout strat,
terminated at 30cmbs due to thickness of gravels. 10%
surface visibility with knee-high grass and zero
artifacts.

negative

99% grassy field 0-30

5YR4/4

reddish brown

very
100%
compact
silty loam

STP located on small terrace with gravel visible on
surface, terminated at 30cm due to gravels. 10%
surface visibility and zero artifacts collected.

kf64

negative

N/A

5YR4/4

reddish brown

very
100%
compact
silty loam

no comments

1-96

kf64

negative

99% grassy field 0-30

5YR4/4

reddish brown

very
0%
compact
silty loam

STP located in ag field with livestock present with
ankle-high grass and 30% surface visibility. Zero
artifacts collected.

1-96

kf65

negative

95% grassy field 0-70

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty loam 0%

STP located on ridgetop overlooking floodplain with
livestock present. CaCO3 at 70cmbs, 30% surface
visibility and zero artifacts unearthed.

1-96

kf65

negative

N/A

5YR4/6

yellowish red

compact 0%
silty loam

no comments

1-96

kf66

negative

95% grassy field 0-30

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silty loam 100%

STP located on eroded ridgetop overlooking ravine
with gravel present on surface. 40% surface visibility
and zero artifacts collected.

1-96

kf67

negative

N/A

5GY7/1

light greenish gray

?

no comments

30-40

70-80

20-30

%Gravels Comments

?

Page 161 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

1-96

kf67

negative

1-96

kf68

1-96

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

95% grassy field 0-20

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

silty loam 100%

STP located next to eroded hillside with gley at
20cmbs, gravel throughout surface with 100% surface
visibility and zero artifacts removed

negative

95% grassy field 0-40

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

silty loam 100%

STP located next to eroded hillside with gravel
throughout strat. Terminated due to sandstone at
40cmbs 80% surface visibility and zero artifacts
collected.

rc37

negative

90% grass

0-40

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

clay

0%

2% slope. 10% surface visibility. Tall grasses, small
trees and shrubs. Negative

1-96

rc38

negative

90% grass

0-60

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

silty sand 0%

5% slope, 10% surface visibility. Tall grasses, small
trees and shrubs. Negative. Next to existing pipeline

1-96

rc39

negative

90% grass

0-80

5YR3/4

dark reddish brown

silty clay 0%

5% slope, 10% surface visibility. Tall grass, small
trees and shrubs. Negative

1-96

rp54

negative

100% grass

0-20

5YR5/6

yellowish red

silty clay 0%

high clay content, very compact ranchland, cacti and
mesquite

1-96

rp54

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR5/6

yellowish red

silty clay 0%

ended at caliche

1-96

tn52

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

30%
no recovery; soil very loose and dry
sandstone
pebbles

Page 162 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-96

tn52

negative

N/A

40-47

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
almost all no recovery; carbonate nodules appeared around
loam/cali carbonates 35cm; terminated due to presence of caliche powder
che
with carbonate nodules

1-96

tn52

negative

98% short-knee
high grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

1%
about 5% slope upwards to the N- sort of a slightly
sandstone sloped bench; sparse mesquite coverage/mostly kneepebbles
high grass 5% surface visibility

1-96

tn53

negative

15% short-knee
high grass

0-18

5YR4/6, 5YR7/1

yellowish red, light
gray

sandy
loam,
caliche

20%, all
atop a small exposed ridge- nearly flat; great surface
carbonates visibility- about 85% overall; no recovery; terminated
due to caliche

1-96

tn54

negative

100% short grass 0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

10%

1-96

tn54

negative

N/A

20-36

5YR4/6, 5YR7/1

yellowish red, light
gray

sandy
loam,
caliche

1-96

tn55

negative

95% short grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

no recovery; carbonates appeared around 15cm but
15%,
almost all terminated due to a layer of mostly caliche and
carbonates nodules; Began near ridge that sloped gen. down S
about 300 m. Between CG52 and TN53, drops off,
exposures of bedrock with washed; pretty but no
less than sloping hillside with about 15% grade towards
5%
drainage to the NW; about 5% surface visibility
through short grass on hillside; no recovery

1-96

tn55

negative

N/A

20-42

5YR4/6, 2.5YR4/6

yellowish red,
reddish yellow

sandy
loam,
sandy
clay

10%,
no recovery; carbonates appear around 35cm along
50% clay with chunks of very dry clay; terminated when
and 5%
carbonate nodules appeared in hard-packed clay
carbonates

1-96

tn56

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

less than
5%

slightly sloping upward- 1-% to the S; short tufts of
grass covering most of surface so only about 5%
visibility overall; no recovery

soil extremely dry and hard-packed beginning in level
no recovery

Page 163 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

%Gravels Comments

1-96

tn56

negative

N/A

40-52

5YR4/6, 5YR6/1

yellowish red, gray

sandy
loam,
sandy
clay

1-96

tn56

negative

80% short grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

20%
carbonates
, 50/50
clay and
carbonates
less than
5%

1-96

tn57

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silt

1-96

tn57

negative

N/A

40-60

5YR4/6

yellowish red

loamy silt almost
none

no recovery; soil change occurs around 45cm

1-96

tn57

negative

N/A

60-80

5YR4/6

yellowish red

loamy silt almost
none

no recovery

1-96

tn57

negative

N/A

80-100

5YR4/6

yellowish red

loamy
almost
sandy silt none

no recovery; more sandy than previous levels;
terminated due to 1m depth- all alluvial deposits
because drainage so close

1-96

tn57

negative

30% dead grass

0-20

5YR4/6

yellowish red

silt

almost
none

floodplain-nearly flat; located 4m SE of a drainage;
surface visibility 10% due to lightly moderate
cedar/mesquite and short knee-high grass coverage

1-96

tn58

negative

0%

0-20

5YR4/6, 5YR7/1,
2.5YR4/4

yellowish red, light sandy
gray, reddish brown loam,
caliche,
siltstone

40%
quartz,
all, all

top of bench- nearly flat; clear except for occasional
cedar- surface visibility 100%. Hit carbonates with
first shovelful then caliche about 8cm then red-brown
siltstone; no recovery

almost
none

no recovery; clay chunks appeared around 45cm;
terminated when tabular carbonate nodules appeared
in hard-packed clay

top of ridge- nearly flat; sparse mesquite/woody
thorned trees and cedar coverage- prickly pear and
cholla cactus so about 5% surface visibility; Around
TN55, drainages running down into main channel 400
m behind CG56 and TN57 on ridge with sparse cedar
no recovery

Page 164 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

1-96

tn59

negative

0%

0-20

5YR4/6, 5YR7/1,
2.5YR4/4

yellowish red, light sandy
gray, reddish brown loam,
caliche,
siltstone

40%
quartz,
all, all

4m S of tn58; same environment; nearly identical
except caliche layer at 12cm; terminated after first
level to ensure continuation; dug in association with
lithic scatter #5

1-96

tn60

negative

100% knee-high 0-20
grass

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

almost
none

flat bench top 2m above floodplain and bin drainage N
6m; poor surface visibility due to grass, cedars and
cacti approx. 5%; no recovery

1-96

tn60

negative

N/A

40-64

5YR4/6, 5YR6/1

yellowish red, gray

sandy
loam,
caliche

65%
no recovery; terminated when caliche/sandy loam
carbonates layer had carbonate nodules

1-96

tn60

negative

N/A

20-40

5YR4/6

yellowish red

sandy
loam

almost
none

1-96

wh45

negative

ankle high grass 0-20; 0-15 plow z 5YR4/4

reddish brown

plowzone less than
silty
5%
sandy
loam

1-96

wh45

negative

N/A

compact 5YR4/4

reddish brown

compact 50%
silty loam

1-96

wh46

negative

ankle high grass no soil

no soil

no soil

no soil

90%

edge of escarpment with sandstone caprock. Lots of
gravels 90% gravels and 25 degree slope.

1-96

wh47

negative

eroded

?

?

?

?

eroded drainage. Photo #5 facing S, basin like edges
50m N/S (kenny in background)

20-40

?

Texture

%Gravels Comments

no recovery; soil becomes very compact around 35cm

loose silty sandy loam, slight gentle slope. Few
gravels, GSV 50% plowzone is about 15-20cmbs. The
soil becomes more compact and gravel lens is visible
at 35cmbs (gravels approx. 5cm) but dense. Subsoil is
below that
no comments

Page 165 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-96

wh48

negative

flat low grass

0-10

5YR5/4

reddish brown

very
less than
compact 5%; pea
silty clay sized
loam

humic plow zone approx 10cm. Very flat surface. No
deposition. 1 gravel. Very compact. GSV 60%.

1-96

wh48

negative

N/A

10-20

2.5YR3/3

dark reddish brown

very
less than
compact 5%; pea
silty clay sized
loam

clay

1-96

wh49

negative

ankle high grass 20-40

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

very
less than
compact 10%
silty loam

(continues from pg 1) homogeneous but with small
caliche/CaCO3 inclusions. Gravels are larger than pea
sized, but less than 5cm.

1-96

wh49

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

loose

increase in CaCO3. terminated at 55cm bs on caliche.

1-96

wh49

negative

flat area
overlooking
drainage

0-20

7.5YR4/6

strong brown

silty loam less than
5%

0-5cm humic zone. Five degree slope. 60% GSV.
Ankle high grass, flat area overlooking drainage to the
W.

1-96

wh50

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR5/6, 5GY7/1

strong brown, light
greenish gray

caliche at none
35cm

hard caliche at 35cmbs- no mas. No artifacto.

1-96

wh50

negative

ankle high grass 0-20

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

silty sand less than
loam
5%
(loose)

overlooking drainage to the E, 10m. Just on flat area
before the drop-off.

1-96

wh51

negative

low grass

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

silty loam less than
5%

drainage ditch on either side of ST. no humic layer
50% GSV

0-20

%Gravels Comments

?

Page 166 of 167

Parcel

ST #

Shovel Tests

Ground Cover

Depth (cmbs)

Munsell Notation

Munsell Color

Texture

1-96

wh51

negative

N/A

20-40

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

silty loam less than
5%

very homogeneous.

1-96

wh51

negative

N/A

40-60

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

silty loam less than
5%

Terminated at 80cmbs. Probably an island. Riverine
deposits at aeolian coluvvium.

1-96

wh51

negative

N/A

60-80

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

silty loam less than
5%

no comments

1-96

wh52

negative

sotol cactus, low 0-20
grass

7.5YR5/6

strong brown

silty
0%
sandy
loam fine

15 degree slope, 50% visibility

1-96

wh52

negative

N/A

35cm rock layer

not applicable

silty
sandstone edge of arroyo; photo # 8
sandy
rock
loam fine

20-35

%Gravels Comments

Page 167 of 167

Appendix 3: Emergency Procedures for Post-Review Discoveries

Emergency Discovery Procedures for Buried Archeological Deposits:
In the unlikely event that previously-unrecognized prehistoric or historic archeological resources
are encountered during clearing or construction, there should be a designation of an on-call
Project Archeologist (PA) to investigate any such resources. If archeological resources are
identified during construction, the PA will be notified immediately as well as the site
superintendent, who will halt construction in the immediate vicinity of the find. The on-site
archeologist (monitor or PA) will flag off the area of the find, including any trenches and dirt or rock
piles from that area. Construction will not occur within the delineated area until the PA can inspect
and evaluate the find. The PA will follow accepted Texas Historical Commission (THC)
professional standards in recording the find and will submit the standard Texas Archeological Site
Data Form and location information to the TXSITE database as well as a paper copy to the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin. If the PA determines that
the find is not significant and the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) concurs, construction
will proceed without further delay. If the PA determines that further information is needed to
determine whether the find is significant/important the PA will, in consultation with the SHPO,
prepare a plan and a schedule for evaluating the find.
Construction Worker Training: WETT should implement a construction worker training program
including, but not limited to, topics such as: the definition of cultural resources, the cultural history
of the area, how to recognize cultural resources, WETT’s plan for complying with the THC
protocol, cultural resources regulations associated with the project, the monitoring plan, avoidance
and mitigation measures, and the consequences of looting.
Report of Findings: If a data recovery program is implemented during construction as a testing
or mitigation measure, the PA will prepare a report as per the THC cultural resources
investigations standard scope of work. This report will be submitted to the THC for review, and a
final copy will be submitted to the curation facility along with the collection.
Curation: If a data recovery program is implemented, the PA will arrange for curation of
archeological materials collected during archeological testing or mitigation. Collections will be
curated at a facility meeting the standards of the THC and will include artifacts, field notes,
stratigraphic profiles, photographs, and other materials developed as part of the data
recovery/mitigation program.

