GEOARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS AT THE MCNEILLGONZALES SITE (41VT141), VICTORIA COUNTY, TEXAS

A Thesis
by
MICHAEL JOHN AIUVALASIT

Submitted to the Office of Graduate Studies of
Texas A&M University
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
MASTER OF ARTS

May 2006

Major Subject: Anthropology

GEOARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS AT THE MCNEILLGONZALES SITE (41VT141), VICTORIA COUNTY, TEXAS

A Thesis
by
MICHAEL JOHN AIUVALASIT

Submitted to the Office of Graduate Stud ies of
Texas A&M University
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
MASTER OF ARTS

Approved by:
Chair of Committee,
Committee Members,
Head of Department,

Michael R. Waters
David L. Carlson
Brian Willis
David L. Carlson

May 2006

Major Subject: Anthropology

iii

ABSTRACT

Geoarchaeological Investigations at the McNeill-Gonzales Site
(41VT141), Victoria County, Texas. (May 2006)
Michael John Aiuvalasit, B.A., The University of Texas at Austin
Chair of Advisory Committee: Dr. Michael R. Waters

The McNeill-Gonzales site is a stratified multi-component prehistoric site in
Victoria County, Texas. The site is located in approximately 2 meters of fine sand that
mantle a fluvial terrace of the Guadalupe River. Geoarchaeological investigations were
conducted at this site to determine the stratigraphy of the archaeological deposits, the
processes that led to the formation of the site, and the integrity of the archaeological
deposits. Three Holocene deposits of fine sand are mantling the tread and slope of a
Pleistocene fluvial terrace of the Deweyville Formation. Granulometric studies and the
stratigraphic position of the sands suggest the deposits are eolian in nature. Artifacts
from the Late Paleoindian period (10,000 B.P.) to the Historic period were found in
generally good stratigraphic position and made possible the correlation of the three
deposits of fine sand across the site. There is evidence of bioturbation across the entire
site and disturbance by colluvial action on the southeastern slopes of the site; however,
intact human burials, hearth features, and artifacts in stratigraphic position indicate that
secondary processes have not completely compromised the integrity of the
archaeological deposits.

iv

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

As with any archaeological project, this work owes a great debt to a number of
individuals. First I must thank my advisor, Dr. Michael Waters, whose considerable
knowledge and pragmatic approach kept me focused on completing my research. Next I
thank the remainder of my committee: Dr. David Carlson for his help with the
archaeological section, and Dr. Brian Willis for entertaining the questions of an
archaeologist pretending to be a geologist. Other faculty members have provided
assistance, whether in instruction or help during my research. I would like to thank the
late Dr. Robson Bonnichsen, Dr. Vaughan Bryant, Dr. Alston Thoms, and Dr. Vatche
Tchakerian. A special thank you goes to Dr. Thomas Hallmark and his lab director Mrs.
Donna Prochaska for the training and lab time to process soil samples at the Soils
Characterization Lab in the Department of Soil and Crop Sciences.
The McNeill family deserves special appreciation from not only me but also the
entire archaeological community. Not only are they protecting an important site on their
property, but encouraging and facilitating archaeological research. Three generations of
the McNeill family have been gracious hosts to me and other researchers. Without their
support this project would not have been possible.
Mr. James Bluhm deserves special gratitude for all his work in discovering the
site, developing a strong working relationship with the McNeil family, directing the test
excavations at the site, and promoting the site to the archaeological community. His
efforts on this and other archaeological projects as a Texas Historical Commission
Steward deserve recognition from both the public and archaeological community.

v

I would like to thank the rest of the THC stewards and volunteers who have done
a tremendous job excavating and processing artifacts at the site. Special thanks go to
Mr. Bill Birmingham, Mr. Nelson Marek, Mrs. Pat Braun, and especially Mrs. Helen
Shook.
Other researchers outside A&M provided significant help. Mr. Wes Miller and
Ms. Amanda Bragg of the National Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) deserve
special thanks for bringing out a coring truck to excavate deep cores during some
inhospitable weather. I thank Dr. Steven Forman of the University of Illinois at Chicago
for analyzing my OSL samples. Dr. Charles Frederick, Dr. Bob Ricklis, and Dr. Ken
Brown gave valuable perspectives on research issues of the region. I appreciate the
advice Dr. Chris Caran and Dr. Steven Black have given me throughout my developing
career in archaeology.
I would like to thank the Council of Texas Archeologists and the Texas
Archeological Societies Donor’s Fund for providing financial support for the OSL
samples. Thanks go out to my archaeological colleagues who helped in the field: David
Foxe, Robert Lassen, Jessi Halligan, Tim Riley and John and Adrianne Campbell. I also
appreciate the help of the other researchers conducting work at the site: Matt Taylor, Dr.
Jennifer Rice, and Dr. Michael Bever.
I have to thank my family for always supporting and encouraging the path I have
found myself on. They raised me to follow my dreams, so I’m sticking to them. I must
thank my new wife Leslie. I couldn’t have completed this without her encouragement,
strength, and love. She’s going to be a much better wife than my thesis ever was.

vi

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
ABSTRACT …………………………………………………………………………….iii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ……………………………………………………………..iv
TABLE OF CONTENTS …………………………………………………….................vi
LIST OF FIGURES ……………………………………………………………………viii
LIST OF TABLES …………………………...………………………………………….x
CHAPTER
I

INTRODUCTION ……………………………………..……………..….1
Project Goals …………………………………………..……….……..2
Methods …………………………………………………….....…..…..3

II

SITE SETTING ………………………………………………….....……6
Geologic and Physiographic Setting………………………….....……..6
Environmental Setting…………………………………….….………16
Archaeological Setting..........................................................................21

III

STRATIGRAPHY ……………………………………………………...30
Beaumont Formation…………………………………………………35
Deweyville Formation………………………………………..………37
Infilled Channel, Possibly Low Deweyville………………….………44
Holocene Deposits……………………………………………………45

IV

ARCHAEOLOGICAL STRATIGRAPHY ………………………….…71
Site Stratigraphy……………………………………………………...71
Comparison to Similar Sites………………………..…………….…103

vii

CHAPTER

V

Page

CONCLUSION …...………………………………………….………..110
Model of Site Formation and Prehistoric Occupation……..………110
Suggestions for Future Work………………………………………114

REFERENCES ………………………………………………………………...……...121
APPENDIX A FIELD DESCRIPTIONS…….………………………………….…….130
APPENDIX B PARTICLE SIZE DISTRIBUTIONS…..………………………....…..159
APPENDIX C EXCAVATION AREA 4 ARTIFACT DISTRIBUTIONS……….…..163
APPENDIX D POLLEN ANALYSIS……………………….………….…………......169
VITA…………………………………………………………………………………...181

viii

LIST OF FIGURES

FIGURE

Page

1

Regional map with sites mentioned in text …………………….……….……7

2

Regional geologic cross section…………………………………….………...8

3

Regional geologic units.……...………….………………………….………..9

4

Regional geologic chronology ……………………………………………...11

5

Local geologic setting …………………………………………………........11

6

Project area soil series ……………….………………………………..…....15

7

Regional archaeological chronology and diagnostic artifacts…………........22

8

Project area cross section line……………………………………………….31

9

Geologic cross section of the project area…………………………………..32

10

Tested surfaces in the project area………………………………….……….33

11

Project area cross section…………………………………………….……...34

12

Cross section of the Beaumont scarp ……………………………………….36

13

Comparisons of Deweyville Paleosol exposures ……………………….......39

14

Exposure with Deweyville Paleosol between 96.60 and 96.20, clay
lamellae in Deweyville fluvial sands below ………………………………..40

15

Exposure of deep calcic horizon in Deweyville Formation ………………...42

16

East-West cross section of the southern edge of the Deweyville terrace…...47

17

Transect through Main Site Area …………………………………….……..48

18

Transect through Anaqua Mott ………………………………………...…...49

19

Transect through Paleo Area ……….………………………….………...…50

ix

FIGURE

Page

20

Photo of gopher mounds ………………………………………………...….53

21

Photo of Deweyville Terrace tread……………………………………….....57

22

Photo of clay lamellae in Holocene Unit Ic………………………………....57

23

Comparison of sand fraction particle size distributions…………………….67

24

Excavation area map…..……………………………………………...……..72

25

Burial Area 1 photo and profile …………………….………………..…….75

26

Burial Area 2 photo and profile ……………………….……………..…….76

27

Excavation Area 4 profile and particle size analysis…..……………..…….79

28

Photo of Excavation Area 4, Unit N397 E850, West Wall……....…..…….80

29

Excavation Area 4 artifact distributions by unit level.…...…………..…….82

30

Excavation Area 5 profile .……….…………………………………..…….84

31

Anaqua Mott 1 x 2 m unit profile …………..………………………..…….86

32

Anaqua Mott 2 x 2 m unit, west wall profile ………….……………..…….87

33

Photo overview of Paleo Area………………………………………..…….89

34

Photo of Paleo Area profile ……………...………………………..……….89

35

Paleo Area profile …………..……………………………………..……….90

36

Paleo Area Excavation unit profile ………………………………..……….94

37

Photo of Paleo Area Excavation unit (facing west wall)…………..……….95

38

Paleo Area Burial unit profile ………….…………...……………..……….98

39

Photo of Sand Pit …...…………………………………………..………...101

40

Sand Pit photo and profile ………………………………….…..………...101
.

x

LIST OF TABLES

TABLE

Page

1

Project area geologic chronology ………………………………………......35

2

Attributes of eolian sands………………………………………………..….64

3

Particle size attributes of Holocene sandy mantle..……………………..…..65

1

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION

The McNeill-Gonzales site (41VT141) is a stratified multi-component prehistoric
archaeological site in Victoria Co., Texas. The site, located on private property, was
accidentally discovered during removal of topsoil for commercial sale. The
archaeological community discovered the site in 2003 when Texas Historical
Commission (THC) Archaeological Steward, James Bluhm, traced the topsoil being sold
with artifacts back to the property of its excavation. Upon learning that the topsoil
removal was damaging an archaeological site, the landowner’s suspended the borrow pit
operation and THC stewards began salvage and test excavations at the site. The
excavations and lab analysis by the THC Stewards recovered a number of prehistoric
human burials and artifacts from the Late Paleoindian period (10,000 B.P.) to the
Historic period. The THC Stewards have made their discoveries available for viewing to
the larger archaeological community and the site has been acknowledged by visits from
state archaeologists, the academic community, and cultural resource professionals for its
potential to contribute to the archaeological knowledge of the region.
In the spring of 2004 the Texas A&M University (TAMU) Center for the Study of First
Americans (CSFA) was contacted and a team of TAMU archaeologists and physical
anthropologists visited the site. The team led by the late Dr. Robson Bonnichsen saw
______________
This thesis follows the style of American Antiquity.

2

great potential for the burials and archaeological findings from this site to provide
evidence of the earliest inhabitants of the region, and Dr. Michael Waters encouraged
my participation. The THC Stewards welcomed the involvement of the TAMU
Department of Anthropology and since the summer of 2004 I have conducted
geoarchaeological investigations at the McNeill- Gonzales site. Granulometric analysis
was conducted during the summer and fall of 2005 in the Soil Characterization Labs at
TAMU, and Dr. Steve Forman of the University of Illinois at Chicago analyzed OSL
samples during the winter of 2006.
Project Goals
The goals of the geoarchaeological investigation are threefold: (1) to describe
and interpret the cultural and natural stratigraphy at the site; (2) develop a chronology of
these deposits; and (3) make interpretations of the archaeological record from these data.
This study will determine how archaeological materials that span the Holocene became
buried in an alluvial terrace that is identified as being Pleistocene in age. It is
hypothesized that a combination of colluvial, eolian, and bioturbating processes led to
the burial of archaeological deposits in a sandy mantle that overlays a paleosol and
underlying fluvial deposits of the Pleistocene terrace. The sands of this potentially
eolian sandy mantle are hypothesized to derive from the local reworking of fluvial
deposits. Examining the complex relationships of sediments, soils, paleosols, and
archaeological materials across the site and adjacent landforms through field and lab
investigations tests these hypotheses. Conversely, if the deposits at the McNeillGonzales site do not correlate to sedimentological and stratigraphic models for

3

deposition by eolian, colluvial, or fluvial transport than the deposits could only have
been buried through a complex process of bio- and pedoturbation of Deweyville
formation sediments.
The second goal of this project is to develop a chronological framework for the
site by establishing stratigraphic relationships of deposits across the terrace from
diagnostic artifacts. Previously reported archeometric dates of burials at the site, as well
as the luminescence dating of sediments reported in this thesis will establish a
chronology that further defines the stratigraphic context of the site. Specifically, if dates
of sediments from below the paleosol in the fluvial sediments are Pleistocene in age and
sediments from above the paleosol are Holocene than a model of site burial in
Pleistocene sediments through bio- and pedo-turbation processes is untenable.
The ultimate contribution of the geoarchaeological research at the McNeillGonzales site is to interpret the stratigraphic and chronological data in order to
understand the evidence of prehistoric human behavior at both a site and regional level.
At this time analysis of the archaeological materials by the THC Stewards is ongoing, so
limited data from the analyses of artifacts and the burials are available for interpretation.
Observations of site integrity, and interpretations of paleo- landscapes are possible, and
future excavations will benefit greatly from having a geoarchaeological model of the site
to guide excavations.
Methods
A combination of field and lab work was required for this geoarchaeological
investigation. Profiles exposed during topsoil excavation and test units excavated by the

4

THC Stewards were recorded using methods and terminology specified by the USDA
Soil Survey Division Staff (1993), as well as common stratigraphic nomenclature. Hand
augering, backhoe trenching, and mechanical coring were employed to examine
subsurface portions of the site and adjacent areas. A map of the site was created using a
transit, Sokkia Total Data Station (TDS) and Garmin Geko 201 GPS Receiver.
Archaeological data from the THC Stewards excavations was used to provide the
stratigraphic position of diagnostic artifacts across the site and densities of
archaeological material by unit level in Excavation Area 4. Granulometric and limited
chemical characterization of sediments was determined using the Soils Characterization
Lab in the Agronomy Department of Texas A&M. Granulometric analyses methods
followed Kilmer and Alexander (1949) and the Soil Survey Laboratory Staff (1996).
Granulometric data was statistically analyzed in order to compare grain size distributions
to models of soil formation and sediment deposition. Dr. Steve Forman of the
University of Illinois at Chicago analyzed two sediment samples using Optically
Stimulated Luminescence (OSL) to provide dates of the underlying fluvial deposits and
colluvial deposits that contained scattered, undated artifacts. Pollen samples from the
site were processed and analyzed in the Palynology Laboratory in the Department of
Anthropology at Texas A&M to assess the potential for pollen recovery from the
archaeological deposits.
The thesis is organized to facilitate the use of these data by the widest range of
practitioners. First the physiographic, geological, environmental, and archaeological
contexts are defined. This is followed by the description and interpretation of the

5

stratigraphic units at the site. The stratigraphy of the archaeological deposits follows,
with archaeological interpretations and implications for regional geomorphic studies
concluding the work. In order to keep the body of the text free of copious tables and
data the appendices contain the majority these data. The detailed core, auger, backhoe
trench, excavation unit, and borrow pit exposure descriptions are found in Appendix A.
Granulometric data are found in Appendix B. Artifact distributions of excavation units
are found in Appendix C. The study of the potential to recover pollen from the
Holocene deposits is found in Appendix D.

6

CHAPTER II
SITE SETTING

Geologic and Physiographic Setting
Regional Geology. The McNeill-Gonzales site is located in the southeastern
portion of Texas (Figure 1). The geologic area is the south-central portion of the West
Gulf Coastal Plain. The boundaries of this region are the Balcones Escarpment to the
north and northwest, the Rio Grande and the Sierra Madre Oriental to the south and
southwest, and the Gulf of Mexico to the south and southeast. The West Gulf Coast
Plain extends east and northeast through Texas and Louisiana to the Mississippi River.
The geologic deposits of the region range from the Late Mesozoic through the Cenozoic,
and were deposited along the prograding margin of the Gulf of Mexico. Older layers
were successively overlain by younger sediments, which created an arcuate pattern of
deposits parallel to the Gulf Coast. The gently dipping beds of ancient littoral, estuarine,
deltaic, and fluvial deposits form the rolling to level surfaces of the Coastal Plain.
Parallel low ridges of resistant units, called cuestas, punctuate the plains. The cuestas
have gentle slope gulfward to the southeast and steeper northwest- facing escarpments
(Bryant et al. 1991: 17).
The Reynosa Plateau is the most coastward cuesta, expressed on the surface in
Bordes-Oakville Escarpment on the northwest side and a low ridge on the eastern
boundary called the Reynosa cuesta where the deposits dip below later Plio-Pleistocene
deposits of the Willis and Lissie Formation (Price 1933). The Reynosa Cuesta derives

7

Figure 1. Regional map with sites mentioned in text (based on USGS 2001)

from the Goliad Formation, which are of Miocene age and contain thick caliche deposits
that are resistant to erosion (Miller 1979: 87). The Guadalupe River forms the northern
boundary of the Reynosa Plateau, and to the north, the Hockley scarp separates
coastward Pleistocene Lissie Formation fluvial deposits from interior Plio-Pleistocene
Willis Formation deposits (Thornbury 1965:63-65). The McNeill-Gonzales site is
located on a terrace of the Guadalupe River just northeast of the Reynosa Plateau (Figure
2).

8

Figure 2. Regional geologic cross section (Hunt 1967 Figure 10.10, used with
permission)

Late Quaternary Geology and Geomorphology. After the Guadalupe River
passes the Reynosa Plateau it enters the level Coastal Plain deposits of fluvial, deltaic,
and estuarine sediments that can be correlated to Pleistocene glacial cycles. Small
exposures of the late Pliocene to early Pleistocene Willis Formation fluviatile deposits
exist on the uplands to the north of the site (Figure 3.). The uplands immediately
adjacent to the McNeill- Gonzales site are mapped as Lissie Formation, which are
considered to be early to middle Pleistocene and consist of sandy fluvial deposits
(Barnes 1987).

9

Figure 3. Region geologic units (Barnes 1987)

The uplands adjacent to the McNeill-Gonzales site are mapped as Lissie,
however the soils are mapped as Lake Charles clay, which is widely considered to form
in Beaumont Formation deposits (Barnes 1987, Miller 1979, Miller personal
communication 2004). Because of this though the deposits are mapped as Lissie, the
tested uplands in the project area will be considered Beaumont. The Beaumont
Formation Pleistocene fluvial, estuary-marsh, and littoral deposits of dominate large
portions of the Coastal Plain. Recent synthesis of chronometric data from across the
Coastal Plain (Figure 4) has shown the Beaumont Formation to be diachronous, with
deposits ranging from 116-74 ka to 74-30 ka (Otvos 2005). Locally,

10

thermoluminescence dating of the Beaumont Formation along the margins of the Nueces
River produced dates of 91.7 + 7.9 ka and 71.9 + 6.9 ka (Durbin et al: 1997: 122).
The Guadalupe River is one of the numerous major drainages that have their source on
the Edwards Plateau and drain across the Western Coastal Plain into the Gulf of Mexico.
It flows approximately 230 miles (370 km) and drains an area of approximately 6,070
square miles (15,720 km2 ). There are three post-Beaumont alluvial deposits associated
with the Guadalupe River. According to Barnes (1987) they are: 1) Fluviatile terraces
undetermined, which are fluvial deposits along the valley walls that could possibly
correlate to any of the Pleistocene deposits; 2) the Deweyville Formation which consists
of fluvial deposits with relict meanders of a much larger radius and curvature than the
modern channel; and 3) Holocene alluvial deposits (Figure 5). Of these deposits the
Deweyville Formation deserves the most attention because the McNeill- Gonzales site is
situated on the slope of what is mapped as a Deweyville Terrace.
Luminescence dating is providing a clearer understanding of the Deweyville
terraces across the Coastal Plain (Blum et al 1995, Durbin et al 1997, Sylvia and
Galloway 2002, Otvos 2005). Synthesis of dates on a regional level from across the
Gulf Coastal Plain suggests that the Deweyville terraces aggraded from between 60 and
18 ka, however the aggradation and incision sequences are not coeval between different
valleys of the Coastal Plain. Otvos (2005) compared dates of samples from six localities
across the Coastal Plain and found that typically a series of up to three post-Beaumont
terraces with large arcuate relict meanders are cut into older valley margins. This

11

Figure 4. Regional geologic chronology (Durbin et al 1997, Otvos 2005, Barnes 1987)

Figure 5. Local geologic setting (Barnes 1987)

12

confirms the ages presented in a local study of the Lower Nueces River, which is the
next major river valley to the south of the Guadalupe River (Durbin et al: 1997, Durbin
1999). Durbin et al (1997: 122) dated the three periods of Deweyville terrace
aggradation, which they classified as High Deweyville 60–47 ka; Middle Deweyville
43–40 ka; and Low Deweyville 35–31 ka. The only known published date for a
Deweyville terrace on the Guadalupe River comes from geoarchaeological investigations
at the Buckeye Knoll site, which is located approximately 30 km downstream from the
McNeill-Gonzales site. Five dates of sediments below archaeological deposits in the
terrace dated from between 49 and 53 ka correspond to the High Deweyville deposits of
the Nueces River (Frederick and Bateman 2004: 10).
The formation of the Deweyville terraces occurred during the Wisconsonian
(Isotope Stage 3) glaciation period of the Pleistocene. During this time sea levels
dropped dramatically due to moisture being sequestered by glaciers. By the end of this
period during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) at approximately 20 ka shorelines
along the Gulf of Mexico dropped to the mid-shelf and edge of the continental shelf,
approximately 200 to 300 km from the modern shoreline. Due to this cha nge in base
level, channels of the major drainages lengthened and down cut into the Beaumont
Formation. During this cooler, drier period the preserved Deweyville terrace sediments
are thick channel belt sands with few overbank mud deposits that commonly have a
well-drained paleosol bounding the top of the deposits. The interglacial period, which
ended the Pleistocene, caused a transgression of sea level and increase of inland
moisture. Although the increase of inland moisture caused an increase in stream

13

discharge, which caused some channel incision, rising sea level lowered stream gradients
(Blum and Tornqvist 2000: 33). This caused the drainages to accommodate more
sediments as muddy overbank deposits in the floodplain during the Late Pleistocene and
Holocene. Aggradation led to the burial of some Low Deweyville terraces (Abbott
2001: 99). The high position of the Deweyville terrace at the McNeill-Gonzales site is
inferred to be an older High Deweyville terrace and that younger Low Deweyville
terraces may be buried in the modern floodplain.
Eolian deposits comprise another geomorphic landform of the Gulf Coastal Plain.
There are two types of eolian landforms in the Gulf Coastal Plain: coastal zone dune
fields of reworked littoral sediments, and thin sandy mantles and mounds located on
high terraces, floodplains, and upland margins of streams (Abbott 2001: 50). There is
little question about the eolian origin of the coastal dune fields, but the sandy mantle
deposits are poorly understood. Debate on the depositional mechanisms of the mantle
deposits exist because the process of their formation has not been observed, they
typically lack intact bedding where disrupted by soil formation and bioturbation (Abbott
2001, Aten and Bollich 1981, and Heinrich 1993). Recent work by Otvos (2004)
provides chronological and paleoclimatic interpretations for eolian features across the
Gulf Coastal Plain. Optically stimulated luminescence (OSL), thermoluminescence
(TL), and archaeological materials were used to date eolian deposits. Dune deposits
ranged in age from post-Beaumont through the Holocene, and of these samples ten
prairie mounds were dated. Of the samples collected from prairie mounds in Texas and
southwestern Louisiana the majority dated from between 1,600 and 800 yr ago, but two

14

samples dated to 6,000 yr and 3,000 yr ago. All samples were uncomformably resting
on Beaumont or older surfaces (Otvos 2004: 114). Eolian deposits suggest a degree of
aridity during the Late Holocene, which is supported by evidence of aridity during this
time from faunal records of the Edwards Plateau of Central Texas and eolian features of
Southern High Plains (Holliday 2002, Toomey et al 1993). Unfortunately Otvos did not
sample any dunes from Deweyville Terraces or other fe atures further inland that have
questionable eolian origins, so currently there is no consensus on the ages, depositional
mechanisms, and structure of these deposits observed in the interior Coastal Plain.
Soils. The soils of the McNeill- Gonzales site and the surrounding landforms
have clear relationships to the area geology. All descriptions come from the Soil Survey
of Victoria County (Miller 1979: 147) (Figure 6). The Beaumont-Lissie Formation
uplands of clayey coastal marsh, deltaic deposits are mapped as Lake Charles (LaA) and
Decosta (DaA) Series. The Lake Charles Series is classified as fine, montmorillonitic,
thermic Typic Pelluderts. The Decosta Series are fine, montmorillonitic, hyperthermic
Vertic Ochraqualfs. The gradual scarp of the Beaumont Formation has a complex series
of soils that have mixture of properties of the clayey uplands and sandy deposits of the
Deweyville Formation terrace. The soils of the scarp are mapped as Telferner (TeA and
TeB), Dacosta-Contee Complex (DnA), and DaCosta and Telferner (DvC). DacostaContee Complex (DnA) is described as being located in depressions of Beaumont
uplands. The steepest slope of the scarp is mapped as DaCosta and Telferner (DvC).
Telferner soils are fine sandy loams that are classified as fine montmorillonitic,
hyperthermic Typic Albaqualfs.

15

Figure 6. Project area soil series (Miller 1979)

The Deweyville Terrace is mapped as Kuy (KyC) loamy sand and Fortran (FoB)
loamy fine sand. The Kuy series are deep loamy sands classified as loamy, siliceous,
hyperthermic Grossarenic Paleudalfs, and though Fortran series are described as deep
loamy fine sands that are classified as clayey, mixed, hyperthermic Grossarenic
Paleudalfs. The floodplain of the Guadalupe River consists of three soil series, Meguin
(Me), Sinton (Sn), and Trinity (To). Starting from the soils immediately adjacent to the
Deweyville terrace, the Trinity (To) are occasionally flooded deep clays that are
classified as very- fine, montmorillonitic, thermic Typic Pelluderts whereas the Meguin

16

(Me) occasionally flooded deep silty clays are classified as fine-silty, mixed,
hyperthermic Fluventic Haplustolls. The Sinton (Sn) soils are developing along the
active channel and overbank deposits of the Guadalupe River. They are classified as
fine- loamy, mixed, hyperthermic Cumulic Haplustolls.
The soils of the McNeill-Gonzales site are mapped as Kuy series. Kuy soils are
found on upland terraces along streams and make up only 1.2 percent of the soils of
Victoria County. The surface A horizon is a slightly acid, light brownish gray loamy
sand about 15 cm thick. The A21 horizon is slightly acid, light gray loam sand from 15
to 101 cm. The A22 horizon is from 101 cm to 130 cm and is mildly alkaline white
loamy sand. The B2tg horizon is strongly acid, mottled, light gray sandy clay loam
subsoil that was described to the depth of 203 cm. The soil is moderately well drained,
with moderate permeability, and low available water capacity. There is a perched water
table at a depth of 90 to 150 cm during rainy seasons. Surface runoff is very slow and
the potential for water erosion is slight (Miller 1979: 22). Detailed descriptions of the
site soils will be described in the next chapter.
Environmental Setting
Modern Climate and Biota. General interpretations of the environment are
derived from the ecoregion systems interpretations of Omernik (1987), from local
environmental data sets acquired from the USDA Soil Series guide for Victoria County
(Miller 1979), and from a report on groundwater resources of Texas (Keese et al 2004).
The region is considered a warm temperate climate, with a mean rainfall of 965 mm and
a mean temperature of 21.2°C. The mean wettest month is September, and the mean

17

driest month is March. The mean wettest month correlates to the period of the year
when tropical storms from the Gulf of Mexico move in from the west. The average last
freeze of the spring is March 6 and the average first freeze of the fall is November 12
(Miller 1979).
On a continental scale the Western Gulf Coastal Plain is a subregion of the Great
Plains. This subregion is further divided into: the mid-Coastal Barrier Islands and
Marshes along the San Antonio Bay, Northern Humid Gulf Coastal Prairies that form the
level clayey uplands of the Beaumont and Lissie Formation, and the complex
Floodplains and Low Terraces of the Guadalupe River. The vegetation types by region
are: sea-oats and seacoast bluestem grasses in the mid-Coastal Barrier Islands and
Marshes; smooth cordgrass with post oak motts in the Northern Humid Gulf Coastal
Prairies; and predominantly deciduous hardwoods on the Floodplains and Low Terraces
(Griffith et al 2004, Omernik 1987: Table 1, and Telfair 1999:19). Vegetation of the
McNeill-Gonzales site is dominated by deciduous hardwoods along the edge of the
terrace and a mixture of grasses and forbs on the level terrace surface. The deciduous
species observed in the immediate vicinity of the site are Quercus (oak), Prosopis
(mesquite), Carya (pecan), Celtis (hackberry), Ehretria elliptica (anaqua), and Ulmus
(elm). The flowering forbs are typically Asteraceae (sunflower/daisy family), Lupinus
(bluebonnet), Urticia (nettle), Solanum (nightshade), Castilleja (paintbrush), Argemone
(prickly poppy), and numerous unidentified graminoids (grasses). A surface soil sample
analyzed for a study of the potential to recover pollen from sediments recovered many of
the species observed in the site area (Appendix D).

18

Within this region 250 edible taxa have been identified which could have been
consumed or used by aboriginal peoples (Abbott 2001: 36). Floral resources can be
divided into five categories: high protein masts such as hickory and pecan; seeds from
amaranths and graminoids; fruits such as blackberries, mulberries, prickly pear tunas,
mesquite beans and anaqua fruit; roots such as arrow root and wild onions; and greens
such as prickly pear pads.
The faunal resources of the region are diverse and variable in their distribution.
Waterfowl, mollusks, and fish are located in mid-Coastal Barrier Islands and Marshes
Region. A number of species, such as black drum, redfish and sea trout come to the
lower salinity waters of bays, lagoons and tidal passes of the to spawn and then spend
their adulthood in deep waters (Ricklis 1996: 15). The McNeill-Gonzales site is much to
far inland to directly exploit these resources, however it is well situated to exploit
resources of the Coastal Prairies and the complex Floodplains and Low Terraces of the
Guadalupe River. White-tailed deer, amphibians, freshwater fish, mussels, and squirrels
are found in the bottomlands of the major rivers. The Coastal Prairies see deer and
rabbit, as well as prairie chicken and doves. Bison were present historically on the
Coastal Prairies (Ricklis 1996: 21, Telfair 1999:19-21). Deer are the dominant large
game animal. The Coastal Prairies have the second highest deer population in the state.
Data on modern deer populations shows an intraregional difference in deer populations
of coastal and immediately interior counties (Texas Parks and Wildlife 2003).
Paleoenvironment. Abbott (2001) provides the most recent and comprehensive
summary of paleoenvironmental conditions of the Western Gulf Coastal Plain.

19

Numerous lines of evidence augmented by data sets from adjacent regions are used to
interpret past climates, and sea level change. These sources include: palynological
records from bogs of the inner Gulf Coastal Plain; faunal assemblages (particularly
microfaunal assemblages of Central Texas Caves); carbon and oxygen stable isotope
data from sediments, human and faunal skeletal material and gastropod shell;
geomorphic studies and mathematical models of large scale climate patterns (Abbott
2001: 26-30). Abbott lists potential sources of paleoclimatological data that are
currently not being applied in the region, such as tree ring dating, phytolith and diatom
studies, macrobotanical studies, and aquatic bivalve distributions (Abbott 2001: 30).
Until the local paleoclimate record becomes more robust the interpretations will continue
to rely heavily on proxy data from adjacent locales.
Pollen records from Central Texas bogs show that the Late Pleistocene Full
Glacial period (16,000-12,000 B.P.) was cool and moist compared to modern climates.
Taxa of cold-tolerant species that in modern environments are associated with mixed
boreal/deciduous forests were recovered, and interpreted to indicate that the inner Gulf
Coastal Plain had a vegetation cover of sheltered cold tolerant species in open prairies as
opposed to full boreal forests (Bryant and Holloway 1985). Faunal assemblages of
extinct megafauna from this period were recovered from an alluvial terrace of Blanco
Creek at the Buckner Ranch site, in Bee County (Sellards 1940). The Late Glacial
period (14,000-12,000 B.P.) was as cool as the previous period, but drier. Clovis
occupations are found from this period across Central Texas and the Southern High

20

Plains (Abbott 2001: 31-32). During this time period sea level was up to 100 m lower
than today, and approximately 200 km further out to sea (Ricklis and Blum 1997).
The Holocene climate is divided into Early (12,000-8,000 B.P.), Middle (8,0004,000 B.P.), and Late (4,000 B.P. to the present). During the Early Holocene there was a
warming and drying trend, though temperatures were cooler than today. Bousman (1998)
interprets the cause of the cooler, drier temperatures to be an influx of glacial meltwater
into the Gulf of Mexico from the Mississippi River between 12,000 B.P. and 10,000 B.P.
This event corresponds to the Clovis archaeological period. The cooling of Gulf of
Mexico water temperatures would have led to less evaporative moisture and
precipitation. During the later part of the Early Holocene the glacial meltwater was
diverted to the Atlantic, causing the Gulf of Mexico to warm. The warmer temperatures
correlate to the Folsom archaeological period, and sea level rapidly raised to only 9
meters below the modern shoreline to approximately 30 km offshore (Blum et al 2002).
A terrestrial shift from arboreal to grassland pollen occurs during this period, which
suggests a change towards prairie-savannah vegetation similar to modern conditions
(Abbott 2001: 32). This transition would have occurred during the Late Paleoindian
period, which is reflected in subsistence, technological, and possibly social changes
during the Paleoindian period. The Middle Holocene is considered warmer and drier
than the previous period, and some researchers see evidence that the conditions would
have been drier than modern conditions (Abbott 2001: 33). Drier conditions would
result in less biomass and probably less expected prey than modern conditions. Sea level
continued to rise, and there is evidence of sea level rising up to 2 meters above modern

21

conditions at approximately. Sea level lowered after this point to near modern
conditions towards the end of this period (Blum et al 2002). Middle Holocene correlates
to the Early and Middle Archaic archaeological periods, during which it is expected to
see greater diversity in resource exploitation. The Late Holocene is interpreted to see an
increase in moisture and possibly a decrease in temperature relative to Middle Holocene
conditions (Abbott 2001: 34). Using the modern analog for the Late Holocene it can be
inferred that there was an increase in biomass and prey from the drier Middle Holocene.
This period is known archaeologically as the Late Archaic 4000-1500 B.P. and the Late
Prehistoric 1500 B.P.-to Historic. During this time period food resources should have
increased, and larger game should have become more abundant, which is possibly
evidenced by an increase in bison remains found at archaeological sites (Ricklis 1992).
Archaeological Setting
An abbreviated survey of the archaeological record of the Central Gulf Coastal
Plain of Texas is presented below. See Hester 2004, Ricklis 2004a, 2004b for a more
comprehensive synthesis of the archaeological research of the region (Figure 7).

22

Figure 7. Regional archaeological chronology and diagnostic artifacts (based on Collins
2004, Hester 2004, Ricklis 2004a)

23

There are very limited data on Early Paleoindian period (12,000 to 10,000 B.P.)
and limited data on the Late Paleoindian Period (10,000 to 8,000 B.P.) for the Central
Gulf Coastal Plain compared to other regions of the state. Clovis and Folsom artifacts
have only been recovered from sites of limited integrity, which include the Buckner
Ranch (41BE2) paleontological site in Bee County, and Clovis artifacts and Pleistocene
fauna washing ashore on McFaddin Beach (41JF50) (Sellards 1940, Hester et al 1992).
Late Paleoindian points such as Golondrina and Angostura have been found with greater
frequency and some have been excavated in situ. Examples are Buckeye Knoll
(41VT98), the Johnston-Heller site (41VT14), and the McNeill- Gonzales site (41VT141)
(Ricklis and Doran 2003, Birmingham and Hester 1976, Taylor 2005). Berger Bluff
(41GD30) is a site that will be discussed later due to its proximity and similar
geomorphic context to the McNeill- Gonzales site. It has a radiocarbon dated Late
Paleoindian component with evidence of local faunal remains of riparian and upland
taxa (Brown 1996).
The lack of Early Paleoindian archaeological data in the region is probably due to
the lack of exploration, but also widespread submergence of sites caused by sea level
rise (Ricklis 2004a, Ricklis and Weinstein 2005). Late Paleoindian sites are too few to
allow a regional synthesis. In adjoining regions it appears that the Late Paleoindian
period is characterized by a decrease in interregional mobility for the exploitation of
large megafauna to one that exploited intraregional, local resources (Bousman et al
2004).

24

By 8,000 B.P. the initial widespread evidence of marine and geophyte food
processing, as well as the cultural development of cemeteries signal the development of
Archaic lifeways. There are few sites from the Early Archaic (8,000-6,000 B.P.),
perhaps because many were inundated during sea level rise in the Early Holocene
(Ricklis 2004a, Ricklis and Blum 1997). The change to a broader diet is seen
archaeologically by the presence of shell middens for processing shellfish (primarily
Rangia) in what would have been coastal environments, and burned rock middens in the
interior plains for processing geophytes. Deer and other medium to small mammals
make up the majority of the faunal assemblages.
Shellfish midden deposits from the Early Archaic have been excavated at coastal
sites of Eagle Ridge (41GV53) and McKinzie (Ricklis1988, Ricklis 2004b). These sites
would have been at the edge of the coastal estuaries forming in the inundated river
valleys. These sites are much smaller than later shellfish middens, and are typically
small scatters of shell and faunal material which could either represent small short term,
logistical foray sites of an intensified population, or conversely are longer term
occupational remains of a society with lower population densities (Ricklis 2004a). There
have been few well-excavated Central Gulf Coastal Plain sites not immediately on the
coast with Early Archaic components. The only interior sites suitable for comparison
are at the extreme western margin of the Coastal Plain near the Balcones Escarpment.
Burned rock middens at the Wilson Leonard site and the Richard Beene site provide
examples of intensified exploitation of floral resources during the Early Archaic (Collins
1998, Thoms 2004).

25

One of the earliest cemeteries in North America, the Buckeye Knoll site, is
located on the Coastal Prairie, and it suggests intensive local occupation during the Early
Archaic period. Isotopic values of skeletal material indicate a mixed diet of both coastal
and interior resources, which in turn indicates that during the Early Archaic mobility was
not restricted as to prohibit movement from the coastal zones into the interior, but that
local populations of the Early Archaic probably lived exclusively within the Coastal
Plain (Ricklis and Doran 2003).
During the Middle Archaic (6,000-2,500 B.P.) the Archaic lifeways continued
but with an increase in the number and size of inland sites on the northern portions of the
upper Texas coast. This suggests increasing populations to the north, however in the
central and southern Coastal Plains there appear to be fewer coastal sites. This may be a
function of sea level rise reducing the productivity of central and southern Coastal Plain
nearshore environments (Ricklis 2004a, Ricklis 2004b). Sites further inland suggest
larger interior populations, as evidenced by large cemetery sites such as the Loma
Sandia site, and a compone nt of the Ernest Witte site (Taylor and Highley 1995, Ricklis
2004b).
The Late Archaic (2,500-1,500 B.P.) saw further signs of local intensification
and reduced mobility with poorer quality, local lithic resources being more frequently
used, increased numbers and sizes of coastal archaeological sites with thicker and larger
shell midden components, and larger cemeteries. This increase in sites corresponds with
the stabilizing of sea level and formation of productive estuary environments that appear
to have been absent or submerged during the Middle Archaic. An example of resource

26

intensification is an increase in coastal fishing, as evidenced by an exponential increase
in fish remains recovered archaeologically along the Nueces and Corpus Christi Bays
(Ricklis 2004a). Large Late Archaic cemeteries are found in a component of the Ernest
Witte site, the Morhiss site, and the Blue Bayou site (Ricklis 2004a). Other data that
suggests decreased mobility due to population pressures, include stable isotope ratios of
human skelatons at the Blue Bayou site that show primarily non- marine resources
dominating the diet at a site less than 20 kilometers from the coastline (Ricklis 2004a).
This site is approximately as far inland as the Buckeye Knoll site, which suggests
reduced mobility from mixed shoreline and interior diets during the Early Archaic to a
more restricted diet and mobility pattern by the Late Archaic. Estuarine resources along
the recently stabilized shoreline were heavily exploited during the Late Archaic.
Facilitated by a greater number of well excavated sites with large artifact assemblages,
Ricklis (1996) proposed there is enough evidence from the Late Archaic to postulate a
seasonal adaptive pattern of exploiting estuarine resources in the fall and winter, and
then moving to the immediately adjacent interior upland prairie environments during the
spring and summer. This pattern seems to continue into the Late Prehistoric, and
corresponds to the ethnohistorical record of the Karankawa (Ricklis 1996).
In comparison to the Archaic, the Late Prehistoric (1,500 B.P. to 400 B.P.) saw
the incorporation of ceramic and bow and arrow technology, and an ever- increasing
intensification of land use, with some new resources. The Late Prehistoric Period is
characterized by Rockport Phase Ceramics. The Rockport Phase material culture
consists of bone tempered, asphaltum decorated ceramics, hunting with the bow and

27

arrow, and large sites with intensive marine exploitation. Bison becomes present on the
Coastal Plain during the Late Prehistoric. Toyah Phase material culture from the Plains
enters the interior of the Central Coastal Plain, though it is debated whether this is due to
a migration of bison hunters into the region, or if it is an introduction of material culture
associated with bison hunting (Ricklis 1992). Although there is archaeological evidence
that people with coastal material culture hunted bison in the interior at the Melon site
(41RF21), the ethnohistorical record of Cabeza de Vaca suggests it was not a regular
occurrence (Ricklis 1996: 97, Kreiger 2002). Seasonal rounds of historically observed
aboriginals of the region are hypothesized to have begun in the Late Archaic and
continue through the Late Prehistoric, with population densities equivalent to
ethnohistorical estimates.
Researchers are fortunate to have ethnohistorical evidence documenting
indigenous populations of the Gulf Coastal Plain. It is a rich history since the earliest
imperial Spanish and French explorations of Texas occurred on the coastal plain. The
Western Gulf Coastal Plain was home to the historically documented Karankawa
Indians, who lived along the Central Coast between the Colorado and the Nueces Rivers.
The most comprehensive analysis of Karankawa culture is by Ricklis (1996). Ricklis
develops a cultural ecology of the Karankawa that interprets seasonal exploitation of
coastal and inland plant and animal resources within a 40 km of the coastline by
synthesizing historical documents and the archaeological record. Fall and winter were
spent on the coast exploiting the near-shore marine resources of bays and estuaries. The
spring and summer saw a transition to inland resources, such as men hunting large

28

mammals and women gathering floral materials such as seeds, fr uits like prickly pear
tunas and edible greens (Ricklis 1996: 23). The McNeill-Gonzales site is located
approximately 30 km inland from the Karankawa territory, so the site area was probably
a border area between the Karankawa and inland cultures. The Coahuiltecan are a
poorly defined interior cultural group that consisted of numerous bands and small tribes.
These tribes and small bands would have been located in the area of the McNeillGonzales site, but they experienced significant cultural upheaval during the historic
period, and only a few sources, primarily Cabeza de Vaca, are considered representative
of the inhabitants of the interior Coastal Plain. These groups had diverse land use
patterns that exploited the full spectrum of possible food resources; that in comparison to
the coastal environments were limited. Opunita fields, mesquite peas, roots, and
occasional small game and amphibians, deer, as well as occasion bison seem to have
made up the diet of interior inhabitants (Nunez 1993: 62-63).
Historically the area of the McNeill- Gonzales site has seen settlement by
Spanish, Mexican, and Anglo-Northern Europeans. The Spanish transferred Mission
Espiritu Santo de Zuniga from a location in modern Victoria, TX to a site on the west
banks and terraces of the Guadalupe River immediately to the west of the McNeillGonzales site. The mission existed at this location from 1726 to 1747 and served local
Coahuiltecan tribes called the Aranama and Tamique and some Karankawa who came
inland from the coast (Ricklis 1996, Walter 1999). Ranching, hunting, gathering, and
possibly farming would have occurred near the McNeill- Gonzales site during this time
period. The Gonzales family acquired the property where the McNeill- Gonzales site

29

exists in the mid to late nineteenth century, though they are unsure if it was a land grant
or purchased property (Gonzales n.d.). For at least 125 years descendants of the
Gonzales family have been ranching and farming the property in an area of Victoria
County that has remained primarily agricultural.

30

CHAPTER III
STRATIGRAPHY

The archaeology of the McNeill-Gonzales site is best understood by placing the
site in geologic context. This was accomplished by: studying maps, surface survey,
examinations of exposures created by borrow pit operations, and subsurface testing.
These studies facilitated the creation of a valley cross section (Figure 8, 9). The
characterization of stratigraphic units was made possible by subsurface testing, profile
descriptions, granulometric stud ies, radiocarbon dating, and luminescence dating (Figure
10). The identified stratigraphic units are presented (Figure 11) with descriptions of
each unit’s stratigraphic position, sedimentology, pedology, and chronology (Table 1).
The units are compared to other described localities of similar stratigraphy to place the
landforms of the McNeill- Gonzales site in a regional context. All of the detailed
descriptions of site stratigraphy and lab analyses are found in the appendices.

31

Figure 8. Project area cross section line

Figure 9. Geologic cross section of the project area

32

Figure 10. Tested surfaces in the project area

33

Figure 11. Project area cross section

34

35

Table 1. Project area geologic chronology
Depositional
Unit

Age

Source

Diagnostics

Diagnostic
Artifacts, AMS
Dates (2020 B.P.,
Holocene Unit
Ic
0-2,500 B.P. 1730 B.P.)
Diagnostic
Holocene Unit 2,500-7,500 Artifacts, AMS
Ib
B.P.
Date (3650 B.P.)
7,500-10,000
B.P.,

Prehistoric: Perdiz, Scallorn, Marcos,
Ensor, Fairland, Catan, Matamoros
Aboriginal: Cameron
Historic: Ceramics, Metal

25,800 +/1630 yr
(UIC1691IR) Diagnostic
23,700 +/Artifacts,
Holocene Unit 1495 yr
Ia
(UIC1691GR) OSL Sample #2
63,100 +/Deweyville
4000
Terrace
(UIC1690GR) OSL Sample #1
Beaumont
Regional
Formation
70-90 ka
Correlation

Plainview, Golondrina, Angostura, Big
Sandy, Saint Mary's Hall, Gower,
Lerma, Abosolo, Uvalde

Pedernales, Refugio, Tortuga, Bell,
Pandora

Mixed date from Deweyville Terrace,
and Ia colluvium

No cultural material
no cultural material

Beaumont Formation
The Beaumont Formation forms the northeastern margin of the Guadalupe River
valley and rise approximately 5 meters above the Deweyville Terrace. These level
clayey uplands were sampled with a truck mounted core rig (Figure 12). Though the
uplands are mapped as Lissie Formation the cores generally corresponded with the
mapped Lake Charles (Key West), Decosta, and Telferner Soil Series, which are
considered soils of the Beaumont Formation. Core 1 was excavated on the level uplands
of the Beaumont Formation. The profile consisted of a shallow 20 cm plow zone of very

36

Figure 12. Cross section of the Beaumont scarp

dark gray clay, underlain by 80 cm of very dark gray clay. Below these clays to the limit
of core 5 meters below the surface was a brownish yellow to light reddish brown silty
clay to clay with common strong calcic soft masses and nodules.
Cores 2 and 3 had similar profiles on the same upland setting but were near the
edge of the slope. Core 5 is on the convex portion of the gentle scarp of the Beaumont
Formation. This exposure was like the previous exposures, except the clayey sediments
above the underlying calcic horizons were reddish brown silty clay loams. Core 7 was
located on the concave toeslope of the gently sloping escarpment. This core was quite
similar to the profiles of Cores 1-3. Three augers (4, 10-4, and 10-5) located at the

37

surface contact between the sandy deposits atop the Deweyville terrace and the
Beaumont clays all had a sandy loam A horizon of the Holocene eolian sands mantling a
shallow sandy clay loam to sandy clay like the Decosta Series description, but with a
few red mottles of iron redox features. Archaeological site 41VT144 was found in this
thin sandy mantle abruptly overlaying the Decosta Series soil along the edge of the
terrace. The contact between the Deweyville Terrace and the Beaumont upland is quite
abrupt, and augers and cores less than 20 meters away to the south of the contact (Core
7, Auger 10-3) have no evidence of Beaumont soils to the limit of exposure at
approximately 3 meters. The cores and augers on the Beaumont surface show that the
uplands are stable, have not seen severe erosion, and have experienced significant
pedogenic alteration. Beaumont Formation deposits presumably dip below the
Deweyville Terrace, but no augers on the Deweyville Terrace encountered any
Beaumont sediments at depth.
Deweyville Formation
The Deweyville Terrace is an unpaired terrace on the northern margin of the
valley that is 5 meters below the upland Beaumont formation and approximately 7
meters above the modern floodplain. It is between 26-33 meters above sea level,
however portions of the upper 1-2.5 meters of the terrace have an eolian Holocene
component. The area of the terrace is 0.5 km2 . Due to the abrupt contact with the
Beaumont uplands the terrace appears to be erosional, however the lack of deep
exposures of the Deweyville Terrace and few exposures of the contact with the

38

Beaumont Formation do not preclude it being a depositional terrace with limited erosion
at the valley margins.
Sedimentological and Pedogenic Attributes. The Deweyville Formation deposits
form the core of the alluvial terrace, with a mantling of Holocene sands that contain the
archaeological deposits. Exposures that encountered the Deweyville Formation consist
of three pedo/depositional units: a discontinuous buried paleosol here named the
Deweyville Paleosol; light yellowish brown medium sands to gravelly fluvial sands; and
a deeply buried calcic horizon. No exposures were extensive enough to determine
bedding structure of the sands, but the presence of gravel lenses and coarser sands
suggest these are fluvial deposits. Six samples from three exposures of sands were
selected for particle size analysis (Auger 5-9, Paleo Profile Auger, Auger 5-36). The
samples averaged 91.3% sand, are slightly gravelly (1.3%), and weakly alkaline with an
average pH of 8.2. The average of the sand size fraction (0.0625-2.0 mm) for the six
samples is moderately sorted fine skewed medium- fine sand.
Five exposures of the complete paleosol show variability in thickness from 75 cm to 175
cm. The paleosol has been truncated with no associated epipedon, and is laterally
eroded at the edges of the terrace. The upper meter of the paleosol is an argillic dark
gray sandy clay loam to clay loam with distinct common red mottles and a strong coarse
blocky subangular structure. In four exposures (A5-9, A5-29, A5-40, C8) below the
upper argillic portio n of the soil is a lower horizon of dark gray sandy clay loam with
common, distinct calcium carbonate nodules (Figure 13). In one exposure of the
Deweyville Paleosol at the central portion of the terrace there is no calcic horizon, but

39

Figure 13. Comparisons of Deweyville Paleosol exposures

instead strong well-developed wavy clay lamellae that are up to 2 cm thick at 15 cm
intervals that extend 1.4 m into the fluvial deposits (Figure 14). Particle size
distributions for two samples of the Deweyville Paleosol were conducted (Excavation
Area 4-Sample D9692, A5-9). The average particle size distribution of the two samples
are 60.6% sand, and is classified as an extremely poorly sorted strongly fine skewed
medium silt. The upper portion of the paleosol is acidic, with an average pH of 5.8. The
red mottles are iron redox features that indicate seasonal wetting and drying. Water
flows through the mantle of well-drained fine sands until it reaches the impediment of
the buried paleosol. The active process of cyclical wetting and drying is probably
causing the redox features, which considering the lower calcic horizon indicates a
polygentic nature to the deposit. The thickness, well-developed redox features, calcic
horizon, and age of the sandy parent materia l indicate it is a buried paleosol and not a
soil formed solely from illuvial processes during the Holocene.

40

Figure 14. Exposure with Deweyville Paleosol between 96.60 and 96.20, clay lamellae
in Deweyville fluvial sands below

The calcic portion of the Deweyville Paleosol that underlies the redox mottled
sandy clay loam derives its calcic character from the accumulation of secondary
carbonate. This has resulted in the formation of a Stage II calcic horizon with common
nodules and soft masses (Birkeland 1999: 357). The standard model of carbonate
formation (Birkeland 1999) would interpret that in this setting the intermittent saturation
of sediments from water that flows through the mottled sandy clay loam was not
sufficient to leach carbonates out, and they have accumulated below the mottled sandy
clay as nodules and soft masses. The processes of calcification in the Gulf Coastal Plain
has come into question by James Abbott, who contends that carbonate horizons found in
this region do not allow the typical interpretations of climate and carbonate formation

41

chronology. In this region carbonate horizons are typically found in the saturated
phreatic zones as opposed to the vadose zone (Abbott 2001: Appendix II). The standard
model of carbonate formation was developed in studies of carbonates in the only
seasonally wetted vadose zone. Considering that in this context the upper clay horizon
has led to the formation of a perched water table the carbonate development of the
Deweyville Paleosol may not be accounted for in standard interpretations of carbonate
formation. Unfortunately compared to the vadose models there have been little work on
phreatic carbonates of humid regions, and little acknowledgement of this form of
carbonate development in the United States (Abbott 2001).
The Deweyville Paleosol is not uniformly present across the Deweyville Terrace,
particularly on the margins of the terrace where it has been eroded and colluvium and
eolian sediments are unconformably resting on the fluvial sands of the Deweyville
Formation. The relationship between the sandy mantle and the underlying Deweyville
Formation will be discussed in detail in the section on Holocene deposits.
A final feature of the Deweyville Terrace is a deep calcic horizon located below
the bedded fluvial sands. A strong, cemented gravelly to silty calcic horizon was only
encountered on the southeastern portion of the terrace. The calcic horizon was
encountered in Auger 1, Auger 2, Auger 5, the Paleo Area Excavation, Auger 10-6, and
Auger 10-7. The thickness of the horizon was only exposed in a borrow pit cut near at
the southeastern margin of the terrace (Figure 15). Here the calcic horizon is
discontinuous with a thickness ranging from 40 to 80 centimeters, and is unconformably
overlain by Holocene deposits with archaeological material. Fluvial deposits with small

42

Figure 15. Exposure of deep calcic horizon in Deweyville Formation

boulder sized gravels underlie the calcic horizon, and though the horizon is primarily
formed in silty sediments, portions of the calcic horizon have formed in the gravelly
deposits. Only the auger furthest upslope (Auger 1) has an exposure of the calcic
horizon buried deeply under fluvial sands of the Deweyville Terrace.
Chronometric Evidence. OSL sample #1 was collected from the fluvial sands
below the Deweyville Paleosol in a deep exposure created by the borrow excavations
(Figure 14).

The sample was collected from medium sands between well-developed

lamellae, 115 cm below the top of the buried paleosol. Methods outlined by Jain et al
(2003) for the analysis of multiple aliquots were used after single aliquot sample did not
produce a finite age. Multiple aliquots were analyzed by three excitation methods, blue
light, green light, and infrared. Of these three methods only the green light stimulation

43

of quartz minerals produced a finite age. Blue light produced an estimation of >26,700
+ 1900 yr (UIC1690BL), while infrared excitation of Feldspars produced an estimation
of >50,400 + 3200 yr (UIC1690IR). The green light stimulation produced a finite age
of 63,100 + 4000 yr (UIC1690GR), which gives age estimation at the 2-sigma age range
of 55,100-71,100 yr. Corroborating evidence of this age is the complete lack of
prehistoric artifacts in any exposures or subsurface tests below the paleosol, and the
similar ages reported by other researchers.
Correlations to Other research. The deposits of this terrace correlate to other
descriptions of Deweyville Formation deposits, and in particular descriptions of deposits
labeled ‘High Deweyville’. The Buckeye Knoll site (41VT98) has a similar
stratigraphy. Fine well-sorted sands with archaeological deposits overlie a buried
truncated paleosol (Frederick and Bateman 2004). Like the McNeill-Gonzales site there
were instances where the upper mantling sands were resting directly on the underlying
fluvial deposits of the Deweyville Formation. They were able to date the deposits by
OSL, and conduct granulometric analyses of the lower fluvial sands and buried paleosol.
In their samples they were not able to discern any textual difference between the
underlying sands and the sandy mantle, but a series of OSL dates identified a clear
difference in age between the deposits. The underlying deposits all dated between 49
and 53 ka while the upper deposits were Holocene in age (Frederick and Bateman 2004:
10).
In a geomorphic study of the Nueces River Durbin (1999) recorded numerous
Deweyville Terraces he described as Holocene sandy A-E soil horizons mantling a

44

buried paleosol with red mottling and calcic nodules, and underlying bedded fluvial
deposits. Although he did not date the upper sands, and did not address the depositional
mechanisms for the upper mantling sands, samples from the lower fluvial deposits
produced the 60-47 ka dates for the ‘High Deweyville’ (Durbin 1999, Durbin et al
1997). A geomorphic survey for the proposed Lake Creek Reservoir in Montgomery
County, Texas recorded numerous instances of eolian sands mantling Deweyville
terraces (Mandel 1987). Mandel recorded profiles that conformed to the A-E sandy
mantle with a buried paleosol with red mottles, though he was not able to directly date
the Deweyville terraces or the mantling sands. Finally, in a geoarchaeological model of
the distribution of archaeological sites in the Houston area, Abbott (2001: 99) identifies
deposits on the San Jacinto River where sand sheets overlie a truncated Pleistocene soil
on Deweyville Terraces.
Infilled Channel, Possibly Low Deweyville
Along the southern and eastern margins of the Deweyville Terrace there is
evidence for a buried paleochannel inset into the High Deweyville Terrace and partially
buried by later Holocene colluvium and sandy mantle. This feature is present along a
low table of sediments that exists at the margin of the terrace before its steep scarp onto
the Holocene floodplain. The buried, infilled channel was encountered in Augers 5-5, 56, near the burial area, Auger 5-28 near the Anaqua Mott Area and backhoe trenches 2
and 3 on the far southeastern edge of the terrace. The sediments of Augers 5-5 and 5-6
consisted of dark grayish brown weakly calcic silty clay that was relatively uniform to
the maximum depth of the augers. Backhoe trenches 2 and 3 had clay to sandy loam

45

sediments with only minimal carbonate filaments. The facies relationship between these
deposits, the Deweyville Formation deposits, and the Holocene colluvium and sandy
mantle is quite abrupt, with completely different profiles existing within 5 to 10 meters
of the silty clay to sandy-clayey loam sediments. Auger 5-6 and Trench 3 were attempts
to identify a southern facies relationship with the other side of the channel, but it appears
this facies is completely eroded away.
Holocene Deposits
The Holocene deposits are located on the terrace tread, the slopes of the terrace,
and the Holocene floodplain. The deposits mantling the Deweyville Terrace are
sediments deposited by colluvial and eolian mechanisms that have since undergone postdepositional processes such as pedogenesis, erosion, and bioturbation. This has created
a complex stratigraphy that required extensive subsurface testing to correlate
stratigraphic units across the terrace. These correlations are in a general project area
cross section (Figure 11), and a series of cross sections that encounter archaeological
deposits at the edge of the terrace (Figures 16, 17, 18, 19). There are three stratigraphic
units identified on the Deweyville Terrace. The Holocene deposits of the floodplain were
only minimally examined because investigations focused on the archaeological deposits.
Many localities with Holocene deposits are found where erosion of the Deweyville
Terrace created depressions and steep grades that then became filled with sediments
during the Holocene. Localized erosion is evident from instances of the truncation of the
Deweyville Paleosol, the complete removal of the argillic portion of the Deweyville
Paleosol leaving only the calcic horizon, and examples of Holocene sands

46

unconformably resting on sands of the Deweyville Formation. The most dramatic
examples of erosion are where the buried Deweyville Paleosol has been completely
eroded down to the fluvial deposits or the deep buried calcic horizon. Subsequent
alluvial and colluvial deposits rest unconformably on these eroded surfaces. Evidence
for erosion was found primarily along the margins of the terrace, however an ancient
gully or depression was identified at the southern portion of the central part of the
terrace. Here profiles created by borrow pit operations and auger 5-22 found no
evidence of the Deweyville Paleosol and the fine sands of the Holocene deposits are
unconformably above coarser fluvial deposits. Augers and profiles approximately 30 m
to the east and west of auger 5-22 have evidence of the paleosol. Due to the localized
nature of this erosion it may represent a gully that eroded only a portion of the terrace,
and then infilled during the Holocene with colluvium and eolian sediments.
In other locations on the south and east portions of the terrace the argillic portion
of the Deweyville Paleosol has been eroded to expose the underlying calcic component
of the paleosol. This erosion was widespread across these portions of the terrace, which
suggests a larger scale erosion event like scouring by fluvial processes. These calcic
soils were then exposed to the surface during early portions of the Holocene, and were
prehistoric living surfaces. Later Holocene deposits then mantled these portions of the
terrace; however the deposits are not nearly as thick as the sandy deposits that filled the
gully in the central portion of the terrace.

Figure 16. East - West cross section of the southern edge of the Deweyville terrace

47

Figure 17. Transect through Main Site Area
48

Figure 18. Transect through Anaqua Mott
49

Figure 19. Transect through Paleo Area
50

51

Evidence of the buried Deweyville Paleosol being truncated comes from the lack
of an epipedon in augers, profiles, and cores. A deep pit on the terrace has an extensive
lateral profile of the contact between the paleosol and Holocene deposits. The contact is
abrupt and irregular with no evidence of an illuvial Bt horizon welded to the buried
paleosol. Because the paleosol is actively experiencing illuviation and gleying in some
locations it was impossible to discern the topography of the upper portion of the buried
paleosol in these locations. The mechanism for the truncation of the paleosol and its
epipedon is unknown, but eolian deflation or water erosion by gullying of the epipedon
could have stripped upper horizons leaving the endopedon susceptible to further
localized erosion.
The first period of Holocene deposits (Ia) are relatively thin sand deposits that
began filling depressions along the southern scarp; and exposed calcic portions of the
Deweyville Paleosol reworked as colluvium along the southeastern scarp edge. This unit
was identified atop the buried Deweyville paleosol in the central portion of the site and
at the southeastern portion of the terrace in the reworked calcic colluvium. Much of this
depositional unit has undergone pedogenesis with clay illuviation. The next Holocene
deposit (Ib) is a sand deposit of varying thickness that continued to fill low-lying
portions of the terrace scarp. This deposit is more uniform across the terrace scarp,
slope, and it may mantle the terrace tread. The deposits have a weak but distinct
paleosol, which is found across the entire scarp and slope of the southern portion of the
terrace. The final period of Holocene deposition on the terrace tread and slope (Ic) is a
sandy deposit that forms the modern surface. These deposits are mollic with a darkened

52

A horizon along the terrace edge that loses its dark color upslope on the terrace tread.
On the terrace tread up to the edge of the terrace scarp these deposits have a weak albic
endopedon with distinct clay lamellae. The southeastern portion of the terrace has only a
thin mantling of Ic deposits and no endopedon. The Holocene floodplain deposits (II)
were not systematically studied, however it was observed that the floodplain deposits
along the terrace edge are fine overbank deposits.
Sedimentological and Pedogenic Attributes. The Holocene deposits have many
similarities: the obliteration of primary bedding structure by biological and pedological
processes; the sediments are uniform fine sands, and the deposits of the terrace edge are
much darker in color than the sediments further upslope. The lack of bedding structure is
evidenced in excavation unit profiles and exposures across the site. Bioturbation as
evidenced by modern roots, infilled root casts, ant hills, insect tunnels, and human
activities have led to the destruction of bedding structures, however the primary form of
disturbance is due to the activity of gophers. Gopher mounds are quite common across
the terrace (Figure 20). The building of gopher mounds was primarily observed
occurring in the early spring when vegetation is at its lowest, and potentially a large
volume of sediment is moved. This has caused a homogenization of the deposits and
translocation of artifacts, which hinders the interpretation of depositional processes and
integrity of the archaeological deposits. Though there is variability in burrow depths, it
is reported that gophers typically do not burrow deeper than 60 cm (Johnson 1989), so
the disturbance by gophers should be limited to the upper portions of each Holocene
depositional unit. The impact of bioturbation on the archaeological stratigraphy and

53

Figure 20. Photo of gopher mounds

integrity of the deposits will be discussed in the next chapter as well, but it should be
said here that there is evidence for burial by sedimentation and not predominately by
biomantle formation.
The evidence for burial by sedimentation comes from the preservation of intact
archaeological features and human burials; diagnostic artifacts that were found in a
stratigraphically consistent manner with the regional chronology; and a physiographic
position on a slope that would be subject to primarily aggradational processes. Features
consistent with pedogenesis and artifact redistribution by biomantling were relatively
limited in the Holocene deposits on the terrace surface, with only limited evidence of

54

artifact translocation to the base of the deposits to form stone lines as defined by Johnson
(2002), or the wholesale mixing of diagnostic artifacts.
Holocene Unit Ia. Holocene Unit Ia is located immediately above the variously
eroded Deweyville Formation deposits along the southern edge of the terrace and has
varying degrees of pedogenic alternation. In excavation unit exposures on the terrace
tread the unit is aggradational, has seen weak clay illuviation, and the partial obliteration
of a weak paleosol at the top of the unit. The remnant A horizon is a 10 cm thick dark
grayish brown loamy fine sand, with evidence of infilled root casts below the A horizon.
The underlying illuvial horizon is 45 cm thick and texturally a sandy loam to sandy clay
loam. This aggradational portion of Unit Ia is weakly acidic (pH 6.2) and has a similar
particle size frequency clustered around fine sands like subsequent sand deposits of the
Holocene. It is assumed this unit exists at the base of the infilled gully on the
southwestern portion of the terrace, though this was not identified in Auger 5-22.
Unit Ia as identified on the southeastern portion of the terrace consists of
sediments from the truncated Deweyville Paleosol that was reworked during the
Holocene as colluvial slopewash. Along this portion of the terrace the argillic portion of
the Deweyville Paleosol was truncated, exposing underlying sandy calcic horizon. The
edge of the terrace was laterally eroded, creating a relatively steeper grade. Portions of
the exposed calcic horizon were mobilized and locally redeposited downslope. These
sediments retained the calcic nodules that developed when the unit was overlain by the
argillic horizon of the Deweyville Paleosol, which is still preserved further upslope. The
deposits are approximately 50 cm thick loamy fine sands that have experienced clay

55

illuviation from Unit Ib. They are weakly alkaline (pH 8.2) like the calcic deposits and
sands of the underlying deposits of the Deweyville Formation.
Holocene Unit Ib. Unit Ib is found across the southern edge of the Deweyville
Terrace and possibly on portions of the terrace tread. In all locations along the scarp the
deposit is aggradational in low portions with a paleosol developed at the top of the
deposit. The deposits are thickest on the central and western edges of the terrace, where
it filled the paleo-gully and mantled Unit Ia with a dark gray fine sand. The deposits are
approximately 75 cm thick and are texturally similar to the aggradational deposits of Ia
in this portion of the site. The paleosol is manifested by an abrupt change in soil
structure from the structureless massive sands of Unit Ic to a weak coarse blocky
subangular structure. On the southeastern portion of the site Unit Ib is a 40 to 60 cm
mantle of dark grayish brown fine sandy loam. This deposit lies directly on the
reworked colluvium of Unit Ia and is found across the southeast portion of the terrace.
During a period of stability this deposit developed into a paleosol with medium weak
blocky angular structure.
The unit may be present on the terrace tread, but unfortunately this is hard to
determine without chronological control on the terrace tread. The paleosol loses its
structure in exposures upslope of the scarp edge, making direct correlation difficult. One
possibility for correlation is that the upper Unit Ic unit has an albic horizon with clay
lamellae that does not extend to the depth of Unit Ib in exposures at the scarp edge
where the paleosol is extant. If the pedogenic process of clay lamellae formation is

56

uniform between the scarp edge and the terrace tread than it suggests that the sands
below the depth of clay lamellae can be at least no younger than unit Ic.
Holocene Unit Ic. The final depositional unit of the terrace is Unit Ic. The
uniformity of the deposit, the texture, and its position on the landscape gives it the
greatest likelihood to be entirely eolian. As opposed to the two lower units that fill low
portions along the edges of the terrace scarp this deposit is of uniform thickness across
much of the terrace. The surface of the unit on the terrace tread is nearly level with a
slightly irregular dome like topography (Figure 21). There are approximately 5 to 8 low
domes no more than 50 cm high and approximately 40 m in diameter across the surface
of the Deweyville Terrace. The stratigraphy of the deposit on the terrace tread consists
of A1-A2 soil horizons of brown fine sands approximately 85 cm thick, underlaid by a
90 cm elluvial E horizon of brown loamy fine sand with clay lamellae for a total
thickness of 175 cm. The lamellae are approximately 5 mm thick, bedded roughly
horizontal, and are spaced approximately 10 cm apart (Figure 22). Below the E horizon
is either a C-horizon of massive fine to medium sands or an abrupt contact with the
Deweyville Paleosol. As the deposit nears the edge of the scarp the sediments become a
very dark grayish brown and the clay lamellae become less pronounced. The sediments
on the slope of the scarp lack clay lamellae, and across portions of the scarp a midden of
prehistoric cultural debris formed. The deposit of the Ic on the slope of the scarp is
thickest at the central portion of the scarp forming one of the low dome-shaped mounds,
and is thinnest on the southeastern portion where it is just a thin mantle approximately

57

Figure 21. Photo of Deweyville Terrace tread

Figure 22. Photo of clay lamellae in Holocene Unit Ic

58

30 cm thick. The sediments are over 90% sand, with just over 60% of the sand fraction
being fine sand. The sand fraction is moderately sorted and coarse skewed. All of the
exposures have examples of bioturbation in the form of insect and rodent burrows, as
well as floralturbation from roots.
Holocene Unit II. Holocene Unit II consists of the floodplain deposits of the
Guadalupe River. These deposits were not studied because this investigation focused on
the deposits of the Deweyville Terrace. The sediments of the floodplain are primarily
overbank deposits that are dark gray silty clays to silty loams. The deposits of the
floodplain near the base of the Deweyville terrace deposits have no similarities to the
Holocene deposits mantling the terrace, which suggest very different inherited properties
of the deposits, and that there is relatively little erosion of the sandy deposits from the
terrace onto the floodplain. No subsurface excavations were conducted on the
floodplain, so the geometry of the deposits or the potential for buried terraces younger
than the Deweyville Terrace is unknown.
Chronometric Evidence. The chronometric data for the Holocene deposits comes
from archaeological artifacts, radiocarbon dating of human burials, and OSL dating of
sediments provide direct dates for the Holocene deposits. No effort was made to date
Unit II.
Unit Ia is dated by diagnostic artifacts and an OSL date. Diagnostic artifacts date
the Ia deposits on the south-central portion of the terrace, while an OSL date and
diagnostic artifacts date the more complicated mixed deposits of Ia on the southeastern
portion of the terrace. OSL Sample #2 is from the sandy colluvium of the reworked

59

Deweyville Paleosol on the southeastern portion of the terrace. The sample was
collected from 1.6 m below ground surface. Though most of the cultural material of this
unit is found above the sample there are scattered artifacts at the level of the sample and
deeper in the profile. Like OSL Sample #1 the single aliquot method was not successful
in producing a finite age. Instead multiple aliquots with infrared and green light
excitation were used to date the sample. Both excitation methods produced finite ages.
Infrared excitation of Feldspars produced an age of 25,800 + 1630 yr (UIC1691IR),
while green light excitation of quartz minerals produced an age of 23,700 + 1495 yr
(UIC1691GR). The two-sigma age ranges overlap with these samp les, being 24,20027,400 yr and 22,500-25,200 yr. These ages are much older than the earliest dated
archaeological components in the region, and probably reflect the limitations of the
aliquot method of OSL dating in depositional settings that have the potential for poor
bleaching. In this colluvial setting not all of the sands may have been bleached during
deposition, which would lead to poorly bleached or unbleached Deweyville sands being
mixed with sands that were bleached later in time during the colluvial process. This
would lead to a mixed value that would average paleodose rate between the age of the
Deweyville sediments 55,000-71,000 yr and Holocene deposits at approximately 10,000
yr. Bioturbation could be another factor with the contribution of younger sediments into
the older deposits. Considering these results future dating should apply the single grain
OSL dating method, which has been shown to successfully identify sediment ages in
poorly bleached, or mixed signature deposits (Bateman et al 2003).

60

The diagnostic artifacts are probably more reliable indicators of the age of Unit
Ia. On the southeastern portion of the terrace the artifacts are primarily in the upper
portion of the colluvial Ia unit with only scattered artifacts deeper in the colluvium
where OSL Sample #2 was collected. On the south-central portion of the terrace unit Ia
consists of aggrading deposits filling depressions atop the Deweyville Paleosol on the
edge of the terrace tread. Diagnostic artifacts of the Late Paleoindian to the Early
Archaic are found in Unit Ia. These artifacts date from between 10,000 to 7,500 B.P.,
and have some degree of stratigraphic separation during this 2,500-year period.
Diagnostic artifacts from the Late Paleoindian period found in this unit were Plainview,
Golondrina, Big Sandy, St. Mary’s Hall, and Angostura. The Plainview and Golondrina
were found towards the bottom of this unit, which suggest the initiation of occupation
and deposition at approximately 10,000 B.P. The Early Archaic diagnostics were found
higher in the profile, though Golondrina points were commonly found intermingled with
these younger diagnostic artifacts. Early Archaic artifacts, which consisted of Gower,
Abasolo, Uvalde, and Lerma dart points were typically in the upper portion of the
deposit, and commonly mixed with the Late Paleoindian artifacts. These data indicate
that the Ia deposits on the terrace tread experienced relatively slow aggradation deposit,
which at its thickest is only 50 cm. The weak paleosol at the surface indicates that this
unit had a period of stability and non-aggradation. The expression of Unit Ia on the
southeastern portion of the scarp is more complicated because it is the result of colluvial
action. Due to lateral movement incurred by colluvial processes the deposits should be
time transgressive, with older deposits upslope and younger deposits downslope,

61

however this could not be tested because systematic excavations in Unit Ia only occurred
in one locality on the southeastern portion of the terrace.
Diagnostic artifacts and the radiocarbon date of a prehistoric burial provide a
chronology of Unit Ib. The unit dates from the Early Archaic to slightly after the Middle
Archaic, which spans from 7,500 to 2,500 B.P. This long period of deposition is
represented at the site by fewer diagnostic artifacts than Unit Ia or Ic. Diagnostic
artifacts recovered were Pedernales, Refugio, Tortuga, Pandora, and a Bell- like dart
point. The Early Archaic artifacts were found in the lower portion of this approximately
60 cm thick deposit that suggests aggradation began around 7,500 B.P. A date from the
top of this depositional unit comes from a burial in the southeastern portion of the
terrace. The researcher analyzing the burial has not published the date, so to not publish
the date before the researcher has an opportunity to the date is presented without the
standard deviation age range. Bone collagen from the burial dated by AMS to 3,650 14 C
yr B.P. (Rice personal communication 2006). This burial appears to be excavated into
older Ib deposits, though there were no older diagnostics near the burial to corroborate
this. A paleosol developed in the upper portions of this unit, and the paucity of Middle
Archaic artifacts and the absence of any artifacts from the earliest part of the Late
Archaic suggest that this deposit stopped aggrading and was stable until 2,500 B.P.
During the Late Archaic burials were excavated into this unit, which has further
complicates the understanding of this unit.
Diagnostic artifacts, radiocarbon dating of two burials, and rates of pedogenesis
date Unit Ic. Numerous diagnostic artifacts date this deposit to the Late Archaic, Late

62

Prehistoric and Historic periods. This unit, which is up to 1 m thick, was aggradational
through this entire period, and there seems that there was no depositional hiatus between
these archaeology periods. Late Archaic artifacts are found at the base of the deposit,
and one burial from this period is excavated into the lower Ib unit. The bone collagen
from two burials was dated. The burial excavated into Unit Ib was dated by AMS to
1730+40 14C yr B.P., while the other located at the base of Unit Ic dated to 2020+ 40 14 C
yr B.P. (Taylor 2005:23). Diagnostic Late Archaic artifacts recovered were Marcos,
Fairland, Ensor, Darl, Catan, Matamoros dart points, and a Friday biface. This in
conjunction with the burials dates the Late Archaic component from 2000 to 1000 B.P.
The Late Prehistoric artifacts consist of Perdiz and Scallorn arrow points, and these are
typically found in the upper portions of the unit, mixed with later historic aboriginal and
European artifacts. European ceramics were found to a depth of 60 cm, which suggests
the upper portion of this unit is mixed through bioturbation. The formation of clay
lamellae is another indicator of age that in this setting helps correlate depositional units
across the terrace. Though the rate of lamellae formation is varied and relative to locale
conditions it is widely accepted that lamellae increase in thickness and frequency with
time (Holliday and Rawlings 2006, Rawlings 2000). Clay lamellae are found in Ic
deposits on the scarp edge in the central portion of the terrace, and in exposures on the
terrace tread. The lamellae formation is comparable between these exposures, which
indicates that deposits on the terrace tread could be Ic, and therefore is no older than
2000 B.P.

63

Depositional Origin of Holocene Sands. It has been hypothesized that the sands
of the Holocene depositional units are eolian in origin. This is based on observations of
a distinct textural difference between the underlying gravel deposits and the fine sands of
the upper deposits, the sandy mantle topography of the Deweyville Terrace surface, and
the Holocene artifacts recovered in stratigraphic context at the edge of the scarp of the
McNeill-Gonzales site. Extensive field observations, particle size distribution studies,
and radiometric dating tested this hypothesis. The results of the studies cannot entirely
confirm that the sediments are eolian in origin, but it seems likely that they are. First
there is a significant age differences between the Deweyville Formation deposits and the
mantling sands. The OSL date of 63,100 + 4000 yr (UIC1690GR), with a 2-sigma age
range of 55,100-71,100 yr for the gravelly sands underlying the Deweyville Paleosol and
the Holocene age cultural artifacts found above the Paleosol establishes that the Paleosol
is a buried soil that formed, at least in part, on the ancient terrace surface. Therefore the
sands that mantle the paleosol are required to be depositional and are not ancient
Deweyville Formation deposits that have remained in place since the Pleistocene.
The sediment particle size and the very limited chemical study of soil pH suggest
a distinct textual difference between the Deweyville sediments, modern overbank flood
deposits of the Guadalupe River, and the Holocene sands. Determining the mode of
transport by particle size analysis has always been questioned (Tucker and Vacher 1980,
Boggs 2001: 72-74) however one method of determining mode of transport was applied
to this setting. Leigh (2001) compiled a list of grain size attributes of eolian sand (Table
2). Sands from the Holocene sandy mantle, which were two samples from the terrace

64

scarp and one from the terrace tread, modern Guadalupe River overbank deposits, and
the underlying gravelly deposits of the Deweyville terrace are compared to these criteria.
Of the three Holocene sandy mantle samples only the sample from the Sand Pit on the
terrace tread met all the attributes of eolian sand (Table 3). The other two samples met
all of the attributes except they were less than 90% sand. The sample from Excavation
Unit 4 was 86.8% sand while the A horizon of the Paleo Profile was 83% sand. The
average phi size of all the samples was fine sand.
The slightly finer particle size distribution of the samples from the terrace scarp
can possibly be attributed to processes that occurred after initially being deposited by
eolian processes. Colluvial action, increased human and biological activity, as well as
extreme flooding events should be considered as possible sources of fine deposits. One
point that should be made about the sample processing is that none of the samples

Table 2. Attributes of eolian sands (From Leigh 2001 Table 10.3, with kind
permission of Springer Science and Business Media.)
Lack of >2 mm particles
> 2 mm particles comprise <0.02% of the
total sample weight
1-2 mm particles comprise <1% of the
total sample weight
1-2 mm particles comprise <2% of the < 2
mm sample weight
>90% sand or <0.063 mm particles (silt +
clay) as <10% of the <2 mm sample
weight
Phi coefficient of variance (CV) of 0.0632.0 mm fraction is typically <55%

65

Table 3. Particle size attributes of Holocene sandy mantle
Mantling Sands
AREA 4
PALEO
3 SAMPLE
0.0625-2.0 mm sands
AVERAGE SAND PIT PROFILE AVERAGE
Standard deviation (phi)
0.805
0.766
0.916
0.829
Average Particle Size (phi)
2.928
3.008
2.754
2.897
Skewness (phi)
-0.354
-0.339
-0.263
-0.318
Phi coefficient of variance
27.49
25.45
33.27
28.62
% Sand
86.84
92.8
83.3
87.65
1-2mm Sand
0.145
0.1
0.4
0.215
> 2mm particles
0
0
0
0

processed for particle size distributions were digested with hydrogen peroxide to remove
the organic portion of the samples. The sediments on the terrace scarp and slope are
very dark with suggests a higher organic content than terrace tread deposits. The higher
organic content may derive from prehistoric cultural inputs such as human wastes and
food possessing but more than likely the greater amount of biological activity occurring
at the edge of the terrace over the millennia has contributed to this darker color and
slightly higher clay content. The organics may have added a slight amount of weight to
the fine clay fraction. Another possibility for the slightly higher clay content in one of
the samples could be the addition of clay from flood deposits. During the flood of
record in the late 1990’s the landowner noted that floodwaters came slightly above the
Deweyville terrace scarp on the far southeastern portion of the terrace. The scarp sample
with the highest clay content was taken from this portion of the terrace and extreme but
infrequent flooding could be a possible explanation for the slightly higher clay content.
The particle size distribution of the mantling sands was compared to overbank
deposits of the modern Guadalupe River. Overbank deposits from a recent flooding of

66

the Guadalupe River were collected from the T1 terrace of the deeply incised channel of
the Guadalupe River. Interestingly the overbank deposits met all of Leigh’s criteria for
eolian sands. The deposits were 90% sand with a distinct lack of coarse >2 mm and
coarse sand particles. The only distinct difference was that while the sandy mantle
deposits are strongly coarse skewed the Guadalupe River deposits are strongly fine
skewed. Though the average particle size for both deposits are fine sand the Guadalupe
River sample has approximately 3 times the medium sand size fraction than the samples
from the sandy mantle. The Deweyville Terrace deposits fluvial sandy deposits are
distinctly different from the mantling sands, and the Guadalupe River overbank deposits.
They are slightly gravelly (1.3%) moderately sorted fine skewed medium- fine sands.
The gravels preclude an eolian origin for these deposits, which was expected.
These differences are further illustrated by a comparison of the fine to coarse
sand fractions (Figure 23). The silt and clay fractions are not included in this
comparison to negate the potential impact of illuvial clays skewing the frequency curve.
The graph shows that samples from the Holocene sandy mantle are better sorted, finer,
and are uniform in their sand fraction distribution. Samples from the Deweyville sands
and the Guadalupe River overbank deposits are not as well sorted, and are slightly
coarser textured. The similarities between the Deweyville sands and the Guadalupe
River suggest a similar method of deposition, which is most certainly fluvial. The
different curve of the Holocene mantling sands is additional evidence of that the mantle
was deposited by a process other than fluvial.

67

Distribution of Sands (VC-VF)
70

60

frequency in percent

50

GUADALUPE RIVER OVERBANK
HOLOCENE MANTLE (EX AREA 4)
HOLOCENE MANTLE - SAND PIT

40

DEWEYVILLE SANDS (SAND PIT)
DEWEYVILLE SANDS (PALEO AREA)

30

20

10

0
-0.25

0.25

0.75

1.25

1.75

2.25

2.75

3.25

3.75

4.25

phi size

Figure 23. Comparison of sand fraction particle size distributions

Though the application of granulometric studies relative to Leigh’s criteria
provided ambiguous results the uniformity of the finely skewed fine sand deposits on the
terrace suggests an eolian origin. Granulometric studies were only conducted at a few
localities, but the particle sizes values of these samples largely reflect observations made
at most exposures of the sandy mantle. This large body of uniform fine sands suggests
deposition by an eolian process. Fluvial processes typically have greater variability in
both the vertical and horizontal distribution in particle sizes. There is no fining upward
sequence in mantling sand deposits and no significant differences laterally across the
terrace. These circumstances in conjunction with the evidence presented earlier strongly
suggest an eolian mode of deposition for these sands.

68

An unresolved concern is the sediment source of the mantling sands. There are
four possible sources for the sands: localized eolian reworking of sands from the
Deweyville Terrace that were exposed from below the eroded paleosol; sands
transported from the Beaumont uplands down onto the terrace surface; fluvial sands
from point bars of the Holocene floodplain transported upslope to the Deweyville
Terrace; or sands deposited after long distance transport. The two modes of transport
that can be immediately ruled out are transport from the Beaumont surface, and long
distance transport. If long distance transport were the case much larger areas of the
coastal plain would be covered in sand sheets. The sands that mantle the Deweyville
Terrace are localized, and an examination of the soil series of Victoria County shows a
limited area has sandy soils. The other argument is that the Beaumont surface once had
a veneer of sand that eroded or deflated downslope onto the Deweyville Terrace.
Holocene sand deposits do exist on the Beaumont Formation, but not in this setting.
These deposits are known as the Ingleside Units and are considered relict barrier island
features that are found much closer to the coast. Considering there are no relict sand
features on the adjacent Beaumont uplands, no relict sand pedoturbated down vertic
cracks into the Beaumont soil, and the sand does not mantle down the slope of the
Beaumont onto the Deweyville Terrace there is little evidence that the sands derive from
colluvial and eolian deflation from the Beaumont uplands.
This leaves localized reworking of the Deweyville Terrace sands and the
deflation of Guadalupe River floodplain sand and the subsequent deposition on the
Deweyville Terrace as possible sources of the Holocene eolian sands. There are ample

69

source materials that the Guadalupe River traverses through on the interior Coastal Plain.
Within 50 km upstream there are sandstone deposits of the Quaternary Willis Formation,
Miocene Fleming and Oakville Formation, and there are numerous sandy formations
further upstream (Barnes 1974). These deposits, in addition to sands residing in
Quaternary fluvial terraces present numerous potential sediment sources for the
Deweyville terrace, and for floodplain sands that could be mobilized by eolian
processes. Deriving the sediment sources and depositional mechanisms will most likely
only be resolved with an intensive regional study of multiple localities; however the
applicability of some possible depositional mechanisms should be tested.
The localized reworking of Deweyville Terrace sands could have occurred in two
ways. One mechanism would be if the Deweyville Paleosol were eroded to expose the
underlying fluvial sands. After the exposure the sands could be entrained and
redeposited above the paleosol. Evidence for the erosion of the Deweyville Paleosol
exists along the margins of the terrace and in the paleo- gully on the south-central portion
of the terrace. Situations like these could expose the sands, however considering that
fluvial erosion would probably be necessary to erode the fine textured paleosol one
would have to question if the climate would be arid enough and the surface void of
vegetation to facilitate eolian transport. Another possible source could be the adjacent
valley slope of the Deweyville terrace. Currently the terrace slope is heavily vegetated
by deciduous hardwoods. If the slope wasn’t vegetated and the underlying sands of the
Deweyville Terrace were laterally exposed there is the potential that they could be
entrained and redeposited on the surface of the terrace. This seems unlikely because it is

70

hard to envision the large quantity of sand mantling the Deweyville Terrace could have
been redeposited from the slope that seems to be depositing colluvium and sand sheets
through the Holocene.
The deflation of floodplain sands and deposition onto nearby terraces is another
distinct possibility. The Guadalupe River floodplain is not particularly wide at this
portion of the draina ge, and though the active channel is 1.1 km to the south of the
Deweyville Terrace there are numerous examples of paleochannels on the northern
margins of the valley. Channels with braided streams or large point bars located near the
northern edge of the valley would be opportune sediment sources for eolian deflation.
Because the current study did not conduct subsurface investigations on the modern
floodplain the location, much less the age, of channels near the northern margins of the
river valley it is not possible to directly correlate channels to possible depositional
events.

71

CHAPTER IV
ARCHAEOLOGICAL STRATIGRAPHY

Site Stratigraphy
The site is located on the complex slope and tread of the southern and eastern
sides of a Deweyville terrace. The total site area is approximately 44,500 m2 , however
only approximately 20,000 m2 of the site along the southern slope and tread has
significant archaeological deposits in stratigraphic context. The geoarchaeological
studies focused on four areas in the southern portion of the site (Figure 24). The Main
Site Area is a dome shaped sandy mantle on the tread and crest-slope of the terrace. This
westernmost portion of the site was disturbed by borrow pit operations, which created
numerous exposures. The THC Stewards work on this portion of the site consisted of
salvage excavation of Burial Areas 1 and 2 and Excavation Area 4 and Area 5. A deep
pit with exposures of underlying Deweyville terrace deposits in the Main Site Area was
also examined. The Anaqua Mott Area is on a gentle rectilinear slope both down slope
and to the east of the Main Site Area. This area is disturbed and the THC Stewards
excavated two test units: the Anaqua Mott 1 x2 unit and the Anaqua Mott 2 x2 m unit.
The Paleo Area is located on the southeastern portion of the terrace further down the
gentle rectilinear slope. Here borrow pit excavations created an upslope exposure named
the Paleo Area Profile, and the bottom of the borrow pit exposed prehistoric surfaces.
Two test units were excavated in the Paleo Area, the Paleo Area Excavation unit and the
Paleo Area Burial unit. The final portion of the site examined was the Sand Pit.

72

Figure 24. Excavation area map

73

The sand pit is on the terrace tread in the open level sand fields. There were no
excavations at this portion of the site. Only scattered lithic artifacts were recovered from
exposures, but the borrow pit excavations provided extensive exposures of the upland
sandy mantle of the terrace tread. Very limited subsurface testing has occurred in the
northern and eastern portion of the site, but auger test and exposures in the sand pit
suggests there is limited potential for intact, stratified archaeological deposits.
An important consideration and acknowledgement needs to be made regarding
the archaeological data presented in this section of the thesis. The THC Stewards
conducted the archaeological excavations at the site with their own goals and research
objectives. They allowed me to use their archaeological data for my study. Their test
excavations are completed they have begun to inventory and catalog the excavated
material. There has been no detailed analysis of the artifacts and the designations of
artifact types come only from their field and lab descriptions. Future analyses may show
that diagnostic artifacts should be reclassified, which may impact the interpretations of
the site stratigraphy.
Main Site Area. The burial areas were excavated as salvage excavations, and
therefore unit records are less detailed. Due to the gap in time between the excavation of
the burials and the geoarchaeological investigations Burial Area #2 was not accessible
due to slumping of the unconsolidated walls of the deep pits. Profiles of Burial Area #1,
adjacent borrow pit exposures, and a profile and auger of exposure adjacent to Burial
Area #2 provide an outline of the cultural stratigraphy of this portion of the site. In the
burial areas the fluvial deposits of the Deweyville Formation, as well as Holocene

74

depositional Units Ib and Ic were encountered. There is some evidence for Unit Ia, but it
appears to be mixed with the upper units, eroded, or non-existent.
Burial Area #1 consisted of excavations to a depth of 225 cm below ground
surface (Figure 25). This portion of the Main Site Area was a slight knoll near the scarp
of the Deweyville Terrace before the borrow pit excavations destroyed much of the knoll
feature. The excavation encountered Holocene Unit Ib and Ic, which had an A1-A2E/Bt-2Ab soil sequence. The A1-A2-E/Bt deposit correlates to Holocene Unit Ic while
the 2Ab deposit correlates to Holocene Unit Ib. The upper cumulic A1-A2 horizons are
combined 107 cm thick very dark grayish brown fine sand. Extensive evidence of
bioturbation in the form of infilled rodent burrows exists in these units. Prehistoric lithic
artifacts and one historic ceramic sherd were observed in these horizons. The E/Bt
horizon consists of 50 cm of dark grayish brown fine loamy sand with very dark brown
fine loamy sand lamellae. The lamellae are approximately 1 cm thick, and are found at 5
cm vertical intervals. They are wavy and discontinuous, and provide no evidence of
bedding structure. There is weak medium blocky subangular structure, and fewer
observed rodent burrows. Prehistoric artifacts were found in this level. Below this unit
the 2Ab horizon is very dark grayish brown loamy fine sand, which correlates to
Holocene Unit Ib. The deposit has a weak fine blocky subangular structure and the
exposure is 60 cm thick. Prehistoric lithic artifacts and burned rock were observed in
profile, and Burial #1 was recovered from this horizon. AMS was used to date bone
collagen from this burial to 1730+40 14 C yr B.P. (Taylor 2005:23). Considering that the

75

Figure 25. Burial Area 1 photo and profile

burial age is younger than the paleosol age it is likely that this burial was excavated into
the 2Ab horizon from the upper horizons. The only diagnostic lithic artifact from the
burial area was a Darl point found 50 cm above the burial, which dates to approximately
1,000 B.P., at the transition from the Late Archaic to the Late Prehistoric.
The stratigraphy of Burial Area #2 was not recorded directly because the unit
was too unstable to record. The unit was 2 x 2 m in area and reached a depth of 2.35 m
below surface. A flexed burial was recovered 1.7 m below surface and a bundle burial
was recovered higher in the profile from 1.05 m below the surface. The flexed burial
dated to 2020 + 40 14 C yr B.P. (Taylor 2005: 23). A dart point that conformed to some
of the attributes of the Plainview point was found above the burial, which dates far

76

earlier to the Paleoindian period. In limited observations it was found that burials were
mixed with prehistoric occupational debris. There may be more than one possib le cause
for this mixing. Certainly bioturbation took place in these units as it did across the entire
site, and the process of burying the individual would have disturbed sediments, but
infilling sedimentation of the paleo gully in this location could ha ve contributed to the
mixing of archaeological deposits. These causes may explain why such an early point
form was found above a Late Archaic burial.

Figure 26. Burial Area 2 photo and profile

77

In order to record a representative profile of the area a nearby exposure was
sectioned and described. Auger 5-22 was excavated to a depth of 2.75 m below surface
to provide a more comprehensive exposure (Figure 26). Unfortunately no diagnostic
artifacts were observed in the profile description, but the profile and auger description
provide evidence of significant Late Holocene sedimentation. The profile consists of a
thick cumulic A horizon over a weak 2Ab, underlain by a weak illuvial horizon above
fluvial sands. Holocene Units Ib and Ic, and Deweyville Formation were recorded in
this profile, and had a soil sequence of: Ap-A1-A2-A3-2Ab1-2Ab22-2Bt2-2BC-3C.
Unit Ic was represented by soil sequence Ap-A1-A2-A3. The upper cumulic A horizons
had one historic whiteware sherd and very common prehistoric lithic artifacts and animal
bone. A few burned rocks and possible scattered human bone fragments were observed.
The sediments are generally very dark grayish brown fine sand to fine loamy sand with
very weak fine blocky subangular structure parting to single grain. The upper A
horizons extend from the surface to a depth of 1.85 m. The flexed burial in the nearby
excavation unit was recovered at what would be the base of this upper horizon dates to
2020 + 40 14C yr B.P. (Taylor 2005: 23). This indicates that the Holocene unit Ib with
the soil sequence of 2Ab1-2Ab2-2Bt2-2BC would have begun being deposited before
2000 B.P. The 2Ab1 horizon is approximately 110 cm thick and is identified by its
darker very dark gray color and slightly more developed structure. Prehistoric artifacts
continue in this horizon and considering this horizon is below the horizon that the flexed
burial was found it suggests this paleosol corresponds to Holocene unit Ib. Below 2Ab1
there is a 25 cm thick brown sandy loam 2Ab2 horizon with prehistoric material. Below

78

this horizon a weak argillic horizon of brownish yellow sandy loam to sandy clay loam
was encountered. This horizon does not resemble the Deweyville Paleosol because there
is no gleying, less overall clay content, no underlying calcic horizon, and the structure is
not as strong as the Deweyville Paleosol. It may represent clay illuviation during the
Holocene, as seen in the welded soil at the base of Excavation Area 4. No artifacts were
observed in the auger from this approximately 1 m thick horizon. Below a 50 cm
transitional 2BC horizon were gravelly medium to coarse sands of a 3C that correlate to
other Deweyville Formation fluvial deposits across the site.
The Excavation Area 4 is located at the edge of the terrace tread, on the eastern
side of the Main Site Area. The excavation was 3 x 2 m in area and reached a maximum
depth of 2.35 m below surface. This excavation unit had the most complete record of
the prehistoric occupation at the McNeill- Gonzales site. Diagnostic artifacts spanning
the Late Paleoindian to the Historic Period were recovered from the excavation unit, and
all of the Holocene depositional units and the contact with the Deweyville Paleosol were
identified (Figures 27, 28). The soil sequence for this excavation unit is Ap-A1-AC2Ab-3Ab-3AB-3Bt1-3Bt2-4Bt. Preliminary artifact counts for unit levels by weight;
pollen studies by stratigraphic horizon; and a continuous particle size distribution study
were conducted for this unit. The data from these studies is found in the appendices.
Holocene Unit Ia was found at the base of the excavation unit. It is
approximately 80 cm thick, and is above the Deweyville Paleosol. The only expression
of the paleosol at the top of Ia (3Ab) is in unit N398 E852. The remnant A horizon is a

Figure 27. Excavation Area 4 profile and particle size analysis

79

80

Figure 28. Photo of Excavation Area 4, Unit N397 E850, West Wall

10 cm thick dark grayish brown loamy fine sand. Evidence of bioturbation of this
horizon and the lower horizon (3AB) are vertical root casts 2.5 cm wide, up to 20 cm
long, filled with dark grayish brown sand from above horizon. Other units in Excavation
Area 4 do not have a preserved A horizon, and instead the underlying 3AB horizon is
directly overlain by the subsequent Ib depositional unit. As evidenced by the particle
size distributions there is a textural break below the 3Ab horizon. The clay content

81

increases as an illuvial Bt horizon has formed in the Holocene sediments. This sandy
loam to sandy clay loam is welded with the underlying Deweyville Paleosol (4Bt). The
pollen samples (#3, #7) from this unit had practically no preserved pollen (Appendix D).
The prehistoric cultural material from unit Ia in Excavation Area 4 consists
primarily of lithic artifacts and fire cracked rock. The diagnostic artifacts from
Holocene Unit Ia are Clear Fork gouge tools and Angostura, Golondrina, Big Sandy,
Lerma, Hoxie, and Abasolo points dart points that date to the Late Paleoindian and the
very early Archaic period. The artifact densities are highest in the 3Ab and 3AB
horizon, and then decrease with depth (Figure 29). Unit levels in these horizons have the
greatest weight of fire cracked rock of the entire profile, which raises the possibility of
this concentration deriving from a pedogenic stone line as opposed to cultural behavior.
Closer review of the FCR distributions finds and average increase in FCR by level but
large fire cracked rock concentration feature in one level of unit N397 E852 accounts for
over half the FCR weight in level 20. This variability does not suggest the development
of a uniform stone line. Another more definitive argument against the development of a
stone line is that there is no spike in lithic artifact weight that corresponds to the increase
in FCR. Lithic debitage does not increase in weight at these levels, which suggests the
increased FCR weight is due to cultural processes and not pedogenic ones.
Holocene Unit Ib is an approximately 60 cm thick buried cumulic 2Ab horizon.
The horizon is dark gray fine sand with a weak coarse blocky subangular structure. The
particle size distributions reveal a very slight fining upwards sequence to this deposit;
otherwise the uniform characteristics of the soils provide little to differentiate horizons.

82

Figure 29. Excavation Area 4 artifact distributions by unit level

The pollen assemblage from this unit was nearly as poor as the samples from Unit Ia,
with only a few Populus, ASTERACEAE, POACEAE, and FABACEAE Mimosa-like
pollen recovered. Diagnostic prehistoric artifacts from this horizon date to the Middle
Archaic. Pandora (2), Tortuga (2), and Pedernales, dart points were recovered, as well as
Clear Fork gouges and bone tools. The concentration of artifacts decreases relative to
later upper horizons, but there is still more lithic debitage by weight than lower Early
Archaic/Late Paleoindian occupations.
Holocene Unit Ic is approximately 110 cm thick and is a mollic epipedon. The
soil stratigraphy of this unit is an Ap-A1-AC, though the sediments are quite uniform
and the AC horizon could be just as well described as an A2. More pollen was
recovered from this unit than the lower two units, however pollen concentrations were
still very low. ASTERACEAE was most prevalent, though approximately half the
pollen grains observed were not identified because they were too degraded. The

83

sediments are very dark gray loamy fine sand with massive single grained structure.
Historic, Late Prehistoric and Late Archaic diagnostic artifacts were recovered from this
unit. The Historic and Late Prehistoric artifacts are found in the upper 60 cm, while Late
Archaic artifacts extend from the upper 60 cm to the base of the unit. Forged and square
nails, as well as a clay marble and various historic ceramics were recovered. The Late
Prehistoric diagnostic artifacts consist of indigenous pottery, Perdiz arrow points, and
Scallorn dart points. One hearth was recorded in this upper portion of the horizon, and
two hearths were recorded in the lower Late Archaic component. Marcos, Friday, and
Ensor diagnostic points were recovered from the Late Archaic component. Artifact
concentrations are highest in the lower A1 and AC horizons. There are clear examples
of bioturbation in the form of large roots, infilled rodent burrows, and fine insect
burrows. However though there are examples of bioturbation the three intact hearth
features suggest that bioturbation has not been significant enough to totally obliterate the
cultural context of unit Ic.
The Excavation Area 5 is located approximately 30 m downslope to the
southwest of the Excavation Area 4. The stratigraphy of the unit is similar to Area 4,
except Holocene Units Ia and Ib are not present in this unit. Instead two thick cumulic A
horizons (A1-A2) that correlate to Holocene unit Ic were identified above the
Deweyville Paleosol. The unit is 1 x 2 m in area and extends to a depth of 150 cm. An
auger (# 5-33) was excavated to 230 cm below the bottom of the unit. Approximately
120 cm of deposits with diagnostic Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric artifacts
unconformably overlie the Deweyville Paleosol (Figure 30). The upper A1 horizon is 54

84

Figure 30. Excavation Area 5 profile

cm thick. A greater concentration of prehistoric artifacts observed in this horizon, and
included lithic debitage and tools, animal bone, mussel shell, snail shell, and occasional
charcoal. Some historic artifacts were also observed in this upper horizon. There are
large roots in the profile and no bedding structure but otherwise there is little evidence of
severe bioturbation. The underlying Deweyville Paleosol is 100 cm thick with both the
argillic and calcic portions of the soil intact. Below are fine sands with gravelly
components that correspond to the fluvial deposits of the Deweyville Formation.
Anaqua Mott. The two excavation units in the Anaqua Mott portion of the site
encountered relatively shallow but quite concentrated archaeological deposits that date

85

from the Late Archaic to the Late Prehistoric. These deposits form a midden
approximately 40-50 cm thick from 20 to 30 cm below ground surface. Artifact
concentrations decrease with depth until all artifact material ceases at a gradual
unconformable contact with Deweyville calcic and fluvial deposits.
The Anaqua Mott 1 x 2 m unit (Unit N341 E883-883) is positioned
approximately midslope of the Anaqua Mott area. This excavation unit was excavated
to 140 cm below surface, and an auger (#5-37) continued another 260 cm below the
bottom of the excavation unit (Figure 31). The profile including the auger data consists
of Holocene Unit Ic and the Deweyville Formation, with a soil sequence of A1-A2-A3AE-2C. Unit Ic is a thick cumulic mollic epipedon, and a weak elluvial horizon with a
gradual boundary with underlying sands and deep calcic horizons of the Deweyville
Formation. The archaeological materials are confined primarily to the upper horizons
A1, A2, A3, and AE. A distinct midden has formed between 34 and 88 cm below the
surface in horizons A2 and A3 with very dark brown organic rich loamy fine sands. The
soil color of the midden is distinctly darker than the upper and lower horizons and has
abundant charcoal wood fragments and stains, animal bone, snail shell, mussel shell,
small fire cracked rock, and lithic artifacts. Diagnostic dart and arrow points from this
midden date the deposit to the Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric (2,000-300 B.P.).
According to THC Stewards records four Perdiz arrow points, one glass Cameron point,
one Scallorn point, one Fairland, one Marcos, and two unidentified Triangular dart
points were recovered. The majority of the diagnostic artifacts were recovered from the
midden levels, but the Fairland and one of the Late Triangular dart point were recovered

86

Figure 31. Anaqua Mott 1 x 2 m unit profile

from near the base of the excavation unit. The artifact densities observed in profile
decrease with depth, and no earlier archaeological components were identified.
Evidence of bioturbation in the form of roots and burrows infilled with sandy sediments
throughout the profile demonstrates that the area has experienced some disturbance.
Deweyville Paleosol is completely eroded exposing the underlying fluvial sands.
Anaqua Mott 2 x 2 m unit (Units N 324-325 E 886-887) is 17 m downslope of
the Anaqua Mott 1 x 2 m unit. This excavation unit has a very similar stratigraphy to the
1 x2 m unit, but the Holocene depositional unit Ic mantling the Deweyville Formation is
not as thick. It the 2 x 2 m unit was excavated to a depth of 94 cm and an auger (#5)

87

continued 108 cm from the bottom of unit N324 E886. The archaeological deposits
consisted of the Late Archaic to Late Prehistoric midden in Unit Ic which has a soil
designation of A1-A2-A3-AE (Figure 32). The THC Stewards records show from this
unit Perdiz, Darl, Fairland, a Pandora- like knife, and Scallorn points were recovered.
These diagnostic artifacts were recovered from the midden levels of the unit, and unlike
the Anaqua Mott 1x2 m unit there is not a Marcos component. This suggests a slightly
younger age for this portion of the midden, as the diagnostics dating back to only 1800
B.P. The midden formed between 20 and 64 cm below ground surface. Like the midden

Figure 32. Anaqua Mott 2 x 2 m unit, west wall profile

88

deposits in the other unit the sediments are a darker color than the upper and lower
horizons, with abundant prehistoric cultural material. A few scattered mussel shells and
a proximal fragment of a Golondrina- like point were recovered at the base of the unit at
the gradual contact with the 2Ck calcic soil deposits of the Deweyville Formation.
Though the recovery of early artifacts was limited to the possible Golondrina point, it
suggests the possibility of an earlier archaeological component below the midden. There
is less evidence for disturbance in these excavation units, except for burrows in the AE
horizon that are infilled with A horizon sediments from the upper levels.
Paleo Area. The Paleo Area is located on the southeastern margin of the terrace.
The surface of the terrace is approximately 2-3 m lower in elevation than the Main Site
Area. The Paleo Area has produced many intriguing early prehistoric artifacts, but the
borrow pit excavations and subsequent erosion has been both a blessing and a curse for
the geoarchaeological investigations (Figure 33). Numerous Late Paleoindian/Early
Archaic diagnostic artifacts have been recovered from this portion of the site; however
they have primarily come from disturbed contexts. Fortunately, two excavations
conducted by THC Stewards in conjunction with geoarchaeological investigations have
helped place some of these artifacts in context.
The Paleo Area Profile consists of the profile description of a large section of
wall created by the borrow pit operations on the northwestern, upslope side of the Paleo
Area (Figures 34, 35). This wall was described on three occasions. The first recorded
the basic stratigraphy and collected samples for particle size analysis. The second
description consisted of cleaning a large portion of the wall and a smaller section to the

89

Figure 33. Photo overview of Paleo Area. Profile is behind white shelter to right, Paleo
excavation area under white shelter to the left

Figure 34. Photo of Paleo Area profile (with scale, soils and geo units)

Figure 35. Paleo Area profile

90

91

north to examine the stratigraphy in a larger section and to assess artifact distribution of
artifacts in the profile. The third description came during the collection of OSL samples.
The stratigraphy recorded at this exposure formed the foundation for correlating the soils
and sediments of this portion of the site. The profile and auger has evidence of
Holocene Units Ia, Ib, Ic, and the Deweyville Formation. The soil horizon sequence is
A-2Ab1-2AB-3Btkb1-3Btkb2-3BC-3C-3Bk. Holocene Unit Ic correlates to the very
dark grayish brown loamy fine sand from 0-65 cm below ground surface. The A horizon
was soft with massive to fine blocky subangular structure. Few prehistoric artifacts were
observed in this unit, which is quite different from other examples of this unit in the
Anaqua Mott and the Main Site Area that have abundant prehistoric artifacts. Below this
horizon is a buried paleosol at the top of Holocene Unit Ib that can be correlated to the
paleosol (2Ab) in Excavation Area 4 and the Burial Area #1 and #2. This 2Ab1 horizon
is a dark grayish brown fine sandy loam found 65-100 cm below the ground surface.
The horizon is firm when wet and has a weak coarse parting to fine blocky subangular
structure. Prehistoric lithic artifacts are very common in this horizon, as are snail shells.
The snail shells include Rabdotus and an unidentified species, and most are broken.
This depositional unit continues with a 2Ab2 horizon from 100-138 cm below the
ground surface, though it is not present across the entire profile. This horizon is a
grayish brown fine sandy loam with weak fine blocky subangular structure. Few lithic
artifacts were observed but numerous snail shells, both Rabdotus and the unidentified
species, were observed. Though most of the snail shell was broken some of the
Rabdotus were whole. Freshwater mussel shells were also observed in this horizon.

92

Unit Ia is found from 138-174 cm as a weak 2Btkb1-calcic horizon with prehistoric
cultural material. This horizon correlates to the calcic portion of the Deweyville
Paleosol that underlies the red gleyed sandy clay loam, however it was reworked during
the early Holocene. As evidenced in this profile and adjacent augers the red paleosol is
eroded away exposing the lower calcic horizon, which was then subsequently
redeposited as colluvium then formed a prehistoric living surface. This 3Btkb2 horizon
is a brown fine sandy loam with weak fine blocky subangular structure. There are
common (15%) calcic filaments and fine soft masses. There are occasional lithic
artifacts with a white to grayish patina, and numerous snail and freshwater mussel shell.
One Clear Fork gouge tool was identified in the profile. The calcic horizon of Unit Ia
continues as 2Btkb2 from 174-202 cm below ground surface. This light yellowish
brown fine sandy loam sees a decrease in calcium carbonate, with only occasional large
granule to small pebble sized calcic nodules. OSL sample #2 was collected from the top
of this level, and produced dates of 25,800 + 1630 yr (UIC1691IR), and 23,700 + 1495
yr (UIC1691GR) with the two-sigma age ranges overlapping at 24,200-27,400 yr and
22,500-25,200 yr. This is probably the result of partially bleached, mixed sediments, and
does not represent the true age of the sediments or cultural deposits. The artifact content
of this horizon decreases, with no shells and only one flake of lithic debitage observed.
The final horizon observed in profile is a very pale brown medium to fine grained sand
that extends from 202 cm to the limit of the profile exposure at 250 cm. This sand has
only very occasional granule sized calcic nodules. A biface fragment with significant
calcic patina, as well as one chert flake of debitage was observed in this profile.

93

Considering the OSL date of from approximately 40 cm above these artifacts they can be
explained either as artifacts translocated by bio-pedoturbation into the sandy substrate or
artifacts deposited in portion of the fluvial sands that were reworked colluvially before
the calcic horizon was redeposited above the sands. Only additional OSL dating using
methods that can account for mixed bleaching of sediments, as well as additional
excavation will be able to determine the nature and chronology of these scattered
archaeological deposits. Auger #1 below the surface continued the exposure to a depth
of and additional 40 cm. The Deweyville sands with very occasional calcic granules of
soil horizon 3C continued to a depth of 280 cm below ground surface, with no additional
prehistoric artifacts recovered. The sands became more gravelly and coarse with depth.
The auger reached its maximum depth at 290 due to contact with impenetrable gravelly
calcic sandy clay of the 3Ck horizon. This deep calcic horizon may correspond to deep
calcic horizons encountered adjacent to the Paleo Area Excavation Unit, Auger #2 in the
bottom of Paleo Burial Excavation Unit, and Auger #10-6 however these deep calcic
horizons are found up to 1.5 m deeper in profile than the deep calcic horizon in the Paleo
Profile.
The Paleo Area Excavation Unit is an area of 3 x 4 m that was excavated to a
depth of approximately 65 cm below the truncated surface (Figures 36, 37). The
excavation unit is 20 m to the south and down slope of the Profile exposure. The THC
Stewards have not completed the artifact inventory of this excavation unit, so at this time
only diagnostic artifacts and a general summary of artifact findings are available for
stratigraphic interpretation. Approximately 50-75 cm of the A1 soil horizon that

94

Figure 36. Paleo Area Excavation unit profile

95

Figure 37. Photo of Paleo Area Excavation unit (facing west wall)

correlates to Holocene unit Ic and the top of the 2Ab horizon that correlates to Holocene
unit Ib were removed as part of the borrow pit excavations. The excavation units
encountered 10-15 cm of disturbed sediments underlain by a soil horizon sequence of
2Bt1-2Bt2-2BC-2CB that were probably buried by slope wash as Holocene unit Ia. The
2Bt1 is approximately 15 cm thick very dark grayish brown sandy clay with strong
coarse blocky angular structure. The THC Stewards recovered numerous diagnostic
artifacts from this horizon. This horizon encountered one Clear Fork Gouge,
Golondrina, Angostura, Uvalde, and Saint Mary Hall dart points, which date from the
Late Paleoindian to the Early Archaic periods. Biface preforms, lithic debitage, and
scattered burned rock were also observed in the profile and in excavation at this horizon.
A Bulverde dart point and three Clear Fork Gouges were recovered at the contact

96

between this horizon and the next lower horizon. If the field designation of the Bulverde
point, which dates to the Late Archaic, holds after the analysis of diagnostic artifacts it
will imply significant mixing of prehistoric components at this portion of the site. The
2Bt2 horizon is approximately 15 cm thick and consists of dark grayish brown sandy
clay loam with moderate coarse parting to fine blocky subangular structure. This
horizon produced four Clear Fork Gouges and another unidentified gouge tool. At the
base of this horizon a Golondrina dart point was recovered. The 2BC horizon consisted
of a 15 cm thick brown sandy loam with weak medium blocky subangular structure and
approximately 1% small pebbles. A Plainview dart point and four Clear Fork gouge
tools were recovered in this horizon. Below this horizon was a15 cm thick 2CB horizon
only exposed in the northern upslope portion of the excavation unit. This horizon was a
brown medium sandy loam with common small pebbles and few boulders at the base of
the excavation unit with a massive structure. Very few artifacts were recovered from
this unit with only one Clear Fork Gouge tool recovered. Based on the position of these
gravels relative to gravels encountered in augers further upslope it is presumed that the
gravels correlate to the gravel of the underlying fluvial deposits of the Deweyville
Formation.
No features were recorded in these units, and field observations found many of
the artifacts orientated at an angle with a general appearance of being disturbed or in
secondary context. The stratigraphy of the diagnostic artifacts shows some mixing of
Late Paleoindian, Early Archaic occupations, and possibly Late Archaic artifacts
considering the recovery of the Bulverde point. Considering the unit location some

97

degree of slope wash would have translocated artifacts before their burial by Holocene
depositional units Ia and Ib. There is no evidence of the calcic portion of the Deweyville
Paleosol, which is found upslope. Instead the remnants of a lower nearly entirely
cemented calcic horizon of the Deweyville Formation are found immediately east of the
excavation unit. In a nearby cut there is an example of the 2Btb soil unconformably
above the calcic soil. There are no artifacts in the calcic soil or the fluvial deposits
observed in profile below the calcic horizon.
Approximately 20 m to the southeast of the Paleo Area profile two human
remains was recovered in salvage and test excavations. A 1 x 2 m unit was excavated to
a maximum depth of 110 cm below ground surface (Figure 38). The original surface
was truncated by borrow pit excavations, and based on a small island of the original
surface to the south and natural ground surfaces to the southeast the original ground
surface is estimated to be 40-60 cm above the current surface. The missing section
would have included Holocene Unit Ic. A portion of Holocene Unit Ic is present, as is
all of Holocene Unit Ib and a portion of the Deweyville Formation were identified in the
section. Holocene Unit Ia may exist in this section below Ib. The excavation unit has a
stratigraphy similar to the Paleo Area Profile, except the upper A-2Ab horizon is thicker
at the burials and the calcic horizon is thinner than the Paleo Area Profile.
On the borrow pit surface badly disturbed and poorly preserved human remains
were identified. These remains consisted of some scattered teeth, femur, and fragments
of the tibia and fibia. These remains were not dated. In an effort to understand the
stratigraphy of this portion of the site an auger was placed near the burial (Auger 2) and

98

Figure 38. Paleo Area Burial unit profile

coincidentally human remains were recovered from a burial approximately 90 cm below
surface. The THC stewards and physical anthropologist Dr. Jennifer Rice conducted test
excavations to recover this burial. The truncated A horizon would have been
approximately 60-80 cm thick, though only the bottom 18 cm are preserved as the upper
albeit disturbed horizon of the unit. The sediments are a very dark brown fine sandy
loam. The deposits are hard when dry but are massive and structureless. Snail shell
fragments, lithics and unidentified bones were observed in profile. From 18-40 cm is the
2Ab1 horizon, which is the upper portion of Unit Ib. This horizon is very dark grayish
brown fine sandy loam that is very hard when dry and very firm when moist. The
horizon was observed as massive and structureless, however the profile was not
disturbed to test ped structure to maintain the integrity of the profile wall. This unit had

99

a dark greasy midden- like color and texture, and prehistoric lithics, shell, and FCR were
observed in profile. Unit Ib continues below this soil horizon as 2Ab2 and 2Ab3
horizons that extend to a variable depth of 80-100 cm below ground surface. These
horizons are very dark grayish brown fine sandy loams that are massive but soft in
texture as opposed to the overlying 2Ab1 horizon. Prehistoric artifacts were observed in
both horizons, though the upper 2Ab2 horizon had fewer prehistoric artifacts. The 2Ab3
horizon has more prehistoric artifacts than the upper horizon and appears to truncate
lower horizons in the location of the burial. The burial was recovered from the base of
this unit approximately 90-100 cm below ground surface. The burial was dated in a
sample submitted by Dr. Jennifer Rice to Beta Analytic Inc. AMS dated the bone
collagen sample to 3,650 14 C yr B.P., making it the oldest dated burial of the site (Rice
personal communication). Considering the evidence of the upper horizon truncating the
lower horizon in the area of the burial the 3,650 14 C yr B.P., date probably occured
before the formation of the 2Ab1 paleosol. Below this horizon the excavation unit
encountered dark grayish brown to grayish brown fine sandy loams that have a decrease
in the amount of prehistoric artifacts. The 3AbC horizons are a transition between these
Holocene Unit Ib and possibly Unit Ia depositional units and the lower reworked calcic
horizon of the Deweyville Paleosol. The limit of the exposure of the excavation unit
was 110 cm below ground surface; however Auger 2 extended the exposure by 65 cm.
This transitional horizon continues for another 15 cm. Below the horizon is a 35 cm
thick 3Bk horizon. This horizon correlates to the calcic paleosol portion of the
Deweyville Paleosol. The deposit is a light brownish gray fine sandy loam with

100

calcareous granules and calcium carbonate crusted large rounded pebbles. Observed
mussel shell fragments suggest that this was once a living surface during the Holocene,
or that Holocene artifacts were translocated down the profile through bio-pedoturbation.
Below this horizon to the limit of the exposure at 175 cm below the ground surface is the
weakly cemented buried calcic horizon, which is encountered upslope below the sandy
Deweyville deposits and downslope to the southwest near the Paleo Area Excavation
Units below the Holocene deposits. The deposit is pale yellow coarse sandy clay that is
entirely calcified. No cultural material was observed in this horizon.
Sand Pit. The Sand Pit is an area approximately 40,000 m2 on the tread of the
Deweyville Terrace that was excavated for fill dirt. The pit is largely devoid of cultural
material, with only occasional, scattered lithic artifacts observed. No test or salvage
units were excavated in this portion of the site, but the walls of pit provided abundant
opportunities to examine the deposits (Figure 39). Subsurface testing to determine the
relationship between the upper Holocene deposits and the underlying Deweyville
Paleosol and fluvial deposits were described in previous sections. This section describes
a detailed profile of the upper sandy deposits in relation to the Holocene stratigraphy,
and details the archaeological findings from this portion of the site.
One portion of the sand pit was cleaned and profiled. This section was 3 m wide
and 1.75 m deep with a 0.25 m pit to extend the profile deeper (Figure 40). Holocene
Units Ic, was identified in this profile, though unit Ib may be present at the base of the
profile. The profile exhibited an A1-A2-E/Bt-C horizon sequence, and did not encounter
the Deweyville Paleosol. The A1-A2-E/Bt sequence is similar to Holocene Unit Ic, and

101

Figure 39. Photo of Sand Pit

Figure 40. Sand Pit photo and profile

102

though the C horizon does not have the paleosol at the top of the Unit Ib the C horizon is
in the same stratigraphic position below an E/Bt horizon like exposures of Unit Ib on the
edge of the terrace. The epipedon is brown fine sand with little to no evidence of
cultural material, however bioturbation in the form of infilled insect and rodent burrows
is common. Below the A1-A2 horizon the E/Bt horizon has clay lamellae that increase
in frequency with depth. The evidence of bioturbation decreases in this level, but there
are still infilled rodent and insect burrows. The upper 40 cm of this level has dispersed
fine charcoal and occasional undiagnostic lithic artifacts and small well rounded pebbles.
The artifacts and pebbles were all recovered from a cluster in a rodent burrow,
demonstrating the impacts of bioturbation. The surfaces of the chert artifacts have a
shiny polish and feel slick to the touch. This cond ition may result from abrasion by
sands, which could have been caused by artifact translocation through the profile. No
artifacts were recovered from below the upper portion of the E/Bt horizon.
The lack of diagnostic artifacts, and the effects of bioturbation complicate
developing an archaeological stratigraphy of the Sand Pit and the tread of the
Deweyville Terrace. Lithic artifacts and diffuse charcoal flecks were observed in other
exposures in the Sand Pit, but the abundant evidence of disturbance and potential for
artifact translocation has potentially obliterated any cultural stratigraphy. Considering
the likely eolian reworking of the upper horizons of this surface, and the probably
limited prehistoric occupations on the tread, there appears to be limited potential for
future recovery of archaeological deposits in this portion of the site.

103

Comparison to Similar Sites
Though there are a number of archaeological sites in the region associated with
Deweyville terraces there is little work on site formation processes associated with these
terraces. The stratigraphy of this site is compared to the stratigraphy of three other sites,
however only one of the sites is in an analogous context. First the stratigraphy will be
compared to the Buckeye Knoll site (41VT98). This site is most analogous to the
McNeil- Gonzales site, and has had the most comprehensive geoarchaeological
investigation of any site in the region (Frederick and Bateman 2004). The site will also
be compared to the Berger Bluff site (41GD30) (Brown 1983, Brown 1986, Brown
1996). This site is in a different physiographic setting and the final report of the site has
not been published, but it worthwhile to compare because it is the earliest recorded site
in the region, and shares some of the same depositional processes as the McNeilGonzales site. Finally the Loma Sandia site will be examined. The Loma Sandia site
(41LK28) is found in a very different setting in the interior of the Coastal Plain, but
similar stratigraphy, cultural artifacts, and a prehistoric cemetery make it a worthwhile
comparison (Taylor and Highley 1995). Other sites such as Blue Bayou (41VT94), and
the Cinco Ranch sites in Fort Bend County have similarities to the McNeill- Gonzales
site, but they either have limited geomorphic data to compare with, like Blue Bayou, or
they do not have a cemetery component and are limited to relatively late deposits such as
the Cinco Ranch sites (Huebner and Comuzzie 1992, Ensor 1987).
Buckeye Knoll (41VT98). The most comprehensive study is the work by
Frederick and Bateman (2005: 11-15) at the Buckeye Knoll site. As described in the

104

previous chapter the site is located in a mantle of Holocene sands on a Deweyville
Terrace, and Beaumont Formation upland of the Guadalupe River Valley. The
Deweyville Formation stratigraphy was described in the previous chapter, but the
Holocene sands were not compared to the archaeological deposits and Holocene
depositional units of the McNeill- Gonzales site. The research identified four Holocene
depositional units that were dominated by sands with pedogenic alteration but no Bhorizons. The deposits aggraded episodically, first mantling the Beaumont Formation,
then infilling depressions in the buried paleosol of the Deweyville Formation, and finally
aggrading atop the sandy mantle. Though there was variability across the site the
general soil horizon sequence was A-2Ab-2AC-2CA-3AC-3CA (Fredrick and Bateman
2004: Figure B). Holocene Unit 1 mantles the Beaumont Formation and contains Early
Archaic Bell and Early Triangular points in one portion of the site, and Late Paleoindian
Dalton, Barber, and Golondrina points in another. The bottom of the unit was a
yellowish brown, and the unit became a very dark gray at the top of the unit. Analysis of
total organic carbon found an increase in organic carbon at the top of the deposit, which
they interpreted along with the darker color to be a paleosol capping the deposit. There
Holocene Unit 1 is similar to the Holocene Unit Ia in Excavation Area 4 at the McNeillGonzales site, except that at the McNeil-Gonzales site the Unit Ia formed on the
Deweyville Terrace, not the Beaumont Formation.
Holocene Unit 2 truncated portions of Holocene Unit 1 and began infilling
depressions on the truncated Deweyville Paleosol and the Beaumont Formation. The
unit had a lighter color C horizon and a darker buried A horizon above. OSL dating

105

dated the deposit from 6 to 4 ka, which corresponds to the Early-Middle Archaic. Most
of the prehistoric burials dated to the early part of this period of deposition. This unit
corresponds to Unit Ib at the McNeill- Gonzales site. A difference is that there is not
evidence of this unit truncating the earlier Unit Ia.
Holocene Unit 3 continued filling depressions and intense prehistoric occupation
led to the formation of a midden. The unit had a distinct A-C horizon sequence, except
for areas with dense midden accumulation. The unit had quite variable ages, ranging
from 3.8 to 1.2 ka, which spans from the Late Middle Archaic to the Early Late
Prehistoric. It appears that deposition of this unit took place at different times across the
terrace surface. This unit has some attributes of Unit Ic at the McNeill-Gonzales site,
but the chronology is different. Midden deposits did occur at the McNeill-Gonzales site,
but the artifact content of horizon and the middens dated only to the Late Archaic and
Late Prehistoric. Holocene Unit 3 of the Buckeye Knoll site began aggrading earlier and
at varying times across the site. The McNeill-Gonzales site may have seen variable
periodicity in the aggradation of unit Ic as well but the chronometric resolution is poor
considering that diagnostic artifacts were the only means of establishing chronology of
these deposits.
The final unit identified at the Buckeye Knoll site was Holocene Unit 4. This
unit is a cumulic dark A horizon that is time transgressive as it moves up the slope of the
terrace surface. The lower portions are the thickest and date from the Late Archaic to
the Late Prehistoric (2.5 ka to present), while the portions further up the slope are thinner
and only date to the Late Prehistoric (approx 1 ka to present). This unit lacks a strong

106

midden component. In some ways it is like the upper- most portion of Unit Ic at the
McNeill-Gonzales site which typically has approximately 20-30 cm of dark cumulic
sediments above the midden portion of the unit, and some downslope areas such as in
the Paleo Area Burial Unit have a thickened horizon as compared to areas further
upslope.
The stratigraphy of the Buckeye Knoll site is very similar to the McNeillGonzales site, and their study into the origin of the deposits has the potential to shed
light on the depositional origin of the McNeill- Gonzales site. Numerous methods were
employed to determine the method of deposition and the sediment source for the
Holocene sands, however the results were inconclusive. Granulometric, heavy mineral,
mineral magnetics, elemental, and SEM studies of quartz grain surface
micromorphology provided conflicting results. In the end the researchers hypothesized
that the deposits originated from local eolian reworking of Deweyville sands based on
the morphology of the sand sheet deposit, but they could not come to a firm conclusion
because of the discrepancies in the data sets (Frederick and Bateman 2004: 15-19).
Berger Bluff (41GD30). The Berger Bluff site provides an interesting
comparison because it has one of the earliest dated archaeological components in the
region. The site is located on a bluff on Coleto Creek, and has been inundated by the
Coleto Creek Reservoir. Like the McNeill-Gonzales site it has a long history of
occupation with stratified archaeological deposits from the Paleoindian period to the
Late Prehistoric, though in a mixture of aggrading floodplain deposits for the earlier
archaeological components and an upper mantle of colluvium and eolian deposits for the

107

later components that has characteristics similar to the McNeill-Gonzales site. A distinct
difference is that the earliest components of the site were buried by alluvial
sedimentation, and then subsequently indurated by calcium carbonate from a now buried
spring. These deposits had exceptionally well preserved faunal remains, unlike the Late
Paleoindian components of the McNeill-Gonzales site (Brown 1986). In comparison far
fewer lithic artifacts were recovered from these early components and it appears that a
short term occupation with specific activity areas occurred at the site (Brown 1996). The
middle 4.5 m of the site were not tested but the upper portions of the site were tested by
excavation units and had Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric components remarkably
similar to the McNeill- Gonzales site. The upper deposits are described as brown loamy
fine sand with dense Late Prehistoric and Late Archaic artifacts (Brown 1983). These
deposits are similar to the deposits of the McNeil- Gonzales site and are an example of
how a sandy loam mantle of colluvial and potential eolian sediments can exist on lower
order streams like Coleto Creek, and with different underlying geologic formations.
Though the Paleoindian component is in a different depositional setting than the
McNeill-Gonzales site it demonstrates how complex depositional environments can
preserve multicomponent sites.
Loma Sandia (41LK28). The Loma Sandia site is located on a sandy knoll
overlooking a small tributary of the Frio River in the interior of the Gulf Coastal Plain.
The site has occupations spanning back to the Paleoindian Period, though the most
impressive feature of the site is the very large cemetery that dates from the Middle
Archaic period (2,850-2,550 B.P.). Holliday summarized the geoarchaeology of the site,

108

though his research was hindered by being written after the completion of the field work
(Holliday 1995). The site primarily consisted of approximately 1 to 3 m of loamy fine
sands (Stratum 3) overlying a truncated buried paleoargillic horizon (Stratum 1) and
colluvial wash on the margin of the knoll (Stratum 2). The paleoargillic horizon is
described as red sandy clay, which is similar to the Deweyville Paleosol at the McNeillGonzales site. The upper deposits consisted of an A-AC-C soil horizon that saw
significant bioturbation. The deposits were generally gray brown in color and possibly
had clay lamellae developme nt. The upper A horizons were stained with dark colored
organics and contained primarily Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric components. This is
similar to the Ic deposits of the McNeill- Gonzales site. The older Middle and Early
Archaic components occurred in the thicker AC and C horizons. These thicker horizons
saw less pedoturbation and appear to have aggraded fairly rapidly during these periods.
This correlates to the Ib deposits on the upper portion of the McNeill- Gonzales site.
Though the McNeill- Gonzales site Ib unit is typically darker colored with a preserved A
horizon paleosol it is a relatively thick deposit with a general decrease in artifact
concentrations. This may help corroborate a regional correlation of more arid climates
and increased eolian transport during the Middle Archaic. The Late Paleoindian
component at the base of the sand deposits is relatively minor at this site and does not
provide much opportunity for comparison. A final observation from the Loma Sandia
site is how localized and compact a prehistoric cemetery can be, which suggests a great
deal of the prehistoric cemetery at the McNeill- Gonzales site may have been destroyed.
According to the report approximately 205 individuals were excavated primarily from an

109

area 144 m2 (Taylor and Highley 1995: iii). Approximately 5,625 m2 around the
excavated burial areas were destroyed by borrow pit operations at the McNeill- Gonzales
site. If the McNeill- Gonzales site had burials at even a fraction of the density of the
Loma Sandia site than a significant number of burials were destroyed and are now
presumably resting in countless Victoria area gardens.

110

CHAPTER V
CONCLUSION

Geoarchaeological investigations at the McNeill-Gonzales site placed this site in
a stratigraphic context, as a framework for future archaeological research. It also
developed a model of site formation that can be tested at other sites in similar
geomorphic settings, provided information on the soils and slope processes of
Deweyville terraces, and presented additional dates on the Deweyville Formation. This
conclusion presents a model of site formation and prehistoric occupation at the McNeillGonzales site, and suggests future lines of investigation.
Model of Site Formation and Prehistoric Occupation
Interpretations of site formation at the McNeill-Gonzales site most closely
resemble a model presented by Paine for sites on the slopes of the San Jacinto River
terrace (Paine 1987, 1990, Abbott 2001). In this model a Pleistocene surface of the
Beaumont Formation is laterally incised by the San Jacinto River as it downcuts during
the Late Glacial sea level lowstand. This lateral incision and gullying of the terrace
continues until the Early Holocene when sea level rise and floodplain aggradation
begins. Slopes then develop a colluvial mantle on the margins of the Pleistocene terrace.
This mantle laterally truncates the Pleistocene soil, and archaeological deposits become
incorporated into the colluvial mantle. The sites Paine (1987, 1990) studied were
primarily Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric in age, and the colluvial mantle were finegrained sediments that derived from the Beaumont Formation.

111

Landscape development of the McNeill-Gonzales site is very similar, except
instead of being clayey sediments of the Beaumont Formation the deposits are
predominately sandy fluvial deposits of the Deweyville Formation. The other important
factor involved is that a sandy mantle of Holocene deposits covers the Deweyville
Terrace. At the McNeill- Gonzales site the Deweyville terrace stopped aggrading and
developed a soil beginning shortly after 60,000 yr. Sea level drop associated with the
Late Glacial led to downcutting and the lateral erosion of the Deweyville surface, which
created the terrace. This lateral erosion stripped off portions of the Deweyville Paleosol
as well as underlying fluvial deposits. Surficial erosion and gullying also impacted the
Deweyville surface. These actions truncated the surface of the terrace creating
topographic depressions, and gullies that exposed the calcic portion of the Deweyville
Paleosol, and the underlying sandy fluvial deposits. The remnant of a small postDeweyville paleochannel on the edge of the terrace is testament to the erosional forces
acting on the Deweyville terrace. This channel probably rapidly filled during the initial
period of floodplain aggradation, though chronological control of this feature is very
weak.
The truncated Deweyville Paleosol became the first living surface for prehistoric
peoples approximately 10,000-8,000 B.P. People using Plainview and Golondrina
projectile points occupied the slopes of the Deweyville terrace, primarily on the
southeastern portion atop the exposed calcic paleosol, and atop the relatively minimally
eroded paleosol further upslope on the central portion of the terrace. Though the artifact
analysis has yet to be completed, the numerous wood working gouge tools in these early

112

portions of the site suggests woodworking activities at the site. It stands to reason that
during this period of the early Holocene when it was cooler and drier than present the
riparian zones along the floodplains may have been the only locations where hardwood
for tools, shelter and transport were located.
Sometime after the incision and lateral erosion that created the Deweyville
terrace the deposition of an eolian sandy mantle began on the terrace (Unit Ia). Low
surfaces along the terrace margins began aggrading with fine sand. It is uncertain how
much sand was deposited on the terrace tread at this time because the deposits atop the
tread have not been correlated and dated. Along the terrace scarp prehistoric settlement
continued with additional Late Paleoindian to Early Archaic diagnostic artifacts being
recovered. Angostura, Saint Mary Hall, Big Sandy, and Lerma Late Paleoindian/Early
Archaic dart points were recovered, as well as the ubiquitous Clear Fork gouges. A
weak paleosol developed atop the fine sands of these deposits on the western edge of the
terrace and while fine sands began to fill the paleo- gully on the western portion of the
scarp, and mantle the reworked colluvial deposits of the Deweyville paleosol calcic
horizon on the eastern side of the terrace. The soil did not form on the eastern side of
the terrace and instead the sedimentation continued into the Early Archaic where Uvalde
and Bulverde dart points of the Early to Middle Archaic are found mixed with the earlier
Late Paleoindian/Early Archaic dart points.
A thicker sand deposit of Unit Ib continued filling low- lying portions of the
terrace and possibly mantled the entire tread of the Deweyville terrace. This thicker
sand deposit has artifacts of the Middle and Early Archaic (8,000-2,500 B.P.). This

113

potentially correlates to the Middle Holocene period of aridity that is inferred to have
occurred on a regional scale. On the eastern edge of the terrace in the Paleo Area fine
sands continued aggrading with the continuation of prehistoric occupation. The earliest
dated burial is found in this deposit, and it dates to 3,650 14 C yr B.P. Freshwater mussel
shells and snail shells appear in the site matrix, which suggests close proximity to a
channel that could support beds of mussels. The interpretation of a nearby stream
channel also implies that sandy would have been adjacent to the terrace, and point bars
or overbank deposits could have been deflated in close proximity to the terrace. There
are fewer mussel shells on the western portion of the site, though by this time the paleogully below the Burial Areas had nearly completely filled to the level of the terrace
tread.
Towards the end of the Middle Archaic (2,500-3,000 B.P.) a paleosol formed at
the top of the fine sand deposits. This paleosol is a mollic and has more strongly
developed soil structure. This soil is found on the western portion of the terrace scarp in
the Burial Areas, the Area 4 Excavation unit, and on the eastern edge of the scarp in the
Paleo Area. There was enough stability in the Paleo Excavation Area for the formation
of a weak illuvial horizon in the lower portions of Early Archaic/Late Paleoindian
deposits.
From the Late Archaic to the Present (2,500 B.P. to present) sedimentation
continued across the tread and the scarp. During this period the aggradation Unit Ic
covered the entire surface, with thick sand deposits aggrading at the Main Site Area on
the western edge of the terrace, colluvial deposits accumulating at the central portion of

114

the terrace for the first time in the Anaqua Mott Area, and a relatively thin deposit of
sand mantling the eastern portion of the terrace in the Paleo Area. In the thicker portions
of the deposit pedogenic clay lamellae develop, which can be traced from the Main Site
Area to the Sand Pit on the terrace tread. This depositional unit has the greatest
concentration of prehistoric artifacts, with distinct midden deposits of darker sediments
and high concentrations of cultural artifacts occurring in the Anaqua Mott and
downslope portions of the main site area in Excavation Area 5. The two of the burials
recovered from the Main Site Area date to the Late Archaic and considering much of the
area where the burials were located were destroyed by the borrow pit operations there
may have been a substantial Late Archaic cemetery at this portion of the site.
Suggestions for Future Work
Future work at the site would benefit from more radiometric dating to better
correlate deposits across the terrace and scarp. Most of the soil and sediment ages come
from relative ages of diagnostic artifacts. Although dating by diagnostic artifacts is a
useful method for dating archaeological deposits some point types were used over long
periods of time, and the range of some tool forms are poorly defined. These factors and
considerations for the impacts of bio-pedoturbation on the Holocene depositional units
make their dating rather general at this time. Because charcoal preservation is so poor at
the site other methods such as dating bone collagen by AMS or dating sands by OSL
remain as productive ways to date the site and the Deweyville terrace. Both methods
have been used to good effect, and future OSL dating of the mantling sands will be
required in order to better understand the depositional processes that led to the formation

115

of the sandy mantle. Pedoturbation may hinder the interpretative value of OSL dating,
but advancing in interpreting OSL data and the application of the single grain method of
paleodose rates has the potential to not only provide more accurate dates, but potentially
measure the amount of pedoturbation that has occurred in the samples (Bateman et al
2003).
The understanding the soil formation processes and the depositional origin of the
Holocene deposits of the site and the terrace mantle would benefit from additional soil
chemistry, soil magnetism, isotopic studies, and micromorphological studies. A study of
the amount of organic carbon and phosphorous in the Holocene deposits may help define
the paleosols. Increases of organic carbon are shown to relate to the increase in organic
matter associated with buried soils (Frederick and Bateman 2004). Increased
concentration of phosphorous in archaeological sites has been shown to derive from
prehistoric cultural activities (Holliday 2004). Conducting studies of the magnetic
properties of the Holocene sediments may assist in identifying sediment sources (Lees
1999). Stable isotope studies of the bulk soil organic matter could provide data on
changes in vegetation types present through time on the slope and scarp of the terrace.
Finally scanning electron microscope (SEM) studies of grain morphology could help
with identifying sediment sources. Comparing grain morphology of the Holocene sands
to known fluvial and eolian sands could assist in determining the mode of transport,
though results could be inconclusive if the eolian sediments were transported only a
short distance. Most studies of eolian grain morphology are from sands that would have
experienced extensive eolian transport in arid desert environments (Tchakerian 1991).

116

This full suite of studies along with heavy mineral and elemental analyses was
undertaken at the Buckeye Knoll site (41VT98), however the results were often
contradictory (Frederick and Bateman 2004). Replicating some of the studies at the
McNeill-Gonzales site would further facilitate the comparison of these sites, and may
help resolve some of the contradictory results of their analyses.
The work at the terrace would benefit from additional geomorphic testing on the
Holocene floodplain adjacent to the site and deep cores to understand the relationship
between the Deweyville Terrace and the Beaumont Formation. Understanding the
Holocene floodplain would help with understanding the fluvial response to sea level
change during the Late Quaternary by identifying terraces that may be buried by
Holocene floodplain aggradation. It would also help discern the location and nature of
Holocene channel deposits, which would assist in evaluating the potential scenarios of
eolian deflation of floodplain deposits onto the Deweyville terrace.
Ultimately regional geomo rphic surveys of similar settings on other remnant
Deweyville Terraces will be required to determine the nature and extent of the Holocene
mantle on Deweyville Terraces. Archaeological deposits are buried in deposits of
Deweyville Terraces of the Guadalupe River and until a uniform theory can explain the
processes that buried these sites the site formation processes at this site will remain
uncertain. A cursory examination of site distributions along the lower Guadalupe River
shows that many prehistoric sites identified in the region are located on slopes and high
terraces along the margin of the Guadalupe River. A larger sample size of sites in
similar settings with geomorphic investigations, and a spatial analysis of site

117

distributions relative to geomorphic surfaces would provide valuable insight into site
preservation, site distribution, help future systematic archaeological investigations, and
the management of these archaeological resources.
Additional studies of materials recovered from excavations could contribute to
the understanding of site formation processes and paleoenvironment. Continuing studies
of artifact distributions through the profile based on artifact weight and size could
provide information on the impacts of bio-pedoturbation on the cultural stratigraphy of
the site. Vertical sorting of artifacts by size or weight may suggest that pedoturbation
decreased site integrity. The presence of diagnostic artifacts in good stratigraphic
context and intact features is evidence that bioturbation has not disturbed the
archaeological deposits to the degree where integrity is compromised. Faunal studies of
mussel and snail shells, as well as animal bones recovered would help in understanding
the local environments during the Holocene. Studying mussel and snail shell species
could provide important data on the behavior of the Guadalupe River by correlating the
environments that the modern mussel species live to the species found in the
archaeological record. Faunal remains from mammals, amphibians, reptiles, and fish
that were recovered from the excavations could provide a wealth of information on the
local environment during the Holocene due to changing distributions of species, as well
as changing dietary patterns of prehistoric peoples.
The understanding of the site stratigraphy and archaeological deposits would
benefit from additional excavations, and geoarchaeological studies. First, the age and
the nature of the archaeological deposits found the in the Paleo Area profile below the

118

colluvially reworked calcic horizon have not been adequately examined. Based on
stratigraphic studies these deposits could be Late Paleoindian or older and as of
publication there have been no excavations into the horizon that contain these deposits.
The Paleo Area needs a systematic excavation unit in an undisturbed portion of the site
to obtain a complete representation of the prehistoric deposits in the area. Test
excavations focused on the exposed earlier components of the site, and the later
components have not been examined. Test excavations of these components would help
relate the stratigraphy and archaeological deposits of this portion of the site to the other
portion. Though more Late Paleoindian artifacts were recovered in the Paleo Area than
anywhere else, it may not be the best part of the site to recover discrete Late Paleoindian
components. Significant mixing of Late Paleoindian and Early Archaic artifacts, the
position on a colluvial slope, significant clay illuviation, and the observations of
scattered artifact distributions suggest that this portion of the site has seen significant
mixing of archaeological components, artifact translocation, and post burial pedogenic
alteration. The deeply buried Late Paleoindian component of Excavation Area 4
indicates that this portion of the site may hold more intact Paleoindian deposits. The
Paleoindian component at this portion of the site was effectively sealed from later
disturbance by a palesol at the top of the unit. As opposed to being an occupation on a
slope these deposits are found in a slight depression on the edge of the terrace tread that
was buried through vertical aggradation as opposed to colluvial deposition. Though
some clay illuviation has occurred in this horizon it is far less pronounced than in the

119

Paleo Area. Based on the stratigraphic work it is estimated that an area of approximately
800 m2 may contain these deposits in the area around Excavation Area 4.
Artifacts from the Early to Middle Archaic are less common than the Late
Archaic/Late Prehistoric and the Late Paleoindian, but there are some locations where
deposits exist. First the burial in the Paleo Area is from the late Middle Archaic and
additional excavations could possibly identify more burials from this time period.
Considering that the archaeological record of the Middle Archaic is poorly understood
on the Coastal Plain and the interior Coastal Plain the burial and Middle Archaic
artifacts from Excavation Area 4 could provide needed information on this period of
prehistory (Ricklis 2004a). The timing of the paleosol development atop the Archaic
period deposits in the Paleo Area could be facilitated by additional excavation of the
Archaic components.
Finally the Late Archaic/Late Prehistoric occupations of the site could provide a
wealth of information on these prehistoric time periods. These periods have the greatest
density and distribution of artifacts, with middens and burials that date to this period.
The mixing of deposits during the late 2,500 years does complicate the interpretive value
of these deposits, but the sheer volume and wide distribution of artifacts is a compelling
reason for future studies. These levels have the best preservation of charcoal, shell, and
faunal material, which would further contribute to interpretations of subsistence patterns
and environmental setting. The Paleo Area is the only portion of the site where
significant deposits from these time periods have not been recovered. Targeted

120

excavations of midden deposits would be best served in the Anaqua Mott area, while
burials most likely still remain to be excavated in the Burial Areas of the Main Site Area.
Though much work has been done these suggestions show just how much work
is possible. I hope future investigations at the site will be facilitated by this
geoarchaeological research and that this research will contribute to and help stimulate
future geoarchaeological studies in the region.

121

REFERENCES

Abbott, James T.
2001 Houston Area Geoarchaeology. Environmental Affairs Division,
Archeological Studies Program Report No. 27. Texas Department of
Transportation, Austin, Texas.
Aten, L. E. and C. N. Bollich
1981 Archaeological Evidence for Pimple (Prairie) Mound Genesis. Science
213(4514):1375-1376.
Barnes, Virgil E.
1974 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Seguin Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Barnes, Virgil E.
1987 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Beeville-Bay City Sheet. Bureau of Economic
Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bateman, Mark D., Charles D. Frederick, Manoj K Jaiswal, and Ashok K Singhvi
2003 Investigations into the Potential Effects of Pedoturbation on Luminescence
Dating. Quaternary Science Reviews 22:1169-1176.
Birkeland, Peter W.
1999 Soils and Geomorphology. 3rd edition. Oxford University Press, New York.
Birmingham, William W. and Thomas R. Hester
1976 Late Pleistocene Archaeological Remains from the Johnston-Heller Site,
Texas Coastal Plain. In Papers on Paleo-Indian Archaeology in Texas, edited by
Thomas R. Hester. Special Report No. 3. Center for Archaeological Research.
The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Blum, Michael A., Amy E. Carter, Tracy Zayac, Ron Goble
2002 Middle Holocene Sea-Level and Evolution of the Gulf of Mexico Coast
(USA). Journal of Coastal Research Special Issue 36:65-80.
Blum, Micha el A., R. A. Morton, and J. M. Durbin
1995 ‘Deweyville’ Terraces and Deposits of the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain. Gulf
Coast Association of Geological Societies Transactions 45:53-60.
Blum, Michael A. and Torbjorn E. Tornqvist
2000 Fluvial Responses to Climate and Sea- level Change: A Review and Look
Forward. Sedimentology 47(Suppl. 1):2-48.

122

Boggs Jr., Sam
2001 Principles of Sedimentology and Stratigraphy, 3rd Ed. Prentice Hall, Upper
Saddle River, New Jersey.
Bousman, C. Britt
1998 Paleoenvironmental Change in Central Texas: The Palynological Evidence.
Plains Anthropologist 43:201-217.
Bousman, C. Britt, B. W. Baker, and A. C. Kerr
2004 Paleoindian Archeology in Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, edited by
Timothy K. Perttula, pp. 15-97. Texas A&M Press, College Station, Texas.
Brown, David O.
1983 The Berger Bluff Site (41GD30A): Excavations in the Upper Deposits, 1979.
Archaeological Survey Report, No. 115. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Brown, Kenneth M.
1986 Archaeological Survey and Backhoe Testing for Flume No. 3 Right-of-Way at
Coleto Creek Reservoir, Goliad County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report
No. 128. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Brown, Kenneth M.
1996 Berger Bluff. In The New Handbook of Texas, edited by. R. Tyler, 1:407408. Texas State Historical Association, Austin, Texas.
Bryant Jr., Vaughan M. and Richard G. Holloway
1985 A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the
Pollen Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American
Sediments, edited by Vaughan M. Bryant, Jr. and Richard G. Holloway, pp. 3970. American Association of Stratigraphic Palynologists, Dallas, Texas.
Bryant, W. R., J. Lugo, C. Córdova, and A Salvador
1991 Physiography and Bathymetry. In The Gulf of Mexico Basin, edited by
A. Salvador, pp. 13-30. Geological Society of America, The Geology of
NorthAmerica, Vol. J. Boulder, Colorado.
Collins, Michael B.
1998 The Place of Wilson-Leonard in Southern Plains Prehistory. In WilsonLeonard an 11,000-year Archeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers in Central
Texas, Volume I: Introduction, Background, and Synthesis, edited by M. B.

123

Collins, pp. 277-291. Studies in Archeology 31. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Collins, Michael B.
2004 Archaeology in Central Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, edited by
Timothy Perttula, pp. 101-126. Texas A&M Press, College Station, Texas.
Durbin, James M.
1999 Geomorphic Responses to Late Quaternary Climate and Sea-Level Change,
Lower Nueces River, Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of
Geosciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln.
Durbin, James M., Michael D. Blum, and David M. Price
1997 Late Pleistocene Stratigraphy of the Lower Nueces River, Corpus Christi,
Texas: Glacio-eustatic Influences on Valley- fill Architecture. Transactions of the
Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies 47:119–127.
Ensor, H. Blaine
1987 The Cinco Ranch Sites, Barker Reservoir, Fort Bend County, Texas. Reports
of Investigations No. 3. Archaeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Frederick, Charles D. and Mark D. Bateman
2004 Geoarchaeological Investigations at 41VT98 Part 1. Report submitted by
Sheffield Centre for International Drylands Research to Coastal Environmental
Resources, Inc, Corpus Christi, Texas.
Gonzales, Felice
n. d. The Gonzales Ranch. Photocopy of the Gonzales family biography. In
possession of the author.
Griffith, G.E., S. A. Bryce, J. M. Omernik, J. A. Comstock, A. C. Rogers, B. Harrison,
S. L. Hatch, and D. Bezanson
2004 Ecoregions of Texas U.S. Geological Survey, Reston, Virginia, (map scale
1:2,500,000). Electronic resource.
http://www.epa.gov/wed/pages/ecoregions/tx_eco.htm#Ecoregions%20denote
accessed May 6, 2005.
Heinrich, Paul V.
1993 Natural Setting. In National Register Eligibility Testing at Sites 41HR632 and
41HR633, Clear Creek Flood Control Project, Harris County, Texas, edited by
C. Kuttruff, pp. 5-22. Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge, Louisiana.

124

Hester, Thomas R.
2004 Prehistory of South Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, edited by Timothy
Perttula, pp. 127-151. Texas A&M Press, College Station, Texas.
Hester, Thomas R., Michael B. Collins, Dee Ann Story, Ellen Sue Turner, Paul Tanner,
Kenneth M. Brown, Larry D. Banks, Dennis Stanford, and Russell J. Long
1992 Paleoindian Archaeology at McFaddin Beach, Texas. Current Research in
the Pleistocene 6:20-22.
Holliday, Vance T.
1995 Geoarchaeology. In Archaeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site
(41LK28): A Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas,
edited by Ann Jean Taylor and Cheryl Lynn Highley. Studies in Archeology 20.
pp. 19-30. Texas Archaeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Holliday, Vance T.
2002 Stratigraphy and Geochronology of Upper Quaternary Eolian Sand on the
Southern High Plains of Texas and New Mexico, United States. Geological
Society of America Bulletin 113:88-108.
Holliday, Vance T.
2004 Soils in Archaeological Research. Oxford University Press, New York.
Holliday, Vance T. and J. Elmo Rawling III
2006 Soil- geomorphic relations of lamellae in eolian sand on the High Plains of
Texas and New Mexico. Geoderma 131:154-180.
Huebner, Jeffery A., and Anthony G. Comuzzie
1992 The Archeology and Bioarcheology of Blue Bayou: A Late Archaic and Late
Prehistoric Mortuary Locality in Victoria County, Texas. Studies in Archeology
9. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. The University of Texas at
Austin.
Hunt, Charles B.
1967 Natural Regions of the United States. W. H. Freeman and Company, New
York.
Jain, M., L. Botter-Jensen, and A.K. Singhvi
2003 Dose Evaluation Using Multiple-aliquot Quartz OSL: Test of Methods and a
New Protocol for Improved Accuracy and Precision. Radiation Measurements
37: 67-80.

125

Johnson, Donald L.
1989 Subsurface Stone Lines, Stone Zones, Artifact-manuport Layers, and
Biomantles Produced by Bioturbation via Pocket Gophers (THOMOMYS
BOTTAE). American Antiquity 54(2): 370-389.
Johnson, Donald L.
2002 Darwin Would Be Proud: Bioturbation, Dynamic Denudation, and the Power
of Theory in Science. Geoarchaeology 17(1):7-40.
Keese, K. E., B. R. Scanlon, and R. C. Reedy
2004 Evaluating Climate, Vegetation, and Soil Controls on Groundwater Recharge
Using Unsaturated Flo w Modeling. In Aquifers of the Edwards Plateau, edited
by Robert E. Mace, Edward S. Angle, and William F. Mullican III, pp 269-291.
Texas Water Development Board, Austin.
Kilmer, V. H., and L. Z. Alexander
1949 Methods for Making Mechanical Analyses of Soil. Soil Science 68:15-24.
Krieger, Alex D.
2002 We Came Naked and Barefoot: the Journey of Cabeza de Vaca Across North
America. edited by M. Krieger. The University of Texas at Austin.
Lees, J.
1999 Evaluating Magnetic Parameters for Use in Source Identification,
Classification, and Modeling of Natural and Environmental Materials. In
Environmental Magnetism: A Practical Guide, edited by J. Walden, F. Oldfield,
and J. Smith, pp. 113-138. Technical Guide No. 6. Quaternary Association,
London.
Leigh, David S.
2001 Artifacts in Sandy Soils. In Earth Sciences and Archaeology, edited by P.
Goldberg, V. T. Holliday, and C. R. Ferring, pp. 269-296. New York, Kluwer
Academic/Plenum.
Mandel, Rolfe D.
1987 Geomorphological Investigations. In Buried in the Bottoms: The Archeology
of Lake Creek Reservoir, Montgomery County, Texas, by L. C. Bement, R. D.
Mandel, J. F. De le Teja, D. K. Utley, and S. A. Turpin, pp. 4-1 to 4-41.
Research Report 97. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.

126

Miller, Wesley L.
1979 Soil Survey of Victoria County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Victoria, Texas.
Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, Alvar
1993 Castaways: the Narrative of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca. edited by Enrique
Pupo-Walker; translated by Francisco M. Lopez-Morillas. University of
California Press, Berkeley, California.
Omernik, J. M.
1987 Ecoregions of the Conterminous United States-Map Supplement. Annals of
the Association of American Geographers Vol. 77(1): 118-125.
Otvos, Ervin G.
2004 Prospects for Interregional Correlations Using Wisconsin and Holocene
Aridity Episodes, Northern Gulf of Mexico Coastal Plain. Quaternary Research
61:105-118.
Otvos, Ervin G.
2005 Numerical Chronology of Pleistocene Coastal Plain and Valley
Development; Extensive Aggradation during Glacial Low Sea-Levels.
Quaternary International 135:91–113.
Paine, Jeffery G.
1986 Late Quaternary Development of the San Jacinto River Valley Margin at
Peggy Lake, Upper Texas Coast. Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of
Geological Societies 37:433-441.
Paine, Jeffery G.
1990 Late Quaternary Geology of the Peggy Lake Area. In Hunter-FisherGatherers on the Upper Texas Coast Archeological Investigations at the Peggy
Lake Disposal Area, Harris County, Texas, edited by E. Gadus and M. A.
Howard, pp. 373-400. Reports of Investigations, No. 56. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.
Price, W. Armstrong
1933 Reynosa Problem of South Texas, and Origin of Caliche. Bulletin of the
American Association of Petroleum Geologists 17(5):488-522.
Rawling III, J. Elmo
2000 Review of Lamellae. Geomorphology 35:1-9.
Rice, Jennifer L. Z.
2006 Personal Email Communication January 25, 2006.

127

Ricklis, Robert A.
1988 Archeological Investigations at the McKinzie Site (41NU221), Nueces
County, Texas: Description and Contextual Interpretations. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 58 (for 1987):1-76.
Ricklis, Robert A.
1992 The Spread of a Late Prehistoric Bison-Hunting Complex: Evidence from the
South-Central Coast Prairie of Texas. Plains Anthropologist 37(140):261-273.
Ricklis, Robert A.
1996 Karankawa Indians of Texas: An Ecological Study of Cultural Tradition and
Change. The University of Texas at Austin.
Ricklis, Robert A.
2004a Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast. In The
Prehistory of Texas, edited by Timothy Perttula, pp. 155-180. Texas A&M Press,
College Station, Texas.
Ricklis, Robert A.
2004b The Archeology of Native American Occupation of Southeast Texas. In The
Prehistory of Texas, edited by Timothy Perttula, pp. 181-202 Texas A&M Press,
College Station, Texas.
Ricklis, Robert A. and Michael D. Blum
1996 The Geoarchaeological Record of Holocene Sea Level Change and Human
Occupation of the Texas Gulf Coast. Geoarchaeology 12(4):287–314.
Ricklis, Robert A. and G. H. Doran
2003 A Treatment Plan for Archeological Findings at the Buckeye Knoll Site,
41VT98, Victoria County Texas. Prepared for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Galveston District, Texas.
Ricklis, Robert A. and Richard Weinstein
2004 Sea-Level Rise and Fluctuation on the Central Texas Coast. In Gulf Coast
Archaeology, edited by Nancy Marie White, pp. 108-154. University Press of
Florida, Gainsville, Florida.
Sellards, E. H.
1940 Pleistocene Artifacts and Associated Fossils from Bee County, Texas.
Geological Society of America Bulletin 51:1627-1658.

128

Soil Survey Laboratory Staff
1997 Soil Survey Laboratory Methods and Procedures for Collecting Soil Samples.
Soil Survey Investigation Report No. 42. United States Department of
Agriculture, NRCS. Lincoln, Nebraska.
Sylvia, Dennis A. and William E. Galloway
2002 The Relative Importance of Climatic and Eustatic Variation on Boundary
Formation in an Incised Valley: A Study of the Latest Pleistocene Brazos River
Valley (TX). Annual Meeting Expanded Abstracts, American Association of
Petroleum Geologists. Pages 172. Houston, Texas.
Taylor, Anna J. and Cheryl L. Highley
1995 Archaeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A
Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Studies in
Archeology 20. Te xas Archaeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Taylor, Mathew S.
2005 Results of AMS Dating from the Cemetery Portion of the McNeil-Gonzales
Site (41VT141). Newsletter of the Texas Archeological Society 49(1):23.
Tchakerian, Vatche P.
1991 Late Quaternary Aeolian Geomorphology of the Daleo fo Lake Sand Sheet,
Southern Mojave Desert, California. Physical Geography 12:347-369.
Telfair II, R. C.
1999 Introduction: Ecological Regions of Texas: Description, Land Use, and
Wildlife. In Texas Wildlife Resources and Land Uses edited by R. C. Telfair II,
pp. 1-39. The University of Texas Press, Austin, Texas.
Texas Parks and Wildlife
2003 Wildlife Management in the Oak-Prairie District, Calhoun and Victoria
County Deer Population Estimates. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department.
Electronic Resource. http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/conserve/wildlife_management
/oak_prairie/regulatory/pop_trends/calhoun_pop_trends.phtml accessed May 8,
2005.
Thoms, Alston V.
2004 Synthesis and Comparisons of Component Assemblages and Structures. In
Archaeological and Paleoecological Investigations at the Richard Beene Site,
41BX831, South-Central Texas (DRAFT REVIEW), edited by Alston V. Thoms
and Richard D. Mandel, Ch 15. Reports of Investigation 8, Center for Ecological
Archaeology, Texas A&M. College Station, Texas.

129

Thornbury, W. D.
1965 Regional Geomorphology of the United States. John Wiley and Sons, New
York.
Toomey, Richard S., Michael D. Blum, and Salvatore Valastro Jr.
1993 Late Quaternary Climates and Environments of the Edwards Plateau, Texas.
Global and Planetary Changes 7:299–320.
Tucker, R. W. and H. L. Vacher
1980 Effectiveness of Discriminating Beach, Dune, and River Sands by Moments
and the Cumulative Weight Percentages. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology
50(1):165-172.
United States Geological Survey
2001 Portion of National Atlas of the United States of America, General Reference
Map. U. S. Geological Survey, Reston, Virginia. Electronic resource.
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/united_states/texas_2002.jpg accessed March
21, 2006.
USDA Soil Survey Division Staff
1993 Soil Survey Manual. U.S. Department of Agriculture Handbook 18.U. S.
Government Printing Office, Washington D.C.
Walter, Tamra L.
1999 Preliminary Report of 1997 Texas Archaeological Field School Excavations
in Area A at Mission Espiritu Santo de Zuniga (41VT11), Victoria Co., Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 70:97-122.

APPENDIX A
FIELD DESCRIPTIONS

Field
Designation

Date/ Location

Core #1

7/30/2004

Ap

0-18

18

Very dark gray 10YR3/1 clay, fine blocky subangular to prismatic, very hard, very
sticky, numerous fine roots, no HCl reaction, clear lower boundary

approx 500m from Hwy
87, northwest side of
ranch rd

Bss

18-97

79

Very dark gray 10YR2.5/1 clay, fine prismatic with slickensides, very hard, very
sticky, occasional fine roots, no HCl reaction, undetermined lower boundary

level upland with
microrelief

Bkss1

97-167

70

Dark gray10YR3.5/1 clay, fine prismatic parting to fine blocky subangular with
slickensides, mottled with CaCO3 soft masses 10YR6/3 from 10% to 40%
increasing with depth to very coarse sands to gravel size nodules at base, no roots,
strong HCl reactions, smooth lower boundary

Soil is mapped as Lake
Charles, but will be
updated as Key West.

Bkss2

167-247

80

Light reddish brown (2.5Y6/4) silty clay, fine blocky subangular with slickensides,
numerous 20-50% white (2.5Y8/1) granular to pebble sized soft masses to
concretions of CaCO3, HCl reactions, abrupt lower boundary
Equal parts light yellowish brown (10YR6/5) clay and light gray (10YR7/1) clay,
fine blocky subangular with slickensides, very hard, very firm, few CaCO3 size to
soft masses and occasional granule sized nodule, presence of black 1-2mm clay,
possibly charcoal coatings on grains

Field
Designation

Date/ Location

Core #2

7/30/2004

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

Beaumont
Formation

Thickness Description
(cm)

Bkss3

247-457

10

C1

457-467

10

2Bkss

467-495

28

2C

495-505

10

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
Beaumont
Formation

0-100

Light brownish gray (2.5Y6/2) interbedded silty loam
equal parts light yellowish brown 10YR6/5 clay and light gray 10YR7/1 clay, fine
blocky subangular with slickensides, very hard, very firm, few CaCO3 size to soft
masses and occasional granule sized nodule, presence of black 1-2mm clay, possibly
charcoal coatings on grains
Light brownish gray (2.5Y6/2) interbedded silty loam

Thickness
Description
(cm)
100

black calcareous clays of the DeCosta Series, no samples collected, only observed.

South side of ranch road, leading to old house, on the scarp of the convex upper slope of the Beaumont uplands. Approximately 400m from house.

130

Field
Date/ Location
Designation
Core #3

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

Thickness Description
(cm)
Very dark gray (10YR3/1) loam, weak fine subangular blocky, moderate-common
27
fine roots, slightly hard, friable, no reaction to HCl, abrupt lower boundary

7/30/2004

Ap

0-27

Approximately 30m
southwest of Core #2,
300m up road to NE of
the old house.

Btss

27-71

44

71-101

30

Btk2

101-125

24

Btk3

125-160

35

Btk1

Field
Designation

Date/ Location

Core #4

7/30/2004
Approximately 7 m
northeast of Excavation
Area 4
ground surface obscured
by high vegetation,
surface uneven, centered
on a high spot. Broke
rig at 170cm.
*note descriptions
questionable due to
problems extracting
core from broken rig

Beaumont
Formation

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

Very dark gray (10YR3/1) clay, moderate fine prismatic, shiny slickensides, very
hard, very firm, few very fine roots, no reaction to HCl, clear lower boundary
Dark gray (10YR4.5/1) clay, moderate fine prismatic parting to moderate fine
blocky, common fine sand grain sized CaCO3 grains, reacts to HCl, very occasional
fine roots, clear boundary
Yellowish brown (10YR5/4) silty clay, moderate fine subangular blocky, common
>20% numerous fine sand grains with occasional <5mm soft masses, occasional
granule sized white nodules, no roots, clear lower boundary
Brownish yellow (10YR5.5/6) clay with common to many strong brown
(7.5YR5/8) mottles, common dark brown (7.5YR3/2) mottles, 2mm thick carbonate
films, 5mm white soft masses, coarse sand grain to granule sizes white nodules, fine
angular blocky

Thickness
Description
(cm)
Dark grayish brown (10YR4/2) loamy fine sand, loose single grained to granular,
18
few fine roots, clear lower boundary

A1

0-18

A2

18-90

72

Dark grayish brown 10YR4.5/2 fine sand, loose single grained to granular,
occasional fine roots, clear gradual boundary

90-150

60

Brown (10YR5/2.5) sand with occasional very coarse grained sand, subrounded
grains, loose sand to granular, no roots, well rounded pebble at 135cm, lithic
artifacts 150cm, clear gradual lower boundary

150-170

20

Light browish gray (10YR6/1.5) coarse to medium sand, loose single grained to
granular, no roots, artifacts at 150cm, abrupt lower boundary

170-190

30

Brown (10YR5/3) sandy clay loam with common reddish yellow (7.5YR6/6)
distinct medium mottles, weak fine granular to subangular blocky

A3

Unit I: Holocene
undetermined

A4

Bt

Deweyville
Paleosol

131

Field
Designation

Date/ Location

Core #5

11/13/2004

A

0-25

: Due West of house,

BA

25-50

approximately 50m,
across road

Bt1

50-94

surface is just below the
upper Beaumont
Formation surface

Bt2

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

Beaumont
Formation

94-128

Thickness Description
(cm)
Very dark brown (10YR2/2) sandy loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR3/2) dry,
25
very weak medium blocky subangular structure, few fine roots, clear boundary
Very dark gray (7.5YR3/1) silty clay loam, with common distinct fine reddish
25
brown (5YR4/4) mottles that increase with depth, yellowish red (5YR4/6) dry,
moderate fine blocky subangular structure, hard, diffuse lower boundary
Reddish brown (5YR4/4) silty clay loam, moderate fine blocky subangular structure,
44
few white carbonate granule sized nodules, few black manganese granular sized
nodules, gradual lower boundary
Yellowish red (5YR4/6) silty loam, yellowish red (5YR5/6) dry, fine blocky
34
subangular structure, firm, abrupt lower boundary

Btk1

128-220

92

Btk2

220-280

40

Ck

280-295

15

Field
Designation

Date/ Location

Core #6

11/13/2004

A

At North end of Sand
Field-Deweyville
Terrace

AE

Just south of Y-in Road,
south of cattle guard

E

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

Btg,
2Btg?

0-60
Unit I: Holocene
undetermined

60-100

100-285
Deweyville
Paleosol

285-295

Brownish yellow (10YR6/6) silty loam, very pale brown (10YR7/4) dry, weak fine
blocky angular structure, common, coarse white carbonate soft masses, firm, sticky,
diffuse lower boundary
Pale brown (10YR6/3) silty clay loam with many distinct yellowish brown
(10YR5/6) mottles increasing to equal with dominant color, blocky angular
structure, common coarse white carbonate soft masses, firm, slightly sticky, gradual
lower boundary
Light yellowish brown (10YR6/4) fine sand, Very pale brown (10YR7/4) dry, single
grain structure, few faint carbonates, decreasing with depth

Thickness Description
(cm)
Grayish brown (10YR5/2) fine sand, light gray (10YR7/2) dry, massive structure,
60
few (2%) granule sized pebbles, soft, few fine roots, diffuse lower boundary
Brown (10YR5/3) loamy fine sand, pale brown (10YR6/3) dry, with very few, faint,
40
fine, dark yellowish brown (10YR3/6) lamelle, massive structure, diffuse lower
boundary
Light gray (10YR7/2) loamy fine sand, very pale brown (10YR7/3) dry, very weak
185
fine blocky subangular structure, becomes saturated at 190cm, soft, abrupt lower
boundary
Brownish yellow (10YR6/6) fine sandy loam, light yellowish brown (10YR6/4) dry,
15
with few, faint, yellowish red (10YR5/8) mottles, reddish yellow (5YR6/8) dry,
very weak fine blocky subangular, slightly firm, moist, limit of exposure

132

Field
Date/ Location
Designation
11/13/2004
Core #7
N. side of
cattelgaurd/fence

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A

0-14

Bt
15-70

E of road 25-30 m, toe
slope of

Btk1
Beaumont
Formation

upland scarp, level with
sand field

70-155

Btkg
155-215
Btk2
215-230
Field
Designation

Date/ Location

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

11/13/2004
2Btg1
Core #8

0-60
In sand pit, near east
enterance,

2Btg2

Deweyville
Paleosol
60-110

encountering argillic
paleosol,

2Btk
110-177

exposed at bottom of
pit, should
be approx 1.5 of sand
above

2C

Deweyville fluvial
sands

177-222

Thickness Description
(cm)
Black (10YR2/1) silty clay, very dark gray (10YR3/1) dry, strong fine blocky
15
angular, hard, sticky, few fine roots, abrupt lower boundary
Very dark grayish brown (10YR3/2) clay, very dark gray (10YR3/1) dry, strong fine
blocky angular, shiny ped surfaces, hard, sticky, very few fine roots, abrupt lower
boundary
55
Very dark gray (10YR3/1) clay, strong fine blocky angular structure, few (5%)
white granule sized carbonate nodules and soft masses, hard, sticky, abrupt lower
85
boundary
Pale brown (10YR6/3) clay, strong fine blocky angular, few (5%) white granule
sized carbonate nodules and soft masses, few (3%) very dark gray (10YR3/1) fine
coatings on vertical and lateral ped faces, few, distinct, brownish yellow (10YR6/8)
mottles increasing with depth common at base of horizon, hard, sticky, abrupt lower
boundary
50
Light gray (10YR7/2) silty clay, very pale brown dry, strong fine blocky subangular,
common distinct large carbonate soft masses and granule sized nodules, limit of
exposure
15
Thickness Description
(cm)
Gray (10YR5/1) silty clay with many (to 40%) prominent fine dark red (2.5YR3/6)
mottles, red (2.5YR4/6) dry, few coarse sand sized black manganese grains, weak
fine blocky subangular, firm, slightly sticky, diffuse lower boundary
60
Grayish brown (10YR5/2) silty loam, light brownish gray (10YR6/2) dry, with
common prominent fine yellowish brown (10YR5/6) mottles, weak blocky
subangular structure, few coarse sand sized black manganese grains, friable, abrupt
lower boundary
50
Very pale brown (10YR7/3) fine sandy loam, weak fine blocky subangular
structure, common (15%) coarse carbonate soft masses to nodules, very slightly
sticky, diffuse lower boundary
67
Pale brown (10YR6/3) fine sand, very pale brown (10YR8/2) dry, single grain, limit
45
of exposure

133

Field
Designation

Date/ Location

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

11/13/2004
A1
Core #9
Between Anaqua Mott
Area 4 and
Paleo Area, 39m at 80
degrees
from E397 N539, 14m
at 40 degrees
from E397 N539, 14m
at 40 degrees from DAT
3 (N347E886)

A2

30-58

2Ab

58-83

2E

Date/ Location

Holocene Unit Ib

2EB
3C

Field
Designation

0-30
Holocene Unit Ic

83-125
125-145

Deweyville fluvial
sands

145-175

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

11/13/2004
EB
Core #10

0-65
Holocene Unit Ic

In main site area, from
site datum 19.5m at 9
degrees
note .75- 1m of
sediments existed above
the current surface, gone
due to dozing.

EB2

65-155

2Ab1

155-185

2E
2Btg

Holocene Unit Ib/a

Thickness Description
(cm)
Very dark grayish brown (10YR3/2) loamy fine sand, brown (10YR4/3) dry, very
30
weak fine blocky subangular to single grained, loose to soft, few fine roots, diffuse
lower boundary
Very dark grayish brown (10YR3/2) fine sandy loam, very weak fine blocky
28
subangular to single grained, loose to soft, very few fine roots, abrupt lower
boundary
Very dark brown (10YR2/2) fine sandy loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR3/2)
25
dry, very weak blocky subangular, very few fine roots, firm, diffuse lower boundary
Brown (10YR4/3) fine sandy loam, dark yellowish brown (10YR4/4) dry, massive,
42
soft, diffuse lower boundary
Dark yellowish brown (10YR4/4) fine sandy loam, massive, soft, very slightly
20
sticky, diffuse lower boundary
30

Pale brown (10YR6/3) gravelly fine sand, very pale brown (10YR7/3) dry, single
grain, gravels 3% well rounded fine granules to pebbles, limit of exposure

Thickness Description
(cm)
Dark grayish brown (10YR4/2) fine sandy loam, brown (10YR4/3) dry, very dark
brown (10YR2/2) medium (1 cm) lamelle every 10 cm, very weak blocky
65
subangular, few (1%) well rounded granule, soft, few fine roots, diffuse lower
boundary
Brown (10YR4/3) fine sandy loam, very dark brown (10YR2/2) medium (1 cm)
90
lamelle every 15-20 cm, very weak blocky subangular to massive, soft, slightly
sticky, diffuse lower boundary
Dark grayish brown (10YR4/2) loamy fine sand, brown (10YR4/3) dry, soft,
massive, diffuse lower boundary
30

185-222

17

222-340

118

Yellowish brown (10YR5/4) fine sandy loam, light yellowish brown (10YR6/4) dry,
massive structure, soft, abrupt lower boundary
Light yellowish brown (10YR6/4) fine sandy loam to fine sandy clay loam, very
weak blocky subangular to massive structure, firm, slightly cohesive, few (1%) faint
light brownish gray (10YR6/2) mottles, limit of exposure

134

Field
Date/ Location
Designation
5/15/2005
Auger 5-1
N374 E979, ele. 97.29
approx. 15m west of
paleo profile

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A
2Ab

Holocene Unit Ic
Holocene Unit Ib

0-20
20-30

3Btk1

Holocene Unit Ia

30-50

3Btk2
3C1
3C2
3C3

Deweyville fluvial
sands

3C4
Field
Date/ Location
Designation
Auger 5-2
5/15/2005
N358 E979, ele. 96.24
15m south of 5-1,
down slope

A1
A2
2Ab1
2Ab2
2Btk

3C1
3C2

190-310

Holocene Unit Ic
Holocene Unit Ib
Holocene Unit Ia
Deweyville fluvial
sands

Field
Date/ Location
Horizon Strat Designation
Designation
5/15/2005
A1
Auger 5-3
Holocene Unit Ic
N342 E979, ele. 95.18
A2
17m south of 5-2 same
2Ab1
transect,
Holocene Unit Ib
immediately to the West
2Ab2

units

160-190

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

2Bk

of paleo excavation

50-80
80-130
130-160

3Bt
3BC
3C

Deweyville
Paleosol
Deweyville
fluvial sands

0-20
20-50
50-89
89-102
102-140

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR3/2 (w) fine to med. sand
20
10YR3/2 (d) / 10YR2/1 (w) sandy clay loam
10
10YR4/3 (d) / 10YR4/2 (w) sandy clay loam, weakly calcic, flake and small shell
frags
20
10YR6/1 (d) / 10YR6/4 (w) sandy loam. Few faint filaments to few small soft
30
masses of CaCO3
50
10YR6/4 (d) / 10YR5/3 (w) fine to medium sand.
10YR6/4 (d) / 10YR5/4 (w) medium sand
30
10YR7/4 (d) / 10YR6/4 (w) medium to course sand with few well rounded small
30
pebbles
10YR7/4 (d) / 10YR6/4 (w) medium to course sand
120
Thickness
(cm)
20
30
39
13
38

Description

10YR4/2 (d) fine to med. sand
10YR3/2 (d) fine to med. sand
10YR2/2 (d) sandy loam
10YR3/2 (d) sandy loam
10YR4/3 (d) sandy loam, weakly calcic, small shell frags.
10YR5/3 medium sand with few pebbles to 30mm3. Few faint filaments to few
140-180
40
small soft masses of CaCO3
10YR6/4 (d) fine to medium sand
180-207
27
10YR7/4 (d) fine to medium sand with few small gravels to 12mm3. Terminates at
207-230
27
impenetrable gravels
Thickness Description
Depth (cm)
(cm)
10YR4/2 (d) fine to med. sand
0-20
20
10YR3/2 (d) sandy loam
20-60
40
10YR2/1 (d) sandy clay loam
60-70
10
10YR3/2 (d) / 10YR2/1 (w) sandy clay loam, at 90cm fine well rounded gravel,
70-120
50
flake and gravels at 105cm
10YR4/4 (d) / 10YR3/4 sandy clay with few small well rounded gravels, flake
120-160
40
150cm
10YR5/6 (d) 10YR4/6 (w) sandy clay loam
160-185
15
10YR6/6 (d) 10YR5/6 (w) sandy loam gravels increases with depth from few
185-203
18
granules to common small well rounded gravels. Terminate at impenetrable gravels

135

Field
Designation
Auger 5-4

Date/ Location
5/15/205
N324 E978, ele 94.29
16m south of 5-3, along
same transect west of
paleoarea

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A1
A2

Holocene Unit Ic

2Ab

Holocene Unit Ib

2Bt

Holocene Unit Ib/a
Deweyville deep
gravels/calcic
horizon

3C
Field
Designation
Auger 5-5

Date/ Location
5/15/2005
N309 E978, ele 93.94
16 m south of 5-4,
downslope
under mesquite/acacia
trees, away from site
area

0-20
20-60

60-84

24

84-93

9

93-100

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A

0-50

Bk1
Bk2

50-90
Infilled Post Deweyville
channel

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR4/2 (d) fine to med. sand
20
10YR4/2 (d) sandy loam
40
10YR2/2 sandy loam few small pebbles 8mm3

10YR2/2 sandy clay flake at 93cm
10YR3/2 gravelly sandy clay gravels large, well rounded, terminates at
impenetrable gravels

7
Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR2/1 (d) / 10YR2/1 (w) clay
50
10YR4/1 (d) / 10YR5/1 (w) silty clay, fine faint CaCO3 filaments, possible small
shell frags from 50-60cm
40
10YR6/2 (d) / 10YR5/2 (w) silty clay, fine faint CaCO3 filaments

90-160

70
10YR6/2 (d) sandy clay loam

C
160-260

100

10YR4/3 sandy clay loam few faint CaCO3 soft masses and very few small pebbles
and shell frags
30
Field
Thickness Description
Date/ Location
Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
Designation
(cm)
5/15/2005
10YR3/2 (d) 10YR3/1 (w) silty clay loam
A
Auger 5-6
0-30
30
N280 E977, ele 93.58
10YR6/3 (d) 10YR6/2 (w) sandy clay
Bt1
30-60
30
30m south of 5-5, 25 m
10YR5/3 (d) 10YR5/3 (w) sandy loam
Bt2
north of BHT3
Infilled Post 60-87
27
Deweyville
10YR4/2 (d) sandy clay few faint CaCO3 filaments, mussel shell frag at 120cm
Btk1
87-120
33
channel
10YR4/2 (d) silty clay, few to moderate faint CaCO3 filaments, snail shell at 173cm
Btk2
120-230
110
10YR6/2 (d) 10YR6/3 (w) clay with few faint 10YR6/6 (d) mottles
Btg
230-253
23
2Bk

260-290

136

Field
Designation
Auger 5-7

Field
Designation
Auger 5-8

Field
Designation
Auger 5-9

Date/ Location
5/16/2005
N388 E978, ele 97.54
15m north of 5-1,
heading upslope

Date/ Location
5/16/2005
N404 E978, ele. 97.99
15m north of 5-7

Date/ Location
5/16/2005
N419 E978, ele. 98.69
15m north of 5-8

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR4/2 (d) 10YR3/2 (w) fine to medium sand
A
Holocene Unit Ic
0-20
20
sandy clay loam, flake 25cm
2Ab
Holocene Unit Ib
20-35
15
3Btk1
35-45
10
10YR4/3 (d) / 10YR4/2 (w) clay loam weakly calcic, FCR and small shell frags
Holocene Unit Ia
10YR5/3 (d) 10YR4/3 (w) sandy clay loam Few faint filaments to few small soft
3Btk2
45-140
95
masses of CaCO3
10YR6/4 (d) sand with CaCO3 soft masses
3Bk
Deweyville fluvial 140-160
20
sands w/ arch
10YR6/4 (d) sand flake at 190cm
3C1
160-237
77
intrusion
3C2
237-280
43
10YR6/4 (d) sand with common small pebbles 5-12mm some to 30+mm
Thickness Description
Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
(cm)
10YR4/2 (d) 10YR3/2 (w) fine to medium sand
A
Holocene Unit Ic
0-45
45
10YR2/2 (d) sandy clay loam
2Ab
45-55
10
Holocene Unit Ib/a
10YR3/2 (d) sandy clay loam to sandy clay flake 82cm
2Bt
55-90
35
10YR4/3 (d) / 10YR4/2 (w) sandy clay loam moderate small filament to soft masses
3Btk1
CaCO3, increasing in size and frequency with depth
Deweyville
90-110
20
Paleosol/edge of
10YR4/3 (d) / 10YR4/2 (w) sandy clay loam frequent to moderate medium
3Btk2
colluvium
110-155
45
filaments and soft masses of CaCO3
10YR6/4 (d) sandy clay loam few fine soft masses of CaCO3
3Btk3
155-164
9
10YR6/4 (d) fine to medium sand
3C1
Deweyville fluvial 164-282
18
sands
10YR6/4 (d) medium to course sand
3C2
282-302
20
Thickness Description
Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
(cm)
10YR4/2 (d) 10YR3/2 (w) fine to medium sand
A
Holocene Unit Ic
0-35
35
10YR3/2 (d) sandy loam
2Ab Holocene Unit Ib/a 35-45
10
10YR4/1 (d/w) sandy clay loam with distinct common 5% medium 2.5YR5/8 (w)
3Btg
mottles
45-113
68
Deweyville
10YR4/1 (d/w) silty clay with distinct few medium 2.5YR5/8 (w) mottles and few
Paleosol
3Btkg
fine CaCO3 filaments
113-151
38
3Btk
10YR4/1 (d/w) silty clay with moderate medium CaCO3 nodules
151-158
7
10YR4/1 (d) sandy loam
3CB
158-170
12
10YR6/4 (d) fine to medium sand
3C
Deweyville fluvial 170-222
52
sands
10YR6/4 (d) medium sand with few small 10-15mm pebbles with occasional
3Ck
CaCO3 nodule
222-320
98
Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

137

Field
Designation
Auger 5-10

Field
Designation

Date/ Location
5/16/2005
N440 E978, ele 99.00
17m N of 5-9

Date/ Location
5/16/2005

Auger 5-12
N978 E451 99.49, N of
5-10, note no 5-11

Field
Designation
Auger 5-13

Field
Designation
Auger 5-14

Date/ Location
N978 E466, 99.43, 15m
N of Auger 5-12

Date/ Location
5/17/2005
N363 N958, ele. 96.75
15m W of DAT 4

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A

Holocene Unit Ic

0-65

2Btg

Deweyville
Paleosol

65-86

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A

Holocene Unit
I:undetermined

0-90

2Btg

Deweyville
Paleosol

90-95

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A

Holocene Unit
I:undetermined

0-98

2Btg

Deweyville
Paleosol

98-101

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A1
A2
2Ab

Holocene Unit Ib

2Btk

Holocene Unit Ia

Holocene Unit Ic

2Ck
3C1
3Ck

Deweyville fluvial
sands

0-30
30-110
110-125
125-150
150-175
175-260
260-290

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR5/2 (d) fine to medium sand
65
10YR4/1 (d/w) silty clay with distinct common 5% medium 2.5YR5/8 (w) mottles
21

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR5/3 (d) 10YR4/3 (w) fine to medium sand
90
5

10YR4/1 (d/w) silty clay with distinct common 5% medium 2.5YR5/8 (w) mottles

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR5/3 (d) fine to medium sand
98
3

Thickness
(cm)
30
80
15
25

10YR4/1 (d/w) silty clay with distinct common 5% medium 2.5YR5/8 (w) mottles

Description
10YR4/2 (d) 10YR3/2 (w) fine to medium sand
10YR3/2 (d) loamy sand
10YR3/2 (d) / 10YR2/1 (w) sandy loam
10YR5/3 (w) sandy clay loam few fine faint CaCO3 filaments to soft masses, snail
shell fragments, flake

85

10YR5/3 (d) sandy loam few faint fine CaCO3
10YR5/3 (d) course to medium sand with occasional small well rounded pebbles,
sand cemented to some pebbles

30

10YR7/2 (d) medium sand with occasional small well rounded pebbles and
occasional well rounded CaCO3 pebbles

25

138

Field
Date/ Location
Designation
Auger 5-15 5/17/2005
N363 E917, ele 97.23
55m west of Dat 4,
15 m west of Core 9

Field
Designation
Auger 5-16

Date/ Location
5/17/2005
N365 E897, ele. 97.40
22m at 38 degrees from
Anaqua Mott
Primary Dat N347 E888
ele. 96.75

A1
A2
2Ab
2E

Auger 5-17

Date/ Location
5/17/2005
N364 E872, ele. 97.6
23m W of 5-16

Holocene Unit Ic
Holocene Unit Ib/a

3Btk

Deweyville
Paleosol

3BC
3C1
3C2

Deweyville
Fluvial sands

107-158
158-182
182-235
235-300

51
26
53
65

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A1
A2

Holocene Unit Ic

2Btk

Deweyville
Paleosol

2C1
2C2
2Ck
2C

Field
Designation

0-42
42-60
60-90
90-107

Thickness
(cm)
42
18
30
107

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

Deweyville
Fluvial sands

0-30
30-76
76-104
104-125
125-150
150-175
175-280

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A1
A1

Holocene Unit Ic

2Ab

Holocene Unit
Ib/Deweyville
Paleoso l

3Btk1
3Btk2
3Btk3
3C

3C

Deweyville fluvial
sands

10YR4/2 (d) 10YR3/2 (w) fine to medium sand
10YR3/2 (d) sandy loam
10YR3/2 (d) sandy clay loam
10YR4/3 (d) sandy clay loam
10YR5/4 (d) sandy clay loam with few fine CaCO3 soft masses
10YR5/4 (d) medium to fine sands few medium CaCO3 nodules
10YR5/4 (d) medium sand
10YR6/4 (d) medium sand

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR4/2 (d) 10YR3/2 (w) fine to medium sand
30
10YR4/2 (d) fine sand to fine sandy loam
46
10YR5/4 (d) sandy clay loam with common 4% distinct medium CaCO3 soft
masses to nodules
28
10YR6/4 (d) sandy loam
21
10YR7/3 (d) medium to fine sand
25
25
10YR6/4 (d) medium sand common 5% distinct medium CaCO3 nodules
105
10YR7/3 (d) course to medium sand with granules to small pebbles
Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR3/1 (d) fine to medium loamy sandy
68
10YR3/1 (d) sandy loam, small shell frags
24
10YR4/2 (d) sandy clay loam

92-110
110-125
125-150
150-183
183-230

18
15
25
33
47

230-255
255-290

25
35

10YR4/2 (d) sandy clay loam few faint fine CaCO3 filaments rabdotus snail shell
10YR5/4 (d) sandy clay loam few faint fine CaCO3
10YR5/4 (d) sandy clay loam few faint medium CaCO3 soft masses
10YR6/4 (d) fine to medium sand
10YR7/4 (d) fine to medium sand few small pebbles 10-14mm few fine faint
CaCO3
10YR7/4 (d) medium to course sands

139

3Ck

Deweyville
Paleosol

0-68
68-92

Description

Field
Date/ Location
Designation
Auger 5-18 5/17/2005
N364 E843, ele. 97.75
30m W of 5-17

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A1
A2
2Btk
2Ck
2C

Field
Designation
Auger 5-19

Date/ Location
5/17/2005
N364 E822, ele. 97.05
20m west of 5-18

Auger 5-20

Date/ Location
5/17/2005
N364 E808, ele. 96.08
15m W of 5-19

0-68
68-130
130-154
154-185
185-276

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A1
A2

Holocene I:
Undetermined

(2)Bt

Holocene
illuvial/Deweyvill
e Paleosol

2C1
2C2
2C3
Field
Designation

Holocene Unit I:
Undetermined
Deweyville
Paleosol
Deweyville
Fluvial sands

Deweyville fluvial
sands

0-62
62-132

132-172
172-190
190-230
230-260

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

Thickness Description
(cm)
68
10YR3/1 (d) fine sandy loam
10YR4/3 (d) sandy loam
62
10YR5/4 (d) sandy clay loam few fine faint CaCO3
24
10YR7/4 (d) medium sand few medium distint CaCO3 soft masses and nodules
31
91
10YR7/3 (d) course to medium sand occasional small well rounded pebbles
Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR3/1 (d) fine to medium sand, sandy loam
62
10YR4/3 (d) sandy loam
70
10YR4/3 (d) sandy clay loam
40
18
40
30

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR4/2 (d) fine to medium sand to loamy sand
60
10YR5/3 (d) fine to medium sand to loamy sand
15
10YR4/3 (d) medium sand with frequent 20mm3 rounded pebbles

A1
A2

Holocene Unit I:
undetermined

0-60
60-85

C

Undetermined
colluvial
Deweyville?

85-105

20

Deweyville
Paleosol

105-122

17

122-156

34

Deweyville
Fluvial sands

156-213
213-220
220-265
265-275
275-287

57
7
45
10
12

2Bt1
2Bt2
2C1
2C2
2C3
2C4
2Ck

10YR4/4 (d) fine to medium sand
10YR4/4 (d) course to medium sand with few small gravels
10YR7/4 (d) coarse to medium sand

10YR4/3 (d) medium sandy clay
7.5YR4/3 (d) medium sandy clay
10YR5/4 (d) medium to course sandy loam with few small 10mm3 pebbles
2.5Y7/4 (d) medium to course sand
10YR7/3 (d) medium to course sand
10YR6/6 (d) dom. with 10YR5/8 course sand
10YR6/6 (d) course sands with distinct medium CaCO3 masses.

140

Field
Designation

Date/ Location

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

5/17/2005
A1
Auger 5-21
N368 E785, 95.15
23m at 280 degrees
from 5-20

Holocene Unit I:
undetermined

A2
2Bt1
2Bt2
2Bt3

Deweyville
Paleosol

2BC
2C1

Deweyville fluvial
sand

2C2

Field
Designation
Auger 5-22

Date/ Location
5/17/2005
N441 E765

0-42
42-50

8

50-62

12

62-85
85-106

23
21

106-123

17

123-152

29

152-185

33

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
2Ab
2EC

Location: at base of
profile in Burial Area #2

2C

top “0” is at 48cm
below the pinflag datum
in the wall

2/3Bt1

Holocene Unit Ib

Holocene Unit
Ib/Ia?

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR3/3 (d) fine to medium sands with few small pebbles flake at 12cm
42

0-70
70-95

10YR4/3 (d) sandy loam
5YR3/3.5 (d) sandy clay
5YR3/4 (d) sandy clay with small pebbles
5YR4/6 (d) sandy clay loam with small pebbles
7.5YR5/6 (d) medium course sand with small pebbles
7.5YR6/6 (d) course sands with frequent small pebbles
10YR7/6 (d) course sands with 7.5YR8/6 (d) clayey mottles with medium pebbles
15-30mm up to 38mm

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR3/2 (d) sandy loam snail shell frag and flake
70
10YR5/3 (d) sandy loam bone frag
25

95-124

29

Deweyville
Paleosol/
Holocene Unit
Ib/a?

124-147

23

147-175
175-197

28
23

Deweyville
Fluvial sands

197-246

49

246-275

29

10YR6/4 (d) sandy loam
10YR6/6 (d) sandy clay loam

2/3Bt2
2/3Bt3
3C1
3C2

10YR5/6 (d) sandy clay loam
10YR6/6 (d) sandy clay loam
10YR6/4 (d) fine to medium sandy loam
10YR7/3 (d) medium to course sand few 10-30mm pebbles

141

Field
Designation
Auger 5-23

Date/ Location
5/18/2005 N379 E808
ele. 97.23
15m north of 5-20,
heading upslope in
gully,

Horizon
A
2Bt1
2Bt2
2BC

in what appears to be
the natural surface,
though the surface is
certainly disturbed due
to nearby gullies
Field
Designation

Date/ Location
5/18/2005

Auger 5-24
N394 E810 ele. 98.23
15m north of 5-23
on eroded/excavated
surface,
real surface would be
approximately 1.5m
over the surface
Field
Date/ Location
Designation
5/18/2005
Auger 5-25
N410 E809 ele. 99.11
15m N of 5-24

2C1
2C2
2C3
2C4
2C5

Strat
Thickness Description
Depth (cm)
Designation
(cm)
Holocene Unit
10YR3/2 (d) fine to medium sandy loam
I: undetermined
0-15
15
Holocene Unit
7.5YR4/3 (d) sandy clay
15-40
25
I:
40-70
30
7.5YR5/6 (d) sandy clay loam
undetermined/
10YR6.5/4 (d) sandy loam
Deweyville
Paleosol
70-92
22
92-210
118
10YR7/3 (d) medium sand
10YR7/4 (d) medium to course sand
210-240
30
Deweyville
10YR8/4 (d) medium sand
240-250
10
Fluvial sands
10YR8/4 (d) fine sands
250-264
14
10YR8/4 (d) fine to medium sand
264-304
40

Strat
Thickness Description
Depth (cm)
Designation
(cm)
Holocene Unit
10YR3/2 (d) sandy clay loam
Ap/2ABb1
0-60
60
Ib
Holocene Unit
10YR4/2 (d) sandy clay loam numerous roots
2Bt
Ib/a?
60-70
10
10YR4/3 (d) sandy clay flake at 77cm, roots continue
3Bt
70-90
20
Deweyville
10YR5/3 (d) sandy clay with few faint fine 5YR5/8 mottles
3Btg
Paleosol with
90-125
35
artifact at top of
10YR6/6 (d) sandy clay
3Bt1
125-185
60
deposit
10YR6/4 (d) sandy clay loam
3Bt2
185-205
20
10YR6/4 (d) sandy loam with occasional very small well rounded pebbles
3BC
Deweyville
205-225
20
Fluvial
sands
10YR7/3 (d) medium sand
3C
225-280
55
Strat
Thickness Description
Horizon
Depth (cm)
Designation
(cm)
10YR3/2 (d) sandy clay loam, 24cm white glaze ceramic
Ap
0-40
40
10YR4/2 (d) sandy loam, 73cm cortical flake
A1
40-144
104
10YR5/3 (d) sandy loam, 156cm flake
A2
Holocene Unit 144-172
28
Bt1
I: undetermined 172-195
23
10YR6/4 (d) sandy clay loam
Bt2
195-204
9
10YR6/4 (d) sandy loam
10YR5/3 (d) sandy loam with some mottles, at 230cm broken/tested cobble
Bg
204-230
26
30x50x65mm
2Bt
DeweyPaleosol 230-291
61
10YR5/6 (d) sandy clay loam to sandy clay
Horizon

142

Field
Designation

Date/ Location
5/18/2005

Auger 5-26
N429 E811 ele. 100.15
20m N of 5-25

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
A5
2Btg

Field
Designation
Auger 5-27

Date/ Location
5/18/2005
N454 E810 ele. 100.65
25m N of 5-26

Holocene Unit I:
Undetermined

Deweyville
Paleosol

Holocene Unit Ic /
Undetermined

E/Bt2

Auger 5-28

Date/ Location
5/18/2005
N309 E883 ele. 93.71

75
40
65
40
46
54

300+

10

0-98
98-186
186-206
206-262
262-303

E/Bt3
Field
Designation

0-75
75-115
115-180
180-220
220-246
246-300

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A1
A2
E/Bt1

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A1

0-28

A2

In anaqua mott, 15m S
(downslope)

Bk1

of 2nd DAT N322 E886
94.75m

Bk2

Infilled Post Deweyville
channel

56
41

10YR6/3 sands, lamelle 10YR5/6 sandy clay, up to 2cm thick

Thickness Description
(cm)
2.5Y 2.5/1 si clay, numerous roots
28
2.5Y 3/1 si clay, small granule size broken shell frags throughout
64

92-120

28

10YR5/3 si clay loam, w. few fine calcarious granules/soft masses and small broken
shell frags
10YR5/2 si clay loam, friable-crumbly common (4%) faint fine to med CaCO3 soft
masses, occasional 20mm3 pebbles begin at 142

190-250
250+

70
60
10

10YR5/2 si clay loam, friable-crumbly common (4%) faint fine to med CaCO3 soft
masses, occasional 20mm3 pebbles
gravelly and crumbly

143

C?

10YR4/2 (d) sandy loam
10YR5/2 (d) sandy loam, 145cm flake
10YR6/3 (d) sandy loam
10YR6/4 (d) sandy loam
10YR7/2 (d) medium sand, at 280 becomes saturated
10YR6/3 (d) sandy clay, saturated with distinct common 40% 10YR5/6 mottles

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR5/3 m-fine sand
98
10YR5/4 m-fine sand, 173 blocky shatter & cortical flake
88
10YR5/4 sand w/ faint 10YR4/3 clayey lamelle bands
20
10YR6/3 m-fine sands, lamelle continue sparsely possibly every 5-10cm

28-92

120-190
Bk3

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR3/2 (d) sandy loam, 24cm flake with flakes throughout level

Field
Designation
Auger 5-29

Date/ Location
5/19/2005
N410 E882 ele. 99.85
45m N of E/W line
(which is 14m W of A516)
due N of anaqua mott
DAT

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A1
A2

Holocene I:
Undetermined

2Btg
2Bt

105-162
Deweyville
Paleosol

2Btk
3C

Field
Date/ Location
Designation
Auger 5-30 5/19/2005
N389 E883 ele. 93.71
15m N of E/W line
(14m w. A5-16)

A1
A2

Auger 5-31

5/22/2005
N315 E978, ele. 94.06
7m S of A5-4, to
determine possible edge
of channel

Holocene Unit I:
Undetermined

2Bt1

2C2

Date/ Location

Deweyville fluvial
deposit

162-223

61

223-260

37

260-278

16

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

2Bt2
2Btk1
2Btk2
2C1

Field
Designation

0-95
95-105

Deweyville
Paleosol

Deweyville
Fluvial deposits

0-52
52-72

38

110-116
116-143
143-160
160-227

6
27
27
67

227-286

59

A
2Ab

Holocene Unit Ic
Holocene Unit Ib

0-20
20-40

2Bt1

Holocene Unit
Ib/Ia

40-83

3Btk

10YR5/4 sandy clay loam w. white soft masses-films
10YR6/4 sandy loam with occasional well rounded small pebbles, terminates at
gravels

10YR4/3 sandy clay, possibly manganese nodules? Charcoal?
10YR5/3 sandy clay
10YR5/3 sandy clay with CaCO3 nodules
10YR6/4 sandy loam w. common CaCO3 nodules & masses
10YR6/4 m-f sand
10YR6/4 m-coarse sand, few sm gravels, one 20X60cm

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR3/2 f-med sand
20
10YR2/2 sandy loam
20
10YR2/1 sandy clay
43

83-120

37

120-165

45

165-175

10

10YR4/2 sandy clay, flake @ 87cm, v.occasional sm. Pebble
10YR4/3 sandy clay to sandy clay loam slightly CaCO3, few faint specks of
CaCO3, frequent granule t o v. fine pebbles w/depth, possible flake at 160cm
10YR6/3 sandy clay w. distinct med. CaCO3 mottles and soft masses terminate b/c
gravels are granule to med. Pebbles

144

3Btk

Deweyville
Paleosol

7.5YR5/6 dry sandy clay

Thickness Description
(cm)
52
10YR4/2 f-m sand
10YR3/1 sandy clay loam then to 10YR3/3 sandy clay loam at 60cm
20

72-110

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

2Bt2

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR5/3 med sand
95
10YR4/2 med sand, saturated seds
10
10YR4/1 sandy clay to silty clay w 10YR5/6 faint-med. Common 3% mottles that
57
get stronger with depth

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR5/2 sand
Holocene Unit Ic
Auger 5-32 5/22/2005
A1
0-5
5
N368 E1125
10YR3/2 sandy loam
2Ab
5-60
55
Holocene Unit Ib
from N368 E1013, 15m
10YR4/4 sandy clay loam
2Bt
60-90
30
E, just west of Rd
10YR6/3 sandy clay loam v. weak calcareous fine weak CaCO3 grains, occasional
3Btk1
90-120
30
granule sized nodules to mod. Distinct med. Soft masses
10YR6/3 sandy clay loam few med. CaCO3 soft masses, few granule to sm pebble,
Deweyville
3Btk2
120-157
37
155cm mussel shell frag
Paleosol
10YR7/2 sandy clay, few med. CaCO3 soft masses
3Btk3
157-180
23
10YR8/1 silty clay, entirely calcic soft masses, becomes moist w/ depth terminate at
3Btk4
180-202
22
202 b/c dense small pebble gravel- like paleo trench profile
Field
Thickness Description
Date/ Location
Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
Designation
(cm)
Zn. 3 of profile description
Auger 5-33 5/23/2005
2Btg
0-20
20
At base of Excavation
7.5YR6/6 sandy clay no mottles
Deweyville
Area 5
2Bt
20-65
45
Paleosol
ele. Approx 97.70
10YR5/4 silty clay w/ occasional med CaCO3 soft masses
2Btk1
65-90
25
10YR8/3 silty clay CaCO3 continues
2Btk2
90-100
10
10YR6/4 sandy loam
2C1
100-120
20
10YR8/2 f-med sands
Deweyville
2C2
120-210
90
Fluvial sands
10YR7/3 c-m. sands w. frequent granules, few small pebbles
2C3
210-230
20
10YR8/2 fine sand loose, end at 230 b/c can’t keep sand in auger, it falls out
2C4
230-240
10
Field
Designation

Date/ Location

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

Field
Designation

Date/ Location

Horizon

5/23/2005
Auger 5-34

Ap/Ab
N355 E993, Paleo Area
2Btk
ele. 95.00

2C1
2C2
2C3
2C4

Strat Designation
Holocene Unit I:
Undetermined
Deweyville
Paleosol

Deweyville
Fluvial sands

Depth (cm)
0-5

Thickness
(cm)

Description
10YR3/2 sandy clay loam, “red”

5
19

10YR6/3 sandy clay CaCO3 (10%) soft masses to sm gravel nodules 10YR8/2, sm
pebble at 15cm

24-45
45-70

21
25

10YR6/4 med sandy loam
10YR7/3 med sand

70-125

55

10YR6/4 med-coarse sand w. med. Granule to f. pebbles

50

10YR8/3 med.-coarse sand w. med gravels to f. pebbles, terminate at 175cm at
gravels

5 - 24

125-175

145

Field
Designation
Auger 5-35

Date/ Location
5/23/2005
20m E of 5-32

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A1
A2
2Bt

Holocene Unit Ic/
Undetermined

2Btg1

Post Deweyville
Infilled Channel?

2Btg2
2Btk
Field
Designation
Auger 5-36

Date/ Location
5/24/2005
sandpit auger 60m N of
A5-13 at approx 45 m
north
of last exposure of red
clay,
estimate 2.25m of sand
originally above this
surface,
also took 2 samples of
adjacent profile
20, 90, 150 cmbgs

0-30
30-50
50-80
80-120
120-192
192-236

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
Ap
A

0-30
Holocene Unit I:
undetermined

2Btg
2Bt

Deweyville
Paleosol

2Bt

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR4/2 sandy loam
30
10YR3/2 sandy loam
20
10YR2/2 moist sandy clay
30
5YR5/8 sandy clay with faint few 10YR5/2 mottles with common strong 5YR5/8
40
mottles
10YR7/2 silty clay with strong common 5YR5/8
72
10YR7/3 silty clay w. mod. Med. Soft CaCO3 masses
44
Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR6/4 sandy clay (poss disturbed b/c sand pit operation)
30
10YR7/3 med. Sand

30-50

20

50-100
100-120

50
20

120-155

35

7.5YR6/4 sandy clay to sandy clay loam w/ common med 7.5YR5/8 mottles,
mottles decrease with depth to few
10YR8/1 med. Sandy loam, 1 sm pebble
10YR6/6 sandy clay
10YR7/3 med. Sandy loam

2C
Deweyville
Fluvial Deposits

155-170

15

10YR7/4 dom. w. 10YR6/6 lamelle, f. to med. Sandy loam alternating lighter and
darker seds. W. varying clay lamelle continuing with depth
33
10YR8/3 med-coarse sand
2C
97
Field
Thickness Description
Date/ Location
Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
Designation
(cm)
5/24/2005
10YR4/3 f. sandy loam, rabdotus frags.
A
Auger 5-37
0-30
30
Holocene Unit I:
bottom of Anaqua Mott
10yR5/3 f. sandy loam to sandy clay loam, whole rabdotus (unburned) and possible
Undetermined
AE
Unit
charcoal frag. @ 52cm
30-140
110
N341 E883
10YR6/3 silty loam weakly calcic, few faint CaCO3 grains, 2 whole snail shell
2Btk
(rab.) at 220cm
Deweyville
140-242
102
Paleosol
10YR6/3 silty clay loam, few med. Weak calcic nodules, terminate at small-med.
2BC
Well rounded pebbles
242-258
16
2E/Bt

170-203
203-300

146

Field
Designation

Date/ Location
5/24/2005

Auger 5-38
15m N of 5-30, 15m S
of 5-29

Field
Designation

Date/ Location
5/24/2005

Auger 5-39
15m N of A5-29

Field
Designation
Auger #1

Field
Designation
Auger #2

Date/ Location
10/17/2004
Paleo Area, base of
paleo profile

Date/ Location

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A

Holocene Unit I:
Undetermined

2Btg

Deweyville
Paleosol

0-78

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR5/3 f.-med. Sand
78
10YR4/1 sitly clay with common faint 10YR5/8 (like A5-29 105-162cm)

78-83

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

5
Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR5/3 med. Sand

A

Holocene Unit I:
Undetermined

0-98

98

2Btg

Deweyville
Paleosol

98-103

5

10YR5/2 silty clay w. 5YR5/8 strong med mottles

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
C1
C2

Deweyville
Fluvial sands and
deep calcic
horizon

0-80

80

80-90

10

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

10/17/2004

Ap/2Bt1

Paleo Area, 1m west of
surficial paleo burial

2Bt2

note surface truncated
approx

2BC

.75m, surface ele 94.9

3C1

Holocene Unit Ib

Thickness Description
(cm)

Thickness Description
(cm)

0-30

30

10YR3/1 (w) loamy fine to medium sand, flake

30-60

30

10YR4/1 fine sandy loam, flakes, snail and mussel shell, bone, FCR

60-100

40

10YR4/2 sandy loam-sandy clay loam flakes, shell, sterile from 75-90, flakes and
human humerous and tibia fragments between 90-100cm

100-125

25

10YR4/1 sandy loam-sandy clay loam, quartzite cobble frag, snail shell

125-160

35

10YR5.5/2 sandy loam, calcareous granules and CaCO3 crusted large pebbles,
mussel shell fragments

160-175

15

2.5Y8/2 coarse sandy clay, CaCO3 rich

Holocene Unit Ia
3C2
4Ck

Deweyville deep
Calcic horizon

gravelly sands with CaCO3 nodules
light gray gravelly sandy clay, calcic

147

Field
Designation

Date/ Location

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

11/12/2004
Auger #3

2E/Bt1

120-140

2E/Bt2
measurements are from
nail in wall
2C1
(96.95), surface of auger
= 95.75
2C2

140-190

Deep Pit Profile

Field
Designation
Auger #4

Date/ Location
11/13/2004
15m NE of Core #6, at
north edge
of sandfield, at contact
with
Beaumont clayey
toeslope

10
10YR6/2 medium sand

200-240

40

240-245

5

2C5
2C6
2C7
2C8
2C9

245-275
275-320
320-330
330-340
340-345
345-365

30
45
10
10
5
20

2C10
2C11
2C12

365-380
380-385
385-395

15
5
10

At base of profile have
10YR6/3
2C3
sands interbedded with
10YR4/3
2C4
loamy sand lamelle

190-200

Thickness
Description
(cm)
10YR4/3 loamy sand, single grained, at 130 sandy loam-sandy clay loam lamelle
10YR4/2 with 7.5YR5/6 mottles
20
10YR6/3 medium to coarse sands with 10YR4/3 sandy loam to sandy clay loam
lamelle, lamelle decreasing in thickness and frequency with depth
50
10YR8/2 fine to medium sand

10YR8/2 medium sand
Deweyville
Fluvial sands

10YR6/2 medium sand

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A1
A2
A3

0-5
Holocene Unit I:
Undetermined

A4
2Btg1
2Btg2

5-25
25-37
37-60

Deweyville
Paleosol

60-70
70-95

10YR8/1 medium sand
10YR7/3 medium sand
10YR8/1 medium to fine sand
10YR8/1 loamy sand with few 10YR6/6 mottles
10YR6/6 medium sand dominate with moderate 10YR8/1, very occasional granule
2.5Y7/3 medium sand
10YR7/1 very firm sandy clay, some organics, possibly root
10YR7/1 gravelly loam sand

Thickness
Description
(cm)
10YR4/1 fine sand, single grained, roots
5
10YR3/2 fine sandy loam, roots, single grained to granular
20
10YR4/2 medium sand
12
10YR4/1 sandy loam, abrupt lower boundary
23
10YR4/1 sandy clay loam, with very occasional 7.5YR5/6 mottles, granule sized
black concretions, possibly charcoal
10
10YR3/1 clay with 10YR6/6 to 7.5YR5/6 mottles
25

148

Field
Designation
Auger #5

Date/ Location

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

12/9/2004
2Btk1
Bottom of Anaqua Mott
2x2 unit
2Btk2
N324 E886, NE corner
of unit
2Btk3
ele. 94.02 at bottom of
pit
2Btk4

0-25
25-40
Deweyville
Paleosol/
Colluvium

Auger #10-1

Field
Designation
Auger #10-2

15

41-53

12

53-105

52

10YR8/2 (w) scl w/ hard CaCO3 nodules, 41-43 is indurated, consolidated hard
CaCO3
10YR8/1 (w) scl w/ occasional to common CaCO3 nodules

10YR8/1 (w) scl w/occasional CaCO3 nodules, 2 well rounded small cobble sized
river gravels, auger obstructed by gravels.
3
Thickness
Date/ Location
Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
Description
(cm)
10/8/2005
10YR4/2 (d) 10YR3/2 (w) fsl, loose, soft
A1
0-30
30
Holocene Unit I:
7.5m N of Auger 5-8, on
10YR3/2 (d) 10YR2/2 (w) sl-scl, firm
Undetermined
transect b/t 5-8 and 5-9
A2/Ab
30-50
20
10YR4/2 (d) 10YR4/3 (w), with 7.5YR5/6 (d) few mottles, scl, firm
Deweyville
Paleosol
Btg
50-55
5
Thickness
Date/ Location
Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
Description
(cm)
10/8/2005
Holocene Unit
10YR4/2 (d) 10YR3/2 (w) sl, medium to fine sands, loose, soft
A1
Ib/Ic
0-40
40
7.5m S of Auger 5-1,
10YR4/3 (d) 10YR3/2 (w) sl, firm (AB)
between 5-1 b/t 5-8 and
5-9
A2
40-72
32
and 5-2, in 2-track rd
10YR4/2 (d) 10YR4/3 (w) sl, hard, occasional CaCO3 nodule, snail shell fragments
2Btk5

Field
Designation

Thickness
Description
(cm)
10YR6/2 (w) scl w/ occasional CaCO3 granules
25
10YR6/3 (w) sl w/ numerous CaCO3 granule to pebble sized concretions

2Bkb1
2Bkb2

105-108

Holocene Unit
Ia/Deweyville
Paleosol

2Bkb3
2C1

2C2

Deweyville
Fluvial sands

72-98
98-125

26
27

125-170

45

170-245

75

10YR6/3 (d) 10YR5/3 (w) fsl, soft, no CaCo3, velvety texture
10YR7/3 (d) 10YR7/4 (w) medium s to sl, at 130cmbgs is med. rounded pebble w.
CaCO3 crust, soft, proximal white colored flake frag 140cmbgs, few sm pebbles
10YR7/3 (d) 10YR7/4 (w) medium sand, occasional coarse grains, few small
pebbles
10YR7/3 (w & d) gr. (5%) sl, medium to coarse sands, granule to medium pebbles,
CaCO3 rounded, hard nodules, impenetrable any deeper

245-255

10

149

Field
Designation

Date/ Location

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

Thickness
Description
(cm)
10YR5/3 (d) 10YR4/3 (w) fsl-fs, well sorted, slightly moist, A
40
10YR6/3 (d) 10YR4/3 (w) fs-vfs, dry, C1

150

Auger #10-3 10/9/2005
A1
0-40
Outside of site
boundary, NE side of
Holocene Unit I:
KyC sand
A2
40-115
75
Undetermined
Deweyville Terrace,
10YR8/2 (d) 10YR6/3 (w) fs-vfs, dry, beginning at 140 very occasional sm.
35m at 20 degrees to
quartzite pebbles
isolated house
C
115-160
45
on topo map, near
10YR7/2 (d) 10YR5/3 (w) dom. w/ 10% 7.5YR5/6 (d) 7.5YR5/8 (w) mottles, fsl,
contact with Dna soils.
slightly moist (Bt1?)
Surface of test is near
Deweyville
modern dump
2Bt1
160-240
80
Paleosol/ illuvial
on elevated surface
10YR6/6 (w & d) fsl-fscl, slightly moist, firm
Holocene?
relative to DnA, large
mott of veges on dunes
to SW
2Bt2
240-310
70
rd on topo goes around
to E of mott, auger is b/t
mott and rd
Field
Thickness
Date/ Location
Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
Description
Designation
(cm)
10YR4/2 (d) 10YR3/2 (w) fsl
Auger 10-4 10/9/2005
A1
0-15
15
Holocene Unit I:
300 degrees at 28m
10YR4/3 (d) 10YR3/3 (w) fsl
Undetermined
from last
A2
15-25
10
(10-3) downslope,
10YR4/2 (d) 10YR3/2 (w) with 10YR5/8 (d) 10YR5/6 (w) moderate, distinct
Beaumont
approx. .75m in ele,
mottles, scl-sicl, hard, dry
Formation
looking at
2Btg
25-30
5
surface, the soils are
right at edge of sands
upslope and clay
downslope in little low
drainage
Field
Thickness
Date/ Location
Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
Description
Designation
(cm)
10YR5/2 (d) 10YR3/2 (w) sl, soft
Auger #10-5 10/9/2005
A1
0-25
25
Holocene Unit I:
120 degrees for 10m
10YR5/3 (d) 10YR3/2 (w) well sorted fs (like 40-115 of 10-3)
Undetermined
from 10-4
A2
25-45
20
upslope
Beaumont
10YR4/1 (d) dom. with 10YR5/6 (d) strong, 8% matrix, sc-scl, like in auger 10-4
2Btg
45-50
5
Formation

Field
Designation

Date/ Location

Auger #10-6

10/9/2005

Ap

44 degrees at 13m to
datum stake at the burial
in the paleo area island
b/t paleo burial and
excavation area is 6m to
the SE

Bk1

island b/t paleo burial
and excavation area is
6m to the SE

Bk2

Field
Designation
Auger #10-7

Date/ Location

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
Holocene Unit
Ib/c?

Thickness
(cm) Description

0-18

18

10YR3/4 (d) 10YR3/2 (w) sl, dry, hard

18-105

87

10YR4/4 (d) 10YR3/3 (w) sl, with 3% (vry occasional) few sm. pebble sized, soft
masses of 10YR8/2 white CaCO3 masses, occasional sm. shell frag, beginning
90cm possible sm fcr, flake 100cm

105-123

18

10YR7/3 (d) 10YR5/3 (w) fs-fsl, with 1% (vry few) granule to filaments of CaCO3,
beginning at 120cm few medium pebbles to lrg well rounded cobbles w. CaCO3
crust, numerous snail shell, flake 115cm, end at 120-123 become impenetrable

Holocene Unit Ia/
Deweyville
Paleosol

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

Thickness
Description
(cm)
35

10/9/2005

A

Holocene Unit Ic

0-35

23m at 20 degrees from
Dat Stake

2Ab

Holocene Unit Ib

35-95

60

10YR3/2 (d) 10YR3/3 (w) fsl, hard (Ab)

at the bural in paleo
area, W aprox

3Bk

Holocene Unit
Ia/Deweyville
PaleosolColluvium

95-120

25

10YR6/8 (d) 10YR5/6 (w) sl-fsl with 5% strong white soft masses-filaments to
granule and sm pebble, sl-fsl

5m of rd, on nat level
surface, gully

3Bk

120-160

40

10YR6/4 (d) 10YR5/4 (w) fsl, 5% soft to firm nodules CaCO3

immed to E

3C1

160-230

70

10YR6/3 (d) 10YR5/3 (w) sl-s (med.) few medium well rounded pebbles with
CaCO3 crust, no CaCO3 in matrix

230-295

65

10YR8/2 (d) 10YR7/1 (w) med to coarse sand with common fine to lrg pebbles, no
pebbles after 260cmbgs

3C2

Deweyville
Fluvial sand

10YR3/3 (d) 10YR3/2 (w) fsl, firm (A)

151

Field
Designation
Excavation
Area 4

Date/ Location

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

Ap

A1

0-30

Holocene Unt Ic

AC

2Ab

30-60

60-110

Holocene Unit Ib

110-170

3Ab

170-180

3AB

180-202
Holocene Unit Ia

3Bt1

202-225

3Bt2

225-264

4Bt

Deweyville
Paleosol

264-295

Thickness
(cm) Description
Very dark gray (7.5YR3/1) loamy fine sand, dark gray (7.5YR4/1) dry, single
grained to massive, few large roots and root casts, common small roots, common
30
large to small open pores, clear smooth lower boundary, historic and prehistoric
artifacts
Dark brown (7.5YR3/2) loamy fine sand, single grained to massive, few medium,
30
common fine roots, few medium, common fine pores, clear wavy lower boundary,
historic and Late Prehistoric period artifacts
Very dark gray (10YR3/1) loamy fine sand, single grained to massive, few large,
50
common fine roots, few medium to fine pores, abrupt broken lower boundary,
prehistoric Late Archaic period artifacts, mottled midden sediments at top of horizon
Dark gray (10YR4/1) loamy fine sand, grayish brown (10YR4.5/2) dry, single
grained to weak coarse blocky subangular, common vertical 2-3 mm wide sand
60
filled root casts 2 to 15 cm long from top of horizon, few fine roots, few fine filled
pores, abrupt broken lower boundary, Middle and Early Archaic period artifacts
Dark grayish brown (10YR4/2) loamy fine sand, single grained, few fine pores,
10
clear smooth lower boundary, prehistoric artifacts
Brown (10YR5/2.5) loamy fine sand, grayish brown (10YR5/2) dry, single grained
to massive, firm, common vertical 2.5 cm wide, up to 20 cm long, filled with dark
22
grayish brown sand from above horizon, gradual smooth lower boundary, Late
Paleoindian period artifacts
Pale brown (10YR6/3) fine sandy loam, brown (10YR5/3) dry, weak fine blocky
23
subangular, few filled root casts from upper horizon extend into this horizon, clear
smooth lower boundary, few Late Paleoindian period artifacts
Light gray (10YR6.5/2) fine sandy clay loam, pale brown (10YR6/3) dry, slightly
hard, moderate medium blocky subangular, few Late Paleoindian artifacts, clear
39
smooth lower boundary

31

Light gray (10YR6.5/2) fine sandy clay loam, pale brown (10YR6/3) dry, slightly
hard, moderate medium blocky subangular, common moderate yellowish brown
(10YR5/6) mottles, limit of exposure

152

Field
Designation

Date/ Location

Burial Area 1

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A1

0-50

A2

50-107
Holocene Unit Ic

E/Bt

2Ab
Field
Designation
Burial Area 2

Date/ Location

107-155

Holocene Unit Ib

155-215

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
Ap

0-40

A1

40-85

A2

Holocene Unit Ic

85-120

A3

120-180

A4

180-224

2Ab

Holocene Unit Ib

224-271

Thickness
(cm) Description
10YR3/2 (w) fls, soft, massive structure, many fine roots and fine pores, clear
50
smooth lower boundary, cultural material: lithic artifacts
10YR3.5/2 (w) fls, soft, massive structure, moderate fine roots and pores, abrupt
57
smooth lower boundary, cultural material: lithic artifacts, 1 modern ceramic?
10YR3/2 (w) fls, weak medium blocky subangular with 10YR2/2 (w) vfls
lamelle bands, 1cm thick wavy discontinuous, horizontal lamelle at 5cm intervals,
48
occasional medium roots, very occasional fine roots and fine pores, clear smooth
lower boundary, cultural material: lithic artifacts and FCR,
60

10YR3/2 (w) fls, weak fine blocky subangular to massive, very few fine roots and
fine pores, limit of exposure, cultural material: lithic artifacts and FCR

Thickness
Description
(cm)
fls, approximate depth of disturbed pushpile sediments which overlay the intact
40
deposits
10YR2/1 (w) fls, slightly moist, weak fine blocky subangular parting to single
grained (fine crumb), few horizontal and vertical 10YR4/2 (w) bands, poss.
45
Lamelle, disturbance of roots, burrows?, numerous very fine and fine roots,
moderate very fine to fine open pores, smooth clear lower boundary that appears to
be very weak lamelle, cultural material:1 whiteware ceramic
10YR2.5/2 (w) fls, weak fine blocky subangular parting to single grained (medium
35
crumb), numerous very fine roots, few fine open pores, abrupt smooth lower
boundary, cultural material: lithic artifacts
10YR2/2 (w) fls, slightly moist, friable, slightly hard, weak medium blocky angular
60
parting to medium crumb, numerous very fine roots, occasional medium to large
root, very occasional very fine open pores, cultural material: lithic artifacts observed
10YR3/2 (w) fls, very friable, weak fine blocky subangular parting to very fine
44
crumbs, few very fine to medium roots, few very fine pores, gradual smooth lower
boundary, cultural material: lithics, bone, burned clay, FCR
10YR3/1 (w) fls, friable weak medium to fine prismatic parting to very fine crumbs
47
to single grained, large infilled burrow with roots, limit of exposure, cultural
material: lithics, bone, FCR

153

Field
Designation
Excavation
Area 5

Field
Designation
Anaqua Mott
1x2

Field
Designation
Anaqua Mott
2x2

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR4/2 (d) fs-fsl, soft fine single grained to massive, occasional large roots,
ele at B43top of unit
A1
0-54
54
numerous very fine roots and open pores, cultural material: few historic artifacts,
99.30
Holocene Unit Ic
common prehistoric flakes, shell, smooth lower boundary
10YR3/2 (d) sl, soft weak massive, common fine to medium roots and fine open
A2
54-136
82
pores, cultural material: moderate lithic and shell, abrupt wavy lower boundary
10YR6/4 (d) dominate with 5YR5/6 mottles, dry, hard moderate medium blocky
Deweyville
2Btkg
136-150
14
subangular, few fine weak calcic soft masses, few very fine roots, no cultural
Paleosol
material, limit of exposure
Thickness
Date/ Location
Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm) (cm) Description
10YR3/2 (d) fsl, friable, slightly hard massive parting to weak granular structure,
5/24/2005
A1
0-34
34
common fine to medium roots and fine pores, cultural material: numerous snail
shell fragments, flakes, bone, charcoal, wavy lower boundary
10YR2/2 (d) fsl, friable, hard massive parting to granular structure, common fine to
Unit N341 E883, N341
A2
34-60
26
medium roots and fine pores, cultural material: abundant flakes, charcoal, shell,
E882
bone and FCR, clear smooth lower boundary
10YR3/2 (d) fsl, friable, hard massive to very weak blocky subangular, fewer roots
Holocene Unit Ic
A3
60-88
28
and pores, cultural material: common but less numerous charcoal, flakes, bone,
shell, FCR, clear smooth lower boundary
10YR4/2 (d) fsl, friable, slightly hard massive to very weak blocky subangular
AE
88-120
42
structure, occasional medium, few fine roots and very few pores, cultural material:
few charcoal, flakes, bone, and shell, clear abrupt lower boundary
10YR4/3 (d) fsl, friable, soft massive structure, few fine roots, very few fine pores,
E
120-140
20
no artifacts observed, limit of exposure
Thickness
Date/ Location
Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
Description
(cm)
10YR3/1 (w) sl, granular structure?, numerous fine to large roots and fine pores,
12/8/2004
A1
0-20
20
cultural material: snail shell (broken & whole), mussel shell, flakes, bones. Clear
smooth lower boundary
10YR2/1 (w) scl, granular structure?, numerous fine to large roots and fine pores,
A2
20-50
30
color and texture, cultural material: snail shell, mussel shell, flakes, bones. Clear
smooth lower boundary
Holocene Unit Ic
10YR3/1 (w) sl, granular structure?, numerous fine to large roots and medium
A3
50-74
24
pores, less cultural material but still occasional snail, mussel, flakes, bone, clear
smooth lower boundary
10YR3.5/1 (w) sl, granular structure, moderate medium to fine roots, and occasional
AE
74-84
10
fine pores, some dark stains of upper horizon, is more like lower sediments, cultural
material: occasional snail shell, flakes, clear smooth lower boundary
E
84-101
17
10YR4/1.5 (w) granular structure?, few fine roots, 1 mussel shell, limit of exposure.
Date/ Location

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

154

Field
Designation
Paleo Area
Excavation

Date/ Location

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR4/2 (d & w) med. sl, massive, slightly variable in color, probably disturbed,
15
few fine roots, few fine open pores, abrupt wavy lower boundary

5/25/2005

2Ap/Ab

0-15

surface truncated by
borrow pit excavations

2Bt1

15-30

15

10YR3/2 (d & w) fine to med. sandy clay, very hard, strong coarse blocky angular,
very few fine roots, very few fine pores, abrupt wavy lower boundary, cultural
material: few lithics few FCR

30-45

15

10YR3.5/2 (d & w) fine to med scl, moderate coarse blocky subangular parting to
fine blocky subangular, very few fine roots, very few fine open pores, smooth clear
lower boundary, very few small pebbles, smooth clear lower boundary, cultural
material: few lithics, few FCR

2BC

45-60

15

10YR4/3 (d & w) med scl-sl, 1% small rounded pebbles,weak medium blocky
subangular parting to fine granular, one medium root, few open pores, smooth clear
lower boundary, cultural material: lithic artifacts and possible FCR

2CB

60-75

15

10YR5/4 (d) 10YR5/3 (w) med sl to med sand with common small pebbles and few
small boulders at base of profile, massive structure, limit of exposure

2Bt2

Holocene Unit
Ib/Ia

Field
Designation

Date/ Location

Paleo Burial
Area

10/10/2005

2Bt1

0-18

18

10YR3/2 (d) 10YR2/2 (w) fsl, firm dry massive structure, few fin e roots and open
pores, smooth clear lower boundary, must consider disturbance because surface has
been cleared, natural surface approx 40-60cm higher, cultural material: common
snail shell fragments, very occasional bone and lithics

N369 E1012

2Bt2

18-40

22

10YR4/2 (d) 10YR3/2 (w) fsl, firm, hard, massive structure, midden like greasy
texture, color, infilled rodent burrows, abrupt smooth lower boundary, cultural
material: common lithics, shell, few FCR

2Bt3

40-63

23

10YR4/2 (d) 10YR3/2 (w) fsl, soft, massive, smooth clear lower boundary, cultural
material: few lithics, shell

2BC

63-82

29

10YR4/2 (d) 10YR3/2 (w) fsl, soft, massive, burrowing disturbances, smooth clear
lower boundary, cultural material: common lithics, bone, FCR, 1 large well rounded
pebble

3CB1

82-102

20

10YR4/3 (d) 10YR4/2 (w) fsl, soft, transition to lower horizon, smooth clear lower
boundary, cultural material: few shell and lithics

102-105

3

10YR5/3 (d) 10YR5/2 (w) fsl, snail shells continue, few to no artifacts

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

Thickness
Description
(cm)

Holocene Unit Ib

Holocene Unit Ia
3CB2

155

Field
Designation
Deep Pit
North Profile

Field
Designation
Sand Pit
Profile

Date/ Location

1/7/2005

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)

A

northern profile

2Ab

approx 1.5m of seds are
above

Bt2

top of profile

C

Date/ Location
10/11/2005

Holocene Unit Ic

Holocene Unit Ib

Thickness Description
(cm)
55

10YR5/2 (d) sl, very weak fine blocky angular parting to single grain, fine roots and
fine open pores, few faint fine (1cm thick) wavy to smooth lamelle, one lamelle
continuous across exposed profile, in-filled rodent burrows, abrupt smooth lower
boundary, cultural material: occasional flakes

55-73

18

10YR3.5/1 (d) fsl, moderate medium prismatic parting to fine blocky angular, very
occasional roots and open pores, in -filled rodent burrows and root systems, with
sand from above (possibly ant tunnels?) clear smooth lower boundary, cultural
material: occasional lithic

73-113

40

10YR4/2 (d) fsl, moderate medium prismatic parting ot fine blocky angular, no roots
or pores, rodent burrows, vertically oriented sand filled roots, clear smooth lower
boundary, cultural material: lithic artifacts including bifaces and occasional well
rounded pebbles

113-130

17

10YR5/3 (d) sl, moderate fine blocky subangular, no roots or pores, occasional well
rounded granules, limit of exposure, no cultural material

0-55

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
A1

0-35

A2

35-90

Thickness
Description
(cm)
10YR4/3 (w) fs-fsl, massive, common medium to fine roots, open ant and insect
35
burrows, smooth clear lower boundary
55

10YR4.5/3 (w) fs-fsl massive, very common infilled roots and insect burrows, few
large 3cm3 open burrows, infilled roots burrows 10YR5/3 (w), abrupt smooth lower
boundary

90-275

85

10YR5/3 (w) sl, massive structure with common wavy lamelle 10YR3/3 (w),
approximately 5mm thick, roughly horizontal, parallel bedded, but do merge with
upper and lower bands, become discontinuous across profile, increase in frequency
with depth, but retain same thickness, few fine roots, few fine open pores, few
infilled large roots or burrows to 8cm3, smooth abrupt lower boundary cultural
material: diffuse scattered charcoal, few lithic artifacts though mostly in upper
40cm, cluster of large pebbles and lithics, suggests burrow disturbance

275-295

20

10YR6/3 (d) 10YR6/2 (w) f-med s, massive structure, no lamelle, limit of exposure

Holocene Unit Ic

EBt

C

Holocene Unit I
Undetermined

156

Field
Designation

Date/ Location

Paleo Profile

10/16/2004

A

N374 E995 top approx
97.30

2Ab1

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
Holocene Unit Ic

0-65

65-100
Holocene Unit Ib

from DAT7 100 deg
4.5m

2AB

100-138

3Btkb1

3Btkb2

138-174
Holocene Unit Ia/
Deweyville
PaleosolColluvium

3BC
3C
Field
Designation
Paleo Area
North Profile

Date/ Location
1/5/2005

Deweyville
Fluvial sands

174-202
170-200

30

10YR7/3 fs, soft, single grained, decrease in CaCO3 nodules, no roots, no pores, no
cultural material, smooth clear boundary, OSL Sample #2 collected from top of unit.

202-217

15

limit of exposure med-coarse sand to loamy sand, soft, single grain, very occasional
CaCO3 3mm3 nodules, biface frag observed in upper portions of horizon

Horizon Strat Designation Depth (cm)
Ap

0-13
Holocene Unit Ic

N394 E1005

A1

top 97.40

2Ab

Holocene Unit Ib

28-46

3Btk1

Holocene Unit
Ia/Deweyville
Paleosol

46-73

3Btk2
3BC
3C

13-28

73-93
93-109

Deweyville
Fluvial sands

Thickness Description
(cm)
10YR3/2 (wet) ls, numerous fine, very fine roots & pores, fine-medium weak
65
blocky subangular, smooth, gradual boundary, cultural material: very occasional
lithic artifacts
10YR4/2 (wet) sandy loam, occasional fine to very fine roots and pores, coarse
parting to fine medium weak blocky angular, gradual smooth boundary, cultural
35
material: numerous lithic artifacts, high concentration of snail shell fragments,
mostly broken, rabdotus and small spiral shaped
10YR5/2 (wet) med to fine sl, occasional very fine roots, very occasional very fine
pores, weak fine blocky subangular structure, gradual smooth boundary.cultural
38
material: numerous rabdotus and spiral snails, mussel shell fragments, most shells
broken but a few rabdotus are intact.
10YR5/3 (wet) fine sl, no roots no pores, weak fine blocky subangular., CaCO3
36
15% filaments and fine soft masses, smooth, clear boundary. Cultural material:
lithics occasional, heavily patinated, numerous snail and mussel shell fragments
10YR6/4 fsl, , fine weak blocky sub angular to granular, occasional CaCO3 nodules
28
5mm3no roots or pores, smooth clear boundary, greatly reduced cultural material:
no shell, 1 possible flake

109-145

157

Thickness
Description
(cm)
13
Ap- disturbed, scraped surface
10YR2/2 (d) fsl, weak fine blocky subangular, numerous fine roots and medium to
15
fine open pores, clear wavy lower boundary –A1
10YR3/2 (d) fsl, moderate prismatic parting to fine blocky subangular structure,
18
moderate fine roots and moderate open pores, abrupt wavy boundary, cultural
material: lithics – Ab or A2
10YR5/3 (d) well rounded fsl, moderate prismatic structure, 5% mottled with soft
27
masses and nodules up to 5mm3 of CaCO3, occasional very fine roots roots and fine
to medium open pores, clear wavy lower boundary
10YR6/3 (d) well rounded fsl, weak, fine prismatic structure, a few granular nodules
30
of CaCO3, clear smooth lower boundary
10YR6/3 (d) medium well rounded sl, weak fine blocky subangular-prismatic
12
structure, few granular nodules of CaCO3, smooth lower boundary
10YR5/3 (d) medium well rounded sand, very occasional granule to small pebble,
36
massive structure, possible gopher disturbance, limit of exposure, possible lithic
artifact.

158

Figure A-1. Project area map with auger locations

APPENDIX B
PARTICLE SIZE DISTRIBUTIONS

EXCAVATION AREA 4, UNIT N398 E850

LAB
NO

DEPTH

Depth
below
surface

SOIL-GEO
HORIZON

COARSE
FRAGMENTS %

PARTICLE SIZE DISTRIBUTION (mm)
………………………….…SAND…………………….……
….SILT……
…….CLAY….…….
Very
Very
Fine
Fine
TOTAL
Fine
Total
Coarse
Coarse
Medium
(0.25(0.10(2.0(0.02(0.05Fine
Total
(2.0-1.0)
(1.0-0.5)
(0.5-0.25)
0.10)
0.05)
0.05)
0.002)
0.002)
(<0.0002)
(<0.002)
……………………………………………………………%…………………………………………………………...

TEXTURE
CLASS

D9686

100.15100.20
100.10100.15
100.05100.10
100.00100.05

D9685

99.95-100.00

20-25

D9684

99.90-99.95

25-30

0

0.1

1.7

15.4

56.7

13.7

87.6

3.0

5.4

4.2

7.0

LFS

D9683

99.85-99.90

30-35

0

0.2

1.7

16.2

56.2

13.4

87.7

3.0

5.6

4.1

6.7

LFS

D9682

99.80-99.85

35-40

0

0.1

1.8

15.5

56.7

13.7

87.8

2.9

5.4

4.2

6.8

LFS

D9681

99.75-99.80

40-45

0

0.2

1.9

16.0

56.8

13.2

88.1

3.0

5.4

3.9

6.5

LFS

D9680

99.70-99.75

45-50

0

0.2

1.5

15.2

57.0

14.1

88.0

2.9

5.7

3.8

6.3

LFS

D9679

99.65-99.70

50-55

0

0.1

1.6

15.0

56.4

14.1

87.2

2.8

5.8

4.6

7.0

LFS

D9678

99.60-99.65

55-60

0

0.2

2.0

17.3

55.3

12.8

87.6

2.1

5.6

4.2

6.8

LFS

D9677

99.55-99.60

60-65

0

0.1

1.4

13.0

57.3

15.5

87.3

3.3

5.9

4.3

6.8

LFS

D9676

99.50-99.55

65-70

0

0.1

1.9

16.3

56.2

13.5

88.0

3.2

5.4

4.2

6.6

LFS

D9675

99.45-99.50

70-75

0

0.1

1.7

14.8

56.4

14.7

87.7

3.1

5.5

4.3

6.8

LFS

D9674

99.40-99.45

75-80

0

0.1

1.3

14.0

57.2

15.0

87.6

3.2

5.6

4.3

6.8

LFS

D9673

99.35-99.40

80-85

0

0.1

1.6

14.3

56.9

14.9

87.8

3.0

5.5

4.3

6.7

LFS

D9672

99.30-99.35

85-90

0

0.0

1.8

15.2

56.3

14.3

87.6

2.9

5.9

4.1

6.5

LFS

D9671

99.25-99.30

90-95

0

0.2

1.6

15.1

56.6

14.1

87.6

3.1

6.0

4.0

6.4

LFS

D9689
D9688
D9687

0-5

0.01

0.1

1.8

16.2

55.8

14.0

87.9

3.3

6.1

3.1

6.0

LFS

5-10

0

0.3

1.6

15.0

57.5

13.5

87.9

3.0

5.8

3.4

6.3

LFS

10-15

0

0.2

2.0

15.3

56.5

13.9

87.9

2.7

5.6

3.5

6.5

LFS

0

0.2

1.9

17.0

56.6

12.7

88.4

2.5

5.0

3.9

6.6

FS

0

0.1

1.8

15.1

56.1

14.0

87.1

3.3

5.7

4.1

7.2

LFS

15-20
Ap –Unit Ic

A1-Unit Ic

AC, A2Unit Ic

pH

6.6

6.6

6.7

159

LAB
NO

DEPTH

D9670

99.20-99.25

95-100

0

0.1

1.6

14.8

56.3

14.8

87.6

2.7

5.7

4.1

6.7

LFS

D9669

99.15-99.20

100-105

0

0.2

1.6

14.9

55.5

14.8

87.0

3.1

5.9

4.8

7.1

LFS

D9668

99.10-99.15

105-110

0

0.1

1.6

15.3

55.3

14.3

86.6

2.7

5.9

4.8

7.5

LFS

D9667

99.05-99.10

110-115

0

0.1

1.7

15.8

55.8

14.0

87.4

3.0

5.3

5.0

7.3

LFS

D9666

99.00-99.05

115-120

0

0.2

1.5

14.4

56.1

14.9

87.1

3.1

5.6

4.9

7.3

LFS

D9665

98.95-99.00

120-125

0

0.1

1.9

16.0

54.7

14.3

87.0

2.9

5.8

4.8

7.2

LFS

D9664

98.95-98.90

125-130

0

0.2

1.7

14.2

55.2

15.3

86.6

2.6

6.0

5.0

7.4

LFS

D9663

98.85-98.90

130-135

0

0.2

1.8

15.4

56.0

13.8

87.2

2.6

5.5

5.1

7.3

LFS

D9662

98.80-98.85

135-140

0

0.2

1.4

14.9

56.8

14.3

87.6

2.9

5.7

4.3

6.7

LFS

D9661

98.75-98.80

140-145

0

0.2

1.8

15.7

55.4

14.3

87.4

3.2

5.8

4.3

6.8

LFS

D9660

98.70-98.75

145-150

0

0.1

1.7

15.5

55.0

14.6

86.9

3.1

5.9

4.3

7.2

LFS

D9659

98.65-98.70

150-155

0

0.2

1.7

15.5

56.3

14.0

87.7

2.5

5.1

4.4

7.2

LFS

D9658

98.60-98.65

155-160

0

0.1

1.8

15.5

57.1

14.2

88.7

2.8

5.2

3.7

6.1

FS

D9657

98.55-98.60

160-165

0

0.1

1.7

15.9

56.5

13.9

88.1

2.9

5.6

4.4

6.3

LFS

D9656

98.50-98.55

165-170

0

0.0

2.1

16.8

56.6

13.4

88.9

2.7

5.2

3.7

5.9

FS

D9655

98.45-98.50

170-175

0

0.2

1.8

15.6

55.8

14.1

87.5

2.6

6.1

4.1

6.4

LFS

D9654

98.40-98.45

175-180

0

0.3

2.1

15.9

54.6

13.7

86.6

2.7

5.9

5.1

7.5

LFS

D9653

98.35-98.40

180-185

0

0.2

2.1

15.9

53.6

13.8

85.6

2.8

5.5

6.6

8.9

LFS

D9652

98.30-98.35

185-190

0

0.2

2.0

16.2

52.8

13.8

85.0

2.5

5.6

6.8

9.4

LFS

D9651

98.25-98.30

190-195

0

0.2

2.2

15.7

51.4

13.7

83.2

3.5

6.3

7.4

10.5

LFS

D9650

98.20-98.25

195-200

0

0.1

2.2

16.0

51.8

13.7

83.8

3.4

6.0

7.2

10.2

LFS

D9649

98.15-98.20

200-205

0

0.1

1.7

12.4

53.0

16.1

83.3

3.1

7.1

6.9

9.6

LFS

D9648

98.10-98.15

205-210

0

0.1

2.2

15.4

51.3

14.0

83.0

3.4

6.2

7.7

10.8

LFS

0

0.1

2.3

16.7

50.6

12.8

82.5

3.3

5.9

8.5

11.6

LFS

0

0.1

2.4

16.8

49.8

12.6

81.7

3.4

6.9

8.5

11.4

LFS

SOIL –GEO
HORIZON

COARSE
FRAGMENTS %

Very
Coarse
(2.0-1.0)

Coarse
(1.0-0.5)

Medium
(0.5-0.25)

Fine
(0.250.10)

Very
Fine
(0.100.05)

Depth
below
surface

TOTAL
(2.00.05)

Fine
(0.020.002)

Total
(0.050.002)

Fine
(<0.0002)

Total
(<0.002)

TEXTURE
CLASS

pH

……………………………………………………………%…………………………………………………………...

D9647

98.05-98.10

210-215

D9646

98.00-98.05

215-220

AC, A2Unit Ic

2Ab- Unit Ib

3Ab- Unit Ia

3AB- Unit Ia

6.5

6.3

6.2

6.20

3Bt-Unit Ia
97.85-98.95

225-235

80.4

3.5

16.1

x

97.75-97.85

235-245

79.7

3.5

16.8

x

97.65-97.75

245-255

79.6

3.5

16.9

160

x

LAB
NO

DEPTH

Depth
below
surface

D9690
D9691
D9692

97.56-97.66
97.46-97.56
97.36-97.46

254-264
264-274
274-284

SOIL –GEO
HORIZON
4BtDeweyville
Paleosol

Very
Fine
TOTAL
Fine
Total
Fine
Coarse
Medium
Fine
Total
(0.25(0.10(2.0(0.02(0.05(1.0-0.5)
(0.5-0.25)
0.10)
0.05)
0.05)
0.002)
0.002)
(<0.0002)
(<0.002)
……………………………………………………………%…………………………………………………………...
0.3
1.9
14.3
45.3
13.6
75.4
4.7
8.5
11.6
16.1
0.1
1.7
12.6
42.0
13.3
69.7
4.3
7.7
16.2
22.6
0.1
1.6
12.4
41.2
13.1
68.4
4.1
7.5
17.6
24.1

COARSE
FRAGMENTS %

Very
Coarse
(2.0-1.0)

0
0
0.01

TEXTURE
CLASS

pH

FSL
SCL
SCL

5.7

PALEO AREA
PROFILE
PARTICLE SIZE DISTRIBUTION (mm)
………………………….…SAND…………………….……

LAB NO

DEPTH

Depth
below
surface

SOILGEO
HORIZO
N

COARSE
FRAG
-MENTS %

Very
Coarse
(2.0-1.0)

Coarse
(1.0-0.5)

Medium
(0.5- 0.25)

Fine
(0.250.10)

….SILT……

Very
Fine (0.100.05)

TOTA
L
(2.00.05)

Fine
(0.020.002)

Tota
(0.050.002)

…….CLAY….…….
Fine
(<0.0002)

Total
(<0.002)

TEXTURE
CLASS

pH

……………………………………………………………%…………………………………………………………...
D9856
D9857
Paleo
Area
Profile

D9858
D9859
D9860

96.5597.20
96.2096.55
95.8296.20
95.4695.82
95.1895.46

D9861
Auger
#1
Auger
#1

D9866
D9867

0-65

A

0

0.4

3.3

22.0

45.0

12.6

83.3

FSL

8.1

65-100

2Ab

0

0.3

3.2

20.2

43.3

11.9

78.9

4.6

8.8

7.3

12.3

FSL

8.3

100-138

2AB

0

0.6

2.8

19.4

41.6

11.0

75.4

6.3

10.0

8.2

14.6

FSL

8.4

138-174

3Btkb1

0

0.4

2.5

17.5

38.2

11.2

69.8

8.2

12.6

9.1

17.6

FSL

8.3

174-202

3Btkb2

0

0.1

1.9

17.4

44.9

10.8

75.1

8.7

12.3

6.4

12.6

FSL

8.4

1

0.4

4.5

32.2

47.2

5.1

89.4

S

8.6

202-217
94.6395.18
94.5394.63

237-257

3C1

6

0.5

5.5

32.0

45.1

7.6

90.7

S

287-297

3C2

1

3.8

28.8

33.9

22.6

3.0

92.1

S

SAND PIT
PARTICLE SIZE DISTRIBUTION (mm)
………………………….…SAND…………………….……
LAB
NO

Depth
below
surface

SOILGEO
HORIZON

COARSE
FRAGMENTS %

Very
Coarse
(2.0-1.0)

Coarse
(1.0-0.5)

Medium
(0.5- 0.25)

Fine
(0.250.10)

….SILT……

Very
Fine (0.100.05)

TOTAL
(2.0- 0.05)

Fine
(0.02
-0.002)

Total
(0.050.002)

…….CLAY….…….
Fine
(<0.0002)

Total
(<0.002)

TEXTURE
CLASS

pH

……………………………………………………………%…………………………………………………………...

Sand
Pit
Profile

20cm

A1-Unit Ic

0

0.2

1.5

13.2

61.3

16.5

92.7

FS

7.1

D9863

90cm

0

0.1

1.6

13.3

61.4

16.5

92.9

FS

6.0

D9864

150cm

0

0.1

1.2

12.8

62.3

16.6

93.0

FS

6.6

D9865

203-300cm

A2-Unit Ic
E/Bt-Unit
Ic/Ib?
2CDeweyville
sands

0

0.1

4.6

56.7

30.1

2.3

93.8

S

7.4

161

Auger
5-36

D9862

GUADALUPE RIVER OVER BANK DEPOSIT
PARTICLE SIZE DISTRIBUTION (mm)

LAB
NO

DEPTH

SOIL-GEO
HORIZON

COARSE
FRAGMENTS %

………………………….…SAND…………………….……
Very
Fine
Fine
TOTAL
Fine
Coarse
Medium
(0.25(2.0(0.02
(0.10(1.0-0.5)
(0.5- 0.25)
0.10)
0.05)
0.05)
-0.002)

Very
Coarse
(2.0-1.0)

….SILT……
Total
(0.050.002)

…….CLAY….…….

Fine
(<0.0002)

Total
(<0.002)

TEXTURE
CLASS

pH

……………………………………………………………%…………………………………………………………...
overbank

D9852

surface

X

0

0.1

3.1

45.8

34.8

6.2

90.0

3.1

6.0

3.0

4.0

S

8.3

AUGER 5-9
PARTICLE SIZE DISTRIBUTION (mm)

LAB NO

Depth
below
surface

SOIL-GEO
HORIZON

COARSE
FRAGMENTS %

………………………….…SAND…………………….……
Very
Very
Fine
Fine
TOTAL
Coarse
Coarse
Medium
(0.25(0.10(2.0(2.0-1.0)
(1.0-0.5)
(0.5- 0.25)
0.10)
0.05)
0.05)

….SILT……
Fine
(0.020.002)

Total
(0.050.002)

…….CLAY….…….
Fine
(<0.0002)

Total
(<0.002)

TEXTURE
CLASS

pH

……………………………………………………………%…………………………………………………………...

Auger 5-9

D9853

43-113

Auger 5-9

D9854

170-222

Auger 5-9

D9855

222-320

2BtDeweyville
Paleosol
C1Deweyville
Fluvial
Sands
C2Deweyville
Fluvial
Sands

0

0.1

1.2

7.8

28.3

15.4

52.8

0

0.1

0.8

5.7

58.3

17.3

0

0.0

0.2

1.7

80.8

12.4

9.7

17.5

22.8

29.7

SCL

5.9

82.2

FSL

8.2

95.1

S

8.6

162

163

APPENDIX C
EXCAVATION AREA 4 ARTIFACT DISTRIBUTIONS
UNIT N398 E850
Geo Unit

Soil Unit

Ap

Ic

A1

A2/AC

Ib

Ia

Deweyville

2Ab

3AB

4Bt

1

Elevation
100.15

Debitage
(gr)
160

8

FCR
(gr)
38

2

100.05

3

99.95

180

54

113

285

265

182

4
5

99.85

179

80

282

99.75

358

56

283

6

99.65

408

40

458

7

99.55

367

51

350

8

99.45

150

10

350

9

99.35

456

49

726

10

99.25

289

46

497

11

99.15

351

26

537

12

99.05

470

28

1203

13

98.95

501

43

719

14

98.85

307

48

5

15

98.75

268

18

460

16

98.65

393

20

348

17

98.55

240

30

313

18

98.45

488

25

397

19

98.35

188

18

762

20

98.25

395

57

596

21

98.15

417

14

596

22

98.05

336

10

787

23

97.95

325

8

282

24

97.85

280

1

99

25

97.75

210

1

104

26

97.65

411

1

153

Level

Bone
(gr)

Uniques

Lerma Lt Pal-E Arch

Chopper tool

164

UNIT N398 E851
Geo Unit

Soil Unit

Ap

Ic

A1

A2/AC

Ib

3AB

3Bt

Deweyville

Elevation

Debitage
(gr)

Bone
(gr)

FCR
(gr)

4Bt

Uniques
Perdiz proximal
(Lt Pre hist II)
Scallorn
(Lt Prehist I, bone awl)

1

100.15

324

23

0

2

100.05

428

27

0

3

99.95

267

51

0

4

99.85

328

7

0

5

99.75

572

40

0

6

99.65

377

32

432

7

99.55

296

3

179

8

99.45

664

42

0

9

99.35

738

30

0

10

99.25

424

258

63

11

99.15

354

39

451

12

99.05

1031

31

0

13

98.95

460

4

0

14

98.85

236

22

344

bone awl frag

15

98.75

362

21

421

pedernales, clearfork, bone
awl frag (mid arch)

16

98.65

284

15

234

17

98.55

875

60

893

18

98.45

176

4

455

19

98.35

121

7

523

20

98.25

157

7

426

21

98.15

305

7

171

22

98.05

438

5

199

23

97.95

247

5

254

turtleback scraper

24

97.85

289

0

153

Big Sandy (early arch

25

97.75

348

0

103

Clear Fork w/asphaltum,
Abasolo (early mid arch)

26

97.65

158

0

46

2Ab

3Ab

Ia

Level

preform, incised bone awl
frag

medial frag of lrg
triangular biface

Hoxie proximal (early
arch)

165

UNIT N398 E852
Geo Unit

Soil Unit
Ap
A1

Ic
A2/AC

Ib

2Ab

3Ab
3AB
Ia
3Bt

Deweyville

4Bt

Level

Elevation

Debitage
(gr)

Bone
(gr)

FCR
(gr)

1

100.15

414

73

329

2

100.05

241

27

0

3

99.95

111

31

123

4

99.85

161

15

464

5

99.75

268

29

267

6

99.65

320

23

1216

7

99.55

288

56

515

8

99.45

247

16

517

9

99.35

375

31

418

10

99.25

617

9

252

11

99.15

326

50

701

12

99.05

324

17

226

13

98.95

405

52

487

14

98.85

470

45

1351

15

98.75

329

13

198

16

98.65

167

7

198

17

98.55

329

10

461

18

98.45

276

1

223

19

98.35

269

6

388

20

98.25

480

2

1046

21

98.15

432

0

198

22

98.05

460

0

121

23

97.95

302

0

72

24

97.85

205

0

118

25

97.75

220

0

140

26

97.65

468

0

189

Uniques
whetstone

Perdiz (Lt Prehist II)

Deer ulna tool

gouge
lrg proximal biface
pandora proximal (midlate arch)

perforator drill

166

UNIT N397 E850
Geo Unit

Soil Unit

Ap

Ic
A1

A2/AC

Ib

Ia

Deweyville

2Ab

3AB

4Bt

Level

Elevation

Debitage
(gr)

Bone
(gr)

FCR
(gr)

Uniques

1

100.15

32

0

0

2

100.05

690

60

0

3

99.95

403

45

0

Perdiz (Lt prehist II)

4

99.85

420

110

6

Axtell (mid-lt arch)

5

99.75

601

30

0

Scallorn (Lt Prehist I)

6

99.65

445

65

25

Scallorn (Lt Prehist I)

7

99.55

433

28

41

8

99.45

363

20

6

Friday biface
Ensor (trans arch Lt
Prehist I)

9

99.35

296

20

49

10

99.25

456

34

836

11

99.15

444

34

25

12

99.05

917

90

2637

13

98.95

292

37

176

14

98.85

436

29

433

Clear Fork, bit tool

15

98.75

395

30

306

Core frag

16

98.65

311

13

382

incised bone-deer ulna

17

98.55

388

35

371

18

98.45

401

3

620

19

98.35

294

1

444

20

98.25

263

12

420

21

98.15

202

2

263

22

98.05

202

13

389

23

97.95

211

7

351

24

97.85

610

2

175

25

97.75

585

1

156

26

97.65

176

1

81

feature?

bone awl-2 pieces

Angostura proximal (Lt
Paleo)

167

UNIT N397 E851
Geo Unit

Soil Unit
Ap

A1
Ic

A2/AC

Ib

2Ab

3AB
Ia

3Bt
Deweyville

4Bt

Level

Elevation

Debitage
(gr)

Bone
(gr)

FCR
(gr)

1

100.15

185

6

0

2

100.05

371

16

34

3

99.95

462

36

84

4

99.85

375

31

23

5

99.75

397

40

91

6

99.65

291

54

434

7

99.55

284

25

605

8

99.45

309

39

278

9

99.35

507

30

754

10

99.25

470

36

241

11

99.15

587

43

602

12

99.05

202

2

177

13

98.95

483

52

400

14

98.85

314

28

586

15

98.75

161

5

437

16

98.65

298

12

454

17

98.55

580

10

1020

18

98.45

347

17

628

19

98.35

203

10

339

20

98.25

283

3

636

21

98.15

466

10

641

22

98.05

392

1

68

23

97.95

917

0

143

24

97.85

297

0

117

25

97.75

173

0

31

26

97.65

52

0

9

Uniques

Perdiz Lt Prehist II

Feature: hearth w. 30
stones

Tortuga (mid-arch)

Chopper

168

UNIT N397 E852
Geo Unit

Soil Unit
Ap

Ic

A1

A2/AC

Ib

2Ab

3AB
Ia

3Bt

Deweyville

4Bt

Level

Elevation

Debitage
(gr)

Bone
(gr)

FCR
(gr)

Uniques

1

100.15

147

2

12

2

100.05

331

34

257

3

99.95

264

28

456

4

99.85

365

32

393

5

99.75

330

20

593

6

99.65

310

36

218

7

99.55

216

32

303

8

99.45

422

35

606

9

99.35

300

31

283

10

99.25

661

20

335

11

99.15

478

20

445

12

99.05

325

22

213

biface/knife

13

98.95

434

22

427

Pandora mid-late arch

14

98.85

526

28

692

preform

15

98.75

478

12

901

16

98.65

263

14

962

17

98.55

131

4

498

18

98.45

242

6

388

19

98.35

381

4

823

Clear Fork (archaic)

20

98.25

296

20

2154

Biface-narrow w/bit

21

98.15

417

3

790

22

98.05

424

0

270

23

97.95

441

0

115

24

97.85

288

0

186

25

97.75

416

2

96

26

97.65

260

0

60

bone awl fragment

bone tool/ulna

Tortuga proximal (mid
arch)

Golondrina (lt paleo)
Hand Chopper

169

APPENDIX D
POLLEN ANALYSIS

For this report sediment samples from one excavation unit profile were analyzed
to assess the potential for pollen preservation in the Holocene sands mantling the
Deweyville Terrace. The following report details the archaeological and ecological
context the samples were taken from, the methods used to process the sediment samples
for pollen analysis, and the analyses of the pollen data. This report finds pollen
preservation at this site is very poor and the potential does not exist to recover pollen in
quantities necessary to make paleoclimatic interpretations.
Site Context
The McNeill-Gonzales site is located in the Floodplains and Low Terraces
ecological sub-region along the Guadalupe River and the modern vegetation is
dominated by deciduous hardwoods along the edge of the terrace and a mixture of
graminoids and forbs on the terrace tread (Griffith et al 2004). The deciduous species
observed in the immediate vicinity of the site are Quercus, Prosopis, Carya, Celtis,
Ehretria elliptica, and Ulmus. The flowering forbs are typically Asteraceae, Lupinus,
Urticia, Solanum, Castilleja, Argemone, and numerous unidentified graminoids. The
region is considered a warm temperate climate, with a mean rainfall of 965 mm and a
mean temperature of 21.2°C. The mean wettest month is September, and the mean driest
month is March. The average last freeze of the spring is March 6th and the average first
freeze of the fall is November 12th (Miller 1979).

170

Samples were collected from Excavation Area 4, which has the most complete
record of Holocene sedimentation with chronological control. The west wall of unit
N397 E850 was sampled on July 9, 2004. The profile was cleaned before collection, and
samples were taken from the top and bottom of each stratigraphic unit using a trowel
cleaned with distilled water between each sample. Seven samples were collected from
this profile. A surface sample was collected from random grab samples collected across
the surface of the site area on March 13, 2005. All eight samples were collected in
plastic ziplock bags and were left untreated (Table D-1).

Table D-1. Sample Localities and Numbering System
41VT141 Unit: N397 E850
West Wall Profile, *notes sample processed Fall 2004
Pollen
Sed Sample
Soil/Geo Unit
Elevation
Sample Designation
Designation
Number
4
Zn 1 Top
Ap-Unit Ic
99.95-100.00
1*
Zn 1 Bottom
A1-Unit Ic
99.71-99.76
2*
5
6
3*
7

Zn 3 Bottom
Zn 4 Top
Zn 4 Bottom
Zn 5 Bottom
Zn 6

AC/A2-Unit Ic
2Ab-Unit Ib
2Ab-Unit Ib
3AB-Unit Ia
3Bt-Unit Ia

99.00-99.05
98.80-98.85
98.41-98.46
98.05-98.00
97.83-97.80

Sample
Weight (g)
20.4
10
10
20.2
20.1
10
21.3

The sediments within the archaeological deposits are dark gray (10YR3/2)
organic rich loamy fine sands. The dark color may be due to decay of organics from the
increased biomass along the terrace edge, or the anthropic input of organics and human
wastes. Post-depositional disturbance by bio- and pedoturbation is common. There was

171

moderate to good recovery of bone and shell in the upper Holocene Unit Ic deposits, but
the abundance and presumably the preservation of these artifact types decreases with
depth. Charcoal was only observed in Unit Ic.
Expectations for Pollen Recovery
The expectations for recovering pollen from this context were low because the
environmental region and many variables at this site are not conducive to the
preservation of pollen. The Loma Sandia site (41LK28), which is found in a very
similar environmental and geological context as 41VT141, saw no recovery of pollen
from archaeological sediments (Jones and Sobolik 1995). Both the southern and eastern
portions of Texas are characterized as having poor pollen preservation, and there is an
almost nonexistent pollen record in this region (Bryant and Holloway 1985: 54, 60-61).
The frequent wetting and drying of the well drained sandy soils can cause the
degradation of pollen grains. Studies conducted by Holloway (1989) have shown that
repeated wetting and drying cycles, which occur in the warm-temperate climate of the
Gulf Coastal Plain, cause significant destruction of pollen through breakage, warping,
and corrosion of the pollen exine. Alkaline sediments, and soil formation processes such
as illuviation of clays and carbonates has the potential to damage pollen. There is the
potential for pollen recovery from high pH sediments, though pollen is typically in a
poor state of preservation (Bryant and Hall 1993). Though anthropogenic inputs to the
pollen record could contribute to the amount of pollen present at the site, deleterious
impacts of mechanical destruction by human activities should be considered as well.
Finally, biological activity is also an agent of pollen destruction. The relatively high

172

biomass along the terrace scarp, the warm temperatures, and moist climate are conducive
to the growth of bacteria and fungi, which have been shown to feed on pollen (Holloway
1989).
Processing Methods
Eight samples from the McNeil Gonzales site were processed. Seven samples
were selected to provide a representative sample of the potential for recovery of pollen
of each soil horizon and one surface sample was collected to provide data on the modern
pollen rain. Beginning on September 23, 2004 three samples were processed by the
author and Tim Riley. The remaining four samples were processed by author between
February 7 and 16, 2005. Samples were weighted before processing and two
Lycopodium 13,500 grain marker tablets were added to each sample. For the first three
samples 10 grams of sediment were processed. There was very minimal recovery of
pollen in these samples so it was decided to double the sample size in order to increase
the potential for pollen recovery. 30% HCl was added to each of the samples to dissolve
the Lycopodium tablets and carbonates. Additional water was added to dilute the HCl
and samples were then screened with 150 micron mesh screens. Samples were then
“swirled” to reduce the amount of larger silicates in the sample. The supernatant was
collected and the heavy fraction was discarded. The supernatants were allowed to settle
overnight and the water was suctioned off. Unfortunately after the water was sucked off
the samples they were allowed to dry out. The samples were probably desiccated for 4
hours, and desiccation for any period of time has the potential to degrade pollen. Due to
increased clay content samples 3 and 7 were sonicated with a small amount of soap to

173

disaggregate the fine clay sediments, which releases pollen that is potentially trapped in
the sediments. These samples were then repeatedly washed in water and centrifuged to
remove the soap from the samples. All of the samples were then treated with 48% HF to
dissolve the remaining silicates. A small amount of HF was added to each of the
samples, which were then allowed to sit overnight. Water was then added to the samples
to dilute the HF. The samples were washed three times and allowed to settle for three
hours between washes. The samples were then transferred to centrifuge tubes and water
with a small amount of 1% KOH was added to each sample. Samples were then
repeatedly washed and centrifuged, and then transferred to 12 mL centrifuge tubes. The
next stage of sample preparation was acetolysis to remove cellulose from the sample,
and the use of KOH to remove humic acids. The KOH step was used on samples 1-3,
but it was accidentally not conducted on samples 4-7. The acetolysis process consisted
of first adding glacial acetic acid to the sample, then centrifuging and decanting the
supernatant. Then 5 mL of the 9:1 acetic anhydride: sulfuric acid acetolysis mixture is
added to each of the samples. The samples were then placed in the heating block for 8
minutes, and were frequently stirred. This process broke down the cellulose molecules.
Glacial acetic acid is then added to stop the chemical reaction and the samples were
centrifuged. The samples were washed with water repeatedly and centrifuged with 95%
alcohol to drive out any water. Samples were then treated with the Zinc Bromide
Procedure to separate the pollen grains from any remaining minerals. This procedure is
predicated on the differences in specific gravity of pollen and minerals. A ZnBr2
solution of a specific gravity of 2.0 causes the lighter 1.5 specific gravity pollen to float

174

to the top of the tube and the heavier silicates to sink to the bottom. Approximately 8
mL of ZnBr2 are added to each sample, as well as a small amount of water to the top of
the sample. The samples were centrifuged for 8 minutes and then the water and pollen
that had risen to the top of the solution were collected with a pipette. 50 mL of alcohol
was added to this supernatant and then the samples were centrifuged down and the
alcohol supernatant was discarded. Water and one drop of red stain was added to each
sample to stain the pollen. This was centrifuged once to set the stain. The samples were
then transferred to 1 dram vials and centrifuged once more to separate the alcohol that
was used in the process of transferring the sample from the test tube to the dram vial
from the pollen. The alcohol was decanted and three drops of glycerol were added to
each sample as a substrate. The samples were then left on the hot plate overnight to
dissolve the remaining alcohol. Slides were made for each sample and were examined
using light microscopes at 400X power. Tallies of all pollen and Lycopodium tracer
spores were made, and digital photographs of representative pollen grains and
questionable pollen grains were taken. Pollen types were compared to type collections
at the Texas A&M Palynology Lab, Knapp’s guide (2000), and internet sources (Davis
2005).
Results
The results of the pollen count detailed in Table D-2 show a very poor recovery
of pollen from the archaeological samples. For the sake of time and due to the extremely
poor recovery it was decided to only count one slide for each of the samples. Sixteen
taxa were identified however the concentration values for the archaeological samples are

175

very low. Photographs identifying some of the taxa identified in the samples are found
in Figure D-1. While continuing to count more slides would probably increase the
number of taxa in the samples, the concentration values would still be too low to
consider these samples meaningful representations of paleoenvironments.
The surface sample had a very high percentage of Celtis, which may be a result
of the surface collection coinciding with its period of bloom. All of the taxa identified in
the surface sample are present in the area, except for Pinus. The pollen types identified
are all represented locally in the grass/forbs terrace tread and the riparian scarp of the
site area. Though Pinus is not present in the site area its presence is to be expected
considering it has such a wide area of dispersal and is grown ornamentally. The pollen
identified indicates a pollen spectrum not too different from the local vegetation, a
mixture of arboreal pollen associated with riparian environments, with grass and forbs
pollen from the open terrace tread and adjacent uplands.
The samples from the upper portion of the test unit (1 and 4) which correspond
Holocene Unit Ic (2,500 B.P. to present) have higher concentration values than the lower
deposits, though recovery was still very poor. Though there were a high number of
spores present in this sample, with the majority being Pucciniaceae sp. and an
unidentified Spheroid Dark Red Spore, the spores were not counted. These upper
samples were dirtier slides and Sample 1 still had a number of silicate grains, which
suggests the potential for error in processing. The number of spores decreased
dramatically with depth.

176

Table D-2. Pollen counts

41VT141 POLLEN COUNT
Pollen Taxa
Wind-Pollinated Types
Pinus
Populus
Salix
Celtis
Castanea
Fraxinus
Ulmus
POACEAE
ASTERACEAE (LS-type)
CHENO-AMS
Insect Pollinated Types

Sample #

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
0

0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0

2
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
2

0
3
0
0
1
0
0
1
2
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

2
0
1
97
2
1
8
15
42
8

ASTERACEAE (HS-type)
Prosopis
Ehretia

2
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
1
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

5

FABACEAE Mimosa-like

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

5

SOLANACEAE

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

Degraded Tricolporate
NO ID- Broken &
Unknown

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

10

8

0

0

13

2

2

1

16

21

2

3

19

14

2

1

214

10
99
275.7576

10
96
27.08333

10
60
65

20.4
298
40.63035

20.2
667
13.5081

20.1
365
3.543924

21.3
54
11.30238

20.1
35
3954.513

total pollen counted
weight of sample (g)
Lycopodium
Pollen Concentration/gram

surface

1

177

1.

2.

4.

5.

7.

10.

6.

8.

9.

Scale: 1 unit equals 40 microns

1. POACEAE 2. Pinus

3. Fraxinus

7. Castanea

9. ASTERACEAE (LS)

8. Salix

3

4. Solanaceae 5. Ulmus
10. Celtis

Figure D-1. Photographs of identified pollen types

6. Ehretia

178

The pollen recovery from the lowest parts of the site was practically nil. The
samples from the intermediate portion of the site (2, 5, and 6) correspond to the
Holocene Unit Ib (7,500-2,500 B.P.). These samples had a marked reduction in spores,
and it can be assumed that the barrage of post-depositional processes had destroyed
much of the pollen record. The deepest samples which correspond to Holocene Unit Ia
(10,000-7,500 B.P.) had only the most minimal amount of pollen recovered, and
considering the development of a weak illuvial horizon this unit has experienced more
pedogenesis and weathering than the upper deposits.
Conclusions
The analysis of sediment samples found the potential for pollen recovery is
extremely low, and future pollen analyses at this site are not recommended. The
environmental setting is clearly not conducive to pollen preservation, but that does not
discount the utility of this exercise because it serves as a model for pollen preservation
for similar sites located in sandy sediments along alluvial terraces of the Gulf Coastal
Plain. One can certainly not rule out the potential for pollen to have been lost during
processing, especially since the sample dried out before the HF treatment. In
conclusion, analysis of these samples tested and confirmed the hypothesis that sandy
open sites in humid-temperate environments have poor pollen preservation and are
poorly suited for pollen analysis.

179

References

Bryant Jr., V. B. and S. Hall
1993 Archaeological Palynology in the USA: A Critique. American Antiquity
58(2):277-286.
Bryant Jr., V. M. and R. G. Holloway
1985 A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the
Pollen Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American
Sediments, edited by V. M. Bryant, Jr. and R. G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American
Association of Stratigraphic Palynologists, Dallas, Texas.
Davis, O.
2005 Palynology at the University of Arizona. Electronic Document.
http://www.geo.arizona.edu/palynology/ accessed May 6, 2005.
Jones, J. G. and K. D. Sobolik
1995 Appendix E: Pollen Analysis. In Archeological Investigations at the Loma
Sandia Site (41LK28) Vol. 2. edited by A. J. Taylor and C. L. Highley, pp. 835838. Studies in Archeology 20.Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
Austin, Texas
Griffith, G.E., Bryce, S.A., Omernik, J.M., Comstock, J.A., Rogers, A.C., Harrison, B.,
Hatch, S.L., and Bezanson, D.
2004 Ecoregions of Texas U.S. Geological Survey, Reston, Virginia, (map scale
1:2,500,000). Electronic resource. http://www.epa.gov/wed/pages/ecoregions/
tx_eco.htm#Ecoregions%20denote accessed May 6, 2005.
Holloway, R. G.
1989 Experimental Mechanical Pollen Degradation and Its Application to
Quaternary Age Deposits. Texas Journal of Science 41:131-145.
Kapp, R.O. and O. Davis, J. E. King
2000. Guide to Pollen and Spores (2nd Edition). American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists, Dallas, Texas.
Miller, W. L.
1979 Soil Survey of Victoria County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Victoria, Texas.

180

Telfair II, R. C.
1999 Introduction: Ecological Regions of Texas: Description, Land Use, and
Wildlife. In Texas Wildlife Resources and Land Uses edited by R. C. Telfair II,
pp1-39. The University of Texas Press, Austin.

181

VITA

Michael John Aiuvalasit received his Bachelor of Arts Degree in archaeological
studies, anthropology, and history from The University of Texas at Austin in 2001.
During his time at UT he attended an archaeological field school in Belize and was an
assistant on a research project in Mexico directed by Dr. James Neely. Coursework in
geoarchaeology under Dr. Karl Butzer and fieldwork in Mexico along side Dr. Chris
Caran kindled his interest in geoarchaeology. After graduation he spent three years
working in cultural resource management for a number of private and university contract
archaeology firms in Texas and for the National Park Service in New Mexico. He
enrolled at Texas A&M University in the fall of 2003 and received his Masters of Arts
Degree in anthropology in May of 2006. During his time at Texas A&M he conducted
geoarchaeological research on a prehistoric hunter- gatherer site in Victoria Co., Texas;
large prehistoric water management features in the Tehuacan Valley, Puebla, Mexico;
and began a pilot study of gleaning environmental and geomorphic data from historical
documents of the Spanish mission period of Texas.
His research interests focus on geoarchaeological investigations, with specific
interests in archaeological site stratigraphy and modeling the distribution of
archaeological sites. He is conducting ongoing research in Texas and Mexico.
Mr. Aiuvalasit may be reached at 1901 Columbia Dr., Richardson, TX 75081.
His email address is michaelaiuvalasit@hotmail.com

