Taking On A
Texas-Sized
Project
Robert Drolet has examined more
than 50 sites during his long-term
investigation of the lower Nueces
River Valley in Texas. He’s made
some important and surprising
discoveries along the way.

By Richard A. Marini
38

winter • 2010-11

F

yards apart on a rise above the nearby Nueces River. Recent
rains triggered a mosquito population boom and the muggy
air is thick with the tangy smell of citronella candles. The
students were in the final week of the eight-week program
and, having lived and worked together for most of the summer, they developed an easy camaraderie, even going so
far as to tease Drolet (they call him Doctor Bob) about his
taciturn manner.
They worked at one of the three Late Prehistoric base
camps, known as NU-54, that have been uncovered in the valley. Each camp had easy access to river quarries, where the
natives gathered the raw materials they used to make tools.
Surrounding the camps were several smaller hunting camps
spread over the valley bottoms or along feeder streams.
Having accumulated large amounts of data, Drolet is able
to hypothesize about what life was like for the inhabitants
of the area over the millennia. He believes members of several extended families lived in the base camps, the largest of
which covered 10 acres. “We’ve found evidence that these
multiple households were occupied over several hundred
years, but we don’t know how big the individual households
were,” he said. “These households may not have even been
contemporaneous.The settlement probably grew over time.”
The camps were organized to support the natives’
hunter/gather economy. Here, everyone shared responsibility

John Hahn

or the past 11 summers, Robert Drolet,
an archaeologist at Texas A&M University–Corpus
Christi, has been excavating sites in the lower
Nueces River Valley in South Texas, collecting and
identifying artifacts left behind by the peoples who made
this area their home for almost three millennia. Dozens of
sites and thousands of artifacts—projectile points, scrapers, and the tools used to make them—have, like individual
pieces of a mosaic, created a surprising, even controversial
picture of what life was once like in this river valley.
Every summer since 2000, Drolet has run an archaeology field school, co-sponsored by the University and the Corpus Christi Museum of Science and History, during which an
ever-changing roster of students and volunteers learn basic
archaeological techniques. Early on, they completed a systematic site survey of a 37-square-mile portion of the valley
and, later, explored more than 50 habitation and quarry sites
along a nearly nine-mile stretch of the Nueces, which empties into the Gulf of Mexico. They’ve found evidence that
the area has been continuously populated from about 3,000
years ago through contact between the Native Americans
and Europeans in 1536, when the Spanish explorer Cabeza
de Vaca arrived in the valley.
On a hot and humid July morning, approximately a
dozen students worked at two excavation areas about 75

Bob Drolet (middle) leads a survey crew looking for evidence of sites. Red flagging is used to mark sites and surface artifacts.
The student on the left is carrying a machete that’s used to cut through heavy brush.

american archaeology

39

to softballs. Drolet’s teams found manufacturing debris that
indicated the natives would carefully inspect these cobbles,
flaking off a piece or two, and take the most promising back
to the camps to be worked while discarding the others.

T

for obtaining and preparing food, manufacturing tools,
making pottery—the essential activities of daily survival. “I
wouldn’t call it a ‘hard life,’ at least not as measured by the
times,” said Drolet, his grey hair sticking out from beneath
a worn baseball cap, his weathered face a testament to his
years as a field archaeologist.“When you live this way beginning as a young child, it becomes a lifestyle. It’s how you
survived.”
Compared to deposits found in the base camps, those
excavated at the hunting camps were shallower and yielded
fewer items, which consisted primarily of basic tools such as
knives and scrapers, and weapons, such as bi-faces and projectile points. “This is where the hunters stayed when they
were out searching for food,” he said. “They weren’t here
often and they probably didn’t stay long, at least compared
to the base camps, which were inhabited full time.”
The researchers have also found the raw material used
to make arrow points at these temporary camps, suggesting
the hunting parties were capable of making replacements
if the points they brought from the base camp were lost
or broken. Drolet believes the natives butchered their kills
either at the hunting camps or in the field because only postcranial bones (i.e. everything but the skull) have been found
at the base camps.
The tools the natives used for hunting and food preparation came from the gravel deposits found along large bends
of the Nueces. The cobbles obtained from these lithic quarries are mostly chert, and they range in size from pebbles

40

ROBERT DROLET

Students excavate and record stratigraphic profiles of a large
trench at the Late Prehistoric base camp called NU-54.

he Nueces Valley is not much more than a
shallow depression in the surrounding countryside.
Until Drolet arrived in the late 1990s, most of the
archaeological work previously done in South Texas focused
on the coastal habitations. The valley, Drolet said, was “ripe
for study.”
He has long been interested in studying settlement patterns to understand why people chose to live where they
did.“If you study any kind of settlement pattern, even today,
it’s based on the needs of people and their everyday life,” he
said. “Where are the natural resources, where do the homes
go, where is food prepared? It wasn’t any different in prehistoric times.”
Drolet previously worked in South America where, he
noted, population growth resulted in more complex, hierarchical settlements. There, as well as in other places in the
New World, those with the greatest status lived in the largest
homes. Things were different in the South Nueces River Valley.The living areas he’s found suggest an egalitarian society,
one without chiefs or social rank; where living quarters were
shared and everyone did everything, from making tools to
preparing food. “In each base camp we find similar assemblages,” he said. “This leads us to believe that everybody
was making the same tools, the same pottery. They hadn’t
reached a level of specialization we’ve seen elsewhere.”
Unlike other hunter-gatherer societies, however, the
people of the Nueces River Valley were not nomads. Instead
they were stationary, indicating a more complex level of
organization than that of typical hunter-gatherer societies.
“Between the Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods, the
only real difference in settlement patterns is that the base
camps got bigger,” Drolet said. “But all the other river valleys in the region were already occupied, so there was no
place else for them to go. So they were essentially forced to
become sedentary.”

These sherds of Mexican galera ware were recovered from NU-54.

winter • 2010-11

ROBERT DROLET

Students standing waist-deep in the Nueces River gently submerge fine mesh screens filled with excavated dirt. The water separates tiny
items such as seed and charcoal remains, which float, from the heavier dirt, which sinks.

To survive, they would have needed year-round
resources, and analysis of several soil samples taken from the
NU-54 site suggests its inhabitants could have been growing corn. “There were a half dozen or so carbonized corn
kernels in the samples,” Drolet said. In recent history, corn
has not been cultivated in the area where the kernels were
found, and they could have come from elsewhere via trade.
But Drolet believes corn could have been cultivated there
centuries ago, perhaps down near the river. “Even though
hunter-gatherers weren’t supposed to have grown corn,
why couldn’t they have?” he said. “Corn isn’t difficult to
grow, it takes only three months to harvest and, if the crop
fails, they’re not out anything.”
Because of disease and other factors, the Late Prehistoric peoples disappeared by the 1820s, so there’s no ethnographic record to support Drolet’s contention. But other
evidence suggests the natives knew enough to modify their
environment and increase their chances of survival. For
example, French and Spanish records tell of the natives using
fire to clear the valley of scrub and expand the grasslands,
which attracted deer, bison, and other large game. Yet they
conserved the forests that hug the meandering Nueces
because these were rich sources of food, such as grapes and
berries. “Is that agriculture? Is it animal husbandry?” asked
Drolet. “I don’t know, but we have to accept some level of
environmental intelligence among these people.”

american archaeology

P

erhaps the project’s biggest mystery is
the complete absence of human remains at any of the
excavated sites. According to local lore, later historic
groups practiced cannibalism, but Drolet believes that if that
were true, it’s likely human remains would have been found
at the camps. He doesn’t think the human bones decomposed because animal bones from the same time periods
have been found. At NU-54, for example, his team uncovered
long mammal bones that were burned and crushed, and Drolet’s theorizes the natives were processing grease from the
bones and using it for cooking and preparing hides. He once
thought they might have added bone temper—a graham
cracker crumb-like substance made from the pulverized
bone shafts—to their pottery to make it stronger. But recent
examinations of more than 400 shards collected over three
years found they used river gravel instead.
Drolet’s most surprising discovery took place at NU-54,
which is believed to be the site of Fort Lipantitlán, a Mexican fort built sometime during the 1830s. No remains of the
fort have been found. Drolet has uncovered mostly pre-fort
material, indicating, as might be expected, that the area was
inhabited long before the Spanish arrived.
What’s surprising, however, is that Drolet’s teams found
Spanish, Mexican, and native artifacts in the same stratigraphic level, suggesting that these groups co-existed for at
least several decades. (Texas was then part of Mexico, which

41

guy moro

This painting, which is based on data uncovered from a Late Prehistoric site known as SP-220, shows village residents performing various chores.

gained its independence from Spain in 1821.) “Some say
flooding caused this mixing, but this site is on a ridge and
there’s no evidence—no flood lenses of sand and silt—to
support that claim,” he said. “And people who’ve lived here
for decades say they’ve never seen this area flooded.”
If Drolet is right, this would make the area the first
recorded instance of Europeans and Late Prehistoric people
living together peacefully, other than in the Spanish missions
located throughout the area.“But the Native Americans were
forced into the missions,” he said. “They were being acculturated and made into Christians. Here, the Indians came
first and the Spanish arrived later to trade. That’s an exciting

42

situation to contemplate.”
Drolet, who has yet to publish these findings, thinks
some historians, as well as locals who prefer the historical
emphasis be on the fort itself, will dispute them.“It’s like the
Native Americans are not part of the cultural history,” said
Drolet. “That’s a common attitude in the U.S. But the fort is
the end of the story, not the beginning.”

O

ne evening, shortly after the fieldwork ended, the students gathered in the local community center to present their findings. In order
to “graduate” from the field school, they had to present a

winter • 2010-11

ROBERT DROLET

scientific paper exploring a topic
(these ranged from faunal analysis
to lithic manufacturing to pottery
remains) related to the project.
The large room there served as the
group’s after-hours gathering center,
where they ate dinners provided
by the ladies of the nearby Catholic church and discussed the day’s
findings.
Most of the attendees were
friends and family, but several area
residents were also there. This
community has embraced Drolet’s
work: Landowners allowed his crew
onto their properties to survey and
excavate. A rancher let them use a
restored field house as their own
base camp. Another loaned Drolet
a pickup to shuttle students around
the valley.
Several years ago, when Texas
Governor Rick Perry proposed
building a 4,000-mile network of
highways, rail lines and utility rightof-ways he called the Trans-Texas
Corridor, residents opposed to the
plan asked Drolet to testify about
how one portion of the network
would destroy many of the archaeological sites in the area. The project
has since been scaled down due to
such vociferous public criticism.
The crew had to bail out a flooded excavation unit at SP-220 during a heavy rain in 2008.
The student presentations were
put together in little more than a week—the final touches Drolet’s introduction. But the students acquitted themselves
of several, in fact, were hurriedly made between dinner and well, demonstrating a thorough knowledge of their findings
and impressing with their poise.
As for Drolet, he’s decided this past field school will
be the last of the project. He’s thankful for having had the
freedom to do the kind of long-term, wide-ranging research
that is becoming increasingly rare in archaeology because
of its expense, and the institutional and public support it
requires.
Though the fieldwork is done, analysis of this summer’s
data remains to be completed, and Drolet thinks it’s time
to publish his findings and see how they hold up to professional scrutiny. He hopes to write a book about his research,
using the various papers he’s presented at professional
conferences over the years. Drolet suspects his publications
will generate more questions that will in turn spur further
research in the region. He may have stopped digging, but
Drolet acknowledged that the investigation of the valley will
“never be over.”
A group of students sort, clean, and catalogue faunal remains
and lithic debitage from NU-54.

american archaeology

RICHARD A. MARINI is a health and medical reporter
for the San Antonio Express-News.
43

