PASTIMES
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archeological Society
Volume Thirty Nine, Number Four, April, 2019

President
Veronica Arias
Vice president
Scott Brosowske
Secretary
Andy Burchard
Miranda Bible
Treasurer
Pam Allison
Publications
Rolla Shaller

Newsletter Editor
Beryl C. Hughes

Beryl C. Hughes

So keep on looking for the bluebird,
And listening for his song,
Whenever April Showers come along.

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
From the Editor’s Desk

2a

Minutes of the Last Meeting

3

Program Information:

4

Upcoming Events

5

Courthouses of Texas

6

TAS Field School

7-8

From the Editor’s Desk
Had a great time at SWFAS this year. The facilities at Midland
College were well-planned, with video/sound systems, and
lunch served on campus.
I’m not giving free advertising exactly (???)but I must say that I
was in NYC last June. My hotel room there could have fit in the
closet of the one in Midland. And besides, the NYC hostel
charged barely twice as much!
We had a lot of excellent speakers, including Chris Lintz, who
raised an interesting question: how did some of the walls at Alibates stand so long?
For the answer, I invite you to tour Jordan, and nearby areas,
where 2,000-year-old Graeco-Roman columns are still standing.
You can see from the photo that these columns are not just one
massive stone. Rather, they are constructed in sections, and each
section, top and bottom, is slightly concave, leaving a little space
between them.
When earthquakes occur, each column can shift without falling
down.
At Alibates, the foundations were slab-and-rubble. Like the sectioned columns, this kind
of foundation allows for slight movement when we have a tremor, thus saving the walls
from collapsing.
Also, the walls were stuccoed inside and out with a mixture of red clay and caliche, giving
additional stability.
2

PANHANDLE ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Minutes of March 20, 2019
The meeting was called to order by Paul Katz at 7:00 p.m. in the Amarillo Downtown Library.
There were 13 persons in attendance.
PROGRAM: The program for the evening was presented by Dakota Larrick, Anthropology Graduate Student at the
University of Oklahoma. Her presentation was entitled, “Interpreting Paleoindian Lifeways in the Bull Creek Valley”.
Dakota described ongoing archeological work at two Paleoindian sites in western Beaver County (Oklahoma Panhandle).
The Bull Creek Camp site and the Ravenscroft Bison Kill site have been dated to 10,400 years ago. One occupation level
at Bull Creek had animal remains from at least 19 different species. The bison bone beds at Ravenscroft indicate multiple
kill events in that former dead-end arroyo. There is evidence of fetal bison harvesting, possibly for soup or hide purposes. There is also evidence of seasonal variation in lithic materials: quartzite in the spring (sourced from the Black Mesa
area to the west), and Alibates in the summer/fall (sourced from our Canadian River area to the south). Dakota invited
PAS members to visit the sites when excavations resume this summer.
MINUTES: The minutes from the previous meeting (Feb. 20, 2019) were accepted as printed in the PASTIMES newsletter – with the following correction: the proper email address for Gen Freix is gfreix3@gmail.com (Gen was the TAS
person requesting a volunteer from PAS to Co-chair the Silent Auction event at the TAS Annual Meeting this October).
TREASURER’S REPORT: Treasurer Pam Allison reported a current balance of $2558.44 in the regular account.
PUBLICATIONS REPORT: Rolla Shaller reported ending February 2019 balances of $2,446.87 in the Money Market
Account, and $5,185.50 in the Certificate of Deposit.

OLD BUSINESS:
Science Day at Lamar Elementary will be all day on May 17. PAS members can volunteer to introduce Lamar students
to Archeology with a presentation and hands-on activities. Rock Art or Ledger Art will likely be the activities this year.
Contact Paul Katz by email (katzes-priam@msn.com ) if you wish to participate in this event.
NEW BUSINESS:
Beryl Hughes will end her tenure as PASTIMES Newsletter Editor with the May edition. A volunteer from the PAS
membership is needed to fill this role beginning in September.
The issue was raised whether PAS should offer to host the 2020 Annual Symposium of the Southwest Federation of Archeological Societies. A motion to do so was made by Beryl Hughes and seconded by Rolla Shaller, followed by unanimous approval of the attendees. This information will be conveyed to SWFAS at the upcoming March 30 meeting.

A spreadsheet was passed around for PAS members to update their contact information. After revisions are completed,
the member list will be distributed.
Other pending events were mentioned as follows:
The upcoming 2019 Southwest Federation Meeting is March 30 in Midland at Midland College.
The West Texas Historical Association will hold their 96th Annual Conference in Canyon, Texas on April 12&13. All
sessions will be in “Old Main” on the WT Campus.
The 2019 Stone Age Fair in Perryton is scheduled for Saturday, April 27.
The meeting adjourned at 8:10 p.m.
Respectfully submitted,
Andy Burcham, Secretary

3

Bonnie Pitblado

Title: Peopling of the New World:
Central Controversies of the 21st Century

Abstract: Dr. Pitblado's talk will explore three of the major de-

bates currently driving the field of the peopling of the New
World. She will first discuss why 35 genera of megafauna (in
North America alone) went extinct at the end of the Ice Age,
focusing in particular on the roles that climate change and (or)
humans played in the extinction process. Next, she will identify
and evaluate the route or routes colonizing people followed to
reach the Pleistocene Americas. Finally, she will touch on the
timing of the initial peopling of the New World. The presentation is designed to welcome interaction with the audience, to help

keep everyone awake after dinner!

Bio: Dr. Bonnie Pitblado is the Robert E. and Virginia Bell Endowed Professor of Anthropology at the University of
Oklahoma, a position she has held since 2012. Her research interests focus on the peopling of the New World more than
13,000 years ago, and most especially on the initial human occupation of the Rocky Mountains. She recently initiated a
complementary research program in Oklahoma, which she and her co-principal investigators have dubbed
"GOFAR" (short for "Gang of Oklahoman First Americans Researchers"). That new research agenda focuses for
now on the high(ish) country of eastern Oklahoma, although over time it may expand to include work in each of Oklahoma's six (!) mountainous regions. Most importantly from her perspective, Dr. Pitblado has had a career-long passion for
public archaeology. She directed the Utah State University Museum of Anthropology for a decade, and two years ago
she founded the Oklahoma Public Archaeology Network (OKPAN). OKPAN offers a variety of publicoriented programs (visit okpan.org for details) and has an active presence on Facebook and Twitter. She encourages
everyone to follow the organization on the social media platform of their choice.

4

Upcoming Events
April 17

7:00 p.m.
5:30 p.m.

Regular meeting, PAS. Amarillo Public Library, Downtown Branch, Upstairs.
Please join us for our pre-meeting dinner, Napoli’s, 700 So. Taylor.

April 27

10:00a.m.-5:00 p.m.

May 17, all day

2019 Stone Age Fair, Perryton.

Lamar Elementary School Introduce students to archaeology.

Email Paul Katz katzes-priam@msn.com if you can help.
June 8-15

TAS Field School, Palo Duro Canyon

July 15-16-17

Canyonlands: Trip to Big Bend, three nights. Rick Day, Richard Galle, Carol
Campbell, and Ellen Fowlkes have visited the park if you have questions.

October 11-13

TAS Annual Meeting, Amarillo.

October 16-19

Plains Anthropological Society conference, Bloomington, Indiana
SWFAS will be here next year. Watch for details.

This is what happens when
archaeologists learn to read!

If that’s the way they’re
gonna act, I say keep
‘em outa Palo Duro
Canyon!

5

THE FAMOUS COUNTY COURTHOUSES OF TEXAS
DEAF SMITH COUNTY
County Seat: HEREFORD

Erastus “Deaf” Smith”
Born: Apr 19, 1787 · Dutchess County, NY
Died: Nov 30, 1837 · Richmond, TX

Deaf Smith county was created in 1876, and formally organized in 1890. There was a dispute as to whether the county
seat would be Ayr or Grenada, later LaPlata. The first courthouse was a two-story frame structure, which was still standing at Hereford as late as 1970.
From 1891 to 1894 the area around La Plata suffered a
drought, which made farming and ranching almost impossible. Also disaster struck in February 1897, when the temperature stayed below freezing for three weeks. More than half
the population moved away.
In 1899, the railroad came, and residents loaded up the courthouse, the jail, and nine houses on wagons and moved. A
new town, originally Blue Water, later Hereford, was formed
and became the county seat. The present courthouse, of brick
and faced with white Georgia marble, was built in 1910. It is
one of only two such structures in the country.
Ranchers L. R. Bradley and G. R. (Rat) Jowell brought the
famous Hereford cattle to the area, and Deaf Smith County
became known as the Hereford capital of the world.

An illness left him partially deaf. He could hear sounds
but couldn’t follow conversation. When someone
spoke to him, he would touch his lips and walk away.
Married to a Tejana, with four children, he was fluent
in Spanish, both linguistically and culturally, allowing
him to serve as spy and courier. His biography reads
almost like a day-to-day account of the Texas Revolution. He participated in practically every famous encounter with the Mexican armies. He carried Travis’
letter from the Alamo and escorted Susanna Dickinson
to Sam Houston; reported Santa Anna’s position to
Houston and carried Santa Anna’s order of retreat to
Filisola; captured Cos; destroyed Vince’s Bridge;
formed a company of Texas Rangers at Laredo.
When he died, at the age of fifty,
The Houston Telegraph, draped in mourning
and announcing his death, said: “This singular
individual was one whose name bears with it
more respect than sounding titles. Major,
Colonel, General, sink into insignificance before the simple name of Deaf Smith.”
At the Episcopal Churchyard in Richmond, Texas, a
marker says, “Deaf Smith, the Texas Spy, died Nov.
30, 1837. “ His actual gravesite is unknown.
It is believed that Smith was the person who first introduced Hereford cattle to Texas, bringing them from
Louisiana to his headquarters in San Antonio.
In our hyper-sensitive time, newcomers are sometimes
confused by billboards in Hereford urging everyone to

Support the Whitefaces!

6

7

8

