-------------

A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY
OF THE EVEREST MINERALS CORPORATION
WEST MT. LUCAS PROJECT
Live Oak County, Texas

Technical Bulletin No. 67

David G.

Principal Investigator:

Robinson

Solveig A. Turpin

A report submitted to Everest Minerals Corporation
by
Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
November, 1983

---------_._-------­

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract . . . .

i;

Acknowledgements

iii

Introduction . .

1

Environmental Background

1

Cultural Background

4

Previous Work

8

Field Procedures

10

Results

11

Summary and Recommendations

13

References Cited . . . . .

16
LIST OF FIGURES

Fi gure 1.

Project and Site Location Map .

2

ABSTRACT
On October 31, 1983 and November 1, 1983, the Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, conducted a cultural
resource survey of selected portions of the
Everest
Minerals
Corporation West Mt.
Lucas Project in Live Oak County, Texas. The
surveyed portions will be affected by expansion of an existing
percolation method uranium mine, and the cultural resources survey was
performed as an aid to planning by Everest
Minerals.
Three
prehistoric sites were found in the upland physiographic lone. The
sites may have served lithic resource procurement, stone toolmaking
and hunting lookout functions, but the sites are insignificant
according
to
all
state
and
National
Register
criteria.
Recommendations for further testing or mitigation of these sites are
therefore unwarranted.

- - ----

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Several individuals deserve thanks for their contributions to
this project. The endeavor was directed and guided from beginning to
end by the Principal Investigator, Dr. Solveig A. Turpin. The field
crew member, David O. Brown, gave generously of his field expertise,
his understanding of physiographic zonation and site classification,
and his knowledge of the finest cafes in South Texas. Alan Eggleston
of Eggleston, Holmes and Associates provided much information about
the project and the survey area. Carol Fabac edited the manuscript,
prepared its publication and drafted the figure, assisted by Abby
Treece and Deborah Smith. Thanks to all of these people.

--

-------------------------

Page 1

INTRODUCTION
On October 31 and November 1, 1983, the Texas Archeological
Survey (TAS), The University of Texas at Austin, conducted a cultural
resource survey of selected portions of the proposed Everest Minerals
Lucas Project on the Twin Oak Ranch, Live Oak
Corporation West Mt.
County, Texas (Fig. 1). The project is an expansion of an existing
percolation method uranium mine, operating under a Texas Department of
The areas
Health permit on the adjacent East Mount Lucas tract.
selected for intensive cultural resources survey, in anticipation of a
request for permit extension, include four identified uranium bodies,
two in the existing permit area and two in the proposed expansion, and
the location of a satellite processing plant. TAS staff archeologists
David G.
Robinson and David O. Brown conducted the survey. TAS
Assistant Director, Solveig A.
Turpin,
served
as
principal
investigator.
The objectives of this survey, formulated
Texas Historical Commission guidelines, were to:

in

accordance with

1) locate and describe any prehistoric or historic cultural
resources which might exist within the study area;
2) evaluate the
resources·
archeological
and
historical
significance,
potential
and
possible
National
Register
el igibil ity;
3) recommend to the sponsor means to avoid or lessen any
disturbance or destruction of the identified cultural resources;
and
4) recommend
further
cultural
resource
evaluations
and
interpretations beyond those feasible by this study.
The survey was conducted as a contribution to planning by Everest
Minerals but was performed to comply with the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966 and its implementing regulations (36CFR800)
and to guidelines set forth by the Texas Historical Commission for
intensive survey in conformance with the Texas State Surface Mining
Criteria set forth by the Council of Texas Archeologists and
Act.
endorsed by the Texas Antiquities Committee are also an acknowledged
standard to be met in assessment of cultural resources.
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
The Everest Minerals West Mt.
Lucas Project is located in
southeastern Live Oak County, in the Nueces River Basin (Fig. 1).
The area lies on the Rio Grande Plain, part of Fenneman·s (1938) West
Gulf Coastal Plain Province. The landscape displays a gently rolling
topography divided into stream flood plains, lower slopes above the
streams, and upper slopes on stream drainage divides. The survey plot
ranges in elevation from 100 to 200 ft AMSL and includes the stream

o

2
miles

A rcheological Site
Existing Permit Area
Extension

.. """...\.....-........'"
Long HOllO.;;...,..··\.....

:-......•_.

.

"'"'\., ..-.....,./f
28110

Ramerina Creek

. . . . . . . ,/'...-'.. .,..,.-. . . . .
'"

Figure 1.

J.r·..."

/...,./

"

;'/;.

Mt. Lu~as Project Area and Site Location Map.
preceded by 41 LK.

All site numbers are

Page 3

flood plain, lower slopes and upper stream divide slope topographic
zones. The Nueces River, drowned here in the upper reaches of Lake
Corpus Christi, borders the project area on the east. The Nueces and
the other major rivers of the region, the Atascosa and Frio. flow
through broad valleys bordered in places by ancient stream terrace
remnants.
The town of Three Rivers, northwest of the project area, has a
mean annual precipitaion of 26 inches (U.S.Army Corps of Engineers
1975). Rainfall maxima in May and September are the result of
convective thunderstorms formed by the convergence of dry. cool air
masses from the north and warm, moist air masses from the Gulf of
Mexico (Carr 1967:8, 11). The fall hurricane season sometimes brings
extremely heavy rains.
Geologic formations in Live Oak County range in age from the
Eocene to the Holocene. These sedimentary formations were formed by
major depositional events brought about by structural changes and
subsidence of the coastal plain.
The Eocene left the interbedded
sands, muds and impure lignite of the Jackson Group (Eargle, Hinds and
Weeks 1973).
These are overlain by the Oligocene Fayette and Frio
clays. The Miocene-aged Catahoula Formation lies unconformably on
these formations. The Miocene also saw the deposition of the Oakville
sandstone on the Catahoula, the Oakville overlain in turn by the
Fleming Formation's clays and sandstones. The Goliad Formation of
clay. sands and sandstone was deposited on these formations in the
Pliocene;
late in that period the chert, quartzite and silicified
wood Uvalde gravels were also deposited. In Pleistocene and Holocene
times, valley incision and sea level fluctuations combined to create
the existing coastal plain topography (Bureau of Economic Geology
1976).
The project area lies on two formations, the
Recent or
Pleistocene Deweyville Formation on the eastern one-quarter of the
lease, and
the
Pliocene Goliad
Formation
on
the western
three-quarters.
Recent alluvium is localized in the lower stretches
of the area's intermittent stream drainages and along the shores of
Lake Corpus Christi, formerly the Nueces riverbank and natural levees.
Uvalde gravel scatters are found on upper stream divide drainage
slopes. The Goliad Formation consists of clay, sand, sandstone, marl.
caliche, limestone and conglomerate, its clay commonly light shades of
The
pink or green, locally containing calcareous concretions.
conglomerate is of black chert and dark siliceous granules and pebbles
The sandstone and conglomerate is locally
in a caliche matrix.
well-bedded while the marl and limestone is poorly bedded or massive.
The Deweyville Formation of the project's eastern one-quarter
consists of sand, silt, clay and gravel locally indurated with
caliche. These deposits exist in the forms of point bars, natural
levees,
stream channels and sand dune depOSits on a surface
characterized by relict meanders of much larger radius of curvature
than those of present streams. In the project area's vicinity, the

Page 4
Deweyville is an average of 10 ft above modern flood plains (Bureau of
Economic Geology 1975).
The survey area lies in Blair's (1950) Tamaulipan
biotic
province, described as a savannah of grasses and mesquite (Prosopis
sp.), and Tharp (1939) characterized the area as a mesquite-chapparral
region.
Gould (1969) classified it simply as the South Texas Plains.
The region originally gave rise to a savannah-type successional
climax, or optimal plant community steady-state, with dense forest
belts in the major river valleys, but long term historic grazing and
other factors have caused an environment change which permits a modern
climax situation of brush country, or brasada.
Several species of
mesquite dominate this floral setting, with competition from prickly
pear cactus (Opuntia sp.). Live oaks (Quercus virginiana) grow along
rivers and intermittent streams. AcaCia, mimosa (Acacia sp.), white
brush (Lippia ligustruia), black brush (Acacia rigidula), ceniza
(Atriplex canescens), catclaw (Acacia sp.), horse crippler cactus
(Echinocactus horizonthalonius), and a few yucca (Yucca sp.) flourish
in the brush country (Blair 1950; Gould 1969; Tharp 1939).
Eggleston, Holmes and Associates,
Inc.,
have
identified
vegetation assemblages on the Mt. Lucas leases. These assemblages
describe the current floral setting of the survey and correspond to a
combination of geomorphology and modern land use.
The pasture
category includes bermuda grass (Cynodon dactylon) , buffalograss
(Buchloe dactyloides) and hooded windmill grass (Chloris cucullata).
The shrub bottomland zone is typified by huisache (Acacia farnesiana),
blue sage (Salvia azurea), Texas perSimmon (Diospyros texana) and
prickly pear. The upland shrub zone is typical brasada of guajillo
(Acacia berlandieri), black brush and ceniza. Woodlands are dominated
by mesquite, huisache and some live oaks, and cropland is usually
covered with bermuda grass (Eggleston, Holmes and Associates 1983).
Blair's (1950) Tamaulipan province includes at least 61 species
of mammals, 36 snakes, 19 lizards, two land turtles, three urodeles
(amphibians with tails through life) and 19 anurans (amphibians
without tails in adult life). Whitetailed deer, armadillos, coyotes,
foxes, squirrels, ground squirrels, cottontail rabbits, jackrabbits,
raccoons, oppossums and skunks can be found in the area. Alligators
have recently expanded their range into the region.
There are wild
turkeys, bobwhite quail, mourning doves, whitewinged doves and various
birds of prey (Blair 1950:103-105; 1952).
CULTURAL BACKGROUND
The culture-historical sequence of the Lower Gulf Coastal Plain
of South Texas and Live Oak County has four cultural divisions: the
Paleoindian stage (ca. 10,000 to 7000 B.C.), the Archaic stage (7000
B.C.
to A.D. 1200), the Late Prehistoric stage (A.D. 1200 to 1528)
and Historic stage (A.D. 1528 to present). These stages have been
defined on the bases of subsistence strategies, artifacts and
geographic associations.
The Historic period, additionally,
is
defined by the keeping of written records.

Page 5
The Paleoindian stage began with the arrival of North America1s
first inhabitants, who spread rapidly to all ice-free regions of the
continent. These people practiced nonspecialized gathering strategies
and the hunting of Pleistocene megafauna such as mammoth and mastodon
(Hester 1976b:3-4; Shafer and Baxter 1975:11). Major time-diagnostic
Paleoindian
artifacts are stone tools, notably Clovis, Folsom,
Scottsbluff, Plainview, Meserve and San Patrice projectile point
types.
By 7000 B.C., subsistence strategies had become regionalized and
based on diversified hunting and gathering; these changes define the
Archaic stage.
In South Texas,
two major Archaic cultural
specializations are recognized, an inland savannah and a coastal
maritime adaptation (Hester 1971:5;
1976a).
Archaic stage traits
include several diagnostic lithic assemblages and cultural features
such as
hearths,
burials,
pits,
middens
and
burned
rock
concentrations.
The Archaic stage ended about A.D. 1200 with the beginning of
the Late Prehistoric, defined by technological innovations applied to
continuing Archaic subsistence
strategies.
Principally,
these
innovations were the adoption of the bow and arrow and the use of
pottery. Late Prehistoric pottery in interior South Texas was a
coasta 1 pottery, Rockport Ware, also
bone-tempered
p1ai nware;
contained bone temper but had ochre and asphaltum decorated varieties.
The Historic period began in A.D. 1528 with Cabeza de Vaca1s
transit of South Texas. Indians of the Coahuiltecan linguistic group
lived in the region and were divided into hundreds of discrete bands.
They pursued ways of life persisting from the Archaic and Late
Prehistoric stages and were semi-nomadic,
inhabiting
temporary
villages usually located near streams, and employed hunting and
gathering subsistence strategies.
They were
patrilineal
and
patrilocal, with inheritance through the male line. Their society was
egalitarian, in which social status was earned. not inherited (Lynn,
Fox and OIMalley 1977:Table 3, 28-29). In the upper coastal area of
the region, the territories of the Karankawas and Tonkawas bordered
that of the Coahuiltecans.
One of the better-recorded South Texas groups, the Mariames,
ranged in this cultural border zone along the Guadalupe River during
the fall, winter and spring. They are reported by Campbell (1983:351)
to have migrated in the summer as far as 80 miles southwestward to
tracts of fruit-bearing prickly pear cactus in the region west of
Corpus Christi Bay.
This seasonal territory included the present
project area.
The Guadalupe River region and the inland plain
constituted the two poles of the Mariame1s bipolar seasonal territory.
The entire Mariame band of perhaps 200 individuals usually
resided in a single community of approximately 40 huts. These
shelters were constructed on a round floor plan with a domed frame of
four poles, each bent into a U-shape with both ends implanted in the
ground. This frame was then covered with mats.
The huts were

Page 6
dismantled for transport on the seasonal march. The Mariames employed
food
preservation
grinding and pulverizing as their principal
technique.
Arrows were originally tipped with chert and later with
iron.
Knives, scrapers and hammers were worked chert (Newcomb
1961:63-64).
Although unreported, the inland availability of needed
tool-flaking stone also may have spurred the summer migration.
Flintknappers could gain workable stone by direct acquisition from
Uvalde gravel outcrops on stream divide hillslopes and use the
resulting tools on the Guadalupe River or trade the stone with other
groups on the stone-deficient coastal lowland.
The pottery of the
preceding Late Prehistoric period was apparently unknown to the
Mariames and the Coahuiltecans living north and east of the Rio
Grande.
The Mariames ' ceremonial cycle climaxed in the summer prickly
pear exploiting season with mitotes, or all-night feasts and dances
Often
fueled by peyote and a mescal-laced drink named mesguitamal.
other bands were invited to a mitote, which thus became a medium for
much information exchange, socializing and trade (Newcomb 1961:54-55).
Inter-band mitotes were a loosely organized form of periodic band
aggregation, a precursor of more complex social organizations never
developed by the Coahuiltecans and their South Texas contemporaries.
These facts are pertinent to archeology in that they provide
clues to the identification of Coahuiltecan sites, as yet poorly
recognized. They also suggest research directions, especially the
investigation
of Coahuiltecan time depth, settlement patterns,
seasonality, and the identification of mitote camps. These and other
research
suggestions are
summarized
in
the conclusions and
recommendations section.
The Historic stage was one of stress and displacement of the
Coahuiltecans who were profoundly affected by the colonizing and
missionizing Spanish from the south and by the raiding Lipan Apaches
from the north.
The result was the eventual disappearance of the
long-standing aboriginal cultures of South Texas.
Of the similarly
ill-fated contemporary Karankawas, Newcomb (1961:81) wrote a fitting
epitaph:
The Karankawas of the Texas Gulf Coast are gone, yet they
will
forever stir our imaginations.
Perhaps this is
because, unlike ourselves, they faced daily and directly the
stark realities of remalnlng alive ... Our civilization is
like a great blanket cushioning and protecting us from the
raw world; the Karankawa blanket was thin and patchy. Yet,
they survived, even thrived, and were happy with their ways.
To Europeans and Texans it was astonishing and insufferable
that such a people would prefer their own gods, food, and
customs to civilization1s blessings. But they did, and they
clung to these ancestral ways. And for this they perished.
To persevere to such ultimate tragedy is a highway to
continuing remembrance.

Page 7
In the later historic period, the project area and Live Oak
County comprised part of the McMullen and McGloin Colony, named for
John McMullen and James McGloin, entrepreneurs in Matamoros, who in
1828 petitioned the Mexican government to settle 200 Irish families in
south Texas. Live Oak County began as a political unit in 1856,
formed from parts of Nueces and San Patricio counties (Henderson
1928:13-14; Webb 1952:67).
The original land grants of the project area were made to
Francisco Botello, William J.
Cannon, Jose Maria Colchado and the
Southern Pacific Railroad (General Land Office, Live Oak County Land
Grant Map).
Francisco Botello and Jose Maria Colchado claimed first
class headrights, granted only to citizens of Texas resident prior to
March 2, 1836.
Botello attested that he was married and thus was
entitled to a league and a labor (4605 acres) of land.
Colchado was
single, entitled to one-third league (1476 acres). Botello received
his grant on February 1, 1838, Colchado on March 30, 1838, but both
grants were assigned to John McMullen when they were granted (General
Land Office, San Patricio County files 1-64 and 1-60).
Records of
these grants appear again in the San Patricio County tax assessment
In that year, both parcels were ~ssessed as
records for 1851.
property of James McGloin, McMullenls partner. They were taxed in
this manner until 1857 when they were rendered by Mrs.
F.
McGloin
and children, James having died in 1856. Live Oak County tax records
show that 300 acres of the Colchado grant were owned in 1865 by James
H.
Grover, who by 1868 owned the entire Colchado grant and all but
177 acres of the Botello grant. Grover accumulated property rapidly,
and in 1871 he owned, in addition to most of the Botello and Colchado
grants, lands totalling 21,426 acres.
Curiously, Grover liquidated
most of his holdings in 1872, and the Botello and Colchado grants were
divided thereafter into various small parcels (Texas State Archives,
microfilm rolls 785 and 607).
William J. Cannon had a first class headright, and as a married
man he claimed a league and a labor of land on January 25, 1838. His
patent was bought by F. Pillsbury on November 23, 1845 (General Land
Office San Patricio County file 1-112).
The Cannon grant was
unrendered until 1872, when four small parcels of the grant were taxed
to S.W. Swearingen, M.S. Pearce, John W. Ramey and the partnership
of Pearce and Lewis (Texas State Archives microfilm roll 607).
The Southern Pacific Railroad received a grant of 640 acres on
March 12, 1862, which they in turn sold to Jacob Baum on July 23,
1866. The property was unrendered in Live Oak County tax records, but
was sold to John James Dix on August 12, 1873. Dix himself held an
original grant, or preemption claim, in Live Oak County.
The tax
records show him to have been a successful horse and sheep rancher
(General Land Office San Patricio County file S-215;
Texas State
Archives microfilm roll 607).

Page 8
PREVIOUS WORK
South Texas and Live Oak County comprise a rich archeological
264 prehistoric and historic sites have been recorded to date
zone;
in Live Oak County (TARL files).
Organized research in Live Oak
County has taken place over a comparatively short span of time,
H.
Wakefield's 1967 survey of 18
however, beginning with W.
archeological sites in the proposed Choke Canyon Reservoir (Wakefield
1968). This initial work by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
the University of Texas at Austin, was followed by survey and
excavation by the Texas Historical Commission and the Center for
Archeological Research, the University of Texas at San Antonio. More
than 400 sites dating from the Paleoindian stage to historic times
have now been recorded and investigated in this Frio River Valley
reservoir in Live Oak and McMullen counties (Hall, Black and Graves
1982; lynn, Fox and O'Malley 1977; Sorrow, O'Malley and Fox 1974).
In recent years, the Texas Department of Highways and Public
Transportation has excavated and analyzed a site of major importance
on the Atascosa River flood plain/terrace margin north of the town of
Three Rivers.
Site 41LK28 is a cemetery site which contained more
than 160 prehistoric burials and artifacts datable to the Paleoindian,
Archaic and Late Prehistoric stages. Continuing site and artifact
analysis is expected to shed light on Archaic stage lifestyles, burial
patterns and interaction between the Central Texas and South Texas
culture regions.
Texas Archeological Survey, the University of Texas at Austin,
initiated
archeological
assessments in the Three Rivers Flood
Protection Project in 1975. The project was sited on the Frio River
plain
at Three Rivers, and investigations recorded 16
flood
prehistoric and 3 historic sites or components.
Analysis of the
prehistoric sites demonstrated functional variations between them,
with overall emphasis on mussel collecting and lithic resource
procurement (Mallouf 1975;
Mallouf 1977; Prewitt and Scott 1977;
Dibble 1979; Pliska 1980).
Small scale research projects in the county have contributed to
prehistoric reconstruction.
Creel, McGraw, Valdez and Kelly (1979)
excavated 41LK106, a site on Sulphur Creek in western Live Oak County.
Artifacts suggested site occupations at various times from the Middle
Archaic to the Late Prehistoric stages. In a survey for the Conquista
Project, McGraw (1979b) found two sites in the upland stream divide
physiographic setting; one site is classified as a light lithic
scatter, the other little more than a rock fire-hearth. Survey and
testing at the site 41LK117 on an alluvial terrace and adjacent upland
above Sulphur Creek defined Early, Middle and Late Archaic occupations
(Smith 1978).
Counties surrounding Live Oak County have received varying
amounts of research attention. To the west. McMullen County has 327
sites (TARL files), a large proportion of which were recorded by the
Choke Canyon Reservoir investigation discussed previously. Shafer and

Page 9
Baxter (1975) found 85 sites in McMullen and Atascosa counties.
A
variety of site
types were defined, distributed across all
physiographic zones. Small scale projects in upland zones above the
river valleys are beginning to give a wider cultural and environmental
picture of the prehistoric period (Dusek 1980; Robinson 1980), as are
studies of surface collections (Hemion 1979; Hester 1968).
To the south, 12 sites are known from Jim Wells County (TARL
files).
Hester (1977) conducted an intensive survey and testing of a
single-component Late Prehistoric site on Chiltipin Creek in Jim Wells
County;
radiocarbon assay of samples from that site dated it to the
fourteenth century A.D.
Ei ghty-two sites have been recorded -j n Karnes County (TARL
files).
A major research project was conducted in the Ecleto Creek
watershed by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project and Prewitt and
Associates, Inc.
Sixteen prehistoric and one historic site were
investigated in this project (Crawford 1971; Kotter and Guy 1980).
The Conquista Project cultural resources inventory in Karnes County
recorded four prehistoric sites and isolated cultural material (McGraw
1979a;
Roemer 1980).
Survey of the Texaco-Sunedco Hobson Uranium
Prospect in western Karnes County yielded two isolated finds and one
site.
The observed site inventory included twelve flakes, one stone
core, one core tool and one dart point medial fragment; none of these
artifacts were temporally or culturally diagnostic (Nightengale and
Bement 1982).
Seventy-four sites have been recorded in Atascosa County (TARL
files).
Major research projects have been those of Shafer and Baxter
(1975), with results as reported peviously, and McGraw (1979b), who
reported four lithic scatter sites distributed from the flood plains
to the uplands and one occupation site located on a stream divide
upland.
Additionally, Usrey, Grysinski and Bond (1978) conducted
controlled surface collections on two sites on the uplands between San
Miguel Creek and the Atascosa River. On the basis of point typology,
the heavily deflated sites were dated to the Middle Archaic and Late
Prehistoric stages.
Bee County lists only thirteen sites in the TARL files, but one
of these is an early man site (41BE2) investigated in 1939 by E. H.
Sellards (1940). By use of machinery, an extremely long stratigraphic
profile was exposed on the Berclair terrace, a Pleistocene stream
terrace of Blanco Creek. This procedure allowed interpretation of a
locality which yielded a rich assemblage of extinct Pleistocene fauna
and associated Paleoindian stone tools. Recent research in Bee County
has been mostly small scale projects, such as Robinson's (1983), which
found a possibly Late Archaic stream terrace site, and, on the portion
of the plot in adjoining Live Oak County, three isolated artifacts in
stream divide zones.
One hundred sixteen sites have been recorded in San Patricio
County (TARL files), an area covering the transition between the South
Texas and Central Coastal culture areas. The majority of San Patricio

Page 10
County sites lie in the Central Coastal culture area, and most of
these are shell middens located hard by Corpus Christi Bay.
Shell
middens are not restricted to the shoreline setting, however, as
evidenced by 41SP53, located on coastal plains more than two miles
from the shore (Dillehay 1973). Dillehay's survey also recorded two
other inland sites (41SP86 and 41SP87) on stream terraces of Chiltipin
Creek.
These sites, as well as the coastal shoreline sites, belong
usually to one or both of two cultural foci, the Aransas Focus of the
Archaic stage, and the Rockport Focus, attributed to the Late
Prehistoric and Historic stages. This latter attribution is "made on
the basis of projectile point styles, pottery, radiocarbon dates and
European trade goods such as a blue trade bead found on the McGloin
Bluff
site,
41SP11 (Corbin 1963;
McDonald and Dibble 1973).
Paleoindian remains have also been found in San Patricio County,
mostly as surface finds of individual artifacts (Hester 1980).
The proposed project area is found on the USGS Dinero 7.5 1
Quadrangle topographic map. Two prehistoric sites are plotted on this
map but neither are within the project boundaries. The sites, 41LK22
and 41LK23, lie north of the project area and have been reported by
amateur archeologists. 41LK22, named the Swinney Switch Site, is an
upland site about which there is little information other than that a
private collection from it exists (TARL files). 41LK23 was situated
on the banks of the Nueces River and yielded an Early Archaic Tortugas
point, another Archaic projectile point and possibly a stone knife.
The extent of this site along the river bank was not determined. A
third local site, 41LK21, lies a few miles south of the project area.
This site, also in the river terrace setting, is comprised of a human
burial with four associated Archaic stage dart points.
The Crater
Ridge and Mulos Hills quads, west and north of the project area,
respectively, report no sites. The Mathis 151 Quadrangle lacks sites
other than those reported above.
FIELD PROCEDURES
The partial cultural resource inventory of the Everest Minerals
Corporation West Mt. Lucas Project was accomplished on October 31 and
November 1, 1983, by an intensive pedestrian transect survey of the
specified four ore bodies and processing plant site. At no time did
spacing between the two field workers exceed 10 meters. Exceptionally
dense ground cover and high site probability zones received extra
walkover coverage. The survey plots were fully surveyed by these
procedures.
Sites and finds were recorded fully, following Council of Texas
State of Texas Archeological Site
Archeologists (CTA) guidelines.
Data forms were completed; photographs of finds and site environments
were taken;
scale maps of sites were drawn. Locations were plotted
on USGS topographic quadrangle maps.
All records are curated at Texas Archeological
Research
Laboratory (TARL), the University of Texas at Austin. Copies of all
written records are filed with the Texas Historical Commission,

Page 11
Austin, Texas.
RESULTS
The survey of the Everest Minerals Corporation West Mt.
Lucas
Project on the Twin Oak Ranch resulted in the discovery of three
prehistoric sites. These were given site numbers and recorded fully
following standards just described. All Texas site numbers follow the
Smithsonian Trinomial site designation system in which the first two
numbers indicate the state (41 = Texas), the letters indicate the
county (lK
Live Oak), and the final numbers indicate the site
sequence number within the county, the sites numbered in order of
discovery. An example is 41LK265, a site recorded on the current
survey.
The number says that the find is the 265th cultural site
discovered in Live Oak County, Texas.
41LK265
The site is a scatter of chert stone tool flaking debris on a
northeast-oriented upper stream drainage slope 2 3/4 km southwest of
RR 534 and 1 1/10 km north of where the Houston pipeline crosses
Ramirena Creek.
The site lies on a ridge of resistant calichified
conglomerate which rims the drainage basin of an intermittent stream
tributary to Ramirena Creek;
the ridge also divides the small
Although
drainage basin's upper slopes from its lower slopes.
directly overlooking this minor drainage, the site's locale also
affords an excellent view of the lower Ramirena Creek drainage, its
confluence with Long Hollow and its former confluence with the Nueces.
The floral assemblage of the site includes ceniza, guajillo, black
brush, yucca (Yucca torreyi) and various herbaceous annuals. The soil
horizon on the site, a pebbly loam, is poorly developed due to
continuing downslope movement on the 5-10% slope.
The material
scatter is composed of chert flaking debris with the exception of one
18.8 cm long mammal long bone splinter which mayor may not be
associated with the prehistoric site occupation. The surface density
of the scatter is extremely low, less than one cultural item per meter
square. Observed cultural items include:
1 primary decortication flake
4 secondary decortication flakes
1 secondary thinning flake
1 tertiary core fracturing flake
1 tertiary flake
1 fractured burned rock
This list lacks specific temporal and cultural diagnostics, and the
site can only be interpreted speculatively as a hunting lookout at
which chert core reduction may have been carried out to pass the time
during the watch for game. This interpretation stems from the site's
excellent view of stream lowlands nearby.
The site's lack of
diagnostics, intact contexts and cultural material in general renders
it insignificant according to established criteria.

Page 12
41LK266
The site is a scatter of chert stone tool flaking debris on a
southeast-oriented stream divide slope between the Ramirena Creek and
Long Hollow drainage basins. The site lies at the intersection of a
ranch road and the Houston pipeline, 1 km west of the ranch road's
intersection with RR 534.
The site is situated almost perfectly
astride the stream drainage divide between Ramirena Creek and Long
Hollow, and so has a good view of the lower reaches of both drainages,
their confluence, and their joining with the Nueces. Site vegetation
is dominated by guajillo and includes black brush, white brush,
mesquite, guayacan, agarita, granjeno, mexican persimmon, ceniza,
yucca (Yucca torreyi) and a variety of mint.
The site's substrate
consists--of calichified conglomerate overlain by a thin, poorly
developed pebbly loam soil profile. The prevailing geological process
is downslope movement although the slope here is gentle, 1-5%. The
site's cultural material is strewn in
extremely
low density
distribution across the surface, and the items, all of chert, include:
1
2
2
2

nodule fragment
primary decortication flakes
secondary decortication flakes
tertiary thinning flakes

The site lacks cultural and temporal diagnostics, but it may be
speculated that the site may have functioned primarily as a hunting
lookout, due to its advantageous perspective on nearby lowlands.
At
such sites chert core reduction for toolmaking may have been a
pastime. The site's paucity of material, its lack of diagnostics and
its lack of intact contexts render it insignificant according to
established criteria.
41LK267
The site is an artifact scatter on a northeast-oriented upper
drainage
slope overlooking Long Hollow.
The site is 8/10 km
west-northwest of the intersection of a ranch road with RR 534 and 400
m southwest (upslope) of the confluence of Long Hollow and one of its
minor tributaries. Ceniza and guajillo are co-dominants of the floral
community and black brush, yucca, guayacan, white brush and mountain
laurel (Sophora secundiflora) are also found on the site.
The site
lies on a calichified conglomerate substrate with a poorly developed,
thin and patchy pebbly loam soil profile; much of the site's cultural
material lies directly on exposed bedrock. Slope varies from 3-10%,
and the dominant geological process is downslope movement.
The
conglomerate contains a small «1%) but culturally significant chert
nodule fraction. The site's observed cultural inventory is entirely
of this outcropping chert fraction and includes:
2 complete thick oval bifaces
2 burned biface fragments
4 core fragments

Page 13
3
2
4
4
1

primary decortication flakes, one of which is burned
secondary decortication flakes
tertiary thinning flakes
large shatter fragments, one of which is burned
triface with a steep end bit, similar to a Guadalupe Gouge

Although this last artifact resembles a Guadalupe Gouge in some
respects, this attribution cannot be made directly, and so this site,
too, exists without known cultural and temporal diagnostics.
One
higher density area, about 5 meters square, was observed on the site;
it contains two to three items per square meter. The site functioned
primarily as a lithic resource procurement site but its outlook above
the Long Hollow drainage makes feasible a hunting lookout function as
well.
Although the site yielded more numerous and diverse cultural
materials than the other sites, 41LK267 1 s lack of diagnostics and
intact contexts denies it a designation as a significant site
according to established criteria.
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The partial survey of the Everest Minerals West Mt.
Lucas
Project discovered three prehistoric sites in the upland physiographic
zone, 41LK265 and 267 located on upper stream drainage slopes, and
41LK266 located on a stream drainage divide. Sites 41LK265 and 266
warrant classification as lithic scatters, manifesting chert stone
toolmaking debris exclusively. with the minor exceptions on 41LK265 of
one burned rock and one bone fragment which cannot be assuredly
associated with the site's cultural occupation. Site 41LK267 adds a
few crude chipped stone tools to the inventory and thus justifies its
classification as an artifact scatter. Among these three sites, with
all their culturally modified items, not a single culturally or
temporally diagnostic artifact was found. The sites can be attributed
therefore only to the prehistoric period;
more specific placement
within that span is impossible.
Site function can be discussed only generally, based on artifact
inventories and aspects of the sites' environmental settings. First,
the sites' general upland physiographic setting and their specific
geomorphic positions provide excellent views of lowland drainage
basins and the Nueces Valley. All three sites would therefore serve
valuably as hunting lookouts. Chert knapping activities conducted by
hunters who awaited game are marked by lithic debris.
Second, site
41LK267 is located on an outcropping of chert nodules. and the lithic
debris on the site suggests chert nodule procurement,
initial
reduction of cores and tool preparation and thinning, if not actual
tool finishing. Finally, some lithic items from 41LK267 have been
burned, indicating fires and perhaps some short-term camping. The
items were burned after flaking and are not residue from deliberately
heat-treated chert nodules.
As a group, the recorded sites contribute to reconstruction of
the
prehistoric activities and the use of the rolling upland
physiographic zone. The chert on all three sites is identical, and

Page 14
the chert was probably collected from outcrops such as that at 41LK267
and other nearby localities. The collectors retreated to favorable
lookouts, such as at 41LK265 and 41LK266, to watch for game and knap
stone tools, thereby making efficient use of time. This theory may be
close to the actual case, especially if prehistoric bands visited the
sites during a restricted period of the year. The Mariames may have
appeared in the project area in transit to or from prickly pear
tracts. Here they could rapidly acquire workable stone, prepare
tools,
and continue
their migrations and subsistence quests.
Confirmation of this interpretive scheme must await further survey and
site identificaton in the upland zone.
Future research in the uplands should, in the widest sense,
investigate the contribution of limited function upland sites to the
overall settlement patterns of the region's prehistoric cultures.
Surveys should, as always, inventory scientifically and culturally
significant sites, and significant sites should be defined as sites
with mUltiple diagnostic artifacts, radiocarbon or thermoluminescence
dating samples, and contexts of primary or near-primary deposits.
Stratified cultural deposits are too much to expect as a necessary
criterion of site significance in the upland South Texas environmental
regime, but if well-stratified sites are found against expectation,
then certainly they should be adjudged significant.
Beyond these
concerns, archeological research in South Texas should explicitly
investigate the antiquity and orlglns of the Coahuiltecans, who
differed materially from the Late Prehistoric cultures, especially in
the Coahuiltecan's apparent lack of pottery.
Future research may also benefit from
two methodological
suggestions.
First, high site probability assessments should no
longer ignore the uplands and focus simplistically on river flood
plains and lower stream drainage slopes.
Upland areas may have
numerous sites, especially in zones with Uvalde gravel scatters or
Goliad Formation conglomerate containing chert nodules, as at 41LK267.
In fact, such zones already warrant designation as high
site
probability zones.
The second note regards the blanket use of phYSiographic zonation
in initial site classification.
Site types and functions sort, or
pattern, according to their physiographiC setting, but not
in
one-to-one or lock-step fashion throughout South Texas. Specifically,
absolute distance from rivers influences the number and kinds of
activities conducted at high stream divide sites. The potential for
use of a site varies widely if the Nueces is a two hour walk away or a
week's march
away.
Similarly,
exploitative potential varies
regionally across the relatively narrow South Texas rainfall isohyets
which chart decreasing rainfall from the coast westwards. In short,
distance from rivers
and
rainfall
are
important
additional
environmental
factors
which
should
influence meaningful site
classifications.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ .........................................

---~.-

Page 15
The recorded cultural resources on the Everest Minerals West Mt.
Lucas Project partial survey, prehistoric sites 41LK265, 41LK266 and
41LK267, are insignificant according to established criteria and
warrant no further management recommendations. The sites fail to meet
criteria for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places or
Texas Archeological Landmark status.
Should artifacts or bones be
unearthed during construction activities, the appropriate agencies
should be notified.

Page 16

REFERENCES CITED
Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
2(1) :93-117.
1952

The Texas Journal of Science

Mammals of the Tamaulipan Biotic Province in
Journal of Science 4(2).

Bureau of Economic Geology
1975
Geologic Atlas of Texas, Beeville:
University of Texas at Austin.
1976

Bay

Geologic Atlas of Texas, Crystal City:
The University of Texas at Austin.

City
Eagle

Texas.

Sheet.
Pass

Texas

The
Sheet.

Campbe 11, T. N.
1983
The Coahuiltecans and their Neighbors.
Handbook of North
William C. Sturtevant, genera--leditor.
American Indians.
Vol. 10 Southwest. Alfonso Ortiz, volume editor.
Carr, John T.
1967
The Climate and Physiography
Development board Report 53.

of

Texas.

Texas

Water

Corbin, James E.
1963 Archeological Materials from the Northern Shore of Corpus
Christi Bay. Texas Archeological Society Bulletin 34:5-30.
Crawford, Daymond D.
1971
An Archeological Reconnaissance of Ecleto Creek Watershed,
South Central Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project
Survey Report 8. The University of Texas at Austin.
Creel, D., J. McGraw, F. Valdez Jr., and T.C. Kelly
1979
Excavations at 41LK106, a Prehistoric Occupation Site in
Live Oak County, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research
Archaeological Survey Report 62. The University of Texas at
San Antonio.
Dibble, David S.
1979 Archeological Assessments at the
Three
Rivers
Flood
Protection Project.
Texas Archeological Survey Technical
Bulletin 26. The University of Texas at Austin.

~

-~-~-----------

- - -

Page 17
Dillehay, Tom D.
1973 An Archeological Reconnaissance of Areas to be Affected by
the Proposed Natural Gas Project, San Patricio County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Research Report
18. The University of Texas at Austin.
Dusek, Curtis
1980 Plainview Points from 41MC10, McMullen
Tierra 7(3):39-41.

County,

Texas.

La

Eargle, D. Hoye, W. Hinds and Alice M.D. Weeks
1973 Uranium Geology and Mines, South Texas. Bureau of Economic
Geology Guidebook 12. The University of Texas at Austin.
Eggleston, Holmes and Associates, Inc.
1983 Vegetation Assemblages Map, Mt. Lucas and Mt. Lucas West.
Eggleston, Holmes and Associates, Inc. Austin.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938 Physiography of Eastern United States.
York.

McGraw-Hi 11 .

Gould, Frank W.
1969 Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary.
Agricultural Experiment Station. Publication MP-585.
A & M University. College Station.

New

Texas
Texas

Hall, Grant D., Stephen L. Black and Carol Graves
1982 Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir,
South Texas:
The
Phase
I
Findings.
Center for
Archaeological Research Choke Canyon ~~~ Volume 5. The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hemion, R.H.
1979 Further Notes on the Bromley Cooper Collection from McMullen
County, Texas. La Tierra 7(5):24-29.
Henderson, Mary Virginia
1928 Minor Empresar;o Contracts for
1825
1834.
Quarterly of
Association 32(1):1-28.

the
the

Colonization of Texas
Texas State Hist orical

Hester T.R.
1968 Paleo-Indian Artifacts from Sites along San Miguel Creek:
Frio, Atascosa and McMullen Counties, Texas. Bulletin of
the
Archeological Society 39:147-161.
1971

Hunters of the Rio Grande Plain and the Lower Coast of
Texas.
Paper presented at the 74th Annual Meeting, Texas
Academy of Science. Nacogdoches, Texas.

Page 18
1976a

The Archaic of Southern Texas. In The Texas Archaic:
A
Symposium.
Thomas
R.
Hester,
editor.
Center for
Archaeological Research. The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

1976b

Hunters and Gatherers of the Rio Grande Plain and the Lower
Coast
of
Texas.
Paper
issued
by the Center for
Archaeological Research. The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

1977

Archaeological Research at the Hinojosa Site (41JW8), Jim
Wells County, Southern Texas.
Center for Archaeological
Research Archaeological Survey Report 42. The University of
Texas at San Antonio.

1980

A Survey of Paleo-Indian Archaeological Remains Along the
Texas Coast.
In:
Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas
Coast. Lynn Highley and Thomas R. Hester, editors. Center
for Archaeological Research Special Report 11:1-12. The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

Kotter Steven M., and Jan A. Guy
1980
Archeological Survey and Assessment of Two Areas to be
Affected by Proposed Critical Area Treatment Measures within
the Ecleto Creek Watershed, Karnes County, Texas.
Reports
of Investigations 5. Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Austin.
Lynn, Warren M., Daniel E. Fox and Nancy O'Malley
1977
Cultural Resource Survey of Choke Canyon Reservoir, Live Oak
and McMullen Counties, Texas. Texas Historical Commission
Archeological Survey Report 20. Austin.
Mallouf, Michael G.
Three Rivers Flood Protection Project, Live Oak County,
1975
An Archeological and Historical Survey of Areas
Texas:
Proposed for Modification. Report submitted to the Fort
Worth
District,
Corps
of
Engineers
by
the Texas
Archeological Survey. The University of Texas at Austin.
1977

Additional Archeological Survey in Areas to be Affected by
the Three Rivers Flood Protection Project, Live Oak County,
Texas. Report submitted to the Fort Worth District, Corps
of
Engineers by the Texas Archeological Survey.
The
University of Texas at Austin.

McDonald, Kenyon L. and David S. Dibble
An Archeological and Historical Resource Inventory and
1973
Evaluation of a Site in San Patricio County, Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey Research Report 33. The University of
Texas at Austin.

Page 19
McGraw, A. Joachim
1979a An Archaeological and Historical Survey of the Haase, Moy
and Wiatrek Properties of the Conquista Project, Karnes
County,
Texas.
Center
for
Archaeo log; ca 1 Research
Archaeological Survey Report 81. The University of Texas at
San Antonio.
1979b A Preliminary Archaeological Survey for the
Conquista
Project in Gonzales, Atascosa and Live Oak Counties, Texas.
Center for Archaeological Research Archaeological Survey
Report 76. The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Newcomb, W.W. Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas.

University of Texas Press.

Austin.

Nightengale, Bruce A. and Leland C. Bement
1982 A Cultural Resource
Survey
and Assessment
of
the
Texaco-Sunedco
Hobson Uranium Prospect, Karnes County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin 51.
The University of Texas at Austin.
Pliska, James R.
1980 Archeological Investigations at the Three
Control Project:
A Final Report.
Texas
Survey Technical Bulletin 30. The University
Aust'j n.

Rivers Flood
Archeological
of Texas at

Prewitt, Elton R. and Robert J. Scott IV
1977
Three
Rivers
Floodwater
Diversion
Levee
Project:
Assessments at Archeological Sites 41LK57, 41LKl13 and
41LKl14. Report to the Fort Worth District, Corps of
Engineers by the Texas Archeological Survey. The University
of Texas at Austin.
Robinson, David G.
1980 A Cultural Resource Survey of the Rhode Ranch, McMullen
County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report
79. The University of Texas at Aust'in.
1983

A Cultural Resource Survey of the Chern Nuclear Systems Inc.
Live Oak County Lease, Live Oak County, Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin 73. The University
of Texas at Austin.

Roemer, Erwin
1980 An Archaeological Survey for the Conquista Project of the
Nieschwietz-Bodden Properties, Karnes County, Texas. Center
for Archaeological Research Archaeological Survey Report 92.
The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Page 20
Sellards, E.H.
1940
Pleistocene Artifacts and Associated Fossils from
Bee
County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Geological Society of
America 51:1627-1658.
Shafer, H.J. and E.P. Baxter
1975
An Archeological Survey of the Lignite Project, Atascosa and
McMullen Counties, Texas. Anthropology Laboratory Report 7.
Texas A & MUniversity. College Station.
Smith, H.P., Jr.
1978 Archaeological Survey and Assessment of Properties for the
Conquista Project in Live Oak and Karnes Counties, Texas.
Center for Archaeological Research Archaeological Survey
Report 64. The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Sorrow, William M., Nancy OIMalley and Daniel Fox
1974
Interim Report on the Archeological and Historical Resources
of the Proposed Choke Canyon Reservoir, Live Oak and
McMullen Counties, Texas. Texas Historical Commission and
Texas Water Development Board. Austin.
Tharp, Benjamin C.
1939 The Vegetation of Texas. Academy of Science Publications in
Natural History. Non-technical series. Anson Jones Pres~
Houston.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
1975
Local Flood Protection Project at Three Rivers, Texas.
Draft Supplement to the Final Environmental Statement.
Usrey, Steve, Stan Grysinski and Clell L. Bond
1978 Archeological Sites 41AT22 and 41AT24 South Central Texas.
Anthropology Research Laboratory Report 46. Texas A & M
University. College Station.
Wakefield, Walter H.
1968 Archeological Survey of Palmetto Bend and Choke Canyon
Reservoirs, Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project
Survey Report 5. The University of Texas at Austin.
Webb, Walter Prescott (editor)
1952
Handbook of Texas Volume II.
Texas
Associatio~ University of Texas Press.

State
Historical
Austin.

