.\

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

.,
.~

.

,J

A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED
AIR hOUTE SURVEILLANCE RADAR SITE
Fort Hood, Texas

.,

..-"

David S. Dibble

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
The University of Texas at Austin
Technical Bulletin No. 19

1977

..

.

.

,'"

.:'..
"

• ~

of

........

A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY OF THE
PROPOSED AIR ROUTE SURVEILLANCE RADAR SITE,
FORT HOOD J TEXAS

.,

David S. Dibble
The site of the above identified proposed radar facUity was examined by tile
writel' on July 19, 1917. Access to the military property was gained through
the assistance of the Directorate of Facilities Engineering, U.S. Ar~-Fort
Hood. Their help is gratetuUyacknowledged.
The area to be modified by construction is located on the flat-topped "Radar
Hill" and abuts on the east the paved access road to the existing complex of
U.S. A:rmy structures occupied by the Combined Arms Director.' The construction
zone was clearly marked by surveyed stakes on the four corners of the square
area. Approximately 6o-7r.1/o of the proposed construction area was vegetated
in maintained Bermud4~ass. The remaining area (generallyxhe northeastern
portion) was vegetated in native grasses, arid second growth' oak, cedar, sum­
mae and redbud tress.
.'
Evidence of prior disturbance within the maintained portion of the site included
a utility pole construction paralleling the 'Paved access road, a buried pipe or .
cable running diagonal.1y (NW-SE) through apportion of the site J and apparent
introductIon of a thin mantle of clayey soil to support: grass growth. A few
recent structural remnants of late historic age were observed in the portion
of the site In natIve vegetation. These included two blocky cement piers and
areas of puddled cement and fractured cement blocks-wall apparently remains
of prior military constructions.
E:lccept for the grassed areas, the upper surface of the limestone was exposed
over much of the area. In a few areas, chert flakes suggested a light degree
ot prior aboriginal occupation. In many instances, however, the flint debris
apparently resulted from non-human fracturing of the chert. Also, much of
this material may have been introduced onto the site with the recent soIl f111.
No demonstrably in situ chert debrIs or features of aborigInal origin were
seen in a number-of closely-spaced transects across the site.
The area covered by this survey exceeded the indicated limIts and mimally
covered a 300 x 300 f't. square.

Examination of the site survey f11es maintained at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin Indicated that no
known historic or prehistoric sites have been reported from this locat10n.
Baaed OIl the above study, 1t is the wr1ter's op1n1on that construction of
th1a radar fac1lity will not adversely affect identifiable cultural resources •

..

