AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE CHATFIELD
WATER SUPPLY CORPORATION WATER SYSTEM
IMPROVEMENTS PROJECT IN NAVARRO COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 05-20

Principal Investigator: William E. Moore

Prepared for
Chatfield Water Supply Corporation
Post Office Box 158
Powell, Texas 75153

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey for the proposed improvements to the Chatfield
Water Supply Corporation (WSC) water system was conducted on February 22,
2006 by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) in east-central Navarro
County, Texas. Five high probability areas pre-selected by the Texas Historical
Commission were examined for the presence of significant prehistoric and/or
historic sites within the Area of Potential Effect (APE). Two cemeteries are near the
proposed route of the water line. These are the Petty’s Chapel Cemetery and the
Navarro County Cemetery. The Petty’s Chapel Cemetery was established in the
late 1800s, is fenced, and contains graves dating to the 19th and 20th centuries.
The Navarro County Cemetery was established in the 1880s and is the final resting
place for indigent persons, mentally ill patients, and prisoners buried by the county.
These sites will be avoided by the planned construction. No previously unrecorded
sites (prehistoric or historic) were found. This investigation was performed under
Antiquities Permit 4041. In all, six acres were examined, and no artifacts were
collected. Copies of the report are on file at the Texas Historical Commission,
Archeology Division and the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin,
Texas.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Brazos Valley Research Associates is grateful to those whose cooperation
made the completion of this project possible. Bezel Strange is the General
Manager/Operator for the Chatfield WSC. Mr. Strange arranged for a pre-field
check for buried utilities and visited with the Principal Investigator during the survey.
In addition, he provided two workers who provided assistance. They are Mike
Craig (Operator) who supervised the backhoe trenching and Joe Greenwell
(General Contractor) who operated the backhoe. Hollie H. Nowlin is the engineer
for this project and works for J. F. Fontaine & Associates, Inc. in Palestine, Texas.
Ms. Nowlin provided maps and visited the five high probability areas with the
Principal Investigator during the pre-survey evaluation. Jean Hughes, Records
Conservator at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory performed the
records search for previously recorded sites and past surveys in the project area
and vicinity. Archaeological Steward Bill Young (Lakes/Brazos Region) provided
information regarding the two cemeteries near the project area, and Navarro
County Sheriff Leslie Cotton took time from his busy schedule to discuss the history
of the Navarro County Cemetery. Lili Lyddon of Lyddon Illustrations in Wellborn,
Texas prepared the figures that appear in this report, and Nora Rogers edited the
manuscript. The field crew consisted of James E. Warren, Arthur Romine, and
Bobby Jemison.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT........................................................................................................... ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...................................................................................... iii
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING...............................................................................3
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ..................................................................6
METHODS............................................................................................................9
AREAS SURVEYED ...........................................................................................11
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS........................................................................16
RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................................19
REFERENCES CITED........................................................................................20

iv

FIGURES
Figure 1. Project Area ...................................................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Area 1 .............................................................................................................. 11
Figure 3. Area 2 .............................................................................................................. 12
Figure 4. Area 3 .............................................................................................................. 13
Figure 5. Area 4 .............................................................................................................. 14
Figure 6. Area 5 .............................................................................................................. 15
Figure 7. Petty’s Chapel Cemetery............................................................................... 17
Figure 8. Navarro County Cemetery ............................................................................ 18

APPENDICES
Appendix I: Entire Route of Water Line
Appendix II: Research Design
Appendix III Backhoe Trench Profiles
Appendix IV: Shovel Test Log

v

INTRODUCTION
The Chatfield WSC is applying for funds from the United States Department
of Agriculture, Rural Development to improve its water distribution system by
adding 43.61 miles of new water line throughout the east-central portion of Navarro
County (Appendix I). Additional improvements consist of a 50,000 gallon ground
storage tank and a 6000 gallon pressure tank at existing Water Treatment Plant 1
and increasing plant piping sizes at existing plants 2 and 5. Valves, fittings, road
bores, encasements, and creek crossings will be installed as needed. The
diameter of the water line in the areas investigated vary from 6 inches to 12 inches.
They will be placed in a trench with three feet of cover, and the project area right-ofway is 15 feet.
The new water line will generally follow state and county road rights-of-way
and private property next to roads. Large trees within the paths of pipelines will be
by-passed to avoid damage to trees. Prime farmland will be crossed by the
proposed pipelines in some areas, but they will generally follow previously
disturbed routes of the existing pipeline. Flood plains and wetland areas located at
creeks will be crossed by proposed water lines. Creek crossings will be encased
and restored to their original condition. There will be no permanent structures
located within flood zones or wetland areas. The Chatfield WSC will adopt binding
resolutions protecting the flood plains and wetland areas from future development.
The Bald Eagle is the only Federally listed threatened species in Navarro County.
Habitats of this species will not be disturbed, and no adverse impact will affect this
threatened species.
Part of the area proposed for new water line has already been investigated
by professional archaeologists, and significant prehistoric and historic sites were
found. In order to ensure that important cultural resources in those areas not
surveyed are not destroyed by the proposed construction, the Texas Historical
Commission selected five high probability areas and requested that they be
examined by a professional archaeologist. In order to fulfill this requirement,
Chatfield WSC contracted with BVRA to provide this service. Figure 1 depicts the
five areas investigated and described in this report.

1

Figure 1. Project Area

2

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
General
The project area is located near the western extreme of the West Gulf Coast
Plain physiographic province as defined by Fenneman (1931:100-102). It is located
east of the Central Texas Section of the Great Plains physiographic province
(Fenneman 1931:54-55). According to the Handbook of Texas (Webb 1952:263),
Navarro County is in the great Blackland Prairie region of North Central Texas and
has an area of 1084 square miles. The altitude of the county is 450 feet, rainfall is
35.96 inches, and the annual temperature is 66.2 degrees Fahrenheit. The ground
surface is level in the central and western parts of the county and rolling hills are
present in the northeast part of the county. The soils along the many tributaries of
the Trinity River are deep, black waxy and loam soils and rich bottomlands.
Soils
Area 1
The soils in Area 1 belong to the Trinity series. In the area investigated, the
soils are Trinity Clay, frequently flooded (Tr). This soil is described by Meade et al.
(1974:29) as being located on flood plains. In some areas scour channels are
numerous, and in other areas they are few. This soil is subject to flooding every
two or three years. A typical profile consists of very dark gray clay (10YR 3/1) from
0-24 inches, dark gray clay (5YR 4/1) rom 24 to 36 inches, black clay (10YR 2/1)
from 36 to 48 inches, and black clay (10YR 2/1) from 48 to 58 inches. The A1
horizon ranges from 34 to more than 62 inches in thickness.
Area 2
The soils in Area 2 are identical to those described above for Area 1.
Area 3
The soils in Area 3 belong to the Burleson series. In the area investigated,
the soils are Burleson clay, 0 to 1 percent slopes (BuA). This soil is described by
Meade et al. (1974:11) as a nearly level soil on broad uplands or narrow ridge tops.
Others are in slightly depressed areas where water stands for a short time. A
typical profile consists of a very dark gray clay (10YR 3/1) from 0 to 8 inches, a very
dark gray clay (10YR 3/1) or black clay (10YR 2/1) 8 to 30 inches, a dark gray clay
(10YR 4/1) or a very dark gray clay (10YR 3/1) from 30 to 45 inches, and a gray
clay (10YR 5/1) or dark gray clay (10YR 4/1) from 45 to 63 inches.
The A horizon consists of a dark gray clay, very dark gray clay, or black clay
that ranges from medium acid to moderately alkaline in reaction.

3

The AC horizon ranges from 8 to 34 inches in thickness. Reaction ranges
from neutral to moderately alkaline.
The C-horizon, generally below a depth of about 63 inches, is mottled in
shades of gray, yellow, brown, and olive. Reaction is mildly alkaline to moderately
alkaline.
Area 4
The soils in Area 4 belong to the Axtell, Crockett, Gowen, Tabor, and Wilson
series. In the area investigated, the soils are Axtell fine sandy loam, 1 to 3 percent
slopes (AxB), Crockett fine sandy loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes, Gowen fine sandy
loam, frequently flooded (Go), Tabor fine sandy loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes (TaA),
and Wilson very fine sandy loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes (WIA).
The Axtel soil is described by Meade et al. (1974:7) as a gently sloping soil
on broad upland ridge tops. A typical profile consists of light brownish-gray fine
sandy loam (10YR 6/2) and dark grayish-brown fine sandy loam (10YR 4/2) from 0
to 4 inches; very pale brown fine sandy loam (10YR 7/3) and pale brown sandy
loam (10YR 6/3) from 4 to 10 inches; mottled grayish-brown (10YR 5/2), yellowishred (5YR 4/6), and light olive brown (2.5 YR 5/4) clay from 10 to 18 inches. This
clay is very firm, very sticky, and very plastic. Clay soils continue to 82 inches. At
82 inches, a yellowish-brown 10YR 5/4) very fine sandy loam overlies a layer of
weakly cemented light olive brown sandstone.
The Crockett soil is described by Meade et al. (1974:13) as a nearly level
soil on broad uplands or narrow ridge tops throughout the county. The surface
layer is a brown fine sandy loam about 6 inches thick. The next layer is a very firm
clay to a depth of about 68 inches. The underlying material is a mottled white, gray,
yellowish-brown, and olive brown firm clay to a depth of about 100 inches.
The Gowen soil is described by Meade et al. (1974:18) as a being found in
the floodplains of streams. The areas are long and narrow and follow the contour
of the floodplain. This soil is subject to flooding every two to three years during the
growing season. Numerous short, scour channels cut into most areas, and the
relief is slightly undulating. The surface layer is a grayish-brown fine sandy loam
about 10 inches thick. The next layer is a dark grayish-brown clay loam to a depth
of about 45 inches. The underling sediment is a grayish-brown loamy material to a
depth of about 60 inches.
The Tabor soil is described by Meade et al. (1974:29) as a nearly level
upland soil occurring mainly as broad watershed divides. In undulating areas,
water stands for brief periods.

4

The Wilson soil is described by Meade et al. (1974:31) as a nearly level soil
on uplands. It occupies broad watershed divides or areas adjacent to streams.
The surface layer is a grayish-brown, very friable, very fine sandy loam about 6
inches thick. The next layer is a dark gray very firm clay about 18 inches thick. The
underlying material is a mottled light gray, light olive brown, and grayish-brown very
firm clay to a depth of about 60 inches.
Area 5
The soils in Area 5 belong to the Axtell and Wilson series. In the area
investigated, the soils are Axtell fine sandy loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (AxB) and
Wilson very fine sandy loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes (WIA). These soils are
described for Area 4 above.

5

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Navarro County is located in the North Central Texas region as defined by
Biesaart et al. (1985:76) in Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical
Overview published by the Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical
Commission. This is an area that was well documented in terms of numbers of
sites in 1985 when compared to other regions of Texas. When the statistical
overview was compiled, a total of 2678 prehistoric sites (13.25% of the state) was
recorded in the entire region, mainly due to work on Richland and Chambers
creeks. Only the Central Texas region reported more sites or had a higher
percentage statewide, and only four counties, Bell (197), Coleman (151), Dallas
(204), and Hill (242) had more recorded sites (Biesaart et al. 1985:83). The 132
sites recorded in Navarro County in 1985 consisted of 4.93% of the region and
.65% of the state. The reader is referred to the overview for additional statistical
information concerning Navarro County and its relation to the rest of Texas.
Previous work in the county has been synthesized by Calvin B. Sanders
(1996) in his survey report entitled Cultural Resources Survey of the Mill Creek
Project, Navarro County, Texas. The following discussion is taken from his work
and other major reports, especially those dealing with studies along Richland and
Chambers creeks.
Most of the archaeological investigations in Navarro County have been the
result of archaeological salvage projects associated with reservoir construction,
often involving multiple counties. The earliest reservoir projects were conducted in
the 1960s and include Navarro Mills (Duffield 1960, 1963) and Bardwell (Shafer
1964; Sorrow 1966).
Tennessee Colony Reservoir was the scene of
archaeological activity in the 1970s (Richner and Lee 1976; Richner and Bagot
1978; Richner 1982). The majority of archaeological data for Navarro County was
collected during surveys at Richland and Chambers creeks in the 1970s and
1980s. Most of these studies were the result of proposed watershed projects by
the Soil Conservation Service, and much of the work was performed by Southern
Methodist University.
Later, when the Richland-Chambers Reservoir was
proposed, archaeologists were on hand to survey there as well (Raab et al. 1980,
1981
Excluding work at Richland-Chambers Reservoir, only seven archaeological
surveys are documented by Sanders (1996:9-10) in the Chambers Creek
watershed with the first conducted by C. Reid Ferring (1975). Ferring's work
"revealed a relative absence of sites on the ephemeral drainages in which the
majority of planned floodwater structures are located" (Sanders 1996:9). The only
exceptions were two lithic quarries on terraces near Chambers Creek proper
(Ferring 1975:3-4). Ferring hypothesized that the paucity of knappable raw material
may have been a factor in the low number of sites in the areas surveyed.

6

Other surveys conducted by Soil Conservation Service archaeologists have
reported similar results. Nancy M. Cole (1981) found only one prehistoric lithic
scatter on an eroded and heavily disturbed upland area, and the last professional
archaeological investigation in this watershed (Nunley 1983) failed to locate
prehistoric sites in either of the three floodwater retarding structures examined.
According to Nunley (1983:4), the results of his study provided further evidence
"supporting the relative scarcity of significant cultural resources in upland areas of
the Blackland Prairie suggested in the previous investigations."
Of particular relevance to this study is the survey conducted by BVRA in
1997 on Mill Creek in northwest Navarro County (Moore and Bradle 1997). A
combined Phase II and Phase III significance testing of site 41NV670 was
performed to determine the research potential of this unique site which consisted of
a bison bone bed approximately 15 feet below the surface of a relict flood plain and
within a heavy clay mantle.
This investigation was performed using shovel testing, excavation of two 1 x
1 meter test units, one backhoe trench, surface inspection of creek exposures, and
an evaluation by a geomorphologist. Site 41NV670 consists of a stratum of bison
bone identified as modern bison (Bison bison) representing minimally five
individuals. The only other identified species in the faunal assemblage was whitetailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) represented by a single scaphoid carpal.
Although no conclusive evidence of cultural modification to the bone was observed
during the laboratory analysis, the presence of human intervention was found in the
form of possible burned bone (field observation); flakes; biface fragments; two
arrow points; and burned rock, charcoal, and ash. This site is located in the Mill
Creek paleosol. Radiocarbon dates taken from charcoal mixed with bison bone in
test unit N200/E201 produced a conventional radiocarbon age of 390  60 years
Before Present (B.P).
The calibrated results, prepared by Beta Analytic
Radiocarbon Dating Laboratory, produced calendar dates of A.D. 1425 to A.D.
1650 (2 sigma, 95% probability).* These dates place site 41NV670 in the Late
Prehistoric or Protohistoric period.
During the Phase II and Phase III testing of site 41NV670, one previously
unrecorded site (41NV671) was found on the south bank of Mill Creek
approximately 200 meters to the west of the project area. Site 41NV671 is a small
hearth about twelve feet below the current flood plain on the south bank of Mill
Creek. The hearth is located in the Navarro paleosol, the geological stratum
underlying the Mill Creek paleosol containing site 41NV670. Radiocarbon dates
obtained from charcoal extracted from the hearth produced a conventional
radiocarbon age of 580  60 years B.P. The calibrated results, prepared by Beta
Analytic Radiocarbon Dating Laboratory, produced calendar dates of A.D. 1290 to
A.D. 1440 (2 sigma, 95% probability).

7

Several archaeological sites have been recorded in close proximity to the
five high probability areas examined during this survey. Prehistoric sites have been
recorded in flood plains, on terraces, and in the uplands. Nearby historic sites
include an abandoned iron bridge across Chambers Creek and a road. In addition,
to the above-mentioned reports, additional information for the area can be found in
a very thorough report published by the Texas Historical Commission entitled
Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region: A Planning Document (Kenmotsu and
Perttula 1993).

8

METHODS
Pre-Field Tasks
Prior to entering the field, the site records at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory on the campus of The University of Texas at Austin were
checked for the presence of previously recorded archaeological sites in or near the
project area. This task was performed by Jean Hughes at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory. Additional background research was performed by the
Principal Investigator utilizing the Texas Historic Sites Atlas and the Handbook of
Texas Online. In addition, reports describing past investigations by professional
archaeologists in the vicinity were reviewed. A field evaluation of the five high
probability areas was conducted by the Principal Investigator and Hollie H. Nowlin
of J. F. Fontaine & Associates, Inc., the engineering firm associated with this
project. This evaluation allowed the Principal Investigator to better plan the field
survey.
Field Survey
The five pre-selected areas were designated as areas 1-5 for convenience.
The methods employed during this survey followed a Research Design (Appendix I)
submitted to the Texas Historical Commission for approval prior to entering the
field. When possible, eroded and otherwise exposed areas within the various
rights-of-way were examined for surface indications of prehistoric and/or historic
sites in each of the five high probability areas. The subsurface was examined
through backhoe trenching and shovel testing. Backhoe trenching was performed
at two locations where the water line will cross Chambers Creek. Each trench was
excavated to the depth of the APE. Trench profiles were drawn (Appendix II), and
Munsell readings were taken of the soils present. Four trenches were excavated
in each of the two flood plains of Chambers Creek (Area 1 and Area 2). Shovel
tests and probes were dug along the rights-of-way in areas 3-5. Shovel probes
differ from shovel tests in that these area areas where the soil was tested for
shallow clays and various forms of disturbance. Probes are not dug by levels, the
earth is not screened, and the locations of probes are not depicted on the project
area maps. The earth excavated during shovel testing was passed through
quarter-inch hardware cloth, the depth of each test is measured in the field, and
they are plotted on the project area maps. In some cases, heavy clays made
screening impossible. The earth from these tests was examined by manually
breaking apart the clay. In all, 14 shovel tests were excavated in the three areas.
A shovel test log describing the results of this task is presented as Appendix III to
this report.

9

During the course of this survey, two cemeteries were observed near the
route of the proposed water line. These are Petty’s Chapel and the Navarro County
Cemetery. Since these historic sites are outside the project area, no site numbers
were assigned. They were photographed and discussed (see Results and
Conclusions below). Also, local informants with knowledge of the cemeteries were
interviewed.

10

AREAS SURVEYED
Area 1
Area 1 is the crossing of State Highway 31 at Chambers Creek on the north
side of the road (Figure 2). Originally, the water line was to be placed on the south
side of the highway, but it was moved to the north side of the road due to the
presence of numerous utilities on the south side. This area is depicted on the
Powell 7.5’ topographic quadrangle and is 2700 feet long. The proposed water line
will be 12 inches in diameter and will be placed in a trench with at least three feet of
cover. Four backhoe trenches (1-4) were excavated on the east side of the creek
within the flood plain. No trenches were excavated on the west side of the creek,
because this is an active flood plain with standing water present. The flood plain on
the east side of the creek is much higher and was dry at the time of this survey.

Figure 2. Area 1

11

Area 2
Area 2 is the crossing of Farm-to-Market Road 3041 (Chatfield Road) at
Chambers Creek on the east side of the road (Figure 3). This area is depicted on
the Chatfield 7.5’ topographic quadrangle and is 2800 feet long. The proposed
water line will be 6 inches in diameter and will be placed in a trench with at least
three feet of cover. Three backhoe trenches (6-8) were excavated on the south
side of the creek within the flood plain, and one backhoe trench (5) was excavated
on the north side of the creek within the flood plain.

Figure 3. Area 2

12

Area 3
Area 3 parallels the east side of NE County Road 0060, crosses an
unnamed tributary of Briar Creek, and terminates at Farm-to-Market Road 3041
(Figure 4). This area is depicted on the Corsicana 7.5’ topographic quadrangle and
is 5400 feet long. The proposed water line will be 6 inches in diameter and will be
placed in a trench with at least three feet of cover. Three shovel tests (6-8) were
excavated on the north side of the tributary, and two tests (9-10) were excavated on
the south side of the tributary.

Figure 4. Area 3

13

Area 4
Area 4 parallels the south side of an unnamed, unpaved road and the east
side of a segment of County Road 3240 (Figure 5). This area is depicted on the
Goodlow Park 7.5’ topographic quadrangle and is 4000 feet long. The proposed
line will be 6 inches in diameter and will be placed in a trench with at least three feet
of cover. Two shovel tests (11-12) were excavated on the west side of an
unnamed tributary of Alligator Creek, and two shovel tests (13-14) were excavated
on the east side of this same tributary.

Figure 5. Area 4

14

Area 5
Area 5 is a cross-country segment that connects State Highway 31 with SE
County Road 4040 (Figure 6). This 2500 foot area is depicted on the Kerens 7.5’
topographic quadrangle. The proposed line will be 4 inches in diameter and will be
placed in a trench with at least three feet of cover. Six shovel tests (1-6) were
placed on the east side of the flagged line that will be installed adjacent to an
existing line. The only water source in the area is an unnamed tributary of Indian
Creek.

Figure 6. Area 5

15

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
The background check revealed the presence of significant prehistoric and
historic sites near the project area. No previously unrecorded prehistoric sites were
found within the APE. Backhoe trenches were excavated in the relict flood plains of
Area 1 and Area 2. These trenches were terminated at the depth of the proposed
water line; therefore, it is not known if buried sites are present below the bottom of
these trenches. The remaining three areas (3-5) were investigated by a Pedestrian
Survey and shovel testing and probing. Not one of these areas cross major
streams, and the soils consist of clays at or near the surface. BVRA believes that
these areas were not utilized by prehistoric groups because of an absence of
dependable water and a lack of raw materials for the manufacture of stone tools.
Previous work by other archaeologists have found that prehistoric sites are typically
found along major creeks and rivers or in areas where chert cobbles suitable for the
manufacture of stone tools are present on the surface.
Two cemeteries are located just outside the highway right-of-way along NE
County Road 0060 in Area 3 (Figure 7). They are the Petty’s Chapel Cemetery and
the Navarro County Cemetery. The Petty’s Chapel Cemetery is associated with the
Petty’s Chapel church and is on the southwest side of the county road. This
cemetery was established in the 1870s or 1880s, and the oldest known graves date
to circa 1881-1882. It is enclosed by a modern chain-link fence.
The Navarro County Cemetery is located in a pasture on the northeast side
of the county road almost directly across from the Petty’s Chapel Cemetery. It was
associated with the “Navarro County Poor Farm” which was established in the
1880s for indigent people. Housing and land for gardens were provided to those
persons with no income. Also, this area contained a two-story brick jail for county
prisoners and the mentally ill. The cemetery became the final resting place for the
residents of the farm. Since the wooden crosses were removed in the 1940s, it is
not known how many graves are present in the pasture. Archeological Steward Bill
Young estimates the number to be at least 230. In 1944, a granite marker was
constructed on the site to mark the location of the cemetery (Figure 8). Additional
information regarding these cemeteries and the history of Navarro County is on file
at the Navarro County Historical Society Museum at Pioneer Village in Corsicana.
This survey was conducted according to the Minimum Survey Standards as
recommended by the Texas Historical Commission.

16

Figure 7. Petty’s Chapel Cemetery

17

Figure 8. Navarro County Cemetery

18

RECOMMENDATIONS
No prehistoric or historic sites were found in areas 1-2 and 4-5. It is
therefore recommended that construction of the water line be allowed to proceed as
planned. Should evidence of an archaeological site be found in any of these areas
construction must stop until the situation can be evaluated by the Texas Historical
Commission. Two cemeteries are present just outside the county road right-of-way
in Area 3. Since the county road was widened and straightened by the Texas
Department of Transportation in 1999 and 2000, the chance of unmarked graves
within the right-of-way is believed to be low. Therefore, it is recommended that the
water line be placed in the center of the ditch within the county right-of-way or in the
center of the unpaved road when digging adjacent to these cemeteries. Should
any evidence of a grave be encountered during the installation of the water line, all
work must stop until the situation can be evaluated by the Texas Historical
Commission, Archeology Division.

19

REFERENCES CITED
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview. Texas
Historical Commission, Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report
28.
Cole, Nancy M.
1981 Cultural Resources Survey of Floodwater Retarding Structures Nos.
130b, 136A, in Navarro County, 20A in Ellis County, and Grade
Stabilization Structures No. 12 in Johnson County, 13 and 114 in Ellis
County, Texas in the Chambers Creek Watershed of the Trinity River
Basin. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service.
Duffield, Lathel F.
1960 Survey and Appraisal of the Archaeological Resources of Navarro Mills
Reservoir, Navarro and Hill Counties, Texas. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Duffield, Lathel F.
1963 The Strawn Creek Site: A Mixed Archaic and Neo-American Site at
Navarro Mills Reservoir, Navarro County, Texas. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1931 Physiography of the Western United States. McGraw Hill. New York.
Ferring, C. Reid
1975 An Archaeological Survey of Parts of the Chambers Creek Watershed.
In Research Background and Cultural Setting, edited by James E.
Bruseth and Randall W. Moir, pp. 34-39;55-58. Archaeology Research
Program, Southern Methodist University.
Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, and Timothy K. Perttula
1993 Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document. Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resource
Management Report 3. Texas Historical Commission.
Meade, William D., W. Glen Chervenka, and James M. Greenwade
1974 Soil Survey of Navarro County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with Texas
Agricultural Experimental Station

20

Moore, William E., and Michael R. Bradle
1997 Phase II and III Evaluations of Site 41NV670 to be Impacted by the
Construction of the Gabion Chute Site M4 Flood Control Structure on
Mill Creek in Navarro County, Texas. Brazos Valley Research
Associates, Contract Report Number 48.
Nunley, Parker
1983 Report of Results of a Preliminary Cultural Resources Survey of
Floodwater Retarding Structures No. 46A, Johnson County and Nos.
124C and 127B, Navarro County, Chambers Creek Watershed, Trinity
River Basin. Report submitted to the United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Temple, Texas.
Raab, L. Mark, Randall W. Moir, and Daniel E. McGregor
1980 Preliminary Report of Archaeological Survey in the Richland-Chambers
Dam and Reservoir Project, Navarro and Freestone Counties, Texas.
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University.
1981 Preliminary Report of Archaeological Testing in the RichlandChambers Dam and Reservoir Project, Navarro and Freestone
Counties, Texas. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist
University.
Richner, Jeffrey L.
1982 Tennessee Colony III. Archaeology Research Program, Southern
Methodist University.
Richner, Jeffrey L., and Reed Lee
1976 Cultural Resources at Tennessee Colony Lake. Archaeology Research
Program, Southern Methodist University.
Richner, Jeffrey L., and Joe T. Bagot
1978 A Reconnaissance Survey of the Trinity River Basin, 1976-1977.
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University,
Research Report 113.
Sanders, Calvin B.
1996 Cultural Resources Survey of the Mill Creek Project Navarro County,
Texas. United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, CRM Report 96-1.
Shafer, Harry J.
1964 An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Bardwell Reservoir,
Ellis County, Texas. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

21

Sorrow, William M.
1966 The Pecan Springs Site, Bardwell Reservoir, Texas. The University of
Texas at Austin, Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project
Number 10.
Webb, Walter Prescott (Editor)
1952 The Handbook of Texas: A Dictionary of Essential Information. The
Texas State Historical Association.

22

APPENDIX I: ENTIRE ROUTE OF WATER LINE

APPENDIX II
RESEARCH DESIGN
CHATFIELD WATER SUPPLY CORPORATION
Records Check
Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) will contact the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), the state repository for site records,
to determine if previously recorded sites are present in the project area. In
addition, a review of relevant archaeological reports will be conducted.
Project Description
The Chatfield Water Supply Corporation (WSC) proposes to improve its
water system by adding 43.61 miles of water line to its customers in rural
Navarro County. Pipeline locations will generally follow road rights-of-way and
private property adjacent to roads.
Removal of large trees within paths of pipelines will be by-passed to avoid
damage to trees. Prime farmland will be crossed by the proposed pipelines in
some areas, but will follow previously disturbed routes of the existing pipeline.
Flood plains and wetland areas located at creeks will be crossed by proposed
water lines. In these areas, the water lines will be encased and the land will be
restored to its original condition. There will be no permanent structures located
within flood zones or wetland areas. The Chatfield WSC will adopt binding
resolutions protecting the flood plains and wetland areas from future
development. The Bald Eagle is the only Federally listed threatened species in
Navarro County. Habitats of this species will not be disturbed, and no adverse
impact will effect the threatened species.
The water line will be placed in a trench approximately 1.5 feet wide and
will be buried beneath 36 inches of cover.
Areas to Survey
In an email from Debra Beene of the Texas Historical Commission (THC) to
Hollie Nowlin of the engineering firm J. F. Fontaine & Associates, Inc. dated
December 13, 2005, five areas were selected by the THC for survey. According to
Ms. Beene, most of the 43 mile pipeline has been examined by professional
archaeologists. The five areas are discussed below:

RESEARCH DESIGN (PAGE TWO
Area 1
This is the crossing of State Highway 31 at Chambers Creek on the south
side of the road. A visual inspection by the Principal Investigator on February 9,
2006 revealed a broad flood plain that appears to be relatively undisturbed. BVRA
recommends excavating three backhoe trenches within the highway right-of-way
within the flood plain on the east side of Chambers Creek and one backhoe trench
on the west side of Chambers Creek. These trenches will be dug to the depth of
the Area of Potential Effect (APE). Since the soils in this area are heavy clays,
screening of the excavated soil will not be possible. The intent of the backhoe
trenches is to look for buried features. If an intact feature is observed, it will be left
in place. Diagnostic artifacts (if any) removed from their original context during
backhoe trenching will be collected for analysis and curation.
Area 2
This is the crossing of Chatfield Road at Chambers Creek. On the east side
of the road. A visual inspection by the Principal Investigator on February 9,2006
revealed a broad flood plain that appears to be relatively undisturbed. BVRA
recommends excavating three backhoe trenches on the south side of Chambers
Creek and one backhoe trench on the north side of Chambers Creek following the
same methods described above.
Area 3
This is the route of the proposed water line along the east side of a county
road. A visual inspection by the Principal Investigator on February 9, 2006
revealed a route that does not cross any major streams. In places there is an
existing ditch where the water line will be placed. BVRA classifies this as a very
low probability area for prehistoric sites. Shovel probes will be excavated along this
route to test for sandy soils. If the soils prove to be clay at the surface shovel
testing will not be performed since there is little chance for buried sites in the upland
clays.
The Principal Investigator observed a historic cemetery adjacent to the road.
It will be documented and discussed in the report, but it is outside the APE. In
addition, there is a marker in a pasture noting the apparent presence of another
cemetery. This will be researched to determine the probability of graves in the
area.

RESEARCH DESIGN (PAGE THREE)
Area 4
This is the route of the proposed water line along the south and west sides
of a county road. A visual inspection by the Principal Investigator on February 9,
2006 revealed a route that does not cross any major streams. In places there is an
existing ditch where the water line will be placed. BVRA classifies this as a very
low probability area for prehistoric sites. No historic sites were observed within the
APE. The soils will be tested by shovel probing at both sides of the crossing of an
unnamed tributary. BVRA believes the upland margin to the south and west
overlooking Chambers Creek is a more likely setting for prehistoric sites.
Area 5
This is a cross-country route of the proposed water line from State Highway
31 to a county road. The Principal Investigator was only able to view the area from
the road. According to the topographic map, no major streams are crossed and no
historic structures are depicted. BVRA believes this to be a very low probability
area for the presence of a prehistoric site. The area will be walked and probed with
a shovel. The crew will be looking for evidence of historic utilization in this area.
Site Types
Based on previous work in the area, prehistoric archaeological sites are
known to occur in a variety of settings. Habitation sites are mostly commonly
found on the lower terraces adjacent to streams, while lithic quarries have been
recorded in all settings where chert cobbles were available in prehistoric times.
Lithic scatters and hearths are found on terraces and uplands. Buried sites may
be found in the floodplains of major streams. A previous investigation by BVRA
examined a buffalo bone bed on Mill Creek at 14 feet below the surface in heavy
clay. Arrow points were found in association with the bone. Historic
archaeological sites are not always tied directly to water and may be found in
areas between streams.
Survey Methods
The Principal Investigator and Project Archaeologist for this project is
William E. Moore. No fieldwork will commence until an Antiquities Permit has been
issued. The entire project area was assessed by the Principal Investigator
accompanied by Hollie Nowlin of J. F. Fontaine and Associates, Inc., the
engineering firm associated with this project. The following methods are based on
this “windshield survey” and a review of previous work in the area.

RESEARCH DESIGN (PAGE FOUR)
All exposed ground surfaces will be carefully inspected for cultural materials
and features. Normally only diagnostic artifacts will be collected from the surface of
a site. Quarry or lithic procurement sites will be treated differently. In these areas,
a controlled collection of cultural materials may be made to identify the kinds of raw
materials present and the ways in which these materials were used.
Shovel tests will be excavated at the discretion of the Project Archaeologist
and will be dug in arbitrary 10 cm levels. All excavated earth will be passed
through ¼ inch hardware cloth when possible. Heavy clays will have to be
examined manually. Artifacts found in shovel tests will be collected and analyzed in
the laboratory prior to curation. Shovel tests will be dug to the underlying clay or
rocky subsoil when possible and to depths of about 100 cm when clay or rock is not
reached. If clay or rock can’t be reached through shovel testing, backhoe trenches
will be excavated where appropriate. When a site is found, an attempt to determine
its boundaries through shovel testing and surface inspection will be made.
The project will be documented through a shovel test log, backhoe trench
log, field notes, and digital photography. A map will be drafted that depicts the
location of all areas surveyed, including shovel tests and backhoe trenches.
All archaeological sites will be plotted on the proper USGS topographic
quadrangle. Field numbers will be assigned to all sites until an official trinomial
can be obtained TARL.
Artifact Analysis and Curation
All significant artifacts will be collected for analysis in the laboratory. They
will be described and measured. Those specimens deemed worthy of permanent
curation will be processed and turned over to TARL. All artifacts not viewed as
containing research potential for future researchers will be discarded following a
written document authorizing this action from the Texas Historical Commission
(THC), Archeology Division. Artifacts found on private property will be offered to
the landowner.
Report Preparation
A report documenting the findings of this project will be written by the
Principal Investigator. This report will follow the guidelines established by the
Council of Texas Archeologists and THC. Two draft copies will be submitted to
the THC for review. Upon acceptance of this report, 20 copies will be submitted
to the THC for distribution to regional libraries.

APPENDIX III
BACKHOE TRENCH PROFILES

APPENDIX IV
SHOVEL TEST LOG*

Shovel
Test

Area

Depth (cm)

1

5

10

sandy loam over gray sandy clay

2

5

10

sandy loam over gray sandy clay

3

5

15

sandy loam over gray sandy clay

4

5

15

sandy loam over gray sandy clay

5

5

15

sandy loam over gray sandy clay

6

3

15

dug through clay (10YR 3/1)

7

3

15

dug through clay (10YR 3/1)

8

3

15

dug through clay (10YR 3/1)

9

3

15

dug through clay (10YR 3/1)

10

3

15

dug through clay (10YR 3/1)

11

4

10

dug through red clay

12

4

10

dug through red clay

13

4

10

dug through red clay

14

4

10

dug through red clay

*All tests were negative

Comments

