ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE SAN ANTONIO WATER SYSTEM
MITCHELL LAKE WETLANDS PROJECT,
SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS
by

Damon Burden

Principal Investigator: Ross C. Fields

LETTER REPORT NO. 923

submitted to

Alan Plummer Associates, Inc.
Fort Worth, Texas

by
Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
Cultural Resources Services
Austin, Texas

PAI No. 217017

October 2018

TEXAS ANTIQUITIES PERMIT NO. 8319

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT...............................................................................................................................

v

CURATION...............................................................................................................................

vi

INTRODUCTION.....................................................................................................................

1

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING...............................................................................................

1

RESULTS OF FILE SEARCH AND POTENTIAL
FOR ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES..............................................................................................

4

RESULTS OF THE ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY.................................................................

8

RECOMMENDATIONS...........................................................................................................

12

REFERENCES..........................................................................................................................

14

iii

LIST OF FIGURES
1.

Project location map. Base image is composed of segments of the USGS
7.5-minute Southton and Terrell Wells quadrangle maps............................................

2

2.

Modern aerial photograph of the project area showing shovel test locations,
concrete features, and site 41BX2216............................................................................

10

LIST OF TABLES
1.

Summary of shovel testing results at 41BX2216..........................................................

iv

13

ABSTRACT
On February 8, 2018, personnel with Prewitt and Associates, Inc., conducted an intensive
archeological survey at Mitchell Lake in south San Antonio, Texas, for Alan Plummer Associates,
Inc., and the San Antonio Water System under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8319. This work
was completed prior to proposed construction of a pilot wetland between the southwest shore
of the lake and Pleasanton Road. The horizontal area of potential effects for this investigation
is a 10.8-acre tract owned by the San Antonio Water System.
Review of topographic maps, aerial photographs, and satellite imagery before the field
investigation revealed extensive disturbance in the project area derived from agricultural activity
and subsurface utility installation and lesser impacts derived from gravel road construction
and fence installation. The field investigation included pedestrian survey and the excavation
of 27 shovel tests. Survey identified surface and near-surface gravel deposits and shallow
surface soils. The field investigation resulted in the identification of a sparse trash scatter and
two concrete features that lack the capacity to impart substantive archeological information
and the identification of one previously undocumented Native American archeological site
(41BX2216). The site is a lithic procurement locality and possible open campsite represented
by a sparse surface and near-surface scatter of chipped stone artifacts and a small amount of
burned rocks. No temporally diagnostic artifacts or Native American archeological features were
identified. The archeological deposit at 41BX2216 lacks integrity, significance, or the capacity
to yield important information, and the site is considered ineligible for listing in the National
Register of Historic Places under Criterion D or designation as a State Antiquities Landmark.
Therefore, Prewitt and Associates, Inc., recommends that the proposed project be allowed to
proceed without additional archeological investigations.

v

CURATION
This survey was conducted under a limited-collection policy in which only temporally
diagnostic artifacts would be retained for curation. No temporally diagnostic artifacts were found
during the field investigation, and thus none were collected. Identified artifacts were noted on
field paperwork and returned to the point of recovery. Project records and photographs currently
housed at Prewitt and Associates, Inc., will be transferred to the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory at The University of Texas at Austin for permanent curation.

vi

INTRODUCTION
This report presents the results of an intensive archeological survey of 10.8
acres that will encompass a constructed wetland along the west shore of Mitchell
Lake in south San Antonio, Texas (Figure 1). This survey was conducted under
the direction of Alan Plummer Associates, Inc., for the San Antonio Water System
under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8319. This investigation complied with Section
106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, and associated
regulations 36 CFR 800, the requirements of the Antiquities Code of Texas (Texas
Natural Resource Code of 1977, Title 9, Chapter 191, VTCS 6145-9), and the City of
San Antonio’s Historic Preservation and Design Section of the Unified Development
Code (Article 6 35-360-634).
Fieldwork conducted on February 8, 2018, resulted in the identification of
a sparse scatter of trash dating from the mid twentieth century, two twentiethcentury concrete features, and one Native American archeological site (41BX2216).
The site is a lithic procurement locality that might have been used occasionally as
a campsite. The nature of the archeological deposit and geomorphological character
of the landform on which it sits indicate this site has little to no potential to yield
important information, and thus it is considered ineligible for listing in the National
Register of Historic Places under Criterion D or designation as a State Antiquities
Landmark.
The planned pilot wetland will cover 2–3 acres and will be a free-water
surface wetland consisting of open water and emergent marsh. Specific development
plans are not yet available, but it is anticipated that surfaces in and around the
wetland will be impacted by mechanical excavation of shallow basins, grading,
berm construction, and installation of water-control structures to establish planned
hydraulic flow patterns. It is anticipated that the wetland will include three wetland
trains (linked series of basins) with two cells or basins per train. Mechanical
excavation will typically extend to depths of 1.5 ft or less below the surface but may
extend to 3 ft in places. The average water depth will be approximately 6 inches
in emergent marsh areas and about 2–3 ft in the open water area. Water will be
impounded with earthen berms averaging 2 ft in height. The wetland will be lined
with a low-permeability clay material. Water will be pumped from the lake into the
initial cell of each wetland train and flow by gravity through the system. Outflow
from the wetland will be collected and flow by gravity back into the lake. Impacts
associated with the installation of necessary water-control structures, pipes, and
culverts will extend no more than 3 ft below the ground surface. The entire system
will be surrounded by a gated and locked security fence. For the purposes of this
investigation, the horizontal area of potential effects consists of 10.8 acres that
encompass the proposed wetland, and the vertical area of potential effects is 3 ft or
less below the modern surface.
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The project area is near the south end of Mitchell Lake in the south-central
portion of Bexar County, about 1 km north of the confluence of the Medina River and

1

Figure 1

2

USGS The National Map: National Boundaries Dataset,
National Elevation Dataset, Geographic Names Information
System, National Hydrography Dataset, National Land Cover
Database, National Structures Dataset, and National
Transportation Dataset; U.S. Census Bureau - TIGER/Line;
HERE Road Data

City of San
Antonio

³

0

1,000 2,000

4,000

Meters

T E X AS

PAI/18/slh

Figure 1. Project location map. Base image is composed of segments of the USGS 7.5-minute Southton and Terrell
Wells quadrangle maps (U.S. Geological Survey 1992a, 1992b).

3

Leon Creek. The lake is in the transitional boundary between the Blackland Prairie
to the north and the Post Oak Savannah to the south. The former is characterized by
rolling to nearly level plains underlain by soft interbedded marls, chalks, limestones,
and shales, while the latter is an undulating to nearly level prairie underlain by
sandy surface sediments. This subregion has more wooded areas than adjacent
prairie ecoregions, and surface topography across much of it is more dissected and
irregular (Arbingast et al. 1973:6; Griffith et al. 2004).
The underlying geologic deposit is mapped as the lower Tertiary Midway
Group, which primarily consists of poorly bedded clays and sands with some silts
and incidental beds of marl and limestone. No Holocene alluvium is mapped in the
vicinity of the project area (Bureau of Economic Geology 1983, 2018). Sunev clay
loam with 0–3 percent slopes is mapped across most of the survey area. An area
that closely conforms with the tree line along the lakeshore is mapped as eroded
Heiden clay with 3–5 percent slopes. The Sunev series is characterized by very
deep, well-drained soils found on nearly level to moderately steep stream terraces
and footslopes of valleys and ridges. Sunev soils are derived from loamy, calcium
carbonate-rich sediments. Heiden series soils are well-drained, deep to very deep
soils that formed in clayey residuum weathered from underlying mudstone. These
nearly level to moderately steep soils are found on footslopes, interfluve shoulders,
and ridge sideslopes on dissected plains (SoilWeb Earth 2018). The very gently
sloping surfaces that dip from north to south across most of the project area are
likely derived from previous agricultural activities on a low-relief landform. Surfaces
in the tree line along the lakeshore are more irregular. Surface elevations in flatter
areas vary from about 540 to 530 ft and fall an additional 7–10 ft in wooded areas
around the lake (U.S. Geological Survey 1992a).
The climate of the Blackland Prairie and Post Oak Savannah physiographic
units (and of Bexar County specifically) is classified as modified humid subtropical
with Gulf-influenced hot summers and continental-influenced mild winters. Seasonal
temperature extremes exceeding 100°F and dipping below 32°F occur in both
ecological regions. The mean annual precipitation for Bexar County is 29.1 inches
(739 mm). Precipitation is distributed throughout the year, with peaks in the late
spring and early fall months (Natural Fibers Information Center 1987:49; Petersen
2001:22; Taylor et al. 1991:102).
The biota of Bexar County is a mixture of Balconian, Texan, and Tamaulipan
species. Flora and fauna of the Edwards Plateau north of the project area are defined
as Balconian. The biota of the Blackland Prairie and Post Oak Savannah below the
Balcones Escarpment in Bexar County can be described as a gradation between
more Texan to the northeast to chiefly Tamaulipan to the southwest and south (Blair
1950). Vegetation in and around the project area is now classified as cropland, but
the mapped soils once supported a fire-influenced tallgrass plant community with
mottes of live oak and hackberry trees or scattered hackberry and pecan trees (Frye
et al. 1984; SoilWeb Earth 2018).

4

RESULTS OF FILE SEARCH AND POTENTIAL
FOR ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES
Review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Archeological Sites Atlas in
January 2018 revealed 4 documented prehistoric sites and 13 previous archeological
investigations within 1 km of the project area. None of the depicted investigation
boundaries overlaps the survey area. Historic site 41BX628 and multicomponent
historic and prehistoric site 41BX629 along a segment of the Camino Real de las
Tejas at the Medina River (between 1.0 and 1.3 km south of the project area) are
also discussed.
The Environmental Protection Agency is listed as the federal regulatory
agency on a large 1977 area investigation that may have been conducted for the
City of San Antonio. The depicted area runs along most of the east side of Mitchell
Lake and wraps around its south end, stopping just south of the present project
area. None of the recorded site centroids in the area are associated with that survey.
Two east-west 1978 linear surveys that might be tied to the same project pass along
the south edge of the lake, but no information is provided about them in the Atlas.
In 1990, the Texas Department of Transportation sponsored surveys along
Pleasanton Road in advance of new bridge construction and road realignment at
the Medina River. This survey was performed after State Department of Highways
and Public Transportation archeologist John W. Clark recorded sites 41BX628 and
41BX629 in the path of the proposed new road alignment in 1984. Site 41BX628
marks the historic community of Earle, which was founded on the south side of the
river in the late nineteenth century. This community was marked by the Daughters
of the American Revolution and the State of Texas in 1918, and the site was
designated a State Archeological Landmark and determined eligible for inclusion in
the National Register in 1984. On the north side of the crossing, the Cassin Siding
site (41BX629) was initially recorded as a Native American open campsite indicated
by lithic debitage, with a possible late historic residential component suggested by
archival evidence. The site was classified as a multicomponent prehistoric open
campsite and possible late-nineteenth/early-twentieth-century residence after a
brief eligibility testing effort there (State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation 1984). Site 41BX629 was designated a State Archeological Landmark
and determined eligible for National Register inclusion in 1984.
Site 41BX1376 is a shallow deposit of chipped stone artifacts and mussel shell
fragments identified at 20–40 cm below the surface during an intensive archeological
survey conducted by Geo-Marine, Inc., in 2001 for the San Antonio Water System
(Duke et al. 2002). The site was determined ineligible for National Register listing
in 2002. A later effort to relocate the site during a 2009 survey conducted by SWCA
Environmental Consultants was unsuccessful (Hartnett et al. 2013).
In 2003 and 2004, personnel with the Center for Archaeological Research at
the University of Texas at San Antonio conducted intensive archeological surveys
prior to the location of a planned Toyota manufacturing plant (Greaves et al. 2004).
The larger survey area stretched west along the Medina River from the south end
of Mitchell Lake. A second survey area was centered just southwest of the lake, not

5

far south of the current project area. Two prehistoric sites identified during these
surveys fall within the 1-km review area. Site 41BX1572 was composed of a single
unlined pit hearth and a uniface identified at 130–160 cm below the surface in an
abandoned terrace above Leon Creek. Feature excavation revealed charcoal in the
hearth but no associated burned rocks. Extensive subsurface testing did not expose
additional features or artifacts. Site 41BX1573 was a small (ca. 20 m diameter) lithic
scatter consisting of a core, debitage, and burned rocks on a high terrace between
Leon Creek and the Medina River. Shovel testing indicated the deposit extended
to a maximum depth of 40 cm below the surface. Limited test excavations were
recommended to investigate higher subsurface densities of burned rocks encountered
in some tests, but there is no evidence that additional investigation was performed.
In 2004, site 41BX572 was determined to be ineligible and 41BX573 was determined
to be eligible for inclusion in the National Register. Both sites were revisited during
later surveys.
Personnel with SWCA Environmental Consultants conducted intensive
archeological surveys within the 1-km review area in 2009, 2010, and 2012. The
2009 survey of the proposed Medina River Sewer Outfall right of way conducted
for Pape-Dawson Engineers and the San Antonio Water System identified 22 new
archeological sites and revisited 24 previously recorded sites along an east-west
survey corridor that passed near the south end of Mitchell Lake (Hartnett et al.
2013). SWCA identified a surface scatter of chipped stone artifacts and burned rocks
about 100 m south of previously documented site 41BX1572 and recommended that
the boundary of that site be expanded to include the scatter. No subsurface artifacts
or features were identified in two backhoe trenches excavated in the surface scatter.
The investigators recommended 41BX1572 was ineligible for designation as a State
Antiquities Landmark and did not suggest any additional work. The portion of
the site within that project area was determined ineligible for National Register
listing in 2010. A new prehistoric site (41BX1847) identified about 200 m northeast
of 41BX1572 was a small (35 m diameter) surface scatter composed of five pieces
of lithic debitage and a chopping tool. No subsurface artifacts were identified in a
backhoe trench placed on the scatter, and no additional work was recommended. Site
41BX1847 was determined to be ineligible for National Register listing in 2011. The
2010 survey of a proposed 1.8-mile-long sewer interconnect stretching between the
Leon Creek Water Recycling Center and the planned Medina River Sewer Outfall
west of the lake identified 2 new surface and near-surface lithic scatters, but neither
is within the 1-km review area (Hartnett 2011). The 2012 survey of the Braunig to
Toyota Transmission Line corridor for CPS Energy passed south of Mitchell Lake.
This survey identified 2 new archeological sites and 4 previously documented sites
within the 11-mile-long project area, but none of these sites is within the 1-km
review area (Galindo and Stotts 2013).
In 2012, personnel with AmaTerra Environmental conducted a survey of the
proposed Medina River Hike-and-Bike Trail corridor for the City of San Antonio
Parks and Recreation Department. A portion of the trail corridor runs along the
south and east sides of Mitchell Lake. Sites 41BX629 and 41BX1573 were revisited
during this survey. A new site form for 41BX629 describes it as a lithic scatter and

6

midden site, but it is unclear if this refers to both the prehistoric and late historic
components or simply the prehistoric component. The form notes that the lithic
scatter is derived from material procurement on a large knoll that stands above
the floodplain. Shovel testing during the 2012 investigation did not recover any
subsurface artifacts. The reinvestigation of 41BX1573 indicated that the site is
larger than what was initially recorded and demonstrated that the archeological
deposit is about twice as deep. Excavation of a 50x50-cm test unit 40 m southeast
of the original site boundary recovered debitage, fire-cracked rocks, and mussel
shells between 20 and 100 cm below the surface. No other test units were excavated
because the client realigned the trail to avoid the site.
The potential for historic archeological sites within the project area was
assessed using a mid-eighteenth-century Spanish map, several nineteenth- and
twentieth-century maps obtained from the Texas Department of Transportation’s
Texas Historic Overlay, and a series of historic and modern quadrangles and aerial
photographs accessed through the Perry Castañeda Library at the University of
Texas at Austin and the NETR Online web viewer. Mitchell Lake is an expanded
natural body of water that was referenced as “Lagunilla” and “Laguna de los Patos”
from the Spanish Colonial period up to the early twentieth century (Carter and
Burgess, Inc. 2000; Menchaca 1764; Menger 1913). This body of water became known
as Mitchell Lake after the lake and surrounding property were purchased by the
Mitchell family in the nineteenth century. The lake was a popular destination for local
hunting clubs in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries (Menger 1913).
The San Antonio Irrigation Company, under contract to the City of San Antonio,
constructed the existing dam and spillway in 1901 to increase water levels, and
the City purchased the lake in 1963. The lake was utilized as a waste management
facility for much of the twentieth century (Carter and Burgess, Inc. 2000).
The lake is depicted as “Lagunilla” on a 1764 Spanish map (Menchaca)
showing the presidio of San Antonio, area missions, roads, waterways, and other
landmarks in the vicinity. On this map, the lake is bordered on the east and west by
roads that converge south of the lake, before the Medina River crossing. The road on
the east side of the lake leads to Mission San Francisco de la Espada, which is about
6.3 km northeast of the project area. The road that passes west of the lake, labeled
“Camino Real de Aboxo para el Rio Grande,” continues north toward the presidio of
San Antonio, passing west of Mission San José. The segment of this road that trends
around the west side of the lake and continues south to the Medina River likely
coincides with present-day Pleasanton Road. An 1845 map of San Antonio and the
surrounding area depicts a structure labeled “Leal’s” not far south of the project area
on the Medina River (below its confluence with Leon Creek) and “Garza’s Rancho”
along the river to the southeast (National Archives and Records Administration
2018). A road east of the Leal structure is labeled “Old Presidio Rio Grande Road”;
this may correspond with the “Camino Real de Aboxo para el Rio Grande” on the
Menchaca (1764) map and roads west of the lake on later maps (Klappenbach 1871;
Rullmann 1887; U.S. Geological Survey 1903). The “Laredo Road” on Rullmann’s 1887
Map of Bexar County crosses the Medina River at Kerr’s Crossing, which is shown
in the vicinity of the present-day Pleasanton Road crossing and likely corresponds
with the road on the Menchaca (1764) map.

7

The present alignment of Pleasanton Road north of the Medina River is
shown on the 1903 USGS San Antonio quadrangle. The same map shows the Medina
River crossing in about the same location as it is now, and the community of Earle
is labeled on the south side of the river. The San Antonio, Uvalde, and Gulf Railroad
is shown along the Puget Sound and Gulf Highway (now Pleasanton Road) on the
1918 Floresville and 1922 Lytle U.S. Army Corps of Engineers quadrangle maps.
The reviewed nineteenth-century maps show few if any structures, and available
twentieth-century historic maps show some structures on either side of the Medina
River crossing south of the project area. Numerous farmsteads are depicted southeast
and east of the lake on the 1918 Floresville quadrangle, but no development other
than the early highway, railroad, and unimproved roads is west of the lake on that
map and the 1922 Lytle quadrangle. The nearest farmsteads are well west and
northwest of the project area. The 1927 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers East San
Antonio and West San Antonio quadrangles show a few structures along Pleasanton
Road north and south of the project area, and several are shown farther west along
Comanche Creek. An abandoned structure and associated unimproved driveway
are immediately north of the project area on the 1953 USGS Southton quadrangle,
but these are absent on later quadrangle maps (NETR Online 2018). The same
map shows one structure west of the area on the Missouri Pacific Railroad and four
structures north of it on Pleasanton Road. The 1953 USGS Southton and Terrell
Wells quadrangles also show the Lakefield Airport north of the project area and a
network of lake-fed irrigation ditches around Mitchell Lake. A trunk line leading
off the dam supplied a series of ditches stretching between Pleasanton Road and
Leon Creek, south and west of the survey area. These ditch networks were part of
a large complex of irrigated lands known as Chavaneaux Gardens, which wrapped
around most of the lake, extending north from the Medina River to Chavaneaux
Road (along present-day Loop 410) and as far east as the San Antonio River (Mills
et al. 2017).
A narrow linear cut visible just north of the survey area on a 1973 aerial
image is likely an irrigation ditch (NETR Online 2018). The same feature was
identified during the current field investigation. The 1973 aerial image also shows
a road across the west side of the area, running parallel to and immediately east of
Pleasanton Road. This is depicted for the first time as an unimproved road on the
1973 USGS Southton quadrangle. The same feature appears little used and largely
overgrown on a 1986 aerial image (NETR Online 2018).
The Leon Creek Water Recycling Center was built approximately 2 km
west of the lake in the mid 1960s, and a subsurface reinforced concrete pipeline
was installed between the plant and the lake at about the same time. This pipeline
trends east-west below the north half of the project area (NETR Online 2018; U.S.
Geological Survey 1973a, 1973b). The same pipeline is visible on the lakeshore in the
northeast portion of the survey area on Google Earth satellite imagery. The concrete
pipeline terminates at a vault that is the delivery point for recycled water from
the Leon Creek Water Recycling Center to the lake. A floating rubber pipeline was
connected to the vault in 2002 and extends northeast across the lake to a recycled
water delivery point on the opposite shore.

8

Review of available aerial and satellite imagery supports the finding of
limited area development. The structure depicted just north of the survey area on
the 1953 Southton quadrangle is clearly visible in a 1955 aerial image, but the drive
leading to it from Pleasanton Road is faint. By 1963, the structure is still visible,
but the surrounding area is partially overgrown; the area is almost completely
overgrown three years later (NETR Online 2018). One or possibly two farmsteads
are visible along Pleasanton Road about 300 m north of the project area in a 1955
aerial image, and this remains largely unchanged through the 1970s. Additional
structures had been built closer to the project area by 1986 (mostly west of
Pleasanton Road). Residential structures and various outbuildings are now common
on both sides of the road for about 550 m north of the survey area. Over the past
60 years, development south of the project area has been restricted to a handful
of residential structures and other buildings along Pleasanton Road on either side
of the Medina River, with most of the land between the river and the project area
used for agricultural purposes.
Except for ghosts of the pipeline trench and the unimproved roadway visible
on 1966, 1973, and 1986 aerial images, review of aerial and satellite imagery showed
no other clear indication of development within the project area (NETR Online
2018). Aside from the wooded lakefront along the east side of the 10.8-acre tract,
the property has been utilized for agricultural purposes since at least 1955. A dark
spot or shadow that appears on each aerial and satellite image from 1955 to 2004 is
roughly 15 m in diameter and is centered about 17 m east-northeast of Pleasanton
Road and roughly 50 m south-southeast of the subsurface pipeline. The approximate
center of this shadow corresponds with the location of a more-discrete bright spot
that is visible on Google Earth satellite imagery from 1995 to the present and a
feature that is visible in Google Earth street view. The field investigation revealed
this to be a rectangular concrete machine mount (see description below), suggesting
that the surrounding shadow may correlate with previous surface disturbance.
While the geologic and geomorphic characteristics of the project area
suggest it has limited potential for naturally buried prehistoric archeological sites,
its proximity to a historically documented natural water source and the presence
of numerous water-proximate Native American archeological sites in and around
the 1-km review area suggest there is some potential for surface and near-surface
archeological deposits in the project area. Although indications of historic-era
development are limited, the potential for historic archeological sites is considered
to be moderate due to its position between a dependable water source and a segment
of the well-traveled Camino Real de las Tejas, the identification of a mid-twentiethcentury structure immediately to the north and possible structural remains within
it, and its close proximity to a long-used river crossing, Spanish missions, and
preexisting Hispanic ranch compounds.
RESULTS OF THE ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
Field investigation consisted of pedestrian survey with examination of
vegetation-free surface exposures and shovel testing where appropriate within the
10.8-acre project area (Figure 2). In general, the east and west edges of the area are

9

defined by Mitchell Lake and Pleasanton Road. Portions of the north and south edges
conform with or closely follow existing tree lines and fence lines. The area encompasses
a 7-acre field and 3.8 acres of light to moderately thick woodland along the lakeshore.
Most is characterized by nearly level to very gently sloping surfaces that extend
across the field and into the wooded area bordering the lake, before ending abruptly
with moderate to steep slopes that fall between 2 and 3 m to the edge of the lake.
The flat terrain that covers most of the project area is punctuated by a very subtle
northeast-southwest gravel rise in the southeast quadrant of the field. The rise varies
from roughly 40 to 80 m in width and stands approximately 30 cm at most above
surrounding terrain. While flatter surfaces exhibit a general north-to-south dip in
elevation, surfaces around the rise also slope gradually to the north, south, and west
off of this landform. The rise is composed of abundant poorly sorted gravels (primarily
chert), with little intervening sediment. Surface and near-surface gravels are also
profuse around the top edges of the lake basin. Gravel sizes range from less than a
centimeter up to 20 cm across. Tabular sandstone from lower strata is exposed along
the sloped, eroded, and disturbed surfaces that border the lake.
A gravel road cuts across the southwest corner, providing access to the
Mitchell Lake dam, and the gravel road visible on 1973 aerial imagery is now
overgrown but still perceptible just east of the Pleasanton Road right of way fence
(NETR Online 2018). Shallow linear swales just east of the former road are likely
drainage ditches. A two-track road once ran along the north edge of the field, parallel
to an irrigation ditch just to the north. No clear indication of the subsurface water line
between the Leon Creek Water Recycling Center and Mitchell Lake was identified
west of a large concrete catchment box and connected 18-inch-diameter outflow
pipeline on the lakeshore. Surfaces around and upslope from the catchment basin
are extensively disturbed by previous construction activities.
Surface visibility typically varied from 0 to 40 percent, with higher visibility
along animal trails, around harvester ant colonies, and in parts of the sparsely
vegetated field. Twenty-seven shovel tests were excavated, all on relatively flat
terrain above the lake (see Figure 2). Shovel Tests D01–D04 were distributed across
suitable terrain closest to the lake. Shovel Tests D5–D26 were systematically spaced
along four survey transects. Shovel Test D27 was excavated close to a concrete
pad in the southwest portion. The shovel test density of 2.5 tests/acre exceeds the
Texas Historical Commission’s minimum archeological survey standard of 2 tests
per acre on tracts that are between 3 and 11 acres in size. This level of effort is
considered sufficient given the geomorphic setting and the extent of disturbance.
Backhoe trenching was considered unnecessary for the same reasons and because
anticipated impacts will be shallow.
Shovel tests were approximately 30 cm in diameter and excavated in 20-cm
levels when sediments allowed. Excavated sediment was screened through 1/4-inchmesh hardware cloth or carefully sorted through with a trowel when too difficult
to screen efficiently. A Shovel Test Record form was used to record brief sediment
descriptions and notes about the presence of natural inclusions (e.g., snail shells),
artifacts, modern trash, and construction materials. The average shovel test depth
was 36 cm, with depths ranging from 20 to 55 cm.

Figure 2

10

D19
D08

D20

D21

Footers
"
D01 )
Catchment
Basin

D18
D23

D17

D22

)
"

D09
D24 D02

D07

D16

D04

D15

D10

D25

D03

D06
Pad

D27

D11

)
"

D14
D13

D05

)
"

PAI/18/slh

Concrete
Negative Shovel Test
Positive Shovel Test
41BX2216 Site Boundary
Project Area

D26

D12

³

0
0

10 20
40

Meters
80

40
160

Feet

Figure 2. Modern aerial photograph of the project area showing shovel test locations, concrete features, and site
41BX2216.

11

Surfaces around Shovel Test D01 are littered with a sparse scatter of trash
that dates from about the mid twentieth century to the present. Most if not all of this
material probably is derived from former and existing residences just to the north. An
undecorated whiteware sherd and a piece of Sprite bottle glass were recovered among
the thin gravel-dominated surface sediments in Shovel Test D01. The other tests
excavated in similar settings (Shovel Tests D02–D04 and D26) revealed abundant,
moderately to very densely packed gravels with little intervening sediment at the
surface. The ground across this wooded area is littered with trash dating from the
mid twentieth century, and modern faunal skeletal material is common. A pair of
concrete footers at the top edge of the lake bank east of Shovel Test D01 may have
supported overhead tanks; each is about 140x55 cm.
As suggested by prefield review, survey indicated that the upper ca. 30 cm of
sediment in the maintained field has been impacted by previous soil amendment and
cultivation. Shovel tests on and south of the low rise exposed common to abundant,
tightly packed surface and near-surface gravels with little intervening sediment,
but tests north and west of this landform encountered thicker surface sediments. A
representative profile of the latter includes a 25–30-cm-thick Ap horizon (cultivation
zone) composed of a well-consolidated strongly granular to moderately blocky mix of
loam, clay loam, and weak silty clay with few small gravels, common carbonate flecks,
and occasional small snail shells. The Ap horizon typically caps well-consolidated,
slightly tacky, weak silty clay with scattered carbonate flecks and occasional small
gravels that was exposed to a maximum depth of 55 cm below the surface. In some
instances, lower sediments graded from clay loam to weak silty clay with depth,
and at times the clay loam and silty clay were distinguishable as distinct layers.
The mottled, poorly sorted sediment below the Ap horizon in Shovel Test D09 was
distinct in that it more closely resembled backfill material, suggesting the test was
on or near the subsurface pipeline trench.
The concrete pad in the southwest part of the survey area corresponds with
the feature visible in Google Earth satellite imagery and street view. This badly
damaged, two-tiered, rectangular pad or foundation probably served as a machine
mount, perhaps for a water pump although no spatially associated pipe stubs were
observed. The 2.3-m-long by 1.2-m-wide pad is set on a roughly 5x2-m area of raised
earth. Six pipes set in the concrete (three opposite pairs) anchor 3/4-inch-diameter
bolts. Several machine-made bricks (some with adhering mortar) and some large
irregular limestone fragments and large chert cobbles are scattered on and around
the concrete pad. Poorly sorted sediment below the Ap horizon in Shovel Test D27
about 6 m east of the pad looked like fill material. This disturbance may correlate
with the dark spot or shadow visible on historic and modern aerial imagery (NETR
Online 2018). Two pieces of flat, torch-cut iron were recovered along with several
mortar fragments and limestone fragments in Shovel Test D27.
Site 41BX2216 is a lithic procurement locality and possible open campsite
that stretches across much of the survey area (see Figure 2). This site is on stable to
degrading, nearly level to very gently sloping surfaces immediately west of Mitchell
Lake and 1.2 km north-northwest of the confluence of Leon Creek and the Medina
River. The delineated site area encompasses the low gravel rise described above and

12

extends to the north and west of it. Surfaces in the site area slope very gradually off
of that landform, and surface elevations vary from about 538 to 533 ft north to south.
Mapped soils consist of Sunev clay loam with 0–3 percent slopes across most of the
site and eroded Heiden clay with 3–5 percent slopes along its east edge (SoilWeb
Earth 2018). Surface sediments are composed of mixed loam, clay loam, and silty
clay over weak silty clay or clay loam grading to silty clay with depth. Most of the
site is in a maintained field now primarily covered in clover, and its east edge is
covered by woody forbs and weeds, smaller trees like deciduous holly, and mesquite,
hackberry, and chinaberry trees. Surface visibility varies from 0 to 60 percent.
Site 41BX2216 is a sparse surface and near-surface artifact scatter
encompassing 14,885 m2 with maximum dimensions of 395 m northeast-southwest
by 112 m northwest-southeast. Site extent was defined by surface observations and
the excavation of 26 shovel tests (half positive for Native American artifacts). The
highest artifact counts were on the north slope of the rise in Shovel Tests D15, D16,
and D24. The documented chipped stone assemblage (n = 27) is entirely composed of
chert and primarily consists of hard-hammer percussion flakes, shatter, and tested
gravels (Table 1). Other artifacts recovered in shovel tests or observed on the surface
include a retouched flake, a biface-thinning flake, flake cores, hard-hammer core
fragments, and bipolar core fragments and flakes. The thinning flake was recovered
adjacent to a fragment of burned sandstone in the wall of Shovel Test D24, and burned
chert was identified in Shovel Tests D16, D23, and D24. Almost the entire assemblage
was recovered within 30 cm of the modern surface. Three pieces of debitage recovered
at 20–40 cm in two tests may have been slightly deeper.
The chipped stone assemblage relates to material testing and procurement
of locally available chert gravels, early-stage core reduction, and perhaps early to
mid-stage tool production. No temporally diagnostic artifacts or Native American
features were identified during survey. The burned chert and one fragment of burned
sandstone could be derived from short-term habitation/site use and heat treatment
of locally available lithic material. The nature of the archeological deposit and
geomorphological character of the landform on which it sits suggest that it is, at
best, a palimpsest of repeated, probably short-term visits to this locality over time.
RECOMMENDATIONS
This survey identified a sparse scatter of trash dating from the mid twentieth
century to the present in very shallow surface soils on the east edge of the project
area, a concrete pad and pair of concrete footers, and a previously unrecorded Native
American archeological site (41BX2216). Any historic artifacts that might be included
in the trash scatter close to the lake would be less than 100 years old and mixed
with modern trash on or immediately below the surface. Any such materials lack the
capacity to impart a substantive archeological contribution. The concrete pad dates
at least as early as the mid twentieth century (NETR Online 2018), and the concrete
footers may be of similar age; neither feature was documented as an archeological site
because they have no potential to impart archeological information. The nature of the
archeological deposit at 41BX2216 and geomorphological character of the landform on
which it sits suggest that it is a palimpsest of repeated, short-term site use over time.

13
Table 1. Summary of shovel testing results at 41BX2216
Shovel Test

Depth (cm)

Depth to clay (cm)

Materials Recovered

D02

25

25+

D03

20

20

None

D04

20

20

None

D05

40

30

20–40 cm: 1 debitage

D06

47

30

None

D07

40

35

None

D08

45

30

None

D09

40

35

0–20 cm: 1 debitage

D10

45

30

None

D11

40

25

0–20 cm: 1 debitage

D12

38

25

None

D13

20

20

None

D14

20

20

0–20 cm: 1 debitage

D15

35

25

0–25 cm: 1 retouched flake, 5 debitage, 1 core fragment

D16

55

45

0–20 cm: 1 debitage, 1 burned chert gravel
20–40 cm: 2 debitage

D17

50

40

0–20 cm: 1 tested chert gravel

D18

55

35

0–20 cm: 1 debitage

D19

33

33

None

D20

45

35

None

D21

40

35

Surface: 1 debitage

D22

40

35

None

D23

50

35

0–20 cm: 1 burned chert

D24

40

33

0–20 cm: 3 debitage, 1 burned chert
20–30 cm: 2 debitage, 1 burned sandstone

D25

25

15

0–25 cm: 4 debitage

D26

20

20+

D27

35

30

0–25 cm: 1 debitage

None
0–30 cm: 2 pieces flat iron, mortar fragments, limestone
fragments

This surface and near-surface archeological deposit has been extensively disturbed by
cultivation and subsurface utility installation and impacted to lesser degrees by gravel
road construction, fence installation, livestock grazing, near-surface root growth, insect
burrowing, and water-derived surface erosion. Given the limited artifact variability and
uncertain depositional history, the absence of temporally diagnostic artifacts, absence
of Native American features, and history of recent surface disturbance, it is unlikely
that the remaining archeological deposit can be interpreted in any meaningful way.
While the identification of this site builds on existing site distribution data that is
useful in a gross sense for understanding Native American landscape utilization in
the region, the aforementioned limiting factors indicate the archeological deposit at
41BX2216 lacks integrity, significance, or the capacity to yield important information,
and it is considered ineligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places
under Criterion D or designation as a State Antiquities Landmark. Hence, Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., recommends that the proposed project be allowed to proceed
without additional archeological investigations.

14

REFERENCES
Arbingast, Stanley A., Lorren G. Kennamer, Robert H. Ryan, Alice Lo, David L. Karney, Charles
P. Zlatkovich, Michael E. Bonine, and Roberta G. Steele
1973
Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93–115.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1983
The Geologic Atlas of Texas, San Antonio Sheet. Reprint. Originally published in 1974.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
2018
		

Midway Group, undivided. Electronic document, available at https://mrdata.usgs.gov/
geology/
state/sgmc-unit.php?unit=TXPNmi%3B0, accessed January 2018.

Carter and Burgess, Inc.
2000
Mitchell Lake Master Implementation Plan.
Duke, Daron, Floyd Largent Jr., Mark Slaughter, S. Hunt, D. Shanabrook, and C. Crawford
2002
Archeological Survey for the Salado Creek and Leon Creek Wastewater Recycling Centers
to Dos Rios Wastewater Recycling Center Interconnection Line Project, South Bexar
County, Texas. Miscellaneous Reports of Investigations No. 2SA. Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano.
Frye, R. G., K. L. Brown, and C. A. McMahan
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas Map. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department.
Galindo, Mary Jo, and Matthew C. Stotts
2013
Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed CPS Energy Braunig to Toyota Transmission
Line Project, Bexar County, Texas. SWCA Cultural Resources Report No. 11-457. SWCA
Environmental Consultants, San Antonio.
Greaves, Russell D., Jason D. Weston, Steve A. Tomka, I. Wayne Cox, Richard B. Mahoney, and
Bruce K. Moses
2004
Archaeology of the Planned Location of the Toyota Motor Manufacturing Plant, San
Antonio, Bexar County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report No. 333. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Griffith, G. E., S. A. Bryce, J. M. Omernik, J. A. Comstock, A. C. Rogers, B. Harrison, S. L. Hatch,
and D. Bezanson
2004
Ecoregions of Texas (color poster with map, descriptive text, and photographs): Reston,
Virginia, U.S. Geological Survey (map scale 1:2,500,000).
Hartnett, Christian T.
2011
Intensive Archaeological Survey of the Proposed Leon Creek Interconnect, San Antonio,
Bexar County, Texas. SWCA Cultural Resources Report No. 11-74. SWCA Environmental
Consultants, Austin.
Hartnett, Christian T., Matthew C. Stotts, Kevin A. Miller, C. Britt Bousman, Ken Lawrence, Steve
Carpenter, Daniel Culotta, Anna Mod, and Michael R. Chavez
2013
Intensive Archaeological Survey of the Medina River Sewer Outfall (MRSO) Project, Bexar
County, Texas. SWCA Cultural Resources Report No. 09-314. SWCA Environmental
Consultants, Austin.
Klappenbach, Louis
1871
Bexar County. Texas General Land Office, Austin.

15
Menchaca, Luis Antonio
1764
Presidio de San Antonio de Bexar: sus Misiones de la Provinsia de Texas, Fecho en 24
del Mes de Marzo de 1764. Electronic document, https://www.elcaminorealdelostejas.
org/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/MapaDelPresidio-NEW.jpg, accessed January 22, 2018.
Menger, R.
1913
Texas Nature Observations and Reminiscences. Guessaz & Ferlet Company, San Antonio.
Mills, Sam, Angelica Mata, and Marisol Robles
2017
Request for Qualifications: Mitchell Lake Wetlands Quality Treatment Initiatives. San
Antonio Water System (SAWS) PowerPoint presentation at pre-submittal conference.
National Archives and Records Administration
2018
Untitled 1845 map of San Antonio and vicinity (cartographer and agency of origin
unknown). National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C.
Nationwide Environmental Title Research, L.L.C. (NETR Online)
2018
Historic Aerials. Electronic document, http://historicaerials.com, accessed January 2018.
Natural Fibers Information Center
1987
The Climates of Texas Counties. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at
Austin, in cooperation with the Office of the State Climatologist, Texas A&M University,
College Station.
Petersen, James F.
2001
San Antonio: An Environmental Crossroads on the Texas Spring Line. In On the Border:
An Environmental History of San Antonio, edited by Char Miller, pp. 17–37. University
of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh.
Rullmann, John D.
1887
Map of Bexar County. Published by the Strobridge Lithograph Company, Cincinnati,
New York, & London. Texas General Land Office, Austin.
SoilWeb Earth
2018
SoilWeb Network Link on Google Earth, Streaming-KMZ Interface to U.S. Department
of Agriculture, National Cooperative Soil Survey, Soils Survey Geographic Database
(SSURGO) and Natural Resources Conservation Service, State Soil Geographic Database
(STATSGO) digital soil survey products. California Soil Resource Laboratory, University
of California, Davis, in collaboration with U.S. Department of Agriculture, National
Cooperative Soil Survey. Electronic document, http://casoilresource.lawr.ucdavis.edu/
soilweb-apps, accessed January 2018.
State Department of Highways and Public Transportation
1984
Letter Report: Testing of Archaeological Site 41BX629 on Pleasanton Road at the
Medina River, 7.1 Miles S. of Loop 410. State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Austin.
Taylor, F. B., R. B. Hailey, and D. L. Richmond
1991
Soil Survey of Bexar County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
1918
Floresville, Texas, 30-minute Quadrangle. War Department, U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, Washington, D.C.
1922

Lytle, Texas, 30-minute Quadrangle. War Department, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Washington, D.C.

1927a

East San Antonio, Texas, 15-minute Quadrangle. War Department, U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, Washington, D.C.

16
1927b

West San Antonio, Texas, 15-minute Quadrangle. War Department, U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, Washington, D.C.

U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)
1903
San Antonio, Texas, 15-minute Quadrangle. U.S. Geological Survey. Walter Geology
Library, University of Texas at Austin.
1953a

Southton, Texas, 7.5-minute Quadrangle. Mapped by the U.S. Army Map Service.
Published by the U.S. Geological Survey, Denver.

1953b

Terrell Wells, Texas, 7.5-minute Quadrangle. Mapped by the U.S. Army Map Service.
Published by the U.S. Geological Survey, Denver.

1973a

Southton, Texas, 7.5-minute Quadrangle. U.S. Geological Survey, Denver.

1973b

Terrell Wells, Texas, 7.5-minute Quadrangle. U.S. Geological Survey, Denver.

1992a

Southton, Texas, 7.5-minute Quadrangle. U.S. Geological Survey, Denver.

1992b

Terrell Wells, Texas, 7.5-minute Quadrangle. U.S. Geological Survey, Denver.

