Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project,
Orange County, Texas
By:
Charles E. Bludau Jr., Jeffrey D. Owens, and Jesse O. Dalton

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8905
H076-180201

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Lanier and Associates Consulting
Engineers, Inc.
New Orleans, Louisiana

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

August 2019

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project,
Orange County, Texas
By:
Charles E. Bludau Jr., Jeffrey D. Owens, and Jesse O. Dalton

Prepared for:

Lanier and Associates Consulting Engineers, Inc.
4101 Magazine Street
New Orleans, Louisiana 70115

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 S. Interstate 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
H076-180201

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8905

August 2019

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project, Orange County, Texas

ABSTRACT

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by Lanier and Associates
Consulting Engineers, Inc. on behalf of Jefferson Gulf Coast Energy Partners, LLC (JGCEP) and
the Port of Beaumont to conduct a cultural resources inventory survey and assessment for the
proposed Orange County South Terminal Project in Orange County, Texas. JGCEP is seeking
to expand its capacity to export crude oil and petroleum products by constructing a docking
facility—the Orange County South Terminal—on the Neches River. The proposed undertaking
would involve construction of the new docking facility within an approximately 15.7-hectare (38.8acre) area on the currently undeveloped northern shoreline of the Neches River approximately
2.4 kilometers (1.5 miles) south of Rose City. In addition, the project would involve dredging an
approximately 23.5-hectare (58.1-acre) area within a side channel of the Neches River adjacent
to the property. For purposes of the terrestrial cultural resources survey, the project area is
assumed to consist of the 15.7-hectare (38.8-acre) land-based portion of the project. The marine
survey of the proposed dredge area within the nearby channel of the Neches River is being
prepared under separate cover (under separate Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8926). Subsurface
impacts are anticipated to be relatively minimal within the terrestrial portion of the project area as
a whole, extending no more than a few feet below surface. Deeper impacts would be localized
around the proposed location of the new docking platform, where subsurface impacts would slope
down into the proposed dredge area and extend to depths of up to 4.6 meters (15.0 feet) below
surface along the shoreline (note that the maximum elevation of the landform is about 1.5 meters
[5.0 feet] above mean sea level and the entire landform appears to be permanently inundated).
The proposed undertaking would be sponsored by JGCEP on land owned by the Port of
Beaumont, a political subdivision of the state of Texas; as such, the project falls under the
jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas. In addition, the project may require federal permitting
by the US Army Corps of Engineers (Galveston District) under Section 404 of the Clean Water
Act and/or Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act. As the proposed project represents a
publicly sponsored undertaking, the project sponsor is required to provide the applicable federal
agencies and the Texas Historical Commission (THC), which serves as the State Historic
Preservation Office (SHPO) for the state of Texas, with an opportunity to review and comment on
the project’s potential to adversely affect historic properties listed on or considered eligible for
listing on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) under the National Historic Preservation
Act (NHPA) and/or for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL) under the Antiquities
Code of Texas, as appropriate.

H076-180201

v

Management Summary

On May 14, 2019, Horizon archeologists Charles E. Bludau, Jahleen Sefton, and Rachel
Naasz conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. The survey was
conducted under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, under Texas
Antiquities Permit No. 8905. The purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural
resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s
archeologists traversed the tract and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for
aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The project area consists of an extensive, largely
inundated marsh that has received some dredge spoil deposits over the years. However, dredge
deposition appears to have been patchy and does not provide continuous cover of the project
area, and dredge spoil does not appear to very deep anywhere within the project area. The water
table was encountered in a fair number of shovel tests.
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of one shovel test per 0.8 hectare (2.0 acre) for tracts
between 4.5 and 40.5 hectares (11.0 and 100.0 acres) in size. As such, a minimum of 19 shovel
tests would be required within the 15.7-hectare (38.8-acre) project area. Horizon excavated a
total of 16 shovel tests; as such, the shovel testing density fell slightly short of the TSMASS
requirements. The TSMASS shovel test minimum for a project area of this size was impeded as
effectively the entire project area appears to be permanently inundated, and large portions of the
project area were largely inaccessible. Shovel testing was conducted on rare elevated landforms
where present and in selected flooded areas where ponding was not too deep. Shovel testing
typically revealed shallow to moderately deep deposits of sandy loam overlying clay at depths
ranging from 15.0 to 30.0 centimeters (5.9 to 11.8 inches) below surface, though deep sandy
sediments were observed in two shovel tests extending to a depth of 1.0 meter (3.3 feet) or more
below surface. Sediments in a few of the shovel tests exhibited iron staining, suggesting that the
project area experiences at least seasonal, if not permanent, high water tables. Additionally, the
water table was encountered in several shovel tests. Based on the overall distribution of shovel
tests within the project area; the marshy, inundated setting; and the lack of observed cultural
resources, it is Horizon’s opinion that the project area was adequately assessed for cultural
resources.
No cultural resources of historic or prehistoric age were observed on the modern ground
surface or within any of the shovel tests excavated within the project area during the survey.
Examination of historical US Geological Survey (USGS) topographic maps dating from 1926 to
the present and aerial photographs dating from 1959 to the present indicate that the study area
has consisted of an undeveloped, wooded marshland throughout the 20th century. A segment of
George R. Brown Road passes through the study area along the shoreline and terminates on the
point of the small peninsula in the southern portion of the study area that projects out into the
Neches River channel. Historical imagery indicates that a small boat dock or pier was briefly
present off this road on the shoreline in the approximate center of the project area. This boat
dock was present briefly from the mid- to late 1980s to mid-1990s, though it has since been
removed and was not of historic age in any case. No standing structures of potentially historic
age are present within the project area.

vi

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project, Orange County, Texas

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified within the project
area that meet the criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26 or for inclusion in the
NRHP under 36 CFR 60.4. Horizon recommends a finding of “no historic properties affected,”
and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking.
However, human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are protected under the Texas Health and
Safety Code. In the event that any human remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered
at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in
previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent
discovery, and the THC should be notified immediately. Similarly, if any cultural resources or
features, either prehistoric or historic-age, are inadvertently encountered during construction
within the project area, work should cease in the immediate area and the THC should be notified
of the discovery.
All project records will be preserved and curated at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL) at The University of Texas in Austin upon completion of the project.

H076-180201

vii

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project, Orange County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
ABSTRACT ............................................................................................................... v

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 7
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 7
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 7
2.3
Climate .......................................................................................................... 8
2.4
Flora and Fauna ...........................................................................................10

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................13
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) ....................................................13
3.2
Archaic Period (5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) ........................................................14
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (A.D. 100 to 600) .......................................................15
3.4
Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 600 to 1500) ...................................................16
3.5
Historic Period (A.D. 1500 to Present)..........................................................17

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ..........................................................................................23

5.0

SURVEY METHODOLOGY .....................................................................................25

6.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................31

7.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................33
7.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................33
7.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .....34
7.3
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Antiquities Landmark........................35
7.4
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................36
7.5
Management Recommendations ..................................................................37

8.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................39
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

H076-180201

ix

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.

Vicinity Map of Project Area ...................................................................................... 2
Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Map ............................................... 3
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ......................................................... 4
Soils Mapped within Project Area ............................................................................. 9
Overview of Central Portion of Northwestern Wetland (Facing West) ......................26
Overview of Northeastern Wetland within Project Area (Facing North-Northeast) ....26
Overview of Western Portion of Project Area (Facing East) .....................................27
Overview of Wetland within Project Area (Facing Northwest) ..................................27
Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Project Area ........................................28

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 1.

x

Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area ......................................................... 8

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project, Orange County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by Lanier and Associates
Consulting Engineers, Inc. on behalf of Jefferson Gulf Coast Energy Partners, LLC (JGCEP) and
the Port of Beaumont to conduct a cultural resources inventory survey and assessment for the
proposed Orange County South Terminal Project in Orange County, Texas. JGCEP is seeking
to expand its capacity to export crude oil and petroleum products by constructing a docking
facility—the Orange County South Terminal—on the Neches River. The proposed undertaking
would involve construction of the new docking facility within an approximately 15.7-hectare (38.8acre) area on the currently undeveloped northern shoreline of the Neches River approximately
2.4 kilometers (1.5 miles) south of Rose City (Figures 1 to 3). In addition, the project would
involve dredging an approximately 23.5-hectare (58.1-acre) area within a side channel of the
Neches River adjacent to the property. For purposes of the terrestrial cultural resources survey,
the project area is assumed to consist of the 15.7-hectare (38.8-acre) land-based portion of the
project. The marine survey of the proposed dredge area within the nearby channel of the Neches
River is being prepared under separate cover (under separate Texas Antiquities Permit
No. 8926). Subsurface impacts are anticipated to be relatively minimal within the terrestrial
portion of the project area as a whole, extending no more than a few feet below surface. Deeper
impacts would be localized around the proposed location of the new docking platform, where
subsurface impacts would slope down into the proposed dredge area and extend to depths of up
to 4.6 meters (15.0 feet) below surface along the shoreline (note that the maximum elevation of
the landform is about 1.5 meters [5.0 feet] above mean sea level and the entire landform appears
to be permanently inundated).
The proposed undertaking would be sponsored by JGCEP on land owned by the Port of
Beaumont, a political subdivision of the state of Texas; as such, the project falls under the
jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas. In addition, the project may require federal permitting
by the US Army Corps of Engineers (Galveston District) under Section 404 of the Clean Water
Act and/or Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act. As the proposed project represents a
publicly sponsored undertaking, the project sponsor is required to provide the applicable federal
agencies and the Texas Historical Commission (THC), which serves as the State Historic
Preservation Office (SHPO) for the state of Texas, with an opportunity to review and comment on
the project’s potential to adversely affect historic properties listed on or considered eligible for
listing on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) under the National Historic Preservation

H076-180201

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Vicinity Map of Project Area
2

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project, Orange County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Map

H076-180201

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 3. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

4

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project, Orange County, Texas

Act (NHPA) and/or for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL) under the Antiquities
Code of Texas, as appropriate.
On May 14, 2019, Horizon archeologists Charles E. Bludau, Liz Sefton and Rachel Naasz
conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. The survey was conducted
under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, under Texas Antiquities
Permit No. 8905. The cultural resources investigations consisted of archival research, an
intensive cultural resources survey of the project area, and the production of a report suitable for
review by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas Historical
Commission’s (THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 26, and the Council
of Texas Archeologists (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports.
Following this introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and
cultural backgrounds, respectively, of the project area. Chapter 4.0 describes the results of
background archival research, and Chapter 5.0 discusses cultural resources survey methods.
Chapter 6.0 presents the results of the cultural resources survey, and Chapter 7.0 presents
cultural resources management recommendations for the project. Chapter 8.0 lists the
references cited in the report and Appendix A summarizes shovel test data.
All project records will be preserved and curated at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL) at The University of Texas in Austin upon completion of the project.

H076-180201

5

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project, Orange County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located in west-central Orange County, Texas. Orange County is
situated on the Gulf Coastal Plain in southeastern Texas, and the project area is located
48.3 kilometers (30.0 miles) northwest of the Gulf of Mexico shoreline. The Gulf of Mexico
represents a structural basin formed by lithosphere deformation. The Texas Coastal Plain, which
extends as far north as the Ouachita uplift in southern Oklahoma and westward to the Balcones
Escarpment, consists of seaward-dipping bodies of sedimentary rock, most of which are of
terrigenous clastic origin, that reflect the gradual infilling of the basin from its margins (Abbott
2001). The Beaumont area is underlain by rocks and unconsolidated sediments that are quite
young in a geological sense, ranging from modern to Miocene in age. These consist
predominantly of a series of fluviodeltaic bodies arranged in an offlapped sequence, with
interdigitated and capping eolian, littoral, and estuarine facies making up a relatively minor
component of the lithology. Major bounding disconformities between these formations are usually
interpreted to represent depositional hiatuses that occurred during periods of sea level low stand.
The oldest rocks in this fill are of Late Cretaceous age. As a result of the geometry of basin filling,
successively younger rock units crop out in subparallel bands from the basin margin toward the
modern coastline.
The project area is located on the northern shoreline of the Neches River approximately
23.5 kilometers (14.6 miles) northwest of Sabine Lake. Physiographically, the terrestrial portion
of the study area is situated along the shoreline and on a narrow peninsula that projects into the
Neches River. The landform has been artificially built up throughout the last century via deposition
of dredge material excavated from the nearby channel of the Neches River. Historically, this area
consisted of marshland prior to being topographically elevated through dredging activities.
Currently, the study area is covered in a moderately densely wooded coastal forest.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

Geologically, the study area is situated on Holocene-age alluvium (Qal), which consists of
mixed clay, silt, and sand forming a variety of point bar, natural levee, stream channel, and
backswamp deposits (Shelby et al. 1968). A single soil unit is mapped within the terrestrial portion

H076-180201

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

of the study area—Neches coarse sand, 2 to 5% slopes (NecC)—which is composed of deep
deposits of sandy and loamy dredge materials (Table 1; Figure 4) (NRCS 2019).
In Southeast Texas, aboriginal cultural resources are relatively common on alluvial
terraces adjacent to prominent streams, bayous, and rivers as well as in coastal settings. While
significant aboriginal sites may occur at great depths adjacent to streams that contain deep
Holocene-age alluvial sediments, deeply buried aboriginal sites are uncommon in upland areas;
however, archeological deposits may be shallowly buried within eolian and alluvial sediments
across the region. Based exclusively on the physiographic setting of the study area on the
shoreline of the Neches River, the study area would be considered to possess high potential to
contain undocumented aboriginal archeological resources. However, this portion of the Neches
River shoreline historically consisted of low-lying marshlands, and deposition of dredged materials
from historical dredging operations within the Neches River channel have impacted the natural
landforms within the project area.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995). While
the paleoclimatic history of the coastal region remains unclear, Bryant and Holloway (1985)
present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas that includes three separate
climatic periods—the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.), the Late Glacial
Period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.), and the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence
from the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was
considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was
more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway
1985). The Late Glacial Period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow
warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands were
gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985). During
the Post-Glacial Period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more stable.
The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas. The
drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued into the mid-

Table 1. Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area
NRCS
Soil Code
NecC

Soil Name
Neches coarse
sand, 2 to 5%
slopes

Typical Profile
(inches)

Parent Material
Sandy and loamy dredge spoils on
coastal flats

0-5: Coarse sand (A)
5-41: Coarse sand (C)
41-45: Clay (Cg)
45-54: Coarse sand (C’)
54-80: Clay (C’g)

Source: NRCS 2019
NRCS = Natural Resources Conservation Service

8

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project, Orange County, Texas

Figure 4. Soils Mapped within Project Area

H076-180201

9

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Holocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic conditions
lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway (1985) indicate
that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were probably achieved by
1,500 years ago.
The modern climate of the upper Texas coast is classified as subtropical humid (Abbott
2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983), forming a transitional zone between the humid southeastern US
and the semiarid to arid west. The climate reflects the influences of latitude, low elevation, and
proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, which combine with the urban heat islands formed by the
tremendous concentrations of asphalt and concrete in the larger cities, such as Houston and
Beaumont, to create a notorious modern climate that is oppressively warm and moist throughout
much of the year. As a result of proximity to the Gulf and the abundance of surface water, humidity
in the early morning can approach 100% even on cloudless summer days, and it often exceeds
50% even on the warmest afternoons. Largely as a consequence of the relatively high humidity
characteristic of the region, temperature patterns exhibit a moderate annual range and a modest
diurnal range that increases slightly with distance from the coast. Average monthly high
temperature ranges from a low of 17 to 19°Celcius (°C) (59 to 63°Fahrenheit [°F]) in January to a
high of 38 to 40°C (89 to 96°F) in August. Average monthly lows range from 4 to 9°C (38 to 47°F)
in January to 25 to 29°C (72 to 79°F) in July and August. Annually, average low temperatures
range from 15 to 21°C (56 to 65°F), and average high temperatures range from 27 to 29°C (75 to
79°F) (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983).
The region experiences two precipitation peaks throughout the year (Abbott 2001). The
first occurs in the late spring (i.e., May to June) due to the passage of infrequent cold fronts that
spawn chains of powerful frontal thunderstorms. The second occurs in the late summer to early
autumn (i.e., August to September) due to the incidence of tropical storms and hurricanes from
the Atlantic and, occasionally, Pacific oceans. In contrast, winter and early spring are relatively
dry, and high summer rainfall is dominated by convectional thunderstorms that are relatively brief
and localized, albeit frequently intense. Average annual precipitation varies from a low of
approximately 101.6 centimeters (40.0 inches) to a high of more than 132.1 centimeters
(52.0 inches). Average monthly precipitation varies from less than 5.1 to 7.6 centimeters (2.0 to
3.0 inches) in March to more than 19.1 centimeters (7.5 in) occurring locally on the coast during
September. Almost all of the measurable precipitation falls as rain—snowfall is extremely rare,
occurring in measurable amounts in only 1 in 10 years.

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

Orange County is situated near the southeastern edge of the Texan biotic province (Blair
1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian provinces
and the grasslands of the Kansan, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some species reach
the limits of their ecological range within the Texas province. McMahan et al. (1984) further define
four broad communities that characterize that portion of the Texas biotic province that lies on the
Gulf Coastal Plain: (1) coastal marsh/barrier island, (2) coastal prairie, (3) coastal gallery forest,
and (4) pine-hardwood forest (cf. Abbott 2001:24-26).

10

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project, Orange County, Texas

The coastal marsh/barrier island category includes well-drained, sandy, coastal
environments and saline and freshwater wetlands in the coastal zone (Abbott 2001:24). Marsh
vegetation is typical of areas that are seasonally wet and have substrates composed primarily of
sands and silts, clays, or organic decomposition products. Vegetation assemblages are strongly
controlled by texture, salinity, frequency and duration of inundation, and depth of the seasonal
water table. Sandy, relatively well-drained, freshwater environments are typically dominated by
little bluestem, switchgrass, Florida paspalum, and brownseed paspalum. Wetter environments
are often dominated by marshhay cordgrass, seashore saltgrass, saggitaria, bulrushes, smooth
cordgrass, seashore paspalum, seashore dropseed, olney bulrush, saltmarsh bulrush, saltmarsh
aster, longtom, sprangletop, burhead, arrowhead, coastal waterhyssop, needlegrass rush, and
other sedges and rushes. Slightly higher, better-drained environments are characterized by such
taxa as seashore saltgrass, seashore paspalum, gulfdune paspalum, shoregrass, gulf cordgrass,
red lovegrass, bushy sea-oxey, and glasswort. A variety of fauna are characteristic of the shore
zone. Important larger taxa include raccoon, nutria, alligators, turtles, swamp rabbit, and many
birds, including ducks, geese, herons, and many smaller species. Aquatic taxa, including a wealth
of fish and shellfish adapted to brackish to hypersaline conditions, are also important in the coastal
zone.
The coastal prairie category consists primarily of grasses with minor amounts of forbs and
woody plants in areas that are not saturated on a seasonal basis (Abbott 2001:24-26). This
community is characteristic of upland areas and grades into the pine-hardwood forest to the north
and east and into the coastal marsh/barrier island to the south. A wide variety of grasses are
found in the prairie environments, but the principal taxa include big bluestem, little bluestem,
indiangrass, eastern grama, switchgrass, brownseed paspalum, sideoats grama, silver bluestem,
buffalograss, threeawn, and Texas wintergrass. Common forbs include Maximilian sunflower,
Engelmann daisy, blacksalmon, penstemon, dotted gayfeather, bundleflower, yellow neptunia,
snoutbean, prairie clover, tickclover, wildbean, western indigo, paintbrush, bluebonnet, ragweed,
croton, milkweed, vetch, verbena, and winecup. Woody plants occurring in the coastal prairie
include mesquite, honey locust, huisache, eastern baccharis, sesbania, live oak, elm, hackberry,
bumelia, and coralberry. The frequency of trees increases dramatically as the coastal prairie
grades into the pine-hardwood forest, forming an open woodland environment with common
stands of hardwood trees and occasional pines. The coastal prairie is home to a diverse fauna,
including coyote, white-tailed deer, skunks, cottontail rabbit, many small rodents, amphibians,
reptiles, and a variety of permanent and migratory birds. Bison and pronghorn were also present
at various times in the past.
The coastal gallery forest consists of diverse, principally deciduous trees and associated
understory in floodplains and streams that traverse the outer coastal plain (Abbott 2001:26).
Important taxa include water oak, pecan, poplar, American elm, cedar elm, sugarberry, ash,
loblolly pine, post oak, cherrybark oak, mulberry, swamp chestnut oak, willow oak, sweetgum,
hawthorn, dogwood, hickory, bois d’arc, sassafras cypress, willow, cottonwood, and sumac.
Shrubs and vines such as mustang grape, greenbrier, yaupon, coralberry, possumhaw,
elderberry, honeysuckle, dewberry, and blackberry are common in the understory, as are grasses
such as little bluestem, big bluestem, and indiangrass. The fauna of the gallery forest include
white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, turkey, a variety of small mammals and rodents,

H076-180201

11

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

turtles, snakes, and many birds. A number of fish and a few varieties of shellfish are present in
the streams.
The pine-hardwood forest is characterized by a mix of coniferous and deciduous trees,
including longleaf pine, shortleaf pine, loblolly pine, post oak, red oak, white oak, blackjack oak,
willow oak, and live oak (Abbott 2001:26). Riparian environments often support larger deciduous
trees like pecan, cottonwood, hickory, beech, and American elm. Understory vegetation varies
from relatively open to quite dense, and consists of shrubs, vines, forbs, and young trees.
Common shrubs include acacia, yaupon, mayhaw, wild persimmon, myrtle, greenbrier, Virginia
creeper, blackberry, dewberry, trumpet vine, gourd, and poison ivy. A variety of fauna is also
present, including white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, rabbit, mink, skunk, various small
rodents, turtles, reptiles, and many different birds. Black bears were also present at times in the
past, and bison and pronghorn were occasionally present in the transition zone to the coastal
prairie environment.

12

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project, Orange County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within the Southeast Texas Archeological Region, a 21-county
area extending from the Colorado River on the west to the Sabine River on the east and
measuring about 200.0 kilometers (124.0 miles) inland from the Gulf of Mexico coastline. Much
of the archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between the Southern
Great Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995; Story 1990).
Further distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin subregions of
Southeast Texas. These two subregions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the inland
subregion has a much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast Texas
comprises a zone about 25.7 kilometers (16.0 miles) inland from the coast that covers the area
influenced by Gulf tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable ecological
variability characterizes this subregion, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes, wetlands,
marine coastline, and barrier islands. The inland subregion also encompasses considerable
ecological diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney woods.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to denote
Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural characteristics of
Southeast Texas culture periods are often different than in neighboring regions. For instance, the
Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and Southeast Texas, and
Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time in
Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit evidence of
reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be associated
with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of subsistence-related
activities. Inland sites also tend to contain modest pottery assemblages, fired clay balls (at some
sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal sites tend to consist of
multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain oyster shell tools, large quantities of pottery
(in later cultural components), numerous bone tools, and only a few lithic artifacts.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (10,000 TO 5000 B.C.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;

H076-180201

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period.
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is represented
by the PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.; Patterson 1995). This period coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various periods
within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted, lanceolate
projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end-scrapers, gravers, and
bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas are
known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the exploitation of
small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There is little evidence in
this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented elsewhere in North
America; rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been practiced during all
prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into two periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 8000 B.C.), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian period
(8000 to 5000 B.C.), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura). An extraordinary number of Clovis points in association
with elephant tusks have been excavated from the McFaddin Beach site in Jefferson County
indicating an early Paleoindian occupation history; additionally, several isolated Folsom points
have been found in situ at two sites in Harris County and on site 41WH19 in Wharton County
(Ricklis 2003).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (5000 B.C. TO A.D. 100)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signaled the beginning of the Archaic period
(5000 B.C. to A.D. 100; Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant
reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Southeast Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding
decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this time period. Material culture shows

14

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project, Orange County, Texas

greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of groundstone
technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods. In
Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5000 to 3000 B.C.) is marked by the presence of Bell,
Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The Bell
point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains. Many of
the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3000 to 1500 B.C.) and several new
types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and probably the GaryKent series. The Late Archaic period (1500 B.C. to A.D. 100) is characterized by Gary, Kent,
Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos points (Ricklis 2003).
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition developed
in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981; Patterson
1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period but reached
full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as boatstones and
bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang knives, stingray
spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial practices included the
systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre, and use of locally made
grave goods, such as long bone implements and bone pins. Most burials are found in extended
supine position, though some extended prone and bundle burials are also known. Burial direction
is usually consistent within single sites but varies from site to site. Patterson et al. (1993) report
that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton
counties. One notable Late Archaic mortuary site is the Ernest Witte site (41AU36), where two
distinct cemeteries have yielded more than 206 bodies were interred with an array of lithics, shell
artifacts, and pedants (Ricklis 2003). Additionally, the Crestmont site in Wharton County, the
Albert George site in Fort Bend County, and the Morhiss site in Victoria County all have led
researchers to hypothesize that these Late Archaic cultures were beginning to systematically and
communally inter their dead as a response to surges in population growth (Ricklis 2003). This
population growth may have been brought on by the climatic changes in the early Holocene, such
as an increase of floodplains from regional streams that indirectly provided locales with an
abundance of food and other resources (Ricklis 2003).

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (A.D. 100 TO 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 B.C., in the Galveston Bay area by
about A.D. 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about A.D. 300, and in the ConroeLivingston inland area by about A.D. 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears to have
progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995). Southeastern
Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where Aten (1983)
established a detailed chronological sequence.

H076-180201

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte
ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville
Stamped are common, while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area
128.7 kilometers (80.0 miles) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal
exception of a few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found
on the Gulf coast west of the Sabine Lake area.
The distinctive Woodland period archeological manifestation known as the Mossy Grove
Culture/Tradition occupies the inland coastal plain and coastal margins that extend from the
Brazos River Delta upwards to the Sabine River Delta (Ellis 2013). The Mossy Grove culture first
appears in the archeological record around 2,500 years ago and consists of a sandy-paste
ceramic technology similar to several styles of the Lower Mississippi River Valley cultures, such
as Coles Creek and Fourche Maline (Ellis 2013). However, in contrast to the latter two cultures,
Mossy Grove ceramics include rounded bottoms, floated surfaces, thinner walls, and, overall,
these wares typically demonstrate lower frequencies of decoration. Important Woodland
components that contain Mossy Grove assemblages have been found at Jonas Short (41PK8),
Crawford (41PK69), and site 41PK21; the latter site contains both Gary and Kent projectile points
as well as evidence of Marksville Stamped ceramic sherds (Ellis 2013), hinting at regional trading
patterns and an economic affinity of Mossy Grove with Lower Mississippi Valley cultures.
Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early part of the Historic periods (Aten
1984; Patterson 1995; Pertulla et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility ware
throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown Plain for
about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods before
once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety, Goose
Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor pottery
types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway (Aten
1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte types
are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste (like
Goose Creek), while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas, such as the Caddo and Toyah cultures, is not common in
Southeast Texas.

3.4

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 600 TO 1500)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 600 to 1500; Patterson 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the latter
part of the Late Prehistoric period, but, as already discussed, ceramics appear earlier in Southeast
Texas. Along the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e., spear thrower) and
spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though they continued to be

16

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project, Orange County, Texas

used in the inland subregion along with the bow and arrow through the Late Prehistoric period
(Ensor and Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In fact,
Patterson (1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in Southeast Texas as early
as the end of the Middle Archaic period, using unifacial arrow points that consisted of marginally
retouched flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a generalized date of adoption of the bowand-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca. A.D. 600) in Central and Southeast Texas.
In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade
technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba, Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn. A serial
sequence for these point types has not been established in Southeast Texas, though Scallorn
points appear to predate Perdiz points throughout the rest of Texas. The Late Prehistoric site,
Mitchell Ridge (41GV66), is an example of an incipient bow and arrow culture that adapted and
shifted to large game hunting subsistence strategies. This technocomplex shift is expressed by
a change in its lithic technology and game procurement and processing toolkits (Ricklis 2003).
Scallorn arrow points were replaced by smaller Perdiz arrow points (which are indicative of the
Toyah horizon), and bison faunal remains began to appear in assemblages along with unifacial
end scrapers, thin bifacial knives, and expanded base drills (Ricklis 2003). By A.D. 1300, an
influx of bison had made their way down to the coastal prairies, and local populations responded
through these technological adaptations.
Grog- (i.e., crushed-sherd-) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto Plain
and Baytown Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small
proportion of small-sized temper, while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that
are often visible on vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek pottery
remained in use throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphaltum Coated
pottery from the Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in Southeast Texas
during the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods. Notable Late Prehistoric sites include the
McGloin Bluff site (41SP11), where a large sample of Rockport ceramic sherds were found
(approximately 28,275), and the Anaqua site (41JK8), where a plain sandy-paste Goose Creek
sherds were found with Scallorn arrow points, the point most often associated with the Rockport
phase (Ricklis 2013). The presence of Rockport Phase ware at certain Spanish missions has
linked this archeological ceramic culture with the historic Karankawa Indians of the South Texas
Coast.

3.5

HISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1500 TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when Álvarez
de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Álvar Núñez Cabeza de
Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay;
however, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The
first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as
the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native culture and social
systems. This process is clearly discernable at the previously mentioned Mitchell Ridge site on
Galveston Island, where the burial data during the Historic period suggest population declines
and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as increased participation on the part of the Native

H076-180201

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

American population in the fur trade. By the time heavy settlement of Texas began in the early
1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian population was greatly diminished. The
Alabama/Coushatta Indians who currently reside in Southeast Texas are migrants who were
displaced from the east in the late 18th to early 19th centuries (Newcomb 1961).
By 1519, Spain had claimed much of the Texas Coast, stretching across the southeast
Texas coastal and interior landscape, that included what is now present-day Galveston, Harris,
and Orange counties. Alonso Alvarez de Pineda mapped the Texas Coastline and named the
Sabine River after San Francisco de Sabenas during this time (Mason 2010). Between the
Neches and Trinity rivers, there was a small tribe of Native Americans called the Orcoquisac by
the Spaniards, and anthropologist John R. Swanton believes these people were akin to the
Atakapan speakers who occupied western Louisiana and southeastern inner-coastal Texas
woodlands (Newcomb 1961; Swanton 1911). Little is known about the Texas sect of Atakapans,
whose name is a Choctaw word for “man-eaters” (Newcomb 1961). Their language was likely of
Tunican stock, but scant data are available about their linguistic origins (Swanton 1911).
According to Newcomb, the Akokisas, or Orcoquisac in Spanish, settled on the lower Trinity and
San Jacinto rivers as well as the eastern shores of the Galveston Bay; to the north lived a lesserknown group, the Patiris, and to their north the Bidais (Newcomb 1961; Swanton 1911).
Altogether, their population estimates were around 3,500 people (Newcomb 1961).
It is possible that Cabeza De Vaca and/or members of the Narvaez expedition may have
encountered the Atakapan communities as early as 1528, but the first confirmed European
account of the Atakapans was documented by French naval officer Simars de Bellisle in 1719
(Newcomb 1961). During his expedition, de Bellisle was stranded on the shore of Galveston Bay
after a mishap during a supply run for fresh water. He was taken captive shortly afterward and
inducted into a tribe of Akokisas (Newcomb 1961). There, he took a widowed wife but
subsequently fled to live with the Caddo tribe to the north. The Frenchman eventually escaped
native captivity and returned to Galveston Bay and worked as a guide for Bernard de la Harpe,
who led the first French expedition into what is present-day Oklahoma (Newcomb 1961). The
Atakapans in southeastern Texas continued to trade deer and bison skins with the encroaching
French settlers to the east in Louisiana throughout the 1730s and 1740s until the Spanish Crown
sent Captain Joaquin de Orobio Bazterra to investigate alleged French settlements in 1745 or
1746 (Henson 2010; Newcomb 1961). During this incursion, Capt. Bazterra visited several
Orcoquisac villages along Spring Creek, a tributary to the San Jacinto River; during his visit, he
found no identifiable roads or maps nor any indications of French presence or structures (Henson
2010; Newcomb 1961).
Around 1756, the Spanish erected an outpost near the mouth of the Trinity River in what
is now known as Chambers County to combat the French presence in the region. Their settlement
consisted of a presidio named San Augustin de Ahumada and a mission named Nuestra Senora
de la Luz (Ladd 2010). Atakapans were intermixed with 50 families of the Tlascalan Indians
brought in from central Mexico (Newcomb 1961). Collectively, this short-lived outpost was known
as El Orcoquisac, named after the tribe. In 1771, after a series of unfortunate events that included
internal fighting and ravaging by hurricanes, the fort outpost was abandoned by the Spanish (Ladd
2010). The Bidais to the north were subjected to Spanish violence after trading firearms with

18

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project, Orange County, Texas

enemies of the Spanish Crown, the Lipan Apaches (Newcomb 1961). A group of Atakapans
moved and settled somewhere on the Colorado River to the west of present-day Harris County in
the mid-19th century and virtually disappear from any records (Newcomb 1961). It is speculated
that the remainder of the Atakapans that were not decimated by European epidemics or warfare
either married into neighboring tribes, such as the displaced Alabama-Coushatta or the Caddo,
or returned to Louisiana, joining their linguistic and cultural kin, the eastern band of Atakapans
(Newcomb 1961). Either way, all Atakapan speakers were killed or foribly removed from Texas
by 1859.
In 1713, the French governor of Louisiana sent Louis Juchereau de St. Denis to
Natchitoches to establish a French trading post, and by 1718 the French were trading fluidly with
both the Atakapans and Caddo Indians (Mason 2010). Southeastern Texas changed from French
to Spanish rule in 1763 during the Treaty of Paris, only to be returned to Napoleonic rule in 1800
and subsequently sold to the US in 1803 through the Louisiana Purchase. In the Adams-Onis
Treaty of 1819, President John Quincy Adams relinquished the territories west of the Sabine River
back to Spain. In order to populate the area, the newly founded Republic of Mexico issued
empresario grants to several capitalists, including Joseph Vehlein and Lorenzo de Zavala. In
1829, Zavala was authorized to settle 500 Anglo-American families in the region that would
become Orange County, only to transfer his rights to the Galveston Bay and Texas Land
Company in 1830 (Mason 2010). After the US government systematically mapped the Sabine
Lake and River in 1837, the Velocipede was the first steamboat to navigate its waters (Mason
2010). By 1850, a large influx of Anglo immigrants had arrived, mostly from Southern states such
as Louisiana, Mississippi, and Tennessee, although a large portion of these settlers were from
Eastern Europe (Mason 2010).
On January 5, 1852, the boundaries of Orange County were officially delineated, and
Madison was chosen as its county seat. Originally named Madisonville and informally known at
the time as Strong’s Bluff, Huntley, Green’s Bluff, Jefferson, and Madison, the county seat was
renamed Orange, supposedly after the orange groves originally planted at the mouth of the
Sabine River by early colonists (Mason 2010). The City of Orange sat at a strategic position at
the mouth of the Gulf of Mexico and served as a gateway to the unsettled west. By 1860, the
population of the county was 1,916; as it grew, it became known as an important maritime and
agricultural hub. For example, in 1861, over 20,000 bales of cotton were produced and shipped
out of the county (Mason 2010).
During the onset of the Civil War, the majority of the county’s citizens voted to leave the
Union in the 1861 Referendum of Secession. Several military units were organized in the county,
which included the Orange Greys, the Orange Light Guard, and Hannah’s Company. During the
Battle of Sabine Pass, the Confederate Army positioned at Fort Griffin and commanded by
Richard Dowling successfully thwarted General Nathaniel P. Banks and his onslaught of Union
gunboats and navy composed of some 4,000 men. Although unharmed by the Civil War, Orange
was decimated by a hurricane only months after the Treaty of the Appomattox Court House was
signed in the fall of 1865. Shortly after the surrender, the 37th Illinois Volunteers arrived and
occupied the county. The population declined; by 1870, there were only 1,255 people living in
the county. However, during Reconstruction, the economy slowly rebounded due to the Texas

H076-180201

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

and New Orleans Railroad, which began operating in 1876, and the opening of a sawmill and
lumber plant by entrepreneur Henry Jacob Lutcher (Mason 2010). The Lutcher-Moore Lumber
Company brought jobs and prosperity to the area; by 1880, the population had grown to 2,938.
Businessman C.P. Huntington helped link San Francisco to New Orleans by bringing the Southern
Pacific Railroad to Orange (Mason 2010). In 1901, the Orange Rice Mill was established, and
the Yell Mill was founded in 1904. At the turn of the century, the population of the county was
flourishing and reached 5,905.
By the early 1910s, most of the hardwood forests surrounding the city of Orange had
become devastated by overharvesting, but the discovery of oil brought a new, untapped resource
into the local economy. In 1913, the Bland well had been discovered and the oil business
stimulated a new era of prosperity. Wildcatters and professionals moved into the area, which by
then had become known as “Orange Oil Field,” which was later shortened to “Orangefield”
(Harden 1979). By 1920, the population had grown to 15,379, and more than 30 oil manufacturers
produced more than $17,154,779 in profit (Mason 2010). During the same year, more than
4,130 employed citizens worked at local manufacturing plants and oil refineries. Spearheaded
by Congressman Samuel Bronson Cooper and Governor William P. Hobby, Congress allocated
funds for the completion of a deep-water navigation system that stretched from Orange to
Beaumont in 1916. By dredging the Sabine Lake and River all the way to the Gulf of Mexico, this
navigable channel was expanded and eventually would become 12.2 meters (40.0 feet) deep and
121.9 meters (400.0 feet) wide and named the Sabine-Neches Waterway (Wooster 2010). By
the late 1930s, this waterway would see the transfer of over 45,000,000 tons of cargo annually
and would become the second largest shipping channel in the state (Wooster 2010). With the
advent of this port expansion, Orange would see major developments in the oil, gas, chemical,
cement, sulfur, cottonseed, and salt industries (Ryan 2010).
Like many other counties in Texas, Orange did not escape the economic wrath brought
on by the Great Depression. Many businesses closed, the population dwindled, farms were
repossessed, and unemployment abounded. By 1940, only 527 workers were employed out of a
population of 17,382 (Mason 2010). Employing establishments had fallen from 25 in 1930 to 16 in
1940 (Mason 2010). However, the needs of the military-industrial complex during World War II
helped the economy in Orange County recover. Because Orange already had shipbuilding
infrastructure in place, such as the Levingston and Weaver shipbuilding companies, US Navy
officials sent plans to the area to build its fleet (Mynatt 2011). The Consolidated Western Steel
Corporation moved a steel shipyard to Orange during this time, and these three companies
together provided thousands of jobs, boosting the population to approximately 70,000 by 1945
(Mynatt 2011). More than 39 destroyers and 110 destroyer escorts were produced by the
Consolidated Steel Corp., and 160 vessels were produced by Levingston Shipbuilders (Mynatt
2011). Chemical manufacturing plants such as DuPont, Allied, Spencer, Firestone, and GoodrichGulf all moved to Orange County during and following the war. By 1950, the shipbuilding
workforce had begun to taper off and the population reached 40,567, which had more than
doubled since 1940. Agriculture and livestock ranching also bolstered the county’s economy in
the 1950s and 1960s. Mainstay crops were fruit, rice, oats, grass, cotton wool, potatoes,
soybeans, and livestock, including cattle, chickens, and sheep (Mason 2010). Crawfish is also
considered a staple in Orange County. Mauriceville was named the “Crawfish Capital of Texas”

20

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project, Orange County, Texas

by the Texas Legislature and has been the host of the Annual Mauriceville Crawfish Festival since
1981. In 1960, the population was 60,357, and in 1970 it grew to 71,170. As of 2018, the
population in Orange County was 83,572 and has remained somewhat stagnant since 1980.
Whites dominate the racial makeup at 87.8%, while 8.3% are African-American and 1.2% are
Asian. The average yearly earnings per person are $37,515, and the average male makes
$50,916, while the average female makes $25,709 annually. The overall poverty rate is 14.2%,
but African-Americans, as a whole, are most likely to be in poverty with an overwhelming 26.5%
that live below the poverty line.

H076-180201

21

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project, Orange County, Texas

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed the THC’s online Texas
Archeological Sites Atlas (TASA) and Texas Historic Sites Atlas (THSA), the National Park
Service’s (NPS) online National Register Information System (NRIS), and the Texas Department
of Transportation’s (TxDOT) Historic Districts & Properties of Texas and Historic Bridges of Texas
online databases for information on previously recorded archeological sites and previous
archeological investigations conducted within a 1.6-kilometer (1.0-mile) radius of the project area.
This archival research revealed that no previously recorded archeological sites, cemeteries, or
historic properties listed on or considered eligible for listing on the NRHP or for designation as
State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL) are present within 1.0 mile of the study area (THC 2019; TSHA
2019; TxDOT 2019a, 2019b).
Examination of historical US Geological Survey (USGS) topographic maps dating from
1926 to the present and aerial photographs dating from 1959 to the present indicate that the study
area has consisted of an undeveloped, wooded marshland throughout the 20th century. A
segment of George R. Brown Road passes through the study area along the shoreline and
terminates on the point of the small peninsula in the southern portion of the study area that
projects out into the Neches River channel. Historical imagery indicates that a small boat dock
or pier was briefly present off this road on the shoreline in the approximate center of the project
area. This boat dock was present briefly from the mid- to late 1980s to mid-1990s, though it has
since been removed and was not of historic age in any case. No standing structures of potentially
historic age are present within the project area (NETR 2019).
The majority of the terrestrial portion of the project area has not been previously surveyed
for cultural resources. In January 2015, Horizon Environmental Services conducted a linear
survey that passed through the eastern end of the project area on behalf of the USACE. In 1980,
an area survey was conducted on behalf of the USACE, though no other information is available
regarding this survey. In November 2011, SWCA Environmental Consultants conducted a survey
west of the project area on behalf of EXP Energy Services, Inc. The main channel of the Neches
River that passes along the southwestern side of the project area was surveyed during an
underwater archeological survey conducted for the Sabine-Neches Waterway Widening and
Deepening Project by PBS&J in 2005, though the side channel to the southeast of the project
area has not been previously surveyed (THC 2019). The side channel is the subject of an

H076-180201

23

Chapter 4.0: Archival Research

underwater archeological survey being conducted concurrently with the terrestrial survey
described in this report under separate cover (under separate Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8926).

24

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey
for the 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project Orange County, Texas

5.0 SURVEY METHODOLOGY

On May 14, 2019, Horizon archeologists Charles E. Bludau, Liz Sefton, and Rachel Naasz
conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. The survey was conducted
under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, under Texas Antiquities
Permit No. 8905. The purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural resources that
could be impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s archeologists traversed the tract and
thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural
resources. The project area consists of an extensive, largely inundated marsh that has received
some dredge spoil deposits over the years. However, dredge deposition appears to have been
patchy and does not provide continuous cover of the project area, and dredge spoil does not
appear to very deep anywhere within the project area. The water table was encountered in a fair
number of shovel tests (Figures 5 to 8).
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of one shovel test per 0.8 hectare (2.0 acre) for tracts
between 4.5 and 40.5 hectares (11.0 and 100.0 acres) in size. As such, a minimum of 19 shovel
tests would be required within the 15.7-hectare (38.8-acre) project area. Horizon excavated a
total of 16 shovel tests (Figure 9). The TSMASS shovel test minimum for a project area of this
size was impeded as effectively the entire project area appears to be permanently inundated, and
large portions of the project area were largely inaccessible. Shovel testing was conducted on
rare elevated landforms where present and in selected flooded areas where ponding was not too
deep. Shovel testing typically revealed shallow to moderately deep deposits of sandy loam
overlying clay at depths ranging from 15.0 to 30.0 centimeters (5.9 to 11.8 inches) below surface,
though deep sandy sediments were observed in two shovel tests extending to a depth of 1.0
meter (3.3 feet) or more below surface. Sediments in a few of the shovel tests exhibited iron
staining, suggesting that the project area experiences at least seasonal, if not permanent, high
water tables. Additionally, the water table was encountered in several shovel tests. Based on
the overall distribution of shovel tests within the project area; the marshy, inundated setting; and
the lack of observed cultural resources, it is Horizon’s opinion that the project area was adequately
assessed for cultural resources. The Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates of each
shovel test were determined using hand-held Garmin Foretrex or eTrex Global Positioning
System (GPS) devices using the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83). Specific shovel test
data are summarized in Appendix A.

H076-180201

25

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 5. Overview of Central Portion of Northwestern Wetland (Facing West)

Figure 6. Overview of Northeastern Wetland within Project Area (Facing North-Northeast)

26

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey
for the 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project Orange County, Texas

Figure 7. Overview of Western Portion of Project Area (Facing East)

Figure 8. Overview of Wetland within Project Area (Facing Northwest)

H076-180201

27

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 9. Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Project Area

28

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey
for the 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project Orange County, Texas

During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel testing and results. Digital photographs were taken, and a
photographic log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural
resources. Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s
marks) and non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal
scrap) were to be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the
same location in which they were found. As no cultural materials were observed during the
survey, the collection policy was not brought into play. All project records will be preserved and
curated at TARL at The University of Texas in Austin upon completion of the project.
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project area as defined in 36 CFR
800.3.

H076-180201

29

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project, Orange County, Texas

6.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

No cultural resources of historic or prehistoric age were observed on the modern ground
surface or within any of the shovel tests excavated within the project area during the survey.
Examination of historical USGS topographic maps dating from 1926 to the present and aerial
photographs dating from 1959 to the present indicate that the study area has consisted of an
undeveloped, wooded marshland throughout the 20th century. A segment of George R. Brown
Road passes through the study area along the shoreline and terminates on the point of the small
peninsula in the southern portion of the study area that projects out into the Neches River channel.
Historical imagery indicates that a small boat dock or pier was briefly present off this road on the
shoreline in the approximate center of the project area. This boat dock was present briefly from
the mid- to late 1980s to mid-1990s, though it has since been removed and was not of historic
age in any case. No standing structures of potentially historic age are present within the project
area.

H076-180201

31

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey
for the 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project Orange County, Texas

7.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with three
primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP and for designation as SALs.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the APE and to make preliminary determinations of whether or not the
resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or federal
codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological properties are a
function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research needs, though
historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with important historic events
and/or personages. Under the NHPA and the Antiquities Code of Texas, archeological resources
are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the significance of archeological
resources for inclusion in the NRHP and for designation as SALs, respectively.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory process.

H076-180201

33

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

7.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The four criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or
history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant. This
concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures, districts,
or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent research
questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by three requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least one of the four criteria for eligibility listed
above, and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As
discussed here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory
and history according to various periods of development in various times and at various places.
Thus, the significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic
development and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular
period of development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP
under Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding
of prehistory. All four criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought
to bear for historic sites.

34

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey
for the 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project Orange County, Texas

7.3

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ANTIQUITIES LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are located
in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any county,
city, or political subdivision of the state are state antiquities landmarks and are eligible for
designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
building, structure, cultural landscape, or non-archeological site, object, or district as an SAL if it
meets at least one of following criteria:
A. [T]he property is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history, including importance to a particular cultural or ethnic
group;
B. [T]he property is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. [T]he property embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, represents the work of a master, possesses high artistic values, or
represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction;
D. [T]he property has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in Texas
culture or history.

H076-180201

35

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

Furthermore, the THC may designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets
one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

7.4

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

On May 14, 2019, Horizon archeologists Charles E. Bludau, Jahleen Sefton, and Rachel
Naasz conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. The survey was
conducted under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, under Texas
Antiquities Permit No. 8905. The purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural
resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s
archeologists traversed the tract and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for
aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The project area consists of an extensive, largely
inundated marsh that has received some dredge spoil deposits over the years. However, dredge
deposition appears to have been patchy and does not provide continuous cover of the project
area, and dredge spoil does not appear to very deep anywhere within the project area. The water
table was encountered in a fair number of shovel tests.
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the TSMASS require a minimum of one shovel test per
0.8 hectare (2.0 acre) for tracts between 4.5 and 40.5 hectares (11.0 and 100.0 acres) in size.
As such, a minimum of 19 shovel tests would be required within the 15.7-hectare (38.8-acre)
project area. Horizon excavated a total of 16 shovel tests; as such, the shovel testing density fell
slightly short of the TSMASS requirements. The TSMASS shovel test minimum for a project area
of this size was impeded as effectively the entire project area appears to be permanently
inundated, and large portions of the project area were largely inaccessible. Shovel testing was
conducted on rare elevated landforms where present and in selected flooded areas where
ponding was not too deep. Shovel testing typically revealed shallow to moderately deep deposits
of sandy loam overlying clay at depths ranging from 15.0 to 30.0 centimeters (5.9 to 11.8 inches)
below surface, though deep sandy sediments were observed in two shovel tests extending to a
depth of 1.0 meter (3.3 feet) or more below surface. Sediments in a few of the shovel tests
exhibited iron staining, suggesting that the project area experiences at least seasonal, if not
permanent, high water tables. Additionally, the water table was encountered in several shovel

36

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey
for the 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project Orange County, Texas

tests. Based on the overall distribution of shovel tests within the project area; the marshy,
inundated setting; and the lack of observed cultural resources, it is Horizon’s opinion that the
project area was adequately assessed for cultural resources.
No cultural resources of historic or prehistoric age were observed on the modern ground
surface or within any of the shovel tests excavated within the project area during the survey.
Examination of historical USGS topographic maps dating from 1926 to the present and aerial
photographs dating from 1959 to the present indicate that the study area has consisted of an
undeveloped, wooded marshland throughout the 20th century. A segment of George R. Brown
Road passes through the study area along the shoreline and terminates on the point of the small
peninsula in the southern portion of the study area that projects out into the Neches River channel.
Historical imagery indicates that a small boat was briefly present off this road on the shoreline in
the approximate center of the project area. This boat dock was present briefly from the mid- to
late 1980s to mid-1990s, though it has since been removed and was not of historic age in any
case. No standing structures of potentially historic age are present within the project area.

7.5

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified within the project
area that meet the criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26 or for inclusion in the
NRHP under 36 CFR 60.4. Horizon recommends a finding of “no historic properties affected,”
and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking.
However, human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are protected under the Texas Health and
Safety Code. In the event that any human remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered
at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in
previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent
discovery, and the THC should be notified immediately. Similarly, if any cultural resources or
features, either prehistoric or historic-age, are inadvertently encountered during construction
within the project area, work should cease in the immediate area and the THC should be notified
of the discovery.
All project records will be preserved and curated at TARL at The University of Texas in
Austin upon completion of the project.

H076-180201

37

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey
for the 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project Orange County, Texas

8.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J.T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Aten, L.E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives on Gulf Coast Prehistory, pp.
72-93. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History, No. 5, The Florida
State Museum, Gainesville.

Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V. M. Bryant, Jr., and R. G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.

H076-180201

39

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Ellis, L.W.
2013
Woodland Ceramics in East Texas and a Case Study of Mill Creek Culture Ceramics.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 84:137-180.
Ensor, H.B., and D.L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas. Reports of Investigations, No. 8, Archeological
Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Hall, G.D.
1981
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Research Report No. 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Harden, N.
1979
The Orange Oil Field. Las Sabinas, Vol. V, Book 4, pp. 9-11.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Henson, M.S.
2010
Harris County. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/handbook/
online/articles/hch07>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed June 27, 2019.
Hudgins, J.D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-51.
Keller, J.E., and F.A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country: Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility. American Antiquity
53:231-244.
Ladd, K.
2010

El Orcoquisac. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/handbook/
online/articles/hve49>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed June 27, 2019.

Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas. Publication LP-192. Texas Department of Water Resources,
Austin.

40

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey
for the 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project Orange County, Texas

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Mason, A.S.
2010
Orange County. The Handbook of Texas Online. https://tshaonline.org/handbook/
online/articles/hco03. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed August 1, 2019.
McMahan, C.A., R.G. Frye, and K.L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and Accompanying
Illustrated Synopsis, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Mynatt, G.
2011
Orange’s World War II Shipbuilding Boom. In Texas Co-op Power. <https://
www.texascooppower.com/texas-stories/history/oranges-world-war-ii-shipbuildingboom>. Uploaded October 2011. Accessed August 2, 2019.
Newcomb, W.W.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. The University of Texas
Press, Austin.
1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:1-63.

National Environmental Title Research (NETR)
2019
Historic Aerials by NETR Online.
May 17, 2019.

<http://www.historicaerials.com>.

Accessed

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2019
Web Soil Survey, <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed May 17, 2019. US Department of Agriculture.
Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264.

Patterson, L.W., J.D. Lockwood, R.L. Gregg, and S.M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.

H076-180201

Houston

41

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Pertulla, T.K., M.R. Miller, R.A. Ricklis, D.J. Prikryl, and C.Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

Bulletin of the Texas

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell
Ridge Site, 41GB66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc., Corpus
Christi, Texas.
1995

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330

2003

The Archeology of the Native American Occupation of Southeast Texas. In The
Prehistory of Texas, edited by Timothy K. Perttula. Texas A&M University Press:
College Station.

2013

The Rockport Ware Pottery of the Central Texas Coast: Form, Technology, Style, and
Ethnic Affiliation. In Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society: 84:85-111.

Ryan, R.H.
2010
Chemical Industries. The Handbook of Texas Online. https://tshaonline.org/
handbook/online/articles/dmc01. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed August 1, 2019.
Shelby, C.A., M.K. McGowen, S. Aranow, W.L. Fisher, L.F. Brown, Jr., J.H. McGowen, C.G.
Groat, and V.E. Barnes
1968
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Beaumont Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin (Revised 1992).
Story, D.A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the
Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C. Rose,
D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes. Research
Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Swanton, J.R.
1911
Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Adjacent Coast of the Gulf of Mexico.
Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 43. US Government Printing Office,
Washington D.C.
Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT)
2019a Historic Bridges of Texas. <https://www.arcgis.com/home/webmap/viewer.html?
webmap=e55a0c5725644e5badef578db02bee9f&extent=-109.4371,25.5608,86.8053,37.2641>. Accessed May 17, 2019.

42

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey
for the 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project Orange County, Texas

2019b

Historic Districts & Properties of Texas. <http://maps.dot.state.tx.us/AGO_Template/
TxDOT_BasicViewer/?appid=c8fc0a742ec44e0e9da4b009c21eb70c>.
Accessed
May 17, 2019.

Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2019
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas Restricted Database.
state.tx.us/>. Accessed May 17, 2019.

<http://www.nueces.thc.

Texas State Historical Association (TSHA)
2019
Orange County. The Handbook of Texas Online. <http://www.tshaonline.org/
handbook/online/articles/hco03.html>. Accessed April 19, 2019.
US Geological Survey (USGS)
1994
7.5-minute series topographic maps, Beaumont East, Texas, quadrangle.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Wooster, R.
2010
Sabine-Neches Waterway and Sabine Pass Ship Channel. The Handbook of Texas
Online. <https://tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/rrs02>. Uploaded June 15,
2010. Accessed August 1, 2019.

H076-180201

43

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed 38.8-acre Orange County South Terminal Project, Orange County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

CB01

397503

3328190

0-5

Black loam

No

5-20

Brown and strong brown clay

No

20-60+

Brown and strong brown sandy clay

No

Soils

Artifacts

CB02

397681

3328050

0-5+

Brown and strong brown sandy clay

No

CB03

397726

3327914

0-5

Black loam

No

Brown with iron-stained sand

No

Black loam

No

Brown with 20% iron-stained sand

No

0-5

Black loam

No

5-75

Brown sand

No

75-100+

Dark yellowish-brown and strong
brown sandy clay

No

5-15+
CB04

397808

3327884

0-5
5-100+

CB05

397880

3327873

ES01

398313

3328073

0-20+

Yellow-brown and gray sand with
reddish-yellow clay

No

ES02

397781

3327993

0-20

Brown sandy loam

No

20-50+

Yellowish-brown and gray sand and
reddish-yellow clay

No

ES03

397716

3327864

0-60+

Pale brown and light gray clay

No

ES04

397831

3327851

0-20

Brown sandy loam

No

Mixed pale brown and white sand with
brown clay nodules

No

Dark grayish-brown sandy loam

No

10-85+

Mixed light yellowish-brown and brown
sand with brown clay nodules

No

20-100+
ES05

397903

3327772

0-10

RN01

398276

3328073

0-30+

Light orange-brown hydric clay

No

RN02

397879

3327981

0-30+

Light orange-brown hydric clay

No

RN03

397705

3327997

0-15

Dark brown course sandy loam

No

15-55

Sticky, course pale brown dense
sandy clay

No

55-60

Moist, coarse pale brown sandy loam

No

60+

Water table

No

0-15

Course dark brown sandy loam

No

15-45

Dense, sticky, course pale gray sandy
clay

No

45-55

Pale gray moist sandy loam

No

Water table

No

RN04

397723

3327947

55+

H076-180201

A-1

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
ST No.
RN05

RN06

UTM Coordinates1
397794

397864

3327954

3327963

Depth
(cmbs)

Soils

Artifacts

0-30

Hydric, course pale brown sandy loam

No

30+

Water table

No

0-30

Hydric, course pale brown sandy loam

No

30+

Water table

No

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 15 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

A

180201_arch_survey_report (rev)

