SALVAGE ARCHEOLOGY
IN THE LANEPORT RESERVOIR DISTRICT
CENTRAL TEXAS

by
Frank W. Eddy

with sections by
Dan C. Witter
and
William W. Amaral

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of~·TexaS at Austin
December-1973

Submitted to the National Park Service
by the Texas Archeological Survey (formerly
Texas Archeological Salvage Project) The
University of Texas at Austin, fulfillment
of the terms of Memorandum of Agreement No.
14-10-7:931-26.

ii

ABSTRACT
Three central Texas prehistoric sites are reported here
in terms of their cultural and natural contents.

The expressed

goal of this study is to develop quantitative data allowing
statements concerning culture ecology as these provide explana­
tions for the dynamics of culture persistence and change
within the Laneport Reservoir District.
Each site has a somewhat different life history within a
span of time between 5000 B.C. and possibly as late as A.D. 1750
They are defined as Archaic and Neo-American Stages of the
Central Texas regional sequence.

In interpretive terms, the

archeological remains reflect a strong cultural and behavioral
persistence regardless of the environmental context or temporal
age; an aspect which is recognized in their characterization
as a Direct Tradition.

The overriding cultural stability is

explained by the almast complete dependence for survival on
local floodplain and riverine exploitation.

Each site occupa­

tion is found to have existed for centuries within a specific
kind of environmental habitat:

floodplain woodland, floodplain

grassland and grassy riverside situations.

It is these environ­

mental settings which provided the localized food and material
resources.

The subsistence technology for food-getting was
iii

centered on hunting and gathering with intensive utilization
of a wide range of edible natural foodstuffs.

The degree of

dependence on the local resources was measured using a con­
centration index which is an expression of the density of
artifacts per cubic foot of soil.

Through this measure, two

corollary principles inversely relating the quantity of speci
mens to the distance from resources are developed.

These em­

pirical principles are explained by postulating that the
aboriginal Central Texas Indians employed a strategy of in­
tensive use of local resources in order to maximize their
economic gains with the least human effort expended.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER I - INTRODUCTION

1

CHAPTER II - MODERN ENVIRONMENT AND RESOURCES
CHAPTER III

13

CHRONOLOGY OF SITES .

CHAPTER IV - DOBIAS-VITEK SITE:

26

41 WM 118

42

CHAPTER V - ADAMEK SITE:

41 WM 135 .

168

CHAPTER VI - LOEVE SITE:

41 WM 133 .

303

CHAPTER VII - SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

369

REFERENCES CITED

377

APPENDIX A - ANALYSIS OF VERTEBRATE BONE AND
ECOLOGICAL INTERPRETATIONS FROM SITE
41 WM 118 by Dan C. Witter . . . . •

384

APPENDIX B - SOME ECOLOGICAL INTERPRETATIONS OF A
PREHISTORIC LAND SNAIL FAUNA, 41 WM 118
by William W. Amaral and Dan C. Witter.

413

APPENDIX C - ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION OF THE
VERTEBRATE REMAINS FROM 41 WM 135
by Dan C. Witter. . . . . . . . . . • . . •

APPENDIX D - NOTES ON THE BONE RECOVERED FROM
41 WM 133 by Dan C. Witter . . . . .

.....

433
448

List of Tables
1.

35

Radiocarbon dates . . .
List of Figures

1.
2.

Map showing the location of the three sites
test excavated: 41 WM 118, 133, and 135 . . . . . •

2

Schematic cross section of the Laneport
Reservoir District showing geological
deposits, Uvalde Formation surface, and
archeological sites . . . . . . . • . .

2

v

3.

4.
5.
6.

Schematic cross section of the San Gabriel
River showing topographic and sedimentary
facies of the Recent river deposits . . . .

28

Projectile point groups indicative
of temporal periods . .
...

32

Chart correlating various lines of
temporal evidence . . . . . .

41

Aerial view of the San Gabriel River
valley showing the situation of
41 W14 118 .

. .

.

. . ..

. ...

43

Contour map of Site 41 WM 118 showing the
distribution of surface artifacts, test
excavations, and the topography of the
floodplain . . . . . . . . . . . .

46

Schematic west to east vegetational transect
from 41 WM 118 to the San Gabriel River . . .

47

General view of Site 41 WM 118 looking
southward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

49

Description of Catalpa soil taken from the
east wall profile of Test Pit 3, 41 WM 118

51

Schematic profile showing the distribution
of critical data from which the chronology
of Site 41 WM 118 is reconstructed . . . .

54

Schematic profile of test pits and
excavation levels, 41 WM 118 . . .

57

Schematic profile showing locations of
fire hearths and aboriginally dug pits,
41 WM 118 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

59

Fire Hearth 4 exposed in the northeast corner
of Test Pit 4, 41 WM 118
....... .

6S

Schematic profile showing the quantitative
distribution of hearth stones and heat
fractured rock spalls, 41 WM 118 . . . . .

69

16.

Stemmed and unstemmed bifaces, 41 WM 118 ... .

75

17.

Schematic profile showing the distribution
of arrow and dart points, 41 WM 118 . . . .

77

7.

8.
9.

10.
11.

12.
13.

14.
15.

vi

18.
19.
20.

Schematic profile showing the distribution of
unstemmed bifaces, 41 WM 118 . . . . . . . .

85

Hammerstone-chopper, scrapers, and
milling stones, 41 WM 118 . . . . .

92

Schematic profile showing the distribution
of Utilized Flakes expressed as a concentration
index calculated for each excavation level,
41 WM 118 . . . . . . . . .

96

21.

Cores, 41 WM 118

107

22.

Schematic profile showing the distribution
of cores and core fragments, 41 WM 118 . . .

113

Schematic profile showing the distribution of
Waste Flint Flakes expressed as a concen­
tration index calculated for each excavation
level, 41 WM 118 . . . . . . . . . . . . .

115

Schematic profile showing percent of burned flint
flakes calculated for each excavation level,
41 WM 118 . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . .

117

Schematic profile, showing ratio of cortex (1)
to Interior C:#) Flakes calculated for each
excavation level, 41 WM 118 . • . . . . . . .

119

23.

24.

25.

26.

Schematic profile showing the distribution
of fired pottery and Baked Clay Objects,
.

134

List of Pelecypod species identified from
41 WM 118 and the San Gabriel River . . .

138

Schematic profile showing the distribution
of freshwater mussel shell fragments expressed
as a concentration index calculated for each
excavation level, 41 WM 118 . . . • . . . . . .

142

Aerial view of terrain above the confluence of
Willis Creek with the San Gabriel River showing
the situation of 41 WM 135 . • . • . . • . . .

169

Contour map of Site 41 WM 135 showing the
distribution of test excavations and the
surrounding topography . . • . . • . . •

171

41 WM 118 .

27.
28.

29.

30.

31.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Schematic west to east vegetational transect
from 41 WM 135 to old Willis Creek cutoff
channel
......
......... .

Vii

...

.

174

32.

A composite east-west profile showing sediments~
Catalpa soil, Pleistocene sand and gravels, test
pit excavations~ and fire hearths, 41 WM 135. . .

178

General view facing east of Site 41 WM 135 showing
work in progress. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

180

Description of the Catalpa soil taken from
the west wall of Test Pit 1, 41 WM 135

181

Schematic profile showing the distribution
of depositional zones, 41 WM 135 . . . . .

187

Schematic profile of test pits and excavation
levels, 41 WM 135
. . . . . . . . . . . .

190

37.

Washing procedure for matrix samples, 41 WM 135 .

192

38.

Fire Hearth 2 exposed in Test Pit 2, 41 WM 135

196

39.

Schematic profile showing the distribution of
hearthstone, hearthstone spa11s, and formal
Fire Hearths 1 and 2, 41 WM 135 . . . . . .

199

40.

Stemmed and unstemmed bifaces, 41 WM 135

201

41.

Schematic profile showing the distribution
of dart points, 41 WM 135
...... .

205

Schematic profile showing the distribution
of unstemmed bifaces, 41 WM 135 . . . . . .

217

Schematic profile showing the distribution of
Utilized Flakes expressed as a concentration
index calculated for each excavation level,
41 WM 135 . . . . . . . .

225

Schematic profile showing the distribution
of cores and core fragments, 41 WM 135

236

Schematic profile showing the distribution
of Waste Flint Flakes expressed as a con­
centration index calculated for each
excavation level, 41 WM 135 . . . . . . . .

242

Schematic profile showing percent of burned
flint flakes calculated for each excavation
level, 41 WM 135. . . . . . . . . . . . • . .

244

Schematic profile showing ratio of Cortex (1)
to Interior (:#) Flakes calculated for each
excavation level, 41 WM 135. . . . . . . . .

245

33.
34.
35.
36.

42.
43.

44.
45.

46.

47.

viii

48.

Faunal list of prehistoric land and aquatic
gastropods, 41 WM 135 . . . . . . . . . . .

258

49.

Histogram showing percentages of snail shell
groups plotted by test pit and excavation
1eve1, 41 WM 135 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

260

Graph showing percentages of four snail shell
groups obtained from matrix samples collected
by each excavation level of Test Pit 1,
41 WM 135 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

262

Schematic drawing depicting changing vegetational
trends, 41 WM 135 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

265

List of the identified prehistoric pelecypods
from 41 WM 135 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

273

Schematic profile showing the distribution of
freshwater mussel shell fragments expressed as
a concentration index calculated for each
excavation level, 41 WM 135 . . . . . . . .

275

Aerial view of the San Gabriel River valley showing
the situation of 41 WM 133 . . . . . . . . . . . . .

304

Plane table map of Site 41 WM 133 showing the
surface drainages, test excavations, buried
fire hearths, and midden . . . . . . . . . . .

307

Schematic north to south vegetational transect
from 41 WM 133 across the flood channel of the
San Gabriel River . . . . . . . . . • . . . • . .

309

57.

General view of Site 41 WM 133 looking northeast.

311

58.

The left cutbank of the San Gabriel River
showing gravel Unit III at 41 WM 133

312

59.

Profile of Recent river sediments taken
from Test Pits 1, 2, and 3, 41 WM 133 .

313

60.

Description of the alluvial and soil section
taken from the east wall of Test Pits 1 and
3,41 WM 133 . . .
. ..........••

316

50.

51.
52.
53.

54.
55.

56.

..

326

61.

Fire Hearths, 41 WM 133 . • •

62.

Faunal list of prehistoric gastropods, 41 WM 133

63.

Taxonomic account of vertebrates from Site
41 WM 118 .

. . •

. . . .

ix

. ....

357
386

64.

List of identified vertebrate remains, 41 WM 118

388

65.

Schematic profile showing the correlation of
excavation levels and faunal horizons, 41 WM 118

392

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.
72.

Chart showing vertebrates recovered from the
1/4 inch screen correlated with the volume
excavated from each faunal horizon, 41 WM 118

74.

75.

...

393

Chart showing the number of identifiable
vertebrate specimens obtained from matrix
samples in each faunal horizon, 41 WM 118

395

Graph of bone fragments and gram weights compared
by faunal horizons from the 1/4-inch screen,
41 WM 118 . . . . . . .
...........

396

Graph of bone fragments and gram weights
compared by faunal horizons from the matrix
samples of 1.2 cubic feet size, 41 WM 118

398

Graph comparing weighted number of burnt bone
fragments from the 1/4-inch screen to burnt
bone fragments obtained from the constant
volume matrix samples, 41 WM 118 . . . . . . . . . .

399

Graph showing number of vertebrate species
occurring in each faunal horizon, 41 WM 118

40;@

Faunal list of prehistoric land gastropods,
41 WM 118 .

73.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

..

.

. .

.

.

.

.

.

Bar graph showing frequency distribution of
Bulimu1us dealbatus (Say), Anguispira
alternata (Say), and Mesomphix friabi1is
(Binney) plotted by each test pit and
excavation level, 41 WM 118 . . . . . . .

420

Histograms showing the raw counts of ten snail
ppecies obtained from matrix samples plotted
by each excavation level from Test Pit 3,
4 1 WM 118 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 2'2

Histograms showing the shell sizes of Anguispira
alternata (Say) obtained from matrix samples
plotted by each excavation level from Test Pit
3,4lWMl18 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

426

x

76.

Histograms showing the shell sizes of Mesomphix
friablis (Binney) obtained from matrix samples
plotted by each excavation level from Test Pit 3,
41 WM 118 .

77.
78.

79.

80.

81.

82.
83.

.

.

.

.

.

.

..

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

..

.

.

.

.

429

Taxonomic account of vertebrates from Site
41 WM 135
. . . . . . . . . ....

436

Chart showing the occurrence of identifiable
vertebrate specimens obtained from matrix
sample column in Test Pit 1 and Fire Hearth 2
in Test Pit 2, 41 WM 135 . . . . . . . . .

437

Chart showing percentages of burned bone
fragments of mammals and fish obtained from
matrix sample column in Test Pit 1 and Fire
Hearth 2 in Test Pit 2, 41 WM 135 . . .

439

Graph showing quantitative distribution of
bone fragment counts in matrix sample
column of Test Pit 1, 41 WM 135 . . • . . .

442

Chart showing distribution of bone in 41 WM 135
recovered from 1/4-inch mesh screen . . • .

444

Taxonomic account of vertebrates from
Site 41 WM 133 . . • . . . . . . . .

450

Chart showing distribution of bone recovered
from 41 WM 133 including matrix sample contents
of Fire Hearths 1" and 2 . . . . . . . . . . . .

451

xi

- - - -.......

-~~

..

~

PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Text excavations in three aboriginal Indian sites (41
WM 118, 133, 135) of the Laneport Reservoir District are re­
ported here as part of a program of salvage archeology currently
being conducted by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project
CT.A.S.P.) under contract from the U.S. National Park Service.
This testing phase is invisioned as the second step proceed­
ing logically from site survey, through testing, to extensive
excavation.

Phase 1 was begun in 1963 when Shafer and Corbin

(1965) conducted a

reconnaissance:~ype

survey of the proposed

Laneport, North Fork (Sorrow 1969) and South Fork Reservoirs.
This survey work has served as the point of departure for the
Phase 2 testing in the Laneport Reservoir District which was
initiated in 1968.

Future research contracts with the National

Park Service are anticipated for the continuance of this long­
term study.
As is the case in any archeological area study, research
is the cooperative product of many individuals.

Thanks are

offered to as many supporters as is practical with no intent
to slight the many more who directly or indirectly contributed
to this study.
Permission to excavate on the privately-owned properties
xii

of the land owners--Jeff Dobias, Ed Vitek, A.J. Adamek, Edward
and Clarence Loeve--is gratefully acknowledged.

Field assist­

ance was ably provided by Elton R. Prewitt and George Chambers,
the latter a field trainee of the U.S. National Park Service.
Pick and shovel labor was recruited from Taylor, Texas and
some part-time students of The University of Texas at Austin.
Harold Beall operated the backhoe in the trenching performed
at the Adamek Site.

Dan C. Witter is to be thanked fer the

service he performed as a field crew member but more importantly
for the time he spent in studying the modern vegetation ecology,
a description of which appears with each site in Chapter IV,
V, and VI.
After the formal archeological field program had been
completed in December of 1968, Witter, Amaral, and I made
several more day-long trips to the Reservoir District to record
the distribution of modern snails and river mussels as a guide
study for interpretations of the prehistoric invertebrates.
On other occasions, float trips to study the river alluvium
were made by boat in company with Lawrence Aten, Amaral and
myself.

Especially the consultation of Aten was of great value

for my indoctrination into the river characteristics and recent
geology of central Texas.
Still another field trip was conducted by myself and V.
Bryant, then of the Department of Botany, to review the poten­
tials of a pollen program for the Laneport Reservoir District.

xiii

Although the soil samples collected by Bryant from the alluvium
section exposed at 41 WM 133 did not yield the anticipated
fossil pollen, his efforts in processing the samples are greatly
appreciated.
To my wife and young son, I wish to express an exceptional
appreciation for the many Sunday drives during which they ac­
companied me for casual site survey and inspection of the differ­
ent landscapes to be seen throughout the study district.
J. Epstein is to be thanked for his piloting skills in

flying me over the Reservoir District while I took the aerial
photographs used in this report.

The overhead perspective

gained from an altitude of 3000 feet (m.s.l.) is of inestimable
value in appreciating the great expanse of the Blackland Prairie
and the Gulf Coastal Plain in general of which the Laneport
Reservoir District is but a small part (see cover).
In the laboratory, William W. Amaral is to be acknowledged
for processing the specimens, both cultural and natural.

His

contribution in the study of both the gastropods and pelecypods
has played a vital part in reconstructing the prehistoric
natural environment and man's utilization of this setting.

In

conjuction with these invertebrate studies, special mention
should be made of Dr. E. P. Cheatum, Professor of Biology at
Southern Methodist University, who willingly provided identifi­
cation on both our prehistoric and modern molluscan species.
He is also to be commended for critically reading the pertinent

xiv

portions of the manuscript.
Of no less importance to the environmental reconstruction
of the Laneport paleoeco10gies are the vertebrate studies of
Dan C. Witter, Department of Zoology.

Applying his unique

talents to the identification of minute scraps of animal bone,
he has buttressed the work of Amaral and provided valuable
understanding of the prehistoric subsistence economy through
his study of the animal food refuse.

His contributions, pre­

sented in Appendixes A, C, and D, are the basis of many of the
cultural ecological conclusions derived in Chapter VII.

Witter

is also to be thanked for his service in initiating the in­
vertebrate study through the research direction he gave Amaral.
Other special studies included soil analysis and radio­
carbon dating.

Thanks are offered to C. D. Welch and Dale

Pennington, Soil Chemists of the Soil Testing Laboratory,
Texas A&M University, for the textural and chemical analysis of
the alluvial sediments including the Catalpa Clay.

Although

it became apparent that the soil features are not necessarily
contemporary with the prehistoric occupation, the research
venture was certainly an important avenue to explore as part
of the study of ancient ecologies.
Due to the recovery of few temporally significant projectile
points, the radiocarbon

dati~g

of buried fire hearths in sites

41 WM 118 and 133 became particularly crucial in temporally

ordering the prehistoric remains.

For this reason, appreciation

xv

~~~~-

..

-~~

....

~-

..

~-

-~-

-

~

-

­

is extended E. Mott Davis and Sam Valastro of the Radiocarbon
Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin, for the five assays
reported here in Chapter III.
The actual preparation of manuscript was assisted by the
typing of Melinda Giles and Nora Comstock.

Photography and

drafting was provided by Elizabeth Shropshire although some
individual figures were drawn by Amaral and myself.

Nora

Comstock performed the unenviable task of editing; arranging,
and typing the final camera-ready copy for reproducing by The
University of Texas Printing Plant.

E. Lundelius and Dee Ann Story performed a valuable service
through their intellectual consultation and advice on matters
of Texas natural and cultural history.

Appreciation of a similar

magnitude is also offered to the entire staff of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project who provided a sounding board for
many of the ideas presented here.

But in particular I would

like to single out aid in identifying the projectile points
given by Harry Shafer, William Sorrow, and Elton Prewitt.

How­

ever, I must accept full responsibility for all statements made
herein.

xvi

CHAPTER I
Introduction
Test excavations at three prehistoric sites (41 WM 118,
133, 135) are reported here as part of a research program to
salvage archeological information endangered by the construction
of the Laneport Dam

a~d

Reservoir (Fig. 1).

This is the second

phase of continuing research executed by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project (T.A.S.P.) under a contract agreement between
The University of Texas at Austin and the U.S. National Park
Service as part of the nationwide Inter-Agency Archeological
Salvage Program.
The Laneport Darn site is to be located across the San
Gabriel River valley at a point some seven and one-half straight­
line miles down river from State Highway 95 which interconnects
the towns of Granger and Taylor in Williamson County, central
Texas.

This location is approximately 35 airline miles north­

east of the state capital at Austin.

Reservoir DescriEtion
Although there have been periodic changes in the reservoir
design by the U.S. Corps of Engineers, the most up-to-date in­

1

Figure 1.

Map showing the location of the three
sitee test excavated: 41 WM 118,41
WM 133 41 WM 135.
I

Figure 2.

- - - - ..

- - ...- - -

-~- ..

Schematic cross section of the Laneport
Reservoir District showing geological
deposits, terrace surfaces, and arch ­
eo1ogica1 sites.

._--------­

_'O-4C'"

---,

-,:'025

f

o

~

112

1

'_ocr:1,cm of F".q Z
frofl1ecl (pcttIQI~/

/'"

,

/'

S<:0Ie in Mdes

"
j

!
~ _ South Abutment of Ptopo..cI
~

Lon.port 001n

o

LEGEND
location, of T.,., E.CovotR
Sit"

C=::::>_OV.rflow Chorm,l. or ""SkKlgh.'·

Holding Water

. . . . . . . . _In_
lhold. F.'...

VaU.y-Fad., Sluff 0/
t .....

/ - "'uouri,KcmM"ot'ldTtaas Railroad
V1H

1912

o

6

Harl....'al
2000
4000

I

I

100

200

6T
400

N

V.,tieal

­

Scot. 'n F•• f

Wilii. C....k

r
C£
• ~- --. -.-~
. .~
. ' r~.I35. ,', . ===.'

WY,971

__ . .-:U· *"
-.-.
.....,.....,... ...............

. _ _ .....~~':.~~~~

,

~

1\'-.-.........

.

:Y:1.
U

(J)

t<

LEGEND
R - Re.:.n'
1972

'11"'flU 1ft

u- Uwolde

Formation

Cretaceou. Shot•• and "orls
Toylor Or-auf,

K - of the

<D - Uvalde Formotlon Svrfoc.

®_ R.c.nt

Floodpklin Svr'ace
VIH

(

formation describes the proposed Laneport Dam as an earth fill
embankement standing ninety-nine feet above the riverbed and
about 11,700 feet measured from one terrace abutment to the
other (Corps of Engineers 1967:111-1).

This structure, for

which construction is planned in 1970, will be capable of
empounding river discharge to a contour height of 504 feet
for

every~day

storage as well as emergency retention of flood

waters to an even greater elevation of 528 feet above mean sea
level (m.s.l.) (Corps of Engineers map 1968).

The resulting

reservoir will affect both the San Gabriel River as well as
Willis Creek, a major tributary, to form a maximum lake of
11,040 acres in surface area during flood control (Texas Water
Development Board 1966:table 5).

In addition to the downstream

flood control, water conservati?n, and sediment catching benefits
for the Brazos drainage basin, the waters of Laneport Reservoir
will also be employed for recreation purposes:

principally

water skiing, boating, and fishing.
These engineering features of the proposed dam and reservoir
bear significantly on the salvage of archeology.
is two fold:

This effect

1) in the construction time-table as it paces

archeological field investigations and 2) by defining the area
of archeological endeavors.

In this study, the anticipated

full-pool reservoir to cover a surface area of 17.3 square miles
as well as the pool perimeter, is defined as the Laneport
Reservoir District.

Use of the term tldistrict" is employed to

3

specify an arbitrary non-archeologically designated area of
study (Dittert, Hester, and Eddy 1961:14).

By this means,

the area of study can be specified and yet avoid the cumber­
some reference to a reservoir which does not yet exist.

Previous Investigations
The first phase of archeological research in the Laneport
District was conducted by Shafer and Corbin (1965) during the
late summer and fall of 1963.

Their reconnaissance-type

survey yielded twenty-two archeological sites of which ten were
recommended for further investigations (1965: Fig. 5).

The

greater part of these are classified as "terrace sites;"
remains of aboriginal camps buried within riverside alluvial
deposits.

The research recommendations of this site survey

phase have been utilized as the "springboard" for the present
1968 field season of test excavations.
Analysis of the stylistically distinctive artifacts recovered
on site survey revealed that three cultural stages have accounted
for these remains:

Paleo-Indian, Archaic, and Neo-American

(Shafer and Corbin 1965: 7-9; Suhm and others, 1954; Suhm 1958).
Evidence of Paleo-Indian occupation was questioned since it
was based only on a single fragmentary dart point found at
site 41 WM 117 (Shafer and Corbin 1965:

Fig. 9B).

But recent

study of a surface collection made by C. Loeve along the
San Gabriel River substantiates the original estimate of Shafer

4

and Corbin (Fig. 1).

Loeve has surface finds which are iden­

tifiable as Plainview, Scottsbluff, Wells-Angostura, and
Meserve projectile points (Prewitt 1969).
Surface evidences of Archaic Stage remains affiliated with
the Edwards Plateau Aspect were found on eleven sites and one
other occurrence was questionable (Shafer and Corbin 1965:
table 4).

The range of hallmark dart points found on these

sites indicates the Early, Middle, Late, and Transitional Ar­
chaic Stages were present (1965: 8),

A large part of this pro­

jectile point sequence has been reproduced in the test excava­
tions including the Middle, Late, and Transitional but as yet
no Early Archaic dart points have been found in the ground.
However, the Loeve collection contains plentiful examples of
all ages (Prewitt 1969: Fig. 4).
Four surveyed sites yielded evidence of Neo-American com­
ponents.

Both the Austin and Toyah Foci of the Central Texas

Aspect were represented, the former being identified by Scallarn
arrow points and the latter focus distinguished by Perdiz
points.

These findings now have been substantiated through the

1968 testing as well as by the many arrow point specimens pre­
sent in the Loeve collection (Prewitt 1969).
Other sites discovered during site survey were not classi­
fiable as to cultural stage because of the lack of the diagnos­
tic projectile points.

5

Surrounding Archeological Studies
A number of archeological studies have been conducted in
areas surrounding Laneport Reservoir District and these will
be utilized for comparative purposes in establishing typologies
and cultural-temporal relations.
works are:

Some of the more significant

(1) the Levi Rockshelter, a Paleo-Indian site re­

ported by Alexander (1963) on the Pedernales River, (2) the
Canyon Reservoir studies featuring Archaic and Neo-American
occupations along the Guadalupe River (Johnson and others 1962),
(3) the Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir containing two reported
Archaic sites with a long stratigraphic record on the Lampasas
River (Sorrow and others 1967), (4) the Merrill Site, signifi­
cant because of the Archaic occupation buried in Recent sedi­
ments along BruShy Creek near Round Rock (Campbell 1948), (5)
the Kyle Rockshelter, a Neo-American occupation on the Brazos
River from which Jelks (1962) defined the Austin and Toyah Foci,
(6) the Smith Rockshelter located on Onion Creek south of AUstin
from which a detailed radiocarbon series of fourteen stratified
charcoal samples has been obtained to accurately define the
temporal span of the Neo-American Stage in Central Texas (Suhm
1957; Valastro and Davis 1970: 54-56), and finally (7) the his­
toric occupation reported QY Gilmore (1969) at the San Xavier
Missions located some 29 rivermiles downstream from the Lane­
port District.

All of these reports have been instrumental in

6

shaping my understanding of Central-Texas archeology but a
particular debt is due the fine work involved in the Stillhouse
HOllow local sequence (Fig. 4), the foci definitions from the
Kyle research, and the radiocarbon "ladder" obtained from the
Smith Rockshelter.
Purpose of Work
Salvage research has as its first order of business the
sample recovery of archeological and natural history data now
endangered by the intended construction of the Laneport Dam and
Reservoir.

But it is planned to make this research of more

than routine significance by conducting this salvage along pro­
blem-oriented lines.

Unlike problem archeology which enters

the field situation armed with a body of research questions to
be solved, scientific river basin salvage of necessity imposed
by reservoir construction schedules, must begin with a geogra­
phic area along a water course, and proceed to research questions
creatively developed from the archeology at hand.
Certain logical and necessary steps will be followed when
proceeding from the empirical data to theoretical explanations
of extinct social phenomena.

The first of these is site survey

or the determination of the inventory of prehistoric data avail­
able for study.

A beginning was made in this direction by the

reconnaissance-type survey conducted in 1963 by Shafer and Corbin
(1965).

I have continued to add to the site survey inventory

7

doubling the number of known and described sites first recorded
to a total of about forty.

From these figures, I estimate that

between 100 to 200 more sites may be present within the confines
of the district.

A thorough study should include an intensive

survey to be conducted through some future National Park Service
contract in order to adequately define the prehistoric settle­
ment pattern by relating each kind of prehistoric occupation to
its ecological context and studying the intersite organizations.
Phase two of the research program is test excavations of
a representative number of the survey sites to provide informa­
tion on the research potential of the most promising selected
from an array of different ages and topographic situations.
Part of this research step was satisfied by the field endeavors
of the 1968 Laneport Project reported in this volume.

Chapters

IV through VI detail excavations of several different ages of
floodplain occupations.

Future work should also deal with up­

land bluff sites seeking a different kind of environmental adap­
tation than the woodland and grassland exploitations described
in the following pages.
The third research phase has to do with intensive intra­
site excavations which will yield information on the spatial
distribution and associations of the different kinds of cultural
artifacts and natural data.

From these intensive distribution

studies, the internal structure of each kind of prehistoric
settlement can be defined by searching for the different loci

8

of behavioral activity.
As these three research procedures are conducted, either
separately or concurrently, it is anticipated that general state­
ments regarding cultural behavior in time and space can be for­
mulated.

With such a culture historical reconstruction, the

anthropologist can derive explanations for persistence and change
in the inferred social life.

Through these means, generaliza­

tions at the level of cultural dynamics can be formulated for
it is only with this operation that the research moves from his­
toriography to social science (Taylor 1948: Chapter 2).

The

latter is involved with explanations independent of particular
historical situations and events by focusing on the rates and
processes of cultural change and persistence (Willey and Phillips
1958: 4).
Research Design
In this research, I have adopted the culture ecological
approach based on the premise that the man-environment interac­
tion is very significant in explaining human behavior (Steward
1955).

According to- Steward, this is not a deterministic rela­

tionship, rather it is one which creatively shapes social forms
in terms of environmental potentialities and limitations.
I interpret this view to mean that a study of the available
natural resources and the prehistoric technical knowledge to
operate on these potentialities will yield important understanding

9

---~--------~~~~~~~~~~~~-~~~--

of man's cultural behavior.

Change in either the available

environmental resources or the exploitative knowledge will tend
to produce changing social forms.

Conversely, a constant en­

vironmental situation or an unchanging technology will yield a
direct cultural tradition; that is, a cultural sequence in which
persistence greatly exceeds change (Haury 1965; Eddy 1968).

It

is these theoretical ideas which will be put to the test in the
Laneport research.
To collect the cultural and natural data necessary to study
the culture ecology of Laneport prehistoric societies, environ­
mentally oriented research procedures are employed.

To meet

these goals the physical properties of the archeological sites
will be investigated so as to extract each kind of data in quan­
titative terms using a variety of sampling and screening pro­
cedures (Heizer 1960),
Where applicable each kind of data (hearthstones and spal1s,
shaped stone artifacts, utilized flakes, waste flint flakes, cores,
animal bone, snail shells and river mussel shells) will be ex­
pressed in terms of their density of occurrence (number per bulk
volume of matrix sediment).

This frequency expression, called

a concentration index by Willey and McGimsey (1954: 44-46), allows
comparisons to be made between locations within sites and, with
less confidence, between sites.

In this fashion, artifacts and

environmental specimens are used in a quantitative manner to in­
terpretively derive statements on the intensity of human actiVities

10

at different points on the landscape and for the diffeTent
time periods.

From such an activity analysis, broader conclu­

sions can be drawn concerning economic adaptability between man's
technology and the environmental setting.
At least one obvious flaw is apparent in this approach
insofar as the floodplain buried sites are concerned.

That is,

any unevenness in rates of alluvial sedimentation would have
affected artifact concentrations.

As more floodplain sites are

dug and dated, thereby providing more temporal data on the sedi­
ments, it should be possible to determine the average rate of
sedimentation by each century (Davis 1969: Fig. 6).

Despite

this limitation, I believe it is profitable to examine at this
time the artifact and specimen densities within each site seek­
ing meaningful patterns of variability from which interpretations
can be drawn.
To these ends I have employed the standard 1/4-inch screen
technique and also supported this evidence by matrix samples;
that is, constant volume samples of soil which were washed over
window screen (l/l6-inch) size mesh as described for the site
41 WM 118 (see Chapter IV).
also taken for pollen and

Individual samples of soil were

soi~

analysis.

Attempts by Vaughn

Bryant, then of the Department of Botany, The University of
Texas, have shown that fossil pollen is not recoverable from
the Laneport sediments and hence information on past vegetation
has been sought indirectly from the prolific snail fauna present

11

in every site (see Appendix BJ.

Study of the site soils was

made by me using the format of the Soil Conservation Service
(Soil Survey Staff 1951) backed up by laboratory analyses con­
ducted under contract by Pennington and Welch of the Soils
Testing Laboratory, Texas A&M University.

Other environmental

studies, (both modern and ancient) have been conducted by
Witter (see Modern Site Ecology in Chapters IV, V, and VI)
for the modern vegetation, the modern and prehistoric pelecypods
by Amaral and the prehistoric animal bone (Appendices A,C,D).
Both the natural and cultural data will be analyzed in
systemic terms wherein each line of evidence is considered with
regard to all other such information searching for internal
verification or refutation of the interpretive meaning of these
data.

In this manner, a validating test of the correctness or

plausibility of each conclusion is made (Eddy 1968).

12

CHAPTER II
Modern Environment and Resources
The Laneport District lies on the extreme inland margin of
the Gulf Coastal Physiographic Province (Fenneman 1931, 1938).
This peripheral position is just east of the Balcones Escarpment,
a fault zone which serves as the boundary between the Gulf
Coastal Plain and the Lampasas Cut Plain.

The San Gabriel River

drains this country flowing northeasterly from its headwaters on
the Lampasas Cut Plain to cross the project area at elevations
between 450 and 528 feet above mean sea level (m.s.l.) to feed
the Little River 30 miles downstream from the study district.
The combined waters of the two rivers empty into the Brazos River
to form a drainage segment of the Brazos Basin.

Moderate relief

expressed as gently rolling hills and youthful to mature valleys,
characterize the surrounding topography of the proposed Laneport
damsite

(Corps of Engineers 1967:. II-I).
Surface Geology and Topography

The local bedrock geology of the Lancport Reservoir District
is composed of Upper Cretaceous marine beds of the Tyler Group
including such formations as the Bergstrom, Pecan Gap, and
Sprinkle (Corps of Engineers 1967: 11-1,2; Shelby 1966).

These

argillaceous shales and marls dip gently to the southeast at 90
13

feet to the mile in a monoclinal structure.
Plio-Pleistocene clays, caliche, sands, and gravels of
Uvald~

the

Formation form a mantle over the bedrock.

These

deposits, largely of floodplain origin, now form an uplands
flanking the San Gabriel River and continue as extremely board
plains lying between the major drainages of the Brazos River
basin (Fig. 2).

In the Laneport District many commercial gravel

pits have been dug into these gravels to reveal a maximum thick­
ness of deposits ranging from 10 to 30 feet.

The gently sloping

bluffs face into the San Gabriel Valley providing the only
appreciable hilly relief to the largely featureless region (Corps
of Engineers 1967: II-I, 3).

The Uvalde gravels have provided a

limited number of economic resources for primitive man.
are:

These

(1) flint nodules utilized in the manufacture of stone

tools; (2) limestone cobbles for hearthstone cooking; and (3)
fresh, cool spring water which discharges at many places where
the permeable gravels are in contact with the underlying bedrock.
Within the confines of the bluffs the San Gabriel River
meanders in its broad, alluvium-filled valley floor.

The river

has been aggrading its valley for some thousands of years and
throughout the span of man's habitation of this reach of the
river.

Such slow but steady aggradation has accumulated 15 to

30 feet of impervious silty clays and 2 to 3 feet of semipervious
to pervious gravel and clay (Corps of Engineers 1967: 11-5).
is this alluvial deposit of Recent geological age which has
buried the three archeological sites (41 WM 118, 113, and 135)

--------

14

............

-

.......

- - - - - -...........

-~-

- - - - ­

It

which are the focus of the present report.

Use of the term

Recent is to refer to the sediments filling the Pleistocene
incised San Gabriel River Valley.

These Indian remains, and

many others like them, have become incorporated into the river
sediments due to the steadily rising valley floor as successive
overbank flooding deposited suspended sediments.

As a geological

deposit, the Recent alluvium was important to aboriginal man for
floodplain settlement and the luxuriant woodland growth it
supported.
Soils
The range of soils found in and around the Laneport District
can be related directly to the parent material and the former
vegetation cover.

The upland soils are Blackland types formed

under mixed prairie grasses (Templin and others 1938: 17). Those
generated on the high surface of the Uvalde Formation are various
phases of the Bell and Lewisville soils while areas of outcropping
bedrock marl are now mantled by the Houston Soil Series.

On

level terrain, these clay and clay loam soils are smooth, deep,
and highly productive while the more sloping country producing
mild surface

erosion~

yields thin, shallow soils.

All soils are

characterized by a deep black humus zone of fairly high organic
content.

Soil series of alluvial origin include the Catalpa and

Trinity.

Within the Laneport District, the greater part of the

floodplain along the San Gabriel is covered by Catalpa Clay
(Templin and others 1938: 40, pocket map).
15

This friable clay is

a dark brown or grayish-brown color throughout the upper 30
inches of its profile grading into light yellowish-brown calcar­
eous clay.

The Trinity Clay is like the Catalpa but much more

restricted in distribution within the study district.

It is

found along intermittent tributaries of Willis Creek as well as
in restricted pockets flanking that creek.

It is also sporadi­

cally present on the perimeter of the main San Gabriel Valley.
The "Trinity Clay is described as a black or very dark gray cal­
careous heavy plastic crumbly clay which gradually becomes
lighter in color with depth and below a depth of about 36 inches
is gray or grayish brown heavy calcareous clay" (Templin and
others 1938: 40).

It is an extremely dense plastic clay with

poor underdrainage after flooding.
These soils are of primary interest because they typically
yield the late archeological deposits of Neo-American (41 WM 118,
113) or Archaic (41 WM 135) ages.
Climate
A sub-humid continental climate with warm year-round tem­
peratures averaging 68 degrees Farenheit characterizes the
Laneport District.
rain[all~

Outstanding features are the irregularity of

sudden changes in

and a high rate of

temperature~

evaporation (Templin and others 1938: 5).

Rainfall annually

averages 33.8 inches as measured over a 30 year period at Taylor
although much of this is dissapated into the relatively dry
atmosphere (U.S. Weather Bureau 1959).
16

Precipitation is fairly

evenly distributed throughout the year with just a slight
tendency for a two peak season:
early fall.

in early spring and again in

The long dry summers have hot days and warm nights.

The mild winters are short in duration and the periods of cold arc
broken by warm sunny days.

Snow seldom falls and the period of

frost-free weather is 251 days in length.

Much of the stormy

winter weather is derived from Polar Pacific air masses which
surge southward in winter to yield north winds accompanied by
frontal type storms.

The thunderstorm type precipitation of

summer is derived from warm, moist maritime tropical air masses
moving inland from a Gulf of Mexico origin (Carr 1967: Fig. 5;
Corps of Engineers 1962: 19).
Surface Drainage and Group Water
The San Gabriel River, from the head of the Laneport Reservoir
District downstream, runs in a deep and narrow flood channel
trench with a capacity of 10,000 second-feet and an average stream
bed slope of 5 feet per mile.

Average surface width of the river

is 30 feet and average depth is 2.5 feet.

Bends of the S-shaped

meandering river exhibit short riffle areas of fast moving 4
to 6 feet deep located along the straighter reaches of the river
(Corps of Engineers 1962: 17,20, 207).
From the damsite upstream, the river drains an area of 711
square miles of which 80 square miles comprises the surface
catchment of Willis Creek.

Rainfall runoff from this drainage

17

net produces a river flow which has ranged from a maximum of
155,000 second-feet CApril 24, 1957) to zero.
the daily flow is 130 second-feet.

On the average,

As a supplement to direct

rainfall, springs in the headwaters generally maintain some dis­
charge exceeding that of other streams in this region of central
Texas even during the prolonged drought of the 1950's.

Mean

monthly discharge figures taken from a 36 year gauge record reach
a peak of 30,141 acre-feet during May coincident with the peak
annual rainfall.

During August, the river flow drops to 2,193

acre-feet corresponding to the end of summer dry spell; there­
after the river flow again builds throughout the winter preparatory
to the spring upsurge (Corps of Engineers 1962: 83,89,206).
Of special interest in this study are the abnormal runoff
conditions producing overbank flooding and floodplain aggradation.
Such peak floods occur when the river channel capacity is
exceeded causing the discharge to overtop the high banks.

In

comparison to other rivers of the region, the San Gabriel produces
some of the highest flood flow rates recorded.

This is true

because of the character of the soil and the nature of the rain­
fall, both of which are conducive to rapid runoff measured as
sharp-crested flood hydrographs.

Flooding is erratic and may

take place at any time of the year but does not normally overtop
the channel levees.

However, the record floods of 1921 (all

time high between 1924 and 1959) and 1957 reached an estimated
40.6 and 37.5 feet respectively covering much or all of the
bottomland (Corps of Engineers 1962: 20-21,230).
18

It is this type

of extreme but infrequent conditions which caused widespread
sedimentation on the valley floor and burial of the archeological
remains in the floodplain during prehistoric times.
The water quality of the river is characterized as hard,
chiefly due to calcium bicarbonates (Rawson 1967: 48).

Although

the river is usually clear as it leaves the Lampasas Cut Plain,
by the time it reaches Georgetown it is quite muddy carrying any­
where from 0.27 to 0.46 tons of suspended sediment per acre-foot
of water (1967: Table 4).

Much of this sediment load is obtained

by the river as it scours out its channel.
Judging from the floodplain location of many prehistoric sites
as well as the aquatic types of food remains (fish bones and
freshwater mussel shells) recovered from excavations, the river
was a major resource to prehistoric man strongly influencing his
economic activities and settlement perferences.
Another source of surface water is found in overflow meander
scars of the river locally referred to as "sloughs".

These

elongated furrows in the floodplain form crescent-shaped ponds or
oxbows as they catch and hold surface runoff after a storm or
following an overbank flooding by the river.

Some overflow scars

hold more permanent ponds kept supplied by spring-fed creeks
which trickle down from the Uvalue terrace escarpment (Fig. 54,
backgrounu).

However, as a rule, they do not seem to be

ciently deeply cut to tap a subsurface water table.

suffi~

If present

in prehistoric times, such ponds would have been good places to
fish, hunt water fowl, and collect marsh-type plant foods.
19

A third type of local water resource is spring discharge.
Coring by the Corps of Engineers (1967: 11-6) revealed that water
is commonly perched in the semipervious to pervious gravels where
they overlie primary bedrock strata.

This observation was verified

many times by our own field party who witnessed spring discharge
from the gravel exposures at the base of the river bank as well
as in the commercial gravel pits bordering the valley.

Indeed,

it seems likely that spring discharge observed from Uvalde For­
mation gravels at the Loeve Site (41 WM 133) was a primary
attraction for ancient camping at that spot.

Several local land­

owners stated that formerly many more springs used to flow than
are active today.
Native Vegetation
Prior to the advent of the historic farming, the dominant
upland plant cover was a prairie of mixed grasses (Templin and
others 1938: 3).

Short grasses and small bunch grasses such as

buffalo grass and grama grasses predominated while tall bunch
grasses including bluestem, were minor associates.
grassy prairie was not obstructed by brush or trees.

The open
But at

present only a few traces of this native vegetation remain as
small native grass pastures.

In contrast to the Blackland Prairie, much of the valley
bottomlands, even today, are woods covered principally with
hackberry, pecans, and several species of elm.

Oak and hickory

are locally abundant while ash and cottonwood are common
20

bordering the river and tributaries.

Beneath this

tree

cover

there is an understory of various shrubs, grapevines, and herba­
ceous plants (Templin and others 1938: 3; Witter, field
observations).
Judging from the ethnobotanical knowledge of technically
simple societies, the herbs, roots, fruits, nuts, berries, and
seeds provided by the streamside vegetation would have commonly
offered many more plant food resources than would the barren
upland prairies.
Wildlife
The native animals of central Texas have been described as
a component of the Texas Biotic Province (Blair 1950: 100-102).
This association of plant and animal communities is seen as a
transition between the western desert grasslands and the eastern
humid forests.

The eastern related animals are, as a rule,

found in mesic wooded cover along the perennially flowing streams
while the western animals favor the drier upland prairies.
Forty-nine species of mammals inhabit the Texan Province of
which 41 are continuously distributed with the eastern forests
and 8 show affinities with the xeric west.

Common mammals

favoring the woody streamside habitats of Williamson County are
the following:

whitetail deer, opossum, Eastern mole, pocket

gopher, long-tailed harvest mouse, white-footed mouse, hispid cotton
rat, shrews, skunks, Eastern cottontail, a swamp rabbit, and the
recent emigrant--the armadillo.

Blair (1950: 101) also lists

21

--------

........

_------­

some of the common grassland favoring mammals including deer,
mouse and California jackrabbit known to have inhabited Williamson
County (Davis 1966).

Terrapins are found in the grasslands and

woodlands as well as a variety of aquatic turtles associated
with the river, tributaries, and ponds.

In addition, nine species

of lizards are also eastern forest members and seven inhabit the
grasslands.

Twenty-seven of the snakes present are eastern forest

types while only 12 are continuously distributed from the west.
Five species of amphibians inhabit the perennially flowing streams
while 18 species of eastern related frogs and toads favor this
habitat; 5 others show western affinities.
Fish found in the mainstream of the San Gabriel include
channel catfish, flathead catfish, large mouth bass, spotted bass,
warmouth bass, green sunfish, bluegill, longear ,sunfish, spotted
gar, gizzard shad, river carpsuckers, gray redhorse sucker, and
numerous minnows.

Today the catch is predominantly catfish and

gray redhorse suckers taken in quiet flowing pools.

The latter

are gill-netted while the catfish are usually caught by line
(Corps of' Engineers 1962: 207).
From these tabulations, it would appear that the largest
number of small game animals were to be found along the stream­
side in the valley bottomland.

On the other hand, the upland

grass habitat was once well suited to support such large grazing
animals as antelope and bison.

Clearly this dichotomy in the

distribution of game would have had an effect on the nature of the
aboriginal hunting practices.
22

Human Resources
Based on the reconstruction of the natural environment just
outlined, I suggest that the bulk of the natural resources which
could have been exploited with an aboriginal technology were
centered in the river valley.

Specifically the bottomland

potentially could have provided water, stone materials for both
tool manufacture and hearth cooking, most wild plant products,
aquatic foods, deer, and most of the so-called "slow game" to
be scavanged or snared.

In contrast, the upland Blackland

Prairie was relatively sparse in exploitable natural resources
with the one exception of large game.

We may speculate from

this review that the streamside resources were a significant
attraction in orienting primitive man to his valley environment,
affecting most directly settlement and the food quest.

This

hypothesis is consistent with the hunting and gathering sub­
sistence practices of the Tonkawa Indians who are known to have
inhabited central Texas in early historic times (Newcomb 1961:
138-141).
Early Historic Environmental Description
During the middle 18th century, the Spanish established a
mission in the buffalo hunting ground and home territory of
local native Tonkawa Indians (the Mayeye, Deadose, and Yojuane
tribes) located at the confluence of Brushy Creek with the San
Gabriel River (Gilmore 1969).

Historical accounts of this region

made during the years 1746 to 1755, provide a valuable environmental
23

record of a section of the San Gabriel River valley stretching
from just below the proposed Laneport damsite 18 miles down
river (Bolton 1962: 225).
The 18th century San Gabriel River was said to be very vari­
able in its flow drying up during years of drought and overflowing
in the rainy season.

Like today, it was measured about 30 feet

across with a sand and gravel bed and confined within soft
sloping banks some 20 to 35 feet deep_

The adjacent floodplain

was densely covered with hardwoods - some of large diameter
trunks - among which were oaks, ash,walnut, pecan, popular, a
white tree (sycamore?), and live oaks.

Spotted at intervals

within this woodland were open, grassy meadows.
on the floodplain, an overflow

At one point

channel was described as holding

water which contained abundant fish and small alligators.
This

sect~on

of the valley supported the native Indian

inhabitants with such wild game as buffalo, deer, and wild turkey.
Available plant foods utilized were the "tuna" or fruit of the
pricklY pear cactus and wild blackberries (Gilmore 1969:
Appendix III).
From these documents, it is apparent that there has been
little change in the aboriginally useful aspects of the riverine
ecology over the last 200 years other than modifications which
are directly attributed to the influence of modern farming
activities.

Environmental stability is particularly apparent in

the size, depth, and nature of the river flow, but it is also
evident in the composition of the streamside woodlands as well as
24

the climate and edible wild plants all of which were very much
like that to be observed today.

25

- - - - - - ........

---~~..........

-

..-

- - - -.........

~~-

CHAPTER III
Chronology of Sites
A chronological statement concerning the local cultural
sequence is offered here to provide a temporal context to the
description of site materials presented in Chapters IV through
VI.

This composite chronology, composed of data integrated

from studies of artifact style changes, radiocarbon dating, and
alluvial stratigraphy, will be subject to change and modifica­
tion through future excavations in the Laneport Reservoir Dis­
trict.

However, the information below is my present understand­

ing of the prehistoric chronological sequence.
Alluvial Stratigraphy
Because many prehistoric sites found within the valley pro­
per are buried within the floodplain sediments, it is my expec­
tation that study of the Recent alluvium will allow the contained
human deposits to be dated in a relative sense.

Detailed study

of some of these sediments has been carried out during the ex­
cavation phase of the three archeological sites reported in this
volume.

Further amplification of this knowledge was obtained

through boat trips conducted along the San Gabriel River from
Highway 95 near the head of the district to a point some ten

26

- - - - - _...........

__

.......

------_.

...............

_

..

_---­

river miles downstream (Fig. 1).

Particular attention was given

to each alluvial exposure appearing in the many outside bends
of the meandering river.

Other types of studies involved field

inspection of gravel pits followed by laboratory study of 23
aerial photographs (Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation
Service, CXB-IFF,2FF series) and the USGS topographic maps
(Taylor and Granger Quadrangles, 7.5 minute Series, 1963 and 1964
respectively).

Credit for many of the ideas in this research

is. gratefully extended to Lawrence Aten of the Department of Anthro­
pology, The University of Texas.
Fifteen to 30 feet of Recent valley fill deposits lie within
the Pleistocene incised valley of the San Gabriel River.

Within

the limits set by the Uvalde Formation bluffs are found four
different kinds of Recent river sediments: (1) channel and point
bar gravels, (2) levee deposits, (3) homogeneous pale brown flood­
plain sediments supporting a woodland soil, and (4) backswamp
deposits which fill overflow channels.

The distribution of these

river facies is schematically shown on Figure 3.

Each type of

sediment is the result of a slightly different fluvial process
(Russell 1967),

For example, both the modern and buried pre­

historic gravels are the direct result of river channel deposi­
tion.

They are indicative of a rapid current containing a suf­

ficiently high energy to move fist-sized limestone cobbles and
Coarse sand, heaping up this material in gravel bars on the in­
side of each river bend point bars and along straight reaches

27

Figure 3.

Schematic cross section of the San
Gabriel River showing topographic
and sedimentary facies of the Recent
river deposits.
(l) modern river
gravels in the bottom of the flood
channel~ (2) levee deposits lining
the sides of the flood channel; (3)
floodplain claysi (4) backswamp clay
in (,verflow channels (lIsloughs II) ;
(5) surface of Uvalde Formationi (6)
Pleistocene incised valley.

rt)

...
G

::I

at

i.L

~

0:::
0
Z

,.-.,
If)

'--'

of the modern and ancient channels.

Outcrops of prehistoric

channel gravels, such as those studied in detail at 41 WM 133
(Unit III deposit), have been found as high as 10 to 13 feet
above the modern river.

Buried fire hearths indicating human

riverside campsites have been found within or associated with
the ancient channel gravels and these have been dated as old as
7,000 BP (Before Present) at 41 WM 133.

Two other sites of

unknown Archaic age are also associated with buried channel
gravels.

Further radiocarbon dating will be needed to deter­

mine the full temporal range of these gravels.
Levee deposits line the sides of much of the modern river
channel.

Other such laminated levee sediments appear as buried

zones which are just now being re-excavated by the lateral cut­
ting of the modern river.

These flood stage deposits, both

modern and prehistoric are composed of alternating thin strin­
gers of fine tan sand and a compact dark gray clay.

To date,

no archeological remains have been discovered in this kind of
fluvial deposit, probably because of the frequent flooding and
dense damp nature of the riverside vegetation which would make
levee terrain unfavorable for human occupation.
The vast bulk of the valley bottomland is composed of flood­
plain sediments deposited during times of overbank flooding.
It is this homogeneous pale brown clay which contains most of
the known archeological sites in the Laneport District including
all three of the excavations reported here.

29

At the top of the

- - - -

floodplain deposits are found Neo-American age sites (41 WM 118,
133) incorporated within the Catalpa soil.

But along Willis

Creek, at the extreme margin of the floodplain, is found an Ar­
chaic occupation (41 WM 135) in this same Catalpa clay soil.
Because of the tendency of the drainages to deposit clays more
rapidly near the main channel, an upbowed valley surface forms
(see Figs. 2 and 3).

Therefore, it is thought that the flood­

plain near the San Gabriel River generally continues to aggrade
even though some marginal stretches had largely ceased to aggrade
by A.D. 1 judging from the dating of projectile point styles
found at 41 WM 135.

Because of the radiocarbon dating of Fire

Hearths 2 and 3 at 41 WM 133, it is known that floodplain depo­
sition was underway as early as 7,000 years ago.
Backswamp deposits are the least well known of the river
sediment facies.

Inspection of the topographic map shows many

overflow channels or "sloughs" generally aligned parallel to the
river course but set back about midway between the river and the
Uvalde Formation bluffs (Figs. 1 and 3).

Aten believes these

channel trenches to be too shallow and narrow to have ever car­
ried the full river flow.

Instead, he has argued that they are

channel scars of wandering overflow waters during flood stage
of the river.

The floodplain channels serve as gathering streams

to direct water back into the main drainage as the flood waters
subside.

Following the peak runoff then, the river always re­

turned to its deep mainstream channel located more in the center

30

~~~--------------------~-------

of the valley.

The backswamp channels maintain their position

because of the swa1e-1ike topographic low found between the
higher levee deposits flanking the main channel and the upsweep
found at the margins of the valley where the floodplain merges
with the colluvium from the Uvalde Formation bluff.

The backswamp

facies are dense black clays which are deposited in the standing
water held by the overflow channels.

No archeological sites

have been found which can be related to such deposits but the
potential food resources of fish, water fowl, and pond type plant
foods would make this habitat attractive to prehistoric man.
Further search of these situations will be made looking for any
associated archeology.
Projectile Point Groups
Much of the recent effort in Texas archeology has been di­
rected toward constructing a chronology utilizing style changes
in projectile point (stemmed biface) types (Suhm and Jelks 1962).
This endeavor has been accomplished in 2 steps: (1) the arrange­
ment of the relative sequence of projectile point forms based
on their stratigraphic order coupled with (2) radiocarbon dating.
Such an artifact chronology is employed in dating deposits of
unknown age much as a geologist utilizes index fossils in stra­
tigraphic work.
One of the more recently constructed projectile point se­
quences was compiled by Sorrow and others (1967: Fig. 72) from

31

Figure 4.

Projectile point groups indicative
of temporal periods. Data compiled
from Sorrow, Shafer, and Ross
( 1967: Figure 72 )i Johnson,
Suhm, and Tunnell ( 1962: Figure
45 ) and Valastro and Davis ( 1970:
54 - 58 ).

Figure

Period

X
IX

St age
z
<l Toyah
0
Focus
00:
LLlLIJ Austin
z~ Focus

,-

Transitional

V III

Late

VII
0

VI

V
IV

-

<l
l:
0
0:

PrOJec
. flIe P'
oln t Group
Perdiz
Cliffton
Eddy
Scal/orn

A~ge (est. )
AD 1750

AD 1200 -

Figueroa
Darl
Fairland
Ensor
Montel/
Castroville
Marcos
Marshall
..

Middle

<l

Early

~-

Pedernales
Bulverde and variants
Nolan
Travis
SII/I
un-named

III

AD

600­

AD

1­

r-IOOO BC­
2000 BC-

3500 BC­
""­

Martindale
Gower
un-named

4

r-4500 BC-

6000 BC­
un-named stemmed point

II

~----.

I
~

PALEO­
I NDI AN

Meserve
Willis - Angostura
Scottsbluff
Plainview

7000 BC-

74

stratigraphic studies at the Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir located
25 miles north-northwest of the Laneport District.

This chrono­

logy is employed in the present study as a basic comparative se­
quence.

Dating from the Stillhouse Hollow point chronology will

be utilized as temporal indicators until further work at Lane­
port Reservoir provides a self-supporting sequence.

Figure 4

lists the projectile point groups, their Roman numeral periods,
and the estimated ages.

The use of the term "projectile point

. group" is a substitution of the term "local phase" employed by
the original authors.

Hereafter, reference to temporal periods

will indicate the presence of one or more of the projectile
point "index fossils" and imply the estimated age.
Following this scheme, site 41 WM 118 dates through Periods
VIII, IX, and X; or A.D. 1 through 1750 (?) based on the occur­
rence of Darl dart points overlain stratigraphically by Scallorn
and Perdiz arrow points.

Part of this sequence is reproduced

at 41 WM 133 which contains Scallorn and Perdiz arrow points in
the uppermost occupational component located in the Catalpa soil.
But the lowermost component (Fire Hearths 2-8) in this same site
has not yielded dart points and therefore cannot be dated by
cultural index fossils.

Occupational debris at site 41 WM 135

contains dart point types Figueroa, Fairland, Ensor, Castroville,
Marcos, and Pedernales of Periods VI, VII and VIII, dated some
time between 2,000 B.C. and A.D. 600.

According to the point

chronology, this site fits temporally between the uppermost and
the lowermost components of 41 WM 133 as well as just prior to
33

most of the occupation at 41 WM 118.
Radiocarbon Dating
Charcoal obtained from informal fire hearths has been assay­
ed for its age by the Radiocarbon Laboratory of The University
of Texas (Table 1, Valastro

and Davis 1970: 54-58).

One date,

sample TX-804, was run on Fire Hearth 1 excavated in Level 3 of
Test Pit 1 at the Dobias-Vitek Site, 41 WM 118 (Fig. 13).

The

age determination of 1350t70 or A.D. 600 (calculated on the re­
ference year of 1950) is very consistent with the estimated age
of A.D. 1 through 500 based on the Period VIII projectile points
(Darl dart points) and sandy tempered pottery found in this level
as well as the overlying and underlying levels (Sorrow and others
1967: Fig. 72),

But because of the radiocarbon central date,

the terminal age of Projectile Point Group VIII is here adjusted
upward by a century to a date of A.D. 600 (Fig. 11).

This date

has significance in the projectile point chronology because the
hearth sample just underlies the appearence of arrow points,
the "hallmark" of the Neo-American Stage.
A second carbon sample, TX-806, was collected from Fire
Hearth 3 at the Dobias-Vitek Site.

These campfire remains were

encountered at the boundary between excavation Levels 4 and 5
of Test Pit 4 (Fig. 13).
l180~70

The radiocarbon age of 770t70 or A.D.

is generally applicable to the Neo-American deposit at

41 WM 118 and in particular to a Perdiz arrow point and a bone

34

~~~~~~~

.......................- - - - - -

.-.-.--~-.-------.--.-

.....

-.~-------.~---.-

..-

--

..............

---.-­

Table 1.

Radiocarbon dates.
A~

t.N
In

n=TS:-c.

-R~dioca~bon

Provenience

Date

Site

770±70

AD 1180±70

Dobias-Vitek

41 WM 118/57

TX-806

Fire
Hearth 3

13S0±70

AD 606±70'

Dobias-Vitek

41 WM 118/6;

TX-804

Fire
Hearth 1

6900±110

49S0±110 BC

Loeve

41 WM 133/30
.

TX-80S

Fire
Hearth 2

7190±80

S240±80 BC

Loeve

41 WM 133/
37.2

TX-803

Fire
Hearth 3

68l0±300

4860±300 BC

Loeve

41 WM 133/
37.1

TX-80Z

Fire
Hearth 3

7000±160
(avg. )

SOSO±160 BC

Loeve

41 WM 133/37

TX-80Z, Fire
803 Hearth 3

B.P. Date

Field No.

Lab. No.*

Comments
Date sandy tempered pot­
tery & Darl point of
Transitional Archaic
Stage
Date bone tempered pot­
tery (Leon Plain) &
Perdiz arrow point of
Neo-American stage.
Date campsite buried in
Unit III gravels & river­
ine exploitation.
Date hearth buried in
base of Unit II &
riverine exploitation.
A second sample taken
from same hearth as TX­
803, small sample.
Average of two dates
(TX-S02,3) run on same
fire hearth.

*Radiocarbon Laboratory, Balcones Research Center, The University of Texas at Austin
(Valastro and Davis 1970: 54-58).

tempered pot sherd (Leon Plain) found just above the hearth in
Level 4 (Fig. 11).
The two dates, TX-804 and TX-806, are separated by one ver­
tical foot of floodplain clay.

The central dates differ by 580

years of elapsed time or 0.1 foot of sediment accumulation every
58 years.

By using the maximum differences obtained between the

standard deviation ranges, the accumulation rate is decreased to
0.1 foot/72 years.

Conversely, a minimum standard deviation

dif­

ference would express a more rapid aggradation of the floodplain
surface of 0.1 foot/44 years.

Additional accumulation measure­

ments will be necessary in future Laneport Reservoir studies in
order to assess the effect that changing sedimentation had on ar­
tifact densities (Davis 1969: Fig. 6).
Three age determinations were run on fire hearths from the
Loeve Site, 41 WM 133.

Samples TX-802 and TX-803 were determined

from charcoal collected at Fire Hearth 3 located in the base of
floodplain deposit, Unit II, and partially resting on the upper
contact of the Unit III channel gravels 18.5 feet below the
ground surface measured at Test Pit 1 (Fig. 59).

The ages of

7190+80 (5240 B.C.) and 68l0!300 (4860 .B.C) were calculated
from separately collected samples of charcoal removed the same
day from different portions of the same hearth.

Sample TX-S02

is almost too small to run and the size affected the dating
confidence as expressed in the large plus and minus standard
deviation range of 300 years.

36

~--

..

_..

_._..

However, the two dates (TX-SOZ,

803) do overlap within the standard deviation figure expressing
the reliability of the hearth date with a mean date average of
7,OOOt160 years ago.
The importance of the Fire Hearth 3 date lies in providing
an age near the beginning of floodplain deposition along this
section of the San Gabriel River as well as an indication of
the presently known lower limits of human occupation in the
district.

Although no projectile points were recovered from

this hearth, the dates are associated with a distinctive aquatic
snail fauna not found at other excavated sites.
Fire Hearth 2 yielded charcoal sample TX-80S dated at 6900t
110 years before present, or 49S0 B.C.

This occupational feature

is incorporated within a buried gravel bar (Unit III) located
18.8 feet beneath the ground surface measured from Test Pit 1.
Like Hearth 3, this hearth did not produce projectile points but
its age provides valuable information on the position of the riv'er
channel and aboriginal camping activities directed toward riverine
exploitation.
The ages of Hearths 2 and 3 are very similar based both on
stratigraphy and radiocarbon dating (overlap within one standard
deviation).

I interpret this to mean that the gravel bars of

Unit III were forming concurrently with the deposition of the
downstream mud flats of basal Unit II.

Prehistoric man built

campfires on both sediment surfaces while foraging for food and
flint materials along the river bank leading to the entombment

37

of his camping debris (Hearths 2-8).
Ceramic Dating
True fired pottery vessels are not common in these test
excavations and it must be assumed that the prehistoric technology
contained some other now destroyed containers suitable for liquid
transport and storage.

But the few recovered potsherds, expres­

sing differing technical qualities, are of unusual interest for
their temporal implications.
Fragments of a single deep bowl containing pure sand temper
were found in association with dart points buried at 41 WM 118
(see Clay Artifacts, Chapter IV).

Sand tempered pottery is much

more commonly found in east and southeast Texas where it is dated
between A.D. 150 and 500.

Therefore, its appearence in a Transi­

tional Archaic context at the Dobias-Vitek Site seems compatible
with these other east Texas associations.

The age of the sandy

paste pottery-Darl dart point association is further secured by
the radiocarbon age of A.D. 600!70 obtained from Hearth 1 found
in the same excavation level as the pottery.
Bone tempered potsherds (Leon Plain) were found at sites
41 WM 118 and 41 WM 133.

Their occurrence is indicative of the

Toyah Focus dated between A.D. 1200 and 1750 elsewhere in central
Texas (Jelks 1962: Valastro and Davis 1970: 54-58).

This age is

verified at the Dobias-Vitek Site where the single piece of bone
tempered pottery in Level 4 of Test Pit 4 was found just above

38

Fire Hearth 3 radiocarbon dated A.D. 1180:70.
Four Caddoan-like potsherds were found in 41 WM 133 where
they were associated with the arrow point horizon in the Catalpa
soil (Unit I).

Although the sherds cannot be identified to a pre­

cisely dated ceramic type, they are temporally compatible with
the Neo-American age of Unit I at 41 WM 133.
From these distributions, it is apparent that occasional
finds of locally made and trade vessels are useful in age deter­
minations during two time periods, the Toyah Focus dated from
A.D. 1200 to 1750, and during the end of the Transitional Archaic
Stage around A.D. 600.
Conclusions
Figure 5 visually correlates the various lines of chronologi­
cal data discussed in this chapter.

Inspection of this chart

shows that Site 41 WM 118 is dated between A.D. 1 and 1750(1) by
a variety of lines of evidence including alluvial and soil stra­
tigraphy, projectile point groups, two radiocarbon assays, and
distinctive pottery.
Occupation at Site 41 WM 135 took place sometime after 2000
B.C. and prior to A.D. 600 overlapping the base of the Dobias­
Vitek Site.

This temporal conclusion is based almost entirely

on the few Middle, Late, and Transitional Archaic dart points
present and also supported by the alluvial and soil stratigraphy.
Three components of occupation are defined at 41 WM 133.

39

The upper occupation is a repeat of the Neo-American sequence at
Site 41 WM 118, but the age determination is less secure, being
based only on alluvial and soil stratigraphy, projectile point
groups, and trade pottery.

A middle component yielding projectile

Point Group VI specimens is dated sometime between 2000 and 1000
B.C.

The lower component at this same site is among the oldest

place occupations now known from the Laneport Reservoir District.
Although not directly assignable to a named cultural

unit~

two

fire hearths of human manufacture appear in the base of the allu­
vial stratigraphy where they are radiocarbon dated around 500 B.C.
But if future excavations discover projectile points in these
basal hearths, it is expected that they will be types assignable
to Projectile Point Group III of early Archaic age.

40

Figure 5.

Chart correlating various lines of
temporal evidence. No scale implied.

Figure

TIME
PERIODS

PROJECTILE
PT GROUPS

ALL.UVIAL.
UNITS

AD 1750{?)

~ ~

?\
UNIT

AD 1200

RADIOCARBON
DATING

X

I

ADII80t70

Catalpa Clay

) }~ l

~

I

*

1I

1
!

IAD600t70

VIII
AD

I

\

L.OCAL.
CHRONOLOGY

) 1
!!!

2

j

IX

AD 600

CERAMIC
DATING

5

-

,.

...3

~

3=

rt)
rt)

::Ii
3:

j 1

\
\

&t)
rt)

\

VII

\

~

3:

\

\

\

1000 BC

-­ -­

I1

UNIT II
pale brown
floodplain clay

VI

2000 BC

4950iUOBC
5000SC

~
00

00

0 I>

UNIT0 III 0°0 0 0
o
yellow limesfon~D

3t

II

AY. 5050tl60BC

fhannelcQrav~sQ

*(I) decorated sherd tempered sherd; (2)bone tempered sherds~ (3) sand

I
74

tempered sherds

CHAPTER IV
The DobiC;ls-Vitek Site:

41 WM 118

At the time of the original site survey, diagnostic
Scallorn and Perdiz arrow points were surface collected from
this site indicating the presence of a Neo-American occu­
pational component.

Based on this finding, Shafer and Corbin

(1965:48) recommended test excavations.

Therefore, the first

intensive salvage research of the Laneport Reservoir Project
was begun here in order to secure data which would contribute
to the construction of a local cultural sequence for the
District.
These expectations were realized through the recovery of
an artifact assemblage which includes projectile point styles
aSSignable to Periods VIII through X spanning an estimated
interval or AD 1 through 1750.

This excavated material, then,

in company with the uppermost deposits of site 41 WM 133,
provides detailed evidence of the latest prehistoric occupation
now known in the Laneport District.
Setting
Evidence of occupation of Site 41 WM 118 was found
exposed in the eastern edge of a plowed field belonging to
Mr. Ed Vitek (Figs. 6, 7).

Because of the dual ownership,

the site is identified with a hyphenated name.

42

Figure 6.

Aerial view of Site 41 WM 118.

A north-south farm lane bisects the cultural refuse
providing a convenient reference line for designations of the
eastern or western halves of the site.

Excavations revealed

that the cultural debris is buried throughout the Catalpa
Soil which has formed at this spot on the topmost portion of
the alluvial floodplain of the San Gabriel River.
tion of

th~

Incorpora­

artifacts in the floodplain sediments took place

by aggradation of the river, probably due to overflow between
periods of human camping.

In this manner, campsite midden

debris was scattered vertically throughout 3.8 feet of alluvial
deposits.
The Dobias-Vitek Site lies on the left bank of the San
Gabriel River at a location 6.7 river miles downstream from
the Highway 95 bridge and 2.8 miles below site 41 WM 133
(Fig. 1).

The river flows nearest the site some 300 feet to

the east.

During extreme flooding it has covered the site

completely, according to local accounts, and judging from the
presence of rafted driftwood, it commonly sweeps across the
lower slip-off slope right below the cultural oUtcrop.
Just south of the eastern set of test pits is a low bank
which lies just above the

500~foot

mean sea level (Fig. 7).

This bank drops gently about six

contour line relative to

feet to a lower level, a slip-pff slope leading to the inside
bend of the river which circles the site on two sides.
The western portion of the site, found in the plowed field,
is somewhat eroded by slope wash.

-------

Judging from the plane

- - - - - - _..................

_------­

table elevation measurements, almost 2 feet of soil have been
removed.

It is believed that this erosion has deflated the

Neo-American stratigraphy in this area "letting down" the
heavy artifacts as the soil was washed away, a process which
has concentrated the surface artifacts much like "lag gravel".
But the full height stratigraphy, unaffected by either plowing
or surface washing, is present within the pecan grove to the
east.

Modern Site Ecology·
Although this area has been largely put into plowed land
or exists as improved pecan groves, there is a strip of wood­
land which borders both sides of the San Gabriel River, often
as much as 100 yards on a side.
Site 41 WM 118 is located on the fringe of this woodland
in which the pecan (Carya illinoensis) is essentially the
dominant tree, and at least two species of elm (Ulmus serotina
and

~

americana), and two species of hackberry (Celtis

laevigata and

~

reticulata) are very important subdominants

(Fig. 8).

The woodland forms a crown canopy, and the floor is clear
with little underbrush, although it is hard to tell if this

*This section by Dan C. Witter
45

Figure 7.

Map of the Dobias-Vitek Site, 41 WM 118.

~"

'"

~f~
:r
u.

ii.

Ii:

10

::.

....

0

\
\

\

-iII(5'

N

\
\

G:

ii:

'Ii

...i

...•

\

\

\

\

\

\

\
\

\

,

\

\

...

\

\

!

.

\

\
\
\

\

'"II
0
c.

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

I

\

\

\

\

\

:!l

•

\

'"
"•

·

\
\

\

\

0

iii

~

\

\

\

\

\

I

\

c

.

\

!
;;

· . .:

>.

i...

0
--

!

~

(J) ~

~
~

, !
0

i0

u

... ..iI
.. I
<

.J

J

u

c

..

~

~

..
~

;;

"

.i

i ,.• ~
...e .; i
, :x: G.
...
00

. .. .. .

~
c

0

,

I
I

,

\

l:

!

I

\

';

~ ;;

v

,,

\

';

..:.::: (J)
~ :E
.3:

0

\

u

en

0

\

\

·

+.­

\

\

.:

Q.)

.c

\

\

\

,,
,

I

I

,

I
/

' .........

---

/
/

.... .,-""
........-...-..._-,., .....

/

Figure 8.

Schematic west to east vegetational
transect from 41 WM 118 to the San
Gabriel River.

Figure

WEST

8

EAST

'" slte
.

Sta. 1

2

Woodland: pecan,
elm, hackberry

~----------flood channel--------~

elm,
ash

ha~~berry,

~

r

San Gabriel River

1--_._- -- -- -Sta. =

station

approximately 100 yards

-------~

4

-~

is the result of Ca) clearing for pecan harvest, (b) shading
out of understory by crown canopy, or ec) occasional flooding
of the river.
Many of the pecan trees have trunk circumferences of 6
feet and some of the elms and hackberrys have 5 feet circum­
ferences.

An old burr oak (Quercus macrocarpa) has a 10 foot

trunk circumference .. Presumably trunk diameters of 2 feet and
over imply a fairly mature stand, and support the landowner's.
claim that the forest has not been cut over since at least
1911.

Hardly any saplings of pecans were noted but elm and

hackberry saplings seem common.

The dynamics and history of

this woodland are by no means well understood by me, but con­
sidering the influence of the river and the protection of the
Balcones Fault Escarpment, it is entirely possible that the vege­
tation of the area may not have undergone much significant change
in the last l,OOO years.
/

Site Description
When first observed, the Dobias-Vitek Site appeared as a
scattering of

Uon~tools,

and lesser amounts of animal bone and

molluscan shells (both land snails and freshwater mussel bivalves).
This material is plentifully concentrated in the plowed field to
the west of the farm road where it covers an area approximately
80 by 130 feet (Figs. 7,9). The distribution of artifacts to the
east of the road in the wooded area is much less conspicuous from
the surface.

Here the occupational debris was largely buried by

48

.......

------~

------~

.............- - - - - - - ­

Figure 9.

--

General view of site 41 WM 118 looking
southward. Test Pit 1 has just been
started in the plowed field. The
pecan grove and remaining buried portion
of the site lies to the left across the
farm lane.

------~-----~---------

- - - -

----~~--

--------------------

the floodplain sediments and is only brought to the surface by
the burrowing activities of some large animals, probably
armadillos.
The initial field problem was to determine whether or not
any deposits still remained "in place" within the area of the
plowed field, as well as to ascertain the depth, thickness, and
age of the artifact-bearing zone.

Excavations of four 5 by 5

foot test pits revealed that the alluvial deposit, composed of
a brown clay, had been secondarily modified by formation of the
deep Catalpa Soil (Fig. 10).

This gray, humus stained soil

feature is a natural product which extends nearly 4 feet beneath
the modern surface.

Human occupation, as indicated most reli­

ably by the frequency of flint manufacturing debris (waste
flakes), is continuous throughout the soil from nearly O.S
feet below the modern undisturbed ground surface to a depth
of 4.3 feet.
Test Pits I and 3 passed completely through the Catalpa
Soil into the subsoil whereas Test Pits 2 and 4
of this goal.

stopp~d

short

Correlation of the test excavations and the

soil-subsoil boundary was made on the basis of measured
elevations, soil color changes, the presence of the hallmark
projectile point styles, and two radiocarbon dates.

Here­

after, the distributions of plentiful classes of artifacts will
be shown on schematic profiles reproducing these correlations
(Fig. 12).

50

Figure 10.

Description of Catalpa Soil taken from
the east wall profile of Test Pit 3,
41 WM 118. The data is telegraphically
listed based on both field observations
and the laboratory analysis of the
Soil Testing Laboratory, Agricultural
Extension Service of Texas A &M
University. Observed section is 4.55
feet thick extending from the undisturbed
(not plowed) woodland covered ground
surface to the bottom of the test pit
which was hand excavated through the
complete depth of occupational debris.

Figure 10
Texture: Fine clay size particles which do not readily form a
ribbon when worked between the fingers except for the soil examined
at the base of the profile.
Color:

Gray brown (lOYR 5/2, 6/2, 4/2, dry).

Structure: Massive, homogeneous throughout lacking noticeable
ped aggregation, it coheres as a mass.
Consistency: Sticky but barely p~astic when wet, friable when
moist, and slightly hard when dry, no cementation.
Special Features: Scattered small yellow pea size pebbles of
limestone and Cretaceous fossil shells (rare) consistently decline
in density from 84.2 per cubic foot of soil just under the surface
(Levell) to a low density of 8.3 per cubic foot (Level 8); visible
carbonates not common except at base of test pit (Levels 9 and 10)
where pseudo-mycelium and veins of white free lime were observed
(acid test not made in field); also a few small limey concretions
are present at the base of the profile and these were also recov­
ered by screening; both living and rotted roots and rootletts are
plentiful in the upper part of the profile; soil damp throughout;
pores and vertically oriented unfilled worm tunnels are common
containing many clusters of mating earthllorms; also common are
human artifacts such as scattered fine f_.ecks of charcoal, hearth­
stones, flint flakes, and other stone artifacts, small splintery
fragments of animal bone, many snail shells, and fragments of
river mussel shells.
Chemical Tests: Base status is mild to moderately alkaline;
percent organic matter high in upper portion of profile (Levels
1-5), moderate in midsection (Levels 6-8), and low at profile
base (Levels 9-10); phosphorus and potassium are very high in
upper levels and taper off toward the base of the profile; zinc
and manganese in minute traces both show concentrations in the
upper levels and decline in the base of the profile; magnesium
and calcium occur in high and very high quantities but these
elements were not quantitatively measured precisely; nitrogen
and iron show wildly fluctuating values lack the predictably
declining trends of some other elements.
Boundary:

Smooth and diffuse.

51

Site Chronology
The usefulness of certain kinds of data for temporal
studies has been discussed in Chapter III.

In this section,

the critical data is applied to the Dobias-Vitek profile in
order to determine the age of all kinds of human artifacts
and natural data recovered through excavations.

A second

purpose is to test the hypothesis that the floodplain sedi­
ments were essentially laid down in a horizontal manner, a
depositional feature which could not be observed directly
because of the masking effect of the dark gray Catalpa Soil.
To this end the temporal data, including pot sherds, C-14
dates, and stemmed biface types, are plotted on the base
chart showing the test pits aligned by elevation (Fig. 11).
Because all of the temporally significant data can be
arranged in the expected order without overturn, the hypothesis
of horizontal floodplain deposition at this site is thought
to be essentially correct (see description of Fire Hearth 3
for a minor exception).
Artifact assemblages of two major cultural stages are
defined from the temporal data:
Neo-American.

Transitional Archaic and

The fo.rmer, lying between 2.8 and 4.3 feet

measured below the undisturbed ground surface at Test Pit
3, is dated between AD I and 600 by

D~

dart points

(Projectile Point Group VIII), sandy tempered pottery, and
one radiocarbon date.

Because most of this data relates to

a period around AD 600, probably the bulk of the Transitional
Archaic occupation should be dated late in that stage.
52

Artifacts of the Neo-American Stage, extending from
2.8 to within 0.5 feet of the modern ground surface, include
arrow points (Projectile Point Groups IX and X), a radio­
carbon dated hearth, and bone tempered pottery which provide
a maximum age range of AD 600 to 1750.

The overlap of dart

points and arrow points between 2.8 and 2.3 feet is assigned
to the early part of the Austin Focus comparable in its
contents to Stratum 1 of the Kyle Rockshe1ter (Jelks 1962:
9, 86).

But the combination of Austin Focus (Projectile

Point Group IX) and Toyah Focus (Projectile Point Group X)
arrow points between the ground surface and a depth of 2.3
feet does not allow further factoring of the tool inventory
into discrete assemblages assignable to a specific cultural
focus within the Neo-American Stage.

However, based entirely

on the 12th century C-14 date of Fire Hearth 3, the material
above that feature might be considered Toyah Focus and
everything below that point to a depth of 2.8 would then be
Austin Focus.

However, this scheme is not employed here

because of the lack of good quantitative support from the
stemmed biface sample.
Neo~American

Further, it is conjecture to date the

occupation as late as AD 1750.

But it can be

argued that the data of the Dobias-Vitek Site are not contested
on this point since the radiocarbon series from the culturally
similar Smith Site shows Toyah Focus occupation to have
lasted as late as the 18th century Spanish mission period
without the appearance of historic artifacts in good associa­
tion with the aboriginal remains (Suhm 1957; Va1astro and
53

Figure 11.

Schematic profile showing the distribution
of critical data from which the chronology
of site 41 WM 118 is reconstructed. See
Figure 12 for the base profile on which
these data are plotted.

Figure II

T.P. 3
,.L

\(M\~ ~(

100'­

T.P. 4
r

I

I

no occupation
Pi!

A.D. 175U

C!)

~

(? )

99'­

tI)

T.P. 2

z

o<:t

T.P.
I

U
H

~

pro~ecti1E"
&
(arroN

horizon)

~
<I

A.D. 1200

0
t:4
Z

{Overla
97'

9

nd gfrow
o1nts )

CD • S

rly
Austin Focus
A.D. 600
Ht:4

..:r;C!:I

z<

oE-!

Projectil
(Darl dar

!-IU}

E-t

!-IU
tl)H

point horizon

z~

96'

~~<
A.D. 1
no occupation

95'

Legend:
T.P. - Test Pit
• S - Sandy tempered pottery: A.D. 150-500
eB - Bone tempered (Leon Plain) pottery: A.~. 1200-1750
Fire Hearth 1: radiocarbon dated A.D. 600 70
@ Fire Hearth 3: radiocarbon dated A.D. 1180±70
Projectile Point Groups IX and X (arrow points):
A.D. 600-1750

CD

Davis 1970:54-58).

One iron arrow head has been found by the

landowner, Jeff Dobias, on nearby terrace bluff site
117, which lies north of the Dobias-Vitek Site.

41 WM

But this

single piece of evidence needs further support before it can
definitely be shown that there was an historic aboriginal
occupation within the Laneport Reservoir District.
The lack of many artifacts in the upper one-half foot
of alluvium in Test Pit 3, is interpreted as continued
deposition of floodplain sediments after the site was abandoned.
Research Procedures
Test excavations were conducted over ten work days
beginning in late October and continuing through early
November.

The work was performed by four hired laborers

supervised by two archeologists:
asslstant Elton Prewitt.

the author, and his field

Concurrent with the excavations,

Dan C. Witter, graduate student, conducted observations on
the vegetation communities surrounding the site (see Modern
Site Ecology).
Horizontal control over the recovery of archeological
data was maintained using a five foot grid network measured
north and west of a hypothetical zero datum point.

The

squares actually dug were designated by the coordinates of the
southeast grid stake.

Vertical control on the individual

excavations was obtained through one-half foot arbitrary dug
levels, each level being measured by line level secured to

S5

the top of the southeast grid stake (Fig. 12).

Vertical

control over the entire grid system was measured from a 100
penny spike driven into the base of an elm tree.

This point

was arbitrarily assigned an elevation of 100 feet and all
other contour elevations were related to this vertical
d a tum (F i g. 7).
The soil shoveled or troweled from each excavation
level was passed through a one-quarter inch hardware screen
mounted on saw horses.

This procedure insured the recovery

of a large proportion of the medium and large size artifacts
but did not recover the really small size flint flakes and
snail shells.

The latter were obtained through selected

sampling of Test Pit 3 where the most complete stratigraphic
profile was encountered.

These samples consisted of a constant

size bulk volume (1.2 cubic feet) of soil collected at the
time each level dug was begun.

The soil was referred to as

matrix sample and it was later processed by washing over a
one-sixteenth inch (window screen) sieve.

One or two men

were continuously running the soil through the one-quarter
inch mesh screens.

All flint flakes, mussel shell, animal

bone, and shaped artifacts were hand collected and sacked.
In addition, a representative sample of snail shells was
saved.
Hearthstones, which were never common, were separated
and measured volumetrically in a metal bucket after which
they were field-discarded.
56

Figure 12.

Schematic profile of test pits and
excavation levels, 41 WM 118. No
horizontal scale implied. Elevations
along left margin are calculated
from the arbitrary vertical datum
assigned a height of 100 feet.

Figure 12

T.P. 3
T.P. 4
100'­

{a:cea '-.'e, IO'v'ed

.y

s:.ope eros ion 0
pi.o'VJed iieldt,p

,99'­

2

,:':"e' e, 3

T.P.
Le'.;e.L '.'

98

1

'Level

Level ;2

Level

Level 3

Le'"e,;,

91'
Leve::.. 4

96

1

Le

,,'2.

,

•

Cata Lila
Clay Soil.
su('soL.

'.

"'

Each archeologist maintained a daily field journal
record of his activities as well as detailed notes on individ­
ual excavation units.

To facilitate coordination of the

records , each unit of excavation, cultural structure, artifact
lot, or batch of environmental data was sacked and labeled
with a sequential feature number.

Such designations were

later converted into more meaningful labels as the laboratory
study proceeded and the minute inspection of the data and
records allowed interpretation of the recovered materials.
The advantages of the interpretation free feature designations
lie in the ease with which data can be field recorded without
the necessity for on-the-spot identification (Dittert and
Wendorf 1963:19).
Excavations were performed with shovel and railroad pick.
Finer work was done with trowel and brush, particularly when
dealing with fragile specimens or such occupational structures
as fire hearths or pits.
Occupational Structures
One of the most reliable contexts for the study of
associations among archeological data in central Texas are
such structures as pits and fire hearths.

Whereas individual

artifacts may be displaced vertically within an alluvial
pro

Ie by such agents as burrowing rodents or human digging

(both aboriginal and modern collector), the "in place" nature
of the occupational structure is virtually assured by the
58

Figure 13.

Schematic profile showing locations
of fire hearths and aboriginally dug
pits, 41 WM 118. See Figure 12 for
the base profile on which these
occupational structures are plotted.

Figure 13

....

T.P. :3
T.P.4

J~~LA

100'­

99'­

T.P 2
T.P. I
98'

4

@
Pit
1

95

1

@ Fire l1earths

-

_.

form of the feature, and its fragile nature and reaction to
disturbance.

Therefore, any set of artifacts found within

such a feature takffi on more associational meaning than would
the same assemblage found in the digging of a six inch arbitrary
excavation level (Varner 1968:51-65; Epstein 1969:11-12).
Fire hearths are loosely classified as informal or formal
depending upon the amount of preparation exercised in their
construction.

Those four hearths which are here called

informal are simple amorphous lenses of charcoal containing
a few randomly scattered burned rocks,snail shell, flint
flakes, and perhaps some animal bone.

The single feature

called a formal hearth (Hearth 4) consists of a shallow basin
pit lined with heat fractured cobbles but little charcoal.
Two pits comprise the other type of occupational structure.
Both of these features are found in Test Pit 1 where they
are defined either because of the unusual contents (a pile
of burned rock) or color contrast between the pit fill and
the surrounding subsoil.

Perhaps more prehistoric pits of

this nature were originally constructed but the lack of soil
color contrast denied us the opportunity to observe them
(Fig. 13),
All of the fire hearths and aboriginally dug pits are
present in the lower three-quarters of the Catalpa Soil.

I

do not believe this elevational correlation to be accidental
but rather an expression of intense camping activities which

60

left occupational structures between 1.7 and 3.7 feet beneath
the modern ground surface measured at Test Pit 3.

In other

words, during the deposition of the floodplain sediments,
man repeatedly returned to this spot building camp fires and
digging storage pits.

Since alluviation was progressively

raising the fairly level ground surface of the valley floor,
these features were vertically spread through 2.0 feet of
alluvial accumulation dated from Transitional Archaic to
Neo,American times.
Fire Hearth 1
A loose, amorphous cluster of charcoal flecks appears in
the southeast corner of Test Pit 1 during the excavation of
Level 3.

Where exposed in the south wall of the test pit,

the charcoal measures 0.5 feet from side-to-side and some
0.4 feet thick.

In the process of troweling through the

feature to collect charcoal for a radioc,arbon
several hearthstones were observed.

5

ample (TX - 80 4) ,

However, no evidence

of a pit was found or any indications of burned soil.

The

hearth was buried in the Catalpa Soil 0.8 feet below the
bottom of the plow zone.

It lies just to the east of Pit 2.

Based on the radiocarbon age of AD 600 t 70, as well as
the presence of sandy tempered pottery in the same excavation
level, and Darl dart points of Projectile Point Group VIII
in levels immediately overlying and underlying the hearth,
this feature is assigned to the Transitional Archaic Stage.

Furthermore, since the arrow point horizon just overlies
Fire Hearth 1, the feature must date to the end of this
Archaic Stage marking the introduction of the Neo-American
Stage.
FrEe Hearth 2
Another amorphous mass of charcoal flecks and scattered
pieces of burned limestone rock (144 small heat-shattered
spalls) were found in the bottom of Level 4 and in the top
of LevelS.

Where exposed in the northeast corner of Test

Pit 1, the hearth measures 2.7 feet along the east face of
the square and extends 1.9 feet into the excavation unit;
more of the feature continues beyond the east wall of the pit.
The hearth is 0.4 feet thick and lies 1.5 feet below the bottom
of the plow zone at the transition between the base of the
Catalpa Soil and the alluvial subsoil.
was no evidence of a pit or burned soil.

Like Hearth 1, there
Careful troweling

and fine screening of the hearth contents revealed two
utilized flakes, one small biface fragment, two cores,
fifteen flint flakes (40.0 per cent burned), two unidentified
bone fragments, 124 small unbnrned snail shells, and twenty­
one hackberry

.~~~;Bal~~s.

The age of the hearth is most likely Transitionsl Archaic
to judge from its depth. below the few Darl dart points of
Projectile Point Group VIII.

Unfortunately this estimate can

not be verified by radiocarbon dating since the amount of
charcoal present is insufficient for a radiometric measurement.
62

Fire Hearth 3
This cluster of charcoal hunks and diffused carbon
flecks was found 1.3 to 2.0 feet below the modern undisturbed
ground surface in the east wall of Test Pit 4.

It is judged

to be an informal fire hearth because of the amorphous outline
of the charcoal concentration and the random manner in which
the burnt rock were scattered through the damp Catalpa Soil.
The hearth is 2.0 feet in maximum diameter as measured in
the east wall of the test pit.

It extended into the square

one foot and continues beyond the east wall for an undetermined
distance.

In profile, it measures a maximum thickness of

0.5 feet and slopes gently from north to south; apparently
the buried ground surface on which it was constructed was
slightly inclined at this spot.

No pjt excavation or burning

of the surrounding soil could be determined.

Two unburned

deer bones, one a small astragalus and the other a vertebra,
were found in the hearth as well as several unburned flint
chips.

The animal bone, probably whitetail deer, is thought

to be discarded food refuse, perhaps left from cooking meat.
Charcoal was collected from the hearth and the sample
(TX~806)

dated at AD lI80±70, an

age determination which

is very compatible with the Neo-American hallmark arrow
points which are found at this horizon.

Particularly pertinent

to the hearth date was the recovery of a single Perdiz arrow
point and a sherd of bone tempered pottery (Leon Plain) from
Level 4 just above the hearth.
63

Fire Hearth 4
Located in the northeast corner of Test Pit 4 is a
formally constructed shallow basin-shaped hearth filled with
burned limestone river cobbles (Fig. 14).

The hearth pit

is 0.7 feet deep near the center but slopes up abruptly near
the uniformly circular perimeter.

Although not completely

exposed by the test square, I judge that a complete pit
radius is revealed from the northeast corner of the test
square to the pit rim.

This distance gives a measurement of

3.8 feet or a reconstructed pit diameter of 7.6 feet.

The

edge of the hearth pit lies 2.5 feet below the undisturbed
modern ground surface.

The soil forming the pit sides does

not show burning.
An estimated 100 pounds of burned rock measuring 0.87

cubic feet bulk volume of rock was removed from the pit.

This

material, irregularly fractured by heat and discolored red,
gray, and white, was densely packed in the hearth pit and
mounded up to a maximum thickness of 1.0 foot.
amdng

Scattered

the hearth rock is a matrix of damp Catalpa Soil

containing a few scattered charcoal flecks, 46 burned rock
spalls, one river mussel shell, seven bone fragments of a
large mammal, 112 snail shells, 110 flint flakes (36.4 per
cent burned, Concentration Index of 68.3), and two broken
hunks of slightly baked clay (see Baked Clay Objects).

Fine

screening of the hearth fill also yielded such stone tools

64

Figure 14.

Fire Hearth 4 exposed in the northeast
corner of Test Pit 4, 41 WM 118.
Left, the shallow, basin-shaped pit
has been exposed and the interior
hearth rock outlined. Right, the
exposed hearth pit is cleared but
the remaining unexcavated portion
shows in profile in the test pit walls.

as:

the medial section of a serrated arrow point, one other

fragment of a biface artifact, and ten utilized flakes
'(concentration index of 6.2).

Because the density of both the

utilized flake tools and the waste flint flakes is higher
within the hearth than they are for the site as a whole or
specifically the excavation level immediately surrounding the
feature, the greater artifact concentration is taken to mean
that stone knapping and manufacturing use of the flake tools
were extremely localized.
The paucity of charcoal in the feature does not allow
radiocarbon dating.

However, the feature lies within a zone

containing both arrow points and Darl dart points of Projectile
Point Groups VIII and IX.

Because of this association, the

feature is dated to the early portion of the Austin Focus
just after AD 600, a calender date which is supported by the
C"14 age of Fire Hearth I located at a similar depth.
Fire Hearth 5
Level 8 of Test Pit 3 was found to contain a diffuse
mass of charchoal hunks and fine particles mixed with consider­
able damp soil.

This informal fire hearth lay 3.4 feet

beneath the modern, undisturbed ground surface in the base
of the Catalpa Clay Soil.

Heat fractured limestone cobbles

were scattered through the amorphous feature but no formal
rock paving was present.

Other inclusions are snail shells,

flint flakes, and modern rootletsi, but no scorching of the

66

soil was noticed.

Although only one-half of the feature was

exposed by the test pit, excavations revealed a diameter of
about one foot and a thickness of 1.25 feet.

Because of the

great thickness of the charcoal mass relative to the diameter,
the hearth may originally have been built in a pit which
could not be detected in the humus stained soil.

More of the

feature disappeared into the east wall of the test square.
The hearth is dated to the Transitional Archaic Stage based
on its depth in the ground where it underlies Darl dart points
of Projectile Point Group VIII.

This dating is compatible

with the similar argument advanced for Fire Hearth 2.
Scattered Hearthstones and Hearth Spalls,
Burned fist size cobbles and cobble fragments of limestone
were field recorded from each excavation level in terms of
the

true

volume of rock.

In the field l measurement was

made in terms of the apparent volume of rock filling a metal
bucket and this figure was later corrected using a water
displacement test calculated on several representative bucket
loads.

Roughly one-half (54.2 per cent) of the bulk volume

is rock, the remaining portion of volume being pore space
between the hearthstones.

Furthermore, burned rock recovery

from Test Pit 3 made by washing soil over a window screen
(one-sixteenth inch mesh) yields density counts of heat-cracked
spalls per cubic foot of soil, another means of quantitatively
expressing the intensity of hearth cooking performed at the
site.
67

The burned rock recovered is identical in appearence to
those found in informal or formal hearths and, except for
the features of thermal fracturing, they also look like the
stream rolled cobbles of the Uvalde gravels and the gravel bar
cobbles of the modern river.

Examination of a representative

specimen lot consisting of 197 pieces shows several hearth­
stone materials of which the dominant element is limestone
and flint cobbles (73.5 per cent).

Lesser amounts of pebble

conglomerate (also present in the Uvalde gravels, 4.7 per
cent), and Cretaceous fossil shells (21.9 per cent) are also
present.

These hearthstones are characteristically fractured

in an angular fashion although portions of the stream cobble
surface often remain.

Much of the heat-induced breakup of the

rock results in very small spalls which are only consistently
recovered from the washed matrix samples.
fract~re

In addition to the

pattern, most of the rock is discolored either a

reddish color (7.5 R 4/2 - weak red to 6/8 light red) or a
smokey gray (N 4.5/0).

Except on the flint hearthstones,

"pot lid" fractures are not to be observed.
Hearthstones are recovered on the one-quarter inch screen
from nearly every excavation level within the confines
$ite midden.

of the

They are present in quantities ranging from no

more than a trace (few stones) to as much as 0.10 cubic foot
of rock per excavation level.

Hearth rock in measurable

quantities is particularly concentrated in nine excavation
levels shown on Figure 15.

68

Interestingly enough, these are not

Figure 15.

Schematic profile showing the
quantitative distribution of hearth­
stones and heat fractured rock spa11~,
41 WM 118. See Figure 12 for the
base prof!le on which dle'Se: da·ta· are
plotted.

Figure 15

T.P. 3
T.P. 4

100'­
T

*5

.99'­

T.P 2

T
*27 .~
"'"'1'

T.P. I
T

T

T

T

T

~

measurable quantity of hearthstones expressed
as true volume of rock

T

trace of hearthstones but not measurable

*.

density of heat fractured rock spalls expressed
as a density count (number per cubic foot of
soil) obtained from the 1/16 inch mesh screen
in Test Pit 3.

the excavation levels in which fire hearths are found and
there is a pattern of avoidance between the two kinds of
data.

I feel that this inverse relationship can be explained

by interpreting the scattered hearthstone recovery as evidence
of now-destroyed campfire remains disturbed by aboriginal
living activities.

This interpretation indicates that there

were a good many more fire hearths at one time than the five
discovered in the excavations and that hearth cooking was
always an important human activity throughout the life history
of the site.
Density counts on hearthstones and spalls recovered from
Test Pit 3 matrix samples shows concentrations ranging from
five fire cracked spalls per cubic foot to a maximum density
of 157.5 per unit of soil.

The

lens~shaped

frequency distribu­

tion exhibited by these densities with a maximum peak of Level
5 and smoothly tapering to minimum counts at the uppermost
and lowermost excavation levels, describes a unimodal profile.
This graphic figure in no way matches the bimodal distribution
with peaks in Levels 3 and 7 exhibited by the flint flake
frequencies in the same test pit (see Fig. 23).

This lack of

correspondence leads me to conclude that the two activities-­
stone biface manufacturing and hearth cooking--are unrelated,
the latter peaking in intensity out of phase with the industrial
operations.
Judging from the appearance of the rock, it was hauled
into the site specifically for hearth cooking purposes.
Whether derived from the San Gabriel River bed or from the
70

Uvalde Formation, it was a scarce commodity requiring consider­
able human effort to transport over some distance.

In this

sense, the cobble supply differs significantly from the
abundant hearthstone material present in limestone outcrops
of the Lampasas Cut Plain upstream and west of Georgetown,
Texas.
Pit 1

A relatively

straight~sided

pit was dug from the base of

the Catalpa soil at a depth of 1.5 feet below the plow zone,
into the underlying alluvial subsoil.
feet in diameter and 1.0 feet deep.

This feature is 1.4
At the time of discovery

in the profile of the east wall of Test Pit 1, it was filled
with light gray soil providing a subtle color contrast with
the surrounding lighter colored subsoil.

The interior pit

fill contains flint flakes and snail shells.

The walls do

not show any red burning and the general lack of hearthstones
and charcoal suggests a storage rather than a fire hearth use
for this feature.

Based on i.ts stratigraphic position, the

pit is Transitional Archaic in age.
Pit 2
In the south wall of Test Pit 1 is a basin-shaped pit
whose outline is defined by its fill of seven heat fractured
limestone cobbles.

When discovered just under the plow zone,

Pit 2 had a 1.0 foot diameter and was 0.7 feet deep.

However,

these dimensions do not represent the original size because
71

-

-

----------------_.

---------­

modern farm plowing has truncated an unknown amount of the
pit orifice,

Gray clay soil unstained by the presence of

charcoal fills the pit interior and shows no particular color
or texture contrast with the surrounding soil.

Sides of the

pit are not burned and no use for the pit is inferred.
Because this feature overlies Fire Hearth 3 of Transitional
Archaic age, the pit is dated to the Neo-American Stage.
Stone Artifacts
Intentionally shaped projectile points are described in
this section in terms of the recognized type nomenclature of
Suhm and Jelks (1962) as well as Jelks (1962).
and debris of a less patterned nature

Stone tools

are treated as artifact

forms without specific connotations of time or space.

Labels

and comparative materials for many of these artifact groupings
were derived from both Jelks (1962) and Sorrow and others
(1967), studies which are particularly applicable due to the
geographic proximity and cultural relatedness to the Laneport
District.
Other than the few ground stone tools, nearly all of the
flaked specimens are made on local flint selectively obtained
from the Uvalde gravels or the gravel river bed.

Since the

material is quite uniform throughout all tool classes, the
flint has been described just once for the cores (see
Description of Core Flint).

72

Flaked stone tools precede the few ground tool descrip­
tions.

The former are organized in the following sequence:

stemmed bifaces (projectile points), unstemmed bifaces,
multifaced tools (hammerstone-choppers), and unifaces (prin­
cipally scrapers).
The stone tool industry heavily emphasizes two classes
of objects:

bifaces (projectile points and unstemmed bifaces)

and utilized flakes.

Tabulations made on eight excavation

units (dug levels) of Neo-American age lying above 97.5 feet
absolute elevation show about 4.5 per cent bifaces and 95.5
per cent utilized flakes.

Counts on the same tool categories

obtained from seven excavation units of Transitional Archaic
age lying below 97.0 feet revealed strikingly similar per­
centages.

These figures are indicative of a strong persistence

in technical activities throughout the entire site history.
Many tool classes such as drills, gouges, mortars, pestles,
burins, gravers, serrated flakes, pendants, gorgets, hematite
pigment, and painted cobbles (Jelks 1962:85-90; Sorrow and
others 1967) found elsewhere in central Texas are missing
from the Dobias-Vitek test excavations.

The selective nature

of the industry is thought to reflect a specialized seasonal
range of activities.

But the deep nature of the deposit does

suggest that the limited number of tasks were periodically
repeated at this spot for a long period of time.

Some inter­

pretive possibilities for these behavorial activities are:
hunting, biface manufacture, wood working, and processing of
plant and animal products.
73

Stemmed Bifaces
Formally typed projectile points described here include
Perdiz, Scallorn, and Darl (Suhm and Jelks 1962; Jelks 1962).
Other stemmed bifaces are too incomplete to be assigned a
type identification.
semi~notched

These are handled descriptively as

arrow points, and arrow point fragments.

The

distribution of arrow and dart points by test pit and excava­
tion level is given on Figure 17.
Perdiz
Type (1 specimen)
,
;

An incomplete Perdiz arrow point has the extreme distal

tip broken off as well as one barbed shoulder.
trianile.dshap~d

without edge serration.

The blade is

Sides of the blade

are relatively straight and evenly chipped by regular marginal
retouch.
Diagonal basal notching has produced a long, paral

I

sided stem and pronounced sharp pointed shoulder barbs, one of
which is now missing.

Like the blade, the stem is marginally

thinned by bifacial retouch to produce a lenticular cross­
section.

However l no marked midline is in evidence.

By projecting a line from the tip of the shoulder barb
to the rounded stem base, it is inferred that the arrow point
was chipped from a thin, subtriangular-shape biface blank
with a curved base and straight sides.
The specimen was found in excavation Level 4 of Test Pit
4 at an absolute depth range between 1.3 and 1.8 feet below the
ground surface measured at Test Pit 3.
74

The artifact was found

Figure 16.

Stemmed and unstemmed bifaces, 41
WM 118. a, Perdiz Type; b , Semi ­
notched arrow pointi C , Scallorn
Type; d,e, Granbury Type, joshua
variety; g-i, Darl Type; j, Sub­
triangular unstemmed biface;
k, Oblong unstemmed bifacei 1,
Lanceolate unstemmed bifaceim,n,
asymmetrical unstemmed bifacei
0, thick unstemmed biface.

o

~-

E
u

:]

CJ

(',.

~

.0

E

.s::.

CJI

c

.. ­ .

-,

near a single bone tempered potsherd from the same excavation
level and it lay in the Catalpa Soil at the same absolute
elevation as a semi-notched arrow point

Scallorn varient ?)

and Granbury arrow points of adjacent Test Pit 3.

Elsewhere

Perdiz points are employed as hallmark indicators of the
Toyah Focus but this example at the Dobias-Vitek Site appears
in a context containing elements of both
(Jelks

1962:24~26,

Dimensions:

Neo~American

foci

85-86).
length, 3,1 cm. (incomplete); width,

incomplete; thickness, 0.35 cm.; weight, incomplete; Fig.
16, a.
The stemmed base of another Perdiz point was found in the
plowed field of Jeff Dobias.

This specimen was reported by

Shafer and Corbin (1965:48) and its provenience indicates
that it was eroded from the Neo-American occupation of the
west half of the site, now destroyed by slope washing.
Scallorn Type (3 specimens)
Two Scallorn arrow points, complete except for a missing
tip on one and a missing spur on the other, were found during
site survey on the surface of the plowed field.

The points

were reported by Shafer and Corbin (1965:48; Fig. 9, G,H).
Like the other surface material obtained from the west half
of the site, these had been dropped from their original
provenience as the Neo-American occupational horizon was
destroyed in this area by slope. wash.

76

Figure 17.

S~hematic profile showing the distri­
bution of arrow and dart points, 41 WM
118. See Figure 12 for the base profile
on which these data:arp~pto~~ed.

Figure 17

T.P. 3
r'

l~tL

100'­

T.P.4

1

.99 ­

T.P 2
.Gj

T.P. I
98

~: 1'1\
.MA

1

• SN

•

Gb

.,

• M4

eOb
eM'
.0

eo
• MA

97'

.0
96'

95'

Legend:
•
Gb

OJ
IN
S
p
MA

o

one specimen
Granbury Type, bono variety
Granbpry Type, joshua variety
semi-notched arrow point
Scallorn Type
Perdiz Type
Miscellaneous arrow point fragment
Oarl Type

A third specimen was found underground during the
excavations.

This point has only the tip of the blade and

spur missingJ otherwise, it is complete.

on.~

The long, tapering

blade has unevenly chipped, concave edges and a lenticular
Edge beveling or patterned serration is not

cross~section.

present.

Corner notching produced lateral barbs and a short,

stubby expanding stem with relatively broad neck.
the stem is mildly concave.

Base of

Attributes observed on this

specimen are those defined for the Scallorn type, an Austin
Focus diagnostic (Suhm and Jelks 1962:285; Jelks 1962:27-28),
but no

type~variety

identification is hazarded.

Burning of the banded flint has discolored the material
to a weak Ted (lOR 5/2) color.

Pot lid scars are not in

evidence but the flint is extensively crazed.
Recovery of the specimen was from a matrix sample taken
from the top of Level 2 in Test Pit 2.
lies near the base of the

N~O·American

This excavation unit
age deposit containing

other arrow points, both stemmed and unstemmed.
Dimensions:

length, incomplete; width, 1.35 cm; thick­

ness, 0.3 cm; weight, incomplete Fig. 16, c.
Sem'i.~notched

Arrow Point (1 specimen)

The basal portion of an arrow point has only one diagonal
corner notch.

In cross section, the artifact is lenticular,

being shaped by both allover bifacial flaking and fine
marginal retouch, on the one remaining side of the blade and
78

across the straight stem base.

The tip and midsection of the

blade are now missing and the diagonal break passes from high
on the unnotched side of the blade to the maximum concavity
of the one corner notch.

Because of the form of the point,

Jelks (1962:34) has suggested that they are unfinished examples
of Sca110rn arrow points and this contention is supported at
the Kyle Site by the fact that all examples found there were
recovered from an Austin Focus context.
This specimen from the Dobias-Vitek Site was recovered
from Level 4 in Test Pit 3.

This arbitrary level lies between

1.2 and 1.7 feet below the unmodified ground surface.

Other

arrow points (Granbury type) were also found in this and the
next overlying arbitrary 0.5 foot level.
Dimensions:

length, incomplete; width, incomplete;

thickness, 0.3 cm; weight, incomplete; Fig. 16, b.
Arrow Point Fragments (6 specimens)
Miscellaneous fragments of arrow points include tips,
medial pieces, and a basal stem.

All are too incomplete for

formal type identification but their distribution in the
upper portion of the Catalpa Soil, at depths ranging between
1.7 and 2.7 feet absolute elevation below the undisturbed
ground surface measured at Test Pit 3, gives good evidence of
the association of the Neo"American occupation in the upper
portion of the soil profile.

The specimens are all light

weight, thin, finely chipped bifaces.

One of the tips and

79

--

---~----~----

------------

two medial sections have evenly serrated edges.

Three of the

pieces are discolored by burning; otherwise the brownish gray
flint material is similar to other chipped bifaces described.
The arrow point tips were found in Level 2 of Test Pit I and
Levell (plow zone) of Test Pit 1.

Medial fragments came from

the surface of the plowed field, Level 2 of Test Pit 2, and
Hearth 4 in Test Pit 4.

The hearth-associated specimen is

In apparent association with a Darl dart point from Level 6
in the same test pit.

The broken basal stem of what might

possibly be a Scallorn point was recovered from Level I (plow
zone) of Test Pit 1.
Darl Type (3 specimens)
Two of these dart points are whole while the other has
a missing tip; the break appears to be from impact.

Charac­

teristically they have long, tapering unserrated blades with
straight to slightly convex sides.

The cross-section is

lenticular with a mild medial ridge in two cases.

A slight

asymmetry is present in two specimens due to very mild
beveling of the right-hand side of the blade created by
steepening the angle of the uniform, parallel-side marginal
retouch chipping along that side.
The stem is well inset from the maximum width of the blade
marked by unobtrusive lateral projecting shoulders.

Sides of

the stem are straight (one example) to expanding which, however,
are not ground,an attribute departure from some reported
examples of

.~

points (Suhm and Jelks 1962: 179, Plate 90).
80

Thinning of the stem was performed by the removal of long,
parallel flakes driven off both faces from the concave base.
These removals, like the manufacturing process on the rest
of the projectile point, were executed in two steps:

first

the all~~ percussion flaking, followed by even, uniform
marginal retouch, likely from pressure chipping.

This order

of manufacturing events is inferred from the pattern of flake
scar intersections.

Some of the flake scars terminate in

hinge fractures and one dart point has a small raised block
of unremoved material on one face of the stem attesting to
some difficulty the aboriginal knapper had in controlling the
even removal of thinning flakes.

One specimen was burned

after manufacture to judge from the presence of heat-induced
pot lid shaped spal1s, crazing of the flint, and reddish
. gray to dead white discoloration (Fig. 16, g).
~

points were found in Test Pits 1 and 4 at an

absolute depth range between 2.1 to 3.4 feet below the
unmodified ground surface at Test Pit 3 (Fig. 17).

This

elevation lies in the basal portion of the Catalpa Soil
humus.

The two uppermost dart points were obtained from

excavation levels which also contained arrow point fragments
of indeterminate type providing a vertical overlap of 0.7
feet between dart points and arrow points.

However, the

basic stratigraphic trend is clearly arrow points overlying
dart points.

81

Dimensions:

length, 4.7, 5.0 cm; width, 1.85, 1.95,

1.7 cm; thickness, 0.6, 0.6, 0.6 cm; weight, 4.9, 5.4 gm;
Fig. 16,

g,- i.

Unstemmed Bifaces
Small, delicately chipped triangular bifaces are
identified here as unstemmed arrow points and assigned to
the named type

Granbury and its varieties.

In contrast,

most of the large unstemmed bifaces" which have sometimes
been called knives or knife blades in other reports (Jelks
1962), are interpreted as broken or discontinued pieces
left unfinished from manufacture.
the

thick~

It is postulated here that

unevenly shaped specimens - some of which still

show patches of unremoved cortex

~

were first roughed out by

percussion flaking from large primary flakes.

Next these

were thinned and evenly shaped to various geometric outlines
including subtriangular, oblong, lanceolate, and even
asymmetrical,

From this preform stage, either knife blades

or projectile points were made.

One interesting aspect of

the thinning technique was the practice of unifacially
trimming the biface in alternate sectors along the margin.
It is thought that this treatment strengthened the edge of
the artifact allowing the knapper to proceed to the next
round of thinning and shaping.
Only one fragmentary example of a thin, unstemmed biface
in this collection has bifacially retouched edges which look
like a finished product.

This piece is interpreted as a

knife blade which was most likely hafted for use.
R2

Granbury Type, bono variety (3 specimens)
The basal portions of three

triangular~shaped

unstemmed

Granbury arrow points have sides and bases which are straight,
forming isosceles triangles.

Uniform bifacial chipping has

produced lenticular cross-sections.

One specimen from

Levell (plow zone) of Test Pit I is little more than a basal
fragment whereas the other two examples are more complete
lacking only tips.

One of the latter arrow points js from

Level 4 of Test Pit 3 while the other, a burned specimen,
came from LevelS in Test Pit 4.

All three occurred from

1.3 to 2.2 feet beneath the undisturbed ground surface

measured at Test Pit 3 where they were found associated with
other arrow points at a similar depth below the modern ground
surface.
Jelks

(1962:35~36)

originally established this pro­

visional type as composed of three varieties - bono, joshua,
and parke!. ,. based on the study of materials at the Kyle rock
shelter site.
Dimensions:

width~

1.9, 1.6, 1.8 cm; thickness, 0.4,

0.5,0.4 cm, Fig'.; 16, d,e.

Granbury
Type, josha variety (1 specimen)
..
A

sub~triangular

for the missing tip.
elongate,

tear~drop

Granbury arrow point is complete except
Sides and base are convex giving an

shape to the outline.

Rough, uneven

bifacial flaking does not impart a finished "look" to the

83

piece.

One flaw is present on a face and this "hump" of

unremoved material is at the terminal point of hinge fractured
flake scars.

The unstemmed point was recovered from Level

3 of Test Pit 3,
Dimensions:

width, 1.6 cm; thickness, 0.5 cm; Fig. 16, f.

Thick, Unstemmed Bifaces (9 specimens)
Both whole and fragments of unstemrned bifaces have been
percussion flaked on both faces to yield either a lenticular
or

plano~convex

cross-section.

Although the original intent

may have been to produce allover flaking l several pieces
have unremoved areas of cortex:
along an edge.

two on a face and two others

Heavy flaking has produced an irregular oval

outline and an uneveness to the artifact surface with deep
flake scars.

As with the other unstemmed bifaces described

for this site, discontinuous lengths of the marginal perimeter
are unifacially retouched from alternate faces.

The thick,

uneven appearence of the bifaces is interpreted as an early
manufacturing stage leading to the thin, more evenly shaped
biface grouping and ultimately in some cases to the finished
stemmed bifaces.

But the thick, uneven biface class described

here does not appear to me to be finished tools in their own
right.

Following this line of reasoning, work was stopped

because of breakage (4 specimens), crack flaws (1 specimen),
and/or cortex and "humps" of excess material which could not
be successfully removed by percussion thinning (S specimens).
Only one specimen is burned.
84

Figure 18.

Schematic profile showing the dis­
tribution of unstemmed bifaces,
41 WM 118. See Figure 12 for the
base profile on which ~he5eu~ata. are
plotted.

Figure 18

T.P. 3
r'­

~vL'L

100'­

T.P. 4

..

•
•

99'­

T.P 2
rL

T ·P. I:~

.1~:

A

­ ~'y\il)t:

98'

•

•

•
97'­

96'

­

•• •
•
•

A

•

•••

•
•
•
•••••

,

•
•

•

A

••

-

Legend:
A

Thin bifaces

•

MisceUlaneou§ biface fragments

•

Thick bifaces

The distribution of these thick unstemmed bifaces is
very similar to the thin, evenly shaped grouping.

rive of

the nine were collected from the surface of the plowed field
on the west half of the site.

They were also found underground

in Levels 3 and 4 of Test Pit 1 as well as in Levels 4 and
7 of Test Pit 3.
Dimensions;

length, 6.6, 6.9, 6.25, 5.0 cm; width, 6.4,

4.3, 4.35, 4.4 cm; thickness, 2.0, 2.2,1.95, 1.7, 1.05 cm;
weight, 69.5, 79.7, 36.3, 26.3 gm; Fig. 16, O.
Subtriangular,

Uns~emmed

Biface (1 specimen)

Except for a notch-type break removed from the distal
tip, this speciman is complete.

Sides of the piece are

relatively straight while the irregularly flaked base is
convex in outline.

Uneven, allover flaking has produced a

plano~convex cross~section;

the flat side appears to be the

ventral surface of a flake from which the biface was made.
Sectors of the sides and base have been marginally retouched
bifacially and occasionally unifacially.

The glassey banded

flint has been mildly burned to a glossy weak red.

The

small size of the artifact suggests that it may have been
intended as an unfinished blank for an arrow point.

Because

the biface was found on the surface of the plowed field, it
was most likely once associated with the Neo-American
occupation.
Dimensions:

length, 4.0 om; width 2.6 cm; thickness,

0.7 cm; weight, 6.3 gm; Fig. 16, j.
86

Oblong, Unstemmed Biface (1 specimen)
A complete biface was made from a cortex platform flint
flake.

Sides of the biface are parallel to slightly convex.

The cortex end of the piece is flat whereas the opposing
end is highly rounded.

Heavy bifacial flaking has removed

most but not all of the original flake surfaces.

In cross­

section, the piece is lenticular although the dorsal flake
surface is more convex than the reverse surface.

In addition

to the allover massive percusion flaking, there are short
lengths of finer, marginal retouch.

Often this edge working

is unifacial l being removed along edge sectors first
from one face and then the other.

The artifact was picked

up from the surface of the plowed field in the western half
of the site,
Dimensions:

length, 5.1 cm; width, 2.0 cm; thickness,

0.75 cm; weight, 8.9 gm; Fig. 16, k.
Lanceolate, Unstemmed Biface (1 specimen)
A lanceolate-shape biface has convex sides which once
converged to a long distal apex but now this tip is broken
off.

The base is evenly squared off.

All over bifacial flaking

has tapered both the sides and base to produce a lenticular
cross-section.

Marginal retouch is present along some portions

of the perimeter.

Most of this trimming is unifacial in

alternate sectors but at least one edge length is bifacially

87

chipped.

The biface was found on the surface of the plowed

field where it was "let down" from a Neo-American context
by slope wash.
Dimensions:

width, 2,4 cm; thickness, 0.65 cm; Fig. 16, 1.

Asymmetrical, Unstemmed Bifaces (2 specimens)
bifaces are asymmetrical in outline.

Oblong~shaped

One

specimen has an end truncated on a diagonal line whereas the
other is slightly curved in a mild crescent shape.

Both

were percussion flaked allover to produce rather irregular
leriticular cross-sections.

Much of this irregularity is due

to crack flaws and hinge fracturing of the thinning flakes.
Unifacial marginal retouch, perhaps trimming to strengthen
the edge during manufacture, is present in short, discontinuous
stretches along the biface perimeters.

Neither piece appears

to be a finished tool but more likely a manufacturing step
le~di~g

to an end form.

One specimen was recovered from

excavation Level 4 in Test Pit 3 while the other came from
Level 7 of the same test square.
Dimensions:

length, 5.5, 5,0 cm; width, 2.7, 2.8 cm;

thickness, 1.3, 1.3 cm; weight, 17.4, 15.1 gm; Fig. 16, m,n.
Thin, Unstemmed Bifaces (13 specimens)
Fragments of unstemmed bifaces consist of tips, a mid­
section, and bases.

Judging from the fragments, these artifacts

were large l thin, evenly shaped specimens, either finished
tools or more likely broken near the end stage in manufacture.
Most of the breaks are transverse or diagonal snaps.
88

Edges and bases of the artifacts are straight to convex
in outline and only one basal fragment is concave.

The

reconstructed shape is subtriangular and individual fragments
approach the outline of Friday,
(Jelks 1962:42-44).

Covin~ton,

and Cleburn knives

Allover biface thinning has produced

a lenticular cross section.

Generally the flaking is quite

regular but occassionally crack flaws, small geodes, and hinge
fracturing have interfered to produce "humps" of unremoved
material and/or edge deviations in an otherwise symmetrical
outline.

Inspection under the microscope shows discontinuous

areas of unifacial (also rarely bifacial) marginal trimming
removed first from one face and then other in alternating
sectors around the artifact perimeter.

Apparently the edge

was being strengthened from time to time by retouch as
percussion thinning was underway.

Only the midsection piece

is extensively retouched bifacially.

This is the only candidate

for a finished tool; perhaps it was intentionally made as a
knife blade.
Five of these bifaces were collected from the surface of
the plowed field where they were !llet down" from their original
context in the Neo-American occupational zone by slope wash.
Others were found in Level 2 of Test Pit 1; Levels 4, 7, and
8 of Test Pit 3; and Levels 3 and 4 of Test Pit 4 (Fig. 18).
This distribution spans both the Transitional Archaic and
Neo"American horizons of the site.

89

Dimensions:

width of bases; 3.0, 4.2, 4.3, 4.5 cm;

thickness, 0.6, 0.65, 0.65, 0.8, 0.95, 0.95, 0.9, 1.0, 1.15,
1.2,1.2 cm.

Miscellaneous Biface Fragments (22 specimens)
Fragmentary pieces of evenly shaped bifaces include
tips, lateral sections, bases, and possibly stems.

These

pieces are too small to provide much data on artifact form
except to say they were broken from thin, evenly shaped
bifaces as well as stemmed dart points; however, none appear
to be from arrow points or thick, unevenly shaped bifaces.
One lateral fragment is a burin spall removed from the
edge of a biface.

Another lateral biface fragment is of

interest because of the reddish yellow (7.5 YR 7/5) color and
oxidized specks of iron in the material which appears to have
been

heat~treated

prior to manufacture.

This seems so because

evidence of direct buring such as pitting, crazing, and red
or white discoloration are absent.
Two biface tips are made on banded flint whereas the rest
are homogeneous gray flint.

Seven specimens were exposed

directly to a flame after manufacture judging from the presence
of

heat~induced

attributes mentioned above.

One specimen was found on the surface of the plowed field
on the west side of the site.

Specimens encountered under­

ground include examples from Levels 3 and 5 of Test Pit 1;

90

Levels 1 (plow zone) and 2 of Test Pit 2; Levels 2, 7, and
9 of Test Pit 3; and Levels 5 and 6 in Test Pit 4.

This

distribution follows that for the combined dart points and
thin, evenly shaped bifaces.
Other Stone Tools
Tools other than bifaces are described here providing
a rather small miscellaneous grouping of hammer choppers,
scrapers, utilized flakes, a grinding slab, and a handstone.
Hammerstone~Choppers

(2 specimens)

Flint cobbles have been bifacially flaked to remove most,
but not all, of the naturally formed cortex coat.

The

resulting tool is oval shaped in outline, actually a very
thick, uneven biface.

Battering and short step fractures

are noticeable at several points along the edge perimeter
(particularly at one end) formed by the flake scar inter­
sections.

Because of these wear attributes, as well as the

sharp edge of the tool where. it was not battered, and the heavy
weight compared to cores, it is inferred that these artifacts
were used in percussion manufacture of other flaked stone
tools as well as pecked-grinding stones, especially bifaces.
Some of the step-fracture edge wear could also be due to a
chopping action on wood and bone materials.

Identical wear

from chopping and hammering has been reproduced on Laneport
flint.

These specimens were first reported by Shafer and

91

~-~~---

....

-~~~~-

..

--~~

...

--....

~~--.--.--

-~--

.....- - - -.....­

Figure 19.

Hammer-chopper, scrapers, and milling
stones, 41 WM 118. a, Hammer-chopper;
b, large flake scraper; c, end scraper;
d, grinding slab; e, handstone. Specimen
d is three-quarters scale, the scale of
all others is shown by the graphic scale.

a

c

. ..

o
I

d

2 em.
I

Corbin (1965:48) who collected them from the surface of the
plowed field where they had been "let down 'l by slope wash
from their original Neo-American context,
Dimensions:

length, 9.05, 5.7 cm; width, 5.85, 5.1

cm; thickness, 3.9, 3.25 cm; weight, 248.8, 98.1 gm; Fig.
19, a.
Large end flakes are oblong to tear-drop shape in outline
and plano-convex in cross section (see Waste Flakes).

The

convex surface (dorsal face of the flake) is steeply ridged,
a characteristic which has been accentuated by percussion
flaking struck from the flat, ventral flake surface.

This

work has removed most, but not all of the original weathered
cortex, some of which still adheres along the convex ridge
of the dorsal flake surface.

Percussion flaking was performed

completely around the perimeter (except for the small plain
flake platform) on two specimens and along one side and both
ends of the other.

Some of the percussion blows were driven

in at an angle to produce stepped fractures thereby thinning
the unifacially worked edge.

Another technique of producing

a thin, acute angle was to percussion-trim off flakes from
the ventral flake surface to yield a bifacial cutting edge.
But this procedure was employed along a restricted section
of the margin on only one tool.
Fine, even marginal retouch is present on all specimens.
It is inferred that this pressure shearing, which overlies
the more massive percussion flaked scars, was developed as the
tools were employed in scraping.
93

Because the three large flake scrapers were collected
from the surface of the plowed field in the west one-half of
the site, it is believed that they were "dropped" as a lag
gravel from a higher Neo-American context by slope wash
erosion.
Dimensions:

length, 8.55, 9.9, 11.35 cm; width, 3.45,

4.7, 5.1 cm; thickness, 1.8, 2.15, 2.5 cm; weight, 46.0,
81.3, 156.8 gm; edge angle, 60-70, 54"72,

67~89

degrees;

Fig. 19, b.
End Scrapers (5 specimens)
All specimens are made on either interior (3 artifacts)
or cortex (2 artifacts) flakes.

Unifacial edge flaking appears

on the dorsal surface of the flake where it was intentionally
struck by a percussion instrument from the flatish, ventral
flake surface,

This edge trimming has produced a steep angled

working edge which is generally confined to the end of the
flake opposite the flake platform and perpendicular to the
flake striking axis.

In four of the five specimens, fine even

marginal retouch overlaps the percussion work; the fine
shearing developed through scraping use.

In three specimens

the trimmed edge is highly convex whereas the other two
scrapers have quite straight chipped edges.
on one of the curved edge scrapers and

a,

The scraping bit
straight edge one

are very notched and uneven whereas the other three scrapers
are marginally trimmed by fine, even chipping providing a
94

_

...........

_-

--

-----~-----

--

......

~----------

............•.

well shaped bit.

The smallest of the convex bitted scrapers

is of a size sometimes labeled a "thumb-nail" scraper.

This

tool from Level 6 of Test Pit 4 has been discolored by direct
flame burning.

An unevenly flaked scraper from Level 2 of

Test Pit 1 lacks a keen cutting edge.

The smooth, rounded

and slightly polished flaked bit of this tool gives the
impression that it was water-tumbled in the river.

Perhaps

it is an ancient specimen collected and carried into the
Dobias"Vitek Site.
Two scrapers were collected from the plowed field surface
in the west half of the site.

The other three come from about

the same absolute depth below the modern undisturbed ground
surface in Level 2 of Test Pit 1 (2 specimens) and Level 6
of Test Pit 4.

Because the underground artifacts appear at

the zone of stratigraphic replacement of dart points by
arrow points, the formally made scrapers are thought to be
early Austin Focus in age.
Dimensions;

length, 1.9, 2.25, 3.6, 3.5, 4.5 cm; width,

1.5, 3.1, 2.95, 4.25, 3,7 cm; thickness, 0.5, 1.0, 0.95,
1,3, 1.25 cm; weight, 1.0, 9.3, 8.4, 22.2, 30.1 gm; edge
angle, 85, 82, 84, 91, 72 degrees; Fig. 19, c.
Uti!ized Flakes (545 observed specimens, 943 estimated specimens)
Utilized flakes were observed in every excavated level
within the zone of occupation in frequencies around 95.0
per cent of the stone tool industry (Fig. 20).

95

In most cases,

Figure 20.

Schematic profile showing the dis­
tribution of Utilized Flakes
expressed as a concentration index
calculated for each excavation
level, 41 WM 118. See Figure 12
for t4e base profile on which these
data .areppd.t>t!.ed.

Figure 20

100'­

99'­

T.P 2
T.P. I
rL

­

9S'

c'iv \JfvJ
2.4
0.5

97

­

r
5.9
I. (l

1

0.2

0.5

0.5

-

3.3

0.3

2.7

0.1

0.6

,

95 ­

0.3

Legend:
~ ~

1.5 times site average

the distinctive unifacially sheared edge on those flakes
allowed them to be picked out of the other waste flint flake
samples by direct observation.

However, because of the very

large total counts of all kinds of flint flakes present in
Levels 3 through 9 of Test Pit 3, a sampling procedure was
established there for the interior flakes.

Studies of the

flake attributes were conducted on random assortments of 100
or so specimens.

It was from these lots that the utilized

flake identifications were made and this proportion of the
selected group was then projected to the total recovery for
that level to provide an estimated number of utilized flakes.
for example, 1126 flint flakes were recovered from Level 7.
Of these, 47 cortex backed flakes exhibit utilized edges.
Interior flakes tallied 988 of which 100 were randomly separated
using a soil sample divider and from this sample of a sample
it was determined that 20 were utilized tools.

By establish­

ing a proportion of tools to flake sample, it was next
calculated that 197.6 utilized flakes were present in the
total group of int€ r ior

flakes.

This figure, plus the

directly observed count of utilized corte--x flakes, equals
an estimated 244.6 utilized flakes.
In order to isolate loci of high work activity, the
counts of utilized flakes for each excavation level were
converted to a Concentration Index as outlined for the waste
flint flakes.
20.

These calculations are reproduced on Figure

Indices from all levels include within the occupation

zone average 5.1 utilized flakes per cubic foot of soil.
97

Above average densities are present at two elevations in
Test Pit 3:

Levels 3 and 4 of Neo-American age, and at

greater depth in Levels 6 and 7 of Transitional Archaic age.
These increases are from two to almost five times the general
average, concentrations which are indicative of high work
activity,

If Jelks (1962:51,73) is right, then Test Pit 3,

as well as being a stone tool manufacturing shop, was repeatedly
the locus of wood industry.

All other utilized flake indices

are low relative to the site average.
In Level 3 of Test Pit 3, 31 flakes with utilized edges
were observed from a sample of 171 flakes examined micro­
scopically.

This Neo-American age sample was studied intensely

in terms of the flake form and use attributes present.

Each

attribute was tabulated and its frequency computed relative
to the flake sample independently of the other attributes.
In this manner, some

non~exclusive

attribute tallies exceed

100 per cent due to doubling up of attributes on the same
flake; for instance, both a straight and a concave sheared
edge may be present on a single flint flake.

The attribute

percentages are to be read as so many utilized flakes showing
this feature.
The largest part (71.4%) of the utilized flakes were struck
from the interior of a flint core while the

rem~ining

portion ex­

hibited some cortex on the dorsal flake surface (28.6%) suggesting
a selective preference for the keener edge interior flakes. A prof
arence for the smaller, thumb-nail 'size interior flakes is shown
98

by the fact that more than one-half (54.8 per cent) of the
sample is one gram or less in weight and 87.0 per cent is
under four grams.

Furthermore, the utilized flakes are

mostly microlithic in size (less than or equal to 3.0 cm. in
greatest dimension) with a microlithic utilized flake tool
index of 74.2 (Marks 1968:393,394).
Many of the flakes were held and used in such a fashion
that pressure shearing of the edge occurred perpendicular to
the striking axis along the distal end of the specimens
(51.6 per cent).

But nearly as many (42.0 per cent) of the

flakes showed use-chips removed along the side of the flake
margin parallel to the striking axis.
sample exhibited shear elsewhere.

Only a fraction of the

The preponderance (90.0

per cent) of the force producing marginal shearing was exerted
from the direction of the ventral flake surface to produce
fine, even unifacial chipping on the dorsal face of the flake.
Much less commonly, the use-chips were removed from the
ventral flake surface

in alternate sectors from the first

one face then the other, or from the platform surface.

As

a rule, the chips removed are quite tiny and in some cases can
only be observed under optical magnification.

Because of this

minuteness, I have assumed that all edge shearing is due to
use of these flakes as tools and conversely that none were
intentionally shaped prior to use.

Further, because every

edge examined was pressure formed unifacially, I think that

99

they were employed in a scraping use against some other
material such as wood, fiber, vegetal matter, bone, and/or
hides.
Jelks' (1962:51) study of identical utilized flakes,
called spall scrapers, obtained from Neo-American deposits
at the Kyle Site, led him to the conclusion that some of these
artifacts were wood working tools employed in manufacturing
bows, arrow shafts, and other wooden objects.

His experimental

simulation, which I have reproduced, showed that scraping of
wooden surfaces will produce the observed beveled shear on
flint flakes.

Further, the dry rock shelter deposits at Kyle

yielded small curled wood shavings which are thought to be
byproducts of the carpentry industry (1962:73).
Relative to the reflectivity of the flake surface
itself, most of the
dull sheen.

use~produced

edge chipping evidences a

However l one in four flake specimens (25.4 per

cent) contrast with a high glossy luster.
IS

This latter quality

thought to represent wear developed through soft abrasion

as the flake was employed in working some pliable material,
perhaps hides,

But the lack of extensive edge modification

to the tool does not indicate that any of these implements
were used repeatedly.

Instead, it appears that any sui table

size interior flake was opportunely employed for scraping use
as the need arose and then discarded.
The normally convex outline of the flake was modified
through use by pressure against the material being worked to
100

~--------

.....

~~---~~.

produce either straight (58.0 per cent), convex (38.7 percent),
or a conca.ve (12.8

percen.t~\

outline.

In one case, a flake

edge was notched and then the deeply concave scar shear­
chipped by use.

In several other instances (9.8 percent)

naturally formed projections along the flake edge were employed
as gravers to part or cut some material by incising.

These

flake spines show evidence of this work in the shear chips
removed from the tip and along one or more converging side of
the projection.
Measurement of the pressure chipped use-edge with a
goniometer shows that they range from 39 to 90 degrees to the
plane of the relatively flat ventral flake surface.

However,

most of the angle distribution clusters between 48 and 81
degrees l a considerable steepening when compared to the
unmodified, razor-thin convergence of the dorsal and ventral
flake surfaces.
The length of the edge modification was measured and
found to be quite restricted along the flake perimeter.

The

bUlk of the measurements were in the vicinity of 0.4 to 0.6
centimeters in length and few were over 1.3 centimeters.

This

observation suggests either that the material being scraped
was narrow in width l such as a wooden arrow shaft, or that if
the material being worked was wide, the hand strokes performing
the scraping were in a fashion so that the same restricted
sector of the scraping edge was always in contact with the
material being worked.

Al though utilized flakes do not constitute an intentional
tool type in the sense of a

pre~determined

manufactured tool

form, their numerical superiority over all other tool classes
demonstrates their importance in the stone industry.

In

addition to a scraping use, it is highly likely that many other
flint flakes examined were used as knives for cutting and
whittling.

This inference is based on the frequent presence

of irregular notches and random shear chips taken off first
one side and then the other of a waste flint flake edge.
However, it was not possible to unequivocally separate these
cutting edges from those flint flake edges which were battered
by aboriginal trampling,mechanical abrasion during our
screening operation or from stresses formed along the flake
margin by radiating fissures.
develop
freshly

That such edge chipping does

during cutting I can demonstrate by the use of
f'a:sih.ti~l€dt f<l1a~s.

Therefore, all I can say is that

tasks requiring materials to be cut were fulfilled by the use
of unmodified waste flint flakes.

But I can not quantify this

conclusion.
A second sample of 17 utilized flakes was studied for its
attribute combinations.

This group of Transitional Archaic

tools obtained from Level 8, Test Pit 3, was examined in much
the same way as those described above.

The two samples show

very similar distributions of characteristics leading to the
conclusions that they were made and used in just about the

102

same manner.

The most significant departure of the Level 8

sample from those in Level 3 is the fact that they have a
greater length of marginal shear from use.

Measurements along

the modified edge range between 0.2 and 1.1 centimeters and
one specimen has 3.0 centimeters of utilized perimeter.
Grinding Slab (1 specimen)
A grinding slab fragment made of a porous coarse-grained
variety of pinkish gray (7.5 YR 7/2) limestone called coquina
consists of a section extending from the rim of the rock slab
in toward (but not to) the midpoint of the grinding basin.
The bottom and edges of the slab are irregular showing no
evidence of shaping; apparently a naturally fractured slab of
coquina was picked up as it was found.

No local outcrops of

this material are known in the Reservoir District but this
piece could have been carried downstream by the river from a
headwaters source.
Man-made modification of the artifact consists of a
smoothly ground basin formed in the upper surface of the stone.
Because of the shape, it is inferred that milling of food
stuffs and/or mineral pigments could have been performed in
the ground basin, an interpretation based on ethnographic
parallels and archeological evidence obtained from the Evoe
Terrace Site (Sorrow and others 1967:101).

The biface mano

(hands tone) described below has double convex grinding
surfaces, the curves of which match perfectly with the shallow

103

concave milling surface of this "nether stone".
porous nature of the rock provided a

The naturally

"self~sharpening"

quality

to the milling stone since deepening of the grinding basin
cut into successive vugs or cavities providing a fresh pitted
surface for milling abrasion.

However~

eventually the wear

of such use so thinned the milling slab that it broke.
farmwork in the plowed field had turned up this specimen
leaving it exposed for collection by the field party.

Like

other artifacts found on the surface in the west half of the
site 1 this milling slab must have been deflated from the
Neo~American

context, slope wash and plowing having just now

advanced almost to the depth of the Transitional Archaic
artifacts.
Dimensions;

maximum slab thickness, 4.1 cm; minimum slab

thickness measured at lowest point remaining of basin, 1.5
cm ; Fig. 19" d.
Handstone (1 specimen)
A light gray (10 YR 7/2) stream-rounded cobble of quartzite
has been ground on two faces; it appears to have been used as
a handstone (mano) to mill against a nether grinding slab like
the one described above.

The mana is naturally oblong in

plain view and oval in section. Two

opposed~:

faces

a;r;~(

flattened

somewhat although still slightly convex in both lateral and
longitudinal axes.

It is these faces which have received

wear from grinding, one much more than the other, including a

104

fine smoothness and a few short streaks of glossy polish.
Under magnification it can be seen that grinding has actually
worn down the individual quartz crystal sand grains which
compose the rock.

A fine pitting to the most prominent ground

surface gives evidence of slight pecking to both shape and
roughen this surface; otherwise, the cobble outline has not
been modified.

However, a small shallow dimple apparently

has been pecked into one edge of the artifact and this is a
characteristic noted on some other manos (Sorrow and others
1967:102).
A diffuse, weak reddish (7.5R 5/4) cast to some areas of
the stone looks like

direct~flame

burning.

Another discolor­

ation is provided by parallel streaks of rust which run
across one ground face of the tool derived from contact with
a plow; the implement was apparently only recently uncovered
from the west half of the site.
Dimensions:

length, 9.3 cm; width, 6.25 cm; thickness,

4.7 cm; weight, 410.7 gm; Fig. 19, e.
Stone Technology and Waste Products
A brief reconstruction of the technical processes employed
to manufacture flaked stone tools is made here based primarilly
on a study of such waste byproducts as cores and flakes.
Evidence obtained from these industrial discards is further
correlated with the sources of the cobble flint materials and
the reconstruction checked against the finished tool products.
105

Cores (17 specimens) and Core Fragments (134 specimens)
Subangular rounded flint cobbles were percussion-worked
to produce flakes suitable for the further manufacture of
other tools or as waste byproducts.

The discarded core

nodules have been reduced in size and weight over the natural
cobbles by several techniques, all of which removed some or
all of the naturally weathered rock cortex.

One approach was

to slice off flakes from one surface of the cobble by raining
hammer blows on the cortex surface to produce a single worked
surface (29.0 per cent of the cores studied).

Further pro­

duction of flakes was effected when the cobble core was turned
and more blows were struck on an edge of the freshly flaked
face thereby driving additional flakes off of the underside
to yield a second scarred surface.

Such secondary working

yielded a core with two acutely (43 - 88 degree) converging
worked surfaces in a wedge-shape (11.0 per cent).

If continued,

allover flaking in this fashion yielded further flakes and a
disc..,shaped core with biconvex cross section and oval to
circular outline (31.0 per cent).

Several of the discoidal

cores show fine marginal retouch along the biface edge.

This

margin had been trimmed to strengthen it before further
percussion work was conducted.

Some percussion flake scars

truncate this trimming showing that detachment of flakes
continued after the margined retouch was applied.
Another technique in working down cores was to prepare
one (17.6 per cent) or more (82.4 per cent) platforms on the
106

...-----~-----

.........

- - - - - - -..

__.... __. __._­

Figure 21.

Cores, 41 WM 118. a, wedge-shaped
core; b 1 discoidal-shaped core; c,
ninety degree l plain platform core; d,
opposed l plain platform core.

r

/~

~

. ..

---­

'''.', ,'fff:',

" . :..I,

-

-... .

.

t ..

.' ~
-" '.

.l'

.

.

"

~

. ,. '

o

2 em.

I

I

flint nodule.

These procedures led to multiple worked faces

(29.0 per cent) in which three or more surfaces of the cobble
had cortex removed.
Commonly in preparing a striking platform a single flake
was removed to produce a plain faceted surface (77.5 per cent)
or several removals might be made resulting in a multifaceted
surface (47.0 per cent).

As these figures would suggest,

some cores exhibit both kinds of platforms.

Study of waste

flakes removed from cores disclosed the corresponding plain
and multifaceted platforms (see below).
Prepared platforms were formed on the elongate cobbles
in several ways.

In some cases they were faceted on the end

of the nodule at right angles to the long axis of the material
(58.8 per cent).

Other possibilities were platform prepara­

tion either on the side of the stone at right angles to the
cobble width (35.3 per cent), or on a flatish cobble face
(11,7 per cent).
When multiple striking surfaces were employed, these
might be placed on opposite sides of the core (11.7 per cent),
at ninety degrees to one another (29.4 per cent), or at both
ends of a cobble so that the flake scars were removed from
the same working face in opposed sets (29.4 per cent) (sec
Marks 1968;

fig, 2 for terminology),

As can be seen from the average and range of dimensions
listed below, the exhausted cores are small in size and weight.
However, many examples retain patches of unremoved cortex and
108

these provide evidence that the original cobble selected for
use from the Uvalde Formation gravels was not a great deal
larger.

The small fist-size dimensions were a determinate

leading to a microflake tool industry (tool size less than or
equal to 3.0 em).

However, casual inspection of the large

waste stone debris at workshop sites located on the Uvalde
bluffs leads me to conclude that not all of the prehistoric
stone industry of the Laneport District was so diminutive.
Examination of the acute angle formed by the intersection
of the core platform and its many flake scars shows a wide
range of latitude in some few examples.

Commonly, however,

the preferred angle spans a thirty-two degree range evenly
distributed between 58 and 90 degrees and averages 73.8 degrees.
There is a slight tendency for wedge and discoidal-shaped
cores to have smaller angles than the prepared platform
varieties.

These core-derived angles reproduce those similar

acute angle measurements made on waste flakes within ten
degrees (see below).

The discrepancy is due to the inclusion

of many low angle lipped thinning flakes in the two flake
samples studied as well as some measuring error.
Only one core, a discoidal shape specimen from Level 7 1n
Test Pit 3, was recovered at a depth where dart points were
also obtained.
Neo~American

Otherwise all of the classifiable cores are

in age (Fig. 22).

But the thirty-four core frag­

ments were more uniformly distributed throughout the profile
showing that some primary working-down of cores was performed
at all periods of occupation.
109

.....................- - - - .

- - - - - - - _..................

_---­

Dimensions:

average length, 6.4 cm, range 3.0-11.8

cm; average width, 4.8 cm, range 4.0-6.5 cm; average thickness,
2,5 cm, range 1.2-4.5 cm; average weight, 101.5 gm, range
31.7-331.0 gm; average platform angle, 73.8 degrees, range
43.0-109.0 degrees; Fig, 21.
Description of Core Flint
The description of flint knapping materials was carried
out on the cores described above using the technical guide
lines laid down by Crabtree (1967:22-24).

The qualities of

color, texture, size of cobbles 1 and cortex coating can all
be reproduced in the Uvalde gravels exposed 0.3 miles to the
northeast of 41 WM 118 in a commercial gravel pit.

However,

flaking open several dozen flint cobbles from this geological
exposure disclosed a preponderance of pale brown slightly
granular rock as opposed to the glassy textured gray flint
which was favored at site 41 WM 118.

This observation is

thought to mean that the aboriginal knapper selected more of­
ten for the finer grained 1 more workable material to be picked
up along the Uvalde bluff.

The presence of flint cobbles in

the river grawels provided another potential source of
knapping material.
The thinner edges of all of the cores and core fragments
are transluscent to an intense incandescent lamp.

Further,

some of the gray glassier textured rocks contain white and red
chemical inclusions which can be seen within the rock, another
expression of transluscency.
110

In reflected light, the brown, coarser grained flint has
a matt to dull appearance.

On the other hand, the gray,

glassy rock shows a good glossy light reflectivity.
Considerable range is expressed in the flint texture
extending from a slightly granular composition to an extremely
fine grain glassy material.

Flaws are not common but occas­

sionally a crack or quartz crystal-filled geode may be
encountered.

Tumbling of the cobbles during geological

transport from an upstream source has produced many small
compression cones just under the surface.

These behave as

pre-stressed flaws but their small size and limited depth does
not create any serious obstacle to knapping once the cortex
has been removed.
Sections of cortex remain on almost all cores and some
core fragments.

This surface coating of chemical weathering

ranges in thickness fromO.1 to 0.4 centimeters and varies in
color from strong brown (7.5 YR 5/6) to a pinkish white (7.5
YR 8/2),

The cortex surface is often roughly pitted and shows

incompletely preserved compression cones, some of which have
been left standing as small spires to produce a "lunar-like"
landscape when viewed with optical magnification.
Within the flint cobble, the rock is homogeneous in
nearly all specimens with the rare exception of a banded
flint.

This latter material has not yet been found in the

nearby gravel pit but it is known from the gravels of the

III

high bluff located just across the San Gabriel River south
of 41 WM 118.

Under well directed percussion blows, the

flint breaks to a fine, keenly sharp edge.
Although some cores, flakes, and tools have been burned
accidentally after manufacture, there is no good evidence at
present that flint nodules were aboriginally heated prior to
working.

Justification for this statement is based on com­

parison with three experimentally kiln-fired flint nodules
subjected to thermo-couple measured temperatures of 550, 700,
and 1400 degrees farenheit respectively.

Those cores and

core fragments which had been burned after manufacture

show

a weak to dusky red color (7.5 R 5/4 to 3/2), a fine heat­
induced

crazing~

and the presence of small "pot lid" spall

fractures on the artifact surface.
Flake scarred surfaces on core specimens recovered from
underground do not show any deep chemical weathering (patina­
tion) nor do they exhibi t surface encrustations such as lime
films.
Waste Flakes (6300 specimens)
Study of waste flakes was performed for two purposes:
(1) in order to technically relate the flakes to cores and the
manufacture and resharpening of finished tools, as well as
(2) to seek activity loci within the site.

The technical

analysis was conducted employing some of the sorting criteria

112

Figure 22.

Schematic profile showing the distri­
bution of cores and core fragments, 41
WM 118. See Figure 12 for the base
profile on which theseudata ar,el "t .. ,;c.1.
plotted.

Figur? 22

T.P. 3

1.J~1VJv(~

1

100 ­

T.P.4

•
99'­

T.P 2

•• A

T.P. I
98'

•

••••
A A ,.
A A

•

A

A

A

A

A

A A A
A A

A

91'
A :
A

A
A

A

96'

A

A

A

95'

Legend:
•

Cores

A

Core fragments

A

• • A&

developed by Shafer (1969;3-5).

Valuable insight and direction

was also obtained from the studies of lithic technology
published by both Epstein (1964, 1969) and Oakley (1956).
Flint flakes were found in every arbitrary excavation
level, but in very uneven numbers.

In order to compare these

recoveries, a concentration index was calculated for each
level (Fig. 23).

The figures analyzed here are the counts

of flakes recovered from the one-quarter inch mesh, the standard
screen size employed in the field.

But to compare the greater

density which might be obtained by washing over a window
screen (one-sixteenth inch) mesh, the concentration index of
Level 7, Test Pit 3, was calculated and found to be twice that
derived using the quarter-inch mesh (220.8 to 112.6 flakes
per cubic foot).
The average density of flint flakes for the four test
squares analyzed is 25.61 flakes per cubic foot.

But two

samples (Levels 3 and 7) of Test Pit 3 show such significant
departures above this tendency that they are interpreted as
areas of intense industrial activity.

The upper sample is of

Neo-American age while the lower is of Transitional Archaic
affiliation.

In contrast, excavation levels just under the

surface of Test Pits 3 and 4 as well as the deepest levels of
Test Pits 1 and 3 so drop off in their flake concentrations
that it is likely that the few specimens (5 or less per cubic
foot of soil) recovered were moved there by such agents as
burrowing rodents.

By this reasoning, the upper 0.5 foot of
114

Figure 23.

Schematic profile showing the dis­
tribution of Waste Flint Flakes
expressed as a concentration index
calculated for each excavation
level, 41 WM 118. See Figure 12
for the base profile on which the-se
data are plbtted.

Fig ure 23

Legend:

~

2.

4 times site average

soil was river-deposited after human occupation and the depth
of the cultural refuse extends no more than 4.3 feet below the
undisturbed ground surface of Test Pit 3 (Fig. 11).

Another

kind of high concentration is present in formal Hearth 4
located in Level 6 of Test Pit 4.

Here the flake density is

68,3 per cubic foot of fill, more than a two-fold increase
over the site average.

The hearth concentration is interpreted

as due to tool manufacturing activities which must have been
conducted immediately around the cobble cooking pavement.
Interestingly enough, Level 6 of the same absolute elevation,
yielded a flake concentration of just slightly below average.
Thus, the manufacturing activity was extremely localized to
the hearth vicinity.

The four informal hearths excavated at

this site yielded no appreciable numbers of flakes.
On the average 23.9 per cent of the waste flakes were
burned to judge from their reddish discoloration, crazing,
and "pot lid" fracturing (Fig. 24),

That this direct exposure

to flame took place on the site is demonstrated by the recovery
of the minute "pot lid tl heat spalls on the window screen.
Significantly higher proportions of the flakes recovered from
Fire Hearths 2 and 4 were burned (40.0 per cent and 36.4 per
cent respectively) although the Hearth 2 sample of fifteen is
too small to be statistically reliable.

At least two hypotheses

are offered to explain the burning of flakes:

(1) many flakes

lay around on the ground and occasionally camp fires were
accidentally built on some of them, and
116

(2) some or all of

Figure 24.

Schematic profile showing per cent
of burned flint flakes calculated
fOT each excavation level, 41 WM 118.
See Figure 12 for the base profile on
which these ,.data ar~J plotted.

Figure 24

T.P. 3
~

loot­

~\lWutj
-

1

99 ­

T.P. 2

T.P. I
9S

15.44

32.64
30.68

33.09
22.19

15.15

27.48

28.02

30.18

27.12
7.76

21.91
29.44

16.96
19.31

1

18.7S
28.57

95

J

'I

1

21.41

96

T.P.4
,J

19.48
29.78

1

•

the campsite occupation was carried out during the winter and
the flint knapper warmed himself near a hearth while manu
facturing tools.

Hypothesis one seems to be refuted by the

general absence of many burned snail shells unless the snails
only frequented the camp as
not present.

visitors when man was

Hypothesis two seems likely based on support

derived from other lines of
Summary and

off~season

seasonally~specific

data (see

Conclusion~).

Flakes showing patches of natural cortex anywhere on
their dorsal surface or edges were classified as

~ortexflakes

and interpreted as evidence of primary flaking of cobble
cores.

These were contrasted with interior flakes which

altogether lack cortex other than sometimes on the platform
surface.

The two kinds of flakes, then, occur in the site in

varying ratios of 1: 1. 7 to 1: 13.8 (Icortex:
[Fig.25]).

interior flake

On the average, the ratio is 1:5.4 Cortex to

interior flakes and this relative relationship is taken to
mean that proportionately much more secondary working down of
cores and tool finishing was carried on than was initial
"peeling" off of the core cortex.

From site survey experience,

it is known that much primary workshop debris is present on
bluff-situated sites which are characteristically littered
with cores and large cortex flakes.

It seems reasonable, then,

to infer that most (but not all) of the initial steps in
stone work were conducted at the Uvalde gravel bluffs (which
is also the source of cobble materials) and the large suitable
118

Figure 25.

Schematic profile showing ratio of
Cortex (1) to Interior (:#) Flakes
calculated for each excavation level,
41 WM 118. See Figure 12 for the
base profile on which these data are
plotted.

Figure 25

T.P. 3

r

~~hJl

I

100­

T.P. 4

2.4
8.5

99'­

T.P 2

T.P. I

5
5

i

98'

4.2
3
13.8

6.7

97'
4

1.7
96'

4.3
2.5

95'

4.3

7
6.3
6.2
8.4

4.8
9

3.5
5

flakes and peeled core nodules were brought into the Dobias­
Vitek Site for further processing and finishing.
clusion

This con­

is verified within the site when the ratio of cortex

to interior flakes was computed using the data in Level 7,
Test Pit 3 obtained from a matrix sample washed over a one­
sixteenth inch screen.

Here the relationship between the two

kinds of flakes was 1:52, the many more interior flakes
recovered being the small size variety which normally pass
through the

one~quarter

inch mesh.

Two flint flake lots were analyzed in terms of the flake
shape present.

Classification was effected in terms of the

right angle position of the platform relative to the length,
width, or obliqueness of the flake.

By this definition, an

end flake is one whose platform lies at right angles to the
long axis of the flake.

A side flake has a platform placed

parallel to the long axis of the flake.

An oblique flake is

one whose longest dimension is angled to the striking axis
and platform of the flake.

No blade type flakes (width one­

half or less of length) removed from polyhedral cores were
observed in the two flake lots examined in detail.
The frequency distribution of the flake shapes observed
in the two samples is quite similar.

Most common are end

flakes making up 71.7 per cent and 62.5 per cent of Level 3,
Test Pit 2 and Level 2, Test Pit 3, respectively.

Oblique

flakes were next most common in frequencies of 24.5 per cent
and 27.1 per cent.

Side flakes were rather uncommon in
120

percentages of 3.8 and 10.4.

From this analysis, I infer

that the flint knapper usually selected an elongate shaped
cobble and drove flakes off by blows struck on the end in
such a way that end flakes were produced in which the striking
axis was also the long axis of the flake.

If the blow was

misapplied or the removal was interrupted in any way, an
angled separation resulted producing obliquely shaped flakes.
Much less commonly the blows were struck at the side of the
elongate cobble to produce side flakes.
Platform attributes recognized include cortex, plain
(simple), ltultifaceted, and Collapsed (crushed).

A cortex­

covered platform will appear on a flake when the blow severing
the detached flake slice is directed upon the unprepared
weathered surface of the core nodule.

However, if a platform

has been prepared by removing a single flake, a
faceted flake platform can be detected.

~lain

or

~imple

Further faceting

(two or more flakes removed) of a tool (such as a biface) or
core striking platform will yield multifaceted platform
remnants upon the flakes removed.

Crushing or collapsing of

a platform may be detected on a flake when all or part of the
striking surface has disintegrated from impact shock leaving
some remnant of the compression cone and perhaps the apex of
the bulb referred to as the point of percussion.

In any

sample of flakes, a significant proportion will be broken by
unintentional snapping and these could not be employed in this
a ttribute study.
121

On some flakes, a projection of the platform forms a
flange or lip which is very slightly recurved.

This feature

lies just above the compression bulb on the ventral face of
the flake.

Some investigators have attributed this lipping

attribute to billet-struck blows employed in the thinning and
shaping manufacture of biface stone tools.

Experimentally they

may also be formed when using a soft stone hammer (limestone
percussor).

Since some of the wedge and discoidal-shaped

cores described above present a low angle between the striking
platform and the worked face, they present edge characteristics
simulating a biface,

Therefore, these acute angle cores

should also yield lipped flakes as readily as would biface
thinning provided a soft hammer is used.

In this study, those

flakes exhibiting multifaceted platforms (including plain,
cup~shaped

surfaces), pronounced lips, a low platform angle,

an arced profile 1 and muiti-scarrr.ed .dorsal surfaces, will be
attributed to either a biface thinning operation or working
down of wedge and discoidal cores.
Level 7 in Test Pit 3, a Transitional Archaic horizon,
yielded 74 cortex flakes with platforms intact.
prevalence 1 the classes of platforms were:

In order of

multifaceted

platform (39.2 per cent including 2.7 per cent plain, cup­
shaped platforms which are simply variants of multifaceted
platforms); plain (simple or single facet) platforms (25.7
per cent); cortex platforms (17.6 per cent); and collapsed
platforms (17.6 per cent).

Of this lot, 27.0 per cent show

122

- - - - ...

--~~-

the presence of a lip.

Because all of these flakes exhibit

some cortex on their dorsal surface, they are interpreted as
flakes struck from various kinds of cores.

The multifaceted

flakes are thought to be struck from wedge and discoidal cores.
Cortex platform flakes were removed from cobble cores either
in the act of preparing a core platform or in those cases when
the flint knapper chose to work directly upon the naturally
weathered surface of the material.

Plain platform flakes

were removed from simple, prepared core platforms.
A sample of 100 flakes was randomly selected from 998
flakes of Level 7, Test Pit 3.

These show the same range of

platforms found on cortex flakes but in different frequencies.
In order of descending incidence, these are:

multifaceted

platform (67.S per cent including 8.0 per cent plain, cup­
shaped platforms)

collapsed platform (20.0

percent~;

platform (11.0 per cent); and cortex platform (2.0
very low).

plain

percent~

Most multifaceted platform flakes are thought to

be the workshop residue of biface thinning and shaping, .an
interpretation which is supported by the presence of stemmed
and unstemmed bifaces (both whole and fragmentary) in nearly
every excavated level in far higher frequencies than any other
shaped stone tool (Figs. 17, 18).

Some may also be residue

from working down of the interior of wedge and discoidal cores.
Plain platform flakes could be either the interior trimmings
from plain platform cores and/or the waste residue from
resharpening intentionally shaped unifacial tools such as
123

scrapers.

Since very few such unifacial tools (apart from

the high incidence of unintentionally sheared utilized flake
scrapers) are known from the Dobias-Vitek Site, they most
likely are derived from the interior working down of cores.
Their low incidence, coupled with the infrequent recovery of
cores from the site, reflects the small amount of effort given
over to this technical activity, given that our limited testing
operation is representative of the entire site.

The very low

incidence of interior flakes with cortex covered platforms is
indicative of a practice whereby the centers of cobbles were
not significantly sliced up without some kind of platform
being prepared thereby removing the cortex from the striking
surface.
Much the same kind of frequency distribution for platform
attributes was noted in a Neo-American sample of 53 flakes
(both cortex and interior flakes combined) studied from Level
2, Test Pit 3,

The major difference is that 54.7 percent

of

these flakes were lipped.
The metric attribute of length was measured in centimeters
along the striking axis from platform to distal end of the
flake.

Two samples were measured.

Thirty-nine early Austin

Focus flakes from Level 3, Test Pit 2, average 1.9 cm. in
length and range from 0.8 to 3.5 cm.

Fifty flakes collected

from Neo-American Level 2, Test Pit 3 J average 2.0 em, almost
the same length as the previous sample.

They range from 0.9

cm to 6.4 cm, the few large examples being the cortex-backed
124

core "peelings".

Sixty-one per cent of the sample is shorter

than the average and many of these are the lipped and
multifaceted platform flakes.
Weight in grams was determined in an attempt to grossly
segregate different kinds of stone working techniques.
Seventy~four

whole cortex flakes studied from Level 7, Test

Pit 3 (Transitional Archaic age) average 1.7 grams in weight.
This sample ranges in size between 0.1 and 15.0 grams of which
70.3 per cent are smaller than the central tendency average.
Of this small weight segment, the bulk are
multifaceted platform or plain, cup shaped platform cortex
trimmings from peeled cores.

The few large weight flakes are

thought to be percussion-struck from cores by hammer.

From

this same excavation sample, 100 interior flakes were randomly
drawn and these have an average weight of 0.7 grams.
a weight range of 0.1 to 10.5
the average point.

grams~

Within

79.0 per cent lie under

Fully half of these are multifaceted

platform flakes with lips and these are interpreted as biface
thinning flakes, probably billet-struck.
of sample was drawn from Level 7.
the

one~sixteenth

Still another kind

Washing of soil matrix on

inch mesh yielded a sample of chips of which

the bulk are less than one gram in weight.

These average

0.03 grams and are interpreted as pressure chips and rock
dust.

Bifaces are the only common stone tool in this site

which would have been finished by pressure chipping and

125

therefore it seems reasonable to assume that the small weight
chips are the residue from this work.

Although a pressure

chipping tool was not found at this site, one was recovered
from test excavations at 41 WM 135 (Chapter V).
A sample of forty-seven Neo-American age flakes obtained
from Level 2, Test Pit 3 was studied for weight characteristics.
The distribution frequencies are much the same as those found
deeper in the ground (Level 7) but the average flake weight
of 2.7 grams is significantly higher.

But in either level,

it is obvious that the flake stone industry is microlithic in
size (length and weight) and in every way is diminutive when
compared to the more massive flakes to be found on the nearby
Uvalde bluff sites.
Measurement of the platform angle was made by the use of
a goniometer.

With this simple instrument, the angle of

convergence between the platform and bulbar (ventral) surface
was determined.

Subtraction of the results (actually read

directly from the goniometer scale) from ninety degrees
yielded; the complementary acute ang:e which is equivalent to
the angle measured on the cores.

In this manner the flake

angles could be compared directly with those on the cores
leading to a reconstruction of the manufacturing sequences.
Angle measurements were made on cortex, plain, and multifaceted
platform flakes but obviously not on collapsed platforms.
Due to the microscopic size of the smaller pressure flakes and
some thinning flakes, it was not possible to acquire reliable
angle measurements on the small end of the flake size range.
126

Thirty-two flakes recovered from Level 2 in Test Pit 3
could be measured.

The average platform angle is 63.2 degrees

within a range of .42.0 to 97.0 degrees.

Only slightly more

than half of the lipped and multifaceted thinning flakes fall
below the average than above.

But all of the large cortex­

backed flakes have steep angles.
Reconstruction of Technology
A series of concluding technical inferrences is offered,
compiled from the analysis of the finished tools, core nodules,
and the waste flakes.
1.

Gray glassy flint nodules were selected out of a

range of flint types to be found in the Uvade gravels and the
river bed gravels.

Because of the masking effect of the

weathered cobble cortex, exploratory percussion strikes were
made probably with a hand-held stone hammer at the bluff
workshops as a means of examining the nature and suitability
of the interior cobble material.

Preliminary working down of

the selected cobbles was conducted at these workshops in which
much of the core was peeled of cortex.

These and perhaps

some large primary flakes were next returned to floodplain
campsites such as the Dobias-Vitek Site.
2.

Analysis of the core-waste flake debris obtained from

41 WM 118 shows that little on-site peeling of cores took
place on the premises.

Comparatively more working down of

the core interior was conducted, again most likely using a
stone hammer to produce large primary flakes suitable for
biface manufacture.

127

3.

The major lithic manufacturing activity, to judge

from the waste flake debris, seems to have been the shaping
and thinning of stemmed and stemless bifaces.

Support is given

this interpretation by the incidence of bifaces in nearly
every level of the site.

Analysis of the biface series suggest

that many of the large, thick stemless specimens are early
manufacturing stages leading to the small, finely finished
stemmed bifaces.

But at least one large, thin stemmless

biface appears to be a finished tool in its own right, perhaps
a hafted knife blade.
Although no direct artifact evidence was recovered,
experimental simulation of biface production suggests that the
working down of cores and large primary flakes into a biface
end product was performed with a soft hammer such as a wooden
or bone billet.

Finishing was likely to have been performed

using a pressure chipping tool which, however, was not found
at this site.
4.

In contrast to the manufacture and use of bifaces,

there is little evidence in either the recovered waste flakes
or finished tools that much consideration was given to the
making or use of unifacially shaped stone tools such as
scrapers, gravers, or gouges at the Dobias-Vitek Site.
5.

Several small localities were places of highly intense

industrial flaking activity.

Two of these spots of intense

activity were formerly open ground whereas another was a

128

cobble hearth paving.

This evidence suggests that some intra­

site flint knapping was spatially localized indicative of more
heterogeneous structure to the aboriginal work pattern than
has generally been attributed to central Texas Indians.
6.

But because some flint flakes are to be found every­

where within the occupation zone, it is concluded that the
stone industry was persistent through time and some flaking
was carri.ed on everywhere on the si te.

Because of this

widespread distribution of waste flakes, keen edge flakes were
everywhere handy to be picked up and utilized for cutting and
scraping purposes.

Because the utilized edge of the tool

most frequently exhibits an evenly sheared unifacial wear,
a scraping use was probably most prevalent.
Clay Artifacts
Two kinds of clay artifacts are reported here:
fired pottery, and baked clay objects.

true

The fired pottery

vessels are a plain ware which were likely used for cooking
and storage of food and goods.

But because of the few pot­

sherds recovered, it is unlikely that ceramic containers were
ever an important element

in the cultural inventory.

Identification of the baked clay objects is problematical
but they could have been either daub fragments from mud
plastered brush huts, remains of objects used to transfer
heat from a fire to boil liquid, or for some unknown use.

129

Plain Pottery (5 potsherds)
Despite the small number, these few potsherds are of
considerable interest because of the technical and temporal
implications of their presence in the Dobias-Vitek Site.
vessels are represented:
identical~looking

Two

field Specimen 4 consisting of four

potsherds obtained from Level 3, Test Pit

1, and field Specimen 51, a single potsherd recovered from
Level 4, Test Pit 4.

Characteristics of both specimens are

, given below in telegraphic form, following Shepard (1957) and
Abel (1955).

When these descriptions diverge, reference to

the individual vessels is made in terms of the field specimen
numbers; otherwise, the quality listed stands for both
specimens.
Const~uction:

coiling, one potsherd of Specimen 4 shows

traces of an idented groove along one edge as if the original
vessel had broken at the juncture of two poorly bonded coils;
Core Color:

very dark gray (5 YR 3/1) to black (5 YR 2/1),

fairly uniform throughout the wall lacking any evidence of
carbon streaks; Firing:

intentional firing in an unoxidized

atmosphere, the carbon present in the wall being incompletely
ignited; Temper:

large quantities of sub-angular rounded

grains of clear, frosted, and rose quartz.

Minor amounts of

other unidentified mineral grains are also present but the
clear quartz predominates.

Sand does not appear ground and

was likely obtained from a stream bed or gravel bar.

A

single carbonized line on the largest sherd of Specimen 4
130

looks like the smudge of a burned out twig.

Other foreign

inclusions are large (1-2 mm) fragments of burned bone in
Specimen 51.

Core Texture:

Specimen 4 is coarse (0.5 -1. 0 mm)

textured due to the temper size and density.

Specimen Sl

contains sand temper also of coarse grade but most are of
0.5 mm size.

Both specimens are porous.

Hardness of Paste:

2.5 (Mohs! scale), low tensil strength reflected in the friable
nature of the sherds.

Surface Finish:

Specimen 4 is well

smoothed and evenly polished both inside and out.

This fin­

ishing exposed some temper sand grains and these lie flush
with the vessel surface.

No tool marks are in evidence.

Thin

spots of lime (acid test) film cover the sherd surface in
patches.

Specimen 51 is roughly finished and polished inside

and out, the polish affecting only th'e surface high spots.
One surface has distinct polishing tool marks and these were
applied so as to striate the then-incompletely dry ("1eather­
hard") clay in many different directions.

Polishing of the

reverse surface did not leave tool marks and must have been
conducted when the vessel wall was almost completely dry.

The

tooled surface has a number of patches of carbonized soot still
adhering to it.
pot.

Probably this vessel was used as a cooking

Surface Color:

Specimen 4 is variable in surface color

ranging from pinkish gray (S YR 7/2) to a very dark gray (5 YR
2.5/1).

This variability could be due to the presence of a

fire cloud but not enough vessel surface area is present to be
sure.

The other specimen (No. 51), is uniformly black (N/O).
131

Thickness of Walls:
7.5 mm.

Forms:

Specimen 4 is 4.5 mm, Specimen 51 is

Specimen 4 sherds are from the wall of a deep

bowl based on the concave-convex curvature and well polished
finish on both surfaces.

Both surfaces of specimen 51 are

concave in one axis and convex in the other suggesting that
the sherd was broken from a point where a jar neck joins the
body wall.

Distribution:

Specimen 51, a small bone and sand

tempered potsherd from a necked cooking jar, was found in
excavation Level 4 of Test Pit 4, between 1.2 and 1.7 feet
below the undisturbed ground surface measured at Test Pit 3
(Figs. 11, 26).
recovered.

From the same level, a Perdiz arrow point was

The association of this arrow point style and Leon

Plain, a "catch-alII! type name for bone tempered pottery in
Central

Texas~

is well recognized as diagnostic of the Toyah

Focus (Suhm and Jelks 1962:95; Jelks 1962:88).
Specimen 4, a deep bowl represented by four sand-tempered
potsherds, was recovered from Level 3 of Test Pit I at an
absolute elevation between 2.6 and 3.1 feet below the undis­
turbed ground surface measured at Test Pit 3 (Figs. 11,2&).
The sherds were found beneath a Darl point present in Level
2 and above another found in Level 4 of the same test pit.
Pure

sand~tempered

potsherds have been recovered in central

Texas before but they are not common (Jelks 1962:61).

However,

the presence of sand-tempered pottery early in the ceramic
horizon of southeast Texas has been well documented.

At

McGee Bend Reservoir sand-tempered pottery was found in
132

---

............

- - - - - -.. -

..

~---~

.......

association with dart points (Tunnel 1961) and sand-tempered
pottery from Cedar Bayou dated between A.D. ISO and 500, is
thought to be of comparable age (Ambler 1967:79).

Therefore,

I think it reasonable to interpret the finding of a sand­
tempered vessel (Specimen 4) interca1culated between two Darl
style dart points at the Dobias-Vitek Site as being an entirely
reasonable association.
Baked
, , Clay Objects (16 specimens)
Fragmentary pieces of baked objects are friable, amorphous
lumps of sandy clay.

One better preserved piece found among

the heat cracked rock of Fire Hearth 4, is described below to
illustrate the artifact class.

It is soft fired, barely

withstanding the disintegrative effects of soil moisture.

In

outline, it is irregular with rounded contours as if smoothed
by some surface erosion.

A smooth grooved impression crosses

one surface, 3,0 centimeters long and 1.25 centimeters wide.
From its appearance, I would judge the groove to be a stick
impression made when the mud was still soft.

The sandy clay

contains a snail shell and other miscellaneous inclusions,
one of which looks like a flint chip or charred bone scrap.
Base color of the baked clay is light brownish gray (10 YR
6/2) throughout the lump but it takes on a pink color (7.5

YR 7/4) just under the smoothed impression supporting the
idea that a stick once rested in the groove and later burned
out oxidizing the clay at that spot.

133

Another burned spot

figure 26.

Schematic profile showing the distri­
bution of fired pottery and baked clay
objects, 41 WM 118. See Figure 12 for
the base profile on which tbese druta
IiLrer plotted.

Figure 26

T.P. 3

""

1

100 ­

T.P.4

i[\(WvtJ..

99'­

T.P 2

T.P. I

6a
98'

•••••

•
97'

•

••

••

••
..S

•

•

9S'

95'

Legend:

.. S
68

•

Fired pottery with sand temper
Fired pottery with bone temper
Baked clay object

of dark gray (7.5 YR 4/0), indicating smudging of the clay,
is exposed on the backside of the lump opposite the impression.
Reference to Figure 26 will illustrate the spatially
restricted distribution of the sixteen baked clay specimens.
Clay fragments are vertically confined to a two foot thick
zone lying between depth of 1.6 and 3.7 feet below the
undisturbed ground measured at Test Pit 3.

This depth spans

the boundary between the Transitional Archaic and Neo-American
cultural deposits.

Horizontally the clay artifacts are

centered in Test Pits 1, 2, and 3, not appearing in Test Pit
4 except as inclusions of Fire Hearth 4.
Questionable uses are:
plastered brush houses,

(1) daub fragments from mud

(2) remains of baked clay objects

employed to transfer heat from a fire to boil water in a
combustable container (a process inappropriately called
"stone boiling"), or equally likely,
pretation.

(3) some unknown inter­

But of the suggested identifications, I favor the

house plaster hypothesis to explain the twig impressions.

If

true, the brush hut or huts must have burned down to account
for the baking of the clay.
That nearby Tonkawa Indians of the San Gabriel valley
built and used huts has been documented for the middle 18th
century by the Spanish missionaries.

But no mention was made

of the use of mud plaster on these structures

(Gilmore 1969:

12).
Dimensions of described specimen:
2,3 cm; thickness, 1.5 cm.
135

length, 3.0 cm; width,

Quantitative Studies on Environmental Data
Land snail shells, river mussel shells, animal bones,
and burned hackberry seeds

are analyzed for the implications

concerning the ecology immediately surrounding the Dobias­
Vitek Site as well as cultural inferences relating to human
diet and economic subsistence activities.

Analysis of the

vertebrates and land snails appears in Appendices A and B
by Witter and Amaral.,

Study of the river mussel shells is

presented by Amaral in this section as is a statement on the
distribution and occurrence of the burned hackberry seeds by
myself.
Mussel Shells*
Small quantities of fresh water mussel shell fragments
and identifiable specimens were recovered from nearly every
excavation level on the

one~quarter

inch mesh screens.

For

purposes of comparison, modern pelecypods were collected alive
from a submerged river gravel bar along the San Gabriel River
located three hundred feet from the site (Fig. 27, B).

Both

the prehistoric and modern pelecypods were identified by
comparison with a type collection, identified by E. P. Cheatum,
housed in the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.

Thirty­

four prehistoric specimens, representing four species, were

*Section by William W. Amaral

136

sufficiently complete
five

specimens~

to be identified (Fig. 27, A).

Ninety­

comprising seven species, were recovered from

the San Gabriel River (Fig. 27, B).
The modern shell fish were discovered after a receding
flood stage on May 17, 1969, and the population was again
sampled on June 1, 1969.

Mussels were found living in two to

three feet of water off the edge of an exposed gravel bar.
The main current was approximately twenty feet away across the
river channel; back eddies '''Iere constantly circulating over
the shellfish bed which was sheltered by a fallen cottonwood
log.
The modern bivalves were studied in the laboratory to
obtain information on the size and weight of the soft body in
relation to the shell size.

Each bivalve was measured across

the maximum length and width, after which the specimen was
opened in one of four ways:
hammering,

prying, baking, boiling, or

The most feasible ways to obtain the edible meat

is either to bake or pry the bivalve open, methods which
result in the least effort expended and the greatest recovery
of meat.

Hammering the bivalves is the most inefficient way

to open the shell fish and results in a considerable amount
of lost meat.

After opening, the soft body parts were weighed

and the results tabulated.
of this

information~

It was hoped that through the usc

some correlation could be made on the

food mass represented by the prehistoric bivalves.

Unfortu~

nately, no positive dietary correlation between the prehistoric
137

Figure 27.

List of
from 41
River.
fied is
A.

pelecypod species identified
WM 118 and the San Gabriel
Number of individuals identi­
shown in parenthesis.

Prehistoric pelecypods from 41 Mvl 118.
Lampsilis anodontoides
Lampsilis lineosa

Conrad

(12)

(9)

Lampsilis strekeri

Frierson

Liguma subrostrata

(Say)

Lampsilis spp.
B.

(Lea)

(5)

(2)

(6)

Modern pelecypods collected from the
San Gabriel River.
Quadrula pus t10s a

(Lea)

(55)

Amblema plicata perplecta

Conrad

(32)

Lampsilis tampicoensis berlandieri
.!:~J1lPs i

lis anodon toides

Lampsilis lineosa

(Lea)

Conrad

Quadru1a quadrula speciosa
Tri tigonia verrucosa

138

(2)

(1)
Lea

(Barnes)

(1)
(1)

Lea

(3)

and modern pelecypods is possible now at this site because
only two modern species, Amblema plicata perplecta and
Quadrula pustlosa, are sufficiently numerous to form a reliable
sample and these species were not recovered from excavations.
Due to the tendency of the archeologically-recovered
bivalves to disintegrate when exposed to air as well as
mechanical abrasion by foot traffic during prehistoric times,
very few whole or large shell fragments were found.

However,

in spite of the relative paucity of identifiable fragments,
some interesting comparisons can be made between species found
today and those predominating during prehistoric times.

Of

the two collections, only species Lampsilis anodontoides and
L. lineosa are common merrlbers; otherwise the lists are quite
different.

Differential preservation should not have been a

factor creating this discrepancy because the shells of the
species found in the site are comparatively fragile while
those of the modern species collected from the river, but not
found in the site, are extremely robust.

There are at least

three possible explanations for these differences:

(1) the

river ecology in the vicinity of the site may have changed
and now favors the species Amblema plicata perplecta and
Quadrula pustlosa where formerly Lampsilis anodontoides and
L. lineosa were dominant.

(2) A sampling error could account

for the difference in species, for the collection of modern
bivalves was obtained from only one gravel bar and perhaps the
aboriginal inhabitants sought different river habitats from
139

which to gather bivalves.

(3) A less feasible explanation is

that the prehistoric inhabitants of the site selectively
gathered only certain pelecypods of the genus Lampsilis
ignoring bivalves of the genera Ambelma and Quaduira.

However

other sites in the Reservoir District do not exhibit this
selectivity (See Mussel Shells, Chapter V).

Most likely the

differences between the two species lists are a product of
the small sample sizes.

But future pelecypod studies can

check this discrepancy, searching for either an ecological
and/or cultural bias in the river mussel data.
Modern habitat perferences of two (Liguma subrostrata
and Lampsilis anodontoides) of the four prehistoric river mussel
species are known from Kansas and this information provides
a basis for a quite general reconstruction of the bottom con­
ditions in the ancient San Gabriel River.

Substrate prefer­

ences of L. subrostrata, not now known from a modern San Gabriel
collection, are ponds and creeks with soft to firm mud but
rarely a rocky bottom.

In the larger streams, they may be

abundant locally but always in shallow pond-like reaches of
the river (Murry and Leonard 1962:142).

Such quiet water

conditions are present today in the San Gabriel River along
slow flowing straight reaches between meander bends.

Today,

Lampsilis anodontoides of Kansas occurs both in large and small
streams in slow to fast moving water.

It will accept a great

range of substrate footings including all kinds of rocky and
muddy bottoms from shallow to deep water (1962:146).
140

Neither

shellfish can tolerate much bottom transport of shifting sand
because of clogging of the siphons, a tolerance limitation
which excludes them from the western portion (headwaters) of
the major Kansas drainages today (1962:121).

However, in the

San Gabriel River, sand transport was obviously not an
excluding factor for these mussels although it may have acted
to thin the natural populations.

As an adaptive measure, both

mussels could have evaded channel movement of sand by seeking
protected habitats such as the downstream end of a gravel bar,
the location of the modern Lampsilis anodontoides obtained
from the river near site 41 WM 118.
Whole and fragmentary mussel shells were recovered during
excavation in quantities ranging from 0.3 to 7.2 pieces per
cubic foot of soil.

The average recovery was 1.7 shell frag­

ments and only six excavated samples exceeded this density
(Fig. 28).

The greatest density of mussel shell fragments

occurred in a zone lying between 96.0 and 98.5 feet arbitrary
elevation confined mostly to Test Pits 1 and 2.
dated from Transitional Archaic to early
association with projectile point styles.

This zone is

Neo~American

times by

The highest density

of shell fragments was observed in Level 4 of Test Pit 2 where
the greatest number of identifiable specimens was also found.
But there is no noticeable stratigraphic segregation among
the pelecypod species; each occurs uniformly throughout the
profile.

141

Figure 28.

Schematic profile showing the dis­
tribution of fresh water mussel shell
fragments expressed as a concentration
index calculated for each excavation
level, 41 WM 118. Minimum number of
individuals are plotted for comparison
with each Concentration Index. See
Figure 12 for the base profile on
which these data are plotted.

Figure 28

T.P. 3
T.P.4

100'­

0.2

1

99 ­

T.P. 2

0.4

T.P. I
0.2
1.6

3
0.7

1
1.6

1
0.2

1

1.6

0.6
-96'

0.1

O.l
95'

Top figures - Minimum number of individuals per level
Bottom figures - Concentration index
Legend:
1.5 times site average

Areas of relatively great shell density are interpreted
as spots of shellfish processing.

Since none of the shells

show any evidence of having been employed as tools or ornaments,
the shellfish were probably opened for the edible meat and the
bivalves immediately discarded under foot.

Judging from the

fairly uniform distribution of the shell, their use as food was
fairly consistent throughout the history of the site.

But the

meat bulk of animals actually consumed was small since the
total of the shell fragments does not add up to many complete
individuals (Fig. 28).

Correlation of the peak shell densities

matches peak hearthstone recovery in four of the six excavated
levels.

However, very few pelecypod fragments were actually

recovered from preserved fire hearths.

Therefore, it cannot

be determined whether the shell fish were cooked or eaten raw.
If cooked, the lack of shell burning favors boiling over
broiling.

Use of river mussels for food by the historic

Tonkawa Indians has been documented by Newcomb (1967: 139) pro­
viding support for the archeologically derived dietary
interpretation.
Observations on the freshwater pelecypods inhabiting
Kansas streams have indicated that the best time to collect
mussels there is between late summer and early autumn.
reasons being:

The

(1) the streams are usually at their lowest

level at this time allowing easy accessibility to the beds of
mussels, and

(2) most of the freshwater mussels in Kansas

move into shallow water during these months in order to breed
143

where they can be easily gathered (Murray and Leonard 1962:32).
With these thoughts in mind about the Kansas pelecypods, let
us examine the situation in the San Gabriel River.

Unless one

knows the exact location of the bed of freshwater mussels,
it would be extremely difficult to obtain pelecypods during
most of the year because of the water depth and the opaque
characteristic of the muddy water which obscures them from
sight.

However, during periods of low river flow, found in

the San Gabriel River during the months of July, August, and
September, pelecypods are exposed to view and therefore are
relatively easy to locate (See Chapter II, Surface Drainage and
Ground Water).

Once located, they can be easily gathered by

feeling along the stream bottom with the bare hands and feet
(Murray and Leonard 1962:32).
Seeds
Matrix samples from seven excavation levels (Nos. 1, 2,
4~8)

of Test Pit 3 were washed over a 1/l6-inch mesh to

recover 875 plant specimens.

As was expected, quantities

of modern fine rootletts were present but also a large number
of both burned and unburned plant seeds.
been identified by a botanist as yet.

The seeds have not

However, one-third of

the sample are seeds of hackberry trees which grow on the site
today (Fig. 8).

Concentration 'i-ndices for the seven levels are

surprisingly high for all

seed~

ranging from 41.7 (Level 7) to

165.8 (Level 4) per cubic foot of soil.
144

Ignoring the recovery

from Level 4 for the moment, there is a general trend of
decreasing frequency from Level 1 (150 per cubic foot) just
under the modern surface to a low at the base of the profile.
This decline is explained as a factor of decreasing opportunity
for preservation in the deeper levels.

But the Level 4

density, maximum for the test pit, is thought to be skewed
because of rodent contamination.

During excavation, a pocket

of small animal remains including rodent bones as well as
unburned hackberry seeds were found in the northeast corner of
the square (Fig. 64).

These were kept separate and are here

interpreted as the remains of a rodent burrow representing both
the deceased animals and stored food supply.

Because of the

anomoulous high density of the Level 4 seed recovery, I think
it very likely that other undetected rodent burrows had
introduced seeds into the ground thereby contaminating that
level.

Other possible sources of contamination are windborn

seeds and seeds which could have dropped into our sample at
the time it was collected.

Only 6.7 per cent of the seed

sample is burned and these specimens are entirely hackberry
seeds from Levels 2, 4, 5, 6, and 7.

Therefore, until further

analysis is possible, I am only attributing the burned hackberry
seeds to the prehistoric occupation because of the unlikelihood
that these seeds were burned elsewhere and introduced into the
ground.

This data does provide evidence of plant use during

both Transitional Archaic and Neo-American times.
seeds are the pits of a small
145

berry~size

Hackberry

fruit which matures

to a deeply reddish purple color in the fall when they are
very sweet, tasty eating.

I think it likely that the fruit

was aboriginally picked and eaten on the site after which the
seed pits were thrown into a fire as an idle act.
Summary and Conclusions
Conclusions derived from each kind of data analyzed in
Chapter IV will be summarized here under two categories:
(1)·a description of the immediately surrounding site ecology
and its natural resources followed by

(2) conclusions con­

cerning the human technology employed to exploit the local
woodland setting.

As a result of the interaction between these

two variables - ecology and technology - a general statement
dealing with culture ecology is advanced.
Prehistoric Site Ecology
The midden campsite comprising the Dobias-Vitek Site was
always located on the prehistoric floodplain of the San Gabriel
River at a point between the margin of the valley and the
meandering river

itself.

Study of the river pebble densities

recovered from matrix sample shows that the river channel was
farthest away from the site prior to A.D. 600 but was steadily
cutting toward the site after A.D. 1200 (Fig. 10).

However,

the complete absence of aqua.tic snails suggests that the river
channel was never close by.

Perhaps its present distance from

the site of about 100 yards is closer than the channel ever
146

was during occupation.

Based on this reasoning, it appears

that the occupants repeatedly chose the same camp area on the
ancient floodplain purposefully selected for its situation
set well back from the river.

Such a choice was likely made

to avoid minor high water stages which today occur frequently
at any time of the year to fill the deep channel trench, some­
times brim full, for short durations.
However at longer spaced intervals of time, overbank
flooding did take place.

Deposition of fine suspended clays

from this event (estimated flood frequency as once in five or
ten .years) repeatedly covered over the camp midden debris
thereby raising the valley bottom surface and burying the
prehistoric artifacts throughout a vertical thickness of 3.8
feet.

This kind of flooding may have taken place during

off",seasons of human occupation or alternatively, when the
occupants were there temporarily forcing them to evacuate.
Portable equipment and supplies must have been carried to high
ground of the Uvalde bluff located just north of the site.
However, any mud covered brush huts and/or other fixed facil­
ities such as storage pits l would have been destroyed.
Judging from the stratigraphic distributions of both the
land snails and certain rodents, Witter and Amaral (Appendices
A and B) reconstruct an open woodland vegetation cover for
the local vicinity of the site which is thought to be struc­
turally not unlike the pecan) elm, and hackberry plant com­
munity found there tOday.

Howevei; direct evidence of the

147

kind of trees present prehistorically is only reflected in
the burned hackberry seeds found ubiquitously throughout the
matrix sample column.

Because of the stratigraphic replace­

ment of the different assemblages of gastropods and vertebrates,
both Witter and Amaral conclude that the woodland community
around A.D. 600 was a dry, open canopy cover permitting an
understory of tall, thick, rank floodplain grass.

In a

relative sense, this woods evolved to a more closely spaced
canopy cover with a more bare woodland floor by A.D. 1200.
The transitional replacement of the less dense by the more
dense woods took place gradually sometime between these two
radiocarbon dated points.

Witter postulates that the dense

floodplain grass growth was favored around A.D. 600 by two
factors:

overbank flooding of short duration, and the sunlight

allowed to pass through the tree folliage and fall upon the
grass understory.

But by A..D. 1200 the grass cover was much

reduced. an ecological change which could have been induced
by longer duration floods which more generally kept the
alluvial soil wetted, drowning out the grass and favoring the
more moisture tolerant trees.

However, there are no indications

that the soil moisture content ever reached a SOQgy swamp or
marsh state.
Such a dynamic change in the vegetation, determined by
the alluvial soil moisture, could be accounted for by either
a climatic shift affecting the nature of the river discharge
or equally likely the lateral
148

mi~ration

of the river towards

the site.

The climatic hypothesis can be tested through

future research on other comparable age sites.

Many sites

showing a similar changing woodland cover would argue for a
reqional climatic control rather than just a chance lateral
shift in the migration history of the river.
More than any other line of environmental evidence, the
occurrence of much of the vertebrate remains is biased by
man's selective

hunting~foraging

these biases, the

lar~er

activities.

However, despite

size prehistoric animals (those

seven kinds of animals caught on the one-quarter inch mesh
screen) are interpreted as evidence of a basically unchanging
species list when compared to their modern counterparts, such
as deer, bison, coyote or dog. Eastern cottontail rabbit,
fox squirrel, turtles, and turkey, known to have inhabited the
area in early historic times, an observation arguing for overall
environmental stability.

Those twelve kinds of animals, whose

bones were recovered bv washing of the matrix samples, reflect
even more restricted an environment around the site than the
lar~e

size animals.

These vertebrates provide further support

for an ecology which, in its major features, was similar to
the modern conditions.

But it is onlv by the distribution of

two rodents - the cotton rat and the prairie vole! - that any
minor evidence of environmental alteration can be determined,
and these are interpreted by Witter in terms of their preferred
grass cover habitat as outlined above.

All of these animals,

recovered either on the one-quarter inch or one-sixteenth
149

inch mesh screens, cnuld have conveniently populated the
drought resistent riparian woodland and river postulated
above on the basis of the vegetation reconstruction.
Land snails are another kind of animal recovered.

Based

on the overturn in the dominant frequencies obtaining between
the prairie snail compared against two large woodland snails,
Witter and Amaral first proposed the site vegetation history
reviewed above.

Based on the changing frequencies, the

prairie snail is known to have been the dominant large
gastropod around A.D. 600,

Later it was outnumbered by the

two largest woodland snails which became common around A.D.
lZOO.

These invertebrates. of edible size. were recovered

on the one-quarter inch mesh screen while a longer list of
eight species of

micro~snail

shells, trapped on the one­

sixteenth inch mesh screen, further supports the interpretation
of the changing woodland density.

Unlike the large forms, the

micro-snails are of such a tiny size that they are free of the
bias of being a food resource and therefore lend credence to
the reality of the vegetation interpretation.
Amaral (see Mussel Shells) reviews the recovery of four
species of river mussels introduced into the site by pre­
historic man in comparison to a modern collection of seven
pelecypod species obtained from the river not 300 feet away.
Only two species of Lampsilis are common members of both
faunas and this discrepancy is explained by three alternative
hypotheses:

(1)

a change in the prehistoric river ecology
150

compared to the modern San Gabriel River may have taken place
or (2) our collecting station on a submerged qravel bar is not
the same kind of mussel habitat exploited by the Indians of
the Dobias-Vitek Site, or less likely,

(3) the aborigines

selectively gathered certain mussel species for food ignoring
others in the river.

Amaral feels that Hynothesis number 2,

the sampling error explanation, is the safest postulate at
the present Dreliminary state of our research.
Available Natural
Resources
,
From the whole range of the natural environment sketched
above, certain aspects lend themselves to resource exploita­
tion for materials and food.

Among these are flint knapping

materials, limestone cobbles for use in hearth cooking, wood
for fuel and materials, vegetal foodstuffs,potable water, and
animal products for food (meat) and materials.
Cobbles of flint suitable for knapping were selectively
collected from the Uvalde bluff and from the river gravels in
the bed of the prehistoric San Gabriel River.

In either

case, the finer grain glassy textured flint was sought in
preference to the coarser grain material.

Judging from the

litter of large cortex flakes and partially exhausted cores
found on bluff workshop sites, exploratory knapping at the
collecting site was employed to inspect likely looking flint
cobbles for suitability.
Limestone cobbles were hauled into the site especially to
be used as hearthstones in fire place cooking.
IS1

These fist-size

cobbles

,~ere

obtained from either the Uvalde bluff and/or the

gravel bed of the prehistoric river.

Because the Dobias-Vitek

Site was located at a midpoint between the prehistoric river
and the Uvalde Formation bluff, some distance from either
limestone gravel supply, the hearth rock material must have
been considered a scarce commodity entailing considerable
backpacking effort to transport.
The biological need of human beings for water could have
ea.sily been met by trips to the river.

Potable water may also

have been obtained from springs which historically used to
issue from the Uvalde bluff north of the site.

That water

was also hauled to the site can be speculated from the sporadic
recovery of fired ceramic vessels but of course no direct
evidence for any vegetal containers was found.
Although Witter (Appendix A) has reasoned from selected
rodent remains for an increasingly bare woodland floor after
A.D. 600 due to overbank flooding, still the woodland snails
can be cited in argument for the presence of some fallen trees
and piles of river rafted logs convenient for use as fire
wood (Appendix B).

Other uses of wood materials are indirectly

inferred from the need for hafted shafts on the stemmed pro­
jectile points,

Especially the contemporary riparian hardwood

trees would have been a ready supply for those purposes.
Vegetal foods are in little direct evidence within the
archeological record with the exception of hackberry seeds, a
tasty sweet red berry which ripens in the fall.
152

But elsewhere

at the Kyle Rockshelter where preservation conditions are more
optimal, a long list of eighteen wild plant foods has been
documented and these provide some idea of the diversity of
vegetal products once available to the Dobias-Vitek occupants
(Jelks 1962: table 5),

On the other hand, Witter has pointed

to two potential sources of plant foods at 41 WM 118 for which
no direct remains have been recovered.

He argues in Appendix

A that during the Transitional Archaic times, the common grass
understory cover would have provided a favorable resource
during late summer and early fall for human collecting of
grass seeds for food.

On the other hand, during Neo-American

times after A.D. 600, the dense woodlands, which he suggests
may have contained many nut bearing trees (pecan and oak) as
today, presented a different resource potential exploitable
in the fall and early winter.
Neo~American

But only the milling tools of

age imply in any way that the grass seed and nut

resources were acturally exploited.
Twenty-three different vertebrates are identified from
bone material by Witter (Appendix A).

These food and material

resources are distributed among five animal classes including;
F(sh~2,

amphibians-I, reptiles-5, birds 3, and mammals-12.

Witter reasons that the seven largest species (5 mammals, 1
bird, and 1 reptile) have cultural meaning as a basis for the
aboriginal diet.

On the other hand, he feels that the small

animals, whose bones were caught on the 1/16-inch mesh screen,
could as likely be natural deaths (either on the spot or
153

washed in carcasses) rather than the result of human consump­
tion.

I can supply only two lines of reasoning in favor of

their presence as due to man's utilization:

(1) bones of

two (snake and rodent) kinds of animals are burned, but this
could be either as a result of scorching as the meat was cooked
or as an accident and

(2) ethnographically the Tonkowa of

central Texas characteristically made full use of a wide
range of tiny animals (Newcomb 1967:139).

But these arguments

are far from definitive and should be verified in the field
by excavations outside of the 41 WM 118 midden limits, seeking
to determine the kinds and frequency of any microfauna which
might have been naturally incorporated in the floodplain
sediments without the interverition of man.

However, further

light is thrown on these interpretations through the analysis
of the

micro~vertebrates

obtained from matrix samples at 41

WM 135 (see Chapter V).
Because of the low density of the four species of river
mussel shell fragments found in the excavations, it is not
thought that shell fish meat ever provided more than a token
supplement to the human diet (see River Mussel Shells).
Furthermore~

the seasons when shell fish may be most readily

obtained are limited to late summer (July, August, and
September) due to the low river flow during these months, a
factor which tends to expose the shell fish making them
vunerable to hand collecting by man.

Therefore the general

paucity of mussel remains throughout the site could mean
154

either that the natural populations within the river were
small to begin with and/or that the shell fish were only
exploited for a very brief season each year.
In terms of gross size, only three species of snails are
sufficiently large to be candidates as food resources for man:
the prairie snail, Bulimulus dealbatus, as well as the two
largest woodland snails, Anguispira alternata and Mesomphix
friabilis,

Amaral and Witter (Appendix B), based on a biometric

study of the two largest species of woodland snail shells,
determined a bimodal population curve of maximum shell lengths
for Levels 4 through 6 of Test Pit 3 dating between A.D. 600
and 1200.

The double-peaked size curve from each excavation

level is thought to reflect snail populations in which the
mortality rate was high for both the little (yomg)
the big (adult) gastropods.

and again

One possible explanation of the

abnormal-looking bimodal distributions is attributed by the
authors to an aboriginal practice of gathering edible adult­
size snails for food.

However, an equally plausible alternative

for the size distribution is offered based on favorable
environmental conditions.
In summary, then, this review of potential and actual
resources indicates a primary reliance on those foodstuffs
and materials obtainable from the local wooded bottomland and
from the San Gabriel River.

In contrast, use of upland prairie

resources is rarely indicated.

Based on the season of ripening

or availability, grass seeds, nuts, hackberry fruit, and river
155

mussel food resources suggest at least the possibility of a
six month semi-permanent human residence at the site extending
from late summer through early winter (see confirmatory
inferences derived from the burned waste flint flakes),

How­

ever this data does not preclude occupation at the site
throughout the remaining portion of the year; that is, they
can be used in an inclusive sense but not in an exclusive
statement.
Human Technology
Up to nOW 1 we have considered the nature of the site
ecology both as a natural setting for the prehistoric occupa­
tion and more importantly as an available source of foods and
materials suitable for human existence.

But ,to obtain, convert,

and put into use such natural resources 1 a body of technical
equipment and knowledge must be brought to bear to exploit
the natural riparian woodland.

It is the purpose of this

section to detail this techniculture in two steps:

first the

nature of the tools and facilities and secondly the subsistence
activities or ways in which these prehistoric peoples put
their technical knowledge to work in making a living.
~ure

of the Tool Assemblage and,

~acilities

Fixed facilities encountered through excavations include
fire hearths, storage pits, and possibly evidence of one or
more houses.

The hearths appear at all stratigraphic horizons

throughout the buried midden deposit and these are classified
156

as two kinds:

informal and formal.

The former are unplanned,

amorphous lenses of charcoal which are thought to be the
residue of fires used in direct flame cooking and warming.
Also, because of the scattering of hearth stones found in
every excavation level, there were undoubtedly many more such
fire places at one time but intact evidence of these was
destroyed aboriginally by foot traffic.

The single occupational

structure called a formal hearth may have been a "fireless"
cooker where heated cobble stones were arranged in a shallow
basin pit for baking of food stuffs.
Two pits were exposed in profile in Test Pit I and these
structures were excavated aboriginally during Transitional
Archaic and

Neo~American

times.

One or both structures could

have been used for storage of food and/or gear.
Because of the appearance and distribution of baked clay
objects distributed in a narrow band across the top of the
Transitional Archaic horizon and in the base of the Neo­
American horizon, it is suggested that the specimens may be
daub from

now~destroyed

mud covered brush huts.

Support is

. given this interpretation by the finding of faint grooves
which appear to be twig impressions in the clay.

However,

other interpretations are plausible and the presence of
houses at the

Dobias~Vitek

Baked Clay Objects).

Site is far from definite (see

Appendix B provides some slight confirma­

tion to this architectural interpretation in the form of clusters
of snail shells which could be the result of gastropods once
concentrated in the shelter of abandoned dwellings.
157

The portable tool assemblage is comprised of two kinds
of artifacts:

stone tools for piercing, cutting, scraping, and

grinding as well as ceramic vessels for cooking, storage, and
water hauling.

But quantitatively, only two classes of tools

are at all common, and these are bifaces (both stemmed and
unstemmed), making up 4.5 per cent of the stone artifacts
inventory, as well as utilized flakes comprising 95.5 per cent
of the in place artifact count.

Minor elements of the stone

tool assemblage, most of which were collected from the surface
of the plowed field, are hammerstone-choppers, scrapers, and
grinding tools, all of which are of Neo-American age.

Still

other uncommon members of the tool assemblage are sherd frag­
ments of two ceramic vessels:

one Neo-American age necked

cooking jar which dates just after A.D. 1200 while another, a
deep, polished bowl, is Transitional Archaic in age, dating

A.D. 600.
Two generalizations are evident in this material:

(1)

there is a strong persistence of the assemblage from Transi
tional Archaic through Neo-American times and

(2) the portable

artifact complex is limited in its composition compared to
other contemporary assemblages of central Texas.

The technical

persistence shown by the tools is particularly evident in the
major biface and utilized flake categories which show nearly
identical frequencies when counts are compared from the upper
and lower segments of the profile.

The minor stone tool

elements do tend to date to the Neo-American horizon but
their small number has probably introduced a sampling error
158

into the tabulations.

Even the two ceramic vessels imply a

repeated if sporadic use of fired clay containers.

Elsewhere~

the intermediate Austin Focus (A.D. 600-1200) is not known to
yield locally made fired pottery (Jelks 1962:88).

Although

the data from the Dobias-Vitek Site are skimpy, they do
reflect this discontinuous distribution.

It is not known if

the Transitional Archaic and post A.D. 1200 ceramics of this
site are locally made or whether they were obtained through
trade from some outside manufacturing center.
The most important evidence of cultural change shown in
the

~rtifact

distributions took place between the dart points

and the arrow points.

These stemmed biface classes, indicative

of the atlatl-dart and the bow-arrow hunting equipment
respectively, are known to have replaced one another gradually
during the early Austin Focus after A.D. 600.

The signi­

ficance of this change in terms of an effect on the hunting
pattern will be considered below.
The second generalization, that the Dobias-Vitek
assemblage is limited in scope compared to the tool assem­
blages of other central Texas sites , is taken to mean that a
specialized range of activities is reflected, perhaps seasonal
in nature.

However, because of the temporal perSistence of

the limited technology, it seems apparent that basically the
same set of special economic tasks were being repeatedly
performed at this same spot throughout the site history.

159

Subsistence Activities
Activities having to do with "making a living" are con­
sidered here in terms of seyeral interpretive categories:
(1) primary acquisition of food,
manufacture and maintenance ~
consumption, and
consumption.

(2) support tasks of tool

(3) processing of food for

(4) storage of surplus for off season

The acquisition of food stuffs is believed to

have been entirely a matter of hunting and gathering wild
products and no data is presently known indicating food pro­
duction through agriculture at this site (but one corn cob
of Toyah Focus age was found at the Kyle Rockshelter, Jelks
1962~

Appendix 3),
Because of the speed,

range~

and feeding habits of the

larger animals, it seems likely that men, either singly or in
small parties, hunted such animals as bison and deer using
projectile devices such as darts and arrow-tipped shafts
indicated by the stemmed bifaces in the site.
(cottontail

rabbits~

Smaller mammals

squirrel), fish, and birds including

turkey may have been either hunted or trapped, perhaps by
young adolescent boys and adult men.

Traditionally, according

to the ethnographic literature, children and women do much of
the foraging including

hand~collecting

of shrews, rats, voles,

turtles, snakes, lizards, toads, frogs, and river mussels.
course, no direct evidence was obtained from excavation con­
cerning either traps or snares since the stock and cordage
parts of such devices have long since rotted.

160

However, at

Of

least the habits of the cotton rat lend themselves to snaring.
This animal is active

year~round,

frequenting tall, dense

grass where it constructs a network of narrow runways (Davis
1966:196).

These paths would be ideal sites for snares although

the gross adult body weight of 4 to 7 ounces would not feed
many people,
Deer show a stratigraphic distribution in which the
animal bones repeatedly appear in each faunal horizon repre­
senting about one individual per level (Appendix A).

Because

of this very consistent but low frequency, deer must have
yielded the primary meat reliance, but at spaced intervals
with supplementary support being supplied from the small game
obtained by traps and foraging.

In this fashion, the small

animals, representing a quite limited biomass, actually played
a very important role in the human subsistence by supplying
the meager

carry~over

spaced deer kills.

allowing human survival between the

However, by A.D. 600 when bison bones

appear in the excavation record of this site, some of the
pressure was taken off the deer-small game pattern because of
the vastly increased big game meat bulk.
Witter (Appendix A) has also examined the animal bone for
implications concerning the hunting pattern.

By comparing

the Early Faunal Zone dated between A.D. 1 and 600 versus the
Late Faunal Zone dated from A.D. 600 until after A.D. 1200
(Fig. 66), he concludes with the following three generaliza­
tions:

(1) after A.D. 600, the intensity of hunting activities

161

rose to judge from the increased density of bone in the site;
(2) an absolute increase in the amount of vertebrate food is
indicated after A.D. 600 by the increased weight of bone
present; and finally,

(3) the number of identified species

increased after A.D, 600 and from this observation, it follows
that a more exhaustive exploitation of animals was made from
a wider' range of habitats.

These generalizations, which have

important implications concerning the increasing ability of
the local group to support itself, represent some of the most
profound change in the subsistence technology yet developed.
Probably most of this techniculture evolution can be accounted
for by the replacement of the dart-atlatl by the bow-arrow
equipment which resulted in an increased projectile efficiency.
From the reconstruction of the flaked

stone technology,

we can infer several generalizations about tool manufacture
and maintenance at Dobias-Vitek.

These are:

(1) core material

was usually "peeled" at the quarry-collecting site located at
the Uvalde gravel bluff rather than on the habitation premises;
(2) the single most important manufacturing activity conducted
at the site was shaping and repair of stone biface tools;
and

(3) although some stone industrial waste was found

everywhere on the site, judging from the concentration of
waste flakes

several spots give evidence of intensely

localized industrial activity.

This finding provides a picture

of a heterogeneous structure to the work pattern during the
Transitional Archaic and again in Neo-American times.
162

Since

the same two activity areas also yielded high densities of
utilized flake tools, it is suggested that these areas were
also localities of intense wood working following Jelks'
(1962:51 1 73)

frequently~cited

data on spall scrapers (utilized

flakes with unifacial edge-sheared edges in this report) and
wood shavings found in the Kyle Rockshelter.

The conjunction

of intense areas of both stone biface manufacture and wood­
working activities leads to a further inference that the two
tasks were related, the woodworking being production of shafts
to

h~ft

the projectile tips for darts and arrows.

Information on the processing of foodstuffs is derived
from the animal bone and milling tools.

Because of the wide

range of skeletal parts found in excavations, Witter (Appendix
A) concludes that the entire deer carcass was returned to camp
rather than field butchered at the kill site.

This inference

suggests woodland hunting within the near vicinity of the camp,
perhaps for a few miles up and down the valley rather than
long distance transport of the carcass which would more likely
be reflected in field butchering and return of selected meat
segments.

Such an inference is not unreasonable since some

populations of

white~tail

deer are described as highly

territorial minded and in one study of marked animals, they
were found to range over an area of no more than one square
mile during a three year period of observation (Davis 1966:
240).

This strong territorial habit 'works to the advantage of

hunters in that the prey are not likely to move away when
stressed by the presence of humans.
163

Recovery of bone elements from the other identified
animals is too meager to interpret in terms of hutchering
practices.

However, based on size alone, the smaller crea­

tures were likely to have been returned to camp whole also.
Because the bones were not usually well preserved in the
soil, no obvious cut marks were found that would.be indicative
of butchering.

However, most bone parts were badly splintered,

especially the shafts of long bones, with many curve-type
breaks as if they were smashed while still green bone.

This

type of fracturing is likely to result from opening bone for
the interior marrow.

But it may also occur if an attempt is

made to extract a portion as material to be used in the
manufacture of bone tools.

At the Dobias-Vitek Site, however,

no finished bone tools were recovered (but see a bone tool at
41 WM 133).

The smashing of the long bones could have been

conducted by the hammer-chopper type of tool, several of which
are dated to a Neo,..American age.
Six excavation levels show greater than average mussel
shell densities and these are largely confined to the western
half of the site

(s~e

Mussel Shell).

These areas, spanning

both the Transitional Archaic and Neo-American deposits, are
interpreted as processing localities where river mussels were
opened to extract the edible meat and the bivalves discarded
underfoot.

Although this activity tended to concentrate at

these few spots, minor amounts of mussels were processed
everywhere in the site indicating that shell fish always
formed a small dietary supplement.
164

The only evidence of processing vegetal products

is the

finding of a set of milling tools in a Neo-American context.
Witter, as mentioned above, has postulated a high potential
for nut-bearing trees such as acorns and pecans at this time
and perhaps these tools were employed to pulverize the nut
meat.
Certain kinds of foods can only be made edible by cooking
while others are made more palatable. Several types of food
processing by heat are indicated by the data including
broiling~

baking, and boiling.

The broiling of meats can be

performed directly over a flame, either held by spit or singed
in the hot ashes of an informal fire hearth.

If the inter­

pretation of the formally constructed rock pavings is correct
(see Fire Hearths, Chapter VI), then those "fireless cookers"
would have served a basically non-ceramic technology well for
baking of both meats and plant foods as described for the Kyle
Rockshelter inhabitants (Jelks 1962:94). Boiling of liquids,
stews, and gruels was likely performed in the few fired clay
pots such as the necked jar with exterior soot reported from
the post-A.D. 1200 deposit.

No evidence remains of the use

of perishable baskets, but ethnographically this kind of water­
tight container is known to have been popular.

Balls of baked

clay or the limestone hearth rock could have been used effec­
tively to transfer heat from an open fire to the liquid con­
tents of the vegetal container.
And finally, the storage of any food supplus for later
use during seasons of low production is indicated by the dug
165

-

......

----.~-

... ~.--~--

.....

-~~-~----

­

pits, the few cermaic vessels, and possibly in the questioned
brush huts.

It is the occurrence of these kinds of simple

storage units which suggests that the Dobias-Vitek Site may
have been a central base, occupied for a large part or all of
the year.

From such a base of operations, its inhabitants

could have sallied out for short term occupations at other
camps where specialized resource exploitation was conducted
to produce a "Central . . Based Wandering" settlement type
(Beardsley

1956:138~140).

Although clearly disjunct in time,

the lower component of scattered hearths described at 41 WM
133 is one example of the type of ephemeral "fly" camp where
specialized,

short~termactivities

were conducted.

Again the

flint debris-covered workshops of the Uvalde bluff are further
examples of briefly utilized collecting stations.
Culture Ecology
This analysis has demonstrated the over-riding persistence
of both the natural woodland setting and the nature of the
human adaptation to this habitat.

With one exception, this

relatively unchanging adaptation is well exemplified in the
stable settlement and constant subsistence activities resulting
from the satisfaction of innate human biological needs (food
and shelter) through the use of the same resources in the same
fashion over an estimated period of time extending some 600
to a 1000 years in duration,

In sum, the same day-to-day

problems were solved in the same way throughout precipitating
166

a Direct, ecologically bound, Tradition segment (Haury
1956:43-51).
The exception to this unchanging, Archaic style life-way
is seen in the cultural elaboration in the hunting pattern
brought about by the introduction of the bow and arrow.

From

its appearance in the archeological record around A.D. 600
until it fully replaced the dart and atlatl equipment in the
early Austin Pocus, the bow and arrow provided a technical
means by which the efficiency of wild game take was steadily
increased as revealed in the number'and kinds of animals
killed.

Further, due to the nature of the quite different

human motor skills required to operate the two weapon systems,
the bow-arrow combination provided a more efficient and
accurate hunting capability in a woodland environment than did
the atlatl-dart.

In this sense, the bow-arrow hunting equipment

served as a technical means whereby the occupants of the
Dobias-Vitek Site made an increasingly more perfect fit with
their woodland surroundings.

167

CHAPTER V
Aoamek site: 41 WM 135
Test excavations were recommended by Shafer and Corbin
(1965: 57) due to surface observations suggesting the presence
of an undisturbed cultural deposit located between a commercial
gravel pit and a recently cultivated field.

Our test excavations

did not encounter the expected undisturbed near-surface remain&
However, intact deposits were encountered below the plow zone
and gravel pit tailings and, therefore, the

~riginal

recommenda­

tions were justified.
The original survey inspection of the Adamek Site, although
demonstrating the presence of prehistoric artifacts, yielded
none of the necessary hallmark projectile points; therefore,
the age of the deposit was not known at that time.

When the

site was first viewed, I speculated that the top of the strati­
graphic sequence would reproduce the arrow point deposits at
41 WM 118 because of the similarity in the Recent alluvium and
presence of the catalpa Soil at both sites.

168

Therefore, with

Figure 29.

Aerial view of terrain above the con­
fluence of Willis Creek (w) with the
San Gabriel River (S) showing the sit­
uation of 41 WM 135 ( circled ). The
high angle oblique photograph was
taken facing north from an altitude
of 2500 feet above the ground sur­
face late in the afternoon.

considerable surprise, it was found that late Archaic, period
VII dart points began to appear just beneath the modern surface
followed by one middle Archaic, period VI dart point at a
somewhat greater depth.

This Archaic material, then, added

an important set of taxonomic units to the local cultural
sequence of the Laneport District extending the range of known
cultural assemblages backward in time beyond the Neo-American
components defined at both the Dobias-Vitek and Loeve Sites.
setting
site 41 WM 135 lies buried in the top of the Recent flood­
plain sediments and the catalpa Soil at a point where this
alluvium overlaps a 10-foot high gravel hillside, the Uvalde
surface, at an elevation of 4900 feet above mean sea level
(Figs. 1,29,30).

The alluvial floodplain to the north and

east of the site is now in a pasture of Johnson grass.

But

along willis Creek, 700 feet north of the Adamek Site, as
well as to the east of the pasture, more moist conditions
permit a fringe woods (Fig. 3).

In contrast, the upland cover

to the west is a dry grassland where a few scrub juniper and
mesquite bushes are present with the addition of an occasional
prickly-pear cactus

eV.

Bryant, personal communication).

Although the modern willis Creek now flows north of the
170

- - - - - _ ........

--... - - - ­

Figure 30.

Contour map of site 41 WM 135 showing
the distribution of test excavations
and the surrounding topography.

CD

... &0
-rt>
00_

1
!

.¥:E

! .: i

i

.."

":

i

i

i

3= . : i
E- I-I t~
ov
"0
CD

r­

~

«

-··:. ;
..

;

'"i.

0:

~

!

... ,

.

• ;g

·i,.
oj!:
....
..

... .­­.
~

\1

...

:

.
"

··-

.,v

'

"i

.
..

..

b

r--E>

'

:

.

it

.....

~

...
.

..

';;

f

­

~-

...

0"

~I

~.

..
11

J

•

0

o

...

:

-; : i
:

;

;;

:>

.

n

site, there is evidence, expressed in the aerial photographs
and on the U.S.G.S. topographic map (Friendship Quadrangle,
1963), that formerly it swung south to pass within 800 feet to
the east of the Adamek site (Fig. 1).

This earlier course,

now an old cut-off channel, is illustrated on the east end of
witter's ecological transect (Fig. 31).

To judge from the

acute geometry of intersection, this course once carried the
creek to a junction with the San Gabriel River at a point
directly south of 41 WM 135.

In recent history the creek,

according to local statements, has been very unstable and during
highwater stage, the flood-swollen waters often crown its
banks at several spots downstream from the Adamek site.

This

instability may also have been a characteristic in the pre­
historic past causing the switch to the modern drainage line
running 2.55 miles eastward to its present-day confluence with
the San Gabriel River.
It is my belief that the prehistoric choice of this
site situation was not accidental but, in fact, was determined
by the unique combination of both upland and floodplain

available to the inhabitants.

reso~rces

since the site lies at a critical

boundary between these two habitats, a rich source of pIa nts ,
animals, water and other materials were close at hand and could
be harvested by moving either upslope a short distance or out
172

across the willis Creek flats.

This accessibility was particu­

larly well illustrated by the abundant deposits of hearthstone
and flint nodule raw materials which are revealed in the Uvalde
Formation deposits of the nearby hillside.

Examination of

Fire Hearths 1 through 3 as well as much of the stray burned
rock found in our excavations shows that the aboriginal in­
habitants of the Adamek site collected the limestone gravels
and conglomerates of the hillside and employed it in constructing
their rock-paved fire hearths.

Furthermore

I

examination of the

flint flakes discarded from tool manufacture shows that this
material was also obtained from the same hillside within a
short distance of the site.

streamside resources were equally

exploited as demonstrated by the presence of freshwater mussel
shells and fish bones in the site.
Modern Site Ecologyl
site 41 WM 135 is located some 100 yards from a small
intermittent stream which also has a small strip of woodland
along it (Fig. 31).

The woodland along the stream is dOminantly

elm of at least two different species (Ulmus americana and U.
serotina), and the hackberries are important subdominants
1. section by Dan witter

173

Figure 31.

Schematic west.. east vegetational
transect from 41 WM 135 to old
Willis Creek cutoff channel.

FiQure

31
].

WEST

~ ~~S'l'..:.

vravel pit

Fallow Field

Sl'
Bbackbe~,

__ bois
;4 t arc
-

hawthorn,

Sapling Thicket;
elm, bois d'arc,
hawthorn

"~.o·

Woodland;
hackberry,
pecan, ash
Flood
Channels

t
Willis Cr.
Cutoff

t - - - - - - - - - - - --Approx. 200 Yds. ­

---1
41 WM 135

(Celtis laevigata and

c.

reticularis).

The pecan (Carya

illinoensis) and the ash (Fraxinus americana) are also important
in forming a crown canopy under which there is a clear woodland
floor.
Between the woodland and the plowed field is a zone of
secondary regeneration in the form of a sapling thicket which
is mainly three different species of elm (Ulmus seritina, U.
americana and U. crassifolia), as well as bois d'arc (Maclura
pomifera) and various hawthorns (Crataegus

~.).

In the stream-border woods the elms appear to have the
greatest trunk circumferences, many of them
pecans have circumferences of about 4 feet.

5~

feet.

The few

Here, as in

41 WM 118, the dynamics and history of this woodland can not be
put forth with any confidence at this time, but it is interesting
to note that the floor is also clear here.

The few pecans in

the woodland imply no clearing by farmers for pecan picking, and
suggest a mature cover either at some advanced, uninterrupted
phase of succession or in climax condition.

If so, presumably

a more extensive woodland of similar composition would have
been characteristic of the area previous to pioneer contact times.
Site Description
In 1963 when Shafer and Corbin (1965:57) first observed
175

the Adamek Site, the field in which it is located had been
recently cultivated and from the profuse distribution of artifacts,
they estimated that the occupation exposed by plowing covered
an area 1/2 acre in extent.

In 1968 when I first saw the site,

a mature sod mat of Johnson grass almost completely obscured the
surface artifacts.

After diligent searching, the excavation

crew was able to gather a rather meager collection of stone tools.
There was considerable relief when our underground exploratory
pits began to yield not only flint artifacts but also burned
limestone rocks, burned-rock hearths, snail shells, and some
freshwater mussel shells.

It was only through this recovery

that we could feel confident that the survey-recorded site had
been relocated.
As was the case at the Dobias-Vitek Site, the initial
field problem was to ascertain the depth, thickness, and age
of the occupational horizon (Fig. 32).

In addition some limits

for the lateral distribution of artifaet remains was sought through
a series of backhoe-dug test pits (Fig. 30).
Nine tests were put down to reveal the soil and cultural
stratigraphy.

These show that the floodplain deposit is a

light brownish gray colored clay to a depth of at least 11.2 feet.
Near the surface the sediments have a slightly finer grain
texture while below a depth of two feet they take on a sandier
176

character and contain more small limestone pebbles colored
bright yellow or red.

Deposition of these sediments was by

repeated overflow of willis Creek coupled with colluvial
slope-wash derived from the front of the adjacent hillside
throughout the history of human camping.
Superimposed o'"er this fluvial deposit is a grayish brmvn
humus zone, the Catalpa Soil, extending to a depth of 1.75 to
2.2 feet below the modern plowed surface (Fig.34).
tenths to 1 1/2

Eight­

feet of light gray colored sediments lie below

the soil humus and these are gradational with the lighter
colored subsoil.

Beyond the limits of the site occupation to

the north at Test pit 8 and east at Test Pit 7, the catalpa soil
(humus and transitional zones) continues at a uniform thickness
of 3.0 feet.

But on the southern margin of the site at Test

pit 6, the dark soil thins to 0.7 feet as the hillside is approached
in that direction.

Most of the fire hearths appear at the base

of the gray humus horizon, Whereas the other artifacts, particu­
larly the flint flakes, are vertically distributed from the
modern plowed surface to the topmost part of the unstained
subsoil.

Unlike the situation at 41

WM

118, there was no

post-occupational sedimentation.
The floodplain deposits immediately adjacent to the hill­
side perform a marked upsweep between Test pits 1 and 4 as
177

--

- - - - -......

- - -.......

--~~--

......

--~--

......

------­

Figure 32.

A composite east - west profile
showing alluvial sediments, Catalpa
Soil, Pleistocene gravels, test pit
excavations, and fire hearths, 41
Wm 135. Arbitrary site elevations
are given along the left margin.

)
!

100'­

Teat PII II

95'­

LEGEND

90'­
0)

Plow l.n,

121 Cololpo Clo, Soil

IS Litht Brownia" Grat S"bsoil (floodplain clar.
M)
(S)

"'I.tH.n.

"a."

of

UW'ald. Formation

Cont1o..., ••• aloe.... D.riv.d fro", 'h.

Uvald. Formation by Molt .aslint
tsl Spoil Dirt from Uti Comm.rClol GrOYl1 Pit

""iCh "01 Piled 01 O".rbutd,n Conri"9 the
Area of T"t Pits 4(t.c.awa,jon l,v,ls I and 2) and 9

shown both in profile (Fig. 33) and by the close spacing of
contour lines on the site plan (Fig. 30).

This rise was pro­

duced by hillside slope-wash of upland Lewisville soil and
small pebbles which added an additional increment of sediment
to the alluvial flats just at the flanks of the valley.
Figure 32 illustrates a composite picture of the cultural
and natural deposits of the Adamek Site.

The profile is composed

of the individual studies at Test pits 1 through 4 as well as
backhoe

trenches and Test Pits 5 and 9.

The individual pro­

files were compiled by matching the different soil horizons and
ground surface elevations.

Close inspection of the composite

profile shows that the soil and cultural features maintain a
basic parallel relationship with the modern surface despite
the upsweep between Test pits 1 and 4.
The majority of the tests (Test Pits 1 through 5, and 9)
were concentrated in the approximate center of the surface
distribution of artifacts and these indicate a minimum east­
west subsurface dimension to the site of 86 feet (Fig- 30).
Towards the close of the work, the T.A.S.P. backhoe was used
to dig three pits to obtain further information on the site
distribution.

Both Test pits 7 and 8 revealed the catalpa

Soil in these locations to be devoid of cultural debris.

Ther&

fore, the site does not extend this far either to the north
179

Figure 33.

General view facing east of Site 41 WM
135 showing work in progress. The fig­
ures in the foreground indicate the
location of Test Pit 4; whereas the
workmen in the midground are screening
at Test Pit 2. Across the grass pasture
can be seen the sapling thicket de­
scribed in Wittier's ecological transect.
( Fig- 31 ).

Figure 34.

Description of the Catalpa Soil, 41 WM 135,
taken from the west wall of Test Pit 1. The
data is telegraphically listed based on both
field observations and the laboratory analysis
of the Soil Testing Laboratory, Agricultural
Extension Service of Texas A&M University.
Observed section is 3.1 feet thick extending
from the plowed surface (0.5 feet thick)
to the bottom of the test pit.

Figure 34
Texture:

Fine clay particles.

Color: Grayish brown (lOYR 5/2, dry) just under the surface
grading to a light brownish gray (10YR 6/2, dry) in the subsoil.
Structure: Massive with little evidence of ped aggregation
although it does cohere as a mass, few noticeable drying cracks.

S:

consistenc
Sticky when wet but only slightly plastic, will
form a tlri bon" when rolled out but this fillet will just sus­
tain its own weight, soil is friable when moist and hard when
dry, no cementation is present.
Special Features: Small pea-size limestone pebbles variously
colored red and yellow, some modern tree and grass roots and
rootlets> slightly porous, worm krotovinas filled with buff soil;
other materials found are snail shells, river mussel shells,
burned hearthstones, one intact hearth (Number 1), and flint
flakes.
Chemical Tests: Base status is mild to moderately alkaline,
percentage of organic matter high in upper portion of profile
(Levels 1 and 2), moderate in midsection (Levels 3 and 4), and
low at the profile base (LevelS), phosphorous and potassium are
high to very high throughout; zinc and nitrates in minute traces
remain constant, minute quantities or iron and manganese show
concentration in the upper levels and decline toward the base
of the profile, magnesium and calcium occur in high and very
high quantities but these elements were not quantitatively
measured precisely.
Boundary: Gradational transition between the organic stained
humus horizon (Levels 2 and 3) and the subsoil (Levels 5 and 6)
is smooth and diffuse.

181

or east of its center.

However, Test pit 6 did yield a few

flint flakes and burned rock and therefore the occupational
debris extends 100 feet south of the known center.

From these

measurements, the minimum occupational area involved is 8,600
feet or slightly less than 0.2 of an acre.

This figure is less

than the 1/2 acre estimated on the site survey When there was no
sod cover to mask the remains.

But further work with the

backhoe would surely demonstrate that the actual underground
distribution of camping debris extends over a somewhat greater
area than the minimum figures calculated here and the site
survey estimate may well be quite reasonable.

Furthermore,

a former landowner tells us that in the construction of the
commercial gravel pit lying west of Test Pit 9, mule-drawn
slips were used to strip the Lewisville shallow phase soil off
of the gravel hillside.

Some of this "spoil dirt

U

was dumped

along the west edge of our excavations and this overburden
contains stone artifacts (Fig. 36).

From these observations,

it appears that prehistoric occupation of the Adamek Site also
included some portion of the hillside above the floodplain flats
but recently most of this upland material has been destroyed by
the modern gravel quarry.,

182

PAGE IS MISSING

183

- - - - - - - - - -

--~~--

formation was coming in from the west.

In this fashion the

buried land surfaces, on which occupation took place, were
always forming an upsweep at the contact of the floodplain and the
gravel hillside.

Despite the somewhat more rapid slope wash

accumulation in the vicinity of Test Pits 1 and 4, these loca­
taions exhibit the thickest portion of the flint flake zone
containing the highest density of specimens on the site.

For

these reasons the picture of very intensive knapping activity
there is a real situation, not one artifically created by our
analysis.
In order to appreciate the local depositional picture at
the Adamek site, it is necessary to introduce some additional
data on Projectile Point Group VII dart points from another
Archaic site (41 WM 122), buried in Recent sediments at the
confluence of willis Creek with the San Gabriel River.

At this

exposure, located in the center of the valley, lenses of snail
shell and several informal hearths are distributed through a
vertical thickness of fifteen to twenty feet of alluvial
unit II sediments exposed in an outside bend of the river.

At

an estimated depth of'ten feet below the existing ground surface,
were found two castroville and one Montell dart points.

These

Group VII guide fossils were discovered as a set eroding out of
the river bank within a couple of feet of on another well below
184

the base of the black catalpa Soil.

In order to explain the

deep burial of the Group VII points in the center of the valley
at 41 WM 122, while the same complex of projectile point types
appears near the modern surface at 41 WM 135, a continuously
aggrading, trough-shaped valley floor is postulated.

In this

model, the older sediments outcrop on the flanks and the younger
sediments appear along the axial center of the drainage.

By

this explanation the stratigra.phic order of the cultural artifacts
reported from all three sites of this volume can be equated with
the sedimentary history of the river.
Datin~ ~

Projectile

~oint

Groups

Three groupings of stemmed bifaces were found in the
Adamek Site, Projectile point Groups VI, VII, and VIII composed
of named Archaic dart points with a maximum time span between
2080 Be and 600 AD.

However, only a few members of Groups VI

(1 Pedernales Type) and VII (1 castroville Type, 1 Ensor Type)

--

were actually found in place through excavations in our hand-dug
test pits.

These suggest that the underground alluvial deposits

enveloping the buried cultural midden date sometime between
2000 Be and AD 1 during Middle and Late Archaic times "­
The presence of some Group VIII (1 Fairland Type, 1 Figueroa
Type) dart points of Transitional Archaic age (I through AD 600)
185

were found either in spoil dirt piled over Test pit 4 or by the
backhoe (Test pit 5) without muCh control on depth.

In neither

case can these artifacts be directly related to the floodplain
profile.

It seems possible but is not established, that these

points were derived both from the uppermost portion of the alluvial
profile as well as from the front slope of the UValde surface,
an upland occupation in the area now occupied by the modern
commercial gravel pit.
Because of the complete absence of fired pottery or any
arrow point members of Projectile Point Groups IX and X, it
seems most unlikely that the buried midden could have resulted
from Neo-American occupation after AD 600.
Reconstruction g£ Depositional Events
By combining the data just reviewed on flint flake densities,
valley fill, and dart point groups, it is possible to reconstruct
three depositional zones labled X, Yand Z (Fig. 35).

The

principal horizon marker is the sloping Zone Y defined on the
basis of the very high values of midden debris and in particular
waste flake concentrations plus the presence of Late Archaic
dart points of Group VII.

Based entirely on the few projectile

points, this intense segment of the cultural midden is dated

186

Figure 35.

Schematic profile showing the distribution
of depositional zones, 41 WM135. See Figure
36 for the base on which these data are
plotted.

Figure 35

T.P. 4

100'­

over­
burden

99'­

T.P. I

T.P. 3
T.P. 2

Zone X
97' -+------1

Zone Z
95'

-+------1

94' -"'-------'

Legend:
Depositional Zone X: undated upper portion of the midden
Depositional Zone Y: middle portion of the midden marked
by high concentrations of waste flakes, hearthstones,
and river mussel shells dated somet,ime between 1000 B.C.
and A.D. 1
Depositional Zone Z: lower portion of ~i9d~n m4~~e4 by
avetage ~ensities of~flint flakes and high densities of
both hearthstones and river
mussel
shells.
.
,

somewhere between 1000 BC and AD 1.
Below Zone Y is a sloping strip, labled Zone Z, of flint
flakes in densities which are about average for the site.
High densities of hearthstones, hearth spalls, and mussel shell
are distributed into this zone from the zone above indicating
that this bottom portion of the cultural midden was formed by
cultural activities only slightly different in emphasis than the
middle strip (Zone Y).

One Pedernales Type dart point of Pro­

jectile Point Group VI, is meager evidence to date the basal
portion of the midden to Middle Archaic time around 1000 BC.
Like Zone Y, Zone Z shows a sloping profile which roughly
parallels the modern floodplain ,surface. '
Zone X, a thick wedge of sediments in Test Pits 2 and 3
which pinches out to the west, is the latest sedimentary deposit
in the site profile.

Although it does not contain particularly

high values of either hearthstone, hearth spalls, waste flakes,
or mussel shell, the presence of some of each of these cultural
residues indicates a low intensity occupation after Late Archaic
times.

It is possible that more excavations to the east in the

thickest part of this deposit would turn up dart points of Group
VIII (Transitional Archaic), but this guess remains untested.

188

Research Procedure
The program of testing was conducted for nine work days
during the early half of November.

The same four man labor

crew employed at site 41 WM 118 was also utilized at the Adamek
Site and their increased knowledge and experience was put to
good use.

Again the overall

dir~ction

of the field research

was in my hands but with valuable assistance from Elton Prewitt.
In addition, George Chambers, of the National Park Service,
joined the field staff on temporary assignment as part of a
refresher program sponsored by the Service for its own
gists.

archeol~

Chambers' presence sufficiently alleviated the pressure

of data recording so that some additional field techniques could
be experimentally examined.
One trial was the field washing of matrix samples using a
set of nested screens (1/2 inCh set within a 1/16 inch) (Fig.37).
However, the winter air and water temperature of Willis Creek
led to the abandonment of this venture.

Matrix samples collected

at Site 118 and most of those collected from Site 133 were
processed in the laboratory.

At Adamek, it was intended to use

the results of field washing as an in-progress guide to the
field excavations.
As at the Dobias-Vitek Site, witter conducted a survey

189

Figure 36.

Schematic profile of test pits and
excavation levels, 41 WM 135. No
horizontal scale implied. Elevations
along left margin are calculated from
the arbitrary site datum assigned a
height of 100 feet.

Figure 36

T.P. 4

w

~I-.\.n

E
100' ­

over­
burden

.

99'­

T.P. I

T.P. 3

98'

T.P. 2

t~ A.~1

Level .3
Level 4
Level 5

Level 1
Level 1
Level 2
97'

Level

Level 6

Level

Level

Level 2
Level 3

'7
/

Level 3
Level 8

Level 4

96'

Level 4
Level 5
Level 5
Level 6

95'

Level 6
Level 7
Level 7
Level 8

94

1

Legend:

II
II
~
.:~~

Catalpa Clay soil
'I'ransi tional humus
Subsoil

of the modern vegetation immediately surrounding site 135.

His

results are shown in Figure 31 where a transect of the major
plant cover running from the site east towards an abandoned
channel of Willis Creek is depicted.
Largely, the arCheological field procedures were those
first devised at Site 118.

The only modifications were those

made because of the different topographic situation of Site 135.
Nine test pits were dug, four by hand and five with a backhoe.
The hand digging was in terms of a 5-foot grid system and
arbitrary 0.5 foot levels to provide the close control on
depth of each artifact sample (Fig. 36), and the power-dug
holes provided information on the soil stratigraphy and lateral
distribution of the artifact-bearing zone.

In addition, Test

Pit 5, a backhoe-dug trench, was excavated in such a manner
that the top soil (humus zone) was piled separate from the
subsoil.

Later, the crew hand-sorted the separated soil re­

covering flint chips and a projectile point.

Some gross

horizontal provenience was also kept on the top soil.

Matrix

and soil samples were taken from the west face of Test Pit 1 in
conjunction with a detailed soil description prepared using the
format and terminology of the u.s. Soil survey (soil Survey
staff 1951).

191

Figure 37.

Washing procedure for matrix samples,
41 WM 135.

The major excavation effort was concentrated in the center
of the surface distribution of artifacts.

Six tests (Nos. 1

through 5, and 9) were dug to provide a west to east profile of
the Recent sediments at the point where they contact the front
slope of the UValde surface.

In this manner, the geological and

cultural history of the site could be investigated more clearly.
Three other test pits (Nos. 6 through 8) were dug with the
backhoe in order to bracket and grossly delimit the areal
extent of the human occupation (Fig. 30).
Fire Hearths
Three fire hearths ,one inform:al and two formal, were re­
vealed by test pit excavations.

other concentrations of burned

rock imply the former presence of hearth cooking1 however,
subsequent human activities destroyed the form of these hearths
by saattering the rock.

Most of the intact hearths and the

burned rock concentrations form an alignment paralleling the
modern ground surface and base of the Catalpa Soil (Fig. 39).
From this observation, I conclude that camping and hearth cooking
were most intense at one period in the site history.
In general, the fire hearths at this site were similar in
appearance to those at site 118 with the exception that hardly
any charcoal was found.

This absence could be attributed to
193

leaching of the soil at some time in the past or equally to the
cultural technique of cooking.
Fire Hearth 1
This formal hearth appeared when Level 4 was excavated in
Test pit 1 at a depth of 1.6 feet below the modern ground surface.
It consists of a loose mass of limestone and conglomerate river
cobbles which were laid in a roughly circular cluster with an
uneven perimeter.

The test pit exposed roughly 1/4 of the

hearth which has an estimated radius of 3.0 feet.

The rock

paving appears to have been constructed directly on a relatively
flat, unprepared surface.

The east-west axis of the hearth

is horizontal but the north-south axis is slightly inclined with
a six degree dip to the north.

After the hearth had been

exposed, photographed, and mapped, the rock was removed and
measured as 0.2 cubic feet.

Many of the individual hearth­

stones are fractured into angular shapes by heat; some are also
discolored to a pinkish or gray caste by burning.

But the soil

directly beneath the hearth was not discolored by fire.
Two freshwater mussel shells, 23 mussel shell fragments, a
and 105 snail shells were found within the hearth but both
charcoal and animal bone were largely absent.

194

stone artifacts

found include six utilized flakes and 98 flint flakes but no
intentionally shaped tools.
Fire Hearth 2
Formal Hearth 2 was found in Level 4 of Test Pit 2 at a
depth of 1.9 feet below the ground surface (Fig. 38).

The dug

square came down upon the rock paving exposing it in the northern
half of the test.

Viewed in profile, the structure was found

to occur at the contact of the catalpa Soil and the underlying
transitional zone, a position which is roughly that of Hearth 1.
Judging from the uneven curvature of the compact paving perimeter,
the northwest corner of the ex

A PAGE IS MISSING

195

Figure 38.

--

---------------

-----~----~

- - ­

Fire Hearth 2 exposed in Test pit 2,
41 WM 135.

-~----------~--------~----

However, the north-south axis is unknown due to soil overburden.
The quantity of hearthstones exposed in the trench width was
not measured.

In the general characteristics of limestone

material, rounded shape, and angular fracture, the stones
appear identical to those described for Hearths 1 and 2.
Scattered Hearthstones
Fire-cracked rock was removed from each excavation level of
the hand-dug test pits and recorded by bulk volume (see Scattered
Hearthstones, Chapter IV).

From the 1/4 inch mesh screen,

quantities ranging between a trace to as much as 0.66 cubic
feet of bulk volume were found.

Inspection of these figures

shows a marked increase in certain excavation levels jumping
by a factor of two or more times the quantity compared with the
overlying or underlying recovery (Fig. 39).

This zone,

contai~

ing 0.11 or more cubic feet of burned rock, extends entirely
across the area of the site tested by the hand-dug pits and
shows a positive correlation with the similarly patterned
configuration of flint flake densities (Fig.45).

Therefore, the

hearth cooking residue is taken as support for the zone of
intense occupation defined on the basis of the stone industrial
activity.

unlike the avoidance relationship seen at 41 WM 118,

197

the distribution of scattered hearthstones at the Adamek Site
includes the extant cobble-paved fire hearths and shows that
formerly many more paved hearths were once present but have
since been destroyed, perhaps by foot traffic during aboriginal
times.
Another kind of data is the recovery of small-size limestone
spalls which were popped off of the hearthstones by heat
fracturing.

Like the fist-sized hearthstones, spalls were

found by means of the 1/4 inch mesh screen in nearly every
excavation level in densities ranging between 2.2 and 60.2 per
cubic foot of soil.

Overall, excavation levels contained an

average spall density of 21.1 per cubic foot of soil and when
anyone level yielded 1.5 times the average, this level was
considered to contain an abnormally high frequency.

Except for

Level 3 in Test Pit 2, all such unusually high recoveries were
found within the zone already defined as containing a high bulk
volume of hearthstones.

Thus the two kinds of data--bulk

volume of hearthstones and density of heat-fractured hearthstone
spalls--are complimentary in their distribution, both being
indicative of the human activity of hearth cooking.

198

Figure 39.

Schematic profile showing the quantitative
distribution of hearthstones, heat-frac­
tured rock spalls, and formal Fire Hearths
land 2, 41 WM 135. See Figure 36 for the
base profile on which these data are plot­
ted.

Figure 39

T.P. 4

E
100' ­

Over­
burden

T.P. I

?

3.8
0.07
7.5
T

5.5
0.05
21.8

95'
0.05
10.9

?

18.0

6.07
94

1

T - trace of hcarthstone~ but not me~sur~ble
Top figure - hearthstone expressed as true
'Jolume of rock.
Bottom figure- concentration index of hCi'l:-th
~
.
stone spalls.
~ ~ 0.11 cubic feet hearthstones.

CD

Fire lIearths

Description of Artifacts
Artifacts of stone are treated here in much the same manner
as were the similar classes of tools and discarded waste stone
reported from Site 41 WM 118.

As was the case there, the

sele~

tive nature of the stone tool industry, when compared to other
central Texas prehistoric sites, is suggestive of a restrictive
range of activities here at 41 WM 135.

One explanation of the

incomplete industry might be seasonal occupation.

But if so,

the same restricted range of hunting-gathering tasks must have
been repeatedly performed at this same spot over a great length
of time.
As was the case at the Dobias-Vitek Site, tabulation of the
stone tools recovered from the hand-dug pits (Test pits 1 through
4) at 41 WM 135 reveals a decided emphasis on bifaces (projectile
points and unstemmed bifaces) and utilized flakes.
stone tools appear in very low numbers.

All other

Although the stone

industry of the two sites is essentially the same, a comparison
shows some minor shifts in tool frequencies, principally in the
proportion of bifaces:

200

Figure 40.

Stemmed and unstemmed bifaces, 41 WM 135.
Stemmed bifaces: Figueroa Type: b , Fair­
land Type: c, Ensor Type; d, Marcos Type:
e, Castroville Type; f. Pedernales Type;
Unstemmed bifaces: g. Rectangular shape:
h-i, Oblong shape.

,,

c

b

a

\

\

\

d

f

e

2cm.
I

9

h

stone Tool Class

41 WM 135

41 WM 118

Bifaces
utilized Flakes
other stone Tools

11.1%
87.2%
1.8%

4.5%
95.5%

This change in the proportion of bifaces at 41 WM 135 is two
and one-half times that present at 41 WM 118 at the expense of
the utilized flake tool class.

other stone tools, such as

intentionally fashioned scrapers, hammer-choppers, and grinding
stones appear in very low frequencies at 41 WM 135.

Their absence

in the frequency list for 41 WM 118 is influenced by the fact
that counts were only made on specimens recovered from the
dug test pits.

han~

However, the same kinds of tools were found on

the surface of the plowed field where they had been eroded from
a Neo-American context.
stemmed Bifaces
Named. dart point types described here are: . Figueroa,
Fairland, Ensor, Marcos, Castroville, and Pedernales (Suhm
and Jelks 1962; Johnson 1964).

These are Archaic stage pro­

jectile points characteristic of the time Periods VI, VII, and
VIII dating between 2000 Be and AD 600 (Fig. 4).

However,

because only member types of projectile point Groups VI and
VII were recorded in the well-controlled, hand-dug excavations

202

of Test pits 1 through 4, the main deposit is thought to date
in Late Archaic times.

other stemmed bifaces, which are in­

complete, have simply been described as untyped dart points and
miscellaneous dart point fragments.
FIGUEROA TYPE (1 specimen):
This projectile point lacks only the blade tip and one
extreme corner of the base.

It is classified as a Figueroa

Type because of the expanding stem and wide, triangular blade
without barbs (Johnson 1964:36).
In cross $"ection, the specimen is lenticular lacking any
evidence of edge beveling or a medial ridge.

The allover

bifacial flaking was irregularly performed as was the finer
sporadically applied marginal retouch.
The distinctive broad stem is set well in from the rounded
shoulders.

It has a mild out-f.lare to its sides·· ltnd a shallow

concave base, characteristics which are similar to Figueroa,
Variety I, described from the Devil's Mouth type site (Johnson
1964:36).

The stem, like the blade, is unbeveled and lacks edge

grinding.

Basal thinning was performed by the percussion removal

of large flakes after which the margin was evened by some finer
retouch.

203

After the tip of the projectile point was snapped off, it
was secondarily modified for use as a burin, to judge from the
five superimposed flake scars which notch one side of the blade
These burin scars were removed by strikes made using the snapped
break as a platform, the blows having been delivered in the
plane of the artifact's longitudinal axis.
Production of the artifact was on a glassy, homogeneous
flint of pale brown color (lOYR 6/3).

This glossy material

is flaw-free and fractures to a sharp edge.

Neither heat­

treatment, burning, patination, nor encrustation are present.
Recovery of the dart point was made on the 1/4·inch
screen when processing the contents of Level 2 in Test Pit 4.
This material was not laboratory analyzed in detail since it
is overburden having been piled there from the initial stripping
of the gravel pit located just to the west of the test pit.
The Figueroa dart point simply shows that Period VIII, Transi­
tional Archaic occupation, took place on the hillside above the
site.

But this upland occupational refuse cannot be strati­

graphically related to the buried component of the alluvial
bottomland.
Dimensions:
0.6 em:

weight,

length, incomplete:
inclomplet~

width, 2.5 cm.:

(Fig. 40,a).

204

thickness

Figure 41.

Schematic profile showing the distribution
of dart points, 41 WM 135. See Figure 36
for the base profile on which these data
are plotted.

Figure 41

....

E
100' ­

T.P. 4

LI-.\J
.F

99' ­

T.P. 3
T.P. 2
roL

~M.
97' .......- - - - - 1

••

•

,

T.P. I

~JJJt

• .E
••c
•

9 6' -+------1

95' -+-----1

94·-----.. .
Legend:
•
F
E

C
P

Dart pOint fragment
Figueroa Type
Ensor Type
Castroville Type
Pedernales Type

••
•••
•

w

FAIRLAND TYPE (1 specimen):
A perfectly symmetrical dart point has characteristics of
the stem which allow identification to the Fairland Type (Suhm
and Jelks 1962:191).

The long, tapering triangular blade of

this point has straight, even, unserrated sides which converge
to a delicate tip.

Right hand beveling on both faces produced

a trapezoidal cross-section, an attribute which is rarely noted
in the ideal type description.

The allover bifacial flake

scars and finer marginal retouch are even and symmetrically
applied, although a few scars do terminate in hinge fractures.
A small block of raised material could not be removed from one
face; otherwise the workmanship is remarkably uniform.
Two long, diagnoal side notches have produced an out-flaring
stem and short sharp, laterally projecting shoulders.

Due to

the shallow nature of the notches, the stem neck is quite broad.
A wide, moderately concave base is bifacially thinned but not
ground.

Together with the out-flaring stem, it produces fairly

sharp spurs or tips to the

base~

The spurs extend laterally

beyond the spread of the shoulders but they do not reach a
point on line with the projected trend of the blade sides.
The artifact was made on a homogeneous, vitreous, flint of
light gray (lOYR 7/2) color.

No flaws or inclusions are present.

206

The sharp edge flint is transluscent to intense light.

Pati­

nation, surface encrustation, and heat alteration are all absent.
Hand picking of the backhoe dirt derived from Test Pit 5 led
to the recovery of this specimen.

Although the exact depth is

not known, the power tool digging of this trench was conducted
so that the CatalPa Clay soil was piled separately from the
subsoil.

Therefore, the point, which came from the humus

stained soil, must have been deposited at a depth somewhere
between the mddern surface and a maximum depth of 3.0 feet.

As

the backhoe dug Test pit 5, the soil from the different five
foot squares was separated.

This Farland dart point was

obtained between the:rEas.t 85 and 90 foot grid lines.

Their

intersection with Test pit 5 lies just grid north of Test pit
2 and immediately east of Fire Hearth 3 (Fig. 30).
Dimensions:
thickness, 0.6 em;

length, 4.45 cm7

width at base, 2.2 cm;

weight, 4.0 gm; (Fig. 40,b).

ENSOR TYPE (1 specimen):
The broken blade tip, as well as a tip of the base, leaves
just a fragmentary portion of this dart point

But the diagnostic

characteristics of stem and side-notching provide distinctive
qualifications for assignment to the Ensor Type (Suhm and Jelks

207

----------

- - - - - -

1962:189).
Based on the remaining portion, the blade once was a long,
tapering triangular shape with straight, fairly even sides.
Allover bifacial flaking and marginal retouch have produced
a lenticular

c~oss

ridge or beveling.
serrations.

section unaffected by either a medial
Edges of the blade are fairly even without

A few flake;

~cars

terminate in minor hinge fractures

and one small block of unremoved material attests to difficulties
the artisan had in producing the point.

Another manufacturing

impediment is a thin, elongate geode which deflected a thinning
flake lengthwise down one face of the specimen.
The presence of shallow, diagonally-aligned side notches
produces a broad neck to the stem.

A further distinction of the

stem is the fact that it is wider than the slightly barbed
shoulders, the basal tips being on line with the projected
trend of the blade edges.

These characteristics imply that

the specimen was made by notching a long, triangular bifacial
blank.

The straight based stem is thinned bifacially but not

ground.
The specimen was made on a glassy, homogeneous flint.
Discoloration by heat has altered the color to a pale red
(7.5R 6/2).

However, no "pot lids" or heat-induced crazing

208

are present.

Patination and chemical encrustations of the

surface are also absent.
Screening of the plow zone, Level. I, in Test pit I, led to
the recovery of this artifact in the Catalpa Clay at a depth
between the modern ground surface and 0.5 feet.

Despite its

presence in the plow zone, it is thought to have significance
in dating the occupation.
Dimensions:

length, incomplete;

thickness, 0.55 cm;

width, incomplete;

weight, incomplete; (Fig. 40,c).

MARCOS TYPE (1 specimen):
This dart point is incomplete due to the missing blade tip
and one shoulder barb.
knicked at two spots.

Also one edge of the blade has been
However, the remaining broad blade

fragment, barb, and stem shape are all sufficiently like the
attribute set of Marcos projectile points to allow identification
to that ideal type (Suhm and Jelks 1962:209).
Even sides of the broad triangular blade are slightly
convex.

The blade lacks beveling and a medial ridge, charac­

teristics which would interrupt the uniform, lenticular cross
section.
Deep, diagonally-aligned corner notching has produced

209

sharp, downward pointing barbs and a marked out-flare to the
wide stem.

However, due to the triangular shape of the original

biface blank, the stem corners do not extend as far laterally
as the barbs.

The base is barely concave and not ground.

Irregular bifacial flaking shows many hinge fractures.
geode further interrupted the thinning operation.

One

Finer marginal

retouch is not present everywhere but, in general, the piece
looks finished.
Manufacture of the specimen was on a glassy, transluscent,
dark gray (lOYR 4/1) flint.

The glossy material is homogeneous

except for a few small geodes and light gray (lOYR 7/1) chemical
inclusions which impart a speckled appearance.

Neither heat­

treatment, patination, nor burning are in evidence.
The specimen was found in backhoe dug

Test Pit 9.

Because

of the use of power equipment, the point could have come from
anywhere in the catalpa Clay Soil between the modern ground
surface and a depth of 3.8 feet.
Dimensions:
0.6

cm~

weight,

length,

incomplete~

incomplete~

width, 3.1

cm~

thickness,

(fig.40,d).

CASTROVILLE TYPE (1 specimen):
An incomplete dart point has minor breaks at its blade tip,

210

both barb tips, and one corner of the stem.

Distinctive

attributes of the stem, barbs, and large size have allowed
classification to the castroville Type (Suhm and Jelks 1962:
173).
The broad triangular blade has slightly convex sides.
Bifacial thinning yielded a lenticular cross section, the
symmetry of which is unaffected by either a medial ridge or any
form of beveling.

Except for several knicks, the edges are

even without serrations.

The entire specimen is covered with

large irregularly placed flaking scars, but only a few restricted
sections of the artifact edges show marginal retouch, suggesting
that the piece was never completely finished.

Major flaws

or hinge fractures are not present to provide impediments to the
aboriginal flint knapper.
A large massive stem is set in from the broken barbs of
the blade.

Judging from the stubs remaining, these barbs were

manufactured by deep, diagonally placed basal notches.

This

same notching technique produced slightly expanding stem sides
which are straight and even.
without grinding.

Base of the stem is also straight

It has been thinned on both sides by the

removal of long flakes differing in no way from the bifacial
flaking over the rest of the specimen.

211

The glassy flint is dark gray (lOYR 4/1) in color speckled
with light gray (lOYR 7/1) inclusions.
around its sharp edges.

The flint passes light

Although generally homogeneous in its

fine texture, a few small geode pockets containing clear quartz
crystals blemish the material.

No sign of heat-treatment,

patination, or limy encrustations are to be seen.
The artifact was found by screening the contents of ex­
cavation Level 2 in Test Pit 1 lying in the Catalpa clay between
0.5 and 1.0 feet below the modern ground surface.

At this

depth, it underlay an Ensor dart point taken from Level 1 of
the same pit; both recoveries came from the main flint flake
concentration, Zone Y.
Dimensions:

length, incomplete 7

thickness, 0.85 cm7

width, 3.5 em;

weight, incomplete;

(Fig. 40,e).

PEDERNALES TYPE (1 specimen)
This dart point is complete except for the tip which was
damaged, perhaps by impact at some time in the past, after which
the angled break was reworked by bifacial flaking.

Another

scar is a burin-like impact break which runs down the blade
edge opposite the angled break.

This damage was not repaired.

Characteristics of the projectile point are those of the

212

Pedernales Type (Suhm and Jelks 1962:235-237).
The blade is a long, tapering triangular shape with straight
to slightly convex sides.
specimen is lenticular.

viewed in cross section, the entire
No beveling or medial ridge is present.

Except for irregularities due to the old breaks, the edges are
even and unserrated.

Both the large percussion flaking scars

which cover the entire face as well as the finer marginal
retouch are irregular in execution.

Several of the flake scars

have hinge fracture but no marked lumps of unremoved material
or flaws are present.
The parallel-sided stem is set well in from the shoulders
which are marked by short barbs projecting downward slightly
towards the base.

Neither the deeply concave base nor the

straight sides of the stem is ground.

Basal thinning was

accomplished by the removal of one large flake on each side as
well as a number of finer retouch chips.

The only evidence of

burning is a small bright red discoloration on one spur.

No

patination or limy encrustation is present.
The faintly banded, glossy, light brownish gray (lOYR 6/2)
flint is transluscent.

In color and glassy texture, it matches

the flint present in the UValde gravels.
The specimen was found in Level 6 of Test pit 3 at a depth

213

of 2.7 feet beneath the modern ground surface.

This location

is in depositional Zone Z below the main concentration of flint
flakes (Figs. 35,41).
Dimensions:
0.7 cmi

length, 6.6 cm:

weight, 13.7 gml

width, 3.0 cm:

thickness, 0

(Fig. 40,f).

UNTYPED DART POINT (1 specimen):
A fragmentary projectile point has both the stem and distal
portion of the blade missing.

Also one notch-like break is

present in the edge of the blade.

The broken parts were snapped

off sharply, truncating the deeply (0.1 cm) patinated surface of
the specimen.

These observations are inferred to mean that the

point lay exposed on the ground surface at some time in the
past and later was collected for reuse by the aboriginal oc­
cupants of the Adamek Site.

Normally buried stone artifacts

found at the three alluvial sites reported here are not even
lightly patinated.
Because of the damaged stem, the dart point cannot be
identified to a known type.
The blade was originally a long, tapering, triangular
shape with even, straight sides.

As seen in cross section, the

piece is a thick lenticular shape without medial ridge or edge

214

beveling.

Because of the blade thickness, the irregular all

over percussion flaking scars often terminate in hinge fractures.
The neck remnant of the stem is narrow and set well in
from the prominent lateral shoulders; the latter project beyond
the edges of the blade.
Production of the artifact was on a dark grayish brown
(lOYR 4/2) fine grain flint.

Due to the heavy coat of very

pale brown (lOYR 7/4) patina, the material is opaque, being
exposed for inspection only where broken.

The piece is not

burned or heat-treated.
Recovery of the artifact was made on the l/4-inch screen
at the time excavation Level 3 was dug in Test pit 2.

This

means that the artifact occurred somewhere between 1.0 and
1.5 feet beneath the modern ground surface within the main zone
(Zone Y) of high flint flake recovery {Fig. 41)0
Dimensions:
1.0 cm;

length, incompletei

width, 2.8 cmi

thickness,

weight, incomplete.

MISCELLANEOUS DART POINT FRAGMENTS (12 specimens):
Fragments of dart points include blade tips (3 specimens),
midsections (2 specimens, 1 questioned specimen),
parts (6 specimens).

a~d

stem

None are sufficiently complete to identify

to a described type.
215

The tips are evenly flaked to a long, tapering point.
Because of the acute angle of convergence, they do not appear
to be broken from thin, unstemmed bifaces.
Of the three midsection pieces, two show the proximal portion
of the blade as well as some remnant of a stem.

The third has

a contracting sided, straight base stem as well as a lower
portion of the blade.

Its identification as a projectile point

is questioned because of the lack of symmetry and discontinuous
nature of the marginal retouch.

Exposure to heat has distorted

and broken one shoulder and· the distal blade break, but the
remaining shoulder is sharp and almost barbed.

Because of the

thick cross section and lack of marginal trimming on one face,
it looks like this piece was discarded before completion.
Probably the artisan was unable to remove a "hump" of material
on one face by percussion thinning and the resultant lopsidedness
led to its rejection.
The various stem fragments include straight-sided, flat
based examples (3 specimens), an expanding stem with straight
base, and straight-sided artifacts with unknown basal shapes
(2 specimens).
One of the dart point fragments is made on banded, glassy
flint while the rest are of homogeneous gray or brown flint.

216

Figure 42.

Schematic profile showing the distribution
of unstemmed bifaces, 41 WM 135. See
Figure 36 for the base profile on which
these data are plotted.

Figure 42

T.P. 4
rL

E
100' ­

99' ­

T.P. I

T.P. 3

T.P. 2

,J. ,

r1

lAM

98'

97'

96'

••
••
••

•

•••
• •••
•
• •
•••
•

•
•• •

95'

94 1

•
- ' -_ _ _---J

LW
••••
•••
•••
•••
••••

~I-.\J
•••
•••

•
•
•••

••••

•
•
••

Legend:
•

Thin bifac.es

•

Thick bifaces

•

Miscellaneous bifaoe fragments

w

Four are discolored to a pink hue by burning.

The others

are unaltered by heat.
The specimens were found in a variety of excavation levels
in Test Pits 1 (Levels 1,2,3);
(Levels 4,5,6)1

and 5.

2 (Level 3);

3 (Leve14);

4

These distributions agree closely with

the inclined site silhouette defined by the high flint flake
concentration (Zone Y) of Late Archaic age (Figs. 35,41).

unstemmed Bifaces

Three classes of unstemmed artifacts are considered here:
thick unevenly shaped bifaces, thin evenly shaped bifaces, and
miscellaneous bifaces.

The first two groupings are thought to

represent manufacturing stages as described for 41 WM 118
(Chapter IV).

The miscellaneous grouping is a composit of

undifferentiated fragments which may include pieces, of both
stemmed and unstemmed bifaces.

THICK, UNSTEMMED BIFACES (33 specimens):

Complete examples (8 specimens) and fragments (25 specimens)
of unstemmedbifaces have been percussion flaked to produce large,
thick, uneven forms.

They are characteristically bifacially

covered with deep, irregularly applied flaking scars which impart

218

a lenticular to plano-convex cross section.

The whole specimens

show a variety of outline shapes including squarish (3 specimens),
oblong(2 specimens), and pointed tips (3 specimens) of lanceolate
to ovate outline.

Unlike the stemmed bifaces or even, unstemmed

forms, these often have irregular, scalloped edges without much
evidence of fine marginal retouch.

Following the interpretation

offered for the same artifact forms described from 41 WM 118, these
pieces are thought to be early manufacturing stages leading to
both even, unstemmed bifaces and/or stemmed bifaces.

But the

crudely made bifaces described were rejected or not finished
because of various flaws including presence of cortex (6 spec­
imens), natural cracks which caused breakage, and hinge fractures
Which left unremoved humps ,of material detrimental to further
thinning of the biface "blanks".
The flint material is like that described for cores and
was obtained from either the nearby uvalde gravels or the river
gravels.

Ten specimens were burned but none show patination.

A few pieces show some lime encrustation, mostly in hinge
fractures or other protected depressions.
Thick, unstemmed bifaces were found in excavations from:
Test Pit 1 (Levels 1,2,3, and 6);
Level 4, Level

6)~

Test Pit 2 (Fire Hearth 2 in

Test Pit 3 (Levels 3,5, and

219

6)~

Test Pit 4

(Levels 3,4,5):
(1 specimen):

Test Pit 5 (3 specimens): and Test Pit 9
{Fig. 42).

Bifaces are particularly concentrated in the upper levels
of Test Pit 1 and 4 while a local cluster was also present in
Fire Hearth 2.

Those in pits l.and 4 suggest, as does the high

flint flake densities, some localization of biface manufacture
between these tests.

Following the dating of the flint flake

concentration, most of these bifaces are Late Archaic products.
Dimensions of whole bifaces:
6.6, 4.8, 4.8, 4.4 em:
4.7, 2.5 em:
1.1 cmi

12.2 gm;

lengths:9.8, 8.2, 7.7, 7.6,

widths: 5.8, 6.1, 3.3, 4.9, 4.2, 4.7,

thickness: 1.9, 2.2

I

1. 7, 2.2

I

1.7, 2.2, 1.0

I

weight: 87.1, 108.1, 43.4, 83.5, 40.5, 46.2, 28.3,
(Fig. 40,g-1).

THIN, UNSTEMMED BIFACES (9 specimens):
Evenly worked fragments of unstemmed bifaces consist of
tips (6 specimens), a midsection, and bases (2 specimens).
Characteristically they were bifacially shaped by the removal
of percussion flakes which left broad, flat scars and a thin,
lenticular cross section.

Three of the tip fragments also have

bifacial marginal retouch and these are thought to be finished
tools, perhaps hafted knives.

220

The remaining pieces either have

no fine retouch or else it is present as unifacial trimming from
alternate sectors of the artifact margin.

This attribute was

noted at 41 WM 118 where it was explained as a technique for
strengthening the specimen during the operation of biface thinning
(Chapter IV).
The basal edges are straight to convex in outline while
the lateral sides and tips are all convex except for one tip.
This latter specimen appears to be from a finished asymmetrical
knife with straight sides and a long, tapering tip.

Over all,

the biface fragments seem to be from subtriangular-shaped
artifacts like the covington and some cleburn knives described
from the Kyle Site (Jelks 1962:42-44).

Two specimens are

burned.
The distribution of- these thin, unstemmed bifaces generally
follows the pattern seen in the thick, biface progenitors (Fig.42).
The thin examples were recovered on the 1/4-inch screen during
the excavation of Test pit 5 (2 specimens).
Dimensions:

length,

incomplete~

width, incomplete;

thickness, 0.5, 0.5, 0.6, 0.6, 0.7, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9,

cm~

weight,

incomplete.
MISCELLANEOUS BIFACE FRAGMENTS (28 specimens) :
These fragments are broken parts, either from thin unstemmed
221

bifaces or stemmed dart points.

It is even possible that some

lateral pieces were remnants of thick, unstemmed bifaces.
However, conclusive evidence to segregate them by form is lacking.
Thirteen are burned while the rest were unaffected by heat.
They were obtained from:

Test pit 1 (Levels 1,3,4);

(Levels 1,3,5,6,7) and Hearth 2 in Level 4:
1,2,4,5);

Test Pit 4 (Levels 3,4,5):

Test Pit 2

Test pit 3 (Levels

and Test Pit 5 (2 specimens).

Other stone Tools
Artifacts other than bifaces are described here providing
a small miscellaneous grouping of :

hammer-choppers, scrapers,

utilized flakes, grinding palett, and grinding slab.
HAMMER-CHOPPERS (2 specimens):
Flint cobbles were bifaciailly flaked along the side
(1 example) or end (1 example) to remove the cortex and
produce a bit edge not dissimilar in appearance to a wedge­
shaped core.

Alternately directed blows have left a sinuous

ridge at the juncture of the two flaked faces.

It is upon this

ridge line that wear was developed in the form of battering and
short step-fractures.

The latter are aligned parallel to the

flake scar ridge line.

since most of the cobble surface is

222

covered with unremoved cortex, a convenient hand grip was
supplied.
Experiments with a flake-scarred core of Uvalde gravel
flint will reproduce both the battered and step-fractured wear
when the tool is used as a percussor to flake flint or as a
chopper to cut a block of pine wood.

During the percussion

flaking operation, it was noticed that the sharp scarred ridge
of the hammer broke angular bits from the edge of the thick
biface being manufactured.

Deep angular bites are also observable

on some prehistoric flint cores recovered from 41 WM 135.

It is

therefore inferred that the two prehistoric artifacts reported
here were used for primary percussion flaking and possibly also
for heavy duty cutting of wood and bone.

However, these two

specimens are too few to account for all of the percussion work
accomplished at the site.

Therefore it seems likely that other

hammers, possibly made of perishable material, were also employed
as percussors.
Hammer-choppers were found in the hand-dug Test Pits:
Numbers 3 (Level 5) and 4 (Level 5).

For illustrations of

similar artifacts, see Figure 19 of Chapter IV.
Dimensions:

length, 6.2, 7.6 cm;

thickness, 2.4, 2.6 cern;

width, 6.2, 5.7 cm:

weight, 120.6, 132.9 gm.

223

SCRAPERS (8 specimens):
Five specimens are complete and three others are fragments
broken from the trimmed tool bit.

All of the whole artifacts

are made on primary flakes, either cortex covered (2 specimens)
or interior (3 specimens) flakes.

Intentional unifacial edge

trimming was performed by percussion blows struck from the
flattish, ventral surface of the flake.

The resulting flaked

bit is steep (4 examples) to acute (1 example) angled.

In all

examples, this trimming is confined to the edge in an area
opposite the flake platform but not always precisely perpendicular
to the striking axis of the flake.

Further, finer marginal retouch

overlaps the percussion flake scars and these features are
thought to be due to pressure shearing from a scraping use.
Convexly trimmed edges characterize four of the artifacts
While the other complete specimen has a concave bit.
One and possibly

a second, scraper shows flake scars on its

ventral surface made by blows struck perpendicular to the trimmed
edge.

This procedure has been described by Frison (1968:Fig.l,c)

as a sharpening technique to refurbish the tool for further usa
In one case, the effort produced sharpening flakes that so
damaged the unifacial bit as to destroy the tool's usefulness.
All specimens are made on glassy flint, six on cobbles and

224

Figure 43.

Schematic profile showing the distribution
of Utilized Flakes expressed as a concen­
tration index calculated for each excavation
level, 41 WM 135. See Figure 36 for the
base profile on which these data are plotted.

Figure

43

T.P. 4

E
100' ­
Over­
burden

99' _.

T.P.

T.P. 3
T.P. 2

2.1

98'
1.1

1.8
1.5

0.5

0.7
1.3

97'

0.1

0.7
1.8
1.2

0.0

9 S'
0.5
1.7
0.4

1.2

9S

0.3

t

0.7
0.4
0.2

94'

0

->

1.S site average
Fire Hearth 1 equals 2.1 concentration
Fire Hearth 2 equals 1.6 concentration

two from ledge flint like that found upstream along the North
San Gabriel River.

only one specimen was burned.

The whole scrapers were found in Test pit 1 {Leve12)i
Test Pit 2 (Level 6); and Test Pit 4 (Levels 3,5).

The fragments

came from Test Pit l(Level 1) and Test Pit 2 (Level 3).

All

but one of these locations occur in the dense flint flake
concentrations of Zone Y which is used to define the intensely
occupied portion of the site.
Dimensions of whole artifacts:
3.0 cm;

length, 7.0, 6.6, 4.3, 3.7,

width, 4.7, 4.7, 4.3, 3.4, 2.3 cm;

1.7, 0.9, 1.2, 1.0 cm;

thickness, 1.5,

weight, 49.6, 45.5, 24.6, 18.1, 8.4 gmi

edge angle, 60-65, 53, 90, 68, 83 degrees.
UTILIZED FLAKES (605 specimens):
The 10,076 waste flint flakes obtained from the hand-dug
excavation units were passed under a microscope in order to
observe the presence of edges showing evidence of use.

unlike

the analysis of 41 WM 118, no field lots were partially sampled.
From this individual and detailed examination, it was found
that nearly every excavation unit contained utilized flakes at
an overall average density of 1.7 specimens per cubic foot.

This

statistical tendency was calculated on twenty-seven specimen lots
but excluded the extremely high density figure (13.0 per cubic
226

foot} found in Levell, Test pit 1.

Examination of Figure 43

shows that the highest densities, ranging from 1.5 to over 8
times the average, characteristically follow the inclined pattern
of the waste flake concentration (Fig. 45).

This configuration

is taken to mean that the technical activities, such as wood
working (Jelks 1962:51,73) which employed utilized flakes, were
performed over much the same area of the site as the manufacture
of flaked stone tools, to judge from the concentrated distribution
of industrial stone waste in Zone Y.

However, none of these

utilized flake activities appear to have been particularly
restricted at the rock paved fire hearths since these structures
contain only average amounts of these tools.
Sixty-three utilized flakes were recovered from Level 2 in
Test Pit 1 and selected to represent the inclined zone of high
utilized flake concentration of Archaic age.

Attributes of these

specimens were studied intensively following the same procedures
outlined for 41 WM 118.
As was the case at the Dobias-Vitek Site, the bulk of the
utilization was found on interior flakes (73.0%) as opposed to
the cortex backed kind (27.0%).

Those waste flakes preferred

are the smaller, lighter weight variety as illustrated by the
fact that 46.0 percent of the sample is less than 1.5 grams in

227

weight and 74.7 percent lies under four grams within a weight
range of 0.1 to 62.9 grams.

Further, the utilized flake sample

has a microlithic flake index of 65.1 indicative of the generally
small size of the tools.
unintentional wear on the edge of the flint artifact was
most often developed along the side (52.4%) of the flake paralleling
the striking axis.

Less commonly, edge shearing wear appears

on the distal end (31.7%) of the flake opposite the platform or
along an edge of the flake lying obliquely (22.2%) to the striking
axis.

Only rarely is

flake platform (4.8%).

f~vidence

of utilization preserved on the

As can be seen from the percentage

figures, some flakes show several positions of use.
Most of the use chips appear on the dorsal (77.8%) flake
surface having resulted from a shearing force on the ventral
surface of the tool.

Less commonly the force exerted yielded

shearing on the ventral (17.5%) surface, or in alternate
sectors along the same edge of the flake (17.5%), or even on
the flake platform(3.2%).
Characteristically the utilized edge is evenly sheared with
many small, close-set chips removed (87.3%).

Less commonly,

the edge wear consists of small unevenly spaced shear scars and
small nicks

(27.~fo).

But whether even or uneven, the wear is

228

- - - - - - - - - - ............

-~----

-~-

predominately unifacial (92.1%) in character.

No flakes show

exclusively bifacial wear although 9.5% show various com­
binations of unifacial shearing interspersed with sectors
showing occasional bifacial chips.

Experiments using freshly­

made flint flakes in various fashions on soft pine wood indicate
that close-set and even unifacial chips develop from a scraping
action, bifacial-spaced use-chips appear after cutting, and
unevenly spaced unifacial chip-scars are the product of Whittl­
ing (that is with flake held at an angle and drawn toward the
worker).

These experiments are taken to mean that the prehistoric

sample was mostly employed in scraping and less often for cutting
and whittling.
Three-quarters of the sample exhibit dull sheen (76.2%) on
the used edge differing little from the reflective sheen of the
unmodified surface of the flake itself.

In contrast, 23.8% of

the sample has sheared edges exhibiting a glossy reflectivity.
Such a polished-type wear was probably developed by use on a
pliable kind of material such as hides or perhaps some vegetal
matter.
In outline, the edge modification varies among straight
(41.3%), convex (27.0%), concave (20.6%), sinuous (27.0%),
notched (ll.l%), and projections (4.8%).

At least the symmetrical

229

~~

--

-~----~

~~---

~-~--~~---

--~

--------------

outlines such as straight, convex, and concave are likely to
reflect the contour shape of the objects being scraped in a
reciprocal manner.

Thus the concave working edge was formed

by action against a convex object such as a wooden shaft.

The

sinuous and notched (with shearing in the notches) flake edges
could have resulted from pressure contact against some irregular
surface such as fiberous vegetal matter.

When shear-chips appear

along a spine-type projection on a flint flake, it is possible
that an irregularity of the flake was opportunely employed as
an engraving tool.
The pressure chipped use-edge varies from 30 to 93 degree
angles relative to the flattish, ventral surface of the flint
flake.

Because the width of the sheared edge is so small,

these measurements have an accuracy fluctuating around five degrees.
When graphed, the distribution of 71 angles forms a flat, quite
normal curve with mean, median, and mode all associated between
69.0 and 70.0 degrees.
Measurement of 77 shear-chipped edges shows them to be
very restricted in terms of the total perimeter of the flint
flake.

Within a size range between 0.3 and 5.0, the average

length is 1.2 centimeters.

But full 65.0%

of the sample lies

below the arithmetic mean to express a right-skewed curve with

230

both the median and modal point lying in the smaller end of the
distribution.
Some evidence is present that the waste flakes selected
for use were flbacked" (dulled) for convenience of hand holding.
Thirty-four and nine-tenths percent of the flake sample showed
evidence of snapping either opposite or perpendicular to the
utilized edge in such a manner that the affected edge would not
cut into the operator's hand.

I cannot say that the flake

was broken by snapping just to produce a hand-hold, but if that
was not the case, then flakes with prior snaps were selectively
employed for utilized flakes.

Another type of "natural backing"

is the presence in the sample of cortex flakes where the cortex
occurs opposite the used flake edge to form a convenient hand­
hold (9.5%).

However, no evidence was observed that backing was

performed by either burin blows or steep edge intentional chipping.
GRINDING PALETTE (1 specimen):
A small, thin slab of tabular medium-fine grain sandstone
shows faint pecking and grinding striations on one flat face.
The specimen is a fragment broken from one end of what once must
have been a rectangular or trapezoidal-shaped palette. Because
of the criss-cross pattern of the striations, grinding on the

231

slab was likely performed reciprocally in many different
directions;

probably by a small hand-held pebble.

Burning

has discolored the stone to a reddish yellow (7.5YR 7/6) color.
When found, it was completely coated with a thin film of calcium
carbonate.
Recovery of the slab was made during the screening of Level 7
in Test Pit 3 between a depth of 3.0 and 3.5 feet below the
modern ground surface.

This location lies in the subsoil just

below the base of the humus stained catalpa Clay soil.

Since the

grinding slab underlay the inclined Zone Y of high flint flake
density which marks the stratigraphic position of the main site,
the specimen is Late to Middle Archaic in age.
Dimensions: length, incomplete: width, 6.3 cm: thickness,

1.0 cm.
GRINDING SLAB (1 specimen):

A flat slab of very pale brown (lOYR 8/3) calcareous
sandstone was pecked and ground in one face to form a milling
basin.

The fragmentary slab block is naturally subangular,

rounded on its edges, and smoothed by abrasion on its undersurfac8
with no indications of human workmanship.

One-quarter of the

original was recovered, judging from the symmetry of the fragment,

232

and this pie-shaped slice provides a transverse section extending
from the outer margin toward the center of the ground basin.

No

paint pigment is present but the slab surface is sporadically
encrusted with a limy film.

Except for the material, this

specimen looks very much like another grinding slab found at
41 WM 118 (see Chapter IV).

The sandstone slab of this artifact

was probably transported either by the San Gabriel River or
man to the Reservoir District from an upstream Cretaceous outcrop.
Although sandstone is not to be found in the local bedrock, it
is known to the west of the district (Aten, personal communication).
The grinding slab was uncovered in place during the
excavation of Level 3 in the southeast corner of Test pit 1 at
a depth of 1.3 feet below the modern ground surface.

At this

location, it lay in the catalpa Soil just above Fire Hearth 1
and within the dense flint flake concentration of Zone Y.
Dimensions:

maximum slab thickness, 6.5 cm:

minimum slab

thickness measured at lowest point remaining of basin, 1.2 cm.
stone Technology and waste Products
Study of the stone technology inferred from the Adamek
Site data is performed following the format established at
site 41 WM 118.

In general, the reconstructed manufacturing

233

industry is quite similar between the two sites suggesting a
long term (Late Archaic through Neo-American stage) stability
in the ways in which flaked stone tools were made within the
Laneport Reservoir District.

The minor differences in the stone

technology are thought to have been influenced by the differing
spatial proximity of each site to flint resources in the Uvalde
gravels.

The flint materials of the gravels are identical to

those of both sites 41 WM 118 and 135.

(For a description of the

flint, see section on Description of Core Flint in Chapter, IV. )
CORES (57 specimens) and CORE FRAGMENTS (53 specimens):
A detailed attribute study of 39 whole cores obtained
from hand-dug excavations at 41 WM 135 is patterned after that
performed on the same class of artifacts recovered from the
Dobias-Vitek Site (see Chapter IV).

Those specimens recovered

from backhoe-dug units, Test pits 5 and 9, are not further
considered here.

The primary difference in the yield of cores

between the two sites lies in the much greater number (2:1) of
specimens found at 41 WM 135.

Here they appear at an average

density of 0.4 specimens per cubic foot of soil and they are
quite ubiquitous throughout the Catalpa Soil within the hand­
dug excavations (Test Pits 1 'through 4).

However, there are

two !thot-spots!! of high core recovery, both located towards the
234

west end of the line of test pits adjacent to the uvalde Formation
bluff (Fig. 44).

The local concentration in Levels 2 and 3 of

Test Pit 1 and Level 3 of Test pit 4 are two to three times the
site average.

Because these levels also contain extraordinarily

high densities of waste flint flakes, it is thought that the
area in and around these two test pits once was the site of
intense stone industrial activity in which working down of cores
for large primary flakes was performed.

Cobble paved Fire Hearth

2 (located in Level 4, Test pit 2) is another site of high core
density (1.2 cores per cubic foot of soil) and it is thought that
this feature was the

fl~cus

of flint working also.

However, the

corresponding recovery of waste flint flakes from this feature,
although slightly above average for the site, is not exceptionally
high.
The shape of the core results from the manner in which
flakes were removed from the original flint river cobble.

If

hammer blows were directed along a midline from alternate
directions, then a wedge (20.5%) or discoidal (12.8%) core
developed.

However, if one or more platforms were first prepared,

then cores with single (25.6%) or multiple (30.8%) worked faces
resulted.

If carried to an extreme, the entire cortex surface

of the cobble was removed producing a spherical or globular

235

Figure 44.

Schematic profile showing the distribution
of cores and core fragments, 41 WM 135.
See Figure 36 for the base profile on which
these data are plotted.

Figure 44

99'­
r'-

98'

T.P. I

T.P. 3

It~kJ

•

....
••••

T.P. 2
~

lAM
•

•
••••

• •

• •••

• •••

97'

••
•

• ••
•• ••

••••
•• ••
•••

•• ••

..'.

•

•

••

••
•

•

Core fragments
Cores

~~ 2 times site avera~e

~

- -... - - . - - - - ­

..

This page intentionally left blank.

(10.3%) shaped core.

All cores have one (33.3%) or more (66.7%) striking platforms,
either prepared or unprepared.

Unprepared, or cortex covered

platforms comprise 59.0% of the sample.
plain prepared

(59.~~)

But as common are

striking surfaces, although multifaceted

(35.9%) examples are not nearly as numerous.

As can be seen

from the percentage figures, almost one-half (46.2%) of the
sample of 39 cores exhibits two or more kinds of platforms.
When first striking an elongate flint cobble, the blows
were frequently directed at the end (30.8%) of the material in
the direction of the l(:mg axis of the perpendicular to one of
the flattish faces (23.1%).

In other cases, the position of

the platform relative to the original cobble shape could not be
determined.
If two or more platforms were employed, these might be
arranged as an opposed (12.8%) set so that flakes were detached
from a single working face from opposite directions.

other

positionings are sets of platforms placed in 90 degree (10.3%)
rotations from one another or on opposite sides (7.7%) of the
core.

As can be seen from the percentages, most platform loca­

tions were not spatially related to one another.
One hundred angles obtaining between the core platform and

238

the flake scars present on the working face were measured with
a goniometer.

The angles .average 73.1 degrees and, except for

a few widely dispersed examples, the bulk of the distribution
falls between 47 and 102 degrees.

When plotted as a histogram,

the mode and median point fall closely on either side of the
average;

the three central tendencies taken together imply a

quite normal curve distribution.

Segregation of the discoidal

and wedge cores from the other kinds shows little or no difference
in platform angles;

each of the distributions essentially

reproduce the composite distribution for all cores taken together.
The weight of cores averages 91.2 grams within a spread
of 13.6 to 386.0 grams.

However, over one-half of the sample

is 45 grams or less in weight indication considerable reduction
in weight over the unmodified cobble material.
Judging from the general distribution of the cores

throug~

out the hand-dug excavations, core technology was quite uniform
during Late Archaic times at this site (Fig. 44).
A single core was found in the floodplain clay at a depth
of 8.2 feet below the ground surface considerably below any other
occupational debris (Fig. 32).

The specimen was recorded in

place in the south wall of backhoe trench, Test pit 5, between
the W65 and W70 grid lines directly northeast of Test Pit 3.

239

It

clearly antidates all of the overlying Late Archaic age midden
debris.
Cores have been altered by heat by direct exposure to a
flame in two fashions:
flaking.

after being worked down, and prior to

When exposed after flaking, both the core cortex as

well as the flake sqars are oxidized red and crazing, accompanied
by "pot lid" fracturing, may be present (10.3% of core sample).
On the other hand, exposure of a core to flame prior to
flaking is indicated by a bright red, burned, cortex surface,
but a lack of such heat-induced red discoloration in the interior
of the flint nodule (12.8%).

However, the flint in this case

does become glassier, it shows a glossy reflectivity to light,
and an interior color change to a reddish yellow (7.5 YR 6, 7/6)
sometimes takes place.

However, since 76.9% of the core sample

is unaltered by heat, neither the burning before or after flaking
is interpreted as anything more than accidental.

This interpre­

tation is made despite the fact that some prehistoric stone
technologies of North America are known to have included
intentional heat-treatment of core material prior to working as
a means of enhancing certain knapping qualities (Crabtree and
Butler 1964:1-6).

Based on the data presently in hand, heat­

treatment was apparently not practiced intentionally in the

240

Laneport Reservoir District.
Dimensions:

average length, 5.5 Cmi

average width, 4.8 cm, range, 2.3 - 8.4
2.5 cm, range, 0.9 - 5.3 cm:
13.6 - 386.0 gm:

range 2.1 - 9.4 emi

cm~

average thickness,

average weight, 91.2 gm, range,

average platform angle, 73.1 degrees, range

4. - 126 degrees.

~STE

FLAKES (10,076 specimens):

Analysis of the unutilized waste flint flake debris recovered
from 41 WM 135 was conducted following the same basic procedure
outlined for the Dobias-vitek site (see waste Flakes, Chapter
IV).

Specimens considered here are those collected from the

1/4 inch mesh screen unless otherwise specified.
Tabulation of flake recovery from the four hand-dug test
pits yields an average density of 33.5 within a range of 2.0
to 88.5 specimens per cubic foot of soil.

Most likely these

bottommost levels in each pit (Numbers 1,3 and 4) which show
flake densities of 7.0 or less, are areas of non-occupation
contaminated by downward movement of flakes by means of burrowing
rodents and perhaps tree root disturbance.

Therefore, the

effective thickness of the cultural midden is actually 2 1/2
to 3 1/2 feet measured from the modern ground surface to the

241

Figure 45.

Schematic profile showing the distribition
of Waste Flint Flakes expressed as a con­
centration index calculated for each exca­
vation level, 41 WM 135. See Figure 36
for the base profile on which these data
are plotted.

Figure

45

T.P. 4

w

I

E

~

100'­

Over­
burden
99' ­

T.P. I

T.P. :3
T.P. 2
98'
16.7
19.7
7.5

97'

16.9
34.8
7.7

15.0
20.3
96

2.0

1

10.2

34.7
22.4

7.0

24.9
18.6

9S'
10.3

14.4
4.7

94'

~ > 1. 5 times 8ite average
Fire Hearth 1 equals 33.8 concentration
Fire Hearth 2

equ~ls

44.4 concentration

base of the zone of flake concentration.
Two flint flakes were found at a much greater depth (7.7,

and 7.9 feet) below the modern ground surface in Test Pit 5
between grid lines W60 and W70 feet (Fig. 32).

Since these

specimens were so far beneath the overlying Archaic midden, they
most likely were deposited in place rather than derived.

Because

of this depth, they (in company with a core mentioned above) are
probably scattered evidence of casual occupation preceding that
of them in Archaic midden.
In the main midden, a sloping band of excavation levels
contains flint flake densities of such high concentration (1.5
to 2.5 times average) that it is interpreted as a zone (depositional
Zone Y) of intensive lithic industrial activity extending completely
across the tested portion of the site (Figs. 35,45).

Neither

of the fire hearths (Numbers 1 and 2) located by the hand-dug
test pits shows an unusual high frequency of flint flakes.
In order to determine the extent to which the different
screen mesh sizes are skewing our appreciation of the flake
density, a matrix sample of soil from Level 2, Test Pit 1,
was washed over a 1/16-inch mesh.

This operation produced a

recovery of 725.8 flakes per cubic foot of soil:

a concentration

which is over eight times that obtained from the 1/4-inch mesh
screen from the same level.

This great increase is largely due
243

Figure 46.

Schematic profile showing per cent of
burned flint flakes calculated for each
excavation level, 41 WM 135. See Figure
36 for the base profile on which these
data are plotted.

Figure 46

T.P. 4
....

~I..\fl
over­
burden

"SS' ­
....

98'

T.P. I

T.P. 3

I~~J
32.6

...

T.P. 2

I~ \I\~

32.0
" l7. 7

19.1

35.9

24.0
30.6

40.5
97'

39.0
38.1

32.5

36.0

30.6

5"4.5

38.2
30.2

96'

24.8

35.4
40.2

25.2
29.5

40.0

26.2
95'

24.0
23.5

Fire Hearth 1 equals 30.6%
32.3

17.0
94

1

Fire Hearth 2 equals 41.4%

Figure 47.

Schematic profile showing ratio of
Cortex (l) to Interior (:#) Flakes
calculated for each excavation level,
41 WM 135. See Figure 36 for the
base profile on which these data are
plotted.

Figure 47

T.P. 4

~I:u

Fire Hearth 1 equals 1:6.0
100' ­

Fire Hearth 2 equals 1:3.2

over­
burden

99' ­

T.P. I

T.P. 3
T.P. 2
98'

3.6

,~JL

4.2
5.2

4.3

4.8

3.9
4.1

3.9

97'

5.2

4.6
4.5

3.8

4.7
4.5

3.1

4.3
96'

3.9

4.4

3.4
4.5

1.9

3.4
95

1

4.8
3.4
3.2
1.7

94

1

2.8

to the many more small size chips and rock dust averaging
0.05 grams in weight.

Many of the tiny flakes recovered from

the small mesh screen are most likely pressure chips removed
during the finishing of bifaces.

Others are probably small

percussion removals from cores, either due to primary strikes
or edge trimming of the core preparatory to a primary percussion
strike.

Much of the rock dust is likely to be the result of

collapse of flake and core platforms.
A portion of the total sample obtained from every hand-dug
excavation level was found to have been burned (Fig. 46).

The

frequency of burning varied from 19.1 to 54.5%, but on the
average it is 32.2%.

There is no appreciable variation in the

percentages of most samples, particularly within the inclined
zone of high flint flake density, which rather consistently
matches the average tendency.

This is even true of the flakes

obtained from the cobble paved hearths.

Following the interpre­

tation offered at the Dovias-Vitek Site (see waste Flakes,
Chapter IV), it is suggested that much of the flint knapping was
conducted during the cold winter time, thereby leading to a
high proportion of flakes being burned after they were detached
from the core or thinned biface tool.
But unlike the situation at Dobias-vitek, the ratio.

246

obtained

between cortex and interior flakes at 41

M1

135

indicates that proportionately a good deal of primary "peeling"
of cores was conducted.

On the average, the cortex to interior

flake ratio is 1:3.9 and this tendency is fairly uniform over
the tested portion of the site (Fig. 47).

Ignoring the few

excavation levels of low total flint flake samples, the proportion
of interior flakes varies between 3.2 and 5.2 to one cortex flake.
These ratios, then, verify the same finding based on the large
recovery of cores already reported:
industrial activity

Wi:l3

that an important stone

the primary working down of flint cores

which were readily acc'l!ssable from the immediately adjacent
Uvalde gravels.
A representative sample of 204 flint flakes was removed,
in an unbiasea manner, from the'total sample of 885 flakes found
in Level 2, Test Pit 1, using a soil sample divider.

This sample

of a sample was analyzed in detail to provide a basis for
comparing the Archaic age flint technology of the Adamek Site
with the Transitional Archaic and Neo-American technology
already reconstructed for the Dobias-vitek Site (see Reconstruction
of Technology, Chapter IV).

Of the 204 flakes pulled out of

Level 2, only 78 were sufficiently complete so that observation
and measurements could be made.

The remainder of the sample are

either snapped or otherwise mutilated so that the critical
247

...........-

-....- - - - - -............- -..

~-------

platform area of the flake is missing.
on the following attributes:

Observations were made

flake position in the core, flake

shape, characteristics of the platform, presence or absence of
lipping, length, weight, and platform angle.
Position of the flake in the core was determined by the
presence or absence of naturally weathered cortex on the dorsal
or outer surface of the flake.

Cortex flakes, comprising 24.4%

of the sample, were removed during the initial "peeling" of the
core while flakes struck from the interior of the core or removed
during the manufacture of an intentionally shaped tool, occurred
in a frequency of 75.6%.
oblique, and side.

Flake shapes are classified as end,

Their frequencies are 51.3, 33.3 and 15.4%,

respectively, a distribution which is quite similar to that
recorded from the flake data of the Dobias-Vitek site.
Most commonly, flakes retain multifaceted platforms (43.6%)
half of which show a ridged or double slope to the facets and some
grinding and/or battering as if the flake had been removed from
the edge of a biface artifact.

Twenty-one and eight tenths per

cent of the flake sample which show a multifaceted platform also
exhibit lipping.
thinning.

These are interpreted as the result of biface

Other flakes retain either a plain platform (26.9%),

one with cortex (9.0%), or the platform has partly or completely

248

collapsed (19.2%).

One specimen was not classifiable.

In addition to lipping observed on multifaceted flakes,
this attribute was also present on flakes of other platform
shape.

Its grand total frequency is 32.1%, reflecting the fact

that this feature can be obtained on any type of flake, not just
those produced by biface thinning.
The metrical attribute of length was measured along the
striking axis.

In this sample obtained from the 1/4 inch mesh

screen, the flakes ranged from 0.5 to 7.3 centimeters in length
with an average of 2.0, of which somewhat more than
smaller than the central tendency.

1/2 are

This is so because the biface

thinning flakes tend to concentrate in the lower end of the
size range.
Weight of flakes spans a range of 0.2 to 42.6 grams averaging
3.0 grams.

However, when graphed, it can be seen that the

distribution is highly skewed to the right, the modal point
falling around 0.4 grams and 86.0 per cent of the sample lies
below the average.

This is particularly true of the multifaceted

lipped flakes.
In order to match the platform angle of flakes to those of
the cores they were removed from, an obtuse angle measurement
was taken between the platform and the ventral or inner face of

249

the flake.

This was then converted to an acute angle by sub­

traction from 90 degrees, corresponding to that of the cores.
The average acute angle of the flakes is 62.9 degrees, falling
short by 10.2 degrees the average angle measured on cores.

This

lack of direct match is attributable to the low angle thinning
flakes which were removed from thin-edged biface tools rather
than the chunky core nodules.

The distribution of flake platform

angles, unlike the skewed distributions of length and weight, is
a quite normal curve with the modal and median point lying quite
near the mean.
Reconstruction of Technology
Because the technology of the Adamek site is so similar
to that of the Dobias-Vitek Site, see the discussion in Chapter
IV (Reconstruction of Technology) for the major implications
of the core and waste flake study.

But 41 WM 135 does differ

in certain minor but significant ways from the Dobias-Vitek Site.
These are:
1) The close proximity of 41 WM 135 to the uvalde gravels
and their flint cobble resources led to considerable primary
working down of cores in contrast to 41 M4 118 where the initial
workshop activity was conducted off the site.

At 41 WM 135 the

primary peeling of cores is reflected in the high recovery of
250

exhausted cores as well as in the high proportion of cortex
(peeling) flakes.
2) On-site slicing of core interiors and thinning of bifaces
were common activities at both sites.

However, the localization

of the industry at 41 WM 118 indicates a definite spatial
structuring to the work habits of its artisans where intensive
stone work was repeatedly concentrated within a small space.

In

contrast, the work habits of the knappers at 41 WM 135 led to the
spread of flake waste across that part of the site hand-tested
(55.0 feet along an east-west axis).

Although lithic waste was

present at several of the paved hearths in this area, it was not
concentrated there in densities that were much above the site
average.

However, there is a definite tendency for the industrial

waste to increase in density when moving toward the front slope
of the Uvalde Formation due to the presence there of the flint
resources.
3) The Adamek Site shows a smaller frequency (21.8% of
detailed flake sample studied) of multifaceted, lipped flakes
(that is, biface thinning flakes) than does 41 WM 118 (33.0%)
despite the greater frequency of biface tools.

However, this

is not thought to mean that less biface manufacture was being
conducted at the Adamek Site than at the Dobias-Vitek Site:

251

rather the inequality is simply a result of percentage swamping
of multifaceted-lipped flakes at the Adamek site by the
increased quantity of primary, percussion-struck cortex flakes
removed from cores.
4) That finishing of the bifaces by pressure chipping was
practiced on the site is indicated on two counts:

by the recovery

of a broken antler tine chipping tool, and by the recovery of
many tiny pressure chips from the matrix sample of Level 2 in
Test Pit 1.
Antler Flaker
The fragmentary tip of a deer antler tine shows cut gashes
and pits in its surface indicative of use as a pressure flaking
tool.

witter (personal communication,1969) says that as a rule

the subtle blunting of such a slender tine tip is unnatural.
Based on this comparison, it appears that use of the tine tip
was responsible for a slight dulling wear as chips were pressured
off in stone biface finishing.

otherwise the antler surface is

in a fair state of preservation with little evidence of corrosion
from burial in the soil.

Discarding of the tool tip was due to

a snap-type break located 2.4 cm. down the shaft from the tip
end.

The specimen was found in Level 5 of Test Pit 4 at a depth

between 1.0 and 1.7 feet below the original ground surface.
position is in Zone Y of Late Archaic age (Fig. 35).
252

-

-~-~-----

-----------------------------------------

This

A second (questionable) deer antler tine tip, is badly
corroded.

Although the damaged surface reveals no evidence of

human modification

now~

the presence of the specimen is worth

mentioning because of the definitely identified tool described
above.

This questionable tine came from Level 4 in Test Pit 1,

a Zone Z location.
Quantitative Studies on Environmental Data
Environmental data available for quantitative analysis
include snail shells, river mussel shells, vertebrate bones,
and burned hackberry seeds.

study of both kinds of shells by

Amaral appears in this section while the vertebrate analysis
is presented by witter in Appendix

c.

The burned hackberry

seeds are here described by me.
Snail Shells l
There were 13,408 snail shells recovered from the Adamek
Site of which the majority are open grassland or transistional
types inhabiting both open fields and/or sparse woodlands.

My

first impression of the snail fauna from 41 WM 135 suggested
that the site had a relatively stable vegetational history.
1. Section by william W. Amaral
253

But

intensive analysis of the frequency distribution of different
snail species revealed a minor trend in which the open grassy
floodplain near 41 WM 135 was gradually replaced by some trees
and/or shrubs mixed with grass understory.
The same field and laboratory techniques of recovery and
preparation of prehistoric snail data employed at 41 WM 118 were
also conducted at the Adamek Site (see Appendix B).

Unfortunately

no modern ecological transect for the purposes of collecting
modern gastropods was performed at this site.
In addition to the standard means of snail recovery by
1/4 inch screening, a level by level column of matrix samples
was taken from Test Pit 1 and washed over a 1/16 inch mesh
(Figs. 49,50).

Also the contents from two fire hearths (Numbers

1 and 2) were removed and sacked in the field for fine screen
washing in the laboratory.

The snail and vertebrate contents

from fire Hearth 1 were removed over a 1/4 inch mesh screen,
while the contents from Fire Hearth 2 were processed over a
1/16 inch mesh screen.
Analysis of the data differed somewhat at 41 WM 135 from
that of 41 WM 118.

For purposes of interpretation, the snails

were factored into four subsets or numbered groups based on
two criteria: knowledge of the contemporary preferred habitats,

254

and the prehistoric associations exhibited by certain members
of the snail fauna (Pilsbry 1946; Allen and Cheatum
Wendorf 1961).

1961~

Under this system, the open grassland snail,

Bulimulus pealbatus, was assigned to Group 1 while three snails
(aelicina orbiculata, Polygyra sp., and Praticollela sp.), that
inhabit both sparse woodlands and open fields, were categorized
as Group 2.

The snails forming Group 3 (Anguispira alternata,

Mesomphix friabilis, aelicodiscus parallelus, Succinea spp.,
Strobilops texasiana, Mesodon sp., and snails of the genera
Gastrocopta and Retinella) prefer to live in a moist woodland
habitat.

Group 4 is composed of all the aquatic snails (Amnicola

integra, Gyraulus circumstriatus, Helisoma anceps, and Physa
virgata) which indicate a number of water environments ranging
from swift flowing perennial streams and pools to more ephemeral
woodland pools.
At 41 WM 118, the ratios between snails from Groups 1 and
3 were used as an indicator of changing woodland densities.
Because snails from Group 2 have a wide range in habitat tolerance
and because of their small numbers and randomly fluctuating
distributions exhibited at 41 WM 118, these snails were not used
in the reconstruction of the prehistoric vegetational cover there.
However, at the Adamek site, the situation is quite different:

255

snail shells from Group 3, if present at all, represent only
about one percent of the total population from any given level,
while snail shells from Group 2 are present in large quantities.
Therefore, the changing ratios found between snails from the
two dominant subsets, Groups 1 and 2, are used in the reconstruction
of the prehistoric environment surrounding 41

~1

135.

The snail

shell recovery from the Adamek site also differs from thaI: at
the Dobias-vitek Site in that aquatic snails (Group 4) were only
found at the former.
Twenty-three species of snails were recovered from site
41 WM 135, of which only two species remain unidentified (Fig. 48).
A total of 4,618 snail shells was recovered from the 1/4 inch
mesh screens While 5,596 shells were removed from the matrix
samples.
shells.

Five excavation levels had twenty-three or less snail
It was felt that these levels presented an unreliable

statistical sample and consequently they were not used in the
analysis.

The 1/4 inch mesh sample ranges from four snail

shells in Level 1 of Test pit 2 and Level 8 of Test Pit 4 to
551 snail shells in Level 5 of Test pit 4.

Bulimulus dealbatus

is the most numerous throughout the profile with the exceptions
of three samples obtained from the upper portions of Test pits
2 and 3 (Fig. 49).

B. dealbatus' share of the total sample

256

~--~-------~-------------------

This page intentionally left blank.

Figure 48.

Faunal list of prehistoric land and
aquatic gastropods, 41 WM 135.

Those

snails that are also found at Site
41 WM 118 are listed on Fig. 72.

Figure 48.

Faunal list of prehistoric land and aquatic
gastropods, 41 WM 135.

AQUATIC SNAILS
Family Amnicolidae
Amnicola integra (Say)
Habitat: large rivers and other premanent streams (Allen
Cheatum 1961).
Shell size: 5 - 6 mm.
Family Planorbidae
Gyraulus circumstriatus (Tryon)
Habitat: perennial waters (Cheatum, personal cimmunica­
tion). Usually occurs in small seasonal water
bodies such as wooded pools and marshes
(wendorf 1961).
Shell size: 1 - 3 mm.
Helisoma anceps (Menke)
Habitat: prefers fresh flowing water, even swift water,
usually not found in stagnant water (Allen
and Cheatum 1961).
Shell size: 5 - 12 mm.
Family Physidae
Physa virgata
Habitat: quiet permanent water with some vegetation
(personal observations}.
Shell size: 5 - 12 mm.
LAND SNAILS
Family Endodontidae
Helicondiscus parallelus (say)
Habitat: moist woodlands: associated with old rotten
logs and other kinds of humus (Cheatum,
personal communication).
Shell size: 3.2 - 3.5 mm.

258

Figure 48 contd.

Family Succineidae
Succinea spp.
Habitat: moist wooded areas, particularly near bodies
of water, along stream banks, and in or near
marshes (Burch 1962).
Shell size: shell relatively small, generally 1.1 mm.
or less in length.

259

Figure 49.

Histogram showing percentage of snail
shell groups plotted by test pit and
excavation level, 41 WM 135. Raw num­
ber of specimens is indicated along
the right margin of each test pit column.
See Figure 36 for the base profile on
which these data are plotted.

Figure 49

T.P. 4
E
100• ­

over­
burden
"99• ­

T.P. I

T.P. 3
T.P. 2

97'--.L..--

80

427

Group 1
Group ~
Group

oI '

100%
, f ,

111111
~ - ­

ranged from 7.4 per cent in Level 2 of Test Pit 3 to 99.1 per
cent in Level 8 of Test Pit 4.

Although B. dea1bauts

remained

in first rank dominance throughout most of the profile, its
relative proportion consistently declined moving towards
the top of the alluvial profile where it was finally out-ranked
by Group 2 in Level 4 of Test pit 3,

where Group 1 reaches

third rank status behind both Groups 2 and 3.

The full history

is illustrated only in Test Pits 3 and 4 while Test Pits 1 and
4 show incomplete sequences at the top.
Snails from Group 2 range in frequency from 0.9 per cent
of the total sample irl Level 8 of Test Pit 3 to 81.7 per cent
in Level 2 of Test pit 3.

This snail group exhibits an inverse

relationship in regard to the Bu1imu1us dea1batus frequency.
When~.

dea1batus share of the total sample decreases, snails

from Group 2 exhibit an increase.

This situation is quite

different from 41 WM 118 where snails from this group exhibited
random fluctuation no matter which other snail group was dominant.
Snails from Group 3 are present sporadically throughout
the site profile in minor numbers.

They increase dramatically

only after snails from Group 2 become dominant over snails from
Group 1 in Level 2 of Test Pit 3.
Results obtained from the relative frequency study of the

261

- - - - - - - - - _.......................................

_­

Figure 50.

Graph showing percentages of four
snail shell groups obtained from
matrix samples collected by each
excavation level of Test Pit 1,
41 WM 135.

Figure 50 not available.

constant volume matrix samples, removed from Test pit I, reveal
a slightly more stable history than was observed from the
1/4 inch mesh screen samples.

This discrepancy is brought about

by the fact that more immature snails from Group 1 were recovered
from the matrix samples While relatively few immature snails
from Group 2 were recovered (Fig. 50).

It is notable that

snail shells from Groups 3 and 4 were present consistently
throughout the entire stratigraphic profile and both show random
fluctuation.
A sample of 3,194 snail shells was recovered from two fire
hearths.

From Fire Hearth 1, which was screened over a 1/4 inch

mesh, a total of 105 snail shells was recovered.

The contents

of Fire Hearth 2 revealed, through fine screening over a 1/16 inch
mesh, a total of 3,089 snail shells.

Twenty-four individuals

representing the four species comprising Group 4 were recovered
from Fire Hearth 2.

Their relative frequency of 0.77 per cent

falls within the range of 0.41 per cent to 1.56 per cent which
is exhibited by the column of matrix samples from Test Pit 1.
Tabulation of the results from Fire Hearths 1 and 2 reveal
that less than one-half of one percent of the snails present were
burned and that there was no significant difference between the
species and their numbers found inside the fire hearths compared

263

with those found outside of the hearths.

Therefore, it seems

that the snails found inside the fire hearth's matrix were not
artifically introduced to the site by aboriginal man but rather
represent a "natural population".
Measurements of size was not made on the individuals of
any species because none exhibited the three factors which are
thought necessary in order to construct a reliable distribution
curve.

The three necessary factors are: (1) large numbers of

individuals~

adult shells;

(2) a wide range of size between immature and
(3) the majority of the individuals must be whole.

Only Bulimulus dealbatus

is present in sufficient numbers to make

a statistically reliable sample;

however, as explained in

Appendix B, immature snail shells of this species are character­
istically broken across the spire and therefore measurements are
unreliable.
The snail fauna from 41 WM 135 suggests a variety of
prehistoric vegetation habitats.

Since the majority of the

snail sample is composed of the Group 1 species, Bulimulqs
dealbatus, this suggests that the area around the site was
always essentially an open grass-covered floodplain.

In addition,

the constant but minor presence of snails of Group 3 genera are
indicative of nearby moist woodlands along Willis Creek.

264

The

Figure 51.

Schematic drawing depicting changing
vegetational trends, 41 WM 135.
Reconstruction of the three vegetation
stages is based on the changing rank
orders of three snail shell groups.

FiGure

51

(Group 1)

Stage 2

Uval

Stage 1

surface

+

a1
Formation
gravels
parian woodland
(Group 3)
Ecotone
(Group 2)
Ancestrial
\','111:5 Creck

grassland

other species of land snails composing Group 2 could occupy
habitats ranging from open fields to sparse woodlands.

Howeve~

their high frequency at this site strongly suggests an ecotonal
condition at the transitional boundary between these two primary
habitats.
Reconstruction of the prehistoric vegetational history
surrounding the Adamek site is arranged
51).

in three stages (Fig.

In Stage 1, estimated to date around 1,000 BC, the Group

1 snails consistently average about 90 percent of the total
sample throughout depositional Zone Z (Fig. 35).

In this same

zone, snails from Group 2 were always dominant over snails from
Group 3.

Based on these relationships, it is felt that Stage I

represents a time period in which a riparian woodland existed
along the banks of Willis Creek bordered by a rather compact
ecotone.

The rest of the floodplain extending from the ecotone

to the site was open and grassy_
In stage 2, sometime between 1,000 BC and AD I, snails from
Group 2 became dominant, outnumbering those from both Group I
and 3.

However, Group 1 continued to out-rank the minor

occurrence of snails from Group 3.
in two samples (Level 4, Test pit 3:
from Zone Y.

This situation is best seen
Level 3, Test pit 2), both

Stage 2 is one in which the sparse tree and/or

266

shrub fringe on the woods, favored by snails from Group 2,
spread across the floodplain towards the site.

There are at

least three possible ways in which this might have come about.
The first possible change was the result of an expansion of the
riparian woodland which would in effect push the ecotone away
from the old creek bed and closer to the site.

The second

possible change was one in which only the ecotone expanded
towards the site.

It is also possible that both the ecotone

and the woodland concurrently expanded.

However, the second

possibility seems to be the most likely since the snails from
Group 3 do not increase in numbers in this stage, indicating
that the woodland was still some distance away.
Vegetational stage 3, dated sometime after AD 1, is
indicated by snails from both Groups 2 and 3 which became
more numerous than snails of Group 1.

This particular stage

is only seen in one sample from Level 2 of Test Pit 3 in Zone X.
It is predicted that if another test pit were excavated farther
to the east, that more material from Zone X and consequently
more samples exhibiting this situation would be recovered.

In

this stage, it appears that both the riparian woodland and its
ecotone expanded towards the site.

At this point it must be

stressed that the vegetational cover immediately around the site

267

never appears to have been predominately

woodland~

rather the

site always remained rather open with widely spaced trees and/or
shrubs.

This stage 3 situation is not seen today because of

farming.

However, proof that the site will support trees is

demonstrated by three living trees--elm, hackberry, and bois
d'arc--that exist at the western-most portion of the site outside
of the formerly plowed field (Figs. 31 and 33).
Because of the constant but minor presence of Group 4
aquatic snails throughout Test Pit 1, it is reasonable to assume
that water was always nearby.

However, the snail shell recovery

is too meager to make any specific identification of the former
aquatic habitats.

At best, it can only be suggested that one

or more kinds of surface water were present during aboriginal
times ranging from transient pools to large perennially-standing
ponds and flowing streams.

Snails of the genera Amnicola and

Physa, indicate perennial waters.

The species Helisoma anceps

is indicative of permanent streams with rapid flow, while the
species Qyraulus circumstriatus usually occurs in small, seasonal
water bodies such as wooded pools and marshes (Wendorf 1961:106).
Their means of introduction into the site, however, remains an
interpretive problem.

There are at least three possible

explanations: first, the aquatic snails were accidental intro­
ductions, specimens which clung to edible water plants as they
268

were broughtfrom the water habitat by aboriginal man.

From

first-hand observations made near the Hoxie Bridge (see Fig. 48),
I have identified a considerable variety of edible aquatic
vegetation along the banks of the San Gabriel River including
common algae (PorEhyra jlaciniata), a common cattail (TYEha
latifolia), a great bulrush (ScirEus validus) and pondweed or
fish weed (Potamogeton spp.) (Harrington 1967).

Collection

of the Algae yielded a few members of two aquatic snail specie&
Helisoma anceps and Physa virgata.
Another explanation for the consistEmt presence of water
snails is that they were floated into the site during periodic
stages of over-bank flooding.

But if this is so, water snails

should also have been found in 41 WM 118 which today is much
closer to a flowing water source than is 41 WM 135.
The last possibility is that the aquatic specimens as well
as some of the terrestial specimens are the result of Pleistocene
contamination from fossil snail shells imbedded in the gravels
of the nearby Uvalde Formation.

That the majority of aquatic

snails are derived from the Uvalde gravels remains a remote
possibility;

however, no distinctly recognizable Pleistocene

vertebrate remains were found in the Adamek Site.

Besides, the

generally well-preserved condition of the prehistoric snail

269

shells in this sample argues against the possibility that all
of these snails are rebedded from Pleistocene deposits.

The

only exception might be the eleven individuals of the species
Gyraulus circumstriatus whose present northerly distribution
suggests that these snails might be of Pleistocene age (Wendorf
1961:106).

Based on this review, I feel that the majority of

the water snails most likely reflect aboriginal collection of
some nearby water plants which were brought back to the site
for processing and consumption.
Mussel Shells l
A total of 245 prehistoric pelecypod individuals were
recovered during excavations at 41 WM 135 of which 85 specimens
are identifiable to species and all are identifiable only to
genus.

Prehistoric pelecypods were most common in Zone

y

and

the upper portions of Zone Z within the buried midden deposits
(Fig. 53).

other freshwater mussel shell fragments and identifi­

able specimens were found in every excavation level on the one­
quarter inch mesh screen.

Additional specimens were also obtained

from the backhoe trench.

1. section by William W. Amaral

270

An attempt was made on May 17, 1969, to obtain modern
pelecypods from willis Creek in the vicinity of the Adamek
site.

Unfortunately our search was unsuccessful due to the

fact that willis Creek was receding from a flood stage and the
water was so murky that it proved impossible to locate any
mussel beds.

However, abundant evidence that willis Creek

supports pelecypods today was seen on the banks where the
high water had deposited many modern mussel shells.
Prehistoric pelecypods were identified from the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory pelecypod comparative collection.
Of the 96 identifiable specimens, mussels of the genus
Lampsilis

make up the majority with a total of 63 specimens,

followed by members of the genera Amblema and Quadrula, each
with fourteen individuals.

The remaining five individuals

represent only the genera Carunculina and Tritigonia, (Fig. 52).
Comparison of this prehistoric fauna with modern fauna
collected from the san Gabriel River near 41 WM 118 shows a
good presence-absence match in that six members of both lists
are common while only three are unshared out of a combined list
of nine species (Fig. 27,B; 52).

However, comparison of the

frequencies shows more discordance.

The modern gravel bar

sample exhibits pelecypods of the genera Quadrula and Amblema

271

in first and second rank orders respectively while the prehistoric
Adamek sample shows three species of Lampsilis dominant.

The

two prehistoric samples from the Dobias-Vitek and Adamek sites
show a good presence-absence match in that both predominately
exhibit members of the three Lampsilis species with lesser
amounts of other bivalves in lower rank positions.

Unfortunately,

our present limited knowledge of the Laneport District pelecypod
ecologies does not allow us to interpret the significance of
these comparisons other than to say that they might reflect
minor differences in where along the river the modern and
ancient mussels were obtained.
Specimens from 41 WM 135 range in condition from small
pieces obviously broken or weathered off of larger pieces, to
perfect or near perfect shells.

The majority of the whole

shells were rather small, averaging only 45 mm.

in length with

the exception of the massive shells of the generus Amblema.

The

most common shell fragments recovered from the site where the
thicker, more robust portions, such as the umbo and pseudocardinal
teeth, rather than the more gracile portions.
Both whole and fragmentary shells were recovered during
excavations in quantities ranging from 0.1 to 20.6 specimens per
cubic foot and only nine excavated samples exceeded one and

272

Figure 52.

List of the identified prehistoric
pelecypods from 41 WM 135.

The number

of individuals for each species is
shown in parenthesis.

Figure 52.

Identified prehistoric pelecypods, 41 WM 135.

Lampsi1is anodontoides (Lea) (22)
Larnpsi1is streckeri Frierson (16)
Larnpsi1is 1ineosa Conrad (14)
Lampsi1is spp. (11)
Amb1ema p1icata perp1ecta Conrad (14)
Quadru1a pustu10se (Lea) (11)
Quadru1a guadru1a speciosa Lea (3)
Caruncu1ina parva Barnes (4)
Tritigonia verrucosa (Barnes) (I)

273

one-half times the site average (Fig. 53).

The highest density

of shell fragments was observed in the lowermost
y) of the midden in Test Pits 1 and 4.

portion (zone

Also it was here that

the maximum number of pelecypod individuals occurred.
There is some correlation between density of shell fragments
per cubic foot of soil and the minimum number of individuals per
level.

There are some exceptions, but generally as the number

of individuals per level increases, the fragment densities also
tend to exhibit an increase.

However, it is felt that the minimum­

number-of-individuals count is by far the most reliable of the
two methods.

As at 41 WM 118, the prehistoric pelecypods

exhibited no discernible stratigraphic segregation of species,
each species occurred uniforma11y throughout the Adamek profile
with the exception of the single shell of the species Tritigonia
verrucosa which was recovered from Level 6 of Test pit 3.
The shell density per cubic foot of soil for Fire Hearth
1 was higher than the site averagei

however, the number of

individuals present in both hearths (Numbers 1 and 2) is lower
than the site average of 7.3 individuals per level.

Almost no

burned pelecypod remains were obtained from the fire hearths.
Fire Hearth 1 had three individuals present of which two were
of the species Carunculina

~~.

274

Figure 53.

Schematic profile showing the distribution
of fresh water mussel shell fragments ex­
pressed as a concentration index calculated
for each excavation level, 41 WM 135. Mini­
mum number of individuals are plotted for
comparison with each concentration index.
See Figure 36 for the base profile on which
these data are plotted.

Figure 53

T.P. 4
,1

E
100' ­

~I-.\J
overburden

99'­

T.P. I

T.P. 3

T.P. 2
98'

0.5
0.3

97'

2

0.8

3

0.5

10
6.7
2

1

96

lli

10
3.5

1

0.1

,J. ,

3.5

12
6.9

:::::: 21
~~? 20.6

::::::
;:::::
..... 10
....•.
..... 8 8
~:::;:

. ~

:::::: 15

~t~

8.0

l4

;6 .. 8

.....

:::::: 37
:~:~:~ 16.1
::::::

:.:.:.
:::::=

1
.2"Z7
2
2.4

3
0.5

7

5.9
3
3.8
95'
4

3.7
2
4

1.3
14'
Legend:
Top figures - Minimum number, of individuals per level
Bottom figures - concentration index
~ ~

8ite average for minimum number of individuals

Ii

1.5 simtesssite average for concentration index

~

w

Judging from the number of mussel individuals present per
level in the Adamek Site, the use of shellfish as food by the
aboriginal inhabitants appears to have been rather constant
throughout the site history except in Zone X where a total of
only six individuals are present (Fig. 53).

The period of

greatest utilization of freshwater mussels appears to have
occurred thcoughout Zone Y and the upper portions of Zone Z.
It is interesting to note that Level 3 of Test pit I exhibits
the greatest variety of prehistoric aquatic life including
river mussel shells, fish remains, and aquatic snail shells
(see Figs. 50,80).

perhaps the diversity of aquatic organisms

in this level is a reflection of a more intensive utilization
of the nearby aquatic environment than at other times during
the midden history.
Judging from the small size of the prehistoric pelecypods
in this sample, the food value per individual, with the exception
of the species Arnhlema Elicata perplecta, must have been rather
insignificant.

Examination of data assembled from the modern

collection of mussels from the San Gabriel River show that the
average size of mussels of the species

~adrula

Eustulosa was

47 mm. with a corresponding soft body weight of 5.6 gm.

Though

this information cannot be directly applied to the different

276

species of prehistoric pelecypods obtained from 41 WM 135, it
does indicate that the small shellfish from this site could not
individually have represented much in the way of food value.
To a degree at least, shell size is a reflection of the
stream or river discharge rate (Pennak 1953:704).

The difference

is size between the prehistoric pelecypods of the same species
certainly suggests that the larger pelecypods found at Dobias­
Vitek were collected from the nearby San Gabriel River whereas
those smaller and more gracile prehistoric shells found at
Adamek were prehistorically gathered along Willis Creek.

In

addition, description of the habitat preference of the mussel
carunculina Earva as inhabiting the shallows (in water no more
than two to three inches deep) of small sluggish streams with
mud bottoms certainly indicates that an aquatic environment
similar to what is now seen in willis Creek existed during
prehistoric times (Murrary and Leonard 1962:136-137).
One shell artifact consisting of a left valve of the
species Lampsilis streckeri was recovered from a backhoe trench,
Test Pit 5, between W75 and

wao

grid lines (Fig. 30).

The shell

is 46 mm. in length and is almost complete except for three
peripheral area breaks.

The periostracum is worn away except

at the ventral anterior margin and portions of the posterior

277

dorsal margins.

Roughly parallel ground striations occur on

the exposed nacre at angles ranging from 77 degrees to 67
degrees relative to an axis formed by a line drawn from the
umbo to the posterior portion of the lateral tooth.

Unfortunately,

the posterior ventral margin of the shell where the striations
appear to converge is broken and therefore the edge cannot be
examined.

However, the strication appear to have been made by

reciprocal abraiding on some sort of granular surface.
this is the only shell artifact recovered from

Because

the site and

because the posterior ventral margin of the shell is missing,
its use remains unknoi/lln.
seeds
Matrix samples from five excavation levels (Numbers
2 through 6) of Test pit 1 were washed over a 1/16 inch mesh
seeking to recover plant parts.

This column spans the middle

(Zone Y) and lower segments (zone Z) of the buried midden but
not Zone X of the upper portion.

Five hundred seeds were

found throughout in densities ranging from 55.0 (Level 2) to
110.0 (Level 3) per cubic foot of soil.

None of these

specimens have been examined by a trained botanist and therefore
identification of the collection can be reported in only the

278

................................

~-~.-----------

.._ - _ . _ - - _ . _ - - - - - ­

most general terms.

One obvious grouping is

hackberry seeds

(72.4%) while a catch-all category of unknowns (27.6%) includes
specimens which could be grass seeds.

Due to the possibility

of contamination by burrowing rodents, only the burned specimens
are considered to la ve been reliably associated with the prehistoric
remains.

Only 35.1% of the hackberry seeds are burned and it

is these which were probably employed as a foodstuff in the
late fall to judge from the ripening of the fruit of the modern
trees, one of which is located quite near Test Pit 4 (Fig. 31).
Summary and Conclusions
General statements developed in this section are offered as
a means of coordinating the many diverse kinds of conclusions
derived throughout the main body of this chapter.

The basic

format is patterned after the summary and conclusions already
presented in Chapter IV and emphasis is given here only to
those features of the Adamek Site archeology which show as
significant departures from the Dobias-Vitek Site.

Basically

the two sites reflect a surprisingly similar life-way despite
their separation in time.
be explained on two counts:

Such differences which do appear can
the culture history of the entire

central Texas area which saw the introduction at Dobias-Vitek of

279

a few critical technical inventions such as the bow-arrow and
pottery around AD 600, as well as',t1le quite different environmental
resources of the two site locations.

Adamek was in a grassland

cover while Dobias-Vitek was in a woodland.
Prehistoric Site Ecology
The Adamek Site is a midden camp buried within the upper
portion of a valley fill composed mostly of fluvial sediments
derived from the ancestral Willis Creek overbank flooding as
well as an increment of slope-wash deposited at the base of the
nearby uvalde Formation bluff.

The activity of these two

sedimentary processes was sufficient so that cultural remains
were covered over about as fast as they were discarded by the
human occupants.

Through this means, midden debris consisting

of hearthstones, mussel shells, flint artifacts, snail shells,
and tiny vertebrate bones, was distributed through a vertical
thickness of 2.5 to 3.5 feet.

This accumulation certainly

took place over considerable time (sometime between 1000

Be and

AD 1) on the order of centuries or even millenia rather than
decades.

Judging from the backhoe tests coupled wi th the

site survey estimates, the lateral extent of the midden may
have been no more than 0.5 acres on the floodplain, itself.

280

However, some evidence shows that occupation also extended up
the low-angled front slope of the adjacent hillside, but most
of this portion of the site has recently been destroyed by
gravel quarrying. Therefore, no estimate of the size of this
upland portion of the site can be made.
Because long term Late Archaic occupation at Adamek was
persistent and stable, it would seem reasonable that some
important "drawing card" was present to entice a hunting and
gathering group back to the same spot repeatedly. I judge
that this attraction was the favorable local resources. By
moving to the west and upslope, the upland resources were
available; whereas by moving a short distance to the east
or north in the direction of the Willis creek drainage,
plentiful grass-covered floodplain foods could be exploited.
Thus the site situation was deliberately placed at the junc­
ture (boundary) of two topographic types, each of which

of­

fered different resources. Another favorable feature is the
distance between drainage lines in the center of the Willis
Creek valley and the Adamek Site located on the extreme
floodplain margin, a factor which would have lessened the
frequency of overbank floods compared to the midvalley
position of Dobias-Vitek.

281

According to the findings of Amaral's snail shell study,
the prehistoric floodplain in the immediate vicinity of the
Adamek Site was always an open grassland. However, after dep­
osition of the lower portion of the archeologicl deposit
(Zone Z), this cover imperceptibly began to change to a mix­
ture of grass understory and open, scattered trees and/or
shrubs (Fig. 51). Further, the minor but persistent occur­
ence of Group 3 snails indicates that a riparian woodland,
not unlike that reconstructed for Dobias-Vitek, was also
present along the ancestoral Willis Creek drainage lines.
Through a study of the changing proportions of different
snail groups, Amaral believes that this woodland and its
associated transitional brushy fringe (Vegetation Stage 3),
expanded across the floodplain towards Adamek reaching closest
proximity after AD 1 during depositional

Zone X times as

the latest portion of the midden was being formed. But
there is no evidence that the woodland or very much of the
brush or shrub cover ever swamped out the grassland at the
site itself.
The vEgeta"t'ion reconstruction outlined above is nicely
corroborated by the faunal analysis of wittier (Appendix C) •
..' ,

282

---

-"------"---"-------~-------

,,-._------------­

Two kinds of environments are reflected by the small size
vertebrates -- grassland and aquatic (Fig. 78). The grass
cover type is known to have been based on the small and
restricted home range territorial habits of the indicator
rodents. From this observation, it is stated that either
the floodplain and/or the nearby uplands were extensively
grass covered throughout the middle and late portions of
the midden. To concentrate on the floodplain habita,t,
wittier first employs some negative evidence -- the lack
of tree squirrels -- to show that the floodplain, itself,
was not likely to have been very wooded infue vicinity of
the site. In a positive sense, he utilizes the modern
habitat preferences of the pocket gopher, ground squirrel,
and the now locally extinct microtines to argue for a dense,
rank grass cover on the floodplain proper, made lush by a
slightly moist soil. Although the vertebrate remains, them­
selves, cannot be employed as indicators of vegetational
changes at this site, Witter

does feel that the appearance

of a pocket mouse in Level 2 of Test Pit I is compatible
with the cover shift postulated from the changing ratios
between snail groups I and 2 in depositional Zone Y. This
indicated gradual expansion of the brush fringe of the

283

riparian woodland extended openly space brush closer to the
vicinity of the site midden and this advance provided a more
favorable nearby habitat for the pocket mouse.
Eighteen or more kinds of vertebrates are identified from
the faunal study (Fig. 77). Of these, only a few skeletal el­
ements of deer, gar, frog or toad, and turtle were recovered
from the 1/4 inch mesh screen. The great bulk of the bone
was unnoticed in the field and only became apparent as the
matrix samples were washed and processed by wind tunnel sort­
ing. In Figure 78, witter interprets these faunal elements in
three sets: 1) grassland, 2) aquatic, and 3} unspecific indi ­
cators. Inhabitants of the grassland are gopher, microtine ,
cotton rat, jack: rabbit and ground squirrel. Aquatic species
include gar fish, undetermined fish, turtle (may also in­
clude some box turtle) and frogs (may also include some toads).
These animals are found today in streams, ponds, and their
margins. Their occuzrence in the site midden simply indi ­
cates that the ancestral Willis Creel>: and its associaten
backswamp "sloughs" were an active drainage. The unspecific
vertebrates could have frequented any and all of the local
vegetation communities including grassland,brushy ecotone,
and riparian woodland, (Fig. 51). Members of this cross-valley

...
2R4

:

'

transect consist of deer, a small carnivore (probably hognose
skunk), pocket mouse, shrew, birds, and lizard.
Amaral was concerned with the study of the Adamek inver­
tebrate remains, both snail shells and bivalves.

Six new

species of snail, two land and four aquatic, are present over
and above the inventory identified from 41 WM 118. The total
assemblage of twenty-three species found at Adamek is employed
for the information that the changing proportions among four
snail groups supply as to the near-site plant cover (Figs.
48,49). Due to the general lack of burning and small size of
almost all of the gastropods, these invertebrates were almost
certainly naturally occurring in the site midden. The consis­
tent presence of a few water snails throughout the matrix
column taken from Test pit 1 is in marked contrast to the
exclusively terrestrial snail fauna recovered from 41 W1
118. The aquatic gastropods from Adamek are indicative of
both nearby water as well as the aboriginal use of aquatic
plants obtained at some of these water sources.
Because the number of recovered water snails is small
relative to the total shells found (less than two per cent),
the specific nature of the water environment cannot be
tified, with certainty •

iden­

However , it is known 'that the four

285

aquatic species tolerate a wide range of water habitats in­
cluding transient pools, large perennially standing pools,
and flowing streams.
Eight species of river mussels are recognized by Amaral.
These appear throughout the middle zone (zone Y) and lower
(Zone z) portions but not commonly in the upper segment of
the midden. Presence of mussel shells in the site is ex ­
plained as food refuse introduced by man. Today, mussel shell
of recently dead pelecypods are transported by swift-water
channel flow but they are not normally carried by slow moving
overflow waters to the back of the floodplain where the Adamek
Site is located. The prehistoric sample was obtained by In ­
dians from the ancestral willis Creek rather than the San
Gabriel River judging from the small size and gracile charac­
ter of the shells compared to the more robust modern sample
of the same species collected from the san Gabriel River.
This interpretation is based on generalities concerning the
relationship between shell growth and rate of stream dis ­
charge (Pennak 1953:704). Only one prehistoric shellfish,
carunculina parva, is indicative of a specific habitat.Today
this organism inhabits small, mud-bottomed, sluggish streams
in Kansas and this description accords well with the

286

-----------------~-------~-------------

-~--------------------

---------------

contemporary Willis Creek.

Because of this match, it seems

reasonable to believe that the modern crel::!k has not altered
much from the prehistoric past in its discharge character­
istics.

Available Natural Resources

Adamek flint resources are plentifully at hand within
the gravel Uvalde Formation exposure right at the site.
this readily available stone

~a.pping

That

material was utilized is

demonstrated by the identity found between the flint artifact
material and the nature of the flint cobbles still present in
the nearby commercial gravel pit.

Further, argument for the

use of the naturally occurring on-site flint is the observation
that the density of both the cores and waste flint flakes
directly increases as the excavations approached the gravel
hillside;

a relationship which is explained by interpreting

areas in Test Pit land 4 as workshops.
Again the gravel offered a plentiful supply of limestone
hearthrock and their greater use here than at Dobias-Vitek is
shown by the increased bulk volume recovered from midden Zones
Y and Z.

Due to the close proximity of the site to the resource,

hearthstones cannot be considered a scarce commodity at Adamek.

287

The only unquestionable vegetal foodstuff is hackberry fruit
indicated by burned seeds found throughout Zones Y and Z
midden.

of the

These are thought to be food remains collected in the

late fall.

Some of the other seeds found could be from grass

but without identification by a trained botanist, this suggestion
is hazardous.

Further, these non-hackberry seeds do not appear

to be burned and this fact makes me suspect their primary
association with the prehistoric remains.

However, reconstruction

of the surrounding plant cover indicates an extensive floodplain
grassland and this natural crop could have yielded

a~ple

edible

grass seeds, a suggestion advanced by witter in Appendix C.

But

we remain ignorant of whether the Indians at this particular
site actually did utilize grass seeds as a food resource.

Only

the grinding slab found in the midden provides any indirect
support for the utilization of hard kernel seeds for food.
Use of aquatic plants for food and materials is another
indirectly inferred resource.

This possibility is developed by

Amaral from a careful consideration of the different possible
ways in which small numbers of water snails could have been
introduced into the matrix column taken from Test Pit 1.

The

most likely answer is that the gastropods were accidently brought
in as they clung to still wet plants harvested from some nearby

288

source of water.
Species of five vertebrate classes are identified from the
animal bone by witter (Appendix C).

~~ere

are:

fish - 2,

amphibians - 1, reptiles - 3, birds - 2, and mammals - 10.
Because of the large fragment sample Witter is able to provide
two kinds of arguments to show that all of these
utilized by man down to the smallest organism.
are:

a~imals

w~re

These evidences

(1) some skeletal elements of each kind of animal are

burned and,

(2) some of the smallest of the series appear as

food remains in Fire Hearth 2.

The burning is a significant

percentage of each sample of bone obtained from an excavation
level.

The frequencies varied between a low of 9.0 per cent and

a high of 24.0 per cent, figures which are considerably higher
than those observed at Dobias-Vitek (Fig. 79).

Fire Hearth 2,

the soil contents of which were processed by fine screen washing
as a separate entity, contained a large variety of vertebrates
including predominately minnow-size fish and small rodents.

Of

the 664 identifiable and scrap bone recovered from this feature,
a significant proportion was burned (42.0%).

The identifications

parallel the faunal assemblage found in the midden proper and
this match is what convinces witter that most of the specimens
are probably in the site because of the agency of man:

289

~-----~----

--~--~--~~~~--------

a

conclusion which contrasts with his initial uncertainty concerning
the microvertebrate fauna of 41 WM 118 (Appendix A).
The density of river mussel remains, both computed as a
concentration index of shell fragments and as a number of
individuals per excavation unit, is indicative of a much more
intensive harvest of this food resource at Adamek than was the
case at Dobias-Vitek.

This finding is borne out by the increased

number of species present at Adamek (8 species ) compared to
Dobias-Vitek (4 species) reflecting (sampling error aside) a
wider exploitation of shell fish habitats along Willis Creek
than was the case for the San Gabriel River resources.

This

discrepancy between the two sites might be explained by the
fact that Willis Creek was a small, shallow drainage allowing
more convenient access to the shell fish colonies than did the
deeper San Gabriel River.
Based on the low incidence of burned shells, study of the
snail shells does not suggest that these organisms were likely
to have been utilized for food.

Further, only the prairie snail,

Bulimulus dealbatus, is sufficiently large as an adult to have
been worth the effort.

As previously discussed, this snail does

not lend itself to biometric study and therefore a size profile
could not be developed as an aid in unraveling the question re­
garding any prehistoric food use (Appendix
290

-~~

.......-......

-~--

...

.......- - - - .

~--.-----

B)~

In summary, this review of the natural environment with
emphasis on resource potentials, indicates a primary reliance on
those foodstuffs and materials which were exploitable from the
immediate grassland surroundings of Adamek as well as the nearby
ancestoral willis Creek.

Use of any upland prairie resourqes

is not definitely indicated and the emphasis on woodland ',vild­
life is meager.

This exploitive picture is in marked contrast

to the reconstruction at Dobias-Vitek which was largely woodland
oriented.

Both sites reflect a pattern of intense use of resources

in their immediate surroundings and thus their appearance in
quite different ecological settings strongly supports the idea
that the aboriginal occupants consciously chose a specific
setting for the materials and food-getting advantages that it
had to offer.

Once a decision had been made to occupy a given

habitat, the settlement was maintained over centuries and perhaps
even millennia with continued use .being dictated
by the nearly constant environmental offerings.

As was the case

at Dobias-vitek, the season of ripening or availability of grass
seeds, hackberry fruit, and river mussel foods suggest at least
the possibility of a six month human residence at Adamek extending
from late summer through early winter, a conjecture which is
supported by the high frequencies of burned flint flakes

291

suggesting flint knapping during cold weather (see Summary and
Conclusions, Chapter IV).

Human Technology

This section will summarize what is presently known about
the technical equipment and knowledge employed in dealing with
the natural grassland surroundings of Adamek as well as the
nearby stream resources.

The discussion is organized following

the format of Chapter IV.

NATURE OF THE TOOL ASSEMBLAGE AND FACILITIES

Fixed facilities present at Adamek consist only of fire
hearths;

no evidence of either houses or storage pits was

encountered.

The hearths, as well as the zone of dense hearth­

stone and heat fractured spalls, were distributed through depositional
Zones Y and Z but not in Zone X.

Two hearths are large, formally

arranged pavements of heat-cracked rock and these are thought to
have been employed as "fireless" cookers where meat and perhaps
vegetal foods were baked.

Fire Hearth 3, located at a greater

depth in Zone Z, exhibited a scattering of rock and this informal
style of feature is interpreted as the fireplace where hearth
rock was heated for transfer to the formal pavings of Hearths 1

292

and 2.

However, unlike the informal hearths of Dobias-Vitek, this

one at Adamek did not contain quantities of charcoal, a charac­
teristic which prohibited radiocarbon sampling.

The sloping

zone of hearth rock and spalls shown on Figure 39 is interpreted
as evidence of the former presence of many more now destroyed
hearths.
The portable tool assemblage is comprised largely of a few
classes of stone tools and an occasional artifact of shell
(use unknown) and an antler tine flaker.
clay artifacts were found.

No pottery or other

The only common stone tools are

bifaces (both stemmed dart points and unstemmed bifaces) and
utilized flakes (primarily unifacial scrapers) while intentionally
fashioned scrapers, hammer-choppers, and grinding stones appear
in very low frequencies.

In comparison with Dobias-vitek, a

minor shift favoring the biface category, by a factor of 2.5 times
that at Dobias-Vitek is apparent.

This increase in the biface

frequency to a statistic of 11.1 percent was compensated for by
a drop in the utilized flake frequency to 87.2 percent;

other

stone tools appear at a negligab1e incidence of 1.8 percent.
However, I have no idea that these minor patterns are particularly
significant.

To me, the important comparison is the basic

similarity in the stone tool industry between the two sites.

293

From this comparison, it seems that at least this preserved
segment of the total technology reflects such a simple and
generalized tool kit that resources of either the riparian
woodland or the floodplain-grassland could be exploited with
equal ease, and any different work habits and activities involved
are not revealed to us through the tools and their percentages.
Therefore, it seems that the analysis of the food refuse and
purely environmental data provides a much more useful i.nsight
into the prehistoric cultural ecology than does the traditional
examination of the stone artifacts.

To emphasize the misleading

character of the stone tools, I would cite the usual equation
the bifaces with hunting and butchering activities.

~f

If we: are

to apply this interpretation to Adamek, the expectation would
be that a large proportion of the meat supply was obtained from
atlatl-dart hunting of big game, probably deer and bison.

Instead,

the faunal analysis shows a decided emphasis on tiny mammals and
the identified class of small to large mammals is in favor of
the rabbit-size over the deer-size animals.

Thus our expectations

derived from the traditional tool inferences are entirely mis­
leading.

In contrast, at Dobias-vitek the frequency of bifaces,

both during the Transitional Archaic and Neo-American times, was
less than half what they are at Adamek, yet the largest proportion

294

of the meat biomass is represented by deer and bison which far
outweighs the harvest of tiny mammals.
SUBSISTENCE ACTIVITIES
Primary acquisition of meat foods was likely made by
hunting, trapping, and most commonly hand-collecting of "slow
game."

Hunting by atlatl and dart was probably a male-oriented

activity dictated by the man's biological exemption from hearth­
side duties, especially pregnancy and the care of children.
Most of this game is reflected in bone scrap classified in a
gross category of small to large-size mammals (rabbit to deer­
size) of which jack rabbit and white-tail deer are the only
identified members.

The deer probably ranged fairly widely

through several habitats including riparian woodland and the
brushy ecotone located along the fringes of the woodland.

Deer,

although they are not grazers by nature, are highly mobile and
passage through the grassland cover would have been unobstructed
where they could have been hit by an atlatl-flung dart as
easily as in their primary habitat cover.

Judging from the few

identified skeletal elements, much of the small mammal - large
mammal class of bone scrap is less that deer-size.
mammal of bison-size was observed by Witter.

295

No large

Another source of meat and animal products was obtained
from very thorough trapping and/or hand-collecting from the
grasslands immediately around the site.

Five kinds of small

rodents are identified as having inhabited this cover.

Witter

reasons that because this fauna was either very small or very
slow in movement, it could have been collected by anyone, but
particularly women and children during the course of other
food-gathering activities in the grasslands.
Traps, seines, and hand-foraging are all possible techniques
for catching the stream inhabitants, particularly the very
small, "minnow-size ll fish as well as

gar~

Witter suggests that

the emphasis on the tiny fish indicates a very thorough exploita­
tion of streams and ponds.

Other aquatic species which could

have been hand-collected by anyone but particularly women and
children are turtles and frogs and/or toads.
Judging from the recovery of bone scrap from the standard
volume matrix samples of Test Pit 1, the intensity of hunting and
butchering was greatest in Level 3 (Zone Y of the midden) and
tapered off to a low in Level 6 (Zone Z of the midden) (Fig. 80).
The proportions of the different animal classes taken also varied
in a minor way throughout the midden history.

Fish, in company

with other aquatic foodstuffs such as river mussels and water

296

plants (inferred from water snails1 shows an all-time high in
Level 3.

Tiny mammals of rodent-size are high throughout the

column but are particularly common in the lower portion of the
midden from Levels 4 through 6.

The combined category of small

to large mammal never over-tops the tiny mammal class. but it
does equal or just exceed fish in Levels 4 and 6.

These relation­

ships are not likely to have anything to do with culture history
but rather reflect mild shifts in local animal population size
as these factors opportunistically influenced the food collector1s
choice.
Manufacture and maintenance of the stone tool industry was
basically similar to the technical practices of Dobias-Vitek.
This similarity is based on the comparison of the attribute
frequencies observed on both the cores and waste flakes, both
by-products of the industrial process.

Such a conclusion is

verified by the similar kinds of finished tool products.

Minor

differences found at Adamek but not Dobias-vitek are: (1)
considerable primary working down of cores was conducted on the
site in contrast to 41 WM 118 where this work was performed off
the premises.

At Adamek, this initial work is reflected in the

high recovery of exhausted cores and cortex flakes:

(2) on-site

slicing of core interiors and thinning of bifaces were common
activities at both sites.

However, these industrial activities
297

were spatially localized at Dobias-vitek but non-localized at
Adamek.

(3) Because of the fine marginal retouch on the finished

stemmed bifaces at both sites, it was inferred that the final
manufacturing step in biface manufacture was edge-shaping by
chipping using a pressure tool.

However, it was not until the

bone and antler sample was processed at Adamek that an actual
example of an antler tine flaker was discovered as confirmatory
evidence of this technical procedure.

Further support for this

inference is proveded by the fine screen recovery of many
tiny pressure chips from the midden, positively verifying that
this pressure finishing was conducted right at that spot.
Data leading to inferences concerning the processing of
food for consumption is of three sorts:

river-mussel shell

concentrations, a milling tool, and fire hearths.

The mussel

shells, whether considered as a high concentration of fragments
or as a count of individuals per excavation level, show a wide
horizontal distribution throughout the middle and lower portions
(Zones Y and Z) of the midden.

This distribution is more nearly

uniform than that observed at Dobias-Vitek, a characteristic
which indicates a general use of shell fish for food.

Since

the fire hearths do not contain above average numbers of
pelecypod individuals, it seems reasonable to conclude that the
meat was eaten raw rather than cooked, an inference which is
298

born out by the very low incidence of burned shells.
Another means of preparing food for consumption was through
the use of the milling slab.

Although the tool, itself, does

not indicate what was ground, it is conjectured that grass
seeds could have been one foodstuff processed in this fashion,
a supposition influenced by the knowledge that the site midden
occupied extensively grass-covered flats.
Evidence of food prepartation by cooking is of just
kind--baking.

Based on the interpretation of the heat

rock pavings as "fireless cookers

ll

,

o~e

ractured

meat and vegetal foodstuffs

could have been baked on the formal fire hearth pavings.

Witter's

analysis of 664 vertebrate bones from Fire Hearth 2 provides a
useful insight into one or more meals cooked there.

The fish

bones are largely from small minnow-size animals but fragments
of gar were also present.
include: gopher, microtine

Grassland rodents identified
l

cotton rat, and ground squirrel.

In

addition, there were some small fragments of unidentified
vertebrates in the size range between rabbit up to possibly even
deer.
skunk.

A small carnivore is present, judging from a hognosed
Several other miscellaneous animals are bird and lizard

(species unknown).

Forty-two percent of this bone is burned1 it

is thus concluded that the sample provides confirmation that

299

diverse fauna were actually cooked and do not represent
"natural deaths" (Fig. 78).

However, because of the high frequency

of charring, which is several times that of bone samples recovered
from the midden outside of a hearth, it would appear that
exposure to flame was made at the fire hearth.

This observatim

might be explained if some glowing coals were transferred with
the heated rock from an open fire located elsewhere to the
formal "fireless" cooker, Fire Hearth 2.

The number and

diversity of animals making up this meal sample suggests a
thorough "scrounging" of the surrounding countryside in order
to bring together enough creatures for a meal.
No evidence was encountered concerning storage pits, houses,
or portable storage containers.

In fact, there is no indication

that a surplus of any sort was developed which would necessitate
such storage devices.

Instead, I think it likely that subsistence

was a hand-to-mouth affair with survival assured on a day-to-day
basis.
The physical evidence of the midden deposit presented here
is quite similar to the midden comprising the Dobias-Vitek
Site.

The latter is interpreted as a central base camp settlement,

a primary focal point in a Central-based, Wandering settlement
pattern.

However, in contrast to Dobias-vitek. the Adamek site

300

lacks most of the fixed facilities and especially the storage
devices which are thought to reflect the semi-sedentary tie to
one point on the landscape.

Therefore, I am somewhat more hesitant

in declaring Adamek to have been a central base

camp~

more

likely it was simply a single, but often used, way-station in
a Restricted wandering settlement pattern (Beardsley 1956:136-138).
Culture Ecology
Insofar as the test excavations have yielded data representa­
tive of the site as a whole, this analysis reproduces the picture
of long term cultural persistence first described in Chapter
IV for the Dobias-Vitek Site.

As for the latter site, Adamek is

a reflection of a stable life-way representing a Direct, ecologically
bound, Tradition segment (Houry 1956:43-51).

However, in contrast

to the woodland dominated Dobias-vitek findings, the ecological
adaptation leading to the Direct Tradition segment at Adamek
was focused on two quite different habitats - a grassland and
the ancestoral Willis Creek drainage.

This diverse environmental

setting was basically unchanging throughout the long, perhaps
1000 year, period of human occupation,

The grass covered floodplain

and related small creek drainage conditioned the kinds of resources
exploitation which featured foraging for small game (principally

301

tiny mammals) and minnow-size fish rather than the big game
(deer and bison) woodland hunting pattern of the Dobias-Vitek
Site.

However, this is not to deny that atlatl

and dart

hunting of small and large mammals (in the size range of rabbit
to deer) did not take place at Adamek as indicated by Witter's
faunal analysis.

Further, due to the implied grass resources

surrounding the site, it is conjectured that grass seeds were
always important as a food at Adamek, a hypothesis which was
only appropriate for the basal Transitional Archaic archeology
at Dobias-vitek but not for the upper, Neo-American age remains.

In social terms, it is inferred that the most significant
food resources at Dobias-Vitek were always obtained by adult
male hunters.

In contrast, at Adamek women and children played

at least as important a role in the basic subsistence through
their diversified collecting within a grassland setting.

302

CHAPTER VI
Loeve Site:

41 WM 133

Large scale excavations at 41 WM 133 were recommended by
Shafer and Corbin (1965: 56) because of the presence of Neo­
American arrow points and the extensive concentration of arti­
facts just under the modern ground surface.

Later, when Prewitt

and I visited the site in 1968, previously unsuspected fire
hearths were found buried near the base of the river bank at a
considerable depth below the near-surface cultural deposit first
observed.

From these additional observations, it seemed apparent

that evidence of early occupations in the Laneport District could
be defined and this information would contribute to the construc­
tion of the local cultural sequence.
Subsequently, excavated artifacts obtained by the T.A.S.P.
field party, as well as from the amateur diggings by C. Loeve,
verified the presence of Neo-American and Transitional Archaic
Stage deposits in the Catalpa Soil just under the modern ground
surface.

At a much greater depth, Fire Hearths 2 through 8 were

studied and radiocarbon dates obtained from two of these struc­
tures indicate an age around 5000 B.C.

Although no diagnostic

projectile points were found associated with these fragile struc­
tures, their age indicates former riverside camping by Early
303

Figure 54.

Aerial view of the San Gabriel River
valley showing the situation of 41
WM 133 (circled). The high angle o­
blique photograph was taken facing
southeast from an altitude of 2500
feet above the ground surface late
in the afternoon. In the background
can be seen a line of commercial
gravel pits which mark the front
bluff of the Uvalde Formation. On
the floodplain, at the base of this
60 foot slope, is an example of a
"slough ll or backswamp.

Archaic Stage peoples at a time considerably antidating any cul­
tural occupations known through excavations at either the Adamek
or Dobias-Vitek Sites.
Setting
Site 41

~m

133 is located on an outside bend of the San

Gabriel River on the property of Edward Loeve, for whom the site
is named.

It is located 3.9 miles downstream from the Highway 95

bridge and 2.8 miles above 41 WM 118.

At this point, the river

swings very near Site 41 WM 133 but does not, itself, intersect
the Uvalde Formation flanks of the alluvial-filled valley (Fig.
54).

Periodic bank erosion by the flood-swollen river has exposed

the prehistoric cultural remains in a 30 foot face of Recent flood­
plain sediments.

C. Loeve, who actually farms the property has

described the active cutting of the river bank and its attrition
of the lower buried fire hearths, particularly Hearths 2 and 5.
Further evidence of the rapidity of bank erosion is supplied by
a large fallen tree whose root system has been undercut by the
river toppling the trunk to an inclined leaning position against
the river bluff (Fig. 58).

The base of the tree now lies some 20

feet from the main cliff and this distance is a measure of the
amount of bank erosion which has taken place in reqent years.
Although this rapid erosion is destroying the site, it has the
value of exposing the deeply buried remains to the view of the
archeologist for study.

305

Just upstream from our excavations, a spring-fed creek
joins the left bank of the river through a deep gully.

C. Loeve

tells me that this V-shaped gully was not a third this deep in
his boyhood some 30 years ago.

This recent active downcutting

has exposed more fire hearths deeply buried (10 to 25 feet) in
clay alluvium.
The upper component at the Loeve Site consists of Neo-Ameri­
can artifacts which are buried through the 3 to 4 foot thick
Catalpa Soil formed from the modern surface.

At this point along

the river bank, the cultural debris is incorporated in a topo­
graphic rise ringed by the 5l0-foot contour (m.s.l.) lying
two surface "sloughs" or flood channels of the river.

betwe~n

This rise

in the floodplain surface may always have been present in this vi­
cinity providing a well drained site situation advantageous to
floodplain campers.
Another attractive resource at the site is a set of two
springs which discharge cool, clear potable water from the base
of a 6 foot bank of Uvalde Formation gravels located at the up­
stream end of the site (Fig. 55).

The water flows from the gravels

at their contact with underlying Cretaceous bedrock.

Recent

exposure of the geologically old deposits took place by headwater
cutting of the spring-fed creek as it cut through the floodplain
sediments.

However, before the valley had filled to within 9.0

feet of the modern surface, the spring location was always exposed.
Therefore, the groundwater discharge would have been accessible

306

Figure 55. Plane table map of site 41 WM 133 show ­
ing the surface drainages, test ex ­
cavations, buried fire hearths, and
midden.

\

I

,

N

J

\

%

I

,

I

,
)

..

,/

:

"

o

..I

ti

o

i
\

,

,­
/

I

/

I

/

I
/

I

I

/'
/

/

I
I

r
I

/

~ ..

$mall liloMy

(r
~;:

J

\

.....

Q)

(J)~
Q)::!:

>~

Q)­

0"'"

.....J

/

I

I

I.
\

\

during the camping represented by the lower hearths (Nos. 2-8).
However, the rising valley floor overtopped the spring acquifer
just before Neo-American times and therefore this fresh water sup­
ply was not available during cultural Period IX and X.
Like the Adamek Site, 41 WM 133 is located in the valley
but very near the gently rising front of the gravel uplands present
200 feet to the northwest of the site.

Therefore, both the flood­

plain and Blackland Prairie environments were conveniently accessi­
ble for human exploitation.
Modern Site Ecology*
Site 41 WM 133 is situated on the floodplain which rises
approximately 30 feet above the edge of the river.

This surface

has elms (Ulmus sp.), pecans (Carya illinoensis) and bur oak
(Quercus macrocarpa) either scattered or as little groves along
it, since most of the floodplain is either cleared or plowed up
to the very edge of the bluff (Figs. 56,57).

Less conspicuous

are hackberries (Celtis sp.), hawthorns (Crataegus
Bumelia.

~.)

and

The vegetation on top of the floodplain before clearing

would at this time be very difficult to conjecture.
The slopes of the river channel support a varied composi­
'i

tion of trees and shrubs,

especially elms, hackberries, ashes,

bois d'arc (Maclura pomifera), cottonwood (Populus sp.), willows
(Salix sp.), and sycamores (Platanus occidentalis).

In the flood

channel, the vegetation is kept permanently unstable by flooding

*

Section by Dan C. Witter
308

Figure 56. Schematic north to south vegetational
transect from 41 WM 133 across the
flood channel of the San Gabriel River.

Figure

NORTH

56

SIHJTII

f

fielJ
site

pecan,
or oak

j ('

Id

Unstable Vegetation:
elm, hackberry, hois
d I arc J s ycumore ,

t

cotton wooJ, willows,
etc.

S,lll Gabriel

River

4l Ml 133

and erosion, and presumably would be dependent in composition and
nature on the behavior of the river.
Site Description
The Loeve Site consists of two main stratified components:
(I) The Neo-American midden buried in Unit I (Catalpa Soil) and
(2) a series of seven fire hearths (Nos. 2-8) buried at consider­
able depth near the base of the river bank.

A third component

consists of one fire hearth and two dart points of Middle Archaic
age, which C. Loeve dug out of the upper middle portion of flood­
plain Unit II.

The upper midden is the outcrop observed by Shafer

and Corbin (1965:56) in the north bank of the river,

They des­

cribed it as a long (100 feet) exposure extending from just under
the modern surface to a depth of six feet.

These estimates were

quite accurate being based on exposures revealed both by river bank
erosion and the extensive digging of the farm operator, C. Loeve.
Since 1963 these activities have continued to expose the Neo-Ameri­
can remains over an irregular area 60 by 200 feet in size (Fig. 55).
Judging from the paucity of artifacts recovered from our test pit
excavations (Test Pits 1, 2 and 4, located just outside Loeve's
diggings), the amateur operation has nearly exhausted the upper
remains to a depth of 4 feet.

Since the artifacts seem to be so

restricted in lateral distribution, it seems to me that the occu­
pation once formed a rather tightly contained campsite, perhaps
occupying a small knoll or rise on the floodplain.

310

Loeve says that

Figure 57.

General view of 41 WM 133 looking north­
east. The area of amateur excavation
is revealed by the churned earth in the
foreground. Beyond is the unplowed sur­
face of the floodplain supporting a
semi-cultivated pecan grove. The San
Gabriel River lies to the right and
thirty feet below the floodplain.

Figure 58.

The left cut bank of the San Gabriel
River showing gravel Unit III at 41
WM 133. The stadia rod base is being
held at Fire Hearth 2.

Figure 59.

Profile of Recent river sediments taken
from Test Pits 1, 2, and 3, 41 WM 133.
The measured drawing illustrates the
stratigraphic position of soil and
alluvial units as well as Fire Hearths
1 and 3.

~------~--------~

I

.
..

"0

on

<II

o

.,
r

!

;
!

..

;i;

.5
~

c::>

I
I

t

. l'

i

0

lio

,
;

I'

;;

.

~

u

,(

;

II,' ",~~

i
.li :1
.c
/;'

/
/

c

"iii

...o •­
=i
I ..

......:. .e )1 ...
..... :1
... ••

JZ

lJ,

/

..

•~

t'f

H

...z !)i
<II

.

J:i
~ i::J

I',
1'1
"'~Dm

..J

'j

,
•

• •
.I• "&•
0

. 'li•i

~

I

en

:x:

I

/

the depth to a first encounter with artifacts is variable ranging
from 1/2 to 2-V2 feet below the ground surface.

These figures

probably reflect a mildly undulating topography during occupation.
At a much greater depth of 15.5 to 19 feet beneath the sur­
face are found seven fire hearths, some of which are questioned,
buried in the base of alluvial Unit II at the contact of Unit 11/
III, and in Unit III (Fig. 59).

The geological context of these

hearths suggests that at one time ancient Indians were ~amping
along the ancestoral San Gabriel River on gravel and mud bars.
Other evidences of occupation in Unit III consist of scat­
tered flint flakes

(33 specimens), several flint cores, and hearth­

stones (IS specimens) destributed primarily through the upper 3.5
feet of the unit.

This distribution among the fire hearths is

predominately confined to the gravel lenses rather than the inter­
bedded stringers of clay indicating a human preference for the
drier and firmer gravel bars as a work surface.

None of these ar

tifacts show evidence of river tumbling and all are in "mint"
condition with thin, sharp edges indicative of in-place deposition.
The bUlk of the flint flakes are cortex covered on both the dorsal
surface as well as the platform.

From these attributes, I infer

that the flakes are the initial trimmings of cores, probably cob­
bles picked up from the river bed.

Since very few of the flakes

are burned, the stone working must have been carried out away from
the fire hearths.
Although the middle portion of the Unit II clays did not
314

yield any intact hearths or artifact concentrations to our ex­
cavations, an occasional flint flake or hearthstone was found
(Fig. 59).

Based on these stray finds, it is possible that other

campsites are present upstream at this stratigraphic horizon
and their erosion yielded the isolated specimens observed in the
Test Pit 3 excavations.
two dart

poi~ts

However, C. Loeve located a hearth and

above the position of Fire Hearth 2 after my test

excavations were completed.
Many of these stratigraphic relationships can be seen on
Figure 59, a profile taken along the grid east wall of contiguous
Test Pits 1, 2 and 3.

There the thickness and sequence of soil

(Unit I) and alluvial units (II, III) are shown as well as the ver­
tical position of Fire Heaths land 3.

Details of the individual

alluvial strata are given on Figure 60 which was compiled from
field observations taken along the profile line using the nomen­
clature of the Soil Conservation Service (Soil Survey Staff 1951)
coupled with the chemical tests of the Soil Testing Laboratory,
Texas A. and M. University.

315

Figure 60.

Description of the alluvial and soil sec­
tion taken from the east wall of Test Pits
1 and 3, 41 WM 133. The data is telegra­
phically listed based on both field obser
vations and the laboratory analysis of
the Soil Testing Laboratory, Agricultural
Extension Service of Texas A. and M. Uni­
versity. Observed section is 27.5 feet
thick extending from the undisturbed sur­
face to near the river level.

Figure 60
UNIT I (Catalpa clay, surface to 5.3 feet depth)
Texture:

Fine clay particles.

Color: Grayish brown (lOYR 5/2, dry) grading to a light brownish
gray (lOYR 6/2, dry).
Structure: Fine platy peds are present just under the grass cov­
ered surface, incipient angular blocky peds(?) occur in the first
1/2 foot of soil but the predominant homogeneous character of the
exposure suggests a massive designation.
Consistency: Sticky and plastic when wet, very friable when moist,
but very hard when dry (during excavation it was necessary to break
up clods to force the soil throught the 1/4-inch mesh screen; un­
cemented.
Special Features: Rock percentage is very low with almost no natural
pebbles and few hearthstones, fine grass roots are common in the
upper one foot while tree roots extend throughout the profile, very
fine pores are present, carbonate effervescence with HCL is strong
throughout the profile and white lime is visible around roots as
pseudo-mycelium, veins, and diffused in the soil; worm tunnels of
thumb and pencil size (both filled but more often open) occur
throughout; also present are some flint flakes, snail shells but
rarely freshwater mussel shell; charcoal is not common even in
Fire Hearth 1.
Chemical Tests: Base status is mild to moderately alkaline, per
cent organic matter high in upper portion of profile (Level 2J,
moderate in midsection (Level 5), and low at the profile base
(Levels 7 and 8), phosphorus is low throughout but the relative
profile trend is from more (Levels 5-7) to less (Level 8), potas­
sium is very high throughout but follows the same relative pattern
as phosphorus, zinc, iron and manganese in minute traces decline
from a peak near the top of the profile, nitrates fluctuate through­
out the profile, magnesium and calcium occur in high and very high
quantities but these elements were not quantitatively measured
precisely.
Boundary: Gradational transition between the organic stained humus
horlzon and Unit II,is smooth and diffuse.
UNIT II (5.3 to 19.4 feet depth)
Texture: Fine clay particles which will form a good "ribbon" when
rolled and can be kneaded into a dense compact mass.

316

Color: Grayish brown (lOYR 5/2, dry) grading to a light brownish
gray (lOYR 6/2, dry).
Structu~e:

Homogeneous without ped aggregation.

Consistency: Sticky and plastic when wet, firm when moist, hard
when dry; no cementation.
Special Features: Small limestone stream rounded pebbles are
scattered throughout the profile and locally stringers of small
pebbles are present, some grass and tree roots, no pores, moder­
ate effervescence with HCL but carbonates are not visible, some
snail shells and occasionally a mussel shell or stray hearthstone;
a zone of hearthstones associated with Fire Hearth 1 is present
at 5.5 feet depth.
Chemical Tests: Base status is mild to moderately alkaline, per
cent organic matter is very low, phosphorus is low to moderate in
quantity and potassium is very high, zinc, iron, nitrates and
manganese present in minute traces, magnesium and calcium occur
in high and very high quantities but these elements were not quan
titatively measured precisely.
Boundary: Very abrupt contact with the gravels but less obvious
contact where the Unit II clays are directly superimposed on the
mottled clays of Unit III, the gravel contact is irregular with
deep pockets due to uneven channel deposition.
Remarks: This Unit II clay is the massive alluvial deposit forming
the subsoil over which the Catalpa Soil (Unit I) was developed.
Unit II contains occasional flint flakes and stray hearthstones
throughout but hearths, themselves, are only prevalent near the
base and top of the unit.
UNIT III (19.4 to 27.5 feet depth)
Texture: Lenses of fine mottled clay particles alternating with
stringers of gravel, the gravel matrix is either a coarse sand or
sometimes a dense clay.
Color: Mottled clay is reddish yellow (7.SYR 7/8, moist; 7/4,dry),
the limonite stained gravel is brownish yellow (lOYR 6/8,dry)
while the unstained gravel is neutral white.
Structure: Clay has incipient sub-angular blocky peds, the gravel
is randomly arranged to a weak horizontal alignment, of some of
the flattish gravels located at the downstream end of stringers
is weakly cross-bedded dipping to the east.
Consistency:

Clay is both sticky and plastic when wet, very firm
317

when moist, hard when dry; no cementation.
Special Features: A few roots are present near the river, no
pores in the clay but spaces are present in the gravel-sand string­
ers, moderate effervescence from HCL, but no white lime stain is
visible, some land snails and river mussel shells are present,
large flecks of charcoal present especially in the mottled clay.
Chemical Tests: Base status is moderately alkaline, per cent or­
ganic matter is very low, phosphorus is low in quantity and potas­
sium is very high; zinc, iron, manganese, and nitrates present in
minute traces, magnesium and calcium occur in high and very high
quantities but these elements were not quantitatively measured pre­
cisely.
Boundary:

Not visible at this locality.

Remarks:

This is the basal and oldest deposit at the site, it
fire hearths and around Hearth 2, a number of flint chips
and stray hearthstones. The gravels range in size from 0.02 to
0.20 feet but most average 0.05 feet in greatest diameter. Indi­
vidual gravel stringers (buried river gravel bars) are long, flat
lenses which very in thickness from a few inches to several feet.
Where exposed in the north bank of the river, the Unit III gravels
are approximately 200 feet long. Upriver 'near the mouth of the
spring-fed creek, the gravels are steeply truncated, whereas down­
river they are masked by soil slump. The maximum thickness of
the unit is 10 feet measured in the vicinity of Fire Hearth 2.
conta~ns

318

Research Procedures
Testing at the Loeve Site extended intermittently throughout
the second half of November and the first half of December.
During this period, cold rainy weather reduced the actual number
of work days to 18.

Further effeciency were brought about by

absenteeism and illness, so that the actual crew size fluctuated
from one or two men to as high as five or six.

As at sites

41 WM 118 and 135, I was assisted by field archeologist Elton
Prewett and George Chambers.

Prewitt handled the plane table

mapping and Chambers, besides supervising excavation of one test
pit, performed most of the photography.

Again Witter joined the

crew from time to time serving as a valuable supplement to

OUT

labor supply but more important are his observations of the moder"
site ecology (Fig. 56).
The field procedures established through the excavations at
site 41 WM 118 were applied at the Loeve Site, the major excep­
tions being adaptations to the potentials of the long river bank
sedementary sequence.

Four test pits were hand-dug, three 6 by 8

foot rectangles and one long trench (Test pit 3); rectangles
numbered 1, 2 and 4 were excavated in levels of varying thickness
(0.25 to 1.0 foot) passing the sediments through a 1/4-inch mesh
hardware screen (Fig. 83).

In contrast, Test Pit 3 was employed

to face-up the river bank along a line from Test Pit 1 to the
river edge.

This hand digging was conducted without benefit of

screeing in a step fashion to provide successive work platforms
319

advancing downslope (Fig. 59).

The three test rectangles dug

from the surface (Numbers 1, 2 and 4) were placed just outside
of C. Loeve's diggings to avoid confro.ntation with his amateur
work as well as to search for undisturbed deposits.

The litter

of rejected artifacts left by Loeve around his diggings certain­
ly suggested a very "rich" Neo American midden.

Therefore it

was with some surprise when our own screened tests yielded such
a low artifact recovery.

I can only conclude that he has com­

pletely defined the lateral limits of the Neo-American occupa­
tion and we were actually digging just outside the sharply de
fined occupational perimeter (Fig. 55).
The work in Test Pit 4 was especially disappointing because
of the evidence of disturbance.

As the successive levels were

dug, a handful1 of historic artifacts (glass, crockery, metal)
continued to appear in the northwest corner of the pit.

When

we were down to a depth of 4.0 feet, the burned base of a tree
taproot was uncovered and it became obvious that a tree had
been dug out and burned at this spot.

Due to these disturbances

with implications of mixing no further treatment will be made
of the few prehistoric artifacts which were recovered from this
test.

Contamination of the upper one foot (Levels 1-3) of both

Test Pits 1 and 2 is also indicated by the presence of historic
artifacts of recent manufacture.
Another unproductive research trial was the analysis of six
soil

samp~es

Pits 1 and 3.

taken from the alluvial section exposed by Test
These samples were obtained at intervals throughout
320

Units I, II and III so as to be representative of the fluvial
exposure (Fig. 59).

V. Bryant, palynologist then with The

University of Texas Botany Department, reports that these were
processed using standard laboratory techniques which have proven
successful with other alkaline sediments in this state.

All of

the samples were completely void of pollen but all did contain
fungal spores.

Non-recovery of pollen probably resulted from

one or all of the following reasons:

(1) high activity of

fungal types which feed on pollen; (2) high bacterial activity
in the soil; (3) oxidation of the pollen grains before they could
become fossilized.
Site Chronology
The following discussion details the temporal data which is
available to date the two major and one minor occupational com­
ponents which are vertically stratified in the cut river bank
exposure comprising the Loeve Site.

The upper component of oc­

cupation consists of buried midden debris distributed continu­
ously throughout the Catalpa Soil (Unit I) and into the top of
Unit II, a thickness of 5 or 6 feet (Fig. 55, 59).

From this

stratigraphic zone, which includes Fire Hearth 1, have been
taken an array of named bifaces, most of which are arrow points
but some are dart pOints, assignable to Projectile Point Groups
VIII through X.

In addition, sherds of two kinds of fired clay

vessels of Neo-American age have been recovered from this same
.stratigraphic zone (Unit I).

All of this material falls within
321

'--

..

-~

-------.. - - - -.....

..

--~

a maximum time span extending from A.D. 1 to no more than 1750.
The latest date, of course, is conjectural without the presence
of historic artifacts (see Site Chronology, Chapter IV).

Be­

cause the bulk of this chronological data was collected by C.
Loeve without regard to its measured depth, no more precise
statement can be made concerning the vertical distribution.
However, I am certainly indebted to him for the use of much of
this data; without it the chronological picture would be far less
clear.
At much greater depth near the base of the river bank was
found a lower component composed of a cluster of seven fire
hearths lacking any dense midden refuse.

These occupational re­

mains are found through a vertical thickness of 3.5 feet from
the base of Unit II, at the contact between Units II and III,
and into the upper portion of the channel gravels of Unit III.
No temporally restricted artifact types were found in associa­
tion with the hearths.

However, three radiocarbon assays, ob­

tained from two of these hearths, overlap within one standard
deviation with central dates around 5000 B.C., and Early Ar­
chaic age.
A third, very minor occupation was found by C. Loeve in the
upper middle portion of the Unit II alluvium but still several
feet below the base of the Catalpa Soil.

While tunneling into

the bank beneath the roots of a large tree, he discovered a
concentration of fire-cracked rock which appeared to me to have

322

been the remains of a fire hearth.

From this same small tunnel,

he also obtained two Pedernales type dart points, members of
Projectile Point Group VI of Middle Archaic Age.

Based on the

Stillhouse Hollow sequence, these should date between 2000 and
1000 B.C. (Fig. 4).

Their stratigraphic position below the

upper component is a repeat of the stratigraphic run observed
at the Adamek Site.

Perhaps some of the other buried single

hearths at this approximate elevation uncovered by C. Loeve in
the spring-fed creek upstream are of an equivalent age.
Fire Hearths
Eight fire hearths, four of which are questionably identified
(Numbers 5-8) and described , were found.

All but Hearth I are

deeply buried in floodplain deposits and are stratigraphically
old, pre-dating prehistoric hearths found in the Catalpa Soil
either at the Dobias-Vitek or Adamek sites.

These deeply buried

hearths (Numbers 2-8) at the Loeve Site lack diagnostic artifacts
but they nevertheless: represent some of the earliest known occu­
pation of the Laneport District.

Two of these hearths are found

in the lower part of the Unit II clays, one questioned hearth
is recognized at the contact of Unit II with Unit III, and four
others are described from the gravels of Unit III.

Of these

last, only Fire Hearth 2 is definitely identified as of human
manufacture through undercut excavations.
Fire Hearth 1 at the Loeve Site is the only example which
has been completely dug and therefore it must serve as a
323

comparative example for the others which have only been partially
exposed, either through our excavations or by river bank erosion.
The incomplete hearth exposure is attributable to two factors:
(1) the testing program has a goal of local sequence building
and not complete excavation and (2) the deeply buried hearths
have a great overburden of sediments making it impractical at
this time to come down upon them for proper study.

But this should

be done in a future full scale excavation by using power equip­
ment to remove the thick accumulation of overlying sediments.
Informal, amorphous hearths with charcoal and scattered
cracked rock are interpreted as fire places for cooking and
warmth.

However, only Fire Hearth 3 shows the verifying fire­

scorched earth to conclusively demonstrate the former presence
of a blazing fire.
Another interpretive possibility is that some or all of the
formally constructed hearths characterized by a laid rock pav­
ing and little charcoal, such as Hearth 1, may have been built
for fireless cooking.

In this interpretation, the paving cob­

bles were heated in a nearby fireplace and then moved, perhaps
with wooden tongs, to the actual paving site for the fireless
baking.

Such a method of cooking

mescal plants has been des­

cribed by Opler (1941: 357 footnote) for the Chiricahua Apache:
... rocks are heated and scattered on the level ground,
the mescal crowns are put on them, and fresh grass and
dirt are piled over all. This "oven" has the appearance
of a mound.
But to demonstrate that this cooking technique was actually

324

used by prehistoric Indians living in the Laneport District,
it will be necessary to first show that the general paucity of
charcoal in formal hearths cannot be explained by soil chemi­
cal destruction after sedimentary entombment, and secondly,
fire hearths to heat the
ble pavings.

~ock

must be discovered near the cob­

Detailed soil studies will help control for the

first variable and a full scale excavation program featuring
lateral stripping will be required to prove the second hypotheti­
cal relationship.

As of this study, no in place examples of

paired fire places and rock paving hearths have been encountered.
An entire flat paving of river cobbles forming Hearth 1 was
uncovered at the line between Test Pits 1 and 3 (Fig. 61,a).
This feature lies 5.2 feet below the surface of the ground in
alluvial Unit II just at the contact with the Catalpa Soil
(Unit I).

It is a formal hearth consisting of a rock paving

laid in a very shallow, dug depression (not a true pit).

How­

ever, the sides of the depression are not scorched pink by fire.
The depression caused the flat, water-tumbled river cobbles to
be inclined slightly to the north.

In plain view, the paving

appears D-shaped with an irregular perimeter and some loose
spacing within the feature.

As the feature was being cleared,

it was observed that the rock tended to concentrate in two
clusters; one to the grid east and the other on the grid west
side.

The long axis of the structure measures 4.3 feet while

the short dimension is 2.3 feet.

In profile, the hearth is 0.4

feet thick measuring both rock and soil matrix.
325

Figure 61.

Fire hearths, 41 WM 133. at Fire Hearth 1
at contact of Test Pits 1 and 3; b , Fire
Hearth 2 exposed by bank erosion in Unit
III gravels, the structure being marked
by the tag among the hearthstones; c,
Fire Hearth 3 exposed on Step 8 of Test
Pit 3.

The rock making up the hearth is 0.43 cubic feet in volume.
It is predominately burned limestone cobbles collected from the
nearby Uvalde gravels.

Most of the stones are whole although

a few are angularly fractured by heat.

Many are oxidized to a

pink or red color although others are burned a gray color.

All

of the rocks are coated in spots by a natural lime (calcium
carbonate) film, probably derived from the overlying Catalpa Soil
which is rich in free lime.

At the time Level 8 was being dug

in nearby Test Pit 1, a concentration of burned hearthstones was
found as well as several flint artifacts and a cobble chopper.
When Fire Hearth 1 was discovered in the adjacent excavations
at the same depth, it was apparent that the scattered rock repre­
sented a living surface associated with Hearth 1 and that they
had been kicked out of the hearth during use of that feature.
Here we could have an example of the hearth cooking activities
which would ultimately lead to the accumUlation of a thick burned
rock midden if the process had continued long enough.
In addition to the reddish-brown clay soil forming the ma­
trix of the hearth are fragments and pieces of charcoal, 90 ani­
mal bone fragments, 39 flint flakes, 292 snail shells, and 14
mussel shell fragments.

The animal bone is identified as deer

and rodent as well as burned (32.0%) and unburned bone scraps
(Appendix D).

Snail shells collected from the hearth are not

likely to have been a food resource,

Instead they are a natural

population reflecting a grassland cover which once existed right
around the hearth.

But the small fragments of freshwater mussel
327

shells are certainly the food residue from a meal.

The char­

coal flecks foundin the hearth are very minute and do not neces­
sarily represent in-place burning.

Perhaps the rock was heated

elsewhere and simply laid in a paving at this spot for "fireless"
cooking.
FIRE HEARTH 2
A thin line of cracked rock and charcoal flecks is exposed
by river erosion in the left bank (Fig. 6l,b).

The feature is

incorporated within a gravel stringer, one of a series of alter­
nating stringers of brownish-yellow limestone gravel and a pink­
ish-gray clay comprising Unit III.

Judging from the appearance

of these sediments, they are a stratified series of point bars
formed on the inside bend of a fast moving river.
The fire hearth itself lies 3.2 feet below the upper contact
of Unit III gravels and 18.8 feet below the general floodplain
surface.

Stratigraphically it is the oldest human artifact dis­

covered at the Loeve Site.
Because Hearth 2 is composed of scattered hearth rocks and
diffused charcoal, it is classified as an informal fire area.
No pit is apparent in profile although the general surface of
accumulation undulates as if occupation had been on a slightly
uneven ground surface.

However this gravel surface does not

show scorching from fire.
The hearth is 8.0- feet long but only one stone thick.

Its

principle component is water rounded limestone cobbles angularly
fractured and burned red~

Mixed among the hearthstones are small
328

rock spalls removed by differential heating during the time
the hearth was burning.

Experimental burning of limestone

cobbles shows that when it is first subjected to a wood fire,
it tends to break up rather rapidly followed by a more stable
absorption of heat as the stone warms uniformly throughout.
In addition to burnt rock, the damp clay soil of the hearth
yielded small pebbles, 4 flint flakes, scattered flecks of
charcoal (sample TX-B05), 43 snail shells, and 2 mussel shells.
The Group 1 and 3 snails imply a grass-covered gravel bar with
some trees, while the Group 4 water snails indicate both a
swiftly flowing river and a quiet water pool fringed with some
vegetation.
These remains are interpreted as the residue of a small
group of aboriginal peoples camped on a grass and tree covered
gravel bar which is likely to have been located on the inside
bend of a fast flowing river--the ancestoral San Gabriel.
Proximity to the river suggests that fluvial and river bank re­
sources were being exploited including river mussels for food,
drinking water, and hearth rock which would have been abundant
on the gravel bar.

The dispersed appearance of the hearth leads

me to believe that a high river stage covered over the camp­
site with gravel soon after its use thereby scattering some of
the hearthstones.
FIRE HEARTH 3
Approximately 1/3 of an elongated sheet of burned limestone

329

cobbles was exposed by excavation on Step 8 near the bottom of
Test Pit 3 (Fig. 6I,c).

The feature is incorporated in the fine

clay sediments of Unit II although the downstream (grid east)
end of the hearth is in contact with the Unit III gravels.
Hearth 3 lies 18.5

et below the modern floodplain surface.

The feature is an informal hearth composed of a loose ag­
gregate of cobbles, large flecks of charcoal, and damp, dense
clay.

No sign of a pit is present and it looks as if the rock

paving was laid directly on the unprepared level ground surface.
One section of the hearth "floor," located on the east side of
the test pit, is distinctly scorched to a pinkish-red color by
burning over an area 1.5 by 1.9 feet in size.

The main layer

of hearthstones overlies this burned surface, but other heat­
fractured rocks were found embedded in the scorched earth and
still others were discovered under this pink zone.

Judging from

this evidence, the hearth had been used as a fire place more
than once but certainly not for any great length of time.
The greatest diameter of the hearth was obtaineq by measur­
ing the long axis of the feature, both that part which was
cleared by excavation and another section which outcrops from
the river bank to the east beyond the limits of Test Pit 3.
A maximum diameter of 12.0 feet was obtained indicating that the
original structure was a large, oval pavement prior to river bank
erosIon. Of this recons true ted size, Tes t Pit 3 exposes only 2.2
feet of the feature in a north-south line.

:):)0

The total thickness

of the hearth, both rocks and soil, is around 0.5 foot.
The most distinctive aspect of the fire hearth is the scat­
tered rock paving.

Individual stones are limestone river cobbles

heat-fractured into an angular pattern and burned pink or gray.
The breakup of the cobbles has produced rock spalls which lie
among the hearthstones.

Measurement of the rock volume shows

0.37 cubic feet of stones were removed from a hearth area of 11.0
square feet uncovered within the test trench.

These water-round­

ed cobbles could have been selectively collected from the gra­
vel bedload of the contemporary river.
The damp and dense clay fill of the hearth also contained
small limestone water-rounded pebbles and coarse sand; 32 flint
flakes; one intentionally-shaped scraper; large flecks of char­
coal; 73 fragments of vertebrate bones some of which are identi­
fied as fish, anuran (frog and/or toad), turtle, snake, bird,
gopher, and other unidentified rodent remains; 743 snail shells;
and 52 micro-bivalves.

However, only one fragment of a river

.mussel shell was discovered.

The presence of the small, rounded

limestone pebbles and coarse sand suggests that the hearth was
repeatedly washed over by the river.

Re-use of the fire place

is especially indicated by the fact that some of the river peb­
bles are burned.

However, this river action was insufficient

to seriously disturb the larger hearthstones or float off all
of the charcoal.

Some of the charcoal was collected for radio

carbon analysis (samples TX-802,803) and the average age has

331
/

been determined as SOSO±160 B.C. (Table 1).

The snail shells

are fresh water and land species, most of which are too small
to have been employed for food.

The land snails indicate that

the mud flats around the hearth were open and grass-covered
with only a few trees and/or bushes, an interpretation born
out by the burned gopher bones (Appendix D).

With one excep­

tion, the snail shells are not burned and therefore they re­
flect a natural population attracted to the camp site after the
fire was extinguished.

Some of the water snails may have been

floated in by the flooding river while others may have climbed
out of the river on wet water-side plants, or even introduced
by man as they clung to water plants collected from along the
river.
Based on the scorched earth, it can be inferred that a hearth
fire was built here in place during Early Archaic times.

How­

ever, its situation subject to high water flooding does not sup­
port the idea that the hearth campsite was utilized for any great
length of time.

Similarly, I suspect that the size of the camp­

ing group was small because of the lack of much discarded refuse
either in the hearth or scattered about on the buried land sur­
face.

The principle food resource cooked here was fish and tiny

rodents which inhabited the grass-covered mud flats and river
bank, judging from the fact that 86.0 per cent of the animal
bone scrap was burned.

But the paucity of river mussel shells

indicates that shell fish were not commonly utilized by these
campers.
332

FIRE HEARTH 5 (?)
A thin string of water rounded limestone pebbles and char­
coal stained sediment is exposed for a length of 1.65 feet in
the gravel bank of Unit III one foot below the upper contact
of this unit and the overlying Unit II clays.

The feature was

photographed and drawn to scale, but because it was not exca­
vated, certain identification as a man-made fire hearth is
questioned.

No artifacts were observed within the feature al­

though stray flint flakes were collected from the river bank on
all sides (above, below, upstream, and downstream) of the burned
pebbles.

It lies 16.9 feet below the maximum elevation of the

floodplain ground surface.
FIRE HEARTH 4
This unexcavated feature is located in the clay sediments
at the base of Unit II some 17.1 feet below the floodplain sur­
face and 2.5 feet above the undulating boundary with the Unit
III gravels.

Four burned limestone river cobbles are exposed

in the river bank as well as large flecks of charcoal.

C. Loeve

says that considerable more charcoal was originally revealed
when the river first cut into the hearth during a flood but
this material has since eroded away.

The burned rock forms a

slight basin-shaped profile 1.4 feet in lateral dimension.
Large land snails occur in the soil just above the feature.
FIRE HEARTH 6(?)
A thin line of burned limestone cobbles 2.9 feet long forms

333

a line immediately at the contact of the Unit III gravels and
the overlying Unit II clays 17.0 feet beneath the floodplain
surface.

No charcoal or artifacts are to be seen among the

burned stone.

Identification of this feature as a product of

human endeavor is questioned excavations were not made.

How­

ever, I believe it is highly likely that this is a fire hearth
built by prehistoric Indians who camped for a brief time on the
eroded surface of Unit III.
FIRE HEARTH 7 (?)
A thin line of limestone pebbles 1.8 feet long lies in the
. gravels 0.75 feet below the feature questionably identified as
Fire Hearth 6.
The pinkish color of the pebbles implies that they are the
site of a former fire place although this interpretation is
based entirely upon profile observations; no excavations were
performed.

Support for the cultural interpretation of the fea­

ture is provided by one flint flake which was removed from
among the burned rock.
FIRE HEARTH 8 (?)
This feature consists of a thin, crescent-shaped line of
burned limestone river cobbles exposed in the Unit III gravels.
It is located just upstream and lower by 1.4 feet than Hearth 5.
In lateral dimension, the feature is 1.6 feet but only one rock
thick.

Flint flakes and scattered hearthstones are present in

the gravel all around this feature but no flakes were observed

334

within it.

Also mussel shells are exposed in a Unit III clay

stringer just upstream from the feature at the same absolute
elevation.
Stone Artifacts
Artifacts described here include stemmed bifaces (projectile
points), unstemmed bifaces (triangular arrow point and bifaces),
as well as a miscellaneous collection of other stone tools.
The same kinds of tools are present as elsewhere in the district
but because this data appears in very small quantity, it is not
possible to compare it statistically to either the Dobias-Vitek
or Adamek Sites.
Stemmed Bifaces
Seventeen dart and arrow points were obtained from Loeve's
excavations in the main part of the Neo-American age component.
These are briefly reported here for the evidence which they sup­
ply on the projectile point typologies and age of the deposits.
My salvage test pits were inadvertently placed just outside the
upper occupation component and from these excavations just one
stemmed biface, a Scallorn arrow point type, was recovered.
PROJECTILE POINTS COLLECTED BY LOEVE ( 17 specimens):
Digging by amateur excavator, Clarence Loeve and his friends
has extensively churned the upper component of the site leading
to a recovery of arrow points buried in the Catalpa Clay Soil
(Unit I) to a depth of three to four feet beneath the modern
335

surface (Fig. 55).

Less commonly dart points have also been

found by these amateurs to a depth of six to eight feet by bur­
rowing into the floodplain from the cutbank of the river channel.
Through these means, C. Loeve has accumulated seventeen arrow
and dart point specimens from 41 WM 133 which were briefly loaned
to us for typological identification by Elton Prewitt (1969).
Many other specimens have been recovered in this manner but they
were dispersed by gift to friends and relatives scattered over
the State of Texas.

The following listing covers just those

projectiles actually viewed by us.

As a collection they form

a valuable set of data useful in dating the archeological deposits;
The type and type-variety names of the pOints are taken from
their descriptions given in the following references: Shafer,
Suhm, and Scurlock (1964); Suhm (1957); Jelks (1962); and Suhm
and Jelks (1962),
Projectile Point Group X (Toyah Focus):
Perdiz Type, whitney variety (3 specimens)
Perdiz Type, no variety (3 specimens)
Projectile Point Group IX-X (transitional Austin- Toyah foci):
Sca1lorn Type, eddy variety or Eddy Type (2 specimens)
Projectile Point Group IX (Austin Focus):
Scallorn Type, sattler variety (3 specimens)
Scal10rn Type, bran~us variety (1 specimen)
Bonham Type (1 speCImen)
Projectile Point Group VII-VIII (borderline Late Archaic­
Transitional Archaic):
Ensor Type (1 specimen)
Kent Type (1 specimen)
Projectile Point Group VI (Middle Archaic)
Pedernales Type (2 specimens)
336

Although none of these specimens were recovered under con
trolled excavation conditions, from a general knowledge of where
Loeve has been digging I believe we can safely apply the project­
ile point groups, and by extension, their estimated ages to the
site profile.

Generally he obtained the arrow points of Groups

IX and X from the Catalpa Clay Soil (Unit I) which is thereby
temporally equivalent to the Neo-American age soil of 41 WM 118.
To speculate from the age estimates of Projectile Point Groups
VII and VIII, the Ensor and Kent dart points were probably mined
out of the side of the river bank near the base of the soil (Unit
I) or in the uppermost part of the Unit II floodplain sediments.
Of more precise stratigraphic location was Loeve's find of two
Group VI, Pedernales type dart points which he discovered in
Unit II while tunneling into the river bank several feet beneath
the base of the Unit I soil.

From this casually collected data,

we can see a sequence of projectile points arranged roughly by
depth in a stratigraphic order through the upper portion of the
floodplain sediments which reproduces the combined sequence of
sites 41 WM 118 (Neo-American and Transitional Archaic Stages)
and 41 WM 135 (Middle through Transitional Archaic Stages).
SCALLORN TYPE, sattler variety (1 specimen):
A complete arrow point has a long, tapering blade with straight
sides and a lenticular cross section.

The edges were serrated

by bifacial pressure chipping, the scars having been aligned with
that of the reverse side.

In this fashion, the inter-scar ridges

337

were left in relief to form close-spaced teeth.

Narrow diagonal

notches were pressure formed from the basal corners of the piece
to create short, sharp barbs and an expanding stem.

The wide

flare of the base is the chief characteristic which has led to
classification of this artifact as a sattler variety of the Scallorn
type (Jelks 1962: 27-30).

The stem base is straight.

The homogeneous pale brown (lOYR 6.5/3) flint is not burned,
patinated, or encrusted.

It was found during the controlled ex­

cavation in LevelS of Test Pit 1 between 1.2 and 2.2 feet beneath
the modern undisturbed ground surface.
Dimensions: length, 3.1 cm; width, 1.3 cm; thickness, 0.4 cm;
weitht, l.2 cm.
Unstemmed Bifaces
Three categories of unstemmed bifaces are recognized here;
an arrow point, large thick bifaces, and large thin bifaces.
The latter include artifacts interpreted as manufacturing stages
as well as a few finished tools referred to as knife blades.
GRANBURY TYPE, bono variety (1 specimen):
Snapping has removed the distal end from this unstemmed,
triangular-shaped arrow point.

The long tapering symmetrical

specimen has even straight sides and base with a lenticular cross
section produced by even bifacial thinning.
marginal retouch overlaps the thinning scars.

Generally fine, even
However, at one

or two sectors along the perimeter, percussion scars were re­
moved truncating the pressure retouch implying that the point
338

---~-~-~-----~-~~---~--~

---~-~--

had not been entirely completed before its discard.
patination, edge grinding, or notching is present.

No bUrning,
A few thin­

ning flake scars terminate in hinge-fractures, but most were
evenly executed.
The transluscent dark gray (lOYR 4/1) flint has white in­
clusions but no noticeable flaws.

One speck of unremoved cortex

exists on the base.
The specimen was found in Level 6 of Test Pit 4 between 2.75
and 3.25 feet below the modern ground surface.

However, no par­

ticular credence can be given this provenience because of the
disturbance in the west end of the test pit by an earlier farm
excavation to remove a burned-out tree tap root.
Dimensions: length, incomplete; width, 1.6 cm; thickness,
0.4 cm; weight, incomplete.

THICK, UNSTEMMED BIFACES (4 specimens):
Percussion flaking has produced asymmetrical bifacial arti­
facts ranging in outline from oval to ovate and plano-convex to
lenticular in cross section.

As a group, they are characteris­

tically irregular due to the presence of deep, uneven flake
scars.

Two bifaces preserve unremoved patches of cortex on one

face; the remainder have been entirely flaked.

One of the pieces

shows a mild surface weathering and a few fresh flake scars trun­
cate this patina, attributes which suggest the re-use of an old
biface.

Still another biface has dulled edges as if it had been

water tumbled before being brought into the Loeve Site.

339

All

specimens show discontinuous sectors of fine marginal unifacial
trimming.

The specimen from Test Pit 4 is made on a cortex

flake while the nature of the biface blanks cannot be determined
for the others.

None of these specimens are burned.

In line

with the interpretation made on the thick, unstemmed bifaces
described from 41 WM 118, these artifacts do not appear to be
finished tools but more likely they are early manufacturing stages
in a sequence leading to thin bifaces.
The three larger bifaces were all picked up from the churned
surface of Loeve's diggings where they persumably had been thrown
up from his excavations in the Neo-American component (Fig. 55),
The smallest biface was obtained by screening the fill of Level
5, Test Pi t 4, between a de'pth of 2.25 and 2m75 feet below the
modern surface.

But as discussed for the Granbury arrow point

found in the same test pit, no confidence is placed in this pro­
venience because of evidence of recent disturbance to the Unit I
deposits at this spot.
Dimensions: respectively: 5.0, 7.0, 8.4,

8~8cm;

width, 3.0,

4.6, 5.4, 6.0 cm; thickness, 0.9, 1.9, 0.9, 1.9 cm; weight, 11.2,
68.4, incomplete, 119.7 gm.
THIN, UNSTEMMED BIFACES (12 specimens):
These artifacts are fragments of thin bifaces including bases
(8

specimens~

a midsection, a lateral edge, a tip, and a nearly

complete piece with just a notch break in the base.

The incom

plete pieces were broken diagonally or transversely by snapping,

340

perhaps during manufacture.
In outline, the specimens generally have symmetrically
fashioned straight or convex bases and sides.

To judge from the

convergence of the sides, the basic shape was subtriangular.
No areas of cortex remain due to allover bifacial thinning which
created a lenticular cross section.

As a rule, the flaking is

regular with even, shallow scars, the only exception being a
"hump" of unremoved material present on the face of one specimen.
Several other artifacts show a few hinge-fractures at the termi­
nal end of scars indicating poor control by the knapper.
marginal retouch overlaps the thinning flake scars.

Fine

As a rule,

this pressure trimming was removed from just one face of the ar­
tifact as discussed for the 41 WM 118 unstemmed bifaces.
three of these artifacts

do

However,

show bifacial rather than unifacial

retouch and these are thought to have been finished tools, per­
haps hafted knives.

In contrast, the other unfinished artifacts

are interpreted as manufacture steps serving as preforms for
either knives or projectile points.
Collecting from the surface of Loeve's diggings yielded seven
specimens.

Presumably these are Neo-American age specimens, based

on the depth of his excavations and the many arrow points found
in this Unit I deposit.

The other five thin bifaces were recovered

underground through our excavations.

These came from Test Pit

1 in LevelS (1.25 - 2.25 feet below the undisturbed modern ground
surface) and Level 7' (2 specimens from 3.25 - 4.25 feet below the
341

modern ground surface).

Two others were recovered from Step 2

in Test Pit 3 at a depth of

6.25 feet and 7.0 feet beneath the

undisturbed ground surface.

The age of the surface specimens

is verified by the two excavated biface fragments found in Level
5 at the same absolute depth as a Scallorn arrow point and bone
tempered pottery, both of which are diagnostic Neo-American age
indicators.

The three biface specimens from greater depths are

at least this old or possibly Terminal Archaic in age.
Dimensions: length, 4.9 cm; remainder are incomplete; width
of bases, 2.6, 3.3, 3.2, 3.3, 3.0, 2.9, 2.8, 2.5, 3.0 cm; thick­
ness, 0.5, 0.8, 0.7, 0.6, 0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 1.0, 0.4, 0.6 cm.
Other Stone Tools
Tools other than bifaces are treated here including a chopper,
end scraper, and utilized flakes.
CHOPPER (1 specimen):
A large, heavy, flattish flint cobble is bifacially flaked
around 1/2 of the perimeter to produce a steep angle bit.

The

fresh-looking flake scars show that the natural cortex of the
cobble was removed by a series of blows struck alternately from
one face and then the other.

Both faces and the unaffected peri­

meter of the fist-size stream-rounded cobble are covered with
a dark brown (7.5 YR 4/4) cortex which provides a suitable hand
grip.

Along the flaked bit of the tool are found many short

step fractures paralleling the axis of the cutting edge.

Ex­

perimental chopping with a flaked cobble shows that such fractured
342

wear will develop when the bit is used to cut such unresistent
material as wood.

Because of this wear, it is inferred that a

tool such as this could have been employed for many heavy duty
cutting purposes among which might

have been: hand felling of

small trees, trimming of branches, butchering animals, breaking
and smashing bone to extract marrow, and preparing slivers of
bone for the manufacture of bone tools.

Of these interpretive

possibilities, direct evidence is present only that animal long
bones were smashed up, based on the recovery of many fragments
of long bones showing curved breaks indicative of smashing when
the bone was still green.
The chopper was found in Level 8 near the grid east wall of
Test Pit I at a depth of 5.2 feet beneath the surface.

This

position is at the same depth and in association with a layer
of fractured hearthstones and Fire Hearth 1, both of which are
the residue of a occupational surface.
Dimensions: length, 9.1 cm; width, 7.4 cm; thickness, 4.7 cm;
weight, 429.6 gm; bit angle, 97 to 105 degrees.
END SCRAPER (1 specimen):
A unifacial edge was flaked on the distal fragment of a cor­
tex flake.

The platform of this flake was removed by two con­

verging breaks caused either by snaps and/or burin blows to
provide a triangular outline to the artifact.

Unifacial per­

cussion flaking struck from the nether surface of the flake has
removed cortex from the dorsal face only along the distal end
of the flake to produce a highly convex bit.
343

Fine, even marginal

shearing overlaps the percussion scars as evidence of wear from
a scraping use.

The tool is not burned, patinated, or water­

tumbled and the keen edge bit shows no polishing from use.

The

specimen was found during the clearing of Fire Hearth 3 located
at the base of the Unit II, floodplain clay (Figs. 55 and 59).
An Early Archaic age is indicated for the scraper by the radio­
carbon dating of the hearth.
Dimensions: length, 5.4 cm; width, 4.4 cm; thickness, 0.7 cm;
weight, 15.9 gm; edge angle, 41 - 59 degrees.
UTILIZED FLAKES (28 specimens):
Proportionate with the very low density of flint flakes re­
covered by our excavations, utilized flakes are exceedingly rare.
Of eight hand dug excavation units, recovery ranged from one to
five utilized flakes, frequencies which are too low to calculate
as a concentration index.

Accordingly, no detailed attribute

study was conducted, although from a casual perusal of the
specimen~

it is safe to say that the edge modification was gen­

erally unifacial shearing and quite similar in character to the
same class of tools reported from the Dobias-Vitek and Adamek
Sites.
The largest single collection of utilized flakes is seven
artifacts plucked from the gravel face of Unit III at the base
of the bank.

This group, making up 21.2 percent of all flakes

found in the river bank, show that in addition to stone knapping,
riverside foraging, and hearth cooking, the Early Archaic age

344

-------

.....

--.~---

- - -

- - - ......

--~--

campers who tended Fire Hearths 2 through 8 also carried on
some tool manufacturing operations which involved the use of
flakes with which to scrape and perhaps cut unresistent materials
such as wood, bone and hide.
Stone Technology and Waste Products
Brief treatment of the few discarded cores and waste flakes
excavated from the Loeve Site is given here.

Use of terminology

follows that introduced for site 41 WM 118 as is the description
of the similar flint material (Chapter IV).

Although an exhaus­

tive treatment of these data is not warranted because of their
paucity, some interpretations of stone industrial activity are
possible.
CORES (14 specimens) and CORE FRAGMENTS (2 specimens):
Stream-rolled cobbles (8 specimens) and large cortex flakes
(7 specimens) of flint were employed as core material.

Most of

the whole specimens show random flake scar removals on multiple
faces (8 specimens) or in a more patterned fashion from two
faces to yield either

discoidal cores (5 specimens) or on

opposite side core (Marks 1968: 397),

Because of the small

number of specimens found underground in the salvage excavations,
an extensive attribute study was not conducted.

However, refer­

ence to the core treatment at either the Dobias-Vitek or Adamek
Sites will provide a detailed review of nearly identical arti­
facts.
345

Eight cores (5 discoidal and 3 multiple worked faces) were
surface collected from the area of Loeve's diggings where they
were probably churned up from a Neo-American horizon in alluvial
Unit I (Fig. 55).

The remaining seven specimens, were found

underground in the salvage excavations.
Test Pit 1 (Level 3,0.50

Specimens came from

0.75 feet below ground surface), Test

Pit 3 (Steps land 2), Fire Hearth 3 (Step 8, Test Pit 3) Test
Pit 4 (Level 6, 2.75 - 3.25 feet below ground surface) and picked
from the river bank face of Unit III among Fire Hearths 2 through
8.

The specimens from Test Pit land 4 are in suspected loca­

tions which were likely to have been contaminated by recent dig­
ging.

Cores from the upper steps of Test Pit 3 are estimated

to be Early Neo-American or more likely Terminal Archaic in age.
The single core from Fire Hearth 3 is Early Archaic in age based
on the radiocarbon age of the hearth context.

In company with

the 32 flint flakes also found in that hearth, it shows that
flint knapping was one of the work activities conducted immediate­
ly around that riverside fireplace.

Additional evidence of

approximately contemporary flint knapping is found in the Unit
III gravels.

Here the opposite side core and a small core frag­

ment were found in gravel and clay lenses where they were left
from knapping on point bars among Fire Hearths 2 through 8.
Based on the radiocarbon dating of Fire Hearth 2, this indus­
trial activity took place around 5,000 B,C.
WASTE FLAKES (359 specimens)
Flint flakes were not studied in detail because of the small
346

recovery of specimens.

This was so because the three hand dug

test pits, Numbers 1, 2 and 4 were unintentionally placed out­
side of the limits of the Neo-American occupation buried in the
Catalpa Clay Soil (Unit I).

Flake densities calculated for

Test Pit 1 ranged from one per 11 cubic feet of soil to a high
of 2.2 flakes per cubic foot.

These figures, which are typical

of the other two tests, are many times lower than those recorded
at either the Dobias-Vitek or Adamek Sites as well as low when
compared to the litter of flint flakes turned up in the main
part of the site completely dug out by Loeve.

Although disap­

pointing, the nearly sterile test pits do have a message to
impart.

I find it quite informative that a Neo-American midden,

such as this, could have such definite and well defined limits
which furthermore, were maintained over a long period of time
(ca. 1000 years),

This finding is in complete contrast to my

original expectation that occupation of the floodplain surface
would drift, gradually shifting as the alluvial plain aggraded
until its final center of distribution was quite off center to
its initial starting point.
In contrast to this low flake concentration is the presence
of higher flake densities in Fire Hearths 1 (13 per cubic foot)
and 3 (20 per cubic foot),

These figures reflect the flint

knapping activities which must have been conducted immediately
around the perimeter of the structures.

In the case of Fire

Hearth 1, which is located in Level 8 of Test Pit 1,
347

the~ heat~h

co~tained

six times the number of flint flakes found in the soil

immediately around it, figures which tend to confirm the localized
nature of the knapping activity.
Counts of the burned flakes recovered from Test Pit 1 show
a proportion of burned to unburned specimens which conform to
that determined at both the Dobias-Vitek and Adamek Sites.

At

Test Pit 1, the general excavation levels ran between 26.9 and
33.3 percent exposed to flame. ' These figures are significantly
above the percentage of burned flakes found in Fire Hearths 1
and 2 (10.3 and 18.8 percent respectively) which I infer to mean
that the flint knapping at the hearth sites was conducted when
the hearths were not lit.

In the case of Fire Hearth 1, it has

been suggested that the cracked rock hearthstones were heated
nearby and moved to the hearth location for "fire,less" cooking
in which case the low incidence of burned flakes becomes an
argument supporting the interpretation of the hearth use.

On

the other hand, use of Fire Hearth 3 can only be for in place
burning since the soil under the hearthstones was directly dis­
colored by burning.

But the flint knapper who worked beside

this structure must have done so when the flame was extinguished.
Ratios measuring the proportion of cortex backed to interior
flakes were run on the Test Pit 1 levels and these show a low
frequency of primary "peeling" of cores relative to the working
down of the core interiors.

But these figures, based on small

samples of 67 to 93 flakes, are quite variable from one excava­
tion level to another (1:3.2 to 1:18.3).
348

Fire Hearth 1 exhibits

this same kind of ratio (1:8.7) simply reflecting the lithic
technology of its surroundings.

But in contrast, at Fire Hearth

3, the ratio of cortex to interior flakes (1:2.6) indicates
much more emphasis on the initial core peeling.

Furthermore,

flint flakes collected from among Fire Hearths 2 through 8 in
the Unit III gravels demonstrate the complete overturn of the
flake ratio (1:0.6) reflecting a dominant interest in removing
core cortex.

If these cobble cores were being picked up from

the gravel bar surface immediately underfoot, then this cortex
removal activity is easily explained by the proximity of the
materials resource.

Therefore the Unit III occupation of Early

Archaic age can be interpreted as a primary workshop component
in addition to the other riverside activities which are inferred
to have been conducted there.
Clax: Artifacts
True fired pottery and a single baked clay object are des­
cribed here.

The pottery is of two kinds: bone tempered sherds

which are classified as Leon Plain, and a decorated sherd temper­
ed specimen which cannot be identified as to type.

The pieces

of Leon Plain were likely manufactured in central Texas whereas
the other is thought to have been made by prehistoric peoples
in or near the Caddoan Culture area.

The baked clay object is

similar to specimens described from the Dobias-Vitek Site and
this cross reference should be consulted for the complete details.

349

PLAIN, BONE TEMPERED POTTERY (2 potsherds):
These two identical looking fragments of an intentionally
fired ceramic bowl appear to be broken from the same vessel
wall.

Therefore, description of the specimens is combined as

a telegraphic listing of attributes following the nomenclature
of Shepard (1957) and Abel (1955):
Construction:

coil and scrape (?); Core Color:

uniform throughout the wall interior; Firing:

black (N/O) ,

intentional firing

in an unoxidizing atmosphere leaving incompletely burned out
carbon throughout the paste.

Charring of the bone temper is one

probable source of this interior smudging.

Temper:

Large (1-1.5

mm.) angular fragments of charred (black and light gray) bone
predominate, less common are sand grains.

The sand is coarse

angular to subangular rounded grains of rose and frosted quartz.
The bone was probably crushed to prepare it for inclusion in the
paste whereas the sand was most likely scooped up from a sand
bar and added without preparation, or else it was accidentally
included.

Core Texture:

coarse to very coarse, porous; Hardness

of Paste:

2.5 (Mohs' scale), Tensile strength is weak but not

particularly friable; Surface Finish:

well smoothed and evenly

polished across high spots both inside and out.

The polishing

tool left many parallel scratch marks and lusterous streaks aligned
in a direction which appears to coincide with coils.
not present on the vessel surfaces.

Surface Color:

Carbon is
convex outer

surface is dark reddish brown (5 YR 3/2), concave inner surface
350

is uniformly reddish yellow (5 YR 6/6), clay is buff fired
based on convex-concave curvature of the wall and the evenly
applied polish on both surfaces.

Provenience:

Both sherds are

from excavation Level 3 in Test Pit 2 which was hand dug between
0.7 and 1.8 feet below the undisturbed ground surface.

This

absolute depth is approximately equal to that of a Scallarn
arrow point found in adjacent Test Pit 1, both kinds of artifacts
being guide fossils of the Neo-American Stage.

Similar pottery,

called Leon Plain, in Central Texas, was found associated with
a Perdiz arrow point at 41 WM 118 (see Chapter IV).

These data

confirm the more voluminous Neo-American age data collected by
Loeve.
DECORATED, SHERD TEMPERED POTTERY (1 specimen):
An incomplete rew(lrked piece of pottery consists of three
sherds which fit together and a fourth which possibly connects.
The fragments were removed from the carinated shoulder area of
a decorated bowl.

After removal, the broken or cut edges were

ground along two sides to manufacture a secondary artifact.

The

original bowl could have been used for food service or storage
of dry goods; however, no interpretation can be offered for the
secondary, ground edge artifact.

Judging from the reconstructed

vessel shape, the carinated bowl was most likely manufactured
in or nearby the Caddoan Culture area of East Texas and traded
west to the Loeve Site (Story, personal communication, 1968).
However, no particular pottery type identification is hazarded
351

due to the incomplete nature of the specimen.

But generally

it is known that trade pottery of both the Gibson and Fulton
Aspects of the Caddoan Culture occassionally appear as trade
items in the Central Texas Aspect (Neo-American Stage) (Jelks
1961: 65-70).

Construction:

coil and scrape (1); Core Color:

uniform throughout the wall; Firing:

black (N/O) ,

intentional firing in an

incompletely oxidizing atmosphere left carbon throughout the
vessel wall and a heavy smudge to the interior surface of the
bowl.

However, the exterior surface of the vessel is not smudged

and the natural iron of the ceramic clay was oxidized.

Temper:

predominantly large (O.S - 2.7 rnrn.) chunks of red (lOR 5/6)
potsherds.

Less commonly are tiny pulverized flecks of calcined

bone and subangular rounded rose and clear quartz sand grains.
Core Texture:

coarse to very coarse and occasionally granular

size grains, porous; Hardness of Paste:

2.S (Mohs' scale);

tensile strength is judged to be weak but not particularly fri­
able; Surface Finish:

well smoothed and polished on both surfaces

although the interior polish is more lusterous, perhaps due to
smudging.

Polishing streaks are prominant.

No carbon is present

on the vessel surfaces suggesting that it was not employed as
a cooking pot.

Surface Color:

outer surface is reddish brown

(SYR 4.5/4), smudged inner surface is black (5YR 2/1), clay is
buff fired where not smudged; Thickness of Walls:

7 mm; Form:

carinated bowl, the secondary worked sherd has two roughly parallel
ground edges which measure 4.3 cm from one to the other.
352

The

other ends of the sherd artifact are missing.

Decorations:

A short bank of lines was cut into the outer surface of the
vessel near the carinated shoulder.

These were incised before

firing when the bowl was almost dry, judging from the ruptures
caused by dragging a dull pointed stylus tool.

Line work is

one millimeter wide and U-shaped in cross section.

No displace­

ment of clay is present along the sides of the jncisions.

The

decorative motif is incomplete but the remaining portion con­
sists of two parallel lines crossed by six others at differing
slanted angles.

Several other thin scratch lines (straight and

one zig-zag) appear to be post firing engravings.
Modifications:
or surface.

Post Firing

six engraved line cuts are present on the interi­

These look like unsuccessful attempts to file

through the wall to make a cut parallel to the vessel shoulder.
Provenience:

The four potsherds were found together by C. Loeve

in an area located approximately 67 feet south-southwest of
the site datum near the river bank.

He recalls that they were

encountered at a depth of about 2.5 feet below the modern ground
surface.

This pOSition would place them in the Neo-American

horizon of the Catalpa Soil (Unit I) where they are compatible
with the other artifacts Loeve has dug out of the soil.
BAKED CLAY OBJECT (1 specimen):
A single amorphous lump of light brownish gray sandy clay
was found in Level 7 of Test Pit 4.

But because of the distur­

bance by recent farming activities, the location of this artifact

353

at a depth between 3.25 and 3.75 feet below the modern ground
surface is not thought to be trustworthy.

However, because the

clay object looks exactly like those found at the Dobias-Vitek
Site, this specimen is probably of prehistoric manufacture and
of Neo-American age (see Baked Clay Objects, Chapter IV).
Bone Artifact
The proximal end of a left ulna of an immature small artio­
dactyl (deer or pronghorn) has been fashioned into a tool of
unknown use.

Modification of the bone consists of grinding of

the broken shaft to create two angled facets.

Striations on these

ground facets indicate that the modification was made by side­
to-side abrasion.

The grinding is well smoothed but shows no

evidence of wear from use.

The blunted tip of the broken shaft

is still rough from the original snapping.
The bone tool was found in the bottom of the spring-fed
gully just upstream from the main site where it probably fell
after eroding from some unknown position in the floodplain al­
luvium.

Loeve has demonstrated by excavation that many pre­

historic fire hearths are present at different elevations through­
out the gully walls. Dimensions: length, 11.Zcm; width of ground
tip, 1.0 cm.
Similar-tools have "been reported from both the Belton
voir (Shafer, Suhm and Scurlock 1964: 70) and
(Sorrow 1966: 50)excavatibns.

t~e

Reser~

Pecan Springs

Because-of the prevalence of

left over right ulnas .in the Bel ton sample, it was suggested
354

that a selection had been made by the prehistoric artisan
determined by his handness.
Studies on Environmental Data
Snail shells, river mussel shells, and vertebrate bones are
considered for the ecological and cultural interpretations to
be derived.

Both the snail and mussel shells are discussed here

while notes on the bones are offered by Witter in Appendix D.
No burned seeds were found in these excavations.
SNAIL SHELLS (2,674 specimens);
Field collection and laboratory preparation of this snail
shell sample followed the procedures already outlined in Chapter
V and Appendix B.
counts.

Amaral handled the shell identifications and

My environmental interpretations are patterned after

the approach of Amaral and Witter and in particular the habitat
groupings established for the Adamek Site (Chapter V).
At least 25 species of snails are recognized of which 7 are
new identifications over the previous studies (Fig. 62).

These

species are distributed by habitat preferences as follows:
Group I (grassland indicator) - 1; Group 2 (open,brushy indica­
tors) - 3; Group 3 (woodland indicators) - 12; and Group 4 (aquatic
indicators) - 9.

Members of snail Groups I and 2 are identical

to those described for the Adamek Site.

Group 3 includes those

eight species (and/or genera) appearing in the Adamek Site plus
four other land snails - Carychium exiguum, Vertiso ovata, Pupoides
albilabris and Hawaiia minscula - shown on Figures 48 and 62.
355

- - -...

-~

'-~--"'--- .. ~~

----~---

--

--~

-~

-----

The largest increase in member species is found in Group 4
which includes those four water snails present at Adamek
(Fig. 48) as well as 5 new ones recovered here at the Loeve
Site (Fig. 62).

But note that three members of this association

are suspected as Pleistocene Age contaminates because of their
present-day northern distributional range (footnote, Fig. 62).
The snail shell column considered here was taken from the
alluvial section exposed by Test Pits I and 3 as profiled on Fig­
ure 59.

Specimens were field recovered in two fashions:

by

picking from the 1/4-inch mesh screen as arbitrary dug levels
were excavated in Test Pit 1 (Fig. 83) and also by fine screen
washing of soil matrix samples collected from two fire hearths
(Numbers 1 and 3) as well as from Step 9 of the Test Pit 3 exca­
vations.

The recovery of shells was very erratic, an observation

which I cannot wholly explain.

This may be due to soil condi­

tions affecting preservation or again it could be due to the
accident of where the test pits did or did not intersect fossil
population clusters of gastropods.

In general, snails appeared

in large numbers in the top one foot of the Unit I soil, in Fire
Hearth I at a depth of 5.2 feet below the surface, and again at
the base of the profile both in Fire Hearth 3 and just below in
Unit III (Step 9) at a depth between 18.5 and 20.5 feet beneath
the floodplain surface.

In contrast, there was very little shell

recovery from the Unit I Catalpa Soil below one foot depth.
Samples taken from the middle of Unit II were not processed and
356

- -.. -~ ...---.~. -

--~ ~----~ ...

- - -...- - - -..--~ ... ~---~-----...

...

FIGURE 62.

Faunal list of prehistoric land and
aquatic gastropods, 41 WM 133. Species
shown are those not otherwise carried
on lists for the other two sites
(Figs. 48 and 72).

Figure 62
AQUATIC SNAILS
Helisoma trivolvis (Say)
Habitat:

may be found in permanent or temporary water, but
maximum size is attained in quiet shallow semi­
stagnant water- (Allen and Cheatum 1961: 297).

Shell size: 10 35 mm.
Lymnaea humi1is modicel1a (Say)
Habitat:

shallow water among the vegetation of lakes and
ponds and in temporary pools (Allen and Cheatum
1961: 299).

Shell size:

7-12 mm.

*Somatogyrus subglobosus (Say)
Habitat:

perennial waters (Cheatum, personal communication,
1969) .

Pisidium compressum Prime
Habitat:

found in perennial water with some current action,
never in bogs or swamps (Wendorf 1961: 108).

Pomatiopsis lapidaria (Say)
Habitat:

perennial waters (Cheatum, personal communication,
1969). Also Malek (1962: 71-72) states that it
always occurs close to freshwater, along banks
and floodplains of streams near ma~shy areas.

.

~l

1) .

*These two species, as well as Gyraulus circumstriatus (Tryon)
are suspect as Pleistocene contaminates because of their
present northerly distributional range.
C

I

• '. ,

35 7 ~.:

q

<' ,
..

LAND SNAILS
Carychium exiguum (Say)
Habitat:

woodland species that prefers moist situations
(Allen and Cheatum 1961: 301).

Shell size:

2 mm.

Vertigo ovata (Say)
Habitat:

found in moist areas under ground clutter and
stones (Allen and Cheatum 1961: 305).

Shell size:

2-3 mm.

358

therefore I do not know whether or not they contain snail shells.
The upper one foot of Unit I sediments yielded snails in
counts ranging from 154 to 252 per excavation level.

When sorted

into the different snail groups, the rank order of the associa
tions is quite variable dominated first by the Group 2 brush in­
dicators, then by the Group 1 grassland indicators, and then by
the Group 3 woodland species in Levels 1, 2 and 3 respectively.
I interpret this level by level variation as a very unstable
floodplain condition at the boundary between a riparian woodland
and a grassland.

The fluctuation is a reflection of the shifting

woodland fringe in which greater or lesser proportions of grass
and trees and/or brush were growing at different ages.

However,

no dating is possible because of the lack of temporally specific
artifacts.

Further, historic artifacts were found throughout

this segment of the alluvial profile although these are likely
to be modern contaminates of the sediments rather than contem­
porary cultural fossils.
At the base of the Test Pit I profile a large sample of 292
snails were recovered from Fire Hearth 1 by fine screen

w~shing.

The identifications of these shells shows a rank order of Groups
1, 2 and 3 respectively.

This series is indicative of a flood­

plain grass cover containing a few bushes and/or a tree or two,
not really very different from the overlying samples.

One

aquatic snail, Helisoma anceps, was recovered indicating the
presence of fresh, swift flowing water.

The'single invertebrate

cnuld have been brought in to this location clinging to a water
359

plant obtained by prehistoric man from the river.
At the base of the alluvial section, in Fire Hearth 3, was
collected a large sample of 743 snail shells by fine screening.
These show a group ordering of 1, 3, 2 respectively which in­
dicates a former grass cover with a few trees and/or bushes.
The Unit II clay sediments containing the hearth are interpreted
as former mud flats present next ot the ancestral
River.

San Gabriel

This sedimentary interpretation is confirmed by the large

number of water snails making up 78.4 percent of the sample.
However, three of the nine aquatic species are possible contami
nates rebedded from the Pleistocene Age Uvalde Formation and
therefore are suspect in this analysis.

But even when this group

of 275 water snails is removed, the remaining sample is almost
twice the number of land snails, a finding which I believe can
only mean that Fire Hearth 3 was constructed and used on mud
flats immediately by the river.

The river side location is well

confirmed by the four most common unsuspected water snails, all
of which favor large rivers or streams with a swiftly flowing
current.

The fact that only one of these shells, a water snail,

is burned is strong evidence that the invertebrates entered the
hearth under their own power when the fire was not lit.

This

observation, as well as their general small size, indicates that
they are part of a natural population reflecting the immediate
surroundings of the feature rather than food refuse.
A very similar snail shell fauna was removed from Unit III
sediments at a location midway between Step 8 and 9 just under
360

Fire Hearth 3.

The sample of 602 specimens is composed of al­

most equal numbers of land and water snails once the suspect
Pleistocene contaminates are removed.

The land snails consist

primarily of Group 1 grassland indicators with lesser numbers
of Groups 2 and 3 indicative of a little brush and trees.

No

cultural remains are in association but the environmental inter­
pretation reflects the river side vegetation of a mud flat and
gravel bar sometime prior to the use of Fire Hearth 3.

The

most common unsuspected water snail species favor large, swift­
ly flowing rivers showing no appreciable change in the nature
of the drainage compared to the aquatic snails of Fire Hearth 3.
MUSSEL SHELLS (20 specimens):
Pelecypod shell fragments were not common in the Loeve Site
excavations, no doubt because most of the testing was performed
outside of the main cultural midden.

Just a few fragments were

found in Test Pits 1 and 2 while Fire Hearth 1, located 5.2 feet
beneath the modern ground surface, contained only 14 unidenti
fiable fragments.
It was only at the base of the alluvial section, in Unit III,
that river mussel shells were very common.

Although these were

not field collected or identified, portions of shells were mapped
throughout the upper 3.5 feet of the unit where they were dis­
tributed among the fire hearths (Numbers 2-8) of the lower com­
ponent.

Eighteen valves were observed of which 2/3 occurred

within gravel stringers, while the remaining'portion was field
361

--

-

...

_-_ . . _ ...•.•....__ _-_ ... _­
..

recorded within the interbedded clay stringers of Unit III.
All of these specimens are thought to be remnants of a natural
pelecypod population thrown up on the prehistoric gravel bars
and mud flats of the ancestral

San Gabriel River around 5000

B.C., to judge from the radiocarbon dates on the contemporary
fire hearths.

In future research, shells found in such a geo

logical context should be collected for study in order to ascer­
tain any human dietary preferences by comparing this kind of
sample with the shellfish food recovered from the floodplain
middens.
Two bivalves were also observed within Fire Hearth 2.
probably were remnants of a shellfish gathering.

These

This observa­

tion might suggest that occupation was during some season of the
year other than late summer when shellfish were not available
in the river because of high water.
Summary and Conclusions
Data developed here is not, strictly speaking, comparable
to that presented for Dobias-Vitek and Adamek.
cause:

This is so be­

(1) our excavations in Test Pits 1, 2 and 4 were placed

outside of the upper component midden buried in Unit I; arid (2)
the lower component, found at the base of the alluvial section,
is a different kind of site type than the upper midden here or
those middens composing either Dobias-Vitek or Adamek.

This

difference is expressed in the river side situation and in the
362

general lack of much camp refuse.

As a settlement, it is thought

to have been a briefly occupied river side camp.
Lower Component
The lower component is a campsite comprised of

~everal'in£Qr­

mal fire hearths (Numbers 2-8) buried in the base of alluvial
Unit II and in the upper portion of Unit III.

Although no tem­

porally diagnostic artifiacts were found here, based on 3 radio­
carbon dates this occupation took place some 7000 years ago during
Early Archaic times.

To judge from the geological context of

the hearths, the camping was conducted on point bars (gravel
bars and mud flats) dE!posi ted on the ins ide bend of a swiftly
flowing river--the ancient San Gabriel.

The channel side inference

is nicely collaborated by the aquatic snail shell interpreta­
tions which indicate a fast flowing river nearby.

Analysis of

the burned gopher bones and land snails points to an open, grassy
cover on the river bars and flood channel banks, which is again
very similar to the vegegation observable on meander bends of
the San Gabriel River today.

However, this open cover type, with

very few shrubs or trees, is altogether different from the dense
modern woodland found along the straight, quiet flowing reaches
of the present river.
The whole appearence of this component gave me the feeling
that the prehistoric Indians were temporarily camped by the river
for the local resources to be found in the water and along the
363

bars and banks of the flood channel.

These field reflections

were amply supported as the data removed from the hearths was
studied in the laboratory.

The most obvious local resources

are drinking water, flint material used for knapping, and lime­
stone cobbles for hearth cooking.

In addition, the river yielded

fish, anurans, (either frogs and/or toads), and turtle.

The

brush and trees of the river bank and point bars were suitable
habitats for birds, gophers, and other unidentified rodents.
The identified snakes, of course, could have inhabited either
environment.

The fact that a large proportion of these verte­

brates were burned suggests that they were singed by cooking
directly in the hot ashes of the fire and/or that the discarded
banes were thrown back into the flame.
is

aquati~

Another river resource

plants which are indicated indirectly by the very

large proportion of water snail shells found in Fire Hearths 2
and 3.

This is an interpretation developed by Amaral from his

gastropod study at Adamek where he reasons that the water snails
could most likely be accounted for in the site by supposing that
they were introduced by man as they clung to aquatic greens be­
ing utilized for food and materials.
The lack of much refuse either in or around the hearths, as
well as the nature of the features themselves, certainly suggests
a brief use for each one.

Since they are vertically stratified

through 3.5 feet of alternating fluvial stringers of gravel and
clay, it is obvious that this spot on the river was repeatedly
reused .'

These conclusions are reinforced through observations
364

at Fire Hearth 3 which show that the feature was washed over
during flood stage on several occasions, to judge by the presence
of river pebbles and micro-bivalves found in the hearth.

Also

the micro-stratigraphy of hearth rocks found under, in, and over­
lying a zone of pink scorched soil indicate several
this one feature.

reuses~

of

Thus the local resources were of sufficient

attraction to continually induce temporary camping here, perhaps
on a seasonal basis.

But the only seasonally specific data

bearing on this idea is negative evidence - the lack of much
river mussel shell in the hearths thrown up on the ancient gravel
bars, despite its presence in the river to judge from the dead
shells.

As has been argued in Chapter V, river mussels are most

accessible for hand collectiong during the low water stage which
in the San Gabriel occurs during late summer (July, August, and
September).

For this reason, it would look as if human occupa­

tion was avoided at this time of year.
Upper Component
A thick midden buried in the upper four to six feet of Unit
I alluvial sediments is characterized as the upper component.
This portion of the Loeve Site probably occupied a low knoll or
topographic rise on the ancient floodplain of the San Gabriel
River.

Our test excavations all lay outside of the midden pro­

per indicating that the farm operator, C. Loeve, has most likely
dug out the main site through his amateur extavations.
365

Despite

this set back, our

sa~va~~

tests have some value in that they

reveal the quite abrupt manner in which the midden distribution
stops.

This finding was very surprising to me since I had

previously assumed that all of the buried prehistoric middens
of the bottomland would have gradational boundaries and growth
histories which would produce a shifting center of mass.
Recovery of temporal guide artifacts, from the Loeve Site,
and in particular the Period VIII through X projectile points,
indicate an age span extending through Transitional Archaic and
Neo-American times--a finding which is little different from
the chronology of contemporary Dobias-Vitek occupation.
Surface observation of the churned up midden contents in­
dicates about the same assemblage of artifacts seen at the other
two prehistoric middens reported in this volume.

At Loeve,

these include shaped artifacts (stemmed and unstemmed bifaces) ,
waste flint flakes and cores, hearthstones, animal bones, snail
shells, and river mussel shells.

Also charcoal flecks are pro­

fusely distributed through the Catalpa Soil of Unit I.

Loeve

tells me that his excavations yielded artifacts at variable depths
but in general no more than four feet beneath the modern surface.
But in addition, his diggings into the side of the river bank
indicate the presence of some individual artifacts and cracked
rock hearths to a greater depth, perhaps as much as 6 feet be­
neath the ground surface.

An example of such a buried feature

is Fire Hearth I found at a depth of 5.2 feet.
366

Therefore the

depth and the apparent density of specimens within the main
part of the midden suggest a semi-permanent camp to me.
Burial of the cultural deposit was by slack water deposition
of floodplain clays as the river aggraded its valley floor
during occupation.

This repeated overbank flooding took place

when the river channel was located on the south side of the
valley, an interpretation which is drawn from the limited space
available between the Loeve Site and the valley margins bounded
by the Uvalde Formation (Fig. 1).

In this fashion, the mid-val­

ley situation of the site reflects a choice for settlement to
avoid many of the high water channel side floodings, a residence
decision which paralleled that made at the contemporary Dobias­
Vitek Site.

Therefore, the modern river position, which is ac­

tively eroding the site today, represents a return to its previous
Early Archaic position in the valley after a 5000 year long
migratory shift to the far side of the valley, a complete lateral
cycle in its meandering history.
If the snail fauna recovered from the upper one foot in Test
Pit 1 is contemporary to the Loeve midden, then the surrounding
plant community during occupation was a boundary ecotone lying
between a woodland and a grassland.

Because of the statistical

prominence of snail Groups I through 3 change their rank order
so often within the upper foot of sediments, the woodland fringe
composed of brush and sparse trees with an understory of grass
would appear to have been highly unstable.
367

Large and big mammal size bone fragments, some of which were
identified as deer and bison, are scattered through the flood­
plain sediments of Test Pits 1 and 2 between depths of 0.7 and
5.4 feet beneath the modern surface (Fig. 83).

These represent

stray items of food refuse scattered on the ancient floodplain
surface by the midden occupants.

368

CHAPTER VII
Summary and Conclusions
This report is based on the archeological study of three
central Texas prehistoric sites in terms of their cultural
and natural contents.

The expressed goal of this study is to

develop quantitative data which will allow statements concern­
ing culture ecology as these provide explanations for the
dynamics of culture persistence and change within the Laneport
Reservoir District.
Test investigations were based on recommendations provided
by a reconnaissance-type survey conducted in 1963.

Although

the criteria for the original selections were not ecological
in orientation, by chance the site locations turned out to
be well chosen for my own purposes.

Basically each represents

a somewhat different prehistoric utilization of the valley
bottomland as reflected in its position along a cross-valley
transect.

From an anchor point along the river (lower component

of the Loeve Site), the series includes a mid-valley location
(Dobias-Vitek Site) and the far end is found at the valley
margin (Adamek Site).

These three locations represent aboriginal

camping during the quest for resources (food and materials)
obtained from a patchwork of habitats including riverside,
369

woodland, and floodplain grassland respectively.
All of the sites are of somewhat different ages within
a block of time extending from 5000 B.C. to as late as A.D.
1750 (?).

In the local Texas stage sequence constructed by

Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954), they are defined as Archaic
and Neo-American.

However, in terms of the more widely

employed stage theory of Willey and Phillips (1958: 104-111),
all of the site components, of whatever age, can be classified
as Archaic in character both as to artifactual inventory and
in terms of the inferred life-way.

Within the Laneport District

These remains reflect a strong cultural and behavioral persis­
tence regardless of environmental situation or temporal age.
Because of the long term stability involved, the cultural
configuration is referred

to~as

a Direct Tradition explained

by the overriding dependence for survival on the local flood­
plain and riverine ecology.

The ecological boundness of the

tradition is an outgrowth of both the resource potentialities
and limitations of the local environment as these could be
exploited by a simple, pre-metal technology.

Specifically,

the bottomland of the San Gabriel River was always a bountiful
environment in terms of the great range of natural products
and foodstuffs useful to the central Texas Indians.

However,

the ecology of this natural setting provided limitations to
cultural growth and development.
are:

These environmental limitations

(1) the capricious production of the natural foodstuffs,

leading to uncertain year-to-year harvests, - (2) surplus yields
of anyone food crop were not quantitatively great (even deer
370

and buffalo, which are high meat producers, were apparently
not present in large numbers), and (3) many of the available
foods do not lend themselves to storage (with the obvious
exceptions of meat which can be sun dried as "jerkey" and
the nut crop which stores well).

From an assessment of the

potentialities and limitations of the environment, I conclude
that these factors operated to shape the human response
towards a Direct Tradition in which the environment exerted
a subtle pressure on the human population to continue the
same technical practices generation after generation.
Subsistence technology for food-getting was centered on
hunting and gathering with thorough utilization of all edible
natural foodstuffs.

When the choice was for either a woodland

or a grassland setting, then that habitat was exploited intensely
over a long period of time through repeated seasonal relo­
cations at one spot on the floodplain as a part of a mobile
pattern of settlement movements routed in a wandering fashion
over the landscape.

Although it cannot be proven with the data

in hand, I feel it is likely that this seasonal movement took
place along prescribed routes within a restricted territory.
But future studies of settlement distributions will be
required to demonstrate this speculation.
The preserved tool assemblage is very limited in scope,
being comprised of just two major elements - bifaces and
utilized flakes - plus a short supporting list of uncommon
artifacts.

Historically, the only technical introductions now

recognized were the bow and arrow and fired ceramics. However,
371

use of pottery containers never became common and therefore
they had little influence on daily life.

Of much more signif­

icance was the use of the bow and arrow hunting equipment
which gradually replaced the atlatl-dart after A.D. 600
providing a more accurate and efficient means for an increased
take in both the number and variety of animals hunted. Through
this means, a more perfect adap'tation was made with the riparian
woodland.

Witter expresses this same relationship from the

standpoint of an ecologist by suggesting that the hunting inno­
vation led to an increased environmental carrying capacity for
human populations during Neo-American times.

But without

some measure of the aboriginal populations before and after
A.D. 600, we are not now in a position to evaluate whether or
not this technical introduction led to a greater density of
people; that is, the carrying capacity idea is only a suggestion
at this time, not a demonstrated relationship.
When I first undertook this study, I had expected to be
able to show a correlation between environmental resources and
the tool assemblage.

That is I hypothesized that a distinctive

tool inventory (list of artifacts and their frequencies)
would be defined for each ecological setting; for example, a
woodland inhabited site as opposed to a grassland occupation
or one situated along a riverside.

Therefore I was very sur­

prised to see this relationship overturned through a study of
the stone tool industry.

Counts of the two main tool classes

show the proportions of bifaces and utilized flakes to remain
about the same through time as well as geographicalJy from
372

environment to environment.

This relationship is a quite

unexpected finding of this study, one which I can only explain
in terms of the simple and very generalized nature of the
technology.

Once this technical solution to resource exploi­

tation had been evolved, sometime prior to 1000 B.C. there
appeared to be little reason to modify it as long as the environ­
ment remained quite constant.

In day-to-day terms, the same

technical solutions were employed for the same food-getting
problems throughout millennia of time.

It is this consistency

in problem solving which led to the Direct, ecologically bound,
cultural Tradition.
But what about the ability of this simple technology to
be adapted with seemingly equal facility to either woodland or
grassland resources?

Certainly at this functional level of

analysis, I had expected more frequency shift in the tool
proportions than is evident.

This belief was based on the

idea that a tool category especially one as simple as a sharp­
edged waste flake, would reflect the intensity of

the food­

getting activities in which it was employed through the
numbers of its occurrence.

By correlating the frequencies of

stone tools with the associated food refuse, I had hoped that
a statistical relationship would emerge allowing more pene­
trating inferences to be made concerning tool use than I am
now able to propose based on the indicative qualities of tool
shape and wear abrasion alone.

Therefore the constant nature

of the technology, when the variable of environment is
373

analytically manipulated, becomes something of a set-back
for the archeologist.
way the

~rehistoric

However, this is obviously not the

Indians viewed the situation.

For their

technical view of the patchwork environment was basically
simple, allowing their unspecialized technology to be employed
in the exploitation of any local habitat without noticeable
modification in the tool kit.
The density studies made on the many different kinds of
cultural and natural data are used here to formulate two
principles dealing with artifact distributions.
concerns any individual

resource-use~

One of these

while the other treats

the whole set of resources present around any given site.
first principle states that:

Proximity of a site to !

resource is directly proportional to the intensity
use.

The

of its

This empirical statement was developed from the observa­

tion that as the distance between the site and the natural
resource was decreased, then the density of the utilized resource
product increased in the site as measured by a concentration
index.

To explain this principle, I believe that a strategy

was employed in which a camp was located either directly at a
prime resource or else at a compromise location midway among
several resources.

Thus if aquatic and

stream~side

foods were

desired, then a camp was pitched by the river channel.

On the

other hand, if a combination of upland materials as well as
aquatic foods were sought, then a mid-valley position was
chosen.

However, in addition to the attractive resource

374

- ....

determinants of a site situation, flooding operated as a
limiting factor which deterred or curtailed choice of certain
topographic situations.

For this reason, the location of the

major midden camps was set back from the main drainages in a
mid-valley or valley margin position.

By this means, major

overbank floods were more often avoided.

But temporary camps

placed directly in the main channel trench were short term
occupations thereby reflecting flood stage avoidance.
The second principle is a corollary of the first and states
that:

The degree of total resource exploitation is inversely

proportional to the radial distance measured from the site
location.

This statement follows from the observation that the

number and intensity of local resource-use increased as the
distance from the site decreased; an inverse relationship which
is primarily based on the analysis of the vertebrate fauna.
Thus is a decision to locate was based on a prime set of
determinants, then all other resources were also intensely
utilized from the immediate site surroundings largely to the
detriment of those more distantly placed.

This principle is

seen operative in a choice of habitats; a site located in a
woodland cover yields largely woodland food refuse while one
situated on an open grassland yields mostly animal bones com­
patible with that setting.
Both principles reflect a view of the local environment
and the most efficient means of making a living from it. This

375

--.-.~-.----------------------.-----~

....

~--.-----.---.---.----

view is a strategy of intensive use of local recources in
order to maximize economic gains (rewards) with the least
human effort expended.

From a human standpoint, it can be

said that the least effort expended in a task often determined
the choice of a work site location, which is to say that
these aboriginal peoples were efficiently lazy in their routine
work habits.

376

- - - " ----

"--"~-----

---

REFERENCES CITED
Abel, L. J.
1955
Pottery Tlpes of the Southwest. Museum of
Northernrizona, Ceramic Series No.3,
Flagstaff·.
Allen, D. C. and E. P. Cheatum
1961
Ecological Implications of Fresh-Water and Land
Gastropods in Texas Archeological Studies.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Vol. 31 (for 1960): 291-316.
Alexander, Herbert L., Jr.
1963
The Levi Site: a Paleo-Indian Campsite in
Central Texas. American Antiquity, 28: 510­
528, Salt Lake Ci ty.
Ambler, J. Richard
1967
Three Prehistoric Sites Near Cedar Bayou,
Galveston Bay Area. State Building Commission
Archeology Program, Report No. 8.
Beardsley, Richard K. (Chairman)
1956
Functional and Evolutionary Implications of
Community Patterning. In Seminars in Archaeology:
1955, edited by Robert Wauchope, Memoirs of the
Societ, for American Archaeology, No. 11, pp.

129-15 .

Blair, Frank W.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal
of Science, Vol. 2, No.1, pp. 93-117.
Bolton, Herbert Eugene
Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century: Studies
1962
in S anish Colonial Histor and Administration.
Burch, J. B.
How to Know the Eastern Land Snails. Pictured
1962
Key Nature Series. Wm. C. Brown Company
Publishers, Dubuque, Iowa.

377

Campbell, T. N.
1948
The Merrell Site: Archaeological remains
Associated with Alluvial Terrace Deposits in
Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 19, Lubbock.
Carr, John T., Jr.
1967
The Climate and Physio~raphY of Texas. Texas
Water Development Boar, Report 53, Austin.
Corps of Engineers
1962
San Gabriel River Watershed Brazos River, Texas.
House Document 591, 87th Congress, 2nd session,
u.s. Government Printing Office
1967

Laneport Dam: Information for Meetinf of Board
of Consultants, Georgetown, Texas, 1 -15
November, 1967. U.S. Army Engineer District,
Fort Worth. Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth.

Crabtree, Don E. and B. Robert Butler
1964
Notes on Experiment in Flint Knapping: 1, Heat
Treatment of Silica Materials. Tebiwa, Vol. 7,
No.1, pp. 1- 6 •
Davis, William B.
1966
The Mammals of Texas. Bulletin No. 41, Texas
Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Davis, Margarett B.
1969
Palynology and Environmental History During the
Quaternary Period. American Scientist, Vol. 57,
No.3, pp. 317-332.
Dittert, Alfred E., Jr., Jim J. Hester, and Frank W. Eddy
1961
An Archaeological surve~ of the Nava~o Reservoir
District, Northwestern ew Mexico.
onographs
of the School of American Research and the Museum
of New Mexico, No. 23, Santa Fe.
Dittert, Alfred E., Jr., and Fred Wendorf
1963
Procedural Manual for Archaeological Field
Research Projects of the Museum of New Mexico.
Museum of New Mexico Papers in Anthropology,
No. 12, Santa Fe.
Eddy, Frank W.
1968
Culture

378

~--.-

--.

......

Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1964
Towards the Systematic Description of Chipped
Stone. Sobretiro del XXXI Congreso Internacional
de Affiericanistas, Aetas y Memorias, pp. 155-169.
Mexico, 1962.
1969

The San Isidro Site: An Early Man Campsite in
Nuevo Leon, Mexico. Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas, Anthropology Series,
No.7, Austin.

Fenneman, N. M.
1931
Physiography of Western United States.
Hill, New York and London.
1938

PhlsiO~raphY

Hi 1,

of Eastern United States.
ew York and London.

McGraw­
McGraw-

Frisen, George C.
1968
A Functional Analysis of Certain Chipped Stone
Tools. American AntiqUity, Vol. 33, No.2,
pp. 149-155.
Gilmore, Kathleen Kirk
1969
The San Xavier Missions: A Study in Historical
Site Identification. State BUildin~ Commission
Archeological Program, Report No. 1 , Austin.
Harrington, H. D.
1967
Edible Native Plants of the Rocky Mountains.
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

The

Haury, Emil W. (Chairman)
1956
An Archaeological Approach to the Study of Cultural
Stability .. In,Seciinars in Archaeology: 1955,
edited by Robert Wauchope, Memoirs'of the Society
for American .Arcnaeolggy, NO. 11, pp. 31-57.
Heizer, R.
1960

Residues.

In.

Jelks, Edward E.
1962
The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect
Site in Hill County, Texas. Department of
Anthropo!ogYt ArchaeolofY Series, No. 5, The
University 0 Texas,
ustin.

379

~~~--~

­

....

Johnson, LeRoy, Jr., Dee Ann Suhm, and Curtis D. Tunnell
1962
Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The
Wunderlich, Footbridge, and Oblate Sites.
Bulletin of the Texas Memorial Museum, No.5,
The University of Texas, Austin.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1964
The Devi1's Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite
at Amistad Reservoir, Val Verde County, Texas.
Department of Anthropology, Archaeology Series,
No.6, The University of Texas, Austin.
Malek, E. A.
1962
Laborator Guide and Notes for Medical Malacolo
Burgess Pu lis ing Company, inneapolis.
Marks, Anthony E.
1968
The Halfan Industry. In The Prehistor~ of Nubia,
assembled and edited by Fred Wendorf,ol. 1,
pp. 392-460. Fort Burgwin Research Center and
Southern Methodist University Press, Dallas.
Murray, D. M. and A. B. Leonard
1962
Handook of Unionid Mussels in Kansas. Museum
of Natural History University of Kansas.
Miscellaneous Publication No. 28. Lawrence.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas.
Press, Austin.

The University of Texas

Oakley, Kenneth P.
1956
Man the Tool-Maker. British Museum (Natural
History), Jarrold and Sons, Ltd., Norwich,
England.
Op1er, Morris Edward
1941
,An Apache Life-Way: The Economic, Social, and
Reli~ious Institutions of the Chiricahua Indians.
The niversity of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Pennak, Robert W.
1953
Fresh-Water Invertebrates of the United States.
The Ronald Press Company, New York.
Piisbry, Henry A.
1946

380

Prewitt, Elton R.
1969
An Analysis of the Clarence Loeve Collection of
Artifacts from Williamson Count Y Texas. Unpub­
lished manuscript on file with t li e Texas Archeo­
logical Salvage Project, The University of Texas,
Austin.
Rawson, Jack
1967
Study and Interpretation of ChecmicalQuality of
Surface Waters in the Brazos River Basin, Texas.
Texas Water Development Board, Report 55, Austin.
Russell, Richard J.
1967
River and Delta Morphology. Louisiana State
University Press, No. 20. Baton Rouge.
Shafer, Harry J., Dee Ann Suhm, and J. Dan Scurlock
1964
An Investigation and Appraisal of the Archeological
Resources of Belton Reservoir, Bell and Coryell
Counties~ Texas:
1962. Texas Archeological Salvage
Project Miscellaneous Papers No. 1 .. Austin.
Shafer, Harry J.
1969
Archeological Investigations in Robert Lee Reservoir
Basin, West Central, Texas. Pa~ers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project,o. 17, Austin.
Shelby, Cader A.
1966
Geology of the Laneport Reservoir. Unpublished
notes of the Texas Water Development Board, Austin.
Shepard, Anna O.
1957
Ceramics for the Archaeologist. Carnegie
Institution of Washington, Publication 609,
Washington, D.C.
Soil Survey Staff
1951
Soil Survey Manual. U;S. Department of Agriculture
Handbook No. 18, Washington, D.C.
Sorrow, William M.
1966
The Pecan Springs Site, Bardwell Reservoir, Texas.
Pa ers of the Texas Archeolo ical Salva e Pro'ect,
ust~n.

1969

Archeological Investigations at the John Ischy Site:
A Burnt Rock'Midden in Williamson County, Texas.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project~
No. 18, Austin.

381

Sorrow, William M., Harry J. Shafer, and Richard E. Ross
1967
Excavations at Sti11house Hollow Reservoir.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
No. 11, Austin.
Steward, JUlian H.
1955a Theory of Culture Change.
Press, Urbanna.

University of Illinois

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
25, Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1957
Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County,
Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. IX,
March, No. 1.
1958

A Review of Central Texas Archeology. In A Review
of Texas Archeology, Part 1. Bulletin or the
Texa~ Archeological Socletx, Vol. 29~ pp. 63-107,
AustIn.

Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
The Texas Archeological Society Special Publication
No. 1 and the Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin No. 4,
Austin.
Taylor, Walter W.
1948
A Study of Archeology. American Anthropologist,
Vol. 50, No.3, Pt, 2, Memoir No. 69.
Templin, E. H., A. H. Bean, J. W. Huckabee, Jr.,
Leslie H. Smith, and M. H. Layton
1938
Soil surve of Williamson County, Texas. Series
1934, No. 0, United States Department of Agri­
culture, Bureau of Chemistry and Soils, in cooper­
ation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station, Washington, D.C.

1

Texas Water Development Board
1966
A Summary of the Preliminary Plan for Proposed
Water Resources Development in the Brazos River
Basin. Austin.
Tunnell, Curtis D.
1961
Evidence of a Late Archaic Horizon at Three Sites
in the McGee Bend Reservoir, San Augustine County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Vol. 30, 1959, pp. 123-158, Austin.
382

Valastro, S., Jr., and E. Mott Davis
1970
University of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates VII.
Radiocarbon, Vol. 12, No.1, pp. 54-58.
Varner, Dudley M.
1968
The Nature of Non-buried Archeological Data:
Problems in Northeastern Mexico. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 38, pp.
51-56, Austin.
Wauchope, Robert (ed.)
1956
Seminars in Archaeology: 1955. Memoirs of the
Society for American Archaeology, No. 11.
Wendorf, Fred
1961
Invertebrate Collections. In Paleoecology of the
Fort Brugwin
Llano Estacado, pp. 105-11
No.1,
The Museum of
Research Center, Publication
New Mexico Press, Santa Fe.
Weather Bureau
1959
Climatological Summary: Climate of Taylor, Texas.
Climatography of the United States No. 20-41,
U.S. Weather Bureau, Austin.
Willey, G. R., and C. R. McGimsey
1954
The Monagrillo Culture of Panama. Papers of the
Peabody Museum, Harvard University, Vol. 49, No.2.
Willey, Gordon R. and Phillip Phillips
1958
Method and Theorf in American Archaeology.
University of Ch1cago Press, Chicago.

383

APPENDIX A
ANALYSIS OF VERTEBRATE BONE AND ECOLOGICAL
INTERPRETATIONS FROM SITE 41 WM 118
by Dan C. Witter
All four test pits of 41 WM 118 produced bone, much of
it very fragmentary and some of it badly corroded.
was recovered by two methods:

The bone

by screening six-inch levels,

and by washing 1.2 cubic feet size matrix samples.

Although

the sample of identifiable bone is statistically small, it
is sufficient to demonstrate a distinct change in midden de­
bris, and permit some cultural and ecological interpretations.

Analysis
Positive identification of fragments to the species
level is based only on those fragments on which diagnostic
characters were recognized.

Except for Bison, no assump­

tions for species identification were based on portion of
ribs or questionable shank fragments.

When the probability

of a species is based on zoogeography or stratigraphic lo­
cation, the abbreviation "af." is used before the name.
The reference collection used was that of. the Vertebrate

384

Paleontology Laboratory at the Balcones Research Center,
Austin, Texas, under the curatorship of Dr. Ernest Lunde­
lius, Jr., which was, for the purposes of this study, mostly
complete.

A summary of the vertebrates is presented in a

taxonomic account (Fig. 63).
Site 41 WM 118 was excavated by arbitrary 6-inch
levels in order to keep vertical control because of the
lack of visible stratigraphic separations.

The site is

located in a floodplain and, assuming that the ground was
level, the various levels of the four test pits may be cor­
related by their elevations from the datum and made into
horizontal equivalents, which for the purposes of this
paper are called "horizons".

The manner in which the levels

are assumed to be roughly equivalent is shown in Figure 65.
The volume of each horizon was next computed and is
shown diagramatically with the diversity of vertebrates
from each horizon obtained from the quarter-inch mesh screen
(Fig. 66).

Although the lower horizons do not generally

represent as much volume excavated as some of the upper
horizons, a definite proportionate increase of the rela­
tive number of species present is recognizeable from early
to late.

On the basis of species composition through time,

the vertebrates recovered from the quarter-inch screen can
be grouped into faunal zones:

(l) Early Zone:

10 to 6, mainly deer-sized bone; (2) Late Zone:

Horizon
Horizon 4

38J

~

-------­

....~-....------.---~~-- ....

Fig. 63.

Taxonomic account of vertebrates from Site 41
WM 118.

Class OSTEICHTHYES
order SEMIONOTOIDEA
family Lepidosteidae (Gar-fish family: one tiny
jaw fragment, a tooth, and
a tiny ganoid scale)
other fish (bone very tiny and fragmentary, most
of it probably referable to such fish
as suckers, basses, and catfish, which
are abundant in the San Gabriel River
today)
Class AMPHIBIA
order ANURA (frogs, toads--tiny fragments, identification
not carried out further)
Class REPTILIA
order CHELONIA
family Testudinidae
Pseudexnys ~ (sliders)
Chelydra ~ (snapping turtles)
other turtles
order LACERTILIA (lizards-mostly tiny jaws, identifi­
cation not carried out further)
order OPHIDIA (snakes-represented by tiny vertebrae)
Class AVES
order GALLIFORMES
family Meleagrididae
Meleagris gallopavo (Turkey-represented by
long bone fragments)
order PASSERIFORMES (perching birds-represented by a
few tiny fragments)
other birds (possibly represented by some of the fragments)
Class MAMMALIA
order INSECTIVORA
family Soricidae
cr*ptotis ~!~ (Least Shrew--one dentary)
other s rews (jaws too damaged for identification)
order CARNIVORA
family Canidae
Canis cf. latrans (Coyote-possibly dog-fragment
of the lower third molar)
order LAGOMORPHA

386

family Leporidae
Sylvilagus af. floridanus (Eastern Cottontail
Rabbit-identification
mostly from jaws)
order RODENTIA
family Sciuridae
Sciurus niger (Fox Squirrel-identification from
dentition)
family Geomyidae
af. Geomys bursarius (gopher-identification
--from jaws)
family Cricetidae
Neotoma ~ (Woodrat-identification from
dentition)
Sigmodon hispidus (Cotton Rat-identification
from dentition)
cf. Microtus ochrogaster (Prairie Vole­
identification from
third lower molar)
other mice (numerous tiny bones not identified in
this study, possibly belonging to
other species)
order ARTIODACTYLA
family Cervidae
Odocoileus af. virginianus (White-tail deer-­
by far the greatest
amount of vertebrate
bone represented)
family Bovidae
af. Bison bison (Bison-mainly represented by
a fragmented rib at a depth
of about 1.5 feet)

387

Fig. 64.

List of identified vertebrate remains, 41 WM 118.
See legend for abreviations and symbols used.

TEST PIT 1.
L-l (H-4, #2) : 1. 4gm, 4 (4b) LM.
L-2(H-S,#3):27.4gm,S6(8b)LM,lB-bird bone frag=liQ.virg.
tooth frags=S,foot bone=l,metapodial frag=l •.
L-3(H-6,#4):23.Sgm,3l(13b)LM,lSM-0.virg.upper third premolar=
1, premolar frag=l,prx post metapodial=l,distal metapodial
frag=l.
L-4(H-7,#7):9.0gm14(8b)LM,2SM.
L-S(H-8,#12) :0.8grn2(lb)LM.
L-6(H-9#19):S4.8gm,16(lb)LM-0.virg.lower dentary piece=l,
tibia dist and piece of shk=T,metapodial shk frag=l.
L-7(H-lO,#25) :1.5gm,1(lb)LM.

TEST PIT 2
L-l(H-3,#lS) :2.9gm,9(6b)LM-Q.virg.tooth frag=l.
L-2(H-4,#16) :24.Sgm,33 (lSb)LM,4T-Q.virg.upper molar=l,lower
molar unerrupted=l,tooth frag=l,astragulus=l,toebone frags=
2iturtle limb bone=l,shell frags=3.
L-3 (H"" 5·, #21) : 20 .lgm, 36 (14b) LM25M, 4T-.!. virg. dist humerous=l i
turtle shell frags=4.
L-4(H-6,#23) :66.5gm,2(lb)BM,20(11b)LM-cf. Bison bison shk
frag=liQ.virg.molar frags=2,radius shk~.

TEST PIT 3
L-l(H-l,#27) :4.8gm,9LM;(#28*) :0.7gm*,35(6b)*-fish frags=4*;
lizard mandible frag=l*,vert=l*,Sorocoid maxilla frag=l*,
Sciurus niger upper jolar=l*,Sigmodon hispidas molar=2*;

388

rodent lower jaw frag=l*,vert=l*,tibia shk=l*,astragulus=l*.
L-2(H-2,#29) :44.9gm,34(8b)LM,2B;(#30*) :l.8gm*,160+(14b)*­
fish frags=2*,cf. Meleagris gallopavo shk frag=libird frag=l;
O.virg humerus-aist frag=l,radius shk-l,vert epiphyseal cap=l.
L-3(H-2,#31) :46.4gm,57(12b)LM,2(lb)5M,2B,3T-turtle carapace
frags=2,plastron frag=l,cf. Meleagris gallopavo shk frags=2;
Sylvilagus cf. floridanus lower jaw=l,dist femur=I;O.virg.
lower premolar=l,metapodial frag=l.
L-4(H-3,#33):35.7gm62(13b)LM,2Bj (#34*) :9.9gm*560+(25b)*-fish
otoliths=S*,vert=l*,spine=I*,frags=lO*;anurian humerus
frag=I*,frags=2*;turtle shell frags=2;Meleagris 1allopavo
shk frag=libird sternum frag=liSigmodon hispidus 2) molars=3*,
unerupted molar=l*;rodent lower jaw=l*,scapula prx=l*,
verts=6*,rib frags=4*,humerus prx=l*,femur prx=l*,toe bones=
ll*,caudal verts=2*iQ.virg.lower molar=l,tooth frags=2,
humerus prx frag=l,metapodial frag=l,vert epiphyseal cap=l.
(#53)Intrusive Rodent Burrow:6.7gm,103(2b)-fish frag=l;
anurian frag=liturtle carapace frag=ljbird sacrum frag=l;
Cryptotus parva lower jaw=l; Sylvilagusse occipital condyles=
2; Sigomodon hispidus molar=2,lower jaw frag=l, upper jaw
frag=liNeotoma sp. molar=l;rodent incisors=3, premax=l,ulna=l,
verts=7,pelvis=l,sacrum=I,rib=1,tibia=4.
L-5(H-4,#35) :13.8gm,2l{5b)LM,I(lb)SM; (#36*) :3.8gm*,300
(33b)*-fish otolith=1*,spine=2*,verts=S;anurian frag=lt j
lizard jaw=l*jsnake vert=4*iGeomys cf. bursarius lower
jaw=l*,tooth=l*;microtine molar=l*jrodent incisors=2,
verts=8*,rib frag=l*,toe bone=liO.virg.metapodial frag=l.
L-6(H-5,#37):l9.3gm,39(Sb)LMi (#38*) :4.2gm*,230+(2lb)*­
fish frags=2*;turtle shell frag=lilizard jaw frag=l*;
snake verts=4*;microtine molar=l*,tooth frag=l*;rodent in­
cisor=l*,scapula=l*,toe bone=I*,claw=I*;Q.virg metapodial
frag=l.
L-7(H-6,#44) :l4.7gm,3S(16b)LM; (#45*) :7.2gm*,2S0+(28b)*­
gar fish scale=l*ifish premax=I*,verts=3*,frags=8*isnake verts=
3;Sigmodon hispidus molar=l*;microtine molars=3*;rodent
verts-2*,calcanium=I*,toe bone=l*iQ.virg tooth frags=2.
L-8(H-7,#49) :2.lgm,4(3b)LM; (#50*);2.4gm*,24*-fish verts=
6*,frags=6*;lizard vert=l*;snake vert=l*jSigmodon hispidus
molars=2*;microtine molars=2*irodent toe bones=3*,calcanium=
l*,vert=l*,incisor=l*,tibia frag=l*icf. O.virg tooth frag=l.

389

L-9(H-8,#58):4.2gm,5(3b)LM-cf Q.virg tooth frags=2.
L-IO(H-9,#60) :3.5gm,ILM.

TEST PIT 4.
L2(H-2,#42) :3.2gm,IBM,4LM.
L3(H-2,#47) :114.7gm,18BM,60+(2b)LM,IB,7T-turtle shell frags=
6;Chelydra ~. shell frag=l;bird polished shk frag-l;Q.virg
(2)upper moIar=l,tooth frag=l,humerus shk frags=5,foot
bone=l,metapodial shk frag=l,toebone frag=l;cf. Bison bison
piece rib=1,frags=15.
L-4(H-3,#5l) :122.9gm,50+BM,35+(lb}LM,lSM,4T-Pseudemys ~ shell
shell frag=l;turtle shell frags=3;cf Sylvilagus ~ metatarsal
frag=l;o'h~rg.lower molar frag=2,maxilary frag-l,vert frags=
3,vert ep 1pyseal frags=2,pelvis=l,pelvis frag=l,astragulus=l,
metapodial shk frag=liaf Bison bison rib piece of blade=l,
rib frags=50+.
L-S(H-4,#S4) :l2.6gm,26(Sb)LM,lSM,lT-turtle shell frag=l;
Canis cf latrans upper second molar=I;Geomys !E tooth=
liQ.virg.molar frags=2.
L-6(H-5,#59) :3.8gm,7(2b)LM; (#61)Hearth 4:7(2b)LM(Hearth)
5:6(lb)LM.Total=l4(4b}LM.

LEGEND.
Total count of bones and fragments per level recovered
from the quarter-inch screen is summarized as:

BM or

"Big Mammal" (ie. bison or horse size), LM or "Large Mammal"
(deer, bear, coyote size), SM or "Small Mammal" (rabbit or
skunk size), B is Bird, T is Turtle.

The

* means from the

matrix sample.
Provenience is indicated by:

L=level, H=vertebrate

horizon, #=field number. i
The following abbreviations and symbols are used in
the indentificationi gm-gram, (lb) , (2b) etc.=number burned,
+=number plus unknown number more, but less than ten, (2),
(3) etc. after identification=minimum number of individuals
represented, cf=probable, af.=highly probable, sp.=unknown
species, vert-vertebra, shk=shank, dist=distal, prx=proxi­
mal, Q.virg=Odocoileus af virginianus.
Thus, for example, in test pit 2 the text begins­
"Level I, vertebrate horizon 3, field number 15 contained
2.9 grams of bone, of large mammal size, 6 of which were
burned.

The only piece of bone further identifiable was

a tooth fragment of Odocoileus af virginianus (deer, pro­
bably white-tail) ••. It

391

Figure 65.

Schematic profile showing the cor­
relation of excavation levels and
faunal horizons, 41 WM 118. The
horizons are established by group­
ing levels of roughly equivalent
elevations. See Figure 12 for the
base profile on which these data
clre plotted.

Figure 65

T.P. 3

.....

100'­

.a

V:Wvt

T.P. 4

~~~=~!-.!1.:.;10 r i

(are,a replOved by

slope erosion of
plowed field)

Z0

n 1

,
,,

,

99'­

T.P. 2

...

­

98'

1,(11'1:on 2

T.P. I

"ow

Horizon 3

-

i\i\J
,
- .. 1 - - - - - - - 1 - . ­

~-

Horizon 4

--

Horizon 5

­

97'

1-------1-­ -

--~

Ho rizon 6

96'

­

....

-- ..... _-- -- .. _---­

95'

Ho rizon 7

- -... -... -... _----­
....

8

110 rlZOH

:J

--­

. -- .... _------------­
Horizon 10

H~ r1zon

Figure 66.

Chart showing vertebrates recovered from
the quarter inch screen correlated with
the volume excavated from each horizon,
41 WM 118. Faunal zones are listed along
the right margin as groupmngs of horizons
containing similar vertebrate content.
Radiocarbon dates are inserted to illus­
trate the chronological control on the
stratigraphic sequence.

Figure

POST OCCUPATION ZONE

(

H-2

H-3

H-4

H-5

H-6

66

TURTLE, TURKEY?, OTHER BIRD, COTTONTAIL
RABBIT, DEER (2 individuals)

TURTLE I TURKEY, OTHER BY ,\
BIRD, RABBIT,DEER,BISON

< Cl4

LATE ZONE
BP 770 (AD lla~70

[TURTLE, GOPHER, DEER, BISON

I

I

TURTLE, BIRD, DEER, GOPHER, COYOTE

~URTLE'

I

J-E Cl4BP
l~50
(AD600-70

DEER, BISON?

L -_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _r _

H-7

[ DEER

H-a

[ DEER

H-9

[ DEER

H-10

I,

I
I

EARLY ZONE

I

Deer?

Scale: .Cubic feet

---~--~---------- ---~~-----------~-------------~~--'----------~------~-------~-~------~-------

to 2, greater varieties of vertebrates; (3) Post-Occupation
Zone:

Horizon 1, almost no bone from quarter-inch mesh

screen.
Radiocarbon dates of 1350 BP (A.D. 1180, Tx-806, fire
hearth) were obtained from Horizon 6 and from between
Horizons 3 and 4 of 770 BP (A.D. 600, Tx-804, fire hearth).
In the case of the matrix column taken from Test Pit
3, the volume of each sample is a constant 1.2 cubic feet
in size.

Each faunal horizon shown on Figure 65 is re­

presented by a single matrix sample, the identified bones
from which are tabulated on Figure 67.

Since the number of

identifiable remains is so small, it is not possible to
define any major change from horizon to horizon based on
this sample alone.

In general, the stratigraphic distri­

bution of animals is somewhat random except, perhaps, for
the vole, or microtine mouse, which occurs from the earliest
matrix sample to Horizon 4.

The distribution of the micro­

tine will be seen later to be especially useful for environ­
mental interpretations.
In addition to examining the stratigraphic occurrence
of the various vertebrates present, the total collection of
bone fragments from the quarter-inch mesh screen and matrix
samples were quantitatively evaluated both as to the total
number of' fragments and the total weights from each horizon.
The counts and weights from the quarter-inch mesh screen

394

Figure 67.

Chart showing the number of vertebrate
specimens obtained from matrix samples
in each faunal horizon, 41 WM 118.
Matrix samples are constant volume in
in size ( 1.2 cu. ft. ).

:I::I::I::I::I::I::I::I::I::I:

1 1 I 1 1 I I I 1 1
I--'I.OOO ..... (1\U1~WNI--'
1--'1--'1

:I:

-g

~.

1 1--'1

I

GAR FISH

I--'I--'I-'NI--'~W

undetermined FISH

0'100'100
II--'II--'WI~

til

ANtmAN

-

-0
r-­

::l

1--'11--'1--'1

1

1

LIZARD'jaw

::s

I--'W I--' I--' 1

I

1

SNAKE vertebrae

til

f--g.
-~

I-'WI-'/

1-'1--'1

undetermined BIRD

.a

I

I

I

I

II--'

SHREW

II>

1

1

I 1--'1

II--'

FOX SQUIRREL ( Sciurus niger )

1

I

I I--' 1

1

GOPHER

1

t---I--'

c..

NI--'l

1

I--'I-'IN

I--'O'\I\JI--'I

I

1

~~(1\I--'WN~

00

COTTON RAT ( Sigmodon hispidus )
MICROT INE
undetermined small RODENT

"

..0
C'

"'"

(I)

en

-.I

Figure 68.

Graph of bone fragments and gram
weights compared by faunal horizons
from the one-quarter inch screen,
41 WM 118. Fragment counts and gram
weights are weighted in proportion
to the volume excavated in each
horizon.

Figure 68

300

-

en 250

.J:.

.-CD0
eC

I

t

200

e0

E
:::J

Z

-

I

I

I
I
I
I

- - - Gram Weights From Quarter Inch Screen

I
I
I
I

,

150

Fragment Count From Quarter Inch Screen

I

I

I

I
I
I
I

,,

I
I

I

I

I
I

I

I

0
.0

.0

t

I

CD
C

CD

I

I

I

....

a.-

•

I

I

,•

aa.­

....0

I

i

C
CD

Legend

I
I

1

"0
C
C

..-

1

I
I
I

:J
a.­
0

,

I

I
1

,

I

I

I

,
,,

I

I

faa

I
I

I

.

80
70-:

I

I

I

I

I

,

I

I

60

50
40
:SO

\

I

I

I

90

,1\~

I

•

I

I '"

"

I
I

,

I

\

I

,

I

I

\

I

I

\

:

J

,.""

I

",,"

\

I
I

\
,

I

\

I

\

I
I

,
I

I

20
10
0

HI

H2

HJ

H4

HIS

H6

H7

He

H9

HIO

I­

"

late lone

Faunal

Early

Zone

Horizons
" I (

­

r''';

were calculated in percent of volume excavated and graphed
proportionately (Fig. 68).

The number of fragments and

their weights vary directly throughout the entire site,
with by far the greatest increase in Horizon 3.

This

same trend is reflected by the total weights and counts
from the matrix samples (Fig. 69).

The burned bone from

the matrix sample does not appear to vary significantly,
but the burned bone from the quarter-inch mesh screen varies
inversely to the total bone counts and weights, and is pro­
portionately greatest in Horizon 6 (Fig. 70).

Discussion
The total surface area excavated for the four test pits
of 41 WM 118 is 100 square feet.

This small sample is in

addition subjected to such bias or disturbance as may have
resulted from variable rates of sedimentation, the vagueries
of bone preservation, and the effect of burrowing animals.
Since it seems that such irregularities would be expected
to occur, interpretations of the vertebrate remains should
be restricted to broad patterns in the local area.
The large-sized bone of the sort recovered from the
quarter-inch screening of the contents of the four test pits
is interpreted as being generally reflective of diet and
culture.

Thus, using some broad assumptions regarding the

397

This page intentionally left blank.

Figure 69. Graph of bone fragments and gram
weights compared by faunal horizons
from the matrix samples of 1.2
cubic feet size, 41 WM 118.

Figure 70. Graph comparing weighed number of
burnt bone fragments from the one­
quarter inch screen to the burnt
bane fragments obtained from the
constant volume matrix samples <.
41 WM 118.
I

Figure 71.

Graph showing the number of ver­
tebrate species occuring in each
faunal horizon, 41 WM 118.

69

700

,

...

V)

."

GOO

Z

w

:It

(!)

500

<[

a:
• I.i..,
*,:

: : '.

"

LLI " 400

',2
'0

,"

.

~

"

'

o:a

300

It..
0
0::
W.
Ul

200

I

;:)

I

100

--

50
:

1',

\

,/

:It
Z

I

I

I

I

10

\

o

\

\

\\ '
~

,

I

6

",,/

-_/

FR..l\GMENl' COUNT

4

--,

~.-I

2

_...._-

GRAH l'i'EIGffl'S

'

HI

HS

H2

'H4

H5

H6

H7
,

,

. . .:

.

'

_ .. ,!, ...: •

FAUNAL

HORIZONS

-,

"

, "

"

~

, : ' '

.' .

,I,. '

~

,

"

,"

Figure 70

QUARTER I~TCH
SCREEN BURN'!' nONg

MATRIX SA!1PLE
BURN!' BO:::-1E COU111'
"

.. l

:,.'.:.

.

.

.......
....

."

HI
~ ~

.

~

. ..

H3

H4

H5

FAUNAL

' H6

HO

H1

H9

HIO

HORIZONS

;

,

~-'

H2

,

..

"

.....

..­

::.~..:

..

1
"",

Fi 9 ure 71

".'

"

'

,

.......
"

"
.,;,
,,'

'

....

.....
<

:. ....

* :

~,'

'­

.

"

"

b.;

••••

"

o

"

... ....

. ~'

,

'

.~

"

.
,

,

"

HI.

I

I

,I,

. I

H4

H5

HZ

H7

I
HO

I
liS

I
tHO'

'~-<I.;-,- - ­

'.

_...

FAUNAL

. .­
'

HOHIZONS,

.....

- - - _................

relationship of culture and midden debris, three observations
about the change in the use of the site can be made.
(1)

If the amount of bone is directly related to the
intensity of hunting activities in the area of
the site, then there was a greater intensity of
these activities in the Late Faunal Zone (Horizon
2 to 4) than in the Early Faunal Zone (Horizons
6 to 10), or sometime after 1350 BP (A.D. 600)

(see Fig. 68).
(2)

If the weight of bone is directly related to
the amount of meat calories represented, then
more vertebrate food is represented in the Late
Faunal Zone than in the Early Faunal Zone ( see
Fig. 68).

(3)

Since far more species are represented in the
Late Faunal Zone (Figs. 66 and 71), the explo­
itation for vertebrates was more exhaustive in
the Late Faunal Zone than in the Early Faunal
Zone.

Butchering techniques are generally not indicated by
the bone sample, except that it would appear that the
entire carcass of a deer was usually carried to the site.
Deer are by far the best represented animal and presumably
they were the primary objective for most wide ranging
hunting activities.

A list of identifiable deer bones is

401

_.

given below:
Horizon 1:

none

Horizon 2:

3 teeth, 1 vertebra, 6 humerus, 1 radius,
1 footbone, 2 metapodia1, 1 toe bone (min­
imum number of individuals represented:

2 deer).
Horizon 3:

3 teeth, 3 vertebra, 1 humerus, 1 pelvis,
1 astragalus, 1 metapodia1, 1 toe bone.

Horizon 4:

1 maxilla, 3 teeth, 3 astragali, 1 meta­
podial, 1 toe bone.

Horizon 5:

8 teeth, 1 humerus, 1 footbone, 2 meta­
p~dial

Horizon 6:

6 teeth, 1 radius, 2 metapodial.

Horizon 7:

1 tooth.

Horizon 8:

2 teeth.

Horizon 9:

1 dentary, 1 tibia, 1 metapodial.

Horizon 10: none.
Note that portions of the head and parts of the feet
are represented throughout.

Ribs are not mentioned because

they were not identified due to the lack of diagnostic fea­
tures.

The scarcity of vertebrae and the excess of humerus

fragments are pro9ably"a result of the small sample and not
otherwise meaningful.
The proportionately greater amount of burned bone in
the Early Faunal Zone, especially Horizon 6, is presumably

402~

due to techniques of fooa preparation which were different
than in the Late Zone (Fig. 70).
Even though the primary value of the bone from the
quarter-inch screen is for cultural inference, it also
provides some environmental indications.

The bison, white­

tailed deer, turkey, and coyote are now absent from the
heavily farmed Laneport Reservoir District today, but the
cottontail rabbits, fox squirrels, and turtles are still
common (Corps of Engineers 1962).
However, the best indication of what the fauna of the
San Gabriel River was like before plowing is from a com­
munication sent in 1746 by Father Mariano to Father Venito
Fernandez Santa Ana in San Luis potosl, Mexico (see Early
Environmental Description, Chap. I).

Father Mariano stated

that the following animals were present at his proposed
mission site to be located on the San Gabriel River about
22 miles downstream from Site 41 WM 118:

bison, deer,

turkey, fish, and alligator, all of which, with the excep­
tion of the alligator, have been identified from Site 41
SM 118 (Gilmore 1969:12).

The best vertebrate record is

from Horizon 1 to Horizon 6 during which time there seems
to be no reason to suppose that the basic physiognomy of
the environment has undergone any extreme change.

That is,

the drought-resistant riparian woodland would have been
continuous throughout this period; however, neither its

403

- - _ ........

_. _ _........ __._--_......._-_.

extent over the floodplain and uplands nor its density and
species composition are indicated.

Whether the meager re­

covery of bone in Horizons 7 to 10 is the result of an en­
vironment which provided poor hunting or other factors can­
not be determined.
A better indication of a change in the environment of
the immediate area comes from the vertebrate remains re­
covered from the matrix samples.

Whether by natural deaths

or as midden debris, the preservation of the very small
vertebrates from the site indicate a sequence of aggradation
as a result of flooding of the San Gabriel River.

Such

floods play an important part in determining the vegetation
of a floodplain, the duration of the floods being especially
critical in influencing the composition and density of
species present.

Grasses have a poor tolerance to floods

of long duration mainly because of the lack of oxygen avail­
able to the roots and an increase of carbon dioxide in the
soil.

Certain trees tend to survive long periods of flood­

ing better, ana with the additional moisture available, they
form a dense crown canopy which also acts to shade out the
grasses.

The relative abundance or occurrence of small

vertebrates with small home ranges which are specifically
adapted for more wooded or more grassy environments could
be a source of inference for environmental change.

All of

the terrestrial vertebrates from the quarter-inch screen

404

and most of those from the matrix samples occur in a variety
of environments:

the fox squirrel, gopher, cotton rat

(Sigmodon hispidus), shrew, snakes 'and lizards are all to
be expected on the floodplain at the present time, and in­
dicate that both wooded and grassy environments were in
the area of the site in the past.

The numbers of specimens

are too few and occur too sporadically to ,either reliably
indicate the relative abundance of the various species or
the period of time they occurred in the site area.

The

matrix sample vertebrates also give some indication of the
proximity of the types of environments to the site.
cotton rat, Sigmoden

The

hispidus, which occurs in most horizons

throughout the site and represents a grassy environment,
has a recorded range of 0.55 acres or roughly a radius of
100 feet (McNab 1963).

The fox squirrel, characteristic of

a wooded environment, has a home range of 13.3 to 25 acres
or a range with a radius of as much as 500 feet (McNab
1963).

The presence of aquatic environment vertebrates

is not unexpected considering the proximity of the river.
Most significant is the presence of voles (microtines)
which are now locally extinct from the area.

The microtines

are chunky-looking mice with short tails and short ears
which, as a group, tend to prefer dense herbaceous cover
and moist conditions, and have a high tolerance for cold
temperatures.

In the matrix samples, microtines occur

405

from the deepest sample (Horizon 7) to Horizon 4, or not
later than the radiocarbon date between Horizon 4 and 3 at
770 years ago (A.D. 1180).

Whether microtines survived

in the general area at a later date cannot be determined
by the small sample taken.

However, the disappearance of

the microtine after Horizon 4 suggests that a change in
cover or in density and composition of the herbaceous ve­
getation was taking place at this spot.

It is not unusual

for microtines in Texas to occur prehistorically but to be­
come absent at various times over the last ten thousand
years.

The list given below is not complete but should

illustrate the trend (Lundelius 1962, 1967; Dalquest and
others 1969; Patten 1963):
Count:i

Localit:i

Date BP

Travis

Levi Shelter

Zone 1, pre-lO,OOO

Kendall

Cave wlo Name

11,000

Edwards

Schulze Cave

8,000

sutton

Felton Cave

7,700

Llano

Millers Cave

3,000

Travis

Barton Road Site

1,000

Hill

Kyle Site

400

The microtine remains are either loose teeth or
toothless jaws, and identification as to prairie mole
(Microtus orchogaster) or pine vole (Pitymys pinetorum)
is difficult.

The only known diagnostic feature in the

406

dentition is a characteristic of the lower third molar.
Microtine teeth look like columns of striated enamal, and
from the top look like triangles of enamel strung together.
In the prairie vole, the third lower molar triangles are
usually closed, but are almost always open in the pine vole
(Patten 1963; Dalquest ana others 1969).

One of the micro-

tine teeth recovered from the matrix samples appears to be
the third lower molar, and all of its triangles are de­
finitely closed.

Two other microtine lower third molars of

the prairie vole pattern were also found in the nearby
Site 41 WM 135 (see Appendix C).

Thus, on the basis of

dental characteristics the micro tine is here provisionally
referred to Microtus oChrogaster.
Prairie voles have the same diet as the cotton rats
and are often found together (Fleherty and Olson 1969).
In the site, microtines and cotton rats are sympatric in
the older matrix samples, but later the microtines disappear
at about 800 years ago, indicating a reduction in grassy
cover.

Since microtines have a home range of, .09 to .30

acres or a range of up to about 100 feet radius (McNab 1963),
it may be inferred that a vegetational change was occurring
close to or including the location of 41 WM 118, in which
an area of dense rank grass was giving way to woodland.
Evidence that wooded and grassy areas were characteristic
of the San Gabriel floodplain before cultivation is provided

407

by Father Mariano 200 years ago when he referred to flood­
plain "pastures" and "woods" (Gilmore 1969).

If pollen had

been preserved at the site, pollen diagrams would have pro­
vided deeper insights into the vegetational changes and
important environmental factors.

Although pollen was not

preserved, snails were extremely abundant in the site and
detailed studies demonstrate a local change from more grass­
land

snails to more woodland snails.

The reduction in

grassland local to 41 WM lIS indicated by both snails and
vertebrates may also be part of a larger over-all pattern!
since the microtines are now locally extinct from the
Laneport region.
Changes in vegetation on the San Gabriel floodplain
were presumably extremely significant to the prehistoric
hunters and gatherers who lived in the area.

A relative

change in abundance of grass-seeds to pecans and acorns
may have had much to do with the use of the site, especially
seasonally.

With the introduction of the bow and arrow

which occurred about 1350 BF (A.D. 600±70) or early in the
Late Faunal Zone, the area may have had a greater carrying
capacity for human populations and thus increased the fre­
quency of sites in which vertebrates were cooked.

Summary
Bone was recovered from 41 WM 11Sboth by coarse

408

screening with a quarter-inch mesh and by fine screening
of 1.2 cubic feet matrix samples.
The bone was analyzed both for species present and for
the quantitative distribution of fragments from the oldest
levels to the most recent.
The cultural interpretations provided by the vertebrate
remains indicate more intensive hunting and preparation of
game on the site, including more exhaustive utilization of
vertebrate resources in later times than earlier, the change
beginning about 1350 years ago (A.D. 600), soon after the
occurrence of arrow points in the site.
Throughout the site, deer represent the greatest source
of vertebrate food.
Microtine teeth were found in the oldest matrix sample
and occurred consistently until about 770 years ago (A.D.
1180) when they disappeared from the later matrix samples.
A vegetational change is thus inferred in which areas
of dense, rank grass around the site location gave way to
a floodplain woodland.
This inferrence closely corresponds with the interpre­
tation of an analysis of snail remains from the same site.

409

~~~---

Bibliography
Burt, W. H., and R. B. Grossenheider
1964
A Field Guide to the Mammals.
Company, Boston.

Houghton Mifflin

Conant, Roger
1958
A Field Guide to Reptiles and Amphibians.
ton Mifflin Company, Boston.

Hough­

Corps of Engineers
1962
Report of Fish and Wildlife Resources Affected
by the Proposed San Gabriel River and Tributaries
Project, Williamson County. Fish and Wildlife
Service, Department of the Interior, pp. 202­
212.
In San Gabriel River Watershed Brazos
River, Texas, House Document 591, 87th Congress,
2nd. session, U.S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D. C.
Dalquest, W. W., E. Roth, and F. Judd
Mammal Fauna of Schulze Cave, Edwards County,
1969
Texas. Bulletin of the Florida state Museum,
Biological Sciences, Vol. 13, No.4.
Davis, William B.
1966
The Mammals of Texas. Bulletin No. 41, Texas
Parks and wildlife Department, Austin.
Fleharty, E. D., and L. E. Olson
1969
Summer Food Habits of Microtus orchoiaster and
Sigmodon hispidus. Journal of Mamma ogy, Vol.
50, No.3.
Fowells, H. A.
1965
Silvics of Forest Trees of the United States.
Agriculture Handbook No. 271, U.s. Department
of Agriculture, Washington, D. C.
Gilmore, Kathleen Kirk
1969
The San Xavier Mission: A Study in Historical
Site Identification. state Building Commission
Archeological Program, Report No. 16, Austin.

410

-------

Hall, E. R. and K. R. Kelson
1959
The Mammals of North America.
New York.

Ronald Press,

Lundelius, Ernest L., Jr.
1962
Nonhuman Skeletal Material from the Kyle Site.
Appendix 2 In: The Kyle Site: A Stratified
central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County, Texas,
Department of Anthropology, Archaeology Series
No.5, The University of Texas, Austin.
1967

Late-Pleistocene and Holocene Faunal History of
Central Texas. In: Pleistocene Extinctions:
the Search for a Cause, edited by P. S. Martin
and H. E. Wright, Jr. Proceedings of the VII
Congress of the International Association for
Quaternary Research, Vol. 6, pp. 287-319, Yale
University Press, New Haven and London.

Martin, A. C., H. S. Zim, and A. L. Nelson
1961
American Wildlife and Plants: A Guide to Wild­
~l~i~f~e~F~o-o-d~H=-arb~i~t-s-.--~D~o-v-e--r-=P-ub~lications, Inc.,
New York.
McNab, Brian
1963
Bioenergetics and the Determination of Home
Range Size, The American Naturalist, Vol.
XCVII, No. 894, May-June.
Patten, T. H.
1963
Fossil Vertebrates from Millers Cave Llano
County, Texas, Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin,
No.7, Austin.
Romer, A. S.
1962
The Vertebrate Body.
Philadelphia.

411

W. B. Saunders Co.,

Acknowledgments
The preparation of this paper has been greatly assisted
by Dr. Frank W. Eddy of the Texas Archeological Salvage
project and Dr. Ernest L. Lundelius, Jr., of the Geology
Department, The University of Texas at Austin.

Much help

has also been received from William W. Amaral, Elton R.
Prewitt, and my wife, Alison.

APPENDIX B
SOME ECOLOGICAL INTERPRETATIONS OF A PREHISTORIC
LAND SNAIL FAUNA, 14 WM 118
by William W. Amaral and Dan C. Witter
The occurrence of great quantities of snail shells is
a common phenomenon in some Texas archeological sites.

How­

ever, so far no rigorous study of the archeological signifi­
cance of snail shells has been made, even though Allen and
Cheatum (1961) have pointed out that snail shells are of
considerable value in interpreting climatic changes and
past environments.
Since Site 41 WM 118 produced great amounts of snail
shells with considerable diversity of species, it was decided
to initiate a detailed study of the usefulness of snail
shells recovered in archeological sites.

The possible value

of snail shells as climatic and environmental indicators
was of particular concern, especially since the site did not
preserve pollen.

Although fossil gastropods should be studied

in conjunction with pollen sample (because the shells reflect
in a more immediate way the broad vegetational trends that
are revealed by pollen samples), it is still possible to

413

derive some inferences on past vegetational trends from the
snail shells alone.

Present Day Ecological Conditions
The San Gabriel River floodplain, with its woodlands
and limestone-derived soils, provides optimum conditions for
many species of snails.

The canopy of the elm, hackberry

and pecan grove woodland communities which are the dominant
forms of vegetation along the river margins and tributaries
are especially important in modifying the conditions of tem­
perature and moisture of the floodplain (See Modern Site
Ecology, Chap. IV).

Although shading, flooding, and clear­

ing by pecan harvesters keeps the woodland floors bare, a
varied array of microenvironments for snail habitats are to
be found such as under rotting logs, flood debris (some­
times in drifts 100 feet long), the upper soil zone, leaf
litter, the bases of trees, and stands of herbaceous plants.
In addition to the woodlands, many other snail habitats are
present, such as fence lines, pastures, flood channels and
gUllys.

Methods
Three methods were utilized in the recovery of snail
fauna:

field observations on contemporary populations, and

414

Figure 72.

Faunal list of prehistoric gastropods,
41 WM 118.

Figure

72

Family Helicinidae
Helicina orbiculata (Say)
Habitat: may be found in open unprotected fields, but it
usually is associated with woodlands (Allen and
Cheatum 1961:309).
Shell size: 7-8.5 mm.
Family Pupillidae
Gastrocopta contracta (Say)
Habitat: wooded areas, especially near moist decaying
wood (Allen and Cheatum 1961:Table I, p.303).
Shell size: 2.5 mm.
G. pellucida hordeacella (Pilsbry)
Habitat: woodlands, and in some open areas that are
protected by nearby trees (Allen and Cheatum
1961:305) •
Shell size: 2-2.5 mm.
~.

procera (Gould) or PUEilla muscorum
Habitat: woodlands, often near standing waters and
streams (Allen and Cheatum 1961:305).
Shell size: 1-2.5 mm.

Pupoides albilabris {Adams}
Habitat: prefers woodlands and sparsely wooded areas,
also found in semi-arid regions with brush
(Allen and Cheatum 1961:305).
Shell size: 4-6 mm.
Family strobilopsidae
Strobilops texasiana (Pilsbry and Ferriss)
Habitat: moist woodlands, often found under moist leaf
litter (Allen and Cheatum 1961:307; field
observations) •
Shell size: 2-3 mm.

415

Fig. 72 contd.
Family Endodemtidae
AnSluis~ira

alternata (Say)
moist woodland species capable of living in
some upland area (Allen and Cheatum 1961:
Table 1,307).
Shell size: 15-25 mm.
Hab~tat:

Family Zonitidae
Hawaiia minuscula (Binney)
Habitat: woodland species capable of living in upland
and lowland areas, often found under rocks
and many other objects which afford protection
(Allen and Cheatum 1961:Table 1, 303).
Shell size: 2-3 mm.
Retinella indentata (Say)
Habitat: moist woodland species, living in the humus
of woodland floors (Allen and Cheatum 1961:
303) .
Shell size: 4-6 mm.
R. roemeri (Pilsbry and Ferriss)
Habitat: moist woodlands (field observations)
Shell size: 2-5 mm.
MesomEhiX friabilis (Bi-ney)
Ha itat: moist woodlands, often found near decaying
wood (field observations).
Shell size: 15-25 rom.
Family Bulimuladae
Bulimulus dealbatus (Say)
Habitat: sparsely wooded areas, floodplains and grass­
lands (Allen and Cheatum 1961:Table 1, 301).
Shell size: 17-23 rom.
Family Polygyridae
Polygyra texasiana (Moricard)
Habitat: woodlands and open fields (Allen and Cheatum
1961:Table I, 310).
Shell size: 10-15 rom.

416

Fig. 72 contd.
Praticolella sp. (van Martens)
Hatitat: open country (field observations)
Shell size: 5.8-6.2 mm.

417

two archeological screening procedures.

Living gastropods

were collected by Witter on May 17, 1969, along a rough
transect from the river to the site itself.
ing stations were used:

Three collect­

one at the river's edge about three

hundred feet from the site, the second at the margin of a
flood channel immediately below the site, and the third at
the site itself (Fig. 8).

An attempt was made to recover a

representative sample of the snails present at each collec­
tion station.

Larger snails were found by hand picking through

leaf litter and under logs lying on the ground.

Smaller

snails were separated from the leafy debris by screening onto
a canvas tarp.

A record was kept of the habitat in which

these snails were found.
Large size fossil gastropod shells were recovered by
screening from each excavation level on a quarter-inch mesh.
In the laboratory, these snail shells were washed and counted
by level.
A less biased sample of snail shells was obtained
from 'l'est Pit 3.

One and two-tenths cubic feet of soil

matrix was sacked from each hand-dug level and brought back
to the laboratory for washing in nested screens the top
screen having a quarter-inch size mesh and the bottom one­
sixteenth inch mesh (window SCreF:ll size).
the

resi~ue

After washing,

was separated by employing three techniques:

(1) lighter objects that could be supported by surface tension

418

of soap suds were removed, (2) heavier objects were separated
according to specific gravity by fractional baffles in a small
wind tunnel.

Next, the size-weight fractions were picked by

hand into the following categories:

flint chips, pebbles,

animal bones, snail shells, seeds and miscellaneous objects.
Identifiable snail shells were then counted and observations
were made on the burned or unburned condition, in order to
construct population-curves, and the larger snails of the
genera Anguispira and Mesomphix were measured along their
greatest length.

Even though shells of the large size

species Bulimulus (Rabdotus) dealbatus show a great size
range, the immature individuals are frequently fractured in
such a way that they cannot be accurately measured.

Thus,

population curves could not be constructed for this species.
Because the smaller species exhibited little size variance,
often less than one millimeter, they were not measured.

Data
Two sources of information are used in the habitat
interpretation of the modern snail fauna:

that collected

from OUr field observations, and studies made elsewhere in
the state (Allen and Cheatum 196]).

This information is

used as a gUide in interpreting the prehistoric data recovered
during excavation.

The following modern snails were found at

419

Figure 73.

Bar graph showing frequency distribution
of Bulimulus dealbatus (Say), Anguispira
alternata (Say), and Mesomphix friabilis
(Binney), plotted by each test pit and
excavation level, 41 WM 118. See Figure
12 for the base profile on which these data
are plotted. Note the changing ratios of
~2. dealbatus, represented by the shaded
bars, versus the combined woodland snails,
A. alternata and M. friabilis, shown in
open bars. The frE'quency cross-over ob­
taining between B. dealbatus dominance found
~t the base of the site profile and the
woodland species peak located high in the
profile is indicated by a dashed line.
Raw counts by each level are shown to the
right of the graph bar.

Figure 13

o
,

100%
,

I

I

I

,

,

;

'

I

I

the first collection station at the river's edge:

Anguispira

a1ternata, Mesodon sp., Mesomphix friabi1is, Hawaiia minuscu1a,
Gastrocopta contracta, and Gastrocopta procera.

The same

species with the addition of Gastrocopta pe11ucida hordeacel1a
and He1icina orbicu1ata, were found at the second collection
station located just downslope from the site at the margin
of the river channel.

Bulimulus (Rabdotus

dealbatus and

He1icina orbicu1ata were the dominant species found at the
third collection station, Site 41 WM 118 itself (Fig. 8).
In addition Anguispira, Mesomphix and Mesodon were also
found at this location under moist rotting logs.

These dis­

tributions show a change in snail fauna; the snail associates
found nearer the river are moist woodland species and those
found at the site are predominately dry open country snails
mixed with lesser numbers of woodland species.
The only recent native snail observed in the field,
that has not been found through excavation at this site, is
the genus Mesodon.

Of the fourteen species of fossil snails

found, eleven are primarily woodland species.

He1icina

orbicu1ata and pupoides albi1abris are hardy species and can
survive in a variety of habitats, but they prefer open
woodlands or brushy cover.

Bulimu1us (Rabdotus) dealbatus

is characteristically found in open country, occurring in both
wet and dry conditions.

Because of the size range found in

421

~~~~~~~

..............

- ..

~.--

Figure 74. Histograms showing the raw counts
of ten snail species obtained from
matrix samples plotted by each ex ­
cavation level from Test Pit 3,
41 WM 118. Note the manner in which
these graphs reproduce the trends
illustrated in Figure 73. For en­
vironmental interpretation of each
snail species, see Figure 72. Level
3 was not sample'd, for matri.x.

Numb",

....
o

o

.•

· ,..
..-~

.•

..
•

:~
-1?­
..
,

~

o

Pur'9~

~

....

of Specimens

o

'"

albildbri~

oJ
....

0

,.>

(A

o
o

o
o

·(Adams)

,

"
PU2illa muscorum

~

.... '"
""
.:
Q

.

Q

o·:> ,.· ~:
'.~
.­ ~ ,
o .
<
•;;

..

4~

Hawaiia minscula (Sinn f '

U

..(

~

·

a~

·:., "

iH

~

+.~

>1·

Gast.rocoota contracta

(Say)

'''~
~.

"

-rP
~ 1~

:1

~

Ga:;:troc

ipta

.eellllciua norae< cella (pU.sbry)

J1!
"f-.W

.,
...

~io •

..

1~

..

"'
~ i:l
~t~~
~

-•. ,,, .

..:
.~

,,,

Angllisoira alternata (Say)

L­

I ...

~

.,
~

~

~

~:

Bulirnulus dealbatus [Say)

rr-'

,

..
, ...

..--... '

r

I ••

• f'
I .. ,

~

~

'"

I

~~

...
' ..
:· ''''
~

..
~

' ....

~

."

Mesompfll.".. -: ~ill.<l:::Uhimey.

·~t

.~

.

....

,

...- ,.,.
..­...

Helicina ori:iJ.c

I ~ ~
1~

H

ttl

stroorrops t.exas,ana

~

(Pil:.ll;~~ft~

::!1

.0

.......
c:

...,
~

Bulimulus (Rabdotus)

I

Anguispira and Mesomphix and the distinct

nature of their habitats, these species were selected for
detailed study.

The changing ratios found between the wood­

land pair--Anguispira and Mesomphix--and the prairie snail,
Bulimulus (Rabdotus)

I

is used as an indicator of changing

vegetation cover within the stratigraphic profile (Fig. 73).
Data on the fossil snail fauna is illustrated on four
graphs.

Two of these deal with the populations of the snails

plotted by each excavation level (Fig. 73 and 74).

The second

pair of graphs show the shell size measured in one millimeter
increments for the species Anguispira alternata and Mesomphix
friabilis plotted by each excavation level (Fig. 75 and 76).
The resulting curves are right skewed with a tendency towards
bimodalism in Levels 4 through 6.
a unimodal curve.

Levels 1, 2, 7 and 8 exhibit

Note the greater efficiency of recovery with

the sixteenth-inch mesh screen as shown by the cross-hatching
in Figures 75 and 76.

Only two snail species--Anguispira

alternata and Bulimulus (Rabdotus) dealbatus--show evidence
of burning in the form of blacking to the shell exterior.
This exposure to fire was curiously restricted to those
snails measuring between 0.3 and 0.6 centimeters in length.

Interpretive Conclusions
Tabulation of the snail shells recovered from the

423

quarter-inch screen demonstrated a greater abundance of open
country forms in the lower levels of the site followed by
an increase in the number of woodland species in the upper
levels (Fig. 73).

The interpretation of those data which are

offered here is a grassy floodplain with scattered trees in
the immediate surroundings of the site before the radiocarbon
date of A.D. 600.

By Neo-American times the woodlands were

dominant with, grassy, meadowlike patches.

It is supposed

that the woodlands would have been similar to those of the
present with the most important trees being elm, hackberry
and ;pecan.
The more abundant species of snails recovered from the
matrix samples reflect the trend first inferred from the
conventional screening techniques;

that is, all of the

seven woodland species show a tendency to increase in numbers
in the upper levels of the stratigraphic profile (Fig. 74).
The smallest species of snails (less than 5 mm. long) caught
only on the sixteenth-inch mesh are of considerable importance
in this interpretation since we can assume that they were not
affected as a food resource by man.

Because of this, these

smaller species can be used as a control to check interpreta­
tions derived from the quarter-inch screen.

An additional check

on this interpretation is the similar inference obtained from
the vertebrate remains (see Appendix A, Discussion).

424

In environmental interpretation, it must be stressed that
snails respond to the environment in a very local way.

That

is, snails are not far-ranging animals such as birds or mammals,
and care should be taken not to allow snails from a very
local environment (such as a rotting log or a spring) to be
used to indicate the common conditions for a large area.
Therefore we can place confidence only in a very local re­
construction of the environment, within less than one-half
acre.

We infer this stratigraphie distribution of snail

shells to mean that the vegetation surrounding the site during
Transitional Archaic times was composed of both trees and
grasses.

By Neo-American times, the site area had become

progressively more wooded, perhaps not unlike the conditions
found today.
It is difficult to tell if the local vegetational trends
indicated reflect climatic trends, or if they are ecological
responses to some other local factor such as a change in
river flood frequencies, fire, or soil development.

Various

combinations of these factors could interact in such a way as
to produce more rafted wood, fallen trees, and damper soils in
the upper levels which in turn would affect the composition of
the snail fauna.

Under these conditions, it would be expected

that the total number of woodland snails, both large and
small, would exhibit an increase, with more snails surviving

425

Figure 75.

----------------------------

Histograms showing the shell sizes
of Anguispira a1ternata (Say) ob­
tained from matrix samples plotted
by each excavation level from Test
Pit 3, 41 WM 118. Note that the
curve is right skewed with a tend­
ency toward unimoda1ism in Levels
1, 2, 7, and 8. Levels 4 through· 6
show a bimodal curve with the larger
individuals making up the minor peak.
Level 3 was scant in size and no
matrix sample was taken.

-------------------------~------------

-

---~

....... - .......

__._-------­ ---- .

...---~-.- ..---~-

--'._-'---'- .

•

~

....•

Ii\

•..
...•

..

....
E
0
~

."

!

"

•
~

0
y

c.

0<

·i

"~~~~~~==~~~==~~__-+~__J!~
8'

."

-

., .

';

•

,

.....

0
-e"

".

••.
~

.E
>Q

. ..:

~S
~

......••

"'0

~

•
•
""
...~

o

..•..
....

"'.
.

'.

to adulthood.

But the fact that we are dealing with such a

limited sample area prohibits reaching any conclusion about
the causes of the changing
41 WM 118.

veget~tional

trend observed in Site

Some definite conclusions regarding local climatic

changes and the trend to a woodland succession might be made
if other contemporary sites in the Reservoir District exhibit
similar snail fauna trends in future research.

Further

geological study of prehistoric river sediments could also
provide more information on the history of river flood frequen­
cies.
Biometrical analysis of prehistoric snail shells of the
genera Anguispira and Mesomphix revealed two types of population
curves (Fig. 75 and 76).

The right skewed unimodal curves of

Levell, 2, 7 and 8 are interpreted as representing a natural
population in which the mortality frequency decreases as the
snails increase in size.

This reasoning is based on the

Malthusian principle illustrated by Deevey in which it is
shown that an animal with a high reproductive rate should have
a high mortality rate of young individuals (Deevey 1947).
The bimodal curves of Levels 4 through 6 show a different
trend in which the mortality rate is high for both large and
small snails.

It is felt that the bimodal curve might not

represent a natural population and that perhaps some cultural
interference is the cause by which an artificial population
composed of the larger snails is superimposed upon the natural

427

unimodal distribution, the composite resulting in a bimodal
distribution.
Three explanations are offered for the cause of the bi­
modality.

The first explanation is that prehistoric snails of

predominantly larger sizes gathered in clusters around favorable
environments to either breed, feed, or aestivate.

Aestivation

particularly can result in large masses of adult snails clustering
together in some sheltered place.

Some of these snails were

always dying off and if these concentrations became buried, a
bimodal curve of the population would result.

Two clusters

of snails were found during excavation of Test Pit I
and Pit 2 (Level 2).

(Level 4)

The bimodal curves might therefore be

the direct result of a combination of the aestivation behavioral
pattern of the snails and possible cultural activities of the
aboriginal inhabitants such as the construction of brush or
wattle and daub dwellings.
~ate

Snails would be expected to congre­

around such an extremely favorable environment;

and as

the snail shells were in remarkable good condition unlike the
bone debris, it seems not unlikely that the smaller numbers of
larger snails were those which had found shelter in some
collapsed or disused dwelling structure.

There is some

reinforcing evidence that this might have been the case, since
the incidence of burned clay fragments, tentatively identified
as daub fragments from mud covered huts, is at its highest in

428

Figure 76.

Histograms showing the shell sizes
of Mesomphix friabi1is obtained
from matrix samples plotted by
each excavation level from Test
Pit 3, 41 WM 118. Note that the
curve is right skewed with a tend­
ency towards unimodalism in Levels
I, 2, 7, and 8. Levels 4 through 6
show an increase in the number of
larger snails . Level 3 was scant
in size and no matrix sample was
taken.

.1

i

J

Figure

-'

I

~.

i
• j:

w-

o

...¢I20
-D

E

:>

Z

'1

r
r

level 6

i.

I
,..

level

Leval 7

e

Size in mm.

·DRecovered from 1/16in. screen

tllJRecovered from 1/4in.screen

50

<10

30

w-

o
... 20

Level2

10

level A

LevelS

Size in mm.

,

a
'.

'

...

,.)

76 \

these levels (see Baked Clay Objects).

If such masses of

snails do, in fact, represent wattle and daub dwellings, it
might be expected that future excavations may be able to
associate living floors with the perimeters of snail concentra­
tions.
The second explanation of the cause of the bimodality
seen in Levels 4 through 6 is that snails constituted a
dietary supplement for the aboriginal inhabitants of this site.
If snails were used in this fashion, then the larger individuals
must necessarily have been favored.

This selection would

produce a situation in which the larger more mature individuals
ranging in size from 1.2 to 1.9 centimeters would make up a
second minor peak.

If so, man might have eaten this selected

group in one of three ways: boiled, raw, or parched.

Boiling

would leave no indication that the snails were being used as
food.

The only evidence one might expect to find if the

snails were being eaten raw would be fractured shell aperatures.
But most of the shell lips of the identifiable specimens are
intact with no indication that the soft animal had been pried
out.

However, large numbers of fragmentary

sn~il

shells were

recovered and these broken shells might represent the snails
that were consumed.

There is no evidence that the snails were

parched prior to being eaten.

Less than one percent of the

snail shells recovered from the matrix samples showed any

430

evidence of being burned, and in addition all of the burned
shells are of the 0.3 to 0.6 centimeter size range, obviously
too small to be on any dietary value.

However, any presumption

that snails were not used for food would seem highly incongruous
when compared to the pattern of apparently total exploita­
tion of vertebrate resources interpreted from the vertebrate
remains.
Another way in which snail shells can become concentrated
in nature today can be seen just after a high water runoff.
During flood stages of rising water, modern shells (both mussel
and snail) are picked up and carried downstream.

When the

flood crest recedes, flotsam, such as shells and other bouyant
debris, is deposited in concentrated lines along the bank as
high water markers.

These shell concentrations could be

preserved if buried by subsequent silt deposition.

However,

any test excavation intersecting such a feature would reveal
its linear nature;

a characteristic which is not exhibited by

the pockets of shell encountered in Test Pits land 2.

It

was further observed that massive outcrops of snails elsewhere
in the reservoir basin occurred only in association
cultural remains, rather than randomly distributed.

431

......

__

... _ - - - ­

with

References Cited

Allen, D.C. and E.P. Cheatum
1961
Ecological Implications of Freashwater and Land
Gastropods in Texas Archeological studies.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Vol. 31 (for 1960) :291-316, Austin.
Deevey, Jr., E.S.
1947
Life Tables for Natural Populations of Animals.
Quarterly Review of Biology, Vol.22:283-314.
Pilsbry, H.A.
1946
Land Mollusca of North America (North of Mexico).
The Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia,
Vol. II, Pt.l, Philadelphia.

432

APPENDIX C
ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION OF THE VERTEBRATE
REMAINS FROM 41 WM 135
by Dan C. Witter
Because of the homogeneous appearance of the sediments
comprising site 41 WM 135, it was excavated by screening
arbitr{i~Y

six inch levels with a quarter..:.inch mesh screen.

Bones recovered during this process were extremely frag­
mented and very sparsely distributed throughout the site.
A matrix sample was taken from a fire hearth in Level 4 of
Test Pit 1.

A considerable amount of bone was recovered

by washing the matrix samples over a one sixteenth-inch
mesh screen and is sufficient to provide interpretations
both on the cultural use of the site and on the surrounding
environment.

Analysis
Very little diagnostic bone came from the quarter-inch
screen.

The few fragments that were recovered were first

sorted into categories of "large to small animals," "tiny
mammals" (such as mice and other small rodents), "fish,"

433

lI

undetermined," and "miscellaneous."

The counts of these

categories should be regarded as being close approximations
rather than precise.

For example, whether or not a tiny

fragment was fish or something else was not always easy to
decide.

However, the sample is large and the counts should

be sufficiently accurate for statistical purposes.

Most

of the genus and species identifications were based on
dentition.

Particular care was given to the microtine

teeth in the sample because of the significance of micro­
tines as environmental indicators.

The size range of the

microtine teeth place them in the Pitymys pinetorum (pine
vole)--Microtus

~:hogaster

(prairie vole) range.

The only

known characteristic which is at all diagnostic in the
dentition that sepClrates these two species is the degree
of in-folding of the enamel of the lower third molar.

In

the prairie vole, the enamel is usually tightly appressed
at the infolds, whereas in the pine vole the dentine is
almost always confluent throughout the tooth (Patton 1963;
Dalquest and others 1969).

Two lower third molars were

discovered among the microtine teeth, one in perfect con­
dition, the other nearly so.

In both cases the teeth were

of the Microtus orchogaster or prairie vole pattern.

How­

ever, the variation of this pattern is not yet clearly
understood in various populations of voles, and although the
microtine is here referred to as the prairie vole, the identi­

434

fication is not altogether conclusive.
The reference collection used for the identifications
is the Recent Collection in the Vertebrate Paleontology
Laboratory at the Balcones Research Center, Austin, Texas,
under the curatorship of Dr. E. L. Lundelius, Jr.

A com­

plete account of the vertebrate bone identified is on file
at the office of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
also at the Balcones Research Center.

The taxonomic account

is almost entirely based on remains from the matrix sample
(Fig. 77).
The bone from the quarter-inch mesh screen produced a
few fragments of large and small sized mammals, fragments
of a turtle, a frog fragment, and the calcanium and toe
bone of a deer (Fig. 81).
Fire hearth 2 (Test Pit 2, Level 4) produced a variety
of vertebrates in which tiny fish and rodents were in direct
association with the hearth (Fig. 78).

A significant por­

tion of the bone was burned.
The matrix sample column of Test Pit I produced a
variety of small vertebrates which have been grouped accord­
ing to the environment they represent (Fig. 78).

The aquatic

environment refers to streams, ponds and their margins, and
includes fish, anurans and turtles.

Today this sort of

environment is found within 700 feet of the site.

However,

it is possible that some of the anuran present is toad and

435

Figure 77.

Taxonomic account of vertebrates from
si te 41 WM 135.

Figure 77.

Class OSTEICHTHYES
order SEMIONOTOIDA
family Lepidosteidae (Gar fish family)
other fish
Class AMPHIBIA
order ANURA (frogs and toads)
Class REPTILIA
order CHELONIA (turtles)
order LACERTILIA (lizards)
order OPHIDIA (snakes) ?
Class AVES
order PASSERIFORMES (perching birds)
other birds ?
Class MAMMALIA
order INSECTIVORA,
family Soricidae (shrews) ?
order CARNIVORA
family Mustelidae
cf. Conepatus leuconotus (hognose skunk)
other small carnivores
order LAGnMORPHA
fami1y Leporidae
Lepus af. californicus (blacktail jackrabbit)
order RODENTIA --­
family Sciuridae
Citellus cf. tridecemlineatus (thirteen-line
--ground squirrel)
family Heteromyidae
Perognathus cf. hispidus (Hispid pocket mouse)
family Geomyidae
Geomys ~ (pocket gopher)
family Cricetidae
Sigmo~on hispidus (Hispid cotton rat)
ct. Microtus ochro~aster (prairie vole)
order ARTIODACTYLA
family Cervidae
Odocoileus ~ virginianus (white-tail deer)

436

Figure 78.

Chart showing the occurrence of
identifiable vertebrate specimens
obtained from matrix sample column
in Test Pit 1 and Fire Hearth 2 in
Test Pit 2, 41 WM 135. Vertebrates
are grouped according to habitat
preference.

(1)<:

'U

(I)

Ii
() rt

(I)

1-'.(1)

!3 tr
Ii
:;:l III

(I)

m rt

dPZI-3
o 0
ttl· rt
C
III
Ii ttl .....
::s(I) C
Ii ()
!:L :;:l 0
(I) C

(I)

!:L:;:l

rt

Undetermined FISH
GAR FISH
TURTLE
ANURAN
GOPHER
Geomys ~:
MICROTINE
Sigmodon hispidus: COTTON RAT
JACK RABBIT
Lepus ~:
Cetellus sp: GROUND SQUIRREL
Odocoileus abo virginianus: DEER
small CARNIVORE
Peio9:nathus ~: POCKET MOUSE
SHREW
BIRD
LIZARD

N t-' -...J
IV-...JCO
w~

TOTAL Number Fragments

1-'.

III Ii
Ii (I)
rt

t"it"it"it"it"i

1-3

<:
(()

m

(I) ~ (I) (I) (I)
(I)

<:(I) (I)
<: <:
(I)

(I)

rt

::r­

.. .. .. .. .. .....'t1

IV

O'IOl~WIV

t-'t-'t-' ..... t-'

rt
t-'

~ ~ ~ ~ ~
~ ~ ~ ~
~ ~ ~ ~

Aquati c
Environment

~

01

~ ~ ~ ~ ~

NCO

~ ~ ~ ~ ~

t-'t-'

~ ~ ~ ~

..........

~

Grassl and
Environment

~
~

~

..........

~
~
<\.I

~

t-'

Undetermined RODENT
"TINY MAMMAL" (mouse sized)
"LARGE-SMALL MAMMAL" (rabbit to deer size)

t:I:t-:t:I

(I)

~

~

~

~

Environment
not su iciently
specific

~

~

w
01

IV

IV,U)

~

W~

~

w

co

N

01

W

IV 0'1
~

IV

00

IV

0'1
.z::,j

."
(,Q

c:
""'t

(1)

......
CD

some of the turtle is box turtle.

The grassland environ­

ment group are those animals most characteristic of a grass­
land with a well developed sod and few or no trees and
shrubs.

Gopher, cotton rats, microtines, jackrabbits, and

ground squirrels are common inhabitants of this environment.
The other vertebrates--deer, small carnivores, birds, lizards,
etc.--range too widely to be useful as environmental in­
dicators (Fig. 78).
The quantitative distribution of fragments from the
constant volume matrix column appear to be sufficient for
statistical use (Fig. 80).

A pattern emerges in which a

distinct peak at Level 3 and a distinct dip at Level 6
is apparent for the total fragment count, as well as for
the "large--small mammals" fragment count and the fish
fragment count.

The "tiny mammals" (rodent size) are re­

latively constant throughout the site.

The proportion of

burned bone in the total fragment count is roughly a quarter
of the fragments except for 15 percent burned in Level 2
and 9 percent burned in Level 6.

Levels 3, 4 and 5 are

about half the percentages of total
as Fire ijearth 2.

bone_~!agments

burned

The "small mammal--large mammal" percent­

ages compare well with Fire Hearth 2 except for a notable
reduction to one percent in Level 2.

Percentage of burned

bone in the case of the "tiny mammal" and fish, do not show
any clear pattern, possibly because of the small sample size,
although the less than one percent recorded for these two
438

This page intentionally left blank.

Figure 79.

Chart showing percentages of burned bone
fragments of mammals and fish obtained
from matrix sample column in Test Pit 1
and Fire Hearth 2 in Test Pit 2, 41 WM 135.

--------

---------~---~-

......~---- .......

-----­

Figure

79

Provenience

T'
_._­
1
Total Numb
_._._ Fish
F
L
Small
_ _---­
1M
r:l. -­
"
Burned Raw Unburned Burned
Raw Unburned Burned Raw Unburned Burned Raw Unburned
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
No.
No.
No.
No.

Fire
Hearth 2

664

58

42

83

58

42

94

76

24

78

78

22

Test Pit 1,
Level 2

371

85

15

28

99

01

39

100

00

29

100

00

Test Pit I,
Level 3

577

74

21

44

52

48

63

83

17

95

88

12

Test Pit 1,
Level 4

320

74

24

34

44

56

59

84

16

29

83

17

Test Pit 1,
Level 5

310

73

27

26

58

42

60

88

12

22

64

36

Test Pit 1,
Level 6

145

91

09

13

62

38

44

70

30

09

56

44

-­

~

....

-

........

It would seem, therefore, that women and children were either
largely responsible,for,-or at least had a hand in, ex­
ploiting the vertebrate resources--both aquatic and ter­
restrial.

The gathering of small vertebrates may have also

been in conjunction with other economic activities such as
gathering grass seeds,

nuts, herbs, and/or edible aquatic

plants.
The matrix sample column yielded a statistically sub­
stantial sample of bone fragments indicating that the ex­
ploitation pattern implied by the bone from Fire Hearth 2
was continuous throughout the site, with the least intensity
in Level 6 and the greatest in Level 3.

projectile points

from the site indicate an age of Late Archaic or 4,000 to
2,000 years BP (1,000 B.C. to A.D. 1)
occupation.

for most of the

Level 1 was the plow zone and was not sampled.

Level 2 shows a distinct decrease in burned bone and rodent­
sized bone implying some sort of change in the use of the
site.

Level 6 is also anomalous compared to Fire Hearth

2.

The environmental interpretations are mainly based
on the assumption that the smaller an animal is, and the
lower total energy diet it has, the less its home range
is likely to be (McNab 1963).

Therefore rodents should be

particularly useful in indicating local environment and
environmental change.

Also, abundant rodents on a site

441

Figure 80.

Graph showing quantitative distri­
bution of bone fragment counts in
matrix sample column of Test pit 1,
41 WM 135.

Fig ure

o

o

N

",

IIJ;:E :IE r.
DC/) ~ In

en:E :IE.&:
DlC/) ~ .!!!

-

&&.:E

~ I

&&.2

&&.

...J

0

~

I

_..J
0

t-

~

Level 2

Level 3

LEG END:

&&.

",

0
22
00 t/)~

­

~

80

I

&&. :IE
..J

0

s::.

en

&&.

02

2.&:

g'C/) ~
...

I

.!!

&&.:.
... ..J

t-

Level 4

Level

...

..J

0

....

0

t-

&&.

ut2:1 s:.
o-C/)~ •
~ I
&&.
&&.:1

5

Level 6

Tot Fraos = Total number fragments
LM-SM = Laroe Mammal- Small Mammal (deer-rabbit size)
TM = Tiny Mammal (mouse size)
Fish

= Fragments

of fish bone.

74

--------------~--

sU9gests that those members of a hunting and gathering
society that collected them would include women and children,
and would probably be operating not far from the camp.
Therefore, while the small grassland vertebrates do not
necessarily mean that the site was in a grassland, they
do imply that a grassland was near at hand.

Site 41 WM

135 is located at the base of a lO-foot high gravel uplands.
Either this uplands, or the floodplain, or both must have
had extensive grassland areas.
the lack of tree

The negative evidence of

squirrels in the matrix samples may be

some indication that the floodplain was more grassy than
wooded.

Another consideration is that if the floodplain was

much less wooded than at present and supported dense rank
grasslands with deep slightly moist soil, an optimum environ­
ment would have been provided for the pocket gopher and the
now locally extinct microtine.

That this was the case in

the immediate area of the site is demonstrated from a de­
tailed investigation of the abundant snail fauna from the
site.

Levels 6 through 4 show an overwhelming dominance of

open country and grassland snails which for Levels 2 and 3
show trends for a more brushy or savanna-like shift in
vegetation.
The appearance of the pocket mouse

in Level 2 may

have been due to an increase in abundance which improved
their chances of preservation as a result of the savanna­

443

Figure 81.

- -.....

--.~-.--

...

--~-------

.....

Chart showing distribution of bone
in 41 WM 135 recovered from quarter
inch mesh screen. See Figure 36 for
the base profile on which these data
are plotted.

Figure 81

T.P. 4

·i..1-.U

E
100'­

Over­
burden

99' ­
,..L

T.P. 2

~.

9S'
I

LM'

lJl.t~

1 :todent

gar fish
LM, 1 SM
anuran

4 LM

deer
tooth

1 deer
toe bO

®

9 6' -+--------4
I

P.
6
11

2 LM
2 SM

97'
I

1 LM

T.P. I

T.P. 3

LM
I

turtle

m
I

1 deer
calcaniut
4 LM
1 LM

3 LM

9 5'

-t-----~---I

1 SM

94' --'­ _ _ _ _---J Legend:
L,l\1 - Large mammal (deer-size mammal)
SIv1 - Small mammal (rabbit-size mammal)
Anuran - 'frog and/or toad

<D
®

Fire Hearth I
Fire Hearth 2 (see Figs. 78 and 79)

Note: Test Pit 5 (backhoe trench): 2 LM

w

like vegetational shift indicated by the snails (Davis 1966).
However, any clear indication of vegetational change at the
site is not provided by the vertebrate remains.

Although

indications as to the location and types of vegetation in
the area of 41 WM 135 are not definable as species composi­
tion and absolute density of plants on the San Gabriel
River floodplain and uplands, both the vertebrates and the
land snails independently reflect a grassland facies during
the period of time represented by the site.

Sununary
,If only the qllarter-inch mesh screen had been used in
the recovery of veLtebrate remains, very little useful in­
formation would haiTe been available.

However, matrix samples

were collected which produced a considerable amount of bone
and made possible much more meaningful inferences.
The matrix samples were sufficiently large to con­
clusively demonstrate that the very small manunal and fish
remains that occurred in all six samples were not a random
OCCurrence but were present as midden debris in the site and
were important as a food resource.
The presence of the grassland rodent fauna indicates
that grasslands were at or near the site the entire time
period sampled.

445

Bibliography
Burt, W. H. , and R. B. Grossenheider
1964
A Field Guide to the Mammals.
Company, Boston.

Houghton Mifflin

Conant, Roger
1958
A Field Guide to Reptiles and Amphibians.
Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston.
Corps of Engineers
1962
Report on Fish and Wildlife Resources Affected
by the Proposed San Gabriel River and Tributar­
ies Project, Williamson County. Fish and Wild­
life Service, Department of the Interior, pp.
202-212. In San Gabriel River watershed Brazos
River, Texas, House Document 591, 87th Congress,
2nd. session, u.s. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D. C.
Dalquest, W. W., E. Roth, and F. Judd
1969
Mammal Fauna of Schulze Cave, Edwards County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Florida State Museum,
Biological Sciences, Vol. 13, 4.
Davis, William B.
1966
The Mammals of Texas. Bulletin No. 41, Texas
Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Fleharty, E. D., and L. E. Olson
1969
Summer Food Habits of Microtus orchogaster and
Sigmodon hispidus. Journal of Mammalogy, Vol.
50, No.3.
Fowel1s, H. A.
1965
Silvics of Forest Trees of the United States.
Agriculture Handbook No. 271, u.S. Department of
Agriculture, Washington, D. C.
Gilmore, Kathleen Kirk
1969
The San Xavier Missions: A Study in Historical
site Identification. State Building Commission
Archeological Program, Report No. 16, Austin.
Hall, E. R. and K. R. Kelson
1959
The Mammals of North America.
New York.

446

Ronald Press,

Lundelius, Ernest L., Jr.
Nonhuman Skeletal Material from the Kyle Site.
1962
Appendix 2 In: The Kyle Site: a stratified
central Texas Aspect site in Hill County, Texas,
Department of Anthropology, Archaeology Series
No.5, The University of Texas, Austin.
1967

Late-Pleistocene and Holocene Faunal History of
Central Texas. In: Pleistocene Extinctions:
the Search for a Cause, edited by P. S. Martin
and H. E. Wright, Jr. Proceedings of the VII
Congress of the International Association for
Quaternary Research, Vol. 6, pp. 287-319, Yale
University Press, New Haven and London.

Martin, A. C., H. S. Zim, and A. L. Nelson
1961
American Wildlife and Plants: A Guide to Wild­
~l~i~f~e~F~o-o-d~H=a-b~i~t-s-_--~D~o-v-e-r--P=-u~bl·ications, Inc.,
New York.
McNab, Brian
1963
Bioenergetics and the Determination of Home
Range Size. The American Naturalist, Vol.
XCVII, No. 894, May-June.
Patten, T. H.
1963
Fossil Vertebra.tes from Millers Cave, Llano County,
Texas, Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin, No.7,
Austin.
Romer, A. S.
1962
The Vertebrate Body_
Philadelphia.

447

W. B. Saunders Co.,

APPENDIX D
NOTES ON THE BONE RECOVERED FROM 41 WM 133
by Dan C. Witter
41 WM 133 produced very little bone either from screen­
ing with a quarter-inch mesh or from matrix samples (Fig.
83) •

The site was excavated by 3 inch to 12 inch levels to
a depth of 12.2 feet.

The vertebrates recovered from the

site are shown on Figure 82.
Of most significance was the matrix sample collected
at Fire Hearth 3 at a depth of 18.5 feet radiocarbon dated
at 7,OOO±160 BP.

A total of 73 fragments were recovered,

86 percent of them burned, but none of which seemed to re­
present an animal larger than a rabbit.

Fis~

anuran, snake,

bird, gopher and other rodent remains were identified.

Al­

though the sample is small, the higher percentage of burned
bone seems sufficient to indicate that some of the ver­
tebrates were used as food.

Had only quarter-inch screening

been used, this insight into the economy of the society
associated with Fire Hearth 3 would have been completely
lost.

448

- - - ..•.....•...

-~~.-~--~------

................

---~-~--------

~---~.----.---------.~--.-

..

-.~~

..

----~--

Fire Hearth 1 was less productive in its matrix sample,
but did indicate that rodent and deer were food items in
which deer-sized fragments seemed the most important.
The distribution of bone from the quarter-inch screen
from the top to Level 8 of Test Pit 1 at a depth of 5.4
feet suggests continuous if infrequent occupation for the
purpose of preparing large game throughout the time period
represented by those levels.

Most of the bone was from the

upper levels, or to a depth of approximately two feet.

Deer

and turtle fragments were recognized, although little diag­
nostic bone was recovered.

A few shank fragments too large

to be deer at a depth between 0.8 and 1.8 feet were recovered
from Level 3, Test Pit 2 and are referred to as bison.
Environmental interpretations of the bone sample from
41 WM 133 are limited to the material from Fire Hearth 3
which indicates that the river was sufficient to carry fish
and turtles.

Fourteen burned rodent incisors were recovered

of which three were identified as gopher, as well as three
burned cheek teeth also of gopher which imply that an area
of open country was at or near the site.

449

Figure 82.

Taxonomic account of vertebrates from
site 41 WM 133.

Figure 82.

Class OSTEICHTHYES (fish)
Class AMPHIBIA
order ANURA (frogs and toads)
Class REPTILIA
order OPHIDIA (snakes)
Class AVES (birds)
Class MAMMALIA
order RODENTIA
family Geomyidae
Geomys ~ (gophers)
other rodents
order ARTIODACTYLA
family Cervidae
af. Odocoileus yirginianus (whitetail deer)
family--B"oviaae
af. Bison bison (bison)

450

Figure 83.

Chart showing distribution of bone
recovered from 41 WM 133 including
matrix samples and contents of
Fire Hearths 1 and 2.

Figure 83

s

N

l.
5 BM, 3 LM, Bison, Deer
Level 3

4

24

(2b) LM, Deer, Turtle
Level 5

2 L

Level 6

Level 8
Fire Hera.rth

6 LM

CD
step 1

\
\

---,

I

\

A ­ Anuran (frogs, toads)
B ­ Birds
F ­ Fish
S ­ Snake
T ­ Turtle
b ­ burned
BM­ Big mammal (Bison size)
LM­ Large mammal (Deer - coyote size)
SM­ Small mammal (rabbit - skunk size)
TM- Tiny mammal (mouse size)
Tot. frag. - Total fragment count.

CD

Fire Hearth 1
1/4" screen: 29LM, Deer
Matrix sample: 90 (29b) Tot. Frag.
(or 32% total fragments burned)
4S(Sb) LM, 1 TM, Rodent

@ Fire

'

.....

\

,

.Step 2 '---_
0,..

'".,.

Hearth 3 Matrix sample:
Fire Hearth
'
73 (66b) Tat. frag. (or 86% burned)
Located
3b SM, 4S(39b) TM, 2b T, lA, 1 S,
step 8.
5",{2br F, gopher, uridetermined rodent.

\

@

