CULTURAL RESOURCE INVESTIGATIONS AT
HAMILTON POOL COUNTY PARK
Travis County, Texas
Technical Butietin 95

David G. Robinson
Principal Investigator:

Solveig A. Turpin

Texas Antiquities Permit 561

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin

September 1986

ABSTRACT
Between July 3, 1986 and July 17, 1986, the Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, conducted a cultural
resource survey and monitoring program of the proposed Phase I
development of Hami Iton Pool County Park, Travis County, Texas.
Performed at the request of the Travis County Commission Precinct 3
and under Antiquities Permit 561 issued by the Texas Antiquities
Committee, the study reassessed the previously discovered sites 41TV52
and 41TV242 and discovered and assessed two sites, 41TV1248 and
41TV1250.
Site 41TV52 (a burned rock midden) and 41TV242
(a
rockshelter and open site) are significant sites according to state
and federal criteria and
merit State Archeological
Landmark
designation. Construction activities on these sites were monitored to
avoid or alleviate adverse impacts, and intact features and high
density artifact areas were successfully avoided. Site 41TV1248 is an
insignificant flake scatter according to all criteria and warrants no
monitoring or further management considerations. Site 41TV1250, a
minimal buried cultural deposit in the large overhang above the pool,
wi II not be further affected by park development and use.

i

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was carried out under the guidance and support of
Dr. Solveig A. Turpin, the principal investigator, and was made
possible by the hard and ski Ilful labor, in lab and field, of Michael
W. Davis, Abby C. Treece, Steve Tomka and Marybeth Tomka. Mr. Scott
Ferguson of the Travis County Commission Precinct 3 made project
planning and orientation easy tasks to accompl ish. Mr. David B. Holt,
Jr. of the Holford Group, Inc., is a companionable and outgoing source
of wide-ranging information on Hami Iton Pool and its development
plans. Mr. Mark Denton of the Texas Antiquities Committee gave prompt
consultations and clear focus to the survey and monitoring programs.
Judy Walther and David Mahler of Environmental Survey Consulting ,
Inc.,
freely
shared
environmental information, especially the
additional botanical information which added relevance to
the
background discussions.
Deborah L. Smith edited the report and Abby
C. Treece drew al I maps and graphics.
The above group of people
created a rare and intellectually satisfying atmosphere for this sma I I
Central Texas research project. A special thanks goes to the Travis
County Sheriff's Department and deputies R. Wade (Badge 257) and
W. Umholtz (Badge 259), who provided I ively discussions and assiduous
enforcement of pool rules.

ii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract . . .
Acknowl edgments
Introduction .
Environmental Background
Cultural Background
Previous Work . . . . . . . .
Field Methods . • . . . . . .
Results and Recommendations .
References Cited . . . . .

i

ii
1
1
6

9

. . . • .

10
11

21

LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE 1. Project Location ..
FIGURE 2. Site Maps . . . . .
FIGURE 3. Artifact Photographs

2

12
14

1

INTRODUCTION
Between July 3, 1986, and July 17, 1986, the Texas Archeological
Survey (TAS), The University of Texas at Austin, conducted a cultural
resource survey of the proposed Hami Iton Pool County Park in western
Travis County, Texas (Fig. 1). The project involves the development
of a recreational park by the county of Travis, Texas, under the
planning and implementation of the Travis County Commission Precinct
3. lAS staff archeologists David G. Robinson, Michael W. Davis, Abby
C. Treece, Steve Tomka and Marybeth Tomka conducted the survey, and
TAS Director, Dr. Solveig A. Turpin served as principal investigator.
The objectives of this survey, formulated
Texas Historical Commission guidelines, were to:

in

accordance with

1) locate and describe any prehistoric or historic
resources which might exist within the study area;
2) evaluate the
resources'
significance,
potential
and
Historic Places eligibi lity;
3) recommend to
disturbance
to
resources, and

cultural

archeological
and
historical
possible National Register of

the sponsor means to avoid or lessen any
or destruction of the identified cultural

further
cultural
resource evaluations
4) recommend
interpretations beyond those feasible by this study.

and

The survey was conducted as a contribution to planning by the
Travis County Commission but was performed to comply with the National
Historic Preservation Act of 1966 and its implementing regulations
(36CFR800) and to guidelines set forth by the Texas Historical
Commission for intensive survey. Criteria set forth by the Counci I of
Texas Archeologists and endorsed by the Texas Antiquities Committee
are also an acknowledged standard to be met in assessment of cultural
resources.
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
The Hamilton Pool project area lies in the southeastern portions
of the Edwards Plateau physiographic province, a major zone lying
transitionally between the Great Plains and the West Gulf Coastal
Plain (Fenneman 1931, 1938). The study area is a few score mi les west
of the Balcones Fault zone; downfaulting along the zone created the
plateau's rei ief.
The rocks of the Edwards Plateau are primari Iy

HAMILTON POOL
SURVEY

-- -

o

0.5
-­IKM

MAP LOCATION

Figure I. Project Location.

3

Cretaceous I imestones. Tertiary and Quaternary stream action has
incised the province into a topographic region of flat to rol ling
uplands and deep, vertically wal led canyons. Climate, hydrology and
the I imey nature of the plateau have combined to create springs,
caverns, solution cavities and typical karstic topography.
The
principal unit in the study area is the Glen Rose Formation, the
oldest formation in the Austin area, and one comprised of as much as
1000 feet of alternating beds of marl, dolomite and I imestone. The
local Hensel I Sand is a fine-grained sandstone poorly to wei I-cemented
with carbonates (Barnes 1981).
Soi Is of the Edwards Plateau are generally calcareous, thin to
non-existent on uplands, attaining significant depth only in river and
stream valleys and on gentle lower slopes.
Mapped soi Is (Werchan,
Lowther and Ramsey 1974) on the project area belong to the Tarrant and
Volente soil series. Tarrant soils are shal low to very shal low stony
clays overlying limestone. Large limestone rocks occupy 25 to 85~ of
Tarrant soi I surfaces, and the soils form on gently sloping ridges,
rol ling side slopes and steep hi I Iy breaks; they develop under tal I
grasses with dispersed stands of trees. Profi les are rarely more than
30 centimeters thick, with dark and very dark calcareous stony clays
having strong, fine subangular blocky and granular structure overlying
the I imestone substrate. The proportion of limestone rocks increases
with depth to a zone of fractured I imestone with clay-fi I led
interstices. This lower zone results from the decay of the underlying
indurated I imestone parent material. Volente soi Is are deep si Ity
clay loams that develop on gentle slopes over alluvium and under mid
and tal I grasses with scattered trees. Soil profi les may develop A, B
and C horizons with distinct boundaries between them. Typical A
horizons are dark, grayish-brown, calcareous silty clay loems with
strong, fine subangular blocky and granular structure. Limestone
pebbles are common on the surface but rare below ground. Underlying B
horizons are dark brown si Ity clays with weak, fine grain granular
structure. C horizons are reddish yel low clay Ioams , massive with
breaking to weak, fine granular structure. They have many limestone
pebbles and are very hard (Werchan, Lowther and Ramsey 1974:39, 44).
Flora and Fauna
The vegetation of the project area is juniper-oak woodland with
woodlandj dominant trees are juniper and I ive oak. The remaining
grasslands have scattered
juniper,
live oak
and
mesquite.
Subdominants include agarita, prickly pear and winged elm. Dominant
Switchgrass
(Panicum
virvatum),
Cane
bluestem
barbinodis),
Silver
b uestem
~ saccharoides
Little
bluestem
(Schizachyrium
scoparium
Sideoats grama (Bouteloua curtipendula)J Canada
60~

4

wi Idrye (Elymus canadensis),
Common
curly
mesquite
(Hi laria
belangeri), and Buffalograss (Buchloe dactyloides). Riparian zones
offer walnut, pecan, wild cherry, sycamore, greenbriar, yaupon and a
wide variety of woody and herbaceous shrubs (Gould 1975).
The well-watered bottom of Hami Iton Creek Canyon is something of
an exception to the wider pattern; the tract of cypresses growing
along the creek is most notable in this regard. A study of vascular
plants in the similar environment of Westcave Preserve listed 230
species of plants in 68 famil ies. The fol lowing I ist of famil ies was
made available by David B. Holt, Jr. of the Holford Group, Inc., and
Judy Walther and David Mahler of Environmental Survey Consulting, Inc.
Grass
True Fern
Cypress
Palm
Pineapple
Rush
Dogwood
Sapodi Iia
01 ive
Mi Ikweed

Horseta i I
Taxodium
Sedge
Arum
Spiderwort
Li Iy
Primrose
Ebony
Logan i a

Water leaf
Mint
Figwort
Plantain
Phlox
Vervain
Nightshade
Acanthus
Madder

The geological and vegetal characteristics of the Edwards Plateau
have given rise to a distinct faunal province, the Balconian,
comprised, for the most part, of a mixture of species more adapted to
the faunal zones around it (Blair 1950:112-116). Most of the 58
mammal species approach their ecological limits in the Balconian
Province, thus have low population densities. Three I izard species
range into the province from the east, finding their western I imits in
the Balconian.
Thirty-six snake species derive from the east, south
and west. Fifteen species of anurans (amphibians without tails in
adult life), with affinities to the east and west, live in the
province. Urodele (tai led) amphibian specIes are seven in number;
five are endemic, neotenous forms evolving and adapting to the
subterranean drainages and springs of the Plateau. They are the most
distinctive creatures of the Balconian Province. Birds and fish are
characteristically diverse in forms and adaptive foci. Hamilton Creek
Canyon seems to be an especially favored preserve of armadi I los, rock
wrens, rock squirrels, and cl iff swal lows.

5

CI imate and Paleoclimate
The project area lies within Carr's (1961) Edwards Plateau
cl imatic division.
The cl imate is classed as humid subtropical with
hot summers (Werchan, Lowther and Ramsey 1974).
Average annual
rainfall totals 32.58 inches (based on U.S. Weather Service data for
the period from 1931 to 1960);
rainfal I peaks are In May and
September. The lowest monthly total is in August, with just less than
2 inches. Winters are mild with generally less than 25 freezing days
Cold temperatures arrive with frequent dry Arctic air
each year.
masses moving down off the plains, bringing rapid temperature drops
with their strong north winds. Weather patterns in the other seasons
of the year are dominated by moisture-laden winds and air masses
moving inland from the Gulf of Mexico. Thunderstorms give drama to
the spring and fal I and spawn the occasional tornado as the cold
Arctic air masses are overridden by the warm Gulf air masses. These
storms can be particularly violent along the orographic divide formed
by
the
Balcones Escarpment.
Convective thunderstorms rumble
sporadically through the summers as wei I.
Modern cl imatic information is the result of collecting data and
recording
observations;
the
study
of
ancient cl imate, or
paleoclimatology, is inferential and derived from such areas as
paleontology, palynology and fluvial geomorphology. Current knowledge
indicates a Quaternary sequence in Texas and the South-central United
States of alternating periods of arid and humid climate. These
periods came about in response to the advances and retreats of
Pleistocene glaciers and osci I lations of the global energy budget at
the behest of planetary precession, volcanic activity and doubtlessly
other factors subtle in nature yet cosmic in import (Gunn 1985). The
effects on I ife have been not to change biota entirely but to change
the mosaic pattern of plant communities and their proportions on the
landscape (Bryant and Shafer 1971).
The Wisconsin Interpluvial
Period, 33,500 to 22,500 BP, indicates a fairly stable, cool moist
cl imate supporting a scrub grassland, or prairie, with numerous
scrubby woody plants and occasional sparse trees in favored locales.
There may have been periodic incursions of spruce, pine and juniper
parkland.
The Wisconsin Fullglacial Period, 22,500 to 14,000 BP,
brought on a glacial cool, dry continental cl imate with mixed conifer
forests in higher elevations, mixed conifer park lands and scrub
grassland on the Llano Estacado, and, in the later Ful Iglacial, mixed
deciduous-conifer
open
canopy forest in Central Texas (Bryant
Lateglacial times,
1969:107-108;
Bryant and Shafer 1977:8-13).
14,000 to 10,000 BP, witnessed the gradual reduction of temperate
elements from the forests, a shift from woodlands to park lands and a
trend away from temperate, mesic conditions to a drier regime.
zones.
The
Grasslands may have returned in many West Texas
Postglacial-Early Holocene Period, 10,000 to 1,000 BP, was a time of

- - - - - - -....- - -......

---~-~

......

- - - - -.....- - - . - - -.......~---.------------------.....~

6

continuing drying and warming and the gradual expansion of scrub
grasslands at the expense of woodlands and park lands (Bryant 1979:112,
145; Bryant and Shafer 1977:13-15). The Altithermal Period, 7,000 to
4,500 BP, was a time of higher temperatures and drier climate. Plant
communities at this time may have come to resemble the present
oak-hickory savanna, or grassland with widely dispersed trees. The
long term trend toward arid conditions may have been interrupted at
about 3,000 BP by a more temperate interval which brought about
increased vegetation cover, an expansion of the range of bison and the
establ ishment of the modern central and eastern Texas post oak
savanna. This mesic interval ended at 2,000 BP with the recommenced
trend toward aridity which continues to this day (Antevs 1955j Bryant
1969:129-131, 141-146j Bryant and Shafer 1977:16-18).
CULTURAL BACKGROUND
This section examines the current archeological knowledge about
Travis County and the surrounding region of which the county is a
meaningful part. The information forms the basis for interpretations
of the Hami Iton Pool project findings.
Regional Summary
The project area I ies within the Central Texas Archeological
Region (Prewitt 1981, 1985), a zone with a cultural occupation of at
least 10,000 years. The region has been divided into a sequence of
four major stages identified on the basis of the economic strategies
employed by the prehistoric populations: Paleoindian (12,OOO-ca. 8500
BP), Archaic (ca. 8500-1250 BP), Late Prehistoric (1250-200 BP) and
Historic (200 BP-present). The dominant economic strategies of the
prehistoric stages have been inferred largely from stone artifacts and
styl istic studies. In recent years, research has cast doubt on any
significant differences between the dominant hunting and gathering
economic strategies of the Archaic and Late Prehistoric stages.
For
this reason, Prewitt (1981) renamed the Late Prehistoric "Neoarchaic·
to indicate the economic continuities. In recognition of both the
conceptual accuracy of the change and the semantic and lexical
entrenchment of the term "Late Prehistoric·, both terms are used here
interchangeably. Prewitt (1981 , 1985) further divided the prehistoric
period into recognizable cultural phases based on artifact styles and
site and artifact assemblages. The chronology was establ ished with
radiocarbon dating. The cultural stages and phases list as follows:
Paleoindian stage
Archaic stage

12,000-8500 BP
8500-1250 BP

7

Circlevil Ie phase
San Geronimo phase
Jarrell phase
Oaka I Ia phase
Clear Fork phase
Marshall Ford phase
Round Rock phase
San Marcos phase
Uvalde phase
Twin Sisters phase
Driftwood phase
Neoarchaic stage

8500-6800
6800-6100
6100-5100
5100-4600
4600-4100
4100-3500
3500-2600
2600-2250
2250-1800
1800-1400
1400-1250

BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP

1250- 200 BP

Austin phase
Toyah phase

1250- 650 BP
650- 200 BP

Historic stage

200 BP-present
(Prewitt 1981, 1985:215).

The following sections summarize the cultural
major stages.

content of

the

PALEOINDIAN STAGE (12,000 to ca. 8500 BP)
The Paleoindian stage began with the arrival of North America's
first inhabitants, who spread rapidly to al I ice-free regions of the
continent.
These
people practiced
non-specialized
gathering
strategies and a degree of specialized emphasis on hunting Pleistocene
megafauna such as mammoth and mastodon.
Major time diagnostic
Paleoindian artifacts in Central and East Texas are stone tools,
notably CI~vis, Folsom and Plainview projecti Ie point types.
Central
Texas Paleoindian sites have placed the region in the forefront of
Paleoindian research.
Publications are sti I I awaited
on
the
Wilson-Leonard Site (41WM235) - which yielded the famous Leanderthal
Lady burial - and the stratified 41BX52 site near San Antonio.
ARCHAIC STAGE (8500 to 1250 BP)
The long Archaic stage is defined by hunting and gathering
economies.
Modern ethnographic studies suggest that these economies
yield greater proportions of gathered plant foods than meat, and they
usually require a nomadic lifestyle. Social differentiation is scantj
individuals accrue status according to their accomplishments and
neither inherit nor bequeath it.
The earl iest Archaic phases in
Central Texas retain Paleoindian I ithic traits
basal edge grinding
and paral lei flaking on projecti Ie points -- but projectile point

8

styles evolved into a variety of stemmed forms, notably the Gower,
Hoxie,
Wei Is,
Bel I and
Martindale
types.
The proportional
contribution of food gathering, evidenced by grinding stones and
freshwater mussel shel I, increased through the Early Archaic, and the
first burned rock middens were formed near the end of the period,
ca. 5000-4600 BP.
Population trends, inferred indirectly from the
ratios of phase components to phase duration, reflect increase to a
peak in the San Geronimo phase, then sl ight decl ine toward the end of
the period (Prewitt 1981:75-78; 1985:216-225).
The Middle Archaic
saw the apex of burned rock midden formation and the emphasis on the
plant foods baked in these features. Continued hunting is shown by
the Nolan, Travis, Pedernales and Bulverde projecti Ie point styles.
Population reached a peak early, then apparently decl ined only to rise
to a stable plateau late in the period. The Late Archaic, beginning
ca. 2250 BP, witnessed the decl ine and disappearance of the burned
rock midden subsistence strategy.
The proportions of gathering
artifacts to hunting artifacts remain high, however, indicating a
shift in emphasis to another set of gathered plant foods. Diagnostic
projecti Ie point styles are Marcos, Montel I, Castrovi I Ie, Frio and
Fairland.
Population rose steadi Iy throughout the period to the
prehistoric population maximum in the Driftwood phase, 1400 to 1250
BP.
LATE PREHISTORIC STAGE (1250 to 200 BP)
Technological
innovations
appl ied
to
continuing
Archaic
subsistence
strategies
define
the
Late
Prehistoric
stage.
Principally, these innovations were the adoption of the bow and arrow
and the use of pottery. The stage is indicated by diagnostic arrow
points of the Granbury, Scal lorn, Perdiz and Cliffton types, by
pottery and by cemeteries. Central Texas pottery is the varied and
i I I-defined Leon Plain ware. This pottery and formal ized cemeteries
both have affinities with East and Coastal Texas. Gulf coastal shel I
in Central Texas indicates continuing, probably trade, connections
with the coast.
The development of agricultural societies in the
Caddo area of northeast Texas had effects in northern Central Texas.
A single cob of domesticated maize in the Kyle Site (Jelks 1962) and
occasional finds of Caddoan pottery in the same Brazos River area,
indicate at least some exchange and social relations between the two
zones. Population declined sharply and steadi Iy through the Late
Prehistoric;
the subsistence emphasis may have shifted to hunting.
Bison remains make a notable reappearance in sites of the Toyah phase
It IS In the Toyah phase sites that artifact
(650-200
BP).
assemblages bear resemblances to those of historically identified
Indian tribes.

9

HISTORIC STAGE (200 BP to present)
Technically, the Historic period began in A.D. 1528 with Cabeza
de Vaca's transit of coastal and southern Texas, but actual record
keeping on Central Texas did not commence for another 200 years In
that interval, indigenous groups suffered dislocations from the
advancing wavefronts of European diseases and other dislocated
Indians.
The Tonkawas, recorded as in Central Texas in the early
nineteenth century, may actually have migrated from the southern
Plains. Intensive settlement of the Travis County region began in the
1820s with the founding of Stephen F. Austin's Little Colony. As the
history of Texas advanced, the aboriginal cultures retreated and
eventually vanished, so that now the native record lies almost
entirely within the province of archeology.
The proposed Hamilton Pool County Park covers parts of three
sma I I original land grants (Texas State Land Office 1936), those of
Joseph C. Little, I.M. Hammett, and Adams, Beatty and Moulton.
Original grants were made to an H. Reimers a few mi les east of
Hami Iton Creek. The Reimers have owned the Hami Iton Pool property
since the late nineteenth century and operated the pool as a
commercial picnicking and camping resort since the 'teens. This land
use al lowed the pool to attain its status as a significant county
landmark. Hami Iton Creek and Hami Iton Pool were named for Andrew
Jackson Hamilton, Texas state representative, Texas attorney general,
U.S. representative from Texas, 10th governor of Texas and noted
anti-secessionist (Webb 1952).
PREVIOUS WORK
At the time of the Hamilton Pool survey, 1,247 sites had been
recorded Ln Travis County, Texas (TARL files). This large number,
increasing weekly, bespeaks both the intensity of Edwards Plateau
prehistory and the rapid pace of modern land altering development in
the county, which results in the discovery -- and al I too often the
destruction -- of prehistoric sites. Stil lone of the most important
development projects in the county, the Marshal I Ford Reservoir (Lake
Travis) project and its attendant salvage archeology set the paradigm
for Travis County and Edwards Plateau archeology, Conducted under the
auspices of the WPA, The University of Texas and Prof. J.E. Pearce,
this project identified the nature of regional sites, the sequence of
prehistoric cultures and the sequence of diagnostic projecti Ie points
stil I of great value in determining site chronology. The survey for
that project identified two sites in the Hami Iton Pool project area,
41TV52 and 41TV242. Research since the Marshal I Ford survey has been
carried on in sma I ler projects too numerous to recount, but which have
gradually accumulated the current huge site inventory.
Current

10
researches include a large block survey in the Bul I Creek Basin
(Howard and Freeman 1984) which has set forth a model of prehistoric
settlement patterns in the region, and intensive excavations in a
rockshelter, Cherry Tree Shelter, which dealt with subsistence,
economic and paleoclimatic issues (Kotter 1985).
FIELD METHODS
The principal method of the cultural resource survey was an
intensive pedestrian transect survey.
A 20 meter interval between
surveyors was establ ished for consistent ground surface observations.
Additionally, surveyors walked a zig-zag route along the I ine of the
transect. Examining the Hami Iton Creek canyon walls and Pedernales
river front bluffs for rockshelter sites and rock art was a special
task accomplished by walking the base of the walls, bluffs and cl ;ffs
and investigating al I overhangs and detached boulders. Stream and
gully cutbanks and spoi I from animal burrows were examined for fresh
exposures of subsurface material. Sharpshooter shovel tests were dug
in suspect areas where natural disturbances provided few subsurface
clues.
Notes and photographs were taken on the test pits, and their
fil I was screened through 1/4" mesh. Dai Iy field notes were kept and
general environment photographs of the project area were taken.
When a site was discovered, crew members walked over the area,
noting al I surface materials which would help del imit the site's
horizontal boundaries. Diagnostic artifacts and cultural residues
were recorded, and these and the vegetal, soi I, physiographic setting,
and cultural and natural features of the site were described on
standard
State of Texas Archeological Site forms.
Diagnostic
artifacts and the cultural materials from the shovel tests were
collected.
Record photographs of the site and its diagnostics were
taken, and the site location was plotted on 7.5' USGS topographic
Sites were given temporary numbers in the field.
quadrangle maps.
These were subsequently replaced by the permanent Smithsonian system
trinomial site designations assigned by Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL), the central repository for archeological records
and materials in Texas. The trinomial system includes a state code
(41=Texas), a county code (TV=Travis) and a site code (52=fifty-second
site recorded in the county). Thus, 41TV52 denotes the fifty-second
site recorded in Travis County, Texas. AI I collected materials and
site documentation are curated at TARL, The University of Texas at
Austin.

11

RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
At the conclusion of the survey and monitoring program, two
previously recorded sites, 41TV52 and 41TV242, had been relocated and
updated in their records, and two sites, 41TV1248 and 41TV1250, had
been newly discovered and recorded. One isolated find of a projecti Ie
point had also been made.
Descriptions of these sites and finds
fol low, along with descriptions of the test pits dug into the sites.
A summary of recommendations fol lows these descriptions.
41TV52, The Hami Iton Pool Site
Originally reported in 1937 by A.T. Jackson, 41TV52 is a burned
rock midden site (Fig. 2). Most of the midden proper is enclosed by
an old stock pen. The pen, midden and a surrounding moderately dense
flake, burned rock and organic soil zone lie on shelves of Glen Rose
I imestone above the left bank of Hamilton Creek. Westward, away from
the creek, the land slopes gently uphil I. Site soils belong to the
Tarrant series along the creek, the Volente series uphil I. The modern
environment is the typical upland Edwards Plateau oak-juniper woodland
with additional members in a local community heavi Iy affected by years
of
goat grazingj
notable constituents are amaranths, agarita,
sticktights and tasajil 10 cactus. A cherry tree grows on the south
side of the stock pen, near the middle of the burned rock midden. The
principal site structures are the midden, a moderate density artifact
and residue scatter around the midden, and an extensive low density
flake and artifact scatter extending west and south of these elements.
The principal cultural remains of 41TV52 other than the midden
are stone tools, burned rock, mussel shell and stone flaking debris.
Test Pit 9, described below, yielded a Travis dart point and fragments
of a Stage 3 and a Stage 4 biface (biface stages are steps in the
manufacturing process of bifaces);
in addition to densely packed
burned I imestone rocks, stone tool flakes and scattered bits of mussel
shel I. Additional surface artifacts from the wider site area included
a fragmentary core chopper, which is a large cobble with one end
tapered by flaking down to a point. An Edgewood dart point (Fig. 3a),
two possible Uvalde dart point fragments (Fig. 3b,c) and a possible
Bel I dart point fragment were also collected, along with three untyped
point fragments.
Jackson's (1937) report listed other diagnostics
including Uvalde, Nolan, Bulverde, Pedernales, Frio, Edgewood, Darl
and Catan projectile points. These diagnostics indicate the Early,
Middle and Late Archaic periods. One specimen, which could not be
identified to a certainty, resembles a Plainview point, a Paleoindian
diagnostic. Altogether these projecti Ie point styles indicate use and
formation of the site at varying levels of intensity possibly from
10,000 BP to 1250 BP. Artifacts and features of modern history are

--""" \
41 TV52

\

\
\

\

---­ --

•

FIGURE

2.

\
I

}

-' .....

"

...........

----­

= Shovel Test

SITE MAP SHOWING SHOVEL PROBE LOCATIONS,

I

I

13
found In the form of fences and circular
scattered seemingly at random over the site and
Almost al I of these hearths overflow with
bottles, metal cans, plastic containers and
beverage can pull-tabs.

stone camping hearths
general environment.
ash, charcoal, glass
wrappers, paper and

the site's
Three disturbance factors bear importantly on
significance and management recommendations. First, surface artifacts
have been completely removed over a period of decades by campers and
picnickers making casual searches for arrowheads. TARL files also
report a significant surface collection by J. Milburn Lathan. Second,
the network of fences on the site, built to create the stock pen and
pasture fences, inflicted damage from modern postholes.
This impact
is cumulatively significant. Third, a ranch vehicle trai I and part of
the pool parking lot overlie parts of the site.
The ranch trai I,
never graded or surfaced, crosses the eastern edge of the burned rock
midden near the creek. The access road and the parking lot of the
Phase I development of the county park cover parts of the low density
flake scatter on the north and west site peripheries. The effect of
these three factors has been to reduce greatly the integrity of site
surface features and artifacts. Subsurface features and contexts, on
the other hand, retain integrity.
The burned rock midden has
considerable depth and numerous artifacts, as Test Pit 9 demonstrated.
Avoidance of the burned rock midden and high density artifact scatter
immediately around the midden wi I I adequately preserve the subsurface
features.
Test pits 1 through 5 were dug into the low density
scatter, Test Pit 9 into the burned rock midden itself.

artifact

TEST PIT 1
This unit was excavated to a total depth of about 30 centimeters
in an area of the Volente soi I series. Topsoi I was a reddish-brown
sandy loam with numerous roots. Caliche specks appeared at about 18
centimeters.
Hard packed reddish-brown sandy loam lay beneath this
zone with increasing numbers of limestone spalls exfoliated from the
underlying bedrock.
Below 25 centimeters the soi I became less
compact, redder and much more clayey.
TEST PIT 2
Excavated to a total depth of about 40 centimeters, this test pit
was located in an area of Volente soi Is. The topsoi I was a dark brown
clayey loam with numerous roots and rootlets but few pebbles.
At
about 23 centimeters the soi I changed to a deep red clay with sma I I
limestone pebbles, and this subsoi I continued to 40 centimeters.
Cultural material was lacking in this test pit.

o

5
em

A.

D.

Figure 3.

B.

E.

1

c.

F.

Artifacts Recovered from the Hamilton Pool Survey.
a,b) Possible Uvalde dart point fragments from the surface
of 411V52;
c) Edgewood dart point from the surface of 411V52 ;
d) Non-dia gnostic dart point from Test Pit 3, 41TV 52;
e) Travis dart point from Test Pit 9, 411V 242;
f) Uvalde-like dart point, an isolated surface find .

15
TEST PIT 3
This test pit was also dug to 40 centimeters in Volente soi Is.
The upper sandy loam zone had numerous roots and rootlets. The
subsoi I zone of red clay lay at a depth of 10 centimeters.
Down to
about 20 centimeters, the pit yielded four chert flakes and a
non-diagnostic dart point (Fig. 3d). The test pit lacked cultural
material below 20 centimeters.
TEST PIT 4
Dug to a total depth of about 40 centimeters In Volente soi Is,
this test pit's topsoil was a dark brown clay loam with numerous
roots. Reddish clay subsoi I was encountered at 32 centimeters.
One
possible chert flake was excavated in the top 20 centimeters and this
was the sum of the pit's cultural material.
TEST PIT 5
This test pit was dug to about 42 centimeters on Volente soi Is.
Topsoi I was a hard packed organic loam with numerous rootlets and
limestone gravels and cobbles. Fi I I became redder and noticeably more
clayey at about 35 centimeters. A limestone boulder at 42 centimeters
halted excavation. Three chert flakes were retrieved from the first
20 centimeters, and no further cultural material was found.
TEST PIT 9
This test pit was dug on the burned rock midden to about 70
centimeters In a zone of mapped Tarrant soi Is, but at a point of
severe anthropic modification of soil horizons caused by the midden
formation processes. As a result, instead of a typical Tarrant series
soi I horizon, all the test pit fi I I was loose, organic, ashy, dark
gray-brown si Ity loam with copious pebble to fist size burned
I imestone rocks. In the upper 20 centimeters, the proportion of rocks
to matrix was about 60~ rocks to 40~ matrix. With depth, this
proportion gradually switched to 40~ rocks to 60~ matrix. At about 40
45 centimeters depth, the fi I I became looser and seemingly lighter
in color. Cultural material other than burned rock was abundant to
about 65 centimeters, then began to taper off.
A Travis point
(Fig. 3e) was recovered at 40 centimeters; chert flakes, many burned,
were abundant throughout. A Stage 3 biface fragment, a Stage 4 biface
fragment, and a utilized flake were recovered from the screen, as were
several fragments of mussel shel I and numerous burned and unburned
Rabdotus snai I shel Is. All recovered items and the burned rock were
Although
coated with a gummy, cl inging, ashy organic residue.
cultural materials became less frequent near the bottom of the pit, it
must be stressed that the pit failed to reach the bottom of the

16

midden. At least one meter of accumulation
of the midden's greatest thickness.

IS

a

reasonable estimate

41TV242, Hamilton Pool Place
Also recorded by A.T. Jackson (1937)1 41TV242 is a rockshelter
and open camp site under the south canyon rim of Hamilton Creek.
Although within the canyon proper, the site's
microenvironment
(Fig.2) contains a mix of upland and riparian zone species. Trees
include oak, juniper, cherry, mesquite and sycamore.
Cypress grows
along Hami Iton Creek within 100 meters of the site. The understory
includes various grasses and flowering annuals, shrubs,
vines,
agarita, abundant sticktights and scattered tasaji 110 and prickly pear
cactus. Site orientation is north to northeast, and slope varies from
1 to 15 percent.
Tarrant series soi Is are mapped on the site
location; the rocKshelter contains as much as half a meter of
culturally modified cave deposit, as Test Pit 8 demonstrated. The
shelter's dripline is 15 meters long, and the overhang has a maximum
depth of 2 meters.
A ranch vehicle trai I crosses the eastern and
northern peripheries of the site.
Modern circular stone campers'
hearths with the standard assemblage of trash dot the site surface.
The predominant cultural material on the site is burned limestone
rock.
The material is scattered over the open area and forms a minor
talus below the rockshelter. Chert flakes are abundant throughout the
site.
Fragments of mussel shell also may be found al lover the site.
A chert bifacial dri I I tip was recovered from the surface of the open
area near the ranch vehicle trail, as was a medial fragment of a chert
bifacial tool. The dri I I tip is similar to common Late Prehistoric
drills, but the specimen is too fragmentary to be declared a Late
Prehistoric diagnostic.
Jackson (1937) reported
no diagnostic
artifacts from the site.
The ranch vehicle trail and camping activities have disturbed the
prehistoric contexts, but the most severe disturbance by far has been
the long term pothunting of the rockshelter. Eighty to 90% of the
rockshelter deposits behind the dripline have been shoveled, removed
or churned in the pursuit of artifacts.
The lack of diagnostic
artifacts anywhere on the site may be attributed to pothunting and
surface collecting. The significance of the rockshelter has been
seriously reduced, but the open campsite may have intact subsurface
deposits as deep as 30 centimeters.
For this reason, development
beyond the Phase I plan should avoid the open site areas (improvements
to the ranch vehicle trail to permit emergency vehicle access to the
pool have been monitored and made no impact on any intact feature).

17
Test pits 6 and 7 were dug in the open campsite near the
trail, and Test Pit 8 was dug in the rockshelter.

vehicle

TEST PIT 6
This test pit was excavated a total depth of 20 centimeters to
I imestone bedrock in an area of mapped Tarrant soi Is. The location
was selected for its position on the open area beside the emergency
vehicle access road down into Hami Iton Creek Canyon. The road was
receiving improvements, and Test Pit 6 aided monitoring efforts. Soil
was dark, grayish-brown clay loam with numerous roots rootlets and
I imestone pebbles. Cultural material included 59 burned and unburned
chert flakes and three flakes of mussel shel I.
J

TEST PIT 7
Excavated to limestone bedrock, 35 centimeters below surface,
Test Pit 7 was located in Tarrant soi Is. The position, like Test Pit
6, was beside the emergency vehicle access road but farther upslope
toward the canyon wal I .
Down to 20 centimeters, soi I was dark
reddish-brown clay loam with copious tree roots, rootlets, and
limestone pebbles and gravels. Below 20 centimeters the soil became
I ighter brown in color. In contrast to Test Pit 6, only four chert
flakes were recovered from Test Pit 7. This difference suggests that
Test Pit 7 may have been located near or beyond the effective site
boundary.
TEST PIT 8
This test pit was excavated 48 centimeters to limestone bedrock
behind
the
rockshelter dripline.
An area free of pothunting
disturbance was sought for the test pit's location, but this effort
was only partly successful.
The western edge of the test pit was
superimposed over an old pothole, but the test pit profile showed no
obvious disturbance.
41TV242 is in an area of mapped Tarrant soi Is,
but al I the fi I I of Test Pit 8 was loose medium brown organic and ashy
cave dust with I imestone pebbles and gravels; a few tree roots grew
near the surface. The test pit yielded plentiful chert flakes and
mussel shel I fragments but no diagnostic artifacts.
41TV1248
This site is a surficial flake scatter located on the nearly flat
uplands south of Hami Iton Creek Canyon, 150 meters from the canyon's
junction with the Pedernales River Canyon.
"rhe environment is the
typical upland Edwards Plateau oak-juniper woodland. The understory
is mixed long and mid grasses with abundant sandbur and scattered

18

tasaji 110 and prickly pear cactus. The site lies on an area of mapped
Tarrant series soi Is; the soi I here is extremely thin, and shelves of
underlying limestone bedrock jut from beneath a few centimeters of
deflating reddish-brown si Ity loam.
Loose limestone tablets and
cobbles I itter the site surface. A ranch road crosses the site, and
modern trash from circular stone campers' hearths nearby has spread
over the site.
Prehistoric artifacts are principally secondary and tertiary
chert flakes from stone tool manufacturing. A few angular specimens
of shattered chert cobbles and a few specimens of burned limestone
were also observed on the site surface. The site was lacking in
diagnostic artifacts which would permit establishment of even a very
broad chronology. The observed active deflation and thinness of soil
deposits adequately demonstrated the lack of any subsurface deposits
and rendered excavation of test pits an absurd exercise.
The ranch road and probable surface collecting, in conjunction
with rapid natural deflation and erosion, have greatly reduced the
value of this site; intact deposits are entirely lacking and the site
offers no potential for contributing to an understanding of aboriginal
cultures beyond the fact of its location, already gained.
41TV1248
therefore lacks significance according to al I state and federal
criteria. The site should be avoided by future development if at al I
possible, but consideration of the site should not enter further
resource management or planning.
Isolated Find 1
A find of a Uvalde-I ike (Fig. 3F) projecti Ie point fragment was
made above the canyon rim near the bluffs overlooking the Pedernales
River. There were no other cultural materials in the vicinity.
The
locale is one of mapped Tarrant soi Is which are very thin above parent
I imestone. The soi I deposit at the findspot amounted to drifts of
dust collected on slabs of limestone shelving above the Pedernales
bluffs. Subsurface cultural deposits are doubtful in the extreme.
41TV1250
This aboriginal site is located In the large I imestone overhang
which is immediately adjacent to Hami Iton Pool. No vegetation is
present in the rockshelter and soi Is are loosely compacted silty clay
intermixed with abundant blocks and spal Is of roof fal I. Modern
trash, such as ring tabs and beer bottles, and remnants of recent
campfires, litter the site surface.

19

Prehistoric cultural material is present as a very light surface
scatter and as very ephemeral amounts of subsurface material. A
single shovel test with 1/4" sample recovery, placed near the center
of the shelter, yielded 5 sma I I interior flakes to a depth of 48
centimeters below the present ground surface.
Historic debris was
also recovered to a depth of 40 centimeters below present ground
surface. Large blocks of roof fall had to be broken and removed
during shovel probing. Below 48 centimeters is basal silty clay which
was apparently water deposited. The probe was extended to a depth of
72 centimeters below ground surface with a negative yield.
Though limited, intact prehistoric cultural deposits may exist at
41TV1250. Their buried nature and proximity to a high visibility area
appear to insure that they wil I not be disturbed by relic hunters. No
further work is currently deemed necessary for this site. Should
future park development entail impact of this area, further assessment
of the location may be necessary.

TEST PIT 1
This unit was excavated near the center of the long limestone
overhang which forms a rockshelter overlooking Hami Iton Pool. Total
depth of the unit was 72 centimeters below present ground surface.
The fi II from surface to 48 centimeters depth was a mixture of loose,
From 0 to 20
dark gray si Ity clay and I imestone roof fall rubble.
centimeters depth one chert, tertiary flake fragment (distal end),
glass (brown and clear), rusted metal, a wire nail and a sawed bone
From 20 to 40 centimeters below surface,
fragment were recovered.
three chert flakes (1 burned), a lead fishing weight and a modern bone
From 40 to 48 centimeters depth, a single
fragment was recovered.
chert flake was recovered. Also recovered from this level was an old
bottle capj
however, it was unclear whether it was actually present
in this level or had been dislodged from a higher elevation.
Basal
material encountered at 48 centimeters is a dark gray, compacted
clayey si It, apparently water deposited. The probe was excavated to a
No cultural material was
depth of 72 centimeters below surface.
observed from 48 to 72 centimeters.
Summary of Recommendations
Sites 41TV52 and 41TV242, relocated by the current study, are
significant resources by al I federal and state criteria and merit
State Archeological Landmark designation despite the pothunting that
has reduced the value of the 41TV242 rockshelter by 80 to 90 percent.
It is recommended that 41TV242 and 41TV52's burned rock midden and
moderate density artifact scatter be avoided and preserved by al I

20

current and future development of Hami Iton Pool
County
Park.
Statements and site locations should be added to the park master plan
so that current recommendations can be included in future planning.
Future impacts deemed unavoidable should initiate consultations on
mitigation measures which may be required. Site 41TV1248 is not a
significant cultural resource by federal and state criteria; the site
should be avoided if possible, but it fai Is to warrant further
management consideration.
41TV1250 simi larly lacks the potential to
contribute to an understanding of regional prehistory beyond the level
achieved by its recording. The shelter wi II not be affected by park
development and use, and its high visibi lity should deter relic
hunting.
Monitoring and consultations on the Phase I development of
the park have minimized and avoided impacts to the significant
cultural resources, and the Phase I development of Hami Iton Pool
County Park should proceed.

21

REFERENCES CITED
Antevs, Ernst
1955 Geologic CI imatic Dating In the West.
20(4) :317-335.

American Antiquity

Barnes, Virgi I E.
1981
Geologic Atlas of Texas. Llano sheet. Bureau
Geology, The UnIVersity of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
11 (1) :93-117.

Texas

Journal

of

Economic

of Science

Bryant, Vaughn M" Jr.
1969 Late Ful Iglacial and Postglacial Pol len Analysis of Texas
Unpubl ished Ph.D dissertation, The University of
Sediment.
Texas at Austin.
Bryant, Vaughn M. Jr. and Harry J. Shafer
1977 The Quaternary Paleoenvironment of Texas: A Model for the
Archeologist.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
48. Austin.
Carr, John T.
1967 The Climate and Physiography of Texas.
Development Board Report 5. Austin.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1931
Physiograrh y of Western United States.
Company, nco New York.
1938

Physiography of Eastern United States.
Company, Inc. New York.

Texas

Water

McGraw-Hi I I Book
McGraw-Hi I I Book

Gou Id, Frank W.'
1975 Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary.
Agricultural Experiment Station. Publ ication MP-585.
A l MUniversity. Col lege Station.

Texas
Texas

Gunn, Joel
1985 Mobility Patterns in Central Texas. Manuscript on file at
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.

.

,

22
Howard, Margaret A. and Martha Doty Freeman
1984 Settlement in the Upper Bull Creek Basin: An Inventory and
Assessment of the Cultural Resources at the Canyon Creek
Development, Travis County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc. Report of Investigations 32. Austin.
Jackson, A.T.
1937 Notes on Marshal I Ford Reservoir Sites. Manuscript on fi Ie
at Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in
Hi I I County, Texas. Department of Anthropology Archaeology
Series 5. The University of Texas at Austin.
Kotter, Steven M.
1985 Cherry Tree Shelter: Excavation of a Stratified Late Archaic
and Neoarchaic Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey Research Report 92. The University of
Texas at Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas.
Society Bulletin 52:65-89. Austin.
1985

Texas

Archeological

From Circlevi I Ie to Toyah: Comments
on
Central
Texas
Chronology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
54:201-238. Austin.

Texas State Land Office
1936 Travis County Land Grant
Austin.

Map.

Texas State

Webb, Walter Prescott (editor)
1952 Handbook of
Texas
Vol. 1.
Texas
Association: University of Texas Press.
Werchan, L.E., A.C. Lowther and R.N. Ramsey
1974 Soi I Survey of Travis County, Texas.
Service. Washington D.C.
l

Land

Office.

State Historical
Austin.

USDA Soil Conservation

