----------------

Archeological Investigations at 41TV285:
A Site to Be Affected by Construction
of the Onion Creek Wastewater Treatment
Interceptor Line
Travis County, Texas
Technical Bulletin 78
Antiquities Permit #424

by Michael Davis

Principal Investigator;
Solveig A. Turpin

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
November 1984

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcones Research Center
10100 Burnet Road

A Report Submitted to the City of Austin Public Works
Department, Water and Wastewater Division, in fulfillment
of Contract # G81852 and Antiquities Permit #424.

ABSTRACT
During August and September of 1984, the Texas Archeological
Survey,· The University of Texas at Austin, conducted an archeological
investigation at 41TV285, a portion of which was to be affected by the
construction of the City of Austin Onion Creek wastewater interceptor
shaft in southeastern Travis County, Texas.
A combination
of
mechanical fill removal and intensive visual monitoring was utilized
to test for and assess the significance and potential of subsurface
deposits.
Very limited cultural remains were observed during these
operations. Due to the low recovery, it was deemed that further work
would not be expected to yield any significant cultural data.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
As is the case in all multiple agency endeavors, individuals from
several walks of life participate toward a common goal. Such was true
of this project.
The author would personally like to express
appreciation to the following:
T.C. Steiner, for allowing access to City of Austin easement,
Paul Marshall, engineer for Mole Construction Company,
Cliff Dunham, City of Austin,
Andy Covar, City of Austin,
Rodger White, City of Austin Wastewater Engineer,
Jerry LaRose, engineer for Black and Veatch, and
Hayden Whitsett and Danny Fox, archeologists for Texas Water
Development Board.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract . . . . . . .
Acknowledgements , . .
Introduction . . . . , .
Environmental Background .
Archeological Background •
Methods and Techniques . . . . .
Research Results . . . .
References Cited . . . . .

iii

iv
1

2
6

12

16

18

Appendix A
Analysis of Onion Creek Stratigraphic Deposits at 41TV285
by Dr. Richard Jones . . .
Appendix B
Analysis of Molluscan Shells Recovered from 41TV285
by Dr. Raymond V. Neck

••

'I!

21

31

LIST OF FIGURES
Fi gure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Fi gure
Figure

vi
Site Location Map . . . . . .
5
Onion Creek Terrace System •
Excavation Unit East Wall Profile
. 8-9
13
Excavation Plan Map . . • . . . . .
15
Site Photographs . . • . . • . . • . . . . . .
22
Photograph of Excavation Unit East Wall Profile.
24
First-Order Trend Surface of Unit A .•
25
First-Order Trend Surface of Unit B . .
9, First-Order Trend Surface of Unit C . . .
. • . . 26
27
10. First-Order Trend Surface of Unit D . .
29
11. Frequency Histogram of Coarser Sediments
30
12. Frequency Histogram of Finer Sediments
1.

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

LIST OF TABLES
1.
2,
3.
4.

First Order Trend Surfaces . . . . . . . . . . .
Terrestrial Gastropods Recovered from 41TV285
Freshwater Gastropods Recovered from 41TV285 .
Bivalves Recovered from 4ITV285 . . • . . . . . .

v

28
32
32
32

Figure 1.

Project Location Map.

41 TV 285.

o
D .

Q

U.S. High way
tate High way
Farm to Mar ke t Road
Archeol ogical Site

o,

2

1

n1iles

3

!

INTRODUCTION
This report is the culmination of an archeological investigation
conducted by the Texas Archeological Survey of The University of Texas
at Austin for the City of Austin at prehistoric site 41TV285 (Figure
1), a portion of which is to be destroyed by the construction of an
access shaft to the Onion Creek wastewater interceptor
line.
Negotiations
between representatives of the Texas Archeological
Survey, Tye F. Collins and Associates, Black and Veatch Engineering,
the City of Austin and archeologists from the Texas Department of
Water Resources resulted in a three phase plan designed to ascertain
the presence and assess the potential of any subsurface cultural
deposits which might exist within
the construction
easement.
Implementation of the latter two phases was contingent upon the
results of the first.
Phase I represented the mechanical excavation of a portion of the
75 foot square (22.8 meters square) easement area and was intended to
determine presence/absence, integrity and potential of possible
archeological remains. This step, considered minimally necessary for
accurate assessment, would utilize a backhoe for fill removal with an
archeologist continuously monitoring the activity. Field time for
this phase was estimated at two months.
via
the
Phase II was designed to enhance data recovery
implementation of hand excavation should mechanical fill removal
expose significant cultural remains.
Phase III called for a full scale mitigative effort in which a
broad horizontal area would be opened in order to maximize retrieval
of remains which had been deemed significant as a result of the two
initial phases.
Two archeologists, sharing time as backhoe operator and monitor,
conducted the field work portion of this project over a six week
period in August and September of 1984.
This report, which was
completed immediately after the field segment, follows the format of
previous Texas Archeological Survey Technical Bulletins, which adhere
to the guidelines approved by the Council of Texas Archeologists and
the Texas Historical Commission. All materials generated during this
project will be permanently housed at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory of The University of Texas at Austin.
This report was written by Michael Davis who also served as Field
Supervisor.
Jeffrey Turpin served as Field Assistant during the
project and Leland Bement was on site for a one week period and David

2

O. Brown visited the site twice to offer suggestions concerning soil
stratigraphic zones and aid in mapping.
Abby Treece drafted the
figures for the report and provided editorial advice. Dr. Solveig A.
Turpin supervised all phases of the project as Principal Investigator.
As this report is the fourth resulting from this particular City
of Austin Wastewater Treatment System construction program much of
the following background information was drawn from the previous three
documents (Whitsett and Fox 1979; Brown 1981 and Thurmond 1982). To
avoid unnecessary repetition the next three sections are general in
nature except where pertaining specifically to 41TV285. Interested
readers seeking a more detailed view are referred to the above three
publications.
J

J

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
Project Location
Site 41TV285 is located along a terrace near the eastern extent
of the Onion Creek Basin, some 11 kilometers (7 miles) above (west of)
the creek's confluence with the Colorado River.
Flowing from its
headwaters in southern Blanco county to the east, the tributary
dissects in succession the Edwards Plateau, the Rolling Prairie and
the Blackland Prairie, on which the site is situated (Skolasky
1978:8).
Climate
The climate along the lower reaches of Onion
Creek is
subtropical.
Temperatures are normally warm and humid with a mean
annual temperature of 68.3 degrees Fahrenheit. Summers are hot with
occasional
100-plus degree days, while winters are mild with
sub-freezing temperatures occurring on an average of 25 days or less.
The average yearly rainfall is 32.8 inches (Texas Water Development
Board 1976).
Flora and Fauna
The most current inventories of Onion Creek flora were compiled
by Riskind (McEachern and Ralph 1974) and Whitsett and Fox (1979) and
were used as references for the following list.
The upper terraces and uplands along Onion Creek would have been
true pralrles prior to the massive impacts of historic activity.
Predominant grasses during the prehistoric era would have been
Indiangrass
(Sorghastrum avenaceum),
Canada wildeye
(Elymus
canadensis), little bluestem (Schizachyr;um scorpar;um), big bluestem
(Anropogon gerard;i), Texas wintergrass (Stipa leuchotric;a), tall

.......................•.•......

-~~--

---~--.-

3

dropseed (Sporobolus asper), side-oats grama
and others.

Bouteloua

curtipendula)

Along the lower terraces and the immediate floodplain, a woodland
, pecan
existed with such species as American elm (Ulmus
black
(Carya illinoens;s
bald cypress Taxodium ~
willow
A number of new species are invading the area as a result of
current cultural manipulation of the land. Cedar (Juniperus ~.),
mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa) and prickly pear (Opuntia ~) may all
be seen near the project area. Ironically, in Richard Maya County
Park, just south of 41VT285, attempts are being made to re-establish
pecan trees in areas which were cleared to facilitate sand and gravel
mining.
Many species of mammal, bird, reptile and fish have been or are
native to the lower reaches of Onion Creek. Faunal remains recovered
from Smith Rockshelter (4lTV42) are indicative of the wide variety of
animals exploited by the earliest inhabitants of the region: fresh
water mussel, turtle, white tail deer, bison, skunk, raccoon, several
members of the dog family, cottontail rabbit, antelope, turkey and
beaver (Suhm 1957:52-54). Several of those listed would be absent
from a contemporary inventory due to a number of factors, all
attributable to human activities.
Geology
The Onion Creek terrace on which 41TV285 is situated lies 200
meters north of the present channel at an elevation of 91.4 meters
Terrace orlgln, deposition and
(460) feet above mean sea level.
composition in the area, especially as the creek approaches its
confluence with the Colorado River, has generated some controversy and
a sizable array of documents (Weeks 1941; Weber 1968; Garner 1973;
As this particular
Baker 1975; Brown 1981 and Thurmond 1982).
project is considerably upstream from the junction of the two
drainages and from the two previous wastewater construction-related
archeological projects, more site specific information was sought from
the above referenced and other reports in an attempt to accurately
describe the site locale.
Two types of alluvial terraces are considered here:
those
deposited by the Colorado River and those deposited by tributary
streams such as Onion Creek. The former have been described as having
matrices colored red-brown to yellow-brown (Garner 1973:30) and as
containing a gravel mixture of, in order of predominance, limestone,
chert, quartzite, metamorphic and igneous rocks (Urbanec 1963; Garner
1973). In contrast, Onion Creek sediments display hues of gray and
brown (Urbanec 1963:40) with a gravel composition exclusively of
limestone and chert. Soil typology is typically identical in the two

4

drainages, consisting of sand, silt and clay and mixtures thereof
(Garner 1973:16-17). This difference in lithic composition of the
terrace gravel fractions is directly related to the area drained by
the streams and is additionally manifested by the types (colors) of
chert present in each.
Onion Creek. draining from the Edwards
Plateau, bisects the Cretaceous Glen Rose, Walnut and
Edwards
formations, yielding gray to black chert eroded from the Edwards
Formation (Skolasky 1978:3-4). The multi-colored variety of cherts
encountered in Colorado River alluviums (Thurmond 1982:16) reflects
the broader lithology encountered up the major drainage basin.
Prior
to actual excavation, it was possible to determine, by inspecting the
existing gravel pit wall immediately adjacent to the project area,
that the terrace consisted of alternating beds of sand, silt, clay and
gravel. This preliminary observation was confirmed during backhoeing
operations and mapping of the east wall profile. Conclusions reached
soil content and
during profile documentation of this unit, i.e.
color and gravel (limestone and chert) description, are indicative of
Onion Creek deposits and are consistent with the description of local
tributary terrace deposition outlined
above.
An additional,
conclusive indication that the sediments comprising the terrace under
scrutiny were deposited by the adjacent tributary was the isolation of
bits of green pyroclastic material derived from the Pilot Knob
volcanic formation.
Erosion of this particular igneous strata is
solely available to Onion Creek.
Age determination of the terrace revolves around correlation with
Colorado River terraces - a system which points up the need for more
work in the Onion Creek area. Increasingly refined methods involving
the adaptation of aerial and high altitude photography and remote
sensing have produced agreement between Urbanec (1963:29-30) and
Skolasky (1978:91-97) on the existence of a three terrace system along
Skolasky, in the most current
the lower reaches of Onion Creek.
study, maps his three terrace zones (Skolasky 1978:Fig. 31). Figure 2
shows these terraces as adapted from Skolasky with the location of
41VT285 superimposed. Temporally, "Onion Creek Terrace I is assigned
a date of Late Pleistocene;
Terrace II is noted as younger but
difficult to date while Terrace III represents the present floodplain"
(Skolasky 1978:91-93). Urbanec (1963), projecting from the seven
terrace
systems devised for the Colorado River by Baker and
Penteado-Orellana (1977:412) assigns ages to his triple terrace system
of approximately 3000-10,000 BP, 2000-3000 BP and 1000-2000 BP,
respectively.
Soils
The soil pattern present on the terrace at the site is the
Lewisville-Patrick association (Werchan et al. 1974) characterized by
calcareous, clayey soils which are moderately deep to deep and
underlain by stream deposited gravels (Werchan et al. 1974:7). In
particular, the impact area consists of Patrick (PaC) series soils

-·~f1~o;;....' \

'"
)
',-..~,,~.". ...'-.. "\~.

".,.,."""""
,.",,/#fII"'"

,.",,,,.,,...,,,

\ ...-19.~~

fIIII""""

~

Onion Creek Terrace I

IIIII

Onion Creek Terrace II

-

Onion Creek Terrace III

~

~

~

1

Onion Creek Terrace
(Not Differentiated)

2

3

4

r

miles

Figure 2.

The Onion Creek Terrace System. Mapped by Remote Sensing by
R.A. Skolasky (Skolasky 1978).
(.n

6

which are generally used for pastureland in the area and are excellent
sources of commercial sand and gravel. These mining operations have,
in fact, destroyed a large portion of this site. The soil profile
exposed by this excavation (Figure 3) is consistent with that reported
by Werchan et al. (1974).

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Cultural History
41TV285 is situated within an area termed the Central Texas
Archeological Region (Suhm 1960:63) where a cultural history of at
least 10,000 years duration is known to exist.
Traditionally, this
broad expanse of time has been divided into a four stage (Paleoindian,
Archaic, Neo-American and Historic) sequence, based on changes in
technology and subsistence modes (Suhm et al.
1954).
Prewitt
(1981:65-89) has refined this chronology, dividing the two middle
His interpretation, which lists key
stages into thirteen phases.
artifact markers and representative archeological sites for each
stage, will be followed in this description.
The Paleoindian stage (before 8500 BP) in Central Texas is marked
by three lanceolate projectile points: Clovis, Folsom and Plainview.
Historically, peoples of this era were thought to s
st primarily on
species of now extinct megafauna.
However, recent investigations
appear to indicate a more varied system which supplemented hunting
with gathering (Bryant and Shafer 1977). Recent excavations at two of
these early sites, 41WM235 and 41BX52, are currently in the reporting
stage and their publication will contribute significantly to the
Paleoindian data base.
The Early Archaic Stage is divided into four phases: Circleville
(8500-7000 BP), San Geronimo (7000-6000 BP). Jarrell (6000-5000 BP)
and Oakalla (5000-4600 BP) (Prewitt 1981:75).
Technologically. the
phases display some remnants of the Paleoindian lithic traits, such as
basal edge grinding and some parallel flaking as the projectile point
styles evolve from lanceolate to a wide variety of stemmed points such
as Gower, Hoxie, Wells, Bell and Martindale (Prewitt 1981:76-78).
Foo~thering,
indicatecr-by the appearance of grinding stones and
freshwater mussels, appears to increase in importance through time.
In the Jarrell phase, burned rock middens make their appearance and
are associated with two distinctive, triangular projectile points
Baird and Taylor.
The Middle Archaic is also divided into four phases: Clear Fork
(4600-4000 BP), Marshall Ford (4000-3400 BP), Round Rock (3400-2600
BP) and San Marcos (2600-2250 BP). Marker projectile points for this
stage include Nolan, Travis, Pedernales and Bulverde. Burned rock
middens, a type 0 specialized cooking oven, proliferate throughout

7

the first three phases to the point of being the predominant feature
type, indicating a heavy reliance on plant food. However, a roughly
equal ratio between projectile points and other tools present in the
archeological remains suggests the continued importance of hunting.
This cultural component was well represented at the Collins Site (Suhm
1955), located approximately 5.5 kilometers (3.5 miles) upstream from
the current project area.
During the first phase of the Late Archaic, the Uvalde Phase
(2250-1750 BP), burned rock midden usage diminishes significantly and
bison bone, which has been absent since approximately 5000 BP, begins
to reappear in the archeological remains. Of interest is a slightly
higher percentage of tools other than projectile points in the total
artifact assemblage during this phase, indicating a probable increase
in plant procurement.
When viewed with the decline in midden
accumulation, a new adaptation in processing seems apparent. A
variety of dart points serve as key indicators for this phase:
Frio,
Marcos, Montell, Castroville and Fairland (Prewitt 1981:75-76, 78).
The later two phases of the Late Archaic, Twin Sisters (1750-1400 BP)
and
Driftwood
(1400-1250
BP)
continue
to
evidence
these
disproportionate fractions in lithic typology,
demonstrating
a
continued heavy reliance on vegetal subsistence. Included in this
non-projectile point category are distinctive bifaces:
Erath, San
Gabriel and Hare, various unifaces and scrapers, perforators and
gravers (Prewitt 1981:81-82). Within the lower Onion Creek area, the
later portion of the Late Archaic, manifested by the presence of Darl
and Ensor dart points, has been documented at the Collins Site,--at
Smit~ckshelter (Suhm 1957), located approximately 7.5 kilometers
(4.7 miles) upstream from 41TV285, and at 41TV461 (Thurmond 1982),
situated near the creek's confluence with the Colorado River.
The Austin (1250-650 BP) and Toyah (650-200
BP)
phases,
originally defined by Jelks (1962), constitute the Neo-American or Neo
Archaic Stage as renamed by Prewitt (1981:68).
The technological
achievements which heralded this particular stage were the replacement
of the atlatl by the bow and arrow and the beginning of the
manufacture of ceramic vessels.
Projectile point markers, in this
case arrow points, for the Austin phase are Scallorn and Granbury
while Clifton and Perdiz define the Toyah phase. Hearths of various
sizes are the predominant cooking features and the use of rockshelters
for habitations increases during this stage.
Hunting seems to
increase in importance to a point where it is equal to or greater than
food gathering as a means of subsistence. Cemeteries, both with
cremated and noncremated interments, appear to be the preferred
mortuary practice (Prewitt 1981:82-83). In situ remains of both the
Austin and Toyah phases were investigated at the Collins Site and at
Smith Rockshelter.
During Historic times (after 200 BP), several Indian tribes
inhabited
Central
Texas.
These included Tonkawa, the native
inhabitants, and Witchita, Comanche and Apache, tribes which moved

Excavation Unit East wall Profile.

Fhmre 3.

S88/E50

Zone 1

Large rock

Existing

Zone 5

Gravel Pit

Zone 6

Zone 7
Zone 8

Zone 10

~

?

Grid North

- - - -;~l¥
3

~c-

i

1
meters

Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone

1.
2.
3.
4.
S.
6.
7.

Very dark gray (10YR3/1)
Brownish yellow (10YR6/6)
Dark gray (5YR4/l)
Gray (SYRSI1)
Dark grayish brown (10YR4/2)
Dark grayish brown (10YR4/2)
Light brown (10YRS/4)

Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone
Zone

8. Light brown (10YRS/4)
9. Light brown (10YRS/4)
to. Brownish yellow (10YR6/6)
11. Dark reddish brown (lOYR4/4)
12. Brownish yellow (lOYR6/6)
13. Dark reddish brown (lOYR4/4)
14. Brownish yellow (lOYR6/6)

co

9
Soil Descriptions

Excavation Unit East wall Prorue

Zone 1

Very dark gray (10YR3/1); very gravelly sandy loam; loosely compacted; weak medium
subangular blocky structure somewhat obscured by gravels; weakly coherent; very friable;
nonsticky; nonplastic; contains humus and many roots and rootlets.

Zone 2

Brownish yellow (10YR6/6); very gravelly sandy loam; any possible structure totally
obscured by gravels which comprise majority of zone; weakly coherent; friable: slightly
sticky; non plastic; contains humus and some small roots.

Zone 3

Dark gray (5YR4/1): sandy (clay?) loam; weak to moderate medium sub angular blocky
structure; slightly hard to hard; friable; nonsticky; slightly plastic; slight amount of
humie material; very few roots: tiny snail fragments.

Zone 4

Gray (5YR5/1); sandy loam with moderate amounts of gravel; possible weak to moderate
medium subangular blocky structure obscured by gravels: hard to slightly hard: friable;
nonsticky; slightly plastic; no roots.

Zone 5

Dark grayish brown (10YR4/2); sandy loam; very compacted; massive structure with
widely spaced vertical cracks along which some weak prismatic structure is forming;
hard, friable, nonsticky, nonplastic, ftlms and threads of calcium carbonate are abundant
but are markedly denser in upper half of zone: no gravels; limited number of snail

shells.
Zone 6

Dark grayish brown (10YR4/2); sandy (clay?) loam with gravels, upper 20-25 centimeters
contains fewer gravels and appears slightly darker, may represent a substratum of zone;
upper half structure weak medium subangular blocky, parrially obscured by gravel; lower
portion structure completely obscured by gravels; hard; friable; nonsticky; nonplastic;
many threads and rums of calcium carbonate; dense pea gravels quasi-cemented in some
areas.

Zone 7

Light brown (10YR5/4); sandy loam with moderate amounts of gravel; densely compacted;
massive structure: slightly hard; friable; nonsticky; slightly plastic; possibly part of same
depositional sequence as Zone 6.

Zone 8

Light brown (10YR5/4); loamy sand, almost no gravel; densely compacted; massive structure:
very friable: slightly hard: nonsticky; nonplastic; moderate numbers of snails.

Zone 9

Light brown (10YR5/4); loamy sand with slightly more clay than Zone 8, gravel content
is low but higher than Zone 8: densely compacted: massive structure; very (dable; slightly
hard; slightly sticky: slightly plastic; moderate numbers of snails.

Zone 10

Brownish yellow (lOYR6/6); dense gravels; upper portion of zone fine gravels weakly
cemented; lower portion large cobbles with some crushed shell.

Zone 11

Dark reddish brown (lOYR4/4); sandy clay loam with moderate amounts of gravel; densely
compacted: massive structure; slightly hard: friable; slightly sticky; slightly plastic.

Zone 12

Brownish yellow (10YR6/6): very ftne gravels with sand: weakly cemented.

Zone 13

Dark reddish brown (10YR4/4): sandy clay loam with moderate amounts of gravel; densely
compacted; massive structure; slightly hard; friable; slightly sticky; slightly plastic: appears
to be identical to Zone 11.

Zone 14

Brownish yellow (10YR6/6); dense gravels ranging in size up to large cobbles; some weak
cementing.

10

into Texas from the north (Newcomb 1961:134-135). Few archeological
sites attributable to these nomadic tribes have been identified, in
part due to their ephemeral nature. When located, they display a
mixture of native American artifacts and European goods, such as seen
at Mission San Xavier near the confluence of Brushy Creek and the San
Gabriel River (Gilmore 1969) in Williamson County, Texas.
Previous Investigations
Archeological work along the eastern end of the Onion Creek Basin
has occurred sporadically over the last 25 years. Two sites, Collins
(4ITV40) and Smith
Rockshe lter
(41TV42),
were
by
excavated
anthropology students from the University of Texas in the e arly
1950 1 s.
At the Collins Site (41TV40), prehistoric
occupation
was
documented on an open terrace of Onion Creek. Artifactual materials
recovered from the excavation indicated cultural activity during the
Late Prehistoric, Late and Middle Archaic, which were represented
respectively by diagnostic projectile points such as:
Perdiz and
Scallorn, Darl and Ensor, and Pedernales, Nolan and Bulverde (Suhm
1955).
--­
At Smith Rockshelter (41TV42), a limestone overhang on the south
side of Onion Creek, stratified deposits yielded artifacts indicating
occupations during the Toyah and Austin Foci of the Late Prehistoric
Stage, and the Late Archaic Stage. Three hundred forty-five arrow
points, the majority Perdiz and Scallorn types, and 229 ceramic sherds
representing at least three vessels were recovered from the upper two
components.
Darl and Ensor dart points were
the
predominant
diagnostics from the earlier stratum. Burned rock, bone and shell
artifacts were present in each zone (Suhm 1957).
Members of the Texas Archeological Society, working during their
yearly summer field school, investigated the Thomas F. McKinney
Homestead and associated outbuildings, along
with
41TV314,
a
prehistoric location, in 1978. McEachern and Ralph (1980) reported
these results as part of a continuing cultural resource management
program for McKinney Falls State Park.
Three previous archeological endeavors, one conducted by Texas
Department of Water Resources and two by the Texas Archeological
Survey, have resulted from the planned construction of the Onion Creek
wastewater treatment facilities.
The original survey, conducted by Whitsett and Fox (1979),
28 historic and 75
recorded a total of 93 archeological sites:
prehistoric. Assessments of significance were made for each and
recommendations were formulated as to the need for further work.

11

Thurmond (1982) conducted archeological investigations at the
proposed location of the Onion Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant and at
41TV461. At the former, a series of thirteen backhoe trenches were
used to test for subsurface cultural deposits.
No remains were
encountered.
At 41TV461, however, chipped stone tools, flaking
debitage and mussel shell were recovered from buried lenses.
Additionally, two in-situ burned rock concentrations (hearths) were
recorded at a depth of over 2 meters. Charcoal directly associated
with one of the features yielded a radiocarbon date of 1370 + 60 years
BP. Two diagnostic projectile points were recovered from the site: a
Pall
like dart point during excavation and a Darl type collected
ng
original site documentation (Whitsett and Fox 1979).
Temporally, both are assignable to the Late Archaic Stage.
Impact areas at two other archeological sites were tested by
Brown (1981).
At 41TV456, where both historic and prehistoric
materials were observed on the surface, ten backhoe trenches and two
one meter square test pits were dug to determine the content and
integrity of deposits. These procedures determined that the historic
debris was surficial in nature and had been disturbed by plowing. The
recovery of subsurface prehistoric artifacts proved to be so low that
no meaningful data collection seemed possible. At 41TV462, eight
backhoe trenches and a single 1 meter square test pit were utilized to
test for potential subsurface remains.
In this case, historic
materials were recovered down into the first 10 centimeter level but,
since this was still within the plow zone, it was undoubtedly
disturbed. Small amounts of debitage were located in several levels
extending below the plow zone. Though recovery of prehistoric debris
was low, the possibility of in situ buried remains was raised. It was
recommended that, should future construction plans further threaten
the site, more testing be conducted in those areas.
Site Hi story
41TV285 has been known to archeologists for a period of ten
years.
Original documentation was completed by Elton R. Prewitt on
January 14, 1974 after a call by Mr. Sid Kelso, owner/operator of
Onion Creek Sand and Gravel Company, to the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, reporting that what appeared to be a hearth had
been exposed by gravel quarrying operation at a depth of approximately
30 feet below ground surface. During his one visit to the area,
Prewitt affirmed that the reported rock alignment was indeed a fire
hearth, actually 20 feet below the surface, and that another hearth
was just beginning to be exposed at approximately the same depth. He
was informed that a third, according to quarry employees, had recently
been mechanically destroyed in the same area. The presence of these
subsurface cultural remains generated, at that time, a six page site
survey form, including locational map, gravel pit profile and scale
drawing of the exposed hearth, a series of black and white photos and
color slides of the feature and an assignment of the standard state

12

trinomial site designation. All these materials are contained in the
permanent files housed at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.
During prefield research for this project, the author learned
that a paper describing the site and intended for inclusion in the
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society had been written but never
published.
This article by Prewitt (1974) was a narrative expansion
of the previously mentioned site form and included the information
that no lithics or faunal remains were found in association with the
features, that the features might represent the remains of a small,
temporary foraging party, and tentatively assigned a possible date of
Early Archaic to the remains on the basis of their depth in the
terrace deposit.
A copy of this article was acquired and placed in
the permanent site files along with the original forms.
In 1979, archeologists were again visiting the site as part of
the cultural resources survey of areas to be affected by the
construction of the new City of Austin Onion Creek Wastewater
Treatment facilities. As a result of this work, the horizontal areal
limits of the site were expanded to 400,000 square meters and the
potential depth of cultural deposits to 8.5 meters (Whitsett and Fox
1979). This massive expansion was necessitated by their observation
of
"occupat i ona 1 hori zons produci ng bone, mussel she 11, 1ithi c
debitage and in situ hearths" (Whitsett and Fox 1979). Noted also was
the extensive damage caused to the site by ongoing aggregate mining,
but the possibility of significant deposits remains in undisturbed
areas.
Due to the findings of these two investigations, the current
archeological work, reported here, was deemed necessary by parties
from the City of Austin, the Texas Department of Water Resources and
the Texas Archeological Survey.
METHODS AND TECHNIQUES
Prior to initiation of archeological field work, professional
surveyors had precisely delineated the location of the City of Austin
75 foot square (22.8 meter square) impact area which consisted, in
part, of the 3-4 meter high wall of the adjoining gravel pit. This
exposed profile was examined, within and for approximately 75 meters
outside the project area, for any evidence of cultural remains. Three
probable artifacts were noted, though none were inside the City of
Austin easement boundaries. This inspection allowed the preliminary
conclusion that subsurface deposits did possibly exist but that they
would be, in all likelihood, thinly distributed.
An 8 meter square excavation area was superimposed on the surface
of the easement (Figure 4) such that the area to be tested would be
partially within and immediately adjacent to the planned access shaft
as prescribed in the proposal. It was felt that a unit of this size,

13

Gravel Pit

t

t

t

t

S80/E42,---------ssoiESO

8x8m

Excavation Unit

•

S83/E42 i----lr--\-----.J·S831E50

Interceptor Line
Point of Intersection

228+72

Figure 4. Excavation
Unit Plan

Oty of Austin Easement

Map.

Datum

.&

Sl00/ESO

-To U.S. 183
1.8 mi.

BURLESON

Richard
Moya
County
Park

Ent1'1lJ1ce

.

~

Magnetic Nortli

ROAD

10

Grid North

- - - - -................... - ­

14

approximately one-third of the impact zone, would be sufficient to
assess the deposits. The block was situated so that one side (north)
would be square with the existing bluff wall. This location served a
twofold purpose: 1) it allowed continuous visual vertical control by
using the existing profile as a key;
and 2) it allowed for the
draining of water out into the existing pit if rains should occur.
As a first step, an 18 inch wide (width of bucket) backhoe trench
was excavated to a depth of approximately 3 meters along the east and
west sides of the unit to allow a further inspection of subsurface
profiles immediately within the area of interest. Next, major fill
removal was undertaken, starting at the face of the bluff and moving
east to west across a line in a southward trend.
A two step procedure was employed to facilitate the removal of a
rather monumental amount of dirt. The first was accomplished with the
backhoe working from the present ground surface and digging down to a
depth of 2 - 2.5 meters (Figure Sa). As the fill was removed, it was
placed to either side of the machine, then the front end loader was
utilized to stockpile the dirt at a suitable distance from the hole to
facilitate further work. The subsequent phase necessitated placement
of the backhoe down into the excavation proper so that the desired
maximum depth could be achieved (Figure 5b). This was done via a ramp
dug into the southeast corner of the unit. Fill removal continued
from this new position with the dirt now deposited on the 2.5 meter
step, where it was picked up and redeposited on the surface before
being loaded to its final destination.
Monitoring of the excavation was continuously conducted by both
individuals working at the site. This procedure was multifaceted.
First, the point of action of the bucket was closely observed as it
removed undisturbed dirt so that if remains, such as a feature, were
encountered, an immediate awareness would be facilitated.
Each
subsequent dumping or lifting of material was also monitored. As the
depth of the unit increased, multiple movements, in some cases as many
as four per increment of dirt, greatly enhanced possible recovery
through visual means. Additionally, occasional random backhoe bucket
loads of dirt were screened through 1/4 inch hardware cloth as an aid
to monitoring.
After the termination of excavation, a scale drawing (Figure 3)
was made of the east wall of the completed excavation block. Zones
were described in the field following Soil Conservation Service
guidelines and colors were assigned using a Munsell Color Chart.
Notes detailing day to day activities were compiled and a series of
black and white photographs were taken throughout the work.

In an effort to glean the maximum amount of data from the
excavation, the expert services of Dr. Richard Jones, Department of
Geography, The University of Texas at Austin, were retained to refine
both the soil (profile) morphology and depositional assumptions

IS
Figure 5.

Site Photographs .

A. Backhoe operating from grou nd surface.

. Backhoe o perating from within excavation uni t .

16

presented in the text of this report.
His observations and
results of his laboratory analysis are reported in Appendix A.

the

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Archeological testing at the construction location of the City of
Austin Onion Creek wastewater interceptor shaft resulted in the
mechanical removal of more than 300 cubic meters of fill.
Depth of
the 8 meter square excavation unit ranged from a maximum of 6.5
meters, along the northern edge of the unit, to a minimum of 4 meters.
Limited amounts of cultural materials were observed during this work,
though never in sufficient quantities to warrant a shift to hand
excavation (Phase II). While actual vertical provenience was somewhat
difficult to determine during backhoe operation, the solely lithic
artifacts appeared to come from certain lenses and some general
conclusions are presented below. No feature or remnant thereof, such
as recorded by Prewitt and observed by Whitsett and Fox (Site History
Section), was encountered, nor was any faunal material seen.
A
collection of gastropods was made from Zones 8 and 9 (Figure 3), which
was the only place where complete specimens were evident.
Likewise,
three freshwater mussel shells were collected from this same strata.
Identification of these molluscan shells, comments on their preferred
habitat and the suggested environment are presented in Appendix B.
Lithic materials were observed from two of the dense gravel
lenses (Zones 1 and 6) portrayed in the soil profile (Figure 3). From
the upper strata (surface to 35 centimeters below surface), two
partially decorticate cores and one large secondary flake were
recovered. Considering that this surface exposure of chertiferous
limestone gravels was undoubtedly available to aboriginal inhabitants
seeking a source of raw materials from which to manufacture tools, it
is not surprising to encounter these types of artifacts. However,
since the surface has been cleared and disturbed by gravel mining
operations, no meaningful information is provided by these remnants of
procurement activities.
From Zone 6, a massive gravel
strata
extending from approximately 150-240 centimeters below the surface, a
small group of chert specimens were noted - once again all products of
the initial stage of lithic reduction.
Several of these pieces
displayed such severe edge damage that secondary deposition via stream
action seemed apparent. This notion was apparently confirmed by the
findings of Dr. Richard Jones (Appendix A), who isolated the channel
of a small tributary stream to Onion Creek cutting through the center
of the excavation unit at this level.
The last group of materials, 8 flakes and 2 bifacial, partially
decorticate core/choppers, though few in number relative to the amount
of fill removal required to locate them,
are
somewhat
more
interesting.
They originated from the thick sand lenses of Zones 8
and 9, together about 1.15 meters thick, and may represent the
ephemeral remains of a small group of people briefly utilizing the

17

terrace for some activity other than extended occupation, which would
undoubtedly have resulted in more concentrated remains. Additional
indications of cultural activity at this level are three probable
artifacts imbedded in the existing gravel pit wall outside the
easement boundary. As is the case for all of the above mentioned
materials, no assignment of cultural affiliation is possible for these
deposits due to their limited nature, the lack of datable materials
and the absence of temporally diagnostic artifacts. The lack of
formal tools makes conjecture on the nature of the activity involved
impossible and the sparsity of the artifacts in the test area appears
to negate the probability of significant data retrieval through
further excavation.
Unfortunately, no correlation with Prewitt's
(1974) documented feature is
possible due
to
its distance
(approximately 600 meters east) from the current project area and the
lack of a contiguous stratigraphie profile.
During a subsequent visit to the site, some three weeks after the
cessation of field work, a projectile point was found just outside the
easement boundaries in an area where bulldozers had been working. The
point of origin of the Pedernales-type was unclear, as the heavy
machinery had been moving not only the backdirt generated by the
project, but, in the process, disturbing other fill. The specimen,
which is temporally assignable to the Middle Archaic Period, is made
of dark gray Edwards chert and is heavily patinated on both faces. It
is crudely flaked and has been reworked, at least twice, to such an
extent that it is now almost completely shoulderless. The projectile
point along with all other material generated by this project will be
curated and permanently housed at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratories of The University of Texas at Austin.
No evidence produced by the current excavation of 41TV285 within
the City of Austin 75 foot square impact area suggests that this site
is eligible for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places
or warrants assignment as a State Archeological Landmark. It should,
however, be noted that other areas of the site, now destroyed by sand
and gravel mining operations, may well have contained archeologically
significant deposits.
This
ongoing
aggregate quarrying will
eventually destroy all remnants of the site.

18

REFERENCES CITED
Baker, Victor R.
1975
Flood Hazards Along the Balcones Escarpment in Central
Texas: Alternative Approaches to Their Recognition, Mapping
and Management. Geological Circular No. 75-5.
Bureau of
Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Baker, Victor R. and Margarida Maria Penteado-Orellana
1977 Adjustment to Quaternary Climatic Change by the Colorado
River in Central Texas. Journal of Geology 85:395-422.
Bryant, Vaughn M., Jr. and Harry J. Shafer
1977 The Late Quaternary Paleoenvironment of Texas: A Model for
the Archeologist.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeolog ical
Soci
48:1-25.
Brown, David O.
1981
Archeological Testing Along the Proposed Route of Wastewater
Pipelines for the Planned Onion Creek Wastewater Treatment
Plant, Travis County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey
~~~~l Bulletin 50.
The University of Texas at Austin.
Garner, Lee Edwin
1973
Environmental
Geology of the Austin
Area,
Texas.
The University of Texas at
Unpublished Master's Thesis.
Austin.
Gilmore, Kathleen Kirk
1969 The San Xavier Missions:
A Study in Historical Site
Identification.
State Building Commission, Archeological
Program
16. Austin, Texas.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in
Hill County, Texas. Department of Anthropology Archeology
Series 5. The University of Texas at Austin.
McEachern, Michael and Ronald W. Ralph
1980 An Experiment in Historical Archeology:
Archeological
Investigations at the Thomas F. McKinney Homestead, Travis
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
51.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
of Texas.
1961
-"-'-"-'---.......;.. -­

University of Texas Press.

Austin.

19

Prewitt, Elton R.
1974 41TV285: A Deeply Buried Hearth Site in Central Texas.
Unpublished paper on file at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
1981

Cultural Chronology in Central Texas.
Archeological Society 52:65-89.

Bulletin

the Texas

Sko 1asky) Robert A.
1978 The Use of Color Infrared and Panchromatic Aerial
Photography for Drainage Density Analysis and Soil Mottling
Studies of Onion Creek Terraces, Travis and Hays Counties,
Texas.
Unpublished Master's Thesis.
The University of
Texas at Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1955 Excavation at the Collins Site, Travis County,
Bulleti of the Texas Archeological Society 26:7-54.
1957

Excavation at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis
Journal of Science 9:26-58.
-'-==

1960

A Review of Central Texas Archeology.
Archeological Society 29:63-107.

County,

Bulletin

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
the Texas Archeological Society 25.

Texas.
Texas.

the Texas

Bulletin

of

Texas Water Development Board
1976 ~ Climatological Summary of Austin, Texas.
Information
Circular, Texas Water Development Board.~tin.
Thurmond, Peter
1982 Archeological Testing and Assessment of 41TV461 and the
Onion Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant Site Travis County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Technica
n 49.
The University of Texas at Austin.
Urbanec, Don Alan
1963 Stream Terraces and Related Deposits in
Texas.
Unpublished Master's Thesis.
Texas at Austin.

the Austin Area,
The University of

Weber. G.E.
1968 Geology of the Fluvial Deposits of the Colorado River
Valley, Central Texas.
Unpublished Master's Thesis. The
University of Texas at Austin.

20

Weeks, A.W.
1941
Late Cenozoic Deposits of the Texas Coastal Plain Between
the Brazos River and the Rio Grande. Unpublished Doctoral
Dissertation. The University of Texas at Austin.
Werchan, Leroy E., A.C. Lowther and Robert N. Ramsey
1974 Soil Survey of Travis County, Texas.
United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
Washington, D.C.
Whitsett, Hayden and Daniel E. Fox
Texas Department
1979 Cultural Resources of Lower Onion Creek.
of Water Resource~ Construction Plants and Water Quality
Planning Division. Austin, Texas.

APPENDIX A
Analysis of Onion Creek Stratigraphic Deposits at 41TV285
Dr. Richard Jones
Analysis of Fluvial Bedding Plane Units
Following pit excavation, the fluvial bedding plane units were
measured to determine their respective strikes and dips. These
fluvial beds were field classified on the basis of observed textural
variation within the respective strata (Figure 6). Representative
sediment samples were collected from each stratigraphic unit according
to standard procedure.
The bedding planes of the Units (A-F) were
measured from datum in meters above sea level with the aid of a
transit.
Because of the limited exposure of Units E and F within the
excavation, only stratigraphic Units A-D will be described in this
discussion.
A first-order trend-surface was computed for each of the four
measured sections. The trend analysis technique was used in order to
1) test the planar regularity of the respective units and 2) average
their strike (bed orientation) and dip (gradient) (Table 1). The
generalized surfaces for the respective units are illustrated in
Figures 7 through 10. All of the predicted trend-surface planes are
statistically significant at the 0.05 confidence interval.
In order to estimate the mean strike and mean dip of
following formulae were used:
Gradient

= [(x

- slope coefficient)

+

units,

the

(y - slope coefficient)]

where the gradient is converted to the dip angle of the unit, and,
tan

~

=x

where the tan

~

- slope coefficient/y - slope coefficient
is converted to the strike orientation of the unit.

Unit A is down-dipping 16.6 degrees at S16.6°E. Unit B is down
dipping 7.2 degrees at SloE. Unit C is down dipping 16.6 degrees at
S16.6oE. Unit 0 is down-dipping 26.5 degrees at SloE.

22
F igure 6.

Stratigraphic Profile, East Wall of Ex cavation Unit.

o;

1

2
i

meters
orrelation of J ones' St ratigraphic Units with Soil Zo nes Defin ed
(See Figure 3)
Stratigraphic Unit
~ tratigraphi c Unit
Stratigrap hic Unit
Stratigraph ic Unit
Stratigraphic Unit
Stratigraphi c Unit

A
B
C
D
E
F

= Zones 1, 2, 3 and 4
= Zone 5
= Zon es 6 an d 7

= Zones 8 and 9
= Zone 10
= Zones 11, 12 and 13

111

Field

23

Sediment Textural Analysis
The six representative sediment samples from Units A-F were
analyzed in the laboratory for size variation according to standard
procedure. This included splitting each sample into two general
sediment texture classes: -4~ to -1~ (16mm to 2mm), and greater than
-1~ (2mm to 1).
The coarser textured fraction was examined through
sieving analysis, while the finer textured fraction was analyzed with
the hydrometer. The histogram of the respective size classes for each
fluvial unit is presented in Figures 11 and 12.
Unit A demonstrates a bimodal sediment distribution of the medium
pebble and sand size texture classes. Apparently sediment transport
for this stratum consisted primarily of bed load with general
velocities in excess of 150 cm/sec. The sand size class represents
the modal class for Unit B. General velocity of Onion Creek at this
stratigraphic level would have been approximately 40 cm/sec; however,
some velocities were in excess of 150 cm/sec during flood conditions
as indicated by the occurrence of medium size pebbles within the unit.
Stream velocities within Unit C would have generally been similar to
those occurring within Unit A (150 cm/sec); however, the higher
percentage of small pebbles and granule sediments suggest slightly
lower velocities, between 120 to 60 cm/sec also occurring with some
frequency for this unit. The dominance of the granule and sand size
texture classes within Unit D indicates that flow velocities for this
stratum generally varied between 60 to 40 em/sec.
In Unit E, the
medium pebble and sand texture classes dominate. This again suggests
flow velocities at times in excess of 150 cm/sec transporting and
depositing the medium sized pebbles, while lower velocities of 40
em/sec transported and deposited the sands.
The mixture of the
coarser texture classes and dominance of the sand class within Unit F
suggests the occurrence of higher flow velocities that varied between
150 to 40 cm/sec.
The relatively low percentages of silt and clay
within each of the six units suggests that suspended load was rather
insignificant in this area of Onion Creek.
Discussion
The flow direction of Onion Creek in the vicinity of the site has
essentially been toward the southeast since the time of human
occupancy. There has, however, been some directional variation as
indicated by the strike of the four bedding surfaces (Table 1). The
oldest bedding plane, Unit D, with the largest gradient (26.5 degrees)
and high percentage of granule and sand texture classes suggests that
the active flow of Onion Creek was greater than at present, with the
active channel margin being topographically higher and located more to
the north. Through time the channel migrated further toward the
southeast, occupying lower topographic positions within each cycle of
unit deposition.

24

E

.

CO

ex)

en

E

25

.

M

0)
0)

~

....

'2
;:J

<.-.

0 '
Q)

u

~

....

;j
CI)

""....
t::

Q)

1-<
....
Q)

""q........
u:'"
....

CO

r
Z

::::>

oci
Q)

....

5b

u:

E

0

.

CO

0)

26

.!O:

:5

.......

o

U
I­

Z

::J

27

.....o

o
I­

-Z

::J

E

en.
Lt)

en

28

The lower explained variance (49.7%) for Unit D, however, does
suggest that the bedding surface is composed of a more undulating
stratigraphic sequence. This is believed to be related to renewed
channel establishment within the former deposits of Unit D while the
Creek occupied that topographic level. The presence of the coarser
texture classes within the younger A, Band C Units also suggests that
Onion Creek was subject to periodic high intensity flood conditions.
These high intensity flows were probably of larger magnitude and
frequency within Units A and C than Unit B, as indicated by the
steeper stream gradients (16.6 degrees) of the bedding planes and the
higher percentage of coarse textured sediments within these two Units
(Figure 11).
In summary, Onion Creek was probably wider with more active flow
than at present, in the vicinity of the excavation. Through time,
stream flow decreased with the active channel migrating toward the
southeast. During all four depositional phases, the Creek was subject
to occasional high intensity flooding as indicated by the relatively
high percentage of coarser grained sediment within each of the
stratigraphic units.
TABLE 1
First Order Trend Surfaces
Unit

Explained Variation

Linear Equation

Dip

Strike

A

91.24%
87.25%
72.71%
49.70%

980+0.003x-0.Oly
974+0.004x-0.Oly
964+0.003x-O.Oly
952+0.005x-0.Oly

16.6
7.2
16.6
26.5

SloE
S16°E
Sl-E

B

C

D

SI6~E

29
F igure 11.

Frequency (%) Histogram of Coarser Textured Sediments within Units A
Through F.

B
%

Medium
Pebble

Small
Pebble

Mediu m
Pebble

Granule

Small
Pebble

Granule

c

D
%

%

01>·~·O.·~ ·

•.• ..v

-4rf>
Medium
Pebble

Small
Pebble

-3rf>
Mediu m
Pebble

Gran ule

-II/>

-21/>
Small
Pebble

Granule

100

F

E

%

%

o~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-41/>
-3</>
-2rf>
-lrf>
Medium
Small
Granule
Pebble
Pebble

Small
Pebble

'.

30

Figure 12.

Freguency (%) Histogram of Finer Textured Sediments with in Units A
Through F .

Hill

lJlQ

B

A
%

124>
Sand

Sand

Silt

silt

c

Clay

D

12ct>

12¢>

Sand

Clay

Clay

Silt

1..QQ

E

o ......................... . ::::...:-:..:..:.:.:.. . . :;..
12ct>

8¢>

Sand

Silt

Clay

Sand

Silt

Clay

---------

APPENDIX B
Environmental Analysis of Molluscan Shells
Recovered from-41TV285
Dr. Raymond W. Neck
A limited number of molluscan shells were recovered from an
archeological site (41TV28S) near Onion Creek in southeastern Travis
County, Texas.
These specimens have been identified and a few
environmental conclusions can be drawn from the assemblage.
All species occur in Travis County today (Neck 1976). Origin of
these specimens may involve in situ populations, flood debris, or a
combination of these two factors. In general, the snails (Table 2)
indicate an open environment with substantial amounts of grass and
some cover in the form of downed wood.
Aquatic environments,
indicated by the freshwater species (Tables 3 and 4), included both
pooled areas and running streams. Substrates of the aquatic areas
included both rocky and soft sediments. The abundance and large size
of_Helisoma anceps indicates the occurrence of permanent running water
Water flow was probably above that of modern
over rocky substrate.
day Onion Creek. However, no conclusions can be reached as to whether
this is due to climatic alterations or modern aquifer depletion.

References Cited
Neck, Raymond W.
Preliminary Checklist of Land Snails of Travis County.
In:
1976
~ Bird Finding and Naturalist1s Guide for the Austin, Texas,
Oasis Press.
Area, E.A. Kutac and S.C. Caran, editors.
Austin, Texas.

---------

-----

---

32

TABLE 2
Terrestrial Gastropods Recovered from 41TV285
Helicina orbiculata (Say)

3

Succineidae*

1

Rabdotus mooreanus (Pfeiffer)

8

Po lygyra texasiana (Moricand)

5

*Shells referable to this family cannot be reliably
species.

TABLE 3
Freshwater Gastropods Recovered from 41TV285
Physella virgata (Gould)

1

Biomphalaria obstructa (Morelet)

1

Planorbella trivolvis (Say)

2

Helisoma anceps (Menke)

7

TABLE 4
Freshwater Bivalves Recovered from 41TV285
Quadrula quadrula apiculata (Say)

1

Lampsilis hydiana (Lea)

1

Lampsilis teres (Rafinesque)

1

assigned

to

