TREATMENT PROGRAM DOCUMENT NO. 1
MCCAMEY TO BIG LAKE, TEXAS
MILE MARKER 1189+1875' TO MILE MARKER 1134+1427'

Prepared by
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
The University of Texas at Austin
and
Lorraine Heartfield
for
Celeron/All American Pipeline Company

Submitted by
Lorraine Heartfield
Cultural Resources Consultant
July 20, 1988

TREATMENT PROGRAM DOCUMENT NO. 1
MCCAMEY TO BIG LAKE, TEXAS
MILE MARKER 1189+1875' TO MILE MARKER 1134+1427'

Prepared by
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
The University of Texas at Austin
and
Lorraine Heartfield
for
Celeron/All American Pipeline Company

Submitted by
Lorraine Heartfield
Cultural Resources Consultant
July 20, 1988

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section 1: Introduction ................................................ 1
Section 2: Setting ..................................................... 4
Section 3: Methods ................................................... 9
Section 4: Historic Sites .............................................. 11
Section 5: Prehistoric Sites ............................................ 15
Section 6: Geomorphic Analyses ....................................... 32
Section 7: Summary and Conclusions ................................... 35
Section 8: References Cited ........................................... 40
Section 9: Supporting Documentation .................................. 42

LIST OF TABLES
1. Site Summary and Treatment ........................................ 3
2. Summary of Materials Recovered from 41 RG23 ........................ 26

SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION
The Celeron/All American Pipeline (AAPL), McCamey to Webster, will be a 30inch heated crude oil pipeline approximately 512 miles long and buried an average
depth of 6 ft. For the purpose of construction, the right-of-way (ROW) will be 100 ft.
except in special function areas, such as pump stations, where additional tracts are
needed. The permanent ROW will be 50 ft. on State and Federal lands and 50 ft. or
less on private property.
In May and June, 1988, the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TAAL),
The University of Texas at Austin, conducted intensive survey and limited site testing
between milepost 1088. 1 and 1133.9 along the approved AAPL ROW from McCamey
to Webster, Texas (Map). All work was conducted in accordance with the provisions
of both the Programmatic Memorandum of Agreement between the Bureau of Land
Management (BLM), the State Historic Preservation Officers (SHPO) in California,
Arizona, New Mexico and Texas, and Celeron/All American Pipeline Company (AAPL)
and the Record of Decision (ROD). Work on State-owned lands was authorized by a
permit issued by the Texas Antiquities Committee.
This document is the first of a series of proposed Treatment Program Documents
that describe the findings and measures needed to reach maximum data recovery
(MOR) for each segment of the AAPL route as described in the Cultural Resource Plan
(CAP) approved by THC and BLM in May 1988. This treatment program focuses on
the first 45-mile stretch from McCamey to Big Lake, Texas, beginning at the Mesa Tank
Farm in Upton County (Mile Marker 1189+1875') and extending to SH 137 in Reagan
County (Mile Marker 1134 + 1427').

1

Fifteen sites, consisting of two historic sites, eleven prehistoric sites, and two sites
with both historic and prehistoric components were recorded during initial acquisition
survey and subsequent centerline staking survey (Table 1). The latter was augmented
by subsurface shovel probing and collection strategies as described in the PMOA,
ROD and CAP. The relevance of the located sites to the research questions detailed
in the CRP is addressed in Table 1. The work conducted to date is considered sufficient to mitigate the effects of pipeline construction at all the recorded sites except
41 RG23, a buried hearth field adjacent to Big Lake Draw. A plan for final treatment of
41 RG23 is presented in this document.
This treatment plan document is organized into nine sections: 1) introductory
material; 2) setting; 3) methods; 4) historic component descriptions and proposed
treatments; 5) prehistoric components and proposed treatments; 6) geomorphic
analyses designed to identify areas for trench monitoring during construction; 7) a
summary of the findings within this 45-mile segment; 8) references cited; and 9) supporting documentation consisting of site forms, artifact inventories and other
supplementary information.

2

TABLE

1

SITE SUMMARY AND TREATMENT

Number

Site
Type

Size

41UT11
41UT12
41UT13
41UT14
41RG15
41RG16
41RG17
41RG18
41RG19
41RG20
41RG21
41RG22
41RG23

LSS
LSS
HS
HS,LSS
ASS
LSS
ASS
ASS
ASSB
ASS
ASSB
ASS
ASSB

120x30
45x30
100x30
90X25
560x30
160x30
300x30
115X30
35X20
80x30
315x30
100x30

41RG24
41RG25

HS
HS, ASS

NIA

250x30

NIA

Drainage
Pecos
Pecos
Pecos
Pecos
Concho
Concho
Big Lake
Big Lake
Big lake
Big Lake
Big lake
Big Lake
Big lake
Concho
Big lake

Owner
Private
State

x
x
x

Test Shovel
Units Probes

Collection ·Surface
Units
Collection

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

2
1
1
2
2
5

7

5

3
1
3
3
3

1
1

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

ARO

Disposition

1,3,5
1,3,5
1,2
1,2
1,3,5
1,3,5
1,3,5
1,3,5
1,3,5
1,3,5
1,3,5
1,3,5
1,3,5,6,

Line Moved
MOR
MOR
MOR
MOR
MOR
MOR
MOR
MOR
MOR
MOR
MOR
Addtional
Treatment
MOR
Out of ROW

1,2
1,3,5

LEGEND: LSS = Lithic Scatter Surface, ASS= Artifact Scatter Surface, ASSB =Artifact Scatter Subsurface, HS= Historic Scatter, MOR= Maximum
Data Recovery, RAO= Relevant Research Questions

SECTION 2: SETTING
Environmental Background

Upton and Reagan counties are considered part of the Edwards Plateau region
of Texas but they are immediately adjacent to the High Plains, the Lower or Rolling
Plains and the Trans-Pecos or Mountain and Basin regions (Gould 1975; Biesaart,
Roberson and Spotts 1985). The climate is semi-arid averaging less than 15 inches a
year. The modern vegetation is invasive mesquite scrub, except in areas maintained
for grazing. Modern land use has undoubtedly degraded the environment from the
grasslands reported by early settlers. No permanent water sources are found in the
study area; the major hydrological feature, Big Lake, has filled about once every 20
years in modern times, the last time in the early 1970s. Presumably, the lake was a
more reliable water source during mesic periods of prehistory. More detailed geomorphic information is reported in Section 4.

Historical Background

Upton and Reagan counties are located in a region of West Texas that was
traversed by explorers and transcontinental migrants long before the construction of
rail lines or the establishment of settlements. The most celebrated expedition to pass
through the general vicinity was that led by Francisco Vazquez de Coronado in the
early 1540s. Driven by reports of golden cities in present New Mexico, Coronado had
little interest in the lands of West Texas. Over a century later, in 1650, captain Diego
del Castillo and Hernan Martin directed an expedition from Santa Fe across West Texas

4

to the Concho River, then known as the Nueces. Operating under the authority of the
New Mexico governor, General Hernando de Ugarte y la Concha, the group surveyed
the territory for natural resources that would prove beneficial to the crown. Their
reports, which included the discovery of fresh-water pearls in the Concho, resulted in
a similar expedition 4 years later under the leadership of Diego de Guadalajara
(Conkling and Conkling 1947).
Accompanying Guadalajara on his 1654 expedition was a young officer named
Juan Domfnguez de Mendoza. In 1685, Mendoza again traversed the region when he
provided military leadership for a missionary expedition to the Jumano Indians along
the Concho River. On the journey, Fray Nicholas Lopez supervised the establishment
of Mission San Clemente near the confluence of the Concho and Colorado rivers
(Conkling and Conkling 1947, Vol. I: 355; Webb 1952, Vol 11:172). Later expeditions
across the West Texas region in the general vicinity of Upton and Reagan counties
included those led by Pedro Vial (1786-1787) and Jose Mares (1787-1788). Both Vial
and Mares were commissioned by the Spanish government to establish a viable trade
route between Santa Fe and San Antonio (Conkling and Conkling 1947, Vol. I: 355;
Webb 1952, Vol. 11:142, 838).
The scarcity of reliable water sources and the hostility of the Indians, including
such notable warriors as the Comanche, proved obstacles to settlement until well into
the nineteenth century. Generally, the earliest Anglo-Americans to visit the area were
traders en route to Santa Fe or gold-seekers journeying to California and Colorado.
A secondary group was comprised of open-range cattlemen who sometimes followed
their drifting herds into the territory. Fort Concho was established in 1867 to counter
the Indian menace; Grierson Springs in Reagan County was an outpost that housed
the famous Buffalo Soldiers on their scouting missions through the study area (Haley

5

1952). It was not until pacification of the Indians and the subsequent construction of
rail lines that the area became open to permanent settlement. The development of
barbed wire, windmills, and dry land farming practices combined to move the frontier
west. Settlers began arriving in present Upton and Reagan counties as early as the
1880s (Eagleton 1971; Werst 1974:1-19, 42-43).
By 1903, the number of settlers in the region influenced the Texas legislature to
create Reagan County from Tom Green County. The community of Stiles served as
the first county seat. In 1935, two years after the opening of the extensive Big Lake
Oil Field, the railroad town of Big Lake became the new seat of government. The Santa
Rita discovery well, drilled on University of Texas lands, dictated dramatic changes in
the state's higher education system and the development of the Reagan County area.
Within days, tent towns sprang up and wildcat drilling operations became common
sights along the prairie (Webb 1952, Vol. II: 825; Schwettmann 1941:30-37). In 1926,
wildcatter George McCamey drilled a successful well in southwestern Upton County.
Founded in 1920, with the community of Upland as county seat, Upton County also
became an important early center for oil production. The town of Rankin became the
new seat of government in 1921 (Webb 1952, Vol. 11:445). Today, oil and cattle
production provide the economic foundation for both Reagan and Upton counties.
Only minimal tracts of land are now devoted to farming.
Although the study area was the scene of dramatic events during the Spanish
Colonial and later Anglo expansion periods, remains from the 1920s oil boom are the
dominant site type expected along the AAPL ROW.. The present route passes just
south of the boom-and-bust towns of Best and Texan. These abandoned communities
demonstrate that the common response to depopulation was the transport of extant

6

buildings to new locations, leaving only foundations and trash to mark the site of oncethriving population centers.

Archeological Background
Upton and Reagan counties are included in the Central Texas cultural area (Brown
et al. 1982), as well as the Panhandle Plains Region (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954).
The area is transitional between the Trans-Pecos, Lower Pecos, Southern Plains, and
Central Texas regions. No cultural chronology has been specifically constructed for
this region but the four broad periods used throughout Texas-Paleoindian, Archaic,
Late Prehistoric and Historic-are represented by artifacts recovered in this survey
and by local collectors. Specific projectile point types and ceramics can be related to
more refined chronologies devised for the Central Texas (Prewitt 1981) and the Lower
Pecos (Dibble, cited in Turpin 1985: Fig. 4) regions.

Local Research
No formal archeological studies have been reported in the vicinity of the approved
AAPL route. Only ten sites have been recorded in Upton County, one as a result of
prior AAPL survey (41UT10). A.T. Jackson (1938: Site 53) recorded a pictograph site
north of McCamey, later assigned the trinomial 41 UT1. Sites 41 UT2, 41 UT3, 41 UT8
and 41 UT9 are a petroglyph-mortar complex approximately 1 mile north of the All
American Pipeline route on Rankin Draw. Sites 41UT4, 41UT6 and 41UT7 are rock
shelters; 41UT4 yielded a complete human burial. Rockshelters 41 UT6 and 41 UT7 are
1 and 2 miles north of the AAPL route respectively. Site 41 UT5 was described as three
sotol pits and 41UT10, near the Crockett-Upton county line, is a large burned rock

7

midden-hearth field with projectile points more characteristic of the Lower Pecos region
to the south than of Central Texas types.
Although the trinomial series for Reagan County shows twelve previously
recorded sites, only four are documented in the TAAL county site files. The remainder
were reserved by Mayer-Oaks for a Texas Tech contract project in northern Reagan
County but no site forms have been filed. Three of the four recorded sites are historic:
the Telegraph Overland Stage Station; the Centralia Station with grave; and Grierson
Springs, the site of a military outpost of Ft. Concho, in service from 1875 to 1882. The
sole prehistoric site, 41 RG4, is a complex of burned rock hearths, a quarry, a lithic
scatter and petroglyphs on Centralia Draw across from 41 AG1, the Telegraph Overland Stage Station.
In terms of prehistoric site types anticipated (CAP 1988), the current sample of
previously recorded sites in Upton and Reagan counties is dominated by rock art (6),
rockshelters (3) and burned rock features (2). Multi-functional sites are petroglyphmortars and petroglyph, burned rock, quarry and mortar complexes. All the recorded
historic sites are special purpose sites (see CAP) related to early Anglo expansion into
the region in the mid-nineteenth century. It is immediately obvious that the avocational archeologists who reported most of these sites were attracted to the spectacular so
the known site inventory can not be considered representative of the entire range of
either historic or prehistoric cultural remains in this region.

8

SECTION 3: METHODS
Initial fieldwork consisted of one archeologist attached to each AAPL acquisition
survey team. The objective was reconnaissance survey to identify cultural properties
that could be avoided prior to final purchase of easements. Sites were recorded on
the basis of surface-exposed cultural material only during this phase of the project.
The second phase, centerline staking survey, was conducted by a team of two
archeologists who conducted shovel probing and surface collection after approval of
the Cultural Resource Plan. Zigzag transects spaced no less than 15 meters apart
were walked following the staked ROW; all high probability areas were shovel-probed
for buried deposits. Shovel probes were also dug to verify the absence of sites in low
probability areas. Maximal data recovery techniques described in the CAP were implemented on all recorded sites. Shovel probes were dug to determine the presence
of subsurface deposits where possible. The majority of the sites in the McCamey to
Big Lake ROW were completely collected without achieving the 100 lithic artifact goal
set in the CAP. Only 41 RG16 and 41 RG24 provided sufficient artifact density to warrant the collection of 4x4 meter units.
A records and document search demonstrated that no previously recorded sites
are within the approved AAPL route and no sites eligible for the National Register of
Historic Places would be affected by construction {TAAL and Texas Historical
Commission files). Concomitant with the field work, archival research was conducted
and a general history of the region compiled. County historical committee chairpersons were contacted and museums in Rankin and Big Lake were visited. Local

9

informants were interviewed and private artifact and photographic collections were examined.
All recorded sites were classified according to categories established in the CAP
and evaluated as described in the PMOA. In addition, criteria for National Register of
Historic Places eligibility were applied. All properties on State lands can be designated
State Archeological Landmarks. Collected materials have been processed through
laboratory procedures in preparation for analysis and curation when appropriate. All
artifacts and records generated by this project are currently housed at TAAL and available for inspection.
Fieldwork was accomplished by W. Weaver, K. Kleinbach, G. Mehalchick and A.
Hobbs under the direct supervision of L. Bement. Collected historic artifacts were
identified by H. Moncure; oral histories and archival research were performed by D.
Utley. Geomorphic studies were conducted by C. Garan. The principal investigator,
S. Turpin, and the cultural resource consultant, L. Heartfield, oversaw all aspects of
the fieldwork and preliminary analyses.

10

SECTION 4: HISTORIC SITES
The three historic sites recorded within the pipeline 100-ft corridor are all artifact
scatters consisting largely of broken glass, crockery, metal fragments, and nails, the
residue of domestic and ranching activities. One, 41UT14, has a minor prehistoric component.

A fourth site, 41 RG25, is a prehistoric campsite with a lesser historic

component, an admixture from a nearby ranchstead. With the exception of a few scattered burned rocks, 41 RG25 is outside the pipeline ROW. All the historic sites and
components were identified during centerline staking survey; none proved to have
buried components when shovel probed.

Site No: 41UT13

AAPL No: 193-12-1
USGS Quad: Rankin
Description: Site 41UT13 lies generally south of the community of Rankin on a
flat area west of a series of hills. A windmill stands about 200 meters north of the site.
Two ranch roads intersect and pass west and south of 41UT13 but neither appears to
have led directly to the site.
This historic artifact scatter consists of domestic glassware and cans with a slight
admixture of building materials. The dispersal of cultural material across the surface
of the ROW is more suggestive of a former house site than a trash dump. Building
materials were scarce, limited to a Standard brick, manufactured from 1914 to today,
and one fragment of window glass. Part of a metal bed frame was noted. Collected
artifacts and their diagnostic value are: lavender glass sherds dating to the 1920s and

11
------------

earlier; a hole-in-top can made not earlier than 1900 but gaining popularity in the 1920s;
and a crown closure with pressed cork dating no earlier than 1916.
Disposition: MOR, archival and informant research

Site No: 41 UT14

AAPL No: 193-10-1
USGS Quad: Rankin
Description: Site 41UT14 lies south and east of the intersection of Highways 67
and 349, west of Rankin. A ranch road terminates at a windmill approximately 40
meters northwest of the site.
This historic scatter extends into the ROW from a denser accumulation south
south-east of the ROW. Construction materials, such as Standard brick (see above),
cut limestone and nails, and domestic debris, such as glass, crockery and tin cans,
suggest a former house site. Collected artifacts include wire nails (not earlier than
1890 but uncommon until after World War I in West Texas); a porcelain-lined cap that
served as a canning jar lid (not earlier than 1890 but in use today); a hole-in-top can
(not earlier than 1900 but common after 1920); and an Owens scar on a bottle base
(1930-1950s).

The small sample of prehistoric lithic material found on this site is

described under Section 3.
Disposition: MOR, archival and informant research.

Site No: 41 RG24

AAPL No: 195-1-1
USGS Quad: Texan

12

Description: Site 41 RG24 lies on the west side of a north-south ranch road, 1.5
miles southwest of the abandoned community of Texan. Construction materials from
a fully dismantled wooden structure (boards, wire nails and wooden piers) and concrete foundations are surrounded by a light scatter of milk glass, undecorated
whitewares, window glass, machine-made brick, tin cans, canning jars, milk bottles,
metal fragments and a 1931 Texas license plate. One L-shaped concrete foundation
and a concrete slab, 8 by 4 meters in dimension, with a trough down the center are
accompanied by a dense accumulation of broken milk bottles.

The bottles were

machine made and required an inset cap. A windmill stands some 60 meters south of
the site. The area is heavily deflated. Collected artifacts are an Akra Agate marble
dated to about 1925, and valve-marked milk bottle bases in favor between the 1930s
to 1950s.
Disposition: MOR, archival and informant research

Site No: 41 RG25
AAPL No: 197-1.5-4
USGS Quad: Big Lake
Description: Site 41 RG25 lies 2.5 miles west of Kemper Station on the south
(right) bank of Big Lake Draw. The site is predominantly a prehistoric burned rock and
lithic scatter outside the ROW. The prehistoric component is described in Section 5.
The historic component consists of a bulldozed trash dump composed of electrical
parts, domestic glassware, brick and miscellaneous metal fragments. The dump is
probably associated with a ranch stead 300 meters north of the site. Collected artifacts
include a green pattern glass celery dish lid manufactured by the late pressing process,
ca. the 1930s, and an open wire insulator dating between 1915 and the 1930s.

13

Disposition: Outside ROW, no action.

Discussion: Historic Sites
All the historic sites in the AAPL ROW are best categorized under the CRP classification as habitation sites. Only one, 41 UT14, retains features related to husbandry.
The remains consist of concrete foundations and debris from a dismantled building.
All diagnostic materials date to the 1920s or later, symptomatic of the oil boom years
in this region. None of the sites retain intact buried deposits so MOR was achieved
by surface collection of diagnostic materials and 4x4 meter sample units. None of the
historic sites meet criteria for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places
and only 41 RG25 is on State property, thus qualifying for designation as a State
Archeological Landmark. The significance of these three sites is their role in the larger
settlement patterns of the historic period, a topic-best addressed through archival and
library research.
Tenant structures, built during the 1920s oil boom in this region, are difficult to
trace in the county land and tax records. Their legal anonymity may be obviated
through the use of local informants who recall the outward appearance of the structures, their function and their inhabitants.

14

SECTION 5: PREHISTORIC SITES
Thirteen prehistoric sites, two with historic components, were recorded during
acquisition and centerline survey. The sites fall under the categories listed in the CAP
as Lithic Scatters, Surface (3), Artifact Scatters, Surface (7), and Artifact Scatters, Subsurface (3). Lithic Scatters, Surface consist solely of culturally modified stone that lack
depth of deposits. The category Artifact Scatters, Surface encompasses a broader
range of cultural material, including lithics, burned rock, ceramics, shell and other artifacts with no depth of deposits. Artifact Scatters, Subsurface exhibit similar artifact
inventories but retain buried cultural deposits.
Factors other than cultural resources mandated a reroute of the pipeline around
41 UT11, a lithic scatter (Lithic Scatter, Surface). With the exception of a few scattered
burned rocks, 41 RG25, a hearth field with lithic scatter (Artifact Scatter, Surface), is
outside the ROW.

Lithic Scatters, Surface (3)
SITE NO: 41 UT11

AAPL No: 193-8-1
USGS Quad: Square Top Mountain/Rankin
Description: During acquisition survey, burned rock and an associated lithic scatter were noted in the ROW on an open flat 1 mile east of Fivemile Creek. Artifacts
noted at that time were one end scraper, two secondary flakes and ten tertiary flakes
The pipeline was subsequently rerouted, avoiding 41 UT11.

Reexamination during

centerline survey determined that the burned rock was interspersed with heavy metal

15

cable, eliminating its designation as a prehistoric feature. The land clearing episode
that probably produced the burned rock is too recent and insignificant to warrant designation of this component as a historic site.
Disposition: Avoidance

SITE NO: 41UT14

AAPL No: 193-10-1
USGS Quad: Rankin
Description: Site 41UT14 is an historic artifact scatter found during centerline survey of the ROW south of Highway 67, east of its intersection with Highway 349. The
prehistoric component consists of four chert artifacts: a large oval biface, a secondary flake uniface and two flakes. Remote from a reliable water supply, the site is not
optimal for. prehistoric occupation and the origin of these materials remains undetermined.
Disposition: MOR

SITE NO: 41RG16

AAPL No: 196-1-1
USGS Quad: Rankin
Description: Recorded during acquisition survey, 41RG16 is a natural chert outcrop following the crest, slope and base of a mesa that forms the divide between the
Pecos and Concho drainages. Cores and all classes of debitage extend 560 meters
along the ROW. The chert is fine-grained and ranges from various shades of brown
to dappled in color. The artifacts are most concentrated on the slopes and at the base
of the mesa on the western end of the ROW where material has been transported

16
-------

-

--~

downslope. The majority of the debitage is composed of large primary and secondary flakes but one polyhedral core reflects late prehistoric blade technology (Turner
and Hester 1985). Two bifaces and one triangular dart point probably of Late Archaic
age were collected in addition to a 4x4 meter unit.
Disposition: MOR

DISCUSSION: LITHIC SCATTERS, SURFACE

Using terminology outlined in the CRP, only one of these lithic scatters can be
considered a special purpose site. The largest surficial lithic scatter, 41 RG16, is a
chert quarry characterized by flakes, blades and cores eroding from the divide between the Pecos and Concho drainages (see Section 5: Geomorphic Studies). Its
proximity to Big Lake, however, suggests it provided a convenient raw material source
for the occupants of the playa perimeter. The collected Hthic sample reflects both blade
and flake technologies. Apparently use of the site ranged from the procurement of
raw materials through all stages of the manufacture of stone tools exemplified by an
almost complete gouge and a finished Late Archaic dart point. Although temporal
components can not be isolated, the blade technology evidenced by a polyhedral core,
is generally considered to be late in the prehistoric sequence (Turner and Hester 1985).
Comparison of the raw materials from 41RG16 and the lithics sampled from the other
sites recorded along the ROW indicates that local materials were exploited for stone
tool production.
Minor ambiguity lies in the classification of 41 UT11 as a surficial lithic scatter due
to the presence of some burned rock reported on the site form. The burned rock is
probably historic in origin, the result of land clearing. The limited range and number

17

of artifacts at this site suggests it was a single episode campsite, perhaps occupied
by a very small group of people while in transit from better watered environments.
The last lithic scatter is the prehistoric component of 41UT14, described in the
Historic Sites section of this document. The prehistoric component consists of four
lithic artifacts, collected during sampling of the historic cultural material. The origin of
these prehistoric artifacts is uncertain given the extent of modern disturbances to the
site area. Material types appear to be locally derived but the site location offers few
inducements for prehistoric occupation.
In summary, none of the recorded lithic scatters holds the potential to contribute
to an understanding of regional prehistory beyond the information gained by site
recording. The lithic raw material collected from 41RG16 provides a reference sample
for comparison of materials recovered from the other sites in the region. Therefore,
MOR has been achieved at all surficial lithic scatters in the ROW and none are considered eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places. By virtue of their
location on University of Texas lands, 41 UT11 and 41 RG16 qualify as State
Archeological Landmarks.

Artifact Scatters, Surf ace (7)
SITE NO: 41 UT12

AAPL No: 193-11-1
USGS Quad: Rankin
Description: Site 41UT12 was first noted during acquistion survey. An extremely light scatter of burned rock and chert flakes was observed on a small, natural outcrop
of inferior chert nodules. The site was reevaluated during centerline survey. No buried
deposits were detected in shovel probes and the total collection of artifacts from the

18

ROW consisted of five chert flakes. The raw material is not suitable for stone tool
production due to its blocky structure and small nodule size. The small drainageway
adjacent to the site is not capable of providing a reliable water source; the conclusion
is 41UT12 was a temporary campsite occupied by a very small number of people.
Disposition: MOR

SITE NO: 41RG15

AAPL No: 195-1-2
USGS Quad: Rankin
Description: One hearth, a Ught scatter of burned rock and an assortment of lithic
artifacts were recorded during acquisition survey along the banks of a minor
drainageway that eventually flows into the Middle Concho River. The full range of
debitage classes, cores, thick bifaces, an end-and-side scraper and a unifacial blade
scraper were noted at that time. Subsequent centerline survey ascertained that only
one small portion of the site was contained within the ROW. Collected artifacts include
one uniface, six secondary flakes, one tertiary flake and one chip. Shovel probing in
the ROW was negative but some subsurface deposits may be retained on the larger
portion of the site outside the ROW. Given the scarcity of water, it is unlikely that long
term occupation could have been sustained at this location.
Disposition: MOR

SITE NO: 41 RG17

AAPL No: 198-2-1
Quad Map: Big Lake

19

Description: This burned rock and lithic scatter is part of an extensive site complex that lines the margins of Big Lake and its feeder drainages. This site was recorded
during centerline survey along the upper margins of the playa on the more ancient stabilized dune surface.

The majority of the burned rock is limestone with a slight

admixture of sandstone. Collected artifacts include one Late Archaic (Marshall-like)
dart point (Turner and Hester 1985), a biface midsection, two uniface fragments, one
utilized flake and 21 flakes and chips.

Five shovel tests produced no subsurface

material.
Disposition: MOR

SITE NO: 41RG18

AAPL No: 198-2-2
USGS Quad: Big Lake
Description: 41RG18 is very similar to 41RG17 in setting and material culture. On
the northern upper margins of the playa, on the old stabilized dune, a light scatter of
burned rock and lithic artifacts was recorded during centerline survey. Only one of
seven shovel probes produced a few fragments of burned rock beneath the surface.
Collected artifacts include one Marshall-like and one untyped stemmed dart points,
one two-beveled knife fragment, one biface midsection, two steeply beveled end
scrapers, one uniface, six utilized flakes and nine flakes and chips.

The steeply

beveled end scrapers and two-beveled knife are characteristic of the Late Prehistoric
Period, lnfierno Phase in the Lower Pecos River region (Bement and Turpin 1986) indicating at least two components are represented in the surface assemblage at
41 RG18.
Disposition: MOR

20

SITE NO: 41 RG20

AAPL No: 197-1.5-2
USGS Quad: Best
Description: A light scatter of burned rock and lithic artifacts was recorded south
of the centerline in the ROW bordering Big Lake Draw during centerline survey. The
site lies at the base of a gradual rise where gullying and sheetwash may have
redeposited much of the cultural material. The artifact inventory included the distal tip
of a biface, one thick biface, one large uniface and flakes.
Disposition: MDR

SITE NO: 41 RG22

AAPL No: 196-1.5-1
USGS Quad: Best
Description: During centerline survey, a light scatter of burned rock, one concentration of burned rock, and lithic artifacts were recorded on the south (right) side
of Big Lake Draw across from site 41 RG23. Shovel probes yielded only one flake between 15 and 20 ems below the surface. Artifacts collected from the ROW include one
Palmillas and one untyped dart points, four bifaces, one end/side scraper, two cores,
two utilized flakes and 35 pieces of debitage. 41 RG22 is part of the extensive hearth
field along both sides of Big Lake Draw; the major differences are in degree of exposure
and integrity of deposits, both functions of post-depositional disturbance.
Disposition: MDR

21

SITE NO: 41 RG25
AAPL No: 197-1.5-4
USGS Quad: Best
Description: A few pieces of burned rock in the ROW, noted during centerline survey, led to the recording of 41 RG25, south and west of the ROW on the north (left)
bank of Big Lake Draw, across from 41 RG21. Burned rock and chert artifacts are
distributed along the margins of the draw. No temporal diagnostics were identified by
survey, and shovel probes placed near the draw were negative. It is concluded that
the site is outside the ROW and will not be affected by construction of the pipeline. A
historic trash dump associated with an extant house and barn is described under the
Historic Sites section of this document.
Disposition: Outside of ROW, no action

DISCUSSION: ARTIFACT SCATTERS, SURFACE
The surficial artifact scatters are all habitation sites in the CAP site typology.
These seven sites were characterized by surface exposures of lithic debitage, tools
and burned rock. The latter dominates the cultural material inventory from all sites.
Presumably, much of the burned rock once constituted prehistoric hearths but an admixture from modern clearing is evidenced by the remnants of burned brush piles
common throughout the study area. All these sites are on deflated surfaces and have
been seriously disturbed by modern land use. Stone tool manufacturing by-products
all compare favorably with the raw material sample collected from 41AG16; no exotics
were identified. In a more qualitative typology, all but one of the Artifact Scatters, Surface (41 RG15), as well as the Artifact Scatters, Subsurface, would be classified as
hearth fields (Turpin 1982), further discussed in the summary of the prehistoric sites

22

section. None of the recorded surficial artifact scatters retain the integrity to contribute
to regional prehistory beyond the information gained by their recording. Therefore,
MOR has been achieved at all the sites classed as Artifact Scatters, Surface in this segment of the ROW. None of these sites meet criteria for nomination to the National
Register of Historic Places but all, by virtue of their location on public lands qualify for
State Archeological Landmark Status.

Artifact Scatters, Subsurface (3)
With the exception of buried features noted outside the ROW on 41 RG21, only
41RG19 and 41 RG23 retained alluvial, eolian and colluvial sediments sufficient to bury
hearths and lithic artifacts.

SITE NO: 41RG19

AAPL No: 197-1.5-1
Quad Map: Best
Description: 41 RG19 is the first in a series of sites recorded at AAPL crossings
of Big Lake Draw. 41RG19 lies at the confluence of a small south bank tributary and
the draw where burned rock and chert artifacts are scattered over a broad area.
Shovel probes produced flakes and burned rock to a depth of 25 ems but no intact
features were identified. Only debitage was recovered during surface collection so no
period of occupation can be estimated.
Disposition: MOR

23

SITE NO: 41 RG21

AAPL No: 197-1.5-3
USGS Quad: Best
Description: Site 41 RG21 was recorded during centerline survey of the ROW.
Burned rock and lithic artifacts rim the left side of Big Lake Draw where erosion has
truncated the site deposits. Shovel probes were largely negative and no features
remain intact in the ROW but 90 meters north of the centerline hearths are eroding
from a ranch road that crosses Big Lake Draw. Charcoal and burned matrix was collected from one of these exposed features but the admixture of roots and carbonates
may introduce difficulties into the radiocarbon assay process, now in progress. Total
collection of the artifacts in the ROW produced one biface fragment, one utilized flake,
one medial dart point fragment and eight pieces of debitage.
Disposition: MDR

SITE NO: 41 RG23

AAPL No: 196-1.5-2
USGS Quad: Best
Description: Site 41 RG23 is a burned rock and lithic scatter paralleling the north
(left) bank of Big Lake Draw, recorded during centerline survey. It differs from the
other sites recorded along this drainageway only in density of temporal diagnostics
and the retention of some buried features. During initial recording, one Marshall-like
and one Marcos/Ensor dart points (Turner and Hester 1985), one biface tip, one biface
midsection, two thick bifaces, and debitage were collected.

Two of three shovel

probes produced cultural material at depths between 15 and 25 ems. A hearth eroding from a minor gully suggested that the site held potential for buried deposits.

24

Limited test excavations were initiated to determine if chronometric samples could be
recovered and if features remained intact with depth.
Testing Program 41 RG23

Five 1x1 meter units were excavated in areas where soils deep enough to mask
features and artifacts were retained. Adjacent Units 1 and 2 were placed above the
cutbank exposure of clustered burned rock, noted during centerline survey. A second
pair, Units 3 and 4, was excavated in the vicinity of Shovel Probe 3 where buried cultural material was recovered, and the fifth unit was established midway between the
cutbank and Units 3 and 4. All were excavated to a minimum depth of 60 cm in 20 cm
increments.

Fill was screened through 1/4 in. hardware cloth.

Burned rock was

weighed, recorded and discarded. All cultural material was recorded on University of
Texas level forms. An updated site map, profiles and feature map were drawn and the
testing was documented using both black-and-white and color photographs. The 395
stone artifacts recovered from surface collection, shovel tests and limited testing are
tabulated for ease of reference (Table 2).
Units 1 and 2, placed to delineate the eroding burned rock cluster, revealed that
the hearth remnant was probably once a burned rock pavement, now buried 20-40 cm
below the surface. Level 2 in both units contained the greatest density of cultural
material, consisting largely of debitage but with three utilized flakes, one biface edge
fragment and a Middle Archaic Pandale dart point. The latter suggests an affinity with
the Lower Pecos River region, south of the study area (Johnson 1964).
Test Unit 3 produced large numbers of debitage in all three levels and a portion
of an intact burned rock pavement hearth was uncovered in Level 3 (40-60 ems). Test
Unit 4 expanded Unit 3 to expose approximately 80% of the hearth, designated as Feature 1 in the field notes. Lithic debitage counts were comparable to those from Unit 3

25

TABLE 2
SUMMARY OF MATERIALS RECOVERED FROM
Lot
Number

Unit

Level

1
2
3
4
5

General
ST 1
ST 2
ST 3
General

Surface
10-15
15-25
40-50
Surface

6
7
8

Unit 1

9
10
11

Unit 2

12
13
14

Unit 3

15
16
17

Unit4

18
19
20

Unit 5

Total

Feature

BR (Kg)

Primary

Flakes
Secondary

Tertiary

Chips

8

13

32
2
2
1

1

0-20
20-40
40-50

0.1
2.5

7

2.8

3

4
9
1

8
17

0-20
20-40
40-60

0.1
0.75
20.0

3
2
5

5
14
8

18
13
15

2
6

15
11
2

21
. 16
9

2
3
5

9
15
5

12
24
16

39

119

217

0-20
20-40
40-60

0.1

0-20
20-40
40-60

0.25
0.25
0.2

2

8.5

35.55

2

Core

Chunk

Bi face
Frag

Dart
Point

1

2

2

1 Marcos/Ensor, 1 Marshall-like

1

Straight Stemmed

1

Pan dale

Comments

4
5
2

0-20
20-40
40-50

1

Utilized
Flakes

41 RG23

3

Grinding Slab

3

1

3

6

4

with a slight decrease in Level 3.

Unfortunately, no temporal diagnostics were

recovered in either Unit 3 or Unit 4.
Feature 1 is a roughly circular pavement of burned limestone cobbles covering
an area 70 cm in diameter (see Supporting Documentation: 41 RG23). The pavement
appears to have been laid on a flat surface as base elevations range from 41 to 45 cm
below the current surface. No subsurface pit could be detected in profile and no charcoal or heat alteration of the sub-hearth deposits were apparent.
A sandstone grinding slab fragment was laying on the northeastern perimeter of
the feature. Both sides of this unburned metate had been worn by a circular grinding
motion. Extensive use had worn a cavity in the center which may have led to fracture
and discard of the slab. Preliminary phytolith analysis of residues on this slab indicates some potential for determination of materials processed. Full analysis is now in
progress.
Test Unit 5 was arbitrarily placed between the paired units along the draw and
the Feature 1 units. Small ,am_ounts of burned rock, large numbers of debitage, a large
bifacial core, a core fragment and the midsection of a dart point were recovered from
this unit (Table 2).
Each of the five test units revealed the same depositional pattern: dark brown
sandy silty loam from the surface to approximately 50 cm, underlain by a lighter brown
sandy silty loam with pea gravels and caliche inclusions. The cultural material was
predominantly in the upper zone but some mixing with lower zone gravels was noted.
In summary, limited testing at 41 RG23 demonstrated that intact burned rock features are buried, albeit shallowly, in areas of deeper sediments along the draw.
Artifacts related to food processing are closely aligned with at least one of the burned
rock features. In the absence of chronometric samples, dating of site deposits must

27

rely on temporally diagnostic artifacts, ranging from an early Middle Archaic Pandale
dart point to Late Archaic Marcos/Ensor and Marshall-like specimens.
Treatment Plan

Site 41 RG23 demonstrably contains relatively intact subsurface cultural deposits
including at least one circular pavement of burned rock, a sandstone grinding slab
with adhering phytoliths, and the debris indicative of stone tool manufacture. That portion of the site within All American Pipeline's ROW is recommended for extensive
subsurface excavation to recover maximum data possible and to provide a means to
mitigate the effects of pipeline construction on the site. The following excavation plan
is proposed to structure the treatment of site 41 RG23.
The next phase of investigation will consist of excavation of at least two 4x4 meter
blocks to a minimum depth of 60 cm. One of the two 4 x 4 meter units will be placed
adjacent to Test Units 3 and 4 which contained Feature 1. The objective of excavating this second 4x4 meter unit is to provide broader areal exposure for interpretation
of this activity area. The second 4 x 4 meter unit will be placed in the vicinity of Test
Unit 5 which yielded considerable debitage, one core, one chunk and a biface fragment.

This location will test the integrity of this possible lithic reduction/tool

manufacturing station and define its relationship to possible hearth areas. Additional
subsurface units will be excavated if artifact patterns or burned rock features require
greater areal exposure for interpretation.
Each 4 x 4 meter block will be removed in 1O cm increments by shovel and trowel
with all fill screened through 1/4 inch hardware cloth. Since burned rock features are
known to be present in relatively intact condition, all burned limestone cobbles will be
pedestalled and mapped in place. Such treatment of burned rock will provide information on hearth configuration and disturbances by cultural practices or natural

28

agencies. Other artifacts, particularly formal tools, will also be mapped in place prior
to removal. Metates or grinding slabs, in addition to in situ plotting, will be packaged
so that, if preserved, phytolith and pollen samples can be obtained from the grinding
surfaces. A soil sample will be collected within 1 meter of all metates for comparative
purposes, and a 1 liter soil sample will be collected from each culture-bearing zone in
each excavation block.
A topographic site map showing the location of the 4 x 4 meter units and their
relationship to the test units and shovel probes will be drawn. A University of Texas
Level Form will be completed for each excavated level and plan maps drawn for any
pedestalled material and features. A representative wall of each unit will be profiled to
supply depositional relationships of cultural zones.

Black-and-white and color

photographs will be taken to document the progress of excavations, artifacts, features
and significant materials recovered.
Preliminary analysis of materials resulting from this excavation will follow acceptable procedures typically included in excavation. Artifacts will be labeled, inventoried
and packaged for curation. All artifacts will be separated into broad manufacture classes (i.e. flaked stone, ground stone) and subdivided into technological stages.
Finished tools and those fitting into defined types will be identified by appropriate
category. Distributional analysis will be performed if applicable and special samples
will be submitted to various consulting laboratories for processing (pollen, phytolith,
C-14, sediment). Since hearths tend to be one focus of camp activity, it is anticipated
that food processing tools will be found in a zone around each feature. The.generally poor preservation characteristic of eolian sediments suggests a low probability for
the recovery of plant macroparts, pollen or bone. In the absence of these primary in-

29

dicators of processed materials, an in-depth use-wear analysis will be performed on
any appropriate tools such as utilized flakes, scrapers and knives.

DISCUSSION: ARTIFACT SCATTERS, SUBSURFACE

The three sites classified as Artifact Scatters, Subsurface are habitation sites in
the CAP typology. They are characterized by burned rock and lithic material and all
represent occupation of the Big Lake drainage, presumably during mesic intervals
when the lake held water. Surface collection and subsurface probing achieved MOR
at 41 RG19 and 41 RG21.

Based on the investigations carried out within the ROW,

neither of these sites meets criteria for nomination to the National Register of Historic
Places but their location on State lands qualifies them for designation as State
Archeological Landmarks.
Temporal diagnostics recovered from surface collection in the ROW are largely
Late Archaic in age with the exception of a Late Prehistoric component at 41RG18.
Subsurface and surface finds demonstrate, however, that 41 RG23 was utilized during
at least during the Middle Archaic and Late Archaic periods. Time markers from sites
outside the ROW on Big Lake proper expand the range of regional occupation from
the Early Archaic through the late Late Prehistoric periods.
Materials amenable to radiocarbon or thermoluminescent dating processes are
rarely preserved in this environment; the one sample extracted off the ROW in an eroding hearth at 41 RG21 may prove too scanty for accurate assay. Radiocarbon dates
derived from shallow or surface features similar to the hearths along Big Lake invariably provide relatively recent dates (Moore 1982; Luke 1983), a function of preservation
rather than occupancy of the sites. Limestone is not conducive to thermoluminescent

30

assay, especially when the features were undoubtedly exposed for long periods of
time prior to burial.
In a qualitative typology, six of the surficial artifact scatters and the three artifact
scatters with subsurface deposits would be classed together as hearth fields (Turpin
1982). The most difficult interpretive aspect of hearth field investigations is relating
features to each other and to artifacts. Contemporaneity remains undemonstrated
due to the loose and shifting nature of the soil matrix and to the slow processes that
effect burial. However, specific areas of 41 RG23 may produce information on site
layout, activity loci, resources exploited and general range of occupancy. Therefore,
the treatment plan was designed to exploit the few areas of the ROW where sediments
may be deep enough to hold intact deposits. Despite the large size·of the site, erosion
has effectively reduced the area within the ROW where excavation might prove fruitful.

31

SECTION 6: GEOMORPHIC ANALYSES
Geomorphological Assessment

In keeping with the Cultural Resources Plan, Environmental Section, a map and
records review was conducted by C. Garan to identify areas where cultural resources
might remain buried and where monitoring of trench excavation is warranted. From
McCamey to Big Lake, the pipeline ROW crosses surface geological units dating as
old as the Lower Cretaceous and as recent as modern alluvial and eolian deposits
(Bureau of Economic Geology 1974). The Upton/Reagan county line marks a drainage
basin divide between the Pecos River to the south and the Middle Concho River to the
north. Five miles east of the county line, the Big Lake playa drainage basin begins its
capture of rainfall and runoff.
The Pecos, Middle Concho and Big Lake drainage basin margins are capped by
the highly fossiliferous Buda Limestone; the lower elevations consist of exposures of
the Segovia Formation and the Antlers Sand of the Edwards Group (Bureau of
Economic Geology 1974). The drainage bottoms contain Quaternary alluvial and colluvial deposits.
Medium to fine-grained, tan to dark brown cherts contained in the Segovia Formation provided a major resource for prehistoric stone tool manufacture. Site 41 RG16
is one example of a quarry/lithic procurement site exploiting an exposure of eroding
chert nodules. In addition, the limestones of the Segovia and Buda formations contributed hearth stones evident in the majority of the recorded prehistoric sites.
Big Lake is a large playa that gathers water from an internal drainage basin, fed
by Big Lake Draw on the west and Sugar Draw on the east. The northern rim of the

32

lake is bounded by stabilized dunes, composed of eolian deposits throughout their
exposure. These dunes and the lake are considered by Garan to be the most significant geomorphic feature in the vicinity of this segment of the ROW.

Three

approaches have been taken to clarify the role of the playa in prehistoric and historic
settlement patterns in this region.
First, an archeological reconnaissance of the lake perimeter identified a concentration of sites along the northern rim, adjacent to or upon the dunes (41RG13,
41RG14 and 41 RG26). Although these sites are clearly outside the purview of AAPL,
their location and artifact assemblage expand the interpretive range of the site inventory gained within the ROW. In the absence of chronometric samples, these sites are
a possible means of dating the geomorphic sequence at Big Lake. Site 41RG13, at
the base of the truncated dunes that line the northern perimeter of the Big Lake playa,
yielded bison teeth and Early Archaic stone tools. Apparently, these materials were
redeposited on the playa floor as the dunes eroded. An extensive burned rock midden, also slumping on to the playa floor east of 41RG13, was designated 41RG14.
One mussel shell was identified as Amblema plicata (Neck, 1988, personal communication), now found in the Concho River system, north of the study area. Site
41 RG26 is an extensive hearth field rimming the northwestern arc of the playa. Now
cut by numerous gullies, the site contains isolated pockets of artifacts and both concentrated and dispersed burned rock. The most signficant find was a cluster of six
plainware sherds and a Perdiz arrow point..
Secondly, the highest exposure of dune associated with an archeological site
(41RG13) was profiled and excavated into the lake bottom sediments and sediment
samples were collected. Finally, a historic review of lake fill and drain is being compiled from aerial photographs, newspaper accounts and construction permits issued

33

by the University of Texas lands. In addition, Soil Conservation Service scientists are
currently conducting field checks of their soil survey for Reagan and Irion counties and
have provided preliminary findings. Although much of the data is still in analysis, Garan
has determined that the Big Lake drainage system from Mile Markers 1122 to 1134
and beyond holds priority for monitoring during clearing and grading and trench excavation (Map). The remainder of the ROW, from McCamey to 5 miles east of the
Upton/Reagan county line, holds little potential for buried archeological sites or for
preserved paleoenvironmental data so monitoring is not recommended.

Paleontological Monitoring
Geomorphological monitoring can be carried out in conjunction with the paleontological monitoring described in the ROD: Section B-7.

The two segments

recommended for paleontological monitoring within the first 45-mile stretch of the ROW
are both exposures of the Lower Cretaceous Fort Terrett Formation (Kft). They ex_tenc;f from Mile Marker 1106 + 3000' to 1108 + 00 11 (Rankin USGS) and from Mile Marker
1109 + 00' (Rankin USGS) to 1110 +00' (Rankin NE USGS) in Upton County.

34

SECTION 7: SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The historic period sites recorded along the pipeline ROW are all remnants of the
1920s boom in Upton and Reagan counties, precipitated by the discovery of oil. Two
major boom towns, Best and Texan, lie north of the ROW; both are reduced to remnant foundations and trash scatters but historical records and photographs show
thriving communities once flourished in the area. The few remains left in these towns
do, however, illustrate the common practice of removing structures for use in other
locations. The sites represented by the historic scatters recorded in the ROW probably functioned within the economic and social sphere of these towns but their physical
remains provide little data.
The relevance of the historic sites to the research questions posed in the CRP
lies in determining their role in the large sphere of economic development. They are
most pertinent to Question 1: What is the variation in human numbers in the study
area? and Question 2: What is the nature of variation in the size/organization of communities in the study area? In addition, historic research into the fill sequence at Big
Lake, although outside the ROW, will address Question 6: What is the nature of variation in the historic environment? The drain and fill sequences in Big Lake incited
considerable local interest so the phenomenon is documented in newspaper accounts
and in long time residents' memories. Thus, research into the historic period in Upton
and Reagan counties is dependant on information other than that physically obtainable
from the three historic sites in the ROW.
Despite the meager recovery from the majority of the prehistoric sites in the first
45-mile stretch of the AAPL ROW, investigations carried out in conjunction with the ac-

35

quisition and centerline survey and geomorphic analyses have significant implications
for future research in the region. The universal dominant factor in arid lands settlement is water availability and the sites recorded along the pipeline ROW can not be
interpreted without expanding the study area to include an analysis of the surrounding hydrology. So few sites had been recorded in Upton (10) and Reagan (4) counties
prior to this survey that distributional studies must rely on information other than that
contained in the county files.

Discussions with local collectors confirmed that the

largest, most complex and longest occupied sites are found north of the ROW along
the Concho River system or south in the Pecos River drainage. The Hickman Library
and Museum in Big Lake holds diagnostic projectile points from Reagan County ranging from Late Paleoindian dart points to Historic metal arrow points, largely collected
north of the study area. The most significant feature in the vicinity of the ROW is Big
Lake, a large, saline playa, fed solely by rainwater, that has intermittently filled and
drained in historic times. Garan has determined that the Big Lake geomorphic sequence may well hold the key to understanding climatic episodes and the formation
of playas throughout the arid west.
The sites recorded along the pipeline increase with proximity to Big Lake Draw
and the playa. The Upton County sites are limited lithic scatters that provide little interpretive value beyond assuming that single episode camp sites were selected on
criteria other than proximity to water. Of the remaining prehistoric sites, only 41RG15
can be considered an outlier to the Big Lake drainage system settlement pattern. This
burned rock and flake scatter lies adjacent to an unnamed drainway that intermittently flows north to the Middle Concho River. Although the main body of the site lies
outside the ROW, the location seems most appropriate for a temporary campsite with
little interpretive value beyond recording.

36

The remaining prehistoric sites are all part of the complex occupation of Big Lake
Draw and the playa.

Although eight sites were recorded along the ROW, this

distribution is more a function of the route of the pipeline than of prehistoric preference.
Moving the corridor to avoid these sites could only be accomplished by a massive
rerouting as cultural material lines the banks of the draw on both sides for its entire
length. Each of the sites along Big Lake Draw probably constitutes but one area of
massive hearth fields that parallel the draw and line the northern perimeter of the lake.
Early Archaic through Late Prehistoric occupations are reflected in the temporal diagnostics recovered from the vicinity of Big Lake.
Based on the series of research questions proposed in the Cultural Resources
Plan, the prehistoric sites in the ROW are most relevant to:
Question 1: What is the nature of variation in human numbers in the study area:
Question 3: What is the nature of variation in the use of the environment in the
study area:
Question 5: What is the nature of variation in the extent and magnitude of exchange networks in the study area?
The distribution of sites in Upton and Reagan counties reflects two modes of occupation.

The limited activity sites are consistent with small numbers of people

camping for an extremely short period of time while the hearth fields that line Big Lake
Draw reflect more intensive exploitation of the playa resources during periods of lake
fill. The inability to delimit specific times of site habitation is the limiting factor in the
interpretability of the distribution pattern. Thus, while no estimate of the exact population numbers can be made with any degree of accuracy, a relative density can be
detected in the intensity of occupation at the ROW sites.

37

No exotic items suggestive of trade were collected during the survey; all lithic
material was comparable to the chert quarry inventory (41 RG16). Relevant artifacts
found outside the ROW are one mussel shell, derived from the Concho drainage
(41RG14), and six plainware sherds (41 RG26) similar to ceramics found in the Abilene
area.

These finds suggest movement of people south to the Big Lake drainage,

probably during more mesic periods. In addition, one Pandale dart point recovered
during testing at 41 RG23 is more characteristic of the Lower Pecos Region to the south
than any local tradition. Thus, the evidence to date favors transport of materials by
mobile populations rather than through exchange and exploitation of local resources
in stone tool production.
In addition, the identification of Middle and Late Archaic components at 41 RG23
suggests that the planned excavations at this site hold potential for addressing:
Question 6: What is the nature of variation in the prehistoric environments in the
study area?
A full response to this question, however, is dependant on the acquisition of paleoindicators from Big Lake. The key role of Big Lake in the interpretation of regional
prehistory was exploited by the investigations described under Section 4: Geomorphic
Studies. As part of this environmental reconnaissance, a circuit of Big Lake was conducted to determine the relationship of prehistoric cultural materials to the series of
superimposed stabilized dunes on the north side. Sites noted in this reconnaissance
included a burned rock midden surrounded by lithic material; a probable Early Archaic
bison kill site and an extensive hearth field now eroding to the lake bottom levels. Informants from the Big Lake area confirmed our impression that sites cluster on the
northern rim of the playa. Although continuing investigations of the archeological
resources at Big Lake proper are clearly beyond the scope of the present study, these

38

sites may identify periods of lake ebb and flow that are critical to the reconstruction of
climatic models.
With the exception of 41 RG23, none of the sites recorded in the AAPL ROW meet
criteria for National Register of Historic Places eligibility. Sites 41 UT11, 41UT14 and
41RG14 through 41 RG25 are on University of Texas lands and therefore qualify for
designation as State Archeological Landmarks. The additional excavation proposed
at 41 RG23 will complete the maximum data recovery required for all sites in the McCamey to Big Lake segment of the ROW.
Thus, the treatment program for the first 45-mile stretch of the AAPL ROW concentrates on 1) additional treatment of the single site on Big Lake Draw (41 RG23) with
intact subsurface deposits; and 2) monitoring of trench excavation from the first encounter with Big Lake Draw, north of and across the playa and its eastern tributary,
Sugar Draw, outside the current

~egment.

The field work will be augmented by

thorough analysis of the archival and informant research to compile a regional history
and identify the role of the historic sites in modern development. Local collectors and
museums have been contacted and their materials will be further studied during additional excavation of 41 RG23. The lithic sample collected from the various sites will be
more thoroughly analyzed as the appropriate tasks are implemented. Geomorphic
studies are dependant upon monitoring of the pipeline trench during trench excavation.

39

SECTION 8: REFERENCES CITED
Bement, LC. and S. Turpin
1986
Technological Continuity and Functional Change: The Case of the
Dorso End Scraper. Plains Anthropologist 32(116):191-196.
Biesaart, L., W. Roberson and L. Spotts
1985
Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview. Office
of the State Archeologist Special Report 28, Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.
Brown, T.M., K.L. Killen, H. Simons and V. Wuhfkuhle
1982
Resource Protection Planning Process for Texas.
Commission, Austin.

Texas Historical

Bureau of Economic Geology
1974
Geologic Atlas of Texas, San Angelo Sheet. The University of Texas at
Austin.
Conkling, R.P. and M.B. Conkling
The Butterfield Overland Mail, 1857-1869.
1947
Glendale, California.

Arthur H. Clarke Co.,

Eagleton, N. Ethie
1971
On the Last Frontier: A History of Upton County. Texas Western Press,
El Paso.
Gould, F.W.
1975

The Grasses of Texas. Texas A & M University Press, College Station.

Haley, J. Evetts
1952
Fort Concho and the Texas Frontier. San Angelo Standard Times, San
Angelo.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1964
The Devil's Mouth Site, A Stratified Campsite at Amistad Reservoir, Val
Verde County, Texas. Department of Anthropology, Archeology Series
6, The University of Texas at Austin.

40

Luke, Clive
1983

Moore, W.E.
1982

Continuing Archeology on Interstate Highway 10: The Musk Hog
Canyon Project, Crockett County, Texas. State Department of
Highways and Public Transportation, Highway Design Division,
Publications in Archaeology Report 24, Austin.
Archeological Investigations at Musk Hog Canyon, Crockett County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 53: 13-82.

Neck, Raymond
1988
Biologist, Texas Department of Parks and Wildlife, personal
communication.
Prewitt, E. R.
1981

Cultural Chronology in Central Texas.
Archeological Society 52:65-89.

Bulletin of the Texas

Schwettmann, M. W.
1941
The Discovery and Early Development of the Big Lake Oil Field.
Master's thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Suhm, D., A. Krieger and W. Jelks
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
1954
Archeological Society 25.
Turner, E.S. and T.R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to Stone.Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press,
Austin.
Turpin, S.A.
1982
1985

Seminole Canyon: The Art and the Archeology. Texas Archeological
Survey, Research Report 83, The University of Texas at Austin.
Seminole Sink: Excavation of a Vertical Shaft Tomb, Val Verde County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 93, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Webb, W.P., Editor
1952
The Handbook of Texas, Vol. I and II. Texas Historical Association,
Austin.
Werst, J.L. Jr, Editor
The Reagan County Story.
1974
Texas.

41

Pioneer Book Publishers, Seagraves,

SECTION 9: SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION

42

STATE OF TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE DATA FORM
RECORDING INFORMATION

GENERAL INFORMATION
Temporary Site No.
Permanent site No.
Site Name :
Project Name :
AAPL

193-8-1
41UT0011

Name of Recorder :
KARL KLEINBACH
Institutional Affiliation
UT-TARL
DATE : 04/27/88

Project Funding Source(s) :
ALL AMERICAN PIPELINE COMPANY
Owner and Address :
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
TRACT 8
Informant & Address

LOCATIONAL INFORMATION
County : =U~P=T=O~N~~~~~~~­
USGS Map Name & No. :
SQUARE TOP MOUNTAIN. TEXAS
Elevation : 2430' AMSL
UTM Zone
14
Easting : 785900
Northing : 3453210
Latitude___/___/~--~~­

Longitude___/___/~--~

Additional Sources of Information

Previous Investigations
Who :
What :

When
Why

Name of Original Recorder of Site
KARL KLEINBACH

Description of Location :
FROM HANKIN, TEXAS DRIVE
WEST ON HWY. 67 TO HWY. 349.
TURN LEFT (SOUTH) AT THIS
PIONT AND CONTINUE FOR 4000'
TO THE AAPL CENTERLINE. WALK
WEST ON THE CENTERLINE FOR
APPROXIMATELY 1100' TO 1300'.
THE SITE IS ON THE R.O.W.

Permanent Site

No.~~~4~1~U~T~O~O~l=l=-~~~~-

WORK PERFORMED BY FIELD PERSONNEL

ENVIRONMENTAL LOCATION

Survey :
Testing :
Method :

Nearest Natural Water Source
FIVEMILE CREEK

YES
NO

----

Distance
800 ..........
M.
..........
Drainage Basin :
1lECCS
~

Excavation
Method :

NO

Notes
Where Housed

YES

---~~~~~~

Drainage Type
RIVERINE
Soil orgins :
COLLUVIAL

UT-TARL
Soil Type
LOAMY SAND

Photographs
Slides--Color
Black & White
Prints--Color
Black & White
Where Housed :
Collections :
Where Housed

NO
NO
NO
YES

Vegetation
NATIVE GRASSES. MESQUITE.
YUCCA, CACTI, CAT-CLAW, BROOM
WEED, WILDFLOWERS, SAGE BRUSH.

~U~T_-_T~A=R=L~~~~~-

YES
UT-TARL

Ground surface Visibility
80%

Collection Techniques

Environmental Setting of Site

Kinds of Materials Collected

SITE IS LOCATED ON A VERY
SMALL RISE WITH A 2% SLOPE.
IT IS SITUATED SLIGHTLY ABOVE
FIVEMILE CREEK (WHICH CANNOT
BE SEEN). HIGHWAY 349 CAN BE
SEEN APPROXIMATELY 1100' TO
1300' TO THE EAST.

Special Samples

How Collected

Permanet Site

No.~~~4=1=U=T=O=O=l=l~~~~~

CULTURAL MANIFESTATIONS

Artifactual Materials Present :

site Size :
At Present : ~8=0=M-*=6=0M=-~~~~~~
At Orig. Occup. : =U=N=KN==O~WN=-~~~~~
Basis for Determination :
OBSERVED SURFACE ARTIFACT
Circumstances of Observation
PEDESTRIAN SURVEY

Artifactual Materials Present :
ONE END SCRAPER. TWO SECONDARY
AND TEN TERTIARY FLAKES WERE
NOTED. ALL ARTIFACTS ARE MADE
FROM THE SAME WHITE CHERT. NO
CONCENTRATION OCCURRED. ONE
HEAVY WIRE CABLE IN FEATURE.

Depth of Cultural Deposit
NA
Basis for Determination
NO SUBSURFACE EXPLORATION
Time Periods of Occupation :

Discussion of Site :

UNKNOWN

THIS SITE REPRESENTS A LIMITED
ACTIVITY AREA IN WHICH A
TEMPORARY STOP WAS MADE ON A
TREK OR A TEMPORARY FOOD
RESOURCE COLLECTION AREA. NO
PERMANENT WATER RESOURCES ARE
NEAR ENOUGH TO HAVE KEPT THE
SITE OCCUPIED FOR ANY LENGTH
OF TIME. THE HEARTH IS VERY
DEFLATED AND THE FLAKES
SCATTERED ACROSS A LARGE AREA.
THE SITE IS MOST PROBABLY A
SURFACE SITE ONLY.

Components

PNKNCWN
Basis for Determination :
NO DIAGNOSTICS/NO SUBSURFACE EXPLOR
Site Type :
LIMITED ACTIVITY AREA

Cultural Features :
ONE HEARTH. W/4 BURNED ROCKS
NEARBY, WAS NOTED. THE HEARTH
IS LOCATED ON THE WESTERN PART
OF THE SITE ABOUT 2 METERS
NORTH OF THE CENTERLINE AND IS
VERY DEFLATED. THE DIMENSIONS
ARE 3.35 METERS BY 1.5 METERS.
THE FILL IS A BRIGHT ORANGE
SAND WITH NO ARTIFACTS. A
LARGE CABLE FROM THE CENTER OF
THE FEATURE SUGGESTS rr IS A MODERN PHECNCMENCN.

Permanet Site

No.~~~4~1=U~T~O~O=l=l=-~~~~~

SITE CONDITIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

CURRENT REGISTRATION

Approximate percentage of site
remaining intact : 5% IN R.O.W.
Natural Impacts

State Archeological Landmark NO
National Register of Historic
Places
NO

SHEET WASH

OTHER
Recommended Actions :
PIPELINE WAS RE-ROUTED.

Artificial Impacts

Known or Perceived Future Impacts
AAPL

Potential for State Archeological
Landmark
YES
Potential for National Register of
Historic Places
NO
Submitted ? :

NO

LIST ALL ATTACHMENTS
1. SITE MAP

9.

2. QUAD MAP

10.

3.

11.

4.

12.

5.

13.

6.

14.

7.

15.

8.

Other (give numbers)

.

''}
) -.Permanent Site No. _ _
-/ _ __.,....· _ ____,__ _ _ _ __
'

SKETCH MAP OF SITE AND SURROUNDING TOPOGRAPHIC FEATURES (include North arrow and scale: note if map
was not made on site). Attach photocopy of topographic map showing site location.

/

_/
/

/

/

,/

/

/

/

I

/
11o.aJ

b '
./

/

"I!

570000
FEET

.,

'

i
/ "10

II

,.....,)
,·

'/

I
!"19

STATE OF TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE DATA FORM
GENERAL INFORMATION
Temporary Site No.
Permanent site No.
Site Name :
Project Name :

RECORDING INFORMATION
193-11-1
41UT0012

MPL

Name of Recorder :
KARL KLEINBACH
Institutional Affiliation
UT-TARL
DATE : 06/22/88

Project Funding Source(s) :
ALL AMERICAN PIPELINE COMPANY
owner and Address
IMOGENE N. MUNRO
TRACT 11
Informant & Address

LOCATIONAL INFORMATION
County : =U~P=T=O=N~~~~~~~­
USGS Map Name & No.
RANKIN, TEXAS
3101-223
Elevation : 2515' AMSL
UTM Zone
14
Easting
Northing

218580
3456000

Latitude___;___;~--~~­

Longitude___;___;~--~

Additional Sources of Information

Previous Investigations
Who :
What :

When
Why

Name of Original Recorder of Site
KARL KLEINBACH

Description of Location :
PIPELINE MILE 1105'+300' TO
700'. FROM THE HWY. 67 AND
HWY.329 (WEST) INTERSECTION IN
RANKIN, TEXAS DRIVE WEST ON
HWY. 67 FOR APPROXIMATELY 0.8
MILES. AT THIS POINT, YOU
SHOULD BE AT A BRIDGE ON HWY.
67. THE SITE IS APPROXIMATELY
850 METERS SOUTH OF THIS
POINT.

Permanent Site No. -------==-=....;:;....;:;-==----------~
41UT0012
WORK PERFORMED BY FIELD PERSONNEL

ENVIRONMENTAL LOCATION

Survey :
YES
Testing :
YES
Method : SHOVEL PROBES ON R.O.W.

Nearest Natural water source
SMALL DRAW
Distance
60 M.
Drainage Basin
PE<XS

---=-=----=,_._----------~~

Excavation
Method :

NO

Notes
Where Housed

YES

Drainage Type
RIVERINE
Soil Orgins
COLLUVIAL

UT-TARL
Soil Type
SILT WITH MANY CALICHE GRAVELS

Photographs
Slides--Color
Black & White
Prints--Color
Black & White

NO
NO
NO
YES

Vegetation :
SAGE BRUSH, MESQUITE, CACTI,
NATIVE GRASSES. BROOM WEED.

Where Housed : =U=T_-=T=A=R=L.__________
YES
Collections :
Where Housed : =U=T_-=T=A=R=L._________

Ground Surface Visibility
70%

Collection Techniques :

Environmental Setting of Site :

ALL OBSERVED ARTIFACTS IN
R.o.w WERE COLLECTED.

THE SITE IS SITUATED ON A
BENCH BELOW A HILL AND ABOVE A
SMALL DRAINAGE DRAW.
SLOPE IS
ABOUT 1%. HIGHWAY 67 IS
VISIBLE APPROXIMATELY 850
METERS TO THE NORTH.
RANKIN,
TEXAS IS APPROXIMATELY 1 MILE
TO THE NORTHEAST.

Kinds of Materials Collected
CHERT DEBITAGE.
Special Samples

How Collected

Permanet Site No.

41UT0012

~~~~~~~~~~~

CULTURAL MANIFESTATIONS

Artifactual Materials Present :

Site Size :
At Present : =1=2~0=M~*~3-0=M---~~~~~
At Orig. Occup. : =U=N=KN==OWN"'-'=~~~~~­
Basis for Determination :
R.O.W. SURVEY ONLY
Circumstances of Observation
PEDESTRIAN SURVEY

Artifactual Materials Present
FIVE CHERT FLAKES
COLLECTED. A LIGHT SCATTER OF
BURNED ROCK WITHIN THE R.O.W.
WAS OBSERVED. A FEW TOOLS
WERE OBSERVED DURING PHASE II
SURVEY CSEE 193-11-1 SITE DATA
FORM).

Depth of Cultural Deposit
SURFACE ONLY
Basis for Determination
NEGATIVE SHOVEL PROBES
Time Periods of Occupation

Discussion of Site :

UNKNOWN PREHISTORIC

WHEN THE SITE WAS INTIALLY
RECORDED (193-11-1), IT WAS
CONSIDERED A LITHIC SCATTER
WITH AN ABUNDANCE OF DEBITAGE.
THIS WAS A QUICK AND WRONG
EVALUATION. WHAT WAS
CONSIDERED DEBITAGE ON THE
INITIAL PHASE II SURVEY IS
SMALL NATURALLY OCCURRING
CHERT NODULES. VERY FEW
EXHIBIT RECENT FLAKE SCARS.
THEY ARE SMALL AND BLOCKY.
TOOL PRODUCTION WOULD BE VERY
DIFFICULT WITH THIS MATERIAL.

Components

Basis for Determination
NO DIAGNOSTICS/R.O.W. SURVEY ONLY
Site Type
TEMPORARY OPEN CAMPSITE

Cultural Features

THE SITE REPRESENTS A
TEMPORARY OPEN CAMPSITE BASED
ON LOCATION OF SITE, PRESENCE
OF BURNED ROCK, THE OBSERVANCE
OF A FEW TOOLS, AND THE
OBSERVANCE OF SOME FLAKES
HAVING THE CHARACTERISTICS OF
BEING CULTURALLY MADE.

Permanet Site No.

41UT0012

~~-=-===--=-~~~~~~

SITE CONDITIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

CURRENT REGISTRATION

Approximate percentage of site
remaining intact : 0% IN R.O.W.
Natural Impacts :

State Archeological Landmark NO
National Register of Historic
Places
NO

SLOPE EROSION, SHEET WASH, GULLYING

OTHER
Recommended Actions :

Artificial Impacts :
CONCRETE TRASH DUMP/POWER
LINE/TWO-TRACK ROAD/COLLECTING

ALL CULTURAL ARTIFACTS WITHIN
THE R.O.W. WERE COLLECTED.
THE SITE IS SURFICIAL ONLY.
INFORMATION ABOUT PAST
LIFEWAYS IS VERY MINIMAL.
THEREFORE. NO FURTHER ACTION
ON R.O.W. IS RECOMMENDED.

Known or Perceived Future Impacts
AAPL

Potential for state Archeological
Landmark
NO
Potential for National Register of
Historic Places
NO
Submitted ? :

NO

LIST ALL ATTACHMENTS
1. SITE SKETCH

9.

2. SHOVEL TEST FORM

10.

3.

11.

4.

12.

5.

13.

6.

14.

7.

15.

a.

Other (give numbers)

/
, ,,.

SllOVlL H'.>I D/\I/\

Lfl_!!_Tl~

01\TE

SITE NUMBER __

SHOVEL TEST #__

l_-t_±_____ _

f '2__~0

LEVEL

6 -'J_~ -- o<g

~

IJ.+-

SOIL___~_~r/

.. $(~---~---~4----

I

w~ ,..,.~./'J 0~--,..{~( 9-'-..a~.:.<A--

RECOVERY :___/IJI!>__ ~-~--

_________ ---------··--------- __ ---------------- ---- -- ·-·-- -------- -------- -- --- ---- --- - - - - -

- - - - - - - - ------·· --- . --------- ------------------------·
LEVEL

"J.

-;)D- 50

--~--

RECOVERY:

NtJ

,_

I

/l

_,.,

SOIL----·---------------·-----------)a./W\R. ~L~~'.'I:'/_;·-.- _ ._,.;
r-I

,

~;:'-"..:.~--

~v-d_-~~-----------------------

SOIL

LEVEL

RECOVrnY : ____________ -------------- ________________ . . . __ . ____________________ _

-----------------------

-------------

------------------------ ·- ------------------------

~HOVEL

TEST #

LEVEL

--------

RECOVIRY:

SOIL ____ -·-·-·-·- _____ ·--------------------------

- - - - - - ----------·--------- ---- ---- - - - ------------- ----- ------- - ----

LEVEL
RECOVERY:

SO IL _______________________________

-- --------. - ---

- - -·-- --------------- - ---------- ---------- - . - . - ------------------------------------

·- -

Site # 41

\j T

I ·z_

PREHISTORIC MATERIAIS
Flaked Stone
PrirraJ:y flakes
--Secondary flakes
-\"-Tertiary flakes
Y. Chips
_.J.-'t'"""l1':

'L

Utilized flakes
--Unifaces
cores
Uni-directional
--Bi-directional
--M.11ti-directional
--Bifacial

Split cobbles
Chunks

Groun:l/Pecked
Manos
Metates
--Waco sinkers
Hamrerstones
--Other
Unidentifiable

Bifaces ·

Thick bifaces
--Thin bifaces
Blanks/prefonns
~~Distal frag.
_ _Medial frag.
Basal frag.
_ _Unid. frag.

Faunal.Material
Snail
--Mussel shell
Non-human bone
Other
COMMENTS:

Matt;rial Types
,/Chert

~ ;l \J'>f N

7

/(,

Other

Quartzite

r. ~- !

:surned Rock
lbs
Type:

---------------------------------~

(lines tone, sands tone, quartzite, chert)

Special Sanples
C-14

TL

Pollen

Sedilren+-

--

Flotation

Site # 41 'J- I'2.,..

Arrow Points
___ CUNEY

___ AGEE
___ ALBA
__ BASSETT

___ DE ADMAN'S

___ BONHAM

___ DUL BAR-STEMMED
___ CAMERON
___ CATAHOULA
___ CLIFFTON
___ COLBERT

___ED'w' ARDS
___ FRESNO
___ FRILEY
___ GARZA
___ GUERRERO
__ HARRELL

__ BELL

__ EVANS

___ F' AIRLAND
___ FIGUEROA
___FIRSTVIEl.J

___ FOLSOM
___ FRIO
___ GARY
___ GODLEY

___ CLOVIS
____ CONEJO

___ GOLDNDRINA
___ GDl.JER
___ HOXIE

___ DALTON
___ DARL
___ DESMUKE

__ CLEAR FORK

___ CLEBURNE
___ CORNER-TANG
___ COVINGTON

___ ERATH

___ FRIDAY

CERAMICS
___ RIM SHERD
___ BODY SHERD
___ INCISED
___ PAINTED
___ PIPE
___ OTHER

___ KENT

___ PALMILLAS
__ PANDALE
___ PANDORA

___ KINNEY
__LA JITA

___ LANGE
___ LANGTRY

___ PEDERNALES

___ MARCOS
___ MARSHALL

___ PLAINVIEW'
___ PONTCHARTRAIN
___ REFUGIO
___ SANDIA

___ MARTINDALE

___ SAN PATRICE

___ LERMA

___ MATAMOROS
___ MESERVE
___ MIDLAND
___ MILNES AND
__MONTELL

___ SCOTTSBLUFF"
___ SHUMLA
___ TORTUGAS

___ MORHISS

___ TRINITY
___ UVALDE

__ MCRRILL.

-~-VAL

___ NECHES

___ NOLAN
___ PAIS AND

BIFACES
___ GAHAGAN
___ GUADALUPE
___ HARE
__ HARVEY

___ BEAD
___ PENDANT

___ GOUGE
__ SPOON

OTHER STONE

___ GOSSETT

__ NU£C£S
___ OLMOS
___ PERFCRATIJRS
___ SAN GABRIEL
___ 2 Qnd 4 BEVELED

___ GRAVER
___ SIDE SCRAPERS
___ OTHER END SCRAPERS

BONE
___ A\IL

___ POitff
___ KNIFE

___ BEAD

___ FLESHER
___ FLAKER

VERDE

___ 'WELLS
---'WILLIAMS
___ YARBROUGH
___ ZORRA

___ ALBANY
___ DORSO END SCRAPER

___ HARVEY

SHELL

___ TRAVIS

RIVER

UNIFACES

___ BRISTOL
___ BRONSON
__ BUTTED KNIFE
___ CHOPPER

___HcGLDIN

___ MOTLEY

___ JETTA
___ JOHNSON

___ DA 'w'SDN

___ PADRE
__ PERDIZ
___ SABINAL

__ ZAVALA

__ EARLY STEMMED
STEM LANCE
__ EARLY TRIANGULAR
--~EDG£'w'DDD
.
___ ELAM
__ ELLIS
___ ENSOR

___ CHARCOS

___ wASHIT A-

__ LIVERMORE

___ LOTT
_LOZENGE
___ MAUD

___ YOUNG

___HAYES

~EARLY

___ CATAN

___ HOMAN

___ TALCO
___ TOYAH
___ TRUNEY

___ ABASDLO
___ ALMAGRE
___ ANDI CE
___ ANGCSTURA
___ BAKER
___ BANDY
___ BARBER
___ BULVERDE
___ CARRIZO
___ CARROLLTON
___ CASTROVlLLE

____ SCALLORN
___ STARR
___ STEINER

___ ABRADING STONES
___ BOATSTONES
___ CELTS
___ INCISED/GROOVED

__ MET ATES
___ MANO
___ ORNAMENTS
___ PESTLE

____ PITTED STONES
___ STONE PIPES
___ 'JACO SINKER

ANTLER
___ BILLET

___ FLAKER
___ TINES

___ MISC

___ CORES

___ DEBITAGE
___ TESTED COBBLES

___ HAMMER STONES

___ BIF" ACES

___ BURNED ROCK SHATTER

I

J<

-

or
'lj

U. T. Austin-SPECIMEN INVENTORY
Lot
No.

Location

No.

Specs.

Horizontal

Oescripllon

Vertical

Anoe. Ref.

,_\_, __:t__c_\j_\F_?__..________,_ _·--~----+·----1
\

I

t:t.-

it.T~ (l-K__
. -·--·----·--i------i-·
···-··· -···-+------i----

1---1---1------ -

1 - - - - - 1 - - - - 1 - - - · - - - - · - - - - ·--·- - . - · - - - - - · - - l----1~--i----·-- ·--·-

--------·-

-·---

-·-· ·----r----·--·----·-·

1---1----+------- --..- - · - - - 1 - - - - - - - i - -·~----+----~-----·1---+------ --------+------·-~---+-----,

-·---+---1-----------~-_:_-+----r-----1
'----1----l-----~-----------i----:,---~--------:-----·----l-----1----r-----------

·---+-----+---1------

L---+--1------·---+---t----r----1
----l---l----------~~--r~------h-------J----~~---i

~

-··-

-

I
I

I

I
I
i

i

,__
I

I

iI

STATE OF TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE DATA FORM
GENERAL INFORMATION
Temporary Site No.
Permanent site No. :
Site Name :
Project Name :
AAPL

RECORDING INFORMATION
193-12-1
41UT0013

Name of Recorder :
G. MEHALCHICK
Institutional Affiliation
UT-TARL
DATE : 06/22/88

Project Funding Source(s) :
ALL AMERICAN PIPELINE COMPANY
owner and Address :
MARGARET ANN CARTER WEBB
TRACT 12
Informant & Address

LOCATIONAL INFORMATION
County : =U=P~T~O=N~~~~~~~­
USGS Map Name & No. :
RANKIN, TEXAS
3101-223
Elevation : 2545' AMSL
UTM Zone
14
Easting
Northing

220650
3456480

Latitude___/___/~--~~­

Longitude___/___/~--~

Additional Sources of Information

Previous Investigations
Who :
What :

When
Why

Name of Original Recorder of Site
G. MEHALCHICK

Description of Location :
FROM HIGHWAY 67 IN RANKIN,
TURN SOUTH ON MAIN STREET
(LOCATED ACROSS FROM HIGHWAY
349N). DRIVE 0.8 MILES ON
MAIN STREET (GOING PAST RANKIN
MUSEUM) . AT THIS POINT THE
HAMP CARTER'S 7 RANCH IS
VISIBLE ON THE LEFT SIDE OF
THE ROAD. ACROSS THE ROAD
FROM THE WINDMILL IS A LOCKED
GATE. PARK HERE AND WALK 300
METERS DOWN THE DIRT ROAD
WHICH BEGINS AT THE GATE.
FROM HERE WALK DUE SOUTH UNTIL
YOU REACH A MAN MADE
EMBANKMENT (WHICH PARALLELS
THE CENTERLINE) . HERE YOU ARE
ON THE SITE.
M.P. ll06 + 2400' TO 1106 + 2540'

Permanent Site No.

41UT0013

~--....-....=.---=...-....-.==---------~

WORK PERFORMED BY FIELD PERSONNEL

ENVIRONMENTAL LOCATION

Survey :
YES
Testing :
YES
Method : SHOVEL TESTS ON SITE

Nearest Natural Water Source
UNNAMED DRAINAGE
Distance
WEST EDGE OF SITE
Drainage Basin :
PECCS

Excavation
Method :

NO

Notes
Where Housed

YES

Drainage Type
RIVERINE
Soil Orgins
COLLUVIAL AND EOLIAN

UT-TARL
Soil Type :
SILTS WITH CALICHE

Photographs
Slides--Color
Black & White
Prints--Color
Black & White
Where Housed :

NO
NO
NO
YES

Vegetation
MESQUITE, BROOM WEED, CACTI,
WILD FLOWERS

=U~T_-~T~A=R=L'-----------

Collections :
YES
Where Housed :U
~-T_-_T~A~R~L_________

Ground Surface Visibility
75%

Collection Techniques :

Environmental Setting of Site

DIAGNOSTIC MATERIAL COLLECTED.

SITE IS LOCATED ON RELATIVELY
FLAT TERRAIN. A MESA IS
VISIBLE TO THE SOUTHEAST CA
WINDMILL IS LOCATED AT THE
BASE OF THE MESA). THE HAMP
CARTER'S 7 RANCH IS VISIBLE
APPROXIMATELY 650 METERS TO
THE NORTHWEST OF 41UT13. A
MAN MADE EMBANKMENT,
PARALLELING THE CENTERLINE, IS
LOCATED IN THE CENTER OF THE
SITE. ONE SHOVEL TEST--SEE
FORM.

Kinds of Materials Collected
LAVENDER GLASS, HOLE-IN-TOP
CAN. DEPRESSION GLASS, BOTTLE
Special Samples

How Collected

Permanet Site

No.~~~4=1U=T==-0=0=1~3~~~~~

CULTURAL MANIFESTATIONS

Artifactual Materials Present :

Site Size :
At Present : _4~5~M~*~3~0~M~~~~~~At Orig. Occup. : =U=N=KN==O~WN=-~~~~~
Basis for Determination :
SURVEY ALONG R.O.W. ONLY
Circumstances of Observation
PEDESTRIAN SURVEY
Depth of Cultural Deposit
SURFACE
Basis for Determination
NEGATIVE SHOVEL TEST/SURFACE ERODED

Artifactual Materials Present
GENERAL LIGHT SCATTER OF
MATERIAL ACROSS THE SITE.
MOST ARTIFACTS FOUND IN
WESTERN 1/2 OF THE SITE.
OTHER ARTIFACTS OBSERVED
INCLUDED; MACHINE-MADE BRICK
FRAGMENT WITH "STAN" MAKER'S
HARK ("STANDARD") UNDEC.
WHITEWARE. ONE PIECE WINDOW
GLASS. AND METAL BEDFRAME.

Time Periods of Occupation

Discussion of Site :

HISTORIC--1920'S AND LATER

THE SITE CONSISTS OF A GENERAL
ARTIFACT SCATTER. THERE WAS
NO GREAT ARTIFACT DENSITY OR
AN ARTIFACT CONCENTRATION TO
WARRANT BEING A DUMP. NEITHER
WERE ANY FEATURES OR BUILDING
REMNANTS OBSERVED (OTHER THAN
A BRICK FRAGMENT AND WINDOW
GLASS) TO WARRANT THE AREA
BEING CALLED A HOUSESITE. OF
NOTE. HOWEVER, IS THE
SIMILARITY IN ARTIFACTS
OBSERVED TO 41UT14, A HOUSE
SITE, LOCATED FOUR MILES WEST.
BOTH ARE PROBABLY RELATED TO
THE 1920'S OIL BOOM. THE
PURPOSE OF THE MAN-MADE
EMBANKMENT IS UNKNOWN.
IT
DOES NOT APPEAR TO BE A
PIPELINE AND THIS EMBANKMENT
IS NOT SHOWN ON THE BLUELINE
MAP.

Components

SINGLE
Basis for Determination :
DIAGNOSTIC ARTIFACTS RECOVERED
Site Type :
HISTORIC ARTIFACT SCATTER-POSSIBLE
HOUSE SITE OR DUMP

Cultural Features

-----~-

---~-------

-----

Permanet Site

No.~~~4~1~U~T~0~0~1=3"-~~~~-

SITE CONDITIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

CURRENT REGISTRATION

Approximate percentage of site
remaining intact : 0% IN R.O.W.
Natural Impacts :

state Archeological Landmark NO
National Register of Historic
Places
NO

EROSION

OTHER
Recommended Actions :
ARCHIVAL WORK RECOMMENDED.
FURTHER TESTING OF SITE.

Artificial Impacts :
MAN-MADE EMBANKMENT

Known or Perceived Future Impacts
AAPL

Potential for state Archeological
Landmark
NO
Potential for National Register of
Historic Places
NO
Submitted ? :

NO

LIST ALL ATTACHMENTS
1. SITE MAP

9.

2. SHOVEL TEST FORM

10.

3.

11.

4.

12.

5.

13.

6.

14.

7.

15.

8.

Other (give numbers)

NO

Permanet Site No.

41UT0013

~~....;:...:::..=...::,_......--="--~~~~-

Kinds of Material Collected
Continued from page 2 :
SHERD, TRANSFER PRINTED
CERAMIC, AND AQUA BOTTLE NECK
WITH APPLIED LIP.

Environmental Setting of Site
Continued f rorn page 2

24

f+-.----:T--~+:--.-,-f---c-;-f-c--...;...-J--+--,-~-J----!-::==-~c
-,-,.-i----,.---t-----:-~,__;--;--f-i--.:.-+--'-l----..L--~

(

I

'r----

l--:- --

-

-t= ___:_r---11,------+-+--L--

~- --~{ --

i

•

.~'--+-·~--'

--.-

22

21

19

18

17
I I

!

16
I

15

-1

..,

I

'I

,.,
•

I

I I

,

I

I

....

~!

I

I

-,

:

'

~·

'I

I

...•''~----j--:-,,-,r"--t----'--,.-/--t--.-l--l--....-1--L+--<

i

I

-t--o---·--t--'--'--c----1--'--'....;_-l--+-J'-l-'...!--L:

'I

: I

13

I

i

'.
I

I

11

10

..,,

...
"'...

T

.

: /!

' J"'f. 1

"

.

J

;

I

:

I

:
I

-

I

,~'

'

'

I'

i'

9
I

. I

" ,.

8

i

,,

!

....
.
I

t

.

=

-

1

--.

Kl

:

I

I

I

i

Ii

I

'

'I

I

, I

I

l

6
·~

I

''

5

'I

i If

4
I

3

I
i

I

I
I

I

-

i

'

.

I'

'i

l :

i

2

,,

I

:

i

I

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

I

14

15

16

17

18

Sl!OVl.L lL'..il DJ\I/\

SITE NUMBER

LflUT/3
-----··

SHOVEL TEST #__ j_ _____·----·--

LEVEL~-:-~~~~

SOI l .. ~t /"fs._;. _(6

Y~_S).3. _---------·-- -·--·-

RECOVERY:_~~;--~:{---~ --1--r;.-~~---~

·------ ----··--···--------·-·-------------·
--------------· --·· ---·-··-- ·------·------·-·-----

. ..P·

LEVEL

-----

SOIL

------·---------------------RECOVERY:
------------- -·-·----·-------------···-----------·-------------- · - - - - SOIL______ ..... ···-·--·-------------RECOVrnY:

--

-----------···----·-·----- · - - - - - - - - - - - ----·----------'------·-------------------

~HOVEL TEST " - - - · - · - -

LEVEL - - - RECOVIRY:

SOIL···-· --·· ·-· -··
'

1
.

;·

.'

- ·-- ..

---·------·----·-·-------

------------------- -·--·------------ ·-----·--· --..

-

LEVEL

--

SO IL________ ···- _ . ___ -····-·-----··-------·------

~ECOVERY:

·-·--·····-··· --

.7---------·--·-----.. -·----··-··--··- .
.

··~··::

"···-·---------·------------------------

/l

L_

/

·---......

Q
,/

. '-

HISTORIC
ARTIFACT CATALOG SHEET
Site # LJ.\ UT I.'.!?
Lot #
I ( t:.:..u_ lof P..~Al..
Date
h - 2 Z-2'8

J

HOUSE~'EE?ING

(list)

_CERA1'1ICS (total)

-

unglazed
burnished
_____ lead glaze

HOUSEHOI.D ::'URN!SHirms

-----

_ t i n glaze
aecorated whitewares
(under glaze)

-

undecorated
_

~hitewares

-- nOOKS, SNAPS, OTtraa FASTENERS
BUTTONS

stoneware

-3I.ASS CONT.AINERS/nAGS

----

_J_ clear

_ _ ?l.isc.

over-glaze decorated{2.. l='~'s oF
'Plr;%..'5 '\
plain colored

-

"black"·
_j_ green (all shades)
brown
__L aqua """{ Cl2.0lil.1 C.1..0~~ ~

_L

&.A-11

~

PERSONAL

C..OQ."- 1..1 i.161. .

blue
white

CAN (thin) il'i:&\i +'oLG • 11.1. 1'0P CA..J

____ IRON (thicker) SCRAP
ID:Eft"'TIFIABLE OBJECTS (list)

-----

MIRROR

--

COINS.

BEADS
JE'w"EL..U
~LASS

001$5 AND

~TCh'"E?r~A.RE

BONE

-

E33·. SHELL

-

SHELL, t'iisc.

saus~

_ _ Misc.

1-1

O

ACTIVITIES
TOYS

- - etc.)

--

A1u

--

A.'1USEME!·ITS (marbles, do

·
WRITDiG MATERIALS (slate, slate
pencils, lead pencils, ete.)

- - FISHING
forks, spoons, etc.)
-____ T.A:aLE"wA..1.E (knives,
(pans, handles, etc.)

(where identifiable

_ _ PIPES

CAPS, TOPS, etc •

..l- TIN

BUCKLES
SEWING ITEMS

- - SHOE PARTS

~ other - '-A" E).l.l:>E'12...

_

OTHEB:

CL'JTHING

_porcelain

-

LAMP PARTS
LIGi:"T BUL3 PA..~TS

- - FLOWEa POT FRAGS

yellow ware

-2..

roruUTURE KARD·11.ARE

EQUIPME~TT

~.is.c •

B.A.RM/SHOP/WOEKSHOP
TOOLS
WIRE
H.AaN!'.SS/SADDtE

---

---

--

--

HARIJ',iARE
!-'.ACE!lra.i1.Y PARTS
~1isc.

PA..~TS/nORSESHOES

.
i

- - GUN FLINTS

GUN PARTS
!•:US:-\ET 3.All.S

PERCUSSION C.AfS
C.A.il.TlUDGES g.: CASES

CANNON 3ALI.S
CONST3.uCTION

wnmow

GLASS

NAIL.$-- CUT
NUI.S-WIRE
UN!D. FRAGi'©.TlfS
ziARDW~

UTILITTIS
Eiectrlcal
Gas
~o~

;,Lt.~

L

~~r

Wc;;--4-I*'i-,-.t-Q-,--.......-

ll

SHINGLES (composition)
MORT.A.a
PLASTER
\'iOOD

-

CO~CRETE

FR.AGS

ASPHALT
COMPOSITION MATERIAL
OTHER

PRE.~ISTORIC

RE?-f.AINS

CHERT !RAGriENTS

tITRIC ARTIFACTS
stra.~

_

ROCK

SEEI.L, WORAED
OTHER

MISC!t!.ANEOUS

_SEEDS, PITS, etc.
_

COAI/CINDEBS/CHA.R.CCAL

PLASTIC
PAPE.~

~~ 'CA.~··

All American Pipeline Project

0- 2..2.. '

1988

U. T. Austin-SPECIMEN INVENTORY

Phase :m::.
Site.•1.l..~f._J_~--------

· lot
No.

I

~

location
Horizontal

Dncrlptlon

ei rn E'e.AI--

-~Pc.'.s~~ b !AS'::;,

Vertical

Anoe. llef.

<'7 - 22-~ 8'

s.. !J£..FAC.b'

i::..1:;.., -~i;,n

I

t\CLE"•IJ•IOp cAl-.1 .L...IQ

\

Wn'r!

I

:BJ.l1_

~~..&aJ..A_~~\VI ~ IAM 12..AlS.En o ezo ~h-n..Q J ·--

I

R:.

t1l~~~----

I

.,,,....

2.

I

~ "17lt>

I• ,,/

('

J_9f'I<:.

C L~l2.. _§L~.$~

·-----dt' ..

·-

SQ.Jr.

~ .T

. "'?:OiiLS::

I

tc'. S

OF S4_K+:=

1"J'\/ r::"t2_ - t:,. I

/'.. •

"'=> ( J I "

c:" t:)e.?l)e..A.,~ '

·-

' 1'rl

l.IJ 1-+1. "T"E" '~ rA Q t'

.
--

-

-

--

-·

.......

-

--

I
I

i

I

'1C 1J (
1

Uf C

rt-80

·-

A,A.·?,
Lil UT 13

\)

/,._..,.,.I.A.~~..,.

7 /.,..:_r

J,,v/e-/,,,,.--/.."r c ... A..J

~/f'r~.z~r-ol ~c1~"<'

_ . ___

.

C's1~ Fvv""

_

'ArJP1,:.eJ

_ ~IJ.9r"eo~ "'s1A.A1~-+-IU)'1_ li>;,c.v -

t:.-el!.r

(,'p ;/ J-•'rllr ..I/.1;..J.J.

A/E-T

1"'J1t.1

1

_ '~f_f14Nel_-.N"c!_' .$:_-!-1_•{/ ~+o/c-

_-··--- ___ __ ___________

~,·_,. ~

__ h)" ;~_~,.._/

4.~/?_,""!/~_r, A/r'r-~ -k ,r~,. 'f-4(' ;.~;c.I(

to ___ j.!;,..__;/
-'-----

________ t.j I

U I

------- -----

if ~ 'ft._c.- <!!-ft~z"f-_~_<F ~

-. -

_!_¥_ ____ _

...

-- v __ ----D, 1.h,..s_ f!_C:=~-_lf!!\.

l!-

_: _

- - - --- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ---

~·

•p

___ _

CJ WIJVV .r SCI\~

Y Gil/ v~

0

/"?~'5,1&.¢;/

,,,Ne...1'1~

-

l

-v 1o e1 f+-f ~
J.:,4

-J-.j.. 1<- b a

#£T
•

/--V;//~tf/(1-1 ,,.,,

J.v,

f]f'*

O'f

b • ...r~ IF

/'?'fe;

J<t()

</ -1'7' ·

Ce_. I Cf_J I!> - t7'Sd
/i-fov""

ro~+ li..JW'J:,,

f""i,._~(
'

I~

I

;;

... '

A- If ~o

/···
-·---~-----

Af~-H::I ,.• ""~.., P I
I

~

I:"

~ /'fz:~

!.(~)vie.. ;t-t~J(~d ~d.f.1-/q '7c:c..S"<! - ~. 11-:re1 -~-r..ro

,,

.... -··-·--- -· --

·- --:-

12.~

\

---~':/. t --~- - ~- .s'

-·---·-· _______ _:_e~'--f4,..,_k : 1., .rs e.'. I~ d,~"4_ _/.!..d. _

7

.ht:./.~

p:r---~~~1..v J

ru_~~ r ..r . ~ I

.p

__4'_e_f:~ _ ~r_<l,. Ii. _ ) .IV~'-'. "-If 'rt:.> IZ

··--·-~-·r?..~s.:_</ d~ ~~-~t~., "'1-f".~.t:'.~-~-{~_$_:
---~-~1/

_ ...r,.;;-s-- ·.r- ,,u/~,,,,.,,_~'-

I c>e.-t I

"""'- J¥et

t(

~ 1:/c/
t(

e,;-(
I{

µ

-S (J ...s

11 I $ - /

'7 1 el~

-

1.N

.C(f-L./-.-.. .,..C' •

---~-- ··~----·-·---

-- """"'-~ ..- <&4~ V'¢

A-i /

1-!.;:E..__

t
"j

-·_t.l!"'"'t

1...v,-.:i.1
, t

1-~

.

'
/""-'

"';-..e_

1-

,,

I I

0.#1(
~.<:;,

::z..
~

l~~c...ro&..r
\

-

/(. 4!. 7

,¥~

cvtd~~

l..,--v_ ol-<lf.

-I-. i"-f ,. ;. .
I

\

--------------

-

--------

STATE OF TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE DATA FORM
RECORDING INFORMATION

GENERAL INFORMATION
Temporary Site No.
Permanent site No.
Site Name :
Project Name :
AAPL

193-10-1
41UT0014

Name of Recorder :
G. MEHALCHICK
Institutional Affiliation
UT-TARL
DATE : 06/23/88

Project Funding Source(s) :
ALL AMERICAN PIPELINE COMPANY
Owner and Address
DEWAYNE LINDSEY
TRACT 10
Informant & Address

LOCATIONAL INFORMATION
county : ~U~P=T=O~N~~~~~~~­
USGS Map Name & No. :
RANKIN, TEXAS
3101-223
Elevation : 2800' AMSL
UTM Zone
14
Easting
Northing

214800
3453430

Latitude___/___/~--~~­
Longitude___/___/~--~

Additional Sources of Information

Description of Location :
FROM THE INTERSECTION OF
HIGHWAYS 67 AND 349 (LOCATED
WEST OF RANKIN)
DRIVE 0.8
MILES SOUTH ON HIGHWAY 349.
FROM HERE WALK 650 METERS
NORTHEAST. HERE YOU WILL BE
ON SITE (A WINDMILL AND
CISTERN ARE VISIBLE IN THIS
AREA).
I

Previous Investigations
Who :
What

When
Why

Name of Original Recorder of Site
G. MEHALCHICK

M.P. 1102 + 900' TO 1102 + 1200'

Permanent site No.

41UT0014
..........

~~~

~~~~~~~

WORK PERFORMED BY FIELD PERSONNEL

ENVIRONMENTAL LOCATION

Survey :
YES
Testing :
YES
Method : RANDOM SHOVEL TESTS

Nearest Natural Water Source
WINDMILL AND CISTERN
Distance
25M. NW/CENTERLINE
Drainage Basin
PECOS

Excavation
Method :

NO

Notes
Where Housed

YES

Drainage Type
RIVERINE

UT-TARL

Photographs
Slides--Color
Black & White
Prints--Color
Black & White
Where Housed :

Soil Orgins
COLLUVIAL AND EOLIAN
soil Type :
SILTS WITH HEAVY GRAVEL AND
CALICHE DENSITY

NO
NO
NO
YES

Vegetation :
MESQUITE, BROOM WEED, CACTI,
GRASSES, YUCCA, ACACIA.

=U=T_-=T=AR==L.__~~~~

Collections :
Where Housed :

YES
=U=T_-=T=A=R=L.__~~~-

Ground Surface Visibility
80%

Collection Techniques :

Environmental Setting of Site

COLLECTION OF HISTORIC
DIAGNOSTICS, COLLECTION OF ALL
OBSERVED PREHISTORIC
ARTIFACTS, ONE 4M2 SURFACE
COLLECTION- BLOCK #1.

GRADUAL SLOPE LEADING TO RISE
TO THE SOUTH/SOUTHEAST. A
WINDMILL IS VISIBLE TO THE
NORTHWEST OF THE CENTERLINE.
ONE SHOVEL TEST--SEE FORM.

Kinds of Materials Collected
HOLE-IN-TOP CAN, BOTTLE
SHERDS, BOTTLE BASES, BOTTLE
Special Samples :

How Collected

Permanet Site

No.~~~4~1U......-.T~O~O=l~4~~~~~

CULTURAL MANIFESTATIONS

Artifactual Materials Present :

Site size :
At Present : =l~O~O=M~*=3~0=M---~~~~~
At Orig. Occup. : =U=N=KN==O~WN=-~~~~~
Basis for Determination :
SURVEY ALONG R.O.W. ONLY
Circumstances of Observation
PEDESTRIAN SURVEY
Depth of Cultural Deposit
SURFACE
Basis for Determination
NEGATIVE SHOVEL TEST/SITE DEFLATED

Artif actual Materials Present :
THE DENSEST AMOUNT OF MATERIAL
OBSERVED 30 M. S OF FENCELINE.
THE ARE IS APPROX. 20 M.(E/WlX
JOMCN/S). ALL ARTIFACTS ARE SE
OF CENTERLINE. MOST MATERIAL
EXTENDS BEYOND R.O.W. AND
INCLUDES; STANDARD BRICK, CUT
AND NATURAL LIMESTONE,
CONCRETE. AND TIN CANS.

Time Periods of Occupation

Discussion of Site

UNKNOWN PREHISTORIC AND
HISTORIC 1920'S

THIS SITE PROBABLY REPRESENTS
A HOMESTEAD. BASED ON
DIAGNOSTICS RECOVERED AND
STRUCTURAL ARTIFACTS (BRICK,
LIMESTONE, NAILS). THE SITE IS
CIRCA 1920'S AND MAYBE RELATED
TO THE OIL BOOM IN TEXAS AT
THIS TIME.

Components
MUI.'CTPTE

Basis for Determination :
HISTORIC ARTIFACTS/LITHICS
Site Type :
HISTORIC HOMESTEAD/LITHIC SCATTER

Cultural Features

ONE 4 METER SQUARE COLLECTION
SAMPLE WAS TAKEN FROM THE
DENSEST PORTION OF THE SITE.
THIS DID NOT EQUAL THE 100
ARTIFACT GOAL. HOWEVER. NO
MORE SAMPLES WERE TAKEN SINCE
ARTIFACTS ARE HEAVILY
REDUNDANT IN THIS AREA (AREA
MOSTLY CONSISTS OF BROKEN
BOTTLE GLASS AND NAILS).
THEREFORE. ONE 4 METER SQUARE
SAMPLE AND A GENERAL
COLLECTION SEEMED AN ADEQUATE
REPRESENTATION OF ARTIFACTS IN
THE R.O.W.

Permanet Site

No.~~~4-l~U~T~0~0~1~4-"-~~~~~

SITE CONDITIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

CURRENT REGISTRATION

Approximate percentage of site
remaining intact : 2% IN R.O.W.
Natural Impacts :

state Archeological Landmark NO
National Register of Historic
Places
NO

EROSION

OTHER
Recommended Actions :
ARCHIVAL RESEARCH, NO FURTHER
TESTING SINCE MOST OF THE SITE
EXTENDS OUTSIDE THE R.O.W.

Artificial Impacts :
FENCELINE. SHEEP AND SHEEP PENS,
DISMANTLING OF STRUCTURES

Known or Perceived Future Impacts
AAPL

Potential for State Archeological
Landmark
NO
Potential for National Register of
Historic Places
NO
Submitted ? :

NO

LIST ALL ATTACHMENTS
1. SITE MAP

9.

2. SHOVEL TEST FORM

10.

3.

11.

4.

12.

5.

13.

6.

14.

7.

15.

8.

Other (give numbers)

Permanet Site

No.~~~4-l~U~T~0~0~1~4--~~~~-

Kinds of Material Collected
Continued from page 2 :
NECKS AND LIPS, MILK GLASS,
TRANSFER PRINTED CERAMICS, ONE
BIFACE, ONEMODIFIED FLAKE, TWO
PIECES CHERT (POSSIBLY
NATURAL) NAILS, INSET CAPS,
WHITEWARE.

Environmental Setting of Site
Continued from page 2

24

I

,--

22

21
I

19

I

1
l-l-++-14-++-H--l--l-l-++-14-++-IH--+--l-l-+-l-H-+-+-IH--+-+-l-++-H-+-+-IH---.-+-l--l-!
-++-H_,_-Hl--+~H-~t-l:Y'1-

;

~~

I

~, ~~

:

tttti:ijjttJ:ttt:t!::t::ltttttt:t!::t::lt::tttttt:t::t::l:ttttt:t!::t::l:ttttt:t=t::t::l:i:ttt:J;~?'.::._.___,+~9--~-+-~-~t----,.-~11¥-1"'--_;_++-..~Y

18

l-J-;--J-,-++-'-l--+-+-1-++-1-+-++-1-+-+-+-1-++-+-+-++-i-+-+-+-l-++-+-f-+.J-1-+-+-+-1-+-+-i--t-++-l-+-+-+-l'-l--+<f~~-;---,,~-~Y~,-+-;__j~-l-'--+--'--'r-t.-_~.~r'-l-+--"-+--~1

tt:::t:ttt:t,:t:ttjj:tt!!j:tt!:t:t:tjj:t:t!:tl:t::t!!jt:tjj::tt!:r::!::::;:t:t:tl:::tt:::::ti::::::,~, ....
~~~..+E~~,.,-<--t--r-r~:------',-,--,---~·-·v--~
~-c--j-~---'-'-'--~~
1
'I

17

./

!

I

1-+-+--H-+-l-H-++-l--+-+-+-ll--+-l-+-t-++-!-t-+-+-lc-+-+-+-t-+-t-t-t-t-+-ll--+-+-+-t-++-+-t-,-+-11--+-+-+,~-~J~·-'--f-!-+.,~Il_t-Jl-++-i--t-!--l-t-'--+-+,~~,,,~:-t-'-+-'-·-!--'-,__,_~-t--c..,_~,-+1'1

1--+-i-+--+-1--1---l-++-14-i--HH--l-+-l-++-H-+-+-l-+-l-+-l-++-H-+--Hl--+-l-+-l-++-'-+-+--HH--""'~~+-t-+,;~V-++-l--+l-+-__,-+-l-~'--+-·-.~,~F~,--'--'-+-;-~~-+-~'+'-'~-+-'t--~l~-t-t
16

15

I I
I

!/
''

'''

/I

f

)

I

<

.,,

14
I
I

JI
'/!

f:

f

. l

Ir.
;

I

·I

'i,

:

'I

I! I

. I
./

13
' I

•

~,..,.

l...w...... )
!

II

I i ··Y+-H1-+-r-+-+-++-rl-++-l-,.+ri-+-~.

.JK

-ii-+-+-,.;__.'-++-H-+1

:J

i

:

! I

~

I

:

I I

I
I

(
,;...
U'lr!I

11

...

11

-\

l/

I

'I

... "''

I

l

I I· I

'I
I·

A

,,

'·

I

,,

\

I

I

..

I

,

I

,,
I

I

I

.

-"

...

i

I

: i

'

-,,

·v-*'
'I

'I

i'

I

9

I

I

I

·~

':

I

10

L.fl

:.....

-·

I/

I

,,,I'

.a

I

I

8
.Y

I"'

~

r'

l'.Mj

-TT

__

!

i

,,

I

7

I

,

6

1--

---

\

,.

.-

I

I

-

ii'
II

"'

,_,

I

'I

..,,.,,

I

4

L...

,_

I

'"T.!I
~-I

:

Cl

l

':

I

•

I
I

I
. I

2

I

I

"

l

i
I

L,.;

•

Iv-

111

'.'''
.

'

I

. I

("----/c.+-i-+-+--l--i-++-!-+-++-!!-+-l-+-l-++-+-f-++-f-+-+-+-l-++-l-+-++-i-++-+-l-++-14-+-+-!-+-+-+-l-++-+-+-++-l-+-+-+-l-++-+-l-+-r-'-t-++-H--+---r-'--H-~;--t-t---+--.--j
..
1

I

I. i !

I I I
I

I

.'

i

2

l

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

SllOVLL HSI D/\1/\

SI iE NUMBER 'fl U t/lf

-----·

SHOVEL TEST #__

L ___ ______

LEVEL~_j_~A.t~

SOIL .. -~1}~ 1

_

/_q'f!J,_~J~---·-- ---------·---·--·-·

RECOVERY:_~~)--~~-·~·-~-9.~~-~----------·--·---- ----··--··--------·-------- - - - - LEVEL

SOIL------·--------------------------RECOVERY:
---------

·-----·---·-----------··-·----------(

LEVEL_ _ _ _ _

SOIL________ ._ ... - - - - · - - - · - - · - - - - -

KEcovrnv: ---·---·· ---·-----···---·--·-· ··-·

..

- - - - - - - - - - - - -·--------------------------·--------------------

SHOVEL TEST h

--

LEVEL _ __
RECOVIRY:

SOIL_____ --··· ___ ··- .. _..... ---·---------------·---

·------------------·--·--------·--·--- ·---- -·--- - ---·
------···------·--··--- . ····- . - ---

LEVEL _______ _

RECOVERY:

SOIL__________ . __ - - - - · - - - - - · - - - - - - - - - - - -

----

-·--·--·-·- -· ·-·····---------·------------- ----------·---· ---·- . - ... - ··---------·---......

-------·-·-----------·-----

-~~

..JI..•~-

..

----

~.::..._.=== s:$ 0 ::::=:"'\~.?'51
II
\\
II

\\
II
II

\\

\
\\

II

.....

'S

:1451

----

L.11 UT

l:J

7 /-.zJ

/-..,.,,....._.eJ(f'~

J,,,c>/~-/..c.-.ftJya

'\ t

S TAA'PA-/Z.4)'

C.dfAJ

I

J,;,c.v

-

J.., It/

A/E.. T

~It fANd-.H-t:/'s+/t/ ~+.If"

lL·.j
ii
:d
I

/!411*tr-N1'c• Z'

I
fo

.r•~,,.... I

.lo7

A/~f"-J ~ J'~, 'f".t<- J.~ ;C.\'

,

I.

/,,;.,.;.; if

'1-4~ ~~f,,.,-1- •'F ~

,,

,,
I

Ii "
'I

-

!

:1,
If

J.. t

•t>

t

- c ,,,,._,,,,., "'"1 J .+- It
/Y4' ~

I

.Jri-1/I

:'

--t.,... ,
,,
S'l.+NPA1C1'
~/·- 1lu

i

.I

CJ

WI/EA' .r

Cd.Al

IAJ-4-b/te..

#1!..r ' ' " ' •

-

r
h d--y
h.c

J.wl A#u...r'

t..I~" ~ ~"4- .... /Cf~

J. ,_, c.V

Sc.4~

o-V

-

.P Ii!.. 7 /"? Nf. S<<- 4J.,..,,-

1-• f+I ~

!.. • ..rE -

1-,0 '1-1"1''7

"

VA I v;c_ M~ -.al h4 -/-~I~ b o rF C,. 1 ~;) t!> - f'?'.S-o ~

:'iiI

v,..;. <'

·i

'I

I

I'
I

.I
I

,;ti""''/ r

- # /£ T
' ,...,t..,..,, o'f
I A/ ;/u:
Jv,(;y.

/ ?trf t.)

ro ~+

,.,_, oy"

lit.I w 'l-

f ""

v...-7
..

I~

HISTORIC
ARTIFACT CATALOG SHEET

...i.,..-----i.---------

Site # 4-1 UI 1Lf
tot# l
2,
Date '2 - 23- 86
HOUSE~"ES?ING (list)

Unit/Level
. Feature
Stratum
ia:TCEEN/DINING
_CERAHICS (total)

i

_unglazed

:!OUSEHOI.D ?UmlISHINGS

burnished
lead glaze

_

---

- - LAMP P.AaTS
LIGET EUL3 PARTS

_ t i n glaze
~ecorated

whitewares
(under glaze)

-

__J__ undecorated
_

--

whitewar~s

--

yellow ware

-o~c;- ~L.Az.E"C

__Lover-glaze decorated

-

-

plain colored

- - iiOOKS, SNAPS, OTru:R FAS!ENE:;l.S

BUCKtEs
---.. WING .
SE"

_.···

::ZtASS CONTAINERS/FaAGS
~clear (Hos-r uow i.Av6Ur:::e:R.)

_:3_

FLOWU POT FRAGS
OTHEi•

CI,.')'!'HING
_ _ BUTTONS

_porcelain

__L stoneware

FUR!UTURE HARDil.ARE

"black"·
green (all shades)~· c.~12.. Oe..tGi.)

ITD15

- - SHOE PARTS
l'.isc.

--

PERSONAL

- - BEADS

_l_ brClm

-- MIRROR Or.ASS
--JEWEI...U

_aqua
blue

COMES AND

~white

--L-- other 1'U'll. "PU:
_l_ ~ TOPS~t,£·1J.1Z>,-:>

(where identifiable

SRUS~

PIPES
-- COINS.

CAi..I. UD.

--

_ _ Misc.

_

TIN CAN {thin) SCRAP

ACTIVITIES

-l

IRON {thicker) SCRAP

- - etc.)

TOYS -Ua'"D AMUSEZ-4.Ii'i"TS (marbles, do

~E"~....\

·

WRITING MATERI.A.I.S (slate, slate

IlJEa""TIFUBLE OBJECTS (list)
fi~l..

....

- - pencil.4, lead pencils, etc. )
- - FIS:t"'ING EQUIP!©JT

-BARM/SHOP/WOEKSHOP
-~.i!tC •

_____ TABLE'w.A.-:U: (knives, forks, spoons, etc.)
~ ~ITCh~J.ARE

30NE

-

E::i:J Sh'ELL

_

SEEI.I., l'dsc.

(pans, handles, etc.)

TOOLS

--

---

--

--

WIRE

HAlil'r.'.SS/SADD!.E PA.~TS/nOP..SESHOES

::ARDWARE
1"'.ACEINERY PilTS
~.fisc.

- - GU?i FLINTS
__.:.__ GUN P.ARTS
-

NUS~"ET 3AI.LS

-

PERCUSSION CAPS

-

CA.aT:a!DGES & CASES

-

CANNOH SALLS

CONSfitiCTION

- - WINDOW GLASS

__L
r1 NAILS·-

CUT -

"Po S-s I "'C l...;7
..J

-

--L- NllLS·-WllE

_UNID. ~'Q~

~ Z!ARDW.ARE
.. ·;.,..
_.:_ UTILITIES
-

.

--

Eiectrlcal

_Gas
_"'fiater

·

:S..UCK 1 TILE , etc.

-

~ SHINGLES ( ccmposi tion)

_MORT.Aa

- - - PLASTER
_
\·.;QOD
CO~CR:.""'TE ?RAGS

-

_ASPHALT
-

COMPOSITIO?r MATERliI.

_

OT!!E..~

PREiiISTORIC RE¥.AINS
-

CHERT FRAGl·iENTS

-

LITHIC ARTIFACTS

-

Slra."ran ROCK

-

SEEI.L, wORAED

_OTHER
MISC!I.I..ANEOUS
----- SEEDS, PITS, etc.

-

COAI/Cl}l"DEES/CHA.aCCAL

-

PLASTIC

-

PA.PE..':?.

~ ~C::fft;;'D

'~ffitS\V'e-l C....
1

M~~f:::,...t....S

ws:r

"'·

Site # 41 U I

llf

PREHISTORIC MATERIAIS
Flaked Stone
Primary flakes
--Secondary flakes
--Tertiary flakes

Z. Chips
_l_Utilized flakes
Uni.faces
Cores
Uni-directional
--Bi-directional
--Mllti-directional
--Bifacial

Split cobbles

Chunks

Groum/.Pecked

Bifaces

_J_Thick bifaces .

Manos

M;tates
--Waco sinkers

Thin bifaces

--_·-:· »iitiY·£ritgs.

.Hanmerstones

- -,-~·'"·-:-=:~_:"Mecf"tii1· -.frag ~
-

--Other
Unidentifiable

~Bas<:!-~

frag.
__;_Unid:; frag.

_ _Blanks/Pi·ef orms
Fauna! Material
Snail

Mussel shell
Non-human bone
Other
COMMENTS:

Material Types
Chert

_ _Quartzite

Other

Burned Rock
lbs
'fype: ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~---

(lines tone, sandstone, quartzite, chert)
Special Sanples
C-14

TL

Pollen

- -Sedirrent

Flotation

Site

* 41

UT

14

Arrow Points
___ AGEE
___ ALBA

__ CUNEY

___BASSETT

___a>V ARDS

_DEADMAN'S

__ BONHAM

__f"RE:SNC

___ BULBAR-STEMMED

___ CAMERON
__ CATAHOULA

___ CLIFF"TDN

___ COLBERT

__ HOMAN

___ SCALLORN
___ STARR
___STEINER
__ TALCO
__ TOYAH.
___ TRUNEY _
---'WASHITA
___
YOUNG
_ZAVALA

___ tRILEY

___ GARZA
___ GUERRERO
__ HARRELL
__HAYES

__LIVERMORE

__ LOTT
_LOZENGE
__ MAUD
__HcGLOIN

___ PADRE
_PERDIZ
__ SABINAL

Do.rt Points
__ABASDLD
__ ALHAGRE
__ANDICE
___ ANGDSTURA
___ BAKER
___ BANDY
_BARBER
__ BELL
___ BULVERDE

___ CARRIZO
___CARRDLLTCN
__ CASTROVlLLE

_CATAN
_CHARCCS
_CLOVIS
_CONEJD
___ DALTON
_DARL
__ DA\JSDN
___ DESMUl<E

_E:ARLY STEMMED
_EARLY STEM LANCE
_EARLY TRIANGULAR
_:_EDGE:W'tlOD
.
__ ELAM
__ELLIS
__ t:NSDR
___EVANS

__F"AIRLAND
__ FOLSOM

_GCLDNDRINA
__ GC\JER

__JOHNSON

UNIFACES

_HARVEY
__ HARVEY

___ COVINGTON

___ PERFORATDRS

.:. __ OLMOS'

__SAN GABRIEL

___ 2 Qnd 4 BEVELED

___ .Be:AD

__ PENDANT
__ GOUGE

__ SPOON

__ SAN PATRICE
__SCOTTSBLUFF"
__ SHUMLA
__ TCRTUGAS
___ TRAVIS
__TRINITY
___ UVALDE
-~-VAL VERDE

___ 'WELLS

---\JILLIAMS

__ YARBROUGH
___ZORRA

OTHER

__ ALBANY
__ DORSO END SCRAPER
___ GOSSETT
___ GRAVER
__SIDE SCRAPERS
___ OTHER END SCRAPERS

_NUECES

SHELL

___ PONTCHARTRAIN

__ MOTLEY
___ NECHES RIVER
___NOLAN
_'PAIS AND

___ HOXIE
_JETTA

_CLEAR FORK

___ INCISED
___ PAINTED
__ PIPE
___ OTHER

___REFUGIO
__SANDIA

___ LERMA

_MCRHISS
__ MORRILL.

__ BUTTED KNIFE ___ HARE

___ BODY SHERD

__ MARCOS
__ MARSHALL

___ PEDERNALES

_MILNES AND
___ MONTELL

__ GARY
__ GODLEY

__ CHOPPER

___ RIM SHE:RD

___PLAINVIEW'

_MIDLAND

__ FRID

_GAHAGAN
__ GUADALUPE

CERAMICS

__ LANGTRY

__ LANGE

___ HATAMCRCS
___MESERVE

___ FIRSTVIEW'

__ BRISTOL
___ BRONSON

___ ERATH
___ FRIDAY

___ PANDORA

___ PALHILLAS
_PA ND ALE

___ MARTINDALE

___ f"IGUEROA

BIFACES

___ CLEBURNE
___ CORNER-TANG

__ KENT
__ KINNEY
_LA JITA

BONE.
___ A\JL

___ POINT
___ KNIFE

___ BEAD
___ FLESHER
__FLAKER

STONE

___ ABRADING STONES
___ BCATSTCNES
___ CELTS
__ INCISED/GROOVED

_META TES
___ MANC
__ ORNAMENTS
__ PESTLE
___ PITTED STONES
___ STONE PIPES
__ 'WACO SINKER

ANTLER
___ BILLET

___ FLAKER
___ TINES

__ MISC

__ CORES

___ DEBITAGE
___ TESTED COBBLES
___ HAMMER

STONES

___ BIF"ACES
___ BURNED ROCK SHATTER

All American Pipeline Project
ftJ -

2.3 '

1988

U. T. Austin-SPECIMEN INVENTORY

Phase .J!C

!.:f.....-

Site••11JJ.I...
. Lot
No.

,,,

\

-

·~~~
L6,

Location
Horizontal

l>eKriptfon

Vertical

A11oc. lief.

(:i • 2
C LEJ:...112..

-wrru:

(_'=f:...') ~I 0 Fl2-)

68.iE'e-AL-s, ue.. FAC...E"

l'..b· I

3.- ee,
t1

~(a

i-1?

(Ht:.."f ?;i6\..0"'-IE:i . TO. A.?-.:.Oie:Y-

/.

R:.

('I

----~~ ~ (1 .6.1/ 1:-:-;..1 DJ£~=)..!!P~'m..t..=l:+-=°l):;.,,L!J,J:.""_ J:'.____--!--------------it;O...

.,,, 1------11-..__l_-4.:..::it-...._=1.0'±1.'TE' c..,_~ss ~1 'S:, Ell C£1.0 ~ •

i----·.......,1--+'R.._'~~·1i.....)~+.1•..:.li'E'
•. .=..;w~~~ -'i!J1...~~~-t:;L ~zc

I

~tF

.i

J ·~P

DE"'U'£.'-"---''-+---·-

---+---------

-+-------·-

C.A~_'-_.l_O
______________

I

/

,,....
,..-

--

-~

.,,...

'-·

\

\

/

.....-

..
~I :.c::..H
-- ,____.i.;::..._~_+"~~·.'~"-..6"'
v

-·

~

11 L..t'TEb

~ l Ill..~<..._

"" ~~ ( U:..V OJ. CE."'e.l -r-H1..c. L "'M':.

.

~ "'e;A~EC-..,

I

~

7

v
v
I-·-

-- -·

;2.0

,

1

•

F12A~ :s c.L.aie.. (L.~vaJ.o~ ~i:: "l!:Oc~1 es

-----i--~~----1----------1

'1

/

""' " ,. '

/

_.,

l--1-~.;;;......-_....;~._e-_--~LA%.EC s-ro 1.1e ~ fT2..A§ L - - - - - + - - - - - - - - - i

1------1-....

-I

I

STATE OF TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE DATA FORM
GENERAL INFORMATION
Temporary Site No.
Permanent site No.
site Name :
Project Name :
AAPL

RECORDING INFORMATION
195-1-2
41RG0015

Name of Recorder :
KARL KLEINBACH
Institutional Affiliation
UT-TARL
DATE : 06/21/88

Project Funding Source(s) :
ALL AMERICAN PIPELINE COMPANY
owner and Address :
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
TRACT 1
Informant & Address

LOCATIONAL INFORMATION
County : ~R~E~A_G~AN----~~~~~~­
USGS Map Name & No. :
RANKIN, TEXAS
3101-224
Elevation : =2=8=0=9-'=AM==S=L---~~~~­
UTM Zone
14
Easting : 237060
Northing : 3455390
Latitude__/__/ _ _ _
Longitude__/__/~--~

Additional Sources of Information

Previous Investigations
Who :
What :

When
Why

Name of Original Recorder of Site
KARL KLEINBACH

Description of Location :
PIPELINE MILE 1116+3750' TO
4050'. FROM THE HWY. 67 AND
HWY. 137 INTERSECTION IN BIG
LAKE, TEXAS DRIVE 16.2 MILES
WEST ON HWY. 67. TURN LEFT
(SOUTH) AT A GRAVEL ROAD FOR
APPROX. 0.4 MI. ACROSS THE
RAILROAD TRACKS. CONTINUE
SOUTH (ROAD CURVES AROUND TWO
OIL TANKS) FOR APPROX. 1.1 MI.
TAKE A 2-TRACK ROAD WEST AT
THIS POINT FOR APPROX. 0.9 MI.
TO A SMALL WATER/FEED TROUGH
THE NORTH SIDE. TURN SOUTH ON
AN ERODED 2-TRACK ROAD FOR
APPROX. 0.4 MI. TO ROW. SITE
IS 200M. WEST.

Permanent Site No. -----====-=-"'-=------------~
41RG0015
WORK PERFORMED BY FIELD PERSONNEL

ENVIRONMENTAL LOCATION

Survey :
YES
Testing :
YES
Method : SHOVEL PROBES ON R.O.W.

Nearest Natural Water Source
SMALL GULLY
Distance : ~~A~DJ
.........
A=C~E~N=T~--~--~­
Drainage Basin :
CONQID

Excavation
Method :

NO

Notes
Where Housed

YES

Drainage Type
RIVERINE
Soil orgins
COLLUVIAL AND EOLIAN

UT-TARL
Soil Type
SILT WITH SMALL GRAVELS

Photographs
Slides--Color
Black & White
Prints--Color
Black & White
Where Housed :

NO
NO
NO
YES

Vegetation :
SAGE BRUSH. MESQUITE. YUCCA.
CACTI. NATIVE GRASSES.

~U-T_-=T=AR==L'---~------

Collections :
Where Housed :

YES
~U=T_-=T=AR==L....________

Ground surface Visibility
70%

Collection Techniques :

Environmental setting of Site

ALL OBSERVED ARTIFACTS WITHIN
THE R.O.W. WERE COLLECTED
(EXCEPT BURNED ROCK) .

SITE IS SITUATED ON THE SLOPE
OF A SMALL GRADUAL RISE. A
SMALL GULLY RUNS SOUTH TO
NORTH ON THE WESTERN EDGE OF
THE SITE.

Kinds, of Materials Collected
CHERT DEBITAGE AND ONE
END/SIDE SCRAPER.
Special samples :

How Collected

Permanet Site No.

41RG0015

~~~~~~~~~~~

CULTURAL MANIFESTATIONS

Artifactual Materials Present :

Site Size :
At Present : =2~0~0=M-*~4=0=0M=-~~~~~
At orig. Occup. : =U~N=KN==O~WN=--~~~~~
Basis for Determination :
OBSERVED SURFACE ARTIFACTS
Circumstances of Observation
PEDESTRIAN SURVEY

Artifactual Materials Present
ALL MATERIAL WAS VARIOUS
COLORS OF CHERT. MORE
ARTIFACTS WERE NEAR THE
DRAINAGE, BECOMING LESS
FREQUENT FURTHER EAST (AWAY
FROM THE DRAINAGE) . FULL
BANGE OF DEBITAGE-SOME CORES
AND END AND SIDE SCRAPERS
NOTED. ONE UNIFACIALLY WORKED
(BLADE SCRAPER) FOUND NEAR THE

Depth of Cultural Deposit
SURFACE ONLY IN R.O.W.
Basis for Determination
NEGATIVE SHOVEL TESTS

FFA'IURE

Time Periods of Occupation

Discussion of Site :

UNKNOWN PREHISTORIC

ONLY THE NORTHERNMOST PART OF
THE SITE WILL BE IMPACTED BY
THE AAPL. THE MAIN BODY OF
THE SITE IS LOCATED
APPROXIMATELY 70-100 METERS
SOUTH OF THE R.O.W., SO
AVOIDANCE WAS NOT RECOMMENDED.
THE SITE IS A MODERATE LITHIC
SCATTER ON THE SURFACE.
FURTHER WORK MAY REVEAL
EVIDENCE OF A CAMPSITE.
FLAKES ON BURROWS SUGGEST
SUBSURFACE DEPOSITS. SITE
BOUNDARIES ARE ESTIMATIONS
BECAUSE WE DID NOT HAVE MUCH
TIME TO SPEND ON THE SITE.
SITE WAS MOST PROBABLY
SEASONALLY OR TEMPORARILY USED
BECAUSE OF THE LACK OF WATER.

Components

Basis for Determination :
R.O.W. SURVEY ONLY/NO DIAGNOSTICS
Site Type :
OPEN CAMPSITE

Cultural Features
ONE ERODED BURNED ROCK
CONCENTRATION NOTED ON THE
EASTERN EDGE OF THE SITE. A
FEW FLAKES AND A UNIFACIALLY
WORKED END AND SIDE CBLADE
SCRAPER) WERE NEAR IT. SIZE
IS ABOUT 50CMS.X 50CMS. EIGHT
BURNED ROCKS DEFINED THE
FEATURE. NO CHARCOAL OR
BURNED SOIL REMAINS

SITE REPRESENTS A TEMPORARY
OPEN CAMPSITE. THIS
OBSERVANCE WAS MADE WHEN THE
INITIAL SURVEY WAS DONE. THE
MAIN BODY OF THE SITE IS NOW
UPSLOPE (SOUTH) OF THE
RIGHT-OF-WAY. THE FEW
ARTIFACTS THAT WERE ON THE
RIGHT-OF-WAY HAVE BEEN
TRANSPORTED DOWN.

Permanet Site No.

41RG0015

~~-=-==-======~~~~~

SITE CONDITIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

CURRENT REGISTRATION

Approximate percentage of site
remaining intact : 0% IN R.O.W.
Natural Impacts :

State Archeological Landmark NO
National Register of Historic
Places
NO

SLOPE WASH. GULLY EROSION, ANIMAL
BURROWING

OTHER
Recommended Actions :
ALL ARTIFACTS OBSERVED IN THE
R.-0.W. WERE COLLECTED. THESE
HAD BEEN TRANSPORTED DOWNSLOPE
ON THE R.o.w. THEREFORE. NO
FURTHER ACTION IS RECOMMENDED
FOR THIS PART OF THE SITE.

Artificial Impacts

Known or Perceived Future Impacts
AAPL

Potential for State Archeological
Landmark
YES
Potential for National Register of
Historic Places
NO
Submitted ? :

NO

LIST ALL ATTACHMENTS
1. SITE SKETCH

9.

2. SHOVEL TEST FORM

10.

3.

11.

4.

12.

5.

13.

6.

14.

7.

15.

8.

Other (give numbers)

Permanent Site N o . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - SKETCH MAP OF SITE AND SURROUNDING TOPOGRAPHIC FEATURES (include North arrow and scale: note if map
was not made on site). Attach photocopy of topographic map showing site location.

'

\

-

--

-.

SllOVl.L 11.'.>I IJ/\I/\

SI TE NUMB ER_:t/g~ . __ _

SHOVEL TEST #__l __________ _

LEVEL~--=-~S ~/\{ _s
RECOVERY

S0 I L__ -~ff'!¥-~

q ___ §_1{f _____ j

b Y1 !f}_~

:if-~ --r-~---~ _::-~. --r~---~-~-

~u...a..c._~~r.tl.4--~ ----··--··-

____ .

----------

------------·

I

-------------· -- - --····-- ----------·-------------LEVEL

----RECOVERY:
----

SOIL

·--------------------··------------LEVEL _ _ _ _

SOIL----- ·--

.

-

.

-·-·

REcovrnv: --- --------·····--------·- ... ··········-- - -·

-------------------------- ·---'------------------·--·-----------

SHOVEL TEST If_,).._ ------

LEVE

L_Swf- .$'$ _

SO IL___ / ~'tt..'::l/.:J. ______ -~«d:_

_J_.f_..~'""""'·""L------=---"'-1~. -~~---~r_- __ (_

RECOVI RY:

r11 f-------·---

----'--------

-----------·--- ----·'·------ - ----------------- - . ---····· . -----··-

LEVEL- - - - - - (

· ..........·

RECOVERY:

----

SOIL------ --- - . - --··-·-------··-----

-----·-·- -- ······--·--------------------- --------------·---· ---- . - ... - ·-----------

-----

RANKIN NE QUADRANGLE
~.TEXAS

MINUTE .SERIES (TOPOORAPHI

ta£v~N,::: ~o~~" 5 ~,

7
'

zr,o·-~··

---.._.._

IJJ

w::-----r":!!l;___~---1·

·~~_L__

"-,

.......s{:::~p::~--=-~-;
...
..

I

;.

/

~,j~

\',

"

JI''

-,,

-...,,..Jo

'

"'---

__ ,__
I

(61·

Site # 41

eC:r t 5

PREEi,ISTORIC MATERIAI.S

Flaked Stone
Primary flakes
~Secondary

flakes
-r-Tertiary flakes
\ Chips
Utilized flakes

f Unifaces

cores
Uni-directional
..--Bi-directional
--?-bl.ti-directional
--Bifacial

Split cobbles
Chunks

GromXi/Pecked

.Bifaces

Manos

Thickbifaces.

M:!tates
-:--waco sinkers

..--'lhi.n bifaces

Blanks/prefonns

.Hanners tones

_ _Distal frag.
___Medial frag.
_ _Basal frag.
_ _Unid. f rag.

--Other
Unidentifiable

Faunal Material
Snail
--Mussel shell
Non-human bone
Other

Material Types

v

Chert

_ _Quartzite

Other

:eurne::l Pock
lbs

'fype:

--------------------------------------------~

(linestone,sandstone,quartzite, chert)
Special Sanples
C-14

TL

Pollen

- -Sediment

Flotation

;

Arrow Points
_AGEE
__ ALBA
__BASSE:TT
_BONHAM
___ BULBAR-STEMMED

__ CUNEY
_DEADMAN'S ·
___EDVARDS
___ FRE:SNC

_CATAHOULA

__ GUERRERO
__HARRELL
__HAYES

___ CAMERON

__ CLIF"f"TON

_COLBERT

·STARR·

=STE:INER
___ TALCO

___ FRILEY

__ ANGCSTURA

;__BAKER
__ BANDY
_BARBER
_BEU.

c

,.

•

·~

.•,_• ·,

I

•

:_Jo,

.f.:.

'

_EARLY STEMMED
_EARLY STEM LANCE
_EARLY TRIANGULAR
--~EDGE\JDDD
'
___ ELAM
__ELLIS
___ ENSOR

_LANGTRY

___ PLAINVIEW'
__PONTCHARTRAIN

___MESERVE

__ CATAN

___ FRID

_MIDLAND
_MlLNESAND

__FOLSOM
___GARY
___ GODLEY

_DARL

__ GDLCNDRINA
___GC'JER
___ HOXIE

_DAW'SDN
__ DESMUl<E

__JOHNSON

___ BODY SHERD

__INCISED

___ PAINTED

__PIPE
_OTHER

_GOSSETT

___ SCOTTSBLUFT

___ SHUMLA

___ TCRTUGAS
__ TRAVIS

__TRINITY

___ UVALDE

-~-VAL VERDE

___ 'WELLS
---'JILLIAMS

___PENDANT
-~SPOON

__ BEAD

___ KNIFE

. ___ FL£SHE:R
_FLAKER

.

___ YARBRCUGH
__ZORRA

OTHER STONE

__ GRAVER
__ SIDE SCRAPERS
___OTHER END SCRAPERS

BONE

. .

__ SAN PATRICE

__AUJANY
__ DORSO END SCRAPER

___ A\IL
__ POINT

__ GOUGE

__ SANDIA.

_PAISAND

UNIFACES

__ BEAD

_REf"UGm

_NOLAN

__ GAHAGAN
_BRISTOL
__ GUADALUPE
_BRONSON
_BUTTED KNIF"E ___ HARE
__ CHOPPER
_HARVEY
___ HARVEY
_CLEAR FORK
_NUECES
___ CLEBURNE
__ CORNER-TANG ___ Ol.MDS
___ PERFORATDRS
__ COVINGTON
__ SAN GABRIEL
_ERATH
__ f"RIDAY
___ 2 Qnd 4 BEVELED

___ RIM SH£RD

__ PEDERNALES

' ___ NECHES RIVER

BIFACES

SHELL

_PANDALE

__MONTELL
_MDRHISS
__ MORRILL.
_MOTLEY

_JETTA

. - •. ~- - ···.-· .... ,..... -· . ,.,,.~

___PANDORA

__LERMA
__ MARCOS
__ MARSHALL
_MARTINDALE
___ MATAMOROS

__EVANS

~

___ PALHILLAS

_KENT
__ KINNEY
_LA JITA
__ LANGE

__FIRSTVIEIJ

CERAMICS

-.

.•

_F'AIRLAND
___ rIGUERDA

_CHARCCS
_CLOVIS
_CONE JD
___ DALTON

__ SABINAL

-:-~AVALA

_BULVERDE
__ CARRIZO
_CARROLLTON

__CASTROVILLE

__HcGLOIN
___ PADRE
_PERDIZ

__ YCUNG

Do.rt Points
_ALHAGRE
__ANDICE

___ MAUD

_TOYAH
__ TRUNEY .
___IJASHIT A

__GARZA

•

__ABASDLC

___ HOMAN
__LIVERMORE
__ LOTT
_LOZENGE

___SCALLORN

__ ABRADING STONE:S
___ BCATSTCNES
___ CELTS
__ INCISED/GROOVED
_MET ATES

___ MAND

__ORNAMENTS
~-PESTLE

___ PITTED STONES

___ STCNE PIPES

__ 'w' ACC SINKER

ANTLER
___ BILLET

___ FLAKER
___ TINES
___ MISC

_CORES
___ DEBIT AGE
___ TESTED COBBLES
__ HAMMER STONES
___ BIFACES

__ BURNED ROCK SHATTER

All American Pipeline Project

,

bI 2- \

U. T. Austin-SPECIMEN INVENTORY

, 1988

r·
\

. Lot

No.

No.

Horizontal

Specs.

__,___._/tr
______
ilI. _ ~ l

._I

'

I

c

c_ 1+

\r

Vertkal

A11oc. lef.

k.

.-·-·-- --'~------''--- __'·

---1

C!'

\1

\\

5 LE c. ,. ,- L ~..!- .. - - - 1 - - - - i - - ' - '- 4 - - - l
1-----1----4-L_f\_~
(,. ~ _u "11 F ~--~=-t:.---11---\_-_ _.,_ _' ~--- ---·-\_'____
.

---i---------·-·-·--··-----------·-·----1----------1---------- -·--·--------1-------1------·1---1--+-----------1------1------1------~

-----+--+----------1------+------+----------1
(
J

----1---1-------------~-----+-----+------i

l-·-·--l---1----------+-----1-------1------~

"----l---l-----------+------t-----1--------1

(_~·
I

I
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ·-----.

·--·

STATE OF TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE DATA FORM
RECORDING INFORMATION

GENERAL INFORMATION
Temporary Site No.
Permanent site No.
Site Name :
Project Name :
AAPL

196-1-1
41RG0016

Name of Recorder :
KARL KLEINBACH
Institutional Affiliation
UT-TARL
DATE : 05/03/88

Project Funding Source(s) :
ALL AMERICAN PIPELINE COMPANY
Owner and Address :
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
TRACT 1

LOCATIONAL INFORMATION
county : ...,R=E.....
A=G.....
A....
N_ _ _ _ _ __
USGS Map Name & No. :
TEXON, TEXAS
3101-213
Elevation : ~2~8~7~5-'=AM=-=S=L'---~~~­
UTM Zone
14

Informant & Address

Easting
244560
Northing
3454730
Latitude___/___/ __ -~~Longitude___/___/ ____

Additional sources of Information

Description of Location :

Previous Investigations
Who :
What :

When

FROM HWY.137 AND HWY.67
INTERSECTION IN BIG LAKE.
TEXAS DRIVE WEST ON HWY.67 FOR
APPROXIMATELY 13.3 MILES TO
RANCH ROAD 1675. TURN SOUTH ON
1675 AT HISTORIC MARKER UNTIL
RAILROAD TRACKS ARE CROSSED.
TURN WEST AND TAKE THE FIRST
ROAD SOUTH (MAILBOXES ON
CORNER) FOR 1.9 MILES UNTIL
BASE OF MESA IS REACHED. AT
THIS POINT A TWO-TRACK ROAD
LEADS INTO AN OLD GRAVEL PIT.
THE SITE IS 160 METERS SOUTH
FROM THIS POINT.

Why

Name of Original Recorder of Site
KARL KLEINBACH

~.P.

1121 + 1400' TO 1121 + 3000'

Permanent Site No.

41RG0016

~~....:..::~~'-=-"'--~~~~

WORK PERFORMED BY FIELD PERSONNEL

ENVIRONMENTAL LOCATION

Survey :
YES
Testing :
YES
Method : SHOVEL TESTS ACROSS R.O.W

Nearest Natural Water Source
UNKNOWN
Distance
Drainage Basin
CONOiO

Excavation
Method :

NO

Notes
Where Housed

YES

Drainage Type
RIVERINE

UT-TARL

Photographs
Slides--Color
Black & White
Prints--Color
Black & White
Where Housed :

Soil Orgins
COLLUVIAL
Soil Type
CRUMBLY SILT,MOST OF SITE
EXPOSED BEDROCK AND CALICHE

NO
NO
NO
YES

Vegetation :
CEDAR. ACACIA. CACTI. YUCCA,
BROOM WEED, SAGE BRUSH. NATIVE
GRASSES, MESQUITE.

=U=T_-=T=AR==L.__~~~~

Collections :
Where Housed :

YES
=U=T_-=TA=R=-=L~~~~-

Ground Surface Visibility
80%

Collection Techniques :

Environmental Setting of Site

ALL ARTIFACTS WITHIN A RANDOM
4X4 METER GRID WERE COLLECTED
AS A SAMPLE. ALL OBSERVED
TOOLS AND DIAGNOSTICS WITHIN
R.O.W. WERE COLLECTED.

THE SITE IS SITUATED ON THE
TOP EDGE. SLOPES, AND BASE OF
A MESA. TEXON CAN BE SEEN
APPROXIMATELY TWO MILES TO THE
NORTH. AN OLD GRAVEL PIT IS
LOCATED APPROXIMATELY 50
METERS NORTH OF THE PIPELINE
RIGHT-OF-WAY.

Kinds of Materials Collected
CHERT CORES, DEBITAGE,
BIFACES, AND DART POINTS.
Special Samples :

How Collected

Permanet Site No.

41RG0016

~~--==-=--=-=-=--~~~~~

CULTURAL MANIFESTATIONS

Artifactual Materials Present :

Site Size :
At Present : =5~6~0=M~*=3~0=M'--~~~~~
At Orig. Occup. : =U=N=KN~O~WN.a.:-~~~~~
Basis for Determination :
R.O.W. SURVEY ONLY
Circumstances of Observation
PEDESTRIAN SURVEY
Depth of Cultural Deposit
0-20CMS.
Basis for Determination
POSITIVE SHOVEL TEST/GULLY INSPECTN

Artif actual Materials Present
CHERT WAS THE ONLY KIND OF
MATERIAL OBSERVED. THE
MAJORITY IS BROWN. THOUSANDS
OF CORES AND ALL CLASSES OF
DEBITAGE ARE PRESENT. THE
MAJORITY OF FLAKES ARE LARGE
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY FLAKES.
ARTIFACTS CONCENTRATED ON THE
SLOPE AND AT THE BASE OF THE
MESA.

Time Periods of Occupation :

Discussion of Site

LATE ARCHAIC/LATE PREHISTORIC

ONE SHOVEL TEST AT THE BASE GF
THE MESA YIELDED 2 TERTIARY
FLAKES FROM 10-20 CMS. BELOW
THE SURFACE. ALL ARTIFACTS
HAVE BEEN TRANSPORTED DOWN
SLOPE. THERE ARE PROBABLY
SEVERAL QUARRY SITES ALONG
THIS MESA WHEREVER THIS
LIMESTONE FORMATION OUTCROPS.
NO WATER SOURCE IS NEAR THE
SITE. FROM THE AMOUNT OF
MATERIAL PRESENT, I WOULD HAVE
TO SAY THE SITE HAS BEEN
UTILIZED FOR SEVERAL
PREHISTORIC TIME PERIODS.
EACH COMPONENT WOULD HAVE
OCCUPIED THE SITE ONLY AS LONG
AS IT TOOK TO COLLECT THE
AMOUNT OF MATERIAL THAT WAS
WANTED. NO BURNED ROCK
OBSERVED. TWO BIFACES AND ONE
TRIANGULAR DART POINT WERE THE
ONLY TOOLS FOUND.

Components
MULTIPLE

Basis for Determination :
POSS.L.ARCHAIC DT.PT./L.PRHST.BLDS.
Site Type :
CHERT QUARRY

Cultural Features

Permanet Site No.

41RG0016

~~~==~'"--=-""'-~~~~~

SITE CONDITIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

CURRENT REGISTRATION

Approximate percentage of site
remaining intact : 0% IN R.O.W.
Natural Impacts

State Archeological Landmark NO
National Register of Historic
Places
NO

SLOPE EROSION

OTHER
Recommended Actions
THE SITE WITHIN THE R.O.W. IS
NOT INTACT AND A SAMPLE OF
MATERIAL WAS COLLECTED.
WITHIN THE R.O.W. IS
RECOMMENDED.

Artificial Impacts :
TWO-TRACK ROAD. POWERLINE

Known or Perceived Future Impacts
AAPL

Potential for State Archeological
Landmark
YES
Potential for National Register of
Historic Places
NO
Submitted ? :

NO

LIST ALL ATTACHMENTS
1. SITE SKETCH

9.

2. SHOVEL TEST FORM

10.

3.

11.

4.

12.

5.

13.

6.

14.

7.

15.

8.

Other (give numbers)

z
Cl
;::

<

~~

a. •

:i
Oz
ll

.

u-

~~

Cl J

...N
w
Cl

ll

:"'
a.

:c
a.

<

ll

Cl ll

z"'
w ti

fa!
... .J

!!! ::!

Cl :I

IL

:I
Cl

•

l'J

d

z

\

/

SllOVLL ll.'..il IJ/\I/\

SI TE NUMB ER_~GL~-

_. ___ _

#_j_ __________ _

SHOVEL TEST

LEVEL~ _:3__0CJVS
SOI L____ ~r:_~~-~-~----,s,Jf ____ --::_l__o_y_4_r/_3___ _
RECOVERY: sjPA,_k________________________________ -----------------------3I

-'ft>

~~-l g S : .s.±~ ----~-~Ji.CP..dt. -~--~-~-t-~

~ ~T 2-

SOIL

cr~~.1~/f--~!l-f- _-l_q_YIL'fh)

RECOVERY:_L_~~----L4.:::_~_C..c{..S

SM(- 2.S°"CM;_

!JS' _

·---------------

-------------·--------

c

LEVEL_~~ -3S~

SOIL__ 3J_fS .. .uJ:~~~~#--ifJ-~
tMteL e.&c.M__~~

~f~-------·-··--------------- ·····--·--- -----·

RECOVrnY:

-----

----·-------·----------------·-----------

-LEVEL
---

SHOVEL TEST If

---·-SOIL -----

RECOVIRY:

---- --· -·- .. - . ·- .. ---·--------·-----------

·-----------·------------------

---------------- - --·-····- - -·- · - - - - - - - - - - - LEVEL

---------

I

\..'

RECOVERY: ·

SOIL______ --·-- __ -·---------------·---------

····------------------------ --- · - - - ----·--------- --- . - - - - - - ----------------------------------··-·--·-··- - - . - . - - - - ----------------------------·--·--·-·-· --

..

'

~~~"""
\

~

. ~ ·~,

. [[ I
II I
\\.
\I

Jl"-

11·

JI,
11.:..-- -

/~"""'[-;~;.,.,,,.~----- ·- - -~

/

i
/

\
\

'
'

:·'

\

'
I'
I

~­

I

\\

\
\

\
I
---f-

/

(
\

/ . /// -- __ :..-:"'~
;-._.__-'"1-___ .
·,

.

\~.

:.

'

"\....
1';1.~---~••s•••:a•
·..,,~\".
I
\'

\:

"It\

\

\

-

.

\\

. - ' .,

Site # 41 -iz.,<§7 I /o
PREHISTORIC MATERIAI.S

Flaked Stone
_h__Prlirary flakes

=1E[Secondary flakes
41.LTertiary flakes
.9o_Chips
~Utilized

flakes

Unifaces
Cores

I Uni-directional
L} . Bi-directional

_9_Milti-directional
-- .5 Bifacial

_j__

Split cobbles

~

Chunks

Eifaces

Grounl/Pecked

Thick bifaces .
z, Thin bifaces
_ _Blanks/prefonns
~~Distal frag.
_Medial frag.
Basal frag.
Unid. frag.

Manos
M:tates

--Waco sinkers
.Hamnerstdnes
--Other
_Unidentifiable

Faunal Material
Snail
--Mussel shell
Non-human bone
Other

Material Types

v'°Chert

_C\lartzite

Other

:surned Rock
lbs

fype:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~----

(limastone, sandstone ,quartzite, chert)

Special Sanples
C-14

- -TL

Pollen

- -Sedirrent.

Flotation

Site # 41

Rfi I la

Arrow Points
___ AGEE
__ ALBA
_BASSETT
__BONHAM
___ BULBAR-STEHMED

___ CUNEY

___ SCALLORN
_;_STARR·
_STE:INER

___ DE ADMAN'S

__,_EDVARDS
___F"RE:SNCJ
__ FRILEY

__ CAMERON

__ GARZA
___ GUERRERO

___ currTaN

__ HARRELL

__CATAHOULA

_LIVERMORE

___ LOTT

___ TALCO
__ TOYAH.

.

_LOZENGE

__ MAUD

___ TRUNEY
---'w' ASHIT A

___ PADRE

_ZAVALA

__ SABINAL

__ McGLDIN

___ YOUNG

__HAYES

__COLBERT

__ HOMAN

_PERDIZ

_ui.J1 c;

Do.rt Points

.

...,.,

-.~:

......

__EARLY TRIANGULAR
~~~EDGEW'DDD
'
__ ELAM
__ ELLIS
__ £NSDR

_ANDI CE

__ BANDY

__ BARBER
_BELL
_BULVERDE
___ CARRIZO
__ CARROLLTON

_EVANS

_CLEAR FORK

___ CLEBURNE
___ CORNER-TANG
__ COVINGTON
__ERATH
__ FRIDAY

CERAMICS
__RIM SHERD

___ BODY SHERD
_INCISOJ
__ PAINTED
_PIPE

_OTHER

___PANDORA

_MARCOS
__ MARSHALL

__ REF"UGlO

__ PEDERNALES

___ PLAINVIE'w'

___PONTCHARTRAIN
__SANDIA.

__GARY

__MDNT£LL

_GAHAGAN
__ GUADALUPE
___ HARE

__ALBANY

_HARVEY

__ GRAVER
__ SIDE SCRAPERS

---'WILLIAMS

___ YARBROUGH

___ZORRA
.J_ U i.J. 1 O

___OTHER

___ PERFORATORS

END SCRAPERS

___ A'w'L
___POINT

___ KNIF'E

___ BEAD
___ FLESHER
_FLAKER

C?
.

__ ABRADING STONES
___ BCATSTCNES
___ CELTS
__ INCISED/GROOVED
__ HETATE:S

___ MANO

__ ORNAMENTS

__PESTLE

___ PITTED STONES

__ SAN GABRIEL
_·_2 nnd 4 BEVELED

BONE

\

. ( \...A.TF ~e.C;t:t.l

OTHER STONE

___ GOSSETT

___ OLMOS

VERDE

___ 'WELLS

__ DORSO END SCRAPER

__ HARVEY
_NUECES

___ PENDANT
__ GOUGE
__ SPOON

--~-VAL

__ MORRILL.
__ MOTLEY
___ NECHES RIVER

UNIFACES

__ BEAD

___ UVALDE

_MORHISS

___JOHNSON

SHELL

__ TDRTUGAS

___ TRAVIS
__TRINITY

_MILNES AND

_NOLAN
_PAlSAND

...

__ SCOTTSBLUFF'

_MIDLAND

BIFACES
__ CHOPPER

_LA JITA
__ LANGE
__ LANGTRY
__LERMA

___ SHUMLA

_CONE JD

-· ,. .. ..t..

__PANDALE

___ MESERVE

___ GODLEY

__ BRONSON
_BUTTED KNIFE

-·.., ...

__ FIRSTVIEIJ
__FOLSOM

_GCLONDRINA
__GC'w'ER
___ HOXIE
_JETTA

__ DESMUl<E

J
- .'••• -

__ SAN PATRICE

__ CLOVIS

_DARL

·~ ...!.

___ PALHILLAS

__ KINNEY

__ MATAMOROS

_CATAN
_CHARCCS

_DA'w'SDN

••

_FAIRLAND

__ FRID

___ DALTON

•

_MARTINDALE

__ FIGUEROA

_CASTRCVll.LE

_BRISTOL

_KENT

__EARLY STEM LANCE

__ANGDSTURA
_BAKER

••••• •

.•. ~ ..,

_E:ARLY' STEMMED

_ABASDLC
__ ALHAGRE

• _!_._

~:

___ STONE PIPES

__ 'w' ACC SINKER

ANTLER
___ BILLET
___ f"LAKER
___ TINES

___ MISC

__ CORES

___ DEBITAGE

___ TESTED COBBLES
STONES
___ BIFACES
___ BURNED ROCK SHATTER
~-HAMMER

·----·-----

All American Pipeline Project
J

1988

U. T. Austin-SPECIMEN INVENTORY
Location

No.
Specs.

· Lot
No.

\

\

Horizontol

Descripllon

---

r

o~~T
O•r-JT. u,..;~ T"'E.tAt-<'tf(
_&Q1.Lc.AV~ I!> MC _

-z_, -~(~ "l::>l-FA..~

-

_

Site. ~lJ;_k:: _l_k__

---

_-:z.,

/r;

74.
(

-·--

U iJ

/i?P,

/"''

~,..

ryz... I t;;-b,....
~~

~

tJ\ l 1 \ l l -

l

H.i()

-·

~(...,M

·-

<'

.

'

"

..

\

11

<::...c

I
'1

.

2J...~

I

'.

'.

~

r r.. I

ll

"

"

,.

C~·-',,:::.<.

..

r i+!; J k:.S

-

·-

b-l'7-B0
t...'l..

-~-12.. r-D>..C.r;;

~ ~--

UltZl=Y~l"""-.

~I- D1 !?F(T".> .... r ~1

-r

.;z___

~~.

\\

c..,.....,...,_,-p,,

I,-

c.

~n.,~

C012..E"""<::.....

I'· I

1

\

f

.

-- ' - .-:..>

.i

.....

..

f"\..A.'L

Y

~x:....

!.o-1&-2iS
~~.M. I'+..-!:...

, ...,_ 2. 0

! .

.fL.k_,_._~

(-(:)I e.g:;T{Qi..l...11.r

-t:-12-n t:... r.::·

4

"J?....tn~

"l=' Q..111.1'..0 ~-F ~K..i=c...

.::<. r

~

~

i+m-z..eo, ~c+..on

u-. LI ..,. t?0 £.'::f.:-IC- E" <.... .. _

<:r?o..::..---....r-..o Y

G- i10 -~ t,

' Cr-l£'N :S~ ~ l "" SJA.F1\C..l ~
..

~ lT. ~l

':> -----··--·-----

c__ ~\P

2-

Anoe. lef.

·---·- -----

--·-·-· -·

2
3

Vertical

--

"

.I

~

-

..

-

l
I

I

I

I
-~-·~--~------~-

STATE OF TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE DATA FORM
RECORDING INFORMATION

GENERAL INFORMATION
Temporary Site No.
Permanent site No. :
Site Name :
Project Name :
AAPL

198-2.0-1
41RG0017

Name of Recorder :
KARL KLEINBACH
Institutional Affiliation
UT-TARL
DATE : 06/09/88

Project Funding Source(s) :
ALL AMERICAN PIPELINE COMPANY
Owner and Address :
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
TRACT 2
Informant & Address

LOCATIONAL INFORMATION
County : ~R=E=A=G=A~N~~~~~~~
USGS Map Name & No. :
BIG LAKE. TEXAS
3101-123
Elevation : =2~7=3~0-'=AM==S=L'--~~~~­
UTM Zone
14
Easting
264160
Northing
3452165
Latitude__;__; _ _ _
Longitude__/__/~--~

Additional Sources of Information

Previous Investigations
Who :
What

When
Why

Name of Original Recorder of Site
KARL KLEINBACH

Description of Location :
FROM THE BLUELINE MAP THE SITE
IS LOCATED ON AAP FROM MILE
1133+2000' TO 2700'. FROM
HWY.67 AND HWY.137
INTERSECTION IN BIG LAKE. TAKE
HWY.137 SOUTH ACROSS THE
RAILROAD TRACKS.
IMMEDIATELY
AFTER THE TRACKS ARE CROSSED
TAKE THE COUNTY GRAVEL ROAD
WEST FOR APPROXIMATELY 0.5
MILES. A LOCKED GATE IS ON
THE SOUTH SIDE AT THIS POINT.
DRIVE SOUTH ON THIS GRAVEL
ROAD UNTIL A SMALL METAL
BUILDING IS REACHED. WHICH IS
AT THE EDGE OF THE TERRACE AND
ON THE SITE MAP.

Permanent Site No.

41RG0017
.............

~~~~

.-......~~~~~

WORK PERFORMED BY FIELD PERSONNEL

ENVIRONMENTAL LOCATION

Survey :
YES
Testing :
YES
Method : SHOVEL PROBES X SITE

Nearest Natural Water Source
BIG LAKE
Distance
2500'
.....................
Drainage Basin :
BIG LAKE
~

Excavation
Method :

NO

Notes
Where Housed

YES

~~~~~~~-

Drainage Type
PLAYA
Soil Orgins
EOLIAN

UT-TARL
Soil Type
SILT

Photographs
Slides--Color
Black & White
Prints--Color
Black & White
Where Housed :

NO
NO
NO
YES

Vegetation
MESQUITE. SAGE BRUSH, YUCCA,
CACTI. NATIVE GRASSES, WILD
FLOWER.

=U~T_-~T=AR~L:..-~~~~

Collections :
Where Housed :

YES
~U~T_-~TAR~~L~~~~-

Ground surface Visibility
40%

Collection Techniques :

Environmental setting of Site

ALL MATERIAL IN R.O.W.
COLLECTED.

THE SITE IS SITUATED ON THE
HIGHEST TERRACE ON THE NORTH
SIDE OF BIG LAKE. THE TOP OF
TERRACE IS FLAT. SOUTH SIDE
OF THE TERRACE SLOPE AT ABOUT
7%. NORTH SIDE OF TERRACE
SLOPES AT ABOUT 3%. THE TOWN
OF BIG LAKE IS VISIBLE ABOUT A
MILE TO THE NORTH. THE SITE
IS BETWEEN TWO SETS OF
POWERLINES.

Kinds of Materials Collected
CHERT DEBITAGE AND TOOLS.
Special samples :

How Collected

Permanet Site

No.~~~4=1=R=G=O=O=l~7~~~~~

CULTURAL MANIFESTATIONS

Artifactual Materials Present :

Site Size :
At Present : 160M*30M
At Orig. Occup. :U
==N=KN==OWN"'"'-=~~~~~­
Basis for Determination :
ONLY SURVEY ALONG R.o.w.

Artifactual Materials Present

=--~'--=""""""''--~~~~~

circumstances of Observation
PEDESTRIAN SURVEY
Depth of Cultural Deposit
SURFACE ONLY
Basis for Determination
FIVE NEGATIVE SHOVEL TESTS

ALL ARTIFACTS ARE CHERT, TWO
END-SCRAPERS, ONE BIFACE
FRAGMENT, ONE DART POINT, ONE
MODIFIED FLAKE, AND
TWENTY-FOUR FLAKES COLLECTED.
95% OF THE FLAKES ARE
TERTIARY. MOST OF THE
ARTIFACTS WERE COLLECTED FROM
THE TOP AND EASTERN SLOPE OF
THE TERRACE.

Time Periods of Occupation :

Discussion of Site :

ARCHAIC (POSSIBLY MULTIPLE)

THE PART OF THE SITE I HAVE
SEEN REPRESENTS A TEMPORARY
OPEN CAMP SITE WHERE THE BIG
LAKE NATURAL RESOURCES WERE
BEING UTILIZED. THERE ARE
PROBABLY SITES ALL ALONG THE
EDGE OF THIS TERRACE AND THE
EDGE OF BIG LAKE. THESE SITES
WERE PROBABLY TEMPORARY ONES
LIMITED BY WATER SUPPPLY.
98%
OF THE BURNED ROCK IS
LIMESTONE; 2% IS SANDSTONE.
ONE SMALL CLUSTER IS LOCATED
ON TOP OF THE TERRACE. THE
REST IS SPARSELY SCATTERED
ACROOS THE SITE.

Components
UNKNCWN

Basis for Determination
ONE DART POINT FOUND,
Site Type
TEMPORARY CAMP SITE

Cultural Features

Permanet Site

No.~~~4~1=R=G~0~0~1~7"--~~~~~

SITE CONDITIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

CURRENT REGISTRATION

Approximate percentage of site
remaining intact : 0% IN R.O .w.
Natural Impacts

State Archeological Landmark NO
National Register of Historic
Places
NO

SLOPE WASH

OTHER
Recommended Actions :
THE PORTION OF THE SITE THAT
IS IN THE R.o.w. HAS NO DEPTH
AND HAS BEEN COLLECTED. NO
FOR THIS PART OF THE SITE.

Artificial Impacts :
ROAD AND FENCE CONSTRUCTION

Known or Perceived Future Impacts
ALL AMERICAN PIPELINE

Potential for State Archeological
Landmark
YES
Potential for National Register of
Historic Places
NO
Submitted ? :

NO

LIST ALL ATTACHMENTS
1. SITE SKETCH

9.

2. SHOVEL TEST FORM

10.

3.

11.

4.

12.

5.

13.

6.

14.

7.

15.

8.

Other (give numbers)

(

I
SllOVLL H'..>I D/\I/\

SITE NUMBER_lfttl_~-. -·-··

DI\ TE. ll. ,_ /J.Q_[ a__g__

SHOVEL TEST #__L_._s___ -----·

__

LEVEL~J_Q___

SOI L__l~y_~f.o/~. ...... Lo_o~ _s,_,jfs ________ _____ _

RECOVERY :_sfe1..J.-k__________'f/_-:_SS_r _La Y/l.!/k r __ S-f_jf_r_~tU.f.L~r-'i-Yff--·="'l"=a....,,_ __

All

S;s

~-f',..f}~-~A_ ____ ~~-~--

~-

--------

----·--···---------------·-------· · - -

LEVEL

-----

SOIL

------- ----------------------

RECOVERY:

·--------------

----------------------------- · - - - - LEVEL _ _ _ __

SOIL_____ .

RECOVrnY: ----- -- --· ---·----- ---- - --- ··-

- - - - - - - - - - - ------------------------

SHOVEL TEST ti-------LEVEL

----

SOIL ____ -····--·-·-_ ... --·------------·-----------

RECOVI RY: _________________________ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

·-------- ·---- -·--· - - ...
··-----··------- - ----·······'
LEVEL ________ _
RECOVERY:

----------- - - - - - -

SOIL_____________ ------------------·-··· -- -

----··--------------------- ---.

- ..

,.

----

____________________________

I

I.

:i

I

9

·--· _o_R.a_d1o_To0wer
1r - - · -

I

'II

I

<'700,

I

--

I

;/618

/

.

\\

\I

\\
\\

II

I

I

II
\\

""

/

\\

'II

. -·-·

II
II

/

o

-.:;;;:=

II

I

II
~~

I
I

TO~~~.~ ~:2

\\
~
\\

II

I

/::TCHISON

/

\\\\

II

I

I
I

,/\

"-

o,,"

I
I

/

'-,

·- -,\

11

I
I

/

.........

... _

• ··

'II,,
"

I

I

'

~~~~~"""'~~~1<=~~~.~~~==J1i1J1

j.
I II
I

/

·r, )
'-

0

~·

\d'
I

'

.."rower

•

I

~ii'

·~ ~~r;.o

1 ',

--:''
!

---· ;"~:.

~-:-

I

, __

I

;- ... :

.·

'

.

/1

~\

I

~

I

"

.

-~olf Coµ rs~(

--.

\

•.,-.., /
-

-- _,,.,--;:::.
,___,.._.___

/
I

\

!

·---(- --. __
I

.:;:,~~~~:c-.-.~~19

·.,"

........

"tr:~:;;:~

•
N

u
u
II
II

Q.

""'

//

I \\ ( (

Hole
~

?~·
'\.;/6;/'
,_
'-

I

I
\

I
/

4' ----

.

i'\,"~

!I

)\

//
.II IT

t

"'(,!''\,

.:~/

,··r.:

11
.

::

•",,_

~
11

__

v

;:__ --~

II

.

//

I

~.-;,.~~

\

""

\
~

~
II
~~
:;::;::;;:.:;: :;::;: ::;::~.?'fg~:.~~-~~-it.,..
••r.•
I.~

,,

/

'
J

--;-(~--(-~

I ·-

c..,

~

I

II
. II · -

(
·

/
~

PREHIS'IDRIC MATERIAI.S

Flaked Stone
Primary flakes
2. Secondary flakes
~Tertiary

flakes

--112_Chips
_J_Utilized flakes

_&_Unifaces
Cores
Uni-directional
--Bi-directional
--M.11ti-directional
--Bifacial

Split cobbles

Chunks

Bifaces

Grourrl/Pecked

Thick bifaces.
--Thin bifaces

MalDs

Metates
--Waco sinkers
Hanmerstbnes
--Other
.
Unidentifiable

-........__Distal frags.
. - ·:::.:.r_Mec;fial frag.
.:___Basal frag.
_ _Unid·~ frag.
_ _Blanks/Pref arms

Faunal Material
Snail
Mussel shell
Non-human bone
Other
COMMENTS:

Ma~ial Types

v

Chert

_ _Q.Jartzi te

Other

:surned Fock
lbs
Type:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

(limestone, sandstone, quartzite, chert)

Special Samples
C-14

TL

Pollen

Sedirrent

Flotation

Site # 41

nC, 11

Arrow Points
___ AGEE
__ ALBA
___BASSETT
___ BONHAM
___ BULBAR-STEMMED
___ CAMERON
__ CATAHOULA
___ CLIFFTON
___ COLBERT

___ CUNEY

___SCALLORN

--·DEADMAN'S ·
___EDV ARDS

_:_STARR·

___ F'RE:SNO
__ FRILEY

__ ANDI CE

__ ANGDSTURA
__ BAKER

__ BANDY
__ BARBER
__ BELL

___ BULVERDE
___ CARRIZO

___ CARROLLTON
___ CASTROVILLE

_CATAN
_CHARCCS
___ CLOVIS
_CCNEJD
___ DALTON
___ DARL
__ DA'w'SDN

_._DESMUKE

__ TOYAH.
___ TRUNEY ·
___IJ ASHIT A

__GARZA

___ GUERRERO

___ YOUNG

__HARRELL

__ HAYES

Do.rt Points
__ ABASDLD
___ ALHAGRE

_STEINER
__ TALCO

-:".'~A VALA

"

.

-~~· ~·:.

'
·,~

'

..

-~\ ··.-~"~'.c-.

\

.

-

... - _\

_KENT
_EARLY STEM LANCE __ KINNEY
_EARLY. TRIANGULAR _LA JITA
__ LANGE
--~EDGEWOD
. . ..
___ ELAM
__ LANGTRY
___ LERMA
__ ELLIS
__ ENSOR
_MARCOS
_MARSHALL
_EVANS
__ MARTINDALE
_FAIRLAND
___MATAMOROS
___FIGUEROA
___ MESERVE
__ FIRSTVIE'IJ
__ FOLSOM
_MIDLAND
__ FRID
__ MlLNESAND
__ GARY
__MONTELL
___ GODLEY
__ MORHISS
_EARLY STEMMED

___ GC'WER

___ HOXIE

_JETTA

__JOHNSON

BIFACES

__CLEAR F'CRl<

__ HARVEY
_NUECES

__ GRAVER
__ SIDE SCRAPERS

___ FRIDAY

CERAMICS
___ RIM SHERD

___ BODY SHERD
___ INCISED

___ PAINTED
___ PIPE

___OTHER

SHELL

. . . ":-";...,

.... """:..a.-~,., ......... --

_ _:_..:,PALHILLAS.

__:,;,,PANDALE
___ PANDORA
__ PEDERNALES
__PLAINVIE'W
__ PONTCHARTRAIN

__REf"UGlD

__SANDIA ...
__ SAN PATRICE

___ SCOTTSBLUFF'
___ SHUMLA
___ TORTUGAS

___ TRAVIS ·

---TRINITY .
___ UVALDE.

-

l ·

:....A~ ~-A•.

BONE

OTHER

..........

STONE

__ ABRADING STONES
___ BCATSTCNE:S
___ CELTS
___ INClSED/GRDOVED

__ BEAD

___ A'WL
__ POINT

___KNIFE
___ BEAD

___ FLESHER
___ F"LAKER

____ PITTED STONES
___ STONE PIPES
__ 'w' ACC SINKER

ANTLER
___ BILLET
__ _F''LAKER

___ TINES
___ MISC

c-

ui.1.1.Q. -k..Ai::z..b5 Si-i.c:..r>P:C::. \

_MCTATE.S
___ MANO
__ OTHER END SCRAPERS __ ORNAMENTS
___PESTLE

___ PENDANT

___ GOUGE
__ SPOON

__ SABINAL

___ ZORRA

__ALBANY
__ DORSO END SCRAPER
___GOSSETT

__ OLMOS

_PERDIZ

_PAISAND

__GAHAGAN
___ GUADALUPE

___ PERFCRATIJRS
___SAN GABRIEL.
__ 2 and 4 BEVELED

___ PADRE

·_:__VAL VERDE
_'WELLS
---'WILLIAMS
__ YARBROUGH

__ SRISTOL
___ BRONSON

___ CLEBURNE
__ CORNER-TANG
___ COVINGTON
__ ERATH

__HcGLOIN

__ MORRILL.
___ MOTLEY
___ NECHES RIVER
___ NOLAN

UNIFACES

_BUTTED KNlf'£ ___ HARE
__ CHDPPER
_HARVEY

_LIVERMORE

__ LOTT
_LOZENGE
___ MAUD

~:

I'

~.>-:.

__ GOLONDRINA

__ HOMAN

__ CORES

___ DEBITAGE
___ TESTED COBBLES

___ HAMMER STONES

___ BIF" ACES

___ BURNED ROCK SHATTER

/

All American Pipeline Project

0.; .· 0 ()

' 1988

~ W-,.t.. S£ :::!!!:

U. T. Austin-SPECIMEN INVENTORY
. Lot

Location

No•
Spoa.

Na.

VN\FAc~

-2

\

Fi<..A G-S

---·-~
\ji..JIO.j

Assoc. lof.

Vertical

C- lfN fF;( A\ -

(., - 8' - gg

,-

S,. v t-..FAc

,-'

~

1(..,1('.. .. ~.~.~
)

t'~....) .--'P01µ:--1?~~ s ~ A.."?i:::,~

I
I

ii+l\......I

!~Ft~

~)

c \-\ ' p

I

-

BJD

--

"-

-----~--

---- ·--

.C'1

I

l-..

l<

,,

I

-

(I

Ii

· - !.-.--·-

,,

\1

\JT/Ll2&0

-

I,

FL I(.

s

,,

l\

5 ~c.
PL-)(' -------·-

0

11

.

i31 FA (. £" ED'1t_~RAfr'

·2
/

Horbontal

Dflcriptlon

ll

-

-

(

--

'
'-·

-

~---

-I---

I

I

I
!;
j

I
I

---------

STATE OF TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE DATA FORM
GENERAL INFORMATION
Temporary Site No.
Permanent site No. :
Site Name :
Project Name :
AAPL

RECORDING INFORMATION
198-2.0-2
41RG0018

Name of Recorder :
G. MEHALCHICK
Institutional Affiliation
UT-TARL
DATE : 06/10/88

Project Funding Source(s) :
ALL AMERICAN PIPELINE COMPANY
owner and Address :
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
TRACT 2.0
Informant & Address

LOCATIONAL INFORMATION
County : ~R~EA........,GA
.........
N~~~~~~~
USGS Map Name & No. :
BIG LAKE, TEXAS
3101-214
Elevation : =2~6~7=5-'=AM==S=L'--~~~~­
UTM Zone
14
Easting
Northing

262970
3452200

Latitude___/___/~--~~­
Longitude___/___/~--~

Additional Sources of Information

Previous Investigations
Who :
What

When

Description of Location :
FROM THE INTERSECTION OF HWYS.
67 AND 137 IN BIG LAKE. DRIVE
SOUTH ON HIGHWAY 137, CROSSING
THE RAILROAD TRACKS. TURN
RIGHT ONTO A GRAVEL ROAD WHICH
PARALLELS THE TRACKS. TWO
MILES TURN LEFT ONTO ANOTHER
GRAVEL ROAD.
0.5 MILES. TURN
LEFT THROUGH A GATE ON A
FENCELINE. VEER TO THE ROAD
TO THE LEFT (NOT DOWN THE
POWERLINEl FOR 1.1 MILES.
TURN RIGHT 0.4 MILES ON A
GRAVEL ROAD. SITE IS 860M.
EAST.

Why

Name of Original Recorder of Site
G. MEHALCHICK

M. P. 1132 + 2569' TO 1132 + 3569'

Permanent Site

No.~~~4-l~R=G~0~0=1=8~~~~~

WORK PERFORMED BY FIELD PERSONNEL

ENVIRONMENTAL LOCATION

Survey :
YES
Testing :
YES
Method : RANDOM SHOVEL TESTS

Nearest Natural Water Source
BIG LAKE
Distance
~=5~0~0=M~·~~~~~~~
Drainage Basin :
BIG LAKE

Excavation
Method :

NO

Notes
Where Housed

YES

Drainage Type
PLAYA
Soil Orgins
EOLIAN

UT-TARL
Soil Type
LOOSE AND COMPACT SILTS

Photographs
Slides--Color
Black & White
Prints--Color
Black & White
Where Housed :

NO
NO
NO
YES

Vegetation :
MESQUITE, PRICKLY PEAR. THORN
BUSHES. GRASSES, WILD FLOWERS,
CACTI.

~U=T_-=T=A=R=L'--~~~~

Collections :
Where Housed :

YES
=U=T_-=T=AR=-=L'---~~~-

Ground Surface Visibility
45%

Collection Techniques :

Environmental Setting of Site

ALL OBSERVED MATERIAL
COLLECTED TO REACH 100
ARTIFACT GOAL.

GRADUAL RISE LOCATED NORTH OF
BIG LAKE. VERY GRADUAL SLOPE
TO THE EAST AND
WEST/SOUTHWEST. MAJORITY OF
ARTIFACTS FOUND ON THESE
SLOPES. ONLY VISIBLE
LANDMARKS ARE A POWERLINE TO
THE NORTH AND SOUTH AND ALSO A
WINDMILL AND CISTERN LOCATED
DOWNSLOPE NEAR BIG LAKE.
SEVEN SHOVEL TESTS--SEE ST
FORMS.

Kinds of Materials Collected
DEBITAGE. SCRAPERS, BIFACE
FRAGMENTS, TWO DART POINTS.
Special Samples :

How Collected

Permanet site No.

41RG0018
............

~~...:...=""'-=

CULTURAL MANIFESTATIONS

""""'-~~~~~

Artifactual Materials Present :

Site Size :
At Present : =3~0~0=M~*=3~0=M---~~~~~
At Orig. Occup. : U~N~KN
.........
O~WN---~~~~~
Basis for Determination :
SURVEY ALONG R.O.W. ONLY
Circumstances of Observation
PEDESTRIAN SURVEY
Depth of Cultural Deposit
SURFACE-10 CMS.
Basis for Determination
ST #1 & MATERIAL ON SURFACE

Artifactual Materials Present :
A LIGHT SCATTER OF BURNED ROCK
ALONG THE SE EDGE AND SW SLOPE
OF THE SITE. THE MAJORITY OF
ARTIFACTS OBSERVED WERE ALSO
ALONG THE SW SLOPE. ALL
MATERIAL WAS CHERT. TWO DART
POINTS, ONE BIFACE FRAGMENT,
TWO END AND SIDE SCRAPERS, 14
FLAKES. ONE UNIFACE, ONE
GRAVER, AND ONE MODIFIED

Time Periods of Occupation

Discussion of Site :

POSSIBLY LATE ARCHAIC/LATE
PREHISTORIC

THE SITE IS AN OPEN CAMPSITE
WITH POSSIBLE MPLTICOMPONENTS,
BASED ON ARTIFACTS RECOVERED.
THE SITE SEEMS SURFICIAL WITH
ONLY ONE IN SEVEN SHOVEL TESTS
BEING POSITIVE (THIS ONLY
CONTAINED A FEW BURNED ROCK
FRAGMENTS). 41RG17 (LOCATED
APPROXIMATELY 0.7 MILES EAST)
IS SIMILAR IN ARTIFACTS
RECOVERED AND SOIL DEPOSITION.

Components
UNKNCWN

Basis for Determination :
DIAGNOSTIC ARTIFACTS/MARSHALL POINT
Site Type
OPEN CAMP SITE

Cultural Features

Permanet Site

No.~~~4~1=R=G~0~0~1~8=-~~~~~

SITE CONDITIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

CURRENT REGISTRATION

Approximate percentage of site
remaining intact : 5% IN R.O.W.
Natural Impacts

State Archeological Landmark NO
National Register of Historic
Places
NO

HEAVILY ERODED

OTHER
Recommended Actions :
NO FURTHER WORK RECOMMENDED.
SITE IS MAINLY SURFICIAL.

Artificial Impacts
NONE

Known or Perceived Future Impacts
AAPL

Potential for State Archeological
Landmark
YES
Potential for National Register of
Historic Places
NO
Submitted ? :

NO

LIST ALL ATTACHMENTS
1. SITE MAP

9.

2. SHOVEL TEST FORM

10.

3•

11.

4.

12.

5.

13.

6.

14.

7.

15.

8.

Other (give numbers)

81

£1

l>l

SL

9l

ll

tl

Ol

8

6

9

-t--I

';

''

1

H++-+--'-H-t-+-H++-l-++"'1Ff-+tt-"'lo,.,_H-"-+-l-++H++l-+-+--hf-+, ++:+H-H;++--+-i+--'--1+-.H-+-·---,.-~+J;1r-.--,-.-t.-+--,___.__..q-.~--:--- - - - , ,
1
1
I
I
I
: I I
I
I I
:
i
'I

1

--

i

.....'"

I

1

1

1

1

.

,, "

I

I

1

1

-

J

I'

1
t--t-;--r-r+..,.-+--+-;-~,::-t-~-+-t-t...ot:-t-,-_,.r~~,.....-..~-+-t-t--t-+-t-t-t--r-:t-t,~1t-t-t-t-t-t-t
-+-~1 -,t-t,-t-_,,-+-+-f--t---t+-~T-r·"'.~-.l+---+-~---IH----+---+-----,

I

'~~

I•

1

I

~/~tJ-t-~·7,-.,----+-~-+----_-+--rl~--1--->---<

l

1
1 -+-+-+-+1 -++-l-+-+-+-l-+-+-+--+•-#-+-~
1-+~-+---J1-++-~--+-----+~-----+i'_ _ _+---+---1
1->-++--+-+-+-+-+4-""~•'H-+-1~-+-+-'M-~-+-r-~"'1--+-+,-t-+-+-i-+
-++-t-t-+-H
1
1
f---++--+-+-+-+-Hfl--i-io'l+-....i.lil-+-+-'"1-+-f----hrt-<-t-+-+-+-+-+-1-+--+-+---+-+-+-+-+-+-!-+-++-->---+-+---'rt--t-+-,t--~,
......--1--,,+-+----+----+-+-----f----+------t

: ....-

...
'IJl
'I

,',

!

II

.. .

"'

I

8
I

'!

' --~

I'

9

. I

•

,,

I•

s

I

J

'

I

- ... '

I

.. ,

.....

'

•

'

.

6
\ '

I

Ol

,~

'"

n1

LL

f---t---1-t-~--'-•"--t~--,----H-+-+-rl-++-t-t-+-.._.-+-+-+-"-+-+-t-t-+-H-+-H-t--r-t-t-+-+--+-+-f--'--t-f-t-..,.:~i, -

,

i

~~t-~---

';:

---+-

>-'-l-+-+-i-+--+-~·4i_~,.-+-+-<l-t--+--+--+-+--+->----+-+-<l-++-._.-+-+->--+-+-+-<--+-+--+-+-+-'--+~+-<-·Hl'__ ,_.J._.·_-----r I
H--++-1-!--+-+I+-+-oJ<.;'i---H
1-t-++-+-++-H--i'i--+-+
l-!--+-i-+-++-i--+-+-H-t-4'-+'...;'-t-+-H--+-+---i--il+-+--f-1+- ~ ~

-+

•,I
'I

i

!

I

i

I

:

, I

+~ ---+-----<

·-

f

•

..

...

i

~i

I

-;

l

I

1 :

:

'

~

I
I

I I
I

I

I

, '
1 11

l

'

£1
I

...,.

'i

._..'

9t

,....

I•
I I

'I

...

St
~

I

'

~

I

'

i

I

I

_L

_

± .l

•---+---·__,lr----+-+--,-+-.--H-+---l---'----+-+-t-t'-i'-++H-'--+-l---i---<-+-i'-"-,/Ji•,_+-+--'-1;+-'1H-----t--.-<--'--+--~·-4----++-"-- +------±=·==-:-i=-::=-j
!->--'"'"~+-'

' :

'

i

;

El

-~-~~

•'I
!

I
I

...__

, ! '

!

....
I

!

I

, I

!____j

tt:

·+,---J'f-'c-+--,-+-----+----c-+---------j----+-----1---1

,;:,.~...

f---,---+--_._+---t-+-4-+---r-r+++-,.---t-H-+-H--t-+--+-+-.,_,-~+--~c.li'•r----r--i.-+'-T---.--+-----t---H---+-----+-----~-~~~ ---i---~

.,./

SlrOVI I. TL'.> T ll/\T/\

DI\ TE. _o_~jp_8/9 8

I
-------·
----··

SHOVEL TEST #

LEVEL~_LQ,Ms

____ JO.Y./?-fo/J__________ _

f<-~.:~·'4..:'---~--l:~.4-.;-~~ ---~-~-~§..~_s._ -------·------

RECOVERY:_!/___

((- s-:i-c.A:s
1$

SOI L_./9_'?.~ .. - ~t.1±._.

Sf~_

~ ~~

'a..

. l,&VEL_ _ _ __

1___ y_~---~d;_eJ-. __~g...:fDL_

~~b~Jj_oYll-:1/_~------------·---

/f\.JM: ..

SOIL

-------- -------------- - - - - - -

.RfCOVERY:

-----··---------------

-----------·--------------- - - - - SOIL-----·-·· - - - - - -----------·---------

LEVEL

RECOVrnY: -------- ------·--·· ----·- --- ....... - -·- -· -· --- - -----

--------- -------

-----------

---·- --·---·--

~HOVEL TEST # S7S
LEVEL_ Sur-

~ :__]_

'-f CJ

SOI L. __ /~.rM-:

.. -:f~ If ____JO ViJ-_rJL_ __
. ------·---

+ __j_Q '/f..7j";J- ---c:.Dm.f'LLJ_ __ 'S.l__,_·ft:"-------------2)/ ~ _x_n_~ __ s_~~ ad 't:i:d'..I

RECOVl"RY :_ l-f-/

tf~"F-& s~-LEVEL

---·---·-

RECOVERY:

.<Tr,a.

/r_i_eµ,_ La.vu..¥ '(_ 'ro c"-1S fD

SOIL____ ._____ -·- _____ - - - · - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

-·--· -- -··· -- ... --- ------------ - -------- ----

----·----- ----·---··-------···--_;_-·····-····· ..

-··

~.

- ..

·----

'-..

• \I

\ u

/

~
.2687

\I

\\

\

'~\

./

;r.1

I

.
4 ~~~~~ ~

i

I

·~

\ J>
\

\
\

,,

,'l)'Oo

~

!

\I

~0 mli~filf~~~~~f~J~~~

"'<ft,

.. )

,,,.~

~~~~'4~JLi,i'-~~,,j;~"'~~" t:'.".: 0
"

•

\

o.

~

.. -• . ·

.

/

/

ATCHISON
I

I

\~\
\\

""".

\,I

~\

II

II

...,,700...._

\\
\\
"II

II

_.,,.....

\I

,,

0

~==

II
II

..

II

~:::.JJ

\\

.

·"(·

I

'/

./··

/
~-

/

J
//

_/·

'

·~~~-----=_-]___\ ·----· (:,.·--{--(~--1· //

: _·F~·~
,- ·~-~-::; :~

..

\l

~""

It\\
,

i

u;,;r

1

111

!

1 II

'""

~

o:: ~
: ' "••
---r.:41---~-i..!
"'

t

. : :-

..

!

""

.

•

""~""""""W~

··r : ""
-- ---·----· _: __ ! o:

~--.

II

.

8

~

:

:

!

>{.llo5

:

JO

-"""" "~ ""'.\ '.

:

II
\\

I

II
!
~~4:

...

~

.

li'""""-

=-"'··

•

I

•:,~~,~~, I _o
\\

\I
II

II

II

II

u
II
"

!.._,,,"•

~--'" . .!"'
I ·-·

1

1

•'-."Ir

II

',

)

I
III

I

I

.-'~~

I

,/ -

_ ,,._x
,,,,
'
/I
I

\

\

I

I , / ; ' ..
. .J_i/

I

·-/

,1 •u---- ":;-

I

~"~ * 6i5~

II

~
II

II

261'

•

, .. ·;,ir,:'.

!

Hole

j

II

s·1g La kc

~

,1
\\

~

II
i}I

'...._

-~

"

"

A~J.

TO~f ~
,,..._
...

....,

.llJI

11

't.::..~

~·--

l67B

Rad·i~To:e~-··"

\\

/

........

II

N

'~r,,'

,· \

0

'11·

II

\ \\

\

l~ ~~~~; 'j')'. , ,_ \

,;'~-··

·1Puk

Big Lake
Airfield

'~\.
\\

r.
I

'";''•OI•"~'

.

I ·o
:

',/

~

:~I\

I'

'l

(

'., '-.

{

I\

·1

I

\

'

o:=

\

"
II

::

.

11/
IIII
.V <'

~'="'" (

"""""

-

\

/ ./ ril,;
.. ,,
,,

-~<!.--;"

~

~~2_6~~=';""""•.,
~
.

11

I

)
J>

..

....

-(~ -- -- -.

-=

.L-

"

I

I,

1f . - ·--,,)

• :
>t;

. "'1

Ir

";;,
~""'!"- . "
C. I

'

•

r.

~~ ·. '
>=-

.' '\'' .

~ \':;.l~6i 1~/•\
\

\ \·2 .. •' II-======---1r-

..-

~

\•

..

J

\
•

- )

"

\,.

\ (/

)

\

•// ·,

\~ l

\

/

~ ' "• .
' ~~ ...
..
\

I

'1\.

:

lJ

V)

1· . I!

II

..'.
'

,,) .'... ' '
I

~

'---11

/

-l
I

l

· 11·.

( ( (

Site # 41

~ 6- l g

PREHIS'IDRIC l-1ATERIAIS

Flaked Stone
Primai:y flakes

--secondary flakes
~Tertiary flakes

_,;-Chips

b Utilized flakes
1 _.,,., 1~ ~

1... Unifaces _

Cores
Uni-directional
--Bi-directional
--Multi-directional
-Bifacial

I -n-\-1 ....!., ~ r

v '=°1-l..-c::.-C

Split cobbles

Chunks

Grour:d/Pecked
Manos

Bifaces
Thick bifaces.
--Thin bifaces
-- . --~D'istal

t1 CJ::) I A I,,....

Metates

--Waco sinkers

:. f rags.

~~Hanrrerstones

--_---._.Maci41 frag•

--Other
Unidentifiable

frag.
_ _Unid·; frag.
_l_Blanks(t>'ref
_L_Basa~

orm0

Fauna! Material
Snail
Mussel shell
Non-human bone
Other
COMMENTS:

Material Types
~ert

g {tOwN

_ _QJartzi te

Other

bit tY , Dt.b--~!r~ f

« 17 o""' v

:surned Rock
lbs

Special Sanples

C-14

TL

Pollen

- -Sediment

Flotation

Site # 41

~ G:: Jf

Arrow Points
___ AGEE
___ ALBA
___BASS£TT
___ BONHAM
___ BULBAR-STEMMED
___ CAMERON
___ CATAHOULA
___ CLIFFTON
___ COLBERT

___ CUNEY
___ DEADMAN'S

___ SCALLORN
__ STARR

___ STEINER
___ TALCO
__ TOYAH
___ TRUNEY

___EDVARDS
___ f"R£:SNO

___ FRILEY

__ GARZA
__ GUERRERO
__HARRELL
__ HAYES

___ YI ASHIT A -

___ YOUNG

_ZAVALA

__ HOMAN
_LIVERMORE
__ LOTT
_LOZENGE
__ MAUD
__ HcGLDIN

___ PADRE
_PERDIZ
__ SABINAL

Do.rt Points
_EARLY STEM LANCE __ KINNEY
___EARLY TRIANGULAR _LA JITA
___ LANG£
___EDGE'w'!JOD
.
___ LANGTRY
___ ELAM
__ ELLIS
___ LERMA

_ANDIC£

___ ANGOSTURA
___ BAKER

___ BANDY

__BARBER
__ BELL

___ BULVERDE

__ E:NSDR

__MARCOS

_EVANS

_LMARSHALL- 1...11'-E'

__ F1GUEROA
__FIRSTVIE\it'
___FOLSOM
___ FRIC
___ GARY
___ GODLEY
_ GCUlNDRINA

___ MARTINDALE
___HAT AMOROS
___ MESERVE
__ MIDLAND
__ MILNE SAND
__MONTELL
__ MORHISS
__ MORRILL _

___ HOXIE

___ NECHES RIVER

__ f"AIRLAND

___ CARRIZO
__CARROLLTON
__CASTROV1LLE

__ CATAN
_CHARCCS
___ CLOVIS
_CDNEJD
___ DALTON
___ DARL
_DA'WSDN
___ DESMUKE

__ MOTLEY

___GO\w'ER

___ NOLAN
_PAISANO

_JETTA
___JOHNSON

BIFACES
_BRISTOL

UNIFACES

___ BRONSON
__ BUTTED KNIFE
__ CHOPPER
_CLEAR FORK
___ CLEBURNE
___ CORNER-TANG
__ COVINGTON
___ ERATH
___ FRIDAY

CERAMICS
___ RIM SHERD

___ .BODY SHERD
___ INCISED

___ PAINTED
___ PIPE

___ OTHER

__ KENT

_EARLY STEMMED.

___ ABASDLC
___ ALHAGRE

__ GAHAGAN
__ GUADALUPE
___ HARE

__ ALBANY

__ DORSO END SCRAPER
___ GOSSETT

__ HARVEY

___ HARVEY
__ NUECES
___ CLMCS
___ PERFORATIJRS
__ SAN GABRIEL

v .l...@ Qnd

___ GRAVER
__ SIDE SCRAPERS

___ BEAD
___ PENDANT
___ GOUGE
___ SPOON

......

-~-·--·-,..-

-

__REf"UGlC

__ SANDIA
___ SAN PATRICE
__ SCOTTSBLUFF"
__ SHUM LA
__ TORTUGAS
___ TRAVIS
__TRINITY
___ UVALDE.
~~-VAL

VERDE
---'WELLS
.
---'WILLIAMS
__ YARBROUGH
__ ZORRA

OTHER STONE
__ ABRADING STONES
___ BCATSTCNES
___ CELTS
___ INCISED/GROOVED

_META TES
___ MANO
., _d:,._cTHER END SCRAPERS __ ORNAMENTS
___ PESTLE:
___.PITTED STONES
___ STONE PIPES

4 BEVELED

SHELL

·.~

___ PALHILLAS
_PA ND ALE
__PANDORA
_PEDERNALES
___ PLAINVIE'J
__ PONTCHARTRAIN

BONE
___ A'w'L
___POINT

___ KNIFE

___ BEAD
___ FLESH£R
__FLAKER

_'JACO SINKER

ANTLER
___ BILLET

___ FLAKER
___ TINES

___ MISC

__ CORES

___ DEBITAGE
___ TESTED COBBLES
___ HAMMER STONES
___ BlF' ACES
___ BURNED ROCK SHATTER

All American Pipeline Project

z

')"•,.I~

t·

!

,,.

'

1988

U. T. Austin-SPECIMEN INVENTORY

'

'·

Location
Vertical

AalOC. ••,.

~v f-F/1<.G~

EN~

~crt&..PE".~

v N \ ,::: AL~:- 111\(.,~
(,

v.,.., i..-12 '17 e)

5

C.\+1PS

FL-\<-).

.,. ~t.-r ~L-t'.:4.

\\

KK,, {;,- & M

l•

II

I1

\t

I1

'I

I 1

--

I\

,,
\ l

"

11

I.

I'

\
I

I l

'-·-·-

-·

I•

I '

.

I I

I

'----~---1-------~--~~----+-----t--------t

(

~-~--1~--l-------~---+------1-----+-------j

"------1----+------------+-------1------+--------l

l---~--1---------------1-------l-·-----l-------1

~--1----+-_:_----------+-----+-----+------I

I
-------"·-------

·---------

STATE OF TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE DATA FORM
GENERAL INFORMATION
Temporary Site No.
Permanent site No. :
Site Name :Project Name :

RECORDING INFORMATION
197-1.5-1
41RG0019

_MPL

Name of Recorder :
KARL KLEINBACH
Institutional Affiliation
YT-TARL
DATE : 06/13/88

Project Funding source(s) :
ALL AMERICAN PIPELINE COMPANY
owner and Address :
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
TRACT 1.5

LOCATIONAL INFORMATION
County : =RE=A==GAN=-=~~--~~~~
USGS Map Name & No. :
BEST. TEXAS
3101-214
Elevation : =2=6~7=5-'~AM:=S~L...._~--~--­
UTM Zone
.li

Informant & Address

Easting : 256240
Northing : 3452650
Latitude__/__/_ _ _
Longitude__/__/ _ _ _

Additional Sources of Information

Description of Location :

Previous Investigations :
Who :
What :

When
Why

Name of Original Recorder of Site
KARL KLEINBACH

ON A BENCH AT CONFLUENCE OF
BIG LAKE GRAW AND UNNAMED
CONFLUENCE. BETWEEN MILE
1128+4200' TO 4600'. FROM BIG
LAKE DRIVE WEST ON HWY.67 FOR
APPROX. 4 MI. TO FM 1676. ON
1676 DRIVE SOUTH FOR APPROX. 8
MI .. JVST ACROSS THE RR
TRACKS. TURN WEST ON GRAVEL
ROAD FOR 1.1 MI. TO A CHAIN
LINK GATE ON THE SOUTH SIDE OF
ROAD. THROUGH GATE. CONTINUE
SOUTH PARALLELING FENCE FOR
APPROX. 1 MI. TO E/W FENCE.
SITE IS 100 M. WEST.

Permanent Site

No.~~~4~1=R=G=0=0=1~9~~~~~

WORK PERFORMED BY FIELD PERSONNEL

ENVIRONMENTAL LOCATION

Survey :
YES
Testing :
YES
Method : SHOVEL PROBES IN R.O.W.

Nearest Natural Water Source
UNNAMED DRAINAGE GULLY
Distance
EAST EDGE OF SITE
Drainage Basin :
BIG LARE

Excavation :
Method :

NO

Notes
Where Housed

YES

Drainage Type
PLAYA
Soil Orgins
COLLUVIAL AND ALLUVIAL

UT-TARL
Soil Type
SILT LOAM

Photographs :
Slides--Color
Black & White
Prints--Color
Black & White

NO
NO
NO
YES

Vegetation :
MESQUITE. CACTI. YUCCA.
GOQRDS. BROOM WEED, NATIVE
GBASSES.

Where Housed : _UT...._-=TAR
..........=L~~~~~
Collections :
YES
Where Housed : =UT..._-=TAR
..........=L~~~~-

Ground surface Visibility :

Collection

Environmental Setting of Site

Techni~es

:

ALL OBSERVED ARTIFACTS WERE
COLLECTED CEXCEPT BURNED ROCK)
TO TRY TO REACH THE 100
ARTIFACT GOAL.
Kinds of Materials Collected
CHERT QEBITAGE.
Special Samples :

How Collected

20%

SITE IS SITUATED ON A 2-3%
SLOPING BENCH. IT IS ON THE
SOUTH SIDE OF BIG LAKE DRAW
AHO ON THE WEST SIDE OF AN
UNNAMED DRAINAGE. A SET OF
PQWERLINES CAN BE SEEN ON THE
NORTH SIDE OF BIG LAKE DRAW.

Permanet Site

No·~-~4=l=R=G=O=O=l=9_ _ _ __

CULTURAL MANIFESTATIONS

Artifactual Materials Present :

site Size :
At Present : ~1=1~5=M~*~3=0=M---_ _ _ __
At Orig. Occup. : =UN=KN~O.....
WN=-----Basis for Determination :
SURYEY ALONG R.o.w. ONLY
Circumstances of Observation
PEDESTRIAN SURVEY

Artifactual Materials Present
ALL ARTIFACTS ARE CHERT. TWO
PRIMARY. ONE SECONDARY. TEN
TERITARY FLAKES COLLECTED FROM
SURFACE. ONE CORE ALSO FOUND
ON SURFACE. MOST OF THE
ABTIFACTS OBSERVED WERE AT THE
EASTERN EDGE OF THE SITE.

Depth of CUltural Deposit
0-25 CMS.
Basis for Determination :
POSITIVE SHOVEL TESTS
Time Periods of Occupation :

Discussion of Site :

UNKNOWN

TRIS IS AN IDEAL LOCATION
FOR A CAMPSITE. THE TWO
QRAINAGES COULD BE UTILIZED
FOR WATER AND ASSOCIATED
RESOURCES. THE LACK OF
ARTIFACTS AND DEPTH OF
QEPOSITS SUGGEST IT WAS NOT
USED FOR A LONG PERIOD OF
TIME. THERE ARE PROBABLY
SMALL SITES RESEMBLING THIS
ONE ALL ALONG BIG LAKE DRAW
BEING USED FOR SHORT PERIODS
OF TIME WHEN WATER WAS NOT
AVAILABLE.
SHOVEL TEST #1 WAS DUG ON
EASTERN END AHD SEVEN TERTIARY
FI.AKES PLUS TWO PIECES BURNED
ROCK WERE FOUND BETWEEN 0-25
CMS. SHOVEL TEST #3 WAS DUG
UPSLOPE fROM #1 AND ONE
TERTIARY FLAKE WAS FOUND
BETWEEN 10-15 CMS. BURNEQ
LIMESTONE AND SANDSTONE
SCATTERED ACROSS THE SITE.

components :

Basis for Determination :
NO DIAGNOSTICS ALONG R.o.w.
site Type :
OPEN CAMPSITE

CUltural Features

Permanet Site No.

41RG0019

~~-=-==-=-=-=-==-~~~~~

SITE CONDITIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

CURRENT REGISTRATION

Approximate percentage of site
remaining intact : 20% IN R.o.w.
Natural Impacts :

State Archeological Landmark NO
National Register of Historic
Places : NO

SLQPE WASH. ANIMAL BURROWING

OTHER

.

Recommended Actions :
NO FURTHER ACTION IS
BECOMMENDED FOR THIS PART OF
THE SITE THAT IS ON THE

Artificial Impacts

~-

FENCE CONSTRUCTION

Known or Perceived Future Impacts
AAPL

Potential for State Archeological
Landmark :
YES
Potential for National Register of
Historic Places : NO
Submitted ? :

NO

LIST ALL ATTACHMENTS
1. SITE SKETCH

9.

2. SHOVEL TEST FORM

10.

3.

11~

4.

12.

5.

13.

6.

14.

7.

15.

s.

Other (give numbers)

z

0

;:
(

E •
J ~
.i. ~
IE ~

Oz
'l -

w
a
• <

7

~ :i:

.:I
N

~

l

ci

z

EEHl3

tttttt

SllOVlL H'..il D/\I/\
(

SI TE NUMB ER_'-fl 12.G-l~- _ ___

I
-----------·---

SHOVEL TEST #

- - - - - - - - ----·--·--·--·---·--·----·---------·----SOIL_ ~t1t___L~~__}_9_Y.4://J_ _ _ _ _ _ __

LEVEL_:l<0-55
RECOVERY:

!""~/e.

cU.A1a4i
(.

SS:-_911$.._-::___ ~~~ @AJ/µah_

-f-~--~~-·--------

~_ST ~ _

----··-----------

SOIL___~1..ft

.. /a~..._J_~Yll-.ef_J_ _________

REcovrnv :~ __-:_ ..Y.. ~-<:-_~ ·---~·~ .. _ -~~--&4~4-

- - - - · - - - - - - ---------·--·-------·--------------·--- · - - - - - - - - - - - - -

.:S

SHOVEL TEST #

LEVEL_-¥..5_Q_

SOIL ___/ _Q_lf(l:.'f/2,_.

_._._S'1.-/~_ j ~~-------·---

~ ~--.J<!_::ACM:. 6,S' a~
.s{.e
.
$6-1- ~-~:~~ LJ 6.rA

RECOVIRY:

·-------·-------·----······---LEVEL

-·--·---

\ ..

RECOVERY:

SOIL----- -- -··- - . -

------ ------

-·- ---·-·------

·--·--··-·-·-·-·······--·----·--·----------·--- ---------------------------- •.... - - - . . . ·---·---------------·-·---~--

\

I

I

I

\

:'

\

'

l

'

/'

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

----........

I

I

/

I

I

I

//IJ

//

.:

i.

z1dJ

"'"

Ii

I.

I

I

I

.)·
//·· '.:f~,;i
,... I/
·~1:

I

I

I

I

I/

8/
"
'
...

,

,;; ti';fl
,,

J/
.?
:t

I

'I

//
I

//

/

//

.

//

q

------ .
I

II
//

'•\

'\

r!'

I\

I/
'II

\I

:

8

I

---;>'---f-....::1.

~

'

\" l ·.-./·
\.

I•

',,

"J~

St

'?

I

I

~~__:.._

...

Site # 41

R. (,- I ~

PREHISTORIC MATERIAI.S

Flaked Stone

2-

Primary flakes

--Y--secondary flakes
2-.. Tertiary flakes

111

Chips

-2.Z_utilized flakes

Urri.faces
Cores
Um-directional
--Bi-directional
--M.llti-directional
--Bifacial

Split cobbles

_L

Chunks ·

Grourrl/Pecked

Bifaces

Thick bifaces.
--Thin bifaces

Manos

Metates
--Waco sinkers
Hamnerstdnes

Blanks/prefo:nn.s
_ _Dis ta! frag.
_ _Medial frag.
_ _Basal fr ag.
_ _Unid. frag.

--Other
Unidentifiable

Fauna! Material
Snail
Mussel shell
Non-human bone
Other
COMMENTS: _,---

~~~~~~----..~~,;._~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Material Types

V Chert

Other

_ _Quartzite

N\ 0 '!>Tl-..,., .· g,tlO \Al N J MA
WE:Alt;IZ"lt tNtr

V'(

f)€c.~

t-!A Vhr

Burned FDck
lbs
'J.Ype:

(linestone,sandstone,quartzite, chert)

Special Sanples
C-14

TL

Poller.

Sediment

Flotation

'
Site i 41

~~

'

1

Arrow Points
___ AGEE

___ CUNEY
__ DE ADMAN'S

___ ALBA
___ BASSETT

__BONHAM
___ BULBAR-STEMMED
___ CAMERON

__ SCALLORN

__ HOMAN

___ f"RILEY

__ TALCO
___ TOYAH.

__ GARZA

___ TRUNEY

___ LOTT
_LOZENGE
__ MAUD

__ STARR·
__ STEINER

___EDVARDS
___ F'RE:SND

___ GUERRERO
__ HARRELL
___HAYES

__ CATAHOULA

___ CLIFFTON

__ COLBERT

---IJASHIT A ·

___ YOUNG

-:-~AVALA

___ LIVERMORE

__ McGLClN

___ PADRE
_PERDIZ

__ SABINAL

Do.rt Points
_ABASDLC

__ ALMAGRE

_ANDI CE
__ ANGCSTURA

_BAKER
___ BANDY
__ BARBER
_BELL

___ BULVERDE

J

_KENT
_EARL y' STEMMED.
___ EARLY STEM LANCE _KINNEY
_LA JITA
_EARLY TRIANGULAR __
LANGE
--~EDGE'w'DOD
'
___ ELAM
__ LANGTRY
___ LERMA

__ELLIS

___ ENSOR
_EVANS

_MARCOS
__ MARSHALL

___PALMILLAS

_PANDALE
___ PANDORA
_PEDERNALES
___ PLAINVIEW'

___ PONTCHARTRAIN

___ REF"UGID
__SANDIA

__ SAN PATRICE
___ SCOTTSBLUFF

_MARTINDALE

___ CARRIZO.

__F'AIRLAND

___ FIGUEROA

.:.. __ HES~VE

___CASTROVILLE

___f"IRSTVIElJ
___ F'O't.. SDM

__ FRIO

_MILNES AND

___ TORTUGAS
___ TRAVIS

_MDRHISS

___ UVALDE

__CARROLLTON

__CATAN
_CHAR CDS

___ CLOVIS

_CONEJO
___ DALTON

__ DARL
__ DAW'SDN
__ DESMUKE

___ MATAMOROS
__MIDLAND

__MONTELL

___ GARY
___ GODLEY
_ GCLDNDRINA
___ GC\/ER
___ HOXIE

BIFACES

___ RIM SH£RD
SH~D

___ INCISED

___ PAINTED
___ PIPE

---\/ILLIAMS

UNIFACES

CERAMICS

___ OTHER

___ NECHES RIVER

_PAISAND

_GAHAGAN
__ GUADALUPE
_BUTTED KNIFE ___ HARE
__ CHOPPER
_HARVEY
__ HARVEY
_CLEAR F'DRI<
_NUECES
___ CLEBURNE
___ CORNER-TANG ___ CLMDS
___ PERF'DRATDRS
__ COVINGTON
__ SAN GABRIEL
___ERATH
__ f"RIDAY
__ 2 Qnd 4 BEVELED

___ BODY

---VAL VERDE

__ NOLAN

__ BRISTOL
_BRONSON

SHELL

__ALBANY
___ DORSO END SCRiAPER
___GCSSE:TT
___ GRAVER

___ W'ELLS

___ YARBROUGH
___ ZORRA

OTHER STONE
__ ABRADING STONES
___ BCATSTCNES
___ CELTS
___ INCISED/GROOVED

_META TES
__SIDE SCRAPERS
___ MAND
___ OTHER END SCRAPERS ___ CRNAMENiS
__ PESTLE
__ .. PITTED STONES

BONE

___ BEAD

___A'IJL

___ PENDANT

__ POINT
___ KNIFE
___ BEAD

___ GOUGE
___SPOON

__TRINITY

__MORRILL _

___ MOTLEY

_JETTA
___ JOHNSON

___ SHUMLA

___ FLESH£R

_f"LAKER

___ STONE PIPES

ANTLER
___ BILLET
___ f"LAKER

___ TINES

___ MISC

__\I ACC SINKER
___ CORES

___ DEBIT AGE

___ TESTED COBBLES
___HAMMER STONES
___ BIF' ACES
___ BURNED ROCK SHATTER

l

All American Pipeline Project
\ ) :l"vi.Jt, 1988

PltAS~ .J1T

U. T. Austin-SPECIMEN INVENTORY
' Lat
No.

I

\
2
I

r

''

7
2...

b

~

I
\

\

2-

--

I.Nation

No.
Specs.

Aaaoc. lef.

Vertical

Horizontal

Description

~tJEr<...ltL .S Vfl-f?Ac £
c. ~v "!_IC
JI
fl(\ M, FL-~~- ----

i- '

k. ~ &- Cr- /I\
I

(.

11

5EC.
Te.~ -r.

FL-'(
-----·-··

I1

FL~_S

11

u_-7 ·-·-·-----s -·-

CH
c H- ,p

T~A.. T

(_ \, \ p

I

,,

I'

·-.---,,

II

5 A-0 \J~ \....

-re:,1 :JI. I

I

·-

7" <tF./! '-&
-r <> ZS c.-,,

I'

I

I

·\ \

- Fl tc..
(.Tr:1LT)

1•

"

'tro..., 'iL\...
\ "'-r ..,s.
/

VTlL-lZgo rL.K-S '?

--.;

&-~-~L

fv-\.5
(....

.... \.

\l
(

Il

Sv-'.. FA-c .rs-

-

......

-·-

""
-

rI

I

I
!

I

I

STATE OF TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE DATA FORM
RECORDING INFORMATION

GENERAL INFORMATION
Temporary Site No. :
Permanent site No. :
Site Name :
Project Name :
AAPL

197-1.5-2
41RG0020

Name of Recorder :
G. MEHALCHICK
Institutional Affiliation

YT-TARL

DATE : 06/14/88
Project Funding Source(s) :
ALL AMERICAN PIPELINE COMPANY
owner and Address :
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
TRACT 1.5

LOCATIONAL INFORMATION
County : :.:RE
.......
A=G=AN~------­
USGS Map Name & No. :
BEST. TEXAS
3101-214
Elevation : 2695' AMSL
UTM Zone
14

Informant & Address

Easting
254890
Northing
3453020
Latitude__/__/_ _ _
Longitude__;___; _ _ _

Additional Sources of Information

Description of Location :

Previous Investigations
Who :
What :

When :
Why

Name of Original Recorder of Site
G. MEHALCHICK

fROM THE INTERSECTION OF
HIGHWAY 67 AND FM 1676
(APPROXIMATELY 4 MILES WEST OF
BIG LAKE) , DRIVE SOUTH ON FM
1676 TO THE RAILROAD TRACKS.
AFTER CROSSING THE TRACKS
IMMEDIATELY TURN RIGHT ONTO A
GRAVEL ROAD (PARALLELS THE
TRACK5l. DRIVE 1.1 MILES THEN
TURN LEFT (GATE ON FENCELINE).
DRIVE 0.4 MILES SOUTH. HERE
TURN RIGHT AND DRIVE WEST Cl.4
MILES) UNTIL YOU REACH THE
DRAW. 41RG21 IS LOCATED
APPROXIMATELY 90 METERS SOUTH
ON THE EAST SIDE OF THE DRAW.
fROM HERE FOLLOW THE DRAW EAST
FOR 400 METERS. THIS IS
_4.1RG20.
M. P. 1127 + 4680' TO 1127 + 4800'

Permanent Site

No.~-~4~1~R~G~0~0~2~0----~

WORK PERFORMED BY FIELD PERSONNEL

ENVIRONMENTAL LOCATION

Survey :
YES
Testing :
YES
Method : RANDOM SHOVEL TESTS

Nearest Natural Water source
BIG LAKE DRAW
Distance : --=-~'-""='~-----2 METERS
0 rainage Basin
BIG LAKE

Excavation :
Method :

NO

Drainage Type
PLAYA

Notes :
YES
Where Housed : -=YT---=T=AB=-L...__ _ __

Soil Orgins :
COLLUVIAL ANO ALLUVIAL
Soil Type :
SILT LOAM

Photographs . :
Slides--Color
Black & White
Prints--Color :
Black & White

NO
NO
NO
: YES

Vegetation
MESQUITE. PRICKLY PEAR AND
VARIOUS CACTI. GRASSES. WILD
FLOWERS

Where Housed : ....
u"""T_-....
T=AR=L...___ _ __
YES
Collections :
Where Housed :UT
....---T=ARL
........___ _ __

Ground Surface Visibility

Collection Techniques :

Environmental Setting of Site :

COLLECTED ALL OBSERVED
MATERIAL.

SITE IS LOCATED AT THE BASE OF
A GRADUAL RISE TO THE NORTH.
MATERIAL OBSERVED IS PROBABLY
ERODING DOWNSLOPE. NEAR TO THE
PRAW. 41RG21 IS APPROXIMATELY
400 METERS WEST. ALSO A HOUSE
CPART OF THE RANCH) IS VISIBLE
ACROSS THE DRAINAGE FROM
41RG21. ONE SHOVEL TEST--SEE
FORM.

Kinds of Materials Collected
QEBITAGE. SGRAPERS. CORE
FRAGMENT, POINT fRAGMENT.
Special Samples :

How Collected

55%

Permanet Site

No.~~~4~1=R=G~0~0~2~0~~~~~

CULTURAL MANIFESTATIONS

Artif actual Materials Present :

Site Size :
At Present : ~3~5~M-*~2~0M~~~~~~~
At Orig. Occup. : ~UN-.--KN
..........
O~WN~~~~~~
Basis for Determination :
SURVEY ALONG R.O.W. ONLY
Circumstances of Observation :
PEDESTRIAN SURVEY
Depth of Cultural Deposit
SURFACE
Basis for Determination :
NEGATIVE SHOVEL TEST

Artif actual Materials Present
MATERIAL WAS SOUTH OF THE
CENTERLINE. BETWEEN THE
CENTERLINE AND BIG LAKE DRAW.
42 FI.AKES. MOSTLY SECONDARY
AND TERTIARY CAPPROXIMATELY
5-10 PRIMARXl. TWO SCRAPERS.
ONE CORE FRAGMENT. AND THE
DISTAL END OF DART POINT WERE
RECOVERED. A LIGHT BURNED ROCK
SCATTER WAS OBSERVED.

Time Periods of Occupation

Discussion of Site :

UNKNOWN PREHISTORIC

ARTIFACTS OBSERVED NORTH OF
THE DRAW APPEAR TO BE WASHING
DOWN FROM UPSLOPE. THE SITE
PROBABLY EXTENDS NORTH OF THE
R.O.W. (HOWEVER. NO MATERIAL
WAS OBSERVED IN OUR 10 METER
SEGTION NORTH OF THE
CEHTERLINEl.THIS SITE IS
PROBABLY RELATED TO 41RG21
(APPROXIMATELY 400 METERS
WEST). BOTH ARE LOCATED ON
THE SAME !ANDFORM. CONTAIN THE
SAME ARTIFACTUAL ASSEMBLAGE
AND BOTH SEEM TO EXTEND NORTH.

Components

Basis for Determination :
NO DIAGNOSTICS
site Type :
OPEN CAMPSITE

cultural Features

Permanet Site

No.~~~4~1~R=G~0~0~2~0~~~~~

SITE CONDITIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

CURRENT REGISTRATION

Approximate percentage of site
remaining intact : 5% IN R.o.w.
Natural Impacts :

State Archeological Landmark NO
National Register of Historic
Places
NO

EROSION

OTHER
Recommended Actions :
NO FURTHER WORK IN R.o.w.
BECOMMENDED--SITE CONSISTS OF
WASHED ARTIFACTS FROM UPSLOPE
IS OUTSIDE THE R.O.W.

Artificial Impacts
SHEEP

Known or Perceived Future Impacts
AAPL

Potential for State Archeological
Landmark :
YES
Potential for National Register of
Historic Places
NO
Submitted ? :

NO

LIST ALL ATTACHMENTS
1. SHOVEL TEST FORM

9.

2. SITE MAP

10.

3.

11.

4.

12.

5.

13.

6.

14.

7.

15.

a.

Other (give numbers)

JI~

:0

I

±:i

..
i:I

a

E

z

E!::!

..
0

I

;;;

±±

~

m !

Et
++

5 ff

$:

E.
f=i

.,

;;

El

tt

±±

I

:+

H

I
II

i:

I

++

II

~

C::

1:1

=

=

I

t± ;j

~

~

=
ff

:;:::; 'E

~

tlf

~

3'

-

it:::

e

~

t:l::l:l:I

I

±±

::;:

j.j;O
II

t::

....

a=

""

t::

::tm:1

±±±

I~

++

BI
~

:j:j CI

t±

fl

.w.u

Et

L:

fmE:
i::

:t

I

t::

mm

W::: ;::
~ .. ++

...... Et± 3

SllOVLL 11.'..il IJ/\I/\

__:t; 12_G ~9. __ _

Sl TE NUMBER_

SHOVEL TEST #

(
-------·--·-·-

LEVEL~~ ~~Ms

SOI L____~_fif ___ _/CJ.~- ___!__9_'i_Jf:._U_3_ __ __ _

S1:e. 4,/s____-_f_1__vz___~L6t---1- .~J1_c~---f~-----

RECOVERY:

---------- ----··--··---------·-------

-----

---------------· --·- --------------------------- · - - - - LEVEL

-----

RECOVERY:

SOIL

-----·---------------------

--------------------

--------------LEVEL

-·-----

RECOVrnY:

SOIL---·---.

-

.. -

____________________

......_

--

____

- - - - - - - - - - - ----------·----- · - - - - - - - - - - -

SHOVEL TEST #

-------·--

LEVEL _ __
RECOVIRY:

SOIL... _. -··· -- . -·- -- - . -·- .. --- ----------- -----

-----------·--·--------··-· -- ----------- - ----··-·-·- -----·--

--

LEVEL
'·.

RECOVERY:

SO IL___________ . _·-. ---·---------

\

\

\ '~I \

Nort.h
W,J,ndmill

\

{""""~

\

-~

''
II

~~~ \

II

\\

..

~lP) S !
r--__

_

//
II

\I

I
I
I

-,,,,,.

I
I
I

\I

"""",,,,,!,

' \ '"""" .. ,,,,,,,,,,,_ \\\~
~""-

I
\

\

~

'\

\\

I\

fl

II

I

'\

,,
, '"'

•

:-

·... \\

\~<
~

\.

\

vi-<"
'\

\

""""~ ~
0~"'~

\

\

---1-. ~~:.~
· . :. __:-_J_.'
\ \U21Z!...:_:-~···J 1 Draw'~--::_~,,.,,---

,,~~;-·'. -- &;:""~c,..~-

·

1

~
\

..........

II'

'

.

.

•. - -

--

-.: ·----·
. if' .

~

I

'-

'/'
a• -

•

.

"

/~,.._;;<>'"':'°~=!S'~~~~indmill
-r,f _.-(,;+-;~-'. · . ~"' .. ,.,,,,., __ ~_ ..
"

'

-

---

// .
/\
.
,-----·
l.

~-

l \.

--

---::::---=---=:::· -

"'--

2s12

\~.;,

\

Windmill

\

·

;

\

\'

'~\~'°"
2750
~ ' ~-··~·.
-'
' ' ' ~·
\,
\
\ ~-

\

'I

'

.. ,

'

/

)

)

I '

/

(

)

:.

.

,--.....----------' .:
I
I
-.../ I ('---.._~- . - .·

)

~/)-.
;:::::::_) )'=---Y.
<-:: .. ~--::::_;

..l.

I

....

/

-~

I
2:;;;-"

I ... -...

---:, ... £.~

-

.

I

...---

.,

:

II

I

. -..

'

\

'

-

\

.

I

JJ

I

I

/

Kemper s1111

---·----·-

(
--

''-'co

- - - ·- -

\

II

\)

.

·-:· ---··----·----·-- -

:

I

·

/

I

I

',

r-r-•

1---I,

\\

i

)1·\·

'
I

'i

.. 1

!

,.\.'\,:_
m• ,. I
, /1
\\
:

) ..

l

~

'\/
I

'

~"'

·-

--...!?f.eE:

.

' \ ..\..\.

\

\

,

,.,...________./

/

\

.

-- -

I

'

...... ......

2724\Rst wind(";"

)

,/~'<--<~- ~~

.... /
/&efJ

.
.£
_ _..._ _ ---- . -. ._ ~ ) \)
------. --=---,,\/ \

:.-:

\

'.
\

//
.:.i.-- .. · - · " \....... ·,,
• / ·"/ ___.-· ·.::;-1110
.
)
, ,
.· / -?~--, I - ""
/
/::_:
"I,
I '- ........ ~\ '
/ ~- -...... ___
0
,,,, ... -

--.- ,-;,/···

I;:~>~

'

(I

)

\/

'--..... ......

\

I

)

2800

,-1

(

'//
/'//,,,._:·-:::>-·
~

28so
_ .::>/:".-' ...
- ,..
I
'--·',,--·
/·-_::~. ·-----.J./
/

I

..

•/

\

I

1

/ , , - - - . . . . . .... . /

:

_Lfbsi->--: I
. ,,

I

1

.

,I - ,·

I // \
,

I

.

2679

,, ...""~64

\\

'

,! --- --

....: _______ - .
';2831

I

1 _

.j "

"">

'-

::;;•.....

-------

~

\

..

i

"-,,

,

-

/- -

\- '

.

7 ).

·'8so

'
·

'.:.

==="'"'"'"' "

\

----

\',

•

I
I

\

'

I

..

·i

t\·J\ )~-=~~".
l
·
'
.
\
-· -~~~~~- ... --.\ \ . .;. ..... ----. ---~~-~~-----· ___ ,, --__ .,_,_ ----- ·-----~-- -·--i-·----·- --t· ----·----·-i--· -- -·- ------~"~-·-·
'

X2681

\If:

1,i~r

'

\

\

•

~L_'L
I U

I

JI

~

'-

1l
' '-

'

1fo2172'
\
\
It
'

'' '

""
'

N
..

(

!I

"'. \

'/

''

,

q

//Q

<'_,,
vl\:)

\\

I

.n2~11fwin Tank

//q

w

\\
\\

\\

I

I
I

/

\\

'

I

I

U

...h / /

'\)·

'\

I

,. ..:_, ... -,._.,/ ··;~~'6:;~,...'\'==
-· '\ . ., .. . .
/
.. ,.t>.,,_-'.:..... - - - - - - -

:}

II

...:

I~
IL.I.:
'f/.hj\/'
\ l,,.,,,-,

j'

11

111
tu

"'---~·

)

':1t21os

\

~-1\

I \\

'. \

-- ... __

7
<' so

;/u ·

/

I

I

\'

--·--

"·,<..
"--

111

\

\
I
J,,"'•
-"'/,'

j··

\I
.'i"-·,""'···

\

\·11

, \

"
__J'~!fl.!!:!f_;:_
_______\ --r--._

11--7•
:.\ ''~ (
/;;p-E:lttvE;_ _ _ _ _ ,__

\

~

»,.,

, , . ·"',....
2n6f'"-- -~,,,,,,,<>
--- · "'

\"•fo~-~~!;"'

1J1t ··.

/I ____ __:_______

~

: ""-.,

I

'\~

\

-~

I
I
I
I
I
I

\-<:>

\

'' '

~~·~_,,,,

""""=="'"'"'-

\

II

, II

I
\

·-.,

\
\

~ 27's

'\ I~

l\

.

/

\

::

<'11 .'.(.
... ( '

:

\

I

,

/./

/

.\

,'

"· ,-

\,

' \'

)/

, /

'

_ _ ---.
'

.

/

.

I
• )

/.·;/
;.

...

.

~.~.. - ',

) ) ;j..
I I

/

x·L,__. >,,,/ -'
I

',

/ /. 1/,.
/

,

/

,-

... _//,,.

/

i

i

\_

(/

/I//
/,. ... \ \ ..
. .....
1
/... .
\
- ..
/ I
\\
,-•
f . ..
2 52
, /~/ _,....
/

,--(
J

II'

II/'

.

: ./ ·

~
-

-Iii-(--...,..=:-

U,'/
, -\

-

/

_,,

-

O'._
site # 41

Rb-'2.o

PREHIS'IORIC MATERIALS
Flaked Stone
( Primary flakes
Secondary flakes
I ::!1Tertia.ry flakes
J3._Chips

I

2- Utilized flakes
--Unifaces
Q:lres
Uni-directional
-Bi-directional ~
2. M.llti-directional
Bifacial

Y

Split cobbles
Chunks

Grouni/Pecked

Bifaces

Manos

~Thick

bifaces
Thin bifaces
--Blanks/prefonns
- \ Distal frag.
_ _Medial frag.
_ _Basal frag.
_ _Unid. frag.

--Metates
--Waco sinkers
--.Harrmarstones
--Other
Unidentifiable

Faunal Material
Snail
--Mussel shell
Non-human bone
Other

(b

COMMENTS:
1~c A L
Ff.A (r. I ~ ""¥0~~1~i....Y A :6.c...e.:I ~-r.
l .s -u iY i:: 1i.J t.s,H en J:F---ffOP..nJ -

~A.'3.

Material Types
_ _C)lartzite

~

Other

Burned F.ock
lbs

Type:

~------------------------------------------------~----~~~-

(limestone, sandstone ,quartzite, chert)

Special Sanples
C-14

- -TL

Pollen

- -Sedinent

Flotation

·....---

R. Cr2.0

Site# 41

'

Arrow Points
___ AGEE
__ ALBA
__ BASSETI
_BONHAM
___ BULBAR-STEMMED
___ CAMERON
___ CATAHDULA

__ CUNEY

_.__ SCALLORN

___ DEADMAN'S
___EDVARDS

___ STARR·

__ F'RlLEY
__ GARZA
__HARRELL
__HAYES

___ CLIFFTON

__ COLBERT

___ TALCO
___ TOYAH.

---'WASHITA

___ PADRE

___ TRUNEY -

__ GUERRERO

___LIVERMORE

___ LOTT
_LOZENGE
__ MAUD

_STEINER

___ FRCSNC

__ HOMAN

___McGLCIN

___ YOUNG
_ZAVALA

__SABINAL

_.:_KENT

___ PALMILLAS

__ PERDIZ

.

Do.rt Points

. ,...

__ ABASDLC

__ ALHAGRE
__ANDI CE

__ ANGDSTURA
__ BAKER

___ BANDY
__ BARBER
__ BELL
___ BULVERDE
___ CARRIZO
__CARROLLTON
___CASTROVILLE
__ CATAN

_EARL y STEMMED__:_EARL Y STEM LANCE
_EARLY TRIANGULAR
--~EDGEW'tJDD

___ ELAM

.

__ ELLIS
_t:NSOR

.-

---VAL VERDE

__ MOTLEY
___ NECHES RIVER

___ GC'w'ER

___ NOLAN

_PAISAND

UNIFACES

_GAHAGAN
___ GUADALUPE
_BRONSON
__ BUTTED KNIFE ___ HARE
__ CHOPPER
_HARVEY
___ HARVEY
_Cl.EAR FORK
___ CLEBURNE
_NUE:CES
___ CDRNER-TANG ___ OLMOS
__ PERFORATCRS
___ COVINGTON
__ SAN GABRIEL
_ERATH
___ f'RIDAY
--~ Qnd 4 BEVELED

SHELL

___ 'WELLS
___ 'WILLIAMS
___ YARBROUGH
__ ZORRA

OTHER STONE

__ALBANY
___ DORSO END SCRAPER
__GOSSETT

__ ABRADING STONES
___ BOATSTONES
___ CELTS
___
INCISED/GROOVED
__ GRAVER
_META
TES
__SIDE SCRAPERS
___ MANO
___ OTHER END SCRAPERS __ ORNAMENTS
__PESTLE
___ PITTED STONES

BONE

___ BEAD
___ PENDANT

___ A'JL
__ POINT
___ KNIFE

__ SPOON

___ BEAD
___FLESH£R
_FLAKER

___ GOUGE

~. -~

___ PLAINVIEW'

__ MORRILL.

__ GCLONDRINA

.

___ PONTCHARTRAIN
__REf"UGID
__ SANDIA.
__ SAN PATRICE
___ SCOTTSBLUFF"
___ SHUMLA
__ TCRTUGAS
___ TRAVIS
___TRINITY
___ UVALDE

_MIDLAND
_MILNES AND
__ MONTELL

..... , .

__ PANDALE
___ PANDORA
__PEDERNALES

__ MClRHISS

___ FOLSOM
___ FRm
__ GARY

_BRISTOL

__ PIPE

.

__ GODLEY

___ MATAMOROS

BIFACES

___OTHER

~

___ MESERVE

_JETTA
___ JOHNSON

__ INCISED
__ PAINTED

- -

__FIRSTVIE\J

_DA'w'SDN
___ DESMUKE

___ BODY SHERD

.

___ MARTINDALE

___ FIGUEROA

___ HOXIE

__RIM SHERD

-

__ EVANS
_F"AIRLAND

_CHARCCS
__ CLOVIS
_CONE JD
___ DALTON
__ DARL

CERAMICS

__ KINNEY
_LA JITA
__ LANGE
__ LANGTRY
___ LERMA
__ MARCDS
__ MARSHALL

...,

___ STONE PIPES
_'JACO SINKER

ANTLER
___ BILLET

___ f'LAKER

___ TINES
..:__MISC

__ CORES

___ DEBITAGE

___ TESTED COBBLES
__ HAMMER STONES
___ BIF' ACES
___ BURNED ROCK SHATTER

All American Pipeline Project

1~ -;r" IVr:i:' ,

19 8 8

j"~i' j\ '5 i$

.m:_

U. T. Austin-SPECIMEN INVENTORY
lot

~~1

-,No_._,fl T""' c.,,.:;:s.,·"L

'-tlon

A.saoc. . .f.

"'~::... so~:";;

kK
--1-------+-----+---+·1-:"'.~~&-_M.......__,.

F=4,. (,.

·---'---~~~l::"""
z \}T\Ll'Z EO Of6._·________''------;---t·---i- - - - - - - 1
\.

PR\ M. f

\

L)(

1-----1----+---------- - --·FLK ~.

1-----1-'1-·-4-"<;._,.£:....;<. .•

I)

I

Te fl. T. FL.k<j

/'

JI

. .,-.. -----l-------+---------1

--·-~--

I'

h

··------+-------1-- ------ - - -I - - - - - 1 I

••

I

·----+---·-·---·-----+------~--i--tn_..._c..__..\...........
+I p_S____ --·---·---1-----1-------1------·-·4
C. l.\v 1'J\( L,------------·---1f-----+-----~
i-~--t---"--1---'-""'-'---·-·L
--·
..

U

~I

....,

\ 1

,.

t1 \J L-11- DI 12...8:..1\.0 ...J. AL

'2-

<- 0

-

ft. E

S-

'·?'

"

-t:\41 ~- -:OW.AC..E.S

11

..

-----------+--------+--------t----------1

-----------+----------------+--------+--------t-----------1
(:

-·---1----+---------------ll----------+-------+------------1

_____,____________________________+--------+--------------1
I

1-----1----1---------------.i------1-·------+----·-------1
~---...._

~--l-----+---------------------+-----------+-----------+-------------1

!

1-----1-----+----------------------+--------------'---------l
I

STATE OF TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE DATA FORM
GENERAL INFORMATION
Temporary Site No.
Permanent site No. :
Site Name :
Project Name :
AAPL

RECORDING INFORMATION
197-1.5-3
41RG0021

Name of Recorder :
KARL KLEINBACH
Institutional Affiliation
UT-TARL
DATE : 06/14/88

Project Funding Source(s) :
ALL AMERICAN PIPELINE COMPANY
Owner and Address :
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
TRACT 1.5

LOCATIONAL INFORMATION
County : =RE=A==G=AN=-------------USGS Map Name & No. :
BEST , TEXAS.
3101-214
Elevation : =2~7~0~5-'=AM=-S~L=-----------­
UTM Zone
14

Informant & Address

Easting
254350
Northing
3453130
Latitude__/__/ _ _ _
Longitude__;__; ______

Additional Sources of Information

Description of Location :

Previous Investigations
Who :
What :

When
Why

Name of Original Recorder of Site :
KARL KLEINBACH

SITE IS ON THE EASTSIDE OF BIG
LAKE D.RAW AT PIPELINE MILE
1127+3200' TO 3450'. FROM BIG
LAKE. TEXAS DRIVE FOUR MILES
WEST ON HIGHWAY 67 TO FM.
1676. DRIVE SOUTH ON 1676
APPROXIMATELY 0.8 MILES OVER
THE RAILROAD TRACKS.
IMMEDIATELY TURN WEST ONTO A
GRAVEL ROAD.
DRIVE 1.1 MILES
AND A CHAIN LINK WIRE GATE CAN
BE SEEN ON THE SOUTH SIDE OF
THE ROAD. DRIVE 0.4 MILES
SOUTH. HERE TURN WEST ON
TWO-TRACK ROAD AND CONTINUE
FOR 1.4 MILES UNTIL BIG LAKE
DBAW IS REACHED. SITE IS
APPROXIMATELY 90 METERS SOUTH
ON THE PIPELINE R.O.W.

Permanent Site

No.~~~4=1~R~G~0~0=2=1~~~~~

WORK PERFORMED BY FIELD PERSONNEL

ENVIRONMENTAL LOCATION

Survey :
YES
Testing :
YES
Method : SHOVEL PROBES ACROSS SITE

Nearest Natural Water Source
BIG LAKE DRAW
Distance
~=A=DJ=.:.:A=C=E=N~T=--~~~~~
Drainage Basin
BIG !AKE

Excavation
Method :

NO

Notes
Where Housed

YES

Drainage Type :
PLAYA
Soil Orgins
COLLUVIAL AND ALLUVIAL

UT-TARL
Soil Type
SILT LOAM

Photographs
Slides--Color
Black & White
Prints--Color
Black & White
Where Housed :

NO
NO
NO
YES

Vegetation
MESQUITE. CACTI. YUCCA,
CAT-CLAW. NATIVE GRASSES. SAGE
BRUSH.

=U=T_-=T=AR==L=--~~~~

Collections :
Where Housed :

YES
U=-=T--T=A=R===L~~~~-

Ground surface Visibility
30%

Collection Techniques :

Environmental Setting of Site :

ALL OBSERVED ARTIFACTS IN
R.O.W. WERE COLLECTED (EXCEPT
BURNED ROCK) TO TRY TO REACH A
100 ARTIFACT GOAL.

THE SITE IS SITUATED ON A 2%
SLOPING BENCH AT A NORTH/SOUTH
TO EAST/WEST DIRECTION CHANGE
OF BIG LAKE DRAW. A RANCH
HOUSE IS LOCATED APPROXIHATELY
200 METERS ACROSS BIG LAKE
DRAW TO THE NORTHWEST.

Kinds of Materials Collected :
CHERT DEBITAGE. CORE. BIFACE.
AND POINT MIDSECTION.
Special Samples :
CHARCOAL FROM HEARTH OUTSIDE

R.o.w.

How Collected
BAGGED IN FOIL

Permanet Site No. ____~4=1R=G==0=0=2=1~~~~~
CULTURAL MANIFESTATIONS

Artif actual Materials Present :

Site Size :
At Present : ~8~0~M-*~3~0~M--~~~~~At Orig. Occup. : =UN==KN==O~WN=-----~---­
Basis for Determination :
SURVEY ALONG R.o.w. ONLY
Circumstances of Observation
PEDESTRIAN SURVEY
Depth of Cultural Deposit
SURFACE ONLY IN R.O.W.
Basis for Determination
NEGATIVE SHOVEL TESTS

Artifactual Materials Present :
ABTIFACTS ARE CHERT. ONE
CORE. ONE BIFACE FRAGMENT. ONE
QTILIZED FLAKE. THREE
SECONDARY FLAKES. AND FIVE
TERTIARY FLAKES. SCATTERED
BURNED LIMESTONE ON ERODING
GRAVELS AT WESTERN EDGE OF THE
SITE. ONE POINT MID-SECTION
FOUND AT EASTERN EDGE.

Time Periods of Occupation :

Discussion of Site :

ARCHAIC

THE SITE REPRESENTS AN OPEN
CAMPSITE USED FOR A SHORT
PERIOD OF TIME WHEN WATER WAS
AVAILABLE IN BIG LAKE DRAW.
MOST OF THE ARTIFACTS OBSERVED
WERE RIGHT AT THE EDGE OF THE
DBAW. SO THE MAJORITY OF THE
SITE IN THE R.O.W. HAS
PROBABLY ERODED AWAY.

components

Basis for Determination :
MEDIAL DART POINT FRAGMENT
Site Type
OPEN CAMP SITE

cultural Features :
HEARTHS OUTSIDE R.O.W. ERODING
FROM THE RANCH ROAD.

Permanet site No.

41RG0021
...........

~~~---

=--~~~~~

SITE CONDITIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

CURRENT REGISTRATION

Approximate percentage of site
remaining intact : 0% IN R.O.W.
Natural Impacts

State Archeological Landmark NO
National Register of Historic
Places
NO

SLOPE WASH. BIG LAKE DRAW EROSION

OTHER
Recommended Actions :
THE SITE HAS VERY LITTLE
ARTIFACTUAL MATERIAL REMAINING
IN THE R.O.W. AND WHAT IS
THEREFORE. NO FURTHER WORK IN
THE R.o.w. IS RECOHMENDED.

Artificial Impacts

Known or Perceived Future Impacts
AAPL

Potential for State Archeological
Landmark
YES
Potential for National Register of
Historic Places
NO
Submitted ? :

NO

LIST ALL ATTACHMENTS
1. SITE SKETCH

9.

2. SHOVEL TEST FORM

10.

3.

11.

4.

12.

5.

13.

6.

14.

7.

15.

8.

Other (give numbers)

z
0

;::
-~
Oz

Q( ~

.. w

0

•
l

-

Q(

"'

z~

- l:
'""'
..J
..J
tl

a.....

ci

z

i

SllOVI L H'..i I D/\I/\

SI TE NUMB ER ___~_L(~__.:l.-1 . __ .
SHOVEL TEST #

I

--------·--·-··

{~y~yp_ ..... ~!_( f._~ ~----·---- ______ _
RECOVERY :_f.rude.. _____ ~£._c;~,at-- __ & ____ /;~: _· f 1_e_c-L ____~!!:-__(~__ QJ_l~ ) - - - ):S.:.J
AS. _c_~~--~-~f'ut,±__________ _
LEVEL

5[M '-=-~Tf?_05

SOI L___

DCM..$

~_sr 3_{_s_µ,~- ~s-)

j_Qt;_t_<i/~ ---~!/~_L~LCV~--------------RECOVrnY: __s__~---f_t:_Q_/_t_~- _ ---~~;±_______ -------- _____
-------------- ----·--- · - - - - - - - - - - - SOIL ___

--------

SHOVEL TEST h_______ __ _
LEVEL

---

RECOVIRY:

LEVEL
RECOVERY:

SOIL ______________ .. _____ -·--------------------------

-------------·----- ----- -- -

SOIL -·-----

--·- -

-- ------- - ....
.

- - - ___ ..., _______ .,

______ _

- ---- -- -- -- ------------------- ---- ...

-

----

----·-----------------------------

'

vj/

,

-'

Noriro

\

-

>.\

'

"'

:

II "'
II

\\'

II

'\'·'-',,

\

'

11\

\\\·

II
II

II

\

\

\
\

~;'.\"~

"'.,,.. \

II
•11

\

I

I

.,

""'

\~\~{1,.
\~
-<>

\\2729

A:

/ :q
t'
h

-.,.,,~o

~<'80o
/

\

!\

:

•

. ..·"

,y

II

I

l

·ll

1

Tank

w·in d m1·11

2812

....._

- ---=-.--..

\

~,

XZ681

. . . ..

l

-..........._

·=o-.,,~---------~
2679

-.. . . . . _

.......

"

\

'

l

---.
...
·-.

~

• .' •
•
--

~--~~

------

'NC

\

·.

\

./ \

'.\

·,,

/
·-\ ............... .
1}·-- ..

-·

64

~,

---

-

•· -

~'
II

,

'•

;

I

-, - -

.

•

•

·

---11_,..
1// _____ _

- - - - - - - 11,1 '

.

~

'

KemperStatio1

11

'\. .

,~..·°""""-=~

_ _ -.,.,';_..:";;.;

'

•

J :

\\

\

..

(!v
"

,,\\

.
-·· ·

---;;.~;..:
"'

P

--'ec

~ 215()N\\
~"\
~\\~

I
II

·r,~c,.

'"'"'

\

-

II.~--'~
,,~
--::.~-

//

.... . ..

• ....._

-----

''

\ \

J

•

\

~=--..:
=
,

!

....

.__

---. . --·

\

-:II

------.......

'\<>

\

1·

I#

~""

"

. / -..........._

2698

- .

c;,,'"'';:'--

,

\

II#2772

...............

/

"

....... ....._ ..,_

---..__

-t"

\

I

f'

/

"' •

-

-

\\_=,,_~
,•r '•

'

j'

....._

·\

'"'·
\_~[& ______________~_ ----------------,I --====-===={-

\ 'll.'H'<j

II

'

....._

'\

,~

I

// /1 .
2728/tTwm

1
""

f/

0 ,,.-U,~" Wmdm•"

q

'

/t
111

'

//II

/,

\·

------\ '.

II
ll
. 11q

/

--

2706~~

-..........._

-~)

\"'~

I

/

. ~.,,,

I/

..............

,.,

. . . . . . . . -::-.-:-~"""+·I ,1 ;,'·'·, . '\

···---ii .. .... .
1

....._

'°"·>< ·- -

'

"--,__

.\

•

I

'

.

.-'

\\

//

~

(/ ' - ·

)'

9

I

\

"'"'"'~
\ '\ ". :""'\ ~"'"""'..,,!,•,,

:

~.

,/''·............ ....._

•

'~ )

''

~~'~
~
~~

---------------,...,,_\ I/
\,'
PIPELINE.
\!f '
\ - -~..
.,,_.-------------~1
\11•
·ol

..............

/

\,''

//

I

\

P/PE:t1Nc:------

....._

"-.

I

\'

\1

'-. . . . . ._~. . . .

i

\

·-

~/

)

• .. ,
· Draw
~"---":::..,_ ' \ \ \·'"·
II.
-_;[~···-- . ~" -.~

./'•
... _,___.~=-

\

'-.

·/

• .•

-

'""'·

'---....

\

'\.

/

·"'~"'-,·..

\

\I''

-:?

/

\

\

\\

\

I
:

!

"'"' ._._."' ·.•..,..

'

n
IJII

\

<.-,,._
''-•,..

I

:

'-.

m1 . "~..,,..,,.
,~~-·. _."'., _. ,~"

'

wfy~':";11~~0.?~46 ,

\

'-.

'.~'''•>....

,~'

'

.I

//

\

''"o- '

.·

//

{j//·

/

?71

•

"

.<'694
·-·---··- ··,·\:-·· ---··-··•·-· -· ,....

•

,,.''· ..
!2178

---.-'9·•. i.... /

I

/

/

,.,.-------

/
0

~ --~~-...,

2831

-.....

(< .~:/--,

\

I

.J

-~(

'

~~'G1~~>
s ,' - (---· ~_;..'...
.

··---

j

. ...-:--···

·.

/

~

I

I

~·

/-;:,>/..
.

.. ·

....--..

,

_./

·~-

/

·--·11~ .-· ~--

1'
.

y/

+ 5~--

I

1.<I'

I/

zaso- ___.....,... /

.. _._~

)

~
I

i

.

1/
I/

'/ J

i

)

-,

~----~--...__I

..

I
, I
I
I
I
I ,

;/

I

.
.

--·. .

) /

.

(

I

'

I

\
,
)

J I
I .

•

1;

.

j '\
I

.

/

____..,......----

\

\

/I

,
!

\

I·

/

.

f

~

1''l

,1

.'

;

\\,,

\

_:.,,,~

,,,,,.--:--

.

\

/

·' \

.· . • ,
\

+

I

\

./\I

.
.

/

)

\

/

·

'

\

I

I

,,,-

/

~;JO

I

\ / /.

1 1

\

, \ ...

/-;.-

;'I _.. -···/ .·· ·
.
5(

"
"'

I

I

7-:::-~-

\,
\

;.4m

.

(

\ .-,··~

\

\

Site # 41

[<;_(,-LI

PReHIS'IORIC MATERIALS
Flaked Stone
Pr:i.rnal:y flakes

~Secondary flakes
~Tertiary flakes

3

Chips

I Utilized flakes
--Unifaces
Cores
Uni-directional
--Bi-directional
--M.llti-directional
I Bifacial

Split cobbles
Chunks

Bifaces
Thick bifaces
--Thin bifaces
--Blanks/prefonrs
I Distal frag.
_ I_Medial frag.
_ _Basal £rag.
_ _Unid. frag.

Grourrl/Pecked
Ma.nos

1-Etates
--Waco sinkers
.Hamrerstones
--Other
Unidentifiable

Faunal Material
Snail
Mussel shell
Non-human bone
Other
COMMENTS:

Material Types
V Chert

_ _Quartzite

Other

Burned Rock
lbs
Type:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

(lirrestone, sandstone ,quartzite, chert)

s

ial Samples
C-14
( .S.u 2:-.f •

TL
-g::,)

Pollen

Sedirrent

Flotation

All American Pipeline Project
~

U. T. Austin-SPECIMEN INVENTORY
Lot
__
No_._

.

- -r-·-

'r-:--:-,\r-:=-

'..:. ".).. :J}ji.:-;, 1988

Sit•----~--L.&.~____?._l

~
Location
_s
_ _ _ _ _D_esc_np_·_1l•------+---H-ori_z_on_ta_1_.....,-_ _ _v._~_1c_a1_ _r

_ _•_11_~_._1_.,_._ _ _

1

1

l
- ____
( ~J }:",\(..~AL"""'
/ v'.?,l ,1 ~--1--J-''_-· _.:_:_-t-·--l'-+,_w-_/
l(v.
1---1---.-£?2::
- v-tS
..-L-_-_.1._ _ ,
I

L? \

e;

I
L.Ar-. 'r ';!' T \\- ) l\J
t=" ".:.
i------1---1--_.P_T......_..;.r-_/?_.A_._&:-.....__________________- - 1 - - - - - - - 1 ' \ . \ 1 rJ
li1F"-.<:..~ Ms.v11'>.:L.
(

a.::..............
A.r ....."""'" __ --·-·

1 - - - - - - 1 - i - - - l - - - - - ' - f =......

4

~-·-+-----!--·-

2

-·---------1----------------

· - - - ------··-----·-·-------11-- -·---

1----·t----+-··----·-- -

-------1

-----------

. I

·-·-·

·-----1---------------------------

IBJ--T · Fc...t,
- --·------1-------1-----------------1
I v Tl L-1 Z l.!"0 ~it.-~
-----1---1-------_p-'=-=-k&..;.o..__________.________1-----------1

2

------1----1-------··--------+--------------------1

1--------1------------~·--------1------+----------

1---·1---1---------------1-------+-------1-------~--

-·---t---+---------·------+------------+---------1
~---·---+------·--------+------+------+-----------!

---·1---1--------------1--------~------t---------1
1---------~--------------+-------+----------------1

1---+----1-----·-·----------1-------1---------+---------1
---l---~--------------t-------~------t---------1

---1---1--------------l-----~

---------------l

STATE OF TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE DATA FORM
GENERAL INFORMATION
Temporary Site No.
Permanent site No.
Site Name :
Project Name :
AAPL

RECORDING INFORMATION
196-1.5-1
41RG0022

Name of Recorder :
KARL KLEINBACH
Institutional Affiliation
UT-TARL
DATE : 06/15/88

Project Funding source(s) :
ALL AMERICAN PIPELINE COMPANY
Owner and Address :
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
TRACT 1.5

LOCATIONAL INFORMATION
County : =R-E=A=G=-=AN~------­
USGS Map Name & No. :
BEST. TEXAS
3101-214
Elevation : 2745' AMSL
UTM Zone
14

Informant & Address

Easting : 252100
Northing : 3453690
Latitude__/__/ _ _ _
Longitude__;__;_ _ _ _

Additional Sources of Information

Description of Location :

Previous Investigations
Who :
What :

When

SITE IS LOCATED ON THE SOUTH
SIDE OF BIG LAKE DRAW.
FROM
BIG LAKE, TEXAS DRIVE WEST ON
HWY· 67 FOR APPROXIMATELY 9.2
MILES TO BEST. TEXAS. HERE
TURN SOUTH ONTO COUNTY ROAD
113. PRECINCT #1 (GRAVEL
ROAD) . CONTINUE SOUTH ON THIS
ROAD FOR 2.4 MILES TO BIG LAKE
DBAW. WALK ON THE SOUTH SIDE
OF THE DRAW FOR APPROXIMATELY
1200 METERS TO THE PIPELINE
R.o.w. THIS WILL BE THE
WESTERN EDGE OF THE SITE.

Why

Name of Original Recorder of site
KARL KLEINABCH

M. P. 1126 + 700' TO 1126 + l670'

Permanent Site No.

41RG0022

~---"-===~==----~~~

WORK PERFORMED BY FIELD PERSONNEL

ENVIRONMENTAL LOCATION

Survey :
YES
Testing :
YES
Method : SHOVEL TEST IN R.O.W.

Nearest Natural Water Source
BIG LAKE DRAW
Distance
ADJACENT
Drainage Basin :
MG IJ>.KE

~==~===-='----~~~~~

Excavation
Method :

NO

Notes
Where Housed

YES

Drainage Type
PLAYA

UT-TARL

Soil Orgins
COLLUVIAL AHD ALLUVIAL
Soil Type :
CLAYEY SOIL

Photographs
Slides--Color
Black & White
Prints--Color
Black & White
Where Housed :

NO
NO
NO
YES

Vegetation :
MESQUITE. BROOM WEED. CACTI.
YVCCA. CEDAR. NATIVE GRASSES.
WILD FLOWERS. CAT-CLAW, SAGE
BRUSH.

=U=T_-=T=AR==L----~~--

Collections :
Where Housed :

YES
=U=T_-=TA=-=-R=L--~-----

Ground Surface Visibility
30%

Collection Techniques :

Environmental Setting of Site :

ALL OBSERVED ARTIFACTS (EXCEPT
BURNED ROCK) WERE COLLECTED.

SITE IS LOCATED ON A 2-3%
SLQPE ON THE SOUTH SIDE OF BIG
LAKE DRAW.

Kinds of Materials Collected
CHERT DEBITAGE, TOOLS, AND
DART POINTS.
Special Samples

How Collected

Permanet Site

No.~--~4=1R==G=0~0=2=2--------~

CULTURAL MANIFESTATIONS

Artif actual Materials Present :

Site Size :
At Present : =3=1=5M=*-3~0=M=---------~
At Orig. Occup. : =U=N=KN==OWN"'-'=----------Basis for Determination :
SURVEY ALONG R.O.W. ONLY
Circumstances of Observation
PEDESTRIAN SUEVEY
Depth of Cultural Deposit :
0-lSCMS.
Basis for Determination
ONE POSITIVE SHOVEL PROBE

Artif actual Materials Present :
ALL ARTIFA6CTS ARE CHERT. A
TOTAL OF 2 CORES, 1 PRIMARY, 8
SECONDARY, AND 26 TERTIARY
FLAKES WERE COLLECTED ON THE
SURFACE. TWO MEDIAL FLAKES, 4
BIFACES, ONE END/SIDE SCRAPER,
AND 2 DART POINTS CONE
PALMILLAS, ONE UNTYPED) WERE
FOUND ON THE WESTERN 1/4. ONE
TERTIARY FLAKES FOUND 15 CMS.

Time Periods of Occupation

Discussion of Site :

MIDDLE TO LATE ARCHAIC

THE SITE REPRESENTS AN
OPEN CAMPSITE OCCUPIED WHEN
WATER WAS AVAILA.BLE IN BIG
LAKE DRAW. I BELIEVE IT
REPRESENTS A SINGLE COMPONENT
BECAUSE OF THE SMALL AMOUNT OF
ARTIFACTS THAT WERE OBSERVED.
THERE IS VERY LITTLE
DEPOSITION ON THE SITE (SEE
SHOVEL TEST FOBMl • THERE ARE
SEVERAL CAMPSITES ALONG THE
DRAW CWE HAVE RECORDED THREE
PRIOR TO THIS ONE). WE CAN
ONLY SURVEY THE R.O.W., BUT
THEY APPEAR TO BE MOSTLY
SURFICIAL AND OCCUPIED FOR A
SHORT PERIOD OF TIME.
85% OF THE ARTIFACTS WERE
COLLECTED FROM THE WESTERN 1/4
IN THE ROW. A SMALL CLUSTER
OF BURNED ROCK AND THIN
SCATTER OF BURNED ROCK IS
LOCATED HERE ALSO. THE
REMAINING 15% OF ARTIFACTS
WERE SCATTERED IN THE ROW.

Components

Basis for Determination :
ONE PALMILLAS PT./NO DEPTH/ROW ONLY
Site Type :
OPEN CAMPSITE

Cultural Features

Permanet Site No.~~~4=l=R=G=0=0=2=2~~~~~
SITE CONDITIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

CURRENT REGISTRATION

Approximate percentage of site
remaining intact : 5% IN R.o.w.
Natural Impacts :

State Archeological Landmark NO
National Register of Historic
Places
NO

SLOPE WASH. BIG LAKE DRAW

OTHER

..

Recommended Actions :
VERY LITTLE OF THE SITE
REMAINS INTACT AND ALL
OBSERVED ARTIFACTS HAVE BEEN
FURTHER WORK IS RECOMMENDED
FOR THE PART OF THE SITE THAT
IS WITHIN THE R.O.W.

Artificial Impacts
TWO-TRACK ROAD

Known or Perceived Future Impacts
AAPL

Potential for State Archeological
Landmark :
YES
Potential for National Register of
Historic Places : NO
Submitted ? :

NO

LIST ALL ATTACHMENTS
1. SITE SKETCH

9.

2. SHOVEL TEST FORM

10.

3.

11.

4.

12.

s.

13.

6.

14.

7.

15.

8.

Other (give numbers)

Permanet Site

No.~~~4~1~R=G~0~0~2~2=-~~~~-

Kinds of Material Collected
Continued from page 2 :

Environmental Setting of Site
Continued from page 2

i
I

i<

I

I
!/
i

I
I

I I
I
I

I

'I
I
I

I

I

I

I
I

I
I

,

I
I

I

I

I

I

I

I
I

i

I

I

I

I

I

I·

I

I
'I
I
I

I
I
I
I

I
~

...

I
I

I

'

'I

I
I

I
I I

I

I

Ii

I
i

I

I

I

I
I

~

l'
~

I
I

I

I

"'
"'
I
I

I
I

• ,.
L
I"'

"'

·~

I

I

I

,

'"'

I

I

I

I
I I

I

I

I
I

I

..."

...

I
I

I

I

I

'
I

I

,_

I
I

I I

,_

I
I

~

I

a

'

'.~

,_

I

I
I,,.

I
I

..:

I
I

I

'f

'

'

I 0

~

'"'...

I
I
I

1-

i
I
I

I&

I

'.,,,

I

I'

I

I

;..
I Y'

,_,

I
I
~

.....

._

,

I I

I

I

I

.

I

I I
I

I

I

I

I
I

......,,

't

...

I
I

I
I

·~""

I
I

"'

"

I

·~I

'
I

I
I

I

I
I
I I

I

I
I

I
I

....

I

I
I

I
I
I
I

I
I

I
I
I

...

"'

1
\J

I
I

I
I
I

I

+-'

,,..

'I
I
'I

I

:'I

,,..

I
I
I
I

....
I

I
I
I

' ' ....

I

I

i

I
I

I

I

I

I

I
I
I

I
I I

'

I

I

I
I

I

I- i.

I

l

I I
I I
I I

I

L Ii.

Sl!OVLL H'.JI D/\I/\

DI\ rE __o__J;_ 5~
SHOVEL TEST f! __ _L _____ ____ _

LEVEL~__J_9_cµ.s
RECOVERY

SOIL ___ /~.

Y~. ~/3_

--_<;;_~"J----SJ_i.± ____ --·

~-

:.J.__:/l~-_!_S::~c..~/-~J1__;Mfy---- ~h ~ ... _..S~~-- -_--------------·---· -·- - ----·- --· ------·--· ----------------

LEVEL

S/- ~ 0

Cll1

s

SOIL_

7.. SY._,(.__~/!1------· ~>!_f-_/a-~

RECOVERY :~--S~1:L__c...o.l_c.~-~---d.__6_~d.a__ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

·-------- ----·---------

J/.3 . . c/4!f.~----.J_1I t ~-: /CJ c~~JRECOV mY: __________ -··---·-----·- ------------~.r_ ')y~ ~/</___ .J.Lf±___/._o rL-_{_l 1 - ~ Oc-t.1.s)
L::tft~T ~--

sbAJle
~ ST

~HOVEL

SOI L__ .L_{I_~

-r

I /Mt~L

c4~ ___ _d__ __ =~°"--'C=-M='-=:s: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

.5 __f:!fFo __ .s/-~ L-L~-- _.Ll!!l.a.::&1~.J

TEST !f _ _ ....... __ _

LEVEL

--

SOIL .....

·····---··.

-

...

·-·---------·--------------·--

RECOVI RY: ---------------- ---·------- ··- ---

- - ------------ ·----- --·----· - -··LEVEL
::\ECOVERY:

SOIL __________ ···--·----··--·-------------·-----

----------- ---·- - - - --

----

--·--·---------------------- ---. - .... ···---- -- ----------------·---.

----.
/

I

,---

-. --

-~'

/------

Site # _
41 _ _ -_.:;,..,::..:.=_
:::._::_.

PREHISTORIC MATERIAIS

Flaked Stone
Primary flakes

rz Secondary flakes

_:z_Tertiary flakes
~Chips

Utilized flakes
--z, Unifaces _

1

'-.. I

~ r ..l

u ..i · F" AC·~-·-·-r

"Ee'./e1..1.£D

cores
Uni-directional

--Bi-directional
--M.llti-directional

·0 o c ~---:a

U>-.!.•F'J::>..C• ~

~'--

Split cobbles
Chunks

I Bifacial

Grouirl/Pecked

Bifaces
, \
~Thick bifaces (-f1so,s)
Thin pifaces
~

Manos
--M:tates
,
--Waco
sinkers

__

---..._·.~--_lliihil. f rags.

Hamnerstones

. ~---~Med'~lJrag.
·_...__Basal frag.
_ _Unid·; frag.
_ _Blanks/Preforms

--Other
Unidentifiable

Faunal Material
Snail
--Mussel shell
Non-human bone
Other

Material Types
V' Chert

:£'

_ _Quartzite

Other

i.....I Y- ) 'i ~L!......O,v;;.;J"--......__f'..._:;;2..=E.=-'{....1----------------------

:surned Feck
~5~j'Ms
Type:

CW c ::J

(lirrestone, sandstone ,quartzite, chert)
Special Sarrples
C-14

TL

Pollen

---Sedirrent

Flotation

----

Site # 41 ~~ ?7

Arrow Points
___ AGEE

___ CUNEY

___ ALBA

___ BASSETT
___ BONHAM
___ BULBAR-STEMMED
___ CN4ERON
___ CATAHOULA
___ CLIF"F'TON

-·--SCALLORN

___ HOMAN

___ DE ADMAN'S

___ STARR

___ EDVARDS

___ STEINER

___ LOTT
__ LOZENGE

___ FRILEY

___ TALCO
___ TOYAH

___ GUERRERO

___ TRUNEY _
___ wASHlTA

___ FRESNO
___ GARZA

___ MAUD

___ YOUNG
__ZAVALA

__ HARRELL

___HAYES

___ COLBERT

___ LIVERMORE

___McGLDIN

___ PADRE
_PERDlZ

___ SABINAL

Do.r-t Points
___ ABASDLO
___ ALHAGRE
__ ANDI CE
___ ANGOSTURA

_EARLY STEMMED
__ EARLY STEM LANCE
__ EARLY TRIANGULAR
--~EDGE:'IJlJDD
'
___ ELAM
___ ELLIS
___ ENSOR

___ BAKER

___ BANDY
__ BARBER
___ BELL
___ BULVERDE
___ CARRIZO
___ CARROLLTON

___ EVANS

__ rAIRLAND

___ FIGUEROA

___ CATAN
__ CHAR COS

___ GODLEY

___ CONE JD
___ DALTON
___ DARL
__ DAW'SDN
___ DESMUKE

___ LANGTRY

___ PLAINVIE'W

___ LERMA

___ MARCOS
__ MARSHALL
___ MARTINDALE
___ MATAMOROS
___ MIDLAND
___ MILNES AND
___ MONTELL

___ FRID
___ GARY

___ CLOVIS

___ PANDALE

___ PANDORA
___ PEDERNALES

___ MESERVE

___ FIRS TVIEW'
___ FOLSOM

___ CASTRDV1LLE

._l~PALMILLAs· .

__KENT
___ KINNEY
__ LA JITA
___ LANGE

___ GOLONDRINA
___ GC'IJER

___ HOXIE
___ JETTA
___ JOHNSON

___ PONTCHARTRAIN
___REFUGIO

___ SANDIA

___ SAN PATRICE
___ SCOTTSBLUFF"

___ SHUMLA
___ TDRTUGAS
___ TRAVIS
___ TRINITY

___ MORHISS

___ UVALDE.

__ MORRILL.
___ MOTLEY
___ NECHES RIVER
___ NOLAN

-~-VAL VERDE

__ PAISAND

___ 'WELLS
.
___ W'ILLIAMS
___ YARBROUGH
___ ZORRA
,
_l_!JI.'..

BIFACES
___ BRISTOL

___ CORNER-TANG
___ COVINGTON

___ ERATH

___ FRIDAY

CERAMICS
___ RIM SHERD

___ BODY SHERD
___ INCISED

___ PAINTED
___ PIPE
___ OTHER

___ ALBANY
___ DORSO END
___ GOSSETT

___ GAHAGAN

c --'."'Ti

C -'"''-

___ ABRADING STONES
___ BOATSTONES
___ CELTS
___
INCISED/GROOVED
___ GRAVER
__ METATE:S
___ SIDE SCRAPERS
___ MANO
___ OTHER END SCRAPERS ___ ORNAMENTS
___ PESTLE

___ GUADALUPE

___ HARE

___ HARVEY

___ HARVEY

__ NUECES
___ OLMOS
___ PERFORATORS
___ SAN GABRIEL

~CRAPER

____ PITTED STONES

___ 2 and 4 BEVELED

SHELL

.

OTHER STONE

UNIFACES

___ BRONSON
__ BUTTED KNIFE
__ CHOPPER
___ CLEAR F"DRK
___ CLEBURNE

·D. ~ASE"~ t'

BONE

___ BEAD
___ PENDANT
___ GOUGE

___ A'w'L

__ SPOON

___ BEAD

___POINT
___ KNIFE

___ FLESHER
___ FLAKER

ANTLER
___ BILLET
___ F"LAKER

___ TINES
___ MISC

___ STONE PIPES
___ IJ ACC SINKER
__ CORES

___ DEBITAGE
___ TESTED COBBLES

___ HAMMER STONES

___ BIF' ACE.S

___ BURNED ROCK SHATTER

>.J
0

U. T. Austin-SPECIMEN INVENTORY

.

!l'?..'--

s''•·----···--~--:::---==
Location

No.
Specs.

Lot
No.

_1_

I

10
2-Lo

l
,/

\

I

SS-.:?'--"'::;;~~':!_ __ F '._A.. ~ ~ - : : .
~--n

c_..LI 1-::P~

u~1rAGE~6.

·' "?!2-~~. "Dt:..C.r?j
~.Y...S:... ~c.~

·~

I

58J f=U .FT"i

I

µ"Lr'! L' t;,.c:.._

·-

t)

·-

I

~

,._ . <:...

-

Ll >.1 1 I=- A C. I t;.. L ""1"'00L

"b~

-

~t....'f-Y

\

"Pl.

>

1

-·--- ·---

-

cF:· +=12

""B+1 GI::.- ..,,..__ 1F ,..,_

,

' ---::::,- U / 2
,,.,
'
·=' -

\

___w

~~..&..'-. ....!:"~.F-:. ·---

7~

2j

-

L.'L..,,

5$ol""~

C..~ ·~~~~::>-;1;.._-=-..

UU.1D.

.:_,) ·:-_;;1-.. . -:_ ~

---·--C.+-'IOC.:i j

°3'}

·-::-"- ~£_;:-...._

.~~l:'..-~2_._ ------

A...e..-'I

.....--

I

~

1

....

--

.Assoc.. ltof.

Vertical

:_,;

"17+! i..l

I

Horizontal

Description

!='t

1'1· -::SAS~/r

.

"'v r::-

ID

'--

S.\Z..:~ oJ1

&-o\J EL "'TISI

.::#- l

..,;

l

v

s- zo c.rv> "':>, .s

-·

-·

---

-

i-----;

--

I

I

i
!

I
I

I

STATE OF TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE DATA FORM
GENERAL INFORMATION
Temporary Site No.
Permanent site No.
Site Name :
Project Name :
AAPL

RECORDING INFORMATION
196-1.5-2
41RG0023

Name of Recorder :
G. MEHALCHICK
Institutional Affiliation
UT-TARL
DATE : 06/15/88

Project Funding Source(s) :
ALL AMERICAN PIPELINE COMPANY
Owner and Address :
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
TRACT 1.5
Informant & Address

Additional Sources of Information

Previous Investigations
Who :
What :

When
Why

Name of Original Recorder of Site
G. MEHALCHICK

LOCATIONAL INFORMATION
County : ...
RE-..A=G=-=AN.....__ _ _ _ _ __
USGS Map Name & No. :
BEST, TEXAS
3101-214
Elevation : 2745' AMSL
UTM Zone
14
Easting : 251750
Northing : 3453810
Latitude _ J _ J _
Longitude _ J _ J _

_

_
_

Description of Location :
FROM BIG LAKE DRIVE WEST ON
HIGHWAY 67 TO BEST (APPROX.
9.2 MILES). HERE TURN LEFT (A
GAS STATION IS ON THE CORNER)
ONTO COUNTY ROAD 113, PRECINCT
1 (GRAVEL ROAD) . STAY ON ROAD
113 CWINDS A LITTLE BIT AND AT
ONE POINT COMES TO A MAJOR
INTERSECTION, HOWEVER, ROAD
MARKER IS VISIBLE) FOR 2.2
MILES TO CENTERLINE. TRAVEL
ANOTHER 0.2 MILES SOUTH. THIS
IS BIG LAKE DRAW. WALK ALONG
THE NORTH SIDE OF THE DRAW FOR
APPROXIMATELY 0.2 MILES. THIS
IS THE WESTERN SITE EDGE. A
NE/SW FENCE IS NORTH OF THE
DRAW AND CUTS ACROSS THE SITE.
M.P. 1126 + 00' TO 1126 + 310'

Permanent Site

No·~--~4=l=R~G~0~0=2~3----~~~

WORK PERFORMED BY FIELD PERSONNEL

ENVIRONMENTAL LOCATION

Survey :
YES
Testing :
YES
Method : 3 ST/5 lXl M.UNITS

Nearest Natural Water Source
BIG LAKE DRAW
Distance :
ADJACENT
.........
.....................
Drainage Basin
BIG LAKE
~

Excavation
Method :

NO

Notes
Where Housed

YES

~

----~~~~~

Drainage Type
PLAYA
Soil Orgins
ALLUVIAL AND EOLIAN

UT-TARL
Soil Type :
CLAYEY SILT. SILT LOAM

Photographs
Slides--Color
Black
Prints--Color
Black
Where Housed

.

&

.
&

White

NO
NO

White

NO
YES

Vegetation :
MESQUITE. CACTI, PRICKLY PEAR,
THORN BUSHES, WILDFLOWERS,
NATURAL GRASSES.

UT-TARL

Collections :
Where Housed :

YES
~U~T_-~T=AR==-L~-------

Ground surface Visibility
45%

Collection Techniques :

Environmental Setting of Site :

COLLECTED ALL OBSERVED
ARTIFACTS FROM SITE.

BENCH LOCATED NORTH OF BIG
LAKE DRAW. THE LANDFORM RISES
VERY GRADUALLY TO THE NORTH.
THE ONLY VISIBLE LANDMARK ON
SITE IS A NORTHEAST/SOUTHWEST
ORIENTED FENCELINE,
APPROXIMATELY 25 METERS FROM
THE DRAW, WHICH CUTS ACROSS
THE SITE. THREE SHOVEL
TESTS--SEE FORM.

Kinds of Materials Collected :
DART POINTS, BIFACE FRAGMENTS.
DEBITAGE
Special samples
SOIL SAMPLES
How Collected
ONE LITRE FROM EACH TEST UNIT

Permanet Site

No·~--~4~1R~G~0~0~2~3--------~

CULTURAL MANIFESTATIONS

Artif actual Materials Present :

Site Size :
At Present : ~l~O~OM~*-3~0~M-----------~
At Orig. Occup. : =U~N=KN=-=OWN.....=.----------­
Basis for Determination :
SURVEY ALONG R.O.W. ONLY
Circumstances of Observation
PEDESTRIAN SPRVEY

Artifactual Materials Present
TWO DIAGNOSTICS
RECOVERED-ONE ENSOR/MARCOS
POINT. ONE MARSHALL-LIKE
POINT. DURING SURVEY CPANDALE
PQINT RECOVERED DURING
TESTING) • SEE ATTACHED
ARTIFACT INVENTORY.

Depth of Cultural Deposit
SPRFACE-50 CMS.
Basis for Determination :
SHOVEL TESTS #1 AND #2. TEST UNITS
Time Periods of occupation :

Discussion of Site :

MIDDLE TO LATE ARCHAIC

THE SITE REPRESENTS AN OPEN
CAHPSITE BASED ON TOOLS AND
BURNED ROCK OBSERVED.
SPRFICIALLY THE SITE IS
SIMILAR TO OTHERS RECORDED
ALONG BIG LAKE DRAW. 41RG22
IS LOCATED 100 METERS
SOUTHEAST ACROSS THE DRAW.
THE SITE DATES TO THE MIDDLE
AND LATE ARCHAIC BASED ON
DIAGNOSTICS FOUND. MATERIAL
WAS RECOVERED FROM TWO SHOVEL
TESTS. APPROXIMATELY 10-50
CMS. BELOW SURFACE WITH NO
ARTIFACTS RECOVERED 26-39 CMS.
IN SHOVEL TEST #1. SOIL
MATRIX REMAINS THE SAME CA
CI.AYEY SILT) FROM SURFACE-SO
CMS. WITH A SILT LOAM
CONTAINING SMALL GRAVELS AND
CALICHE FRAGMENTS FROM Sl+CMS.
BELOW SURFACE. A DART POINT
MIDSECTION AND ONE PIECE
BQRNED ROCK WAS FOUND IN
SHOVEL TEST #1. 40-50 CMS.
BELOW SURFACE.

Components

Basis for Determination :
DIAGNOSTIC PROJECTILE POINTS
Site Type :
OPEN CAMPSITE

CUltural Features :
HEARTHS ERODING FROM THE
GULLY. LOCATED SUBSURFACE IN
TESTING PROGRAM.

Permanet Site No.

41RG0023
......................

~~

--.-...-...~~~~~

SITE CONDITIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

CURRENT REGISTRATION

Approximate percentage of site
remaining intact : 30% IN R.o.w.
Natural Impacts :

State Archeological Landmark NO
National Register of Historic
Places
NO

EROSION, POSSIBLE FLOODING

OTHER
Recommended Actions
MITIGATION

Artificial Impacts
FENCELINE

Known or Perceived Future Impacts
AAPL

Potential for State Archeological
Landmark
YES
Potential for National Register of
Historic Places
YES
Submitted ? :

NO

LIST ALL ATTACHMENTS
l. SITE MAP

9.

2. SHOVEL TEST FORM

10.

3.

11.

4.

12.

5.

13.

6.

14.

7.

15.

8.

Other (give numbers)

I
I

I
I
I

I

' '

I
I

"

I

I

•t
I

I

I

I
I

I

I

I

I

I
I

'
....

I

I

I

I

'~

I

I
I~

-

I
~

-

I

I

I

•

I

''

I

I
I
I

~

I
I~

I

I

.ll
~

I I

1r--

I
I

I I
I

.

,

I
I

..

I

....

'

..

,
I

'

I
I
I

~

'

I

I

I I

~'
I

..

...

"

'

-

.

I

'

I

\

i

I

I
I
I
I
I

I

I
I
I
I I

I
Ir
I

I
I

,~

I
I~

I
I I
I'

SllOVIL H'.JI IJ/\l/\

SI TE NUMBER___t'._~_q-~ ~

__

____ f_ __

SHOVEL TEST #__~r

LEVEL~-=5SJ;JVIS

_c}~_ --~.i./l_ __ ______ _
RECOVERY:_1._;fl-~--/rJ-=~~=-~~~-- ~?$..$.. -;- ___ . L_-"f!-~-f /f-,_4:,.7 _·!_~
f§Utt.f lt4~~---_¥e::~o-~~--&~--~~----SOI L__ _/_9_Y&..3/3 ___

~ s ~----:_. -- -----···---· ---------·--·----------·5 ~ -& OcM. S
SOI L__7, S~'i_f~ ____ .JJ..li:. _
__i_o__t?:;'V&.
RECOVERY: S-/-~ - JiJNt~ __ u,;;t,,,_,__ ___ AaiJdL~---LEVEL

·-----·--·-------·------------

LEVEL----·-----

SOIL_______ _

RECOVrnY: ----·-----· - -------·--- -------- ---- - -

------·--- - -------- · - - - - - - - - - -

SHOVEL TEST tf __-3._ _______ _

LEV£L_4_lf5

SOI L___ _/f}_l/f?.__J/3.

RECOVI RY: ____ ~_/.S.::J..£CM..S__ a_s_

LEVEL_/fS-~D_tA]J_
RECOVERY:

SOI L__

_sj_a.rr__S;_{t_ ______._ _

1-- ·o'#.Mw1~ J~

J5-!(~ _'ff~- ___I1ff:._J'6~.~-----

C-~ /-a,,.4 ~-- _4).M4...L/_ _ .rz«Ad_.r,_ ________ ----- - - - .

~

___ ___

- .. - . ··-------------------------

ST 3--J-"1"·~-3-CJ·--cfiEJPj----s,-t./- ·;..: -~-)--:§.f--C---s-r#--/(j~

w1/ti t'~t1~/J ----=s~f-~~=---------------

_/

.,'
"'"'x

/
I,

\

\
\
~·::;x
I

.,
I

!.

)

ti.

''
----~

--------

--+-- -

)

~·

.__

..,:

______ --

- --· -

-----·-

;
J

41 RG 23

FEATURE 1 - PLAN MAP

----------, --······-·· ·--, --·

..

,

II

~

I

I

I

I

I

I '

I I

;

I

I

I

I

I I
. I

I
I

Q:....

I

l

I

I
I I
I

~

~

,
.....

.J

,_
'

I

'

_,

1~

.,

I

i/

I/

.I.

"
I

,I

"'

~-

."" . -

'

'

-

.
. I -, i

I

1-!....._

I
I

~I-',

'\

..,__

i

-

-r I

'

I

Jr--..'

I'\..,
I
I

I "1

•-

I

I p :

II

I

,.

r

I

'1'
I
I
,.... /l
I

+- ""TT
I

I

.

! !
I

I
I

I

I
I

i
I

'

:
I

:

!

I

I

I

I

I

I

I
I

)1

f

'

.... --

·-!·I

,

... ,,
'I I

;

!f

I

f

'

I

I

I
I

I

I
l

I

,,.,,i :

r

/
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

'

,,........

;_

I

I

i

'

'
I

I
I
'

,.,

/n'

I

I
I
I

./

'

I
i

I
i I
I
I

'

'

i I
:

i

I

:

!
I

I

'

I

i

i I

I

I

i !

!
I

I

!

I

!

I

I I
I l
I
!

I

I

:

1

i
i !
! I

i

I
I i

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

!

I

i

I

'

!
1

I

I

I
I

I

I

!

I I
I
I
1 i
i I
I I
i I I I i

I

I

I

'

'

1

I
I

!

1

I
I

;

I

'11 A

I
I

1 I

I

I

I
i

I
I

•

I

i I

'~
·1 I_>

I l
I

I

i

I
i

i

I I

i I

I
I

I

I

I

I
I

I

I

,.,.
I

. -<

·'I

. ..._

1'1

i

I I

J; lC.1"1

I

~ ..l'..IA

i :

I

I

I

1

. ·tII . ·+· ..! •••••••
1.i .. + . ..l .~- •
+++ +· "i''i"
-+-+-+-+-1-if-+-+-+-+-~:-i--+-+--+-+-+,-+-lli--i-+-+-+-!--!--i-+-+-+-t

!

I

I

I

I

i I
I i

I

i

I

!

·1·7·.'
I
I
I
I

I

,.....,,..

~

I

I

~-

I

.

I

11

i
i

I
I ... I

!

-d l

I I:

1~

,

"'

.
'..' KJ'J!f

I

u·.1,

"'

:

I

··I

~1

•\

~

UJJl-r L(-

,,,

l

I

I

I

ri A

:

,.....

I

I

I

I IV

I

I
I

i
I

Li •

IA!

I

I
I

A

I

I

I I
I I
I
i ;
I I
Ii I

'

I

::~·

J~IT

I

I

I

I

!

41 RG 23

FEATURE 1
24

(

l

J

I

I

I

I

''

I'

I

0'

j

I

j

ti
'I
I I

I

I

T1

''

i

i

I

1

i

,

I

I

I

i:

I

I

'i

I
I

I

I

~

!I

I

I

I

:

.-.....

I

I'

I

,-,

\
I!:
I
I'
l

I

,

I

13

I

-,

I

I

,

:/

I

I

I

:

'I

I

I I

11
'I

''I

,

.

I

I

I

,,
1

i

I

I I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I
I

I

'I

I

I'

!

'I
I!

I

'

,,
,,

I I

,,,

I

I

; -:

'

,1

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

f

JI

I'

I

I

I

,
,

I
I

.

I

''

:

I

.

I

I I
. I

I

, -,

'I
'I

';

10

I

I

I

1

I

I

I
'cl;

!

\ l

I

...

~I

I'..

I

I

I I'

I

'

i

I I
I

7

I

!

I I

I,,,
,'

•'·-

'I

I I I I

I

"'

I I

I

I·,

I

,J

'I

I:,:

' 'I
If!

;

'I
I

'"

·--

I
~

I

IT:

I'

I'

T

I

I

·T

I I

I

I

I

I

I

I

' I'"\'- . • ,
I

:

1 !

r

I'
I

1 i I

T

I

I

I: I

I

I!

(

I

''

I\

I

I
1

I

1

I I

I

•I

I'
i"\.I

-~

'
-, T'

I

I

' :-

I I

IS

14

I
I

I

,T

I

I

I

Ii
I I
I

I

1 I

1 I I
I; i I

I'

I

T '
, I
I

I

!
I

'

I

I'

I

'i

I

' 11

16

I

I I,

I I

r
I

17

I'

I I I
j

r

I

I

! '

I

I

I '

'I'

I

1s
! '

I

ii

TI

,

;v

I

I

'J

-r

'i

T
!ltJ~•

... _,

'

I

7

(
'·

~-~--------'. ---= =--f----j:--r--:-----1------.-+,-----+_._,L..,---L_µ4~~w.L=.-r --=:tf~t==--=~~:~ ~~=~-~
T·

I

2

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

:-r:c- -r=J

~I

T

12

14

15

I

16

I

17

.

18

Site # 41

'RG Z,3

PREHISTORIC MATERIAIS
Flaked Stone

9JqTertiary
Secondary flakes
flakes
Z., Primary flakes

ZJ!L.Chips

3 Utilized flakes
--Unifaces
Cores
Uni-directional
--Bi-directional
--Multi-directional
/ Bifacial

Split cobbles
~

Chunks

Grourrl/Pecked
Manos
_L_Metates - v: "'- r::-

Bifaces
bifaces
_J__'lhin bifaces ~
Blanks/prefonns \

~Thick

s-:--~1-- ~

Waco sinkers
.Hamrerstones

frag.
frag.
_ _Basal frag.
j__Unid. frag.

·~Distal

--Other
Unidentifiable

~Medial

Faunal Material
Snail
Mussel shell
Non-human bone
Other
COMMENTS:

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Material Types
_ _Quartzite

~Chert

:surned Rock
lbs
Type:

-----------------------------------------------------------------

(lirrestone, sandstone ,quartzite, chert)

Special Sanples
C-l4

- -TL

Pollen

Sediment

--

Flot-.ation _L r'n·x:-o '·~',...
( S.u~r'·..:'....~)

"

\
(t-1~-S
~-)

Site # 41

~

:;-, .2 "2...,

Arrow Points
___ AGEE
___ ALBA
__ BASSETT
___ BONHAM
___ BULBAR-STEMMED
___ CAMERON
___ CATAHOULA
___ CLIF'FTDN
___ COLBERT

___ CUNEY

-·--SCALLORN
___ STEINER
___ TALCO
___ STARR·

__ DEADMAN'S

___EDVARDS
___ F"RE:SNO
___ FRILEY

___ TOYAH.
___ TRUNEY _
___ IJ ASHIT A

__ GARZA

___ GUERRERO
__HARRELL
___ HAYES

___ YCUNG
__ZAVALA

___ HOMAN
___ LIVERMORE
__ LOTT
___ LOZENGE
___ MAUD
_ __ HcGUJIN

___ PADRE

___ PERDlZ

___ SABINAL

Da.r-t Points
___ EARL Y STEM LANCE ___ KINNEY
___ EARLY TRIANGULAR ___LA JITA
___ LANG£
___ EDGEW'DDD
'
___ ELAM
___ LANGTRY
___ LERMA
_ELLIS
___ MARCOS
I____ENSOR/MP..'QC..oS
EVANS
_L_MARSHALL - W1'E"'
___ MARTINDALE
___ r A!RLAND
___ MATAMOROS
___ FIGUEROA
___ MESERVE
___FIRSTVIE\i
___ MIDLAND
___ FOLSOM

__ ALHAGRE
__ ANDI CE

___ ANGQSTURA
__ BAKER
___ BANDY
___ BARBER
___ BELL
__ BULVERDE

___ CARRIZO
___ CARROLLTON
___ CASTROVILLE
__CATAN
___ CHARCOS

___FRID

___ MILNES AND
___MONTELL

___ GARY
___ GODLEY
___ GOLDNDRINA

___ CLOVIS
___ CONEJO

___ DALTON
___ DARL

___ ERATH
___ FRIDAY

CERAMICS
___ RIM SHERD

___ BODY SHERD
__ INCISED
___ PAINTED

__ PIPE

___ OTHER

___ SCOTTSBLUFF"

___ SHUM LA

___ TORTUGAS
___ TRAVIS

___TRINITY

___ NECHES RIVER

---\IILLIAMS

___NOLAN

___ PAIS AND

UNIFACES
___ ALBANY
___ DORSO END SCRAPER
___ GOSSETT
___ GRAVER

__ GAHAGAN
___ GUADALUPE
___ HARE
___ HARVEY

___ HARVEY

__ SIDE SCRAPERS

_NUECES

___ OLMOS

___ PERFDRATDRS
___ SAN GABRIEL
___ 2 Qnd 4 BEVELED

SHELL
___ BEAD
___ PENDANT
___ GOUGE
___ SPOON

___ UVALDE.

---'w'E!..LS
.
___ YARBROUGH
___ ZDRRA

_j_ LJ;..I..'O,-

BIFACES

___ COVINGTON

___REFUGIO
___ SANDIA
___ SAN PATRICE

___ HOXIE

__ JETTA

__ BUTTED KNIFE

~.

-~-VAL VERDE

___ JOHNSON

___ BRISTOL

. ....

___GC'JER

___ DE:SMUI<E

___ BRONSON

.

___ PALMILLAS
_l_PANDALE
___ PANDORA
___ PEDERNALES
___ PLAINVIE'w'
___ PONTCHARTRAIN

___ MQRHISS
___ MORRILL.
___ MOTLEY

__ DA\ISDN

___ CHOPPER
_CLEAR FORK
___ CLEBURNE
___ CORNER-TANG

___ KENT

__ EARLY STEMMED-

___ ABASDLO

OTHER

S-~'r·~C

STDt~E

__ ABRADING STONES
___ CELTS

___ BOATSTDNES

___ INCISED/GROOVED

___ METATES
___ MANO

___ OTHER END SCRAPERS __ ORNAMENTS

BONE
___ A'w'l
___ POINT

___ KNIFE
___ BEAD

___ FLESHER
__ FLAKER·

___ PESTLE

___.PITTED STONES

___ STONE PIPES
___ IJ ACO SINKER

ANTLER
___ BILLET
___ FLAKER
___ TINES

___ MISC

___ CORES

___ DEBIT AGE

___ TESTED COBBLES
___ HAMMER STONES
___ BlF" ACES
___ BURNED ROCK SHATTER

U. T. Austin-SPECIMEN INVENTORY

'3 I F "A"c E"-

I \.\I ;j

~·-f5

-<"-"

~·.

\3

&1~/\Ll?:'

2_

2...

~

1

i

1-

4

I

.-

\

-·
.z:::;

\

(o

(

,,

I

I

I \

T1 'P

·--------·---

Jk;;_
EL-~-.c.4~-/L:_C
-

-

..

<,__ 'C (

.. . -

I\

-

.

I

'I

f I

I'

f

\ •..::> _,

I

I

I

I

t

t3 I FA'- r;;:-

_.,.t I

,..

I

~o-r

-P"f",

c;. ·-J '

-:r

'I

4- ~- Sr.;:;

I\

b<

c.. .........

--

...,,_

1- 1!1-nh

\!..Y

•

J

ff-

"\T'!l iJ

E"OG::ii;:""

P~r-,::-

Ui...1•!

I

'

i

'I

\

c:'tt,::::~
.:_

~t-

l

l

•·\ ..

;

5,T,3

Bc.ll.&.
c..'11P

( I

('.

~I..

'

.

$

IS-2...$

.,

,

•

c:.. ....... bc.

-- s. T.: 2.

f'Lk

l~-r1r-1~

' I

I

S:r: \

;s: 11

c!

I\

-

G\,-\ \f>
IN

·-

'\

I

c \-t \PS

lw'\

I

·-

\\

FLK

TlE'LT.

'

I.

·--·--l I
f

IJ

rL'<

Q A_tl, '(

o N

-'66

1 I

l

I

I

-·-

I.---·~

Tell~.

-r"\~

1

I\

,__,

)L C\-t\P)
j
C....\-\VN \(

-·-

I It" "'X. (' t-..IJ o=-

WI

. "\" \-\I iJ

I'

Anoe. lef.

C-~ ~ fi,AL 5VLFAcC K.k t-~M

·11+1 .... )511="ALE:' p{l.A&p A. I\.. T ~ J=. ~.,.. l!'lYl_ ---·-· -·-

\

--

~

Vertical

~Tr:Mi&~.S...WNst>~- -----

'"'<,..

·,

Location
Horl~ontal

'I

)

z.oci.......?:>.~
'7-1-.>3~
I l=VEl. 7

I(\:.. Ci ?rt
/

~

lo-···

_1_ s
1

A

:z_

C1

~
A

-

- '·

(" l+I 'Pc.....

UJJ1I

CH1 'P<:;

'"11:..""e.T7 !.:.. f'

•.(

.t-~Y ..L

Ft

J

L F'./ Eel- Z..
zo~

l

u1.....t1- f

I
~~

l \\1 r

.::+="t

.~

'::'.

'fl!.
1'... \"'

2-

UiJ 1-;-

i=-<:....

l J J.J i '"i" 1...--

uvc-1-

I cl
I

sa-oi...lr::::..
-~'·

Fr

f'V

(

'

'7 .i./- 0'~ \<. ~ . ld--1Jl.f

'

'7· r- S :. · l:

1,';. $:

,,

'l

z...

c,, ___

ZO · If()

I(

I

(

J

'

I

i

\

' '.

i:-. '~

F-\..-.AIC_.t-<..

~.

~ - -Z () (' r••

\

I

3

LE:.V't:'L

I

\

3

G,(...., H

'I

•

../ I) • "";.') ('

l '

t...c

I~ It-

~'"'>

GM?""::.
~.AN. D-A

'7- r . x ;-

4oc.......

,,

,-

Ct·\-l 'PS
--n;'e.JJ...A.g .:t_ei.c. i:.'

\..
I '-

L-1:-YE"'"<....

I~

..-/")t '...._,....._

-

1> IF Ac..;"·~/:\t,.
~
---1-

Lot
No.

I

\)

I

I

I

y_ . i..tr:':, ,.~

:·.-.
U. T. Austin-SPECIMEN INVENTORY
Site ..
Lot
No.

,

_J

l
I

..,

.......:::i_

Horizontal

DeKriptlon
"f1-l(

_iZ-J

J

\c r......~

tl ('; .. '; .,.--;-..-,_
i
.. ~-

r

··--,,,,J-

"bl pj.,.C•t....L

c..H-v

~I.'.'.......

('CJCF
.

·--·--·---

----·-

_
...

" er O..!.'..:.:.:...~••:e..:!__ f'JX,:f ~

:z.J
c::;·

<"
ff,.,

~

S:.tl'O~

c

~

-ft.."!')?....,-r 6.

-

--

H1 p.-..,

('~

Aua<:. lief.

Vertical

L.l \ F.l_ L

u ~ 17" s_.

-r-\
\

,If

----c ·{_ r-t.t:. f{_ ~

e.'(

<"~

l.!14 IT .c;

£).-:( 1:)

MI

ri.

' '

~

;.:: . ~--- ., .

IL!.'.....

~l:.,1:

,.~

i

/

'

(

i

I
·--- ·--

-

__ \

\

t

\

~
LS' <='1.-

s

i-10 . f,,o

\

7.7,qg·

f' u_

·~.W..,~1

I/

\ I

P"-":

"'"">.if C

r

I< -n..::v \l_b.e.:_'L_ ..El...f...!:;J:S....
2!)

ill..Kfu__ _z_3_

Location

No.
Spec1.

,g

t-'P~, ~

-

,v

"v

-......

...

,._ ...

----

-·,___

~I
I

I!
I

I

I

__ ....

rJr~·:·.:·.

: ....

A.~J?

.I

U. T. Austin-SPECIMEN INVENTORY
Location

· Lot
No.

DHcriptlon

-----

10

Horixontal

Vertical

Assoc. lief.

LP/R..2-

--------

U ~ IT 2---1-=2~0~-_Ll..=;.O.....;C;_•~---+-7_._-....:1-=-b;....:&"'-'-; =!'......:~""'-C.:;;;.:....;._~"-'--1
't.:._-

I(

7:-1/--~3-) ¥-l'.'.-,<;('.:11--r

J.1.n-S'o c.....__,

-=-='--~_;;""'-=-"'-"'-'-=--1-~

I

L...€\J Cl.

I 2-

1------1-7-'-·,_--i·__...~=·---=c?.c. _(

;71- .,

_3

L.li.....1 IT

D •__E~--l-·--r-/_-___- 1 - -

1----11--~-~"'-+--_,_ffi.=.:.-~ T ~LP... t:-c.~. - ......_ _ __,,,,

1
rr.1H.~u
c~·. t.L

D=:.

j)

. r,~,
~4

.-r---_ /-- \/

-------11---

\

1----i__.:.t~~-'-"-~c'-~-'1;_·~-----------------11---~i_~---1--~-~-~-+----1.__--z..
1

~€'"L

~'~
~'-1---'2-.-;;.._-t--==s,::..:,..-z..:;_=1.o_..J....:.O=A.=f2,..;:=..t...2.£.1.o·1J:>.:.,;.=~~e:<-..j;l----j.loll,.,;:l.il::::....;..l'li--'2.._._,_-+=Z:;:::0:,_-_4l..,lon.:...~"..::::..:.._.-1'!;._'_L(1........=.Qt::..+·..:..~..::.~::..J...'

i:;,.::;_.:::._C-<.:..!j'1

::rr&n A. e.-i

I

.I

f

_rlA~_..;:;;i::.e='=s....__+--_b"---_-+------'t__-_ _--+-_ _ _ _J___

\

l

I

(

(

\

L..&YF?..- r

m- z.o

I"

1

cM o·<;. '7·S -~it · 'l..'L ~ c:.~~
"

,

-

-·---t--~--+'"'Pt2---._l'-H~P...-=~~V--P-~_~_--'.~~~~·'------+-----1--~---+---'-~---i-------,~/,,___- - t
(

~

Z.)

""tb-&2:rlt:-...P-.•f

f l-A..'LF'"'-.

(

(

\

\

\

c_14-!P<::"-..

-·---11---'-"-----"'-~-'-----"--------------·--·--11----_,..---+---------1

·1...e ve ( l..

LlL-1---'"'-1-=~=-=CC/'-"'-~,,_,_1rh
....··f>._.r'-7·--·__F_.',h...._fl-_._.1....._....__r_-i"""IJ......11..._i-r-...__-r-L/---r__.2.....,D..__-......I/',!')."""""-,,,.,l..._"'-1-(___,..~_',.._
,J_''......._
ff?-'"'K.....,'k~,(""-'''6""-'-'f,;,

II

kr- J-~),_r-:

tiPk@-~

(

f

(

!

1----::-\-1-=Z-i;;;.....-i__,~-.:..;t+l~~-....._~_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _-+-----------------1----------1

~Cou~)'--____l _______________~----~--------1______

-..I

STATE OF TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE DATA FORM
GENERAL INFORMATION
Temporary Site No.
Permanent site No. :
site Name :
Project Name :
AAPL

RECORDING INFORMATION
195-1.0-1
41RG0024

Name of Recorder :
G. MEHALCHICK
Institutional Affiliation :
UT-TARL
DATE : 06/17/88

Project Funding Source(s) :
ALL AMERICAN PIPELINE COMPANY
Owner and Address :
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
TRACT 1.0

LOCATIONAL INFORMATION
County : =-RE-=A=G=AN=-------USGS Map Name & No. :
TEXON, TEXAS
3101-213
Elevation : =2=8=3=5-'~AM-=-S-L.__~-~-­
UTM Zone
14

Informant & Address

Easting
242115
Northing
3454810
Latitude __J__J _
_
_
Longitude __J__J __ _ _ __

Additional Sources of Information :

Description of Location :

Previous Investigations
Who -:
What :

When
Why

Name of original Recorder of Site
G. MEHALCHICK

FROM THE INTERSECTION OF
HIGHWAYS 67 AND 137 IN BIG
LAKE. TRAVEL 13.3 WEST ON
HIGHWAY 67 TO RANCH ROAD 1675
IN TEXON. TURN LEFT ONTO ROAD
1675 TO RAILROAD TRACKS.
AFTER CROSSING THE TRACKS,
TURN RIGHT AND THEN TAKE THE
FIRST LEFT (A MAILBOX IS ON
THE CORNER) AFTER A MAJOR BEND
IN THE ROAD. FOLLOW THIS ROAD
STRAIGHT FOR 1.8 MILES. TURN
RIGHT 1.0 MILES CTHE ROAD
PARALLELS A POWERLINE) . TURN
LEFT (SOUTH) FOR 4.0 MILES.
THEN RIGHT CWESTl FOR 0.5
MILES TO NORTH/SOUTH FENCE.
WALK 160 METERS PAST WINDMILL.
M.P. 1119 + 4450' 'ID 1120 + 00'

Permanent Site

No.~~~4=1=R=G=0=0=2~4~~~~~

WORK PERFORMED BY FIELD PERSONNEL

ENVIRONMENTAL LOCATION

Survey :
YES
Testing :
YES
Method : SHOVEL TEST ON SITE

Nearest Natural Water Source
WINDMILL ANO CISTERN
Distance
~~6~0""""""'M~·~~~~~~~
Drainage Basin :
OONCliO

Excavation
Method :

NO

Notes
Where Housed

YES

Drainage Type
PLAYA
Soil Orgins
COLLUVIAL AND EOLIAN

UT-TARL

Photographs
Slides--Color
Black & White
Prints--Color :
Black & White

Soil Type :
LOOSE SILTS, GRAVELS AND
CALI CHE
NO
NO
NO
YES

Vegetation :
MESQUITE, YUCCA, PRICKLY PEAR,
CACTI.

Where Housed : =U=T_-=T=AR.....,..L__~~~~
Collections :
Where Housed :

YES
=U=T_-=T=AR......,.L---~~~-

Ground Surface Visibility
90%

Collection Techniques :

Environmental Setting of Site

COLLECTION OF DIAGNOSTIC
ARTIFACTS FROM SITE.

THE -SITE IS LOCATED ON A
GRADUAL RISE WHICH HAS BEEN
HEAVILY DEFLATED. A WINDMILL
IS VISIBLE 60 M. SOUTH OF THE
CENTERLINE. A
NORTHWEST/SOUTHEAST ORIENTED
FENCELINE IS ALONG THE WESTERN
SITE
ONE SHOVEL TEST-SEE
FORM.

Kinds of Materials Collected :
BOTTLE BASES, MARBLES, CERAMIC
DOOR KNOBS.
Special samples :

How Collected

Permanet Site No.

41RG0024
......................

~~...-.....----

CULTURAL MANIFESTATIONS

~~~~~

Artifactual Materials Present :

Site size :
At Present : ~2=5~0=M~*=3~0=M~~~~~~
At Orig. Occup. : =U=N=KN""'"""O~WN=--~~~~~
Basis for Determination :
SURVEY ALONG R.O.W. ONLY
Circumstances of Observation
PEDESTRIAN SURVEY
Depth of Cultural Deposit
SURFACE
Basis for Determination
NEGATIVE SHOVEL TESTS

Artifactual Materials Present :
MOST OF THE MATERIAL CONTAINED
WITHIN BOTH FEATURE AREAS.
LIGHT SCATTER BETWEEN FEATURES
AND WEST OF FEATURE N0.2.
OTHER MATERIAL INCLUDED MILK
GLASS. UNDECORATED WHITEWARE.
WINDOW GLASS. A 1931 TEXAS
LICENSE PLATE, AND MACHINE
MADE BRICK.

Time Periods of Occupation :

Discussion of Site :

HISTORIC-1930'S

THE SITE MAY BE A HOMESTEAD
WITH HUSBANDRY RELATED
ACTIVITIES OR ALL BUILDING
REMNANTS MAY BE ANIMAL
BELATED. OF CUROIUS NOTE IS
THE DENSE AMOUNT OF THE
AFOREMENTIONED "MILK-TYPE
BOTTLES" WITHIN THE FEATURE
N0.2 AREA. WHICH APPEARS TO BE
ANIMAL SHELTERS. THE SITE
DATES TO THE LATE 1920'S AND
EARLY 1930'S, BASED ON
DIAGNOSTICS OBSERVED. THE
WINDMILL. WHICH IS OFF THE
R.O.W •. IS LOCATED ON THE
HIGHEST POINT WITHIN THE SITE
AREA. THE SITE AND THE R.O.W.
ITSELF ARE ON A VERY GRADUAL
SLOPE BELOW THE WINDMILL. THIS
AREA. HOWEVER. IS GREATLY
DEFLATED.

Components
SINGTE

Basis for Determination :
DIAGNOSTIC ARTIFACTS RCOVERED
site Type :
HOMESTEAD W/HUSBANDRY RELATED
ACTIVITIES

Cultural Features :
FEATURE NO.l: FULLY DISMANTLED
WOODEN BUILDING. POSSIBLE
HOUSE OR OUTBUILDING BOARDS.
WIRE NAILS AND WOODEN PIERS.
OTHER DOMESTIC RELATED
ARTIFACTS. SUCH AS WHITEWARE.
MARBLES, CANNING JARS. TIN
CANS, CONCRETE RUBBLE AND
SLABS NEAR AREA-PURPOSE
UNKNOWN.

-

-------------------------------------

Permanet Site No.~~~4=l=R=G~0~0~2~4~~~~~
SITE CONDITIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

CURRENT REGISTRATION

Approximate percentage of site
remaining intact : 10% IN R.O.W.
Natural Impacts

State Archeological Landmark NO
National Register of Historic
Places
NO

EROSION-HEAVILY DEFLATED

OTHER
Recommended Actions :
ARCHIVAL RESEABCH. NO OTHER
WORK RECOMMENDED.

Artificial Impacts :
DISMANTLING OF STRUCT!JRES, SHEEP.
FEN CELINE

Known or Perceived Future Impacts
AAPL

Potential for State Archeological
Landmark
YES
Potential for National Register of
Historic Places
NO
Submitted ? :

NO

LIST ALL ATTACHMENTS

1. SITE MAP

9.

2. SHOVEL TEST FORM

10.

J.

11.

4.

12.

5.

13.

6.

14.

7.

15.

8.

Other (give numbers)

····--mm~

::=•I•.. •
I

I

I-;

·
1
·
l
"
•
I1l"
11111111111111::
=l,l l l il l l l il~l li:l l !l l il l l l l~l l il l lil!lil l !il l l l~ l i l i~ :I'l flil ll il :l !l 'l~ l~ l~ ;~I
11
.

.

I

I

'

.

.

.

.

.

.

+--'---

.
!

•

I

I

I

11

I

I

!

,f=

' :

l

-1

1

-

'

'

H

~-!·---··.

111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111''1111rt
1
I

u

'

'-~

-

.

·
·
·
·
·
2
±
•
:

"

I

'

r-r+--

+-......--

;:;:
-r-

1-T,-

o
''

'T

---~
·
•
C

L

I

lo

'

'~

'

'

.

.

.

.

.

I

.

T1~

I

'

;

I

'

I

.

.

.

.
'l

..

•

I

I

l

l

I I

SllOVLL H'.11 D/\I/\

SI TE NUMBER__L(; /(.q}--_!:/_

Of\

fE __6__~1(_

z/_!8

I

SHOVEL TEST #

LEVEL~ ___:_{5c11115

SOIL ___ /o.~

..£t!f;. _f_4YtL41/i ________ _____

RECOVERY:_~~-(Y._j___s~,,k... ~---~--·

.rr

<!J..t"&4~--------- ------------------·----------

- - - - - - - - ----- --- . ·-----·--· -----------------·--------LEVEL

-----

SOIL

-------·- ·---·- -------------- - - - - - - -

RECOVERY:

·---- ... ·--------------

SOIL·------ ..

LEVEL

-·----

--

- ..

---···-------------------------

RECOVrnY : ___________ --------·--·- --------·- ---· -·- _

----------·- -------

SHOVEL TEST #_______ _

LEVEL

---

RECOVIRY:

LEVEL
RECOVERY:

SO IL __ -· .... _________ -· _.. _·-------- ------ - - - - - · - - -

----------· --·-···-·-- -·-····-· -- -- ----- ----- -··---- - ---------------------

SOIL________ .... _. ___ --·-·-·--------------------

- - - - - - ------ --·-··-· -- - . ---- ------·-- ------- ---------- ----

----

,,

~~
\\

,,ii

"
II
\\

I\
II
II
II

11.

"

~.:;:~\l
11
~:;

11-

..,.:;.,;::.:.:-::;.-

...

\

\

""jl__

~
- ... ?,-·--~II
:
rl
I

-

,,
,,

'

. r:fJ ,, -·
~

II

..

II

i
ti
-;;.~
r~~-.:,.

I

.

---------

"-

-';\'

.•

"-

i.

:1

1

ll

'

11

I~ __/~I
/'
II

\\
II

zq

II

!:"
,,

I\

==,===

\
!I

II
II
II
;\

II
ti',

II
II
~-JI

==its=a•========;===s

M

II
II
II

II

,,"

l
I

,,,,,,~ . .~.,..,..,.

\-

-r

st. lt.r -d
c

t=-u~elct..-1-' ,,'.-.r

.,,...,~ d-N•'IA. -1r~

..)

r4J.4,~.,,., 71•.r.J

c.rll .d'-r\Lt

'-4/-r p"r ~ .r .TIN 1
w1 •l~

&> P l!::k'

134.s~J

.d#

/,c/
f

p

l'-CIC..,e"

::r J

/N.$~•A1 ~1?

C.""'( /

<j

°! d -S

17 J .> -1i;

1

10 :i

CA.'r~i'"F-.,.:f e'l..rse--.,<-1J,,f~1e:

A-1/

A-1/

"I
$1'/-<"J'"

e)r

t

'~ "'4.~d,,"9:r~1...;j
I

l"fA1,.;e1..,,.

f.,,LJlfl.

I ..

(~re.....J.,,._'f p.-f4..c,,.A.J1..v~ '-'""_.".' --~
I

rll<

t11 uT

2'-f

..A-l /

. r l /. T

".;.

/ e>e-t

I

...u

ft?, c1-F

7

,Ml,,¥/.-"t~/

L(

t.t..J--e.

1~

rE"-

,

~

(?;

re.

Cl."

'

> c,..,...,..~d-v

a . &;. 3. o..µ,..~p.,.. M'N'M'"A....·
(),, t/ - No (.>"t"•t11~ u t
~

~ • ....,. -C°ff-4!..-i-. .,.~
'
~i.-"""t!~~ ;.....,
o~y z. 1..-V- ~ c:...-: .r
,.
,_ R. t;;;_ (, - ,va cvtc/~C.('
µ1,v,_,_~ I (,,L

~- ....... t111 .e''°"c-J.."" V'C
A-l /
I(

~lk./
(I

e.)-r
I(

,. .

r~..r+...-•c..~'-'/

\

_,....~

(

(

I/

''

/\, 4),

7

-

l..1....., .,.J.~ '--

i tt-...f' /...
I

HISTORIC
ARTIFACT CATALOG SHEET

-----

Site # Wl 1?,q2 ;_
Lot # l - (..:. . •::-, ..-C-rJ_·_,
Date
2 _ 1 '! - 1 a ? 'l,
HOUSE~o\ESPING (list)

unit/Level
Feature
Stratum -~~--~
i\ITCHEN/DI~HNG

::_r;

c ~ r .-::-

_CERAHICS (total)

_unglazed
:IOUSE:iOLD ?UIDI!SHI!ms

burnished

-----

~

lead glaze
_ t i n glaze

I

_L

---

CLOTHING
BUTTONS
HOOKS, SNAPS, OTRER FASTENERS

_porcelain
stoneware
_____ over-glaze decorated

-

-

CONT.AINERS/FaAGS

~ clear ( 1=",,_._., ~
~-

r'

t.. e...-.::...i:n ~ \....E "bASE")

"black"·

-

green (all shades)
brown

white

---

_

CAPS, TOPS, etc.

_

TIN C~'i (thin) SCRAP

IRON (thicker}

Sc ~·'~
Luu-

-

-?{

?'.isc.

-----

blue

----

other

/

--PERSONAL
----

_aqua.

-

'le

* ClJLLEL.~~

-

._..__ TA.BLEWA..-=tE (lalives, forks, spoons, etc.)

BONE
E3'.J

-

SHELL

S!::."ELL, t'..isc.

(pans, handles, etc.)

BEADS
JEWEL":\Y

MIRROR ~LASS (where identifiable

CO'i-!BS AND

s:aus:-::ES

PIPES
COINS.

Misc.

ACTIVITIES

IDENTIFLtBLE OBJECTS (list)
q ~I Ix'. 1-ie-0-'.~~ °P'-~~ (>-JOI
_
1
1

~ITCh:lrJA.RE

ITEMS

SHOE PARTS

1q30_10'5Q's,)

_

------- SE"WING
-----

BUCKLES

plain colored

~I.ASS

LIGr.T BUt3 PARTS
FLOWER POT FRAGS

undecorated ...,hitewar~s
yellow ware

_

LAMP PARTS

---- OTHER

ciecorated whi tewares
(under glaze)

-

FURNITURE HAR.Di/ARE

---

TOYS ~;:o .A.."'i"TJSE?-!Ei·:TS (marbles, de

etc.) 1-~ r::j:_~ ·_-:;; _

:--r...~.ca ·
-,,q"'.'
WRITiliG -Y!ATER!.ALS (slate, slate
pencil.s, lead pencils, etc.)
FIS?.ING EQUIPl-!E?'fT
1-::..~:-~

P-'.:..."=-:J

:-.::...·c::.t"\c...i;:..""L...e'

~.:is.c •

BA..-:U-~/SHOP/WOEKSHOP

_ _ TOOLS

---

WIRE

--- HA.RN:'..SS/SADDLE
?'.ARlJWARE
--- 1-'.ACEINERY
--- :.Use. PARTS
---

PA..~TS/nORSESHOES

_ _ GUN FLINTS
GUN PARTS
l•!US;\ET 3ALLS

PERCUSSION CAPS
C.A.c1.T:a.IDG:C:S & CASES
C..UINON 3ALI.S
CONSTRCCTION

wnmow

GLASS

NAILS-- CUT
NUI.S--WIRE
UN!D. F'R.A.G.L'©.'TS

RARDW.ARE

UTILITIES

~

Electrical
- Gas
-B.."i.ICK, Water
TILE, etc.
SHINGLES (composition)
MORTA.,_

PLASTER

,.;oon
CQ!{CRETE FRAGS

ASPHALT
COHPOSITIO?I MATERIAL
OTHER

PREHISTORIC REJ.1'.AINS
CHERT FRAG1·1ENTS
tITHIC ARTIFACTS
s~ran ROCK
_SEE.I.I., 'WORKED

OTHER
:1ISC!I.LANEOUS
~SEEDS,

PITS, etc.

COAI./ClNDERS/CP.A..~CCAL

P!.A.STIC

PAPE..,_

U. T. Austin-SPECIMEN INVENTORY
lot
No.

No.
Specs.

location
Description

Vortlcal

Anoe. bf.

• 1 J~~Tv!T-;4'- r:- _ - - - - - - - - · - - i · - - - - - - i - - - - - - - -

-:-_ '?LOCJ::-.-rso

U:...\bi::-?'OCA"""?r·
1------1-----1--- -----

Horizontal

~ ~-~---?:+-...-------+----·-·---t---------

·------------·------i·-- ------

i------~-_,1-H_..J::;,.;.__..~...!::!?.:S___ ···-- --·------------·- ---+--------

BJ D

-------------+---------+-----·--·~

-·---t----+---------·------1-------t--------+----------1

- . ·---1------------------1-- - - - - - + - - - - - - - + - - - - - - - - - !

~--1----1----------------1-------11-------1---------1

1--··---;---+---------------+------~-

-----------------i

STATE OF TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE DATA FORM
GENERAL INFORMATION
Temporary Site No.
Permanent site No.
Site Name :
Project Name :
AAPL

RECORDING INFORMATION
197-1.5-4
41RG0025

Name of Recorder :
G. MEliALCHICK
Institutional Affiliation
UT-TARL
DATE : 06/28/88

Project Funding Source(s) :
ALL AMERICAN PIPELINE COMPANY
owner and Address :
·UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
TRACT 1.5
Informant & Address

LOCATIONAL INFORMATION
County : ~R~E~A~G~AN--.....~~~~~~­
USGS Map Name & No. :
BEST. TEXAS
3101-214
Elevation : 2715' AMSL
UTM Zone
14
Easting : 254150
Northing : 3453155
Latitude___;___; _ _ _
Longitude___/___/~--~

Additional Sources of Information

Previous Investigations
Who :
What :

When
Why

Name of Original Recorder of Site
G. MEHALCHICK

Description of Location :
FROM BIG LAKE. DRIVE 4
MILES WEST ON HWY. 67 TO FM
1676. TURN SOUTH 0.8 MILES
ACROSS RR TRACKS. TURN RIGHT
CWEST) PARALLEL TRACKS 2.75
MILES TO RANCH ROAD. TURN
SOUTHTHROUGH RANCHSTEAD YARD,
FOLLQW ROAD 1/2 MILE TO BIG
LAKE DRAW.

Permanent Site

No·~~-4=1~R~G~0~0~2~5~~~~~

WORK PERFORMED BY FIELD PERSONNEL

ENVIRONMENTAL LOCATION

survey :
Testing :
Method :

Nearest Natural Water Source
BIG LAKE DRAW

YES
NO

Distance
EAST SITE EDGE
Drainage Basin
BIG LAKE
Excavation
Method :

NO

Notes
Where Housed

YES

Drainage Type :
PLAYA
Soil Orgins
ALLUVIAL

UT-TABL
Soil Type
SILTY SAND

Photographs
Slides--Color
Black & White

.

Prints--Color
Black & White
Where Housed

.

NO
NO
NO
YES

Vegetation
MESQUITE. GRASSES, CACTI.
PRICKLY PEAR. THORN BUSHES.
YUCCA.

UT-TARL

Collections :
Where Housed :

YES
~U=T_-=T=AR~L..._~~~-

Collection Techniques :

Ground surface Visibility
40%
Environmental Setting of Site
LOCATED ON GRADUAL RISE ABOVE
BIG LAKE DRAW. SITE IS
LQCATED WEST. ACROSS DRAINAGE
FROM 41RG21. A HOUSE IS
VISIBLE 300 METERS TO THE
NORTH.

Kinds of Materials Collected
A HISTORIC COLLECTION FROM A
DUMP; INCLUDED A DISH.
Special Samples :

How Collected

Permanet Site No.

41RG0025
..........

~~---=

CULTURAL MANIFESTATIONS

~---=-~~~~~

Artifactual Materials Present :

Site Size :
At Present : =U~N=KN=--O~WN=-~~~~~~
At Orig. Occup. : UN===KN=-=O~WN=-~~~~~
Basis for Determination :
SITE OUTSIDE R.O.W.
Circumstances of Observation :
PEDESTRIAN SURVEY
Depth of Cultural Deposit :
UNKNOWN
Basis for Determination
ONLY SURFACE MATERIAL & NEGATIVE ST

Artifactual Materials Present
A FEW PIECES OF BURNED ROCK
WHERE OBSERVED ALONG THE
R.O.W •. HOWEVER, THE GREATEST
DENSITY OF BURNED ROCK AND
LITHIC MATERIAL IS LOCATED
SOUTH AND WEST OF THE R.o.w.
TRE SITE HAS BEEN RECORDED DUE
TO THE POSSIBILITY OF IT BEING
IMPACTED DURING PIPELINE
CONSTRUCTION OR THE

Time Periods of Occupation :

Discussion of site :

UNKNOWN PREHISTORIC

THE SITE IS AN OPEN CAMPSITE
AND IS SIMILAR TO 41RG21,
SITUATED EAST ACROSS THE DRAW.
THE AREA ALONG BIG LAKE DRAW
HAD BEEN USED EXTENSIVELY
DURING THE LATE TO
TRANSITIONAL ARCHAIC AS
EVIDENCED BY OTHER SITES
RECORDED IN THE R.O.W. A
TRASH DUMP IS LOCATED ON THE
SITE. IT PROBABLY RELATES TO
THE HOUSE TO THE NORTH.

Components

Basis for Determination
NO DIAGNOSTICS FOUND
Site Type :
OPEN CAMPSITE

Cultural Features

Permanet site

No.~~~4=1R~G......._0~0~2~5~~~~~

SITE CONDITIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

CURRENT REGISTRATION

Approximate percentage of site
remaining intact : 0% IN R.O.W.
Natural Impacts :

State Archeological Landmark NO
National Register of Historic
Places
NO

EROSION

OTHER

..

Recommended Actions :

Artificial Impacts :
TRASH DUMP CINCLUDES BURNING) ,
SHEEP. ROADS, FENCELINE

NO FURTHER WORK RECOMMENDED
UNLESS THE PIPELINE WILL
SIGNIFICANTLY AFFECT THIS
SHOULD BE SHOVEL TESTED AND
FURTHER INSPECTED FOR
SIGNIFICANCE TO WARRANT ANY
SUBSEQUENT TESTING.

Known or Perceived Future Impacts
AAPL

Potential for State Archeological
Landmark
YES
Potential for National Register of
Historic Places
NO
Submitted ? :

NO

LIST ALL ATTACHMENTS
1. SITE MAP

9.

2.

10.

3.

11.

4.

12.

5.

13.

6.

14.

7.

15.

8.

Other (give numbers)

Permanet Site No.

Kinds of Material Collected
Continued from page 2 :
ELECTRICAL UNIT.

41RG0025
..........

~~-=-==--

~:.-~~~~-

Environmental Setting of Site
Continued from page 2

-~-,:_____:_

___ --t---.. !----

_ __...______________ _

··-- ---·--·r------

-- - - - L - - - -_;__
·--

-----·--·----- -

-

· - - - - - -+-- -

--- ...-- -- -----:----~~~-=-:=--=-==== ~--

,-..-·-=~- __:.__.__ ___;___

- - _ _ ___._ _ _ _ _ _ - - - - - -

------ ---..--------

!

·------~----------r--··--·--~--

---------·

--------·--·---:------~-

-

------------i-------------------

2

L----~·

6

8

9

10

11

13

..

1;

'O

"'· \
'

\

~·~.

I
!/

,!I
,/;;,~

!

/

i

I

·I;::
'/ "'

",;;, \

,,

-

\\

\\
\\

\\

,_.r-

~

.

A-J.f ,ea

V Cf. ) v

S_IA

""'r "'d

I

~~?~

,.,

IL ,,t..t..._y I<.~

,u ,._v

I f!'

I

p

1-~ .J-/-/q

d

~-'-!__AJeleJ1... /.1.1'_r

.. C.o~"'l~_l!l.-<1.A..1f~ :;

. ··~'i_ I
~~ .p"r"«-S~l.A/J
P

~

i3~_.s!.~

... /4-1/

d,.v

$1

.,

"f~r

... 5:'_t f c t.f/~T

A-l( ..rt~T

o-F

\:

""""'v t..J..¥f<C...
•
JO« -14~,, ....,I....,.~

a+.

I

I(

G)-r
!{

fa?'

,,Ml#/~l't./

)

N.S1.J.,J..1{'r. t:.>fZ

1..v

.....

e/d ,,..-~.:J ,......,j

1..(-'V"#

d-f

UJ'"E_

(..(.S-tC_

t~

tJe:> !

I~. . {-1,.

,;...,

} C

11... · Q.

,

,.

.

~.,, :..- t e/ d......, '("~ ...r +.,..., ~.f-1 ~~)

()..µ_.._.,.,_

J2,&J. 3,

(7, t;',,

'2:,-

t

t
!"ffA/fN/fnt\.'

ha f'~•d.;:

u

t

"""'- ~- Ctf-e...~ -r~

M-. ..,.._ ..- re 4 e-./-111 ..- c

I(

1ZI:::

'

\

/..A 1

2:/ _ .A.,(7

/ c>e ....

~lfC,/

WI

t

C-c /''j"'!(J~

o.~+-i"~-t ~..rse-~hr~1' ·

(.s pc.. .j, ,._' (

A-l/

!'?:.;.,)

prc.1~~:r-_r

µ

--t ..... ""£I~~

;,,..,v,_,_,,,, I "
I

(

(,,I ,..r~

It

/-"IJ

.1I I

o.Nty

z

R. <:;,

~

/(: 41.. 7

/ '1,/

.rf....-v. c..iC: ..r
\

-

,.v~

<:! VI d~·'-"

L,wv oJ.~ ./.-.

C..'

,<( ...... f,7

HISTORIC
ARTIFACT CATALOG SHEET
Site lf !.l I -Q_c; ::. 5

unit/Level
Feature
----Stratum

Lot

# )-

C:'"'.) -

Date
J - ~ 1HOUSE:.'"ZS?ING (list)

KITCEEN/DWING

' - .

!

I

.; ) ;)

_CERAHICS (total)

_unglazed
burnished
~ lead glaze
_ t i n glaze
~ecorated whitewares
(under glaze)
undecorated whitewares
_
yellow ware
_porcelain
stonaware
_____ over-glaze decorated
plain colored

-

-

~LASS

:tOUSE:iOLD ?\JRN!SEI:ms
F1JR1UTURE KARD"1l.ARE

--

- - LA..'l.!P PARTS

-----

--

-- - SE"WING IT:EY!S

CONTAINERS/nAGS

--

(where identifiable)
--- MIRROR
COi.ffiS AND saus:-:::s
~I.ASS

_blue
white
other

---

--

PIPES

COINS.
Misc.

TIN CAN (thin) SCRAP

-ACTIVITIES

IRON (thicker) SCRAP

--etc.)

____ CAPS, TOPS, etc.

TOYS A..'1D A.'1USEY-E:N"TS (:na rbles, do:

IDENTIFIAELE OBJECTS (list)

tra.ITI!·iG MATERI.ALS (slate, slate

T.ABI.E"dA.'=l.E (knives, forks, spoons, etc.)
~ITCh""]litl.ARE

pencils, eto.)

FISHING EQUIPME!TT
Y:is.c.

BA..~N/SHOP/WOR~SHOP

TOOLS

(pans, handles, etc.)

---

BONE
E:J~·

·

.__.._pencil~, lead

--

-

BUCKLES

- - SHOE PARTS
?'isc.

-

~

OTHER"

CLOTHING
BUTTONS
nOOKS, SNAPS, OTllER FASTENDS

clear
"black"·
2..- green (all shades) ($.A>' 5
brown
_aqua

_

LIGr.T BUI3 PARTS
FLOWER POT FRAGS

SHEtL

Sh"'ELL, t1J.sc.

----

WIRE
P...A..~'?..SS/SADDLE PA..~TS/RORSESHOES

?.ARDWA.RE
~.Use.

~~~----

-

-- Gtll'! P.AR'IS

Gilli FLINTS

!·'.US ;\ET 3ALI.S

PERCUSSION CAPS
CA.d.TR!DG:ES & CASES
CANNON BALIS

CONS'Bt'CTION
WDi1lOW GLASS

NAILS-- CUT

_L

Nlits--WIRE
UN!D. FRAG.'m."rS

nARDWAAE:

UTILITIES
_.k.,. Ei.ectrical -

-

C(?(.2...t._ t'1

Gas

Water

;,____ SaICK, TILE, etc.
SHINGLES (composition)
HORT.Aa

PLASTER
~.;ooo

CO!rCRETE FRAGS
ASPHALT

COHPOSITIOU MATERI.AI.
OTHER
PR.E.~ISTORIC

RE?d..AINS

CHERT FRAGMENTS
tITHIC ARTIFACTS

_

:smt~clJ

ROCK

S:{ll!., WORXED

OTHER
MISC'ZLLANEOUS

-

PITS, etc.
COAI/CIMDERS/CP..AaCCAL
PLASTIC
SEEDS,

PAPER

1

c

1..._1

.s.u ·-A..""'n'R- S:>

::.::>

Alr~'-i·:"':"·?";.

U. T. Austin-SPECIMEN INVENTORY
. Lot
No.

I

~

,,,

Vertical

~ e..F-ACE -

Auoc. lef.

(p-z.q-88

F e..Ot'

"/~It' ?

"D.

u.

,
-PC.C:....

'2-i~I .01.A~---

012:>

__WI Q..~

L...~-~"':::..[93n'•

'J S.v LP...:pe_( I'! '5 - I '1,:o~~'\

-

n~~-.SY. cA_TQt:;-_ rf:..t.J.

--

----·

~ I-A. S5, C.ELE'l!- Y

!>• ~!-!

I

.. 2..5

Location
Horizontal

DeKriptlon

(r:> A~

t

'-i:o,..:

Site...'.:!.l....~---··

~- W I ~E..__i..,\AJ.•1=

2-

..

-

-.

-----·
--

!.D_-::-

A

·.

.

.__

--

....

---

-

--

I
I
I

I
I

