AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED CAMP MOHAWK
COUNTY PARK IN EAST-CENTRAL BRAZORIA COUNTY, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Permit Number 2384

by
William E. Moore

With contributions by
William A. Dickens and Linda Wootan Ellis

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 76

2000

AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED CAMP MOHAWK
COUNTY PARK IN EAST-CENTRAL BRAZORIA COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 00-03

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared for
Brazoria County
313 West Mulberry
Angleton, Texas 77515

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) performed an archaeological survey
of a 55.84 acre tract, the site of the future Camp Mohawk County Park in east-central
Brazoria County, Texas, in May 2000. This project was conducted under Antiquities
Permit number 2384 with William E. Moore performing the duties of Principal
Investigator. The project area was investigated by shovel testing and probing and
backhoe trenching. Five prehistoric archaeological sites (41BO206-41BO210) were
found. All five sites are located along the margins of two oxbow lakes, former channels
of Chocolate Bayou.
Site 41BO206 was found on a low terrace or knoll adjacent to an oxbow lake in
the northwest corner of the project area, sites 41BO207 and 41BO208 are located on
high banks overlooking the opposite side of the same oxbow lake, and sites 41BO209
and 41BO210 were found on small pimple mounds adjacent to an oxbow lake in the
southeast corner of the project area. Sites 41BO206 - 41BO209 are Late Prehistoric
based on the presence of ceramics and a Catahoula arrow point which dates from A.D.
700 to A.D. 1100. Site 41BO210 did not contain any diagnostic artifacts. These small
sites probably represent temporary occupation areas that were utilized for various
activities such as tool manufacture and repair and subsistence tasks such as food
processing/cooking, plant gathering, and base camps for hunting. Together they are
part of the local subsistence pattern of this part of Southeast Texas. It is recommended
that these sites be subjected to Phase II testing to determine their significance if they
will be impacted by the proposed construction.
Also present in the project area are several buildings such as dormitories and
rest rooms that were constructed for Camp Mohawk. Although the camp is supposed to
date to the 1930s or 1940s, not one of these structures is from that period. They were
built in the 1950s and 1960s and are not architecturally or historically significant.
Copies of the final report are on file at the Archeology Division, Texas Historical
Commission (THC); Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL); Brazoria
County; and BVRA in Bryan, Texas. The artifacts and records have been placed in
permanent curation at the Brazoria County Historical Museum in Angleton, Texas.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am appreciative of the assistance provided by Mr. Mark Hansen, Parks Director
for Brazoria County, Texas. He supplied the field crew with project area maps, helped
the field crew locate the project area boundaries in the field, and provided a backhoe
and operator. In addition to the Principal Investigator, the field crew consisted of Roger
G. Moore, Douglas Molineu, James E. Warren, Arthur F. Romine, and Bobby Jemison.
Roger G. Moore of Moore Archeological Consulting is acknowledged for volunteering
his time to visit the project area; his expertise in this area of Texas was especially
useful. At the state level, Jean Hughes, Assistant Curator of Records at TARL checked
the TARL files for previously recorded sites in the project area. Ed Baker of the THC,
was the reviewer for this project, and his input is appreciated. Except for the artifact
illustrations that were drafted by Bradly F. Bowman, all figures in this report were
prepared by Lili G. Lyddon of Lyddon Illustrations, North Zulch, Texas. The lithics found
during this project were examined by William A. Dickens, and the ceramics were
analyzed by Linda Wootan Ellis.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS..................................................................................................iii
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ......................................................................................... 5
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ............................................................................ 9
METHODS .................................................................................................................... 11
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................. 13
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 17
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 18
Appendix I: Shovel Test Log
Appendix II: Backhoe Trench Profiles
Appendix III: Lithic Analysis (William A. Dickens)
Appendix IV: Ceramic Analysis (Linda Wootan Ellis)
Appendix V: Map of Sites and Shovel Tests and Probes
Appendix VI: Site Avoidance Plans
Figures
Figure 1. General Location of Project Area ..................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Project Area on Liverpool Quadrangle ............................................................. 3
Figure 3. Project Area Map ............................................................................................. 4
Figure 4. Soils Map ......................................................................................................... 7
Figure 5. (a) Catahoula Point from 41BO206; (b) End Scraper from 41BO208............. 14

iv

INTRODUCTION
Brazoria County plans to develop Camp Mohawk County Park in east-central
Brazoria County, Texas (Figure 1). The total area of land to be acquired for the
proposed park consists of 55.84 acres, all of which will be donated to the County by
private landowners. The project area is depicted on the topographic quadrangle,
Liverpool (dated 1963 and photorevised in 1974) (Figure 2). A review of archaeological
reports for the area revealed that Brazoria County contains significant prehistoric and
historic sites. Therefore, an archaeological survey was recommended by the Texas
Parks and Wildlife Department to be reviewed by the THC. In order to comply with this
request, the County of Brazoria retained BVRA to conduct this service which was
performed under Texas Antiquities permit 2384 with William E. Moore the Principal
Investigator.
In addition to the cultural resource survey, a wetlands study will be conducted by
the United States Corps of Engineers, Galveston District. This investigation will ensure
that proper delineation of the wetlands is described and not impacted by park
development.
The 55.84 acre project area is bounded on the north and east by the current
channel of Chocolate Bayou and on the south and west by land in private ownership
(Figure 3). Much of the project area is wooded; however, a large area has been cleared
to accommodate the buildings and other use areas for Camp Mohawk. Two oxbow
lakes, remnants of the former channel of the bayou, are present in the project area and
contained water at the time of this investigation.
Camp Mohawk is believed to have been a religious camp since the 1930s or
1940s (Mark Hansen, personal communication, May 9, 2000); however, not one of the
existing structures date to this period. According to Mr. Hansen, all of the current
buildings were erected in the 1950s and 1960s. The County plans to renovate existing
dormitories, restrooms, roads, and utility systems. Also, family camping areas and trails
will be constructed. The proposed trails will parallel the bayou and meander throughout
the park; however, the trail system will be constructed above ground and will not impact
the subsurface. In addition to the existing facilities and roads, disturbance within the
project area exists in the form of two oil wells that are the result of an oil, gas, and
mineral lease executed in 1994 and easements for two underground natural gas
pipelines that cross the property.

1

Figure 1. General Location of Project Area

2

Figure 2. Project Area on Liverpool Quadrangle

3

Figure 3. Project Area Map

4

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Brazoria County is located in the southeastern part of Texas along the Gulf of
Mexico. Much of the area is defined as Gulf Coast Prairie. According to the soils book
for Brazoria County, the inland portion of the county belongs to the Gulf Coast Prairies
Major Land Resource Area (Crenwelge et al. 1981:1). Along the coastal region the
county contains mainly salty soils and is part of the Gulf Coast Marsh Resource Area
(Crenwelge et al. 1981:1).
The land surface of the county is characterized as broad and nearly level. There
are a few sloping areas that occur mainly adjacent to major drainages such as the San
Bernard River, Brazos River, and Oyster Creek. Most drainages flow to the southeast
through the major streams. Other streams empty directly into the Gulf of Mexico or into
the bays adjacent to the Gulf (Crenwelge et al. 1981:1).
The project area lies on the west bank of Chocolate Bayou within the area known
as "Austin's Woods" (also known as the Columbia Bottomlands). Approximately the
eastern half of the project area remains undeveloped and consists of a native
bottomland hardwood forest. The forest lands of the "Austin's Woods" are the only
significant expanse of forest adjacent to the Gulf of Mexico in Texas. Approximately
one-half of the area on this site consists of this forest as well as significant wetland
areas. Along the east side of the site, bordering Chocolate Bayou, lies undeveloped
native forest of both hardwood species and native loblolly pine, the only native stand of
this pine within "Austin's Woods." Hardwood species are intermingled in some places
with the loblolly pine and include sycamore, water oak, live oak, honey locust, cedar
elm, cottonwood, sugar hackberry, green ash, and black willow. Understory vegetation
in most of the undeveloped areas is dense with shrubs, vines, palmetto, and young
trees.
The southeast corner of the site contains significant wetland areas that consist of
meandering, interconnected sloughs and swamps which were once the Chocolate
Bayou channel. Past floods have changed the course of Chocolate Bayou isolating the
old channels from the active bayou channel, creating permanent wetlands and swamps
in these areas. These wetlands support both submerged aquatic and emergent
vegetation. Palmettos and several species of wetland grasses grow along the shoreline
and on raised areas of soil extending between and into the wetland areas. Black willow,
button brush, and palmettos grow along the steep banks and into the wetlands. The
other previously listed tree species occur on higher banks at the edge of the wetland
areas and on the higher ground out of the wetland sloughs. The wetland areas on this
site provide an excellent habitat for waterfowl, including migratory birds.

5

According to the soils map on Sheet Number 27 (Crenwelge et al. 1981), the
majority of the project area is located within the Edna fine sandy loam, 1 to 5 percent
slopes mapping unit (14). This is a gently sloping, nonsaline soil on slopes adjacent to
drains and bayous. Typically, this soil has a surface layer of medium acid, dark gray
fine sandy loam about 4 inches thick. The subsoil to a depth of 60 inches is clay that is
dark gray and medium acid in the upper part and light brownish gray and neutral in the
lower part (Crenwelge et al. 1981: 17-18). Sites 41BO206 - 41BO208 were found in this
soil type (Figure 4).

6

Figure 4. Soils Map

7

Very relevant to the prehistoric use of the project area is the presence of the
Bernard-Edna Complex (8) that consists of nearly level, nonsaline soils as described by
Crenwelge et al. (1981:14). The surface is mainly level and has many distinct knolls or
pimple mounds about 0.5 foot high and 10 to 15 feet in diameter. Slopes average about
0.2 percent. Areas are irregular in shape and range from 5 to several hundred acres in
size. This complex is about 60 percent Bernard clay loam and 20 percent Edna fine
sandy loam. The Bernard soil is generally on the flats between the knolls and pimple
mounds. The Edna soil is mainly on the knolls and mounds.
Typically, the Bernard soil has a surface layer of very dark grayish-brown clay
loam about 12 inches thick. The subsoil to a depth of 60 inches is clay that is dark gray
in the upper part and grayish-brown in the lower part. Typically, the Edna soil has a
surface layer of slightly acid, dark gray fine sandy loam about 9 inches thick. The
subsoil to a depth of 60 inches is dark gray clay that is slightly acid in the upper part and
neutral in the lower part. The soils in this complex are somewhat poorly drained to
poorly drained. Surface runoff is very slow. Permeability is very slow. Sites 41BO209
and 41BL210 were found in this soil type (Figure 4).
A small portion of the southwestern corner of the project area contains Edna fine
sandy loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes (13) as described by Crenwelge et al. (1981:16-17).
This is a nearly level, nonsaline soil. Slopes average about 0.2 percent. Areas are
irregular in shape and range from 5 to several hundred acres. Typically, this soil has a
surface layer of slightly acid dark gray fine sandy loam about 8 inches thick. The
subsoil to a depth of 60 inches is clay that is neutral and very dark gray to gray in the
upper part and moderately alkaline and light brownish-gray in the lower part. This soil is
poorly drained. Surface runoff is very slow and permeability is very slow. No sites were
found in this soil type.

8

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Brazoria County is located in the Southeast Texas cultural-geographical region of
Texas as defined by the Texas Historical Commission in a statistical overview compiled
in 1985 (Biessart et al. 1985:76). At that time, Brazoria County was fifth in the state in
terms of numbers of sites recorded (1630) and percentage of sites recorded (8.06%).
Within the region, Brazoria County was sixth with 89 sites (.44% of the state and 5.46%
of the region). According to Biesaart et al. (1985:114), all major periods of Texas
prehistory were documented in Brazoria County in 1985. At that time, 89 sites had
been recorded with the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL). Of this
number, 43 sites were classified by temporal period as follows: Paleo-Indian (2 sites),
General Archaic (11 sites), Middle Archaic (2 sites), Late Archaic (2 sites), and Late
Prehistoric (26 sites). One site has been designated as a State Archeological
Landmark (SAL), and one is listed on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP).
Information for the county in 1985 came primarily from surface collections (79 sites).
Thirty-three sites were tested by hand in 1985, 12 were excavated, and 1 tested by
machine. At the time of this survey 205 sites have been recorded in the county.
Recent work by Prewitt and Associates, Inc. in Galveston and Harris counties
(Howard et al. 1992) and others have confirmed the presence of prehistoric sites
ranging from the Paleo-Indian through Late Prehistoric periods. The dates for this span
of time are believed to be from the early Holocene, about 10,000 to 7000 B.C. (Aten
1983:141, 144-152) through the influx of Europeans around A.D. 1700, otherwise
known as the Historic Period.
Archaeological sites in the Clear Creek drainage basin have been identified as
conforming to three types. These are shell middens, terrace sites, and natural mound
sites. The interested reader is advised to consult the report by Howard et al. (1992), the
scholarly work by Aten (1983), and Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas:
A Planning Document published by the Texas Historical Commission (1993) for more
detailed information regarding the kinds of sites found in the area. The report by
Howard et al. (1992) is very thorough in its discussion of previous work in the region.
Although Brazoria County was not included in their investigation, their report, because
of the close proximity of their project area to the current study, is considered by this
author as a major reference for all future work in the region including Brazoria County.

9

The 205 previously recorded sites in Brazoria County are indicative of a number
of earlier investigations. Much of the work in the county consists of small area surveys,
many of which did not locate cultural resources. State and Federal agencies such as
the Corps of Engineers, Galveston District; Texas Water Development Board; and
Texas Department of Transportation have been active in the county and surrounding
area. The remaining studies have been conducted by universities, private contractors,
and avocational archaeologists. Most of these projects can be found by checking the
Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology series sponsored by the Department of
Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission (Moore 1990, 1991, 1992a, 1992b,
1993, 1994), a bibliography of Southeast Texas (Moore 1989), and an ongoing
database published by the Houston Archeological Society (Patterson 1989).

10

METHODS
This investigation was performed utilizing the pedestrian survey method
supported by shovel tests and backhoe trenching. Shovel tests were concentrated in
high probability areas, mainly in sandy areas along the margins of the two oxbow lakes,
landforms rising significantly above the natural terrain (i.e., pimple mounds), and
randomly along the current channel of Chocolate Bayou. Interior areas far from water
were considered low probability and were examined by the survey crew for historic
sites. The area around the oxbow lake ("A") in the northwest corner of the project area
was fairly open with only sparse woods present. The lack of thick woods and the
presence of structures drawn to scale on the project area map provided by the client
made it easy to accurately locate shovel tests and archaeological sites found in this part
of the project area. Figure 3 illustrates the project area with shovel test, shovel probe,
and backhoe trench locations.
The area around oxbow lake "A" was thoroughly shovel tested, and three
prehistoric sites (41BO206 - 41BO208) were found. All obvious sandy soils along the
bank of the current channel of the bayou were shovel tested, and it was found that the
overlying sandy mantle is shallow in this area. Three backhoe trenches were excavated
along the bayou, and each one produced heavy dark clay at the surface and to a depth
of an average of one meter with no buried sandy soil. In addition to the backhoe
trenches, the areas between each trench were probed with a shovel and also produced
clay at the surface. Therefore, the three backhoe trenches along the current channel
are considered to be an adequate sample of the current bank in this part of the project
area.
The area around oxbow lake ("B") in the southeast corner of the project area is
located in a low-lying area that contains pimple mounds and low rises or knolls. The
areas surrounding the mounds and knolls consists of a shallow sandy mantle with clay
at or near the surface. The survey crew walked this area in an attempt to identify any
sandy areas that might contain prehistoric sites. Two pimple mounds were observed.
Both were shovel tested and produced cultural materials (41BO209 - 41BO210). Each
mound was tested in its approximate center and dug to clay.
All excavated matrix from shovel tests and backhoe trenches was screened
using 1/4 inch hardware cloth and recorded on a shovel test log (Appendix I). In all, 36
shovel tests and 23 shovel probes were excavated in the 55.84 acre project area
(Figure 3). All shovel tests were excavated to clay when possible and ranged in depth
from 10 to 90 cm. Once clay was encountered, the shovel tests were continued another
5 to 10 cm in most cases. Because the total area of the project area is 55.84 acres, the
number of shovel tests (n=36) exceeds the number per acre required by the
Archeological Survey Standards for Texas as recommended by the Texas Historical
Commission.

11

Backhoe trenching was utilized to help define the northeast boundary of
prehistoric site 41BO206 and to sample the current channel of the bayou. One trench
(BT 5) was dug at the age of the woods in the vicinity of the two pimple mounds
(41BO209 and 41BO210) and produced fine sandy loam (10YR 7/4) to a depth of 10
cm; from 10 cm to 90 cm was mottled yellow clay. Because of the mottled nature of the
soil, no Munsell reading was taken in this stratum. Samples of the excavated matrix
were passed through 1/4 inch hardware cloth. Each trench was 1.5 meters wide and 4
meters long. They were excavated to clay or through clay in an attempt to search for a
buried sandy stratum. The three trenches along the bayou were excavated to 80 cm
(BT 2) and 100 cm (BT 3 and BT 4). Each trench produced mottled yellow clay from the
surface to the bottom. All backhoe trenches were profiled in the field and examples
appear as Appendix II to this report.
Much of the area has been disturbed through existing structures and other
improvements as well as oil and gas wells and pipelines. These were photographed to
document the disturbed nature of the project area. The negatives of these photographs
are housed at BVRA.
The artifacts were examined in a laboratory setting by William A. Dickens (lithics)
and Linda Wootan Ellis (ceramics). The results of the lithics analysis are presented in
Appendix III, and the ceramics study is presented in Appendix IV.

12

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Although a review of the literature revealed that significant prehistoric and historic
sites are present in Brazoria County, the site records at TARL yielded no previously
recorded archaeological sites in the project area and immediate vicinity. One previously
recorded prehistoric site (41BO166) is located on the west bank of Chocolate Bayou
approximately 1800 meters north of the current project area and is the nearest recorded
site to the area investigated during this study. This site, recorded by James E. Warren
yielded paleontological specimens in a lower stratum and lithic debitage in an upper
stratum in a disturbed area along the bayou (Jim Warren, personal communication, May
10, 2000).
Five prehistoric sites were found in the project area (see Appendix V for a map of
the site locations and shovel tests and probes). They were designated in the field as
temporary sites 1-5 and later changed to 41BO206 - 41BO210 when recorded at TARL.
The five sites are classified in this report as special activity areas where specific tasks
such as tool manufacture and repair were performed as well as providing a base for
subsistence activities such as food preparation, plant gathering, and hunting. The
argument for tool manufacture and repair is based on the presence of lithic debitage
ranging from primary to tertiary flakes. Subsistence activities are supported by the
presence of pottery, an end scraper, and an arrow point.
Site 41BO206 was identified during the survey based on the recovery of flakes,
an arrow point, and ceramics from three shovel tests. This site is situated on a low
sandy terrace or knoll adjacent to Oxbow Lake "A" in the northwestern part of the
project area. Artifacts were found between 10 and 90 cm below the existing ground
surface. It appears that 41BO206 may be a single component site dating to the Late
Prehistoric period. Based on the presence of a Catahoula arrow point (Figure 5a), this
site dates from A.D. 700 to A.D. 1100 (Turner and Hester 1985:168). The presence of
sandy paste pottery at the site is also an indicator of a Late Prehistoric occupation
(Appendix IV). The positive tests were surrounded by negative shovel tests and probes
and one backhoe trench resulting in a site area of approximately 20 meters in diameter.
Although a pipeline supposedly crosses this site, all of the shovel tests excavated
in the site area were in undisturbed soil. It is believed that 41BO206 is an intact site
that may contain significant research potential and should be tested if avoidance is not
possible. This area will not be affected by the proposed construction at Camp Mohawk
County Park.

13

Figure 5. (a) Catahoula Point from 41BO206; (b) End Scraper from 41BO208

Site 41BO207 was identified during the survey based on the recovery of flakes
and ceramics from two shovel tests. This site is situated on a high sandy bank
overlooking Oxbow Lake "A" in the northwestern part of the project area. Artifacts were
found between 10 and 30 cm below the existing ground surface, and Shovel Test 18
yielded one flake between 0 and 15 cm at which point clay was encountered. The
presence of pottery at the site is an indicator of a Late Prehistoric occupation; possibly
post A.D. 1000 (Appendix IV). The positive tests were surrounded by negative shovel
tests resulting in a site area of approximately 40 meters in diameter.
All of the shovel tests were in undisturbed soil. A road passes through the
western edge of the site. Because of the proximity of the site to the edge of the high
bank overlooking the oxbow lake, it is assumed that part of the site may have eroded
into the lake at sometime in the past. Therefore, it is not believed that site 41BO207 is
100% intact; however, the shallow nature of the site suggests it may be a single
component site. It is believed that 41BO207 may contain significant research potential
and should be tested if avoidance is not possible. This area will not be affected by the
proposed construction at Camp Mohawk County Park.
Site 41BO208 was identified during the survey based on the recovery of an end
scraper (Figure 5b), flakes, and ceramics from two shovel tests. The site is situated on
a high sandy bank overlooking Oxbow Lake "A" in the northwestern part of the project
area. Artifacts were found between 10 and 30 cm below the existing ground surface;
clay was encountered between 20 and 30 cm. The presence of bone-tempered and
bone-and-grog tempered ceramics at the site are consistent with Late Prehistoric sites
dating to post A.D. 1400 (Appendix IV). The positive tests were surrounded by negative
shovel tests resulting in a site area of approximately 20 meters in diameter.

14

All of the shovel tests were in undisturbed soil. A road passes to the west of the
site, and it is believed (based on shovel tests) that the site does not extend this far.
Because of the proximity of the site to the edge of the high bank overlooking the oxbow
lake, it is assumed that part of the site may have eroded into the lake at sometime in the
past. Therefore, it is not believed that site 41BO208 is 100% intact; however, the
shallow nature of the site suggests it may be a single component site. It is believed that
41BO208 may contain significant research potential and should be tested if avoidance
is not possible. This area will not be affected by the proposed construction at Camp
Mohawk County Park.
Site 41BO209 was identified during the survey based on the recovery of flakes
and ceramics from one shovel test. The site is situated on a pimple mound adjacent to
Oxbow Lake "B" in the southwestern part of the project area. Artifacts were found
between 10 and 30 cm below the existing ground surface; clay was encountered at 40
cm. The presence of sandy paste ceramics at the site is an indicator of a Late
Prehistoric occupation (Appendix IV). Because of the small size of the site (10 meters
in diameter) on a well-defined landform only one shovel test was excavated.
The single shovel test was in undisturbed soil, and it is believed that the site is
100% intact except for a single rodent burrow. Because of the shallow nature of the
cultural materials, 41BO209 may be a single component site. It is believed that this site
may contain significant research potential and should be tested if avoidance is not
possible. This area will not be affected by the proposed construction at Camp Mohawk
County Park.
Site 41BO210 was identified during the survey based on the recovery of two
flakes from one shovel test. The site is situated on a pimple mound adjacent to Oxbow
Lake "B" in the southwestern part of the project area. Artifacts were found between 10
and 30 cm below the existing ground surface; clay was encountered at 50 cm. No
ceramics or other diagnostic artifacts were found; therefore, the age of this site is not
known. Because of the small size of the site (10 meters in diameter) on a well-defined
landform only one shovel test was excavated.
The single shovel test was in undisturbed soil, and it is believed that the site is
100% intact. Because of the shallow nature of the cultural materials, 41BO210 may be
a single component site. It is believed that this site may contain significant research
potential and should be tested if avoidance is not possible. This area will not be
affected by the proposed construction at Camp Mohawk County Park.

15

Five apparently intact prehistoric sites were found in the project area. These
sites represent part of a regional pattern of utilization that was present during the Late
Prehistoric period of Texas prehistory. It is, therefore, important to view these sites from
a holistic perspective and not as individual sites, some containing few artifacts. When
the sites are treated as part of a greater occupation of the area, it makes sense to view
them as significant. Another argument for significance is the fact that work by
professional archaeologists along this segment of Chocolate Bayou (a major tributary of
the region) has been sparse, and few sites have been recorded. Also, pimple mounds
are vanishing at an alarming rate, mainly due to development of the areas where they
are known to occur. In the project area we have two undisturbed examples that should
be protected or tested for significance if they are to be affected by construction.

16

RECOMMENDATIONS
Five prehistoric sites (41BO206 - 41BO210) were found within the project area.
These sites are believed to possess research potential, and it is recommended that they
be subjected to Phase II significance testing if avoidance is not possible. According to
Mark Hansen, Parks Director for Brazoria County, the five sites will be avoided. Plans
for site avoidance are discussed in Appendix VI to this report. It is recommended that
construction be allowed to proceed as planned in the remainder of the project area. It is
always possible that archaeological sites are missed during any archaeological survey.
Should evidence of a prehistoric or historic site in the project area not discussed in this
report be discovered during construction, all work in this area must cease immediately
until the Archeology Division, Texas Historical Commission can evaluate the situation.

17

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, Lawrence E.
1983 Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press.
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview. Office of
the State Archeologist, Special Report 28. Texas Historical Commission.
Crenwelge, Gerald W., Jack D. Crout, Edward L. Griffin, Michael L. Golden, and Janet
K. Baker
1981 Soil Survey of Brazoria County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
Howard, Margaret A., Martha Doty Freeman, and C. Britt Bousman
1992 Archeological Reconnaissance in the Third Reach of the Clear Creek
Flood Control Project, Galveston and Harris Counties, Texas. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Report of Investigations Number 85.
Moore, William E.
1989 Archeological Bibliography for the Southeastern Region of Texas. Texas
Historical Commission, Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report
31.
1990 Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1988. Texas Historical
Commission, Department of Archeological Planning and Review,
Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1.
1991 Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1987. Texas Historical
Commission, Department of Archeological Planning and Review,
Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 2.
1992a Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1990. Texas Historical
Commission, Department of Archeological Planning and Review,
Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 3.
1992b Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1991. Texas Historical
Commission, Department of Antiquities Protection, Abstracts in Texas
Contract Archeology 4.
1993 Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1989. Texas Historical
Commission, Department of Antiquities Protection, Abstracts in Texas
Contract Archeology 5.

18

Moore, William E. (continued)
1994 Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1992. Texas Historical
Commission, Department of Antiquities Protection, Abstracts in Texas
Contract Archeology 6.
Patterson, Leland W.
1989 A Data Base for Inland Southeast Texas Archeology. Houston
Archeological Society Report 6.
Turner, Ellen Sue, and Thomas R. Hester
1985 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press.

19

Appendix I: Shovel Test Log
________________________________________________________________
Shovel Test Depth
Diameter
Results
________________________________________________________________
01

73 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at 70 cm)

02

35 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (dug through fill and disturbed
earth)

03

20 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at 20 cm)

04

50 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (rusty iron pipe and unidentified
pieces of rusty metal; clay at 50 cm)

05

10 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at 5 cm)

06

55 cm

30 x 50 cm

3 flakes; 6 ceramics (clay at 50 cm)
[41BO206]

07

53 cm

30 x 50 cm

12 flakes; 1 ceramic; 1 arrow point (clay
at 48 cm) [41BO206]

08

10 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at surface)

09

10 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at 10 cm)

10

20 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at 10 cm)

11

20 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at 10 cm)

12

10 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at surface)

13

10 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at surface)

14

15 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at 10 cm)

15

50 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at 45 cm)

16

15 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at 15 cm)

17

35 cm

30 x 50 cm

1 flake; 4 ceramics (clay at 30 cm)
[41BO207]

18

15 cm

30 x 50 cm

1 flake (clay at 15 cm) [41BO207]

________________________________________________________________
Shovel Test Depth
Diameter
Results
________________________________________________________________
19

05 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at 5 cm)

20

20 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at 20 cm)

21

20 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at 20 cm)

22

25 cm

30 x 50 cm

3 flakes (clay at 25 cm) [41BO207]

23

10 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at surface)

24

10 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at surface)

25

10 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at 10 cm)

26

15 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at 12 cm)

27

20 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at 20 cm)

28

20 cm

30 x 50 cm

1 end scraper; 5 flakes; 3 ceramics (clay
at 20 cm) [41BO208]

29

35 cm

30 x 50 cm

5 flakes; 10 ceramics (clay at 30 cm)
[41BO208]

30

15 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (disturbed; did not dig to clay)

31

10 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at surface)

32

22 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (disturbed; did not dig to clay)

33

90 cm

30 x 50 cm

1 flake; 22 ceramics (did not dig to clay)
[41BO206]

34

60 cm

30 x 50 cm

sterile (clay at 30 cm)

35

40 cm

30 x 50 cm

3 flakes; 2 ceramics (clay at 40 cm)
[41BO209]

36
50 cm
30 x 50 cm 2 flakes (clay at 40 cm) [41BO210]
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX II
BACKHOE TRENCH PROFILES

APPENDIX III: LITHIC ANALYSIS
Introduction
The survey conducted at Camp Mohawk by Brazos Valley Research
Associates (BVRA) resulted in locating and testing five archaeological sites
(41BO206 - 41BO210). All five sites are located along the margins of oxbow
lakes, former channels of Chocolate Bayou. One site (41BO206) is located on a
terrace or knoll adjacent to an oxbow lake in the northwest corner of the project
area, two (41BO207 and 41BO208) are located on raised terraces overlooking
the same oxbow lake, and two (41BO209 and 4BO210) are located on pimple
mounds adjacent to an oxbow lake in the southeast corner of the project area.
These sites yielded a total of one projectile point (41BO206), one edge modified
blade/flake (41BO208); and 37 pieces of debitage: 41BO206 [n=17], 41BO207
[n=5], 41BO208 [n=10], 41BO209 [n=3], 41BO210 [n=2].
Lithic Analysis
The following is a discussion of the lithic artifacts recovered from each
site. The analysis of flake debitage can be an invaluable tool in determining
those activities and/or strategies conducted at a particular site. To accomplish
this, a number of attributes were coded for and recorded for a statistical and
comparative evaluation. The process began with size grading each flake. It has
been determined that reductive processes and stages of reduction can be
defined through the maximum size of a flake (Stahle and Dunn 1982:86);
therefore, each flake was size graded through a series of eight nested screens.
The screen sizes are: (1) 50 mm or 2 inches, (2) 37.5 mm or 1 1/2 inches, (3) 25
mm or 1 inch, (4) 19 mm or 3/4 inch, (5) 12.5 mm or 1/2 inch, (6) 9.5 mm or 3/8
inch, (7) 6.3 mm or 1/4 inch, and (8) less than 6.3 mm.
Additional debitage variables coded for included material type, presence
of cortex, heat treatment, platform preparation, type of bulb of percussion, and
flake termination. The type of material is useful in determining the method of
material procurement, preparation, reduction, and ultimate artifact morphology
(Dockall 1991). The presence and amount of cortex helps determine the type
and degree of reduction applied to a core or flake. For example, most of the raw
material from the project area are small chert gravels that are completely covered
with a hard "rind" called cortex that is unsuitable for tool use. Thus, as the
cobble is reduced, the cortex is also removed and, as the cobble is further
reduced, the amount of cortex is proportionately reduced until finally removed.
Three cortex stages have been established: (1) primary decortication flakes, or
those whose platforms and most of the dorsal surfaces are completely with
cortex; (2) secondary decortication flakes, or those partially covered with varying
amounts of cortex on the platform and dorsal surface; and (3) interior or tertiary
decortication flakes which are those having no cortex.

The identification of heat alteration can help determine whether purposeful
annealing has occurred or if heating was from some other factor. The platform is
the flat surface on top of the flake where the blow removing the flake was
received (Whittaker 1994:14). These platforms are either natural (cortex
covered) or prepared, and their use is a variable controlled by the knapper
(Whittaker 1994:91). Thus, the recognition of platform types can help to further
determine reduction strategies.
The type of bulb of percussion (a swelling immediately below the
platforms) is usually an indicator of whether a hard hammer (stone) percussor or
a soft hammer (bone, antler, or wood) percussor was used. Very prominent
bulbs usually indicate hard hammer use, and more flattened or diffuse bulbs
indicate soft hammer use (Whittaker 1994:185).
Finally, successful tool manufacture is dependant upon each successive
flake removal. When a flake is removed from a core or biface, a "scar" is left on
the core of the surface of the biface, and the type of termination of this scar can
determine whether additional flakes can be removed with desired results. The
most desirable termination type is known as "feathered," and flakes exhibiting
feathered terminations contain distal and lateral edges that are thin and sharp.
This flake type will allow additional flakes to be removed with few problems.
However, "stack" or "hinge" terminations may prevent additional flake removal by
failing to detach evenly or smoothly. Such terminations usually result in a buildup
of material and/or diving into the surface forming "valleys," both of which could
result in unsuccessful reduction and tool manufacture.
Results
41BO206: Shovel tests 6-7 and 33 yielded one projectile point and 17
pieces of debitage. The projectile point (see Figure 5a in the Results and
Conclusions section of this report) is a small arrow point that can be classed as a
Catahoula. It is typical of the type having recurved blade edges, wide flaring at
the shoulder area, and squared barbs. The stem, which is missing in this
example, usually is expanding, but occasionally straight-sided stems are
encountered, and the basal edge is straight to convex. It dates to the Late
Prehistoric between A.D. 700 and A.D. 1100 (Turner and Hester 1993:206; Davis
1995:202-203).

The debitage recovered was size graded and four fell within Grade 6 and
12 within Grade 7. One flake is a primary flake, 6 are secondary flakes, and 10
are interior flakes. Four contain natural platforms, and four have plain platforms
with one that is strongly lipped; the rest being medial or distal fragments with no
platforms remaining. Those containing bulbs of percussion include eight that are
diffuse and one that is strong. Seven flakes can be classed as biface thinning
flakes. Not one is heat altered, but one is crazed from post-manufacture burning.
All of the materials used are regional gravels with some from the Brazos River
and possibly the Colorado River.
These lithics suggest that some lithic reduction was preformed on the site.
Since no bifaces or formal tools were recovered, except for a single arrow point,
it is difficult to establish any specific type of tool manufacturing tasks present.
The small size of the debitage, the biface thinning flakes, and the interior flakes
with natural cortex covered platforms suggest middle to late stage biface
reduction and tool rejuvenation tasks were preformed. The reduction of gravels,
especially small-sized gravels once common in the region, usually requires that
the lateral edges not be reduced until final thinning to preserve as much width as
possible. Therefore, some of the lateral cortex will be retained until the last
thinning stage and, as a result, will often be found on some platforms (Dickens
1993:134-136). Tool rejuvenation may require extensive tool remaking or may
be as simple as edge sharpening or re-shaping, all of which usually result only in
small flake debitage.
41BO207: Shovel tests 17-18 and 22 at this site resulted in the recovery of
five flakes. These included 2 size grade 5, 1 size grade 6, and 2 size grade 7
flakes. One is a secondary flake, and the other four are interior. Only one
contains a platform (which is natural) cortex covered with a diffuse bulb. Those
flakes with distal terminations include 2 feathered, 1 hinged, and 1 overshot.
One flake can be classed as a biface thinning flake. All are made of local
gravels, and no burning is indicated.
The artifact recovery at this site is small with no diagnostics recovered.
The few pieces of debitage found suggest activities in lithic maintenance
represented here are similar to those at 41BO206. The single flake with a cortex
platform and the various termination types from the other flakes, as well as the
biface thinning flake, all suggest the probability that middle to late stage biface
reduction and/or tool maintenance activities had occurred here.

41BO208: Shovel tests 28 and 29 at this site recovered one utilized flakes
and ten flakes. The utilized flake is an end scraper made on a small flake with a
prominent longitudinal dorsal ridge (see Figure 5b in the Results and
Conclusions section of this report). This modified end is slightly curved
downward, and the modification was preformed unifacially on the dorsal surface.
Flakes having this ventral curve at the end of a flake and a longitudinal ridge on
the dorsal surface (presumably for added strength) were often selected for use
as thumb scrapers (Johnson 1997:222-223). Some minor abrasion and rounding
are present on the modified edge, and the remaining portion is small, suggesting
it was broken in use. Many of these tool types (end scrapers) were probably
used for working with hides; however, the specific use of this particular piece
cannot be determined.
The flakes included 3 Grade 5, 5 Grade 6, and 2 Grade 7 flakes. Six are
secondary, and four are interior. Five have plain platforms with no preparation, 1
contains a strong bulb, and 4 are diffuse. Those with terminations include 4
feathered, 1 hinge, and 1 step. One lip flake and three biface thinning flakes are
also represented. One flake is of opal or opalized wood, and the rest are of local
gravels. One flake has been crazed from heat, and another is colored red on
both of its surfaces from exposure to heat.
Activities indicated from these artifacts include middle to late stage biface
reduction and tool maintenance tasks. The strong bulb of percussion indicates a
hard hammer (stone) use, and the more diffuse bulbs of percussion indicate a
soft hammer (bone, antler, or wood) use. However, diffuse bulbs can also be
produced with a hard hammer. When the blow is light or "relaxed," the hard
hammer is "dragged" over the platform, or the point of contact (platform) is struck
by a wide or flattened hard hammer surface. Lipped flakes can also be produced
in this same manner, but are more prevalent in the use of "softer" forms of hard
hammers, such as some limestone. It is highly likely that a hard hammer was the
primary reduction tool in use here, with final edge trimming and modifications
accomplished through pressure flaking utilizing small antler or bone tools.
Evidence for the latter would be very small flake debitage, size grades less than
7, none of which were recovered. The presence of an end scraper indicates that
some subsistence or hunting activities were also conducted.
41BO209: The artifact recovery from this site (shovel test 35) comprises
three flakes. One is size grade 5 and the other two are size grade 6. Two are
secondary flakes, and one is an interior flake. Only one flake has a platform,
which is plain with a diffuse bulb. No terminations are present, and no burning is
indicated. All materials are of local gravels. The only activities represented by
the debitage are some lithic reduction or tool maintenance tasks.

41BO210: The artifacts recovered (shovel tests 35 and 36) from this site
are two flakes. Both are size grade 6. Two are secondary flakes, and one is an
interior flake. The single platform represented is plain with a diffuse bulb and is
lipped. The single termination is feathered and is a biface thinning flake. No
burning is indicated, and all materials are from local gravels. Little can be said of
the activities represented here. However, it is highly likely that those activities
here (41BO210) are similar to those conducted at the other sites, especially
41BO209.
Discussion
The lithic analysis of the materials recovered from sites 41BO206 41BO210 indicate that typical reduction activities, tool maintenance tasks, as well
as various subsistence activities were conducted on these sites. Many of the
activities may have centered on hunting, plant gathering or other subsistence
related tasks. The artifacts counts are small, but are sufficiently dense enough
when considering these were recovered in 30 cm shovel tests, to expect that
greater artifact densities may be present.
Pimple Mounds
At one time, pimple mounds were probably the most common type of site
for archaeological remains in the region. These sandy mounds are geologic
features that have origins in, at least, the late Pleistocene. The exact nature of
their formation is still not clear, but it appears that some began formation in the
Pleistocene, some have formed since, some still are, and supposedly will
continue to form in the future. These mounds are usually 18 to 24 inches high
and average 50 to 60 feet across. They appear to have been most abundant
along watercourses, but they are also often found in areas devoid of streams.
The very nature of these mounds makes them an important feature in the region.
The sandy nature of their composition and the rise above the more flood prone
terrain affords excellent protection from standing water, often very prominent in
bottomlands throughout the region. Perhaps the earliest account of their
usefulness was recorded by Nicolás de Lafora, who wrote a daily account of the
Marqués de Rubí's 1767 Inspection Tour of Northeastern New Spain (Southeast
Texas). At one point, approaching the Trinity River, in the vicinity of the PolkHardin-San Jacinto County line, Lafora recorded that they encountered an area
where the ground was covered in water except for a number of flat-topped
mounds, from 12 to 18 feet in diameter rising 3 to 6 feet above the water table.
Passage through this area was considered impossible without the aid of these
dry mounds, which served as resting places (Foster 1995:189).

Hundreds of sites containing thousands of these mounds once existed
throughout the region, but over the last hundred years, expansion along all the
regions major waterways has destroyed the majority of these sites. Local artifact
collectors who know the worth of such sites have dug up many hundreds more.
Archaeologists have traditionally ignored these sites due to their general overall
low artifact yield, yet the very first archaeological dig in Harris County was
conducted on a number of sites in the Addicks Reservoir by Joe Ben Wheat
(1954). These sites were all sandy mounds, and these contained a very high
density of cultural materials.
One problem with pimple mounds is they often have small artifact
densities that attract little archaeological interest. Yet, many of these sites
served for a multitude of small activities over a long period of time. The fact that
mound formation, in many cases, may have also led to sporadic or only
occasional use, due to an unsatisfactory low profile of a "young" mound. Some
pristine mounds may have been visited any number of times, such as at Addicks
Reservoir, while others were used only occasionally. Family units, for example,
moving through the region could easily spread out and stay for a time on a
number of mounds, conduct a number of subsistence related activities, and then
move on. Small activity areas such as these probably made up the greatest
number of sites in the coastal region of Texas. Therefore, the study of these
sites, especially where groups of mounds exist, could easily provide a better
picture of the region's prehistoric land use than is currently known.
It is not the purpose of this analysis to lead a campaign to save or study
these mounds. However, since several were found in the project area and that
these do contain cultural material, their value as an important regional site type
should not be overlooked.

References Cited
Davis, Dan R. Jr.
1995 Prehistoric Artifacts of the Texas Indians. Pecos Publishing
Company, San Antonio, Texas.
Dickens, William A.
1993 Tool Types, Reduction Strategies, and Local gravel: Analysis of
Lithic Artifacts. In The Brazos Valley Slopes Archaeological Project:
Cultural resources Assessments for Texas A&M University Animal
Science and Research Complex, Brazos County, Texas, edited by
Alston V. Thoms, pp. 113-144. Reports of Investigations Number
14. Archaeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University,
College Station.
Dockall, John E.
1991 Chipped Stone technology at the NAN Ruin, Grant County, New
Mexico. Unpublished Master's thesis, Department of Anthropology,
Texas A&M University, College Station.
Foster, William C.
1995 Spanish Expeditions Into Texas 1689-1768. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Johnson, Jay K.
1997 Stone Tools, Politics, and the Eighteenth-Century Chickasaw in
Northeast Mississippi. American Antiquity 62(2):215-230.
Stahle, David W., and James A. Dunn
1982 An Analysis and size Distribution of Waste Flakes from the
Manufacture of Bifacial Tools. World Archaeology 14(1):84-97.
Turner, Ellen Sue, and Thomas R. Hester
1993 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Gulf Publishing
Company, Houston, Texas.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1954 The Addicks Dam Site: An Archaeological Survey of the Addicks
Dam Basin, Southeast Texas. River Basin Surveys Papers,
Number 4, pp. 143-252. Smithsonian Institution Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin 154, Washington.
Whittaker, John C.
1994 Flintknapping: Making and Understanding Stone Tools. University
of Texas Press, Austin.

APPENDIX IV
CERAMIC ANALYSIS: BY LINDA WOOTAN ELLIS

APPENDIX V
MAP OF SITES AND SHOVEL TESTS AND PROBES

APPENDIX VI
SITE AVOIDANCE PLANS

AFFECTS OF PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION
41BO206
This site is on a low sandy terrace or knoll adjacent to the margin of the
main Oxbow Lake and is covered with grass and trees. It is between the lake
and an adjacent, existing paved road. There are no plans for construction in this
area as depicted on the Site Plan: Existing Conditions, Proposed Facilities &
Future Facilities prepared by Duke Landscape Architecture + Planning. The site
will remain a grassy area as confirmed by Mr. Hansen (personal communication
to William E. Moore, June 1, 2000). The paved road, which does not affect the
site area, will remain as is and will not be widened. No temporary or permanent
easements are planned in this area.
41BO207
This site is located on a high sandy bank overlooking the main oxbow lake
and is covered with some grass and a few trees. The main site area is between
the edge of the bank and an adjacent existing, paved road. Shovel test 18,
which produced 1 flake and clay at 15 cm, is on the other side of the road, but
this is the only positive test found in this area. According to the Site Plan:
Existing Conditions, Proposed Facilities & Future Facilities prepared by Duke
Landscape Architecture + Planning, a wooden pier will be constructed on the
lower terrace below the site. Access to the site will be by a trail that will be built
up on the existing surface and wooden steps to the terrace below.
The site area will remain intact as confirmed by Mr. Hansen (personal
communication to William E. Moore, June 1, 2000). The paved road, which
passes through the southern edge of the site, will remain as is and will not be
widened, and no temporary or permanent easements are planned for this narrow
strip of land overlooking the lake. If there is a change in plans you will be notified
immediately.
41BO208
This site is located on a high sandy bank overlooking the main oxbow lake
and is covered with some grass and a few trees. The entire site, based on
shovel testing, is between the edge of the bank and an adjacent existing, paved
road. There are no plans for construction in this area as depicted on the Site
Plan: Existing Conditions, Proposed Facilities & Future Facilities prepared by
Duke Landscape Architecture + Planning. The site area will remain intact as
confirmed by Mr. Hansen (personal communication to William E. Moore, June 1,
2000). The paved road will remain as is and will not be widened, and no
temporary or permanent easements are planned for this narrow strip of land
overlooking the lake.

41BO209
This site is located on a pimple mound in the wooded, natural area of the
park. It is in an area where the only proposed improvements are a trail that will
transport visitors through this interesting part of the park. The path of the trail as
depicted on the Site Plan: Existing Conditions, Proposed Facilities & Future
Facilities prepared by Duke Landscape Architecture + Planning is tentative and
subject to change. According to Mr. Hansen, the route of the trail will be planned
with avoidance of site 41BO209 in mind (personal communication to William E.
Moore, June 1, 2000). It is important to note that construction of the trail will be
built up on the existing surface and, no matter where it is placed; it will not affect
the subsurface of the area.
41BO210
This site is located on a pimple mound in the wooded, natural area of the
park. It is in an area where the only proposed improvements are a trail that will
transport visitors through this interesting part of the park. The path of the trail as
depicted on the Site Plan: Existing Conditions, Proposed Facilities & Future
Facilities prepared by Duke Landscape Architecture + Planning is tentative and
subject to change. According to Mr. Hansen, the route of the trail will be planned
with avoidance of site 41BO210 in mind (personal communication to William E.
Moore, June 1, 2000). It is important to note that construction of the trail will be
built up on the surface and, no matter where it is placed; it will not affect the
subsurface of the area.
Summary
It is the intention of Brazoria County to avoid all five archaeological sites
present within the boundaries of Camp Mohawk County Park. The only site that
may be affected is 41BO207. Should this be the case, Brazoria County is
agreeable to additional shovel testing or significance testing prior to construction
of the proposed elements that will affect the site.

