Archeological Survey of the FM 723
Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM
1093, Fort Bend County, Texas
CSJs: 0188-09-040
Permit No. 7293
Prepared by: Bruce A. Darnell, Julian A. Sitters, and Heath Bentley, AmaTerra
Environmental, Inc.
Date: December 2017

The environmental review, consultation, and other actions required by applicable Federal environmental laws for this project are being, or have been,
carried-out by TxDOT pursuant to 23 U.S.C. 327 and a Memorandum of Understanding dated December 16, 2014, and executed by FHWA and TxDOT.

ABSTRACT
In June 2015, AmaTerra Environmental, Inc. began an intensive archeological survey for the Farm-toMarket (FM) 723 expansion project, north of the City of Rosenberg, Fort Bend County, Texas (CSJ#
0188-09-040). Work was delayed due to a lack of right-of-entry (ROE) into portions of the project area.
After ROE was granted, archaeological survey was completed in late August of 2017. The total project
length is approximately 9.3 miles, or about 228.11 acres, of which 97.9 acres are proposed new Rightof-Way (ROW). AmaTerra conducted the archeological survey under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 7293.
Archeological investigations consisted of a pedestrian survey, the manual excavation of 199 shovel
tests, and the mechanical excavation of eight backhoe trenches throughout the Area of Potential Effect
(APE). Field archeologists observed numerous landscape modifications, including, but not limited to,
transportation, agricultural, and residential activities. A prehistoric archeological site, 41FB352, and a
historic period archeological sites, 41FB353, were recorded during field investigations; neither is
recommended as eligible to the National Register. However, Site 41FB352 within the APE is situated in
close proximity to a historic family cemetery, the Briscoe Family Cemetery and it is possible that
unmarked graves may be present within the APE at this location. As backhoe scraping was not
permitted on this property during the survey, it remains unknown whether graves are present in the
APE. Based on the results of field investigations, no additional archeological investigations are
warranted for any portion of the APE accessed during this survey. However, a number of properties
within the APE were not surveyed due to a lack of right-of-entry. AmaTerra recommends that survey
be conducted in these parcels, as well as further investigations for unmarked graves in the portion of
the Briscoe Family Cemetery parcel that overlaps the APE. No artifacts were collected during this survey
and project records will be curated at the Texas Archaeological Research Laboratory in Austin.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ………………………………………………………………………………..……….….………..1
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ……………………….……...…………6
CHAPTER 2. PROJECT BACKGROUND ………………………………………………………...………….11
2.1 Environmental Setting ……………………………………………………………………..11
2.2 Cultural Background ……………………………………………………..…….…………..14
CHAPTER 3. PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS …………………………………………..……….………….20
CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY…………………………………………………………..….….…..………23
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS ……………………………………………………………..……..……..…………25
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS …………………………….….....…………44
REFERENCES CITED ……………………………………………………………………….…..……………46

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

2

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. Project location depicted on a topographic map………………………………………………………………………6
Figure 2. Project location on aerial photograph…………………………………………………………………………….……….7
Figure 3. Map depicting parcels within the proposed ROW that warrant survey, where ROE was not granted….8
Figure 4. Geology and PALM of the APE………………………………………………………………………………………….….16
Figure 5. Soils within the APE………………………………………………………………………………………………………….…17
Figure 6. Project APE depicted on aerial photograph dated 1953……………………………………………………………..18
Figure 7. Project APE depicted on aerial photograph dated 1977……………………………………………………………..19
Figure 8. Previously conducted archaeological investigations within and near the APE……………………………….22
Figure 9. Project APE depicted on a modern aerial photograph showing areas of disturbance along with shovel
test and background trench locations………………………………………………………………………………………….26
Figure 10. View of the general area surrounding backhoe trenches 1, 2 and 3…………………………………………….28
Figure 11. Soil profile of the west wall for BHT1 (left to right: top, middle, bottom), note the distinct asphalt
layer………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………28
Figure 12. View of construction debris observed in BHT1……………………………………………………………………….29
Figure 13. View of concrete slab and pillars in BHT1, facing north…………………………………………………………….29
Figure 14. Detail of concrete spiral concrete stabilizing pillar in BHT1……………………………………………………….30
Figure 15. View of soil profile on the west wall of BHT2………………………………………………………………………….31
Figure 16. View of debris found in BHT2………………………………………………………………………………………………31
Figure 17. Soil profile of the west wall of BHT3……………………………………………………………………………………..32
Figure 18. Fragmented railroad tie and silt fence encountered in BHT3…………………………………………………….33
Figure 19. General view of area surrounding BHT4………………………………………………………………………………..33
Figure 20. Soil profile of the east wall of BHT4……………………………………………………………………………………..34
Figure 21. View of broken timber of pier found in BHT4…………………………………………………………………………35
Figure 22. View of BHT5 profile………………………………………………………………………………………………………….36
Figure 23. Map of site 41FB352…………………………………………………………………………………………………………..38
Figure 24. Artifacts observed at 41FB353…………………………………………………………………………………………….39
Figure 25. 41FB353 depicted on a 1953 aerial photograph………………………………………………………………………41
Figure 26. 41FB353 depicted on a 1973 aerial photograph………………………………………………………………………..42

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

3

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SUMMARY
In June 2015 and August 2017, on behalf of Ecosystem Planning and Restoration, AmaTerra
Environmental, Inc. (AmaTerra) conducted an archeological survey in advance of the proposed
expansion of Farm-to-Market (FM) 723 north of the City of Rosenberg, in north central Fort Bend
County, Texas (CSJ# 0188-09-040). The project extends approximately 9.3 miles from Avenue D,
crossing the Brazos River, to FM 1093 (Figure 1). The Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT)
proposes to improve FM 723 to a four-lane divided roadway.
Currently, FM 723 is a two-lane rural highway with two 12-foot wide travel lanes. The road from Avenue
D to the Brazos River Bridge also contains one 14-foot wide turn lane and a 5.5-foot wide sidewalk within
a typical Right-Of-Way (ROW) of 60 feet. From the north end of the Brazos River Bridge to Baker Road,
the street has 14-foot wide shoulders and a typical ROW width of 120 feet. Continuing from Baker Road
to FM 359, FM 723 has eight-foot wide shoulders on either side of the travel lanes within a 120-foot wide
ROW, before finally tapering into 2.5-foot wide shoulders within a 120-foot wide ROW from FM 359 to
FM 1093. The entire roadway is bordered on both sides by roadside drainage ditches.
The proposed undertaking would improve FM 723 to a four-lane divided roadway with a flush/raised
median for a left-turn lane along with other improvements. FM 723 from Avenue D to south of the
Brazos River would be expanded into four 11-foot wide travel lanes with 5.5-foot wide sidewalks within
a 60 to 175-foot wide ROW. The Brazos River Bridge will not be modified. From the north end of the
Brazos River Bridge to FM 1093, FM 723 would be expanded into four 12-foot wide travel lanes, with 12foot outside shoulders. The roadway would be divided by an 18-foot raised median and have two-foot
curb offsets. In addition, six detention pond locations are proposed along the ROW. The existing facility
covers 130.21 acres; the proposed improvements would require a total of approximately 97.9 acres of
new ROW (Figure 2).
The Area of Potential Effects (APE) for archeological resources is defined as the footprint of the
proposed project to the maximum depth of impact(s), including all easements, retention pond
locations, and project specific staging locations. Thus, the APE for archeological resources will cover a
total distance of approximately 9.3 miles, within a typical road width of 180 feet. The APE encompasses
97.9 acres of proposed new ROW and 130.21 of existing ROW for a total of 228.11 acres. The proposed
undertaking will be built at grade and therefore the maximum depth of impact would be 4 feet (1.21 m)
or less, except where bridge expansion is proposed, where the depth of impact from the construction
of piers could potentially exceed 25 feet (7.62 m) below the surface, At these locations, impacts would
likely extend below the depth of Holocene-age deposits.
The project is being funded by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). In addition, the proposed
project will involve land and easements owned or controlled by a political subdivision of the State of
Texas and will occur within private property that will be purchased for new ROW. Since the proposed

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

4

project will be built using FHWA funds on land owned or controlled by the State of Texas, the project is
subject to the rules and regulations outlined by Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of
1966, as amended (Section 106), as well as the Antiquities Code of Texas (ACT). Therefore, AmaTerra’s
work conformed to the guidelines under 36 CFR Part 800 and 13 TAC Chapter 26, which outline the
regulations for implementing Section 106 and ACT, respectively.
Coordination with the TxDOT resulted in a survey recommendation for the entire APE. Archeological
investigations consisted of a pedestrian survey, shovel testing of all portions of the APE where Rightof-Entry (ROE) was made available, and backhoe trenching at two major water crossings: the Brazos
River and Jones Creek. The proposed project would be built on both public and private property.
Although access was available to much of the APE, approximately 1.5 miles of the proposed new ROW
was not surveyed during the course of this project due to lack of landowner access. AmaTerra
recommends that these parcels will require survey and shovel testing before construction efforts
commence (Figure 3). Field investigations took place from June 8-12, 2015 and August 21-23, 2017
under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 7293. Rachel Feit acted as Principal Investigator and Bruce A. Darnell
and Julian A. Sitters served as Project Archeologists, while Heath Bentley, Noel Steinle, and Emory
Worrell assisted with field investigations. A total of 188 person hours were expended in the field in
support of this project. Two new archeological sites (41FB352 and 41FB353) were documented, though
neither is recommended as eligible for the National Register. No artifacts were collected during the
investigation and the records from this project will be curated at the Texas Archaeological Research
Laboratory (TARL) in Austin.
This report is divided into six chapters. The project background and cultural overview are discussed in
Chapter 2. Chapter 3 discusses previously conducted cultural resources investigations near the project
area. Chapter 4 includes the field methodology implemented during the project and the results of field
investigations are discussed in Chapter 5. Chapter 6 presents the summary and recommendations.
Appendix A contains the shovel test locations.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

5

Figure 1. Project location depicted on a topographic map.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

6

Figure 2. Project APE depicted on a modern aerial photograph.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

7

Figure 3. Map depicting parcels within the proposed ROW that warrant survey, where ROE was not granted.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

8

CHAPTER 2. PROJECT BACKGROUND
The project area, located just north of downtown Rosenberg in Fort Bend County, Texas, is a rapidly
growing suburban area, experiencing considerable residential and commercial development over the
last decade. Twenty years ago, the majority of the APE was farm or pasture land, with scattered
residential communities or commercial business adjacent to FM 723. Today, the expansion of Houston
has led to the growth of suburbs around Houston like Katy, Richmond, and Rosenberg, Texas.
2.1 Environmental Setting
According to McMahan et al. (1984) the APE lies within the Western Gulf Coastal Plain Level III
Ecoregion. Prior to development, the vegetation of the coastal plains consist primarily of grassland
species with clusters of oak and other woody species. Grass species include little bluestem
(Schizachyrium scoparium), yellow Indiangrass (sorghastrum nutans), brownseed paspalum (paspalum
plicatulum), gulf muhly (Muhlenbergia capillaris), and switchgrass (Panicum virgatum). However, native
vegetative species have largely been replaced by agricultural crops and invasive exotic species. It has
been estimated that 99 percent of the coastal prairies has been lost to agricultural and urban land use.
In areas not actively farmed, vegetation generally consists of a mix of native grasses and introduced
Bermuda and San Augustine varieties, as well as ornamental flowers and shrubs. Surface visibility within
these areas would be variable depending on crop growth and other seasonal variations in vegetation
growth.
Common fauna in this region include swamp rabbit (sylvilagus aquaticus), plains pocket gopher (Geomys
bursarius), nutria (Myocaster coypus), scissor tailed flycatcher (Tyrannus forficatus), killdeer (Charadrius
vociferous), cattle egret (Bubulcus ibis), coyote (Canis latrans), hog-nosed skunk (Conepatus leuconotus),
American alligator (Alligator mississippiensis), Texas blind snake (Leptotyphlops dulcis), Gulf Coast toad
(bufo valliceps), and diamondback terrapin (Malaclemys terrapin).
Two natural sources of water cross the APE: the Brazos River flows west to east across the southern
portion of the project area, and Jones Creek crosses through the middle portion of the APE.
Topography
Overall, the APE is extremely flat coastal plain, with very little variation in the topography. The only
exceptions to this environment are the areas around the Brazos River, Jones Creek, and some small
intermittent drainages, which have cut through the plain and contain gradual-to steep- slopes to the
bottom of the waterway.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

9

Soils and Geology
Deltaic sands, silts, and clays of Quaternary-age typically underlie much of this ecoregion, which are
located on the gently sloping coastal plain. Soils are usually fine-textured clay, clay loam, or sandy clay
loam (Table 1).
Table 1. Soil Units Within the APE
Soil Series

Map
Symbol

Parent Material

Landform

Type

Asa-Pledger
Complex
Lake Charles clay, 2
to 5 percent slopes

AC

Flood plains

Silty clay
loam
Clay

Brazoria clay, 0 to 1
percent slopes,
rarely flooded

Ma

Clemville silt loam,
0 to 1 percent
slopes, rarely
flooded
Clemville silty clay
loam, 0 to 1 percent
slopes, occasionally
flooded
Pledger clay

Mc

Loamy alluvium
of Holocene age
Clayey
fluviomarine
deposits derived
from igneous,
metamorphic and
sedimentary rock
Clayey alluvium
derived from
igneous,
metamorphic and
sedimentary rock
Loamy alluvium
of Holocene age

Churnabog clay, 0
to 1 percent slopes,
frequently flooded
Sandy alluvial land

Sloping alluvial land
Mohat loam, 0 to 1
percent
slopes,
rarely flooded

Lb

Backswamp
s

Solum
Thickness (cm;
Abbott 2001)
80+ inches

Geoarcheologica
l Potential

50-80

Low

Flood plains

Clay

40-60

Moderate-High

Flood plains

Silt loam/silty
loam

>60

Very High

>60

Very High

unknown

unknown

Md

Loamy alluvium
of Holocene age

Flood plains

Pa

Clayey alluvium of
quaternary age
Clayey alluvium

Flood plains

Silty clay
loam/silt
loam/ silty
clay
Clay

Oxbows on
Flood plains

Clay/Silty
clay

80+ inches

Poorly drained

Sa

N/A

Flood plains

Loamy
sand/stratifie
d sand to
loam

60 inches (48
inches to water
table)

Somewhat poorly
drained

Sb
Ya

N/A
Loamy alluvium
derived
from
igneous,
metamorphic and
sedimentary rock

N/A
Flood plains

Clay loam
Loam/very
fine
sandy
loam

80+ inches
80+ inches

Well drained
Well drained

Ra

Geologically, the region is located over the Lissie Formation and the lower Beaumont Formation, which
both date to the Pleistocene (BEG 1992). Typically the Lissie Formation contains lighter colored soils,
mostly Alfisols and are sandy clay loam in texture. The Beaumont Formation has darker, more clayey

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

10

soils associated with Vertisols. A large section of the APE falls within Holocene age alluvium deposits
(Figure 4).
The project APE consist of 10 different soil associations ranging from clays to sands. The majority of
soils in the project area are Pledger clay (Pa), which represent almost half of the project APE (Figure 5).
Pledger soils are located north of the Brazos River, primarily in areas that have been utilized as
agricultural fields. The next most prominent soil type is Brazoria clay, 0 to 1 percent slopes, rarely
flooded (Ma), which are also found north of the Brazos River, in agricultural fields. The remaining soil
types are spread throughout the project area. Table 2 summarizes the various soils types found in the
APE (USDA-NRCS 2015).
Land Modifications and Historical Land Use
The project area consists of land that has been utilized primarily as agricultural fields or pasture. An
aerial from 1953 clearly shows the project area surrounded by farmland, with the exception of the area
south of the Brazos River which had already developed into the Town of Rosenberg (Figure 6). North of
the Brazos River, several structures can been seen within, or near the ROW. Historic period
archeological deposits could be found at these locations. A 1977 aerial photograph illustrates that the
landscape remains relatively unchanged from the 1950s (Figure 7). Modern aerials depict a largely
agricultural setting with some development south of the Brazos River (see Figure 2). North of the
Brazos, there is some commercial and residential development, primarily along the eastern side of the
road. Three large schools have been constructed at the intersection of FM 723 and FM 359. North of FM
359, sporadic residential housing has been constructed along with the occasional commercial business,
including a large orchard near Old Pecan Road and FM 723. Finally, a large residential community was
constructed at the northwestern intersection of Fulshear Gaston Road and FM 723. Despite these
developments, large sections of the APE remain unaltered (Figure 8).
Archeological Site Potential
The deep sandy, clay loams, have the potential for containing intact archeological deposits, especially
near the waterways, their tributaries, and at old oxbow lakes. The historic aerial photographs assessed
by AmaTerra archeologists indicate that historically there were several structures located adjacent to
the APE, suggesting a moderate potential for historic-period archeological materials. Several
archeological surveys have been conducted within, or near, the APE resulting in the recording of one
prehistoric archeological site within one kilometer (0.62 miles) of the APE. The deep soils, presence of
previously recorded sites within the immediate vicinity, the APE’s proximity to water, and a lack of
comprehensive archeological surveys suggest a moderate to high probability for unrecorded prehistoric
sites to be within the APE or nearby.
According to Abbott’s (2001) Potential Archeological Liability Mapping (PALM) for TxDOT’s Houston
District, the soils within the APE have a high potential for archeological remains. Map units 1, 2, 2a and
3 are present within the APE, and according to Abbott’s model all of these soils have potential for

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

11

archeological remains from the surface to various depths. Deep deposits are most likely within map
units 1 and 3, which fall along land between Jones Creek and the project terminus at Rosenberg (see
Figure 4). North of Jones Creek, the APE crosses into PALM map units 2 and 2a, where archeological
sites would most likely be on the surface or shallowly buried. The very southern portion of the project
APE, south of the Brazos River, was labeled a 4 on PALM, indicating no survey was required. The PALM
is a useful resource for predicting the potential for prehistoric archeological deposits, but does not
account for the potential of an area to contain historic materials. Therefore recommendations need to
take into account to the potential for historic deposits independent of the Houston PALM.
Several large swaths of the APE have been disturbed by commercial and residential development). As
a result, investigators believe that only some areas of the APE warranted survey, while others do not
due to disturbances. Areas warranting survey include the areas around the Brazos River, large parcels
south of FM 359, parcels near Jones Creek, and other areas not disturbed by development. It is in these
areas that AmaTerra archeologists focused survey efforts.
2.2 Cultural Background
The project area is located in the Gulf Coast Prairies Region of Southeast Texas. This region has been
extensively researched, and comprehensive chronological sequences have been established (Turner
and Hester 1999). According to research conducted at archeological sites in this region, evidence of
human occupation in the region roughly spans 12,000 years before present (BP). These 12,000 years of
occupation are typically divided into five main periods, based on technological and cultural changes
seen throughout the archaeological record. These five main periods are as follows: the Paleoindian
(12,000/11,500–8,500/8,000 BP); the Archaic (8,500/8,000–2,000/1,500 BP); the Ceramic Period (2,000
BP–1250 BP [AD 700]); the Late Prehistoric (AD 700–1650); and the Historic (AD 1650–1950’s). The
following is a general overview of trends seen during each period, followed by a discussion of what
occurred in the Gulf Coast Prairies Region of Southeast Texas.
Paleoindian (ca. 11,500–8,000 BP)
Generally, there is a lack of data relating to the Paleoindian Period in Southeast Texas and archeological
excavation of any Paleoindian site has yet to be undertaken. While many projectile points such as Clovis,
Plainview, Folsom, Scottsbluff, and San Patrice have been recovered, most were isolated, mixed, or
surface finds, or found in excavations of later contexts (Ricklis 2004). The distribution of artifacts
suggests that most sites occur along major streams or within major stream drainages.
Because of the paucity of evidence, no detailed understanding of settlement mobility and subsistence
patterns during the Paleoindian period in Southeast Texas exists. What evidence does exist suggests
that groups likely engaged in a mix of hunting and gathering, and since many of the lithics recovered
are made of materials that are sparse or absent in the region, extensive movement of people and
materials over the landscape is also suggested (Ricklis 2004).

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

12

Archaic in inland southeast Texas (ca. 8,000–1,500 BP)
Many Archaic sites have been found in this region, mostly near major streams, and these are
represented by flaked stone dart points and other lithic tools. A general outline of dart point chronology
during this period in Southeast Texas is available (Ricklis 2004), yet the lack of any other evidence (i.e.,
faunal, botanical, etc.), allows for little generalization regarding subsistence strategies other than the
suggestion that groups were likely engaged in some form of hunting and gathering. By the Late Archaic
period, the use of poor quality and local lithic materials suggest reduced mobility and smaller, more
localized territories.
The use of cemeteries in this region, most notably the Ernest Witte cemetery, became increasingly
important culturally by the Late Archaic period. These cemeteries could be quite large and often
contained grave goods. For example, Group 2 of the Ernest Witte cemetery contained 145 individuals
along with lithics, bone pins, and shell beads and pendants.
Archaic sites in the Coastal region of Southeast Texas consist mostly of shell middens. Most are located
along the shores of secondary bays or in and around river mouths and deltas (Ricklis 2004). The most
complete Archaic sequence of occupation in this region was recovered from the Eagle’s Ridge site, a
densely stratified shell midden. A large sample of features and artifacts from the earliest part of the
period to the latest were recovered at the midden, which comprises mostly of Rangia cuneata, but also
oyster shells. By the Late Archaic (ca. 3000 BP), the increase in number of sites uncovered has led
researchers to suggest significant population growth occurred during this period.
Ceramic (ca. 2,000–1,250 BP [700 AD])
The Ceramic Period in Southeast Texas has been defined as the point at which ceramics first appeared,
and thus signaling the end of the Archaic Period. During the Early Ceramic period, while ceramics were
introduced from Louisiana and the Lower Mississippi Valley, there is not much evidence of major
changes in lifeways. Ceramic Period artifacts recovered overlying Archaic ones near river drainages
suggest consistent patterns in subsistence and settlement over time. Story et al. (1990) coined the term
Mossy Grove Tradition/Culture to describe groups that occupied areas surrounding Galveston Bay
(including the current project area) during the Ceramic Period.
Late Prehistoric (ca. 700–1650 AD)
This period is usually defined by the introduction of the bow and arrow. Evidence from the Mitchell
Ridge site (41GV66) suggests that the Late Prehistoric in Southeast Texas can be divided into the Initial
Late Prehistoric subperiod, represented by Scallorn arrowpoints, and the Final Late prehistoric period.
The Final Late period correlates with the well-documented Toyah phase, as defined by an abundance
of bison bone and a lithic assemblage geared towards the processing of the meat and hides of large
game (Ricklis 2004).

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

13

Historic (1650–1950s AD)
The Historic Period in Texas begins with the arrival of the Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca in 1528.
During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the French and Spanish made forays into Texas for the
sake of exploration and trade, though no permanent European settlements were successful until the
late seventeenth century. Archeological sites dating to this period contain a mix of both European (e.g.,
metal and glass arrow points, trade beads, and wheel-made or glazed ceramics) and traditional Native
American artifacts (e.g., manufactured stone tools). The effect that Europeans had on Indians in Texas
prior to about 1700 is not well-understood. What is known is that the initial arrival of Spanish and French
missionaries and explorers spread disease that killed, displaced, and fragmented a huge percentage of
the population. As colonization spread from Mexico, many of the Coahuiltecan groups moved
northward to avoid the Spanish. At the same time, invading Indian groups from the north put pressure
on Native American groups in North Texas (Nickels et al. 1997). Historians believe that these pressures
led to intense territorial disputes, further destabilizing Native American populations.
Although it was not officially established until 1837, settlement in Fort Bend County began in the 1820s
as part of Stephen F. Austin’s original colonization efforts. Initial settlers in Fort Bend County were 53
of Austin’s original 297 families who are known as the Old Three Hundred. Many abandoned their
homes during the Runaway Scrape of 1836 and returned to devastation. Richmond, the county seat,
became a thriving trade center and helped rebound the post-war economy.
Slaves were an important factor to the early economy in Fort Bend County. By 1845, it had one of the
largest slave populations in Texas, and in 1860, the slave population was more than double that of the
white population. Dependent on a plantation economy, Fort Bend County had 159 farms which
produced 12,000 acres of cotton, 7,000 acres of corn, and 1,000 acres of sugarcane in 1860. Due to this
economic structure, county residents overwhelmingly supported secession and the Confederacy during
the Civil War. The area was devastated economically during and after the Civil War, with some
plantations being totally destroyed. Agricultural production also dramatically decreased with the
emancipation of slaves. Economic recovery was slow after the Civil War (Ott 2010).
At the close of the nineteenth century, the county’s economy remained dependent on agriculture, but
in the 1880s-1890s small farms and ranches dominated the landscape rather than large plantations. The
national recession of the 1890s, a flood of the Brazos River in 1899, and the 1900 Galveston hurricane
caused economic hardship at the turn of the 20th century in Fort Bend County. This difficulty increased
the rate of farm tenancy and by 1910, 61% of the farmers in the county were tenants. By 1925 a state
recession and poor weather conditions caused 72% of the farms in the county to be managed by
tenants. This trend was eventually relieved by the rural to urban movement and the pull to military
service of the 1940s. Commercial farming declined as residential, business, and industrial development
have reduced the available agricultural land.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

14

The area surrounding Rosenberg was first settled in the early 1820s as part of Steven F. Austin’s Old
Three Hundred colony; however, intensive settlement did not begin until around 1880. In that year, the
county seat, Richmond, refused to grant access to the Gulf, Colorado, and Santa Fe Railway (GCSF). As
a result, the railroad was built to the west where it crossed the Galveston, Harrisburg, and San Antonio
Railway. The junction of these lines resulted in the founding of Rosenberg, named after Swiss
immigrant to Galveston and former GCSF president Henry Rosenberg. Town development was heavily
dependent on the railroads and by 1883, the GCSF had platted land around a city square. As the 1880s
continued, the New York, Texas, and Mexican Railway established headquarters in Rosenberg, and in
1889 the Union Depot was constructed. At the close of the decade the population of Rosenberg reached
1,000, largely due to immigrants from Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Germany. Rosenberg was
incorporated in 1902 and continued to grow, becoming an oil boomtown in the 1920s, and a center for
sulfur mining. Farming and ranching also played an important role in Rosenberg’s development (Myers
2015).

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

15

Figure 4. Geology and PALM of the APE.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

16

Figure 5. Soils within the APE.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

17

Figure 6. Project APE depicted on an aerial photograph dated 1953.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

18

Figure 7. Project APE depicted on an aerial dated to 1977.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

19

CHAPTER 3. PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
According to the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC’s) Archeological Sites Atlas (Atlas) and the
records at the Texas archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), there are no previously recorded
archeological sites within the APE, however, site 41FB252 is located within one kilometer (0.62 mile) of
the APE (Figure 8). The site, located approximately 165 m (ca. 540 feet) west of the APE, is a middle to
late Archaic campsite containing Bulverde, Yarbrough, Gary, Kent, Darl, Marcos, Ensor, Ellis, and
Williams-like projectile points, as well as a bifacial knife, bifacial chopping tool, and large scrapers. The
site was recommended for further study and its current eligibility for the National Register of Historic
Places (NRHP) is undetermined.
Three previously conducted archeological surveys crossed or abutted the APE. The earliest was
conducted in 1987 by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The survey was conducted in two
places along the central portion of the project area. No archaeological sites were located during this
survey. More recently, a survey was conducted in the northern portion of the APE by MAC, Inc. for the
Texas Commission of Environmental Quality (TCEQ) in 2003; and by AmaTerra Environmental, Inc. for
Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) in 2012. Neither of these surveys resulted in the
recordation of archaeological sites.
Within a kilometer (0.62 miles) of the APE, three additional surveys have been conducted including: a
small area survey completed in 1977 (no information provided on the THC website); an area survey near
the southern terminus of the project conducted in 1994 by BC & AD Archaeology for the City of
Rosenberg; and a linear survey completed by HRA Gray & Pape for the United States Department of
Agriculture in 2009. None of these nearby surveys resulted in finding archeological sites within one
kilometer (0.62 miles) of the project area.
In addition, several cemeteries are located within one kilometer (0.62 miles) of the APE, but not within
the APE. These cemeteries, from north to south along the project area, are summarized in Table 2
below.
Several historical markers are found within one kilometer (0.62 miles) of the project area. These include
the markers commemorating pioneers Randolph and John Foster, The Rosenberg Cemetery, The
Vogelsang Building, The Rosenberg Post Office, the First Baptist Church of Rosenberg, the Trone-RayLane House, and the Julius Edward Junker community. None of these resources would be affected by
project activities as they are currently designed.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

20

Name

Table 2. Cemeteries near the FM 723 project
Dates
No. of Graves
Condition

Notes

Washington
Cemetery

1900-1945, 1945-1975

1

Maintained

Spring Green
Baptist Cemetery
Andrews League
Cemetery

Unknown

0

Unknown

1860-1900, 1900-1945,
1945-1975

50

Unknown

1838-present

At least 38

Maintained

Moderately
endangered by
subdivision
encroachment
Occupies six acres
in a pasture
African American
cemetery on two
acres with marked
and unmarked
graves
On private property

1975-Present

1

Maintained

Masonic marker

Unknown

Unknown

Maintained

Unknown

Unknown

Maintained

Masonic, veteran
graves. Fenced.
Three acres
adjacent to
Rosenberg
Cemetery

Briscoe Family
Cemetery
Wilderness Branch
Cemetery
Rosenberg
Cemetery
Our Lady of
Guadalupe Church
Cemetery

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

21

Figure 8. Previously conducted archeological investigations within and near the APE.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

22

CHAPTER 4. METHODOLOGY
Prior to field investigations, archeologists conducted archival research to assess the potential for buried
historic archeological materials. This research involved examining historical maps (Perry-Castaneda
Library 2015) and aerial photographs (EarthExplorer 2015). As mentioned above, archeologists
consulted the Atlas to assess the potential for prehistoric archeological sites within the APE. This not
only allowed investigators to determine the presence of previously recorded archeological sites within
the APE, but also to gain a sense of site types (lithic scatter, vs. occupation site), artifact types (lithic
debitage, mounds, and/or diagnostic artifacts), and average depth of cultural materials below the
surface, among other things. Lastly, the APE was overlaid on aerial based gridded maps and loaded
onto hand-held DeLorme GPS units to aid in navigation.
Archeological investigations were carried out in accordance with the THC/CTA survey standards (as
referenced in 13 TAC 26.20 and THC policy). Archeological fieldwork consisted of pedestrian survey and
the manual excavation of 139 shovel tests at approximately 100 m intervals. In addition, archeologists
excavated a total of four backhoe trenches at locations where the proposed road expansion crossed
natural waterways (Brazos River and Jones Creek). These investigations took place within the existing
and the proposed new ROW currently within public domain, as well as on private property for which the
landowner explicitly granted authorization for the investigation work.
AmaTerra inspected the entire APE for direct effects on foot through visual reconnaissance. As a result,
archeologists observed multiple areas of disturbance. Areas of disturbances were thoroughly
photographed and archeologists made notes on the conditions they encountered during their
investigations. Shovel testing was not conducted within obviously disturbed locations. Disturbances
observed while in the field include artificially raised and levelled surfaces, roadside drainage ditches,
buried utilities, plowed agricultural fields, and natural erosion.
Shovel tests measured 30 cm in diameter and extended to a maximum depth of 80 cm below the surface
or until restrictive features (e.g., water or basal clay) were encountered. The shovel tests were
excavated in 10 cm increments and all soil was screened through a ¼-inch hardware cloth. Relevant
information for all shovel tests was recorded on a standardized form. Shovel tests were backfilled upon
completion. This archeological investigation was a non-collection survey; therefore, artifacts
encountered during the course of the work were returned to their original location.
Backhoe trenches were mechanically excavated by Buddy Nelson using a Bobcat E55. Spatial
constraints determined where the trenches were placed, as well as a trench’s horizontal dimensions;
whereas, the vertical dimensions (depth) were defined by the proposed depth of impacts, the depth of
the water table, and safety. Therefore, trench dimensions varied in length from 6–8.8 m, maintained an
average width of 1.3 m, and extended to depths ranging from 1.8–2.4 m below the surface. A
representative sample of sediment from each soil zone in each trench was screened through ¼-inch

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

23

hardware cloth. Following the excavation of the each trench, the trench walls were intensively
examined for artifacts and features. Relevant information was recorded on standardized forms. Digital
photographs were used to document the excavation of each backhoe trench and soil profile. A profile
and plan map drawing was completed for each trench. The locations of each trench were recorded using
a DeLorme GPS unit. All backhoe trenches were backfilled upon completion.
Archeological sites were defined using the THC/CTA standards (as referenced in 13 TAC 26.20). Thus,
an archeological site had to contain a certain number of cultural materials or features older than 50
years of age within a given area. The definition of a site is: (1) five or more surface artifacts within a 15m (50-foot) radius; or (2) a single cultural feature, such as a burned rock midden or cistern, observed on
the surface or exposed during shovel testing; or (3) a positive shovel test containing at least five total
artifacts; or (4) two positive shovel tests located within 30 m (98 feet) of each other. Archeologists
documented two archeological sites using these criteria.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

24

CHAPTER 5. RESULTS
A review of historic aerial photographs indicated that the project area was primarily utilized as farmland
with a few homesteads dotting the length of the APE. This level of agricultural activity has impacted
the upper levels of the ground surface, disturbing any cultural material in the upper 30-40 cm below the
surface (cmbs), known as the plow zone. Despite this disturbance, AmaTerra investigators excavated
shovel tests in order to evaluate the ground surface beneath the plow zone.
AmaTerra archeologists surveyed the APE through visual inspection and shovel testing, supplemented
with backhoe trenching, from June 8-12, 2015 and August 21-23, 2017 and found the terrain to be flat
and open with large sections containing heavily disturbed soils. Investigators found the APE to be
largely disturbed by earth moving activities, roadway construction, utility line instillation, plowing, and
residential and commercial development. A total of 199 shovel tests (Figure 9) and eight backhoe
trenches were excavated in order to evaluate the APE for subsurface archeological deposits. The
backhoe trenches typically revealed heavily disturbed subsurface soils containing a mix of modern trash
and stabilizing fill material. Soils encountered during shovel testing consisted of thick, compact gray or
brown clay loams terminating between 40-50 cmbs due to heavy compaction throughout the majority
of the APE. Sections of the APE in the north consisted of brown sandy loams to depths of 80 cmbs. Deep
soils encountered through backhoe trenching near the Brazos River revealed heavily disturbed
yellowish and brown clays mixed with fill material and modern construction debris. The backhoe trench
placed near Jones Creek revealed thick, compact clays.
Shovel Testing
AmaTerra archeologists were granted limited access to the project APE. Of the approximately 228 acres
of existing and newly acquired ROW, investigators had access to approximately 93 percent of the
parcels. Fortunately, AmaTerra personnel had access to a number of parcels that were relatively
undisturbed, or around areas thought to be higher probability due to their proximity to permanent
water sources or un-plowed sections of wooded land. Figure 8 illustrates the amount of APE which has
been disturbed through road construction, utility installation, drainage ditches, residential and
commercial construction, and extensive plowing.
Shovel testing began at the northeast bank of the Brazos River and continued north to where the project
terminated at the intersection of FM 723 and FM 1093. At the northern terminus of the APE,
archeologists looped around and tested the western side of the project heading south. Investigators
shovel tested only in parcels that AmaTerra was given ROE. Shovel tests were placed in approximately
100 m intervals. A total of 199 shovel tests were placed throughout the APE, three of which led to the
recovery of prehistoric artifacts (41FB352), and one surficial historic-age artifact scatter was discovered
(41FB353). These sites will be discussed in detail below. Two shovel tests excavated in plowed fields
exposed modern debris consisting of fragmented brown beer bottle glass in the upper 5 cmbs and a
metal wire fragment at 15 cmbs. Additionally, two areas designated for potential retention ponds were
shovel tested. The proposed pond areas were located in plowed field with brown sandy clays.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

25

Figure 9. Project APE depicted on a modern aerial photograph showing areas of disturbance along with shovel test
locations.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

26

Areas of heavy disturbance included the northwestern portion of the APE between Fulshear-Gaston
Road and FM 1093; a high school, junior high school, and middle school at the intersection of FM 359
and FM 723; the subdivision of Kingdom Heights at Evans Road and FM 723; and both sides of FM 723
south of the Brazos River. Much of the remaining portion of the APE consisted of plowed, or previously
plowed fields. Little of the project area appeared to be undisturbed, with an area not accessible
northwest of the Brazos River, and two wooded areas on the west side of FM 723 south of Riverside
Blvd, and near Winner Foster Road.
Soils encountered during shovel testing varied depending at which point along the APE they were
excavated. In the southern portion, near the Brazos River, shovel tests typically consisted of very dark
grayish brown (10YR3/2) clay loam over light yellowish brown (10YR6/4) silty clay loam. Shovel tests
placed near the middle portion of the APE were typically mottled dark brown (7.5YR3/3) clay or clay
loam over very dark gray (7.5YR3/1) clay. Shovel tests located near the northern terminus consisted of
brown (10YR5/3) sandy loam over dark brown (10YR3/2) sandy clay loam. Two proposed retention
ponds in the northern portion of the project area contained soils that were brown or dark brown
(10YR5/3 or 10YR7.5YR3/3) sandy clays.
Backhoe Trenching
A total of eight backhoe trenches were excavated in the project area. Three of the trenches were placed
near the Brazos River crossing at FM 723, one near Jones Creek at the FM 723 crossing (see Figure 9) in
2015 and four in a proposed detention pond area north of the Brazos River crossing in 2017. Trenching
was limited to parcels accessible to AmaTerra archeologists and within the designated ROW. Despite
these limits, investigators attempted to place trenches in areas AmaTerra archeologists determined
had the most potential for intact, deeply buried archaeological resources.
Backhoe Trench (BHT) 1 was excavated at the southwest intersection of FM 723 and the Brazos River,
in a strip of land designated as a city park and owned by the City of Rosenberg. The space for a backhoe
trench was limited due to the constraints of the ROW and various improvements such as the
construction of the Brazos River Bridge and a disc golf course in the park. BHT1 was positioned parallel
to the FM 723 approximately 30-40 meters from the bank of the Brazos River, and measured seven
meters in length, by 1.3 meters wide. The surrounding area was flat and clear, although the terrain
sloped slightly towards the river (Figure 10).
The trench was found to contain three layers or zones and reached a terminal depth of 1.8 meters. Zone
I (0-50 cmbs) consisted of mottled brownish yellow (10YR6/8), yellowish brown (10YR5/8), and light
brownish gray (10YR6/2) sandy clay loam with some gravels and a few roots (Figure 11). Zone 1 was
heavily disturbed most likely as a result of road and bridge construction and from ground stabilizing
activities. One green glass fragment, a piece of metal wire, and some broken concrete and brick
fragments were encountered (Figure 12). Zone II (50-55 cmbs) was a distinct layer of asphalt (see Figure
12), and was most likely the remains of an old road or asphalt truck washout area.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

27

Figure 10. View of the general area surrounding backhoe trenches 1, 2, and 3.

Figure 11. Soil profile of the west wall for BHT1 (left to right: top, middle, bottom), note the distinct asphalt layer.

Below this, Zone III (55-180 cmbs) was very similar to Zone I with soils consisting of mottled brownish
gray (10YR6/8), yellowish brown (10YR5/8), and light brownish gray (10YR6/2) sandy clay loam and
sand. Zone III contained a large amount of construction debris including broken concrete, ceramic
sewer pipe, fragmented brick, and asphalt (see Figure 13). Also encountered at a depth of 140-150
cmbs were two spiral concrete pillars embedded into the soils and a large concrete slab in the
southern portion of the trench, at a depth of about 60 cmbs (Figure 13).

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

28

Figure 12. View of construction debris observed in BHT1.

Figure 13. View of concrete slab and pillars in BHT1, facing north.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

29

Running parallel to each other in a northwest to southeast trajectory, these pillars appear to have been
placed in order to combat erosion and stabilize the banks near the bridge. These concrete pillars
measured roughly six inches in diameter and were situated between the north of the trench and a
concrete slab encountered three meters from the southern end of the trench (Figure 14). The slab
exposed in the trench tilted slightly away from the road and bridge and was mostly likely placed to
inhibit erosion. The trench was terminated at 1.8 meters due to the level of in place concrete and
disturbances.

Figure 14. Detail of concrete spiral concrete stabilizing pillar in BHT1.

Backhoe Trench 2 was placed at the southeast intersection of the river and FM 723, within the limited
ROW available. The terrain very closely matched the area surrounding BHT1: relatively flat with a
slight slope towards the river bank. The trench was positioned parallel to FM 723, approximately 40-50
meters from the river. The trench measured 8.8 meters in length and 1.3 meters wide. BHT2 was
found to contain five distinct zones (Figure 15).
Zone 1 consisted of disturbed, mottled yellowish brown (10YR5/8) and very pale brown sandy clay from
0-23 cmbs. Construction debris and stabilizing fill material including broken concrete, brick and metal
wire was encountered in Zone 1. Zone II (23-60 cmbs) consisted of mottled yellowish brown (10YR5/8),
very pale brown (10YR7/3), and dark yellowish brown (10YR4/6) sandy clay with a large amount of fill
material. Construction debris was encountered in this level and included broken concrete, bright red
floor tile fragments, red ceramic sewer pipe and two pieces of chert likely deposited from road gravel
or fill. Two wire cut metal nails were found mixed with the construction debris (Figure 16). Below this,
Zone III (60-130 cmbs) consisted of a very disturbed level of broken concrete and asphalt and
corresponds to the asphalt lens encountered in BHT1, although more fragmented. Zone IV (130-205
cmbs) was characterized by a thick, compact layer of yellowish red (5YR5/6) clay devoid of cultural
material, terminating at Zone V (205-240 cmbs), which consists of a sterile, very thick, highly compact

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

30

layer of gray (5YR6/1) clay. Generally, BHT2, was very similar to BHT1: extremely disturbed down to the
basal clays.

Figure 15. View of soil profile on the west wall of BHT2.

Figure 16. View of debris encountered in BHT2.

Backhoe Trench 3 was excavated at the northeast intersection of the Brazos River and FM 723, in a flat,
cleared area about 60 meters north of the river bank (see Figure 9). The entire area appeared to have
been washed out and evidence of disturbance caused by bridge construction was evident on the surface.
Despite this disturbance, AmaTerra excavated a trench in order to evaluate deeply buried deposits.
BHT3 contained only two distinct levels or Zones (Figure 17): Zones I (0-150 cmbs) and II (150-180 cmbs).
Zone I contained disturbed, mottled brownish yellow (10YR6/8), yellowish brown (10YR5/8), and light
brownish gray (10YR6/2) sandy clay loam.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

31

Figure 17. Soil profile of the west wall of BHT3.

Modern debris was observed at this level, including a broken railroad tie at 120 cmbs, a metal T-post at
about one meter in depth, and a silt fence and wire and cloth silt fence section at 120 cmbs (Figure 18).
Below this, Zone II consisted of reddish brown (5YR5/3) and gray (5YR5/1) thick, compact clay. This zone
was absent of archeological material and the water table was encountered at 180 cmbs.
Backhoe Trench 4 was excavated in a cleared area southwest of the intersection of FM 723 and Jones
Creek. The area was open and flat, and appeared to be the only available space that wasn’t disturbed
and still within the ROW (Figure 19). AmaTerra did not have access to surrounding parcels. BHT4
measured six meters in length and 1.3 meters wide. Soils in this area were less disturbed than those
around the Brazos River, with four distinct levels encountered (Figure 20).

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

32

Figure 18. Fragmented railroad tie and silt fence encountered in BHT3.

Figure 19. General view of the area surrounding BHT4.

Zone I (0-80 cmbs) consisted of dark yellowish brown (7.5YR4/6) clay mixed with strong brown
(7.5YR4/6) sandy clay. The only cultural material encountered in Zone I was a 60 centimeter milled
lumber beam or pier extending from the ground surface to about 70 cmbs (Figure 21). This timber may
be an old bridge pier, although it is equally as likely it represents a piece of debris deposited during a
flooding episode, as no associated timbers or features were found.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

33

Figure 20. Soil profile of the east wall of BHT4.

Below this, Zone II (80-125 cmbs) consisted of dark gray (10YR4/1) thick, blocky clay. A single
fragmented mussel shell was encountered at 100 cmbs. Zone III (125-175 cmbs) consisted of a sterile
layer of mottled sandy clay and clay. The lowest level, Zone IV, was characterized by strong brown
(7.5YR4/6) clays before encountering the water table at 195 cmbs. No cultural material was encountered
in Zone IV.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

34

Figure 21. View of broken timber or pier found in BHT4.

Backhoe trenches 5 through 8 were excavated in a proposed detention pond area located in a hay field
on the east side of FM723, 325 meters north of the Brazos River crossing. Trenches were spaced
throughout a tall-grass field across relatively level, open terrain. Consistent soils were encountered in
all four trenches placed within the area (Figure 22). These consisted of three separate layers of soil. The
top layer Zone I, consisted of dark brown (7.5YR 3/4) clay that ranged from zero to 80 cmbs and zero to
100 cmbs. Zone II is composed of very dark gray (10YR 3/1) clay with moderate pebbles and small gravel
inclusions and extends from the bottom of Zone I to depths that range from 180 to 190 cmbs where it
is underlain by Zone III. Zone III consists of yellowish red (5YR 4/6) silt loam that extends to depths that
range from 240 to 260 cmbs. No prehistoric or historic cultural materials were observed within trenches
5 through 8.
AmaTerra archeologists had limited access to portions of the APE, and the ROW near areas designated
for trenching along the bank of Brazos was narrow, forcing investigators to trench in what turned out
to be a heavily modified environment. Deep subsurface testing from backhoe trenching supported
shovel testing and revealed a generally disturbed ground surface lacking any cultural material. Modern
construction debris at depths of greater than one meter demonstrate the extent of disturbance in the
areas trenched for cultural materials. Additionally, trenches excavated in the proposed detention pond
area (BHT 5 to 8) did not recover any signs of buried cultural material. No sites were recorded as a result
of backhoe trenching.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

35

Figure 22. View of BHT5 profile.

Newly Recorded Sites
Two new archeological sites were recorded throughout the course of survey. These include one buried
prehistoric site, 41FB352, and one surficial historic age artifact scatter named 41FB353. Both of these
sites contain materials that are limited in diversity and occur in shallow depths. Neither site is
recommended for NRHP listing.
41FB352
41FB352 consists of a buried prehistoric lithic scatter located on a stream terrace that overlooks a small
unnamed drainage, 600 meters west of Jones Creek, and 5.58 miles north of the Brazos River (Figure
23). The site is located within the ROW along the west side of FM723 in between Winner Foster Road
and a private road. The fenced Briscoe Family Cemetery is located approximately 400 feet west of the
APE and unmarked graves could extend into the APE. The site dimensions are defined by the
distribution of positive shovel tests and measures 1,005 square feet. The site area occurs within an open
manicured yard of private property under the shade of mature pine, elm and post oak trees.
Groundcover consists of a dense patch of St. Augustine grass which limited ground surface visibility to
between zero and five percent. According to the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service (USDA-NRCS 2017), soils present within the site area include Lake

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

36

Charles clay with two to five percent slopes. This series is composed of black (2.5Y 2/1) to very dark gray
(2.5Y 3/1) clay which extends to depths that are greater than one meter. Shovel tests placed within the
site encountered grayish brown (10YR 5/2) sandy loam that overlays very dark gray (10YR 3/1) clay loam
at depths that range from 50 to 60 cmbs.
41FB352 was discovered during shovel testing along the proposed expansion of the ROW. A total of six
shovel tests were placed within the site area, three of which led to the recovery of prehistoric artifacts.
The material observed at this site consists of 17 pieces of lithic debitage recovered from depths that
range from 10 to 60 cmbs. These include a cortical flake, interior flakes (n=7) and angular debris (n=9).
The majority of these artifacts (12 of 17), which includes all angular debris and the cortical flake, were
recovered from between 10 and 60 cmbs in one shovel test (DS-07). The remaining five interior lithic
flakes were recovered from between 40 and 60 cmbs in two shovel tests, named HB-07 and HB-08. All
artifacts were composed of light yellowish brown, pink and gray chert, jasper and red fine-grained chert.
Soils encountered in shovel tests placed within this parcel were intact and only contained prehistoric
cultural remains.
The current fenced boundary for the Briscoe Family Cemetery is located about 400 feet west outside of
the proposed ROW at the 41FB352 location, but the dedicated cemetery parcel extends east all the way
to the existing roadway. Shovel testing within the proposed ROW did not reveal any evidence that
would suggest that graves are within the APE. However, according the Mason Briscoe and Dyal
Schlitzkus, the family believes that unmarked graves of enslaved and freed blacks could be present
outside the fenced limits of the cemetery and may well extend all the way to FM 723. Although no
surface or subsurface evidence of graves was noted during the survey, Amaterra recommends that this
area nevertheless be scraped prior to construction to confirm that unmarked graves are not present
within the APE. AmaTerra did not have permission to enter the property with a backhoe and therefore
could not conduct those investigations during this survey.
To summarize, 41FB352 is a light lithic scatter of an unspecific prehistoric age that is buried between 10
and 60 cmbs. The site is in close proximity to FM 723 and it is highly likely that this site once extended
into the existing ROW, and may well extend outside the proposed new ROW to the west. A small
number (n=17) of artifacts that are mostly limited to lithic debitage of early stages in manufacturing
were observed at the site, with no features faunal materials, shell or charcoal observed. It is possible
that there are additional components of the site outside of the ROW. However, within the APE there
the site contains minimal data potential that would have value for future research. Therefore, we
recommend that the prehistoric portion of 41FB352 that is located within the APE is not eligible for
listing on the NRHP. However, backhoe scraping is recommended at this location to ensure that
unmarked graves associated with the Briscoe Cemetery do not extend into the APE.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

37

Figure 23. Map of site 41FB352.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

38

41FB353
41FB353 is a light scatter of mid-twentieth century artifacts on the ground surface, within a plowed field
(see Figure 6) located along the eastern side of FM 723. This site is situated on floodplain about 0.84
miles north of the Brazos River. According to the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service (USDA-NRCS 2017), soils in the site area consist of Brazoria clay with
zero to one percent slopes. This clay extends to depths greater than one meter. Elevation within the
site area ranges from 87 to 89 feet above mean sea level (AMSL).
During investigation, a total of five shovel tests were placed within the site area, none of which tested
positive for cultural materials. Historic-age artifacts were observed along the surface of the plowed field
and include red paste brick fragments, orange terracotta ceramic fragments, clear, brown, green, and
aqua vessel glass fragments, milk glass fragments, undecorated whiteware sherds, white porcelain
sherds, white ceramic tile fragments, and a pig tooth (Figure 24). None of the artifacts were clearly
diagnostic, or had production ranges that spanned both the historic and modern periods, and it
remained unclear if the material was over 50 years of age. The artifacts were observed in a small area
measuring roughly 15 x 5 m north to south.

Figure 24. Artifacts observed at 41FB353.

Structures are shown adjacent to the location of the 41FB353 on a 1953 aerial (Figure 25), but they are
not clearly visible on a 1977 aerial photograph (Figure 26). In 1955, the landowners did not use this
property as their primary residence, though deed research (Table 3) determined that they may have
leased the property at various times (Ft. Bend County Records). The property was involved in a court
case between the middle of the 1960s and 1972 regarding the bequeath of the property to the DePelchin
Faith Home by Emma K. Flanagan (Ft. Bend Co. Records Book 562, Pg. 586), during which the structures
on the property may have remained unoccupied. The structures were likely occupied into the 1960s, but
may have been demolished by 1977 after potentially sitting empty for a number of years.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

39

Table 3. Chain of Title for 41FB353
Owner

Ownership Period

Acquired Via

Acreage

Deed References

Notes
101.949 ac property
part of larger
purchase; William

Laverne C. and Barbara
May

Andrews Survey,
June 1982-current

Purchase

130.26

Book 1060, Pg. 267

Tract 2

Book 716, Pg. 457; Book
UT Board of Regents

March 1977- June 1982

Purchase

130.26

1060, Pg. 267
Book 650, Pgs. 481-484;

JM West Texas Corp.

June 1975-March 1977

Purchase

130.38

Ronald T. Sherman,
Trustee

Book 716, Pg. 457
Book 650, Pgs. 481-484;

Aug. 1973-June 1975

Purchase

130.38

Book 595, Pg. 885
Book 595, Pg. 885: Book

JM West Texas Corp.

Nov. 1972-Aug. 1973

Purchase

130.38

577, Pg. 606
E. Flanagan
bequeathed other
parcels in addition

Bequeath from
DePelchin Faith Home

Book 595, Pg.606; Book

to property in
question

Jan. 1972-Nov. 1972

E. Flanagan

131.9

558, Pg. 888

1964/1965 - Jan. 1972

Temp. Custody?

131.9

Book 558; Pg. 888

Buckner Baptist
Benevolences

Partitioned from
RS and Emma K. Flanagan

Feb. 1919-1964/1965

Purchase

110.9

GW and Samantha
Songer

Book 79, Pg. 328

Songer property

Book 79, Pg. 328; Book
June 1906-Feb. 1919

Purchase

320

32, Pg. 500
Land was a partition
of the Estate of
James and Susan
Briscoe. Mary's

JB and Mary (Maudie)
McCloy

Probable
Unknown - June 1906

Bequeath

maiden name was
?

Book 32, Pg. 500

Briscoe

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

40

Figure 25. 41FB353 depicted on a 1953 aerial photograph.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

41

Figure 26. 41FB353 depicted on a 1977 aerial photograph.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

42

The scatter was thin, with an artifact density of about 2-3 artifacts per square meter. Investigators
expanded the visual inspection outside the APE, but did not encounter any structures or other features
related to the scatter. The scatter had evidently been re-deposited by plowing activities and shovel
testing in the area revealed that no artifacts were present subsurface. The artifacts observed on the
surface were out of context and not associated with any structures or features. Thus, we recommend
that the scatter is not eligible for listing on the NRHP.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

43

CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Under TAC Permit No. 7293, AmaTerra archeologists completed an intensive archeological survey of
proposed improvements totalling 228.19 acres of land (97.9 acres of which are proposed new ROW)
within the FM 723 road expansion APE. The survey included 199 shovel tests and eight backhoe
trenches. Shovel testing and backhoe trenching revealed a terrain that was generally disturbed with the
only archeological material encountered consisting of a prehistoric lithic scatter (41FB352) and a historic
artifact scatter within a plowed field (41FB353). Site 41FB352 consisted of 17 pieces of lithic debris all
recovered within shovel tests, and is recommended not eligible for listing due to the small amount of
debris documented and the lack of diagnostic artifacts. However, this site is located within a parcel
dedicated as the Briscoe Family Cemetery, the fenced boundaries of which are 400 feet west of the APE.
The cemetery parcel extends to the existing roadway and it is believed that unmarked graves may be
located outside the fenced cemetery boundary, and could extend into the current APE. AmaTerra
recommends that surface scraping be conducted at this location within the proposed ROW in order to
test for unmarked graves associated within the Briscoe Family Cemetery parcel. The second site,
41FB353, contained red paste brick fragments, orange terracotta ceramic fragments, clear, brown,
green, and teal vessel glass shards, milk glass shards, undecorated whiteware sherds, white porcelain
sherds, white tile fragments, and an animal tooth, spread over an area measuring approximately 15
meters by 5 meters north to south. No associated structures or features were found in the vicinity and
it was determined that the lack of diagnostic and subsurface artifacts, and the generally low density of
material in a disturbed context warranted the scatter does not meet the requirements for National
Register listing.
The remaining portions of the APE, including the areas trenched around the Brazos River and Jones
Creek did not contain any archeological deposits. Shovel testing revealed very dark grayish brown clay
loam over light yellowish brown silty clay loam in the southern portion of the APE. Heading north, soils
encountered tended to consist of mottled dark brown clay or clay loam over very dark gray clay, while
soils in the northern most portion consisted of brown sandy loam over dark brown sandy clay loam.
These shovel tests were generally located in areas currently, or recently plowed, although some of the
central portions of the APE were wooded.
AmaTerra surveyed the APE where access was available and recommends that project can proceed with
no further archeological investigations in any of those properties except the property owned by Dyal
Schlitzkus, where the Briscoe Family Cemetery is located. AmaTerra recommends scraping the
proposed new ROW when access becomes available to determine whether unmarked graves are
present. Archeologists did not have access to approximately 1.5 miles of the proposed new ROW;
therefore, we recommend that survey and shovel testing of those properties take place prior to
construction. The properties recommended for survey prior to construction are depicted on Figure 3
and listed in Table 4 below.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

44

No artifacts were collected during this survey. All notes and records for this project will be permanently
curated at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory to complete the terms of Permit No. 7293.
Table 4. Properties to Survey Prior to Construction
Survey
Parcel
Recommended
Landowner
R30367

Yes

Marcus and Juanita Ortiz

R147572

Yes

Craig Maddox

R157113

Yes

Craig Maddox

R164310

Yes

Craig Maddox

R192211

Yes

Roger and Marjorie Finley

R149468

Yes

MATHEWS CARL JR & DONNA

R30439

Yes

Attaway, Jennie M

R30426

Yes

GILLETTE, ROBERT L

R117907

Yes

Briscoe Alan Lee etal

R285904

Yes

Millennium Alliance Corp

R212383

Yes

Christopher, David

R175502

Yes

R30394

Yes

Wilson Revocable Living Trust
McMullan Jeffrey S & Joanne C
Huesko

R211738

Yes

Harris William D & Anita

R145243

Yes

Al-Jazrawi Samir & Kathryn A

R203408

Yes

LYNCH RICHARD H & REBEKAH J

R46518

Yes

Land Tejas FM 1093 & 723 Ltd

R47300

Yes

R30338

Yes

Land Tejas FM 1093 & 723 Ltd
Dyal Schlitzkus, Trustee for Briscoe
Family Cemetery Association

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

45

References Cited
Abbott, J. T.
2001 Framework for Archeological Investigation, Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in
the Houston Highway District. Archeological Studies Program. Report 27. Texas Department of
Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1992 Geological Atlas of Texas, Houston Sheet. The University of Texas at Austin.
Griffith, G.E., and J.M. Omernik
2009 Ecoregions of Texas (EPA) – The Encyclopedia of Earth. Electronic document,
http://www.eoearth.org/view/article/152207/, accessed on February 2015.
McMahan, C.A. R.G. Frye and K.L. Brown
1984 Vegetation Types of Texas; Including Cropland. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Myers, Lynda Jill
2015 “ROSENBERG, TX” Handbook of Texas Online
(http://tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/her02), accessed February 04, 2015. Uploaded on June
15, 2010. Published by the Texas State Historical Association.
Perttula, T. K. (Editor)
2004 The Prehistory of Texas. Texas A&M Press, College Station.
Ricklis, R. A.
2004 The Archeology of the Native American Occupation of Southeast Texas. In The Prehistory of
Texas, edited by T.K. Perttula, pp. 181-202. Texas A & M University Press, College Station.
Story, D. A., J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D. Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J.
Reinhard
1990 The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain. 2 vols. Research Series No. 38.
Fayettesville: Arkansas Archeological Survey.
Turner, S. E., and T. R. Hester
1999 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas (Third Edition). Gulf Publishing Company, Houston.
Nickels, D. L., D. W. Pease, and C. B. Bousman
1997 Archaeological Survey of Lackland Air Force Base, Bexar County, Texas. Archaeological Survey
Report No. 248. Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas, San Antonio.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

46

Ott, V. L.
2015 The Handbook of Texas Online, s.v “Fort Bend County.”
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/FF/hcf7.html, accessed June 2015.
Texas Historical Commission
2015 Texas Archeological Sites Atlas online. Texas Historical Commission. Online at
http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/. Accessed June 3, 2015.
United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service (USDA-NRCS)
2017

Web Soil Survey, Fort Bend County Texas. Electronic document,
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.asp, accessed on February 2015.

Archeological Survey of the FM 723 Expansion Project from Avenue D to FM 1093, Fort Bend County, Texas

47

This report was written on behalf of the Texas Department of Transportation by

4009 Banister Lane, Ste. 300
Austin, TX 78704
www.amaterra.com

