ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS AT THE ORIGINAL SITE OF THE
MACGREGOR HOUSE, AUSTIN COUNTY, TEXAS

, ~.

by

Des$amae Lorreln

."

l

\

Report on Fieldwork carried out In December, 1970
and submitted to Wlneda!e Inn Properties

.
Texas Archeological Salvege Project
Research Report No. 2
The University Qf Texas ~t Austin

February 1971

Test excavations were conducted at three areas around the orlgln~1
loratlon of the MacGregor house In December, 1970. -rhey were intended
to solve S: felflc questions about the original construction detatls
which arose during the restoration.
One ques t Ion concerned the wid th of the front arch s te,' s. When
the house was "urc:hased, the steps were narrow and located slightly off
center of the ;orch (FLg. 5) but a leture taken In the 1890's showed
wi der .s te: s. The extent of the stal r wi dth and ,'resence or absence of
banisters could not be determined from the 'Ilcture however because of
the :lresence of EI group of peap I ft I n front of them. Our p)(nwat I on Ilr!1!I
I (Fig. r) was staked out In front 01 the two ~;tonc,> trmd , . / l t d l ,lUll itt.
I

that It encompassed the entire i.o,$!lI~le i.'lr~l1 whlLh
tuJ' porch wi dth s tel'S had bun i·resent.

woUld tHi! IrwolHlll If

Excavation area 2 (Ftg. 2) was placed at the Inner angle formed 6y
two sections of the house. Thea !,roblem In this area was ;1artlculerly
strangfl' and complicated. When urchased by Wlnedale, there was a small
porch In the kitchen portion of tht house with doors leading from It Into
the kitchen and thQ adjolrilng room. Ful' porch width steps led down
from the porch toward the southwest. As a reSUlt, the double doors at
the back of the large center hall of the living and bedroom part of the
house opened partially onto the ~orch and partially ontD the ste~sJ
leaving a dangerous drop tram the door to the lower steps. It seemed
totally Incongruous that this well constructed housl would have been built
originally wIth this back porch c~nflguratlon •. Our task was to find out
If something else had ~receded the existing steps.
the

Tht third excaVation unit (Fig. 3) was located outside of the back
wall of the kitchen. Seams In the wood siding of the wal I Indicated
that there had onCQ been a door and a flre~Jlace which had been removed
and the openings boarded up. We wanted to determine the size of the
chimney, the materials used on Its construction, and the location and
size of the ste,l$ leading down from the door.
The excavations met with variable success--Ilttle was learned In
area 3 but answers were forthcoming.Jn the other two areas. The results
were affected by the verl~ble 5011 .condltlons In the three areas.
Throughout the site two o18jor sol I zones were present: loose, sandy,
brownish loam overlying comJlact red clay subsol I. Excavation area 3 had
been subjected to heavy erosion which left only a thin mantle 01 loam
over the subsol I and obi Iter~ted ~Imost all traces of the chimney and back
steps. Area I had a lourn covering which varied In de,Jth from eight Inches
by the porch to about four Inches along the outer edge. The loam in area
2 was from one to one and a half f~ei dee~ between the house Bnd the

2

concrete slab at the bottom of the steps. This area was apparently alwlIys
covered by some sort of structure which i'rotected It from erosion. Beyond
the concrete slab, distinct sup-zones could be seen In the soil layer
above the clay (Fig. 4). Just above the cll!lY was the usual layer of
brownish sandy loam. starting about five feet from the concrete and con­
tinuing outward from the kitchen wing of the house, the loam was covered by
a Simi lar loam In which distinct thin varve lines eQuid be seen. This
layer I s the resul t of dede::osl tlon by water of loam washed from the arQa
at the bottom of the ste .. s. The topllayer consisted of a fine white sand
which I am quite sure was Introduced by the occupants of the house to
build up the eroded are;::--prabably In this century. The best i1reservlItion
of structural remains occurred In the protected section of area 2 between
the porch and the concrete slab. This shOUld be considered In planning
future excavations If any are contemplated.
The results ot the excavation are presented In large part on the ;<
drawings (Fig. 1,2, and 3) and wll I not be described In minute detail
I n the text. The e I evatt ons recorded on the ,', I cns llre no t above sea I eve I
readings. They are relative to u fixed !'olnt on a corner of the well
pump's concrete foundation. This corner was assigned an arbitrary elevation
of 100 feet. The f\ur';ose \ieS to show the vertical relationships between

the various features we found.
A posthole was found at the Inside cor.ner of each of the outer front
::>llIrs In C!Xcl:1vatlon area I (Figs. 1,6,7, and B). They are un­
doubtedly the supports for the stringers of front ste~s which extended
thct full width of the;orch. The third, off-center i'o.sthote between the
Iders Is a puzzle (Fig. 9). 1f the s"an of eight feet between the stringers
;:roved to be too great, a third stringer might have bun added to the
stairs or It might have been.8n added support ~ost under the edge of the
:'orch. A shallow posthole (Fig. 10) was found six feet In front of the
left l,orch1ler. Ttis Is assumed to be a banister post. The post for
the right bMlster ,·rob<lbly did not extend Into the Clay subsoil which Is
several Inches lower In that locale than It Is by the left lost. AI I but
one of these f·ostholes In excavatIon area I were only found after the
topsoil was removed and the clay troweled. They blended with tht sandy
PQrc~

loam so completely that we could not see them earlier. The elevations
recorded for the ,lostho I es ilre at the I eve I of the clay. They were not
troweled out to determine their original depth because the Information was
not consl dered necessary for ur;,oses of restorat Ion.
The situation which developed In excavation area 2 (Fig. 2) Is con­
siderably more complex than In the other two areas. The existing wide
steps at the.tlme of rurchase were a~parently the last of a series of
similar steps. When the remnants of the last steps-the I" x 6" :,Iank
shown In Ink and the two 2" x 4"s (Fig. 12}--were removed, a row of four
spilt logs was discovered. They had been placed with the cut side up.
t feel reasonably sure that they were the bases on which the outer ends
of four stringers rested. Elevations on the top surfaces of only tw~ ar~
shown because the other two were badly decayed and only stains remained
to show their shape and size. Below them the remnants of another long

01ank (Fig. 2, In red) w~re found which was slightly narrower than the
upper one. It had been placed In a shal low trench dug into the sandy
loam (Fig. 13) whereas the upper ~Iank was simply laid on the surface.
this superimposed series of wood structural elements suggests that a wide
staIrway of the same slzQ and sha e as the latest one had been rebul It at
least twice over the years ~s It wore out and the sand accumulated under
It. All of these :deces of wood had round nails sticking In them Indicating
that ai' of the wide ste0s were bul It abmetlme after the construction d~te
of the house.
The structure whlc.h preceded the wide stairway Is believed to have
been a ;,orch supported on woad posts. Seven postholes were found between
the house and th~ outer edge of the wide stairway (Fig. 2). There were
fragments of wood and a few square nat Is In postholes I, 2, and 3. These
thru posts (Ft gs. 14, 15, and 16) <:Ire a II set at about the same dep th
and are probab.y contemporaneous. None of them extend onto the clay sup­
5011. Although they are set at a very shallow de?th,.1 think they are'
the support [:osts for a ;lorch extending three and a hal f feet beyond the
0resent one. It would seem that there should also be a post Just north­
west of the L-shaped reer and another In the area of the board between the
,d ers at the bottom 01 the iJ I an eFt g. 2). I f the wood had been removed
from the rostholes, It would have been difficult to detect them. In
addition the sol I around the board had been disturbed In the not-too­
distant !Iast, certZllnly 11/1 thin the

Twentieth Century.

Under :losthole 2 there was the remnants of an earlier [,osthote In
the same relative i'osltlon to the closest iller as ,:os\hole 4 Is to the
L-sh~ped

;)ier. Elevation of Its baslt was just at the clay level (98.66')
as Is the base of osthele 4. I think that these two posts were supports
for a smal I porch centereQ In front of the original house before the
Greek Revival structure was built.
Posthale.5 (Fig. 17) had been cut Into the wood plank shown In red
clearly post dates It. I am ot a loss to account for this post.
Possibly the stairway was slowly disintegrating and needed some extra
support at that s~ot. Later that stairway was removed, the spilt logs
were put In, and a new stairway built. The :-:osthele was found under the
log after the latter was removed.
and

Postholes 6 and 7 are the dee:>est ones found-both extended well Into
the clay subsoil. The stain of posthole 6 was detected a couple of Inches
above the clay but posthole 7 could only beesten after the top of the clay
was troweled. The fl II of both contained square nails and window glass
~herds.
No .obv I DUS reason for these postho I es has come to ml nd but they
a;-pear to be contemporaneous wi th each other and earl Ier than the other
five In this area.
The post by the upper end of the concrete and wood III link I s the
remnant of the banister ;Jost of the last stairway. The small Isolated
~osthole In the upper left has no apparent relationship to the ~orch
and/or ster's.

<4
No remains of the ste.is leading down from the large porch was found
but the location of the sidewalk and the wear on the stones at the right
end of It (the northeast end) lead me to believe that the stepssled down
to It. They were probably only as wide as the sidewalk--ca. four 11«t-­
rether than the fUll width of the porch. Possibly the ~orch had a railing
of the same design 8S the railings on the front porch. It Is a re8sonabl.
assumption In view of the other attempts made to bring the two parts of
the~ house Into harmony with each other.

A section of the sidewalk was torn out at some unknown date. I am
quite sure that It was once continuous. A number of large rocks were
found In the area adjacent to the sidewalk (Fig. II) and were probably
once part of It.
In excavation area 3 some Inconclusive indications of the chimney
were found. Th' walls of the trench showed a shallow, flat-bottomed ,L
depression six Inches dUlJ In the red clay. The depression was filled
with e very compact soil consisting of mixed sand and ashes with charcQal
flccks and 8 few small chunks of sandstone. The ilJreiIJ on either side of the
trench was carefully troweled to find the outline of the sand and ash
dtposlt (FIg. 18). The viSible outline Is enclosed In solid lines on the
plan (Fig. 3). The dotted line Is an estimation Qf Its original size.
There wert no brick or plaster fragments In the entire excavation area
and no remains of tht back shps.

,
~.

.

Table No. I.

Suggested building sequence In Area 2.

Postholes 6 and 7

Probably earliest postholes.
Purpose unknown.

Postholes 4 and under 2

SUpports for small porch on
original buIlding.

Postholes I, 2, and 3

Supports for large porch bu II t
when Greek Revival house was
added.

I" x 5" plank (In red)

Outer edge of first of wide
stairways, down from existing
porch.

Posthole 5

Possibly added support for
sagging stlpS.

4 spIlt logs (In blue)

Outer stringer supports for
second wide stairway.

I" x 6" plank 'In Ink)

Outer edge of thlrA and last
wide stairway.

and 2ft X 4"s

