AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
FALCON RURAL WATER SUPPLY WASTEWATER PROJECT
IN STARR COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 05-15

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
Falcon Rural Water Supply
Post Office Box 24
Falcon Heights, Texas 78545

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey of 8.82 km of 12” force main, three lift stations, two
grinder pump locations, and a wastewater treatment plant in western Starr County,
Texas was conducted by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) in November
of 2005 for the Falcon Rural Water Supply under Antiquities Permit 3957. In all, 15
acres were examined. No previously recorded archaeological sites were found to
be within any portion of the project area. One prehistoric lithic scatter (41SR362)
was found within the project area. This site is small, restricted to the surface, and is
outside the APE. One Catholic Hispanic cemetery (Cemetario Catolica) is located
in close proximity to Lift Station “D” on what is locally referred to as the Salineño
River Road. It is outside the Area of Potential Effect (APE). This historic site
contains graves dating to the 19th century and is still in use. No artifacts were
collected.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to those individuals who participated in this project.
At Falcon Rural Water Supply we were assisted by Aaron Ramos (Manager) who
helped obtain landowner permission. The Falcon Rural Water Supply also
provided a backhoe operated by Derly Solis and Jesus Lopez. Hollie H. Nowlin
and George E. Lazaro of J. F. Fontaine & Associates, Inc provided maps and other
information necessary to complete this investigation. Brandon S. Young of
Blanton & Associates, Inc. in Austin, Texas shared information regarding previous
work in the area by his firm. The site number for the lithic scatter was assigned by
Jonathan H. Jarvis, TexSite & Atlas Coordinator at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL). Information regarding the Salineño cemetery was
provided by Annette Bethke, Assistant to the Historic Texas Cemetery Program at
the THC, and Sam Ramos of the Starr County Historical Commission. Jean
Hughes, Records Conservator at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL) in Austin, Texas checked the site records at TARL for previously recorded
archaeological sites in or near the project area. Jennifer McMillan provided
technical support, and Nora Rogers assisted with the editing chores.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT........................................................................................................... ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...................................................................................... iii
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING...............................................................................5
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ..................................................................8
METHODS OF INVESTIGATION .......................................................................12
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS........................................................................15
RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................................19
REFERENCES CITED........................................................................................20

Appendices
Appendix I: Research Design
Appendix II: Shovel Test Log
Appendix III: Backhoe Trench Profiles
Appendix IV: Location of Site 41SR362

iv

Figures
Figure 1. General Location ............................................................................................. 2
Figure 2. Project Area...................................................................................................... 3
Figure 3. Disturbed Right-of-Way along Area A.......................................................... 7
Figure 4. Tertiary Fossil Beds in Area A....................................................................... 7
Figure 5. Upland Region of Area B ............................................................................. 13
Figure 6. Proposed Wastewater Treatment Plant Site............................................. 13
Figure 7. Shovel Tests .................................................................................................. 14
Figure 8. Relationship of Cemetery to Project Area ................................................. 16
Figure 9. Newer Section of Cemetery......................................................................... 16

v

INTRODUCTION
The Falcon Rural Water Supply is a small water supply corporation
located in Falcon Heights, a community approximately 43.0 miles northwest of
McAllen, Texas along United States Highway 83 in western Starr County, Texas.
Presently, approximately 1000 families in small colonias are without a
wastewater collection system. Wastewater treatment for these families consists
of individual on-site septic type systems. The proposed wastewater project will
replace these septic systems with a central sewerage system, and approximately
665 colonia families will benefit directly from this plan. Funds for this project will
come from the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Rural Utilities
Services (RUS). The general location of the project area is depicted in Figure
1.Topographic coverage of the project area is provided by the 7.5’ USGS
topographic quadrangle Salineño dated 1965 (Figure 2).
The proposed project consists of a collection system, nine lift stations, six
grinder pump stations, and a wastewater treatment plant. The gravity flow
collection system will consist of 8” PVC gravity sewer lines installed on grade with
manholes spaced not more than 500 feet apart. Nine lift stations with force mains
ranging from 4” to 6” in diameter are proposed to transfer the wastewater to a new
400,000 gallon per day wastewater treatment plant. Several communities or
colonias are part of this project; however, the sewer line will be placed in the middle
of the streets beneath the existing pavement. These communities are Salineño,
Los Arrieros, Jardín de San Julian, Falconaire, Falcon Heights, Miguel Garza, New
Falcon, Indio 1, Indio 2, and Lopeño.
The proposed wastewater collection system will be installed within existing
road rights-of-way. The nine lift stations and six grinder pump sites will be small at
20’ x 20’ in size with frontage on existing road rights-of-way. The proposed
wastewater treatment plant will be constructed on a 5-acre tract of land to be
acquired by the water supply corporation.
Proposed sewer line additions will be centered in a 15-foot wide permanent
easement adjacent to the various road rights-of-way, which they parallel. The pipe
will be placed in a trench two feet wide and four feet deep.
Removal of large trees within paths of pipelines will be avoided where
possible by boring. Creek crossings will be encased, and creek bottoms and
slopes restored to their original conditions. Maps will be evaluated for crossings of
prime farmland, floodplains, and wetlands throughout the project area. It is
anticipated that the project will not result in adverse effects on these resources
since the majority of the proposed collection system will be placed in previously
disturbed routes within the rights-of-way of existing roads and streets. Historic
structures in the colonias will also not be affected because the sewer line will be
placed in the center of the streets in these communities.

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

Figure 2. Project Area

3

An archaeological survey was requested in a letter from William A. Martin of
the THC to Hollie H. Nowlin of the engineering firm J. F. Fontaine & Associates, Inc.
dated September 9, 2005. In order to satisfy this requirement, the Falcon Rural
Water Supply retained the services of BVRA to perform an archaeological survey of
all areas not previously examined by other archaeologists.
A review of past work in the area revealed that all of the area along United
States Highway 83 had been previously surveyed by a professional archaeological
firm (see Archaeological Background below). BVRA was contracted to evaluate
only those areas not previously examined by other archaeologists.
Although the proposed project area includes Starr and Zapata counties, the
only areas included as part of this project are in Starr County. This survey followed
the methods outlined in the Research Design submitted to the THC (Appendix I). In
the field, changes were made by the engineers, which required the Project
Archaeologist to survey a different location for Lift Station E in Area A and .66 km of
additional sewer line in Area B. This line was not depicted on the original maps
provided by the engineers. This problem was found after a review of a different set
of maps and a discussion with the Project Engineer. The survey methods for these
areas are described in more detail in the Methods section below.

4

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The following information for Starr County was taken from the published
soil survey (Thompson 1972), Davis (1974), a planning document published by
the THC (Mercado-Allinger et al. 1996:25), and The Handbook of Texas Online
(2001).
Starr County is located in the South Texas Brush Country and is part of
the Rio Grande Plain region. It comprises 1226 square miles with elevations
from 200 to 400 feet above sea level. In the southwest part of the county soils
are gray to black crackling clay. Limestone can be found within forty inches of
the surface. Along the river, brown to red loams cover crackling clayey soils.
The nearest major source of permanent water is the Rio Grande to the north.
The county has a warm-temperate, subtropical steppe climate. Rainfall
between 1931 and 1962 averaged about 43 cm annually. Most of the rain falls in
the form of thunderstorms; however, occasional tropical disturbances produce
heavy rains in early fall. The month of September has the highest monthly
rainfall average. The driest months are November and December. Temperatures
are high in the summer with daily maximums exceeding 100 degrees Fahrenheit
in July and August. Winter temperatures do not usually fall below 40 degrees
Fahrenheit. Freezes are not regular annual occurrences.
Natural resources include caliche, clay, gravel, oil, and gas. Gas and oil
production is significant.
Starr County is in the South Texas Plains Vegetation region and is
characterized by mid and short grasses, thorny shrubs, mesquite, cacti, live oak,
and post oak. Other natural plants in the area include spiny hackberry, ebony,
lime prickly ash, guayacan, Texas persimmon, lotebush, coyotillo, and cenizo.
Grasses and forbs include Arizona cottontop, Texas bristlegrass, lovegrass
tridens, fourflowered trichloris, hooded windmill grass, pink pappusgrass, and
knotroot panicum.
Overgrazing; deep root plowing; and irrigation, which have resulted in a
lowering of the water table, have resulted in an alteration of the natural
vegetation. The natural vegetation in prehistoric and early historic times probably
consisted of more grasses and less mesquite and brushy thorn because of the
practice of large scale burning. In 1982, 80 percent of the land was in farms and
ranches with 17 percent of the farmland under cultivation and 19 percent
irrigated.
Numerous species of mammals occur in Starr County today or were living
there in the past. These include opossum, mole, lshrew, black bear, raccoon,
weasel, skunk, badger, fox, coyote, ocelot, cougar, jaguarundi, bobcat, squirrel,
gopher, mouse, rat, beaver, rabbit, javelina, antelope, and deer.

5

Most of the survey area was in an upland setting comprised of shallow
soils, short grasses, cacti, and mesquite. The exceptions were slightly deeper
soils along each side of the upland tributaries and deeper clay soils on the
terraces of the Rio Grande. All of the proposed line sections, the grinder pump
stations, and the lift stations were in disturbed rights-of-way (Figure 3). Much of
the right-of-way had been cut through hills to fill the creek crossings. In many
places, exposed sandstone and beds of bivalve fossils were observed, and some
were very large specimens (Figure 4). These fossils are part of ancient Tertiary
coastal beds from the Eocene epoch, specifically the Jackson group. Tertiary
soils began in most places at the ground surface to within five cm of the surface,
and scattered fossils were spread over the surface. The plant site location was
in a plowed field on private land in alluvial clays. The above geological data were
taken from the following references (Sellards et al. 1932; Thompson n.d.;
Sheldon 1979; and Finsley 1989)

6

Figure 3. Disturbed Right-of-Way along Area A

Figure 4. Tertiary Fossil Beds in Area A

7

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
According to a statistical overview published by the THC (Biesaart et al.
1985:76), Starr County is located in the Southern Coastal Plains CulturalGeographical Region of Texas. In 1985, when the overview was published, the
number of archaeological sites in the region was 1516 or 7.50% of the state. In
1985, there were 228 recorded sites in the county. This accounted for 15% of
the region and 1.13% of the state. Although three Paleo-Indian sites were
reported, the majority of sites in 1985 were listed as Archaic (n=51) and Late
Prehistoric (n=12). Site disturbance is common in the area. Biesaart et al.
(1985:185) mention erosion disturbance (173 sites), construction disturbance (63
sites), disturbed and artificially capped (9 sites), deflated (14 sites), dispersed
(108 sites), potted and/or surface collected (10 sites), and destroyed (1 site).
Sites with subsistence related features were also common where hearths were
present (73 sites), burned rock features (18 sites), shell middens (5 sites),
midden soil (1 site), pits (1 site), and other (15 sites). Twenty-four quarry sites
were known to exist. Today there are approximately 360 recorded sites in Starr
County.
According to a planning document for the Central and Southern Planning
Region of Texas as defined by the Texas Historical Commission (MercadoAllinger et al. 1996:13), Starr County is located in the Rio Grande Plains
Archeological Region. This is one of the major oil producing areas in the state. It
also contains significant amounts of coal-bearing formations and is on the
eastern edge of Falcon Reservoir. The area is rapidly changing due to an
increase in tourists and seasonal residents (“Winter Texans”). These factors are
major contributors to site disturbance in the area.
Sites defined as Paleo-Indian in South Texas are typically limited to
surface discoveries of distinctive lanceolate spear points (Hester 1980a). As
stated above, Archaic and Late Prehistoric sites are common and consist of
campsites with subsistence-related features and, in some cases, burials.
According to Hester (1980b:57), there are two kinds of occupation sites in
South Texas, surface-exposed sites and sites buried in stream silts. He states
that “Erosion, often helped along by cultivation, cattle grazing, ranch roads, and
droughts, has exposed many prehistoric occupation sites.” He cites Starr County
as an area where erosion has been so severe that sites have been completely
exposed. As a result, the artifacts of different time periods became mixed and
then were covered again by recent silting and deposition. Hester believes that
these sites are likely to be of little archaeological value.

8

The earliest account of Europeans in the vicinity of the current project area
was the route taken by Cabeza de Vaca in the sixteenth century when he
crossed what is believed by Alex D. Krieger (1961) to be the Rio Grande at the
present-day site of Roma, Texas (Fox 1983). In the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, the Spanish established colonies and missions in parts of South
Texas. In 1749, for example, Spanish colonists found the land in what is now
Starr County to be suitable for cattle and sheep raising. Some of the earliest
settlements were Roma-Los Saenz (founded in 1767) and Salineño (formerly the
headquarters of Rancho Salinas. Of the two, Salineño is the closest to the
current project area. This community is 250 years old and is located near an
ancient Indian river crossing which was used until bridges were completed. A
mission church was established in 1906, and a brick school replaced the wooden
school (erected in 1900) in 1937. The Salineño residents were primarily ranch
workers and migrant laborers who followed the harvest north and south every
year. In 1990, the town had three stores, a church, post office, waterworks,
cemetery, and 155 residents. In 1986, Starr County was one of the poorest
counties in the nation. Between 8000 and 10,000 residents lived in colonias
outside Rio Grande City, and another 3200 lived in twenty to thirty other colonias
spread throughout the rest of the county. In 1993, Starr County was the nation’s
second poorest county with 60 percent of its population living below the poverty
rate. It also ranked first in percentage of persons of Spanish origin and forty-first
in the highest birthrate. Part of the above information was taken from the
Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Salineño, TX.” And “Starr County.”
Starr County has been the focus of numerous surveys by professional
archaeologists. Much of the work in this area has been the direct result of oil and
gas exploration and the construction of the Falcon Reservoir (Starr and Zapata
counties). In the 1950s, salvage archaeology was carried out along the Rio
Grande River prior to impoundment of the waters of the Falcon Reservoir
(Krieger and Hughes 1950 and Hartle and Stephenson 1951). Numerous sites
were recorded and several towns were relocated to higher ground. Two of these
towns (Falcon Heights and New Falcon) are located near the project area.
Falcon Heights was created in 1954, and New Falcon (also referred to as simply
Falcon) was created in 1953 following a flood created by the completion of the
dam in 1952,
In 1996, James E. Warren of Archaeology Consultants, Inc. supervised an
intensive survey of all land above the 307-foot contour interval at Falcon
Reservoir (McCulloch et al. 2003). This study examined an estimated 28,175
acres. In addition to assessing known sites, 353 previously unrecorded sites
were documented. At or below the 407-foot contour an additional 636 sites are
known to exist. Prehistoric sites visited and/or recorded include campsites and
quarries or workshops dating to Archaic and Paleo-Indian times. Historic sites
include cemeteries, farmsteads, urban house sites, ranches, ancillary ranch
facilities, towns, quarries, bridges, and water control features.

9

Structures in Warren’s project area consisted of houses, outbuildings,
house ruins, bridges, cemetery headstones, and ranching structures. At the time
of the current survey by BVRA, the report produced by Archaeology Consultants,
Inc. was not on file at TARL. The above information was taken from the Texas
Sites Atlas prepared by the Texas Historical Commission.
The nearest major archaeological survey to the current project area was
carried out by Blanton & Associates, Inc. in 2003 (Meadows et al. 2005). They
investigated approximately 61.4 miles of United States Highway 83 in Starr and
Zapata counties prior to proposed construction by the Texas Department of
Transportation (TxDOT). This survey was performed under Antiquities Permit
3140. Archaeologists from Blanton & Associates, Inc. conducted a no-collection,
intensive archaeological survey with systematic shovel testing and backhoe
trenching within the Area of Potential Effect (APE), which comprised all of the
proposed new and existing rights-of-way along the highway. This was a very
thorough investigation, which included the excavation of 1501 shovel tests and
42 backhoe trenches. Forty-nine sites were documented within the expansion
right-of-way. Forty of these sites were previously unknown, and the remaining
nine were previously recorded sites which were visited and assessed. In Starr
County, five sites (41SR338 – 41SR342) were documented for the first time.
Forty-one of the sites assessed were determined on the basis of the limited
survey level investigations to be not eligible for listing in the National Register of
Historic Places, and they do not warrant official designation as a State
Archeological Landmark. The significance of eight sites (41SR340, 41ZP35,
41ZP149, 41ZP150, 41ZP161, 41ZP191, 41ZP890, and 41ZP894) could not be
determined on the basis of existing information. Although these eight potentially
significant sites are located within the general project area as proposed by the
Falcon Rural Water Supply, not one is located within the APE as outlined for the
current survey.
Additional survey and testing by professional archaeologists have been
conducted in the county.
One testing project, conducted by the State
Department of Highways and Public Transportation (now TxDOT) in the 1990s
(Price 1992) revealed the disturbed nature of sites in the county. Site 41SR191
was recorded as a surface scatter of burned rock and lithic debitage in a fallow
field occupying an area of approximately 50 meters x 150 meters. Although this
site was not initially viewed as significant, it was selected as one of two sites from
a sample of 25 prehistoric sites most likely to yield significant information. The
work at this site consisted of eight square meters and machine excavation of two
backhoe trenches, each approximately 40 meters in length and 2 meters in
depth.

10

Testing yielded only five prehistoric biface fragments, none of which was
temporally or culturally diagnostic, and relatively small quantities of lithic
debitage. The debitage was found at the surface and to a depth of 30 cm.
Historic artifacts were found mixed with the prehistoric materials. It was
concluded that this site had been very disturbed through historic land clearing
and cultivation activities. Since site 41SR191 was one of only two sites believed
to possess research potential, this study reveals the disturbed nature of many of
the lithic scatters found in this part of Texas.
Additional small area surveys have been conducted in Starr County. For
more information regarding other work in the area researchers are advised to
consult the site files at TARL and the THC. No bibliography has been published
for that part of South Texas that includes Starr County. There is a published
series entitled Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology (published by the THC
and compiled by William E. Moore) that documents all work in Texas from 1988
through 1992. As mentioned above, there are several overviews of South Texas
that provide excellent data for the area. These are Archeology in the Central and
Southern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document (Mercado-Allinger et al.
1996), Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur Archaeologists
(Hester 1980), Texas Graveyards: A Cultural Legacy (Jordan 1988); Prehistoric
Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview (Biesaart et al. 1985), and
Traces of Texas History: Archeological Evidence of the Past 450 Years (Fox
1983).

11

METHODS OF INVESTIGATION
Prior to the field survey, the Principal Investigator conducted a review of
previous work in the general area and talked with other archaeologists. The
Texas Historic Sites Atlas was checked for previously recorded sites and areas
surveyed, and a records check by Jean Hughes at TARL was performed. Local
informants were interviewed regarding the historic Salineño cemetery.
The project area was divided into two areas for survey and labeled areas
A and B. Area A runs along a stretch of Farm-to-Market Road 2098 from United
States Highway 83 to the community of Falcon Heights (4.6 km), and it also
includes a small paved road (.7 km) that passes through a subdivision. The area
of concern along Highway 83 is the right-of-way along the northeast side of the
road that contains two lift stations (“E” and “G”) and the proposed wastewater
line. Along the subdivision road, grinder pump stations 4 and 5, and the
wastewater line were examined. Figures 3 and 4 above depict the condition of
portions of Area A at the time of this survey.
Area B runs along the north right-of-way of the Salineño River Road (2.36
km) from United States Highway 83 to the community of Salineño. It continues
along the east and south right-of-way to a small unpaved road (.42 km) that
leaves the river road and runs to the proposed plant site. Two other small paved
roads (.66 km and .08 km) come off the river road and service small subdivisions.
The proposed 8” wastewater line in these rights-of-way was also surveyed. The
survey in Area B examined 3.52 km of proposed gravity sewer line (8”), one lift
station (“D”), and a proposed wastewater treatment plant. The community of
Salineño was excluded from survey because the sewer line will be placed
beneath streets that are currently paved. Figures 5 and 6 depict the condition of
portions of Area B at the time of this survey.
The two areas were examined by a 100% Pedestrian Survey and shovel
tests. Shovel test locations along the right-of-way are depicted in Figure 2.
Backhoe trenching was also employed on the proposed plant site area due to the
deeper soils in that region and the deeper APE. The five acre site of the
proposed wastewater treatment plant was walked in parallel transects with
intervals of 30 meters. This area was shovel tested (Figure 7), and two backhoe
trenches were excavated in that portion of the site where the subsurface
disturbance will be the greatest. Selected samples of excavated earth were
screened, and the walls were examined for features and soil change. A shovel
test log was maintained (Appendix II), and backhoe trench profiles were drawn
(Appendix III) In all, 26 shovel tests were excavated to depths of 10 to 80 cm in
areas such as stream channel sides and the Rio Grande terraces in the western
part of Area B. The upland sections of both areas were only minimally shovel
tested since the Eocene deposits are 40 million years old (Finsley 1989:149),
and there is no possibility of buried cultural deposits. Any sites would be on the
highly disturbed surface.

12

Figure 5. Upland Region of Area B

Figure 6. Proposed Wastewater Treatment Plant Site

13

Figure 7. Shovel Tests

Five shovel tests were dug in the proposed treatment plant site, 11 were
dug along Farm-to-Market Road 2098 (Area A), and 10 along the Salineño River
Road (Area B). The project was documented through a hand-held GPS and
digital photography. All earth excavated through shovel testing was passed
through ¼” hardware cloth. No artifacts were found in any of the subsurface
tests; therefore, no collection was made. One surface lithic scatter was found
and recorded at TARL. There were no diagnostic artifacts present; therefore, no
collection was made.

14

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
One prehistoric site (41SR362) was found 150 meters east of the
proposed wastewater treatment plant (Appendix IV). This site consists of lithic
debitage found on the surface of a recently plowed field. This site is
approximately 20 m x 20 m in size, and only 4 quartzite cobble fragments, 1 core,
2 flakes, and 1 possible quartzite cobble hammer stone were observed. Lithic
scatters are common in this part of Texas. Therefore, site 41SR362 is not
significant. Surface survey, shovel testing, and backhoe trenching at the location
of the proposed wastewater treatment plant site did not encounter evidence of
this site. It is outside the APE as currently defined by the project engineers and
the Falcon Rural Water Supply.
The Salineño Cemetery (Cemetario Catolica) is owned by the community
of Salineño and is located on the south side of the Salineño River Road leading
to the colonia of Salineño. Based on the presence of 19th century headstones,
this cemetery meets the age criterion for a historic site. According to Sam
Ramos of the Starr County Historical Commission, the early graves were marked
with mesquite, which has since deteriorated
A search of the Texas Historic Sites Atlas published by the THC revealed
this site is not listed in the National Register of Historic Places and is not part of a
National Register District. Also, there is no reference to a neighborhood survey.
There was no historic marker in place at the time of this survey. Figure 8 depicts
the relationship of the project area to the cemetery, and Figure 9 illustrates the
more modern cement headstones recently decorated for All Souls Day.
According to Annette Bethke (Assistant to the Historic Cemetery Program
at the THC), this cemetery was surveyed on May 25, 2004 as part of the
“Record, Investigate, and Protect” program designed to identify as many
cemeteries in Texas as possible through field investigations and a check of
topographic maps. This cemetery was assigned the number SR-CO57, and it is
not listed as a historic cemetery at this time. A private individual or group must
make such a designation.
According to Terry G. Jordan (1988:75), most Spanish graves during
frontier times had no markers. Locations of the interred were kept in a book by
the local priest and were not described according to accurate measurements.
Instead, the location of a burial might be mentioned as being simply within the
boundaries of the cemetery. Also, use of the compass was not an important
factor in arranging graves in early times. Jordan (1988:70) suggests that this
practice may be related to the “unplanned pattern of the traditional Mexican
village.”

15

Figure 8. Relationship of Cemetery to Project Area

Figure 9. Newer Section of Cemetery
16

After about 1820, tombstones in Mexican cemeteries became more
common, and some scholars believe that Mexican-American grave markers
represent a borrowing from Anglo culture. Others refute this claim, but it is
known that the earliest markers in Texas were made of wood.
Because of the combination of unmarked graves during frontier times and
the use of wood, a perishable resource, Jordan (1988:75) states that he knows of
no markers in Mexican cemeteries in the state over a century old. The
widespread use of cement to create headstones in Mexican cemeteries began in
the 1920s and has spread to all parts of the state (Jordan 1988:76).
The boundaries of cemeteries associated with early Catholic churches or
missions in New Mexico are often poorly defined and frequently produce human
remains outside of their marked boundaries (Bradley F. Bowman, personal
communication to William E. Moore on December 6, 2005). Spanish documents
from San Antonio, Texas and interviewed church personnel explain that 19th
century soldiers could not afford to pay the tax levied for official interment in the
hallowed ground of the defined cemetery. The dead were buried as close as
possible to the defined cemetery as possible. (Fox 1977). This was also true for
poor families who want their family members buried as close as possible to the
sanctified areas within the formal cemetery boundaries. Fox (1977:8) also states
that this would not have presented any problems of conscience, especially in the
case of stillborn or un-baptized babies since these individuals would not have
been allowed in a concentrated cemetery. According to informants interviewed
by Bradley F. Bowman, the practice of burying family members outside the
formal cemetery boundaries is still being conducted in New Mexico. According to
Louis Waldron (personal communication to Bradley F. Bowman on May 14,
2005), an educator for thirty years teaching primarily in schools in barrios, it is
common knowledge for individuals who are not members of the church to bury
their dead unofficially outside the cemetery. This is also true of those who are in
the country illegally or who cannot afford the cost of a church funeral.
In a recently completed archaeological survey near the Presidio Nuestra
Señora de Loreto de la Bahía (41GD7) in Goliad County, the co-mingled human
remains of three individuals were found in the disturbed right-of-way outside the
known boundaries of La Bahia Cemetery (41GD123), and a possible grave
outline was observed , also outside the known cemetery boundaries (Moore et al.
2005).
Construction of the Salineño River Road has caused the most disturbance
near the cemetery. From the north cemetery fence, there is an unpaved grass
right-of-way, which runs nine meters north to the paved road, which is seven
meters wide. North of this pavement is a 15 meter wide right-of-way terminating
at a barbed wire fence.

17

A check of other past construction in the area revealed that there is an
existing 12” water line on the south side of Salineño River Road at the northern
boundary of the cemetery. Southwest Engineers, Inc installed this line in the
1990s. The trench was dug to a maximum depth of 42” and was 12” to 18” wide.
In the 1970s, Southwest Engineers, Inc installed an 8” water line on the north
side of Salineño River Road. The trench was 36” deep and 12” wide. According
to Clarence L. Littlefield, P.E. of Southwest Engineers, Inc. an archaeological
survey was not conducted during either of these water line installations (personal
communication to William E. Moore on December 6, 2005).

18

RECOMMENDATIONS
No prehistoric archaeological sites were found to be within the APE.
Cemetario Catolica (Salineño) cemetery is located in close proximity to the route
of the sewer line as currently planned. Documented and undocumented
cemeteries are protected by the Texas Health and Safety Code, Title 8,
Subchapter C. It is recommended that the sewer line be placed across the
highway from the fenced cemetery and adjacent to the existing 8” water line. If
unmarked graves are exposed during installation of the sewer line, all work must
stop until the Texas Historical Commission, Archeology Division, can assess the
situation. The Falcon Rural Water must also terminate work in any area where a
prehistoric or historic site not discussed in this report is found. Should
construction plans change to include new areas that will affect undisturbed
ground the THC must be notified as a return visit by a professional archaeologist
may be required.

19

REFERENCES CITED
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistorical Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28. Texas Historical
Commission.
Davis, William B.
1974 The Mammals of Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department,
Bulletin 41. Reprinted 1978.
Finsley, Charles
1989 A Field Guide to Fossils of Texas. (reprinted 1999) Gulf Publishing
Company. Houston.
Fox, Anne A.
1977 The Archaeology and History of the Spanish Governors Palace
Park. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report Number 31.
Fox, Daniel E.
1983 Traces of Texas History: Archeological Evidence of the Past 450
Years. Corona Publishing Company, San Antonio.
Hartle, Donald D., and Robert L. Stephenson
1951 Archeological Excavations at the Falcon Reservoir, Starr County,
Texas. Report published by the Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C.
Hester, Thomas R.
1980a A Survey of Paleo-Indian Archaeological Remains Along the Texas
Coast. In Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas Coast, edited by
Lynn Highley and Thomas R. Hester, pp. 1-12. Center for
Archaeological Research, Special Report Number 11. The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
1980b Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur
Archaeologists. Corona Publishing Company, San Antonio.
Jordan, Terry G.
1988 Texas Graveyards: A Cultural Legacy. University of Texas Press.

20

Krieger, Alex D.
1961 The Travels of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca in Texas and Mexico,
1534-1536. In Homenaje a Pablo Martinez del Rio en el XXV
Aniversario de la Edición de los Origenes Americanos, the Instituto
National de Antropologia y Historia, pp. 459-474. Reprinted in An
Ethnohistorical Survey of Texas Indians by L. L. M. Skeels, Texas
Historical Survey Committee, Archeological Report Number 22, pp.
57-73.
Krieger, Alex D. and Jack T. Hughes
1950 Archaeological Salvage in the Falcon Reservoir Area: Progress
Report Number 1.
McCulloch, Samuel D. James E. Warren, James Thomas Dureka, and Timothy
K. Perttula
2003 A Report on the Reconnaissance of Cultural Resources on Lands
Managed by the U.S. Section, International Boundary and Water
Commission, Falcon Reservoir, Zapata and Star Counties.
Archaeology Consultants, Report Number 500.
Meadows, Richard K., Christopher W. Ringstaff, Brandon S. Young, James T.
Jones, and David O. Brown
2005 Cultural Resources Survey of Proposed Improvements to U.S. 83 in
Zapata and Starr Counties, Texas. Report prepared by Blanton &
Associates, Inc. Austin. (Project Number 00101)
Mercado-Allinger, Patricia A., Nancy A. Kenmotsu, and Timothy K. Perttula
1996 Archeololgy in the Central and Southern Planning Region, Texas: A
Planning Document. Office of the State Archeologist, Special
Report 35 and the Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural
Resource Management Report 7. Texas Historical Commission.
Moore, William E., Andrea C. Schulz, and James E. Warren
2005 An Archaeological survey for the Goliad Water Supply Corporation
Water and Wastewater Project in Goliad County, Texas.
Archaeology Consultants, Inc., Report Number 597.
Price, G. R, Dennis
1992 Archeological Significance Testing at Site 41SR191, Starr County,
Texas. Unnumbered report prepared by the State Department of
Highways and Public Transportation, Division of Highway Design.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932 The Geology of Texas. (Volume I – Stratigraphy). The University of
Texas at Austin Bulletin 3232 (6th printing, 1975).

21

Sheldon, Robert A.
1979 Roadside Geology of Texas. (2nd printing – 1982) Mountain Press
Publishing Company. Mizzoula, Montana.
Thompson, Charles M.
1972 Soil Survey of Starr County. United States Department of
Agriculture in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Thompson, Ida
n.d. The Audobon Society Field Guide to North American Fossils. Alfred
A. Knopf. New York.

22

APPENDIX I
RESEARCH DESIGN
FALCON RURAL WATER SUPPLY
Records Check
Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) has already contacted the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), the state repository for site
records, to determine if previously recorded sites are present in the project area. No
sites were found. In addition, a review of relevant archaeological reports was
conducted. This action revealed much of the project area has already been
examined by professional archaeologists. When possible, local informants will be
interviewed concerning known sites and artifact types in the area.
Project Description
The Falcon Rural Water Supply proposes to construct improvements to its
sewer system by installing a collection system, nine lift stations, six grinder pump
stations, and a wastewater treatment facility in portions of Starr and Zapata
counties. The line will be placed in the already disturbed public right-of-way (often
in ditches) along United States Highway 83 and some of the farm-to-market roads,
and county roads. The line will be placed in the center of paved streets in the
communities of New Falcon, Lopeno in Zapata County and Salineño, Los Arrieros,
Jardín de San Julian, Indio 1, Indio 2, Falconaire, Falcon Heights, and Miguel
Garza in Starr County.
The nine lift stations and the six grinder pump stations will be small (20’ x
20’) in size and will be placed in existing road rights-of-way. The treatment plant
site will be constructed on a 10-acre tract of land. The line to be installed in the
above-mentioned communities will be placed in the middle of the streets, most of
which are paved. The new line will not affect the yards or structures of private or
commercial residences.
The sewer lines will vary in size from 4 inches in diameter to 6 inches in
diameter. These lines will be placed in a trench approximately 3 feet in depth and
1.5 feet in width.
Removal of large trees within paths of pipelines will be avoided where
possible by boring. Creek crossings will be encased, and creek bottoms and
slopes restored to their original condition. It is anticipated that the new line will not
adversely affect prime farmland, floodplains, and/or wetlands since the majority of
the proposed line will follow along previously disturbed routes of the road right-ofway.

RESEARCH DESIGN (PAGE TWO
Areas to Survey
A check of the TARL records and Texas Archeological Sites Atlas Map
indicated that all of United States Highway 83 within the current project area has
been previously surveyed by Blanton & Associates, Inc., an environmental firm
based in Austin, Texas under contract with the Texas Department of
Transportation. This work was performed in 2003. This survey recorded 49
archaeological sites. The significance of eight of these was not determined. Not
one of these sites, however, is located within the current project area. Therefore,
no previously recorded sites will be visited and/or evaluated as part of this project.
Likewise, no portions of United States Highway 83 will be subjected to survey.
The only areas to be examined will be the routes of new sewer line on the
secondary roads from United States Highway 83 to the communities of Salineño,
Falconaire, and Falcon Heights and the wastewater treatment facility near
Salineno. No subsurface work will be performed by BVRA within these
communities (or any other communities) because the line will be placed in the
middle of the streets. This work will not affect standing structures or undisturbed
prehistoric sites.
Site Types
Based on previous work in the area, prehistoric archaeological sites are
known to occur in a variety of settings. Habitation sites are mostly commonly found
on the lower terraces adjacent to streams, while lithic quarries have been recorded
in all settings where chert cobbles were available in prehistoric times. Lithic
scatters and hearths are found on terraces and uplands. Buried sites may be found
in the floodplains of major streams. Historic archaeological sites are not always tied
directly to water and may be found in areas between streams.
Survey Methods
The Principal Investigator for this project is William E. Moore, and the Project
Archaeologist is Edward P. Baxter. No fieldwork will commence until an Antiquities
Permit has been issued for this project. The entire project area was assessed by
the Principal Investigator accompanied by George E. Lazaro, P.E. of J. F. Fontaine
and Associates, Inc., the engineering firm associated with this project. The
following methods are based on this “windshield survey” and a review of previous
work in the area.

RESEARCH DESIGN (PAGE THREE
BVRA intends to examine the entire area not surveyed except in the
communities where the collection system will be placed in the middle of paved
streets. The “windshield survey” identified only two stream crossings, neither of
which appears to be major. Since lithic scatters can occur anywhere on the
landscape, the Pedestrian Survey will not be limited to stream crossings usually
referred to as “High Probability Areas.”
All exposed ground surfaces will be carefully inspected for cultural materials
and features. Normally only diagnostic artifacts will be collected from the surface of
a site. Quarry or lithic procurement sites will be treated differently. In these areas,
a controlled collection of cultural materials may be made to identify the kinds of raw
materials present and the ways in which these materials were used.
The subsurface will be examined through shovel tests and probes within the
road rights-of-way, and the wastewater treatment facility will be examined through
backhoe trenching. Non-diagnostic artifacts observed in the back dirt the backhoe
trench or trenches will not be collected. Selected shovels full of earth will be
screened at each backhoe trench location. Since only a small portion of the
wastewater treatment facility will contain subsurface disturbance it is estimated that
no more than two trenches will be adequate to evaluate the Area of Potential Effect
(APE) in this area.
Shovel tests will be excavated at the discretion of the Project Archaeologist
and will be dug in arbitrary 10 cm levels. All excavated earth will be passed
through ¼ inch hardware cloth. Artifacts found in shovel tests will be collected and
analyzed in the laboratory prior to curation. Shovel tests will be dug to the
underlying clay or rocky subsoil (caliche) when possible and to depths of about 100
cm when clay or rock is not reached. If clay or rock can’t be reached through
shovel testing, backhoe trenches will be excavated where appropriate. When a site
is found, an attempt to determine its boundaries through shovel testing and surface
inspection will be made.
The project will be documented through a shovel test log, backhoe trench
log, field notes, and digital photography. A map will be drafted that depicts the
location of all areas surveyed, including shovel tests and backhoe trenches.
All archaeological sites will be located on the landscape using a hand-held
GPS, and each site will be plotted on the proper USGS topographic quadrangle.
Field numbers will be assigned to all sites until an official trinomial can be obtained
TARL.

RESEARCH DESIGN (PAGE FOUR)
The number of shovel tests and/or backhoe trenches will meet or exceed
that number requested in the Minimum Survey Standards for projects of 200 acres
or less.
Artifact Analysis and Curation
All significant artifacts will be collected for analysis in the laboratory. They
will be described and measured. Those specimens deemed worthy of permanent
curation will be processed and turned over to TARL. All artifacts not viewed as
containing research potential for future researchers will be discarded following a
written document authorizing this action from the Texas Historical Commission,
Archeology Division. Artifacts found on private property will be offered to the
landowner.
Report Preparation
A report documenting the findings of this project will be written by the
Principal Investigator and Project Archaeologist. This report will follow the
guidelines established by the Council of Texas Archeologists and Texas Historical
Commission. Two draft copies will be submitted to the Commission for review.
Upon acceptance of this report, 20 copies will be submitted to the Commission for
distribution to regional libraries.

APPENDIX II: SHOVEL TEST LOG

APPENDIX III
SHOVEL TEST PROFILES

Backhoe Trench 1 (Area B)
South Wall Profile

Backhoe Trench 2 (Area B)
South Wall Profile

APPENDIX IV: LOCATION OF SITE 41SR362

