AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE
PROPOSED BRIDGE REPLACEMENT ALONG
CR427 AT EAST METATE CREEK
ATASCOSA COUNTY, TEXAS

Ecological Communications Corporation

CSJ#0915-13-011
TAC Permit 4678

March 2008

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE
PROPOSED BRIDGE REPLACEMENT ALONG
CR427 AT EAST METATE CREEK
ATASCOSA COUNTY, TEXAS
CSJ#0915-13-011

Written by:
Rachel Feit

Principal Investigator:
W. Nicholas Trierweiler
Prepared by:

Ecological Communications Corporation

Prepared for:
Professional Engineering Design Group

Texas Antiquities Committee Permit #4678
March 2008

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Bridge Replacement Along CR427 at East Metate Creek

ABSTRACT
The San Antonio District of the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) proposes
to replace a bridge located along CR427 at East Metate Creek in Atascosa County,
Texas. In compliance with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA)
and the Antiquities Code of Texas Ecological Communications Corporation (EComm)
conducted an intensive archeological survey of the proposed bridge replacement
location under Texas Antiquities Committee (TAC) Permit #4678. A 100% pedestrian
inspection was conducted that included shovel testing and one backhoe trench. No
cultural material was found in any of the subsurface tests and no archeological cultural
resources were recorded within the APE of the project. All notes, records and documents
from this project will be permanently held at EComm in Austin, Texas. This report
documents the results of the investigations and recommends that no additional
archeological work is warranted for the proposed project to proceed.

Ecological Communications Corporation

i

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Bridge Replacement Along CR427 at East Metate Creek

TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.0
2.0
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
4.0
4.1
4.2
5.0
6.0

INTRODUCTION................................................................................................ 1
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND............................................................... 3
CULTURAL BACKGROUND ............................................................................. 4
Paleoindian Period ............................................................................................ 5
Archaic Period ................................................................................................... 5
Late Prehistoric Period ..................................................................................... 6
Protohistoric and Historic Period .................................................................... 7
Previous Investigations.................................................................................... 7
RESULTS OF FIELD INVESTIGATIONS...................................................... 8
Methods.............................................................................................................. 8
Results................................................................................................................ 8
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS ................................................................ 13
REFERENCES .................................................................................................... 14

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Project Location on Christine East USGS 7.5’ Topographic Quad........... 1
The five archeological regions of South Texas .......................................... 4
Project area looking west at East Metate Creek........................................ 9
View showing embankment in APE along CR427, looking west. ............ 9
Location of Backhoe and shovel tests...................................................... 10
Backhoe Trench 1, facing south. ............................................................... 11

Ecological Communications Corporation

ii

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Bridge Replacement Along CR427 at East Metate Creek

1.0 INTRODUCTION
In October 2007, Ecological Communications Corporation (EComm) conducted an
archeological survey in advance of a proposed bridge replacement along CR427 at
Metate Creek in Atascosa, County Texas (Figure 1). The survey was undertaken for the
San Antonio District of the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT), which plans to
replace the existing one lane wooden plank and steel stringer supported bridge with a
two-lane three span concrete bridge (CSJ #0915-13-011).

Figure 1. Project Location on Christine East USGS 7.5’ Topographic Quad.

The project area is located in a rural area, along a gravel road used primarily as an
access point for local farms and ranches. The APE for this project is located entirely
within the existing public right-of-way (ROW) along CR427 at Metate Creek, which is
approximately 40 feet (12.2 m) wide. The APE extends for 120 feet (37 m) on each side
of the 75 foot (23 m) bridge for a total length of about 328 feet (100m). Depth of
disturbance at the bridge abutments will be about 28 feet (7.6 m) and is defined on the
basis of currently available engineering designs. The total APE for this project is less

Ecological Communications Corporation

1

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Bridge Replacement Along CR427 at East Metate Creek

than one acre. No new ROW will be required for the bridge replacements; hence, all
work was conducted within existing ROW, which is owned by Atascosa County.
The proposed bridge will be built using federal and state funds; hence the project falls
under the provisions of Section 106 of National Historical Preservation Act and the
Antiquities Code of Texas. The object of the archeological survey was to identify,
document, and assess archeological resources that could be impacted by the proposed
improvements. The survey consisted of a 100% pedestrian inspection within the APE of
the undertaking, supplemented by three shovel tests and one backhoe trench at the
proposed bridge replacement location. No cultural material was found in any test or
observed on the surface during the survey. No new sites were recorded.
All work was conducted in compliance with 36 CFR 800 and 13 TAC 26, which pertain to
the guidelines for implementing Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act
(NHPA) (16 U.S.C. 470 et seq.) and the Antiquities Code of Texas. Work was conducted
under Texas Antiquities Permit #4678.
Weather conditions during the investigation were ideal for survey, with mild
temperatures, clear skies, and only minimal recent rains. W. Nicholas Trierweiler
functioned as Principal Investigator; Rachel Feit conducted field investigations and wrote
the report. Rene Pickard provided backhoe assistance. Remaining sections of this report
detail the environmental and cultural background of the project area, field methods
used, results of investigations and conclusions. Since no new sites were recorded, and
no cultural material recovered, all field records generated during this project will be
permanently housed at EComm in Austin, Texas.

Ecological Communications Corporation

2

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Bridge Replacement Along CR427 at East Metate Creek

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
The project area lies within the Interior Gulf Coastal Plain physiographic province of
Texas. This area is characterized by rolling to level topography with soils that include
clay, loam, sand and gravel. According to Wermund (2007), this underlying geology
consists of uncemented sandy ridges intermixed with shale. The Geologic Atlas of Texas
indicates that geology is dominated by Eocene sands; thin bands of Holocene alluvium
are present along the perennial creeks, such as East Metate Creek.
The project area elevation is approximately 306 feet AMSL. An examination of USDA
soil maps for Atascosa County (Dittmar and Stevens 1980) and an analysis of the APE
using the USDA online Soil Survey reveals that soils within the APE are exclusively Sinton
series. These are deep, well drained loamy soils along major streams (Dittmar and
Stevens 1980:70) with a typical pedon as follows:
• 0-5 inches (0-13 cm) - dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) clay loam;
• 5-12 inches (13-30 cm) - dark grayish brown (10YR4/3) clay loam;
• 13-44 inches (30-112 cm) - brown (10YR 5/3) sandy clay loam;
• 44-64 inches (112-163 cm) - brown (10YR 5/3) loamy fine sand.
These soils have the potential to contain deeply buried archeological deposits beneath
the range of manual shovel testing.
In terms of vegetation and wildlife habitat, the project lies within the South Texas Plains
as described by Gould et al. (1960). Vegetation physiognomy is a patchwork of native
and non-native grasses, interspersed with woody shrubs, chaparral brush, and woods.
Low to medium tall broad-leaved deciduous and evergreen shrubs can be scattered
singly, in groves or thickets, or as bands (Telfair 1999) along waterways. Land-use
changes have prompted a decline in many of the dominant native prairie grasses and
brush species.
The project area forms a riparian zone within a vegetational region dominated by woody
shrubs and prairie grasses. Native plant species noted during the field evaluation in
October 2007 included black willow, gum bumelia, hackberry, mesquite, retama,
windmill grass, and silverleaf nightshade. Black willow and Hackberry are the dominant
overstory trees, typically growing to 20-30 feet in height, understory plants were
dominated by windmill grass, poison ivy, greenbriar and yaupon.
The riparian zone along East Metate Creek represents a travel corridor for occurring
wildlife since it exhibits a generally continuous vegetation community that provides
food, concealment, and escape cover from predators. This corridor, therefore, contains
what typically represents some of the highest quality habitat within the county.
Indigenous wildlife in this area includes white-tailed deer, javelina, turkey, fox squirrel,
jack rabbits, foxes, ring-tailed cats, skunks, opossum, bobcats, and coyotes, with
seasonal migrations of ducks, cranes, and geese.

Ecological Communications Corporation

3

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Bridge Replacement Along CR427 at East Metate Creek

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND
The project area is located in the archeological region typically considered a part of the
south Texas archeological region. The region is still little understood archeologically,
reflecting the paucity of systematic excavations as well as the challenging characteristics
of the landscape as they pertain to site formation processes (Black 1989). Black (1989)
divided the south Texas archeological region into five biogeographical areas based on
Hester’s (1981) description of prehistoric adaptation patterns in South Texas (littoral vs.
inland). According to Black (1989), the five biogeographical areas of south Texas are as
follows: Rio Grande Plain, Rio Grande Delta, Nueces-Guadalupe Plain, Sand Sheet, and
the Coastal Bend (Figure 2).

Figure 2. The five archeological regions of South Texas
(from Padilla and Nickels 2003:4: Figure 4)

The project area lies in the Nueces-Guadalupe Plain region of south Texas. Although
the south Texas plains archeological region is generally considered a distinct
archeological entity, much of what is known of the area is in part derived from
comparisons and extrapolation with adjacent areas that have been subjected to more
intensive investigation, particularly the central Texas archeological region. Following
Hester’s (1995) chronology, the four prehistoric cultural periods include the Paleoindian
(11,200-8,000 B.P), Archaic (8,000-1,200 B.P.), Late Prehistoric (1,200-400 B.P.), and
Protohistoric (400-300 B.P). Similar to the cultural chronology provided by the central
Texas region, these divisions are not absolute, but represent contrived temporal
categories based on perceived cultural expressions reflected in lithic technology,
subsistence practices, mortuary behavior, and other sorts of material remains. These
material expressions further reflect broader patterns in the environment and human
behavior.

Ecological Communications Corporation

4

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Bridge Replacement Along CR427 at East Metate Creek

The most commonly recorded sites in south Texas are open occupation sites. In some
cases, meaningful excavation of these sites has proven to be a challenge to
archeologists (Hester 1995). This vexing situation stems from the exclusively horizontal
patterning of many open occupation sites in the region. These sites tend to exist as
laterally extensive occupation and use area where temporally separated components
occur on a single surface without overlapping (Hester 1995). Other open occupation
sites, especially in upland settings, occur on stable ancient surfaces with very shallow or
deflated cultural deposits that are sometimes impossible to conclusively attribute to a
particular time period. Comparatively few deeply stratified occupation sites have been
excavated in south Texas. Black (1989) posits that this is the result of both settlement
patterning and depositional context. Common site types in south Texas include lithic
procurement and reduction sites, rock shelters, artifact caches, and burials.

3.1

Paleoindian Period

The Paleoindian stage (11,200–8,000 B.P.) was commonly characterized throughout
Texas by nomadic big-game hunters who heavily relied on megafauna of the Pleistocene
(e.g., mammoth, mastodon, bison, camel, and horse) for subsistence (sensu Willey
1966). However, a more accurate description of this stage is presented by Bousman et
al. (1990:22): “…this period may have seen use by small, mobile bands of
nonspecialized hunters and gathers occasionally utilizing megafauna perhaps only as the
opportunity arose.” Thus, according to Bousman et al. (1990), Paleoindians used a
wider variety of resources than previously thought. Evidence of this broader resource
subsistence is based on the works of Johnson (1977), Collins (1998: 1505–1506), and
Collins and Brown (2000). Johnson (1977) reviewed reports on numerous Paleoindian
sites that indicated a range of small and medium fauna were harvested in addition to big
game. Investigations at the Wilison-Leonard site (41WM235), the Gault site (41BL323),
and Lubbock Lake (41LU1) provide evidence of small and medium faunal remains (i.e.,
turtle, rabbit, squirrel, snakes, gopher, and deer) associated with megafaunal remains
(i.e., bison and mammoth) (Collins 1998: 1505–1506). Clovis and Folsom points are the
primary diagnostic artifacts associated with this stage (Turner and Hester 1999; Collins
1995).

3.2

Archaic Period

The Archaic Period (8,000–1,200 B.P.) spans nearly 7,000 years of prehistory. The
primary cultural marker of this time period is the burned rock midden (Collins
2004:119). These piles of burned limestone, sandstone, and other lithic debris
represent the remains of multiple ovens that were used, reused and discarded over
time. Their appearance signifies a shift from a big-game hunting subsistence strategy to
a less mobile, generalized subsistence strategy. Projectile points also changed;
lanceolate-shaped points gave way to dart points that were stemmed and barbed (Black
1989). During the Archaic period the climate changed from wet and mild conditions
seen in the Paleoindian stage, to warmer and drier conditions. Researchers believe that
the changes in climate influenced prehistoric subsistence strategies (Story 1985:38–39;
Weir 1976).

Ecological Communications Corporation

5

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Bridge Replacement Along CR427 at East Metate Creek

The Archaic period is typically divided into three sub-stages: early, middle and late. The
Early Archaic stage is still relatively obscure in the archeological record. The majority of
Early Archaic sites are distributed around the Edwards Plateau along the eastern and
southern margins, suggesting concentrations near reliable watersources with a variety of
food resources. These sites are generally described as small with highly diverse tool
assemblages.
Cultural material associated with Early Archaic sites are points
(specifically Angostura, Early Split Stem, and Martindale-Uvalde) (Collins 2004), Clear
Fork and Guadalupe bifaces, manos, hammerstones, burins, metates, circular scrapers,
and various biface styles (Osburn et al. 2007), suggesting specialized tool usage. Also,
burials have been found associated with this stage, although very few (Prewitt 1981;
Story 1985).
During the Middle Archaic, the climate became very warm and dry. The number and
size of burned rock middens from this period increases dramatically, leading many
archeologists to posit not only a population increase but also an intensification in the
types of food processing typically done in earth ovens. Types of project points that
frequently occur on Middle Archaic sites are Bulverde, Langtry, and Kinney dart points
(Hall et al. 1986). Other materials found among Middle Archaic assemblages are an
increase of wooden and bone implements, plant processing implements, and the
intensive use of large burned rock features. Burials during this stage become more
frequent than in the previous stage.
During the Late Archaic climatic conditions once again became more mesic. Cultural
traditions observed in the Middle Archaic carry over in to the Late Archaic. There is an
intensification of the Middle Archaic traditions as well as newly developed ones. Trade is
observed during this period with the exchanging of material from different localities.
Coastal materials such as shells used as ornaments have been reported to have been
exchanged for both finished tools and raw material (Story 1985). Rock ovens and
hearths were continuously used as a means to prepare food, and bison once again
became available. Ritualized mortuary practice became more common during the Late
Archaic with interments becoming quite elaborate in terms of associated burial furniture.
Large cemeteries were established along drainages suggesting the importance of the
location, and perhaps territorial ties by groups to these localities (Story 1985). Location
of these cemeteries “are believed to be the result of the same cultural group using a
place on the landscape to reaffirm their rights of descent and control/access to critical
resources” (Osburn 2007:15; see Taylor et al. 1995:627–631 and Taylor 1998).

3.3

Late Prehistoric Period

Of the prehistoric stages, the Late Prehistoric stage (1,200–400 B.P.) is the best defined,
marked by the presence of the bow and arrow and by the production of small arrow
points (Hester 1981:122). The emergence of agriculture and ceramics also occurred in
the Late Prehistoric. While incipient agricultural and ceramic use is evident in south
Texas most researchers believe that these technologies diffused into south Texas from
other regions (Bousman et al. 1990). Much of the ample evidence for late prehistoric
lifeways indicate that people exploited a wide range of animal and plant resources for
their diets. Food processing techniques relied heavily on manos, metates, and earth

Ecological Communications Corporation

6

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Bridge Replacement Along CR427 at East Metate Creek

ovens for cooking. Diagnostic artifacts of this time period include Scallorn, Edwards and
Perdiz arrow points. Sites tend to be more closely clustered around creeks, rather than
dispersed along other landforms, suggesting intensifying nucleation around reliable
natural resources.

3.4

Protohistoric and Historic Period

The Protohistoric (ca. A.D. 1528–1700) is marked by the venture into south and
southeast Texas by Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca beginning in 1528. Archeological
sites dated to this substage contain a mix of both European (e.g., metal and glass arrow
points, trade beads, and wheel-made or glazed ceramics) and traditional Native
American artifacts (e.g., manufactured stone tools) (Hester 1995). The establishment of
the first Spanish missions and the expansion of the Spanish Colonial Empire mark the
Historic substage (ca. 1700–present). Most of our knowledge of this substage is
through the written records of early Spanish missionaries.
Families of European descent began migrating northward from Mexico into the Atascosa
County area and establishing ranches during the mid-eighteenth century. According to
Peterson (1996) they named the area “Atascosa” based on the boggy conditions they
encountered in the region. After the Texas Revolution, the Spanish and Mexican Era
ranches were broken up, and Anglo immigrants eventually settled the area starting in
the late 1840s. In 1856 the area was separated from Bexar County and officially named
Atascosa County, with the seat in Navatasco. However, the county seat was moved to
Pleasanton in 1858.
In the early years, the population of Atascosa County remained low as a result of poor
roads and threat of Indian raids, which isolated the county from the larger population of
Texas. However, the population began to increase after the Civil War, when new waves
of immigrants began arriving by means of the Great Northern Railway which crossed the
northern tip of the county (Peterson 1996). Cattle ranching sharply increased in the
1860s and 1870s, followed by cotton agriculture toward the end of the nineteenth
century. In 1910 the county seat was moved from Pleasanton to Jourdanton.

3.5

Previous Investigations

The Texas Historical Commission (THC) online atlas shows no previous archeological
survey within the current APE and no previous archeological surveys within two miles
(3.2 km) of the APE. There are no previously recorded sites within two miles of the
project area.

Ecological Communications Corporation

7

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Bridge Replacement Along CR427 at East Metate Creek

4.0 RESULTS OF FIELD INVESTIGATIONS
4.1

Methods

Prior to field investigations, EComm archeologists conducted a review of records
maintained by the Texas Historical Commission, noting all previously recorded
archeological sites within a two mile (3,200 m) radius of the APE. In addition, USDA soil
survey maps and the Geologic Atlas of Texas for Atascosa County were consulted to
assess the potential for deeply buried deposits.
Field methods for this project were in compliance with THC survey standards. The
bridge crossing at CR427 was inspected on October 10, 2007. The ground surface
within the APE for the bridge was visually examined for cultural material and shovel
tests were excavated to 80 centimeters below surface (cmbs) at areas with potential for
buried cultural material.
The scope of work for the project specified that four tests were to be dug—at each of
the four corners of the bridge. In addition, two backhoe trenches were to be dug, since
research revealed potential for deeply buried cultural deposits. In the event that tests
contained archeological material, additional tests were to be excavated within the APE to
further investigate the possibility of buried materials, and to define site boundaries.
However, in areas where surface and subsurface disturbances were clear to
investigators, fewer tests would be excavated, and conditions documented
photographically instead. The latter scenario applied to most locations, with extensive
disturbances apparent at the bridge replacement location.
Tests were at least 30 centimeters (appr. 1 ft) in diameter and excavated in 20
centimeter levels. All excavated material from shovel tests was sieved through ¼-inch
mesh. For each level, the texture and Munsell color of the excavated sediments were
recorded together with any cultural items present. The location of each subsurface test
was recorded using a hand-held GPS receiver. Archeologists documented the effort
through field notes and photographs.

4.2

Results

The project area is located in a rural gravel road that serves surrounding farms and
ranches. The landscape is primarily flat to gently undulating, vegetated with either
cultivated crops or south Texas scrub. East Metate Creek forms a riparian corridor
within this landscape, shaded mainly by mature hackberry, mesquite, and black willows
(Figure 3). Ground surface visibility ranged from 0-60% with the project area.
Investigations commenced with visual inspection which demonstrated moderate impacts
to the project APE within the existing ROW. The steel span and timber bridge over East
Metate Creek desperately needs replacement: loose and missing boards were evident
throughout the bridge span, and recent flooding has evidently caused erosion of the
concrete and wooden supporting embankment walls.

Ecological Communications Corporation

8

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Bridge Replacement Along CR427 at East Metate Creek

Figure 3. Project area looking west at East Metate Creek

The bridge, and the road leading up the bridge for a distance of approximately 70 feet
on either side of the creek is built up on a steep soil and gravel embankment to increase
its height over the creek and presumably level the bridge (Figure 4).

Figure 4. View showing embankment in APE along CR427, looking west.

Ecological Communications Corporation

9

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Bridge Replacement Along CR427 at East Metate Creek

The embankment ranges in height from approximately three feet at the bridge itself, to
about one foot at the outer limits of the APE along CR427. No artifacts or archeological
remains were observed either on the surface or in profile exposures of the creek itself.
Given the steep embankment, and the narrow APE width within the existing ROW, the
project archeologist at first wondered whether any suitable areas would be found to
conduct shovel and backhoe trenches. Ultimately, one backhoe trench was excavated at
the southwest corner of the existing bridge (Figure 5) on a relatively flat section of the
road embankment next to the bridge—the only feasible location for trenching.

Figure 5. Location of Backhoe and shovel tests.

Ecological Communications Corporation

10

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Bridge Replacement Along CR427 at East Metate Creek

This trench revealed a profile characterized by an undulating upper layer (0-40 cmbs) of
loose sandy loam (10YR 4/4). This overlay interbedded, laminated grayish brown,
brown and gray sands and clay sands loams (40-60 cmbs). Below this was mottled
brown and olive sandy clay (5Y 5/6 and 2.5Y 3/2, 60-90 cmbs), and mottled orange and
olive sandy clay with eroded caliche and sandstone (10YR 6.8 and 2.5Y 6/4, 90-150
cmbs; Figure 5). This last stratigraphic zone was interpreted to be pre-Holocene in age
and the trench was terminated at 150 centimeters below surface (cmbs).
At the
eastern end of the trench, closest to the creek, evidence of the road and bridge
embankment was observed in profile as large chunks of sandstone and mortar mixed
with natural soil. This sandstone and mortar fill was observed to a depth of
approximately 40 cmbs in the northeast wall profile. No archeological material was
found in the trench fill or profile.

Figure 6. Backhoe Trench 1, facing south.

Three shovel tests were dug at each of the other APE corners in areas where the manmade bridge embankment appeared to meet the natural (or close to it) soil surface
(Figure 4). Each test was dug to a maximum depth of 80 cmbs. The shovel tests
revealed an upper zone of loose brown sandy loam (0-approximately 40 cmbs) overlying
slightly more compact clay sand transitioning into brown or olive brown sandy clay.
Shovel Test 3, placed at the southeast corner of the APE contained disturbed soil mixed
with road base to a depth of 40 cmbs. Below that, however, soils appeared to be intact.
No cultural material was observed either in shovel tests or on the surface. Given this,

Ecological Communications Corporation

11

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Bridge Replacement Along CR427 at East Metate Creek

and given the limited area to conduct further shovel testing, investigators felt that
additional subsurface testing was not warranted.

Ecological Communications Corporation

12

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Bridge Replacement Along CR427 at East Metate Creek

5.0 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Archeological investigations of a proposed bridge replacement along CR427 in Atascosa
County found no new archeological sites and no archeological material. Investigations
consisted of visual inspection, shovel testing and backhoe trenching. One backhoe
trench and three shovel tests were excavated—one at each quadrant of the bridge
replacement. The survey documented moderate impacts within the APE due to the
existing road embankment. Road base was documented to a depth of 40 cmbs in one
shovel test and the backhoe trench. The backhoe trench results suggest that Holocene
soils extend to a depth of no more than one meter below ground surface. Ancient
mottled clays mixed with caliche and sandstone comprise the subsoil. No cultural
material was observed in subsurface tests, on the surface, or in profile exposures of the
creek itself. No new archeological sites were recorded. This report recommends that no
further work is warranted within the APE of the bridge replacement undertaking.
The intensive archeological survey was conducted in compliance with Section 106 of the
NHPA and the Antiquities Code of Texas, and adhered to the guidelines set forth in 36
CFR Part 800 and 13 TAC 26. Work was conducted under TAC Permit #4678. It is the
opinion of the Principal Investigator that no NRHP or SAL-eligible archeological
properties will be directly affected by the proposed bridge replacement.
No artifacts were collected; field records will be permanently held at EComm in Austin.

Ecological Communications Corporation

13

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Bridge Replacement Along CR427 at East Metate Creek

6.0 REFERENCES
Black, S. L.
1989 South Texas Plains. In From the Gulf of the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation in
Central, South, and Lower Pecos Texas, by T. R. Hester, S. L. Black, D. G. Steele,
B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. J. Reinhard, and L. C. Bement, pp. 39–62. Research
Series No. 33. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Bousman, C. B., S. A. Tomka, and G. L. Bailey
1990 Prehistoric Archeology and Paleoenvironments in Hidalgo and Willacy Counties,
South Texas: Results of the Phase II Test Excavations. Reports of Investigations
No. 76. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Collins, M. B. (Assembler and Editor)
1998 Wilson-Leonard: An 11,000 Year Archeological Record in Central Texas, Volumes
1–6. Studies in Archeology 31, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
University of Texas at Austin. Archeology Studies Program, Report 10, Texas
Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division, Austin.
Collins, M. B.
1995 Forty Years of Archeology in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society.
66:361–400.
Collins, M. B.
2004 Archeology in Central Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, edited by T. Perttula,
pp. 101–126. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Collins, M. B., and K. M. Brown
2000 Gault Gisement: Some Preliminary Observations. In Current Archeology in Texas
2(1):8–11.
Dittmar, G.W. and J.W. Stevens
1990 Soil Survey of Atascosa County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with the Texas Department of
Agriculture Experiment Station.
Gould, F.W., G.O. Hoffman, and C.A. Rechenthin
1960 Vegetational Areas of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment Leaflet. Texas A &
M University, College Station
Hall, Grant, Thomas R. Hester and Stephen Black
1986 The Prehistoric Sites of Choke Canyon Reservoir, Southern Texas. Center for
Archaeological Research, Choke Canyon Series No. 10. University of Texas, San
Antonio.

Ecological Communications Corporation

14

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Bridge Replacement Along CR427 at East Metate Creek

Hester, T. R.
1981 Tradition and Diversity Among the Prehistoric Hunters and Gathers of South
Texas. Plains Anthropologist 26(92):119–128.
1995

Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:427–
459.

Johnson, E.
1977 Animal Food Resources of Paleoindians. The Museum Journal 17:65–77.
Osburn, T. L., C. Frederick, C. G. Ward
2007 Phase II Archaeological Investigations at Sites 41BX254, 41BX256, 41BX1628,
and 41BX1621 within the Historical Mission Reach Project Area, San Antonio,
Texas. Miscellaneous Reports of Investigations No. 373, Geo-Marine Inc., U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District.
Padilla, A. E., and D. L. Nickels
2003 Browne Road Regional Park Survey, Cameron County, Texas. Technical Report
No. 15. Center for Archaeological Studies Texas State University, San Marcos.
Peterson, Linda
1996 Atascosa County. In the New Handbook of Texas, Volume 1, edited by Ron
Tyler, Douglas E. Barnett, Roy R. Barkley, Penelope C. Anderson, and Mark F.
Odintz, pp.273-274. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Prewitt, E. R.
1981 Culture Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65–89.
Story, D. A.
1985 Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Costal Plain. In
Prehistoric Food Production in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 19–56.
Anthropological Papers No. 75. Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor.
Taylor A. J.
1998 Mortuary Practices and Territoriality: Archaic Hunter-Gatherers of Southern Texas
and the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28). Ph.D. dissertation, Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas Austin.
Taylor A. J., M. L. Marchbank, and F. K. Meskill
1995 Relative Dating of Human Skeletal Remains. In Archaeological Investigations at

the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak
County, Texas. By A. J. Taylor and C. L. Highley, pp. 581–631. 2 Vols. Studies in
Archeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas
at Austin.

Ecological Communications Corporation

15

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Bridge Replacement Along CR427 at East Metate Creek

Telfair, R.C. II
1999 Introduction. In Ecological Regions of Texas: Description, Land Use and Wildlife.
R.C. Telfair II, ed. Texas Wildlife Resources and Land Uses. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Turner, E. S., and T. R. Hester
1999 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. 3rd ed. Texas Monthly Field
Guide Series. Gulf Publishing, Houston.
Weir, F. A.
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. Anthropology
Department, Washington State University.
Wermund, E.G.
2007 Physiogrpahy
of
Texas.
Electronic
document.
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/geo/physiography.html. Accessed October 15, 2007.

Ecological Communications Corporation

16

