A Cultural Resources Survey of the Inwood Subdivision,
Brownsville, Texas

John E. Keller

Texas Antiquities Permit #4716

Southern Archaeological Consultants
Report of Investigations 11-2007

Prepared for the Community Development Corporation of Brownsville

Abstract
During November of 2007, Southern Archaeological Consultants, Inc. carried out an
intensive cultural resources survey of an area of approximately 60 acres within the city
limits of Brownsville, Texas. The property is scheduled for development by the
Community Development Corporation of Brownsville. At present most of the location is
a large plowed agricultural field northeast of the intersection of Dana Road and the
former Morrison Road corridor. Some 1200 feet (365 meters) of the Resaca del Rancho
Viejo borders the northeastern quadrant of this property. Numerous agricultural
disturbances, including land leveling and an immense buried irrigation canal are
apparent.
The survey utilized standard pedestrian survey methodology in which ground exposures
were supplemented by shovel and auger testing. No cultural resources were recorded
during the survey and no further work is recommended in the area. The lack of cultural
materials is attributed primarily to disturbance and the fact that more syitable areas for
settlement are available elsewhere.

During early November of 2007, Southern Archaeological Cosultants carried out an
intensive cultural resources survey of approximately 60 acres adjacent to Dana Road and
the Resaca del Rancho Viejo in Brownsville, Texas. This is a project of the Community
Development Corporation of Brownsville and is funded in part by the Department of
Housing and Urban Development. Mostv of the location is currently a plowed
agricultural field. Since the project is Federally funded it is covered under procedures
defined under the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (P.L. 89-665), as amended;
the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (P.L. 91-190); Executive Order 11593,
"Protection and Enhancement of the Cultural Environment", 13 May 1971 (36 CFR Part
800); Preservation of Historic and Archaeological Data, 1974 (P.L. 98-291, as amended;
and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, "Procedures for Protection of Historic
and Cultural Properties" (36 CFR Part 800) as well as the Texas Antiquities Code.
The project consisted of five interlinked phases:
Phase 1 Permit application
Phase 2 Background and Literature Search
Phase 3 Map Review
Phase 4 Pedestrian Survey
Phase 5 Report Preparation and Recommendations

The project is concerned with the location, recording and evaluation of cultural resources
present within the affected land parcel of approximately 60 acres. This kind of project
does not generally lend itself to detailed research methodologies or comprehensive
examinations of cultural process. Such compliance oriented studies are primarily
concerned with the practical rather than theoretical issues.
The texas Historical Commission has assigned Antiquities Permit #4716 to this project.
Project Area
The project area is located wholly within the city limits of Brownsville, Texas and
covers an impact area of approximately 60 acres. This area is roughly between Dana
Road and the Resaca del Rancho Viejo north of the former the former Morrison Road
corridor but only includes a portion of resaca frontage. Most of the area isa a plowed and
leveled agricultural field with an area of approximately 57 acres. A narrow corridor of
Ntural brush encompassing nearly three acres is present along approximately 1200 feet of
The Resaca del Rancho Viejo. The ages of the trees dominating this natural area suggestv
that the field was once plowed all the way to the banks of the resaca and shovel testing
confirmed this supposition.
Reference to the USGS quadrangle and aeial photographs suggests that the field was
artificially leveled in the 1960’s. This activity took place sometime after the covered
canal was constructed as the raised area associated with this feature was also leveled. As

a result, the degree of distrurbance associated with these improvements or developments
is believed to be considerable. Shovel testing also confirmed this interpretation.

Culture History
The culture history of the Rio Grande Valley, especially its prehistoric component, is not
well understood. In large measure this is due to a basic lack of data (Prewitt 1974).
Archaeological sites have been recorded and in some cases, at least, investigated but
almost without exception these sites have been heavily disturbed cemeteries from which
archaeologists have been able to extract only limited data.
Prehistoric populations are believed to have been the predecessors of the Cohuiltecan
groups encountered by the first European explorers. They are believed to have practiced
a nomadic hunting and gathering way of life that stressed mobility and the exploitation of
fish, shellfish and plant products (Hester 1969). Presumably this way of life has been
practiced from the time of the earliest occupations with only slight alterations occurring
with the adoption of such technological innovations as the bow and arrow and the use of
ceramics. As a result, the best known of the defined cultural complexes, the Brownsville
complex (MacNeish 1947) appears to differ little from the preceding Archaic.
The Brownsville complex is characterized by large numbers of shell artifacts, Fresno,
Matamoros, Starr and Cameron arrowpoints and limited numbers of ceramics. This
complex is known almost entirely from heavily disturbed mortuary associations. As a
result, some of the assumptions about Brownsville complex culture may be unfounded
and it is suspected that basic chronological relationships are badly in need of revision
(Collins, Hester and Weir 1969). Populations encountered by the first European
explorers and observers were nomadic hunters-and-gatherers (Salinas 1990). The records
of the first Spanish explorer, Alonso Alvarez de Pineda, suggest as many as forty brush
arbor settlements (ramadas) or rancherias were present along the first sixteen miles of
river channel (Salinas 1990:22) in 1519. Other documents suggest that the Rio Grande
delta was the most densely populated area of northeastern Mexico and Southern Texas
(Salinas 1990:139) if only because of the greater subsistence resources available in the
area. The project area is included within this area of higher population density and, with
the limited data presently available, almost any prehistoric site would add greatly to our
data base and predictive capability.
The historic period beginning with the first explorations of Pineda is better understood.
Nevertheless, there has been comparatively little work done with historic materials
despite the fact that the settlements established by Escandon on the Rio Grande River
are some of the earliest in what is now the United States. These settlements are generally
associated with the present course of the Rio Grande and are located north and west of
the project area.
After the establishment of the Republic of Texas the area remained a Mexican holding
until the conclusion of the Mexican war in 1846. Indeed the first battle of that struggle

were fought at Palo Alto and the Resaca de la Palma in what would becomer Brownsville
and the establishment of the city dates to this time period. Skirmishing assocaited with
these events could have taken place within the project area but there is no collaborative
evidence of such involvement. During the Civil War this entire area was the scene of
intermittent skirmishing by combatants representing the United States, the Confederacy,
the Mexican Republic and the Emperor Maximillian.
After the Civil War, the project area returned to its relatively undeveloped state. Land
use was dominated by open range and cattle production although Brownsville prospered
as an entreport and trading center. The establishment of intensive irrigation agriculture
(Pierce 1917, Stambaugh and Stambaugh 1954) in the early 1900's caused a fundamental
change in the lifestyle of Cameron County and Brownsville. The city became a major
marketing center and the largest United States city in the Lower Rio Grande Valley.
After 1995 Brownsville began aseries of expansions to the north and annexed the project
area in the late 1990’s.
Background and Literature Search
The general survey area, and indeed Cameron County (Texas Historical Commission
1987), has not been the scene of numerous cultural resource investigations. This seems
to be related both to a lack of Federal or State supported projects and limited knowledge
of the requirements. A background and literature review was carried out at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin. This indicates that
there are no recorded cultural resources within the project area. In 1994 Southern
Archaeological Consultants (Keller and Zamarripa 1994) conducted a survey of
approximately 50 acres a few miles south of the project area but recorded no cultural
resources.
Additional literature searches were carried out at the library of the University of TexasBrownsville, the Cameron County Courthouse, the Hidalgo County Historical Museum
and the Historical Collection in the Library of the University of Texas-Pan American.
These resources proved to be particularly valuable for the maps prepared for the
International Boundary Commissions in 1884, 1889, and 1900. These maps provide
topographic evidence for active Rio Grande River channels, resacas, cutoffs, bancos,
oxbow lakes and historic occupations during the period from 1853 to 1911.
The 1983 photo revised USGS quadrangle (West Brownsville, Texas) does not indicate
any structures within the boundaries of the project area except for a large covered
irrigation pipe. This pipe or canal is still in use, although the only surfacial evidence of its
existence is a series of massive standpipes which provide flood irrigation. Aerial
photographs of the location from the 1970’s (USDA 1977) and earlier show that the
location of this covered canal and the cultivated field. This condition prevailed until the
expansion of Brownsville began in the mid-1990’s.
The USGS quadrangle also indicates that the southern portion of the project area wa once
nearly nine feet lower than the area north of the pipeline. Since the entire field is now

esssentially level, there is little doubt that the field was artificially leveled as an aid to
irrigation and drainage. Deep plowing is also evident.
Survey Procedures
Given the size of the plowed field and the spase vegetational copver a transect
methodology waspropriate. Thus, the entire impact area was walked over by investigators
in line abreast. Surface exposures of over 99 percent prevailed throughout the etire
plowed field and there was very little vegetational debris present. Shovel testing in this
area was limited and mainly served to confirm the extent bof the disturbabce present and
the nature of the cut and fill process during the field’s leveling.
Laredo silty clay loam and Olmito silty clay (USDA 1977) are the predominant soil types
in this location. Both of these soil types are characteristic of old flood plains and deltas
and are, of course, often prsent addjacent to resacas. Typically Olmito soils occur in
slight depressions within larger areas of Laredo soils and, as a result, it is likely that the
originally lower portions of the project area were dominated by this former type. A series
of six shovel tests excavated across the plowed field produced monotonous results. In the
upper 40 centimeters this soil is very dry and compact with a Munsell coloration of
10YR5/3. Below 40 centimeters the soil is moister and slightly less compact with a
Munsell coloration of 10YR6/3 shading into a 10YR7/3 at a depth of approximately 92
centimeters. Structurally there is little difference between the soil encountered at the
surface and that present a greater depths. This situation appears to confirm the
hypothesis that there has been considerable filling across the field as suggested by
reference to the contours present in 1955. There are lumps and concretions of calcium
carbonate present throughout the solum and root hairs are also present. The plow zone is
approximately 40 centimeters in thickness throughout the field portion of the project area
with numerous inclusions of recent plant parts and debris to at least that depth.
The narrow band of unplowed soil adjacent to the resaca was also sampled by shovel
tresting. Once again there is little structural difference between these soils at the surface
and those encountered at greater depths. A series of six shovel tests was excavated
throughout this unplowed area. Once again these shovel tests proved to be remarkably
similar and closely matched those tests excavated in the plowed field. In the upper 40
centimeters this soil is very dry and compact with a Munsell coloration of 10YR6/3
shading into a 10YR7/3 at a depth of approximately 92 centimeters. This situation as
well as the age of the trees in this narrow band of apparently unaltered vegetation
suggests that the field was plowed all the way to the resaca until at least the 1970’s. Tree
ring coring suggests that therte are no trees older than 30 years in this location.
The soils encountered along the resaca are less compact and the plow zone is less
distinctive than in the plowed field. This is also suggestive of a plowing hiatus in this
location during which the present vegetation became established. There has been
considerable bankside soil collapse along the resaca and in some locations the banks are
deeply undercut. This suggests that the resaca was once narrower than its present

dimensions and that portions of the original bank have been eroded and/or sloughed off
into the water fairly recently.
All shovel tests were excavated in a similar manner. Typical shovel tests were measured
50 centimeters by 50 centimeters. These were excavated in 20 centimeter levels with the
excavated material from each level being screened separately through 1/4 inch mesh and
examined for cultural materials. Notes were taken regarding the soil composition of the
unit, its coloration and of the presence of any unusual features.
Results
No significant cultural resources were discovered or recorded during this survey. A
number of factors may be involved in the absence of prehistoric or historic archaeological
resources. Disturbance by modern activities is, however, a primary factor. Much of this
disturbance appears to be associated with agricultural developments. For example, the
plowed fields in the area have been under nearly continuous cultivation since before the
1900's. Because of soil characteristics deep plowing is necessary to maintain tilth. In
addition, it appears that the fields were once extensive and that cultivation probably
extended throughout the area. The aerial photographs supplied by the Soil Conservation
Service appear to confirm the degree of agricultural disturbance. Uring the 1960’s and
1970’s increasing use was made of landleveling technologies and these introduced a
regime of repeated and extensive disturbances.
Additional disturbance factors have been introduced by irrigation and flood control
involved with the management of the Rio Grande (Stambaugh and Stambaugh 1954).
Finally, construction associated with the highway and drainage facilities have had
considerable effect on the survey area.
While the presence of the nearby resaca does suggest thatv human populations with
relatively primitive technoogies, such as the native Cohuiltecan inhabitants, might have
utilzed the location on a sporadic basis there is no direct evience of this kind of activity.
The limited number of prehistoric sites so far investigated in the Lower Rio Grande
Valley wewre generally associated with very slight rises in elevation above the general
level of the floodplain. These rises may have provided some degree of flood protection as
the whole delta was subject to cyclical overflow flooding in the past (Lonard, Everitt and
Judd 1991). At any rate, no such rises are present in the impact area.
If Ricklis' (1988, 1990, 1992) model of aboriginal congregation and dispersal is correct
the project area would probably be considered most suitable for dispersed occupation and
exploitation. Such a dispersed settlement pattern would leave little trace except at special
use sites like 41Cf2, the Floyd Morris cemetery (Collins, Hester and Weir 1969; Hester
1969), which seem to suggest congregation for ceremonial reuse. Perhaps Floyd Morris
does represent a sort of centralized mortuary for essentially dispersed nomads. The
presence of a similar specialized occupation in the project area is not, of course,
impossible but seems unlikely in the light of disturbance factors.

Historic settlement, as represented by the city of Brownsville itself, has obviously
occurred within the area. However, archival research and particularly the maps
associated with the various International Boundary Commissions do not indicate
extension of the city or any associated improvements into this area until relatively
revently. The absence of historic resources is, then, not unexpected.
Conclusions
No cultural resources were recorded and there are no previously recorded archaeological
sites, prehistoric or historic, are present within the project area. As a result, no further
work is recommended within the surveyed impact areas. There remains the very slight
possibility that deeply buried deposits of archaeological importance may be located by
mechanical excavation. If such deposits are encountered the work in that vicinity should
be halted and the State Historic Preservation Office, Department of Antiquities Protection
should be contacted immediately.

References Cited or Consulted
Allhands, James L.
1960 Railroad to the Rio. The Anson Jones Press, Salado, Texas.
Anderson, A.E.
1932 Artifacts of the Lower Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society 4:29-31.
Anderson. David G. and Jenalee Muse
1982 The Archaeology of Tenancy: An Example from the South Carolina Low Country.
South Carolina Antiquities 14:71-85.
Barnes, V.E.
1976 McAllen-Brownsville Sheet, Geologic Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Barton, Florence
1983 The Magic Valley of Texas. Eakin Press, Austin, Texas.
Baulch, Joe Robert
1974 James B. Wells: South Texas Economic and Political Leader. Ph.D. Dissertation, Texas
TechUniversity.
Black, Stephen L.
1989 South Texas Plains. In From the Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation in Central,
South, and Lower Pecos Texas, by Thomas R. Hester, Stephen L. Black, D. Gentry
Steele, Ben W. Olive, Anne A. Fox, Karl J. Reinhard, and Leland C. Bement, pp. 39-62.
Research Series 33, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Bomar, G.W.
1983 Texas Weather. University of Texas Press.
Boothe, Betty I.
1967 The Cavalier and the Caballero: Conflicts in the Lower Rio Grande Valley in the 1850's
and 1860's.. M.A. Thesis, New Mexico Highlands University
Brown, L.E., Jr. Brewton, J.L.,Evans, T.J., McGowan, J.H., White, W.A., Groat, C.G., and W.L. Fisher
1980 Environmental Geologic Atlas of the Texas Coastal Zone-Brownsville-Harlingen Area.
Bureau of Economic Geology, University of Texas at Austin.

Buckner, Dellos Urban
1929 Study of the Lower Rio Grande Valley as a Cultural Area. M.A. Thesis, University of
Texas.
Caylor, Jule A.
1986 A Proposed Rule-of- Thumb to Pedict Scale Requirements for New Project Aerial
Photographs. Proceedings of the Forest Service Remote Sensing Applications
Conference. Salt Lake City, Utah.
Central Power and Light Company
1967 The First 50 Years. Central Power and Light Company, Corpus Christi, Texas.
Chatelle, Miriam
1948 For We Love Our Valley Home. The Naylor Company, San Antonio, Texas.
Collins, Michael B., Thomas Roy Hester and Frank A. Weir
1968 The Floyd Morris Site (41CF2): A Prehistoric Cemetery Site in Cameron County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:119-146.
Collins, M.B., Hall, G.D. and C.B. Bousman
1989 Archaeological Applications of Geochronological Techniques in Southern Texas.La
Tierra. Vol..16, No.1,pp14-27.
Crawford, Polly Pearl
1925 The Beginning of Spanish Settlement in the Lower Rio Grande Valley. M.A. Thesis,
University of Texas, Austin.
Davenport, Harbert
1933 Life of James B. Wells. S.N.
Day, D. William
1981 Cultural Resources Survey and Assessments in Portions of Hidalgo and Willacy Counties,
Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.
Day, D.William, J. Laurens-Day and E.R. Prewitt
1981 Cultural Resources Survey and Assessment in Portions of Hidalgo and Willacy Counties,
Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Reports of Investigations 15. Austin.
Diaz del Castillo, Bernal
1955 Historia Verdadera de la Conquista de la Nueva Espana. 2 vols. Mexico City:Editorial
Porrua.
Dougherty, E.
1955 The Rio Grande Valley, 1807. Runyon Brothers, Brownsville, Texas,
Dougherty, Edward
1869 Availability of the Counties of Cameron and Hidalgo on the Lower Rio Grande, Texas
for Agricultural Stock Raising and Manufacturing. Sentinel Book and Job Printing,
Brownsville, Texas.
Doyon, Bernard
1956 The Cavalry Christ on the Rio Grande 1849-1883. Catholic Life Publications, Bruce
Press, Milwaukee.
Ellis, L.G. and G.A. Goodfriend
1994 Chronometric and Site-Formation Studies Using Land Snail Shells: Preliminary Results.
In Archeological Investigations on 571 Prehistoric Sites at Fort Hood, Bell and Coryell
Counties, Texas. Research Report No. 31, U.S. Army, Fort Hood,pp.183-201.
Escandon, Jose de
1946 Relacion de la Costa de Seno Mexicano. Vol. 2, Archivo de la Historia de Tamaulipas.
Compilado and editado por Gabriel Saldivar. Mexico City.
Fernandez de Navarrete, Martin
1955 Coleccion de Viajes y Discubrimientos que Hicieron por Mar los Espanoles Desde
Fines del Siglo XV. Biblioteca de Autores Espanoles. Vol 3.Madrid: Ediciones Atlas.
Fleming, Grace
1986 The Land of Shary. Pan American University, Edinburg, Texas.
Foscue, Edwin Jay
1930 Agricultural geography of the Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas.Ph.D. Dissertation
Clark University.
Haecker, Charles M.

1994 A Thunder of Cannon: Archaeology of the Mexican-American Battlefield of Palo Alto.
With Contributions by Michael Farmer, Eric A. Ratliff, Norman L.Richard, Dr. Alfred T.
Richardson and Kevin R. Young, National Park Service, Southwewst Cultural Resources
Center, Professional Papers No. 52.
Hall, Grant D.
1986 Cultural Resource Investigations along Drainage Improvements, Hidalgo and Willacy
Counties, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.
Hall, Grant D. and K.A. Grombacher
1974 An Assessment of Archeological and Historical Resources to be Affected by the Brazos
Island Harbor Waterway Project, Texas. Research Report 30, Texas Archeological
Survey, the University of Texas at Austin.
Hall, Grant D., Michael B. Collins and Elton R. Prewitt
1987 Cultural Resource Investigations, Drainage Improvements, Hidalgo and Willacy Counties,Texas:
1986 Investigations. Reports of Investigations 59. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Hantman,J.L., K.G. Lightfoot, S. Upham, F. Plog and B. Donaldson
1984 Cibola Whitewares: A Regional Perspective. In Regional Analysis of Prehistoric Ceramic
J.L. Hantman, pp. 17-35. Anthropological Research Papers No. 31, Arizona State
University, Tempe.
Herrera, Antonio de
1945 Historia General de los Hechos de los Castellano, en las Islas, y Tierrafirme de el
Mar Occeano, Vols. 3,4, and 5. Asuncion, Paraguay:Editorial Guarana.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1969 The Floyd Morris and Ayala Sites: A Discussion of Burial Practices in the Rio GrandeValley and
Lower Texas Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:157-166.
Hester, Thomas R. (editor)
1979 A Preliminary Archaeological and Historical Assessment of the Proposed Tenneco
Pipeline: Hidalgo to Victoria Counties, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hill, Kate Adele
1973 Lon C. Hill 1862-1935: Lower Rio Grande Valley Pioneer. The Naylor Company, San
Antonio, Texas.
Horgan, Paul
1984 Great River: The Rio Grande in North American History. Texas Monthly Press, Austin
Texas.
Hoyo, Eugenio del
1972 Historia del Nuevo Reino de Leon (1577-1723). 2 vols, Serie: Historia, Publicaciones de Insttituto
Technologico y Estudios Superiores de Monterrey.Monterrey.
Irby, James Arthur
1969 Line on the Rio Grande: War and Trade on the Confederate Frontier 1861-1865.
Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Georgia, Athens.
Irby, James A.
1971 Backdoor at Bagdad: The Civil War on the Rio Grande. Texas Western Press, El Paso,
Texas.
Jackson, Jack
1986 Los Mestenos: Spanish Ranching in Texas 1721-1821. Texas A &M University Press,
College Station.
Jacobson, Lori
1982 "Soldiers in the Valley: 1916-1917" Document to accompany exhibit at the McAllen
International Museum October 12-December 3, 1982.
Jenkins, John S.
1850 History of the War Between the United States and Mexico: From the Commencement
of Hostilities to the Ratification of the Peace Treaty. Derby and Miller, Auburn.
Kearney, Milo and Anthony Knopp
1991 Boom and Bust: The Historical Cycles of Matamoros and Brownsville. Eakin Press, Austin, Texas.
Keller, John E.
1991 Archaeological and Geomorphological Investigations at the Anzalduas International

Crossing, Hidalgo County, Texas. Prepared for the McAllen, Mission and Hidalgo
International Bridge Board, Southern Archaeological Consultants, Inc. Report of
Investigations 9-95.
1997 A Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed Laguna Vista Wastewater Treatment Plant
in Cameron County, Texas. Texas Antiquities Permit # 1771. Southern Archaeological Consultants,
Report of investigations 1-97.
2005 Campo Santo Viejo: Archaeological Investigations at the old Brownsville Cemetery, Oscar
S. Dancy Building Parking Lot, Brownsville, Texas. Texas Antiquities Permit # 3586.Prepared by
Southern Archaeological Consultants, Inc. for the Cameron County Commissiloners Court 1-2005.
2005 An Archaeological Survey of the Laguna Heights County Park Improvement Project,
Cameron County, Texas. Texas Antiquities Permit # 3686 Southern Archaeological Consultants, Inc.,
Report of Investigations 3-2005.
Kelly, Pat
1985 River of Lost Dreams: Navigation on the Rio Grande. University of Nebraska Press,
Lincoln.
Krieger, Alex D.
1950 Archaeological Salvage In the Falcon Reservoir Area. Report No 1 National Park Service
and the University of Texas. Austin, Texas.
Lonard, James I., James H. Everitt and Frank W. Judd
1991 Woody Plants of the Lower Rio Grande Valley, Texas. Number 7, Miscellaneous
Publications of the Texas Memorial Museum, University of Texas at Austin.
Looney, Wesley Hall
1971 The Texas Ranger in a Turbulent Era. M.A. Thesis, Texas Tech University.
Lott, Virgil N. and Virginia M. Fenwick
1957 People and Plots on the Rio Grande. The Naylor Company, San Antonio,Texas, Lower Rio
Grande Community Heritage Project, Texas Historical commission
Lower Rio Grande Valley Development Council
1977 Historic Preservation Plan. McAllen, Texas.
1983 Environmentally Sensitive Areas in the Lower Rio Grande Valley. McAllen,
Texas.
Lower Rio Grande Historical Society
1978 Selections from the Collected Papers of the Lower Rio Grande Historical Society 19491979. Lon C. Hill Memorial Library, Harlingen, Texas.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1947An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Tamaulipas, Mexico. American Antiquity 13(1):
33- 39.
Mallouf, Robert J.
1977 A Predictive Assessment of Cultural Resources in Hidalgo and Willacy Counties,
Texas. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission.
1990 Prehistoric Archaeology and Paleo Environments in Hidalgo and Willacy Counties,
South Texas:Results of the Phase II Test Excavations. Prewitt and Associates, Austin,
Texas.
Mallouf, Robert J. and Anthony N. Zavaleta
1979 The Unland Site: A Prehistoric Groups Burial fom Laguna Atascosa Wildlife Refuge,
Cameron County, Texas. Survey Report 23, Texas Historical Commission, Office of the
State Archeologist.
Mason, J.A.
1935 The Place of Texas in Pre-Columbrian Relationships Between the United States and
Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 7:29-46.
Matthews, William Kenneth
1938 A History of Irrigation in the Lower Rio Grande Valley. M.A. Thesis, University of
Texas.
McAllen, Margaret
1991 The Heritage Sampler: Selections from the Rich and Colorful History of the Rio Grande
Valley. for the Hidalgo County Historical Museum by New Santander Press, Edinburg,
Texas.

McClung, John Busby
1981 Texas Rangers along the Rio Grande 1910-1919. Ph.D. Dissertation, Texas Christian
University.
McNail, Eddie Gatlering
1941 Mexican Missions North of the Border. Luther League of the American Lutheran
Church, Columbus, Ohio.
1946 The History and Development of Irrigation in the Lower Rio Grande Valley. M.A
Thesis, Texas College of Arts and Industries.
Mercado-Allinger, Pat A.
1983 Survey, Testing, and Assessment of Cultural Resources in Portions of Willacy County
Drainage District No.1, Willacy County, Texas. Report of Investigations 20, Prewitt and
Associates, Inc. Austin.
Miller, Hubert J.
1979 Jose de Escandon: Colonizer of Nuevo Santander. New Santander Press, Edinburg,
Texas.
Miller, W. Frank and Michael D. Wallis
1974 Applications of Remote Sensing in Archaeological Site Identification. Institute for Environmental
Studies, Mississippi State University.
Napper, Gertic McGee
1939 Some International Aspects of the Water Problems of the Lower Rio Grande Valley.
M.S. Thesis, Texas College of Arts and Industries.
Neff, Hector
1993 Theory, Sampling, and Analytical Techniques for Compositional Characterization of
Archaeological Ceramics. American Antiquity 58(1):23-44.
Neitzel, J., and R.L. Bishop
1991 Nuetron Activation of Dogoszhi Style Ceramics: Production and Exchange in the
Chacoan Regional System. The Kiva 56:67-85.
New York Division
1916 General Orders No. 37, Headquarters, New York Division, McAllen, Texas,
October 14, 1916
Norris, W. Clyde
1942 History of Hidalgo County. M.A. Thesis, Texas College of Arts and Letters.
Orser, Charles E. and Claudia C. Holland
1984 Let Us Now Praise Famous Men -Accurately: Toward a More Complete
Understanding of Postbellum Agricultural Practices. Southeastern Archaeology
3(2):111-120.
Paine, G.P.
1991 Late Quaternary Units, Sea Level, and Vertical Movements Along the Central Texas
Coast. Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
Peavey, John R.
1963 Echoes From the Rio Grande. Springman-King Company, Brownsville, Texas.
Phelps, Stephen Jay
1983 El Horcon: United States Territory South of the Rio Grande. M.A. Thesis, Pan American
University.
Pierce, Frank C.
1917 A Brief History of the Lower Rio Grande Valley. The Collegiate Press, George Banta
Publishing Company, Menasha, Wisconsin.
Pope, Dorothy Lee
1971 Rainbow Era on the Rio Grande. Springman-King Company, Brownsville, Texas.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1974 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in the Rio Grande Delta of Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 45:55-65.
Quigg, J. Michael
1989 An Archaeological Survey of Proposed Drainage Ditch Realignments, Hidalgo
County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Austin, Texas.
Ramirez, Emilia Schunior

1971 Ranch Life in Hidalgo County after 1850. New Santander Press, Edinburg, Texas.
Ramirez, Joe M.
1984 Los Rancheros: A Case Study of Hispanic Ranching Society of the South Texas Plain.
Manuscript prepared for University of Texas.
Ratkin, Gary Allen
1963 An Economic History of the Rio Grande Sugar cane Industry 1870-1922.B.A. Thesis,
Rice University.
Rice, P.M.
1980 Trace Element Characterization of Weeden Island Pottery: Implications for Specialized
Production. Southeastern Archaeological Conference Bulletin 2:29-35.
Robertson, Brian
1985 Rio Grande Heritage: A Pictorial History. The Donning Company Publishers, Norfolk,
Virginia.
1984 Wild Horse Desert: the Heritage of South Texas. New Santander Press, Edinburg,
Texas.
Rocha, Rodalfo
1974 Background to Banditry in the Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas 1900-1912. M.A.
Thesis, Pan American University, Edinburg, Texas.
Saldivar, Gabriel
1943 Los Indios de Tamaulipas. Publicion no. 70. Mexico City: Instutito Panamericano
de Geografia e Historia.
Salinas, Martin
1990 Indians of the Rio Grande Delta: Their Role in the History of Southern Texas and
Northeastern Mexico. University of Texas Press. Austin.
Samponaro, Frank N. and Paul J. Vanderwood
1992 War Scare on the Rio Grande: Robert Runyon's Photographs of the Border Conflict
1913-1917. Texas State Historical Association, Austin, Texas.
Sanchez, Mario L.
1993 The Cultural and Natural Resources of Los Caminos del Rio Heritage Corridor: An
Interdisciplinary Evaluation. National Park Service and the Texas Historical Commission,
Austin, Texas.
Santos, Richard G.
1983 Early Visions of the Lower Rio Grande . Munguia Printery, San Antonio, Texas.
Scott, Florence Johnson
1970 Historical Heritage of the Lower Rio Grande. Texian Press, Waco.
Scott, Oran Randolph
1934 History of Hidalgo County 1749-1852. M.A. Thesis, Texas Christian University.
Shearer, Ernest Charles
1939 Border Diplomatic Relations Between the United States and Mexico, 1848-1860.
Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Texas.
Shepard, A.O.
1947 Plumbate: A Mesomaerican Tradeware. Publication No. 573. Carnegie Institution of
Washington, Washington, D.C.
1965 Ceramics for the Archaeologist. Publication No. 609. Carnegie Institution of
Washington, Washington, D.C.
Smith. Franklin
1990 The Mexican War Journal of Captain Franklin Smith. University of Mississippi Press,
Jackson, Mississippi.
South, Stanly
1977 Method and Theory in Historical Archaeology. Academic Press, New York.
Stambaugh, J. Lee and Lilian J. Stambaugh
1954 The Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas. The Naylor Company, San Antonio, Texas.
South Texas Regional Development Council
1979 Regional Historic Sites Survey- 1979. Laredo, Texas.
Thompson, Jerry D.
1974 Sabers on the Rio Grande. Presidial Press, Austin, Texas.

Trinkley, Michael B.
1983 "Let Us Now Praise Famous Men" - If Only We Can Find Them. Southeastern
Archaeology 2(1):30-36
Turner, Ellen Sue and Thomas R. Hester
1985 A Field Guide to the Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service
1981 Soil Survey of Hidalgo County. By Jerry L. Jacobs, Soil Conservation Service in Cooperation
with Texas Agricultural Extension Service.
United States Department of Agriculture
1977 Soil Survey of Cameron Clounty, Texas. By DeWayne Williams, Charles M. Thompson and
Jerry L. Jacobs, Social Consevation Service with Cooperation of Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station.
United States Department of the Interior
1947 Plan of Development for the Valley Gravity Project, Lower Rio Grande, Texas: Report.
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
United States Department of State
1903 Proceedings of the International (Water) Boundary Commission United States and Mexico
Treaties of 1884 and 1889. Equitable Distribution of the Waters of the Rio Grande.Volume 2.
U.S.Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
1913 Proceedings of the International Boundary Commission United States and Mexico,
American Section. Joint Report of the Consulting Engineers on Field Operations of
1910-1911. Supplemental Report of the American Consulting Engineer. Government
Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Valley By-Liners
1975 Gift of the Rio: Story of Texas' Tropical Borderland. Border Kingdom Press, Mission,
Texas.
1978 Roots by the River: A Story of Texas Tropical Borderland. Border Kingdom Press,
Mission. Texas.
Vigness, David M.
1948 The Lower Rio Grande Valley 1836-1846. M.A. Thesis, University of Texas.
Walker, Jim
1999 Low Altitude Large Scale Reconnaissance. Paper delivered at the NonDestructive Mound and Earthwork Research Conference, Chillicothe, Ohio.

651 000m E.

652 000m E,

TOPOl map printed on 10/31/07 from "UntitJed,tpo"
653000mE.
654 000m E.

NAD27 Zone 14R 656 000m E,

v

gAT T

I (

o

z

z

I

l..

r--.

.

r--.

~

i.

i.

i

r--.

i

011

~

r--.

l!l

i.

i.

!

!

r--.

r--.

~

l!l

z

i.

t

l

r--.

r--.

~

l!l

i.

z

i

i

r--.

r--.

l!l

~

i.

z

{

{

r--.

r--.

ill

~

i.

z

§....

§....

r--.

r--.

l!l

~
.<!

651 OOOm E.
TN

5°

652 000m E,

9
~lIlO fW

655 000m E,

654 000m E,

653 000m E,

lM~

5

9

5l!L

llllO ",mRS

Mop CI06Iod witb TOPOl. 0Dl3 NIboal Oeognphie (www ~bi:.comllopo)

NAD27 Zone 14R 656 000m E,

