THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcom! Researcb Center
10,100 Bllrnet Road

A CUItura1 Resource Survey of the Proposed

Martin Lake Area D
Railroad and Transmission Line

Rusk COunty I Texas

He.n/Ltj B. Mo VlC.Wte.
Jac.1<. M. Jac.fuoVl

principal Investigator:

David S. Dibble

A report subnitted to Texas Utilities Services, Inc. in
partial fulfillment of the tenns of Purchase Order .MID-009

June, 1982

---~

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1

Abstract • • •

....

Introd.uction .

1

Environmental Background

3

Archeological Background

13

Survey Design

19

Results of the Survey

21

Surm:ary and. ReCClll:lIel1dations

34

....

Ack::no;.vledgements .

35
36

References cited •
List of Figures
Figure 1.

Mill Creek Area, Rusk County, Texas

Figure 2.

Rusk County in Relation to the Physiographic
Provinces of the Region, as Defined by
Ferm.e:tlan

Figure 3.

• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • ••

~ations

Figure 4.

Survey Area, Site

Figure 5.

:t:bcument fl.UTI File 729, Rusk County Records,
Contract Sh.cMing walling Cabin Attribution

~

and. Isolated Find.

18
22
25

Figure 6a. Walling Cabin Photo
6b. Drawing of Conjectural Original Cabin

28

Figure 7a. Chimney and Hearth Opening, walling Cabin
7b. Shims for Furring Strips, walling Cabin
7c. Well Head and. CUrb, Walling Cabin • • • .

30

ii

----

5

Spanish Explorations in Rusk County, Texas

1691-1788 • • • • . • • . . . . . • . . • .

-~--

2

~~~~~~~~~

~~~~~~~~~--~-~--~--

---~~

-~~--~-~

Figure 8.

Site Sketch, Walling Cabin Complex, 41RKl04

31

Figure 9.

Photographs of Square 'Notched Cornering, Walling
cabin, and Corner 'Notching TypE! Drawing • • ••

33

List of Tables
Table 1.

Characteristics of Envirorm:mtal Units

10

Table 2.

Sl.lItIIla.l:Y I Study Area Environment • • • . .

12

iii

ABSTRACT
V~n9 Janu~y and Feb~y, 198Z, the Texa¢ Ancheologicat Sunvey,
The UMveJl...6ily 06 Texa¢ at AMlin, conducted.a pnogJLam 06 cuUunat
ne60unce 1>unvey and a¢.oe6.oment along two nelatively naMOW land cow­
daM ,[n Ru.ok. County, Texa¢, wMch would be modi6,[ed by the. COVl..6bt.ucUon
06 a nailway and an eledUcal powe.n bt.amm,t,¢1>,[on Une. The pnognam
WM 1>pon.ooned by TexM UUUUe6 Se.nv'[Ce6, Inc., 06 Vai.i..a¢, Tex.M,
and Wa¢ de6,[gned to locate, ,[nventony and a¢1>e61> the cult~
ne6ounCe6 within the COWdOM' pnopo1>ed ~ght,¢-o6-way. No pne­
JU,¢to~c 1>ile6 we.ne located within the 1>unvey ~ea.
One JU,¢to~c .6ile
wa¢ 60und which could be adveMely a66ected by the nailwaY'1> con.obt.uc­
lion. The naMOW w.i..dth.o 06 the two cawdoM, the t~n path.o
.oelected 60n them, togethe.n with exten.o,[ve land-Me d,[,¢tunbance, appe~
to be majon co~butoM to cultunal ne60unce !.;,c~cUy. The JU,¢ta~c
!';'ile, a modiO,[ed log 1>Uuc.:tuJLe dating to 1841 which ,t,¢ well documented
M to owne.n/buJ.i..de.h and !.;,ub.6equent awneJl...6, WaManU .6peUai attention.

INTRODUCTION

An intensive level cultural resource survey of designated areas
of Rusk County, Texas, was conducted for Texas Utilities Services,
Inc. (TUSI) by the Texas Archeological Survey (TAS), The University
of Texas at Austin, during January and February, 1982. The study was
designed and performed to conform with the criteria and guidelines set
forth by the Texas Historical Commission for intensive survey. The
general objectives of this survey were to provide data on the specific
nature of the cultural resources present and to ascertain the extent
of impact of the proposed construction of a railway line and a power
transmission line on those resources.
The corridors surveyed (Fig. 1) are two generally parallel
northeast-to-southwest oriented right-of-way swaths extending from the
Martin Lake electric generating plant east of Dirgin, Texas, to a
locus three miles northeast of Henderson, Texas. The railroad right­
Of-way, a map-measured distance of 10.85 miles, varies in width from
as little as 200 feet to as much as 900 feet,depending on the grade
and curvature of the proposed track. The total area surveyed on this
right-of-way is approximately 500 acres. The transmission line corri­
dor is 11.09 miles, map-measured. It is 85 feet wide through all but
the westernmost 1.3 miles of its length; at this point it is 235 feet
wide. Total area surveyed in this corridor is approximately 136 acres.

1

FIGURE

1.

Project Location Map
G REG G

COUNTY

---------------+'-­
C 0 U NT Y

R US K

TATUM

t
j
~OO""
o
HENDERSON

2

3
miles

3

The specific aims of the survey and assessment were to provide the
sponsor with:
1)

2)
3)

a detailed inventory and evaluation of the scientific or
historic significance of cultural resources within the areas
subject to modification;
an estimate of the nature of the impacts of the projects on
. such resources; and
recommendations for lessening or avoiding adverse effects on
the identified resources.

In accordance with the stated aims of the survey and assessment
the following specific tasks were accomplished:
1)

the single recorded archeological site in the two corridors
was relocated and re-evaluated in terms of present condition;

2)

historical research was conducted in the State Archives, Rusk
County Property and Probate Records, University of Texas
libraries and collections and the Rusk County Memorial
Library;

3)

a detailed land ownership search was made to identify any
cultural resources which could have been associated with
persons of historical note or local or national prominence;

4)

the full length and breadth of the two corridors were
systematically field surveyed; and

5)

continuing special subject research and analysis of the
survey findings were conducted in February and March, 1982,
preparatory to this report.

This report includes both the survey and research results.

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
Geographic Location
The proposed railroad line right-of-way begins at a point
immediately west of the intake unit of the Martin Lake Electric
Generating Plant, which is one mile east of FM 2658 at Dirgin, Rusk
County, Texas, and follows a generally southwest oriented path
(Fig. 1) .10.85 miles to a termination point 1.3 miles northwest of the

4

junction of State Highway 43. and FM 1716 near Henderson, Texas. Univer­
sal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates for the approximate center of
the right-of-way are 344000E - 356800N, Zone 15.
The proposed transmission line right-of-way commences at the
generating plant and follows a 11.09 mile route (Fig. 1) generally
southwest oriented to the south and roughly parallel to the proposed
railroad line. Its terminus is an existing power transmission line
adjacent to the unnumbered county road which provides an east-west
connection between FM 1716 and FM 782. The point of termination is
UTM 335500E - 356575N.
Geomorphology
Rusk County is within Fenneman's (1938a: 100-103) West Gulf
Coastal Plain physiographic province, which is characterized by gently
rolling hills and ridges which rarely exceed 500 feet AMSL. Within
the study corridors elevation stays within this boundary. Sand and mud
deposits have eroded differentially to produce the hills and valleys.
The presence of the sand element was readily observed during the sur­
vey. The West Gulf Coastal Plain can be further refined into the area
known both as the East Texas Timber Belt and the Nacogdoches Cuesta
(Fenneman 1938: 103) (Fig. 2). Both designations are included .here
since vegetation provldes a link to soil characteristics, faunal array
and land use, while the rock base relates to soil parentage, geologic
formations and, in turn, to the processes which caused and act upon
them.
Geology
Rusk County is within the Gulf Coastal Tertiary Province (Henry
and Basciano 1979: 4). The Sabine Uplift dominates the area struc­
turally and coincides with the transition zone between the ancient
alluvial and deltaic plains. This broad structural uplift produces a
gentle northwest dip (0.2 degrees) at the flanks of Mill Creek
(Kaiser, Ayers and LaBrie 1980: 24). The dominant geologic unit is
the Wilcox Group, which is composed of sand and mud deposited by
ancient river systems (Kaiser, Johnston and Bach 1978: 19). The
partially overlying Claiborne Group, not a lignite host unit, is com­
posed of a rhythmic series of marine and continental deposits of sands
and clays,where a marine fossiliferous formation alternates with a
sandy-nonmarine formation (Sellards, Adkins and Plummer 1932: 610). A
generally thin veneer of modern deposits of sand, gravel and clay
occurs in the modern stream valleys; Prospect Branch, Wright Branch,
Wasson Branch and Tenny Lewis Branch within the study area. The
texture of these top level depOSits, narrow swaths in the study corri­
dors flanking the streams which cross them, becomes progressively
coarser with increased depth. This variation may be exposed at any

SCALE OF' MILES

100

150

After Fenneman. 1938.

'FIGURE 2. 'Rusk County in. 'relation to, the physiographic provinces 'of the region.

6

point in its range, depending on whether the location is in the flood
plains where deposition is still active, or on the terraces where
erosion now dominates (Moncure and Jackson 1980: 4).
The high sand content of the Wilcox Group, which reaches 60 per­
cent in the study area (Kaiser, Johnston and Bach 1978: 19), shapes
much of the character of the cultural resource environment. A major
effect of this sand content, and the unconsolidated soil formed in part
from it, is to produce a fragile, easily disrupted, environment for
any extant cultural resources. Erosion and deposition can assume com­
paratively high rates with relatively small surface disturbance, with
the result that artifact locations may be completely altered (Moncure
and Jackson 1980: 4). The Claiborne Group formations, including the
Carrizo Sand and the Reklaw Formation, also have significant sand con­
tent (Flawn 1965: Map) and are also subject to easy disruption of site
location.
.
Soils
Substrate materials available as parent material for the soil are,
as stated above, in large part sands or sand heavy. The amount of
precipitation normal to East Texas (see below) tends to encourage
leaching. Soils derived under such circumstances are characteristically
thin sandy loarns over dense clay B horizons (Henry and Basciano 1979:
6). The presence of this clay B horizon produces moderate shrinkswell conditions, churning the soil somewhat and muddling the strati­
graphy of archeological sites to some degree. The local SOils,
members of the Axtell-Tabor Association, are typically acidic and
range in color from light to dark gray (ibid. 7). Where flood plain
conditions exist along the stream draining Wilcox Group areas, the
soils are iron rich, of even texture, and well drained. These
characteristics are major factors in determining the type of vegeta­
tion supported, which in turn affects human land use both now and in
the past.
Hydrology
The major aquifer is composed of the Wilcox Group and the over­
lying Carrizo Sand of the Claiborne Group. The Carrizo-Wilcox strata
are considered a single aquifer (Henry and Basciano 1979: 4). The
aquifer consists, in the main, of hydrologically connected ferruginous,
cross-bedded sand with clay, sandstone, silt, lignite and gravel. It
is recharged by precipitation and by streams crossing the outcrop area
(Muller and Price 1979: 17).· Within the study area the aquifer is
saturated to near the land surface which causes much potential
recharge to be rejected and turned into stream runoff, a circumstance
which was apparent during the rains which occurred while survey was in

7

progress. This condition resulted in ground water seeps and springs,
which are prime locales for prehistoric occupational remains. Several
such locales were noted during the railroad
survey but none were
within the corridor.
Stream Order and Drainage
Ordering of streams is based on the premise that the first order
streams of a drainage basin are the smallest gullies or channels
having well-defined banks. Most such streams are intermittent and are
right at the limits of resolution on U.S. Geological Survey 1:24,000
maps (Butzer 1976: 185). Ordering then follows a hierarchy developed
by the joining of first order streams to form a second order stream,
two second order streams to form a third order, and so on. The areal
division supplied by stream ordering assists in highlighting high
archeological potential areas and forms a natural, permanent
reference grid useful for future study.
The study area lies within the Sabine River Basin. The present
bed of that river
9.5 miles due north of the eastern terminus of
the railroad corridor at its closest approach. Drainage to the river
is via a dendritic pattern. Short, first order intermittent streams
feed Prospect, Wright, Wasson, and Tenny Lewis branches, the second
order streams, which flow generally southeast across the two corri­
dors and converge to form east-northeast flowing Dry Creek, Panther
Creek and Rocky Ford Creek as the major water suppliers to man-made
Martin Lake whose drainage, the fourth order stream, is termed Martin
Creek but is actually a combination of the flow of all four above
named streams. This Martin Creek flows north-northeast to the Sabine,
the fifth order stream. The Sabine turns south in neighboring Panola
County and leaving that subdivision forms the eastern border of Texas
all the way to Sabine Lake at Port Arthur and empties into the Gulf
of Mexico via Sabine Pass. Stream system flow from the western
just over
terminus of the transmission line corridor to the Sabine
35 miles.
The changes in direction of the stream pattern shows the effect
of the Sabine Uplift as a dominant structural control, while the near
classical pattern and density, except for Martin Lake, show no
archeologically significant deviation in expected stream density or
gradients. The exception, Martin Lake, can be expected to alter site
exposure along the drainage pattern, to include the study area, as it
changes the erosional/depositional characteristics of the associated
streams. From an archeological standpOint, in this study, the second
order streams which bisect the two survey corridors assume importance
as major permanent water supplies. That importance is tempered
severely by the. relatively small segments which are included in the
corridor widths.

8

Climate
Rusk County lies within carr's (1967: 17) East Texas climatic
division. Maximum precipitation has dual peaks in May and December
with the minimum occurring in August. Average rainfall is between 44
and 48 inches and its pattern results in a winter surplus summer
deficit of water (Arbingast et ale 1973: map). The former condition
was in evidence during the survey with heavy precipitation runoff
occurring due to moisture saturated soil. Mean annual evaporation
(1940-1957), for the county, is 10 inches, a factor contributing signi­
ficantly to the summer water deficit (Kier, Garner and Brown 1977:
map). A mean annual temperature of 66.4F has been recorded (1940­
1978) and the seasonal pattern provides a mean annual growing season
just above 250 days, a mild climate (Vines 1977: xvii map).
Vegetation
The study area is located in Gould's (1975: 2) Texas Vegetational
Region 1, the Pineywoods. The area, also known as the TiInber Bel t and
the East Texas Forest Region, is the southwestern extremity of the
pine-hardwood forests of the southeastern United States. Plant dis­
tribution is most directly linked to two above-mentioned factors:
soil and climate.
Two basic associations of woody plant species occur in the
prospect region: upland pine-oak and bottomland hardwood. The changes
in vegetation between these two are distinct. Streams which are
effluent most of the year are within the bottomland division while
those which are dry for lengthy periods are within the upland divi­
sion.
The drier, sandy uplands are dominated by shortleaf pine (Pinuc
echinaia) , with loblolly pine (Pi~ taeda) in moist locations (Holm
1975:17).· A secondary canopy is composed of southern red oak
(QuVtCiL6 m'aJr.UancU.ca). There are minor inclusions of hickory,
blackgum, water oak, sugarberry, and winged elm {Little 1980: 355,
401, 412, 418}. The understory shrubs include American beautyberry,
dogwood, yaupon, hawthorn, sumac, southern bayberry, sparkleberry and
fringetree. Common vine species are greenbriar, trumpet creeper,
poison ivy, peppervine and jessamine (Holm 1975: 19).
The typically wet, low-lying, swampy bottomlands fringe the
major streams. The study area, crossed by four streams, provides
several examples. The bottomland areas have soils with a higher silt
and clay content than the uplands, which in part accounts for vege­
tational differences. The bottoms generally have not been fully
cleared or heavily grazed. Hardwoods are dominant -with the following
species most prevalent: swamp chestnut, oak, shumard oak, laurel oak,
water hickory, butternut, hickory, sweetgum, and sycamore. A second

9

story is composed mostly of red maple, American holly, American horn­
beam, and magnolia.
The shrub .understory includes waxmyrtle, dog­
wood, buttonbush, arrowwood, leatherwood, American elder, snowbell
and poison sumac. The vines, in places forming dense thickets, are
poison ivY, grape, supplejack and greenbrier (Holm 1975: 19). Cotton­
wood is present throughout the bottoms. A few species, such as river
birch, black willOW, and hazel alder grow along the stream banks as
wet area species (Little 1980: 366, 335, 363). The non-native, but
extensively cultivated, types such as crepe myrtle and the Babylon
weeping willow indicate a historic site close by_
The climax grasses, present in the Pineywoods, include switch­
grass, red love grass, sea oats, indiangrass, little bluestem and
broomsedge bluestem. The introduction of grasses and legumes to
improve pasture has caused a high level of mixing with native
grasses; carpetgrass, bermudagrass, dallisgrass and vaseygrass are the
most common overseeds. Invaders arriving naturally where land
clearing has removed the forest include smutgrass, yankeeweed, green­
briar, yaupon and western ragweed (Gould 1969: 10). It is probable
that the pines which give the region its name today actually are a
subclimax or a fire disclimax (Gould 1969: 8). For most of the
Holocene the deciduous species, the nut-bearing varieties among them,
were probably much more numerous and assumed major importance in the
native economies (Keller 1974: 139-156). Remnant stands of such trees
offer locales worth investigation for archeological remains.
Fauna
The study area falls within the Austroriparian biotic province,
which includes the Gulf coastal plain from the Atlantic to Eastern
Texas (Blair 1959: 99). The vertebrate.fauna of the Austroriparian
of Texas is typical of the province as a whole. Blair cites forty­
seven mammalian species either present or recently occurring, plus
twenty-nine snake species, ten lizards, two land turtles, seventeen
anurans and eighteen urodeles. Representative small mammals are the
oppossum, the mole, the plainnose bat, the red bat, the eastern fox
squirrel, the eastern gray squirrel, the southern flying squirrel,
the plains picket gopher, the fulvous harvest mouse, the whitefooted mouse, the rice rat, the hispid cotton rat, the eastern cotton­
tail, the swamp rabbit, and the racoon (Burt and Grossenbeider 1976).
CarniVore species include the ominpresent coyote, the longtail
weasel, both spotted and striped skunks, the red fox, gray fox and
bobcat. The area is within the range ascribed to the red wolf (Burt
and Grossenbeider 1976: 71). From an archeological standpoint, the
presence of the gophers and moles is especially important because
their burrowing frequently rearranges cultural material. These
animals will actually gather and cache small artifacts such as
lithicsand potsherds~ Gophers are particularly active during the
spring and have a great effect on the soil's porosity, organic matter
and phosphorous content, and nitrogen level (Lee 1980: 36, 38).,

TABLE 1. Characteristics of Environmental Units.

Geologic Unit

Substrate

Soil

Slope

sand hills

friable quartz sand

sand,
loamy sand,
sandy loam

3-10%
rarely
more

low-rolling sands

friable quartz sand

sand,
loamy sand,
sandy loam

0-3%

Tree
Vegetation

H~drologic and

rosional
Processes

Non-forest
Land Use

oak
lpine

infiltration,
recharge

aquifer,
improved pasture,
rangeland

oa~

infiltration,
recharge

aquifer,
improved pasture,
rangeland

runoff,
gUllying,
minor recharge

improved pasture,
rangeland

runoff,
gullying,
minor recharge

improved pasture,
rangeland

pine

low-relief
sandy clay forest soils

sandy clay,
laminated sand
and clay

fine
sandy loam

0-3%

oak,
elm
pine

moderate-rei ief
sandy clay forest soils

sandy clay,
laminated sand
and clay

fine
sandy loam

3-8%

oak,
elm

floodin~,

flood plain

clay,
silt

clay,
clay loam

0-2%

hardwoods

infiltration,
runoff,
deposition

cropland,
improved pasture

low terrace

clay,
silt

clay,
clay loam

0-2%

hardwoods

infiltration,
runoff,
rare flooding

cropland,
improved pasture

mixed

silt,
sand

silt loam,
sandy loam

0-3%

oak,
hardwoods

Adapted from Moncure and Jackson 1980: 11

. flooding,
I infiltration,
I runoff

improved pasture,
rangeland

11

The array of reptile and amphibian species made significant addi­
tional resources available for exploitation by an aboriginal popula­
tion. The populations of these species are large, reflecting the wet,
mild, bottomlands climate, a suitable ecotone for cold blooded species.
They were, beyond doubt, exploited by Native American inhabitants of
the area (Butzer 1971: 149). Representative species are the western
box turtle, eastern fence liZard, sic-lined racerunner, rough green
snake, common water snake, tiger salamander, Woodhousets toad,
leopard frog, bullfrog and green frog (Stebbins 1966). According to
Blair (1950: 100), the Austroriparian is the richest in urodele fauna
of any biotic province in the state; thirteen species are present.
The faunal array currently in the Austroriparian province is not
necessarily that available to a prehistoric or even historic Native
American population. Archeological excavations within the province
have yielded bones of bison, puma, black bear, and lynx, all now
missing from the province (House 1978). These large-bodied mammals
represent a considerable potential food source and were no doubt so
utilized. Despite the poor preservation of bone, due to the soil con­
ditions in much of East Texas, the remains of amphibians, reptiles,
fish, birds and mammals of a wide range of species have been identi­
fied in Austroriparian area archeological sites (House 1978: Table 2).
Current Land Use
Agriculture is the study area's dominant land use. Most cleared
land in the uplands is in pasture, much of it improved. Only a com­
paratively small, and constantly decreasing, amount of land is being
cropped (Cedar Post 1980).
In 1968, 50 percent of the county was forested (Branda 1976:
824). Within the study area, 20 to 25 percent was forested in 1982.
The bottomlands, with their own vegetational array, constitute a
small portion of the forest land, but one which is still significant
due to the water-tolerant hardwoods found within them. No incor­
porated communities of hamlet size or larger lie within the study
area. An unnamed, partially abandoned, dispersed hamlet-sized
grouping of dwellings and former dwellings impinges on the proposed
railroad right-of-way
the area between FM 1716 and the western
terminum of the corridor. All but a small fraction of this grouping
lie outside the present study area. The sole remaining standing
structure within the study corridor shows no architectural features
of Singular note nor any denoting unusual function, type or age. It
appears to be a 1920's frame construction occupied into the 1970's
and currently shows the cumulative effects of vacancy and lack of
upkeep.

TABLE 2.

Summary, Study Area Environment.

Location:
Physiography:
Surface Geology:
Structural Geology:
Soils:
Hydrology:
River Basin:
Climate:
Vegetation Region:
Mineral Resources:
Energy Resources:
Agricultural Projects:

Eastern Rusk County, Texas
Nacogdoches Cuesta/East Texas Timber Belt
Eocene ear deposits
Sabine Uplift
Sandy loams, clay loams, sand
CarrizolWilcox Aquifer
Sabine
Mild with winter moisture excess and summer
deficit
Pineywoods
Industrial clay
Lignite
Livestock, timber

~---------

-------- ------ - - - - - - - - - - -

13

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Previous Investigations
Prior to this survey, several professional archeological investi­
gations had been undertaken in the immediate vicinity. The general
area has been of interest for quite some time. The early work of
Clarence B. Moore (1912) will not stand close modern scrutiny with
regard to method or design, but it did serve to highlight East Texas
and Louisiana cultural resources. The files of the Texas Archeologi­
cal Research Laboratory (TARL) show a listing of twenty-seven Rusk
County sites in a catalogue of East Texas sites compiled by Hughes
(1948) on work commencing in the 1930's. The very general locational
data in these notes shows none of these sites to be close to the two
corridors under current study. While doing research for a Master's
thesis, Buddy Jones examined material from one non-Prospect Rusk
County site (Jones 1968: 62-84). In 1972, the Texas Highway Depart­
ment's archeologists excavated an Archaic period site lying in what
is now the right-of-way of FM 2658 east of Henderson, Texas (Jarvis
1972), and north of the eastern extension of the study corridor.
In 1972, the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University
of Texas at Austin, conducted an archeological survey of the Martin
Lake area of Rusk and Panola counties prior to the construction of
Martin Creek Dam (McDonald 1972). At the time, four sites were
recorded in the area. One of these (41RK10) is adjacent to the rail­
road line study corridor. Texas Utilities Services, Inc. sponsored
that survey and subsequent investigation of the resources affected by
the filling of the lake. The investigation of Martin Lake area sites
was carried out in 1972-73 and constitutes a plurality of the profes­
sional archeological investigation within Rusk County (Clark and Ivey
1974). The Martin Lake area series alone accounts for forty-one of
the 103 currently recorded sites within the county. That level of
density is the result of close attention to a specific area, and like
areas receiving the same attention, can be expected to show a similar
density.
Historic sites related to early Texas pottery production were
investigated and recorded in the early 1970's by Dr. Georgeanna
Greer (TARL files). Twelve such sites were recorded in Rusk County.
None of these is in the study area.
In 1980 the Texas Archeological Survey at Austin conducted a
reconnaissance survey of the Mill Creek area, mining areaD, two
large_areas north and south of Henderson, Texas (Moncure and Jackson
1980). In addition to re-recording several previously known sites,
and the generation of a predictive planning map, the survey produced
four new sites.

- - -

-

----------------------------- - - - - - - - - -

14

Also in 1980, the survey of the Exxon lignite prospect which lies
partially in Rusk County, produced 16 sites, 15 of them historic and
of Anglo-American origin (TARL files).
103 archeological sites recorded for Rusk County prior to the
present study fall within a series of stages or periods in North
American prehistory. These periods are not precise time frames, but
time markers based on major cultural developments where evidence of
exists. The occurrence of diagnostic cultural developments, and
hence the beginning of the associated periods, varies from.area to
area within the state and beyond. In most cases precise labelling of
period boundaries is not possible; an arbitrary round figure date. is
most appropriate. The broad periods or eras (not cultural stages)
most commonly cited are: Late Paleo indian , Archaic, Late Prehistor·ic,
and Historic. These periods, in brief, are characterized as follows:
Late Paleoindian Period (before 10,000 to 8,000 B.P.)
Artifacts relating to the Paleoindian Period are found in East
Texas but thus far neither in satisfactory stratigraphic context nor
in sufficient quantity for meaningful analysis (Davis 1970). Paleo­
indian subsistence is customarily associated with megafauna exploita­
tion in most locales, but, due to the rarity of sites, this associa­
tion has not as yet been demonstrated for East Texas. The period's
diagnostic artifacts, including Clov~, Foi4om, Sco~blu6nl Plainvi~,
Me6~ve, Golondnina and Ango~~a projectile points, reflect the
exploitation strategy. It is quite possible that most Paleoindian
occupation in the East Texas area followed a pattern in which small
groups engaged in generalized hunting and gathering, occupying sites
for short periods of time.
Archaic Period (8,000 to 1,450 B.P.)
Although the Archaic in East Texas is better known than the pre­
ceding period, both its span and scope are still being refined.
Early efforts to develop a chronology centered on projectile point
typologies (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1965). The Yanbnough and E~
dart points. were found to be temporarally diagnostic of the period
{Davis 1970}. Attempts to bring together the several facets of the
Archaic lifeway and firm up a list of diagnostic artifacts have
served to highlight the difficulties involved in such a synthesis,
and have pointed to the existence of numerous regional artifact style
differences (see Webb 1960; Davis and Davis 1960; Tunnell 1961). A
series of areally delimiting terms have been applied to cope with the
problem, these in turn spawning further divisions as further trait
list divisions were uncovered. The Red River Aspect (Davis and Davis
1960: 56), the East Texas Aspect (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1965: 149),
and the La Harpe Aspect (Johnson 1962), the latter further divided
into north~ central and southern divisions, are all applicable East
Texas Archaic terms within their authors' specified setting. Davis

15

and Davis sum the situation well with
It is evident that the history of the Archaic stage is notuni­
form throughout the forests between the Lower Mississippi and
the prairies (1960: 56) •.
Late Prehistoric Period (1,450 to 350 B.P.)
The Late Prehistoric Period, which emerges from the Archaic, is
the best known of the prehistoric occupations of East Texas. This
period, called the Formative (Davis 1970), is divided into a pre­
caddo Formative, Caddo I, Caddo II, Caddo III and Caddo IV. These
divisions and their temporally diagnostic artifacts are as follows:
Pre-Caddo Formative

Man~vitte-Tchenuncte

and Cole¢ Cheek

ceramic styles.
Caddo I

Alba points, Copena knives, Hottq Fine
Enghav~, Hickohq Enghaved, Chockett
Inci¢ed, Pennington Inci¢ed, Davi4
In~ed, Duncan Inci¢ed, and Wech~
Fingehnail Implt~.&ed ceramics. Long,
narrow-necked bottles, carinated bowls and
barrel shaped jars.

Caddo II
(750-550 B.P.)

Bonham pOints, Plains-like knives, Canton
I ncAA ed, Monk.&town FingehnaU Imph~,oed,
red-filmed Maxeq Noded, and Sand~
Enghaved ceramics. Plain bowls, carinated
bowls, flaring-rim jars, and longnecked bottles.

Caddo III
(550-450 B.P.)

Alba pOints, Peaoe B~hed-rncAAed, Maddox
Enghaved, Belcheh Ridged, Ripleq Enghaved,
Tayloh Enghaved, Buttand B~hed, and
Maydette IncAAed ceramics.

Caddo IV
(450-350 B.P.)

Ba.&.&ett, Tatco and FJt.-i1.eq points, Ripley
Enghaved, Taqloh Enghaved, WUdeJt
Enghaved, Bankman Engltaved, AVehY
Enghaved, Simm.& Enghaved, H~etonAppti­
qued, Maydelle Inci¢ed, Buttand Bnu.&hed,
Na.&h Neck Banded, and Fo.&teh Thailed
IncAAed ceramics. Grog and bone temper,
carinated bowls, long-necked bottles, and
effigy vessels.

It is imPortant to note that the above chronology and artifact
framework results from a series of site datings and artifact inven­
tories which are nowhere near as numerous or areally
as desired.

16

There exists a need for chronological refinement which can only be
resolved by more excavation, analysis, and synthesis.
There is no simple explanation of the designation. Caddo. The
word has served to designate a linguistic family, a subdivision of
related dialects within the family, a collective term for a number of
tribes or bands, a confederacy of tribes, a single tribe within that
confederacy, the geographic area containing a set of remains and a
collection of prehistoric and historic archeological manifestations
(Story 1978: 46). The latter usage is applied in this report.
Historic Period (European contact to present)
The first recorded contact between Europeans and East Texas Native
Americans was in A.D. 1541 when the DeSoto expedition moved through
the area (Newcomb 1961: 284). Though other explorers and their expe­
ditions passed through the area in the next half century, the accounts
of their visits are sketchy and usually secondhand. Continuous well­
documented incursions of a type which were to have major effects on
the Native American lifeway began about A.D. 1600. These effects mark
the change from the Late Prehistoric (Formative) period to the
Historic and from Caddo IV to Caddo V.
When the French and Spanish arrived in East Texas, they found it
inhabited by groups of Native Americans who shared religious beliefs,
linguistic background, and other interests. Despite such commonali­
ties, these groups were not organized under one governing aegis
but were separate political units. They lived in fixed villages and
planted crops for their basic subsistence (Bolton 1908: 271). These
people and their predecessors left behind the cultural remains which
are classified as Caddoan. These remains, it should be noted,are not
those of large numbers of inhabitants but rather of many generations
of occupation by relatively small numbers of people. Bolton (1908:
175-176), citing Spanish records, comes to the conclusion that the
general area in 1716 was occupied by perhaps 4,000 Indians.
Caddo V, as given above, begins after A.D. 1600 and is marked
by the appearance of European trade goods in the artifact inventory
along with Womack Eng~av~d~ Emo~y Punctat~d~ Ndtchitocheo Enghaved,
Hudoon Ptain and Nacona Ptain ceramics. The use of shell tempering
for ceramics is more common in this period (Davis 1970).
The framework for historic archeology in Texas coincides with the
division of Texas history as follows (Pass 1974-75):

17

I.
II.

Indian Era:
Mexico.

Pre-European arrival in 1519 (the conquest of

Conquest and Colonization (1519-1835).
A.
B.
C.
D.

Early exploration and missionaries (1519-1690).
Mission period and Spanish domination (1690-1793).
Spanish decline and filibustering era (1793-1821)'­
Mexican era and Anglo-American colonization (1821-1835).

Revolution and Republic (1835-1845).
A.
B.
IV.

Revolution (1835-1836),
Republic (1836-1845).

Texas in the United States (1845-present).
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

Pre-Civil War (1845-1861).
Confederate State (1861-1865).
Reconstruction (1865-1874),
Early economic development (1874-1899).
Industrialization and urbanization (1899-present).

A large number of Indian tribes lived in Rusk County .during
historic times. A village of the Anadarko tribe of the Caddoan­
speaking Hasinai Confederation was found by the Spanish near the
center of the county's southern boundary (Bolton 1908: 256), and a
Nabiti village was found in the southwest corner. Somewhat later,
Shawnee and Cherokee elements forced west by Anglo settlement moved
into the county. A major Shawnee village was located on land now
occupied by the southern quarter of the town of Henderson. When the
last battle between the army of the Republic of Texas and the
Cherokees and their allies was fought in 1839, the Cherokee treaty
lands, which included portions of western Rusk County, were opened to
Anglo settlement. The sword carried by Chief Bowles, the paramount
chief of the Cherokee, was kept as a battle trophy for many years in
the Masonic Hall in Henderson (Winfrey 1951: 31). The sword had been
given to Bowles by Sam Houston, who had Signed the treaty granting
the Indian land. When the Texas Senate failed to confirm the treaty,
President Lamar abrogated the pact and Chief Bowles was killed in the
battle that followed (Reagan 1898).
Historic Period II sites could exist in or near the study area,
given the Spanish explorations within Rusk County (Fig. 3) dating
from 1691 (Winfrey 1951). However, those from Period III are much
more likely since settlement not exploration is involved. Several
Period IV sites, most of them late, lie close to the corridors, and
a few Period IV, E,dated sites of no architectural, historic or
scientific. significance are present within them (see Historic
Resources).

FIGU~RE.3 .

/
'to..

....................

........ ...,..

.....,.........",.

/

/

I

/

;-f-~

/
/
I

I

I

/

I

/

/

/

I

o

I

/

"

/
.........
/

I

10

miles

/

/

5

I

.. --....... ...

...~

,.X...

-"

SPANISH EXPLORATIONS IN RUSK COUNTY, TEXAS
1691 - 1788

Route of Domingo Teran de los Rios 1691
Route of Captain Domingo Ramon 1716 - 1719
.. ...•••

Route of Padre Fray Joseph Francisco Calahorra y Saenz 1760

... +-+ . Route of Pedro Vial 1788

(
~.t~ ~-~
"'-..,.. '\ .

19

SURVEY DESIGN
A variety of archival, field and laboratory methods were employed
during the survey. The major components were a background data
search, a field survey of several portions of the prospect areas,
limited test probing and data analyses.
Research Procedures
The files of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory were
searched for previously recorded sites within the proposed construc­
tion areas. One historic/prehistoric site was found to have been
recorded within these bounds. It was scheduled for field relocation,
and for re-evaluation of its present condition and the effects of the
proposed land usage.
An assessment was made of the results of survey in nearby areas
having similar environmental settings. From these it appears that
prehistoric sites dating to agricultural periods tend to be in bottom­
lands and lowest terraces nearest to the present stream courses. Pre­
ceramic sites tend to be further away and at a higher elevation,
possibly due to an adjustment of the stream valley profile by erosion
over the longer period of time since those sites were occupied. An
alternate explanation for the position of these pre-ceramic, non­
agricultural sites is that some controlling factor in the inhabitants'
cultural pattern, other than close proximity to water, took precedence
in the selection of a living site. Defensibility, proximity of
hunting and gathering locations, and wild plant food collection loca­
tions may have had greater weight in site selection for these non­
agricultural Native Americans.
The State of Texas Archives, The University of Texas Barker
History Center Library, the Rusk County Courthouse records and the
Rusk County Memorial Library historic section were all researched
for references to historic sites, such as major plantations, abandoned
towns and facilities, and Indian villages.
The walking survey covered the entire length and breadth of the
two corridors. Breadth varied, as stated in the introductory state­
ment, from 220 to 900 feet. Where engineering specifications were
not available a maximum width was assumed on the advice of the
sponsor. In those areas showing particular promise, shallow shovel

20

test pits were dug. Ruined structural remains, older extant struc­
tures, and natural and man-made cuts in the earth were examined. No
artifactual material was collected during the course of the survey.
Site Definition
of prehistoric are in this general area typically lack sur­
face artifacts. The shrink-swell quality of the subsoil, the high
sand content of the upper soil horizons, and erosion and deposition
rates accelerated by the historic land use pattern, combine to
minimize and obscure the surface evidence. As a consequence, any
indication of a siters presence -- be it artifact, feature, raw
material, or topographic context -- should be investigated below
the surface since surface indications are an unreliable
marker.
of historic European affiliation are most frequently
marked by a ceramic and building material scatter. Here the designa­
tion,
, is more easily applied and site significance, not
identification, becomes the primary consideration.
Documentation
Those sites located during the reconnaissance survey were docu­
mented on standard University of Texas site survey forms, with
descriptions of surficial features and residues, their sizes, types,
frequencies, spatial distributions and possible associations.
Environmental settings and cartographic information were recorded,
sketch-mapped and photographed. Physiographic features, the hydrol­
ogy, vegetation, and soil characteristics were noted and recorded.
Active and dormant erosional and depositional processes, as well as
human activities which might affect site integrity, were also listed.
The Field Survey
Field survey was initiated on January 22, 1982, and was carried
out by Texas Archeological Survey staff members H.B. Moncure and Jack
Jackson.
Walking transects were done in such a manner as to give near
100 percent coverage of the corridors. Particular attention was
given to those areas where the topography, drainage system.and vege­
tation indicated a high degree of correlation with those factors
relative to known sites in the vicinity of the study area.
Shovel testing, the excavation of shallow pits, was employed in
areas where ground visibility was severely limited, a not uncommon

2l

condition in the study area, and where surface conditions indicated
the possibility of cultural remains at depth.

RESULTS OF THE SURVEY
Prehistoric Resources
Only one new indicator of prehistoric usage of the study corri­
dors was found during the survey_ A single finq of a chipped stone
projectile point was made near the western terminus of the trans­
mission line corridor. The context of the find was that of a highly
disturbed ground surface adjacent to a recently drained man-made
pond. Close inspection of the vicinity failed to identify any other
evidence of prehistoric activity. As a result, no site designation
was made and the point was recorded as an "isolated find." No
further work at this location is justifiable in terms of its
potential for providing useful information. The find location
appears on Figure 4.
4 'I RK 10, a previously known site, was recorded as having a
possible prehistoric component (McDonald 1972: 26). It was properly
labelled as having evidence of predominantly historic characteris­
tics showing only four flint flakes and one stone biface as pre­
historic evidence against more than eighty historic occupation indi­
cators.
current status is therefore treated under Historic
Resources.
Historic Resources
41RKlO
This site was located 200 feet east of the then-proposed Martin
Lake power plant intake unit, on the crest of the hill above what
was the Panther/Rocky Ford Creek confluence before the creation of
Martin Lake (McDonald 1972: 26; TARL files) _ John W. Clark, Jr.,
who authored the McDonald report appendix on untested sites and was
the site's recorder, describes it as follows:
The
consists of the. remains of late 19th-early 20th.
century occupation, including a well and pond, on the flank of
the knoll and scattered historic artifacts on top of the knoll.
A small amount of prehistoric Indian remains were also found
associated with the knoll.
The report recommended no further work at the site after
collecting 46 historic ceramic sherds, 28 glass fragments, one stone

FIGURE 4.
PROJECT AREA AND SITE LOCATIONS

t
o

2

3

1

miles
Adapted from USGS qUlldrongl...

23

biface, four flint flakes and "miscellaneous metal, If the latter
unidentified.
The current survey, using Clark's original site notes and site
map, established that a small portion of the site would be within
the present study area at the eastern end of the railroad right-of­
way. A fence line referred to in Clark's notes was located and used
to establish previous boundaries of the site in what is now a
radically altered area. Alterations resulting from the filling of
Martin Lake, the construction of the power plant and its associated
buildings, road network and ash disposal area have obliterated all
evidence of the site but the fence line and a minor amount of dis­
placed hand-molded brick rubble at the knoll base. Within the current
study area no evidence of the site remains. An updated status report
will be furnished to the TARL for inclusion in its files.
41RK105
This farm house complex impinges on the proposed railroad right­
of-way to the extent that debris from the house-barn-shed-well
complex extends into it. The structures themselves lie outside the
limits of the right-of-way (Fig. 4),
The site lies on both sides of an unnamed, county-maintained
dirt road which bisects the right-of-way at Prospect Branch, three­
tenths of a mile southeast of State Highway 43. The site consists
of an abandoned 1920 vintage vernacular farm house, a shed, barn
and a well. The construction details of the house, pressed brick
with brand imprint no earlier than the 1920s, machine planed and
sawed board siding, round wire nails and poured concrete, indicate
no great age. The architectural features are not unusual or repre­
sentative of significant innovation. The barn-shed presents no
unusual architectural features or materials or evidence of extra­
ordinary function. The well was hand dug but later given a concrete
casing and presents no unusual features. Only the debris scatter,
and only that part of it outside the right-of-way, shows cultural
resources of note. The presence of alkaline glaze pottery sherds,
glass fragments turned purple by exposure, and a few hand-hewn
timbers near the well indicate the possibility. of an earlier occupa­
tion preceding construction of the present structures. A careful
search, within the right-of-way, was conducted to ascertain if the
trash pit or dump lay within the affected corridor. No indication
was found of such a presence. The site does not show ownership by a
person of particular note at any time during its occupancy. Inview
of the above, no further investigation is recommended, particularly
since the majority of the site is not threatened by the proposed
railway construction.

24

41RK104
This historic site is located three-quarters of a mile east of
State Highway 43 on an unmarked, county maintained, dirt road which,
at the site, lies between Wright and Wasson Branches. The county
road intersects State Highway 43 2.5 miles northeast of Antioch
Community. The site is wholly within the proposed railway right-of­
way (Fig. 4).
The site consists of a single pen log cabin with alterations,
a well, an artificial depression, a feature which is probably a root
cellar, and another which is thought to be the remains of either
another well or a privy.
The cabin is referred to in Rusk County Deed and Probate Records
(Files 729 and 1752) (
• 5) as having been the property of Thomas
Jefferson Walling. That gentleman was sufficiently prominent in
Texas history to be included in The H~ndboo~ on Texa6 (Webb 1952,
Vol. 2: 858). The following section presents the historic setting
applicable to this site.
The Historic Setting
Rusk County is defined along its eastern boundary by an early
roadway known as Trammel's Trace. This wagon road may actually have
been the route of an Indian trading path before it was discovered by
Trammel. The road led to the north from the Spanish colonial town
of Nacogdoches and became a major influence in the early settlement
of east Texas. It was a pre-existing route by which new immigrants
to the area could easily bring their wagons into Texas. The sandy
loam soils and ,pine woods encountered along this route in present­
day Rusk and Harrison Counties were especially attractive to the
Southern yeomen farmers who composed the bulk of the early Anglo
settlers.
Many of these old line American families had built a tradition
of chain migration (Zelinsky 1973: 12, 29) to the west. Sometimes
entire communities moved hundreds of miles into new territory. The
organizational basis for these moves was the extended family.
Several generations of a family might move and claim ,land in the
same vicinity in the new area. This is a pattern that
widely
encountered in the settlement of frontier Texas.
The Walling family was part of just such a chain migration.
John Walling, Senior, was born in Montgomery County, Virginia,
before the American Revolution (Morris 1977: 469). His oldest son,
Jesse,who was destined to fight in the battle of San Jacinto, was
born June 17, 1794, in Hawkins County, Tennessee (ib~d.) .. The

~ .. ,-~.: .'"';

*;:#
f·

.
.

-i;

";:"

...

•
•

:"!.
-,

~:;':;::~~:'~;;.:;..
-

'''L._

~~-~"".;"4!"

-";,.

...

• " ....,• .";'K..

-.
~,

.

-,

.;,

,
-,;;?.:-~-~:)~\: ~ ':"'~~';;'.",:

,

..

.

'

\,

.
,".---:

'.

-.~.-~.;>:'\.

.

.....

,-

'

•
•
•
•
•
•I
I
I

26

fourth son, Thomas Jefferson Walling, was born in White County,
Tennessee, in 1811 (Webb 1952, Vol. 2: 858). The family moved west
into Mississippi in 1818, then back to Fayette County, Tennessee,
about 1825 (ibid.).
Jesse Walling came to Texas in 1834 and settled near
Nacogdoches. His younger brother, John Jr., (born 1805) had been the
first of the Wallings to arrive. He came in the fall of 1833 and
it was he who first claimed land in Rusk County. His long lot sur­
vey along the Sabine in Northern Rusk County was recorded on
August 15, 1835. The town of Camden drew up on this land at the
pOint where a ferry was operated by the Wallings across the Sabine.
The current name of this town is Faston.
During the Texas Revolution, both Jesse and John saw active
service with the Army of the Republic. Jesse enlisted on March 6,
1826, four days after the declaration of independence from Mexico.
He remained with the Army until the battle of San Jacinto, where he
fought as a member of Captain Hayden Arnold's Company (Webb 1952,
Vol. 2: 858). For this service he was granted Donation Certificate
373 by the Secretary of War of the Republic. He later claimed 640
acres of land in Rusk County with this certificate. John C. Walling
received a similar grant certificate although he was engaged in
guarding the baggage train of Houston's Army at Harrisburg (Miller
1967: 862) and thus missed the actual final victory.
Thomas Jefferson Walling does not seem to have seen active
service in the Army of the Republic although he was present in Texas
at the time of the Revolution and took the oath of allegience to the
Republic (Webb 1952, Vol. 2: 858).
Thomas J. Walling married Nancy Price in Tennessee in the
1830s and brought her with him to Texas before 1838. According to
the 1850 census (Carpenter 1969: 1637; U.S. Bureau of Census 1850),
their first son, Edward T., was born in Tennessee in 1833 and a
.
second son, John H., in 1835. Their third child, Thomas J., was the
first to be born in Texas. He is shown to be 12 years.old in the
1850 census. Five other children are listed in this.same census
entry: Charles T.,
10; Sarah Ann, age 8; Cynthia, age 6;
Paulimey V. (a son),
4; and one-year-old William F. It seems
quite probably that the Wallings were married in Tennessee in about
1832 when he would have been 21 and she two years younger.
The family lived near Nacogdoches until 1841. In that year
the land in the study area near.Henderson in Rusk County.was claimed
(Texas General Land Office 1978). It is probable that Walling
e!'ected the cabin on that property during the same year. As outlined
in our earlier report (Moncure and Jackson 1980: 35), the Wallings
were perhaps the most prominent land-owning family
this area
before the Civil War. Jesse had the most extensive holdings, but

27

other members of the family were holders of significant acreages.
This included Jesse's father-in-law, Isham Chisum (or Chisholm) and
his wife, Amelia. The "Parmelia Chism" grant, the Isham Chisum
grant and the John Walling, Sr., grant are all found in the same
area as the Thomas Jefferson Walling grant (General Land Office Map
of Rusk County, July 1932).
Nancy Ann Walling died on May 30, 1853 (Webb 1952, Vol. 2:
children. The widower remarried in Rusk County
858), leaving
the next year, on September 4, 1854. His new wife was the former
Eleanor S. Hardy. In 1859 both Jesse and Thomas Jefferson Walling
moved further west, to Hill County_ Jesse died August 11, 1867, and
is buried in the old Walling's Bend Cemetery near Whitney. The
small town of Walling in Hill County (one store and a population of
50 in 1940) (ibid.) was named for this family.
The cabin and the 307-acre portion of the original grant on
which it stands were sold to John Harrison on October 27, 1859
(Rusk County Deed Book M: 693).
Harrison and his wife, Catherine, occupied the house from 1859
until Harrison's death during the Civil War. A contract executed by
Catherine, found in the Rusk County Probate Files (#729) (Fig. 5),
confirms that the house was formerly occupied by T.J. Walling.
Another document in that file gives a complete inventory of the
contents of the house as of 1867. The Harrisons were not a parti­
cularly wealthy family, but were of the same class of yeomen
farmers as most of their neighbors. However, the probate records
contain considerable material on the disposition of three black for­
mer slaves: an older man, Ralph, and two young boys. What exactly
should become of the three seems to have posed a fairly new legal
problem at the time. The contract made by Catherine Harrison with
B.C. Oberthier obligates him to see that two cabins are built on the
property for these new freedmen (Fig. 5).
Actual ownership of the 307-acre property was eventually passed
to H.L. Oberthier (Rusk County Deed Book Q: 554 and V: 473) by
1874, although he appears to have been operating the farm as a
tenant as early as 1867. Oberthier sold the land and house to W.A.
Hubbard in 1877 {Rusk County Deed Book Y: 357 and Book 27: 45}
who continued to own the property until 1894. In that year various
parcels were sold to J.A. Vinson. The probate record of Vinson's
estate (#1752) was filed in 1904 and has not yet been explored for
additional historic information content.
Subsequent 20th century owners include F.C. Oberthier, C.A.
Price, M.C. Oliver and Clyde B. Green.
The cabin (
6a) has been subject to modification/alteration
during its existence but has retained its basic log frame.

Figure 6.
a.

'Ihe Walling cabin 'Ibday

b.

Conjectural Drawing of Original cabin

29

Figure 6b is a conjectural representation of its original appearance.
The shed room at the rear is.not contemporary with the log frame as
indicated by construction features (circular saw-produced boards,
make-do corner joinery, altered roof pitch, separate.sill-joist
supports, etc.). These post date 1841 and indicate a later addition.
The side shed room shows many of the same indications and, in
addition, is entered from the original pen via a door which shows
evidence of having originally been a window. The present chimney
retains what may be the original fieldstone base upon which is a much
later pressed brick chimney and hearth. The evidence for this is
the brick brand which includes a labor union marking (1930s at
earliest) and the fact that the present chimney is considerably short
of filling the hearth space cut into the log wall (Fig. 7a).
The basic cabin is nearly square, 20 feet across the front by
19 feet deep (outside measurement), in the classic English style
(Bealer 1978: 23) (Fig. 8). The centered front door is symmetrically
flanked by two windows. The hearth wall (east wall) to the right
as one enters, has a low-placed, very small window to the left of
the chimney which may have served to pass logs inside from a wood­
pile just outside. The other gable wall (west wall) contains the
centered door to the side shed room. Tool marks indicate this door
was produced by enlarging a window. The back (north) wall contains
a door which aligns with the right front window and which allows
entry into the add-on rear shed room. It appears, from hinge
evidence and the closure latch position, that this door may be con­
temporary with the construction of the shed room and not an original
feature of the cabin. Most often doors were hung so as to swing out
from the house and not reduce available indoor space. This one
opened into the main cabin pen.
The exterior of the cabin shows the use of weatherboards,
horizontally placed, to cover the interstices between the logs. The
square notched cornering method employed (Fig. 9) lacks the self
locking feature of most other notch types but was held in place by
vertically placed, narrow boards which may also have acted as
furring strips for the weatherboards. Later weatherboards, as
indicated by circular saw marks, are the majority of those remaining.
Rabbetted edge joinery of the weatherboards, such as that present in
many cases, would have been possible at the date of the first con­
struction but it appears likely that this feature belongs to those
weatherboards which replaced the originals. First priority would
have gone to covering the spaces between the logs (there is no
evidence of chinking or luting) and complete outside covering with
weatherboard would follow when there was time to plumb the walls.
Indeed, evidence of cutting and shimming of the
walls to allow
the support of vertical furring strips lends support to the above
(Fig. 7).

Figure 7.

The Walling cabin

a.

Chimney and Hearth Opening

b.

Well Head and CUrb

c.

Shims for Furring strips

b. ~.

a.
FIGURE 7.

Root cellar depression

..

•

Shallow depression

Well or privy depression

•

Hand dug well

Hackberry trees

Porch

Shed kitchen

"!L
g

Original cabin

~..~

Lines of
Iris plants'

//'''''------ ..."
I
I

I

'

\

Relict garden

r
I

\
\

o

10

25

50

feet

FIGURE 8.

Sketch map of the T. J. Walling site, 41 RK104

I

---------- ---------------

32

There is evidence of at least four roofs. Shakes, shingles,
composition shingles and a corrugated galvanized iron roof are
present. There are large, untapered shakes froe riven from cypress;
smaller, slightly tapered in length, shingles of the. same wood;
and red composition asphalt-type commercial shingles. It appears
that the roof boards to which these are attached in layers may be
remnants of the earliest roof. It was common practice to form the
initial roof of these early cabins by edge butting roof planks split
from logs (Jordan 1978: 90; Bealer 1978: 11). At this stage the
cabin was said to be "covered" (Jordan 1978: 90). When shakes or
shingles were added the structure was considered "roofed" (Bealer
1978: 11).
The plank floor currently in the original pen, the rear shed
room and the side shed room is probably not original but, within
the original pen, is nailed to the original log floor joists. Saw
marks from a rotary saw on many of these planks point to their being
replacements.
Associated with the cabin is an area of depressed earth, ovoid­
shaped and 33 feet to the north-northwest (Fig. 8). This feature is
6 feet long on its east-west axis and averages 3 1/2 feet wide on
its north-south axis. Its function can be explained only if exca­
vation is undertaken.
In line with the depression to the west and 42 feet from the
cabin is a well (Figs. 7, 8). The well was originally hand dug
but was later partially lined with a concrete sheath. The remains
include the wooden well curb and the uprights which supported the
windlass used to lower a bucket. The current well depth is 38 feet
and there was no water present at the time of sounding measurement.
The presence of a later sheathing indicates possible deepening which
in turn may limit its archeological potential in terms of
recovering early artifacts.
To the north of the depressed area and 54 feet from the cabin
is a feature which appears to have been the root cellar (Fig. 8).
It is brUSh-overgrown to the extent that its external shape is .
obscured. The possibility of later use as a trash pit exists. A
test trench will be necessary to verify its function.
Downslope from the well and 90 feet from the cabin is the site
of a possible privy or second well (Fig. 8). Brush overgrowth and
partial collapse at the edges of this hole and depression mask its
external appearance and a test trench will be required to determine
its function and contents, if any.
The remainder of the cabin-associated features include a
relict garden in front containing domestic flowers and a non-native

--

-

-~

--_._-.

- . -...

---.--~--

..

-----~

..

_----------­

Figure 9.

Square Notched Cornering on the Walling cabin

a

b

Square Notches

c

d

',.

34

Bois d'arc tree of unusual size near the county road at the
entrance to the property.
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The surface inspection of the proposed railroad and electrical
transmission line right-of-way revealed little evidence of pre­
historic artifacts or identifiable archeologically significant
features. A single isolated find of a chipped stone prOjectile point
was made in a context altered from that in which deposition
occurred. Close inspection of the find area revealed no other evi­
dence of prehistoric activity.
Two areas of historic activity received site designation. One
of these, 41RK105, is situated, in the main, out of the railway
right-of-way and merits no further attention with respect to miti­
gating damage resulting from the proposed construction. Site
41RK104, the Walling cabin, by virtue of its age, association with
a person of local and state prominence, its condition and location
with respect to the railroad right-of-way, merits mitigation action.
It is recommended that the basic cabin, that which is the original
single pen, be removed to an appropriate location, stabilized, and
offered to the Rusk County Historical Commission. It is further
recommended that careful archeological investigation and recording
of the present site, including the several features (well, root
cellar, depression and privy) as well as the cabin site, be carried
out concurrent with the moving of the cabin. The cabin is believed
to meet the criteria for nomination to the National Register of
Historic Places.

35

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This report results from the combined efforts of the Texas
Archeological Survey staff. The authors appreciate the editorial
and composition guidance of Solveig Turpin, the drafting and
graphics of Carol Fabac and typing by Deborah Smith. Doug Comstock
supplied the photographic expertise to convert negatives to print­
worthy results.
The timely assistance of Mr. Dick Robertson of Texas Utilities
Services, Inc. speeded the field effort •. Information provided by
Ms. Virginia Knapp, Chairperson, Rusk County Historical CommisSion,
and Ms. Susan Weaver, Rusk County History Book Committee, aided the
assessment of the Walling cabin and its recommended disposition.
The expertise and resourcefulness of the anonymous land survey crew
who marked and staked the railway centerline and boundaries is
hereby acknowledged and applauded.
Finally, to the gentleman who provided the tow when East Texas
red dirt, in its mud mode, threatened to swallow "Zero", we owe a
debt of gratitude.

36

REFERENCES CITED
Arbingast, S.A., L. Kennamer, R.H. Ryon, A. Lo, D.L. Karney, C.P.
Zlatkovich, M.E. Bonnie and R.G. Steele
1973
Ati~ 06 T~x~.
Bureau of Business Research, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Bealer, Alex W.
1978
Th~ Log

Cab~n.

Barre Publishing, Barre, Massachusetts.

Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
Sci~nc.e,

Th~ T~~

Joanna! 06

2( 1): 93-117.

Bolton, Herbert E.
1908
The Native Tribes About the East Texas Missions.
H-U,;toJUc.a1. QuaJ7.:teJr.ly t II (4) :. 249-276.
Branda, Eldon S. (editor)
1976
Th~ Handbook 06 Tex~, A Supplernen..t, Vol. III.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Bridenbaugh, carl
1969
Myth6 and R~a1Lti.e.-o, Soumu 06
Atheneum, New York.

th~

A~c.heology.

The

ColoMai. South.

Burt, William H., and Richard P. Grossenheider
1976
A Field Guide to. the Mammals, Third Edition.
Pe,teJl-6on Fidd Gu.id~ S~e6, No.5, Boston.
Butzer, Karl W.
1971
Env~onment and

T~x~

Th~

Aldine Press, Chicago.

carpenter, V.K.
Th~ Sta.t~ 06 T~x~ F~d~al Pop~on Sc.h~c1.u.te6,
1969
Seventh Cerul14.\ 06 the United Sta.te.-o 1850 , 5 volumes.
Century Enterprises, Huntsville, Arkansas.
Carr, John T., Jr.
1967
The Climate and Physiography of Texas. Texas Water
Development Board, Repo~ No. 53, Austin.
Cedar Post
1980

Tex~

to

L04~

2,000 Fanm4.

August 15, p. 10.

37

Clark, John W., Jr., and James E. Ivey
1974
Archeological and Historical Investigations at Martin
Lake, Rusk and Panola Counties, Texas. Texas Archeolo­
gical Survey, Re4e~ch Repa~ No. 32, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Davis, E.M.
1970

Archeological and Historical Assessment of the Red
River Basin in Texas. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Senie4 1: 25-65. Fayetteville.

Davis, W.A. , and E.M. Davis
The Jake Martin Site: An Archaic Site in the Ferrell's
1960
Bridge Area, Northeastern Texas. Department of
Anthropology, A~cheology Senie4 No.3, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938a Phy-6iog~aphy 06 EM:tVLI1 Ul1lied S:ta:te4.
Book Company, New York.
1938b

PhY.6iogMphy 06 We4:tVLI1 Ul1lied S:ta:te4.

McGraw Hill
McGraw Hill

Book Company, New York.
Flawn, Peter T. (Project Director)
1965

Geologic AUM 06 TeXM, TylVL Shee:t. Bureau of Econo­
mic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Greer, Georgeanna
1978
Letter to Martha D. Freeman, on file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Balcones Research
Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
Gould, Frank W.
1969
TexM Plal1u t A ChecfziM:t ami Ecological SwnmMy.
Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
1975

The G~M-6e4 06 TeXM. Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station, Texas A&M University, College Station.

Henry, Christopher D., and Joyce M.Basciano
1979
Environmental Geology of the Wilcox Group Lignite Belt,
East Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology, Repo~ 06
Il1ve.6tigatiol1 No. 98, The University of Texas at Austin.

38

Holm, Melody
1975
A Preliminary Study of Biologic Assemblages
East
Texas Lignite Belt. Bureau of Economic Geology,
R~eanch Nate 1, The University of Texas at Austin.
House, Kurt D.
1978
Tex~ A4cheology.
Dallas.

Southern Methodist University Press,

Hughes, Jack T.
1948
Untitled notes on file at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, Balcones Research Center, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Jarvis, R. Whitley
1972
The Folly Site: 41RK26. Texas Highway Department,
Publication¢ ~n A4chealagy. Austin.
Johnson, L., Jr.
The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas,
1962
with a Preliminary Definition of the LaHarpe Aspect.
Bulletin 06 the" Tex~ A~cheolag~cat Society, 32: 141­
284. Austin.
Jones, Buddy C.
1968
The Kinsloe Focus: A Study of Seven Historic Caddoan
Sites in Northeast Texas. Master's thesis on file at
the library, University of Oklahoma, Norman.
Jordan, Terry G.
1978
Tex~ Log Bulld{n9~.
and London.

University of Texas Press, Austin

Kaiser, W.R., W.B. Ayers, Jr. and W.W. LaBrie
1980
Lignite Resources in Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology,
Repo~ an rnv~tigatian¢ No. 104, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Kaiser, W.R., J.E. Johnston and W.N. Bach
1978
Sand-body Geometry and the Occurrence of Lignite in the
Eocene of Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology, GeoR..og~­
cal C~culan 78-4, The University of Texas at Austin.
Keller, J.E.
The Subsistence Paleoecology of the Middle Neches
1974
Region of Eastern Texas. Ph.D. dissertation on file at
The University of Texas at Austin.

39

Kier, R.S., L.E. Garner and L.F. Brown, Jr.
Land RuouJtc.u on TexM (map). Bureau of Economic
1977
Geology, Land Ret!ouJtcet! LaboJta,toJtf{ SvU..et!. The Univer­
sity of Texas at Austin.
Lee, David S.
1980
The Pocket Gopher Mound Probe.
36, 38.

NaA:wt.a.£ H.-Lo.toJty 1 89 (6) :

Little, Elbert L.
1980

The Audubon Soue.ty F-i..e£d Gu-i..de .to NoJt.th AmvU..c.an
TJteu, EM.teJtn Region. New York.

McDonald, Andrew J.
1972
An Archeological Survey of the Martin Lake Area, Rusk
and Panola Counties, Texas. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, Ret!eaJtc.h RepoJt.t No. 14. The Univer­
sity of Texas at Austin.
Miller, Thomas L.

1967

Bounty and Vonation La.nd GltanA4 On TeXM 1835-1888.
University of Texas Press, Austin and London.

Moncure, Henry B., and Jack M. Jackson
1980
A Reconnaissance Survey of Cultural Resources, Mill
Creek Area, Rusk County, Texas. Texas Archeological
Survey Ret! eaJtc.h RepoJt.t No. 80. The University of Texas
at Austin.
Moore, Clarence B.
1912
Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River.
Ac.ademy 06 NatUJta.i SuencU

Series, 14(4): 481-644.

On

JouJtna.i 06 .the
Pru..t.ade.1..ph-i..a, Second

Morris, Mrs. Harry Joseph (editor)
1977
C,f..ilzeJU 06 .the Republic. 06 Texa.6.
gical Society, Dallas.

Texas State Geneolo­

Muller, Daniel A., and Robert D. Price
1979
Ground-water Availability in Texas. Texas Department
of Water Resources RepoJt.t No. 238. Austin.
Newcomb, W.W., Jr.

1961

The Ind-i..a~ 06 Texa.6.

University of Texas Press,

Austin.
Pass, Fred R. (editor)
1974
The TexM Almanac., 1974-75.

Dallas.

40

Reagan, John J.
1898
The Expulsion of the Cherokees from East Texas.

QuOJLteJtlfj 06 ;the TeXM S.ta;te. H.<..o;toltic.al

A.6.6o~on,

I: 38.
Rusk County
ms.
Deed Record Books M, Q, Y and 27.
Office, Henderson, Texas.
ms.

Probate Record Files 729 and 1752.
Office, Henderson, Texas.

County Clerk's
County Clerk's

Sellards, E.H., W.S. Adkins and F.B. Plummer
1932
The Geology of Texas, Vol. I, Stratigraphy.
sity of Texas Butietin No. 3232. Austin.

The Univer­

Sloane, Eric
1964
A Mu.oe.wn 06 Ea.Jt.-tfj Amwcan Too.f...6. Ballantine Books,
New York. Member's Edition, American Museum of
Natural History.
Stebbins, Robert C.
1966
A Field Guide to Western Reptiles and Amphibians.
PUeJL60n Field Guide SWe.6, No. 16. Boston.

The

Story, Dee Ann
1978
Some Comments on Anthropological Studies Concerning the
Caddo. In Texa.6 Ancheotogfj, K.D. House, editor.
Southern Methodist University Press, Dallas.
Suhm, D.A., A.D. Kreiger and E.B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
06 ;the Texa.6 Anc.heotogic.al Society No. 25.

Butietin

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
ms.
Site report files for Rusk County.
Texas General Land Office

1878

06 Land Titte.6 06 TeXa.6 Compn-Loing ;the Titted
Patented and Located Lan~ in ;the S.ta;te, Vol. 1. Shaw

Ab~tnac.;t

and Blaylock, Galveston.
1932

Map of Rusk County.

Tunnell, C.D.
1961
Evidence of the Late Archaic Horizon at Three Sites-in
the McGee Bend Reservoir, San Augustine County, Texas.
Butietin 06 ;the TeXa.6 Anc.heotog,[cal SOUUfj No.
30: 123-158. Austin.

-----

-------~----

41

United States Bureau of Census
1850
Texas, Rusk County.
Vines, Robert A.
1977
TJr.ee-6 06 feud TexLU • University of
Austin and London.
Webb, C.H.
1960

Press,

A Review of Northeast.Texas Archeology. Bulletin 06
the TexLU Ancheotogical Soc£ety No. 29: 35-67. Austin.

Webb, Walter P.

1952

The

H~ndbook 06 TexLU, Vol.
Historical Association, Austin.

Winfrey, Dorman H.
1951
A History of Rusk County, Texas.
University of Texas at Austin.

The Texas State

Master's thesis, The

Zelinsky, Wilbur

1973

The CuLtwtctt

Geog~phy 06

the UnUed

S~e-6.

Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.

Prentice­

