Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract,
Montgomery County, Texas
By:
Charles E. Bludau, Jr., and Jeffrey D. Owens

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8871
BOA345-10760N

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Berg-Oliver Associates, Inc.
Houston, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

May 2019

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract,
Montgomery County, Texas
By:
Charles E. Bludau, Jr., and Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

Berg-Oliver Associates, Inc.
14701 St. Mary’s Lane, Suite 400
Houston, Texas 77079

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 S. Interstate 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
BOA345-10760N

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8871

May 2019

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by Berg-Oliver Associates,
Inc. (BOA) to conduct a cultural resources inventory survey and assessment of the Fairview tract.
The Fairview tract covers an area of approximately 81.7 hectares (202.0 acres) and is located off
the eastern side of Farm-to-Market Road (FM) 2854 south of Hilltop Ranch Drive to the southeast
of the community of Montgomery in Montgomery County, Texas. For purposes of the cultural
resources survey, the project area was assumed to consist of the entire 81.7-hectare (202.0-acre)
tract.
The proposed undertaking would be sponsored by Montgomery County Municipal Utility
District (MUD) No. 166, a political subdivision of the state of Texas; as such, the project would fall
under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas. In addition, the project may
require the use of Nationwide Permits (NWP) issued by the US Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE), Galveston District, to permit construction within any “waters of the US” that may be
present on the property; in this case, those portions of the overall project area subject to federal
permitting would also fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation
Act (NHPA). As the proposed project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking, the project
sponsor is required to provide the applicable state and federal agencies and the Texas Historical
Commission (THC), which serves as the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) for the state
of Texas, with an opportunity to review and comment on the project’s potential to adversely affect
historic properties listed on or considered eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic
Places (NRHP) and/or for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL), as appropriate.
In April and May 2019, Horizon archeologists Charles E. Bludau, Jr., Jesse Dalton, and
Amanda Kleopfer and conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area.
Jeffrey D. Owens acted as Principal Investigator, and the survey was conducted under Texas
Antiquities Permit no. 8871. The purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural
resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s
archeologists traversed the tract and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for
aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources.
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of one shovel test for every 1.2 hectares (3.0 acres) for
tracts greater than 40.9 hectares (101.0 acres) in size. As such, a minimum of 67 shovel tests

BOA345-10760N

v

Management Summary

would be required within the 81.7-hectare (202.0-acre) project area. Horizon excavated a total of
83 shovel tests, thereby exceeding the TSMASS for a project area of this size. In general, shovel
tests measured approximately 30.0 centimeters (11.8 inches) in diameter, and all sediments were
screened through 6.35-millimeter (mm) (0.25-in) hardware cloth. Based on the overall distribution
of shovel tests within the project area and the lack of observed cultural resources, it is Horizon’s
opinion that the project area was adequately assessed for cultural resources.
Shovel testing typically revealed moderately deep to deep deposits of silty and clay loam
extending to depths of 60.0 to 100.0 centimeters (23.6 to 39.4 inches) below surface, though
many shovel tests revealed dense clay sediments on the modern ground surface. Many shovel
tests contained iron concretions and dense clayey sediments at depths ranging from 30.0 to
100.0 centimeters (11.8 to 39.4 inches) below surface. Many shovel tests exhibited signs of
disturbance in near-surface sediments in the form of heavily mottled clay. It is Horizon’s opinion
that sediments with the potential to contain subsurface archeological deposits were fully
penetrated and that the project area was adequately assessed for cultural resources.
No archeological sites, historic-age or prehistoric, were recorded within the project area
during the survey. Examination of historical US Geological Survey (USGS) topographic maps
dating from 1963 to the present and aerial photographs dating from 1957 to the present indicate
that there are no historic-age structures within the project area. Two modern buildings are
depicted on USGS maps dating from 1978 to the present and on aerial photographs dating from
1995 to the present, though these structures do not appear on earlier images and are not old
enough to warrant designation as historic-age buildings (i.e., 50 years of age or older).
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified within the project
area that meet the criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26 or for inclusion in the
NRHP under 36 CFR 60.4. Horizon recommends a finding of “no historic properties affected,”
and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking.
However, human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are protected under the Texas Health and
Safety Code. In the event that any human remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered
at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in
previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent
discovery, and the Texas Historical Commission (THC) should be notified immediately.

vi

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... v

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 7
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 7
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 7
2.3
Climate .........................................................................................................10
2.4
Flora and Fauna ...........................................................................................11

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................13
3.6
Historic Period (ca. 1700 A.D. to Present) ....................................................17

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ..........................................................................................23

5.0

SURVEY METHODOLOGY .....................................................................................27

6.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................33

7.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................35
7.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................35
7.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .....36
7.3
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Antiquities Landmark........................37
7.4
Management Recommendations ..................................................................38

8.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................39
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

BOA345-10760N

vii

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.
Figure 10.

Vicinity Map of Project Area ...................................................................................... 2
Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle .................................... 3
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ......................................................... 4
Soils Mapped within Project Area ............................................................................. 9
Locations of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area ...................24
Martin Creek within Northeastern Portion of Project Area (Facing South) ................28
Mechanical Clearing within Northern Portion of Project Area (Facing West) ............28
Overview of Eastern Portion of Project Area (Facing West) .....................................29
Overview of Southwestern Portion of Project Area (Facing West) ............................29
Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Project Area ........................................30

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 1.
Table 2.

viii

Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area ......................................................... 8
Summary of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area ...................23

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by Berg-Oliver Associates,
Inc. (BOA) to conduct a cultural resources inventory survey and assessment of the Fairview tract.
The Fairview tract covers an area of approximately 81.7 hectares (202.0 acres) and is located off
the eastern side of Farm-to-Market Road (FM) 2854 south of Hilltop Ranch Drive to the southeast
of the community of Montgomery in Montgomery County, Texas. For purposes of the cultural
resources survey, the project area was assumed to consist of the entire 81.7-hectare (202.0-acre)
tract (Figures 1 to 3).
The proposed undertaking would be sponsored by Montgomery County Municipal Utility
District (MUD) No. 166, a political subdivision of the state of Texas; as such, the project would fall
under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas. In addition, the project may
require the use of Nationwide Permits (NWP) issued by the US Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE), Galveston District, to permit construction within any “waters of the US” that may be
present on the property; in this case, those portions of the overall project area subject to federal
permitting would also fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation
Act (NHPA). As the proposed project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking, the project
sponsor is required to provide the applicable state and federal agencies and the Texas Historical
Commission (THC), which serves as the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) for the state
of Texas, with an opportunity to review and comment on the project’s potential to adversely affect
historic properties listed on or considered eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic
Places (NRHP) and/or for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL), as appropriate.
In April and May 2019, Horizon archeologists Charles E. Bludau, Jr., Jesse Dalton, and
Amanda Kleopfer and conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area.
Jeffrey D. Owens acted as Principal Investigator, and the survey was conducted under Texas
Antiquities Permit no. 8871. The cultural resources investigations consisted of archival research,
an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area, and the production of a report suitable
for review by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas
Historical Commission’s (THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the
Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports.
Following this introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and
cultural backgrounds, respectively, of the project area. Chapter 4.0 describes the results of

BOA345-10760N

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Vicinity Map of Project Area

2

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle

BOA345-10760N

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 3. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

4

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

methods. Chapter 6.0 presents the results of the cultural resources survey, and Chapter 7.0
presents cultural resources cultural resources management recommendations for the project.
Chapter 8.0 lists the references cited in the report, and Appendix A summarizes shovel test data.

BOA345-10760N

5

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located southeast of the community of Montgomery in northwestern
Montgomery County, Texas. Montgomery County is situated on the Gulf Coastal Plain in
southeastern Texas, which is a structural basin formed by lithosphere deformation. The Texas
Coastal Plain, which extends as far north as the Ouachita uplift in southern Oklahoma and
westward to the Balcones Escarpment, consists of seaward-dipping bodies of sedimentary rock,
most of which are of terrigenous clastic origin, that reflect the gradual infilling of the basin from its
margins (Abbott 2001). The Houston region is underlain by rocks and unconsolidated sediments
that are quite young in a geological sense, ranging from modern to Miocene in age. These consist
predominantly of a series of fluviodeltaic bodies arranged in an offlapped sequence, with
interdigitated and capping eolian, littoral, and estuarine facies making up a relatively minor
component of the lithology. Major bounding disconformities between these formations are usually
interpreted to represent depositional hiatuses that occurred during periods of sea level low stand.
The oldest rocks in this fill are of Late Cretaceous age. As a result of the geometry of basin filling,
successively younger rock units crop out in subparallel bands from the basin margin toward the
modern coastline.
Physiographically, the project area spans a series of prominent uplands dissected by
tributaries of Martin Creek. Martin Creek flows northeastward beyond the project are into Lake
Conroe, an artificial impoundment on the San Jacinto River. The San Jacinto River flows
southeastward across the coastal plain, discharging into the Gulf of Mexico at Baytown.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

Geologically, the project site is underlain by the Willis Formation (Barnes 1992). The Willis
Formation, which correlates with the Williana Formation farther east in Louisiana, is also
occasionally referred to as pre-Lissie, and units in the same approximate stratigraphic context
have been termed Citronelle (Abbott 2001). The Willis Formation consists of diverse fluvial
deposits of clay, silt, sand, and siliceous gravel. The Willis and other correlative units are undated
at present, though they traditionally have been considered Early Pleistocene based on
stratigraphic criteria. While debate about the temporal affiliations of and correlations among the
deposits that underlie the major coastline terraces remain active, they are of little direct

BOA345-10760N

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

geoarcheological relevance because virtually all investigators agree that these deposits
considerably predate the earliest demonstrated dates of human occupation in North America.
The project area is underlain by a mosaic of sandy, clayey, and loamy fluviomarine
deposits and residuum weathered in situ from underlying bedrock of Pleistocene to Miocene age.
No Holocene-age alluvial sediments are mapped within the project area that would have the
potential to contain archeological materials at substantial depths (Table 1; Figure 4) (NRCS 2019).

Table 1. Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area
NRCS
Soil Code

Soil Name

Typical Profile
(inches)

Parent Material

BlC

Betis fine sand,
0 to 5% slopes

Sandy marine deposits on interfluves

0-10: Fine sand
10-48: Fine sand
48-80: Fine sand

FcC2

Latium clay,
1 to 5% slopes,
eroded

Residuum weathered from calcareous
shale and marl of the Miocene-age
Fleming Formation on ridges

0-6: Clay
6-63: Clay
63-80: Clay

FcD2

Latium clay,
5 to 8% slopes,
eroded

Residuum weathered from calcareous
shale and marl of the Miocene-age
Fleming Formation on ridges

0-6: Clay
6-63: Clay
63-80: Clay

Hs

Bleiblerville clay

Residuum weathered from calcareous
sandstone and marl of the Miocene-age
Fleming Formation on ridges

0-10: Clay
10-60: Clay
60-80: Clay

KpB

Normangee clay
loam,
1 to 3% slopes

Clayey residuum weathered from shale on
stream terraces

0-7: Clay loam (Ap)
7-52: Clay (Bt)
52-72: Clay (Cdk)

ObC2

Woodville soils,
2 to 5% slopes,
eroded

Clayey marine deposits on interfluves

0-4: Loam
4-48: Clay
48-60: Clay

SuC

Woodville fine sandy
loam,
1 to 5% slopes

Clayey marine deposits on interfluves

0-4: Loam
4-48: Clay
48-60: Clay

SuD

Woodville fine sandy
loam,
5 to 12% slopes

Clayey marine deposits on interfluves

0-4: Loam
4-48: Clay
48-60: Clay

WkC

Fetzer loamy fine
sand,
1 to 5% slopes

Clayey and/or loamy marine deposits on
interfluves

0-29: Loamy fine sand
29-35: Sandy clay loam
35-80: Clay

WkD

Fetzer loamy fine
sand,
5 to 12% slopes

Clayey and/or loamy marine deposits on
interfluves

0-29: Loamy fine sand
29-35: Sandy clay loam
35-80: Clay

Source: NRCS 2019
NRCS = Natural Resources Conservation Service

8

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

Figure 4. Soils Mapped within Project Area

BOA345-10760N

9

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Aboriginal cultural resources are commonly encountered in deep alluvial sediments
adjacent to major streams in southeast Texas. Based on the physiographic setting of the project
area on a series of rolling uplands dissected by tributaries of Martin Creek, the project area has
moderate to high potential to contain aboriginal archeological resources. However, these
resources would be expected to occur in surficial or shallowly buried sediments potentially lacking
in integrity within the relatively ancient fluviomarine sediments that characterize most of the
project area due to erosion. Historic-age cultural resources may occur in any physiographic
setting, though they are most common in urban settings and in rural settings suitable for
agriculture, and they tend to be observable on the modern ground surface. Historic-age cultural
resources would also be expected to occur in surficial or shallowly buried contexts within the
project area.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995). While
the paleoclimatic history of the coastal region remains unclear, Bryant and Holloway (1985)
present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas that includes three separate
climatic periods—the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.), the Late Glacial
Period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.), and the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence
from the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was
considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was
more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway
1985). The Late Glacial Period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow
warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands were
gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985). During
the Post-Glacial Period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more stable.
The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas. The
drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued into the midHolocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic conditions
lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway (1985) indicate
that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were probably achieved by
1,500 years ago.
The modern climate of the upper Texas coast, including the region surrounding Houston,
is classified as subtropical humid (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983), forming a transitional
zone between the humid southeastern US and the semiarid to arid west. The climate reflects the
influences of latitude, low elevation, and proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, which combine with the
urban heat island formed by the tremendous concentration of asphalt and concrete to give the
Houston area a notorious modern climate that is oppressively warm and moist throughout much
of the year. As a result of proximity to the Gulf and the abundance of surface water, humidity in
the early morning can approach 100% even on cloudless summer days, and it often exceeds 50%
even on the warmest afternoons. Largely as a consequence of the relatively high humidity
characteristic of the region, temperature patterns exhibit a moderate annual range and a modest
diurnal range that increases slightly with distance from the coast. Average monthly high

10

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

temperature ranges from a low of 17 to 19°Celcius (°C) (59 to 63°Fahrenheit [°F]) in January to a
high of 38 to 40°C (89 to 96°F) in August. Average monthly lows range from 4 to 9°C (38 to 47°F)
in January to 25 to 29°C (72 to 79°F) in July and August. Annually, average low temperatures
range from 15 to 21°C (56 to 65°F), and average high temperatures range from 27 to 29°C (75 to
79°F) (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983).
The Houston region experiences two precipitation peaks throughout the year (Abbott
2001). The first occurs in the late spring (i.e., May to June) due to the passage of infrequent cold
fronts that spawn chains of powerful frontal thunderstorms. The second occurs in the late summer
to early autumn (i.e., August to September) due to the incidence of tropical storms and hurricanes
from the Atlantic and, occasionally, Pacific oceans. In contrast, winter and early spring are
relatively dry, and high summer rainfall is dominated by convectional thunderstorms that are
relatively brief and localized, albeit frequently intense. Average annual precipitation varies from
a low of approximately 100.0 centimeters (40.0 inches) to a high of more than 132.0 centimeters
(52.0 inches). Average monthly precipitation varies from less than 5.0 to 8.0 centimeters (2.0 to
3.0 inches) in March to more than 19.0 centimeters (7.5 inches) occurring locally on the coast
during September. Almost all of the measurable precipitation falls as rain—snowfall is extremely
rare, occurring in measurable amounts in only 1 in 10 years.

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

Montgomery County is situated near the southeastern edge of the Texas biotic province
(Blair 1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian
provinces and the grasslands of the Kansas, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some
species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texas province. McMahan et al.
(1984) further define four broad communities that characterize that portion of the Texas biotic
province that lies on the Gulf Coastal Plain: (1) coastal marsh/barrier island, (2) coastal prairie,
(3) coastal gallery forest, and (4) pine-hardwood forest (cf. Abbott 2001:24-26).
The coastal marsh/barrier island category includes well-drained, sandy, coastal
environments and saline and freshwater wetlands in the coastal zone (Abbott 2001:24). Marsh
vegetation is typical of areas that are seasonally wet and have substrates composed primarily of
sands and silts, clays, or organic decomposition products. Vegetation assemblages are strongly
controlled by texture, salinity, frequency and duration of inundation, and depth of the seasonal
water table. Sandy, relatively well-drained, freshwater environments are typically dominated by
little bluestem, switchgrass, Florida paspalum, and brownseed paspalum. Wetter environments
are often dominated by marshhay cordgrass, seashore saltgrass, saggitaria, bulrushes, smooth
cordgrass, seashore paspalum, seashore dropseed, olney bulrush, saltmarsh bulrush, saltmarsh
aster, longtom, sprangletop, burhead, arrowhead, coastal waterhyssop, needlegrass rush, and
other sedges and rushes. Slightly higher, better-drained environments are characterized by such
taxa as seashore saltgrass, seashore paspalum, gulfdune paspalum, shoregrass, gulf cordgrass,
red lovegrass, bushy sea-oxeye, and glasswort. A variety of fauna are characteristic of the shore
zone. Important larger taxa include raccoon, nutria, alligators, turtles, swamp rabbit, and many
birds, including ducks, geese, herons, and many smaller species. Aquatic taxa, including a wealth

BOA345-10760N

11

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

of fish and shellfish adapted to brackish to hypersaline conditions, are also important in the coastal
marsh/barrier island zone.
The coastal prairie category consists primarily of grasses with minor amounts of forbs and
woody plants in areas that are not saturated on a seasonal basis (Abbott 2001:24-26). This
community is characteristic of upland areas and grades into the pine-hardwood forest to the north
and east and into the coastal marsh/barrier island to the south. A wide variety of grasses are
found in the prairie environments, but the principal taxa include big bluestem, little bluestem,
indiangrass, eastern grama, switchgrass, brownseed paspalum, sideoats grama, silver bluestem,
buffalograss, threeawn, and Texas wintergrass. Common forbs include Maximilian sunflower,
Engelmann daisy, blacksalmon, penstemon, dotted gayfeather, bundleflower, yellow neptunia,
snoutbean, prairie clover, tick clover, wild bean, western indigo, paintbrush, bluebonnet, ragweed,
croton, milkweed, vetch, verbena, and winecup. Woody plants occurring in the coastal prairie
include mesquite, honey locust, huisache, eastern baccharis, sesbania, live oak, elm, hackberry,
bumelia, and coralberry. The frequency of trees increases dramatically as the coastal prairie
grades into the pine-hardwood forest, forming an open woodland environment with common
stands of hardwood trees and occasional pines. The coastal prairie is home to a diverse fauna,
including coyote, white-tailed deer, skunks, cottontail rabbit, many small rodents, amphibians and
reptiles, and a variety of permanent and migratory birds. Bison and pronghorn were also present
at various times in the past.
The coastal gallery forest consists of diverse, principally deciduous trees and associated
understory in floodplains and streams that traverse the outer coastal plain (Abbott 2001:26).
Important taxa include water oak, pecan, poplar, American elm, cedar elm, sugarberry, ash,
loblolly pine, post oak, cherrybark oak, mulberry, swamp chestnut oak, willow oak, sweetgum,
hawthorn, dogwood, hickory, bois d’arc, sassafras cypress, willow, cottonwood, and sumac.
Shrubs and vines such as mustang grape, greenbrier, yaupon, coralberry, possumhaw,
elderberry, honeysuckle, dewberry, and blackberry are common in the understory, as are grasses
such as little bluestem, big bluestem, and Indian grass. The fauna of the coastal gallery forest
include white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, turkey, a variety of small mammals and
rodents, turtles, snakes, and many birds. Black bear was also present at various times in the
past, and a number of fish and a few varieties of shellfish are present in the streams.
The pine-hardwood forest is characterized by a mix of coniferous and deciduous trees,
including longleaf pine, shortleaf pine, loblolly pine, post oak, red oak, white oak, blackjack oak,
willow oak, and live oak (Abbott 2001:26). Riparian environments often support larger deciduous
trees like pecan, cottonwood, hickory, beech, and American elm. Understory vegetation varies
from relatively open to quite dense, and consists of shrubs, vines, forbs, and young trees.
Common shrubs include acacia, yaupon, mayhaw, wild persimmon, myrtle, greenbrier, Virginia
creeper, blackberry, dewberry, trumpet vine, gourd, and poison ivy. A variety of fauna is also
present, including white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, rabbit, mink, skunk, various small
rodents, turtles, reptiles, and many different birds. Black bear was also present at times in the
past, and bison and pronghorn were occasionally present in the transition zone to the coastal
prairie environment.

12

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within the Southeast Texas Archeological Region, a 21-county
area extending from the Colorado River on the west to the Sabine River on the east and
measuring about 200.0 kilometers (124.3 miles) inland from the Gulf of Mexico coastline. Much
of the archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between the Southern
Great Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995; Story 1990).
Further distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin subregions of
Southeast Texas. These two subregions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the inland
subregion has a much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast Texas
comprises a zone about 25.0 kilometers (15.5 miles) inland from the coast that covers the area
influenced by Gulf tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable ecological
variability characterizes this subregion, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes, wetlands,
marine coastline, and barrier islands. The inland subregion also encompasses considerable
ecological diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney woods.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to denote
Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural characteristics of
Southeast Texas culture periods are often different than in neighboring regions. For instance, the
Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and Southeast Texas, and
Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time in
Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit evidence of
reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be associated
with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of subsistence-related
activities. Inland sites tend to contain modest pottery assemblages, fired clay balls (at some
sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal sites tend to consist of
multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain few lithic artifacts, oyster shell tools, large
quantities of pottery (in later cultural components), and numerous bone tools.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (10,000 TO 5000 B.C.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;

BOA345-10760N

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists have historically discounted claims of much earlier human
occupation during the Pleistocene glacial period. However, recent investigations of the Buttermilk
Creek Complex in Bell County, Texas, have raised the possibility that a pre-Clovis culture may
have been present in North America as early as 15,500 years ago (Waters et al. 2011).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is represented
by the PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) (Patterson 1995). This stage coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various periods
within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted, lanceolate
projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end-scrapers, gravers, and
bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas are
known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the exploitation of
small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There is little evidence in
this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented elsewhere in North
America; rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been practiced during all
prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into two periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 8000 B.C.), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian period
(8000 to 5000 B.C.), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (5000 B.C. TO A.D. 100)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signaled the beginning of the Archaic stage
(5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) (Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a
significant reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Southeast Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding
decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture shows
greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of groundstone
technology.

14

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods. In
Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5000 to 3000 B.C.) is marked by the presence of Bell,
Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The Bell
point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains. Many of
the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3000 to 1500 B.C.) and several new
types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and probably the GaryKent series. The Late Archaic period (1500 B.C. to A.D. 100) is characterized by Gary, Kent,
Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos points.
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition developed
in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981; Patterson
1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period but reached
full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as boatstones and
bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang knives, stingray
spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial practices included the
systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre, and use of locally made
grave goods, such as longbone implements and bone pins. Most burials are found in extended
supine position, though some extended prone and bundle burials are also known. Burial direction
is usually consistent within single sites but varies from site to site. Patterson et al. (1993) report
that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton
counties.

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (A.D. 100 TO 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 B.C., in the Galveston Bay area by
about A.D. 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about A.D. 300, and in the ConroeLivingston inland area by about A.D. 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears to have
progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995). Southeastern
Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where Aten (1983)
established a detailed chronological sequence.
The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte
ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville
Stamped are common, while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area
128.7 kilometers (80.0 miles) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal
exception of a few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found
on the Gulf coast west of the Sabine Lake area.
Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early part of the Historic periods (Aten
1984; Patterson 1995; Perttula et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility ware

BOA345-10760N

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown Plain for
about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods before
once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety, Goose
Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor pottery
types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway (Aten
1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte types
are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste (like
Goose Creek), while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas is not common in Southeast Texas.

3.4

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 600 TO 1500)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 600 to 1500) (Patterson 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the latter
part of the Late Prehistoric period, but, as already discussed, ceramics appear earlier in Southeast
Texas. Along the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e., spearthrower) and
spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though they continued to be
used in the inland subregion along with the bow and arrow through the Late Prehistoric period
(Ensor and Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In fact,
Patterson (1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in Southeast Texas as early
as the end of the Middle Archaic period, using unifacial arrow points that consisted of marginally
retouched flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a generalized date of adoption of the bowand-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca. A.D. 600) in Central and Southeast Texas.
In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade
technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba, Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn. A serial
sequence for these point types has not been established in Southeast Texas, though Scallorn
points appear to predate Perdiz points throughout the rest of Texas.
Grog- (i.e., crushed-sherd-) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto Plain
and Baytown Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small
proportion of small-sized temper, while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that
are often visible on vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek pottery
remained in use throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphalt Coated
pottery from the Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in Southeast Texas
during the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods.

3.5

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1500 TO 1700)

For the most part, Protohistoric and early Historic Indian sites in Southeast Texas have
not been articulated with the ethnographic record (Story 1990:258). Similarly, reconciling the
ethnographic record to prehistoric Indian groups in this region is problematic. Late Prehistoric
and Historic population movements further complicate this issue. Aten (1983) has reconstructed

16

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

the territories of native groups present in this region in the early 18th century, including the
Akokisa, Atakapa, Bidai, Coco (possibly Karankawa), and Tonkawa. The presence of the
Tonkawa in Southeast Texas may be due to their rapid expansion from Central Texas in the
17th and 18th centuries (Newcomb 1993:27). The Karankawa Indians are thought to have
occupied the coastal margin of this region as far east as Galveston Island and the corresponding
mainland (Aten 1983). Judging by the scarcity of Rockport pottery on sites east of the San
Bernard River, the ethnic association of the Karankawa Indians with the Coco tribe may be in
doubt.
Protohistoric and Historic Indian sites may not be systematically recognized as such
because few aboriginal artifact types changed from the Late Prehistoric to the Historic periods
(Patterson 1995). Only a few non-European artifact types are useful in identifying Historic Indian
sites, including Bulbar Stemmed and Guerrero arrow points and possibly Fresno and Cuney
points after A.D. 1500 (Hudgins 1986). Historic period Indian sites are usually identified by the
presence of glass and metal artifacts, gunflints, and European types of pottery.

3.6

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1700 A.D. TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519 when Álvarez
de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Álvar Núñez Cabeza de
Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay;
however, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The
first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as
the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native culture and social
systems. This process is clearly discernible at the Mitchell Ridge site, where the burial data
suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as increased participation
on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the time heavy settlement of
Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian population was
greatly diminished. The Alabama-Coushatta Indians who currently reside in Southeast Texas are
migrants who were displaced from the east in the late 18th to early 19th centuries (Newcomb
1961).
By 1519, Spain had claimed much of the Texas Coast, stretching across the southeast
Texas coastal and interior landscape, including present-day Montgomery, Galveston, Chambers,
and Harris counties. Between the Neches and Trinity rivers there was a small tribe of Native
Americans called the Orcoquisac by the Spaniards, who may have been akin to the Atakapan
speakers who occupied western Louisiana and the inner-coastal Texas woodlands (Newcomb
1961; Swanton 1911). Little is known about the Texas sect of Atakapans, whose name is a
Choctaw word for “man-eaters” (Newcomb 1961). Their language was likely of Tunican stock,
but scant data are available about their linguistic origins (Swanton 1911). According to Newcomb,
the Akokisas, settled on the lower Trinity and San Jacinto rivers as well as the eastern shores of
Galveston Bay; to the north lived a lesser known group, the Patiris, and, to their north, the Bidais
(Newcomb 1961; Swanton 1911). Altogether, their population estimates are around 3,500 people
(Newcomb 1961). The Galveston Bay focus likely practiced a hunter-gatherer subsistence

BOA345-10760N

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

strategy, for the salt water flooding in the region would be cumbersome to any agricultural
practices (Newcomb 1961).
It is possible that Cabeza de Vaca and/or members of the Narvaez expedition encountered
the Atakapan communities as early as 1528, and it is also possible that La Salle’s excursions in
1684 would have encountered these groups. However, the first documented European account
of the Atakapans was left by French naval officer Simars de Bellisle in 1719 (Newcomb 1961).
During his expedition, de Bellisle was stranded on the shore of Galveston Bay after a mishap on
a supply run for fresh water, and he was taken captive and forcibly inducted into a tribe of Akokisas
(Newcomb 1961). After taking a widowed wife, escaping to live with the Caddo tribe to the north,
and living with a Hasinai woman, Angelica, the Frenchman eventually escaped native captivity
and returned to Galveston Bay to work as a guide for Bernard de la Harpe, who led the first French
expedition into present-day Oklahoma (Newcomb 1961). The Atakapans in southeastern Texas
continued to trade deer and bison skins with the encroaching French settlers in Louisiana
throughout the 1730s and 1740s until the Spanish Crown sent Captain Joaquin de Orobio
Bazterra to investigate alleged French settlements in 1745 or 1746 (Henson 2010; Newcomb
1961). During this incursion, Bazterra visited several Orcoquisac villages along Spring Creek, a
tributary of the San Jacinto River. He found no identifiable roads, maps, or any indications of
French presence (Henson 2010; Newcomb 1961).
Around 1756, the Spanish erected an outpost near the mouth of the Trinity River in what
is now Chambers County to combat the French presence in the region. This settlement consisted
of a presidio named San Augustin de Ahumada and a mission named Nuestra Senora de la Luz
(Ladd 2010). Atakapans were intermixed with 50 families of Tlascalan Indians brought in from
central Mexico to help “pacify [them] more successfully” (Newcomb 1961). Collectively, this shortlived outpost was known as El Orcoquisac, named after the tribe. After a series of misfortunate
events that included mutinous internal fighting and ravaging by hurricanes, the fort outpost was
abandoned by the Spanish in 1771 (Ladd 2010). The Bidais to the north were subjected to
Spanish violence after trading firearms with the Lipan Apaches, who were enemies of the Spanish
Crown (Newcomb 1961). A group of Atakapans settled somewhere along the Colorado River to
the west of present-day Harris County in the mid-19th century, but they virtually disappeared from
any records (Newcomb 1961). It is speculated that the remainder of the Atakapans who were not
decimated by European epidemics or warfare either married into neighboring tribes, such as the
displaced Alabama-Coushatta or the Caddo, or returned to Louisiana to join their linguistic and
cultural kin, the eastern band of Atakapans (Newcomb 1961). Either way, all Atakapan speakers
were gone from Texas by 1859.
When Stephen F. Austin received his empresario grant in 1824 to allow 300 settlers to
move to an allotment of 67,000 acres granted by the Mexican government, 42 Anglo-American
families settled in what is now western Montgomery County (Long 2010a). The empresario
contract specifically forbade Galveston Island and the Gulf shore to colonial settlement, so
Austin’s colonizers turned northward and northwestward to the lands that now comprise Harris
and Montgomery counties (Henson 2010). During this time, there were no indications of Native
American habitation in the former Atakapan lands (Henson 2010). By then, the local indigenous
populations and social matrices had completely dissolved.

18

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

One of the first Anglo-American settlers in the area was filibuster, adventurer, and
businessman Andrew Jackson Montgomery, who by 1823 had established a successful trading
post on the lower Coushatta Trace between the Brazos and Trinity rivers (Montgomery 2010).
Montgomery’s business sat on the nexus of the famous Coushatta trail and the Lomo del Toro,
another locally used Native American trail (Montgomery 2010). By 1827, Montgomery’s business
and settlement fostered a growing community, out of which grew the town of Montgomery;
however, the actual town may have been named after William Montgomery, the father of two
heroes of the Battle of San Jacinto (Grandy 1952). During the following decade, more settlers
and businesses moved into the town and region, and in 1837, Montgomery County was carved
from Washington County by an official decision made by the Republic of Texas Congress (Long
2010a). Originally, the county stretched from the Brazos River to the Trinity River and from the
Old San Antonio Road on the north to the San Jacinto on the south, but Montgomery was
subdivided amongst Grimes, Walker, San Jacinto, Madison, and Waller counties when Waller
County was established in 1870 (Long 2010a). Being the largest town within the county,
Montgomery was chosen as the county seat; other, smaller towns included Danville, Bay’s
Chapel, and Cincinnati. In 1838, the first log-structure court house was built, and in 1855, it was
replaced by a large Greek Revival-style structure (Long 2010a). Also in 1838, Isaac Lemuel
Gillespie Strickland, a pioneer Methodist missionary, was appointed by elder Littleton Fowler at
the Texas Mission to organize a Methodist church between the Trinity and Brazos rivers. There,
Rev. Strickland proselytized to the nascent settlement of Montgomery. By the 1850s, the
Montgomery Academy had been established, which became one of the first prominent religious
institutions in the region (Long 2010a).
By the onset of the Civil War, Montgomery County had transitioned from a subsistence
farming-based economy to a slave-labor-based plantation economy that focused on cash crops,
such as sugar and cotton. By 1860, the county contained 2,106 slaves out of a total population
of 5,479, making it one of the largest slave-owning counties in the state (Grandy 1952). In early
February 1861, the majority of the county’s white male residents (318 of 416) voted in favor of
Texas seceding from the Union (Long 2010a). Many citizens, which included almost every ablebodied man in the county, volunteered for the Confederate cause and joined regiments such as
the Fourth Texas Regiment of Hood’s Texas Brigade, Company H, and Terry’s Texas Rangers;
by the end of the war, more than three-quarters of the volunteer soldiers would be killed or
wounded in action (Grandy 1952; Long 2010a). The costs and aftermath of the economic vacuum
caused by the Civil War had drastic effects on the town of Montgomery. The slave-owning
population suffered a huge decline in property values as slaves made up half of all taxable
property in Montgomery County before the war (Long 2010a).
Many ex-slaves became sharecroppers and tenant farmers. There was no Freedman’s
Bureau, an agency initiated by President Abraham Lincoln whose goal was to educate ex-slaves
and incorporate them into society, nor was there a federal garrison positioned in Montgomery
County, and several acts of violence and intimidation toward African-American officials occurred
during the Reconstruction period (Long 2010a). By 1872, due to the rise of the Ku Klux Klan
violence across the South, the newly freed African-American population was disenfranchised and
marginalized through threats, the use of the White Primary poll tax, and other racially targeted
literacy tests (Long 2010a). By the 1880s, the local Democratic white elites had taken back the

BOA345-10760N

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

reigns of the post-war Republican-controlled government and ousted many African-Americans,
who would not see positions in office until after the Civil Rights movements of the 1960s. Racial
tensions were so high that white citizens who taught school to African-Americans or represented
their legal rights were drowned, shot, or hung by the local Ku Klux Klan, mobs, and vigilante
posses (Grandy 1952).
During the antebellum and Reconstruction periods, Montgomery County suffered a
prolonged economic depression. However, this was alleviated somewhat by the introduction of
the railroad. In 1871, the Houston and Great Northern Railroad laid its tracks across Montgomery
County, which ignited a business boom for the towns that were adjacent to the lines. Willis, a
town that sat right on the Houston and Great Northern Railroad, feuded with Montgomery after
the war for contender for county seat, and many businesses and citizens moved from Montgomery
to Willis after the war (Grandy 1952). However, Montgomery remained the county seat until a
vote in 1889 moved it to Conroe, then a popular fledgling sawmill and timber town (Grandy 1952).
Conroe was also chosen because it was positioned at the nexus of both the International-Great
Northern and the newly built Gulf, Colorado, and Santa Fe Railway lines (Long 2010a). As a
result of the feuds with Willis, especially during 1873, the town of Montgomery petitioned for a
new railway, which was partially funded with citizen contributions (Grandy 1952). In 1877, a rightof-way was granted to the newly founded Central and Montgomery Railroad, and this independent
line was maintained and operated from the 1880s until the 1940s (Grandy 1952). From 1879 to
1880, two more railroads were constructed—the Houston, East, and West Texas, and the
Houston and Texas Central (Grandy 1952; Long 2010a). With these economic advances, the
county’s population boomed from a mere 6,483 citizens in 1870 to 10,154 citizens by 1880.
Until the 1870s and early 1880s, Montgomery County suffered a dismal agricultural
depression. Prices of cotton slumped during the late 1860s, and the plantation economy based
on free slave labor had disappeared virtually overnight. Many plantations maintained a
dependence on cotton and utilized the same African-American ex-slave labor force now under
the guise of sharecropping, only to deplete the region’s soils of nutrients. By the 1880s, overfarming, the lack of livestock rotation, and the introduction of the boll weevil took a toll on cotton
production; in some areas, one acre of farmland produced as a little as one-third of a bale (Long
2010a). Other farmers turned to animal husbandry or switched to other crops such as corn and
wheat, but cotton remained the largest export of the county until the early 1900s (Long 2010a).
Many farmers turned to tobacco in the 1880s as the county began to recover from its
economic slump during the Reconstruction period. The town of Willis became known as a tobacco
town and, at one point, had seven cigar factories employing hundreds of people (Grandy 1952).
The favored and special variety was a fine-grade type known as Vuelta Abajo, and seeds were
imported from Cuba every year (Grandy 1952). This successful industry prospered until the US
government lifted a tariff on Cuban tobacco, which deflated the import taxes, making prices
plummet; thereafter, no tobacco was grown in Montgomery County until the 1910s (Grandy 1952).
As the tobacco market subsided, the lumber industry began to boom. After the arrival of
the railroads in the 1880s, the rich timber resources of the piney hardwoods of Montgomery
County were harvested and exported to sawmills throughout the county (Grandy 1952). Before
the Civil War, the cost of transporting natural resources out of the county over rough wagon roads
20

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

made the timber industry unsustainable. With the emerging lumber boom came the establishment
of 45 steam sawmills, and the ensuing systematic deforestation of the county would permanently
alter the county’s landscape and transform it from an area covered in thick pine forests to one
that was more suitable for livestock and farming (Grandy 1952; Long 2010a). Lumber hubs
included the towns of Bobville, Cowl Spur, Dobbin, Egypt, Fostoria, Honea, Karen, Keenan,
Mostyn, Leonides, and Security (Long 2010a). Towns like Willis that had suffered from the
collapse of the tobacco industry were saved by the wealth of the lumber industry. By the turn of
the century, the population had grown from 11,765 in 1890 to 17,067 in 1900.
In 1932, while most counties were suffering the economic tribulations of the Great
Depression, oil was discovered southeast of Conroe. Prior to this discovery, traces of oil and
natural gas were known to occur in the county from exploration conducted by the Santa Fe
Railroad Company, and later, leases were acquired by natural gas companies, but these were all
ill-fated (Long 2010a). However, wildcatter and business adventurer George William Strake
successfully tapped two oil wells in 1931 and 1932; the latter year produced a well that yielded
more than 900 barrels daily (Long 2010a). Strake’s discoveries sparked an oil boom, and by early
1932, a transient population of fortune-seekers had moved into Conroe (Grandy 1952). By early
1933, more than 100 wells would produce more than 25,000 barrels of oil per day, and at the end
of the year, that number would double to more than 52,000 barrels per day (Long 2010a). Local
infrastructure development in the county included public buildings, banks, paved roads, and new
monuments erected from direct or indirect proceeds from the oil business (Long 2010a). By the
second World War, Montgomery was one of the largest oil-producing counties in the entire nation,
and Conroe, at one point in time, was considered the “third largest oil field in the United States”
(Grandy 1952). Soon, the county saw the construction of several oil refineries, a carbon black
manufacturing plant, and two creosoting plants (Grandy 1952). Population growth followed the
boom, and the population jumped from 14,588 people in 1930 to 23,055 in 1940.
Today, Montgomery County still produces a vast amount of natural resources; in 2004,
more than 1,000,000 barrels of oil and 12,615,000 cubic feet of gas were produced in the county
(Long 2010a). The Sam Houston National Forest, administered by the US Forest Service, is
currently used for lumbering, grazing, oil production, and hunting (Long 2010b). The pine-wood
forests and lumber industry in the area provided $73,108,000 in local income for the resident
population in the year 1994 (Long 2010b). The expansion of the greater Houston population
through urbanization has been a direct impetus for the population growth in Montgomery County
over the last decade. The current population is 590,925, and the county currently oversees six
public school districts, several private schools, and more than 100 churches (Long 2010a). The
lumber, agriculture, and oil industries dominate the local economy. Lake Conroe and Lake
Woodlands are popular tourist destinations as well as the W. Goodrich Jones State Forest, which
strives to protect the endangered red cockaded woodpecker (Etienne-Gray 2010).

BOA345-10760N

21

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed the THC’s online Texas
Archeological Sites Atlas (TASA), the National Park Service’s (NPS) online National Register
Information System (NRIS), the Texas Department of Transportation’s (TxDOT) Historic Bridges
of Texas and Historic Districts & Properties of Texas online databases, and the Texas State
Historical Association’s (TSHA) The Handbook of Texas Online for information on previously
recorded cultural resources sites and previous archeological investigations conducted within a
1.6-kilometer (1.0-mile) radius of the project area (NPS 2019; THC 2019; TSHA 2019; TxDOT
2019a, 2019b).
Based on this archival research, two previously recorded archeological sites have been
recorded within a 1.6-kilometer (1.0-mile) radius of the project area (Table 2; Figure 5). No
documented cultural resources, including any archeological sites, cemeteries, or historic

Table 2. Summary of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area

Site
No./Name

Site Type

NRHP/SAL
Eligibility
Status1

Distance/Direction
from Project Area

Potential to
be Impacted
by Project?

Archeological Sites
41MQ289

Multiple-component
prehistoric and historicage site (unknown type)
(undetermined prehistoric;
undetermined historic)

Undetermined

0.9 mile south

No

41MQ290

Prehistoric site
(unknown site type)
(undetermined prehistoric)

Determined
ineligible

0.9 mile south

No

1

Determined eligible/ineligible = Site determined eligible/ineligible by SHPO
Recommended eligible/eligible = Site recommended as eligible/ineligible by site recorder and/or sponsoring
agency but eligibility has not been determined by SHPO
Undetermined = Eligibility not assessed or no information available
NRHP National Register of Historic Places
SAL State Antiquities Landmark
SHPO State Historic Preservation Office

BOA345-10760N

23

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Figure 5. Locations of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area

24

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and/or designated as State
Antiquities Landmarks (SAL) are located within or immediately adjacent to the boundaries of the
project area.
In addition to the background archival research, Horizon reviewed historical aerial imagery
and US Geological Survey (USGS) topographic maps for additional information about the
potential for historic-age structures and archeological materials within the project area (NETR
2019). Two modern buildings are depicted on USGS maps dating from 1978 to present and on
aerial photographs dating from 1995 to present, though these structures do not appear on earlier
images and are not old enough to warrant designation as historic-age buildings (i.e., 50 years of
age or older).
Based on the TASA database, no prior cultural resources surveys have been conducted
within the limits of the project area.

BOA345-10760N

25

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

5.0 SURVEY METHODOLOGY

In April and May 2019, Horizon archeologists Charles E. Bludau, Jr., Jesse Dalton, and
Amanda Kleopfer and conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area.
Jeffrey D. Owens acted as Principal Investigator, and the survey was conducted under Texas
Antiquities Permit no. 8871. The purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural
resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s
archeologists traversed the tract and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for
aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The project area is characterized by prominent
uplands dissected by tributaries of Martin Creek (Figure 6). At the time of survey, some portions
of the project area had been cleared of undergrowth (Figure 7). The project area is currently
being used for agricultural purposes (Figures 8 to 9).
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of one shovel test for every 1.2 hectares (3.0 acres) for
tracts greater than 40.9 hectares (101.0 acres) in size. As such, a minimum of 67 shovel tests
would be required within the 81.7-hectare (202.0-acre) project area. Horizon excavated a total of
83 shovel tests, thereby exceeding the TSMASS for a project area of this size (Figure 10). In
general, shovel tests measured approximately 30.0 centimeters (11.8 inches) in diameter, and all
sediments were screened through 6.35-millimeter (mm) (0.25-in) hardware cloth. Based on the
overall distribution of shovel tests within the project area and the lack of observed cultural
resources, it is Horizon’s opinion that the project area was adequately assessed for cultural
resources.
Shovel tests generally measured 30.0 centimeters (11.8 inches) in diameter and were
excavated to a target depth of 1.0 meter (3.3 feet) below surface, to the top of pre-Holocene
deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable. Standard shovel test logs were completed for
each shovel test describing the location, strata, soil texture and color, archeological materials (if
present), and any unusual characteristics of the surrounding landscape. All sediments excavated
from shovel tests were replaced in the shovel test hole upon completion of recording. The
Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates of each shovel test were determined using
hand-held Garmin Foretrex Global Positioning System (GPS) devices, which are typically
accurate to within 1.0 meter (3.3 feet) within moderately open forest canopies, using the North
American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83). Specific shovel test data are summarized in Appendix A.

BOA345-10760N

27

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 6. Martin Creek within Northeastern Portion of Project Area (Facing South)

Figure 7. Mechanical Clearing within Northern Portion of Project Area (Facing West)

28

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

Figure 8. Overview of Eastern Portion of Project Area (Facing West)

Figure 9. Overview of Southwestern Portion of Project Area (Facing West)

BOA345-10760N

29

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 10. Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Project Area

30

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

Shovel testing typically revealed moderately deep to deep deposits of silty and clay loam
extending to depths of 60.0 to 100.0 centimeters (23.6 to 39.4 inches) below surface, though
many shovel tests revealed dense clay sediments on the modern ground surface. Many shovel
tests contained iron concretions and dense clayey sediments at depths ranging from 30.0 to
100.0 centimeters (11.8 to 39.4 inches) below surface. Many shovel tests exhibited signs of
disturbance in near-surface sediments in the form of heavily mottled clay. It is Horizon’s opinion
that sediments with the potential to contain subsurface archeological deposits were fully
penetrated and that the project area was adequately assessed for cultural resources.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel testing and backhoe trenching results. Digital photographs were
taken, and a photographic log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for
cultural resources. Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with
maker’s marks) and non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and
metal scrap) were to be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced
in the same location in which they were found. As no cultural materials were observed during the
survey, the collection policy was not brought into play.
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and good-faith
effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project tract as defined in 36 CFR 800.3.

BOA345-10760N

31

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

6.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

Horizon was selected by BOA to conduct a cultural resources inventory survey and
assessment of the Fairview tract. The Fairview tract covers an area of approximately
81.7 hectares (202.0 acres) and is located off the eastern side of FM 2854 south of Hilltop Ranch
Drive to the southeast of the community of Montgomery in Montgomery County, Texas. For
purposes of the cultural resources survey, the project area was assumed to consist of the entire
81.7-hectare (202.0-acre) tract.
The proposed undertaking would be sponsored by Montgomery County MUD No. 166, a
political subdivision of the state of Texas; as such, the project would fall under the regulatory
jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas. In addition, the project may require the use of NWPs
issued by the USACE, Galveston District, to permit construction within any “waters of the US” that
may be present on the property; in this case, those portions of the overall project area subject to
federal permitting would also fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the NHPA. As the
proposed project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking, the project sponsor is required to
provide the applicable state and federal agencies and the THC, which serves as the SHPO for
the state of Texas, with an opportunity to review and comment on the project’s potential to
adversely affect historic properties listed on or considered eligible for listing on the NRHP and/or
for designation as SAL, as appropriate.
In April and May 2019, Horizon archeologists Charles E. Bludau, Jr., Jesse Dalton, and
Amanda Kleopfer and conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area.
Jeffrey D. Owens acted as Principal Investigator, and the survey was conducted under Texas
Antiquities Permit no. 8871. The purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural
resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s
archeologists traversed the tract and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for
aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources.
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the TSMASS require a minimum of one shovel test for
every 1.2 hectares (3.0 acres) for tracts greater than 40.9 hectares (101.0 acres) in size. As such,
a minimum of 67 shovel tests would be required within the 81.7-hectare (202.0-acre) project area.
Horizon excavated a total of 83 shovel tests, thereby exceeding the TSMASS for a project area
of this size. In general, shovel tests measured approximately 30.0 centimeters (11.8 inches) in
diameter, and all sediments were screened through 6.35-millimeter (mm) (0.25-in) hardware cloth.
Based on the overall distribution of shovel tests within the project area and the lack of observed

BOA345-10760N

33

Chapter 6.0: Results of Investigations

cultural resources, it is Horizon’s opinion that the project area was adequately assessed for
cultural resources.
Shovel testing typically revealed moderately deep to deep deposits of silty and clay loam
extending to depths of 60.0 to 100.0 centimeters (23.6 to 39.4 inches) below surface, though
many shovel tests revealed dense clay sediments on the modern ground surface. Many shovel
tests contained iron concretions and dense clayey sediments at depths ranging from 30.0 to
100.0 centimeters (11.8 to 39.4 inches) below surface. Many shovel tests exhibited signs of
disturbance in near-surface sediments in the form of heavily mottled clay. It is Horizon’s opinion
that sediments with the potential to contain subsurface archeological deposits were fully
penetrated and that the project area was adequately assessed for cultural resources.
No archeological sites, historic-age or prehistoric, were recorded within the project area
during the survey. Examination of historical USGS topographic maps dating from 1963 to the
present and aerial photographs dating from 1957 to the present indicate that there are no historicage structures within the project area. Two modern buildings are depicted on USGS maps dating
from 1978 to the present and on aerial photographs dating from 1995 to the present, though these
structures do not appear on earlier images and are not old enough to warrant designation as
historic-age buildings (i.e., 50 years of age or older).

34

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

7.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with three
primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP and for designation as SALs.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the APE and to make preliminary determinations of whether or not the
resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or federal
codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological properties are a
function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research needs, though
historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with important historic events
and/or personages. Under the NHPA and the Antiquities Code of Texas, archeological resources
are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the significance of archeological
resources for inclusion in the NRHP and for designation as SALs, respectively.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory process.

BOA345-10760N

35

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

7.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The four criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or
history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant. This
concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures, districts,
or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent research
questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by three requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least one of the four criteria for eligibility listed
above, and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As
discussed here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory
and history according to various periods of development in various times and at various places.
Thus, the significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic
development and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular
period of development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP
under Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding
of prehistory. All four criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought
to bear for historic sites.

36

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

7.3

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ANTIQUITIES LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are located
in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any county,
city, or political subdivision of the state are state antiquities landmarks and are eligible for
designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
building, structure, cultural landscape, or non-archeological site, object, or district as an SAL if it
meets at least on one of following criteria:
A. [T]he property is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history, including importance to a particular cultural or ethnic
group;
B. [T]he property is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. [T]he property embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, represents the work of a master, possesses high artistic values, or
represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction;
D. [T]he property has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in Texas
culture or history.

BOA345-10760N

37

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

Furthermore, the THC may designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets
one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

7.4

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified within the project
area that meet the criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26 or for inclusion in the
NRHP under 36 CFR 60.4. Horizon recommends a finding of “no historic properties affected,”
and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking.
However, human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are protected under the Texas Health and
Safety Code. In the event that any human remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered
at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in
previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent
discovery, and the THC should be notified immediately.

38

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

8.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J.T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Aten, L.E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives on Gulf Coast Prehistory, pp.
72-93. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History, No. 5, The Florida
State Museum, Gainesville.

Barnes, V.E.
1992

Geologic Atlas of Texas—Beaumont Sheet.
University of Texas at Austin.

Bureau of Economic Geology, The

Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.

BOA345-10760N

39

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Ensor, H.B., and D.L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas. Reports of Investigations, No. 8, Archeological
Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Grandy, W.H.
1952
A History of Montgomery County, Texas. Unpublished Master’s thesis, University of
Houston, Texas.
Hall, G.D.
1981
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Research Report No. 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Henson, M.S.
2010
Harris County. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/handbook/
online/articles/hch07>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed June 27, 2019.
Hudgins, J.D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-51.
Keller, J.E., and F.A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country: Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility. American Antiquity
53:231-244.
Ladd, K.
2010

40

El Orcoquisac. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/handbook/
online/articles/hve49>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed June 27, 2019.

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas. Publication LP-192. Texas Department of Water Resources,
Austin.
Long, C.
2010a Montgomery County. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.org/hand
book/online/articles/hcm17>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed July 1, 2019.
2010b

Sam Houston National Forest. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.
org/handbook/online/articles/gks02>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed July 2,
2019.

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
McMahan, C.A., R.G. Frye, and K.L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and accompanying
illustrated synopsis, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Montgomery, R.N.
2010
Montgomery, Andrew Jackson. The Handbook of Texas Online. <https://tshaonline.
org/handbook/online/articles/fmo90>. Uploaded June 15, 2010. Accessed July 1,
2019.
National Environmental Title Research (NETR)
2019
Historic Aerials by NETR Online. <http://www.historicaerials.com>. Accessed May 7,
2019.
National Park Service (NPS)
2019
National Register of Historic Places online database. <http://nrhp.focus.nps.gov>.
Accessed May 7, 2019.
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2019
Web Soil Survey. <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed May 7, 2019. US Department of Agriculture.
Newcomb, W.W. Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press:
Austin.

BOA345-10760N

41

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:1-63.

Open Street Map (OSM)
2019
OpenStreetMap. < http://www.openstreetmap .org>. Available under the Open
Database License: <www.opendatacommons.org/licenses/odbl>. Accessed May 7,
2019
Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264.

Patterson, L.W., J.D. Lockwood, R.L. Gregg, and S.M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.
Perttula, T.K., M.R. Miller, R.A. Ricklis, D.J. Prikryl, and C. Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

Houston

Bulletin of the Texas

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell
Ridge Site, 41GB66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc., Corpus
Christi, Texas.
1995

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330.

Story, D.A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the
Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C. Rose,
D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes. Research
Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Swanton, J.R.
1911
Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Adjacent Coast of the Gulf of Mexico.
Bureau of American Ethnology: Bulletin 43. Smithsonian: Washington, D.C.
Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT)
2019a Historic Bridges of Texas. <https://www.arcgis.com/home/webmap/viewer.html?
webmap=e55a0c5725644e5badef578db02bee9f&extent=-109.4371,25.5608,86.8053,37.2641>. Accessed May 8, 2019.

42

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

2019b

Historic Districts & Properties of Texas. <http://maps.dot.state.tx.us/AGO_Template/
TxDOT_BasicViewer/?appid=c8fc0a742ec44e0e9da4b009c21eb70c>.
Accessed
May 8, 2019.

Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2019
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas Restricted Database.
state.tx.us/>. Accessed May 8, 2019.

<http://www.atlas.thc.

Texas State Historical Association (TSHA)
2019
Montgomery County. The Handbook of Texas Online. <http://www.tshaonline.org/
handbook/online/articles/hcm17>. Accessed May 8, 2019.
US Department of Agriculture (USDA)
2016
Digital orthophoto, MontgomeryCounty, Texas. National Agriculture Imagery Program,
Farm Service Agency, Aerial Photography Field Office.
United States Geological Survey (USGS)
1959
Montgomery, Texas, 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle.
1976

Keenan, Texas, 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle.

Waters, M.R., S.L. Forman, T.A. Jennings, L.C. Nordt, S.G. Driese, J.M. Feinberg, J.L. Keene, J.
Halligan, A. Lindquist, J. Pierson, C.T. Hallmark, M.B. Collins, and J.E. Wiederhold
2011
The Buttermilk Creek Complex and the Origins of Clovis at the Debra L. Friedkin Site,
Texas. Science 331:1599-1603.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

BOA345-10760N

43

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

AK1

243585

3362289

0-50+

Hard black blocky clay

No

AK3

243548

3362156

0-15

Dark yellowish-brown blocky clay

No

Brown clay

No

Dark yellowish-brown clay

No

20-35+

Brown clay

No

15-30+
AK5

243326

3362295

0-20

Soils

Artifacts

AK8

243491

3362255

0-35+

Very dark brown clay

No

AK10

243457

3362204

0-20

Dark yellowish-brown blocky clay

No

Brown clay

No

Very dark gray blocky clay

No

Brown clay

No

Dark yellowish-brown clay

No

Brown clay

No

Dark yellowish-brown blocky clay

No

Brown clay

No

Dark yellowish-brown blocky clay

No

Brown clay

No

Dark yellowish-brown blocky clay

No

Brown clay

No

Dark yellowish-brown blocky clay

No

Brown clay

No

Dark yellowish-brown blocky clay

No

Brown clay

No

0-20

Dark yellowish-brown clay

No

20-30

Coarse brown sand

No

30-50+

Dark yellowish-brown clay

No

0-25

Dark yellowish-brown clay

No

25-30

Mottled dark yellowish-brown with light
red clay

No

30-40+

Light red clay

No

20-35+
AK12

243425

3362260

0-25
25-35+

AK14

243399

3362205

0-25
25-35+

AK16

243362

3362259

0-20
20-30+

AK18

243303

3362260

0-30
30-40+

AK21

243278

3362209

0-25
25-35+

AK24

243235

3362258

0-35
35-45+

AK26

243217

3362214

0-20
20-35+

AK29

AK31

243687

243628

3362647

3362461

AK35

243612

3362561

0-30+

Dark yellowish-brown clay

No

AK37

243563

3362654

0-30+

Mottled brown with reddish-yellow and
light yellowish-brown sandy clay

No

BOA345-10760N

A-1

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

AK39

243504

3362470

AK40

243481

3362372

Artifacts

0-25+

Light gray and light yellowish-brown
and reddish-yellow and dark yellowishbrown sandy clay

No

0-15+

Yellowish-brown loamy sand

No

15-25

Brown sandy clay

No

25-40+

Brown clay

No

AK42

243454

3362493

0-25+

Black and dark yellowish-brown with
light red sandy clay

No

AK44

243438

3362652

0-25

Fine very dark grayish-brown loamy
sand

No

25-40

Fine brown sand

No

40-50+

Dark yellowish-brown clay

No

AK47

243357

3362360

0-35+

Dark yellowish-brown clay

No

AK50

243368

3362656

0-20

Fine very dark grayish-brown sandy
loam

No

20-35

Fine brown sand

No

35-50+

Dark yellowish-brown clay

No

Very dark gray clay

No

5-60+

Dark yellowish-brown with yellowishred clay with iron

No

CB2

A-2

Soils

243579

3362196

0-5

CB4

243542

3362255

0-60+

Very dark gray clay

No

CB6

243512

3362195

0-60+

Very dark gray clay

No

CB7

243579

3362196

0-60+

Very dark gray clay

No

CB9

243462

3362301

0-5

Very dark gray clay

No

5-50+

Reddish-brown clay with calcium
carbonate

No

CB11

243423

3362161

0-60+

Very dark gray clay

No

CB13

243400

3362304

0-60+

Very dark gray clay

No

CB15

243358

3362158

0-60+

Very dark gray clay

No

CB17

243340

3362306

0-60+

Very dark gray clay

No

CB19

243342

3362204

0-60+

Very dark gray clay

No

CB20

243294

3362164

0-60+

Very dark gray clay

No

CB23

243278

3362309

0-60+

Very dark gray clay

No

CB25

243234

3362161

0-60+

Very dark gray clay

No

CB27

243217

3362312

0-60+

Very dark gray clay

No

CB28

243744

3362630

0-40+

Black clay

No

CB30

243684

3362546

0-60+

Black clay

No

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

CB32

243593

3362369

0-25

CB33

243537

3362377

243607

3362369

Artifacts

Brown sandy clay loam

No

25-60+

Yellowish-red with light brownish-gray
clay

No

0-15

Very dark grayish-brown sandy loam

No

Yellowish-red sandy clay

No

Dark yellowish-brown clay loam

No

10-60+

Reddish-brown clay

No

15-50+
CB34

Soils

0-10

CB36

243630

3362653

0-60+

Brown/yellowish-brown clay loam with
iron stains

No

CB39

243504

3362470

0-20

Very dark gray clay

No

Light yellowish-brown with light gray
and yellowish-brown clay loam

No

Very dark grayish-brown clay loam

No

5-50+

Yellowish-red clay

No

0-20

Very dark grayish-brown sandy loam

No

Wet gray with yellowish-red sand

No

Very dark grayish-brown sandy loam

No

20-50+

Wet gray with yellowish-red sand

No

20-35+
CB41

CB43

243424

243488

3362392

3362593

0-5

20-50+
CB45

243432

3362544

0-20

CB46

243404

3362446

0-50+

Light gray and yellowish-brown loam
with dark yellowish-brown clay

No

CB48

243338

3362458

0-50+

Light gray and dark yellowish-brown
clay

No

CB49

243350

3362560

0-20

Very dark grayish-brown sandy loam

No

Gray with yellowish-red sand

No

Dark yellowish-brown sand

No

Dark yellowish-brown with yellowishbrown sandy clay

No

Dark yellowish-brown sand

No

Dark yellowish-brown with yellowishbrown sandy clay

No

Dark yellowish-brown sand

No

Dark yellowish-brown with yellowishbrown sandy clay

No

Dark yellowish-brown sand

No

Yellowish-red clay

No

Dark grayish-brown sandy loam

No

Yellowish-red clay

No

Dark grayish-brown sandy loam

No

20-50+
CB50

243783

3362351

0-55
55-70+

CB51

243905

3362343

0-55
55-70+

CB52

244043

3362311

0-60
60-70+

CB53

244045

3362202

0-30
30-45+

CB54

243875

3362214

0-10
10-30+

CB55

243769

BOA345-10760N

3362201

0-20

A-3

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)
20-40+

CB56

243644

3362216

JD54

JD55

242853

242974

243112

3362617

3362614

3362635

No

Dark yellowish-brown sand

No

Yellowish-red clay

No

0-10

Dark gray brown sand

No

10-40

Light grayish-brown sand

No

40-70

Light reddish-brown sandy clay

No

70+

Light gray clay with light reddish-brown
mottles

No

0-20

Dark grayish-brown sandy loam

No

20-60

Light reddish-brown sand

No

60-90

Reddish-brown sand

No

90+

Reddish-brown sand

No

0-20

Grayish-brown sand

No

20-60

Light grayish-brown sand

No

Light brown sand

No

0-20

Dark grayish-brown sandy loam

No

20-60

Light reddish-brown sand

No

Light brown sand

No

0-20

Dark grayish-brown sandy loam

No

20-60

Light grayish-brown sand

No

60-80

Gray and reddish-brown sand

No

Wet gray brown sand with red clay
mottles

No

0-20

Dark brown/gray sandy loam

No

20-40

Medium reddish-brown sandy clay

No

40-65+

Red/yellow clay with light brown
mottles

No

0-20

Light gray/brown sandy loam

No

20-70

Light reddish-brown sandy loam

No

Light gray fine sandy loam

No

0-20

Dark brown sandy loam

No

20-70

Light grayish-brown sandy loam

No

Light grayish-brown sandy clay loam

No

Dark brown sandy loam

No

Medium reddish-brown sandy loam

No

Dark brown sandy loam

No

0-35

60-100+
JD56

243130

3362567

60-100+
JD57

243030

3362545

80-100+
JD58

JD59

242935

243045

3362514

3362462

70-100+
JD60

243118

3362475

70-100+
JD61

243183

3362578

0-20
20-100+

JD62

A-4

243205

3362422

Artifacts

Yellowish-red clay

35-45+
JD53

Soils

0-20

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
202.0-acre Fairview Tract, Montgomery County, Texas

UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)
20-40

243163

3362361

No

Grayish-red brown sandy loam

No

Dark brown clay with yellow and gray
mottles

No

Dark brown sandy clay

No

Dark brown clay with gray and yellow
mottles

No

Dark/medium brown clay

No

0-20

Light grayish-brown sandy loam

No

20-50

Light yellow/brown sandy clay loam

No

50-70+

Light grayish yellow brown clay with
red mottles

No

Light gray/brown sandy loam

No

Medium gray clay with yellow and
brown mottles

No

Dark grayish-brown sandy clay loam

No

Hard dark brownish-gray clay

No

0-5

Light pale grayish-brown sandy loam

No

5-55

Medium pale brown sandy loam

No

55-70+

Light yellowish-gray brown clay

No

0-15
15-30+

JD64

243116

3362295

0-30
30-50+

JD84

JD85

243814

243970

3363090

3363104

0-40
40-65+

JD87

244084

3363074

0-15
15-35+

JD88

243987

3362937

Artifacts

Light gray sandy loam

40-100+
JD63

Soils

JD89

243773

3362966

0-25+

Moist dark brown clay

No

JD90

243845

3362748

0-30+

Compact, globular dark brown clay

No

JD91

243956

3362790

0-10

Light brownish-gray sandy loam

No

10-30

Medium brownish-gray sandy loam

No

30-40+

Reddish-brown hard clay

No

Dark brown clay

No

JD92

244137

3362699

0-30+

JD93

244137

3362894

0-8

Dark brown sandy loam

No

8-30

Medium grayish-brown sandy clay
loam

No

30-50+

Dark gray brown compact globular
clay

No

Dark brown and medium brown clay

No

Medium brown clay with yellowishgray mottles

No

Dark brown clay

No

Medium brown clay with yellowishgray mottles

No

Dark grayish-brown sandy loam

No

JD94

244136

3362888

0-15
15-35+

JD95

244018

3362559

0-15
15-35+

JD97

244109

BOA345-10760N

3362398

0-18

A-5

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

JD98

JD99

JD100

Easting

243923

244101

243856

Northing

3362401

3362491

3362434

Depth
(cmbs)

Soils

18-40

Medium reddish-brown sand

No

40-50+

Brown clay with reddish-brown mottles

No

0-15

Dark brown sandy loam

No

15-60

Medium reddish-brown sand

No

60-80

Reddish-brown sandy clay

No

80-90+

Reddish-brown clay with red mottles

No

0-10

Light gray sand

No

10-55

Light brownish-gray sand

No

55-70

Light brownish-gray sandy clay

No

70-85+

Light gray clay with light reddish-brown
mottles

No

0-10

Medium brown sandy loam

No

10-60

Medium brown sandy clay loam

No

60-70+

Brown clay

No

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 15 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

A-6

Artifacts

BOA10760_arch_survey_report

