....

","

.,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

'.

'

ADD~TIONAL

ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY IN AREAS TO BE
AFFECTED BY THE THREE RIVERS FLOOD PROTECTION
PROJECT
, , ...
-1

Live Oak County, Texas

Michael G. Mal/ouf

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
The University of Texas at Austin
Technical Bulfetin No. 16

1977

f

,

· SURVEY
ADDITIONAL ARCHEOLOGICAL
IN AREAS TO BE AFFECTED BY THE

THREE RIVERS FLOOD PROTECTION PROJECT,
LIVE OAK COUNTY, TEXAS

-, ­

Michael G. Ma.llou!'

, .

, r

A Report to the
Fort Worth District, ;
Corps of Engineers

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin

April, lCJ77

....:..

~.

1

t

<11

INTRODUCTION
This report summarizes the results of additional archeological survey in areas
to be affected by construction of the Three Rivers Local Flood Protection
Project, Live Oak County, Texas. Previous investigations in this project area
were carried out and reported to the Fort Worth District office in September,
1975.* This initial survey provided surficial coverage of the authorized
levee alignment and associated structures. Additional surficial inspection,
reported herein, was requested by the Corps of Engineers to assess possible
conflicts with cultural resources (archeological and historical) in areas
affected by a subsequently proposed levee alignment. The new alignment differs
substantially in its location from the authorized route only in its northwestern
segment (see accompanying project map). In this area the proposed route lies
well ~ast of the authorized route and therefore necessitated aaditional survey
coverage beyond that accomplished and reported to the Corps of Engineers in
September, 1975.

SURVEY METHODS
,

,

An intensive surficial inspection of the proposed levee alignment was carried

out from April 13 to April l~ 1977, by Michael G. Mallouf, staff archeologist
ot the Texas Archeological Survey. This inspection covered a 200 foot corridor
measured along the centerline of the proposed levee in the northwestern sector
of project area. Mapping controls included a large scale contour map of the
project area supplied by the Fort Worth District plus a USGS topographic quad
map (Three Rivers 7.5 1 ) . The methods of on-foot survey were identical to those
utilized in the earlier survey of the project area, including techniques of
site documentation.
Since all areas surveyed were either in plowed or cleared agricultural fields,
groucd cover did not create a significant problem of visibility. The detection
ot surficially exposed cultural residues was thus considered to be nearly l~
successful.

* Three

Rivers Flood Protection Project, Live Oak County, Texas: An Archeological
and Historical Survey of Areas Proposed for Modification. A Report to the Fort
Worth District, Corps of Engineers by the Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin. September 30, 1975 •

..

SURVEY RESULTS

.\

Three prehistoric sites and one multi-component historic and prehistoric site were
discovered and recorded in the course of this survey. Additionally, one (41 LK 57)
prehistoric site encountered during the 1975 project area survey ~as revisited and
evaluated in terms of its position with respect to the proposed new levee alignment.
All sites were examined carefully, their position plotted with respect to the
proposed project modifications and their lateral extent estimated as closely as
surface observations would allow. No collections were made.

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
'J.

The survey did effectively demonstrate that construction of the proposed re-align­
ment of the levee will conflict with identifiable cultural resources in the
northwestern segment of the Three Rivers Flood Protection Project. Specifically'
the areas of conflict are as follows:
. .'
"

Site 41
41
41
41

LK
LK
LK
LK

113
114

_"...

57 (reportea in the initial survey)
116

Brief descriptions of these localities, all of wpich are considered to be
potentially significant prehistoric/historic sites are provided in the attached
table. Their approximately locations and lateral extent are indicated on the
small scale area map included with this report.
Based on our surficial inspection of these sites it is recommended that subsur­
face testing at sites 41 LK 114, 41 LK 113 and 41 LK 57 be carried out to
provide sufficient basis for more accurate judgment of the depth and general~
stratigraphic character of these localities. This program of subsurface testing
should be of sufficient magnitude to assess the sites in terms of their potential
for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places and, further, to en­
able well-based opinions as to the need or extent of mitigative action, should
this become an appropriate alternative.
Site 41 LK 116, situated near the juncture of the authorized and proposed levee
alignments, appears to represent an important resource and, in our opinion,
requires no further assessment.

i

I

. '... "'­

.:,:.,
\.

,I

4

....

·1

...,

-

TAllJLAR LISTING OF ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES
Site No.
41 LIe 113

41 LIe 114

"';.

Description: Site is located on a cleared low sandy loam knoll
on the north side of 01ds Slough. The Missouri Pac~fic Railroad
tracks are roughly the eastern boundary of the site and it is
approximately .25 miles west of Three Rivers and .50 miles east
of the Frio River. Materials observed consist of a concentration
of burned rock fragments, lithic debitage, thick and thin bifacia11y
flaked tools, mussel and snail shell.
Size: 300 x 100 meters
Arfected by proposed project: Yes
Recommendations: Subsurface testing
Description: Site is located in a plowed field o~ a high sandy
knoll overlooking a small tributary of Hackberry:~reek. Site is
approximately .25 miles west of Hwy 281 and .50 miles north of
Three Rivers. It is bounded on the west by the Missouri Pacific
Railroad tracks and is approximately .50 miles east of the con­
fluence of Hackberrr Creek with the Frio River. ~te~ia1s
observed c~nsist of a scatter of lithic debitage, burned rock
fragments, mussel and snail shell •..
Size: ca. 50 x 50 meters
.,
Affected by proposed project: Yes
Recommendations: Subsurface test~g
.,J

, 41 LIe 115

41 LK ll6

Description: Site is located around the Ray Pullen home in Three
Rivers, Texas. It is on the north side of a small sandy knoll .25
miles north of the Frio River. Material observed consists of a
scattering of burned rock fragments, lithic debitage, mussel and
snail shell.
Size: ca. 50 x 50 meters
Affected by proposed project: No
Recommendations: None
Description: Site is located on the east side of the Frio River in
a plowed field. It is approximately .5 miles north of the Hwy 72
bridge over the Frio River. This site has a prehistoric and historic
component. Prehistoric materials observed include a scattering of
burned rock fragments, lithic debltage, utilized flakes, a core bi­
face, mussel and snail shell. Historic materials include brick
fragments, metal fragments, bottle glass fragments, a molded bottle
fragment with a hand finished neck, and glazed earthenware fragments.
The historic material probably dates to the late 19th century.
Size: 150 x 50 meters
Affected bi' proposed project: Yes
.
Recommendations: No further work at survey level. Sampling of
site recommended prior to construction •

..
"

••u

\'

,t

•

x­

..,..

'

. ......

~'-~:

,",-""

~ l' r"~
~.
.!

".-1;'

-~-

,

.. .... ....
,

. , -' .
,

,

....

"

"

"

'

'.

-"'

­

