Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek
Replacement Project,
Fayette County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8966
H042-190132

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Fayette County
La Grange, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

June 2019

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek
Replacement Project,
Fayette County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

Fayette County
Homeland Security and Emergency Management
151 N. Washington Street, Room 301
La Grange, Texas 78945

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 S. Interstate 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
H042-190132

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8966

June 2019

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by Fayette County to
conduct an intensive cultural resources inventory survey and assessment for the proposed
Krenek Road at Pettys Creek bridge-replacement project near Ellinger in Fayette County, Texas.
The proposed undertaking would involve replacing the existing bridge, which measures
15.2 meters (50.0 feet) in length by 6.1 meters (20.0 feet) in width, with a slightly larger structure
measuring 30.5 meters (100.0 feet) in length by 8.5 meters (28.0 feet) in width. All construction
would be constrained to the existing, narrow right-of-way of Krenek Road. For purposes of the
cultural resources survey, the project area was assumed to measure approximately 91.4 meters
(300.0 feet) in length (i.e., 30.5 meters [100.0 feet] along Krenek Road on either side of the 30.5meter- [100.0-] foot-long existing bridge) by 19.8 meters (65.0 feet) in width, covering a total area
of 0.2 hectare (0.4 acre).
The proposed project is being sponsored by Fayette County, a political subdivision of the
state of Texas; as such, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of
Texas (Natural Resources Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). In addition, the proposed undertaking
would be partially funded by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); as such, the
project also falls under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act
(NHPA) of 1966, as amended. As the project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with
the potential to impact potentially significant cultural resources, the Texas Historical Commission
(THC) has required that the project sponsor provide for a cultural resources inventory of the
project area.
On June 20, 2019, Horizon archeological technician Jared Wiersema, under the overall
direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resources
survey of the project area to locate any cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by
the proposed undertaking. The survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8966.
Horizon’s archeologist traversed the project area and thoroughly inspected the modern ground
surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. Krenek Road is an improved, two-lane
gravel road that runs within a narrow existing ROW lined with narrow shoulders covered in short
grasses. Prior disturbances from construction, use, and ongoing maintenance of the existing
roadway and bridge were observed within the project area. In addition, the narrow southeastern
side of the existing Krenek Road ROW has a subsurface fiber optic line running within it, and a
gas pipeline crosses the project area west of Pettys Creek.

H042-190132

v

Management Summary

In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of three subsurface probes per 0.4 hectares (1.0 acre)
for project areas less than 1.2 hectares (3.0 acres) in size; as such, one subsurface probe would
be required within the 0.2-hectare (0.4-acre) project area. Horizon exceeded the TSMASS by
excavating a total of two backhoe trenches within the project area. The two backhoe trenches
were excavated within the northern side of the Krenek Road ROW, including one on the
northeastern side of Pettys Creek and one on the southwestern side of the creek. It was not
possible to excavate any trenches on the southeastern side of the road due to the very narrow
road shoulder, which measures only a few feet in width, and the presence of a subsurface fiber
optic line in this area. Modern trash was abundant within the upper 30.0 to 50.0 centimeters
(11.8 to 19.7 inches) of sediments, and disturbed sediments may extend as deep as 1.0 meter
(3.2 feet) below surface in some areas. Natural sediments underlying the disturbed surface
horizons consisted of reddish-brown clay loam, sand, and loamy clay extending to depths of 2.2 to
2.8 meters (7.2 to 9.2 feet) below surface.
No cultural resources, historic-age or prehistoric, were observed within the project area
during the survey.
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26 or for inclusion in the NRHP according
to 36 CFR 60.4. Horizon recommends a finding of “no historic properties affected,” and no further
archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking. However,
human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are protected under the Texas Health and Safety
Code. In the event that any human remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered at any
point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously
surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent discovery,
and the THC should be notified immediately.

vi

190132_arch_survey_report

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... v

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 7
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 7
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 7
2.3
Climate .......................................................................................................... 9
2.4
Flora and Fauna ...........................................................................................10

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................13
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (ca. 12,000 to 8500 B.P.) ...............................................13
3.2
Archaic Period (ca. 8500 to 1200 B.P.) ........................................................14
3.3
Late Prehistoric Period (ca. 1200 to 350 B.P.) ..............................................14
3.4
Historic Period (ca. 350 B.P. to Present) ......................................................14

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ..........................................................................................21

5.0

SURVEY METHODOLOGY .....................................................................................23

6.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................29

7.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................31
7.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................31
7.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .....32
7.3
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Antiquities Landmark........................33
7.4
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................34
7.5
Management Recommendations ..................................................................35

8.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................37
APPENDIX A: Backhoe Trench Data

H042-190132

vii

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.
Figure 10.
Figure 11.
Figure 12.

Vicinity Map of Project Area ...................................................................................... 2
Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle .................................... 3
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ......................................................... 4
Soils Mapped within Project Area ............................................................................. 8
Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area .......................................22
Overview of Krenek Road Bridge (Facing East-Northeast) ......................................24
View of Pettys Creek South of Krenek Road Bridge (Facing East) ...........................24
View of Pettys Creek North of Krenek Road Bridge (Facing North) ..........................25
View of Erosion along Pettys Creek Bank North of Bridge (Facing North) ................25
Southeastern Side of Krenek Road with Fiber Optic Line (Facing Southwest) .........26
Gas Pipeline Crossing of Krenek Road West of Bridge (South) ...............................26
Locations of Backhoe Trenches within Project Area ................................................27

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 1.
Table 2.

viii

Summary of Mapped Soils in Project Area ................................................................ 9
Summary of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area ...................21

190132_arch_survey_report

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by Fayette County to
conduct an intensive cultural resources inventory survey and assessment for the proposed
Krenek Road at Pettys Creek bridge-replacement project near Ellinger in Fayette County, Texas
(Figures 1 to 3). The proposed undertaking would involve replacing the existing bridge, which
measures 15.2 meters (50.0 feet) in length by 6.1 meters (20.0 feet) in width, with a slightly larger
structure measuring 30.5 meters (100.0 feet) in length by 8.5 meters (28.0 feet) in width. All
construction would be constrained to the existing, narrow right-of-way of Krenek Road. For
purposes of the cultural resources survey, the project area was assumed to measure
approximately 91.4 meters (300.0 feet) in length (i.e., 30.5 meters [100.0 feet] along Krenek Road
on either side of the 30.5-meter- [100.0-] foot-long existing bridge) by 19.8 meters (65.0 feet) in
width, covering a total area of 0.2 hectare (0.4 acre).
The proposed project is being sponsored by Fayette County, a political subdivision of the
state of Texas; as such, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of
Texas (Natural Resources Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). In addition, the proposed undertaking
would be partially funded by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); as such, the
project also falls under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act
(NHPA) of 1966, as amended. As the project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with
the potential to impact potentially significant cultural resources, the Texas Historical Commission
(THC) has required that the project sponsor provide for a cultural resources inventory of the
project area.
On June 20, 2019, Horizon archeological technician Jared Wiersema, under the overall
direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resources
survey of the project area to locate any cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by
the proposed undertaking. The survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8966.
The cultural resources investigation consisted of an archival review, an intensive pedestrian
survey with backhoe trenching, and the production of a report suitable for review by the State
Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the THC’s Rules of Practice and
Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA) Guidelines for
Cultural Resources Management Reports.

H042-190132

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Vicinity Map of Project Area
2

190132_arch_survey_report

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle

H042-190132

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 3. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph
4

190132_arch_survey_report

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

Following this introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and
cultural backgrounds, respectively, of the project areas. Chapter 4.0 describes the results of
background archival research, and Chapter 5.0 discusses cultural resources survey methods.
Chapter 6.0 presents the results of the cultural resources surveys, and Chapter 7.0 presents
cultural resources management recommendations for the project. Chapter 8.0 lists the
references cited in the report, Appendix A summarizes backhoe trench data.

H042-190132

5

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located in Fayette County, Texas, near the boundary of two significant
physiographic provinces—the Edwards Plateau and the Blackland Prairie. The Blackland Prairie,
the narrow physiographic zone situated between the Edwards Plateau on the west and the Gulf
Coastal Plain on the east, is a low, rolling land that extends in a narrow band along the eastern
edge of the Balcones fault zone from the Red River Valley in northeastern Texas to the southern
edge of the Edwards Plateau. This is an area of low topographic relief and poor drainage in which
water often ponds after rainstorms and streams flow at very gentle gradients. The Edwards
Plateau and Balcones Escarpment are associated with a great fault system that arcs across
Texas to form a distinct boundary between uplands composed primarily of limestone bedrock and
lower plains composed mostly of softer rocks. In places, this boundary is marked by an abrupt
scarp (the Balcones Escarpment) and in others by a more gradational ramp, but the entire length
of this transition zone is a major ecotone in terms of topography, bedrock, hydrology, soil,
vegetation, and animal life.
Physiographically, the project area is situated on the floodplain and adjacent terraces of
Pettys Creek approximately 1.9 kilometers (1.2 miles) northwest of Ellinger in southeastern
Fayette County, Texas. The channel of Pettys Creek is incised into the Pleistocene-age terraces
that frame the broad floodplain of the Colorado River, and Pettys Creek flows southwestward to
join the Colorado River approximately 3.5 kilometers (2.2 miles) southwest of the project area.
Elevations within the project area slope down steeply toward the creek channel, ranging from
approximately 76.2 to 79.2 meters (250.0 to 260.0 feet) above mean sea level.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

Fayette County is underlain by a thick sequence of Eocene-age sedimentary rock and
sand formations, while areas of Pleistocene- and Holocene-age alluvium may be present adjacent
to major streams and rivers. Geologically, the project area is situated on Pleistocene-age fluviatile
terrace deposits (Qt) and Holocene-age alluvium (Qal), which consist of gravel, silt, clay, and
gravel (USGS 2019). Approximately the northeastern two-thirds of the project area is
characterized by loamy alluvial sediments of Holocene age, whereas the southwestern one-third
of the project area is composed of Pleistocene-age age loamy alluvium (Figure 4, Table 1).

H042-190132

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Figure 4. Soils Mapped within Project Area
8

190132_arch_survey_report

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

Table 1. Summary of Mapped Soils in Project Area
NRCS Soil
Code

Soil Name

Parent Material

Typical Profile
(inches)

Dg

Degola loam,
occasionally flooded

Loamy alluvium of
Holocene age on
floodplains

0-36: Loam
36-72: Sandy clay loam

Pu

Pursley clay loam,
frequently flooded

Loamy alluvium of
Holocene age on
floodplains

0-14: Clay loam
14-34: Loam
34-60: Silty clay loam
60-80: Loam

RbC

Rabbs clay loam,
5 to 8% slopes

Loamy alluvium of
Pleistocene age on
stream terraces

0-6: Clay loam
6-38: Clay loam
38-80: Loam

Source: NRCS 2016
APE = Area of Potential Effect
NRCS = Natural Resources Conservation Service

In southeastern Texas, aboriginal cultural resources are commonly encountered adjacent
to major streams and rivers as well as in upland settings. Based on the physiographic setting of
the project area spanning Pettys Creek, the proximity of the Colorado River, and the presence of
Holocene-age alluvial sediments within the northeastern portion of the project area suggests that
cultural resources may occur at depth in subsurface sediments. The antiquity of the Pleistoceneage terraces in the southwestern portion of the project area suggests that cultural resources in
this area would be constrained to the modern ground surface or in shallow subsurface contexts.
Historic-age resources may occur in virtually any physiographic setting but are most common in
urban areas and in rural settings suitable for agriculture. Prior construction, use, and ongoing
maintenance of existing roadways, overhead and subsurface utilities, and the existing Krenek
Road bridge may have disturbed the integrity of any cultural resources that may be present within
the project area.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995). Bryant
and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas from
the Wisconsin Full Glacial period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.) through the Late Glacial period
(14,000 to 10,000 B.P.) to the Post-Glacial period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence from the
Wisconsin Full Glacial period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was considerably
cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was more heavily
forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway 1985). The Late
Glacial period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow warming and/or drying
trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands were gradually replaced by
grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985). During the Post-Glacial period,
the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more stable. The deciduous forests
had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas. The drying and/or warming

H042-190132

9

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

trend that began in the Late Glacial period continued into the mid-Holocene, at which point there
appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic conditions lasting from roughly 6,000 to
5,000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway (1985) indicate that modern environmental
conditions in east-central Texas were probably achieved by 1,500 years ago.
Fayette County is located within the south-central climatic division. The modern climate
is typically dry to subhumid with long, hot summers and short, mild winters. The climate is
influenced primarily by tropical Maritime air masses from the Gulf of Mexico, but it is modified by
polar air masses. Tropical Maritime air masses predominate throughout spring, summer, and fall.
Modified polar air masses are dominant in winter and provide a continental climate characterized
by considerable variations in temperature.
On average throughout the past century, precipitation and temperature in Texas manifest
regional clines with mean annual precipitation totals declining fairly regularly from east to west
and mean annual temperature declining equally evenly from northwest to southeast (Larkin and
Bomar 1983). In Central Texas, climate has fluctuated from subtropical humid to subtropical
subhumid. Average annual precipitation totals 81.3 centimeters (32.0 inches) and temperature
averages 19°Celsius (C) (67°Fahrenheit [F]) annually, ranging from 36°C (96°F) in August (the
warmest month) to 15°C (59°F) in January (the coldest month). During this time, however, drier
periods lasting from three to seven years, when total annual rainfall ranged from 30.5 to
63.5 centimeters (12.0 to 25.0 inches), were followed by abnormally wet years with 114.3 to
127.0 centimeters (45.0 to 50.0 inches) of rainfall.
Two annual precipitation peaks, which typically occur in May and September, are
associated with frontal storms that form when southward-moving cool air masses collide with
warm, moist air masses moving inland from the Gulf of Mexico (Bomar 1983; Carr 1967). The
topographic discontinuity along the Balcones Escarpment lies directly in the path of the Gulf storm
trace and increases the lift in convective storms to produce extreme amounts of rainfall. Two
extreme examples are the excess of 91.4 centimeters (36.0 inches) of rain that fell within an 18hour period in the vicinity of Thrall, Texas, in September 1921, and the 55.9-centimeter (22.0inch) deluge that fell in less than three hours near O’Harris, Texas, in May 1935. Lower rainfall
amounts are characteristic of winter and late summer. In winter, frontal storms pass so frequently
that there is little time for moisture to increase, and prevailing upper-level winds from west to east
often dominate over meridional flow, meaning that much of the available moisture is derived from
the Pacific rather than from the Gulf of Mexico. In summer, cool fronts rarely penetrate into the
region, and rainfall occurs primarily as localized, thermal convective storms.

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

The project area is situated in the southwestern portion of the Texan biotic province (Blair
1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian provinces
and the grasslands of the Kansan, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces (Dice 1943). Some
species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texan province. The boundary,
characterized as “approximate,” between Blair’s (1950) Texan and Balconian provinces passes
through western Williamson County, northwest of the project area. Rainfall in the Texan province

10

190132_arch_survey_report

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

is barely in excess of water need, and the region is classified as a C2 (moist subhumid) climate
with a moisture surplus index of from 0 to 20%.
Edaphic controls on vegetation types are important in the Texan biotic province, which is
located near the border between moisture surplus and moisture deficiency. Sandy soils support
oak-hickory forests dominated by post oak (Quercus stellata), blackjack oak (Q. marilandica), and
hickory (Carya buckleyi). Clay soils originally supported a tall-grass prairie, but much of this soil
type has been placed under cultivation. Dominant tall-grass prairie species include western
wheatgrass (Agrophyron smithii), silver beardgrass (Andropogon saccharoides), little bluestem
(Andropogon scoparius), and Texas wintergrass (Stipa leucotricha). Major areas of oak-hickory
forest include the Eastern and Western Cross Timbers, and major tall-grass prairie areas include
the Blackland, Grand, and Coastal prairies.
Some characteristic associations of the
Austroriparian province occur locally in the Texan province, such as a mixed stand of loblolly pine
(Pinus taeda) and blackjack and post oak in Bastrop County, as well as a series of peat and bog
marshes distributed in a line extending from Leon to Gonzales counties.
The fauna associated with this region are represented by a mixture of species from the
Austroriparian, Tamaulipan, Chihuahuan, Kansan, Balconian, and Texan biotic provinces. At
least 49 species of mammals occur in the Texan province, including Virginia opossum (Didelphis
virginiana), eastern mole (Scalopus aquaticus), fox squirrel (Sciurus niger), desert pocket gopher
(Geomys breviceps), fulvous harvest mouse (Reithrodontomys fulvescens), white-footed mouse
(Peromyscus leucopus), hispid cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus), eastern cottontail rabbit
(Sylvilagus floridanus), raccoon (Procyon lotor), striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis), ground squirrel
(Citellus tridecemlineatus), white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginiana), hispid pocket mouse
(Perognathus hispidus), deer mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus), black-tailed jackrabbit (Lepus
californicus), pygmy mouse (Baiomys taylori), nine-banded armadillo (Dasypus novemcinctus),
and jaguar (Felis onca). Both species of Terrapene known from the Austroriparian province—
eastern box turtle (T. Carolina) and desert box turtle (T. ornata)—occur in the Texan.
Sixteen species of lizards, including seven grassland and nine forest species, are also
found, including green anole (Anolis carolinensis), eastern fence lizard (Sceloporus undulates),
common ground skink (Leiolopisma laterale), and glass snake (Ophiosaurus ventralis) (grassland
species), as well as collared lizard (Crotaphytus collaris), Texas spiny lizard (Sceloporus
olivaceous), Texas horned lizard (Phrynosoma cornutum), and Great Plains skink (Eumeces
obsoletus) (forest species). Only five species of urodele fauna are known from this area, including
small-mouthed salamander (Ambystoma texanum), tiger salamander (Ambystoma tigrinum), and
eastern lesser siren (Siren intermedia), and the Texan province acts as a barrier to urodele
distribution between the endemic Balconian province fauna to the west and the Austroriparian
fauna to the east.
Anuran fauna is composed primarily of Austroriparian or otherwise widely distributed
species, including eastern spadefoot toad (Scaphiopus holbrookii), Gulf Coast toad (Bufo
valliceps), Woodhouse’s toad (Bufo woodhousii), southern cricket frog (Acris gryllus), southern
chorus frog (Pseudacris nigrita), gray treefrog (Hyla versicolor), green treefrog (Hyla cinerea),
North American bullfrog (Rana catesbeiana), northern leopard frog (Rana pipiens), and narrowmouthed toad (Microhyla carolinensis). Additional anuran species that fail to cross from the Texan

H042-190132

11

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

into the Austroriparian province include Pacific tree frog (Pseudacris clarkia), Strecker’s chorus
frog (Pseudacris streckeri), and striped whipsnake (Microhyla olivacea). Other reptile and
amphibian species common to this biotic zone include 6-lined racerunner (Aspidoscelis
sexlineata), rat snake (Ptyas mucosus), eastern hognose snake (Heterodon platirhinos), rough
green snake (Opheodrys aestivus), copperhead (Agkistrodon contortrix), western diamondback
rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox), Blanchard’s cricket frog (Acris crepitans), diamondback water snake
(Nerodia rhombifer), and Houston toad (Bufo houstonensis).
Common bird species include northern bobwhite (Colinus virginianus), eastern
meadowlark (Sturnella magna), mourning dove (Zenaida macroura), killdeer (Charadrius
vociferus), field sparrow (Spizella pusilla), red-tailed hawk (Buteo jamaicensis), turkey vulture
(Cathartes aura), belted kingfisher (Ceyrle alcyon), and mockingbird (Mimus polyglottos).
Small herds of bison and antelope were common during the late prehistoric and early
historic periods, but these species are no longer native to this region (Jurney et al. 1989:13-14).

12

190132_arch_survey_report

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located along the southeastern margin of Prewitt’s (1981, 1985)
Central Texas Archeological Region. The indigenous human inhabitants of Central Texas
practiced a generally nomadic hunting and gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory, and, in
contrast to much of the rest of North America, mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to
have changed markedly through time in this region.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (CA. 12,000 TO 8500 B.P.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 12,000 B.P. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists have historically discounted claims of much earlier human
occupation during the Pleistocene glacial period. However, recent investigations of the Buttermilk
Creek Complex in Bell County, Texas, have raised the possibility that a pre-Clovis culture may
have been present in North America as early as 15,500 years ago (Waters et al. 2011).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Central Texas is represented by
the PaleoIndian period (12,000 to 8500 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This stage coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various periods
within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted, lanceolate
projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end scrapers, gravers, and
bone foreshafts. PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian
bands consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and
settlement pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Central
Texas are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the
exploitation of plants, small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There
is little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented
elsewhere in North America. Rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been
practiced throughout all prehistoric time periods. In Central Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is
divided into two periods based on recognizable differences in projectile point styles. These

H042-190132

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

include the Early PaleoIndian period, which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile points
(i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian period, which
is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview, Scottsbluff, Meserve, and
Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (CA. 8500 TO 1200 B.P.)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend marks the beginning of the Archaic period
(8500 to 1200 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant
reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Central Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding
decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Central Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture shows
greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of groundstone
technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
Changes in projectile point morphology are often used as markers differentiating these
3 subperiods, though other changes in material culture occurred as well. Perhaps most markedly,
burned rock middens appear during the Middle Archaic subperiod, continuing into the Late
Archaic subperiod, and large cemeteries appear during the Late Archaic subperiod. In addition,
the increasing density of prehistoric sites through time is often considered to constitute evidence
of population growth, though differential preservation probably at least partially accounts for the
lower numbers of older sites.

3.3

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1200 TO 350 B.P.)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (1200 to 350 B.P.) (Collins 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. In Central Texas, pottery also appears during the Late
Prehistoric period (though ceramics appear earlier in Southeast Texas). Use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion of Southeast Texas along with the bow and
arrow through the Late Prehistoric period (Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In Texas, unifacial
arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. The Late
Prehistoric period is generally divided into two phases, the Austin and Toyah phases. Austin
phase sites occur earliest to the north, which has led some researchers (e.g., Prewitt 1985) to
suggest that the Austin-phase populations of Central Texas were migrants from the north and
lack the ceramic industry of the later Toyah phase.

3.4

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 350 B.P. TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas occurred in 1519, when
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Cabeza de Vaca

14

190132_arch_survey_report

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay;
however, de Vaca did not approach the Colorado River basin. It was not until 1691, when
Domingo Terán de los Ríos led an expedition along the route that became known as the Camino
Real, that exploration of this region began.
In the late 17th century, natives from northern Mexico and southern Texas began
migrating into Central Texas to escape forced occupation and labor in the Spanish mines and
missions and on Spanish ranches. At approximately the same time, horses stolen from the
Spanish had become an integral part of the Apache way of life. These mounted, nomadic bison
hunters of the High Plains enjoyed a tremendous advantage over their pedestrian enemies. They
terrorized native groups to the east and southeast of their High Plains homeland, forcing many to
flee, some into Central Texas (Newcomb 1993:2). Thus, the first Europeans into the region
encountered native groups fragmented by the growth of the Spanish missions, the raids of the
Apache, and the diseases that swept before the physical presence of Europeans. Their accounts,
therefore, do not provide direct analogues to prehistoric cultural patterns, but rather represent a
time of drastic cultural change (Collins 1995). A few indigenous cultural patterns may have
prevailed through time. Large, diffuse encampments composed of peoples with mixed ethnic
affiliations and small, band-sized residential camps date to this particular period in Central Texas
(Collins 1995:386). The smaller sites may represent indigenous groups.
Historical documents dating from the 1730s to 1800 make reference to remnants of native
groups living in the missions, primarily in Bexar County (Collins 1995). Toward the end of this
time, the Comanche began to move into Northwestern Texas from the high plains. Records of
their presence in Central Texas at this time tend to be highly biased since they are provided mostly
from the hostile perspective of Anglo settlers (Collins 1995). Prior to European settlement, Lipan
Apaches and Tonkawa Indians inhabited part of what is now Fayette County.
During the early part of the 19th century, the Native American presence in Central Texas
was composed of small numbers of mission Indians, “far flung nomadic native groups (primarily
the Comanche)” (Collins 1995:387), with EuroAmerican settlers becoming increasingly common.
The Comanche presence began fading in the mid- to late 19th century. Their final expulsion
heralded the end of Native American presence in Central Texas.
The Fayette County area was part of Stephen F. Austin's first colony, but the earliest
known white settlers, Aylett C. Buckner and Peter Powell, arrived earlier and lived on La Bahía
Road west of La Grange, where they ran a trading post.1 Formal settlement began in 1822 with
the arrival of the Austin colonists. From 1824 to 1828, 10 members of the Old Three Hundred
received title to their land grants in the fertile Colorado River valley. William Rabb received four
leagues in order to build a mill. A total of 92 Mexican land grants were granted in the area that is
now Fayette County. The earliest settlers gathered at Wood’s Fort, Moore’s Fort (La Grange),
James Ross home, and Jesse Burnam’s blockhouse located 19.3 kilometers (12.0 miles) below
La Grange. Burnam’s Ferry on the Colorado River provided a cutoff route from La Bahía Road
to San Felipe. Prior to Texas independence, the area above La Bahía Road was in the Mina

1

The following history of Hays County has been adapted from TSHA (2019).

H042-190132

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Municipality and the area below in the Municipality of Colorado. Gotier’s Trace, the Wilbarger
Trace, and the La Grange-San Felipe road intersected La Bahía Road. Ferries were used to
cross the Colorado River until the first bridge was built at La Grange by private subscription in
1883. On December 14, 1837, upon petition of the citizens, the Congress of the Republic of
Texas established the county of Fayette, named in honor of the Marquis de Lafayette. La Grange,
the name of the chateau to which Lafayette retired, was designated as the county seat. The
citizens organized the county government on January 18, 1838, and the southwestern boundary
of the county was extended westward on May 3, 1838. The county lost territory in the south to
Lavaca County in 1854 and in the north to Lee County in 1874.
The early settlers’ life revolved around their plantations, but problems with Indians
occupied much of their time. Sometimes the settlers felt so threatened that they moved down to
the lower Colorado River area. At other times, they grouped together, sometimes aided by Lipan
Apache and Tonkawa Indians who were friendly to the settlers, to resist marauding bands of
Comanches, Wacos, and Kichais. Fayette County men were prominent in the Texas Revolution;
more than 50 men participated in the Battle of San Jacinto, including Joel W. Robison, one of the
captors of Antonio López de Santa Anna. The Somervell, Mier, and Dawson expeditions were
composed mostly of Fayette County men. In 1848, the remains of the men killed in the Dawson
Massacre and in Perote Prison were returned to Fayette County and interred on Monument Hill;
in 1933, a granite tomb was dedicated there. The historic Muster Oak, still standing on the square,
has been a rallying site since the early settlement. William Menefee, a signer of the Texas
Declaration of Independence, was from Fayette County. A proposal to permanently locate the
state capital in Fayette County was approved on April 11, 1838, by an overwhelming majority of
the Second Congress. Local citizens arranged for the purchase of the Eblin league on the east
side of the Colorado River near La Grange, reserving all vacant lands within a nine-mile radius.
The measure was vetoed by Sam Houston, however, and the capital was located upriver in what
later became Austin.
The first private schools opened in the county as early as 1834. Academies and institutes
were operated in La Grange, Fayetteville, and Round Top in the 1840s. The Methodists founded
Rutersville College, one of the first colleges in Texas, in 1840; it consolidated with the Texas
Military Institute, Galveston, in 1856. The earliest churches organized in the county were
Methodist (1838), Baptist (1839), Presbyterian (1841), and Episcopal (1852). Most of the early
settlers were from the Old South, but the Austin Colony also included a few German immigrants.
In 1832, Joseph Biegel received title to a league in the area and developed the first German
community in the county, the Biegel Settlement. In the 1840s, many more German immigrants
settled in Fayette County. The Adelsverein purchased a league in 1843 and established a
plantation called Nassau Farm. During the mid-1850s, sizable numbers of Bohemian Czechs
also began moving into the county. In 1856, the first Bohemian settlement in Texas, Dubina, was
founded in Fayette County. The county’s population grew rapidly, especially after Texas joined
the Union; by 1850, it had 3,756 residents. During the early years, the economy was based
largely on subsistence farming, but during the late 1840s and 1850s a thriving plantation economy
emerged. In the early 1850s, plantations were producing impressive quantities of corn and
shipping tobacco, wool, and cotton to outside markets. To clear land, harvest crops, and perform
other forms of labor, planters brought in increasing numbers of African-American slaves. Between

16

190132_arch_survey_report

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

1840 and 1850, the slave population grew from 206 to 820, and by 1855 the number had reached
2,072. On the eve of the Civil War, Fayette County was among the most well developed areas in
the state, with nearly 1,000 farms containing 75,463 improved acres. In 1859, farmers produced
12,683 bales of cotton and 320,580 bushels of corn, placing Fayette County among the state’s
leaders in both categories. The population of 11,604 was more than three times what it had been
only a decade before; the number of slaves alone (3,786) in 1860 exceeded the entire population
for 1850. Despite the county’s large slave population, however, voters narrowly rejected
secession by a margin of 46 votes (626 against, 528 for), primarily due to the area’s numerous
German and Bohemian residents, who generally opposed slavery. Despite the result, three
volunteer companies were immediately organized after the war broke out. Before the war’s end
a total of about 800 men had served in the Confederate army.
The Civil War and its aftermath brought profound changes to the county. Although it made
only a small material contribution to the war effort, the lack of markets and wild fluctuations in
Confederate currency caused hardships for many. The end of the war brought wrenching
changes in the economy. For many whites, the abolition of slavery meant devastating economic
loss. Before the war, slaves had constituted more than a third of all taxable property in the county,
and their loss, coupled with a sharp decline in property values, caused a profound disruption for
most planters. The county’s African Americans fared no better. Although most of the county’s
black residents remained, many left the farms owned by their former masters to seek better
working conditions. For the vast majority, the change brought only marginal improvement in their
living and working conditions; most ended up working on the land on shares, receiving one-third
or one-half of the crop for their labors.
During Reconstruction, Fayette County received little attention from federal political or
military authorities. Federal troops were stationed there only briefly, and there was little of the
violence that many other areas experienced. The economy began to recover in the late 1860s,
and by 1870 production levels neared or exceeded the 1860 figures. During the next three
decades, the county experienced a long period of growth, fueled in large measure by a surge of
new German and Slavic residents. Many of the early plantation owners, hard-pressed to make
ends meet without their slaves, sold their lands to German, Bohemian, or Wendish settlers, who
in turn sold portions of it to others. As a result, the large plantations that had dominated
antebellum Texas were gradually replaced by smaller, more numerous farms. This trend is
reflected in the agricultural census of the late 20th century, which shows the number of farms
increasing from 1,483 in 1870 to 5,189 in 1900. The number of acres under cultivation also grew
dramatically during this period, rising from 76,401 to 287,853. Although the new farms were
smaller, they tended to be much more productive because of intensive cultivation by the Germans
and Bohemians. Most of these small farmers grew cabbages, tomatoes, potatoes, beans, peas,
turnips, and peaches, but the leading cash crops remained cotton and corn. In 1880, farmers
produced 24,766 bales of cotton and 694,833 bushels of corn; by 1890 cotton output had grown
to 37,559 bales, and corn production topped 912,000 bushels.
The influx of Germans, Czechs, and Wends after the Civil War also gradually altered the
cultural face of the county. Although some of the new settlers moved in from other counties,
including most of the Wends, many of the settlers were new immigrants who brought their own

H042-190132

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

distinct culture with them. The tide of immigration was particularly strong in the 1880s as
numerous additional German and Bohemian settlers arrived. By 1890, nearly one-fourth of the
county’s residents (7,856 of 31,481) were foreign-born, with the largest contingents from Germany
(3,667) and Austria-Hungary (3,224). As a result, by the late 20th century many of the leading
businesses and civic organizations were dominated by Germans and Czechs. During the late
19th and early 20th centuries La Grange had two foreign-language newspapers, the Svoboda
(Czech) and the La Grange Zeitung (German). The Germans and Czechs formed shooting clubs,
poetry groups, and fraternal and religious organizations. The KJT (Czech Catholic Union), the
SPJST (a Czech benevolent society), and the Round Top Rifle Association, founded in the
19th century, still existed in the early 1990s. Public education in the late 19th and early
20th centuries was supplemented by private and parochial schools, which were often taught in
German and Czech. Despite the increasing number of white residents, African Americans
continued to form a large segment of the population. In 1870, the black population was 5,901,
and as late as 1900 blacks still represented about one-third of the population. In spite of these
numbers, however, African Americans had little political power. While Fayette County citizens
rejected the white primary, largely due to German and populist sentiment against it, AfricanAmerican voters were often excluded from voting and had little say in the local political structure.
During the early decades of the 20th century, Fayette County continued to grow and
prosper. Corn remained an important crop, with cattle and dairy products also providing
significant sources of income. However, it was cotton that emerged as the single largest cash
crop. Cotton production averaged more than 30,000 bales annually between 1900 and 1930, and
by 1929 more than half of all of the cropland (118,256 of 196,847 acres) was devoted to cotton.
The growth of cotton in turn fueled a steady rise in farm tenancy. By 1920, nearly half of all
farmers (2,195 of 4,728) were tenants. During the years of the Great Depression, when nearly
all farmers suffered, these tenants found themselves particularly hard pressed. Overproduction,
droughts, and boll weevil infestations combined to drive down prices and reduce the crop size.
Between 1930 and 1940, the amount of land planted in cotton fell by more than 50% (from
118,858 to 50,858 acres), and production was barely a third of what had been during the peak
years of the 1920s. After World War II, the agricultural emphasis changed. Cotton continued to
be grown on a much smaller scale through the early 1950s, but farmers also turned increasingly
to cattle raising. By 1987, there were 2,235 milk cows and 110,511 head of cattle in the county,
and cotton was no longer being grown. Due to rich soils and abundant surface and groundwater,
Fayette County remains an important agricultural county. In the late 1980s, it ranked among the
top three counties in the state in cow and calf production. In 1989, there were 2,476 producers.
Leading crops included corn, grain sorghums, peanuts, and pecans. The estimated gross
agricultural income for 1988 was $42,427,000—beef cattle 57%, grain 10%, poultry (eggs) 8%,
swine 8%, hay 8%, dairy products 7%, pecans 1%, and miscellaneous 1%. Of the 2,750 farm
operators, about half held additional jobs.
During the 1980s and 1990s, the economic development of the county was largely
dependent on its natural resources. Construction gravel and sand, grinding pebbles, clays, and
fuller’s earth were mined. Oil, first discovered in 1943, was an important source of income. Due
to new horizontal drilling techniques, Fayette County experienced a dramatic rise in oil and gas
production in the early 1990s. As a highly active part of the Giddings oilfield of the Austin Chalk

18

190132_arch_survey_report

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

trend, the county produced 14,044,733 barrels of oil and 72,469,984 million cubic feet of gas in
1992. Timber is selectively cut for commercial purposes from 28,200 acres of privately owned
woodlands. Agribusiness plays a major role in the economy. Light industry includes shops, a
cabinet factory, plastic recycling, gas processing, and other manufacturing. The Lower Colorado
River Authority’s Fayette Power Project is the largest employer in the county, with around 500
workers. Other sources of employment are banking, services, retail sales, trucking, government,
schools, and drilling and pipeline management.

H042-190132

19

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed the THC’s online Texas
Archeological Sites Atlas (TASA), the National Park Service’s (NPS) online National Register
Information System (NRIS), the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory’s (TARL) files, and the
Texas State Historical Association’s (TSHA) The Handbook of Texas Online for information on
previously recorded cultural resources sites and previous archeological investigations conducted
within a 1.6-kilometer (1.0-mile) radius of the project area. The archival research indicated the
presence of one previously recorded archeological site, 41FY29, located south of the project area.
No cemeteries or historic properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) are
present within or in the vicinity of the project area (THC 2019) (Table 2; Figure 5).
No prior cultural resources surveys have been conducted within the project area.

Table 2. Summary of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area

Site
No./Name

Site Type

NRHP/SAL
Eligibility Status1

Distance/Direction
from Project Area

Potential to
be Impacted
by Project?

Undetermined

0.4 mile southeast

No

Archeological Sites
41FY29

Aboriginal campsite
(undetermined
prehistoric)

1

Determined eligible/ineligible = Site determined eligible/ineligible by SHPO
Recommended eligible/eligible = Site recommended as eligible/ineligible by site recorder and/or sponsoring
agency but eligibility has not been determined by SHPO
Undetermined = Eligibility not assessed or no information available
NRHP National Register of Historic Places
SAL State Antiquities Landmark
SHPO State Historic Preservation Office

H042-190132

21

Chapter 4.0: Archival Research

Figure 5. Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area

22

190132_arch_survey_report

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

5.0 SURVEY METHODOLOGY

On June 20, 2019, Horizon archeological technician Jared Wiersema, under the overall
direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resources
survey of the project area to locate any cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by
the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s archeologist traversed the project area and thoroughly
inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. Krenek
Road is an improved, two-lane gravel road that runs within a narrow existing ROW lined with
narrow shoulders covered in short grasses. Prior disturbances from construction, use, and
ongoing maintenance of the existing roadway and bridge were observed within the project area.
In addition, the narrow southeastern side of the existing Krenek Road ROW has a subsurface
fiber optic line running within it, and a gas pipeline crosses the project area west of Pettys Creek
(Figures 6 to 11).
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of three subsurface probes per 0.4 hectares (1.0 acre)
for project areas less than 1.2 hectares (3.0 acres) in size; as such, one subsurface probe would
be required within the 0.2-hectare (0.4-acre) project area (Figure 12). Horizon exceeded the
TSMASS by excavating a total of two backhoe trenches within the project area. The two backhoe
trenches were excavated within the northern side of the Krenek Road ROW, including one on the
northeastern side of Pettys Creek and one on the southwestern side of the creek. It was not
possible to excavate any trenches on the southeastern side of the road due to the very narrow
road shoulder, which measures only a few feet in width, and the presence of a subsurface fiber
optic line in this area.
Backhoe trenches were excavated using a standard-sized backhoe with a 0.6-meter- (2.0foot-) wide bucket with a flat-edged cleanout to the lesser of a target depth of 3.0 meters
(10.0 feet) below surface, deposits that substantially pre-date the Holocene, deposits that
represent facies beneath which archeological potential is minimal, or to a natural obstruction
preventing further excavation, such as the water table or impenetrable soils, gravels, or bedrock.
In practice, trenches measured 6.0 meters (19.7 feet) in length and were excavated to depths
ranging from 2.2 to 2.8 meters (7.2 to 9.2 feet) below surface. During trench excavations, soil
“lifts” (i.e., thin, subhorizontal layers) measuring approximately 10.0 centimeters (3.9 inches) in
thickness were removed from across the entire trench, and the emerging trench walls and floor
were thoroughly inspected for evidence of artifacts, cultural features, or anomalous soil horizons
that may suggest the presence of buried land horizons potentially associated with prehistoric

H042-190132

23

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 6. Overview of Krenek Road Bridge (Facing East-Northeast)

Figure 7. View of Pettys Creek South of Krenek Road Bridge (Facing East)

24

190132_arch_survey_report

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

Figure 8. View of Pettys Creek North of Krenek Road Bridge (Facing North)

Figure 9. View of Erosion along Pettys Creek Bank North of Bridge (Facing North)

H042-190132

25

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 10. Southeastern Side of Krenek Road with Fiber Optic Line (Facing Southwest)

Figure 11. Gas Pipeline Crossing of Krenek Road West of Bridge (South)
26

190132_arch_survey_report

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

Figure 12. Locations of Backhoe Trenches within Project Area

H042-190132

27

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

cultural occupations. A sample of backfill removed from each trench was screened through 6.35millimeter (0.25-inch) hardware cloth during trench excavation. A minimum of one 5.0-gallon
bucket from every third backhoe bucket load was screened, though all backfill from selected soil
horizons was screened if the potential for subsurface archeological deposits was judged to be
high. Following completion of each trench excavation, a 1.0-meter- (3.3-foot-) wide section of
one trench wall was scraped down with a flat-bladed shovel to expose a clear stratigraphic profile
for inspection and photography. A standard backhoe trenching form was completed for each
trench detailing soil characteristics, stratigraphy, and the presence or absence of cultural
materials. Color digital photographs were taken of each trench and profile exposure. After
recording was completed, each trench was immediately backfilled and the ground surface was
restored as closely as possible to its original condition. At no time was an open trench left
unattended. The Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates of all backhoe trenches were
determined using hand-held Garmin ForeTrex global positioning system (GPS) devices based on
the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83). Specific backhoe trench data are presented in
Appendix A.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken, and a photographic log
was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources. Diagnostic
artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and nondiagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were to be
described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same location in
which they were found.
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project area as defined in 36 CFR
800.3.

28

190132_arch_survey_report

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

6.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

On June 20, 2019, Horizon archeological technician Jared Wiersema, under the overall
direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resources
survey of the project area to locate any cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by
the proposed undertaking. The survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8966.
Horizon’s archeologist traversed the project area and thoroughly inspected the modern ground
surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. Krenek Road is an improved, two-lane
gravel road that runs within a narrow existing ROW lined with narrow shoulders covered in short
grasses. Prior disturbances from construction, use, and ongoing maintenance of the existing
roadway and bridge were observed within the project area. In addition, the narrow southeastern
side of the existing Krenek Road ROW has a subsurface fiber optic line running within it, and a
gas pipeline crosses the project area west of Pettys Creek.
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the TSMASS require a minimum of three subsurface
probes per 0.4 hectares (1.0 acre) for project areas less than 1.2 hectares (3.0 acres) in size; as
such, one subsurface probe would be required within the 0.2-hectare (0.4-acre) project area.
Horizon exceeded the TSMASS by excavating a total of two backhoe trenches within the project
area. The two backhoe trenches were excavated within the northern side of the Krenek Road
ROW, including one on the northeastern side of Pettys Creek and one on the southwestern side
of the creek. It was not possible to excavate any trenches on the southeastern side of the road
due to the very narrow road shoulder, which measures only a few feet in width, and the presence
of a subsurface fiber optic line in this area. Modern trash was abundant within the upper 30.0 to
50.0 centimeters (11.8 to 19.7 inches) of sediments, and disturbed sediments may extend as
deep as 1.0 meter (3.2 feet) below surface in some areas. Natural sediments underlying the
disturbed surface horizons consisted of reddish-brown clay loam, sand, and loamy clay extending
to depths of 2.2 to 2.8 meters (7.2 to 9.2 feet) below surface.
No cultural resources, historic-age or prehistoric, were observed within the project area
during the survey.

H042-190132

29

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

7.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with three
primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP and for designation as SALs.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the project area and to make preliminary determinations of whether or
not the resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
properties are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with important
historic events and/or personages. Under the NHPA and the Antiquities Code of Texas,
archeological resources are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the
significance of archeological resources for inclusion in the NRHP and for designation as SALs,
respectively.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory process.

H042-190132

31

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

7.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The four criteria of eligibility are applied following the identification of
relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or
history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant. This
concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures, districts,
or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent research
questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by three requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least one of the four criteria for eligibility listed
above, and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As
discussed here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory
and history according to various periods of development in various times and at various places.
Thus, the significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic
development and the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular
period of development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP
under Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding
of prehistory. All four criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought
to bear for historic sites.

32

190132_arch_survey_report

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

7.3

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ANTIQUITIES LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are located
in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any county,
city, or political subdivision of the state are state antiquities landmarks and are eligible for
designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
building, structure, cultural landscape, or non-archeological site, object, or district as an SAL if it
meets at least one of following criteria:
A. [T]he property is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history, including importance to a particular cultural or ethnic
group;
B. [T]he property is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. [T]he property embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, represents the work of a master, possesses high artistic values, or
represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction;
D. [T]he property has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in Texas
culture or history.

H042-190132

33

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

Furthermore, the THC may designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets
one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

7.4

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

On June 20, 2019, Horizon archeological technician Jared Wiersema, under the overall
direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resources
survey of the project area to locate any cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by
the proposed undertaking. The survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8966.
Horizon’s archeologist traversed the project area and thoroughly inspected the modern ground
surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. Krenek Road is an improved, two-lane
gravel road that runs within a narrow existing ROW lined with narrow shoulders covered in short
grasses. Prior disturbances from construction, use, and ongoing maintenance of the existing
roadway and bridge were observed within the project area. In addition, the narrow southeastern
side of the existing Krenek Road ROW has a subsurface fiber optic line running within it, and a
gas pipeline crosses the project area west of Pettys Creek.
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the TSMASS require a minimum of three subsurface
probes per 0.4 hectares (1.0 acre) for project areas less than 1.2 hectares (3.0 acres) in size; as
such, one subsurface probe would be required within the 0.2-hectare (0.4-acre) project area.
Horizon exceeded the TSMASS by excavating a total of two backhoe trenches within the project
area. The two backhoe trenches were excavated within the northern side of the Krenek Road
ROW, including one on the northeastern side of Pettys Creek and one on the southwestern side
of the creek. It was not possible to excavate any trenches on the southeastern side of the road
due to the very narrow road shoulder, which measures only a few feet in width, and the presence
of a subsurface fiber optic line in this area. Modern trash was abundant within the upper 30.0 to
50.0 centimeters (11.8 to 19.7 inches) of sediments, and disturbed sediments may extend as
deep as 1.0 meter (3.2 feet) below surface in some areas. Natural sediments underlying the
disturbed surface horizons consisted of reddish-brown clay loam, sand, and loamy clay extending
to depths of 2.2 to 2.8 meters (7.2 to 9.2 feet) below surface.

34

190132_arch_survey_report

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

No cultural resources, historic-age or prehistoric, were observed within the project area
during the survey.

7.5

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26 or for inclusion in the NRHP according
to 36 CFR 60.4. Horizon recommends a finding of “no historic properties affected,” and no further
archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking. However,
human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are protected under the Texas Health and Safety
Code. In the event that any human remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered at any
point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously
surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent discovery,
and the THC should be notified immediately.

H042-190132

35

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

8.0 REFERENCES CITED

Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bomar, G.W.
1983
Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Carr, J.T.
1967
Climate and Physiography of Texas. Texas Water Development Board, Report No. 53,
Austin.
Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dice, L.R.
1943
The Biotic Provinces of North America. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.

H042-190132

37

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI)
2019
Digital orthographic photography sourced by ESRI for ArcGIS Online. <arcgis.com>.
Accessed June 26, 2019.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Jurney, D.H., F. Winchell, and R.W. Moir
1989
Cultural Resources Overview of the National Grasslands in North Texas: Studies in
Predictive Archaeological Modeling for the Caddo and LBJ Grasslands. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas. Submitted to the US Forest Service, Lufkin, Texas.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country: Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility. American Antiquity
53:231-244.
Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas. Publication LP-192. Texas Department of Water Resources,
Austin.
Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2019
Web Soil Survey, <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed June 26, 2016. US Department of Agriculture.
Newcomb, W.W.
1993
Historic Indians of Central Texas.
64.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:1-

Open Street Map (OSM)
2019
OpenStreetMap. < http://www.openstreetmap .org>. Available under the Open
Database License: <www.opendatacommons.org/licenses/odbl>. Accessed June 26,
2019.

38

190132_arch_survey_report

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. In Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 53:201-238.

Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2019
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas Restricted Database.
state.tx.us/>. Accessed June 19, 2019.

<https://www.atlas.thc.

Texas State Historical Association (TSHA)
2019
Fayette County. The Handbook of Texas Online: A Digital Gateway to Texas History.
<https://tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/hcf03>. Accessed June 26, 2019.
US Geological Survey (USGS)
1981
7.5-minute series topographic maps, Ellinger, Texas, quadrangle.
2019

Texas Geology Web Map Viewer. <https://txpub.usgs.gov/txgeology/>. Accessed
June 27, 2019.

Waters, M.R., S.L. Forman, T.A. Jennings, L.C. Nordt, S.G. Driese, J.M. Feinberg, J.L. Keene, J.
Halligan, A. Lindquist, J. Pierson, C.T. Hallmark, M.B. Collins, and J.E. Wiederhold
2011
The Buttermilk Creek Complex and the Origins of Clovis at the Debra L. Friedkin Site,
Texas. Science 331:1599-1603.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

H042-190132

39

APPENDIX A:

Backhoe Trench Data

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

Table A-1. Backhoe Trench 1 (BHT-1)
Trench No.:
UTM Coordinates1:
Comment:

BHT-1
719736 E, 3303677 N
BHT-1 was excavated in the northeastern quadrant of the project area (north of
Krenek Road and east of Pettys Creek). The trench was oriented northeast to
southwest, parallel to Krenek Road, and measured 6.0 meters (19.7 feet) in length.
Trench was excavated to a depth of 1.5 meters (5.0 feet) below surface, profiled,
and then excavated to a total depth of 2.8 meters (9.2 feet) below surface.

Zone

Depth
(cmbs)

1

0-40

Fine grayish-brown sandy loam; crumbly, friable structure;
road gravels and modern trash from 30 to 50 cmbs; gradual
lower boundary

None

2

40-80

Fine yellowish-gray sandy clay loam; crumbly, medium
structure; gradual lower boundary

None

3

80-150

Dark grayish-brown loamy clay; crumbly, friable structure; few
roots and gravels; gradual lower boundary

None

4

150-280

Very dark brown loamy clay; massive structure

None

Description

Cultural Materials

cmbs = centimeters below surface
mm = millimeters

Figure A-1. Overview of Partially Excavated BHT-1 (Facing North)

H042-190132

A-1

Appendix A: Backhoe Trench Data

Figure A-2. Profile of BHT-1 at 1.5 Meters Below Surface (Northwest Wall)

Figure A-3. Profile of BHT-1 at 2.8 Meters Below Surface (Northwest Wall)

A-2

190132_arch_survey_report

Cultural Resources Survey for the
Krenek Road Bridge at Pettys Creek Replacement Project, Fayette County, Texas

Table A-2. Backhoe Trench 2 (BHT-2)
Trench No.:
UTM Coordinates1:
Comment:

BHT-2
719664 E, 3303634 N
BHT-1 was excavated in the northwestern quadrant of the project area (north of
Krenek Road and west of Pettys Creek). The trench was oriented northeast to
southwest, parallel to Krenek Road, and measured 6.0 meters (19.7 feet) in length.
Trench was excavated to a depth of 1.5 meters (5.0 feet) below surface, profiled,
and then excavated to a total depth of 2.2 meters (7.2 feet) below surface.

Zone

Depth
(cmbs)

1

0-20

Dark grayish-brown loam; modern trash; abrupt lower
boundary

None

2

20-40

Pale brown clay loam with caliche mottles, small cobbles, few
roots, and modern glass and plastic trash; gradual lower
boundary

None

3

40-100

Reddish-brown clay loam with caliche (road base?); gradual
lower boundary

None

4

100-140

Reddish-brown clay; abrupt lower boundary

None

5

140-220

Reddish-brown sand

None

Description

Cultural Materials

cmbs = centimeters below surface
mm = millimeters

Figure A-4. Overview of BHT-2 (Facing East-Northeast)

H042-190132

A-3

Appendix A: Backhoe Trench Data

Figure A-5. Profile of BHT-2 at 1.5 Meters Below Surface (Northwest Wall)

Figure A-6. Profile of BHT-2 at 2.2 Meters Below Surface (Facing East-Northeast)
A-4

190132_arch_survey_report

