-

•

7"

.,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

THREE RIVERS FLOODWATER DIVERSLON LEVEE PROJECT
ASSESSMENTS AT ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES 41 LK 57, 41 LK 133
AND 41 LK 144
.. ,-'
,

,

Elton R Prewitt
Robert F. Scott, I V

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
The University of Texas at Austin
Technical Bulletin No. 18

1977

.. ......
,

'

.

. .... ":'.,
\.

,t

"

-

. ,.

THREE RIVERS FLOODWATER DIVERSION LEVEE PROJECT:

Assessments at Archeological Sites 41 LX 57, 41 LX 113, and 41 LK 114

.,

,' r.

Elton R. Prewitt
Robert F. Scott, IV

"

,

,

A Report to the Fort Worth District,
Corps of Engineers in fulfillment of
Purchase Order DACW63-77-M-065l

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
.June, 1971

.. ., ...
,
.

,

...

,:~

~~

.. . '

+.'

,t

4

.'

-

INTRODUCTION

..:-­

.,

.
During the week of 31 May to 3 June 1977 the Texas Archeological Survey
conducted assessments of the information yield potential at three archeological
sites to be affected by the proposed construction of a floodwater diversion
levee in the Frio River flood plain near Three Rivers in Live Oak County, Texas.
Five aSpects of investigation were pursued during the course of the assessments:
(1) surface inspection to confirm relationship of overall site configuration to
the proposed construction project; (2) controlled test pits to determine types
and quantity of debris present at each site; (3) unscreened shovel tests to
determine lateral extent of any subsurface deposits; (4) backhoe trenching to
determine the presence or absence of deeply buried deposits; and (5) inspection
of available private collections of artifacts reported from any of the subject
sites.
Assessments at the three sites were conducted at the request of the Fort
Worth District, Army Corps of Engineers. This work is a continuation of the
studies of alternate route possibilities for the proposed constructi~n of a
floodwater diversion levee. Subsequent to the archeological survey of the
original levee alignment (Mallouf 1975) a se~ond survey was made of alternate
alignments (Mallouf 1977). The three sites assessed in the pr.esent report are
described in the reports by Mal10uf and are not repeated here •

.

I

The field crew under the direction of Elto~ R. Prewitt (Senior Staff
Archeologist, Texas Archeological Survey) included: Robert F. Scott, IV,
assistant archeologist in charge of day-to-day.operations; Roxanne Briston,
Carol Knolle, and Dan Potter, crew members; and Harold L. Beall, equipment
operator. David S. Dibble, Director of the Texas Archeological Survey was
Principal Investigator. All artifacts collected were bagged and labelled
appropriately. Verbal notes, measured profile sketches, rough plat sketches,
and photographs were made as needed during the assessment; these data have
been placed in the files of the Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
_Texas at Austin. Access permission was secured from the landowners or lessees.
These landowners and 1esses--the Matthijetz brothers, Mr. Schultz, and Mr.
Weiding--are thanked for their gracious cooperation •. The Spacek family gen­
erously allowed the field party to view and photograph a collection of artifacts
made at site 41 LK 57; they are thanked for their kind assistance.

WORK ACCOMPLISHED
41 LK 57

Controlled test pits:
·Shovel tests:

1 (1 x I m.)

3 (50 x 50 cm.)

1

..

-'

3
Backhoe trenches:

3 (approximately 2.0 x 1.2 ~. deep average) .

-

. ,.

•t

Stratigraphy: With the minor exception of one area where the plow zone
is indistinct, the stratigraphy at this site is reasonably uniform. In
descending order of depth, the zones encountered consist of a sandy clay· loam
plow zone about 15-20 em. thick underlain by dense clay loam about 35-45 cm.
thick. , This is in turn underlain by a massive sandy clay stratum of undeter­
mined thickness.
Remarks: As at 41 LK 57 the artifacts were generally contained within
the plow zone or were exposed on the surface. The few specimens noted below
the plow zone may be attributed to physical displacement caused by vertical
cracking in the high shrink/swell clay soil.
Artifacts/Debris observed: The debris noted on the surface of this site
essentially duplicates that observed at 41 LK 57. One utilized flake, 4 bi­
face fragments, 1 gouge, and 2 unidentified dart point bases:were collected.
In addition, historic glass sherds were noted (4 were collected). Practically
no debris occurred below the surface in the excavated units, and 15 of the 22 ,
objects collected were recovered from the plow zone. Three backhoe trenches
failed to expose evidence of identifiable subsurface cultural features.

-.

.-_ .......
,

II

41 LK 114
Controlled test pits:
Shovel tests:

2 (50 x 50 cm.)

Backhoe Trenches:
Stratigraphy:

1 (1 x 1 ma)

None

The unconsolidated sand at this site differs markedly from

41 LK 57 and 41 LK 113. The vertical profile (in descending order) consists

of a plow zone generally 10-12 em. thick composed of loose sandy loam which is
underlain by unaffected sandy loam 5-10 cm. thick. This in turn is underlain
by compact sandy clay loam about 10-15 cm. thick and which overlies denser
sandy clay loam. On the downslope side of the site (west-toward the flood
plain) the clay loam had not been encountered when the test was abandoned at a
depth of 50 cm. below surface.
Remarks: Unlike sites 41 LK 57 and 41'LK 113, this site contains reason­
able quantities of debris below the plow zone and hence may represent relative
integrity of the cultural deposits.
Artifacts/Debris observed: Numerous burned rocks, scattered flakes, and
occasional mussel shell fragments were noted on the surface of this site. It
essentially duplicates the type of debris noted at 41 LK 57 and 41 LK 113; how­
ever; the quantity of debris at 41 LK 114 is Significantly greater. Over 150
flakes and numerous burned rocks were recovered from the control test pit (no
surface collections were made). Shovel Test 1, near the top of the hill where
the levee will be anchored, yielded about 100 flint flakes, 1 utilized flake
about 100 mussel shell fragments, and numerous burned rocks. Shovel Test 2

-"
. "....
,

Ii

.

u. s.e

(4

~---_ _-

........- -_ _ _...._ .

-~---~-~-..,.--

'.

u u.

4
was placed on the slope of the hill near the edge of the site; the artifact
yield was significantly lower with only about 20 flint flakes and a few
burned rocks appearing.

ASSESSMENTS
41 LK 57
The paucity of cultural debris, the apparent history of surface deflation,
agricultural modification, and the lack of intact cultural deposits within the
levee alignment at this site suggests that no further archeolozical investi­
gations are warranted at 41 LK 57. This site does not, in our opinion, meet
the eligibility requirements for nomination to the National ~egister of Historic
Places.
"

.

41 LK 113

~

The thinly scattered nature of the debris and the agricultural disruption
of the artifact bearing deposits suggests that.:the levee alignment will not
conflict with cultural resources of significant data-yield potential at this
site. 41 LK 113 does not meet the eligibility requirements for nomination to
the National Register: of Historic Places·•
. 41 LK 114
The depth, quantity, and restricted horizontal distribution of artifacts
and debris at this site suggest that significant information may be contained
within the archeological deposits. It is suggested that controlled sampling
of the archeological materials are warranted prior to project construction.
Site 41 LK 114 is assessed to meet eligibility requirements for nomination to
the National Register of Historic Places.

REFERENCES CITED

Mallouf, Michael G.
1975 Three Rivers Flood Protection Project, Live Oak County, Texas:
An Archeological and Historical Survey of Areas Proposed for
MOdification. Report submitted to the Fort Worth District, Corps
of Engineers by the Texas Archeological Survey in fulfillment of
Purchase Order DACW63-76-M-02l7.
'1977

Additi~nal

Archeological Survey in Areas to be Affected by the
Three Rivers Flood Protection Project, Live Oak County, Texas.
Report submitted to the Fort Worth District, Corps of Engineers
by the Texas Archeological Survey in fulfillment of Purchase
Order DACW63-77-M-0547.

..
$

e

~---

-"

,

