THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcom's Research Center
10,100 Bt.rmll Road

A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND
ASSESSMENT OF THE TEXACO-SUNEDCO
HOBSON URANIUM PROSPECT
Karnes County, Texas

Technical BuLLetin 51

Bruce A. Nightengale
Leland C. B.ement

Pr inc i pal

I n yes ti gat 0 r Day;' d S. Di b b1 e

A report submitted to Texaco, Inc. of Denver, Colorado
in partial fulfillment of Miscellaneous Work Agr2ement CERD-18

April. 1982

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction . . . . . . .
Environmental Setting
Archeological Background .
Methods . . . . . . . .
Results and Conclusions
Append; x I . . . . . . . .

1
1

. . . .

5

8
9

12

List of Figures

Figure I .

;

Figure II

4

Fi gure II I

13

".
LEGEND

Location of Study<~ea

INTRODUCTION
From t~e 13th through the 17th of July, 1981, the Texas
Archeological Survey eTAS), The University of Texas at Austin,
conducted a cultural resource survey and assessment of the
proposed Texaco-Sunedco Hobson Uranium Project near Falls City,
in Karnes County, Texas. This was accomplished in conjunction
with an environmental stUdy conducted by Camp Dresser and McKee?
Inc. for Texaco-Sunedco. Eight-hundred and forty-five acres
were intensively surveyed by TAS staff members Bruce A.
Nightengale and Leland C. Bement. David S. Dibble, TAS
Director, served as principal investigator.
The objectives of this survey were to:
1) locate and describe ~ny prehistoric or historic
cultural resources which might exist within the study
area;
2) evaluate the archeological and historical potential
of these resources;
3) recommend to the sponsor means to circumvent any
disturbance to, or destruction of, the identified
cultural resources; and
4) recommend further evaluation and interpretation of
significant resources which may be beyond the scope of
this study.
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The study area is located in the northwestern part of
Karnes County, South Texas (Fig. I). The area is situated on the
Rio Grande Plain, which is a part of Fennemants (1938) West Gulf
Coastal Plain Province. The Kisatchie-Oakville Escarpment,
the fourth escarpment of the plain, lies just to the south of
the study area. Geologic formations occurring within the area

-2­

are the Jackson Group and the Catahoula Formation (Bureau of
Economic Geology 1~76). The underlying Jackson Group, of
Eocene age, is generally composed of shallow water marine and
beach deposits - medium and fine grained, thin-bedded sand,
argillaceous and tuffaceous clays and tuffs, and lentils of
coarse, rounded and poltshed sand grains. Overlying this
formation is the Catanoula, of Miocene age. which is
made up of tuffaceous clays, sandstone, tuff, and conglomerate
beds of chert, chalcedony, opal and quartzite (Sellards et at
1978: 678). Scattered pieces of tuffaceous stone over the
surface of certain parts of the study area can be attributed
to the upper zone of the Catahoula. This is especially
apparent in the central and northern sectors, where intermittent
drainages have deeply incised the surface, Also noticeable
on the surface are small quantities of ch~rt cobbles and petri­
fied wood.
Topographically the study area has minimal relief ­
elevations range from 370 t AMSL along drainages to 440 l AMSL
in the uplands. The area is cut by five intermittent drainages;
three drain the northern and central sectors and two the
central and southern portions. These streams have cut deeply
into the upper zone of the Catahoula, as have the noticeable
rills which haye begun to disect this formation in and around
the drainages. In areas of minimal ground cover, sheet wash
erosion has had a substantial effect on the surface. This is
particularly apparent on slopes along the drainages. The major
drainage in this part of Karnes County, the San Antonio River,
is located approximately 4 km. northwest of the study area.
Most of the more extensive prehistoriC sites have been found
along this drainage.
Soils in the area are of the Monteola-Tordia-Clarevflle
association (Soil Conservation Servtce.1973), which

-3­

is made up of moderately-to-well drained upland soils that have
clayey to loamy surface layers and clayey subsoils. Shovel
probes done by the field crew revealed 5 to 1Q em. of loamy
elay over clay in upland areas of the northern sector and 5 to
30 em. of mixed tuffaceous stone and loamy clay over clay on the
slopes and terraces of the tributary draining the eastern portion
of the central sector. Site 41KA82 is located in the area of
t hes e 1ate r pro be s ( Fig. IlL
An assessment of the vegetation in the study area was
carried out by Camp Dresser and McKee, Inc. (198Qt as part of
an environmental baseline study.
As part of the survey
design, the study area was divided tnto a northern, central
and southern sector, each containing varied types of vegetation,
Land modification is evident throughout the study area,
The northern sector, composed of woodland and shrub vegetation,
has been modified by oil production, a pipeline, senderos (paths
cut through the area for better access}, access roads leading
to oil production facilities, and stock tank construction. The
central sector has been modified by oil production faciltles,
cultivation, and quarrying, The latter was observed in the
northeastern part of the central sector. Here the ground has
been excavated to depths of approximately 2 m. oyer an area
roughly 100 m. north-south and 150 m. east-west. The southern
sector has also been modified by cultivation, oil production,
and the pasturing of livestock. About two-thirds of this
sector is now fallow and overgrown, sometimes to shoulder
height, with sunflowers, Johnson grass, broomweed, and sand
burr. Ground Yisibi1ity in these areas is minimal. In the past,
cotton was the main crop; today, sorghum and corn are under
cultivation in the central and southern sectors. All of these
modifications have had an adverse effect on ths cultural
material, from breakage and movement by plowing and on pro­

-----~--

...........----.--..

- -..

--~-~-

-~------

-----­

\

'"'-.

• • • • Process Facility Area
-

•

.::::­

-" I

0

*

Study Area

(

Prehistoric Site

Isolated Find

•
0'
I

- 500
:

1000 fl
!

_ _ _ _ _ _ _-'1 \

~II

----

"­

~ ):1
I

II

/0

('
,

Figure II Topography of Study Area
~

with cultural MaterIal area plotted.

-5­

duction to collection of artifacts by oil industry personnel
and local landowners. These factors, when combined with
natural erosion, can acco~nt for tffe isolation of cultural
material and the amorphous sttes with little or no subsurface
cultural material.
The study area falls within Blairts (1950l Tamaulipan
biotic province. The climate for the provtnce is semiarid and
megathermal. Temperatures in the study area range from 44 0 in
January to 96 0 in July (Be10 Corp. 1979). Thorny brush makes
up the majority of the flora and is predominantly mesquite in
the study area. The fauna of the Tamaulipan province includes
at least sixty-one species of mammals, thirty-six species of
urodeles (amphibians with tails throughout life}, and nineteen
anurans (without tails in adult life) (Blair 1950: 103l. The
field crew observed or saw signs of raccoon, deer, coyote, jack
rabbit, cotton tail, and armadillo, along with red tail hawk,
night hawk, dove, and quail. Undoubtedly, some of these animals
were in the area during prehistoric times and were used as
subsistence items by the aborigines.
ARC~EOLOGICAL

BACKGROUND

For convenience in ordering the archeological remains,
the general chronology of the region has been divided into
four periods.
The Paleoindian Period (9200-6000 B.C.} is usually
considered to be characterized by a subsistence economy based
on the hunting of big-game. On the Rio Grande Plain, the
lifestyle of the Paleoindians is generally assumed to be that
of small roaming groups dependent on generalized hunting and
gathering.
The Archaic Period (6000 B.C. to A.D. 12001 is one of
more diversified nunting and gatnering. The lithic technology

-6­

of the period is almost stagnant with few changes in tool
types (Hester 19761.
The La t e Pre his tor i c Per i 0 d LA. D. 1 200 -1 520) i s d iff e r ­
entiated by the introduction of ths bow and arrow and ceramics.
Along with these new items came a change in lithic technology
including the production of prismatic blades (Patterson 1973).
This new technology gave rise to new tool forms such. as keeled
scrapers and blade tools.
The. HistoriG Period (A.D, 1520 to present) begi'ns with
the first contact with the Spanish. Metal arrow points, trade
beads, and other trade items appear in aboriginal sites. Ethno­
historic accounts tell of tne intrusions of fndian groups from
outside areas during this period (Hester and Kelly 1976).
Ths settlement pattern for the Rio Grande Plain follows
a physiographic patte.rn. During Archaic and Late Prehistoric
times, large village sites were located along permanent water
sources, primarily streams and rivers. These large sites,
often found on the flood plains (Hester 19]61, seem to haye
functioned as base camps from which short expeditions went out
to smaller satellite camps, One class of satellite sites are
quarry areas, found near the gravel outcrops which are often
located along ridges and on hilltops. Also considered in this
category are small upland sites which seem to be the remains
of short term, or perhaps seasonal. camps used by small groups
of hunters or foragers. Often, these sites are near intermittent
streams.
The base camp/satellite camp settlement pattern has been
suggested to accomodate the data thus far collected from the
region around the study area (McGraw 1979). It should be noted,
however, that insufficient research has been done in Karnes
County to adequately test this hypothesized pattern.

-7­

The Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) records at
the University of Texas at Austin list eig~ty-one sites in
Karnes County. Initial recordings were 5y amateur archeologists;
systematic investigations of tfie cultural resources began with
the reconnaissance of tfie watersfieds of proposed damsites and
reservoirs. The first of tfiese was conducted by Crawford (1971)
of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project for tfie National Park
Service. The survey covered areas in t~e Ecleto Creek Watershed
to be affected by the placement of dams on Ecleto Creek and its
tributaries. Fourteen sites were recorded during this survey.
Further work was conducted within this watershed by Kotter and
Guy (1980) of Prewitt and Associates. Inc. This field season
re-examined two previously recorded prehistoric sites and
recorded an additional historic and two prehistoric sites.
Smith (1978) of the Center for Archaeological Research, the
University of Texas at San Antonio, conducted a field survey
for the Conquista Project in area of Live Oak and Karnes counties.
No archeological sites were reported in Karnes County by this
survey. The Center for Archaeological Research (McGraw 1979)
continued with a second survey for this project. recording
four prehistoric sites. A third survey of additional areas
for the same project was conducted by Roemer (I98Q). The area
surveyed is located approximately 2.1 km. north of the current
study area. No prehistoric sites were located. although isolated
cul tural material was observed.
Previous archeological work reported from Karnes County
does not provide the information necessary for an understanding
of the cultural activity within the area. Most of the recorded
sites are described as light lithic scatters with few tools and
even fewer diagnostic projectile points. Seldom are the reported
sites well enough stratified to provide the kind and quality of
~rcheological remains needed to formulate a cultural sequence

-8­

for the immediate area. One site ~ 41KA61 - is reported as
stratified and which can serve as a basis for developing
such a sequence when more data becomes available (Kotter and
Guy 1980).
At present, regional similarities can be drawn from the
more extensively researched areas to the southwest in Live
Oak Co u nt y . Tn eCho ke Can,yo n Res e r YO i r Pro j e c t (L yn n, fox
and O'Malley 19771 and the Three Rivers Flood Protection
Project (Mallouf 1975, 1977; Prewitt and Scott 1977; Dibble
1979; Pliska 19801 report many sites supportive of a cultural
sequence which may be applicable to the Karnes County area.
METH.ODS
To facilitate control of the study area, the area was
divided into northern, central and southern sectors. The
northern sector is bounded by fencelines on the north, south,
and west, and by a north-south county road on the east. This
sector contained the densest woodlands. The central segment
is bounded on the north by a common fenceline with the northern
sector, a fenceline to the west, the north-south county road
on the east, and, on the south by an east-west road which
dissects the study area. The southern sector is bounded by an
east-west road on the north, the north-south county road on
the east and fencelines to the west and south. Each sector
was surveyed in turn by means of east to west serpentine
transects at intervals of 30 to 50 m. Promising areas were
more intensively surveyed, and in some instances, shovel probed.
Where cultural material was found, at 41KA82 and the two
isolated finds, subsurface probes were used to ascertain the
depth., if any, of cultural material, and to examine the soil
characteristics. The soil from these probes was screened
througH ~ in. mesh box screens,

-9­

The one site located was recorded on standard University
of Texas site survey forms. T~e site and the two isolated
finds were plotted on a 1=400 vegetation mosaic and on a 7.5 t
USGS topographic quadrangle map.
No cultural material was collected. Artifacts were drawn
(Fig. III}, photographed and measured in t~e fteld, The site
was given a permanent number - 41KA82 - in the trinomial system
of site nomenclature whereBy the first two digits refer to the
state (41=Texas), the two letters to the county (~A~Karnesl,
and the last digits to the number of the site within that county
(82=82nd site recorded in Karnes County}.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
As a result of the intensive survey and assessment of the
845 acre project area, one site (41KA82} and two isolated finds
(IF 1 and 21 were recorded, No evidence of historic debris or
structures was observed. By means of shovel probes in the site
area and in the area of the isolated finds, it was determined
that no additional cultural material was immediately apparent
beneath the surface. Due to the dispersed nature of the exposed
artifacts, and the lack of observable subsurface cultural material,
interpretation of site function is only speculative. Lithic
material found in the area - chert cobbles and petrified wood ­
could indicate a source for tool manufacture. The presence of
flakes and tools might imply small scale tool manufacture. Sites
found in upland areas along intermittent streams in South Texas
have been interpreted as periodic camps used for hunting and
foraging or lithic procurement.
Land modifications and natural
erosion, which played a key role in the dispersal of site
material, have so affected the context that conclusive evidence
for chronological or functional assignments is lacking.

-10­

The only temporal diagnostic found on the survey is one
Perdiz arrow point UF 1}. The interpretive value of this
point is limited since no cultural material could be found
in association; however, tKis projectile point style is
attributable to the Late Prehistoric Period.
The lack of historic material in the study area may be
a result of the heavy land modifications and the continued
use of the farmlands by present day owners.
In summary, due to the lack of observed subsurface cultural
material, the dispersed nature of the surficial site material ~
and the lack of diagnostic artifacts at the site, no further
work is recommended in the project area.
CULTURAL ACTIVITY AREAS - 41KA82
This site is located between the road forming the eastern
boundary of the study area, the roadtransecting the project
area on the south, and South Creek on the west (Fig. Ill. The
site is situated on the gentle slope near the drainage and
continues up the slope and onto the flat upland platn. The
sparse vegetation in this area includes Spanish dagger, low
grasses, and BrasU shrubs. The soil has been disturbed by
drilling and heavy erosional sheet wash. The flat upland 1s
heavily deflated, exposing numerous flakes, No buried cultural
material was located in subsurface probes. The gentl e slope
has a shallow 5 to 30 cm. topsoil of loamy, tuffaceous character.
Erosion has caused slippage, forming shelves of exposed Catahoula
Formation where the cultural material was observed. The nature
of this exposure limits the stratigraphic interpretive potential.
Limited shovel probes into the non-deflated areas produced no
cultural material; the exposure of the cultural material on the
bedrock is robabl due to tile deflation of the soil. Horizontal

- 11­

movement of materlal has resulted from sheet washing. The site
boundaries have been defined by the extent of exposed material,
60 m. north-south by 100 m. east-west.
Twelve flakes, one core,
one core tool, and one dart point medial fragment were noted.
RECOMMENDATION
On the basis of the inferred site condition, the limited
material observed, and the lack of subsurface materials, no
further investigation of this area is warranted. Howeyer,
when and if further alterations are made, the possi5tltty of
uncovering additional cultural material should be recognized
and caution be taken. If such occurs, the State Historical
Commission should be promptly notified.

-12­

APPENDIX I
TOOL DESCRIPTIONS FROM 41KA82
Core Tool
This specimen is made on a rectangular piece of petrified
wood. One end of the rectangle has had one large flake removed
from one side and three flakes removed from the other, creating
a scalloped edge. The direction of the flakes parallels the
grain of the petrified wood. The exposed inner portion of the
material is dark brown and the exterior has weathered to a
creamy white. This artifact is 7.0 cm. long, 2.8 cm. wide,
and 2.0 em. thick (Fig. III-B).
Projectil e Point
This dart point fragment is a portion of the blade,
missing the tip, base, and a small part of one lateral edge.
The remnant shows that the point had convex lateral edges
and rounded shoulders, and was lenticular in cross section.
Made of petrified wood, the grain of the wood streaks
diagonally across the artifact. The remaining portion of this
specimen is 3.5 cm. long, 2.2 cm. wide, and 0.4 cm. thick (Fig.
III-A).

In addition to site 41KA82, two isolated finds (IF) were
located. Both were found directly across South Creek, to
the west of 41KA82 (Fig. II). This area has been modified
by terracing and farming. and the clearing of a trail to
the drill pad across the drainage. IF 1 was located just
south of the trail and 100 m. west of the drainage. IF 2
was found 65 m. south of IF 1 on the top of a man-made terrace.
Shovel probes in this area produced no other cultural material;
soil depth in this area is 10 to 20 cm.

Figure III

a

b

c

d

Artifacts drawn at actual size.

-14­

IF 1
This artifact is an arrow point of the Perdiz type, It
is missing the distal tip and both barbs. The hody is tri­
angular with straight edges. The edges are predominately
unifacially worked, making this section plano-convex in cross
section. The stem, which contracts slightly to a rounded base,
is bifacially worked and lenticular in cross section. The
material used is tan chert and the specimen is 2.5 cm. long,
1.4 cm. wide and 0.3 cm, thick (Fig. III-C),
IF 2

This artifact is the end fragment of a biface, It is
lenticular in cross section. The material used is petrified
wood and the grain of the wood crosses perpendicular to the
1 ength of the tool.
This item was f1 aked to the extent that
no cortex remains. This fragmented specimen is 3.8cm. long.
2 . 9 cm. wide and O. 8 cm. t hie k eFt g. II I - DL

-15­

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Belo Corporation
1979 Texas Almanac 1980-1981.

Dallas Morning News.

Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
of Seienee 2(1): 93-117.

The Texas Journal

Bureau of Economic Geology
1976

Crystal City-Eagle Pass
The University of Texas at Austin.

Geologie Atlas of Texas.

Sheet.

Crawford, Daymond D.
1971 An Archeological Reconnaissance of Ecleto Creek
Watershed, South Central Texas. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project Survey Reports No.8, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Dibble, David S.
1979 Archeological Assessment at the Three Rivers Flood
Protection Project, Live Oak County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Teahniaal BulZetin
No. 26, The University of Texas at Austin.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938

Physiography of Eastern U.S.

McGraw-Hill Book

Co., New York.
Hester, Thomas R.
1976 Hunters and Gatherers of the Rio Grande Plain and
the Lower Coast of Texas. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hester, Thomas R. and T.C. Kelly
1976 Archaeological Reconnaissance in Karnes County,
Texas for VTN Consolidated, Inc. A report submitted
by the Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Kotter, Steven M. and Jan A. Guy
1980 Archeological Survey and Assessment of Two Areas
to be Affected by Proposed Critical Area Treatment
Measures Within the Ecleto Creek Watershed, Karnes
County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No.5,
Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Austin.

-16-

Lynn, Warren M., Daniel E. Fox and Nance O\Malley
1977
Cultural Resource Survey of Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Live Oak and McMullen Counties, Texas. ArcEeo­
logical Sur~ey Report 2Q, Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.
Ma 110 uf, Mi c ha e 1 G.
1975
Three Rivers Flood Protection Project, Live Oak
County, Texas: An Archeological and Historical
Survey of Areas Proposed for Modification.
Report to the Fort Worth District Corps of Engineers
by the Texas Archeological Survey, The University
of Texas at Austin.
1977

Additional Archeological Survey in Areas to be
Affected by the Three Rivers Flood Protection
Pro j e c t, Li v e 0 a k Co u n t y, Tex as. Rep 0 r t sub­
mitted to the Fort Worth District Corps of
Engineers by the Texas Archeological Surv,y, The
University of Texas at Austin.

McGraw, A. Joachim
1979
An Archaeological and Historical Survey of the
Haase, Moy and Wiatrek Properties of the Conquista
Project, Karnes County, Texas. Center for Archaeo­
logical Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report No. 81.
Patterson, Leland W.
1973
Some Texas Blade Technology.

Bulletin Of the
Texas Archeological SocietY3 Vol. 44: 89-111:

Pliska, James R.
1980
Archeological Investigations at the Three Rivers
Flood Control Project: A Final Report. Texas
Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin No, 30,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R. and Robert F. Scott, IV
1977
Three Rivers Floodwater Division Levee Project:
Assessments at Archeological Sites 41 LK 57,
41 LK 113 and 41 LK 114. Report submitted to the
. Fort Worth District Corps of Engineers by the
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.

.

-17­

Roemer, Erwin
lQ80
An Archeological Survey for the Conquista Project
of the Niescnwietz-Bodden Propertles~ Karnes
County, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio. Apahaeo­
logiaal Supvey Repopt, No. 92.
Sellards, E.H., W.S. Adkins and F.B. Plummer
1932

The Geology of Texas Vol. I

Stpatigpaphy~

Bureau of Economic Geology, Seventh Printing,
1978, The U.T. Bulletin.
Smith. Harvey P., Jr.
1978
Archaeological Survey ~nd Assessment of Properties
for the Conquista Project in Live Oak and Karnes
Counties, Texas. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio,
ApahaeoZogiaaZ Supvey Repopt, No. 64,
Soil Conservation Service
1973
General Soil Map, Karnes County, Texas, U.S,D.A.

