I'~'I I~ ~

I II11'1'1'11'1 'I' "II1"1
105140

A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY
OF THE HERMITAGE SUBDIVISION, SECTIONS I AND II
Williamson County, Texas

Technical Bulletin No. 77

Henry B.

Principal Investigator:

Moncure

Solveig A. Turpin

I
t

A report submitted to Nash Phillips/Copus Inc.
by

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
May 1984

i

ABSTRACT
A cultural resource survey of Sections I and II of the Hermitage
Subdivision, a 55.17 acre parcel of land located northwest of Round
Rock, Texas, was performed by the Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin, for Nash Phillips/Copus, Inc. during
April, 1984. Twenty-one isolated prehistoric artifacts were located
but their dispersed distribution and lack of temporal or functional
attributes did not hold promise
for
significant cultural
interpretions.
Although historically, the property was owned by
several distinguished Williamson County
individuals,
the
land
apparently remained unoccupied. The cultural resources of the study
area present no obstacle to residential development .

•...•..

......

_

..

-­

--------~------

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This report is the result of the combined efforts of the Texas
Deborah Smith participated in the
Archeological
Survey Staff.
fieldwork with the author and also began the entry of the draft into
the word processor. Abby Treece and Laura Petruska completed the word
processing and Abby drafted the figure and edited the text.
Solveig
Turpin provided editorial guidance and project oversight.
Michael Guarino, of NPC, provided essential liason between TAS
and the project sponsor and, as in the past, produced timesaving area,
plot and survey data for our use.
This report is dedicated to the future residents of
Trail, Section I, which, from a cultural resource
standpoint, is fortunately a misnomer, and to those who
Hunters Trail, probably a more accurate name.

Indian Camp
preservation
will occupy

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract . . . .

ii

Acknowledgements

iii

Introduction . .

1

Environmental Background

1

Cultural Background

5

Historical Background

7

Research Procedures

10

Survey Results and Analysis

11

The Artifacts

12

. . . . .

Summary and Recommendations

14

References Cited . . . . . .

15

Fi gure Li st
Figure 1.

Project location map

v

Table List
Table 1.

Summary of the Study Area Environment

5

0......

•••""Q

<£..
?

.($)

\

10

11

•

-:g

'~4~~~C'~
"

..

,.....

"0\

5

12

•

.'.

4

•

,

•

~
-7'­

-8

6

-:g

•

~

-

•

9

13

--:g

~

\

20

-

21

•

17

•

•
15

00,

•
14

18

•

SECTION I

SECTION"
3

•

-

16

19

Brushy Creek

2

-

1

-

3:

9

~

LEGEND

/ 900'

-

--*-

?
• Florence

:::c
:0'
:::r
-;t
o

Isolated find
Fenceline

2~O

";""

400

j

feet
Index to Isolated Finds

Georgetown

•

Stage 1. Core bifaces: 12,14
/
Stage 2. Thick bifaces: 5. 6, 7. 13, 16, 19. 20
Stage 3. Thinned bifaces: 10, 11, 18
Stage 4. Thinned bifaces with form:
Stage 5. Final Product: 1, 2. 3
Scrapers. Cores:

Williamson County

Figure 1.

•

Project location a-:l1d distribution of isolated finds.

4

8, 9. 15. 17, 21

Isolated find numbers show order in which specimens were
recorded and have no other significance.

~

'<

-..

Page 1

INTRODUCTION
A cultural resource survey of designated areas of Williamson
County, Texas was conducted for Nash Phillips/Copus, Inc. (NPC) of
Austin, Texas by the Texas Archeological Survey (TAS), The University
of Texas at Austin during April, 1984. The study was designed to meet
the broad requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of
1966, and the more specific regulations implementing that legislation.
The survey was carried out in conformance with criteria and guidelines
set forth by the Texas Historical Commission for intensive survey.
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
Geographic Location
The study area, shown in Figure 1, is located in the area covered
by the United States Geological Survey's Round Rock, Texas Quadrangle
7.5 minute series map. The tracts of land surveyed total 55.173 acres
comprising Sections I and II of the Hermitage subdivision at Round
Rock, Texas. These tracts are scheduled for development, primarily
residential.
The two tracts are contiguous and form a metes and
bounds, property line defined area bounded to the northeast by the
Missouri Pacific Railroad right-of-way and to the southwest by Sam
Bass Road (FM 173). The city of Round Rock lies to the southeast.
The longest dimension of the surveyed tract, southwest by northeast,
is one kilometer (.6 miles). No permanent streams pass through the
area.
Brushy Creek lies .28 kilometers (.17 miles) to the southwest,
placing the area within that drainage system. The northeast corner of
Section II is truncated just short of Onion Branch Creek, an
intermittent stream whose bed traverses the railroad right-of-way
northwest to southwest.
Physiography and Geology
The study area lies in the Balcones Fault Zone at the edge of the
Edwards Plateau, specifically within the Jollyville Plateau area
The Jollyville Plateau is an
(Garner and Young 1976:Plate VII).
undissected portion of the Edwards Plateau differing in that respect
from the bulk of the parent topography. The study area lies above the
flood hazard boundaries (100 year peak flood) cited by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency for Brushy Creek and its
drainage
(1982:MAP).
The uppermost rock strata in the study area is the Edwards
Formation.
It is characterized by fine to medium grained, light gray
to tan limestone (Garner and Young 1976: Plate VII).
Chert nodules
are common; these would have provided aboriginal populations with an
easily obtained, readily worked source of raw material for the
production of lithic tools. The Edwards Formation contains numerous
Cretaceous.
shallow water species fossils dating to the Lower

Page 2
Ammonites (Texanites), and pelecypods (Trigonia and Exogyra texana)
were found at the surface in the study area. All these fossil species
are marker fossils both for the area and for the dating of the rock
formation (Matthews 1960:32, Moore, Laliker and Fischer 1952:384,
342) .
The general area is one of low slope intensity and most of the
study area is no exception. Altitude at Sam Bass Road is 765 feet
above mean sea level (AMSL). At the railroad line boundary, altitude
is 740 feet AMSL.
Most of this fifteen-foot difference occurs in
Section II since the Section I differential is five feet or less from
front to rear boundary.
Soils and Drainage
The soil associations, mapping units of the U.S.
Department of
Agriculture1s Soil Conservation Service, are the Crawford clay, the
Eckrant cobbly clay, and the Denton silty clay (Werchan and Coker
1983:Sheet 65).
Most of Section I is Crawford clay characterized by
shallow depth, a high shrink-swell potential, and a sticky consistency
(Werchan and Coker 1983:
26,27,106 and 123). At the time of the
survey, large shrink-produced cracks showed in the surface and
extended well down into the soil. The general area was undergoing a
dry period wherein actual rainfall was about half that normally
received during the average quarter year (See climate below). Such a
clay, by its shrinking and swelling and the opening and closing of the
cracks which result, can cause small artifacts to be stratigraphically
misplaced. The shallowness of the soil in this area, less than a foot
in most places, combined with the shrink-swell potential, precludes
much chance of intact stratified deposits.
The Crawford clay grades into Eckrant cobbly clay about 1,500
feet into Section I from Sam Bass Road. The Eckrant cobbly clay is
even more shallow than the Crawford;
there are areas where the
bedrock is at the surface, and, as its name implies, the soil is full
of limestone and chert cobbles. Limestone fragments make up about a
50 percent cover at the surface (Werchan and Coker 1983: 33). The
clay has a sticky consistency, a calcareous make-up and;s moderately
alkaline.
The cobbles and the shallow to very shallow root zone make
this soil agriculturally poor except as pasture.
About the center of Section II, the Eckrant cobbly clay grades
into Denton silty clay.
The Denton is deeper than the Eckrant or
Crawford, typically about 33 inches and therefore has a deeper root
zone.
Its shrink-swell potential ;s high but the percentage of
fractured rock is much lower than either of the
other
soil
associations in the study area. It is potentially usable as cropland
or pasture.
The bulk of the study area drains to the north/northeast.
Rainfall, when not absorbed, runs off into Onion Branch Creek, a
tributary of Brushy Creek. Onion Branch Creek was a dry bed at the
time of the survey. The small section of land immediately adjacent to

Page 3
Sam Bass Road (Section I southwest boundary) would drain toward Brushy
Creek to the southwest when rainfall rates were sufficient to cause
run-off. This lack of a ready water source would make the study area
a less likely choice for aboriginal occupation than nearby areas
closer to Brushy Creek.
Climate
Williamson County is within Carr's Interior Region of May and
September maximum rainfall (Carr 1967:6 MAP). The study area is near
the juncture of three of Carr's climatic divisions;
the Edwards
Plateau, the South Central, and the North Central (1967: 6). A
climatic region is composed of climatic divisions having a common
seasonal rainfall pattern.
A climatic division is a grouping of
counties having similar annual rainfall. The study area has an annual
rainfall averaging 31.5 inches with twin maximum rainfall periods in
May and September (Bonnar 1983:221). Minimum average monthly rainfall
(1951-1980) has occurred in January (Bonner 1983: 221). Annual
evaporation, run-off and water consumption result in little or no
water
surplus from local precipitation in any season (Russell
1945:43-46). Occasionally, wide deviations from these patterns and
averages occur. The unofficial U.S. record rainfall within a one day
period (38 inches) was recorded at Thrall, Texas east of the study
area during a storm in 1921, which was officially recorded at 23.11
inches at nearby Taylor and 19.03 inches in Austin (Bonner 1983:
By contrast, May 1984 was the driest May ever recorded at
225).
Austin's weather station.
The mean annual temperature for the study area is 66.7 degrees
Fahrenheit with January having an average norm of 48.8 degrees
Fahrenheit and August an average norm of 83.1 degrees Fahrenheit (Carr
1967: 8). Below freezing temperatures occur less than 25 days a year
on the average and the growing season, the frost-free period, is about
270 days a year (Arbingast and others 1973: 19).
Winds are generally southerly throughout the year with northerly
shifts in winter which accompany Canadian continental polar cold
fronts several times a season. The summer season is dominated by
Maritime tropical fronts generated in the Gulf of Mexico. These warm,
moist air masses provide the major component of the area's climate
which is basically humid and subtropical.
Biota
The study area is within Gould's (1975:2) Texas Vegetation Region
Its position on the edge of the
5, Cross Timbers and Prairies.
Edwards Plateau close to the Blackland Prairie (Regions 7 and 4),
however, makes it transitional with respect to vegetation and fauna.
The study area contains live oak, pin oak, juniper, and Spanish Oak in
small numbers.
Due to clearing for pasturage and crop growing, few
trees remain in Section II and in Section I most are concentrated in
small northwest and central groves. Flowering plants include prairie
coneflower, sunflower, daisy, and rosering gaillardia.
Bluebonnet,

Page 4
ra;nlilly, western yarrow and Mexican hat are also present. Shrubs
Small amounts
of
include yucca, lantana and evergreen sumac.
greenbriar were noted.
Grasses present include silver bluestem,
sideoats grama, buffalo grass, and Texas grama. It is probable that
grazing has altered the natural climax grass regime in favor of the
present growth while reducing or eliminating little bluestem, indian
grass and big bluestem.
In any event, the regimented tree stands
currently present and the current range of grasses is not that of
pre-Anglo-European settlement.
The aboriginal population of the
county probably viewed this section as part of a tall grass,
multi-specious oak savannah.
The faunal complement of the study area currently includes black
tailed jack rabbit, cottontail rabbit, at least two coveys of quail,
songbirds, and squirrels. All these were noted by the survey team.
In addition, the skeletal remains of deer, raccoon and armadillo were
found. It would be unusual if skunks, gophers and oppossum were not
present but none were sighted.
The area is part of Blair's
(1950:112-115) Balconian biotic province which he calls a hodge-podge,
a collection of species from the neighboring provinces. Fifty-seven
mammalian species are known within the Balconian but none
is
restricted to this province (Bl~ir 1959:
113).
Because the
Jollyv;lle Plateau is atypical of the Edwards Plateau topography (See
Physiography and Geology), the dissected areas which support habitats
suitable for many Balconian species are lacking in the study area.
Additionally the lack of a watercourse within the study area would
reduce the number of reptile, amphibian and mammalian species present
on a continuing basis.
The pre-Anglo-European settlement faunal
complement probably included those species present today and a large
predator element, bob cat, coyote, possibly puma and, at times, bison.
In short, the area probably held some hunting potential aboriginally.
Land Use
The study area has recently been utilized as pasturage. There is
also some evidence of farming in the form of stones piled along old
fence lines, probably to allow cultivation in Section II.
That same
area shows the remnant ridges of the contouring projects which had
government sponsorship and assistance in the 1930's. Such contouring
was usually linked to crop growing, but was sometimes used as a means
of erosion control. In this case, erosion would not seem a major
problem.
No evidence of structures was found anywhere within the study
area.
Ownership since early in this century has been in the hands of
the Charles D. Fulkes family, descendents and kin, all with known
local domicile or residing elsewhere.
Owners prior to the Fulkes
family were absentee owners (Williamson County Deed Records ms.).
Table 1.
Location:
Phys i ography:

Summary of the

Study Area Environment

South Central Williamson County, Texas
Jollyville Plateau

Page 5
Surface Geology:
Structural Geology:
Soil s:
Drainage:
Climate:
Vegetation Region:
Biotic Province:
Archeologically
sign ifi cant
circumstances:

Cretaceous limestone
Balcones Fault Zone
Clay, cobbly clay, silty clay
Brushy Creek from Onion Branch
Mesothermal, humid, subtropical
Confluence of Regions 4, 5 and 7
Balconian
Shallow soil with high shrink-swell
potential, vegetation modified by farming,
immediate surface water
CULTURAL BACKGROUND

Previous archeological research in Williamson County has resulted
in the recording of more than 500 sites. Major professional attention
has been focused on the county owing to the impounding of the North
Fork and Granger reservoirs, highway construction, and recently, rapid
land development. As far back as the 1930's, the Brushy Creek
watershed was found to contain significant archeological sites.
Pearce and Wilson investigated the Merrell Site, 41WM2, in 1934
(Campbell 1948:7-35) and in 1938 Pearce productively investigated the
Cedar Park Mound, 41WM8, even though it had been partially looted by
relic hunters (Schuetz 1957:135-136).
The watershed continues to
produce significant finds including the Wilson-Leonard Site (41WM235),
still under investigation, popularly known as the Leanderthal Lady
site. This important early burial site lies just a few miles west of
the current study area. At this writing, recorded archeological sites
within the watershed number more than forty (Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory files).
Williamson County is included in the Central Texas archeological
culture region. The explanation and sequencing of human occupation in
this area has been the subject of ongoing, evolving interpretation
since early in this century.
Contributions leading to the establishment and refinement of a
cultural chronology are still in progress. Early contributions and
interpretations were made by J.E. Pearce, A. T. Jackson and Charles
Kelley. Expansions, refinements and interpretations of a major nature
have been offered by Alex Krieger, Thomas Campbell and Edward Jelks.
Frank Wier, now of the Texas Highway Department, made the Central
Texas Archaic the subject of his doctoral dissertation (Wier 1976)
and, most recently, Elton Prewitt (1981:65-89) offered a refined
chronological model.
Prewitt defines the region under consideration as the "eastern
half of the Edwards Plateau, the Llano Uplift, most of the Lampassas
Cut Plains, the Comanche Plateau, the southern end of the Grand
Prairie, and the Blackland Prairies bordering the Balcones Escarpment"
(Prewitt 1981:71). The current study area is located within the
latter sector.
The chronology Prewitt suggests includes four major
stages of development within the area.
These are termed
the
Paleoindian, the Archaic, the NeoArchaic (Late Prehistoric), and the

Page 6
Historic.
Within the Archaic and NeoArchaic, further divisions
(phases) are made, eleven for the former and two for the latter. The
number of phases, named after towns in the Central Texas region, is
generally proportional to the quantity of evidence currently available
for each of the stages of development; the Archaic is far and away
dominant in this respect.
An abbreviated summary of the four
developmental stages is included below. Phase differentiations have
been proposed based predominantly on lithic artifact types, most
frequently projectile points, found in usable archeological contexts.
Paleoindian Stage
The Paleoindian stage includes the earliest currently recognized
human occupation of the New World. It is evidenced by the presence of
lanceolate points such as the Clovis, Folsom and Plainview types. The
economy is considered to have emphasized the hunting of now-extinct
megafauna such as mastodon, mammoth, and forms of bison larger than
the living species. Prewitt (1981:75) places the termination of this
period at approximately 8,500 years before the present (BP).
It
should be understood that a stage of development is of an evolutionary
nature and thus has no abrupt boundary with its succeeding stage.
Thus, an approximation is appropriate especially when the size of the
area addressed is taken into consideration. The commencement of the
Paleoindian stage is as yet undefined and the subject of considerable
debate.
Eleven
thousand years
B.P. is acceptable
to most
investigators, with some researchers willing to adopt dates more than
twice that. The Paleoindian stage is poorly known in Central Texas;
its presence there is usually manifested by single implement finds.
Site 41BX52 in Bexar County is a notable instance of an isolatable
component attributable to this stage (Henderson 1980:14-15) and the
Wilson-Leonard Site (41WM235), previously mentioned, is another.
Archaic Stage
The Archaic Stage spans the time between the era of the
big-game-hunting peoples (Paleoindian) and the introduction of the bow
and arrow, along with the use of ceramics in the Late Prehistoric
period.
The Archaic is characterized by what is termed a hunting and
gathering culture, a food collecting people whose subsistence strategy
is more accurately described as hunting, gathering, scavenging and
foraging with no more emphasis on anyone aspect than another.
It
commences, following the Prewitt model, ca. 8500 years BP and grades
into the Late Prehistoric in Central Texas ca.
1250 BP (Prewitt
1981:75).
As stated above, this 7,000 year span has been subdivided
into eleven phases based on key indicator artifact and feature types.
A wide variety of key index markers are diagnostic of the Archaic:
Wells, Nolan, Travis, Pedernales, Bulverde, Frio and Ensor projectile
pOints,--and burned rock middens. All are w~represented in Central
Texas.

Page 7
late Prehistoric Stage
In Central Texas, this spans the era from approximately 1250
years BP (ca. 700 A.D.) to about 200 years BP (ca. 1750 A.D.). It
;s characterized by no major changes in the subsistence strategy,
which remains hunting and gathering, but by changes in technology,
including the adoption of the bow and arrow over the dart and atlatl,
the making of ceramics and the use of cemeteries rather than isolated
interments. Diagnostics of the Late Prehistoric period in Central
Texas include Perdiz, Scallorn and Clifton arrow points, Leon Plain
pottery and cemeteries.
-- --­
Historic Stage
This stage begins when European influence on the aboriginal
population reached significance and the extant culture was affected.
The advent of a recorded history of the aboriginal population
commences with first Spanish contact, but the time when continued
contact produced changes in aboriginal lifeways marks the practical
beginning of this stage.
It is characterized in the artifactual
record by items of European manufacture, the adoption of European
materials for the production of traditional items, and the imitation
of European styles in the manufacture of items adaptive to culture
change. Decorative trade beads, metal and glass arrow points and hide
horse tack are some examples. No specific date can be ascribed to the
commencement of the Historic stage in Central Texas, but it ;s safe to
say that European influence on the aboriginal culture was established
at least a century before the major influx of Anglo-American settlers
into the area around 1820. This stage is not well known in Central
Texas and is not currently a subdivided stage.
HISTORIC BACKGROUND
The framework for historic archeology in Texas coincides with the
division of Texas history as follows (Pass 1974:75).
I.
II.

III.
IV.

Indian Era: Pre-European arrival in 1519 (Conquest of
Mexico)
Conquest and Colonization (1519-1835)
A. Early exploration and missionaries (1519-1690)
B. Mission period and Spanish domination (1690-1793)
C. Spanish decline and filibustering era (1793-1821)
D. Mexican era and Anglo-American colonization (1821-1835)
Revolution and Republic (1835-1845)
A. Revolution (1835-1836)
B. Republic (1836-1845)
Texas in the United States (1845-present)
A. Pre-Civil War (1845-1861)
B. Confederate State (1861-1865)
C. Reconstruction (1865-1874)
D. Early economic development (1874-1899)
E. Industrialization and urbanization C1899-present)

Page 8
Spanish explorers made more than 40 expeditions into present day
Texas during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Cabeza de Vaca,
Moscoso and Coronado all entered Texas prior to 1550 beginning with de
Vaca's shipwreck on the coast in 1528. When de Vaca reached Mexico
City in 1536, after nearly eight years among the native populations,
he and his companions described their adventures. One result was
Coronado's expedition in 1541, in search of Quivera and its reported
gold.
Another was DeSoto's expedition, led after DeSoto's death by
Moscoso, into northeast Texas during the same year. There are almost
as many routes proposed for deVaca as there are scholars who have
studied the subject. A few have suggested he made it as far north as
Williamson County (Shepard 1964:190-191). Neither Coronado or Moscoso
entered the county, but the combined effect of these three expeditions
and those which followed was to bring Texas into the historic era, as
accounts of the expeditions were recorded and published.
When the French encroached on Spanish-claimed areas of east
Texas, beginning in the 1680 1s, the Spanish responded by sending
expedition after expedition to oppose them. They established a series
of missions, presidios, and forts to claim and defend the area. The
most used route to the missions was the Camino Real which passes
southeast of Williamson County, but there was an alternate route,
Camino de Arriba, used when high water conditions prevailed.
This
route ran right through Williamson County, crossing Brushy Creek on
its way east (Scarbrough 1973:53).
Later, several missions were
founded in Central Texas. Among these were San Francisco Xavier de
Horcasitas, San Ildefonso and Candelaria, which were established in
1748 and 1749 near the confluence of Brushy Creek and the San Gabriel
River (Bolton 1915:227-230). They were located in what is now Milam
County, just beyond the Williamson County line. Though no Spanish
settlement is known within the present county boundaries,
the
influence of the San Xavier Missions extended into the area and the
Spanish camped within the county on their way to the Missions (Bolton
1962:141).
Spain's rule but not her influence ended when Mexico became an
independent monarchy in 1821.
Almost simultaneously, Moses Austin
began negotiations for a colony in Texas. His empressario colony and
others like it were to bring Anglo-American settlers to the county.
The Anglo-American settlement of Williamson County began in the
1830 ' s as extremely isolated homesteads in the San Gabriel and Brushy
valleys. Exploratory sorties from Austin's colony, hunting trips and
the activities of land speculators served as catalysts. Tumlinson
Block House, a protective outpost against the Indians built near
Leander
in 1836, was manned briefly by rangers of the Texas
The
Rangers were
Provisional Government (Scarbrough 1973:78).
commanded by Major Robert M. Williamson for whom the county was named.
Following the formation of the Texas Republic, immigration into Texas
increased. An economic depression and poor crop seasons in the United
States brought a tide of immigrants in search of economic betterment
and low land prices. Kenney1s Fort was established east of present
day Round Rock in 1838 and served as the keystone for a series of

Page 9
individual settlements in the area (Scarbrough 1973:83-84).
Settlement progressed despite Indian opposition during the late
1830's and the 1840's.
Brushy Creek was the scene of the Webster
Massacre in 1839 and the Battle of Brushy in that same year (Smithwick
1900:224).
Both conflicts were Indian successes but did not stem the
settlement tide. Instead they served, if anything, to solidify the
support for President Mirabeau Lamar's policy of ousting the native
population from the Republic.
Annexation into the United States
brought even more settlers to the area.
One hundred and seven people signed two circulating petitions
aimed at forming a new county early in 1848, a request quickly
granted. The only change made by the legislature was to name the new
county after one of its own members, Judge (formerly Major) Robert
McAlpin Williamson. The 1850 U.S. Census for the county shows 242
families in 230 dwellings, a total population of 1,379 free citizens
(Scarbrough 1973:173).
The total county population was
1,568,
including slaves, whose presence attests to the beginnings of a cotton
industry.
Round Rock, parent city of the proposed subdivision, is one of
the
oldest continuously settled communities within the county.
Brushy, as the community was first known, had some few settlers as
early as 1834, and there were enough by 1839 to warrant the
establishment of Kenney's Fort (Brandt 1976:818). The name Round Rock
was adopted in 1854 in the process of an application to the U.S. Post
Office. The change served to differentiate the community from several
others carrying the name Brushy, including nearby Cedar Park, then
known as Running Brushy. Round Rock until recently was a commercial
center
for the surrounding agricultural region, and its urban
population reflected that status. By 1878 the population was about
In 1890 it had climbed to 1,438, but in 1900 it was down to
1,200.
1,138 and by 1920 stood at 900 (Scarbrough 1973:346).
As the U.S.
population urbanized and people migrated to the larger cities, such
communities as Round Rock grew relatively slowly. At some point early
in the 1960's, Round Rock crept past 2,000 residents, but by 1970
still had less than 3,000. However, the city has come to Round Rock.
Rapid growth and expansion in the Austin area has changed the
character of the Round Rock community.
The 1980 population census
showed 11,812 residents and the current estimate is 19,000 (Be10
Corporation 1982:191; Austin American Statesman, May 27, 1984, C1).
Most of the increase is attributable to the influx of persons employed
The old Round Rock
in Austin-associated commerce and industries.
community
is now a de facto suburb of Austin, surrounding and
overshadowing the old agricultural central core.
The property within the study area has had a series of locally
prominent owners; none, however, lived on the property. David Curry,
the original (1851) land grant holder, quickly disposed of the
property by selling it to James G. Harrell in 1852 (Williamson County
Deed Records 4:13). Harrell, a blacksmith and signator of the 1848
petition to form a new county, sold the property in two parcels less

-~-~-~---~~------~--------~-

~----

---

Page 10
than a year later (Williamson County Deed Records 4:184 and 7:19-20).
James Harrell's father Jacob is the Harrell for whom Harrell Memorial
Park is named. Jacob's log home was moved to the park to serve as
headquarters for the Old Settler's Association (Scarbrough 1973:113).
Purchasers from James G. Harrell were J.W. Atkinson, in 1852, later a
postmaster at Florence who gave that town its name (Scarbrough
1973:340) and James Boyce, in 1853, first president of the Round Rock
area school district (Scarbrough 1973:149). Boyce acquired Atkinson's
parcel the day before purchasing the second parcel from Harrell
Thus, in less than two
(Williamson County Deed Records 7:96-97).
years, the property had seen four owners and five sales.
Boyce was
owner until 1867 when he sold the property to Elizabeth A. Oatts
(Williamson County Deed Records 12:119). Elizabeth was the wife of
Round Rock merchant Thomas C.
Oatts. He was also the postmaster
(1851-1860) who selected the community1s name when a change from
Brushy Creek was required (Scarbrough 1973:449). Mrs. Oatts' heirs,
no longer residents of the county, sold the property to W.M. Webster
in 1900 (Williamson County Deed Records 92:284) and Webster, in turn,
sold it to Charles D. Fulkes in 1904 (Williamson County Deed Records
The Fulkes family had moved to the area from Mr. Fulkes'
109:452).
parents' home on Walnut Creek in Travis County (Moncure 1984:6).
The
family maintained ownership until Section I was sold for development
1n 1978 (Williamson County Deed Records 705:527). Section II was sold
in 1983 for the same purpose (Williamson County Deed Records 906:110).
RESEARCH PROCEDURES
The aims of the survey and its accompanying
provide the following:

assessment were

to

(1) a detailed inventory and evaluation of the cultural resources
within the area subject to modification;
(2) an estimate of the nature and extent of the impact of the
projected land use on such resources;
(3) recommendations to the sponsor to lessen, avoid, or otherwise
mitigate adverse effects on the identified resources, and;
(4) provide recommendations for any additional studies related to
the interpretation and preservation of the resources which may
be beyond the investigative scope of this study.
Archival and publications searches were conducted prior to the
fieldwork. In Austin, the records of the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, the special collection of the University of Texas
libraries, the Texas Natural Resources Information System, and the
State Archives were consulted. In Georgetown, the Williamson County
seat, the records of the commissioners court, the probate court, and
the county clerk were reviewed. In addition, the files of the Texas
Archeological Survey and those of the author were used to gather
background and preliminary data on the local environment and history.
Fieldwork was conducted on April 21, 1984 by the author and on
April 23, 1984 by the author and Deborah Smith. The full length and
breadth of both tracts was systematically surveyed.
The lack of

Page 11
recent rain had inhibited vegetation growth and allowed unusually good
ground visibility. That visibility, excellent weather, and the lack
of major topographic relief variation within the survey area combined
to the surveyers' advantage.
No sites were located within the surveyed tracts.
Twenty-one
isolated finds were recorded, most of them indicative of lithic
The
procurement activity or discards of lithic reduction episodes.
artifacts collected, all notes, photographs, and this assessment will
be placed on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.
Balcones Research Center Austin, Texas.
SURVEY RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
The walking survey of Sections I and II located twenty-one
isolated finds distributed without apparent concentration (Fig. 1).
For example, isolated finds 11 and 12, those closest to one another,
are separated by 130 feet.
A hasty inspection of the property
immediately adjacent to the southeast of Section I, with the owner's
permission, showed a similar scarcity of artifacts. Archival research
into the reports of the sites closest to the study area, 41WMl1,
41WM150 and 41WM428 indicates the same conditions prevail in the
immediate vicinity of the study area (TARL Files). Michael Johnston,
in 1978, recorded 41WM150, one half mile southeast of the study area
on the opposite side of Sam Bass Road. Johnston stated "Broken flint
is abundant, and bifaces are relative common, with no apparent
concentrations ll (Johnston 1978:1). He goes on to note a scarcity of
identifiable points, a circumstance also seen in the study area.
Crawford (1979) recorded site 41WM428, which is located on Onion
Branch Creek just over half a mile north of the study area. He noted
a single chopper, a few flakes and some cores on the surface, and
found nothing when he dug test pits (Crawford 1979:1). Site 41WMll is
documented in the Miscellaneous folder for Williamson County in the
TARL Files, with no site form completed. It is located opposite
41WM150 on the north side of Sam Bass Road, within the fenced area of
the electrical power substation there. This site may now be destroyed
by additions to the power station. In any case, 41WM11 was probably
part of a continuum which included 41WM150 until the construction of
the road and power station. Former ownership is indicated by its
original designation, the Fulks <sic> Site (TARL Files). Johnston, in
a letter to TARL in 1978 concerning the 41WM150 area, wrote, "Having
found no concentrations of artifacts, I would hazard a guess that a
considerable stretch of Brushy Creek and Dry
Fork
represent
essentially a single homogeneous site." The acceptance or rejection of
such a statement is a matter of defining what is meant by "site",
While some observers have suggested that a site can be lias small as
the spot where an arrowhead lies" (Hole and Heiser 1973:111), most
would opt for clustered cultural remains, at least when those remains
are relatively small individual artifacts. Just how many artifacts
are required in a given cluster to produce a IIsite" varies with the
types of artifacts included, the geographical location and the culture
represented.
Paleoindian diagnostic artifacts are notable in the

Page 12
singular, especially in Central Texas. Crude, unidentifiable bifaces
and biface fragments, unpatterned in distribution, usually lack the
significance necessary to warrant site status.
Their potential for
adding to our knowledge of culture is too limited. They are best
recorded as isolated finds.
THE ART! FACTS
The production of lithic weapons
and
tools
involves
a
multi-stepped reduction of the raw material until the desired form is
achieved. It is reasonable to believe that when making a product
requlrlng a large number of chipping/flaking steps, the product
desired was not always completed without interruption.
It is also
reasonable to believe that owing to defects in the raw material and
carelessness, lack of skill, misjudgement or impatience on the part of
the maker, many chipping and flaking operations were unsuccessful or
unsatisfactory. The results would be artifacts in all stages of
reduction ranging from very crude shapes to those virtually complete
but broken in the the last stages of production. Some may have been
utilized for purposes other than that intended when the production
sequence started. Areas with good raw material supplies but not
otherwise suitable as campsites, especially when located near areas
more suited to that use, can be expected to show quarrying and early
reduction in the form of roughly shaped artifactual remains. The
study area is just such an area.
From the standpoint of water
availability, presence of nut-bearing trees, and the greater abundance
of edible plants, fish and water seeking game animals, the Brushy
Creek floodplain and terraces are much more attractive living locales
than is the adjacent study area.
It appears that the st.udy area
artifact complement is that to be expected of a quarrying/lithic
reduction area.
Eleven of the twenty-one isolated finds are relatively crude
bifaces or biface fragments.
Of these, seven are fragments with
little or no diagnostic value other than to note that all cortex has
been removed. The four more complete bifaces include three reduced to
the point where no cortex remains and one where part of the cortex is
present.
None of the eleven shows use marking on any potential
cutting, scraping or gouging edge.
Three projectile point fragments were found. Two of these are
medial
segments.
One
segment appears unfinished due to the
irregularity of the flaking scars and their lack of symmetry.
This
specimen lacks both tip and base and can not be confidently assigned
to any known type. The specimen has a hinge fracture and appears to
have been broken in the making. The few remaining characteristics
resemble those of the Darl dart point, a type commonly found in
Central Texas. This type has been dated to the Late Archaic extending
into the Late Prehistoric (Suhm and Jelks 1962:179).

Page 13
The
second,
smaller
medial
segment
lacks
typological
characteristics but has a more finished appearance. The third point
fragment is recognizable as the base of Pedernales type point. It is
impossible to tell if its tip end and barbs were broken in manufacture
or in use. The type is the most common dart point of the Edwards
Plateau Archaic (Suhm and Jelks 1962:235).
A single, discoidal, multtdirectional core, showing no apparent
order of flake removal was found. It has no known characteristic
useful in establishing its place in current Central Texas chronology
but does indicate lithic reduction activity and may be a reduction
stage leading to an ovate biface. No cortex material is present on
the specimen.
Two thumbnail scrapers were among the isolated finds.
These
small tools are probably the prehistoric equivalent of an X-acto knife
used for light cutting and scraping. Easily made with a mlnlmum of
small flake removal, these expedient tools were probably produced when
a task arose rather than in anticipation of a task.
Both specimens
show some edge use.
They are compatible with the other artifacts
found in terms of chronology but are not diagnostic of a given stage.
A triangular, thick, unifacially flaked artifact was found which
had undergone only the earliest stages of reduction. It shows no
evidence of use. In its present form it could be further reduced to a
projectile point or to a Clear Fork gouge end product. Another find
is unifacially flaked, wedge shaped and shows considerable remalnlng
cortex. The thin edge of the wedge shos some flaking apparently aimed
at improving the cutting bevel. That edge also shows minor use wear.
It is certainly a tool produced by a minimum number of reduction
steps.
A thin, triangular uniface was recorded which appears to be a
reduction sequence flake which showed a sufficiently sharp edge to be
utilized fortuitously as a tool. The tip or point of the triangle
with
the
most acute angle is hinge-fractured which may have
discouraged any further attempt to produce a bifacially flaked point.
The final artifact recorded is a formed, thinned biface which may
be a preform for a projectile point or a finished tool. It shows some
use wear on the tip and base.
Patterson (1977:53-82) has described a lithic reduction sequence
model to be used as a site function indicator. The model used a data
sample drawn from a survey conducted along portions of the North Fork
of the San Gabriel River which is near the study area. That model
recognized five artifact groups within a reduction sequence continuum
and allowed for utilization of flakes produced during the sequence
(Patterson 1977:61, 69-75).
Sixteen isolated
finds,
including
fragments, from this survey fit within the raw material-to-final
product as a projectile point reduction continuum: two in the core
biface group, seven in the thick biface group, three in the thinned
biface group, one in the thinned biface-with-form group and three in

----------------------------------------------------------

Page 14
the final product group.
The five remalnlng artifacts are the
discoidal core, a crude scraper and three byproducts of the reduction
sequence, flakes utilized as tools. This distribution of artifacts is
in keeping with light lithic reduction activity utilizing the abundant
raw material of the study area.

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The quantity, quality, distribution and types of cultural
material in the study area are insufficient to warrant assignment of a
site designation. The character of the geologic/soil complex holds
little or no promise for significant buried depOSits. The indications
of prehistoric cultural activity point toward light use of lithic
resources in the earlier stages of lithic reduction. Historic use of
the area shows no significant relationship with persons, events or
circumstances warranting further investigation and no remains of early
occupation.

Page 15

REFERENCES CITED
Austin American Statesman
1984 "Class of 154".

May 27, 1984.

Belo Corporation, A.H.
1982 Texas Almanac.

Dallas, Texas.

p.

Cl.

Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
2( 1): 93-117.

Texas Journal

Bolton, Herbert Eugene
1915 Texas in the Middle Eighteenth
and Russell, New York.

Century.

Bonnar, George W.
1983 Texas Weather.

of

Reprinted

Science

1962.

University of Texas Press, Austin.

Brandt, Eldon S. (Editor)
1976 The Handbook of Texas, ~ Supplement.
State Historical Association. Austin.

Vol.

III.

Texas

Campbell, Thomas N.
1948 The Merrell Site: Archaeological Remains Associated with
Alluvial Terrace Deposits in Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 19:7-3~ --Carr, John T.
1967 The Climate and Physiography of Texas.
Development Board Report 53. Austin.

Texas

Water

Crawford, Daymond
1979 Site Survey form for 41WM428. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory File for Williamson County. Balcones Research
Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
Federal Emergency Management Agency
1982 Community Panel Marker 481048002B, Flood liazar~ Boundary
~
City of Round Rock, Texas, Williamson County.
September 21, 1982. On file at Perry-Cadstenada Library,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Garner, L.E. and K.P. Young
1976 Environmental Geology of the Austin Area: An Aid to Urban
Planning.
Bureau of Economic Geology
Report of
Investigations 86. The University of Texas at Austin.

Page 16
Gould, Frank W.
1975 The Grasses of Texas.
Station.

-

--­

Texas A&M University Press.

College

Henderson, Jerry
1980 A Preliminary Report of Texas Highway Department Excavations
at
41BX52
- The Paleo Component.
Texas Archeology,
Newsletter of the Texas Archeological Society 24(2):14-15.
Hole, Frank and Robert F. Heizer
1973
Introduction to Prehistoric Archaeology.
Winston. New-Vork.

Holt, Reinhart and

Johnston, Michael
1978
Letter to Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, March 13,
1978.
Filed in Williamson County records of the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Balcones Research Center,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Matthews, William H. III
1960 Texas Fossils. Bureau of Economic Geology Guidebook 2,
University of Texas at Austin.
Moore, R.C., C.G. Laliker and A.G. Fischer
1952
Invertebrate Fossils. McGraw-Hill Inc.
Pass, Fred R. (Editor)
1974 The Texas Almanac, 1974-1975.

The

New York.

Dallas.

Patterson, Patience E.
1977 A Lithic Reduction Sequence: A Test Case in the North Fork
Reservoir Area, Williamson County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 48:53-82.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas.
Archeological Society 52:65-89.

Bulletin of the Texas

Russell, Richard Joel
1945 Climates of Texas. Annals of -the
- Association
Geographers 35(2):37-52.
Scarbrough, Clara Stearns
1973
Land of Good Water.

Sun Publishers.

of

American

Georgetown, Texas.

Schuetz, Mardith
1957 A Report of Williamson County Mound Material.
the Texas Archeological Society 28:135-146.

Bulletin

Shepard, William R.
1964 Historical Atlas.
York.

Noble.

Ninth Edition.

-------

Barnes

and

of

New

---~--~------------------

---------

Page 17
Smithwi ck, Noah
1900 The Evolution of a State.
Nanna Smithwick Donaldson,
compiler. Gamme--lBook Company. Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology:
Type Descriptions.
Texas
Archeological
Society Special Publication 1 and Texas
Memorial Museum Bulletin 4.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL)
ms.
Site report files for Williamson County, Texas. TARL Files,
Balcones Research Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
Wier, Frank A.
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
Washington State University, Pullman. On file at the Texas
Archeological Survey.
Werchan, Leroy E. and John L. Coker
1983 Soil Survey of Williamson County, Texas.
United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service. U.S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Williamson County Deed Records
ms.
Deed Record Books (Vol:pg) 4:13, 4:184, 7:19-20, 7:96-97,
12:119, 92:284, 109:452, 705:527 and 906:110. 1852 - 1983.

----

- - - - _ .....................

_­

