A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT
OF THE BONITA VISTA SUBDIVISION,
Travis County, Texas

Steven M. Kotter

A letter report submitted by the Texas Archeological Survey to Mr.
Tom McDi 11 .

May 1986
Technical Bulletin 92

On May 13,1986, Steven M. Kotter and Paddie Patterson, of the
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, conducted
a cultural resource survey and assessment at the proposed Bonita Vista
Subdivision, Travis County, Texas. Investigations are intended to meet
compliance with Code Part G, Section 13 - 3 - 351 - 3 of the City of Austin's
Barton Creek Watershed Ordinance and were initiated at the request of Mr.
Tom McDill, of Murfee Engineering, Austin. Texas. The 136 acre tract is
located south of FM 2244 (Bee Cave Road), about one kilometer southwest
of the intersection with Commons Ford Road in the west-central portion
of the county.
The project area consists of a portion of the headwaters of an
unnamed tributary of Barton Creek. The northeastern quarter of the
project area is a high hill located at the southern margin of the stream
divide between the creek and the Colorado River. The remainder of the
tract is sloping land below this hill that includes two tributary branches
incized into the Lower Cretaceous Age Glen Rose Formation. The primary
branch forms the northern and eastern project boundaries, while the
lesser branch draws the southern portion of the area. The branches join
near the southeastern corner of the project. where an active spring was
noted during the current survey. Upper slopes are broken by a series of
benches which give the area a distinctive stair-step topography. Vegetation
is dominated by a juniper oak woodland.
Prior to the field work, a search of records housed at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory revealed that no known sites or National
Register properties occur within the project area. Approximately 90
acres had been previously surveyed (Atkinson 1982) without results.
Current investigations consisted of an intensive pedestrian survey of
remaining portions of the tract. Major divisions in topography - areas
above canyons, canyon walls and stream floors - were used to divide the
project and ensure systematic coverage. Soil covered benches were more
intensively examined than other areas, but nowhere did transect intervals
exceed 20 meters. A total of one day was required for two persons to
complete the survey.

Two small prehistoric sites, 41TV1236 and 41TV1237, were iden­
tified during the current survey, both on benches above the head of
the second tributary branch.

Site 41TV1236 includes two surficially

exposed tools without other associated cultural materials, separated
by about 20 meters.

Both tools are concave scrapers made from large

flakes of non-Edwards chert.

However, one appears to be an older

biface manufacturing failure (exhibiting patination) later reworked
into a scraper (recent flake scars are unpatinated).

The site appears

to represent a small area of specific activity, but period of occupation
is unknown.

A portion of the site has been disturbed by land clearing

activities and information yield potential is limited.

Both tools

were collected.
Site 41TV1237 consists of two fragments of a Pedernales dart point
and an angular fragment of burned chert on the bench above the canyon
rim, as well as an isolated flake observed on a slightly higher bench.
The association of these areas is uncertain, and the two are combined
primarily for convenience in recording.

Site function and activities

are not clearly defined, but the remains are dated by the dart point
present to the Round Rock phase of the Middle Archaic Period, between
3400 and 2600 years BP. A low information yield potential is indicated.
A scatter of historic materials, primarily of a domestic nature,
occur over much of the upland portion of the project area.

Since

neither structural remains nor concentrations suggesting trash disposal
were observed, the origin and significance of the materials is uncertain.
Manganese - bleached and unbleached glass, pearl ware ceramics and

crockery provide an early twentieth century date.
In summary, intensive pedestrian survey of the Bonita Vista sub­
division resulted in the identification of two prehistoric sites,
neither of which appears to be eligible for nomination to the National
Register of Historic Places.

It is recommended that proposed con­

struction will not affect significant cultural resources.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1982 Atkinson, James R. Archeological Survey of the Mel Tract,
Barton Creek Watershed, Travis County, Texas. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc. Letter report No. 160, Austin, Texas.

