ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF
THE ROC ST 5-5 WELL PAD AND ACCESS ROAD,
BRAZORIA COUNTY, TEXAS

For
Carr Environmental Group, Inc.

TAC Permit Number 4560

By
Douglas G. Mangum
Project Archeologist
&
David Driver
Principal Investigator

Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc.
Report of Investigations Number 505
August 2007

ii

ABSTRACT
On June 14th and 15th, 2007, Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc. of Houston, Texas
conducted an intensive pedestrian survey, backhoe trenching and visual inspection of a
proposed well pad and access road in Brazoria County, Texas. The well pad will be
approximately 121 meters (m) by 121 m (400’ by 400’) in size and the roadway will be
183 m (600’) long and 4.5 m (15’) wide. Aside from the well drilling itself it appears that
the deepest impact within the Project Area will be roughly 2 meters (6 feet) in a “Reserve
Pit”. Altogether the Project Area will cover an area of roughly 3.75 acres. This was
performed at the request of Carr Environmental Group (the Client) for Rutherford Oil
Corp. as a result of a Project Review letter from the Texas Historical Commission (THC)
dated May 7, 2007.The results will be subject to review by the Texas Historical
Commission and the Client. The project falls under Texas Antiquities Permit Number
4560.
A total of nine shovel tests and three backhoe trenches were excavated as a result of this
investigation. No cultural resources were found. As a result of these findings it was
recommended that construction of the well pad and access road should be allowed to
proceed without further archeological investigations. It was determined that while intact
cultural deposits may exist deeper than was reachable during this investigation, it is
unlikely the expected impacts will reach such hypothetical resources.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTINGS
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
PREVIOUS ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
METHODS
RESULTS
RECOMMENDATIONS
REFERENCES CITED
APPENDIX A: Photographs
APPENDIX B: Shovel Tests

ii
iii
1
6
8
10
11
13
16
17
19
21

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. Project Area in Brazoria County
Figure 2. Project Area on the Cedar Lane NE USGS quadrangle
Figure 3. Project Area detail
Figure 4. Project Area on aerial photograph
Figure 5. Shovel Test Locations
Figure 6. BHT 1 Profile
Figure 7. BHT 2 Profile
Figure 8. BHT 3 Profile

2
3
4
5
12
14
15
16

1

INTRODUCTION
On June 14th and 15th, 2007, Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc., of Houston, Texas
conducted an archeological survey of a proposed well pad and access road within
portions of the Clemens State Farm, Brazoria County, Texas (Figures 1-4). This was
performed at the request of Carr Environmental Group (the Client) for Rutherford Oil
Corp. as a result of a Project Review letter from the Texas Historical Commission (THC)
dated May 7, 2007. The results of this investigation will be subject to review by the
Texas Historical Commission and the Client. The project falls under Texas Antiquities
Permit Number 4560. The well pad will be approximately 121 meters (m) by 121 m (400’
by 400’) in size and the roadway will be 183 m (600’) long and 4.5 m (15’) wide. Aside
from the well drilling itself it appears that the deepest impact within the Project Area will
be roughly 2 meters (6 feet) in a “Reserve Pit”. Altogether the Project Area will cover an
area of roughly 3.75 acres.
The objective of the investigation is to determine the presence or absence of cultural
materials within the locations proposed for the well pad and access road. It will also
assess any potentially impacted archeological sites within the well pad site and access
road right-of-way (ROW) and provide recommendations regarding mitigation measures,
if any are deemed necessary. The property in question belongs entirely to the Texas
Department of Criminal Justice (TDCJ).
The crew excavated 7 (30 x 30 centimeter) shovel tests in the well pad site and another 2
along the proposed access road as described in the METHODS section of this report.
Additionally 2 backhoe trenches were dug in the pad locales and one more in the access
road. Project Archeologist Douglas G. Mangum, Field Project Archeologist Darren
Schubert and Crewmember Eleanor Dahlin conducted this investigation under the
supervision of the Principal Investigator, Roger G. Moore.

2

Figure 1: Project Area in Brazoria County

3

Figure 2: Project Area on the Cedar Lane NE USGS quadrangle

4

Figure 3: Project Area detail

5

Figure 4: Project Area on aerial photograph

6

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTINGS
Modern Climate
The modern climate of the Project Area can aptly be characterized as hot and wet for
most of the year. The mean annual temperature for the region is about 20 degrees
Centigrade, with mean rainfall of 117 centimeters. Summer temperatures average about
34 degrees Centigrade, with temperatures above 38 degrees common during July and
August (Carr 1967; St. Clair et al. 1975). The average winter temperature is a mild 18
degrees Centigrade. Freezes are infrequent and of short duration, with an average of 271
frost-free days per year. Snow, sleet, and freezing rain are uncommon.
Rainfall varies from 7 centimeters in March to 11 centimeters in December, with July to
December rainfall often supplemented by tropical fronts and storms. The rainfall records
range from a low of 45 centimeters to a high of 185 centimeters. Prevailing winds are
usually from the southeast, except during the winter months when ‘Northers’ sweep into
the area.
Modern Flora and Fauna
Southeast Texas is within the Austroriparian biotic province near its western boundary
with the Texan province (Blair 1950:98-101). This boundary, set by available moisture
levels, is marked by pine-hardwood forests on the eastern Gulf coastal plain. The Project
Area is situated within the pine-oak forest subdivision of the Austroriparian province and
includes, within its western limits, portions of the coastal prairie (Tharp 1939).
Grasses within the coastal prairies and marshes vegetation area are described from a
range-management perspective in Hoffman et al. (nd: 45). This 10,000,000-acre area
consists of 9,500,000 acres of gulf prairies and 500,000 acres of gulf marshes. The
regional vegetation of the coastal prairies is characterized as follows:
“The principal grasses of the prairies are tall bunchgrass, including big bluestem
(Andropon gerardi), little bluestem, seacoast bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium, var.
littorus), Indiangrass, eastern gamagrass (Tripascum dactyloides), switchgrass, and gulf
cordgrass. Seashore saltgrass is common on moist saline sites. Grazing pressures have
changed the composition of the range vegetation so that the grasses now existing are
broomsedge bluestem, smutgrass, threeawns, tumblegrass and many other inferior
grasses. The other plants that have invaded the productive grasslands are oak
underbrush, mcartney rose, huisache, mesquite, pricklypear, ragweed, bitter sneezeweed,
broomweed, and many other unpalatable annual weeds” (Hoffman et al. nd: 45).

The dominant floral species of the pine-oak forest subdivision of the Austroriparian biotic
province include loblolly pine (Pinus taeda), yellow pine (Pinus echinata), red oak
(Quercus rubra), post oak (Quercus stellata), and blackjack oak (Quercus marilandica).
Hardwood forests are found on lowlands within the Austroriparian and are characterized
by such trees as sweetgum (Liquidambar styraciflua), magnolia (Magnolia grandiflora),
tupelo (Nyssa sylvatica), water oak (Quercus nigra) and other species of oaks, elms, and

7

ashes, as well as the highly diagnostic Spanish moss (Tillandsia usneiodes) and palmetto
(Sabal glabra). Swamps are common in the region.
Blair (1950) and Gadus (Gadus and Howard 1990:12-15) define the following mammals
as common within the Austroriparian province: white-tailed deer (Odocoileus
virginianus), muskrat (Ondatra zibethicus), raccoon (Procyon lotor), coyote (Canis
latrans), opossum (Didelphis virginiana), Scalopus aquaticus, Pipistrellus subflavus,
Lasiurus borealis, Sciurus niger, Sciurus carolinensis, Glaucomys volans, Geomys
breviceps, Reithrodonomys fulvescens, Peromyscus leucopus, Oryzomys palustris, cotton
rat (Sigmodon hispidus,), packrat (Neotoma floridana), eastern cottontail (Sylvilagus
floridanus), and swamp rabbit (Sylvilagus aquaticus.). Bison (Bison bison) may have
been present on nearby grasslands at various times in the past (Gadus and Howard
1990:15).
Common land turtles include eastern box turtle (Terrapene carolina) and Terrapene
ornata, while snapping turtle (Chelydra serpentinia), mud turtle (Kinosteron spp.), river
cooter (Chrysemys concinna), and diamondback terrapin (Malaclemys terrapin) comprise
common water turtles. Common lizards include Anolis carolinensis, Sceloporus
undulatus, Leiolopisma laterale, Eumeces laticeps, Cnemidophorus sexlineatus, and
Ophiosaurus ventralis. Snakes and amphibians are also present in considerable numbers
and diversity.
The immediate Project Area is overgrown pasture.
Soils and Geology
The segment of the Texas Gulf Coast that encompasses the current Project Area is on
soils laid down primarily over the last million to two million years. It sits on the
Beaumont Formation, a band of alluvial deltaic soils running parallel to the coastline that
was deposited during a series of glacial and interglacial intervals during the Middle to
Late Pleistocene epoch. Downcutting and erosion processes during the most recent
glacial period incised and widened many of the river drainages running through the
Beaumont Formation. After the sea levels rose again during the Holocene, these river
valleys then filled with alluvial soils and created broad, level floodplains. The Project
Area is in deep, non-saline soils on the boundary between the Pledger-Brazoria and the
Asa-Norwood associations.
The Project Area is depicted on sheet 101 of the Soil Survey of Brazoria County, Texas
(Crenwelge, et al 1981). Only one soil appears in the immediate Project Area. That is
Pledger clay. Pledger clay is a somewhat poorly drained clayey soil of recent alluvial
origin. It has a moderate to high geoarcheological potential (Abbott 2001). Additionally
within roughly 50 meters (to the northeast) of the Project Area are deposits of Asa silty
clay loam. This is a well-drained silty clay loam of recent alluvial origin. It has a high
geoarcheological potential (Ibid.).

8

Hydrology
The nearest stream affecting the Project Area is an unnamed, intermittent drainage that
flows north towards the town of Brazoria. It appears that this stream is in or close to its
natural channel, though it has likely been influenced somewhat by the long-term usage of
the vicinity for agriculture.
Of more note and geological influence on the Project Area is the proximity of both the
Brazos River (4.4 kilometers to the north) and the San Bernard River (2.5 kilometers to
the southwest). This Project Area is situated so that it falls within the archaic floodplain
of an older river. This floodplain has been filling with sediments from what is now the
Brazos and San Bernard Rivers since the end of the last ice age. The deep deposits found
in the area are all of recent alluvial origin, creating the potential for deep cultural
deposits. It is due to this alluvial influence that this project required the use of backhoe
trenching.
The relatively close proximity of these two rivers has other effects. Both rivers were
likely used as migration routes for tribal groups. It is likely that stops along the way could
have included locales such as this where the two rivers are so close.

9

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
The Project Area is within the Southeast Texas Archeological Region, which has been
recently summarized by Patterson (1995). Another recent prehistoric summary equally
pertinent to the prehistory of the area includes Ensor (1991). The reader is referred to
these works for detailed data on the prehistory of this region.
Previous investigations in Southeast Texas have demonstrated that prehistoric people
occupied this area as early as 12,000 years ago. All through prehistory the inhabitants
were nomadic hunter-gatherers. Ensor (1991) has proposed a prehistoric cultural
sequence of periods for Southeast Texas which are as follows: Paleo-Indian (10,0008,000 BC), Early Archaic (8,000-5,000 BC), Middle Archaic (5,000-1,000 BC), Late
Archaic (1,000 BC – AD 400), Early Ceramic (AD 400-AD 800), and Late Ceramic (AD
800-AD 1750).
Evidence for prehistoric occupation of Southeast Texas is scarce in the Paleo-Indian
period, and indeed, is rather ambiguous through the Middle Archaic period (Patterson
1983; Aten 1983:156-157). However, although most previously recorded sites date to the
Late Archaic and Ceramic periods, it is probable that earlier dating sites have been lost to
erosion, channel cutting, and, particularly in the case of very early sites, to rising sea
level. In cases where early-dating artifacts have been found, such as Wheat’s (1953) finds
of projectile points dating from the Paleo-Indian through Middle Archaic periods at
Addicks Reservoir in western Harris County, the materials occur in deposits with poor
contextual integrity.
Sites dating from the Late Archaic through the Ceramic periods are much more
commonly found in the project vicinity. During the late Archaic period, modern climatic
conditions evolved, sea level rose and stabilized, and coastal woodlands expanded. Aten
(1983) hypothesizes that an increase in population and the establishment of seasonal
rounds, including regular movement from littoral to inland areas occurred during the Late
Archaic period.
Aten (1983) has proposed that ceramics were introduced in the aboriginal artifact
assemblage on the Upper Texas Coast at AD 100. Ensor places the beginnings of the
Early Ceramic period at AD 400, which may be more applicable for areas inland from the
coastline. The Early Ceramic period is characterized by a continued growth in population
levels. Ensor (1991) places the beginning of the Late Ceramic at AD 800, which
coincides with the introduction of the bow and arrow. A plain sand-tempered pottery
dominates throughout both parts of the Ceramic era. Story et al. (1990) has defined the
Mossy Grove Cultural Tradition for Late Prehistoric cultures in Southeast Texas with
sandy paste pottery being the principal diagnostic artifact type.
European settlement did not begin to seriously disrupt aboriginal habitation in the areas
inland from the Upper Texas Coast until after AD 1700 (Patterson 1995; 249). European
diseases, probably introduced by explorers and early traders, did begin to have impacts as
early as AD 1528. At least 7 epidemics were recorded among the tribes of the study area

10

between that date and AD 1890 (Ewers, 1974).
The Project Area is in what was the territory of the Coco tribe during the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries (Aten 1983). This tribe was related to the Karankawa tribe that lived
along the gulf coast west of Galveston Bay. During the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, epidemic diseases, the mission system, and the fur trade acted to severely
reduce, and in some cases exterminate, the indigenous populations as mentioned above.

PREVIOUS ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
A review of the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas was conducted. This check found that
there are no sites within a kilometer of the proposed well pad. The nearest site is more
than 2500 meters from the Project Area. There are no previous surveys within one
kilometer of the Project Area. It is likely that the lack of previously recorded sites is to
some extent the result of the lack of previous archeological investigations.

11

METHODS
Field Survey
The pedestrian cultural resources survey covered 100% of the proposed project area. All
areas of exposed soil were examined for surface exposure of cultural remains and
features. Particular attention was paid to any landforms or features that were determined
to have high archeological probability. Surface visibility was typically very poor
throughout the Project Area due to ground cover.
Shovel testing was conducted in an attempt to identify buried cultural resources. Small
(40 cm by 40 cm) shovel tests were excavated at intervals within the Project Area. Texas
Historical Commission minimum standards for required shovel tests on an area project of
this size are 2 per acre. Shovel tests were excavated in 10-cm arbitrary levels and were
excavated to at least one meter deep or until intact basal clay was reached. Each test was
documented, including information on location (utilizing a hand-held GPS), soil profile
and cultural yield. Soil fill from tests were screened (when possible) through ¼-inch
hardware cloth and examined for cultural materials, and the units were backfilled
immediately. Allowances were made in the shovel test interval to allow for the sampling
of landforms or features of interest.
Based on a THC letter it was determined that deep reconnaissance (in the form of
backhoe trenching) was necessary for this project. It was proposed that a minimum of 3
trenches be excavated, two in the well pad area and one along the entrance road.
Trenches were dug to a maximum safe depth in order to achieve the most data recovery
and were be 3-5 meters in length. One or more measured profile drawings was made for
each trench, and trench wall photographs were taken. Trenches were backfilled
immediately after profiles and photographic documentation had been completed. The
location of all backhoe trenches was mapped utilizing a hand-held GPS unit.
Any locality producing either prehistoric or historic cultural remains would be recorded
on State of Texas archeological site forms for submission to THC. In addition to form
information, photographs, plan and stratigraphic sketches and measured drawings and
crewmembers’ daily field notes would document sites and features.
Investigations at any identified site or feature would seek to determine site boundaries,
depth, nature of the archeological deposits, and the site’s state of preservation. Historic
buildings (if any) and all other archeological sites and cultural features would be
photographed, mapped in plan view and plotted on USGS quadrangle maps and project
maps (if available). If possible, recommendations for State Archeological Landmark and
National Register of Historic Places eligibility would be made to the THC.
For buried or obscure sites, boundaries would be delineated through a combination of soil
surface examination and shovel test excavation. Where necessary, shovel tests would be
dug at 10-meter intervals radially in the cardinal directions from the presumed center of
each site until no further artifacts are encountered in two successive units (or until the

12

boundary of the Project Area is reached). The site boundary on each radius would be
presumed to lie between the last artifact-producing test and the first sterile unit.
Information on the depth and nature of the deposits would be derived from shovel test
results, as well as available surface observations.
The collection policy for this survey was that (1) we would retain any prehistoric or
potentially pre-1870 historic materials recovered from shovel tests or other subsurface
investigations that did not prove, after extensive site delineation tests, to be isolated
artifacts1, and (2) for surface materials: only diagnostic cultural materials from the above
periods will be collected and retained.

Figure 5: Shovel Tests locations

1

These isolated artifacts, such as a single flake surrounded by multiple, negative shovel tests, will be
reburied and the isolate will not be recorded as an archeological site.

13

RESULTS
Shovel Test Results
Visual examination, shovel testing and backhoe trenching were conducted in the
proposed well pad and access road. During this examination a total of 9 shovel tests and 3
backhoe trenches were excavated. Seven shovel tests were evenly placed within the
proposed well pad and two more along the proposed access road (Figure 5). All 9 of the
shovel tests were negative for cultural resources (Shovel Test Log). It was noted during
the fieldwork that the upper layer of some of the shovel tests had what seemed to be a
disturbed plow zone. None of the shovel tests reached basal clay. All ended in silty clay
loams at depths ranging from 55-80 centimeters below surface.
Backhoe Trench Results
Three backhoe trenches (BHT 1 – BHT3) were excavated within the proposed well pad
(Figures 6 and 7, Appendix A: Photographs). The reason for these excavations was that
the Project Area appeared to have a likelihood of deep soils deposited and/or influenced
by the nearby Brazos Rover and San Bernard River. As discussed in the Soil Survey of
Brazoria County, Texas (Crenwelge, et al 1981) these soils are deep clay soils of recent
alluvial origin.
No artifacts were observed in any of the three trenches. None were able to reach basal
clay soils, though they were dug to the deepest safe levels possible. All were getting close
to the water table based on the increasing wetness of the deposits. BHT 3 actually seems
to have reached the water table with water seeping in at the bottom. The profiles and
description of soils from the backhoe trenches are seen in Figures 6-8.
Though it was farthest from the nearby stream, BHT 1 had the widest array of layers
within its profile. It contained 7 identifiable layers, though 3 were repeats or variants of
Zone III. The lowest layer (Zone IV) was wet silty loam with little or no clay content.
BHT 2 contained only three identifiable layers. It ended in a Zone III soil contained
ferrous concretions and an increasing number of calcium carbonate concretions. This was
a silty clay loam soil that also appeared to be increasingly wet as the trench bottom
neared the water table.
The final trench (BHT 3) was the closest to the nearby stream. There were only three
identifiable layers, virtually identical to those found in BHT 2. Likely due to the
proximity of the stream, the water table appeared to have been much closer to the water
table. Because of this water began seeping in through the bottom of the trench and
collapsed the walls shortly after the profiles were completed.

14

Figure 6: BHT 1 Profile

Figure 7: BHT 2 Profile

15

Figure 8: BHT 3 Profile

16

RECOMMENDATIONS
Based on the investigation it is recommended that no further archeological investigations
are necessary prior to construction. No cultural resources were recovered in any of the
excavations conducted within the proposed well pad or its access road. Although none of
the units reached the basal clay subsoil it appears impossible to do so in a safe way. This
is due primarily to two factors. The first is that the alluvial soil deposits found within the
project area appear to be deep (see Soils & Geology in the Environmental Settings
section). Considering the geological history of the area it is likely that these deposits are
deeper than even large excavation machinery could reach. The second factor is the level
of the water table within the Project Area. Based on the seeping of water into two of the
three backhoe trenches it seems that the water table is within 1.5-2 meters of the surface.
Considering the nature and recent deposition of the soils within the Project Area it is
possible that intact cultural resources lay beneath what was reachable by the current
investigation. However, with the exception of the well drilling itself, none of the
construction proposed will be deeper than what shovel testing and backhoe trenching was
able to reach. This makes it unlikely that any deeply buried cultural deposits would or
could be impacted by the proposed construction of the well pad and its access road. It is
therefore recommended that the proposed construction be allowed to proceed without
further archeological investigation as long as the impacts are limited to the Project Area
as described. Should any construction occur outside of the described boundaries it will
likely be necessary to conduct additional archeological investigation prior to said
construction.
Should archeological deposits or features be encountered during construction, it is
advised that construction cease in the immediate area of the finds and the Archeology
Division of the Texas Historical Commission should be contacted for further
consultation.

17

REFERENCES CITED
Abbott, James T.
2001 Houston Area Geoarcheology; A Framework for Archeological
Investigation, Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the
Houston Highway District. Report 27, Texas Department of
Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division, Archeological Studies
Program.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1983 Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. National Parks Service, United States
Department of the Interior. Washington, D.C.
Blair, Frank W.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2 (1):
93-117
Carr, John T.
1967 The Climate and Physiography of Texas. Report Number 53, Texas Water
Development Board. Austin, Texas.
Crenwelge, G. W., J. D. Crout, E. L. Griffin, M. L Golden, and J. K. Baker
1981 Soil Survey of Brazoria County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service and Forest Service, and Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station.
Ensor, H. Blaine
1991 Comments on Prehistoric Chronology Building in Southeast Texas.
Houston Archeological Society Journal, 98:1-11
Ewers, John C.
1974 The Influence of Epidemics on the Indian Populations and Cultures of
Texas. Plains Anthropologist, Volume 8: 104-115. Lincoln Nebraska
Gadus, Eloise F., and Margaret Ann Howard
1990 Hunter-Fisher-Gatherers on the Upper Texas Coast: Archeological
Investigations at the Peggy Lake Disposal Area, Harris County, Texas
(Volume 1). Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Report of Investigations Number
74. Austin
Hoffman, G. O., B. J. Ragsdale and J. Daniel Rogers
N.d. Know Your Grasses. Texas Agricultural Extension Service. The Texas
A & M University System. College Station, Texas

18

Patterson, Leland W.
1983 Prehistoric Settlement and Technological Patterns in Southeastern Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Volume 54: 253-270.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, 66: 239-264

St. Clair, A. E., C. V. Proctor, W. L. Fisher, C. W. Kreitler, and J. H. McGowen
1975 Land Resources Laboratory Map Series – Houston – Galveston Area
Council . The University of Texas, Bureau of Economic Geology. Austin.
Story, D. A., Janice A. Guy, Barbara A. Burnett, Martha D. Freeman, Jerome C. Rose, D.
Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, and Karl J. Reinhard
1990 The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain: Volume 1.
Arkansas Archeological Survey Research Series. No. 38
Tharp, B. C.
1939

The Vegetation of Texas. Texas Academy of Sciences, Non-Technical
Series 1 (I-vi): 1-74

Wheat, Joe Ben
1953 An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas.
Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 154: 143-252. Washington, D.C.

19

APPENDIX A: PHOTOGRAPHS

Photograph 1: General view of project area

Photograph 2: Profile of the south wall of BHT1 with water seeping in

Photograph 3: Excavation of BHT2 in progress

20

Photograph 4: Profile of the south wall of BHT2

Photograph 5: Profile of the south wall of BHT3

21

APPENDIX B: Shovel Test Log
ROC ST 5-5 Well Pad and Access Road
No.

Depth

1

0-23
23-55

2

0-46
46-61

3

0-38
38-56

4

0-26
26-48
48-80

5

0-21
21-66

6

0-19
19-37
37-51

7

0-16
16-37
37-56

Description
very hard, dry 10yr 3/2 very dark
grayish brown silty CL
7.5yr 4/6 strong brown dry silty CL
very hard, dry 10yr 3/2 very dark
grayish brown silty CL
7.5yr 4/6 strong brown dry silty CL
very hard, dry 10yr 3/2 very dark
grayish brown silty CL
7.5yr 4/6 strong brown dry silty CL
w/ CaCO3 nodules common, up to
2 cm diameter
Very dry, hard 10 yr 5/3 brown
(when moistened) CL
very hard, dry 10yr 3/2 very dark
grayish brown silty CL
7.5yr 4/6 strong brown dry silty CL
10yr 5/3 brown very hard dry,
compact CL
7.5yr 4/6 strong brown dry silty cCL
w/ small friable Fe concretions
throughout
10yr 5/3 brown very hard dry,
compact silty CL
7.5yr 4/6 strong brown dry silty CL
7.5yr 4/6 strong brown moist silty
CL w/ small black Fe O concretions
comman. Friable
10yr 5/3 brown, very hard, dry
compact silty loam
10yr 2/1 black silty CL
7.5yr 4/6 strong brown silty CL

Comment

sticky, plastic, very clayish

sticky, plastic, very clayish

sticky, plastic, very clayish

sticky, plastic, very clayish

sticky, plastic, very clayish

sticky, plastic, very clayish

22

8

0-25
25-44

10yr 5/3 brown very hard dry
compact silty L
black silty CL

44-84

9

0-6
6-22
22-70

7.5yr 4/6 strong brown silty CL
very dry, hard brown silty loam
black silty CL
strong brown silty CL, concretions
below 49 cmbs

CaCO3 nodules below 65
cmbs (black in the middle,
possible Fe, whitish
exterier) < 2 cm diameter,
possibly Fe w/ Ca CO3
outside

