austin • denver

Emergency Archeological Monitoring for Remediation of Jet Fuel Spill along
Unnamed Tributary in Acequia Park, City of San Antonio, Mission Parkway
National Register District, Bexar County, Texas

April 2014

Short Report

Texas Historical Commission
TAC Permit # 6813

Prepared for:
TAS Environmental
3929 California Parkway E.
Fort Worth, Texas 76119

Prepared by:
aci consulting
1001 Mopac Circle
Austin, Texas 78746

Ann M. Scott, PhD, RPA
Principal Investigator

austin • denver

Abstract
From March 7-9, 2014 personnel from aci consulting performed archeological monitoring
during an emergency remediation response of a jet fuel spill into an unnamed tributary that
drains into the San Antonio River in Acequia Park, City of San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas.
This location is also part of the Mission Parkway Historic-Archeological District, a National
Register District. The remediation was restricted to approximately 124 linear meters (406 ft) of
creek bed and immediate creek bank to a depth of about 15 cm (6 in), however, a larger area of
approximately .17 acres (.068 ha) defined as the Area of Potential Effect (APE) was examined
prior to actual remediation efforts in the event the clean up plan had to be modified or expanded.
The San Juan Ditch, a historic acequia located about 15 meters (49 ft) north of the creek, was not
impacted by the remediation efforts. No prehistoric artifacts were observed in any cut banks, on
the surface, or during remediation. Trash had been dumped in the general area around the
tributary. In addition, early-to mid-twentieth-century trash was observed adjacent to the creek in
two areas. As expected a few bottles were observed during remediation and their locations noted.
A decision was made that the recent and disturbed nature of the trash did not warrant assigning a
site number following consultation with National Park Service World Heritage Coordinator,
Susan Snow. No further work is recommended and no historic properties eligible for inclusion
on the National Register of Historic Places or as a State Antiquities Landmark were affected by
the remediation efforts.

1

austin • denver

Introduction
On March 6, 2014 the San Antonio office of Terracon on behalf of TAS Environmental
contacted aci consulting to perform archeological monitoring of remediation efforts for a jet fuel
spill that had occurred on property that was part of the Mission Parkway Historic-Archeological
District, a National Register District, managed under the jurisdiction of the National Park Service
(NPS) who had requested an archeological monitor be present during the remediation process.
On March 7, 2014 Ann M. Scott from aci consulting arrived at the park and obtained more
information from TAS Environmental concerning ownership of the property. The property is
owned by the City of San Antonio (COSA) but was also managed by the San Antonio River
Authority (SARA), who had a representative on-site monitoring remediation efforts. Once it
became known that the property was owned by COSA, efforts were made to contact the Office
of Historic Preservation (OHP) and the City Archeologists regarding permitting. When they were
not available, efforts were made to contact the Texas Historical Commission (THC) to receive an
emergency monitoring permit under the Texas Antiquities Code (TAC). Bill Martin at the THC
was reached and assigned TAC permit number 6813 (Appendix A) to the project. The
monitoring for this project also satisfies federal compliance under Section 106 of the National
Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, for any impacts in the National Register District
or any compliance necessary for permits related to Section 404 of the Clean Water Act under the
jurisdiction of the US Army Corps of Engineers.
From March 7-9, 2014 personnel from aci consulting, assisted in part by Susan Snow, NPS
World Heritage Coordinator, monitored the remediation of an accidental jet fuel discharge into
an unnamed tributary that drains into the San Antonio River near Espada Dam in Acequia Park,
located south of SE Military and west of S. Presa Street (Figures 1 and 2). The remediation was
restricted to about 124 linear meters (406 ft) of creek bed and immediate creek bank to a depth of
about 15 cm (6 in); however, a larger area of approximately .17 acres (.068 ha) defined as the
Area of Potential Effect (APE) was examined on March 7 prior to actual remediation efforts in
the event the clean up plan had to be modified or expanded. The San Juan Ditch, a historic
acequia located about 15 meters (49 ft) north of the creek, was not impacted by the remediation
efforts.
This investigation consisted of oversight of the removal of contaminated sediment from the creek
bed and immediate low banks as well as an intensive pedestrian survey within the APE. The
overall investigation included monitoring, pedestrian survey, photography, the examination of
exposed cut banks, resource identification, basic archival research prior to on-site visit, any
necessary National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and State Antiquities Landmark (SAL)
eligibility assessment, data analysis, and preparation of a letter report.

2

austin • denver

Soils and Current Conditions
According to Bexar County Soil Survey data from Web Soil and Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS 2013), the soil unit within the project area is the Loire soil. These
are alluvial sediments found located on Edwards Plateau floodplains. Loire soil is clay loam,
generally deep, well drained, and moderately permeable (Figure 3). The current conditions in the
area indicate that much modification occurred during the construction of Acequia Park and there
is evidence of earlier trash dumping, the placement of fill, and earth moving by bull dozer within
the APE.
Site Records Search
The THC’s Sites Atlases were accessed seeking information about previous surveys in the area
and the locations of previously recorded sites prior to arrival at the project area. No sites were
recorded within the APE while two prehistoric sites were recorded nearby in the park,
41BX1888 and 41BX1902, which have undergone NRHP eligibility testing but the report is not
completed. Numerous historic sites and features are also located within 1 km of the APE within
the National Register District but not detailed here. The site file search indicated that the
potential for intact archeological resources within the APE was high.
Pedestrian Survey and Monitoring Efforts
From March 7-9, 2014 fieldwork consisted of a pedestrian survey of the APE and the monitoring
of the removal of the contaminated sediment and rocks. The removal was accomplished by the
excavation of the sediment by either hand or heavy machinery (small trackhoe) or by the
vacuuming of the contaminated sediment with large industrial machines. The pedestrian survey
included an examination of the ground surface, which was heavily vegetated at the creek bottom
but less vegetated on the upper terrace, and inspection of exposed cut banks of the terrace
(Figure 4). The creek bed is rocky with areas of sediment where the creek turns and meanders.
The majority of the water coming into the creek had been stopped for the remediation process
allowing for easier inspection of the bed and bank. No prehistoric artifacts were observed in any
of the cut banks or in the creek bed. One area of the cut bank contained what appeared to be
concrete, wire, and other industrial waste (Figure 5). Above the bank it appeared as if fill was
bulldozed into a push pile (Figure 6). In the northwest area of the APE is where a disturbed trash
dump was observed in the vegetation and loose sediment (see Figure 6). Based on the trash
present, it likely dates to early-to mid-twentieth-century. The trash observed included broken and
whole bottles (mostly screw top), broken plates and cups, a Ray-O-Vac D cell battery, a plastic
knife, and numerous metal fragments (Figures 7 and 8). While the trash was located about 1.5 m
(4.9 ft) from the current creek edge, bottles were encountered in the creek mud during the
remediation efforts (Figures 9 and 10; see Figure 6). In discussion with Susan Snow it was
decided that the trash dump did not warrant the designation of a trinomial site number and did
not represent an intact historic site. Finally, another artifact of unknown function was observed
3

austin • denver

along the rockiest parts of the creek bed (Figure 11). It appears to be industrial porcelain and/or
some form of stoneware and may have served as a coupling device.
Conclusions and Recommendations
From March 7-9, 2014 personnel from aci consulting, with assistance from NPS archeologist
Susan Snow, monitored remediation efforts in Acequia Park. While some historic trash was
encountered in the mud of the creek during clean up, likely from the erosion of materials in the
nearby trash heap, the trash is not considered to be intact and does not contributed to our
understanding of early- to mid-twentieth-century homesteads in Bexar County. Additionally, no
intact prehistoric deposits were encountered or observed during the monitoring. No further work
is recommended at the remediation location. Finally, no historic properties eligible for NRHP
inclusion or SAL listing were affected by the remediation process.

4

austin • denver

Figures

5

austin • denver

Figure 4. Close up of cut bank examined for cultural resources; these thicker cut banks were not affected by the
remediation process. View to the south.

Figure 5. Trash pushed along creek and eroding out of the bank. View to the north.

9

austin • denver

Figure 7. Overview of historic trash dump. View to the north.

Figure 8. Example of materials from trash dump.

11

austin • denver

Figure 9. Bottle recovered from the mud bank during remediation downstream from trash dump.

Figure 10. More bottles recovered during remediation near the location of the trash dump.

12

austin • denver

Figure 11. Unknown industrial artifacts made of porcelain or stoneware.

13

