ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED BAUER BRIDGE
REPLACEMENT PROJECT, HARRIS COUNTY, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 3202

By
H. Blaine Ensor
and
Randy Ferguson
with a contribution by
Nancy Porter

Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc.
Report of Investigations Number 364
August, 2004

ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED BAUER BRIDGE
REPLACEMENT PROJECT, HARRIS COUNTY, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 3202
MAC PN 02-111

By
H. Blaine Ensor
and
Randy Ferguson
with a contribution by
Nancy Porter

H. Blaine Ensor
Principal Investigator

Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc.
Report of Investigations Number 364
August, 2004

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY
On August 22, 2003 personnel from Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc. (MAC), of Houston,
Texas conducted an archeological survey of less than 2-acres in the vicinity of Bauer Road
bridge. The existing bridge is to be replaced. The investigations were conducted for Atser, L.P.
on behalf of the Harris County Public Infra-Structure Department, Houston, Texas (TAC Permit
Number 3202) and will be subject to review by the Texas Historical Commission (THC) and by
Atser, Inc. The objectives of this investigation were to locate and identify cultural materials or
resources within the proposed bridge reconstruction project area along Little Cypress Creek and
to prepare management recommendations regarding any identified resources or materials. Copies
of the final report describing the results of the survey will be submitted to Atser, L.P., the Texas
Historical Commission, and other interested parties.
The survey determined that there was a high degree of mechanical disturbance within the portion
of the proposed project area centered on Bauer Road bridge. This disturbance was primarily the
result of prior bridge and road construction and associated drainage easements. The area west of
the bridge produced relatively intact deposits, however nothing was found. No cultural materials,
features, or deposits were encountered during the course of this investigation other than modern
debris and the existing road/bridge. It is therefore recommended that reconstruction of the Bauer
Road bridge at Little Cypress Creek be allowed to proceed from the standpoint of cultural
resources. No further work is recommended. In the unlikely event that archeological deposits or
features should be encountered during construction, it is advised that construction cease in the
immediate area of the finds and the Archeology Division of the THC contacted for further
consultation.

i

TABLE OF CONTENTS

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY…………………………………………………….……….….i
TABLE OF CONTENTS……………………………………………….……………………...ii
LIST OF FIGURES……………………………………………………………….…………...iii

CHAPTER
I

INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………..….1

II

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTINGS……………………………………….….....3
Modern Climate……………………………………………………….…….....3
Modern Flora and Fauna………………………………………………..….…..3
Soils and Geology………………………………………………….………......4
Hydrology……………………………………………………….…………......5

III

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND………………….……………..…......5
Southeast Texas Culture History……………………………………….………5
Historic Overview…………………………………………………….…..…..10
Previous Archeological Investigations……………………………..…………10

IV

METHODS…………………………………………………………..…….…14
Introduction and Project Description………………………………….……...14
Shovel/Augur Testing………………………………………………...………17

V

RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS…………………………..………18

REFERENCES CITED………………………………………………………………………...19
APPENDIX A. SHOVEL TEST INVENTORY……………………………………………...27

ii

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1. General Location Bauer Road Bridge Replacement Project, Little Cypress Creek…….2
Figure 2. Map showing shovel test locations along Little Cypress Creek and in the vicinity of
Bauer Road Bridge…………………………………………………………….………15
Figure 3. View of Bauer Road bridge at Little Cypress Creek, showing bridge detail and
vegetation, view south-southeast………………………………………………………16
Figure 4. View north-northwest along Bauer Road showing fill build-up, slope,
vegetation cover south of bridge…………………………………………………...…16

iii

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
On August 22, 2003 personnel from Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc. (MAC), of Houston,
Texas conducted an archeological survey of less than 2-acres in the vicinity of Bauer Road bridge
(Figure 1). The existing bridge is to be replaced. The investigations were conducted for Atser,
L.P. on behalf of the Harris County Public Infra-Structure Department, Houston, Texas (TAC
Permit Number 3202) and will be subject to review by the Texas Historical Commission (THC)
and by Atser, Inc.
The objectives of this investigation were to locate and identify cultural materials or resources
within the proposed bridge reconstruction project area along Little Cypress Creek and to prepare
management recommendations regarding any identified resources or materials. Copies of the final
report describing the results of the survey will be submitted to Atser, L.P., the Texas Historical
Commission, and other interested parties.
The project area along Bauer Road consisted of short 100 m or 300 foot long sections on the
north and south sides of Little Cypress Creek. The total right-of-way expansion width, including
existing Bauer Road is approximately 100 feet or 30 m. A small (.15-acre) rectangular area west
of the Bauer Road bridge was also surveyed. The rectangular area is centered on the creek and
measures approximately 130 feet by 50 feet. The total area surveyed includes about 1.6-acres.
The vegetation along the creek banks was primarily hardwoods and a few pines along with some
invasive tree species such as tallow, cottonwood, yaupon. Short grasses and vines were also
present. The crew excavated 15 (30x40 centimeter) shovel tests/augur tests at intervals
determined by the project archeologist and as described in the methods section of this report.
Project Archeologist Randy Ferguson and field technician Josh Gibbs conducted this
investigation under the supervision of the Principal Investigator, H. Blaine Ensor.

1

Figure 1 General Project Location Map.

2

CHAPTER II
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTINGS

Modern Climate
The modern climate of the study area can be characterized as hot and wet for most of the year.
The mean annual temperature for the study area region is about 20 degrees Centigrade, with mean
rainfalls of 117 centimeters. Summer temperatures average about 34 degrees Centigrade with
temperatures above 100 degrees common, during the months of July and August (Carr 1967; St.
Clair et al. 1975). The average winter temperature is a mild 18 degrees Centigrade. Freezes are
infrequent and of short duration, with an average of 271 frost-free days per year. Snow, sleet, and
freezing rain are quite uncommon.
Rainfall varies from 7 centimeters in March to 11 centimeters in December, with July to
December rainfalls often associated with tropical fronts and storms. The rainfall records are 45
centimeters in 1917 and 185 centimeters in 1917. Prevailing winds are usually from the southeast
except during the winter months when ‘Northers’ sweep into the area.
Modern Flora and Fauna
Southeast Texas is within the Austroriparian biotic province as defined by Blair (1950:98-101),
near its western boundary with the Texan province. This boundary is marked by the western edge
of the pine-hardwood forests of the eastern Gulf coastal plain with this boundary set by available
moisture levels. The southeast Texas study area is situated within the pine-oak forest subdivision
of the Austroriparian province and includes, within its western limits, portions of the coastal
prairie (Tharp 1939).
Grasses within the coastal prairies and marshes biotic zone are described from a rangemanagement perspective in Hoffman et al. (nd: 45). This 10,000,000-acre area is comprised of
9,500,000 acres of Gulf Prairies and 500,000 acres of Gulf Marshes situated along the Texas
coast. The regional vegetation of the coastal prairies is characterized as follows:
The principal grasses of the prairies are tall bunchgrass, including big bluestem
(Andropon gerardi), little bluestem, seacoast bluestem (Schizachyrium
scoparium, var. littorus), Indiangrass, eastern gamagrass (Tripascum
dactyloides), switchgrass, and gulf cordgrass. Seashore saltgrass is common on
moist saline sites. Grazing pressures have changed the composition of the
range vegetation so that the grasses now existing are broomsedge bluestem,
smutgrass, threeawns, tumblegrass and many other inferior grasses. The other
plants that have invaded the productive grasslands are oak underbrush,
mcartney rose, huisache, mesquite, pricklypear, ragweed, bitter sneezeweed,
broomweed, and many other unpalatable annual weeds.

The dominant floral species of the pine-oak forest subdivision of the Austroriparian biotic
province include loblolly pine (Pinus taeda), yellow pine (Pinus echinata), red oak (Quercus
rubra), post oak (Quercus stellata) and blackjack oak (Quercus marilandica). Hardwood forests
are found on lowlands within the Austroriparian and are characterized by such trees as sweetgum
(Liquidambar styrciflua), magnoila (Magnolia grandiflora), tupelo (Nyssa sylvatica), water oak
(Quercus nigra) and other species of oaks, elms, and ashes, as well as the highly diagnostic
Spanish moss (Tillandsia usneiodes) and palmetto (Sabal glabra). Swamps are common in the
region.

3

Blair (1950) and Gadus (Gadus and Howard 1990:12-15) define the following mammals as
common within the Austroriparian province: white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), muskrat
(Ondatra zibethicus), raccoon (Procyon lotor), coyote (Canis latrans), opossum (Didelphis
virginiana), Scalopus aquaticus, Pipistrellus subflavus, Lasiurus borealis, Sciurus niger, Sciurus
carolinensis, Glaucomys volans, Geomys breviceps, Reithrodonomys fulvescens, Peromyscus
leucopus, Oryzomys palustris, cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus,), packrat (Neotoma floridana),
eastern cottontail (Sylvilagus floridanus), and swamp rabbit (Sylvilagus aquaticus.). Bison
(Bison bison) may have been present on nearby grasslands at various times in the past (Gadus and
Howard 1990:15).
Common land turtles include eastern box turtle (Terrapene carolina) and Terrapene ornata,
while snapping turtle (Chelydra serpentinia), mud turtle (Kinosteron spp.), river cooter
(Chrysemys concinna) and diamondback terrapin (Malaclemys terrapin) comprise common water
turtles. Common lizards include Anolis carolinensis, Sceloporus undulatus, Leiolopisma laterale,
Eumeces laticeps, Cnemidophorus sexlineatus and Ophiosaurus ventralis.
Snakes and
amphibians are also present in considerable numbers and diversity.
The resources provided by river-influenced estuarine and marsh environments were undoubtedly
of great importance to the littoral residents of southeast Texas. These resources are admirably
summarized by Gadus (Gadus and Howard 1990:12-15). Estuarine fish resources cited by Gadus
include sand trout (Cynoscion arenarius), spotted sea trout (Cynoscion nebulosus), Atlantic
croaker (Micropogon undulatus), striped mullet (Mugil cephalus), southern flounder
(Paralichthysis lethostigma), shortnose gar (Lepisosteus platostomus), channel catfish (Ictalurus
punctatus), freshwater drum (Aplodinotus grunniens), red drum (Sciaenops ocellata), and bluegill
(Lepomis macrochirus) and other sunfishes. Common shellfish include Rangia (Rangia cuneata),
Macoma spp., dwarf surf clam (Mulinia lateralis), oyster (Crassostrea virginica), Vioscalba
louisianae, and olive nerite (Neritina [Vitta] reclivata). Arthropods such as shrimp and crab are
also numerous and highly productive. Area marshes replete with plants such as cordgrasses
(Spartina spp.), reeds (Phragmites spp.) giant millet (Setaria magna) and bullrushes (Scirpus
spp.) would have formed a highly attractive and bountiful magnet for waterfowl (Gadus and
Howard 1990).

Soils and Geology
The portion of the Texas Gulf Coast that encompasses the current project area rests on sediments
laid down primarily over the last million to two million years. It rests on the Pleistocene Lissie
Formation, a deltaic plain of alluvial origin that runs parallel to the coastline. The Pleistocene
Lissie Formation or plain, comprised of clay, silt, sand, and on occasion, fine gravel, outcrops in
the project area (Barnes 1982). This deltaic plain was formed during interglacial high sea level
when streams discharged into the Gulf of Mexico. It is characterized by a level to slightly
undulating surface and may be marked with shallow ponded depressions and pimple mounds
(Abbott 2001). Calcium carbonate concretions and iron-manganese rhizoliths are often present
(Abbott 2001). The Lissie occurs as a broad, unbroken flat plain dissected only by filled stream
valleys.
The property discussed herein is depicted on Sheet 17 of the Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas
(Wheeler 1976). The proposed project area lies within the Gessner complex which is
characterized by nearly level land with slopes ranging from 0-1 percent. Pimple mounds and
slight depressions between the mounds are common. The soil texture is loamy. The soil is poorly

4

drained and stays saturated for much of the winter and early spring. Abbott (2001) has recently
developed the PALM (Potential Archeological Liability Model) for Houston and Harris County in
conjunction with the Texas Department of Transportation. A number of soils and geological
criteria are used to predict where archeological sites have the best potential for preservation.
Gessner soils are classified as having low-moderate potential for containing archeological sites
(Abbott 2001). The location of the proposed project along an active floodplain contains some
Map Unit 1 soils/sediments according to the PALM model. Locations that fall within Map Unit 1
are recommended for deep reconnaissance (backhoe trenching/auger coring) whenever deep
impacts or disturbance will occur in undisturbed environments. Intact, preserved sites are likely to
be present in this environment.

Hydrology
Little Cypress Creek, which has been previously channelized, is centered on the project area at
the Bauer Road Bridge location. It flows eastward into Cypress Creek which historically flowed
into the West Fork of the San Jacinto River or present day Lake Houston.

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

Southeast Texas Culture History
Various syntheses of the archaeology of Southeast Texas and the upper Texas Coast are currently
available for interpreting the chronology, culture history, and lifeways of prehistoric and historic
Native Americans (cf. Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1985, 1995, 1996, Ensor 1990, 1995, 1998,
Shafer 1988; Story 1981, 1985, 1990). For example, Aten (1983:141-142) has divided the
archeology of the upper Texas Coast into three periods: (1) Paleo-Indian (12,000 B.P. to 9,000
B.P.), (2) Archaic (9,000 B.P. to 3,000 B.P.), and (3) Late Prehistoric-Woodland (3,000 B.P. to
A.D. 1700). These broad periods appear to correspond more or less with periods of major
environmental change, i.e., (1) the Late Glacial, (2) post-Pleistocene adaptations with
concomitant economic reorientation and population increase, and (3) cultural adaptation to
essentially modern environmental conditions (Aten 1983:141-142).
Other researchers in Southeast Texas have put forth a number of prehistoric sequences or artifact
chronologies based on the available archeological data. Story (1990) has provided her estimate of
an artifact sequence for this area that parallels to a great extent those put forth by other
researchers (cf. Shafer 1988, Ensor 1990, 1998). Projectile point sequences outlined and proposed
by Patterson (1985, 1991, 1995, 1996) diverge somewhat from the above chronologies in that a
wider range of types from central Texas are proposed as being an integral part of the Southeast
Texas sequence. In addition, Patterson’s beginning and end dates, as well as period of duration
and/or overlap for particular dart point/arrow point forms often deviate from estimates by the
above researchers. This review will follow the sequences proposed by Story (1990) and Ensor
(1990, 1998) for the upper Texas Coast.
The earliest projectile points that are usually associated with the prehistoric occupation of
Southeast Texas include occasional finds of fluted and unfluted Clovis points as well as fluted
Folsom points. Recently, the estimated time range for Clovis occupation in Texas has been
pushed back based on data from the Aubrey site near Denton (Ferring 2001) and the WilsonLeonard site in central Texas (Collins 1998). When these dates are coupled with recent ice core

5

data from Greenland (Feidel 1999:95-115), it is now estimated that Clovis-Folsom occupations
may date 2,000 years earlier than previously thought across North America. A time range from
13,500 to 14,500 years before present is now estimated for initial Clovis occupation of North
America by many Paleo-Indian researchers. Traditionally, Clovis and Folsom points are thought
to be followed in time by such unfluted lanceolates as Plainview, Golondrina, and Angostura as
well as notched and unnotched Dalton and San Patrice points in Southeast Texas. However,
recent work at the Wilson-Leonard site near Austin in central Texas has produced evidence that a
corner-notched form termed Wilson follows the Clovis/Folsom occupations. An undefined
component intervenes between the Wilson and Clovis occupations at Wilson-Leonard from
11,400-11,000 B.P. that most closely resembles Plainview or Folsom (Collins1998). The Wilson
period occupation (10,000-9500 B.P.) is in turn followed by such lanceolates as St. Mary’s Hall
and Golondrina/Barber/Angostura which date from 9500 B.P. to 8800 B.P. (Collins 1998:281).
Plainview points are rare at Wilson-Leonard and may predate the St. Mary Hall’s occupation as
noted above.
Further to the east, San Patrice points (coeval with Dalton in the Eastern Woodlands) Ensor
(1986) are thought to be related to Webb et al.’s (1971) types A and B which have also been
termed Keithville, varieties A and B (Story 1990, Webb 1981). These notched forms appear to
follow San Patrice in time from at least 7500 B.C. up to about 6,000 B.C. The relationship of
Wilson points to corner notched and side-notched forms further east such as those reported at the
Crawford site in Polk County (Ensor and Carlson 1988), at 41FB19 (Patterson et al. 1987) and
elsewhere (Story 1990; Patterson 1996) is unknown. However these early corner/side notched
forms, along with San Patrice points, most likely represent a widespread regional notched haft
technology that is primarily associated with early Holocene climatic events (cf. Goodyear 1982).
These types in general are followed during the Middle Archaic period by such expanded haft
cluster types as Trinity, Yarbrough, and Carrollton. These point types are believed to date from
circa 6,000 B.C. to 2,000 B.C. (Story 1990, Ensor 1990, 1998) but they are not well dated. These
expanded haft cluster forms along with straight to slightly contracting stemmed Central Texas
types Bulverde and Wells/Morrill points (Ensor 1998; Ensor and Carlson 1988, Patterson 1996)
are also thought to fill a long temporal gap in the Southeast Texas Archaic sequence from about
6,000 B.C. to 2,000 B.C. Other Central Texas types such as Williams, Lange, Pedernales, and
Travis also occur (cf. Ensor, 1990, 1998; Howard et al. 1991; Patterson 1995, 1996). About
2,000 B.C., the late Middle Archaic to early Late Archaic Palmillas type is introduced followed
by Kent and Gary points during the Late Archaic/Early Ceramic periods (Ensor 1990, 1998; Story
1990). Recent excavations at the Eagle’s Ridge shell midden, when coupled with data from Aten
et al.’s (1976) Harris County Boy’s School excavations, indicate that Kent points are confined
almost exclusively to the Late Archaic period from 2800 B.P. to the beginning of the Early
Ceramic (Clear Lake) period along the upper Texas Coast around 2400 to 2200 years ago (Ensor
1998). Kent points occur as a distinct regional lithic tradition that utilized primarily quartzite and
silicified wood gravel for biface manufacture at Eagle’s Ridge. This marks a distinct
technological shift with earlier groups at the site who used principally high quality cherts for
biface manufacture from Paleo-Indian through Middle Archaic times. A similar pattern has been
observed throughout Eastern Texas with the use of non-local exotic cherts prevalent during the
Middle Archaic (cf. Ensor and Carlson 1988; Gadus et al. 1992; Pertulla and Bruseth 1994; Fields
1995).
While no one culture adhered strictly to the use of a single raw material, there was apparently a
shift from long distance regional chert procurement at the end of the Middle Archaic period to
localized procurement during the Late Archaic and Early Ceramic periods at Eagle’s Ridge and
by inference much of the upper Texas Coast (Ensor 1998). Further to the north and east at the

6

Alabonson Road site (Mueller-Wille et al. 1991), the percentage of silicified wood and
quartzites versus chert used to make Kent points was the highest of all projectiles (about a third)
even though chert was still the predominate material used in biface manufacture. This trend for an
increase in chert use from east to west in Harris County has been noted by several researchers (cf.
Ensor 2003; Moore 1995; Patterson 1996) and appears to be a direct function of availability and
ease of procurement.
Gary points appear to have been introduced at Eagle’s Ridge and other upper Texas coastal
margin sites around the end of the Late Archaic period or 2400/2200 B.P. While Kent and Gary
points share a close technological history (cf. Weber 1991, Ensor 1991, Patterson 1996), and
may in fact be associated with initial formation of the Mossy Grove tradition (Moore 1995), data
from these Texas coastal margin sites demonstrate clearly that stratigraphic/chronometric
separation is possible at some sites (also see Story 1990:222 for a similar opinion). Further, the
data from Eagle’s Ridge clearly indicates that Kent points have a rather restricted temporal
duration at this site since expanded haft cluster forms predominate at the virtual exclusion of Kent
points in the lower portion of the midden. While some local variation may exist in the temporal
distribution of these types in Southeast Texas, especially between inland and coastal sites, the
preponderance of evidence to date suggests the above general sequence probably occurred over
much of the area (cf. Story 1990). The question of Gary point or dart point extension into the
Late Prehistoric and co-occurrence with arrow points is unresolved.
Story (1990) has noted a very generalized sequence for inland post-Archaic or Late Prehistoric
sites. She refers to this as the Mossy Grove Tradition which later formed the core of Moore’s
(1995) dissertation. Story breaks with Aten (1983, 1984) and Shafer (1975) who referred to postArchaic remains in Texas as Woodland. It has been pointed out by Ensor and Carlson (1988) that
the Goose Creek pottery tradition most closely resembles Gulf Formational sandy paste and sand
tempered ceramics of Louisiana and the greater Southeast in terms of decorative modes and paste
composition (cf. Walthall and Jenkins 1976). In fact, a developmental sequence from the Gulf
Formational types Tchefuncte and Mandeville (Jenkins and Walthall 1976; Weinstein and Rivet
1978) to Goose Creek Plain var. Anahuac and Goose Creek Plain var. Unspecified has recently
been postulated by Ensor (1995, 1996, 1998) based on work at the Eagle’s Ridge shell midden on
the upper Texas Coast.
Archeological research at inland Mossy Grove sites has led to a two-fold division into an Early
Ceramic period and a Late Ceramic Period (Ensor 1987, Ensor and Carlson 1991; Fields et al.
1983; Howard et al. 1991; Story 1990; Winchell and Wootan-Ellis 1991). The Early Ceramic
period lasts from about A.D. 100 to A.D. 800 and is characterized by sandy paste Goose Creek
Plain pottery and Gary points while the succeeding Late Ceramic period, which lasts from about
A.D. 800 to A.D. 1750, is characterized by both sandy paste Goose Creek ware and grog
tempered Baytown ware, as well as a variety of arrow point forms such as Scallorn, Alba, and
Perdiz/Cliffton. Other aspects of post-Archaic period lithic assemblage are less well understood,
however there appears to be an overall decrease in flake size from the Early Ceramic period to the
Late Ceramic period (Ensor 1987; Ensor and Carlson 1988; Patterson 1985, 1995, 1996).
Archeological site distribution across the inland coastal prairie of Southeast Texas indicates that
sandy, well drained-elevated soils along creeks and bayous were the favored locales that were
repeatedly occupied (Ensor et al. 1983; Ensor 1987; Fields et al. 1986; Freeman and Hale 1978;
Moore 1995, 1996; Patterson 1985). The floodplain and upland margins or scarps where older
geologic deposits abut the floodplain are notably preferred site locations (cf. Ensor et al. 1983;
Fields et al. 1986; Hall 1981; Moore 1995). The occurrence of sites far removed from a
dependable water source on the upland prairie is rare (Ensor et al. 1983; Fields et al. 1986; Moore

7

1995, 1996). However, sites in the Greens Bayou drainage of eastern Harris County have shown a
tendency to be located at greater distances from large streams than further west in Harris County
(Ensor et al. 1990; Sanchez 2003). There are indications that a relatively stable environment has
been in place across Southeast Texas for the past 4,000 years as noted above. The redundancy in
settlement patterning noted by researchers along inland drainages is likely tied to intensive
exploitation of the narrow band of riparian woodland that borders each stream (Ensor 1987). The
result may have been the ubiquitous site clusters, either on sandy pimple mounds or other
landforms that occur along the waterways.
Data from the Alabonson Road site, as well as other inland sites, suggest that minimally a
dichotomous breakdown of sites into longer term residential base camps and shorter term
extractive sites is evident (McReynolds, Ensor, and Korgel 1988; Ensor and Carlson 1991; Moore
1995). Moore (1995) further indicates that evidence of hunter-gatherer logistical activities
(Binford 1980) within the riparian zone may indicate a more complicated pattern of resource
extraction and scheduling of day to day activities than would be expected in a pure forager model
and that a three-tier system of residential base camps, residential bases, and locations or
temporary extractive locales may best fit the observed data (Moore 1995:189-190). Establishing
criteria that enable the archeologist to empirically separate and/or test the validity of these
hypothetical site types should be a major goal of on-going research. Cemetery sites are known
for inland Southeast Texas with large Late Archaic cemeteries documented at Allens Creek on the
lower Brazos River (Hall 1981). Data from Late Archaic cemeteries at Allens Creek suggest that
widespread movement of exotic goods occurred during this period. Other burials occur in
Addicks Reservoir at the Kobs and Doering sites (Wheat 1953) and isolated individuals have
been found at more intensively occupied sites such as Alabonson Road (Ensor and Carlson 1991).
While there is evidence of long term stability in environmental conditions since the onset of the
Late Holocene; there also exists paleo-environmental and archeological data that suggest short
term environmental fluctuations. For example, the occurrence of bison kill sites across Southeast
Texas (McReynolds, Korgel, and Ensor 1988), often in association with Perdiz arrow points, the
presence of prairie soils in now heavily wooded areas (Ensor et al. 1990), and pollen data
indicating climatic fluctuation (Beck et al. 2001), all suggest such change. Both Patterson (1985)
and Ensor (1987) have posited that populations became more mobile during the Late Ceramic
period at inland sites, possibly related to a drier climate and the expansion of prairies and prairie
species.
Regarding the coastal situation, Aten (1983) has subdivided the coastal Mossy Grove sites (Late
Prehistoric/Woodland period) into five prehistoric and three protohistoric sub-periods that span
approximately 2,000 years along the upper Texas coast. The earliest of these he terms the Clear
Lake period from A.D. 100 to A.D. 425 based on radiocarbon dating of early pottery
assemblages. Tchefuncte, Goose Creek, and O’Neal ceramics predominate along with a minority
of incised sherds. Gary dart points are often associated with Clear Lake period middens as are
socketed bone projectile points (Story 1990). Recent data from the Eagle’s Ridge shell midden
(Ensor 1998) suggests that Aten’s (1983) subdivision the Clear Lake period into an early and late
period based on varying amounts Goose Creek var. Anahuac and Mandeville pottery is correct.
However some need for refinement is in order based on data from Eagle’s Ridge. At this site,
Mandeville Plain/Stamped and Tchefuncte Plain/Incised/Stamped pottery dominate the early
portion of the Clear Lake period from 2,400/2,200 B.P. to 2,000 B.P. or slightly later. Goose
Creek Plain var. Anahuac dominates the latter portion of this period from 2,000 B.P. to 1,600
B.P. or slightly later (Ensor 1998). Goose Creek Plain var. Unspecified predominates in postClear Lake contexts at Eagle’s Ridge with a very small percentage of decorated ware along with a
few arrow points.

8

Aten (1983) has noted that in the subsequent Mayes Island period from A.D. 425 to A.D. 650 that
the ceramic assemblage consists almost entirely of Goose Creek Plain var. Unspecified with
minor amounts of Goose Creek Incised. It has been surmised that stone dart points may have
disappeared but that socketed bone points continue into this period (Story 1990). The next period,
Turtle Bay, runs from A. D. 650 to A.D. 900. It is characterized by an increase in Goose Creek
Red-Filmed and an elaboration of incised design motifs on Goose Creek Incised pottery (Aten
1983; Ensor 1995). It has been postulated that the bow and arrow first came into use during this
period along the upper Texas coast and that socketed bone points fell into disuse.
Baytown-related grog-tempered ceramics (Phillips 1970) first appear around A.D. 1000 and mark
the beginning of the Round Lake period (Aten 1983). Sandy paste Goose Creek ceramics decline
during this period. The Phoenix Lake variety of Goose Creek, which is characterized by a dense
grog paste, is thought to predominate by the end of this period at about A.D. 1350. Perdiz/Cliffton
arrow points are common and microlithic drills or perforators become more visible in the
archeological record. The final prehistoric period has been termed the Old River period by Aten
(1983). It lasts from about A.D. 1350 until A.D. 1700 and is characterized by an increase in
Goose Creek sandy paste pottery and the decline of Baytown grog tempered ceramics (Aten
1983). Bone tempered pottery is introduced and Perdiz arrow point become more pervasive
during this period (Aten 1983; Ensor 1995; Story 1990). The Old River (prehistoric) period is
followed by the Old River (protohistoric) period, the Early Historic Orcoquisac period and the
Late Historic period (Aten 1983).
The subject of Mossy Grove coastal settlement patterning has been discussed by several
researchers (cf. Aten 1983; Ensor 1987, 1998; Gadus and Howard 1990; Moore 1995; Patterson
1995, 1996; Story 1985, 1990). Most would agree that beginning with the Late Archaic period or
certainly by 2000 years ago that two distinct settlement systems were in place; a coastal and an
inland pattern (Aten 1983; Ensor 1998; Ensor and Carlson 1991; Patterson 1995, 1996; Moore
1995; Story 1990). The establishment of modern environmental conditions by 4,000 years ago
over Southeast Texas seems to coincide with the establishment of an inland/coastal settlement
dichotomy. Articulating different site types between coastal and inland settings and defining there
range and variation has been somewhat problematic. Gadus and Howard (1990), based on work at
Peggy Lake, suggest that longer term residential camps and shorter term extractive camps (littoral
harvesting stations) were present on the coast. This mirrors somewhat the longer term Type I sites
and shorter term Type 2 sites defined for inland site types (McReynolds, Ensor, and Carlson
1988). Story (1990) describes a minimum of three site types in coastal settings (1) bay margin or
barrier island camps, (2) shorter term sites used in transit between major sites (hunting/foraging
camps), and (3) inland riverine camps that served as places to exploit fresh water stream,
woodland, and upland prairie species (Story 1990:268).
Patterson (1995, 1996) has postulated that a 15 mile wide strip along the coast was exploited by
local populations and formed the basis of a littoral settlement pattern. Prior to the Late Archaic
period, there is evidence that population densities were lower and that the need for social
mechanisms to deter group movement between inland and coastal areas were diminished (Aten
1983). Evidence from Eagle’s Ridge suggests that such movement did occur on a regular basis
during the Early to Middle Holocene and that populations densities were lower (Ensor 1998). The
question of degree of interaction between coastal and inland groups, the position of group
territories or boundaries, and how specific site types may relate to one another are unclear. Late
Prehistoric cemetery sites are common along the coast (Aten 1983; Patterson 1996). Sites such as
Harris County Boys School (Aten et al. 1976) and 41GV66 on Galveston Island (Ricklis 1993,
1994) contain a variety of grave goods. Cemeteries and scattered burials with grave goods also

9

occur at more inland locations such as at sites 41FB11, 41FB13, and 41FB255 in Fort Bend
County (Walley 1955; Rogers et al. 2000).
Historic Overview
European settlement did not begin to seriously disrupt aboriginal habitation in the areas in and
from the Upper Texas Coast until after AD 1700 (Aten 1983; Patterson 1995:249). European
diseases, probably introduced by explorers and early traders, did begin to have impacts as early as
AD 1528. At least 7 epidemics were recorded among the tribes of the study area between that
date and AD 1890 (Ewers 1974). The project area appears to have been on the boundary of the
territories of several Native American groups in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Groups
that may have resided in Harris County include the Atakapan, Akokisa, Karankawa, Bidai, and
the Tonkawa. During the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, epidemic diseases, the mission
system, and the fur trade acted to severely reduce, and in some cases exterminate, the indigenous
populations.
The upper Texas Coast and Harris County were, in general, sparsely populated in the early 19th
century; neither the French nor the Spanish settled the area to any great extent (Freeman 1990).
Some early settlement occurred along the San Jacinto drainage (Gilbert 1963). However
settlement increased at Harrisburg (Houston) after the land grants were issued to members of
Austin’s colony. Despite setbacks during the Mexican revolution, a land office was set up in
Houston, the new county seat, in 1838 (Freeman 1990:13). The Board of Land Commissioners
then made land grants which enabled the establishment of numerous small farms, large ranches,
and plantations along local waterways. Lumbering and cotton quickly took hold after 1880 as the
mainstay of Houston economy as many absentee landowners and speculators held large parcels of
timber. Prior to this, stock-raising had been dominate (Carlson 1983). The industrial base was
expanded to support the highly profitable timber industry. Railroads were built to handle
increased cotton and timber shipments during the late 19th century and a large German immigrant
population settled in western and northern Harris County. A deep water port and the Houston
Ship channel were established during the early 20th century and the discovery of oil in the area at
about the same time led to economic good times for the area (Freeman 1990). Cotton continued
as an important export through the 1930’s and with the introduction of improved technology, rice
cultivation became feasible on previously uncultivated land (Carlson 1983). The advent of
automobile transportation, the development of the service industries, and increased participation
in a global marketplace insured that Houston and Harris County were gradually transformed into
the thriving urban areas we see today.
Previous Archeological Investigations
The current study area has undergone extensive urbanization for the last 50 years. Urban
subdivisions, roads, bridges, and commercial/industrial sites now occupy formerly open areas. As
noted by Dureka (1998), there have been numerous cultural surveys north of the project area
along Cypress Creek Several small cultural resource projects have been noted for the Cypress
quadrangle or the general vicinity of the current project area. The more substantive of these
projects is summarized below.
A survey is currently underway by MAC at the confluence of Cypress and Little Cypress Creeks
about 20 km southeast of the proposed bridge crossing. Several new prehistoric sites have been
documented to date on this survey and several pre-existing sites recorded during the 1970’s have
been revisited and re-recorded (cf. Freeman and Hale 1978). In 1986, personnel from Cultural

10

Resource Services, Inc. conducted an archeological survey of 598-acres that encompassed a
portion of Little Cypress Creek less than a mile south of the proposed project area (Hudson et al.
1986). The project involved archival and background research and pedestrian survey for
Municipal Utility Districts 317, 318, and 319. Only one historic house site was recorded and it
was not deemed significant. In 1995 personnel from BC & AD Archeology Inc. surveyed the
location of a proposed borrow pit for SH 290 about 6 km west of the proposed Bauer Road bridge
reconstruction project. No historic properties were recorded (BC & AD Archeology Inc. 1995).
No substantive surveys have been conducted along Little Cypress Creek proper in the immediate
vicinity of the proposed project area. However survey along Cypress Creek and the present
survey at the juncture of Cypress and Little Cypress Creeks clearly illustrate the potential for
prehistoric sites. These projects are summarized below.
Cypress Creek
In 1977, The Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, conducted a
reconnaissance survey of selected portions of the Cypress Creek watershed in Harris and Waller
Counties (Freeman and Hale 1978). This survey was done at the behest of the Corps of
Engineers, Galveston District, who was seeking to assess the significance of archeological and
historical resources within the watershed prior to developing a predictive drainage basin model.
This model would be used to aid in planning future flood control modifications in the Cypress
Creek watershed. Since the sizable basin (320 square miles) could not be entirely surveyed, the
investigations were concentrated on the 100-year flood plain as this would be the most likely
portion to experience modifications. Approximately 20 percent of the floodplain was surveyed.
Some reconnaissance was also conducted in selected upland areas contiguous to the floodplain.
The investigations resulted in the recording or reevaluation of 58 prehistoric sites and the
recording of 25 historic sites (information on many other historic sites was gathered but stopped
short of formal recordation). The study indicates that there is a relatively high density of
prehistoric and historic sites within the Cypress Creek floodplain and its adjoining uplands. En
masse, the prehistoric sites are described as small in size and believed to reflect general camping
activities. More specific site function interpretation was not attempted due to the limited scope of
the reconnaissance. The study area produced artifacts ranging from the late Paleoindian period to
the Late Prehistoric Period. Historic sites included cemeteries, houses, churches, sawmills, roads,
road crossings, bridges, schools, railroads, stage stops, and resorts. In the main, these sites date to

the mid-to-late nineteenth century and early twentieth century (Freeman and Hale 1978).
Several of Freeman and Hale’s sample units lie just north of the current project area at
Horsepen Creek.
In 1985, MAC performed a small survey in advance of the construction of a road extension across
Cypress Creek, several kilometers downstream (northeast) of the current project area. No
archeological sites were recorded, and site 41HR525, a prehistoric site recorded by avocational
archeologists from the Houston Archeological Society and lying near the proposed construction
corridor, was determined to be destroyed by clearing and erosion (Moore 1985).
In 1989, the Archeological Research Laboratory of Texas A&M conducted an intensive survey of
a rectangular 645-acre tract, centered on a 13.5 mile segment of Cypress Creek, in northern Harris
County. The tract lies approximately 16 kilometers northeast of the current project area. This
investigation was done in advance of proposed flood control maintenance activities along a
segment of Cypress Creek. Four previously unknown sites (41HR628– 41HR631) were recorded
during the survey. Three of these sites were prehistoric, yielding lithic debris, ceramics, bone,
and charcoal. All were deemed potentially eligible for the NRHP; the fourth, a scatter of modern

11

structure remains, was determined ineligible. Twelve known sites, all prehistoric, were
reassessed. Of those, sites 41HR374 and 41HR375 were determined to have possible subsurface
intact deposits and recommended for eligibility testing (Ensor 1991a).
In 1990, Texas A&M returned to Cypress Creek to conduct National Register eligibility testing at
prehistoric sites 41HR374 and 41HR375. Test units and backhoe trenches were excavated at both
sites, and it was determined that neither site was eligible for inclusion in the NRHP (Ensor et al.
1991).
Also in 1990, personnel from Texas A&M conducted an intensive survey of a 43-acre tract in
northwestern Harris County. The tract centered on Faulkey Gully, approximately 1.8 kilometers
above the confluence of the Gully and Cypress Creek and north of the current project area. The
investigation was done in advance of channel dredging within Faulkey Gully. No cultural
resources were located (Ensor and Moore 1990).
In 1992, MAC conducted a cultural resources survey of a 90-acre tract, the proposed location of
Telge Park in Harris County on Cypress Creek, approximately seven kilometers upstream (west)
of the current study area. This investigation recorded six prehistoric sites (41HR717-41HR723),
all of which were determined to be eligible for SAL designation. Site 41HR720 was the only site
that produced chronologically diagnostic artifact, an Alba point that may date the site to the Late
Prehistoric period. An attempt was made to relocate previously recorded site 41HR394, the
Cypress Creek crossing of the Old Washington Road. This crossing point was no longer visible;
however, a short segment of raised roadbed located in another portion of the project may be a
surviving remnant of the road (Moore 1992a).
In 1993, MAC conducted an intensive survey of 143 acres on Little Cypress Creek approximately
1.5 kilometers northwest of its confluence with Cypress Creek. This tract is located
approximately 4.5 kilometers west of the current project area. The survey was done in advance of
the construction of a floodwater detention facility along Little Cypress Creek. A single historic
cemetery, the Roeder/Becker Cemetery, was record as 41HR750. An isolated find of a single
flake was noted (Moore et al. 1994).
In 1994, Moore Archeological again performed a survey in the Cypress Creek watershed. This
50-acre investigation took place on the banks of an unnamed tributary of Cypress Creek at the
western edge of Harris County. The survey was done in advance of a creek bank mitigation
project. No cultural resources were located (Moore and Daigle 1996).
In 1996, MAC conducted an intensive survey on a 488-acre tract along the north bank of Cypress
Creek in northern Harris County. Cypress Creek defines the southern border of the tract, and the
eastern edge of the tract sits at the confluence of Cypress and Spring Creeks. This tract lies
approximately 20 kilometers northeast of the current project area. While this seems a great
distance, the floodplain area investigated bears a striking resemblance to the current project area.
This investigation was done in advance of the construction of a golf course. Thirteen previously
unknown sites (41HR584-41HR596) were recorded, and previously recorded site 41HR371 was
revisited. The newly recorded sites were characterized as sparse subsurface lithic scatters, small
in size and producing no diagnostic artifacts. A reassessment of 41HR371, a larger site dating to
the Early Ceramic Period, found it to be in good condition and worthy of protection. All sites
identified and reassessed during the survey were deemed eligible for nomination as SALs and
recommended for avoidance during construction (Moore 1997).
Also in 1996, personnel from Geo-Marine, Inc. conducted survey, backhoe trenching, and
geoarcheological investigations in two areas of the Cypress Creek floodplain in northern Harris

12

County. These investigations were carried out at the request of the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers prior to the commencement of channel improvements and drainage basin construction.
Prehistoric sites 41HR789 and 790, described as extremely low-density, shallow lithic artifact
scatters, were recorded. Neither site was deemed eligible for SAL or NRHP designation (Ensor
et al. 1996).
A survey was conducted by personnel from Moore Archeological Consulting (MAC) in 1996 on a
43-acre parcel approximately 1.2 kilometers upstream (west) of the juncture of Cypress Creek
and Faulkey Gully. The tract was the location of a proposed floodwater detention basin. The
investigation recorded thirteen previously unknown archeological sites – twelve prehistoric sites
and one prehistoric site with a surface historic component (41HR774 through 41HR786). Sites
ranged from sparse lithic scatters on large sandy rises to sizable, full-function campsites on broad
levee ridges. Lithic and ceramic samples from the sites indicate occupation(s) during the Late
Prehistoric and possibly a second occupation or series of occupations dating to as early as the
Middle Archaic. The historic component at 41HR783 appears to be structural remains (mostly
brick fragments) of unknown origin; however, Moore states that the remains resemble portable
sawmill remnants found elsewhere in Harris County. Nine of the sites were recommended for
further investigation if they were to be impacted by detention basin construction (Moore et
al.1996).
In early 2003, an additional survey was conducted by personnel from MAC approximately 1.5
kilometers upstream (west) of the 129-acre tract discussed below. The project consisted of a
reconnaissance survey of a 47-acre tract scheduled for purchase by HCFCD to serve as a
floodplain preservation area. Three prehistoric sites (41HR945-947), situated on sandy rises or
ridges were located and recorded as subsurface lithic scatters. One site, 41HR947, was
determined not eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) or for
State Archeological Landmark (SAL) status. The two remaining sites were recommended for
further investigations if subsurface disturbance would be necessary in the future (Porter and
Moore 2003).
Most recently, in February and March of 2003, personnel from MAC conducted an archeological
survey of a 129-acre floodplain preservation area in northwestern Harris County along Cypress
Creek near its juncture with Faulkey Gully (Porter 2003). A total of 406 shovel tests were dug in
an attempt to locate sites and define site boundaries. Twenty new sites were found but three
previously recorded sites could not be relocated. Site density was calculated at 1 site for every 6.5
acres surveyed or .16 sites/acre. One site was deemed ineligible as a State Archeological
Landmark (SAL) while the eligibility of the other sites could not be determined due to the
reconnaissance nature of the survey (Porter 2003).

13

CHAPTER IV
METHODS
Introduction and Project Description
The subject Area of Potential Effect (APE) is depicted on the Hockley, Texas 7.5’ USGS
topographic quadrangle map, edition of 1962, photo-revised 1980 (see Figure 1). The Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) in Austin, Texas performed a check of the project
area for known archeological sites. This check found that there are no previously recorded sites
within one kilometer of the proposed project corridor. No SAL’s or NRHP properties are in close
proximity. Examination of the 1920 15’ USGS Hockley quadrangle indicates no buildings or
structures within the proposed right-of-way. Likewise, the 1928 soil survey of Harris County
(Geib et al. 1928) shows no structures. A road is present over Little Cypress Creek on both of
these maps. Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc. (MAC) has an on-going program to expand its
geographical information systems database for the Southeast Texas region. The location and titles
of all official Texas Historical Markers in Harris County are within the data base. There are no
official Texas Historical Markers or cemeteries near the proposed Bauer Bridge reconstruction
project.
The project area along Bauer Road and a small portion of Little Cypress Creek involves about
600 linear feet (200 m) or 1.45-acres of Area of Potential Effect (APE) centered on existing
Bauer Bridge (Figure 2). However this includes existing Bauer Road and the relatively
undisturbed areas were confined to narrow shoulders (Figure 2). Even these areas had received
substantive prior mechanical disturbance and fill placement. An additional rectangular shaped
area west of the bridge encompasses some .15 acre centered on the creek (Figure 2). The bridge
reconstruction project will require demolition of the current bridge with the only new impacts
being confined to the area west of the bridge, the location of the present bridge, and the narrow
expansion shoulders. It is presumed that the original bridge construction has resulted in extensive
mechanical disturbance where the new bridge will be constructed.
The entire survey area was visually inspected for the presence of exposed/eroded surfaces,
however none were present. The vegetation along the shoulders of Bauer Road in the linear
portion of the APE consisted of well-manicured grasses. The area to the east of Bauer Road
appeared to be in a fairly natural state consisting of various species of hardwoods, a few pines,
some opportunistic species such as Chinese tallow, cottonwood, and yaupon, as well as short
grasses and vines. To the west of Bauer Road the land had been cleared and was in pasture. The
vegetation there consisted of ankle to knee-high grasses and weeds with occasional small stands
of tallow or cottonwood. The banks along Little Cypress Creek were lightly wooded with hard
woods, a few pines and some tallow and cottonwood (Figure 3). Yaupon, vines, and short grasses
were also present.
The APE or right-of-way along either side of Bauer Road and the approaches to the bridge had
been built up by placing fill to varying heights from a low point of about .5 m of fill at 300 feet or
100 m from the bridge to 2.5 m of fill where the road crosses the bridge (Figure 4). Drainage
ditches have been excavated on either side of Bauer Road and the slope of the grade steadily
increases as the bridge is approached from either direction.

14

Figure 2. Map showing shovel test locations along Little Cypress Creek and in the vicinity
of Bauer Road Bridge.

15

Figure 3. View of Bauer Road bridge at Little Cypress Creek, showing bridge detail and
vegetation, view south-southeast.

Figure 4. View north-northwest along Bauer Road showing fill build-up, slope, and vegetation
cover south of bridge.

16

Shovel/Augur Testing
A total of 12 shovel/augur tests were excavated along the Bauer Road APE, 6 north of the bridge
and 6 south of the bridge (see Figure 2). Four of the tests (ST’s 4, 5, 7, 8) were extended by augur
to depths of about 2 meters. Soil/sediment was screened if at all possible from the deep augurs.
The shovel/augur tests were placed on each side of the road at distances of 15 m, 60 m, and 90 m
from Little Cypress Creek. The shovel/augur tests were placed where the horizontal plane of the
natural grade of the adjoining property met the slope of the ditch embankment. Tests were dug at
this point since if was reasoned that the best chance for preserved soil would be at this elevation,
about equidistant from the road edge and the excavated drainage ditch. The upper 30-40 cm of
these shovel/augur tests appeared to represent a clay cap to prevent erosion. Some modern glass
and debris were found in the fill. However below this the soils appeared fairly intact on the slopes
of the ditches. Soils consisted principally of compact silty to fine sandy loams and clay loams
grading to sandy basal clay at depths ranging from 40 cm to well over 1 meter (see Appendix A).
No cultural remains were found in these tests. The shovel/augur tests dug along Bauer Road were
moderately disturbed near Little Cypress Creek but less disturbed with increasing distance from
the creek except for the southwestern portion of the right-of-way. Along the southwestern portion
of the right-of-way the fill was very thick for the entire 100 m, most likely due to the depth and
steepness of the drainage ditch.
A total of three shovel/augur tests were placed west of Bauer Road bridge in the small rectangular
area along Little Cypress Creek (see Figure 2). Two tests (13 and 14) were excavated on the north
side of the creek and shovel test 15 was dug on the south side. These tests were placed on the
most suitable landforms for prehistoric habitation. Tests 13 and 14 were extended by augur to
depths of 1.75 m and 2.25 m below surface. This area appeared to be largely unaffected by prior
road and bridge construction. The upper 30 cm of these tests was possibly disturbed by farming
or heavy cattle usage. Shovel test 15 on the south side of Little Cypress Creek had a profile
similar to the shovel tests dug along Bauer Road and basal clay was encountered at about 1 meter
below surface. Shovel/augur tests 13 and 14 on the north side of the creek and shovel/augur test 4
along Bauer Road (see Figure 2) had a somewhat different profile from the remainder. These
shovel/augur tests had fine sandy or silty loams/clay loams that graded into deep mantles of pure
sandy loams and finally sandy basal clays (see Appendix A). Extension of the shovel tests by
augur reached over 2 m in depth (see Appendix A). All tests were negative and basal clay was
reached.
The crew excavated all shovel tests in 10-15 cm arbitrary levels and screened the soils through
one-quarter inch hardware cloth wherever possible. Soils that were too compact or clayey to sieve
through hardware cloth were broken up by hand and/or trowel. All soils were carefully examined
for cultural artifacts. All soil/sediment from the standard 4-inch bucket augur tests was also
screened through one-quarter inch hardware cloth. Location, size, depth, and all other information
for each shovel test was recorded on standardized Moore Archeological Consulting shovel test
forms (see Appendix A). Shovel tests were immediately backfilled. The UTM location of all
shovel tests were recorded utilizing a Magellan Trailblazer GPS unit. The location of each shovel
test was then plotted on a USGS quadrangle map of the project area.
Photographs were taken of the Bauer Bridge Road APE shoulder/approach areas and along
Cypress Creek at the bridge (see Figures 3-4). Photograph direction, subject, photographer name,
and dates were recorded on a standard MAC photo log.

17

CHAPTER V
RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
On August 22, 2003, a 2 person crew from Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc. performed an
archeological survey of the proposed Bauer Road bridge reconstruction project along Little
Cypress Creek, northwestern Harris County, Texas. The project area was visually examined and
was subjected to an intensive 100 percent pedestrian survey. The portion of the project area along
Bauer Road on either side of the bridge had been subjected to extensive mechanical disturbance
from previous road/bridge construction. Fill had been placed to elevate the road and bridge over
Little Cypress Creek. Shovel testing was conducted in the areas where disturbance was thought
to be minimal on either side of Bauer Road and along the north and south bank of Little Cypress
Creek. This sampling methodology resulted in the excavation of 15 shovel/augur tests. Maximum
shovel/augur test depth was 225 cmbs with most tests excavated to between 40 and 100 cmbs. All
shovel tests were negative. Basal subsoil was encountered in virtually al tests and disturbed road
fill was present in many of the tests along Bauer Road. Despite the presence of intact
soil/sediment in some portions of the project area, no artifacts of significance were recovered.
The minimum number of shovel tests mandated by the Archeology Division of the THC for areas
less than 2-acres in size is three. For linear surveys, the minimum number is one test for every
100 meters or 300 feet surveyed. A total of 12 tests were dug within the linear portion of the APE
and an additional three tests were dug in the rectangular area west of the bridge. These totals are
well above the minimum numbers requested by the THC. Deep shovel testing and auguring were
conducted west of Bauer Road bridge in small relatively undisturbed area along Little Cypress
Creek. Basal clays were reached and despite careful screening of the soil/sediment from the tests,
no artifacts were recovered.
In summary, there was a high degree of mechanical disturbance within the portion of the
proposed project area centered on Bauer Road bridge. This disturbance was primarily the result of
prior bridge and road construction and associated drainage easements. The area west of the bridge
produced relatively intact deposits, however nothing was found despite careful screening of the
soil/sediment removed by the bucket augur. No cultural materials or deposits were encountered
during the course of this investigation other than modern debris. The current bridge over Little
Cypress Creek (see Figure 3) is a concrete structure that appears to have been built in the 1950’s
or early 1960’s. It is not considered to be significant. It is therefore recommended that
reconstruction of the Bauer Road bridge at Little Cypress Creek be allowed to proceed from the
standpoint of cultural resources. No further work is recommended. In the unlikely event that
archeological deposits or features should be encountered during construction, it is advised that
construction cease in the immediate area of the finds and the Archeology Division of the THC
contacted for further consultation.

18

REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, James T.
2001 Houston Area Geoarcheology; A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway
District. Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division,
Archeological Studies Program, Report 27.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1983 Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. National Parks Service, United States
Department of the Interior. Washington, D.C.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives on Gulf Coast
Prehistory, edited by Dave D. Davis, pp. 72-93. Ripley B. Bullen Monographs in
Anthropology and History, No. 5. The Florida State Museum, Gainesville.

Aten, Lawrence E., C.K. Chandler, A.B. Wesolowsky, and R.M. Malina
1976 Excavations at the Harris County Boys’s School Cemetery. Texas Archeological
Society, Special Publication No. 3.
Barnes, V.E.
1982

Geologic Atlas of Texas: Houston Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology. The
University of Texas Press. Austin

BC & AD Archeology, Inc.
1995 Phase I Archaeological Investigation US 290 PSLs, Harris County
(FHWA, F2, F30). BC & AD Archeology, Inc.
Houston, Texas.
Beck, Abigail P., Vaughn M. Bryant, and Roger G. Moore
2001 A Late Holocene Pollen Sequence from Aronow Bog, Northern Harris County,
Texas. Texas Journal of Science 53(4):353-364.
Binford, Lewis R.
1980 Willow Smoke and Dog’s Tails: Hunter-Gatherer Settlement Subsystems and
Archeological Site Formation. American Antiquity 45:4-20.
Blair, Frank W.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2 (1):
93-117
Carlson, Shawn B.
1983 Historic Setting. In Archeological and Historic Investigations of the Harris
County Lease in Barker Reservoir, Harris County, Texas, by H.B. Ensor, S.B.
Carlson, and D.L. Carlson, pp. 24-57. Archeological Research Laboratory,
Archeological Surveys No. 2, Texas A&M University. College Station.

19

Carr, John T.
1967

The Climate and Physiography of Texas. Texas Water Development Board
Report Number 53. Austin, Texas.

Collins, Michael B.
1998 The Place of Wilson-Leonard in Southern Plains Prehistory. In Wilson-Leonard,
An 11,000-Year Archeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas.
Volume I: Introduction, Background, and Syntheses. Assembled and edited by
M.B. Collins, pp. 277-292. Studies in Archeology 31, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin and Archeology Studies
Program, Report 10, Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs
Division, Austin.
Dureka, J. Thomas
1998 Cultural Resource Surveys of Harris County, Texas. Volumes I-IV. Moore
Archeological Consulting. Houston, Texas
Ensor, H. Blaine
1986 San Patrice and Dalton Affinities on the Central and Western Gulf Coastal Plain.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:69-81.
1987

The Cinco Ranch Sites, Barker Reservoir; Fort Bend County, Texas.
Archeological Research Laboratory, Reports of Investigations No. 3. Texas
A&M University, College Station.

1990

Comments on Prehistoric Chronology Building in Southeast Texas. Houston
Archeological Society Journal, 98:1-11

1991

Gary Production Model. In Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptation
to the Inland Coastal Prairie Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas, edited by
H.B. Ensor and D.L. Carlson, pp. 259-273. Reports of Investigations No. 8.
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station

1991 (editor) Archeological Survey of Cypress Creek from Spring Branch to Kuykendahl
Road, Harris County, Texas. Archeological Surveys Number 8, Archeological
Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
1995

Archeological Test Excavations at Four Shell Midden Sites in the Wallisville
Lake Project Area, Chambers and Liberty Counties, Texas. Wallisville Lake
Project Technical Series, Reports of Investigations No. 2., Geo-Marine, Inc.,
Plano, Texas.

1998

Eagle’s Ridge: A Stratified Archaic and Clear Lake Period Shell Midden,
Wallisville Lake Project, Chambers County, Texas. Wallisville Lake Project
Technical Series, Reports of Investigations No. 4, Geo-Marine, Inc. Plano,
Texas.

20

2003

Analysis of Ceramic and Lithic Arttifacts. In A Cultural Resource Survey of a
129-Acre Proposed Floodplain Preservation Area on Cypress Creek, Harris
County, Texas by Nancy Porter, pp. 71-86. Moore Archeological Consulting,
Inc., Report of Investigations No. 350. Houston, Texas.

Ensor, H. Blaine, and David L. Carlson (editors)
1988 The Crawford Site, 41PK69, Central Trinity River Uplands, Polk County, Texas.
Contract Reports in Archeology, Report No. 4. Highway Design Division, Texas
State Department of Highways and Public Transportation. Austin.
1991 Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptation to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 8.
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Ensor, H. Blaine., Saul Aronow, Martha.D. Freeman, and Joseph. M. Sanchez
1990 An Archaeological Survey of the Proposed Greens Bayou Stormwater Detention
Facility, Greens Bayou, Harris County, Texas. Archaeological Surveys No. 9.
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University.
Ensor, H. Blaine., Shawn B. Carlson, and David L. Carlson
1983 Archaeological and Historic Investigations of the Harris County Lease in Barker
Reservoir, Harris County, Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory,
Archeological Surveys No. 2. Texas A&M University.
Ensor, H. Blaine and William E. Moore
1990 An Archeological Survey of a Portion of Faulkey Gully, Harris County, Texas.
Technical Report Series No. 8, Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University.
Ensor, H. Blaine, John E. Dockall and Frank Winchell
1991 National Register Eligibility Testing and Assessment at the Al Soloman I and Al
Soloman II Sites, Cypress Creek, Harris County, Texas. Reports of Investigations
No. 12, Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University.
Ensor, H. Blaine, Lee C. Nordt, and Marsha Prior
1996 Historic Properties Survey of Alternatives 6 and 19, Cypress Creek Flood
Control Project, Harris County, Texas. Miscellaneous Report of Investigations
No. 133, Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano, Texas.
Ewers, John C.
1974 The Influence of Epidemics on the Indian Populations and Cultures of Texas.
Plains Anthropologist, Volume 8: 104-115. Lincoln Nebraska
Feidel, Stuart J.
1999 Older Than We Thought: Implications of Corrected Dates for Paleoindians.
American Antiquity 64(1):95-115.
Ferring, Reid
2001

The Archaeology and Paleoecology of the Aubrey Clovis Site (41DN479) Denton
County, Texas. Center for Environmental Archaeology, Department of
Geography, University of North Texas.

21

Fields, Ross C.
1995 The Archeology of the Post Oak Savannah of East Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, 66:301-330.
Freeman, Martha D. and Thomas H. Hale, Jr.
1978 Cypress Creek: Reconnaissance Survey and Assessment of Prehistoric and
Historical Resources, Cypress Creek Watershed in Harris and Waller Counties,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, Research
Report No. 78. Austin.
Gadus, Eloise F., and Margaret Ann Howard
1990
Hunter-Fisher-Gatherers on the Upper Texas Coast: Archeological
Investigations at the Peggy Lake Disposal Area, Harris County, Texas (Volume
1). Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Report of Investigations Number 74. Austin
Gadus, Eloise F., Ross C. Fields, C. Britt Bousman, Steve A. Tomka, and Margaret A. Howard
1992 Excavations at the Finley Fan Site (41HP159) Cooper Lake Project, Hopkins
County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 78. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin, Texas.
Geib, H.V., T.M. Bushnell, and A.H. Bauer
1928 Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Bureau of
Soils, Washington, D.C.
Goodyear, Albert C.
1982 The Chronological Position of the Dalton Horizon in the Southeastern United
States. American Antiquity 47:382-395.
Hall, Grant D.
1981 Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River
Valley, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 61. Austin
Hoffman, G. O., B. J. Ragsdale and J. Daniel Rogers
n.d.
Know Your Grasses. Texas Agricultural Extension Service. The Texas A&M
University System. College Station, Texas.
Howard, Margaret A., Martha Doty Freeman, and C. Britt Bousman
1991 Archeological Reconnaissance on Upper Greens Bayou, Harris County, Texas.
Reports of Investigations No. 83, Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Austin, Texas.
Hudson, Jack C., Kay G. Hudson, Mark A. Price Sharla Azizi, and Charles Dunton
1986 Archeological Survey and Assessment: Harris County Municipal Districts 317,
318, and 319, Harris County, Texas. Cultural Resource Services, Inc., Report
of Investigations 86-2. Seabrook, Texas.
McReynolds, Mary J., H. Blaine Ensor, and David L. Carlson
1988 Archaeological Investigations at 41HR530 and 41HR608, Langham Creek,
Addicks Reservoir, Harris County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 6,
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University

22

McReynolds, Mary J., Randy Korgel, and H. Blaine Ensor
1988 Archaeological Investigations at a Late Ceramic Period Bison Kill Site,
(41HR541), Whiteoak Bayou, Harris County, Texas. Reports of Investigations
No. 7, Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University.
Moore, Roger
1985 An Archeological Survey of Proposed Extensions of Cypresswood Drive and
Cutten Road, Northern Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigations Number
1, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston, Texas.
1992a An Archeological Survey of the Telge Road Park Tract, Harris County, Texas.
Report of Investigations Number 61, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston,
Texas.
1992b An Archeological Survey of Two Detention Basins Langham Creek (HCFCD
Unit U500-01-00) and Dinner Creek (HCFCD Unit U520-01-00) Harris
County, Texas. Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc., Report of Investigations
No. 72. Houston, Texas
1995

The Mossy Grove Model of Long-Term Forager-Collector Adaptations in Inland
Southeast Texas. Unpublished Ph.D Dissertation. Rice University, Houston,
Texas.

1996

An Empirical Analysis of Elements of Prehistoric Site Location and Formation In
Harris County, Texas. Moore Archeological Consulting, Report of
Investigations, Number 149. Houston, Texas.

1997

An Archeological Survey of a Proposed Harris County, Cypress Creek Golf
Course, Northern Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigations Number 7,
Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston, Texas.

Moore, Roger G. and Robert P. Daigle
1996 An Archeological Survey of a 50-Acre Mitigation Bank on an Unnamed
Tributary of Cypress Creek in West-Central Harris County, Texas. Report of
Investigations Number 126, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston, Texas.
Moore, Roger G., James Thomas Dureka, Nicola Hubbard, and Lee Nordt.
1996 A Cultural Resource Survey of a Proposed Floodwater Detention Basin on
Cypress Creek, Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigations Number 157,
Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston, Texas.
Moore, Roger G., William E. Moore, and Ann Mesrobian
1994 An Archeological Survey of the 143 Acre Little Cypress Creek Detention Facility
(L500-02-00) in Northwest Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigations
Number 101, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston, Texas.
Mueller-Wille, Catherine S., H. Blaine. Ensor, and Harold Drollinger
1991 Lithic Analysis. In Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptation to the
Inland Coastal Prairie Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas. Reports of
Investigations No. 8.
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station.

23

Patterson, Leland W.
1983 Prehistoric Settlement and Technological Patterns in Southeastern Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Volume 54: 253-270.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
66: 239-264

1996

Southeast Texas Archeology. Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 12.

Patterson, Leland W., Joe D. Hudgins, Richard L. Gregg, and Sheldon M. Kindall
1987 Excavations at Site 41WH19, Wharton County, Texas. Houston Archeological
Society, Report No. 4. Houston.
Pertulla, Timothy K. and James L. Bruseth
1994 Trade and Exchange in East Texas: 1100 B.C.-A.D. 800. In Exchange in the
Lower Mississippi Valley and Contiguous Areas in 1100 B.C. Bulletin Number
17. Louisiana Archeological Society.
Phillips, Philip
1970 Archeological Survey in the Lower Yazoo Basin, Mississippi, 1949-1955. Papers
of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology 60. Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Porter, Nancy
2003 A Cultural Resource Survey of a 129-Acre Proposed Floodplain Preservation
Area on Cypress Creek, Harris County, Texas. Moore Archeological Consulting,
Inc., Report of Investigations No. 350. Houston, Texas.
Porter, Nancy F. and Roger G. Moore
2003 A Cultural Resource Survey of a Proposed Floodplain Preservation Area on
Cypress Creek, Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigation Number 344.
Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston, Texas.
Rogers, Robert, Linda Wootan-Ellis, and Gary Rutenburg
2000 Archaeological Data Recovery Excavation at Site 41FB255 Fort Bend County,
Document No. 991246, PBS&J, Inc. Austin, Texas.

Texas.

Sanchez, Joseph F.
2003 Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources, Redstone Golf Course
Expansion, Harris County, Texas. Draft report submitted to Berg-Oliver
Associates, Houston, Texas by Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc., Report of
Investigations No. 300, Houston, Texas.
Shafer, Harry J.
1975 Comments on Woodland Cultures of East Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 46:249-254.
1988

Archeology in the San Jacinto River Basin: A Look Back After 20 Years. In A
Collection of Papers Reviewing the Archeology of Southeast Texas, edited by P.
Wheat and R.L. Gregg, pp. 17-21. Report Number 5. Houston Archeological
Society.

24

St. Clair, A. E., C. V. Proctor, W. L. Fisher, C. W. Kreitler, and J. H. McGowen
1975 Land Resources Laboratory Map Series – Houston – Galveston Area Council.
The University of Texas, Bureau of Economic Geology. Austin.
Story, Dee Ann
1981 An Overview of the Archeology of East Texas. Plains Anthropologist
26(92):139-156.
Story, D. A., Janice A. Guy, Barbara A. Burnett, Martha D. Freeman, Jerome C. Rose, D. Gentry
Steele, Ben W. Olive, and Karl J. Reinhard
1990 The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain: Volume 1.
Arkansas Archeological Survey Research Series. No. 38
Tharp, B. C.
1939

The Vegetation of Texas. Texas Academy of Sciences, Non-Technical Series 1 (Ivi): 1-74

Walley, Raymond
1955 Preliminary Report on the Albert George Site in Fort Bend County.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 26:218-234.
Walthall, John A., and Ned J. Jenkins
1976 The Gulf Formational Stage in Southeastern Prehistory. Southeastern
Archeological Conference Bulletin 19:43-49.
Webb, Clarence B., Joel L. Shiner, and E.W. Roberts
1971 The John Pearce Site (16CD56): A San Patrice Site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:1-49.
1981

Stone Points and Tools of Northwestern Louisiana. Special Publication.
Louisiana Archeological Society.

Weber, Carey
1991 Lithic Replication Study. In Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptation
to the Inland Coastal Prairie Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas, edited by
H.B. Ensor and D.L. Carlson, pp. 247-257. Reports of Investigations No. 8.
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Weinstein, Richard A., and P.G. Rivet
1978 Beau Mire: A Late Tchula Period Site of the Tchefuncte Culture, Ascension
Parish, Louisiana. Anthropological Report No. 1. Louisiana Archaeological
Survey and Antiquities Commission, Department of Culture, Recreation, and
Tourism. Baton Rouge.
Winchell, Frank and Linda Wootan-Ellis
1991 The Ceramics of the Alabonson Road Site. In Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic
Period Adaptation to the Inland Coastal Prairie Zone, Harris County, Southeast
Texas, edited by H.B. Ensor and D.L. Carlson, pp. 49-99.
Reports of
Investigations No. 8.
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station.

25

Wheat, Joe Ben
1953 An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas. Bureau of
American Ethnology Bulletin 154: 143-252. Washington, D.C.
Wheeler, Frankie F.
1974 Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service and Forest Service, and Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station.

26

APPENDIX A
SHOVEL TEST INVENTORY

27

Shovel Test Inventory, Bauer Road Bridge Reconstruction Project at Little Cypress Creek

No. Recorder

Status

Depth
(cmbs)

Description

Comment

1

Gibbs

Negative

0-39
39-50

2

Ferguson

Negative

0-20
20-30
30-70

10YR2/2 very dark brown SCL-fill
10YR5/2 grayish brown SC w/orange
mottling
10YR5/2 grayish brown SiL loamcompact-disturbed fill
10YR6/3 pale-brown SiL-mixed
10YR4/3 brown CL w/mottling

3

Gibbs

Negative

0-9
9-37
37-40

10YR4/2 dark grayish brown SL-humus
10YR5/2 grayish brown FSL-firm
10YR5/1 gray CL

North side of creekshallow ditch

Negative

0-30
30-70
70-185
185-200

Red and brown CL
10YR5/4 yellowish brown SiL-compact
10YR5/8 yellowish brown fine sandy
loam-loose
10YR5/1 gray SC-very wet

Augured from 60-200
cmbs

Negative

0-15
15-70
70-110

Humic zone-probable spoil-fill
10YR4/2-5/2 grayish-dark grayish
brown SC
10YR5/2 grayish brown SC w/heavy
orange/red mottling

Augured through clay
to check for sand
beneath but none found

Negative

0-10
10-40
40-60

10YR 4/3-3/3 brown to dark brown
loam
10YR6/3 pale brown SiL-very compact
10YR7/1 light gray SC w/orange
mottling

Less disturbed than
other areas

Negative

0-72
72-160
110-160
160+

Negative

0-10
10-25
25-70
70-100

10YR5/3 spoil/fill
10YR6/4 light yellowish brown SLcompact-w/modern glass
10YR5/4 yellowih brown SiL
10YR6/2 light brownish gray SC
w/orange mottling

Upper 25 cm fill basal
clay reached-augured
from 55-110 cmbs

Negative

0-14
14-53
53+

10YR4/2 dark grayish brown SL-fill
10YR5/2 grayish brown SL w/brown
mottling
10YR5/2 grayish brown SL w/orange
mottling

Original surface
scraped away

10YR5/2 grayish brown loam w/glass10YR4/3 brown clay loam-fill
10YR5/2 grayish brown SL
10YR5/2 grayish brown silty clay
w/orange mottles

15 m south of Little
Cypress Creek-steep
slope to ditch-55 cm
of fill on top

Heavily mottled clay fill
throughout, SCL, SiL, and SL

Clay fill

Yellowish-brown clay fill-mottled
10YR5/4 yellowish brown SiL-compact
10YR6/2 light brownish gray SiL
10YR6/3 pale brown SC w/orange
mottling

10 m west of Bauer
Road-basal clay

4

5

6

7

8

9

Ferguson

Gibbs

Ferguson

Gibbs

Ferguson

Gibbs

10

Ferguson

Negative

0-20
20-55
55-110
110-120

11

Gibbs

Negative

0-85

Negative

0-40
40-70
70-90

12

Key:
SL-sandy loam
FSL=fine sandy loam
SC=sandy clay
SCL=sandy clay loam
SiL-silty loam
CL=clay loam

Ferguson

15 m north of Little
Cypress Creek and 9 m
east of Bauer Road
60 m north of Little
Cypress Creek, 9 m
east of Bauer Road

Spoil/fill mixed--sandy loams and
sandy clays brown to very dark brown
to grayish brown
72 cm of spoil then
10YR6/3 pale brown SL-friable
natural soil-augured
10YR5/2 light grayish brown SC
w/orange mottling

1

Shovel Test Inventory, Bauer Road Bridge Reconstruction Project at Little Cypress Creek

13

14

15

Key:
SL-sandy loam
FSL=fine sandy loam
SC=sandy clay
SCL=sandy clay loam
SiL-silty loam
CL=clay loam

Ferguson

Ferguson

Ferguson

Negative

0-30
30-60
60-215
215-225

10YR5/3 brown FSL, compact
10YR5/4 yellowish brown FSL
10YR5/3 to 7.5YR5/6 strong brown SL
10YR6/2 light brown grayish clay
w/mottling

5 m north of Little
Cypress Creek-augured
to 225 cmbs-basal clay
at 215 cmbs

Negative

0-40
40-95
95-160
160-175

10YR 5/3 brown SCL
10YR5/4 yellowish brown FSL
7.5YR6/4 light brown SL
10YR6/2 light brown grayish clay
w/10YR6/8 w/mottling

Augur used after 110
cm

Negative

0-35
35-62
62-105
105-130

10YR 5/3 brown SCL
10YR5/2 grayish brown SL
7.5YR6/3 pale brown SCL w/orange
mottling
10YR6/2 light brown grayish clay
w/10YR6/w orange mottling

3 m south of Little
Cypress Creek-basal
clay at 105 cmbs

2

