AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE FORT GRIFFIN SPECIAL
UTILITY DISTRICT WATER IMPROVEMENT PROJECT IN CALLAHAN AND
EASTLAND COUNTIES, TEXAS

Antiquities Permit 6236

By
William E. Moore

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 260

2012

AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE FORT GRIFFIN SPECIAL
UTILITY DISTRICT WATER IMPROVEMENT PROJECT
IN CALLAHAN AND EASTLAND COUNTIES, TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 12-04

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
Fort Griffin Special Utility District
1180 County Road 109
Albany, Texas 76430

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey for a water distribution line in Callahan and
Eastland counties was performed by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA)
under Antiquities Permit 6236 on April 25, 2012. The area investigated consisted of
nine acres. No evidence of previously recorded site 41CA7 was found, and no
new sites were recorded. Much of the area consisted of shallow soils over
limestone bedrock, and the ground surface visibility was excellent. Copies of the
report are on file at the Texas Historical Commission (THC), Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL), Texas State Library, Fort Griffin Special Utility District
(SUD), Jacob & Martin, Ltd., and BVRA.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am grateful to those who helped ensure the success of this project. The
field survey was conducted under the supervision of Jesse Todd with assistance
from Brett Lange. Mark Gardenhire is the General Manager of the Fort Griffin
SUD, and he answered questions regarding access and past use of the area.
Jacob & Martin, Ltd. is the engineering firm for this project. Derek Turner and
Alex Castillo are engineers at this firm, and they provided maps and logistical
support. Jean Hughes, Records Conservator at TARL, checked the site files for
previously recorded sites in the project area. Lili G. Lyddon of LL Technical
Services prepared the figures, and she also edited the report. Jesse Todd
provided the photographs that appear in this report, and Courtney Siegert helped
prepare the records for curation at TARL.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ....................................................................................................................... ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS................................................................................................. iii
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENT ............................................................................................................... 4
METHODS......................................................................................................................... 7
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND........................................................................ 12
RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS .................................................................... 14
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 15
FIGURES
Figure 1. General Location ............................................................................................. 2
Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangles ................................................. 3
Figure 3. Battle Creek (facing West) ............................................................................. 5
Figure 4. Eubanks Creek (facing West)........................................................................ 6
Figure 5. Ground Visibility East of Battle Creek (facing West) ................................. 8
Figure 6. Exposed Limestone Bedrock on Ridge ........................................................ 9
Figure 7. Improved Pasture .......................................................................................... 10

iv

INTRODUCTION
The Fort Griffin SUD proposes to install approximately 4.6 miles of new
water line along the north side of State Highway 6 in Callahan and Eastland
counties (Figure 1). The water line begins at the Pueblo Processing Plant and
ends at an existing pump station. The purpose of the proposed water line is to
replace an existing 3” water line 2-3 feet to the south. The proposed water line
will be centered in an easement twenty feet wide on private property and in
Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) right-of-way. The pipe will be
placed in a trench two feet wide with three feet of cover. The water line will cross
one major stream (Battle Creek) and a tributary of Battle Creek (Eubanks Creek).
Battle Creek will be crossed using the trenching method. The trench will be 30”
deep and 15” wide, and the trench will be dug when the creek is dry. Eubanks
Creek will be crossed using the horizontal directional boring method, and this can
be done when there is water in the creek because the water line will be at least
six feet beneath the creek channel. The entry point will be placed about twenty
feet from the southeast bank of the creek, and the exit point will be placed about
the same distance from the northwest bank of the creek. The borehole will be 10
feet from the entry and exit points until the creek is reached. At this point, the
depth will be at least six feet. There is a stock tank about one-half mile west of
Battle Creek, and this wet area will also be crossed by boring. That portion of the
water line to be placed in TxDOT right-of-way begins at the processing plant and
continues to Battle Creek. The rest of the water line will be on private property.
Funding for this project will be provided by the United States Department of
Agriculture, Rural Development, and the representative is Todd Powell. The
project area is depicted on two United States Geological Survey 7.5’ topographic
quadrangles. They are Indian Knoll (3299-411) and Moran (3299-412) (Figure 2).

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangles

3

ENVIRONMENT
The project area is located in an upland setting in North Central Texas and
is located in the Red Rolling Plains and the West Cross Timbers Land Resource
Areas with some minor areas in the Edwards Plateau and the North Central
Prairie. The topography is undulating to hilly, and elevation varies from 1250 to
2100 feet.
The soils in the project area formed under a savannah of grasses and post
oak trees. The soils within the proposed pipeline route in Eastland County belong
to the Tarrant-Bolar association that consists of gently sloping to hilly upland
clays and loams overlying limestone (Moore et al. 1977:General Soils Map). The
soils alternate between shallow clays overlying limestone to undeveloped deeper
loams overlying clay (Moore et al. 1977:Sheet 1). The soils in Callahan County
belong to the Throck-Speck-Lueders and the Leeray-Sagerton-Nukrum soil
associations (Clower 1981:General Soils Map). Both series contain stony and
cobbly upland loams. The Throck-Speck-Lueders association is east of Eubanks
Creek and continues in that direction before it changes to the Tarrant-Boloar
association. The Leeray-Sagerton-Nukrum association is west of Eubanks creek
and continues to the end of the project area at the Shackelford County line.
Throck-Speck-Lueders soils are shallower than those found in the LeeraySagerton-Nukrum association. The soils east of Battle Creek to Eubanks Creek
consist of shallow loams overlying clays and limestone bedrock. According to
Clower (1981:Sheet 6), both channels of Battle Creek and Eubanks Creek
contain Gageby loam, occasionally flooded soil (19). The A horizon is calcareous
loam from 0-29 inches. The B horizon consists of brown loam from 29 to 60
inches that formed from recent floodplain alluvium (Clower 1981:75, 85). Soils of
the Bonti series are the most prevalent type in the area between the west bank of
Eubanks Creek and the end of the proposed pipeline route. The A horizon of
these soils consists of fine sandy loam from 0 to 8 inches, and the B horizon is
sandy clay from 8 to 30 inches and overlies clay (Clower 1981:70). The A
horizon for Gageby soils and soils of the Bonti series had been removed due to
plowing. Therefore, the B horizon was exposed on the surface.
The area is drained by the Brazos River watershed on the north and by
the Leon River and the Sabanno River on the south. The only streams in the
project area are Battle Creek (Figure 3) and Eubanks Creek, a tributary of Battle
Creek that is only 1.5 to 2 meters wide (Figure 4). At the time of this survey, it
was dry.
The land in the two counties is mainly used as range and cattle and goats.
Cultivation is also practiced, and wheat, oats, peanuts, cotton, and grain
sorghum are the main crops. About 20% of the land in Callahan County is used
for cultivation, and 30% of Eastland County is in cultivation. Crops are grown in
the areas where sandy soils are present.

4

Figure 3. Battle Creek (facing West)

5

Figure 4. Eubanks Creek (facing West)

6

METHODS
Prior to entering the field, the site records at TARL and the Texas
Archeological Sites Atlas were checked for the presence of previously recorded
archaeological sites in the project area and vicinity as well as previous projects
and surveys in the area. In addition archaeological reports documenting work in
the area were reviewed. Mark Gardenhire, General Manager of the Fort Griffin
SUD was interviewed regarding the nature of the area and access to that
segment on private property. Scott Pletka at TxDOT was contacted and informed
that a survey would be conducted on TxDOT right-of-way, and he said that it was
not necessary for a TxDOT representative to sign the permit application.
The survey was conducted on April 25, 2012 under the supervision of the
Project Archaeologist (Jesse Todd) who was assisted by Brett Lang. They began
at the Pueblo Processing Plant in Eastland County and examined the Area of
Potential Effect (APE) to a point about 400 meters east of Battle Creek just
across the county line in Callahan County. This area was examined using the
“Windshield Survey.” This is a very low probability area that was not part of the
area requested by the THC for survey. Also, this segment is located in the
TxDOT right-of-way and past road construction has cause serious disturbance.
Next, the crew examined the east bank of Battle Creek that is on private
property. Surface visibility was excellent, and the surface contained exposures of
limestone and gravel (Figure 5). A shovel test was attempted, but the A Horizon
consisted of only a few centimeters of sandy silt before impenetrable limestone
gravel was reached. Therefore, no additional shovel tests were excavated.
On the west bank of Battle Creek is a ridge where surface visibility was
excellent and outcrops of limestone bedrock were present (Figure 6). West of
Battle Creek there is a residence on the ridge. Although this residence is north of
the APE, it is our opinion that construction of this house may have removed any
cultural materials on top of the ridge. From the west bank of Battle Creek to the
borehole entry point on the east bank of an unnamed, intermittent tributary of
Battle Creek, the area was in improved pasture (Figure 7). From the borehole
exit point west of the tributary, the pipeline route will be placed in an existing dirt
road. The borehole entry point on the east bank of the intermittent tributary is in
the area where site 41CA7 is depicted on the TARL maps. Despite an intensive
inspection of the area, no evidence of this site was found. North of the borehole
entry point and about 500 meters north of State Highway 6, a small trailer house
and outbuildings were present. Push piles were present in the vicinity of the
borehole entrance as well. Construction of the trailer house location and the
outbuildings probably removed any cultural materials that may have been
present in the southern portion of site 41CA7.

7

Figure 5. Ground Visibility East of Battle Creek (facing West)

8

Figure 6. Exposed Limestone Bedrock on Ridge

9

Figure 7. Improved Pasture

From the borehole exit point, the proposed pipeline route will follow a dirt,
two-track road up the slope of a ridge in a westerly direction. Approximately 200
meters of this ridge was visually examined for cultural materials. Shovel tests
were not excavated due to the excellent ground visibility and the fact that
limestone bedrock was exposed on the ground surface. The field survey ended
at a point about 200 meters west of Eubanks Creek, and the remainder of the
proposed water line was examined using the “Windshield Survey” method with
occasional stops to look at the surface on the ground.
It was not known at the time if boring would be used to cross Eubanks
Creek. Therefore, the field survey was conducted on either side of the creek for
a distance of 200 meters. Shovel tests were not excavated east of the creek due
to the presence of shallow soils and outcrops of limestone bedrock at the
surface. No shovel tests were excavated west of Eubanks Creek due to the
good to excellent ground visibility and the fact that the sandy clay B horizon was
exposed on the ground surface in the recently mowed hay pasture. Although the
area west of Eubanks Creek appears to be a floodplain on the USGS map, visual
survey indicates that the area is in an upland setting.
10

The APE from a point 200 meters west of the edge of the ridge to the end
of the project was considered to be a very low probability area due to the
distance from perennial water and disturbance from oil field and residential
construction. Therefore, this segment was evaluated utilizing the “Windshield
Survey” method. Prior to encountering the Shackelford County line, there is a
wetland area that will be crossed using directional boring. No locations likely to
contain a prehistoric archeological site in this area were noted. The project was
documented through field notes and digital photography and a site revisit form
was completed and submitted to TARL.

11

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
General
The project area is located on the border of the Lower Plains and North
Central Texas regions as defined by Biesaart et al. (1985) in a statistical overview
published by the Texas Historical Commission. When the overview was compiled
in 1985, these regions were well documented in terms of numbers of sites when
compared to other regions in Texas. At that time, there were 1302 known sites in
the Lower Plains region and 2678 known sites in the North Central Texas region. In
1985, there were no recorded sites in Callahan County. Twenty-eight sites were
known to be present in Eastland County. Of this number, five sites are described
as General Archaic, and one site is referred to as Paleo-Indian. Disturbance to the
sites in Eastland County is listed as mainly due to erosion with construction being
the next in terms of number of occurrences. Today, there are 24 known sites in
Callahan County and 33 known sites in Eastland County.
Previous Investigations
There have been no major archaeological investigations in either county.
Most of the work has been performed by contract archaeologists associated with
private firms and archaeologists working for state and federal agencies. Major
studies in the area have been associated with reservoir construction. The three
reservoirs nearest the current project area are Squaw Creek Reservoir in Hood
and Somervell counties (Skinner and Humphreys 1973), Joe Pool Lake in Dallas,
Ellis, and Tarrant counties (Moir et al. 1988), and Possum Kingdom Lake in Palo
Pinto and Young counties. The Works Progress Administration was responsible
for the work at Possum Kingdom Lake. Jean Hughes (personal communication)
stated that no formal report was written for this project.
In Callahan County, eleven of the twenty-four known sites were recorded
in the between 1928 and 1940 by E. B. Sayles and R. E. Forrester. Formal site
forms were not used in those days, and the location of many of these sites is still
in question. The rest of the sites were recorded by archaeologists from Hicks &
Company during a survey of fire retarding structures for the National Resource
Conservation Service in 1994 that recorded six sites, Mesa Field Services who
examined a transmission line in 2000 and found three sites, and Horizon in 2011
during their survey of a proposed transmission line that recorded four sites. All of
the sites are prehistoric except 41CA22 and 41CA25 where historic trash
scatters were found. The only information for 41CA1 is the presence of
mastodon bones. The prehistoric sites date to the Archaic and Late Prehistoric
periods and consist of quarries, lithic scatters, camps, and burned rock middens.
Sandstone hearths were reported at three sites.

12

In Eastland County, four of the thirty-three known sites were recorded
between 1938 and 1940 by R. E. Forrester. Although they were the first sites to
be visited and documented in the county, they did not receive TARL numbers
until much later. The remainder of sites were recorded by professionals working
for contract firms and the Highway Department. Other sites were documented by
Archeological Stewards and the Tarrant County Archeological Society. Twenty
sites are prehistoric, and the rest or historic. The majority of the prehistoric sites
are described as lithic scatters or unknown prehistoric. Two sites are described
on the site forms as containing diagnostic artifact that date to the Archaic period.
Hearths and burned rock were observed at several sites. The historic sites are
described as trash scatters, sheds, a log barn, a house foundation, farmsteads,
cistern, and a park constructed by the Works Progress Administration.
The only investigation in the immediate area was the recording of site
41CA7 by R. E. Forrester sometime between 1937 and 1955. He described it as
a lithic scatter with large sandstone hearths. Artifacts observed and collected
included manos, dart points, and a corner-tang knife. He also mentioned a PaleoIndian presence, but does not list any artifacts found at the site dating to this period.
The description of the location of this site is difficult to interpret based on the
sketchy site form. These early sites were plotted on highway maps and then to 15’
topographic quadrangles. Later, efforts were made by TARL staff to plot them on
the newer 7.5’ topographic quadrangles.
Prehistoric Chronology
According to Alex D. Krieger (1946), the cultural patterns in this region
tend to mirror those found to the east more than those identified farther west in
the high plains of the Llano Estacado. Since no defined culture sequence has
been established for the Lower Plains cultural unit, researchers are forced to
borrow the sequences defined in nearby regions such as Central Texas or North
Central Texas. Cultural chronologies for the North Central Texas area have
been presented by Brown (1987), Krieger (1946), Prikryl (1987), and Skinner and
Gallagher (1974). Chronologies for Central Texas have been prepared by
Prewitt (1981, 1985) and Carlson et al. (1986). Although there is some difference
in the terminology used by these researchers, they all agree that the last 10,000
to 12,000 years of prehistory and history for the area can be divided into four
major temporal periods. These are Paleo-Indian (12,000 B.P. to 8000 B.P.);
Archaic (8000 B.P. to 1250 B.P.); Late Prehistoric (1250 B.P. to 300 B.P.); and
Historic (300 B.P. to Present).

13

RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
This survey did not discover any evidence of site 41CA7, and no new sites
were recorded. The plotting of site 41CA7 on the maps at TARL is suspect, and it
is possible that the site exists in a different area. If it is in the area as depicted on
the TARL maps, it was probably destroyed as a result of construction of the trailer
house location and the outbuildings. The soil in the project area is very shallow,
and there is no possibility of a buried site.
It is recommended that the client be allowed to proceed with construction as
planned. Should evidence of an archaeological site be encountered during the
construction associated with this project, all work must stop until the THC can
evaluate the situation in the area of the find. If a change is made to the route of the
water line, the THC must be notified, as an additional archaeological survey may
also be required. This survey was conducted in accordance with the Minimum
Survey Standards as outlined by the THC.

14

REFERENCES CITED
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28, Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.
Brown, David O.
1987 Archeology at Aquilla Lake, 1978-1987 Investigations. Texas
Archeological Survey, Research Report 81. The University of Texas
at Austin.
Carlson, David L., Shawn B. Carlson, Frederick L. Briuer, Erwin Roemer, Jr., and
William E. Moore
1986 Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1983, the
Eastern Training Area. United States Army Fort Hood,
Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report
11.
Clower, Dennis F.
1981 Soil Survey of Callahan County, Texas. United States Department
of Agriculture in Cooperation with the Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946 Cultural Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. The
University of Texas at Austin Publication 4640.
Moir, Randall W., Duane E. Peter, David H. Jurney, and Daniel E. McGregor
1988 Archaeological and Historical Investigations of Joe Pool Lake:
Recovering Evidence of 6,000 Years of Human Occupation along
Mountain Creek in North Central Texas. Archaeology Research
Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern
Methodist University.
Moore, Joe D., Winfred C. Coburn, and Edward R. Harris
1977 Soil Survey of Eastland County, Texas. United States Department
of Agriculture in Cooperation with the Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:65-89.

15

Prewitt, Elton R. (continued)
1985 From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas
Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:201238.
Prikryl, Daniel J.
1987 A Synthesis of the Prehistory of the Lower Elm Fork of the Trinity
River. Unpublished master’s thesis, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Skinner, S. Alan, and Gerald K. Humphreys
1973 The Historic and Prehistoric Archaeological Resources of the
Squaw Creek Reservoir. Institute for the Study of Earth and Man,
Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University.
Skinner, S. Alan, and J. Gallagher
1974 An Evaluation of Cultural Resources at Lake Whitney, Texas.
Southern Methodist University, Research Report 17.

16

