CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT OF THE
TNP-ONE - TWIN OAK 345 KV TRANSMISSION CORRIDOR
Robertson County, Tuai

Steven M. Kotter

With a Contribution by Dan K. Utley

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
Technical Series 1
The University of Texas at Austin

1988

CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT OF THE
TNP-ONE - lWIN OAK 345 KV TRANSMISSION CORRIDOR
Roberbon County, Texas

Steven M. Kotter

With a Contribution by Dan K. Utley

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
Technical Series 1
The University of Texas at Austin

1988

COLLEGE OF LIBERAL ARTS

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory· Sponsored Projects
lOlOOBurnetRoad· Austin, Texas 78758-4497· (512 }835-3120

A Report submitted to:
Texas-New Mexico Power Company

In partial fulfillment of
Purchase Orders 81626 & 92732
dated June 4, 1987

Abstract

During June and July. 1986. personnel from the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory. the University of Texas at Austin. conducted a survey and preliminary
assessment of cultural resources of the major portion of a 14.5 mile corridor in
northern Robertson County. Texas for Sargent & Lundy Engineers. agents for TexasNew Mexico Power Company.
Between November 1986 and January 1987. three
alternate routes. totalling about 15 additional miles of corridor. were surveyed . The
four corridors were various options for the construction of a transmission line
connecting the proposed TNP-ONE generating plant with the Twin Oaks substation.
The 29 archeological and architectural sites investigated. 41RT10. 41RT107 and
41RT125. and the series 4RT327 through 41RT345. 41RT354. 41RT355 and 41RT357
through 41RT361. represent 21 prehistoric and 11 historic components. Twenty-six of
the sites are within the Walnut Creek Basin. a tributary to the Brazos River and three
are within the Navasota River Basin.
Approximately half of the prehistoric sites.
predominantly small hunting camps. hold some potential for significant deposits. The
historic sites are all rural farmsteads but one house is extant. Further documentation
is recommended at this and two additional historic sites if they are to be affected by
construction.
In most instances. potentially significant cultural resources can be
preserved by alignment of the actual right-of-way within the much wider surveyed
corridor.

Ill

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The survey of the TNP-ONE - Twin Oak transmission line corridor was carried
out with the able field assistance of Michael W . Davis. Bruce A. Nightengale and Steve
A. Tomka. Dan K. Utley and Solveig A. Turpin. Principal Investigator. carried out the
historic site research.
Tim Krause of Sargent & Lundy served as liason between
sponsor and agency and coordinated the survey throughout its complicated reroutes.
Dr. Larry Sanburg ably represented Texas-New Mexico Power Company for the duration
of the survey and analysis.
Finally. the many residents of Robertson County who
permitted us to survey their land and provided additional information on sites and site
locations deserve a special thanks for their assistance.

IV

Table of Contents

Abstract

Ill

Acknowledgments

IV

Introduction

1

Methods

3

Site Descriptions

5

Site Distribution

25

Summary and Recommendations

31

References Cited

39

List of Figures

Figure 1. Routes of proposed transmission line corridors

2

Figure 2. Site environments

9

20

Figure 3. Historic site. 41RT343

List of Tables

Table 1. Summary of Prehistoric Resources within the Final Corridor .

32

Table 2. Summary of Other Prehistoric Resources

34

Table 3. Summary of Historic Resources .

38

This page intentionally left blank.

INTRODUCTION

At the request of Sargent & Lundy Engineers of Chicago. Illinois. agents for the
Texas-New Mexico Power Company. the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL) conducted an intensive survey of a 500-ft wide corridor in anticipation of
construction of a proposed overhead electric transmission line in Robertson County .
Texas. The 18 mile-long. 500 foot-wide corridor crosses the northern portion of the
county (Fig. 1). connecting the Texas-New Mexico Power Company's proposed TNPONE power plant. near Hammond. and the existing Twin Oak Substation.
Investigations. accomplished between June 17 and July 3. 1986. were limited to the
eastern 14.5 miles of corridor: the western end had been previously surveyed (Davis
and Utley 1986). Subsequently. three alternate routes were surveyed (Fig . 1). primarily
in the central and east-central portions of the line from above the right bank of Walnut
Creek to its headwaters.
The initial re-route. surveyed between July 14 and 17. 1986. was 2 miles long
and avoided potentially significant sites identified along Big Sandy and little Sandy
creeks. Although a clear corridor was defined. other considerations favored a second
re-route that eliminated turns in the line. Approximately 3. 7 miles of new corridor that
more closely followed Walnut Creek near its FM2293 crossing were subsequently
surveyed between November 11 and 13. 1986. The second re-route also changed the
location of the western terminus to reflect revisions in the proposed TNP-ONE plant
layout. Finally. the corridor route was changed a third and final time to follow the left
bank of Willow Creek across FM2293. and to move the segment near the Twin Oak
Reservoir further north. This 9.6 mile-long alternate was surveyed between January 6
and 16. 1987.
The TNP-ONE - Twin Oak transmission line was originally part of the much
Complete
larger Calvert Mine cultural resource study (Davis and Utley 1986).
environmental and cultural background information is provided in Davis and Utley
Descriptions of investigative methods are
(1986) and will not be repeated here.
followed by a summary of cultural resources recorded along all surveyed routes and
assessments of site significance.

1

N

...........

~
~

FALLS

CO

LIMESTONE
CO
\
-. - - · - - . · - -·

----~-- ·

ROBERTSO~

CO

)

'fl

~

~

~

~

(')

0

;g
0

~

(')

""'i

;v-·

/

~

)

.

I o

..

.(

r

"'--.. ..
i...__·· . ....-· ..

Tidwell

"-.._

CALVERT TRANSMISSION LINE
•
---

0

Figure 1.

Routes of proposed transmission line corridor.

I

ORIGINAL ROUTE
REROUTE
FINAL REROUTE

2

3

4

§Ml

METHODS

The inventory and
proposed transmission line
with a pre-field search of
relative to stream ranking

preliminary assessment of cultural resources within the
corridor were accomplished in four separate phases beginning
records housed at TARL. A review of known site locations
and landform type was also undertaken at this time.

The proposed line runs north of the Calvert-Cple Creek project area (Good.
Turpin and Freeman 1980). although part of the corridor passes near sites identified in
that sample survey.
The records search also revealed additional sites of potential
concern. Prehistoric site 41RT219 (TARL files) is located adjacent to. but not within .
the proposed corridor. The corridor also crosses the back edge of a ridge containing
prehistoric site 41RT10 (Turpin and Kluge 1980). near the Twin Oak Reservoir. The
third and final re-route includes site 41RT125 within the 500-foot corridor and passes
near site 41RT107 (Turpin and Kluge 1980).

Survey
The second phase of investigation consisted of a pedestrian survey of the corridor
by a two or three person crew walking two linear transects. one up and one back.
Survey was ineffective in identifying prehistoric sites because of the sandy nature of
area soils. the absence of erosion and the density of ground cover. Surficial cultural
The walk-over did. however. permit an
materials were observed at only one site.
assessment of site potential of landforms shown on USGS 7.5' maps. locate small rises
and other high probability areas and identify historic sites with surficial features.

Testing
Success of the prehistoric inventory was dependent upon the effectiveness of
shovel probing as a method of site identification .
During the third phase of
investigations. the site potential of observed topographic features was reviewed and
specific areas were selected for shovel testing. Site probability was based on a number
of interrelated criteria defined during the pre-field phase investigation which. in the
absence of detailed soil data. were limited to 1) stream rank: 2) location within each
stream basin: and 3) landform.
Distinct rises immediately above perennial streams
were felt to have the highest site probability. followed by similar landforms along major
tributaries near their confluence with perennial streams.
Gently sloping landforms
distant from water. especially near the headwaters of perennial streams. were assessed
as low probability areas . A number of these low potential locales were tested as a
check on pre-field assessments to insure that no potential site locations were
overlooked .

3

4 / TEXAS-NEW MEXICO PROJECT
Each shovel test was approximately 50 cm in diameter and excavated to culturally
sterile clay subsoil or a depth of 1 meter. the effective limit of shovel testing. Matrix
was removed in arbitrary 20 cm levels and dry screened through 1/4 inch hardware
cloth.
Cultural materials were described and measured. but except for temporal or
functional diagnostics. were not collected. Non-collection was justified by the absence
of variability in the materials which were. with the exception of a single angular
fragment . the result of final stage biface reduction .

Site A11e11ment
The final investigative phase. site assessment. was not limited to a determination
of research and information yield potential but also included the accuracy of testing
results. Assessment of potential is accurate only if the shovel tests reflect the real
density and vertical distribution of• cultural materials.
Consistent data obtained from
two or more tests in horizontally restricted. distinct landforms with shallow surface
soils are more reliable than those obtained from broad. evenly sloping landforms with
deep soils. especially if ,individual probes vary.
Extremes in the density of material
recovered are more reliable measures of site significance than scattered materials of
moderate density. Site descriptions address this important aspect of site significance.
Given the sparsity of culturally and temporally diagnostic artifacts noted on this
survey. a key indicator of research potential is location. At the current level of data
integration . the diversity of environments used by prehistoric peoples is a key research
question . Recommendations for additional investigations are offered for sites where the
potential yield is moderate or high based on the type and density of artifactual
materials. the presence of features or cultural stratigraphy and site condition. Where
possible. these potentially significant sites should be avoided by movmg the
transmission line within the broad surveyed corridor.

Documentation
All identified cultural resources were recorded on State of Texas Archeological Site
Data forms.
The shovel tests at both site and non-site locales were numbered by
landowner section and recorded on forms specifically devised to document depth and
nature of soils and materials recovered. A daily journal was maintained by the field
supervisor who summarized survey methods and results. The Robertson County deed
and tax records were searched for land ownership and historic sites were evaluated by
the staff historian.
Photographic documentation consisted of 35 mm black-and-white
prints. All materials are curated at TARL.

SITE DESCRIPTIONS
Prehistoric Resources

41RT10
Prehistoric site 41RT10 is located on a prominent rise {430 ft. MSL) immediately
above the right floodplain of Duck Creek (390 ft. MSL). approximately 300 meters from
the current stream channel. Sandy surface soils. over 1 meter in depth. are primarily of
colluvial origin.
Half of the site has been cleared of oak/elm woodland and now
supports mixed grasses and annuals.
The proposed transmission line corridor crosses the back edge of this large
campsite. recorded during initial reconnaissance of the Twin Oak Reservoir (Prewitt and
Grombacher 1974) and later tested (Turpin and Kluge 1980) . Seven 2 by 2 meter
units. placed near the tip of the wooded crest of the rise, recovered abundant cultural
Although the majority of
materials representing several prehistoric occupations.
materials appeared mixed. three features were relatively intact and there was a clear
separation between late Prehistoric and earlier Archaic remains. Testing was felt to
obtain a representative sample of generalized hunting and gathering subsistence between
the Middle Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods (ca. 4000 to 1000 B.P.) .
Current testing identified a hearth buried between 80 and 100 cm below the
surface. but only a few chert flakes were recovered . Neither test reached culturally
sterile subsoil. but the vertical distribution of materials corresponds well with earlier
testing results where remains were more abundant in lower levels.
Current
investigations redefined the horizontal site extent to include an area 200 by 100 meters.
or 20.000 square meters in size. but provided little additional data.
The Late
Prehistoric occupation may be more restricted. confined to the top of the crest.
Previous testing of this site by Duford Skelton (as reported by Turpin and Kluge
1980) provided sufficient data for assessment. The proposed transmission line will not
affect the main site area. crossing the margin furthest from the creek where materials
are less abundant. No further work is recommended .

41RT107
Previously recorded prehistoric site 41RT107 (Turpin and Kluge 1980) is situated
on one of a series of low hills that form a relatively steep bluff above the Walnut
Creek floodplain . Erosional gullies . one of which may originate as a spring. bound the
site to the north and south. Colluvial sands vary in depth from 40 to 60 cm but are
totally deflated near the gullies. Except along the fenceline. the site has been cleared
and planted in bermuda grass.

5

6 / TEXAS-NEW MEXICO PROJECT
The site is a small 20 by 20 meter or 400 square meter campsite of unknown
age.
A shovel test dug during the original recording of the site recovered cultural
material from the upper half of a sandy soil stratum 60 cm in depth. Current testing
indicates moderate densities of material (three flakes and a burned rock) are equally
distributed within 40 cm of sediments overlying clay. Neither culturally meaningful soil
stratigraphy nor cultural features were observed.
The topographic feature containing this site is small and discrete.
Soils are
shallow to moderately deep . At least the upper half of the deposits has been disturbed
by clearing and cultivation. A low to moderate information yield is indicated. depending
upon the presence of intact hearths and diagnostic tools. Site 41RT107 will not be
affected by the construction of the transmission line as presently designed . However. if
the site can not be avoided. testing to determine the context and nature of buried
cultural materials is recommended.

41RT125
This previously recorded site (Turpin and Kluge 1980) is situated below site
4RT107 and a low rise adjacent to Walnut Creek where it makes a wide meander to
the left margin of the floodplain. The rise is connected to the bluff by a flat saddle.
Colluvial soils over 1 meter in depth support dense bermuda grass. The land has been
cleared except along the banks of Walnut Creek where riparian woodland still grows.
The site is a stratified campsite approximately 50 by 50 meters in size. At the
crest of the rise. in Test 1. cultural materials were equally distributed through 1 meter
of sandy soil. with burned rock recovered from between 60 and 80 cm. A grayish sand
with charcoal flecks between 20 and 40 cm apparently represents a cultural zone
associated with a late site occupation.
At the back of the rise. in Test 2. soil
discoloration was not observed. but charcoal and burned rock occur at this same level.
Charcoal was noted in each level but Level 1. A ceramic sherd from between 60 and
80 cm apparently dates the majority of the deposits sampled to after the introduction
of ceramics. An intensive occupation. consisting of an intact hearth. charcoal. relatively
abundant flakes. and preserved bone. was identified below the ceramic level.
The rise crest and saddle connecting the rise and the bluff slope apparently
represent a single intensively occupied site.
Although horizontal extent is fairly well
defined by topography. the vertical extent of deposits is unknown. The nature. density
and vertical distribution of cultural materials indicate a moderate to high information
potential. If this site cannot be avoided. testing to determine the nature and context
of buried cultural materials is recommended.

41RT329
Prehistoric site 41RT329 (410 to 420 ft . MSL) is located just above the left
modern floodplain of Walnut Creek (390 ft. MSL) at the base of a high hill that is
part of the upland divide between the major headwater branches.
The site is
approximately 35 meters from the creek and 2.1 km downstream from its head. Sandy
surface soils of primarily colluvial origin are between 37 and 60 cm in depth .

SITE DESCRIPTIONS / 7
Vegetation consists of mixed grasses and annuals but the land was once wooded and
has been cleared.
The site is an open lithic scatter of unknown age on gently sloping land about
1.5 to 5 meters above the current creek channel. A small rise adjacent to the site
tested negatively. On the basis of three positive tests. the site includes an area of at
least 50 by 50 meters. or 2.500 square meters in size.
Cultural materials were
recovered between the ground surface and 20 cm depth in each of the positive tests.
and between 40 -and 60 cm in Test 1. Materials consist of six small secondary and
interior flakes. and a larger angular fragment (2 by 3 cm) that may indicate on-site
No culturally meaningful soil stratigraphy or cultural features were
cobble reduction.
observed.
Site 41RT329 is relatively extensive. although · specific boundaries were not
defined. The consistency of recovery from near the surface (Level 1) appears to define
a late component that was accurately assessed by testing results. but may be disturbed
by land clearing.
Two flakes recovered between 40 and 60 cm below the surface
suggest the presence of an earlier. possibly intact. site occupation that is largely
undefined. A low to moderate information potential is indicated. Testing to determine
the nature and context of buried cultural materials was recommended but 41RT329 is
no longer within the proposed corridor.

41RT330
Prehistoric site 41RT330 (430 ft . MSL) is located just above the modern
floodplain of Walnut Creek (420 ft. MSL) at the base a high hill that comprises part
of the upland divide between the major branches of the creek headwaters .
The
tributary confluence is 0.3 km north of the site and 1.6 km downstream from the head
of Walnut Creek.
Sandy surface soils of colluvial origin are between 12 and 20 cm
deep. Area vegetation . consisting of an oak/elm woodland. has been cleared from the
site which now supports mixed grasses and annuals.
On the basis of current testing. 41 RT330 is defined as an open lithic scatter of
unknown age. Cultural materials are apparently confined to a slight rise covering an
area 15 by 15 meters . or 225 square meters in size. A single. small interior flake was
recovered from between the ground surface and 20 cm in one of the two shovel tests
placed on the rise. A test dug on more sloping ground above the rise was negative.
No culturally meaningful soil stratigraphy or any cultural features were noted.
Both horizontal and vertical extent are limited . and testing results probably
accurately reflect sparse material density . Land clearing has disturbed the entire depth
of cultural deposits. A low information yield potential is indicated. and no further work
is recommended . Site 41RT330 is no longer within the proposed corridor.

41RT331
Prehistoric site 41RT331 is on the crest of a high knoll (400 ft. MSL) between
Red Bank Creek (360 ft. MSL) and Barton Branch. The site appears to be associated
with the creek which is 0.4 km away. Below the site. Barton Branch skirts the edge

8 / TEXAS-NEW MEXICO PROJECT
of Walnut Creek and marks the location of an older. slightly more distant channel.
Sandy surface soils between 50 and 90 cm in depth may have developed in situ.
Vegetation consists of cultivated bermuda grass and scattered oak trees.
The site is an open lithic scatter of unknown age. restricted to a slight rise 30
by 20 meters. or 600 square meters in size. A single flake was recovered from each
of two shovel tests placed on the crest. while areas below the crest tested negatively.
Cultural materials occur between 40 and 80 cm below the surface and slightly above
the clay contact. A single buried component may be represented. Neither culturally
meaningful soil stratigraphy nor any cultural features were noted.
Results obtained from the two positive tests probably accurately reflect the
density of cultural materials. Although a buried and possibly intact component may be
present. the sparsity of materials indicates a low information potential.
No further
work is recommended.

41RT332
Prehistoric site 41RT332 is located on a high hill (430 ft. MSL) above a minor
unnamed tributary (400 ft. MSL) of Walnut Creek that drains the relatively wide
stream divide between Sandy Creek and Barton Branch. The site is below the hill
crest on a slight rise overlooking the valley wall and tributary about 150 meters away.
Sandy surface soils approximately 1 meter in depth may have developed in situ.
Vegetation now consists of cultivated bermuda grass. but the area is shown as wooded
on the 1962 USGS map.
The site is defined as an open lithic scatter of unknown age on the basis of a
test placed on the rise crest. The crest is 30 by 30 meters. or 900 square meters in
size. Single flakes were recovered from between 40 and 60 cm and between 80 and
100 cm below the surface at which point clay was encountered. The presence of one
or more buried components is suggested. Additional tests were not excavated since the
site appears to be entirely outside of the proposed transmission line corridor.
Two
tests placed above the rise on the hill crest and within the earlier corridor were
negative. The transmission line corridor no longer passes adjacent to this site.

41RT333
Prehistoric site 41RT333 is located on a low rise (400 ft. MSL) just above the
modern floodplain of Long Branch (390 ft. MSL). approximately 1.2 km from Duck
Creek. Sandy surface soils. possibly of mixed colluvial and alluvial origin. are over 1
meter in depth. Vegetation consists of mixed grasses and annuals adjacent to uncleared
land along the creek that supports an oak/elm woodland (Fig. 2a).
Site 41RT333 is an open lithic scatter 20 meters distant from and 3 meters
above the modern creek channel. The site is assumed to cover the entire rise. 30 by
15 meters. or 450 square meters in size. even though only one of two tests was
positive. Two small interior flakes were recovered from between 20 to 60 cm below
ground surface. but neither test reached culturally sterile subsoil.
The flakes may
represent a single buried component.
No culturally meaningful soil stratigraphy or
cultural features were observed .

SITE DESCRIPTIONS / 9

Figure 2.

Site Environments.

A.

Long Branch near site 41RT333.

B.

Log structure at site 41RT327.

10 / TEXAS-NEW MEXICO PROJECT
This site is one of only two prehistoric sites identified within the Long Branch
Basin.
The restricted nature of the landform would appear to indicate that testing
results accurately reflect the sparsity of the cultural materials. However. a relatively
intact buried component may be present and the vertical extent of cultural deposits was
not determined. Avoidance or testing to determine the nature and context of buried
cultural materials is recommended.

41RT334
Prehistoric site 41RT334 is situated on the crest of a high stream divide (440
ft. MSL) between Little Sandy (390 ft. MSL) and Walnut creeks.
The site is 300
meters from the modern channel of Little Sandy Creek at the point where the
floodplain of this and Big Sandy Creek merge. approximately .7 km from Walnut Creek.
Sandy surface soils. primarily between 28 and 48 cm in depth. may have developed in
situ. The site is mostly wooded. but partially cleared and planted in bermuda grass.
The site. defined as an open lithic scatter of unknown age. is approximately 15
by 20 meters. or 300 square meters in size. Testing results indicate cultural materials
are confined to the edge of the divide overlooking a steep slope to the creek 50 feet
below. Two positive tests at the northern end of the site recovered five specimens.
primarily from the upper 20 cm of sandy soil.
The vertical distribution of cultural
materials. all small interior flakes or fragments. suggests a single late occupation. A
single shovel test at the southern end of the site recovered one flake from between 40
and 60 cm in soils over 1 meter in depth. No culturally meaningful soil stratigraphy
or cultural features were observed.
Although the site is relatively extensive. the association of cultural deposits at
opposite ends of the site was not clearly defined. Recovery was greatest at the edge
of the field where clearing has disturbed surface soils. but the potential for intact
deposits within the wooded portion is good.
A low to moderate information yield
potential is indicated. Avoidance or testing to determine the nature and context of
buried cultural materials was recommended but 41RT334 is no longer within the
proposed corridor.

41RT335
Prehistoric site 41RT335 is located at the tip of a low stream divide (400
ft. MSL) which separates Big Sandy (385 ft. MSL) and Little Sandy creeks near their
confluence.
Sandy surface soils. primarily of colluvial origin. are 1 meter in depth.
The site area and nearby floodplain have beeri cleared of trees and now support mixed
grasses and annuals.
The site is an open campsite with at least two components. the most recent
dating to the Late Prehistoric Period and an earlier component presumably dating to
the Archaic Period. The site is at least 20 by 20 meters. or 400 square meters in
size. but probably includes the entire ridge tip that is twice this size. Two tests.
neither of which had encountered clay at a depth of 1 meter. define a Late Prehistoric
occupation represented by an arrow point recovered from between the ground surface

SITE DESCRIPTIONS / 11
and 20 cm in depth. Evidence of
below surface was gathered from
recovered in association with flecks
soil stratigraphy or cultural features

an earlier occupation buried between 60 to 100 cm
both tests.
A total of three small flakes were
of charcoal below 60 cm. No culturally meaningful
were observed .

The arrow point falls within the description of the Alba type that includes
projectiles with an expanding base. attributable to the earlier phase of the Late
Prehistoric Period in East Texas. The complete point is 20 mm in length and has a
maximum blade width of 15 mm. Blade edges are slightly concave and serrated. The
base is 5 mm in length with a maximum width of 6 mm and a neck width of 4 mm.
The point is made from fine-grained tan chert.
Site horizontal extent is defined by topography. but depth of cultural deposits was
not determined. The consistency of recovery provides · evidence of a buried component
that may be early and datable by radiocarbon assay of charcoal. The late component
is not as well-defined. but the arrow point was the only tool recovered during the
survey. A moderate to high information potential is indicated. Testing to determine
the nature and context of buried cultural materials was recommended but the site is no
longer within the corridor.

41RT336
Prehistoric site 41RT336 is located on a high ridge crest (430 ft. MSL) at the
right upland margin above Big Sandy Creek (390 ft. MSL). near its confluence with
The site is approximately 100 meters from the current creek
Little Sandy Creek.
channel. Sandy surface soils between 60 and 90 cm deep may represent in situ soil
development.
Vegetation consists of cultivated bermuda grass. but at one time the
area is assumed to have been wooded.
The site is an open lithic scatter defined by a single large interior flake recovered
from between 40 and 60 cm below the ground surface. Materials apparently are limited
to a low rise, 20 by 20 meters or 400 square meters in size. adjacent to the steeply
sloping valley wall. Two shovel tests placed on the crest of the high ridge were both
negative. No culturally meaningful soil stratigraphy or cultural features were observed.
Site 41RT336 occupies a distinct landform of restricted size.
Although only a
single test was excavated. results suggest that cultural materials are very sparse. A
low information potential is indicated and no further work is warranted. This site 1s
no longer within the proposed corridor.

41RT337
Prehistoric site 41RT337 is on a low stream divide (390 ft. MSL) between Red
Bank Creek (360 ft. MSL) and a right bank tributary. approximately 100 meters from
the creek. Sandy soils of colluvial origin are between 40 and 60 cm deep. Vegetation
consists of primary growth oak/elm woodland.
The site consists of a single small flake recovered from between the surface and
20 cm in one of three shovel ·tests . The low divide has a flat. featureless crest. and

12 / TEXAS-NEW MEXICO PROJECT
testing did not define site horizontal extent.
or any cultural features were observed.

No culturally meaningful soil stratigraphy

The proposed corridor crosses the back portion of the low stream divide where
the site potential is much lower than near the tip of the divide . Although current
investigations failed to define site extent. testing results appear to indicate that
materials are very sparse. A low information yield potential is indicated and no further
work is recommended.

41RT338
Prehistoric site 41 RT338 1s located adjacent to a minor right tributary.
approximately 0.3 km from Red Bank Creek. Stream downcutting has created a low.
but very prominent rise (390 ft. MSL). at the headwaters of the tributary (360
ft. MSL). Sandy surface soils. probably primarily of colluvial origin. are over 1 meter
deep. Except for a large oak tree. vegetation consists of mixed grasses and annuals.
but the rise may once have been wooded .
The site is a campsite of unknown age, although at least two components are
apparently represented. A single shovel test. excavated to 100 cm without reaching
culturally sterile clay subsoil. recovered more materials than at any other site identified
by the current survey. A concentration of nine flakes between the ground surface and
20 cm depth is clearly separated from a hearth located between 80 and 100 cm by 40
cm of deposits where only few flakes were recovered. The site is assumed to include
the entire rise crest that is 30 by 30 meters or 900 square meters in size. The site
plotting in the records at TARL appears much larger due to the lack of topographic
relief identifying the rise crest on the USGS 7.5 minute topographic maps.
The possible horizontal extent of the site is defined by landform. but additional
prehistoric occupations may be present below the depth reached by testing. The noted
feature and distribution of cultural materials suggests that stratigraphic context is good.
although clearing may have disturbed deposits near the surface. A moderate to high
information potential is indicated.
Testing to determine the nature and context of
buried cultural materials is recommended if the site can not be avoided.

41RT339
Prehistoric site 41RT339 is located on a low rise (390 ft. MSL) above the right
bank of a minor unnamed tributary (360 ft . MSL) of Walnut Creek that drains the
divide between Big Willow Creek and Red Bank Creek. Sandy surface soils 60 cm in
depth are primarily of colluvial origin . Vegetation consists of cultivated bermuda grass
except along the tributary where remnants of an oak/elm woodland grow.
The site is an open lithic scatter of unknown age defined on the basis of a single
cortical flake recovered from between the ground surface and 20 cm depth. Clay was
not reached at 100 cm below the surface in the negative test located 30 meters
downstream. Upstream the bank is eroded and materials . if present. would have been
visible. No culturally meaningful soil stratigraphy or cultural features were noted.

SITE DESCRIPTIONS / 13
Although horizontal extent was not defined. the site is apparently of limited size.
Cultural materials are very sparse and a low information potential is indicated.
No
.·.further work is warranted.

41RT340
Prehistoric site 41RT340 is located at the tip of a high ridge (420 ft. MSL)
above a minor unnamed tributary (390 ft . MSL) of Walnut Creek. approximately 1.2
km from the current creek channel. Sandy surface soils. primarily of colluvial origin.
are between 70 and 100 cm in depth. Vegetation consists of cultivated bermuda grass
except along an existing fenceline where the original oak/elm woodland was not cleared .
The site is an open lithic scatter. apparently confined to the very ti"p of the
ridge. an area 30 by 30 meters or 900 square meters- in size. Small secondary and
interior flakes were recovered from between the ground surface and 60 cm depth in
each of two shovel tests. Investigations were not able to define specific components
since materials are uniformly distributed. No culturally meaningful soil stratigraphy or
cultural features were observed. A test placed above the tip of the ridge was negative.
Site 41RT340 lies within a restricted area and testing indicates cultural materials
Culturally sterile subsoil was reached in both tests. but
are relatively abundant.
separate components could not be distinguished. A low to moderate information is
indicated. Testing to determine the nature and context of buried cultural materials was
recommended but the site is no longer within the corridor.

41RT344
Prehistoric site 41RT344 is located on a low rise (380 ft. MSL) adjacent to a
minor tributary (370 ft . MSL) approximately 0.7 km from Big Willow Creek. Sandy
surface soils of colluvial origin are a maximum of 45 cm in depth . The majority of
wooded vegetation has been cleared and the area now supports mixed grasses and
annuals.
The site 1s a campsite of unknown age estimated to be 20 by 20 meters or 400
square meters in size. Two small flakes and a single burned rock were noted on the
surface where road construction and erosion have deflated surface soils. An additional
flake was recovered from between the ground surface and 20 cm depth in one of two
tests placed on the more intact portion of the site. Soils are more compacted than at
other sites . No culturally meaningful soil stratigraphy or cultural features were observed.
Approximately half of the site has been severely disturbed. with remaining areas
affected by land clearing and possibly by cultivation. The surficial materials reflect the
sparsity of cultural materials. The land owner was not aware of the site. although he
has collected from other localities, indicating that if tools are present they are few in
number. A low information potential is indicated. and no further work is recommended.

14 j TEXAS-NEW MEXICO PROJECT

41RT355
Prehistoric site 41RT355 is situated on a commanding hill top (420-435 MSL)
which overlooks a broad expanse of floodplain created by the confluence of Sandy.
Little Sandy and Walnut creeks. just 0.5 km south of the site. Sandy soils extend to
at least 1 meter below the present ground surface.
Vegetation is thick coastal
bermuda grass; oak. cedar elm. cottonwood and willow trees fringe the drainages.
On the basis of one test. the site is defined as a campsite of unknown age. but
at least the upper 80 cm appear to postdate the introduction of ceramics to the area
(ca. A.O. 500). Relatively abundant remains were recovered between 20 and 80 cm.
~ut none came from nearer the present surface.
Only a single flake was below 80 cm.
but basal clay was not reached and additional materials may be buried below 1 meter.
The site is assumed to include the entire crest of the rise. an area potentially 75 by
40 meters or 3000 square meters in size.
No culturally meaningful soil stratigraphy
was noted but the burned rock may be evidence of buried features.
The ceramic sherd is too small to determine type or form. but it is poorly fired.
crumbling to the touch.
This sandy paste sherd is blackened throughout and is
different from the only other aboriginal sherd collected during this project (see
41RT125).
Although neither the vertical nor horizontal extent of the site was defined.
location and relative abundance of cultural materials suggest a significant prehistoric
component.
Dating of the site components may be possible given the charcoal
associated with hearths and the potential for a larger collection of ceramics. Clearing
and cultivation have affected only the upper soil layer.
This site is not within the
proposed corridor but if future projects impinge on this location. testing 1s
recommended.

41RT36t
Prehistoric site 41RT361 lies on the tip of a ridge that extends into
The ridge is
Creek floodplain near its confluence with Walnut Creek.
relatively steep bluff along Walnut Creek. Colluvial sandy soils are between
cm deep, overlying a gravelly clay that is exposed in numerous places.
consists of various grasses and annuals and scattered oak trees.

the Gnats
part of a
15 and 35
Vegetation

Sparse cultural materials. consisting of one dart point and three flakes. are widely
scattered over an area 350 by 100 meters or 35.000 square meters in size. The dart
point and two flakes were surficial and separated by at least 50 meters.
The
remaining flake was recovered between 25 and 35 cm in the deepest of three tests
which sampled topographic breaks the length of the ridge tip.
The tan chert dart point has a strong expanding stem. 11 mm long and 20 mm
wide. The neck is 17 mm wide. The blade. now 18 mm long and 21 mm wide. has
been markedly reworked. Based on the shape of the stem. the point is estimated to
date to the Middle Archaic Period.

SITE DESCRIPTIONS / 15

The deflated soils and cultivation of this site provide excellent visibility . All
surface soils are disturbed and cultural materials are extremely sparse. No further work
is recommended .
Multicomponent Resources

41RT341
Site 41RT341 is located on a slight but distinct rise (405 ft. MSL) adjacent to
the right bank of Walnut Creek (400 ft. MSL). approximately 2.85 km downstream
from its head. The site is within the modern floodplain and may be alluvial in origin.
but there is little evidence of the development of fluvial features near the creek
headwaters. Sandy surface soils are over 1 meter in ·depth. Except along the creek
which supports oak/elm woodland species. the area has been cleared and planted m
bermuda grass.
Site 41 RT341 consists of a number of components. primarily prehistoric in age.
but an historic ceramic sherd was also recovered. On the basis of current data. the
prehistoric component is defined as an open lithic scatter of unknown age. Testing
results provided over 1 meter of cultural deposits. evidence of relatively intensive
occupation. Two shovel tests were placed near the crest of the rise which is 30 by 20
meters or 600 square meters in size and divided into two unequal parts by a recent
small gully.
One buried site component is defined by abundant cultural materials
between 40 and 60 cm below the surface. but the number of artifacts recovered from
other levels indicates that both later and earlier prehistoric components may also be
represented . Small interior flakes and fragments are the most common category of
material. but a few cortical flakes and a single bone fragment were also recovered. No
culturally meaningful soil stratigraphy or features were noted.
Site horizontal extent is clearly defined by topography . but cultural
extend beyond the effective limits of shovel testing.
The consistency of
(except between 80 and 100 cm) indicates testing results provide an
assessment of prehistoric remains. which are relatively abundant and include
bone. Only the upper 20 to 40 cm of site deposits have been disturbed. A
to high information potential is indicated .

deposits
recovery
accurate
preserved
moderate

The historic component of 41RT341 consists of a single nm sherd of Blue
Feather Edge earthenware. a ceramic that reached the height of its popularity in Texas
during the mid-nineteenth century . The site is 3.5 km northwest of the Post Oak
Community and 3.6 km northeast of the Walnut Church and Cemetery. an area settled
during the 1850s.
The presence of an artifact potentially dating to the settlement
phase of Robertson County is intriguing. but does little to define site function . The
rise appears too near the creek and too prone to flooding to be selected as a house
location where broken dishes might become buried. Use of rises as trash dumps some
distance from a house is also not typical. Possibly the sherd may be associated with
the suggested late aboriginal occupation of the site. Tes ting to determine the nature
and context of buried cultural material was recommended but this site is no longer
within the corridor.

16 / TEXAS-NEW MEXICO PROJECT
41RT342
Site 41RT342 consists of both prehistoric and historic components located on a
high rise (380 to 390 ft. MSL) adjacent to the floodplain of Big Willow Creek (350
ft. MSL). 200 meters from the current stream channel. Sandy surface soils of colluvial
Vegetation consists of native oak/elm
origin are a maximum of 55 cm in depth.
woodland. as well as introduced Bois d'Arc and apple trees . Surrounding areas have
been cleared and planted in bermuda grass. The site is slightly less than 3 km north
of Tidwell Prairie.
Both site components apparently include the entire rise crest. an area 30 by 30
meters or 900 square meters in size.
The prehistoric component is defined as a
campsite on the basis of an intact hearth buried between 43 and 50 cm below the
surface and approximately 5 cm above clay. Artifactual 'remains are few in number .
being limited to two small flakes. one from the upper 20 cm of two excavated tests.
The distribution of prehistoric materials may indicate two components.
Site 41RT342 occurs on a landform of limited extent and testing results probably
provide an accurate means of assessing the quantity and distribution of cultural
materials. At least one prehistoric component is present and relatively intact. but a
later component. if present. has been disturbed by subsequent historic use. A low to
moderate potential is indicated.
Avoidance or testing to determine the nature and
context of buried cultural materials is recommended.
The historic component of this site was identified by a very light scatter of
historic materials . It includes ferruginous stone. boards. tin. red clay brick fragments
and a washtub. Using the existing stone locations to determine the possible setting of
the structure. it is presumed that it faced in a southeasterly direction. Plants in the
area include Bois d' Arc. oak and china berry. Some of the trees show an alignment
that may indicate the outline of the yard.
A search of the property records was made for 41RT342 and 41RT343. both
located on land now owned by Marion Okonski.
Because the two home sites were
located on the same property. and because of the confusing nature of land transactions
among family members (not all were made part of the official records). it was not
possible to determine a history of previous owners.

41RT354
Multiple component site 41RT354 is situated on a high rise (390 to 400 ft MSL).
overlooking the confluence of Little Sandy and Sandy creeks and the Walnut Creek
floodplain .
A minor Walnut Creek tributary skirts the southern edge of the site.
Sandy surface soils are colluvial in origin and vary in depth between 20 cm and more
than 1 meter. The rise crest has been cleared. leaving scattered oak trees amidst a
bermuda grass field. The site. which is 120 by 90 meters or 10.800 square meters in
size. is divided into two lobes by an erosional gully . The house location. one well and
Test 1 are on the southern lobe; the majority of the outbuildings and Test 2 are on
the northern lobe. One barn and one well are near the head of the erosional gully.

SITE DESCRIPTIONS / 17
The prehistoric component is defined as a campsite of unknown age. although
burned rock was recovered only from Test 2 in the northern site area. Soils within
the corridor are very shallow (22 cm) and cultural materials few in numbers. but the
crest of this rise is outside the surveyed area.
Relatively abundant materials were
recovered from each of the levels in the test on the southern _lobe.
No culturally
meaningful stratigraphy or features were noted in the deep homogenous matrix and
additional remains may be buried below the reach of the shovel probe. Although the
vertical distribution of materials is fairly uniform. more than one prehistoric component
may be represented.
The historic component is the remains of a house and outbuildings shown at this
location on the 1962 Petteway USGS topographic map.
Since then. the house has
been moved or razed and all construction materials destroyed or removed. Three handdug wells lined with 24-inch concrete casing collars remain. Three extant outbuildings.
two barns and a storage shed are constructed of vertical corner poles. 2 by 4 milled
lumber framing and corrugated tin walls and roof. A cattle loading pen is adjacent to
the larger barn.
Scattered plain earthenware and metal fragments are surficially
scattered and plain bottle glass was recovered from one of two shovel tests.
According to the current owner. Kai Mileski (personal communication. 1987) his
father erected the outbuildings about 60 years ago. The house was extant when they
purchased the property in 1925 but was subsequently razed as unsafe. This site is no
If.
longer within the proposed corridor and will not be affected by construction.
however. future development threatens this site. testing is recommended.

Historic Resources
41RT327
Historic site 41RT327 is located on a low divide (415 ft. MSL) between Long
Branch (390 ft. MSL) and a minor tributary. The site is about 150 meters from Long
Vegetation consists of mixed
Branch. 1.2 km upstream from the creek confluence.
grasses and annuals with clumps of oak/elm woodland on uncleared land. The site is
4 km east of the White Rock community and 5 km northeast of the Post Oak
community.
There are no indications of an historic structure on the 1962 USGS map of this
area. Cultural materials consist of a small log structure. probably a single pen cabin 4
by 4 meters in size. with an associated brick feature that may be the remains of a
fireplace. The two courses of logs at the site are half-sawed, joined by half dovetail
notching and have wire nails driven into them. Other features include a hand-dug well
lined with Standard bricks and a small pile of bricks. both some distance from the
structure. The overall site size is 50 by 50 meters or 2500 square meters. Artifactual
materials are domestic in nature and include corrugated tin. a hatchet head. scattered
bricks. a bucket with handle. a sheet metal flue cover. bottle glass. porcelain and
earthenware ceramics.

18 / TEXAS-NEW MEXICO PROJECT
A search of the Robertson County archives in Franklin gives some indication of
the age of this structure. On December 22. 1883 J .W. Boatner acquired a 100-acre
tract from H.W. Cooke which he transferred to William Petteway the same day for
$1.000 (Robertson County Deed Records V11:460 . V2:351).
On December 6. 1900.
Maude Petteway sold the property to Davis Pierce who in turn sold it to Oscar
Woodsworth. again for $1.000 {Robertson County Deed Records V55:39). On October
27. 1910. Woodsworth suffered a loss. selling the same 100 acres to J.C. Bodiford for
$900. Mrs. Bodiford held the property until 1919 when she sold it to J.R.S. Bell for
$1.500. a substantial increase from the purchase price (Robertson County Deed Records
V71:589). By 1939. when J.R.S. Bell sold to T.A. Pundt. the sale price had dropped
to $500 (Robertson County Deed Records Vl 18:248). The property passed into the
hands of the Watson family in 1945 when D.S. Watson purchased it from Pundt for
various notes totaling $450 (Robertson County Deed Records V141 :17). A succession
of Watson family members held the 100-acre tract until it was sold to Texas Utilities
Services. Inc.
The Robertson County tax records reflect the same fluctuation in values. From a
low evaluation of $500 in 1907. the property increased to $620 in 1908-1909 then
dropped to $600 in 1911 where it remained until 1916 when it rose to $800. This
coincides with the period 1910-1919 when the market price of the tract rose
substantially only to drop dramatically by 1939. Other properties of similar size and
function did not appreciate during this time. It is therefore likely that the house which
once stood at 41RT327 was built by the Bodifords around 1915 and was no longer
suitable for housing by 1939.
This house site is in the transmission corridor and
should be avoided during construction and maintenance. If the site cannot be avoided.
the location should be further documented through local informants and mapping of
features .

41RT328
Historic site 41RT328 is located on a low ridge crest (430 ft. MSL) nearly 2 km
downstream from the head of Walnut Creek (410 ft. MSL) and adjacent to a minor
tributary.
The site is off the dirt road between Post Oak and White Rock.
approximately equidistant from each community.
Both were crossroads settlements
born in the 1880s and abandoned during the Depression exodus from rural Texas
(Baker 1970). The oak/elm woodland has been partially cleared and most of the site
supports mixed grasses and annuals.
A house and two associated outbuildings shown on the 1962 USGS map are no
longer extant. and no evidence of the outbuildings was observed during the current
survey. Remains of the house. approximately 9 by 5 meters in size. include foundation
footings of both mortared bricks and roughly shaped sandstone blocks. and gas pipe.
probably for propane.
A decorative hog wire and post fence surrounds the house
location. Outside this enclosure are a hand-dug 24-inch well with cement casing and
an electric hook-up. The entire site area is 50 by 50 meters or 2500 square meters in
size. Artifactual materials noted consist of clear bottle glass. an aluminum pop can. an
Atlas brick and a wringer type washing machine.

,•

SITE DESCRIPTIONS / 19
This property was. in 1937. part of the J .D. Meggs estate. along with many
tracts of rural and township land. Anton Kowalski purchased this acreage from Annie
Lee and Bill Mensey in 1950 (Robertson County Deed Records V155:436).
He
presumably lived on the property until he sold it to Texas Utilities Services. Inc. No
further work is recommended at 41RT328 and the site is no longer within the proposed
corridor.

41RT343
Located on the 395 foot contour line east of Big Willow Creek. 41RT343 is a
twentieth-century farmstead consisting of a frame house and outbuilding. a cased well.
and a moderate scatter of historic artifacts (Fig. 3). The home is of board and batten
construction with a witch's hat roof configuration. Similar in overall design to two
other homes in the Tidwell Prairie area (41RT249 and 41RT263). it features 4 over 4
lights. milled (scalloped) battens. a front porch constructed of a jig-cut header and
notched rafters. and a wood shingled roof. now covered by tin sheeting. The interior
consists of three rooms: two rooms. side by side. that follow the roof peak alignment.
and a shed room addition on the back (north side) that has been partially burned .
Elements of the interior include vertical plank walls. beaded ceilings with opening for
attic access. a chimney flue. electricity and wallpaper.
The wallpaper was of two
designs--ferns and swags with flowers.
The house is supported by vertical posts. although there is evidence of
ferruginous sandstone porch foundations.
The porch is now supported minimally by
split railroad ties not original to the house. Additional exterior features include a brick
chimney exiting from the east end of the roof in the middle of the peak. a flue opening
on the back wall of the shed addition. and an electric meter housing on the west wall.
The _indication that battens had been used on what is now an interior wall. along with
evident foundation shifts and differences in construction methods. show the house was
previously a one room structure. The dividing wall between the two main rooms was
originally the west wall of the house. with a wood burning stove on the opposite wall.
The house sits on a gently sloping rise with the porch on the lower (south) side.
Surrounding plantings include crepe myrtles along the front yard fence. a catawba tree
on the west and a chinaberry tree behind the shed addition.
The frame outbuilding is located approximately 8 meters south of the home's
southwest corner. It is partially collapsed, but there is evidence that the east end was
open. Only the west end has battens over vertical planks. The planks on either side
(north and south) showed extensive deterioration due to moisture wicking and algae
growth.
Southeast of the house is a concrete cased well and an accumulation of farming
machinery and equipment. Identifiable artifacts include bottles. gears. a clutch handle.
One of the stoves was apparently
plow heads. a disker (or rake) and two stoves.
fueled by propane gas. The other. a Quick Meal model (no. 6725-0). manufactured by
the American Stove Company of Lorrain. Ohio. was identical to the kerosene stove
recorded at the Tidwell Prairie Church site (41RT257).
In the vicinity of the stoves

20 / TEXAS-NEW MEXICO PROJECT

Figure 3.

41RT343.

A.

Sharecropper house, showing shed addition.

B.

Collapsed outbuilding.

..

SITE DESCRIPTIONS / 21
were the remains of a buckboard wagon that included the tongue. iron wheels. seat
springs and some wooden elements . Because this structure is similar to two others.
41RT249 and 41RT263. it is recommended that a floor plan and photographic
documentation be made of the building if it is to be destroyed or dismantled.

41RT345
Historic site 41RT345 is located near the crest of a high hill (390 ft . MSL)
overlooking Walnut Creek {350 ft. MSL) approximately 0.6 km away. Sandy surface
soils of unknown depth support oak/elm woodland species. The site is 4.5 km south
of Walnut Church and 9 km southeast of the Post Oak community .
The site consists of a barn and 24-inch wellhead. as well as a former house
location marked by scattered bricks. railroad ties and corrugated tin . The barn is of
board and batten construction and set on vertical log supports. No cultural materials
other than structure remains were observed.
According to the current owners. Mr . and Mrs . Bruno Olexy {1986. personal
communication). a small house stood on this lot when they purchased the land in the
1940s. Mrs. Olexy estimates that the house had been built by the former owner a few
years before. in the late 1930s or early 1940s. The structure was sold and moved to
an undisclosed location.
The previous owners. Joe and Mary Wilganowski and their
son Tom. acquired the property in 1937 from Virginia and Tom Mears (Robertson
County Deed Records V166:301). The barn seems to predate this transaction. The low
potential suggests that this site can contribute little beyond the settlement pattern
information gained by the survey . This site is no longer within the corridor.

41RT357
Historic site 41RT357 is situated on the upper slope of a low hill (430 ft MSL)
above the Walnut Creek floodplain. approximately 2.5 km from its head. The site is
off the White Rock Road. about 3.2 km southwest of this community. and less than 2
km from old Petteway. Sandy surface soils of unknown depth are colluvial in origin .
Vegetation consists of cleared pasture composed of mixed grasses and annuals with
scattered motts of oak/elm woodland.
The site consists of scattered sandstone blocks. each 25 to 40 cm m size. over
an area 25 by 25 meters or 625 meters in size. A pile of oak branches adjacent to
the remains . the result of clearing scattered oak trees from around this old house. is
evidence of recent bulldozing. The sandstone apparently marks an old house location
but other structural remains or a well were not located. Artifactual materials include
brown and cream colored crockery. plain earthenware. clear and blue bottle glass.
The site is severely
agricultural implements and miscellaneous metal fragments.
disturbed and the number and kinds of remains indicate a low information potential.
The property containing 41RT357 has changed
association of this farmstead with any individual
subdividing and combining of tracts. it is difficult
certainty.
The Swingler family bought the land

hands a number of times and the
remains obscure.
Due to the
to trace actual landowners with
which included the site in 1950

22 / TEXAS-NEW MEXICO PROJECT
(Robertson County Deed Records V158:184).
from Peter Judd. the landowner since
1931 (Robertson County Deed Records V101 :328).
Prior to that time. either John
Wilanski (Robertson County Deed Records V86:182) or Jake and Mary Atamaczuk
(Robertson County Deed Records V68:546) held the land in question. Tax evaluation
figures indicate that improvements were made by one of these owners. probably the
Atamaczuks. between 1912 and 1931.
In summary. the site is a rural farmstead
minimally 65 years old but very disturbed. The information potential is low and no
further work is recommended.

41RT358
Site 41RT358 is a recent farmstead located partially within the surveyed corridor
at the headwaters of Walnut Creek (440 ft MSL). The sjte is off the road connecting
modern Petteway, 2.75 km away. and the White Rock community. 1.75 km distant.
Thin colluvial sands overlie clay which is exposed in several places. Except along the
creek where hardwood trees grow. the land has been cleared. The site is overgrown
with shrubs and annuals but narcissus were the only introduced species noted.
The site consists of standing structures. surface features and scattered artifactual
materials within an area 75 by 50 meters or 3750 square meters in size. The former
house IOcation is marked by a graded area where the remains of foundations. consisting
of cast cement blocks with cinder block cores. lie scattered.
Gas and sewer lines.
electric and water hookups and a basket ball hoop remain. Three outbuildings stand
north of the house location: one is a small frame and tin storage shed. The other two
are both 10 by 10 meters in size and half enclosed with adjacent open pens. One is a
frame and pole pen typical of many farmsteads where cows are kept. The other has a
cement floor and linear separations within a fenced pen. partially covered by wire. Five
small chicken coops are distributed across the farmstead.
Artifactual remains are
limited to a few fragments of plain earthenware and clear bottle glass. Except for the
house. the site appears intact.
Site 41RT358 1s the former farmstead of Charles Morehead (personal
Mr. Morehead moved a
communication. 1987) who was interviewed by telephone.
house to this location in 1969 and built the barn. dog kennel and all other observed
structures. When Mr. Morehead sold the land to Texas Utilities. he moved the house
to the location where he now lives. In summary. the site is less than 50 years old.
with low information potential. and no further work is recommended.

41RT359
Historic site 41RT359 is a farmstead located on a low hill (450 ft MSL) above
Long Branch. approximately one km from its Duck Creek confluence. The site is off
the White Rock Road. about 2.5 km east of this community. Shallow surface soils of
colluvial origin now support varied grasses and annuals and scattered oak trees.
However. large tracts north of the site have been cleared of oak/elm woodland.
The site was first identified by the presence of a thicket of thorny shrubs with
purplish bark. A former house location is defined by this and several very large oak

y

SITE DESCRIPTIONS / 23

trees. At present. cultural remains are limited to artifactual materials scattered over an
area 75 by 75 meters or 5.625 square meters in size and the remains of a corral at
the western site boundary. The latter consists of a few upright and scattered wooden
posts. No well or cistern was located. Artifactual remains include varied bottle glass.
plain earthenware and a kerosene glass chimney fragment.
The site 1s severely
disturbed and all structural remains were apparently removed from the site.
The age of site 41RT359 is uncertain but it probably dates to sometime between
1910 and 1925 when the property was owned by various members of the Bates family
(Robertson County Deed Records V65:32).
One transfer of the property was in
payment of a debt. suggesting that this site was not the Bates homestead. A rise in
the value of the property in 1925 may reflect the construction of the house shortly
before. The house may well have been a tenant building. In summary. the site may
well be 60 years old but it is severely disturbed . No further work is recommended.

41RT360
Site 41RT360 is an historic farmstead situated on a low hill (400 to 410 ft
MSL) overlooking the Walnut Creek floodplain near the mouth of Gnats Creek. The
site is 5 km southwest of old Petteway and 8.5 km northeast of Tidwell Prairie.
Clayey subsoil is exposed over much of the site.
Large oaks surround the former
house location and other trees border former fence lines but the majority of the area 1s
cleared pasture. A bed of iris and other bulbs was noted.
The total area of the site. including surrounding pasture with relic fencelines. is
200 by 150 meters or 30.000 square meters.
The farmstead. which is 50 by 50
meters. at present includes scattered sandstone blocks from the house foundation. a Ushaped foundation approximately 3 by 1.5 meters in size. a cement-lined well and a
cistern or earlier well filled with historic debris. Artifactual materials are limited to
scattered bottle glass and plain earthenware. The site is apparently intact except for
the house and house foundations.
Site 41RT360 is on land owned by Charles Eddins whose grandfather. R.F. Gary.
bought the land in 1948 (Robertson County Deed Records V150:155. 157: V149:586).
At the time. the house and associated outbuildings had been moved or destroyed
(Eddins. personal communication. 1987). The previous owner was the heir of Esaw
and Luke Hopkins who bought the property in 1910. A change in the evaluation of
the property between 1913 and 1914 may reflect construction of the farmstead now
identified as 41 RT360.
In summary. the site contains evidence of rural life between
Except for the possible cistern. the
1910 and 1940 in the form of surface features.
deflated surface soils limit the information potential for testing. If the site cannot be
avoided. detailed mapping and description of site remains and assessment of the cistern
fill is recommended.

This page intentionally left blank.

SITE DISTRIBUTION
Project Area Drainages
WALNUT CREEK HEADWATERS
A portion of the corridor approximately 4.2 km in length between Mile 10.6 and
13.2 (Sections East 19. 20. 21) lies within the Walnut Creek headwaters.
At the
eastern end of this segment. a high hill (505 ft. MSL) and slope comprise the
interfluve between the Brazos and Navasota river basins: Topography is gently sloping
and there are no distinct rises either at the crest or on the slope nearer Walnut Creek.
No tests were excavated due to the absence of specific high probability landforms. the
distance to the nearest water source and negative testing results obtained near the
creek head.
Walnut Creek. from its head (450 ft. MSL) to the confluence of Hurricane Creek.
a distance of about 1.3 km. is shown as intermittent on the 1962 USGS map. The
creek floodplain shows downcutting into the Eocene age Simsboro Formation which has
produced low. gently sloping land without distinct rises or evidence of fluvial landforms.
The lower portion of the creek valley wall is generally evenly sloping, but three distinct
rises were observed adjacent to the creek floodplain. Three tests (East 21-1. 21-2.
21-3) excavated in shallow soil at the larger of the rises (440 ft. MSL) were devoid of
cultural materials. Results at two smaller rises further downstream were similar (Tests
East 20-1. 20-2).
Only below the confluence of Hurricane Creek (420 ft. MSL). where Walnut Creek
is perennial. were prehistoric sites identified. A large rise adjacent to the creek is the
location of previously recorded site 41RT219. which is south of and entirely outside the
final corridor.
Testing at two smaller rises. also within the floodplain. located site
41RT341. consisting of at least two prehistoric components and an early historic
ceramic sherd. Results at a nearby rise (310 ft. MSL) with shallow surface soils were
negative (Tests East 20-3. 20-4). Of the three landforms tested above the floodplain.
two hold prehistoric sites. Sloping land at the base of the valley wall contains site
41 RT329. a possibly stratified site with moderately dense cultural materials. although a
more distant rise (430 ft. MSL) tested negatively (East 20-5).
A single flake was
recovered from a small rise. 41RT330. some distance from the creek but adjacent to a
small tributary. An historic house location. 41RT328. shown on the 1962 USGS map.
and a recent farmstead. 41RT358. were also identified in this area.

SANDY CREEK
The Sandy Creek area includes both Big and Little Sandy creeks and their
tributaries. a system 10 km in length and over 7 km in maximum width. The original
corridor crossed just above the point where the Sandy Creek branches share a common

25

26 / TEXAS-NEW MEXICO PROJECT
floodplain that is incised 60 feet into Eocene age strata of the Simsboro Formation .
The confluence with Walnut Creek was then 1.75 km south of the corridor and 5.4 km
downstream from the head of Walnut Creek. The nearly 2 km of corridor (Sections
East 15a. 15b. 16) associated with this intermittent tributary ran between Mile 9.65
and 10.6.
Testing of six areas above the Sandy Creek floodplain resulted in the
identification of three prehistoric sites. 41RT334. 41RT335 and 41RT336.
Multiple
component site 41RT335. located at the tip of the low stream divide separating the
two creek branches. overlooks a wide featureless floodplain (380 ft . MSL) with
extensive evidence of stream movement. No cultural materials were recovered (Test
East 15b-1) from the only other low-lying. high probability area observed, a low rise at
the base of the left valley wall (400 ft. MSL). The r~maining sites are located at
either upland margin above the steeply sloping walls that characterize this stream
valley. The more-intensively occupied of the sites. 41RT334. lies at the crest of the
stream divide between Sandy and Walnut creeks. Rises at the crest of a high ridge
above the right creek bank tested negatively (East 15a-1. 15a-4. 15a-5). but a small
rise below the crest commanding a view of the floodplain contains site 41RT336.
represented by a single flake.
Additional considerations necessitated a change in the corridor orientation.
bypassing potentially significant sites 41RT334 and 41RT335. Two alternative corridors
south of the original corridor were subsequently surveyed and five areas tested . No
cultural materials were recovered at the tip of a high ridge (420 ft. MSL) above the
right bank of Sandy Creek from deep sandy soils (East 14-4. 14-5. 15a-3). although
Investigations above the left bank of the creek
clay was reached in only one test.
redefined the southern boundary of site 41RT334 (Tests East 15b-4. 334-4) and tested
the tip of this same divide further downstream.
Although both tests (East 15b-2.
15b-3) in this location were negative. neither reached clayey subsoil.
Subsequent alterations to the corridor resulted in the identification of two sites
that overlook the confluence of Walnut and Sandy creeks - prehistoric campsite
41RT355 and multicomponent site 41RT354.

UNNAMED TRIBUTARIES
The stream divide between Sandy Creek and Barton Branch is drained by two
minor unnamed tributaries of Walnut Creek. each between 3 and 4 km in length. The
approximately 2.4 km of corridor between Mile 7.9 and 9.65 (Sections East 9 through
14) crosses the tributaries near their headwaters (400 to 410 ft. MSL). In general. the
topography is gently rolling and without distinct high probability features. Ridge and
hill crests are some distance from a reliable water source. and except near the tributary
closest to Sandy Creek. testing was limited.
This tributary is well-incised .
approximately 40 feet. with steeply sloping valley walls. The crest of a high hill (440
ft. MSL) above the right bank was tested (East 12-1. 13-1) but no cultural materials
were recovered from shallow sandy soil. However. testing of a small rise just outside
the corridor and overlooking the tributary identified prehistoric site 41RT332. with
possibly two buried components.

SITE DISTRIBUTION / 27
A series of rises above the left bank of the tributary was tested during the
survey of alternate routes across Sandy Creek.
Only the tip of a high ridge. the
location of apparently stratified prehistoric site 41RT340. tested positively.
Investigations at two additional rises ( 420 ft. MSL) further downstream (Tests East
14-1. 14-2. 14-3) recovered no cultural materials. but failed to reach culturally sterile
subsoil.
A high hill (420 ft. MSL) adjacent to the other tributary where the landowner
(Syzdek 1986) remembers finding cultural materials after plowing. was also tested (East
10-1. 10-2. 10-3). but with negative results. Sandy surface soils are shallow.

WALNUT CREEK
Between Mile 6.2 and 7 .25 (parts of Sections East 4 and 5) the corridor parallels
Walnut Creek. at a point between approximately 7 and 9 km downstream from its
head.
Although the nearest stream is Barton Branch (350 ft. MSL). the current
channel was until recent times the location of Walnut Creek (Olexy 1986).
The
transmission corridor crossed a number of relatively flat landforms adjacent to the
floodplain composed of Simsboro strata of Eocene age.
The area is bisected by a
minor creek tributary. West of the tributary. the corridor ran some distance from the
creek and high probability rises above the floodplain. The flat featureless land crossed
(370 ft. MSL) is low in site potential and only one area was tested (East 4-2).
East of the tributary. a number of distinct rises nearer the creek held more site
potential.
However. permission to test these areas was denied.
Pedestrian survey
which was allowed identified historic site 41RT345. a former house location not shown
on the 1962 USGS map. but apparently occupied during the twentieth century.
Rerouting of the corridor through this area impinged on previously recorded site. 41RT107.
and resulted in the recording of two former house sites. 41RT357 and 41RT360.

RED BANK CREEK
Red Bank Creek is an intermittent tributary. approximately 5 km in length and 2
km in maximum width. located 10.8 km downstream from the head of Walnut Creek.
The 1.4 km of corridor between Mile 5.2 and 6.2 (Sections East 2. 3a. 3b and part of
4) crosses Red Bank Creek 1 km from the Walnut Creek confluence. At this point the
creek bed (360 ft. MSL) is incised between 40 and 50 feet into the Eocene age
Simsboro Formation . The stream divide above the right creek bank is a high hill (410
ft. MSL) that is gently sloping and featureless. except the actual crest which is some
distance from water. No tests were excavated.
Below this high hill and near the head of a small tributary only 0.35 km from
Red Bank Creek is a very prominent rise (390 ft. MSL) where prehistoric site 41RT338
was identified.
The obvious role played by topography in site selection makes it
difficult to associate the occupation with a particular water source. The tributary is
low enough in the stream profile to have once been spring-fed. although the 350 meters
that separate the site from Red Bank Creek is not a prohibitive distance. Recovery at
41 RT338 was the greatest of any site identified during the current survey and at least

28 / TEXAS-NEW MEXICO PROJECT
two components are represented. In contrast. prehistoric site 41 RT337 located on the
downstream divide (380 ft . MSL) between the tributary and Red Bank Creek was not
intensively occupied. The tip of this landform which is outside the corridor is felt to
have a higher site potential.
Above the left bank of the creek is a high hill (407 ft. MSL) that comprises the
divide between Red Bank and Walnut creeks . Testing of two areas identified 41RT331.
with very sparse but buried materials. at the crest of the hill. Two site tests (331-2.
331-3) placed below the crest. as well as a single unit excavated at a small rise nearer
the creek (Test East 4-1) were negative.

UNNAMED TRIBUTARY
The transmission corridor between Mile 4.45 and 5.2 · (Sections West 23 and part
of 40 and East 1) crosses two branches of an unnamed Walnut Creek tributary that
drains the stream divide between Willow and Red Bank creeks.
The 1.4 km of
corridor is within flat to gently sloping land near the tributary headwaters. A linear
rise (390 ft. MSL) above the steep right bank of the eastern branch (360 ft. MSL).
the location of 41RT339. represented by a single flake. was the only area tested.
Other portions adjacent to the tributary have flat to gently sloping, featureless
topography and are some distance from water.

BIG WILLOW CREEK
Big Willow Creek is a perennial tributary with its confluence 14.5 km downstream
from the head of Walnut Creek. The creek basin is 13.5 km in length and 3.5 km in
maximum width. and at least the lower courses have developed fluvial features that
support a riparian woodland (Davis and Utley 1986). Where the proposed transmission
line crosses Willow Creek 2. 75 km above the confluence with Walnut Creek. the stream
is incised between 60 and 70 feet into Eocene age strata of the Calvert Bluff
Formation. Of the 3.1 km of corridor within this segment. the 1.85 km west of the
creek had been previously surveyed (Davis and Utley 1986).
The corridor covered by the current project between Mile 3.6 and 4.5 (Sections
West 25. 26. 27 and part of 40) includes a rise (390 ft. MSL) overlooking the creek
(350 ft. MSL) and land adjacent to a minor tributary . Site 41RT342 located on the
crest of the rise consists of the remains of a homestead dating to the twentieth
century. as well as at least one prehistoric component. Three small rises adjacent to
the tributary were also investigated but only the one nearest the creek tested positively.
No cultural materials were
resulting in the identification of disturbed site 41RT344.
recovered from shallow surface soils at the remaining rises (Tests West 26-1. 26-2.
25-1. 25-2) . An extant board and batten house. 41RT343. shown on the 1962 USGS
map. is also located near the tributary.

SITE DISTRIBUTION / 29
DUCK CREEK
Near the eastern end of the project area the proposed line will parallel and
partially share an already cleared corridor with an existing line from the Twin Oak
substation north to above Long Branch. The 2.15 km of corridor between Mile 15.7
and 17 (Sections East 30. 31. 32. 33) follows the lower right valley wall of Duck
Creek. a perennial tributary of the Navasota River.
Only sloping land where site
probability is low will be affected. except for two rises that protrude onto the floodplain
(below 390 ft . MSL).
Current investigations redefined the boundary of previously
recorded prehistoric site 41 RT10 to include the back portion of one rise. Testing at
the other rise (430 ft. MSL) (East 30-1. 30-2. 30-3. 30-4. 30-5) revealed shallow
surface soils but no recovered no cultural materials.
LONG BRANCH
Long Branch is an intermittent right tributary of Duck Creek 4.1 km in length
The creek confluence is over 26 km from the
and 3.2 km in maximum width.
Navasota River. The Branch is incised a maximum of 60 feet into Eocene age strata.
primarily of the Calvert Bluff Formation. The approximately 4.0 km of cdl'ridor crosses
Long Branch twice. as well as several tributaries. Only about 2.1 km was actually
surveyed due to landowner restrictions and several high probability areas visible on the
1962 USGS map within unsurveyed areas were not tested .
A high hill (480 ft. MSL) at the western end of this segment that comprises part
of the divide between the Brazos and Navasota river systems was surveyed.
Topography is gently sloping and featureless and the crest of the hill is some distance
from water. Although judged to have a low site potential. the crest was tested as a
check on landform assessment. No cultural materials were recovered from deep sandy
soils in either unit excavated (East 22-1. 22-2) to clayey subsoil.
Investigations at three additional areas nearer Duck Creek identified prehistoric site
41RT333 with sparse but buried cultural materials on a small rise adjacent to the
Branch. Two more elevated rises (430 ft. MSL) on either side of a small tributary
tested negatively (East 28a-1. 28a-2). Erosion has deflated surface soils of other area
landforms. creating good archeological visibility and eliminating the need for subsurface
probes.
Historic site 41RT327. an apparent house location not shown on the 1962
USGS map. was also identified .
HERDS BRANCH
The far eastern end of the corridor between Mile 17 and 18 (Sections East 34
and 35) crosses Herds Branch. another tributary of Duck Creek. The major portion of
this area is beneath Twin Oak Reservoir.
Visual assessment both from the power
plant site and from Duck Creek indicated that remaining portions have been severely
affected by previous construction . The area . which is a low site potential. gentle slope.
was not surveyed .

This page intentionally left blank.

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
INTERPRETATION OF PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

Prehistoric cultural resources documented by the current survey are geographically
widespread and environmentally diverse (Tables 1.2).
Areas investigated provide
significant data from the upper portion of the Walnut Creek basin that complement
information contained in Davis and Utley (1986).
More fragmented data from the
Walnut Creek tributaries and the Duck Creek system · were also gathered. but only
within the Walnut Creek basin were investigations of sufficient magnitude to discuss
results in terms of the research design proposed for the Calvert Lignite Mine
management plan (Davis. Turpin and Utley 1986). Project data. summarized below. is
pertinent to questions concerning 1) the distribution of site types within the study area:
and 2) differences in subsistence strategies through time.
Disregarding tested 41RT10. where Middle Archaic through Late Prehistoric
occupations were documented. the age of only three sites can be determined with any
certainty. An early phase Late Prehistoric component. represented by an Alba arrow
point. was identified at site 41RT335. situated atop the divide between Big Sandy and
Little Sandy creeks. Buried components at high knoll site 41RT355 and low rise site
41RT125 date to after the introduction of ceramics. Area investigations indicate Late
Prehistoric deposits may be up to one meter in depth. One dart point collected from
41RT361. although indirect evidence of Middle Archaic period use of the area. was in a
Late Archaic or Late Prehistoric context.
The cultural affiliation of ·the recovered
prehistoric artifact appears to be eastern. A number of other sites are stratified and
the location of deposits relative to the ground surface provides significant information of
a general nature. Buried components at 41RT125. 41RT335. 41RT338. 41RT341 and
41RT342 may be Archaic in age. Area excavations (Davis and Utley 1986) suggest
that Middle and Early Archaic remains are deeply buried and the majority of buried
components may date to the Late Archaic Period. Other Late Prehistoric components
at sites 41RT334. 41RT338 and 41RT341 may be defined by relatively abundant
cultural materials recovered near the surface.
A number of other sites have deep
deposits where materials are equally distributed. Although more than one occupation is
probably represented at these sites. the separation of components is unclear.
Site types identified by this survey include campsites (n=8) where burned rocks
and/or charcoal were recorded: lithic scatters (n=8). and single flake sites (n=5). The
majority of campsites are near perennial streams. two along Walnut Creek. two at the
confluence of Sandy and Walnut creeks and one each along Duck and Big Willow
creeks.
The remaining two campsites occupy very favorable locations near major
intermittent streams. Sandy and Red Bank creeks.
Significant by their absence are
campsites at the headwaters of Walnut Creek. Lithic scatters and single flake sites are
more inclusive in their distribution. and dominate the headwaters of Walnut creek and

31

Table

;l.

w
......,

Summary of Prehistoric Resources within the Final Corridor.

AREA

SITE
NUMBER

Walnut Creek

41RT125

41RT361

Red Bank Creek

Big Willow Creek

41RT331

LOCATION

DESCRIPTION

Low rise above
creek floodplain

Stratified campsite with
intact features and preserved bone; 50x50m in
size; intact buried
deposits over lm in
depth
Sparse lithic scatter,
mostly surficial; 350x
lOOm in size; surface
soils 15 to 35 cm in
depth, mostly disturbed
Sparse lithic scatter;
30x20m in size; possible
intact buried deposits
30 to 95 cm in depth
Single flake from area
20xl0m in size; surface
soils 40 to 60 cm in
depth, undisturbed
Stratified campsite with
intact features; 30x20m
in size; intact buried
deposits over lm in
depth
Possibly stratified
campsite with intact
features 30x30m in size;
lower portion of surface
soils, 40 to 55 cm,
intact
Single flake from area
20x20m in size; partially destroyed, surface
soils 40 to 55 cm in
depth, disturbed

Low ridge tip
above confluence

High knoll

41RT337

Low stream divide

41RT338

Prominent low rise

41RT342

High rise above
creek floodplain

41RT344

Low rise adjacent
to tributary

RECOMMENDATIONS

_,

Ceramic sherd, 34
flakes and burned
rocks from 2 tests;
4.3 items per unit
level

Testing or
Avoidance

B
vi

1 flake from 3 tests;
0.2 items per unit
level .

No further
work .

TESTING
RESULTS

<:
rr,
~

~

~
~

0

~
::::\)

2 flakes from 4 tests;
0.17 items per unit
level

No further
work

1 flake from 3 tests;
1.5 items per unit
level

No further
work

15 flakes and burned
rocks from 1 test; 4.0
items per unit level

Testing or
Avoidance

2 flakes from 2 tests;
0.4 items per unit
level

Testing or
Avoidance

1 flake from 2 tests;
0.4 items per unit
level

No further
work

0

'rr,

_,

~

Table

1, cont'd

AREA

SITE
NUMBER

LOCATION

DESCRIPTION

Unnamed Walnut
Creek tributary

41RT339

Low linear rise
at bank

Duck Creek

41RT10

High rise above
creek floodplain

Long Branch

41RT333

Low rise adjacent
to creek

Single flake from area
15x10m in size; upper
portion of soils 60 to
100 cm in depth disturbed (flake recovered
Level 1)
Previously tested multicomponent campsite;
200xl00m in size; buried
deposits over lm in
depth
Sparse lithic scatter;
30xl5m in size; possible
intact deposits 80 to
100 cm in depth

TESTING
RESULTS

RECOMMENDATIONS

1 flake from 2 tests;
0.13 items per unit
1evel

No further
work

Current results: 5
flakes and intact
hearth from 2 tests;
0.5 items per unit
1 evel
2 flakes from 2 tests;
0.2 items per unit
1evel

No further
work

Testing or
Avoidance

V)

~

CJ

~

~

~
:::j

a

~

V)

--w

w

w

~

Table

2.

---

Summary of Other Prehistoric Resources.

AREA

SITE
NUMBER

LOCATION

DES CR I PTI ON

Walnut Creek
Headwaters

41RT329

Low rise above
creek floodplain

Possibly stratified
lithic scatter; at least
50x50m in size; intact
buired deposits 37 to
60 cm in depth
Single flake from area
15x15m in size; surface
soils less than 20 cm in
depth and disturbed
Stratified lithic
scatter; 30x20m in size;
intact buried deposits
over lm in depth; possible historic aboriginal
component
Possibly stratified
campsite; 20x20m in size;
half of 40 to 60 cm of
surface soil disturbed
Possibly stratified
campsite; 120x90m in
size; intact buried deposits lm in depth
Possibly stratified
campsite; 75x40m in size;
intact buried deposits
over lm in depth
Possible late single
component; 150x20m in
size; soil depth 22 to
40 cm northern area, over
lm southern area

TESTING
RESULTS

-i

RECOMMENDATIONS

~
)::,.
(./)

41RT330

41RT341

Low rise above
creek floodplain
Low rise above
creek floodplain

Walnut Creek

41RT107

High rise bluff
overlooking creek
floodplain

Walnut/Sandy
Creek confluence

41RT354

Low hill bluff
overlooking creek
floodplain

41RT355

High hi 11 over1oo king creek
floodplain

41RT334

High stream divide
above bluff

Sandy Creek

7 flakes from 3 tests;
1.0 items per unit
level

Testing or
Avoidance

'

~

ni

~
~

1 flake from 3 tests;
0.33 items per unit
level

No further
work

25 flakes and historic
ceramic from 2 tests;
2.6 items per unit
level

Testing or
Avoidance

3 flakes and burned
rock from 1 test; 2.0
items per unit level

Testing or
Avoidance

11 flakes and burned
rock from 2 tests;
2.0 items per µnit
1evel
Ceramic, burned rock
and flakes from 1 test;
2.0 items per unit
level
5 flakes from 2 tests
northern area; 0.83
items per unit level;
1 flake from 1 test
southern area; 0.2
items per unit level

Testing or
Avoidance

-""
~
0

"'O

:::\)

0
'-

ni

""
-i

Testing or
Avoidance
Testing or
Avoidance

..

Table

2, cont'd.

AREA

SITE
NUMBER

LOCATION

DESCRIPTION

Sandy Creek

41RT335

Low stream divide
above confluence

41RT336

High ridge crest
above bluff

41RT332

High ridge crest
above bluff

41RT340

Tip of high ridge
crest

Stratified campsite with Arrow point and 3
intact features at least flakes from 2 tests;
0.33 items per unit
20x20m in size; intact
1evel
buried deposits over lm
in depth
Single flake from an area 1 flake from 1 test;
0.25 items per unit
20x20m in size; soil
1evel
depth 63 to 90 cm
2 flakes from 1 test;
Possibly stratified
0.25 items per unit
lithic scatter; 30x30m
level
in size; intact but
sparse buried deposits
over lm in depth
11 flakes from 2 tests;
Possibly stratified
0.82 items per unit
lithic scatter; 30x30m
1evel
in size; intact buried
deposits 70 to 100 cm
in depth

Unnamed Walnut
Creek tributaries

TESTING
RESULTS

RECOMMENDATIONS
Testing or
Avoidance

No further
work
No further
work

Testing or
Avoidance

Vi

~
t:J

~

~

~
:j

a

~

Vi

-w

l..T'1

36 / TEXAS-NEW MEXICO PROJECT
tributaries downstream from creek confluences. At present. perceived differences in the
intensity of occupation at these two site types are assumed to reflect reality .
The kinds of artifactual materials present. with few exceptions. consist of small
flakes removed during final biface reduction or tool refinishing. These results suggest
that bifacial tool manufacture and use were consistently an important site activity. but
the nearest chert source was some distance away.
Recovered materials other than
flakes are limited to an angular chert fragment. projectile points (41RT335. 41RT461).
ceramics (41RT125 and 41RT341) and bone fragments (41RT125. 41RT341). indicating
hunting. general camp maintenance and food consumption.
The number of items recovered from specific sites vanes considerably. from a
single flake to as many as 40 items at site 41RT341.
Except at the latter site.
abundant artifactual materials do not correlate with the presence of features. At other
sites. most of the feature remains are buried and probably of Archaic age.
In summary. the results of the current survey provide evidence of possible
differences in Archaic and Late Prehistoric use of Walnut Creek. The association of
features only with Archaic components is so consistent that it may transcend the
limitations of sampling error. representing real differences in settlement and site
function. The exception is campsite 41RT125 where a late cultural zone was recorded:
this site is the furthest downstream of our sample. The lithic scatters common near
the headwaters of Walnut Creek permit little evaluation of resource exploitation in that
habitat.
Only the perennial portion of the creek at and below the confluence with
Sandy Creek affords sufficient variability to test pertinent research questions.
Within the context of the Calvert Mine research design. the Late Prehistoric
components recorded by this survey conform more closely to the pattern expected if a
collecting strategy was practiced. Intensive tool use. resulting in greater amounts of
debitage. and limited camp maintenance might characterize the field camps of groups
based at residential locations nearer major rivers. The Archaic components. however.
may reflect seasonal occupations within a more dispersed foraging strategy. Although
the current sample is small. the upstream portion of the creek may be more sensitive
to shifts in settlement and procurement patterns through time. The noted differences
may also be attributable to a shift from plant procurement. where extensive gathering
and processing are needed. to hunting highly mobile animal resources. Any subsequent
testing program should be designed to determine 1) if the perceived differences between
cultural deposits are both temporal and spatial in distribution: and 2) possible causes
for shifts in procurement and settlment patterns over time and space.

RECOMMENDATIONS
The corridor survey is intended as a broad assessment of the potential effect of
transmission line construction. The 500-foot width of the corridor provides sufficient
leeway for final engineering plans to avoid many of the significant sites. Preservation
by avoidance is recommended for all potentially significant sites. The two segments of
the corridor where landowner access was denied should be surveyed when easements are

;

SITE DESCRIPTIONS / 37
obtained .

If identified sites cannot be avoided. the following actions are recommended .

Prehistoric Resources Recommendations
The prehistoric cultural resources recommended for avoidance or testing hold some
promise for yielding data relevant to local and regional research questions . Only four
sites within the final corridor (Table 1) are recommended for testing to determine their
eligibility to the National Register of Historic Places. Of the total site inventory. 12 of
21 or 57 percent. merit additional subsurface examination if they are ever affected by
land development or construction.
These sites sample the entire range of area
environments. site types and temporal components. The four sites within the final
corridor include three campsites in the Walnut Creek basin and one lithic scatter in the
The remainder of the prehistoric sites are too sparse to
Duck Creek system.
effectively contribute to the area data base beyond the information recorded by this
survey.

Historic Resources Recommendations
Ten historic sites recorded by this survey are examples of rural farmsteads (Table
3). One site. 41RT341. is a prehistoric campsite with a historic component marked
only by one artifact. a nineteenth-century ceramic sherd.
The one standing house.
41RT343. is similar in architecture and construction methods to two houses. 41RT249
and 41RT263. in the Calvert Prospect (Davis and Utley 1986). If this house is to be
dismantled or razed, a measured floor plan and photographic documentation would
assist in comparisons with the other similar structures. Archival and oral searches may
be able to relate it to the Bartula family who built the same style of sharecropper
houses in the Calvert Prospect. The surface features of two other farmsteads. 41RT327
and 41RT360. should also be documented if avoidance is not possible.
The other
historic sites are either too disturbed or too limited in their potential to contribute to
regional or local history beyond that gained in the survey.

Table 3.

Summary of Historic Resources.
w

AREA

SITE
NUMBER

Walnut Creek

41 RT32fl
41RT341
41RT345

Long Branch

Walnut and
Sandy confluence

LOCATION

DESCRIPTION

Low ridge above headwaters

r-armstead with surface features built Outside final
about 1950; house and two outbuildings corridor
moved.
Outside fina ·1
Blue Feather Edge rim sherd.
corridor
Farmstead with barn and surface
Outside final
features; house built 1930 has been
corridor
moved; no artifactual materials noted.
No further work
Farmstead consisting of scattered
sandstone foundation stones; probably
built between 1912 and 1931.
No further work
Recent farmstead with surface features. House moved in 1969.
Mapping, photographic
Farmstead with surface features
documentation, testing
including filled cistern; house
of cistern
built 1913 and removed before 1948.
See prehistoric
Farmstead with surface features
recommendations
and 20th century artifacts; house
moved.
Architectural & photoExtant board & batten house w·1th
graphic documentation
surface features. Similar to RT249
and RT263 in Calvert Prospect.
Architectural & photoRemains of log structure & surface ·
graphic documentation
features probably built in 1915 &
razed by 1939.
No further work
Farmstead consisting of surficial
artifactual materials; house built
between 1910 and 1925 and later moved.

Low rise within floodplain
High hill

41RT357

Low hill above
floodplain

41RT358

Low rise near headwaters
Bluff above floodplain

41RT360
Willow Creek

CX>

41RT342

High rise above
floodplain

'I llH :J43

IU se

41RT327

Low stream divide

41RT359

Low hill

41RT354

High rise

adjacent to
tributary

Farmstead consisting of surficia1
artifactual materials; 3 wells; 3
outbuildings

RECOMMENDATION

Outside final
corridor

...___
-;

~

):,.

Y'>
n,
:;;:;:

~

s:

~
a
("')

'"'(:)

:::t::i

._a

n,

("')

-;

REFERENCES CITED
Baker. J.W.
A History of Robertson County. Texas.
1970
Survey Committee. Waco. Texas.

The Robertson County Historical

Davis. Michael W. and Dan K. Utley
1986
Section I: Intensive Survey of the Calvert Li~nite Mine. Robertson County ,
Texas.
IN:
Continuing Cultural Resource Investigations in the Calvert
Prospect. Robertson County. Texas by M.W. Davis. D.K. Utley. S.A.
Tomka and S.A. Turpin . Texas_ Archeological Research Report 95. The
University of Texas at Austin.
Davis. Michael W .. Solveig A. Turpin and Dan K. Utley
Directions for Future Research .
IN:
Continuing Cultural
1986
Section Ill.
Resource Investigations in the Calvert Prospect. Robertson County. Texas by
M.W. Davis. D.K. Utley. S.A. Tomka and S.A. Turpin.
Texas
Archeological Survey Research Report 95. The University of Texas at
Austin.
Eddins. Charles
1987
Landowner. 41RT360.

Personal communication to Solveig A. Turpin.

Good. Carolyn E.. Solveig A. Turpin and Martha Doty Freeman
1980
A Cultural Resource Assessment of the Calvert and Cole Creek Lignite
Prospects. Robertson County. Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research
Report 75 . The University of Texas at Austin .
Mileski. Kai
1987
Landowner. 41RT354.

Personal communication to Solveig A Turpin .

Morehead. Charles
1987
Landowner. 41RT358.

Personal communication to Solveig A. Turpin.

Olexy. Mrs. Bruno
1986
Personal communication to Solveig A. Turpin. August 12. 1986.
Prewitt. Elton R. and Kerry A. Grombacher
An Archeological and Historical Assessment of the Areas to be Affected by
1974
the Proposed Twin Oak and Oak Knoll Projects. East Central Texas .
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 43. The University of Texas
at Austin.

39

40 / TEXAS-NEW MEXICO PROJECT
Robertson County
ms.
Robertson County Deed Records.
ms .

County court house. Franklin.

Tax records. Robertson County Tax Office.

Syzdek. Cleo
1986
Landowner. study area.

Franklin.

Personal communication to Solveig A. Turpin.

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL)
ms .
Robertson County site files . The University of Texas at Austin.
Turpin. Solveig A. and Margaret J. Kluge
1980
Cultural Resource Sampling. Survey and Assessment in Areas to be Affected
by the Twin Oak Steam Electric Station . Robertson County. Texas . Texas
Archeological Survey Research Report 7 4.
The University of Texas at
Austin.

