AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF A PROPOSED
WATER TRANSMISSION LINE
FOR THE CITY OF GRANGER WILLIAMSON COUNTY TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Permit Number 2652

by
William E. Moore

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 83

2001

AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF A PROPOSED WATER TRANSMISSION LINE
FOR THE CITY OF GRANGER, WILLIAMSON COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 01-15

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
The City of Granger
P.O. Box 367
Granger, Texas 76530

ABSTRACT
A Phase I archaeological survey of a 34,000 foot water transmission line in
Williamson County, Texas was conducted by Brazos Valley Research Associates
(BVRA) in August 2001 for the City of Granger under antiquities permit number 2652.
Four prehistoric sites (41WM992 - 41WM995) were found during this study. A
lithic procurement site (41WM992) was found on the first terrace overlooking Willis
Creek to the north. Cultural materials in the form of numerous tested cobbles, early
stage bifaces, and a unifacial scraper were observed on the surface. On the floodplain
immediately below 41MM992, and adjacent to Willis Creek, another lithic procurement
site (41WM994) was found. Tested cobbles, early stage bifaces, a burned core, and
flakes were seen on the surface and in the first level (30 cm) of a backhoe trench. On
the south side of the San Gabriel River a buried site (41WM993) containing freshwater
mussel shell, two unidentified animal rib bones, three chert flakes of Colorado River
gravels, and a core fragment of Georgetown chert were found in a backhoe trench. On
the north bank of Willis Creek in the floodplain a buried feature (41WM995) containing
Bison bison bone, 2 chert flakes, 1 utilized flake, 2 fish scales, and 1 fish operculum
were found at 108 cm in a backhoe trench. In a nearby trench to the north, two chert
flakes were found at approximately the same level as the feature.
Sites 41WM992 - 41WM994 are not significant and warrant no further work. The
significance of site 41WM995, however, is unknown, and additional testing is
recommended if avoidance is not possible. The artifacts from site 41WM993 were
analyzed in the field and returned to the backhoe trench. The artifacts from 41WM995
found in Backhoe Trench 7 have been placed in permanent curation at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) in Austin, Texas. The non-diagnostic flakes
found in Backhoe Trench 8 north of 41WM995 were not collected.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am appreciative of the assistance provided by the following individuals. John F.
Winkler, Senior Vice-President of The Wallace Group, Inc. was in charge of this project.
Others at The Wallace Group, Inc. include Kristina M. Rameriz, EIT who provided maps
and coordinated various tasks such as obtaining landowner permission, providing a
photographer plus a backhoe and operator. I am grateful to the field crew who endured
the heat to conduct this survey. They are James E. Warren, Arthur Romine, and Bobby
Jemison. Ed Baker at the Texas Historical Commission (THC), Archeology Division,
served as the reviewer for this project, and his input was valuable to the successful
outcome of this investigation. Geologist Lee Nordt, Ph.D. is thanked for discussing the
local soils with the author, and Bradley F. Bowman, Curator of The Museum of
Archaeology and Material Culture in Cedar Crest, New Mexico, is acknowledged for
analyzing the bison bone and describing his findings in Appendix IV.
Adrianne Mraz, Research Assistant, at TARL, assisted the Principal Investigator
with the records check for previously recorded sites in and near the project area, and
David Parkhill provided site numbers. Dan Thomasson, the Corps of Engineers contact
visited the project area to allow the crew access to Corps property and discussed
previously recorded sites in the area. Landowners June Brooks and A. W. Weinzapfel
are thanked for allowing us access to their property. The drafted figures appearing in
this report were prepared by Lili Lyddon, and the photographs were taken by Ed Hale of
The Wallace Group.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS..................................................................................................iii
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ......................................................................................... 5
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ............................................................................ 8
METHODS .................................................................................................................... 10
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................. 16
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 19
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 20
Appendix I: Backhoe Trench Log
Appendix II: Backhoe Trench Profiles
Appendix III: Site Maps
Appendix IV: Faunal Analysis
Figures
Figure 1. General Location Map...................................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Northern Section of Project Area on Topographic Map.................................... 3
Figure 3. Southern Section of Project Area on Topographic Map ................................... 4
Figure 4. Northern Section of Project Area Depicted on Soils Map ................................. 6
Figure 5. Southern Section of Project Area Depicted on Soils Map ................................ 7
Figure 6. Site 41WM992................................................................................................ 12
Figure 7. Backhoe Trench 3 at 41WM992..................................................................... 13
Figure 8. Backhoe Trench 5 at 41WM994..................................................................... 14
Figure 9. Backhoe Trench 5 at 41WM994..................................................................... 14

iv

INTRODUCTION
The City of Granger plans to install an eight-inch water transmission line along a
34,000-foot route (2.4 acres) in northeast Williamson County, Texas (Figure 1). The
proposed water line will lead from a City of Taylor connection point at county road 1331
to a new ground storage tank in Granger. The water line will be placed in a 36-inch
wide trench with a depth of 36 inches. In addition to the trench, there will be a 20-foot
temporary work easement. Originally, the water line was to be placed in the county
road right-of-way. However, it was later learned that there is a buried telephone cable
in the area. As a result it was decided to place the water line on private property
instead.
The project area is depicted on the 7.5' United States Geological Survey
topographical map Granger dated 1964 (Photorevised 1988). Figures 2 and 3 depict
the project area on this topographical map. The Wallace Group, Inc. of Killeen, Texas is
the environmental coordinator for this project, providing data relating to endangered
species, wetlands, and archaeological potential of the project area.
The project area is located in a region known to contain significant archaeological
sites. Because of this archaeological potential, a survey by professional archaeologists
was requested by the THC. Therefore, BVRA was retained by the City of Granger to
examine the proposed water line route for the presence of significant archaeological
sites. The project number assigned by BVRA is 01-14. The survey was conducted on
August 1 and 13, 2001 under antiquities permit number 2652.

1

Figure 1. General Location Map

2

Figure 2. Northern Section of Project Area on Topographic Map

3

Figure 3. Southern Section of Project Area on Topographic Map

4

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The focus of this study lies within the Blackland Prairie area of Williamson
County approximately 12 miles east of the Balcones Fault (Shafer and Corbin
1965:Figure 1). The project area falls generally within the Taylor Prairie that consists of
almost flat blacklands with the major relief occurring around the stream valleys (Shafer
and Corbin 1965:6). The major drainages in the county are the San Gabriel River and
Brushy Creek that flow through the county in a west-east direction. All drainage is into
the Brazos River watershed (Werchan and Coker 1983:1).
Williamson County is hot in summer but cool in winter when an occasional surge
of cold air causes a sharp drop in otherwise mild temperatures. Rainfall occurs
throughout the year, reaching a slight peak in spring. Snowfall is rare. In winter, the
average temperature is 49 degrees Fahrenheit, and the average daily minimum
temperature is 38 degrees. In summer, the average temperature is 83 degrees, and the
average daily maximum temperature is 95 degrees.
The route of the proposed water transmission line as currently planned passes
through several soil types (figures 4-5). These soils are described in the Williamson
County Soil Survey (Werchan and Coker 1983), and the interested reader is referred to
this source for in-depth descriptions of the various soils present.

5

Figure 4. Northern Section of Project Area Depicted on Soils Map

6

Figure 5. Southern Section of Project Area Depicted on Soils Map

7

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Numerous archaeological studies have been performed in the Central Texas
area since the early part of this century. Data regarding previous work in the vicinity of
the current project area were collected from the TARL files and the Texas Archeological
Sites Atlas. The focus of this study lies within the Blackland Prairie area of Williamson
County approximately 12 miles east of the Balcones Fault (Shafer and Corbin
1965:Figure 1). The project area falls generally within the Taylor Prairie that consists of
almost flat blacklands with the major relief occurring around the stream valleys (Shafer
and Corbin 1965:6).
The first professional study to be conducted in the immediate area was an
archaeological survey of the North Fork, South Fork, and Laneport reservoirs by the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin (Shafer and
Corbin 1965). The field survey was conducted in 1963 and relied on surface inspection
(no shovel testing) and interviews with local residents to locate archaeological sites. As
a result of this study, 109 previously unrecorded sites were identified and recorded at
TARL. Site descriptions in the report are restricted to short paragraphs, and the site
forms are sketchy. This survey recorded one site in close proximity to the current
project area. Site 41WM119 is located on an unnamed tributary of the San Gabriel
River on the east side of Highway 95; the exact location is questionable according to the
TARL plotting on the topographic map.
Site 41WM119 is discussed in the report by Corbin and Shafer (1965:49) as
thinly scattered occupational debris found over about half an acre of a cultivated field on
the slope of a high terrace. No artifacts were found by the survey crew, but the
landowner reported a collection which included a Castroville and Pedernales point from
the site. No additional work was recommended for this site.
The next period of site recording in the vicinity of the project area was conducted
by Frank Eddy who recorded sites along San Gabriel River and several tributaries
between 1968 and 1969 (TARL site files). Eddy's documentation is restricted to a few
short site forms; no formal report is available. The nearest of these sites to the current
project area is 41WM164, which was co-recorded with Lawrence Aten. This site is
located on the river about 100 meters east of Highway 95. According to the site form at
TARL, this is a campsite that contained two superimposed hearths in a tan clay which is
described as between two "gravel stringers." Small amounts of burned rock, mussel
shell, and snail shell was observed; however, the main focus of the sites was the
hearths. Other sites recorded in the area by Eddy consisted of lithic quarries and
workshops (41WM159 and 41WM16) and a burial (41WM163).

8

Unfortunately, there is no information for the nearest site to the project area. Site
41WM478 is located on the west side of Highway 95 on a terrace overlooking the San
Gabriel River to the north. This site had been investigated during an earlier Texas
Archeological Society Field School under the supervision of Elton R. Prewitt. No site
form is on file at TARL, and messages regarding previous work at this site were not
returned.
Sites containing significant amounts of cultural materials are present within the
Blackland Prairie of Williamson County, especially along the major streams. A recent
survey involving the Blackland Prairie in Travis County by Brazos Valley Research
Associates (Moore 2001) found that the absence of prehistoric sites in that area
appeared to be due to the presence of ancient clays at or near the surface and the
absence of major stream crossings. Prehistoric sites for which information was
available consisted of unimpressive sites, usually sparse lithic scatters (41TV1213,
41TV1215, 41TV1216, 41TV1218, 41TV1219), some only producing a single artifact.
One of the more significant Blackland Prairie sites is the Bessie Kruze site
(41WM13), approximately 20 km to the southeast (Johnson 2000). This site contains
artifacts in the top 1.5 meters of a 6-meter deep T-1 terrace overlooking Brushy Creek
which eventually flows into the San Gabriel River. Three zones were recognized
containing dart points predating Pedernales, fireplaces, and two human cremations
(Zone III), Pedernales points, burned limestone rocks, rock-lined fireplaces and small
ovens, bone and mussel shell fragments, and a few plant remains, and three mixed
skeletons (Zone II), and Marshall-Marcos and Castroville and other dart points and a
few woodworking tools (Zone I). The soils at the site are described as yellowish-brown
silty alluvium with an A soil horizon at its top (Johnson 2000:15).

9

METHODS
Prior to entering the field, a records check was conducted for BVRA by Adrianne
Mraz, Research Assistant at TARL and reviewed by William E. Moore. Ms. Mraz
checked the site files for previously recorded sites in and near the project area. Site
forms were reviewed in order to obtain an idea of the kinds of sites found in the
immediate area and the kinds of landforms on which they are located. In addition,
information pertaining to previous archaeological work in the region was obtained from
the library at BVRA.
The background check revealed the presence of several previously recorded
sites near the project area. The closest site (41WM478) is located on a terrace
overlooking the San Gabriel River to the north. No site form was found on file at TARL,
and messages to Elton R. Prewitt regarding previous work at this site were not returned.
Initially, the route of the water line was to be within the highway right-of-way with
a 20-foot construction easement extending onto private land. On the first of August the
survey crew visited the project area with the intent of testing the right-of-way through
shovel testing and backhoe trenching. During this visit it was learned that there was a
buried telephone cable in the area. Since the exact location of the cable was not
known, no subsurface investigation was employed. The first terrace overlooking the
floodplain of Willis Creek to the north had been recently plowed, and the crew walked
over this area and located evidence of a prehistoric site. The area was marked on the
project area map for future analysis. This site was assigned the temporary site (TS)
number TS-1. Later, a site form was submitted to TARL, and the official trinomial
41WM992 was assigned to this locality.
Since the initial visit, the telephone company (Verizon) flagged the centerline of
the buried cable. According to Kristina M. Rameriz, The Wallace Group was now
interested in placing the water line on private property within 20 feet of the county road
right-of-way.
On August 13, the survey crew returned and tested the project area with a
backhoe provided by the City of Granger. Each test was approximately 4 meters long, 1
meter wide, and dug in arbitrary 30 cm levels. Twenty shovels full of dirt were screened
through 1/4-inch hardware cloth for each level. A backhoe trench log was kept and
appears as Appendix I to this report. Profiles of the backhoe trenches were sketched in
the field, and they appear as Appendix II to this report.

10

The first area tested was the south bank of the San Gabriel River on land owned
by the United States Army Corps of Engineers. Backhoe trench 1 was excavated on
the T-1 terrace 23 meters from the edge of the river, and a prehistoric site (41WM993)
was found. Mussel shell, animal rib bones, and lithic artifacts were found between 90
and 170 cm below the surface. This trench was dug to 210 cm through a clay loam.
The artifacts are not diagnostic and were not collected. A second trench was excavated
23 meters to the south of the first trench (also through a clay loam), and no cultural
materials were found. It was terminated at 150 cm. Modern trash (glass and metal)
was found in the upper level of both trenches. Appendix III depicts the site areas where
the backhoe trenches were excavated.
Next, the field crew visited site 41WM992 where a surface scatter of chert
gravels, tested cobbles, early stage bifaces, and a unifacial scraper had been found
(Figure 6). Two backhoe trenches (3-4) were dug at this site in order to define the
vertical limits of the site and identify any buried components, if any, within the "Area of
Potential Effect." Backhoe trench 3 was dug through a dark gray clay loam to a depth of
130 cm (Figure 7). Natural chert cobbles were found throughout the first level (30 cm),
but no cultural materials were found at any level. A second trench (4) was dug 30
meters to the south with the same results. It was terminated at 140 cm. In addition, the
site area was walked to ascertain the northern and southern boundaries of this site.
Although this site may continue past the southern boundary as depicted in the site map
(Appendix III), it was decided that a marked decrease in exposed gravels were an
indication of the southern limits of a resource that was being utilized by prehistoric
groups.
The crew then moved to the north of 41WM992 and identified another surface
scatter identical to that at 41WM992, this time on the floodplain of Willis Creek. This
area was assigned the field number TS-3 (41WM994). Backhoe trench 5 was dug on
the edge of the woods 42 meters from the creek through a clay loam to a depth of 175
cm (Figures 8-9). Cultural materials were observed on the surface, and the trench
yielded two chert flakes and one burned core in level 1 (30 cm). The site area was
walked by the crew to determine the southern boundary. Approximately 100 meters
south of backhoe trench 5 the exposed gravels were tapering off in terms of raw
numbers. At this point a second trench (6) was excavated through a clay loam and
yellow clay to a depth of 140 cm. No cultural materials were found in any level. The
southern boundary was, therefore, fixed at approximately 100 meters from the edge of
Willis Creek.
The final area tested was the north bank of Willis Creek. Backhoe trench 7 was
dug three meters from the edge of the creek in the floodplain through a clay loam with
no natural gravels present. At 110 cm several pieces of large bone were exposed.
Unfortunately, the backhoe broke most of the bone during removal. At this point the
backhoe was stopped, and the Project Archaeologist removed the rest of the bone by
hand. One large bone was left in the west wall for future reference should additional
work be conducted in this area.

11

Excavation at the trench was continued to 150 cm, and no gravels or cultural
materials were encountered. One utilized flake was found in this trench in the same
backhoe bucket as the bone. During washing of the bone, two additional chert flakes
were found embedded in the clay matrix adhering to the bone. This site was assigned
the field number TS-2 and later given the TARL trinomial 41WM995.
The next trench at 41WM995 was dug on a higher area, believed to be the first
terrace, approximately 67 meters north of trench 7. This trench was dug through a clay
loam to a depth of 140 cm. Two chert flakes were found in Level 4. No gravels were
present. The flakes are not diagnostic and were not collected. Moving back to the area
where the bone had been found, the trench 9 was dug two meters north of backhoe
trench 7. This trench was dug through a clay loam to a depth of 150 cm. No cultural
materials or bone were seen.

Figure 6. Site 41WM992

12

Figure 7. Backhoe Trench 3 at 41WM992

13

Figure 8. Backhoe Trench 5 at 41WM994

Figure 9. Backhoe Trench 5 at 41WM994
14

Artifacts observed on the surface at sites 41WM992 and 41WM994 are nondiagnostic and not collected. No cultural materials were recovered in the backhoe
trenches at 41WM992, and the artifacts found in the backhoe trench at 41WM994 are
not diagnostic and were not collected. The flakes, core, rib bones, and mussel shell
found at 41WM993 are not significant and were not retained for curation. At site
41WM995, the bison bone, utilized flake, chert flakes, fish scales, and fish bone were
retained for analysis and curation. The two flakes found in backhoe trench 8 are not
diagnostic and were not collected.
The bison bone and associated artifacts were sent to the Museum of
Archaeology and Material Culture in Cedar Crest, New Mexico where they were
examined by the Curator, Bradley F. Bowman. The results of his findings appear as
Appendix IV to this report.

15

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
The records check at TARL revealed the presence of no previously recorded
sites in the project area. Several sites have been recorded in the vicinity, and some are
close to the right-of-way as currently planned. Unfortunately, little data exists for these
sites, making it virtually impossible to predict the kinds of sites likely to be found in the
project area.
Four prehistoric sites (41WM922 - 41WM9995) were found as a result of the
survey. These sites are discussed below, and the location of each is depicted in
Appendix III.
41WM992 (TS-1)
This is a prehistoric lithic procurement site located on the T-1 terrace area
overlooking the floodplain of Willis Creek approximately 550 meters to the north. The
soils in this area are described by Werchan and Coker (1983:44-45) as Oakalla silty
clay loam, occasionally flooded (Oa). This is a floodplain soil that dates from Late
Holocene to Recent times (Lee Nordt, personal communication, August 17, 2001).
At this locality chert cobbles were tested and partially reduced prior to being
fashioned into finished tools at another location. Artifacts observed include tested
cobbles, early stage bifaces, cores, and a unifacial scraper. Two backhoe trenches
revealed no cultural materials below the first level (0-30 cm), indicating that this site is
restricted to the surface. The actual size of this site is not known; however, cultural
materials were observed on the slope of the terrace to a point 120 meters to the south.
The survey crew was limited to an area 20 feet from the fence line; therefore, the
eastern extent of the site is not known. The plowed field in which the cobbles were
observed extends at least 1000 meters to the east, and it is assumed the site may be as
large as 120 x 1000 meters in size. No diagnostic artifacts were observed; therefore,
the age of this site is not known. This is a shallow site that has been subjected to
cultivation for many years. As a result all of the artifacts are mixed. It is, therefore, not
considered significant.
41WM993 (TS-2)
This is a prehistoric site located on the T-1 terrace overlooking the San Gabriel
River approximately 30 meters to the north. The soils in this area are described by
Werchan and Coker (1983:44-45) as Oakalla silty clay loam, occasionally flooded (Oa).
At this locality freshwater mussel shell, two rib bone fragments, two small
complete percussion flakes made from Colorado River gravels, and one core fragment
of Georgetown chert were found in a buried context between 90 and 180 cm. A second
backhoe trench 30 meters to the south did not contain any cultural materials. It is
hypothesized that 41WM993 represents a possible campsite where various fauna were
consumed and lithic tool maintenance activities were performed.

16

There is a high probability that the chert flakes were obtained locally from one of
the gravel outcrops such as 41WM992 and 41WM994. The core fragment was
obviously obtained from a distant source where this material is available. It is also
possible that some of the material such as the mussel shell could have been deposited
by flooding as this is an alluvial area and may not be associated with the animal bone
and/or flakes.
The actual size of this site is unknown. Since the backhoe trench was dug at the
edge of the river it is unlikely that the site extends very far to the north. No diagnostic
artifacts were observed; therefore, the age of this site is not known. The artifact return
was sparse, probably an indication of a limited activity area. The rib bones are soft,
possibly as a result of weathering and leaching effects of the soil. These characteristics
are considered typical of older bone. This site is not considered significant.
41WM994 (TS-3)
This is a prehistoric lithic procurement site located on the floodplain of Willis
Creek 30 meters south of the creek. The soils in this area are described by Werchan
and Coker (1983:44-45) as Oakalla silty clay loam, occasionally flooded (Oa) in the
floodplain and Oakalla soils, frequently flooded (Of) near Willis Creek (Werchan and
Coker 1983:44-45).
At this locality, chert cobbles were tested and partially reduced prior to being
fashioned into finished tools at another location. Artifacts observed include tested
cobbles, early stage bifaces, cores, and flakes. A backhoe trench within 30 meters of
the creek revealed two chert flakes of Colorado River gravels and a burned core at the
surface. A second trench about 100 meters from the creek produced no cultural
materials. Neither trench yielded cultural materials before the first level (0-30 cm),
indicating that this site is restricted to the surface. The actual size of this site is not
known; however, cultural materials were observed in the plowed field just south of the
creek to a point 100 meters to the south. The survey crew was limited to an area 20
feet from the fence line; therefore, the eastern extent of the site is not known. The
plowed field in which the cobbles were observed extends at least 700 meters to the
east, and it is assumed the site may be as large as 100 x 700 meters in size. This is a
shallow site that has been subjected to cultivation for many years. As a result all of the
artifacts are mixed. It is, therefore, not considered significant.
41WM995 (TS-4)
This is a prehistoric site located in the floodplain on the north side of Willis Creek
that is approximately 30 meters to the south. The soils in this area is described by
Werchan and Coker (1983:45) as Oakalla soils, frequently flooded (Of).

17

At this locality large bones, two fish scales, a fish operculum and several chert
flakes made from Colorado River gravels were found in a buried context. In the initial
backhoe trench the bone was found at 108 cm, and one utilized flake was found.
During washing of the bone, two additional chert flakes were found mixed with the clay
that was adhered to the bones following their removal from the ground.
Although no bones diagnostic of Bison, such as the skull, were recovered, the
size of the animal, depth of the bones, and presence of cultural materials (flakes)
strongly suggested at the time that the bones are the remains of a bison rather than a
cow (Bos). At backhoe trench 8, two flakes were found at Level 4 (100-120 cm), the
same level as the bone in the first trench. It is hypothesized here that 41WM995
represents an area where a bison was killed and butchered or an area where prehistoric
hunters found a bison dead of other causes and exploited the situation to obtain meat
and perhaps other parts of the body as well.
The fish scales and operculum could have entered the area through flooding, and
it is not suggested here that they co-existed in time with the bison bones. Additional
testing will be necessary to make this determination.
The importance of bison as a resource during prehistoric times is well
documented. These large animals were used as a food source, in the manufacture of
tools and weapons, for clothing and shelter, and their hides were considered an
important trade item. The use of bison among Texas Indians probably reached its
zenith during the Late Prehistoric when it is believed they reached their maximum range
(Dickens and Wiederhold 2001).
There is a high probability that the chert flakes were obtained locally from one of
the gravel outcrops such as 41WM992 and 41WM994. No diagnostic artifacts were
observed; therefore, a chronological age for this site can't be determined. According to
Geomorphologist Dr. Nordt, however, the depth (108 cm) of the bison bone in Oa soils
suggests that the event involving the killing and/or butchering of the bison occurred
during Late Prehistoric times. The actual size of this site is not known. All that can be
said at this time is that cultural materials were found in the southern end of one backhoe
trench, and additional artifacts were found in another trench 90 meters to the north. The
level of work during this investigation was not sufficient to determine significance of this
site. Bradley F. Bowman presents the results of his analysis of the bison bone in
Appendix IV.

18

RECOMMENDATIONS
Four prehistoric sites were found as a result of this investigation. Sites
41WM992 - 41WM994 are not significant, and no further work is warranted. Site
41WM995 is viewed by BVRA as significant. It is recommended that testing be
conducted at this site to determine its significance if it can't be avoided during
placement of the water line. If the City of Granger decides to avoid this site by boring
beneath Willis Creek it is recommended that the disturbance caused by this activity
remain at least 30 meters north of the creek and should be on the first terrace out of the
floodplain.
Three areas are recommended for investigation prior to construction of the water
line. First, the south side of the San Gabriel River was only tested on Corps of
Engineers property due to lack of permission from the landowner at the time of the
survey. BVRA believes that additional backhoe trenches should be excavated to the
south of the area initially tested to make sure that cultural materials are not missed. It is
not known to what extent the river has meandered in the past. The additional trenches
are viewed as necessary to evaluate this section of the project area.
Second, the north side of the San Gabriel River was not tested due to lack of
permission from the landowner at the time of the survey. It is recommended that this
area be investigated by excavating additional backhoe trenches.
Third, Pecan Branch, a tributary of the San Gabriel River, was not investigated
due to lack of landowner permission at the time of the survey. It is recommended that
both sides of this stream be tested using backhoe trenches. This stream may be an old
channel of the river.
Should, however, cultural materials be exposed during the construction of the
water line in areas other than mentioned above, all work should cease until the situation
can be evaluated by the Texas Historical Commission in consultation with The Wallace
Group, Inc. and Brazos Valley Research Associates.
Much of the area between the streams in the right-of-way are mapped as
Branyon clay, 0-1% slopes (BrA) (Werchan and Coker 1983:22-23). These are nearly
level soils on high, broad, ancient stream terraces. According to Dr. Nordt, landforms in
these soils are Pleistocene in age and are unlikely to contain human remains. It is
recommended here that these areas not be subjected to survey.

19

REFERENCES CITED
Dickens, William A., and James E. Wiederhold
2001 Some Notes on Bison, the Texas Post Oak Savanna, and the Late
Prehistoric. Draft manuscript submitted to the Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society.
Gould, Frank W.
1975 Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station. Texas A&M University. College Station.
Johnson, Leroy
2000 Life and Death as Seen at the Bessie Kruze Site (41WM13) on the
Blackland Prairie of Williamson County, Texas. Texas Department of
Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division, Archeology Studies
Program, Report 22.
Moore, William E.
2001 An Archaeological Survey of Proposed System Improvements for the
Manville Water Supply Corporation, Lee, Travis, and Williamson Counties,
Texas. Brazos Valley Research Associates Contract Report Number 86.
Shafer, Harry J., and James E. Corbin
1965 An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of North Fork, South Fork
and Laneport Reservoirs, Williamson County, Texas. Report submitted to
the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Werchan, Leroy E., and John L. Coker
1983 Soil Survey of Williamson County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with the Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station.

20

APPENDIX I: BACKHOE TRENCH LOG
________________________________________________________________
Test Length
Width
Depth
Results
_______________________________________________________________
41WM992
03

4 meters

1 meter

130 cm

sterile

04

4 meters

1 meter

140 cm

sterile

41WM993
01

4 meters

1 meter

210 cm

modern trash (level 1); mussel
shell (level 3); 2 rib bones (level
4); 3 flakes and 1 core fragment
(level 6)

02

4 meters

1 meter

150 cm

modern trash (level 1)

41WM994
05

4 meters

1 meter

175 cm

2 chert flakes and 1 burned core
(level 1); numerous fossil shells
(oyster and mussel throughout)

06

4 meters

1 meter

140 cm

sterile

41WM995
07

4 meters

1 meter

150 cm

bison bone, flake tool, 2 chert
flakes, 2 fish scales, and 1 fish
bone (level 4)

08

4 meters

1 meter

140 cm

2 chert flakes (level 4)

09
4 meters
1 meter
150 cm
sterile
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX II
BACKHOE TRENCH PROFILES

Backhoe Trench 1

Backhoe Trench 2

Backhoe Trench 3

Backhoe Trench 4

Backhoe Trench 5

Backhoe Trench 6

Backhoe Trench 7

Backhoe Trench 8

Backhoe Trench 9

APPENDIX III
SITE MAPS

41WM992

41WM993

41WM994

41WM995

APPENDIX IV: FAUNAL ANALYSIS
Introduction
A Phase I archaeological survey conducted for the City of Granger, Texas
by Brazos Valley Research Associates in August of 2001 resulted in the recovery
of 32 fragments or partial elements of a large bovoid and fish remains consisting
of two scales and a single operculum. Excavation procedures employed
included the use of a backhoe digging in approximate 30 cm levels and random
screening of soils through ¼ inch hardware cloth. Bone was encountered at 108
cm in Backhoe Trench 7, the location of all recovered faunal materials. The use
of heavy equipment was suspended at that time, and all visible bone and
surrounding soil were collected. Two chert flakes were found in close
association with the bone. All faunal materials were mailed to the Museum of
Archaeology and Material Culture in Cedar Crest, New Mexico for analysis.
Analysis
The fragmented bovoid remains exhibit recent damage, a result of
excavation procedures and pre- or post-depositional cracking of long bone
diaphysis and eroded articular surfaces. An attempt was made to reconstruct the
recent damage using glue made from Buvar B45, an acetone-soluble, reversible
bone preservative. This facilitated future analytical procedures by reducing the
32 fragments into 10 identifiable elements. These remains were then identified
as to element, portion of element, side, and degree of epiphysial fusion (Table 1).
This line of inquiry revealed that no duplication of elements was represented in
the assemblage.
The left tibia articulates perfectly with the left astragulus and calcaneus,
which articulates with the left naviculo-cuboid, producing a complete ankle. A
visual examination was conducted of muscle attachments and general robusticity
that was consistent throughout the collection. These inquiries suggest that all
recovered material probably represents a single animal. Differenation between
Bos and Bison from incomplete post-cranial remains is problematic as both taxon
are almost identical in many respects.
Comparative analysis was conducted using the museum’s collection,
suggesting to the author that only Bison bison is represented in the collection.
Olson (1960:12) further reinforces this conclusion, stating that in Bison the distal
tibia is separable from those of Bos indicus and Bos taurus by noting the
absence of the groove for the flexor digitalis longus. This groove is well
represented in Bos and absent from the tibia in this collection.

Table 1. Inventory Bison bison and Bos Remains

The calcaneus exhibits an angular sulcus for deep flexor tendon as
opposed to a curved sulcus as in Bos and a downward curved sustentaculum
viewed from the posterior as in Bison (Olson 1960). McDonald (1981:79)
examined Bison bison skeletal material and published metric ranges that divide
males from females. The measurements presented in Table 2 identify the
remains as that of a female. Koch (1935) and Empel and Roskosz (1963)
collected data from Bison bonasus, a European species, and compiled a
diagnostic time frame for the epiphysial fusion in long bones (Table 1). There is
no definitive evidence that Bison bison and Bison bonasus mature at the same
rate, but a reasonable correlation exists between species. An examination of
Table 2 estimates the individual represented in this collection as an adult at least
six years of age.
The fish remains cannot be tied directly to the same deposit as the Bison
as they were not found in situ. The area of excavation is within three meters from
the creek, and fish remains could be introduced at any level. All three specimens
appear to belong to the order Cypriniformes, suckers, carp, and Buffalo fish
(Sublette 1990), but species is indeterminate at this time.

Table 2. Biometric Analysis of Bison bison Remains

Taphonomy
The recovered Bison bison remains exhibit no indications of predepositional human activity. Butcher marks, anvil and hammer abrasion, and
spiral fractures are absent from the assemblage. Observed pre-excavation bone
damage consists of the absence of some articular surfaces, minor root etching,
and abrasion consistent with bone exposed on the surface a few months before
burial. Subterranean damage in the form of minor polishing and abrasion is
attributed to argilliturbation (Waters 1992:104), the shrinking and expansion of
the clay-like matrix. Long bones present exhibit longitudinal cracks caused by a
differential loss of moisture. Angular breaks are present on some elements. This
type of breakage occurs only in dry bone due to a loss of collagen. Excavation
techniques employed at the site caused heavy damage to the collection in the
form of fractures and abrasion.
Conclusions
Biological materials from site 41MM995 represent the post-cranial remains
of a single adult female Bison bison that appears to be in situ with the cultural
materials represented as stone debitage (two non-utilized flakes and one utilized
flake). The bones offer no evidence of human activity and appear to have
remained on the surface a short time before burial. The fish remains could not
be positively connected to any stratum, and their meaning is not known.

References
Empel, W. and T. Roskosz
1963 Skelett der Gliedmassen des Wiesents, Bison bison. (Linneaus
1758). Acta Theriol 7:259-300.
Koch, W.
1935 The Age Order of Ephiphyseal Union in the Skeleton of the
European Bison (Bison bonasus L.). Anat. Record 61:371-376.
McDonald, Jerry N.
1981 North American Bison, Their Classification and Evolution.
University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles.
Olsen, Stanley J.
1960 Post-Cranial Skeletal Characters of Bison and Bos. Papers of the
Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology 35(4). Harvard
University, Cambridge.
Sublette, James E.
1990 The Fishes of New Mexico. New Mexico Department of Game and
Fish.
Waters, Michael R.
1992 Principals of Geoarcaeology: A North American Perspective. The
University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

