ARCHEOLOGICAL SALVAGE EXCAVATIONS AT THE ALAMO
(MISSION SAN ANTONIO DE VALERO)
1970

William M. Sorrow

Research Report No. 4
Texas Archeological Salvage Project
The University of Texas at Austin

ARCHEOLOGICAL SALVAGE EXCAVATIONS AT THE ALAMO
(MISSION SAN ANTONIO DE VALERO)
1970

William M. Sorrow

Resea r ch Report No. 4
Texas Archeological Salvage Project
The Unive ·nd. t· ,- o f Tejcat:

J une, 1972

>.;;t

Austin

This project was made possible by a grant-in-aid
from the Texas State Building Commission and was
carried out under provisions of Antiquities Permit No. 7 granted by the Texas State Antiquities
Committee.

1~CKNOWLEDGMENTS

Many people were involved in the planning and implementation
of this project. Without specifying the nature of their varied
contributions I would simply like to offer thanks to the following
individuals: Curtis Tunnell (State Archeologist), David S. Dibble
(Director, Texas Archeological Salvage Project), Douglas Comstock,
Daymond Crawford, Douglas Brown, Melinda Giles, Nora Comstock (TASP
personel), Katherine McDowell, Mildred Wolff, Nina Hortuess, Madeline
Perez, BBnnia Montez (Alamo personel). Perhaps the most heartfelt
thanks are to be gi-,en to the na.1nerous interested people who gav-e

freely of their
These include:
Anne Fox, Randy
Frances Sorrow,

time and abili~ies during the &ctual excavations.
John Clark, Mary Ann Crawford, William Fawcett,
Griggs, Helen O'Brien, Paul McGuff, Mardith Schuetz,
and Al Wesolowski.

This project was in many ways facillitated by the cooperation
of the Daughters of the Republic of Texas.

Edited by Melinda Giles

TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION • . . • • • .

1

........
...
. ........
..
EXCAVATIONS
..

EXCAVATION PROCEDURES
THE ARTIFACTS
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF
REFERENCES CITED

•

~

•

0

•

•

'

•

•

•

•

•

•

0

•

1

• • 15
• • 17
. . 18

• • • 20

•

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS ;
,.

':

..
. .

. . . . .• .
........

1.

Plan map of excavations

2.

Profile of north wall

3.

Diagram showing relationship of · defined features iu
the western portion of the excavation area artd
profile exposed along N20 lin~ •
. • • • •

6

Plan map showing horizontal cxt'ent and positions of
features • • • . • • • • • ~ • • ~ • • • • • .• • •

8

4.

,_\

... .
~

~~

1
4

5.

Field photographs illustrating .various subsurface
features encountered during e·xcav~tions • . • . • 10

6.

Field photographs illustrating various subsurface

1.

Field photographs illustrating various subsurface
features encountered during excavations • • •

8.

features encountered during excavations

• • , • • 12
9

•

14

Field photographs illustrating various subsurface
features encountered during excavations • • • • • 16

INTRODUCTION
Frou1 August 11, 1970, through the first week in September
the Texas Archeological Salvage Project (TASP) conducted
archeological investigations on the grounds of The Alamo
(Mission San Antonio de Valero) in the city of San Antonio,
Texas.

The impetus for the investigation was th~ proposed
construction of a new wing of The Daughters of the Republic
of Texas., Texas History Resoarch Library (Fig. 1). The
purpose of the excavations was to determine wheth~r or not
the construction of the library wing would destroy any feature
of historical significance, and if so, to identify that
feature." The area investigated. was delimited by the proposed
dimensions and placement: of the new wing.
Excavations revealed the remains of one wall of the main
Alamo irrigation channel (!'Acequia Madre") with evidences

of later structures. Although most of the irrigation channel
has been destroyed by urb~n development, two small sections
have been investigated in recent years {Schuetz 1970): one
was within the area affected by construction of the Hemisphere
1
68 Plaza and the other was an area used to channel a large
concrete pipe. Despite the fact that the section investigated
on the Alamo grounds has subsequently bee~ destroyed there
are indications that a portion remains intact. This little
known iacet of Spanish engineering could enhance the interpretive story of the Alamo.

EXCAVATION PROCEDURE
Prior to actual excavation the area of concern was mapped.
Special attention was paid to existing structures, such as
the libra y and more importantly the Alrur.o chapel. In addi tion, careful note was mad~ of all possible visible sources
of modern subsurface disturbances (e.g., sprinkler heads, water
faucets, woody vegetation, gar<len plots, and surface depres sions). These items are shown, along with a plan map of the
subsequent excavations as Figure 1.
A g~id system consisting of S foot squares labeled so
that all designates were contained within a single quadrant
was superimposed over the area prior to excavation. The
1

Figure 1

PLAN MAP of 41BX6
ALI DADE
NORTH

SIDEWALK

LEGEND

I

FLOWER BED

I

,.

I

APPROXIMATE OUTL INE

I

l I BR ARY WING

OF PROPOSED

I
DEPRESSION

I

.......·

'··

I

I

I
I
I

<J'.)

TREE

®

SPRINKLER HEAD

Scale in Feet -

I
2
3
4
S

t.l..l..l_1_J

I
I
I

I
I
I

.... ·'·· ..
......-

N / 20
W/35

D

/

I

I
I

I
I

SIDEWALK

1971

r---_J -

-

-

-

-

-

J_ - -

I
VTH

-~

I

"-----------/

Chapel
Museum
library
Cenotaph
Excavation

e

north wall of t-he librr"'ry served as - the~ base line and was
labeled North zero (NO). Coordinates perpendicular to the
base line were designated by the prefix "West". All grid
units were identified by the south-east coordinates. The
grid system was maintained until subsurface features (s~e­
cifically Feature 6) were detected, at which time the direction and exten,t of the excavations were governed by the
nature of specific features.
The actual excavation was begun by digging in one-half
foot arbitrary levels in units N20/WS~ and N40/WSS. This
was continued ex~ept when features ~r distinct stratigraphic
changes were detected. In these instances either the features
or the physical character o:f the fill determined the depth
and outline of the excavations.
Until judgments were made of the importance of any one
stratum within . a unit, all fill was passed through 1/4-inch
screen. In some instances, subsequent to the assessments
of a comparable stratum in other units, the upper deposits
were removed without screening. All material collected from
a level or stratum of an excavation unit was bagged and
labeled separately. Since there wr.s little or no original
fill in Feature 6, the standard vertical control techniques
were not used. Much of this feature was exposed without
effort to collect artifacts; parts were excavated in hori~
zontal units; and three small excavation units were dug with
no assigned grid coordinates (Fig. 4) •
. Field notes include level by level notes for each unit,
a daily journal, plan maps, profilesJ end photographic
records (35 mm. color slides and black and white photographs).

Internal Structure of the Excavation
For ease of description the internal structure of the
excavation area can best be discussed in terms of two areas.
The area east of the W50 grid line was relatively undisturbed
and will be discussed first. The area west of the WSO grid
line revealed extensive alteration. This will be considered
concurrently with a descTiption of the features encountered
in that area.
The area east of Feature 5 (Fig. 2) appears relatively
undisturbed. An undulating bedrock was reached at about 2.7
feet below the surface in the shallow excavation units. In
others, excavations reached 3.7 feet below the surface without
encountering bedrock. Overlying exposed portions of bedrock
were isolated accumulations of limestone rubble.
3

Figure2

N / 25
W/ SO

... ··.· ,' ·· ··. .

....·.··.·.· . ......

.. : :. ·. ·: :·: ·. ; ·:.· ··:: ·.: .·

·:.· ..

:

=-~;~~~=~;~~~:~=~~~t-r=~~~·
,
.
=:::····
- _- _--- --=- _- --~--=- -

Feature S I F.5

- -

-

l

N / 25
W/35

SURFACE

I

-'-------------------------

- -

-

Unexcav ated

-,
LEGEND
Heavily Charcoal
-Stained Soil

Q
_Red·Brown
LJ
Sandy Clay

41BX6
Profile of North Wall of

~ -Charcoal

Excavations East of Feature S

~ Sandy Clay

D

~-Caliche

~-Sand

Stained

Along N /25 Grid Line

?

l

:r

~
Feet

,

1

Lense

Soil (rocky)

~~
~~ -Limestone

Lense

n
Lense of Small
L::.J-Lime stone Pebbles

~-Ashy Gray-Black
~

Dark Brown Clay
Loam & Landfill

Rock

0

1971

ti

VTH

1i

l}

"

The major soil stratum overlying bedrock was a redbrown sandy clay. The coloration in the upper half foot of
this stratum was less red, possibly due in part to the presence of numerous flecks of charcoal. Overlying this zone
in the east end of the excavations was a thin lens of caliche
and caliche pebbles#
The next major stratum was a gray-black clay loam which
contained numerous angular limestone rocks overlain bya
heavily charcoal stained soil which was most evident in the
east end of the excavations. The surface stratum, attributable to 20th century landfill, is . a <lark brown clay loam.
Within this stratum is a thin lens of reddish brown sand and
a lens of small caliche or limestone pebbles.
Two shallow depressions encountered are shown in the
profile .illustrated i.n Figure 2. The exact point or origin
for these features was not precisely determined although it
appears that the eastern most depression originated from the
rocky, gray-black clay loam stratum and the western most
from the top of the charcoal stained sandy clay. That they
should have originated from the same surf ace is suggested by
the fact that there are indications of shallow trenches
bisected by the excavation unit. These features are oriented
roughly parallel to the acequia wall (Feat. 6) and their
elevation is slightly below that of the top of the acequia.
The possibility exists that they are irrigation trenches.
The exposure of the dep~essions on the opposite wall of the
excavation (Fig. 3, C, D) is somewhat more detailed and offers
additional evidence to support this supposition; here the
depressions are more clearly delimited and the bottoms are
silt lined as might be expected in an irrigation ditch (Fig. 4).
West of the WSG grid line the stTatigraphic picture is
much more complicated. Numercus human disturbances have
completely altered the natural deposits. From earliest to
the latest these features range in age f~om the Spanish
occupations of the 18th century to disturbances attrihutable
to the late 19th and early 20th centuries.

The following discussion is a presentation of evidence
offered to substantiate the suggested sequence of events.
Figures 3, A~ B and 4-8 are a necessary adjunct to the
discussion and will be referenced frequently.
The disturbances in the area west of the WSO grid line
were given feature designations and numbeTed in ord.;r of
their discovery. The features. encompassing a wide range of
disturbances from simple pits to various architectural items,
will be discussed in order. However, befo~e this discussion
can begin it is necessary to describe an aspect of the
5

Feat.6

I

A
/

Surfac

8--

Caliche Veneer

Feat.5

6.1

N/20
DP..W/40

Diagram

0

0

0

0

.·.•. •

Figure 3

N/20
W/45

Surface
o • "' o • o o.,• • o

Showing Relationship of Features in
Western Half of Excavation Area

h
·.•.·.~•. . .•

• 0

° 0°0°

0
•

41BX6

0

:

o

o-

0

1

2

3

D

4

Feet
LEGEND

Unexcavated

Profile Ses,iment of
South Wall(N/20 Grid Line)

G

Sandy Clay

~

Charcoal Stained
Sandy Clay

D

Dark Brown Clay
Loam, landfill

~

Ashy Gray - Black
Soil (rocky)

D
LJ

lense of Small
limestone Pebbles

~ Heavily Charcoal
~ Stained Soil

Red~Brown

~Silt

B

c

D

D

Lense

VTH

1971

..

'/

stratigraphy that serves as a uni.fylng stratum or zone.
Prior to the land fill that effected most of the Alamo
grounds the area west of Feature 5 had been covered with a
thin deposit or layer of caliche (Fig. 3,A,B; 5,A~B; 6,A-·C; 7
B;E). This stratum, called herein the "caliche veneer",
was easily recognizable beneath the upper soil and served in
all units where it was present as a stratigraphic marker for
the excavations. All of the features were in some way related
to this statum; consequently, it serves as the key toward
establishing the sequence of events resulting in the various
features.

Feature

!

(Fig. 4)

Visible on the surface as a subcircular depression, it
lay mostly within the confines of the unexcavated unit NlS/
WSS. Subsequent excavation in unit N20/WSS revealed that
the limits of this disturbance were larger than the surface
indications. Other than noting its occurrence in the south
wall of unit N20/W55 no ~ffort was made at evaluative
inv13stigation..

Feature

! (Figs. 4; 5, A)

A small circular pit extending into the north wall of
unit NZO/WSS originated from the caliche veneer. It was
roughly 1.5 feet in diameter and had a maximum depth of 0.7
of a foot, ha<l sloping sides, and an u:n<lulatiug bottom. The
fill is a heavy brown clay loam resembling the land fill
stratum. Possibly it functioned as a cooking pit as several
mammal bones we:re recovered from the fill and the surface of
the surrounding caliche veneer had been burned.

Feature

!

(Figs. 4; S, A-C)

First acknowledged as a disturbance along the east wall
of unit N20/W55, eventually it was noted in unit N40/WS5
and in excava~ions (not recorded on the grid system) near
the north wall of the library and finally recognized as a
trench originating from the caliche veneer. It ~ontained a
2-inch water pipe and an electrical conduit. This feature
paralleled Feature 5.
7

.

N /40
W/45

N/ 20
W/ 35

Shallow Trenches; Possible Remnants of Some
Sort of Irrigation Network

Red Brick Structure

41BX6
Plan Map Showing Horizontal
Position of Features

0

s

10

lS

a

Unnumbered Excavation Units from which
Artifact Collections were made

Feature and Number

Feet

Figure 4
1971

VTH

Feature 1 (Figs. 4; 5, B, C;; 6, A, E; 7, E)
Discovered in unit N40/WS5 as a disturbance originating
from the caliche veneer and extending westward at an almost
perpendicular angle from Feature 3. Excavat.ions revealed a
trench and fill for a sewe~c line with the pipe sloping downward to the west. Its use had been discontinued and the
east end had been broken off close to the foundation identified as Feature S. Possibly it had originated from a
commode (several fragm.;;nts were :found in the vicinity) that
had been placed close to a wall of t~e foundation. The pipe
had not gone through the foundation nor had the: foundation
cut through the sewer pipe. However it can definitely be
shown that the sewer line cut through the acequia wall,
completely destroying it in unit N40/W5S.

Feature~

(Figs. 2-4; 5, B-F)

Present in units N40/WSO, N20/W50. and in an unnumbered
unit near the library wall. It has been identified as a
foundation composed primarily of layers of bricks arranged
in what appears to be a herringbone patte1~n. The exact
pattern was not discerned because a narrow band of concrete
(averaging 2.2 feet in width) was overlying the top layer.
This appa·.rently served as the adherent for a wall of some
sort. Five layers of bricks (many of them painted on one
face) were found. overlying a concrete section extending
down an undetermined depth. Paralleling the foundation on
the west was a 2-inch water pipe and a~ electrical conduit
(Feat. 3). The latter curved up into the brick foundation
in notch~s f),pparently made by a heavy hammer or a pick in
units NZO/W50 and N40/WSO. As previously mentioned, the
sewer line (Feat. 4) seems to have some relationship to tha
foundation as it terminates in close proximity ~o it in unit
N20/W55.

Although the function of this feature has not been
determined, it is possible that it represents the back wall
of the Central Tire Store which was ~ red brick building
(several stories) located in this vicinity. This information was taken from a photograph (about 1916) provided by
Katherine McDowell of tha Library of the Daughters cf the
Republic of Texas. If Feature 5 represents the foundation
cf a building the only · c~rtain thing is that there was no
basement.

...

9

Figure 5:
A, Looking east into excavatiqn unit N20/WSS.
Features 2 and 3 and the cali~he veneer ace
shewn. Feature 2 is circular pit at left.
Feature 3 is the trench along the top of the
excavations.
B, Features 3 and S exposed at juncture of units
N40/WSO and N40/WSS. Note remnant of caliche
veneer at lower left and east (Tight) end of
Feature 4. Caliche veneer seems to extend
over the top of Feature 5.
C, Features 3 (excav~ted) and 4 (east end, partially
excavated). A small pipe (electrical conduit)
parallels the larger water pipe and curves up
into Feature S.
D, Overhead view of Feature 5 in unit N20/WSO.
A narrow band of concrete run;;; the length of
the exposed feature covering what appears to
be a

herringbon~

pattern of brick.

In upper

left a notch has been cut into foundation for
the placement of two electrical conduits.
E> Features 3 and 5 exposed. Looking east into
unit NZO/WSO. Note stacking of bricks and
relationship of foundation to water pipe and
electrical conduits.
F, Looking west down excavations between N20 and
N25 grid lines. Feature 5 (foreground) is
partiaily exposed,

Fig. 5

Feature 6 (Figs. 3, A-B; 4; 6, A-F; 7, A-F; 8, A-F)
This designation represents the most complex feature
recorded. It not only includes a structure attributable to
the Spanish period (identified as the east wall of the main
Alamo acequia) but also evidence of later (possibly late
19th or early 20th century) structures. The necessity for
this inclusive treatment is that the evidence for these
individual structures is so entwined as to make separate
discussion of each unwieJ.dy. Refezence to Figure 3 shows
that there are four numbered subdivis.ion.s within Feature 6,
each referring to a specific portion of the fill sequence.
In addition there are two other segments of Feature 6 not
part of the fill sequence: the acEquia wall and a red brick
structure of undetermined function. Overlying Feature 6,
and other features as well, is the caliche veneer which
served the important function of establishing a stratigraphic
relationship between Feature 6, its comp~nents, and the
Temainder of the excavation area.
The acequia wall is characterized by dressed limestone
blocks cC.mented with a lime mortar. Although only a section
of the east ~all was exposed in th~ excavations, it is presumed that a west wall did exist but was later destroyed.
An L-shaped section of the wall was excavated: the northsouth side of the wall was about 32 . feet in length and the
east-west side {the base of the L) was about 8 feet in
length. The north end of the excavated wall was removed when
a sewer pipe (Feat. 4) wcs laid; the south end was possibly
intact although its proximity to the water pipe (Feat. ~)
and the brick foundation (Feat. 5) suggests it too was damaged.
Unsuccessful attempts were r1ade to locate an extens.ion
of the short east-west section of wall by using a steel rod.
The rod was pushed :i.11to the ground to a depth of 1. 5 to i. 0
feet east of Feature 5 and in line wi~h the wall. Similar
efforts wet"e made to locate the·north.,.south wall south of
the corner of the "L", bet these too were unsuccessful.
Presumably the construction of the original library resulted
in destruction of this pnrt of the acequia wall.

The wall itself was constructed of tabular or rectangular
blocks of limestone.

It was first p::"esumed that the one

missing block was accidental, bu.t examination of the photograph (Fig. 8~ B) suggested that a gate might have been
present here. Th~re were visual indications that a channel
(perpendicular to tha acequia wall) existed east of the wall.
Possibly this is part of a larger system of shallow irrigation

11

Figure 6:
A, Exposed caliche veneer. 1rench marking location
of Feature 3 is in upper left. Part of rock
and brick fill of Feature 4 (foreground) is shown
as well as various details of Feature 6.
B, Looking south down excavations between W57.5
and W62.5 showing the caliche veneer and
expose<l $tackc1..l lir,;estone slabs of the acequia
wall of excavation. unit l~33. 6/l:57 . 5.
C, Looking north at same subject described for B.
Pipes for spTinkler sys~em are resting on
caliche veneer.
DJ Detail showing relationship of various paTts
of FeatuTe 6 to Feature 4c Rock at upper left
is part of acequia wall. Dark area in center
of photo is Feature 6.3a, and light area to its
right is the "caliche wall", or Feature 6.2.
Feature 4 is shoun partially excavated as the
jumbled rocks in the fo~ceground.
E 7 Looking east along Feature 4 excavations prior

to the discovery of the sewer pipe.
3 and S in background.

Features

F, Looking west at area behind acequia wall where
stone was missing.

•

Fig. 6

chann~ls

implied by the small ditches described as a part
of the excavations cast of the W50 grid line. A similar
gap has been observed by the author in the still intact
acequia near Mission Espada at the southern edge of San
Antonio.

The acequia wall was built on limestone rubble (weathered
bedrock?). The back of the acequia wall was excavated in
unit N20/W55: the partiil outline of the bottom of the
acequia is visible in Figure 7, B. The waste present indicated
that subsequent to the construction of the wall, the space
behind the wall· (between the wall an4 the side of the ditch
that was necessary for construction) was filled with loose
rubble and earth.· In the spaces between the rocks in this
area was found varying amounts of a very fine silt as well
as several sherds of Majolica.

The bottom of the acequia ch&nnel was indicated by the
contact between the fill designations 6.3a &nd 6.3b (Fig.
3. A, B). Feature 6.3b xcp?esents the bottom of the acequia
channel, is a yellow-brown ~~aciy clay, and contained no
artifacts other than at th~ contact with 6.3a. Feature 6.3a
represents the filled irrigation channel. The fill is a
heavily charcoal impregnated soil and contained numerous
metal an~ ceramic artifacts and a considerable amount of bone.
Although no analysis of this material has been attempted there
is evidence to suggest that the fill wes introduced prior
to 1890 and after 1879. Within the fill was at least one
bottle fragment of a typ0 developf:d for use with the 11 Hutchinson Spring Bottle Stopper" d~velop~d in 1879. The terminal
date corrnspcrn<ls with the development of the crimp crown
bottle cap, the patent of which was applied for in 1891 (Lief,
1965; p. 14 and Fig. 15). No crimp caps nor ~ny bottle
suitable fer this type of closuTe were found in the 6.3a fill.
Subseq\.'ent to filling the acequia another excavation
took plao.= which apparently destroyed the west wall of the
acequi~ .

~ne purpose of this excavation was to construct
the red brick structure (pert of Feature 6) and presumably
an associated structure (since removed). The function of
the latter structure is unknown. The east edge of this
excavation w~s marked by the east side of Feature 6.2~ a
vertical depos:i t of comr·acted calic:he. Neither the maximum
depth of the new exc~vetion nor its southern, northt:rn, or
western limits were detected.

The red brick s~Tucture is 2.3 feet wide and extended
to an undetermined depth . The top of the brick averaged
about 3.S feet below the surface and was traced 1.6 feet

13

Figure 7:
A, fSadc of ace :itda wa1J , lcok_ing wcs t betweon the

N20 and N2S g1id lires.
B, South wall of uni~ N26/W60. Acequia wall {at
left) is resting on rock rubble. The wh~te band
across the top cf the picture is the cal:che
blanket. The ve1tical column is the caliche
wall (Feat. b.2) <l1ich extends &long the floor
paralleling the acequia and juxtaposed to the
brick structure. The dark soil between the
aceq11ia and th·~ caliche wall (Feat. 6.3a) is
the charcoal and trash filled channel of the
acequ:ia.
C, North wall of NZ6/W60 showing many of the same
features as the previous picture.
D, An additional ri~w illus~rating relation5hips
of portions of the brick structure, the caliche
w~ll and the caliche veneer.
E, Looking south to the exposed caliche wall and
brick structur~ of Feature 6. Rocks at extreme
left and sewer pipe are components of Feature 4.
This picture shows that Feature 4 was constructed
subsequent to Eeature 6.2 1 as it clearly cuts
through the caliche wall and over the br~ck
s·tructure.
F, Looking down into unit N26/W60 prior to removing
the caliche wall and the fil- next tc tho acequia
wall.

...

..

A

B

c

D

E

F

Fig. 7

'l.

below its surface (Feature 6.2 was traced to a comparable
depth). Contiguous to the east side of the brick is the
so-called "caliche walP' (Feat. 6. 2). . The straight, flat
face on the west side (next to the brick) would seem to
indicate that it served as a fill between the edge of the
new excavation and a structure of some sort that was placed
on the red brick feature. The east face of the caliche wall
substantiates this assumption as it is irregular, looking as
if · it conformed to the shape of the excavation wall.
Feature 6.1 represents the fi l l subsequent to the abandomnent and d~struction of the structural element ~hat was
associated with the red brick structure. Within the fill>
near the bottom, were bricks aud br.ick fragments similar to
those used in constructing the structure. Other artifacts
were scarce but two crimp crown bottle caps were found
indicating a fill date after 1890.
Overlying all of Feature 6 was the caliche veneer.
Figure 2 shows that the caliche veneer did not cover the
acequia wall, but this was an exception (see Fig. 8, F).
Like tbs area east of the WSO grid lint; the final stratum is
the 20th centu:ty landfill that pre;s ently mantles much of the
Alamo grounds.
·

THE ARTIFACTS
Artifacts were collected from all areas and depths of
the excavations. These include nmnarous metal fragments
(most of wh~.c; h are nails), bottles and bottle fragments,
numerous typf~s of fragmentary c~TaJ,lic pieces, stone items
of Indian origi~, and a variety of miscellaneous artifact
classes. Included in the collection of ceramic materials
were examples of Spanish pottery, i ncluding Majolica, aboriginal pottery, and a fairly large amount of later European
style$, A relatively la·.rge collect ion of macro-fauna! remains
were collected. Most of this appears to be associated with
the later occupations. No attempts hnv~ , as yet, been made
toward analyzing this material.

15

Figure 8:
A~

View of acequia wall between N26 (right)an<l N33
Note area of missing stone· and that the wall
is resting on limestone rubble. The caliche
wall and an exposed portion of the brick structure is in the foreground.

B, Close-up of wall and area of missing stone.
Note mortar at middle left.
C, Looking south down acequia wall from N20 grid
line. The caliche wall here 1s in contaGt
with the acequia wall.
D, Looking east along east-west section of acequia.
The wall gradually narrows in width. The south
end of Feature 5 is visible here.
E, Close-up of corner cf acequia wall.
F, Detail of stacked limestone !>labs in unit N33.6/
WSS.7. Contrast structure of acequia wall here
with that in previous pictures.

B

A

c

E

F

Fig. 8

P.

At the time of writing, all original sit~ notes, field
photographs, and cataloged collections are on deposit at the
T·e xas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas
at Austin. Presumably these will eventually be housed permanently at the Anthropological Laboratories at Balcones
Research Center in Austin.

SUMI't'.ARY OF PINDINGS

This s ection is concerned with a discussion of the
of events that resul t ed in t he f eatu:t:"es encountered in
t he tes t ed a~ea. The initial cultural event was the construc t i on of the acequia and possibly the cssociated shallow
field ditches. The presence of the fine silt deposits behind
~he wall in unit N20/WSS suggests ~he acequia was in use
grior t o t~ e construction of the rock walls.
~crie s

..

The acc quia apparently remained in constant use until
the late 1!1th c entury when i t ·was .filled with charcoal
i.:mp-r::grrnted s oil and trash (Feat. 6. 3a). Subsequently a

majo£ excavat ion took place removing the west waJl of the
ace;.r1ht ;"nd ·ch e
thi~

11

~·ed

b:-ic k structure" wf..s built .

represent s a building foundation .

Probably

After construction

of thir; .j.s~;umed but not definitely specifiable building, the
su;:u~.~ lvw;;woen it and the ed.g~ of the excavation was filled
~1th rottcu l imestone or cai i che (feat . 6.2). Sometime
after 1890 t he building was destroyed and the excavation

was

fill~d

i u (Feat . 6.1) .

Later the SU!'face w.! is

c ovcrc..~d

(probably intentionally)

Nith a thin veneer of caliche. The eff ected area apparently
was limited to that area on or near the filled ·· in excavations.
Little or no trace of t his strat i graphic feature was found
east of Feature S.
The succeeding events are les s clearly separable, suggesting rt; lative contemporaneity ..

Thes e ir.:.clv.rle the <::on-

struction of Features 3J 4, and S. Features 3 and 4 are
clearly later that the caliche veneer as each i s dug through
it . Feature 2, the smal l pi t, was also dug th'.i:ough the
caliche veneer~ but it is considered not to be a major disturbance and no further 3ttention will be given to it.

17

Figure 5, Bf C illustrates f.hat what has been termed
the caliche veneer appears to extend over the top of Feature
5. This would suggest that the destruction of whatever was
on the brick foundation, possibly the Central Tire Store,
predated the caliche veneer and therefore features 3 and 4.
However the relationship of these features to one another is
such as to suggest they were a unit. A possible alternative
is that Feature 3, the water line, is later than both features
4 and 5 and that spoils from the excavation for this feature
were strewn over Feature 5. This possibility is somewhat
negated as no "spoils" were found ldthin the confines of the
Feature 4 ~rench which abuts Feature~.
It is clear that Feature 4 did succeed the latter components of Feature 6 as it definitely cuts through the caliche
wall (Feat. 6.2) and goes over the red brick structure. That
i t wa s not a part of the structure that probably rested on
t he red brick feature is also indicated by the fill which
consi s t;.; of dirt, bricks. and limestone rocks, all of which
are f ound above the red brick structure (Fig. 7, E). Feature
~ al s o c ut through part of the east acequia . wall.
Traces of
t he wa ll are visible on both sides of the trench (Fig. 4).
:

.

"

That Features 4 and 5 are contemporaneous and are part
of a single unit is strongly suggested by the fact that the
sewe1· line e nds in close proximity to the foundation and
there is no evidence that it ever went beyond the wall. In
addition t he fragments of the commode found in the vicinity
add further evidence of t he suspected relationship.

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE EXCAVATIONS

Despite the f act that a large potential source of informat i on has been neglected in the analysis (i.e., the portable
artifacts) there are positive statemants about the signifi"
cance of the excavations that can be made. That there was a
feature of some historica l interest (the acequia) has been
demonstrated. That there were later structures is not considered especially important as they offer nothing toward
explicating the role of the Alamo in Texas history. The
later structures are, of course, worthy of ncte in that their
presence has affected the preservation of earlier cultural
features.
18

,.
The location of a portion of the acequia in this area
should not be surprising as its presence has been known (in
general terms) from noting its presence on maps and from
other historical documents. However, subsequent to the
landfill project (an event which can now be given only a
relative date) the actual pinpointing of remains of the
original structure had not been accomplished on the Alamo
grounds until the archeological excavations of 1970. In
conjunction with the location and identification of the
acequia the conjecture has been made tha t a series of shallow
t renches might be the remains of some ki nd of associated
irrigation network. If this be true . the& it can be claimed
that we have recognized and isolated a use-specific area,
i.e., agricultural fields. That this is a possibility is
s upported somewhat by the location of the area of investigat i on to the original Alamo settlement plan (F i g. 1, inset).
Tha t the a re a investigated is away from the original complex
i s j of cou r se , not conclusive in itself. But the proximity
tu the ac e qu i a and the possible interpretation presented for
t he sha llow d itches adds some credence to the hypothesis
tha t the area was utilized for agriculture.
Regard l ess of whether the above hypothes i s is correct,
the location of a remnant early architectural feature does
enhance the i nterpretive story of the Alamo. That the segment
of the acequ i a exposed cannot be exploited is unfortunate
since the l i br a ry wi ng h:;.s fllready been completed. However
there is a rP al po ssibilityr even a pr obabili t y, that a
~onnecting se gment of the acequia is sti l l intact.
The
exnecLed area of occurrence is between the nor t hern most
ex~osurc cf the acequia wall in the excavation (N40/W55)
and the loc2~ ion of the modern acequia ( i n rea l ity a long,
narrow goldfi s h pond) behind the Alamo chapel . Depending
en the nort hward extent of the red brick structure of Feature
6 it is poss~ ble that both sides of the acequia are preserved
in this area . It is unlikely, however , that a long section
of the ea st wall is still undamaged as the ang l e at which it
a ppears t o be converging with Feat ure 5 is such that one would
c:xp ect that only about: a 10 foot s e gment rema i ns intact.
It is felt that the interpretive potential of t he original acequia {even if only fragmentary) is such as to warrent
excavation and preservation with the i dea of p r esenting an
open air display with apropriate interpretive devices to aid
in presenting a more comprehensive his t ory to t he many Alamo
visitors.

19

REFERENCES CITED
Lief:> Alfred
1965
~Close-~ of _closures.
91ass Container
turers Institute, New YorK.

Manufa~­

Schuetz, Mardith K.
1970
Excavation of a Section of the Acequia Madre in
Bexar County, Texas. Tex!s Hi~torical ?urvei
Committee; Archeo:i.ogical ~£.!!No. 19", A:ustin .

..

.

~

20

