CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY
AND ASSESSMENT OF THE
EXTENDED KINGSVILLE DOME LEASE
Kleberg County, Texas

David G. Robinson

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
Technical Series 3
The University of Texas at Austin
1988

This page intentionally left blank.

CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT OF THE
EXTENDED KINGSVILLE DOME LEASE
Kleberg County, Texas

David G. Robinson

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
Technical Series 3

The University of Texas at Austin

1988

COLLEGE OF LIBERAL ARTS

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
Texas Archeologicai Research Laboratory-Sponsored Projects
lOJOOBurnetRoad·Austin . Texas 78758-4497· (512) 471-5980

A report submitted to:
URI, Inc.

In partial fulfillment of
a Professional Services Agreement
dated January 27, 1988

Principal Investigator: Solveig A. Turpin
Editor: Anne C. Kerr

ABSTRACT
During February and April 1988, the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin, conducted a cultural resource survey of the URI Kingsville Dome extended uranium lease in Kleberg County, Texas.
The county is part of the lower coastal cultural and geographic zone. An addition
to an original lease surveyed for cultural resources in 1983 by The University of
Texas at Austin, the extended lease covers about 1,929 acres and will become
part of a percolation method uranium mine. A cultural resource survey was required for compliance with the Texas Radiation Control Act as set forth by the
Bureau of Radiation Control and implemented by the Texas Department of Health.
The cultural resource survey was designed to meet these regulatory requirements
and to conform to criteria and guidelines set forth by the Texas Historical
Commission for intensive survey. The entire extended lease was intensively surveyed, and one site, 41KL77, was found. This, plus the lack of sites in the
extensive flat uplands away from the creeks, follows site-settlement expectations
for the region. These results are understandable due to the prospect's
predominant physiographic location away from the prehistoric settlement pattern
concentration on creek terraces, tidal flats, and bay shore ecozones. The location of site 41 KL77 near Jaboncillos Creek correlates well with this pattern.
Avoidance of 41 KL77 is feasible and is recommended as an alternative to limited
testing of the site deposits.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The hard work and cooperation of several individuals are responsible for the
successful outcome of this project. Mark Pelizza of URI and Craig Holmes of
Eggleston, Holmes and Associates provided effective management of the project.
The endeavor was directed and guided deftly by its principal investigator, Dr.
Solveig A. Turpin, Associate Director of Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin. Leland C. Bement accomplished the fieldwork
with skill and brought his acute observational powers to bear on matters of the
prospect's environment, especially its biota. Yorke Rowan and Bruce Albert assisted with the April fieldwork. Daniel G. Julien served ably as photographer and
as a patient instructor on the computer generation of Figure 1. A special thanks
goes to Monga's Mexican Restaurant, Riviera, Texas, for being there.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract .......................................................... iii
Acknowledgments ..................................................iv
List of Figures ..................................................... v
List of Tables ...................................................... v
Introduction ....................................................... 1
Environmental Background ........................................... 5
Cultural Background ................................................ 7
Field Procedures .................................................. 11
Results and Recommendations ...................................... 13
References Cited .................................................. 15

LIST OF FIGURES
1. Project location map ............................................vi
2. General environment of URI extended lease, and 41 KL77
and Jaboncillos Creek tidal flats ................................... 2

LIST OF TABLES
1. Previously recorded sites near the survey area ....................... 9

v

LEGEND
Gravel Pit
Area Surveyed

&£

Road
0

TEXAS

Figure 1. Project location map.

vi

----

1

2

3

5km

INTRODUCTION
At the request of Uranium Resources Inc. (URI) and their agents, Eggleston,
Holmes and Associates, the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL),
The University of Texas at Austin, conducted a cultural resource survey of the
Kingsville Dome Lease in Kleberg County, Texas (Fig. 1). Lying within the lower
coastal cultural and geographic region, the property currently is used for plowed
fields, cattle pastures and a producing oil field (Fig. 2). URI plans to develop this
property into a percolation method uranium mine. The survey plot is an extension
of the URI Kingsville Dome uranium lease (Nightengale 1983), and is located eight
miles southeast of Kingsville, Texas, and five miles east of the hamlet of Ricardo
in the San Fernando and Jaboncillos creek drainages. The original lease of 900
acres was surveyed for cultural resources in 1983 by the Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin (Nightengale 1983). During the 1983
survey, two sites, 41KL72 and 41KL73 were recorded, and 41KL73 was subsequently tested. The extended lease encompasses 1,929 acres and slightly
overlaps the primary lease to the southeast and south. The larger segment of the
extended lease stretches northwestward upslope onto the interfluve of the Santa
Gertrudis/Jaboncillos creek drainages. A detached, 500 acre portion of the extended lease on the south side of the original lease lies alongside the creek terrace
above Jaboncillos Creek.
The entire extended lease was surveyed intensively by TARL staff members
David G. Robinson, Solveig A. Turpin, Leland C. Bement, Yorke Rowan and Bruce
Albert in two periods, the first between February 3 and February 24, 1988, the
second between April 13 and 15, 1988. Solveig A. Turpin, Associate Director of
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin,
served as principal investigator of the project.
The objectives of this survey, formulated in accordance with Texas Historical
Commission guidelines, were to:
1) locate and describe any prehistoric or historic cultural resources which
might exist within the study area;
2) evaluate the cultural resources for archeological and historical significance and potential for National Register eligibility;
3) recommend to the sponsor means to avoid or lessen any disturbance or
destruction of the identified cultural resources; and
4) recommend further cultural resource evaluations and interpretations
beyond those feasible for this study.
The survey was conducted in compliance with standards set by the Texas
Department of Health, Bureau of Radiation Control, and its regulatory Guide 1.1,

1

2 I KINGSVILLE DOME

Figure 2. General environment of URI extended lease (top); and 41 KL77, with
shovel probe in progress, and Jaboncillos Creek tidal flats in the background
(bottom).

INTRODUCTION I 3

Part 1, Section E. The research conformed to the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966 and its implementing regulations (36CFR800) and to criteria and
guidelines for intens~ve survey set forth by the Texas Historical Commission.
Professional standards formulated by the Council of Texas Archeologists and endorsed by the Texas Historical Commission were adhered to in all phases of this
project.

This page intentionally left blank.

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
The environmental, prehistoric and historic background of the immediate
study area has been described in detail by Nightengale (1983:1-6). That level of
detail is not duplicated here; instead, background topics are summarized and the
reader is referred to the work mentioned above for more information.
Geology and Climate

Kleberg County and the extended lease lie in Fenneman's (1938) Outer West
Gulf Coastal Plain physiographic province. The plain is formed of southeast-dipping Tertiary and Quaternary formations striking in arcs generally parallel to the
coast. The province's topography is flat to gently rolling under the erosive forces
of stream action and wind. This landscape is interrupted by a series of low-relief,
inland-facing scarps paralleling the major formations, and by clay dunes and shallow surface depressions which are sculpted by eolian deposition and erosion. The
project area lies on an area of clayey and silty loams overlying the Pleistocene
Beaumont formation. The county caliche pit is located immediately northwest of
the extended lease and exposes a layer of indurated caliche more than six meters
thick. A 50-cm-thick soil horizon has developed over the caliche. On the URI
lease, backhoe trenches recently excavated for caliche exploration exposed strata
similar to those noted in the caliche pit.
On the survey plot, irregular patches of sand and clay observed in the fields
are remnant dunes now plowed level with the surrounding fields. The prevailing
clayey soils show wide cracks which indicate high shrink-swell potential. This feature of the region's geology and eolian processes of deposition and erosion
influence cultural sites both by the downward displacement of artifacts and features and by exposing and distributing them (Fenneman 1938; Barnes 1975; Caran
1988, personal communication).
The most significant feature of the region's climate is the wind which blows
strongly from the southeast, off the Gulf, for ten months and from the north for two
months in the winter. The relatively high rainfall and prevailing warm temperatures
result in a high evapotranspiration rate which accelerates caliche formation. The
average temperature ranges from 48° F in January to 96° F in July (Johnston
1955:31; Dallas Morning News 1980-1981:139).

5

6 I KINGSVILLE DOME

Flora and Fauna

The region lies within Gould's (1975:2) Gulf Prairie floral zone. Vegetational
climax here would be long grass prairie, but intensive grazing in the past has
promoted the dominance of brushy species. Uncultivated land is in brush, variously dominated by mesquite, prickly pear, and several species of acacia.
Subdominants include white brush, black brush, hackberry, ash, various cacti,
succulents and grasses. Motts of oak and other trees grow in the flat uplands,
and trees line stream courses inland from the tidal flats along the creeks. Mesquite
prairies, favorable for browse, were noted historically (Inglis 1964:40).
Animals of the Tamaulipan Biotic province (Blair 1950:102-105) find rich
habitats in the undisturbed areas of the region. Sixty-one species of mammals are
listed, including badger, gray fox, coyote, cottontail rabbit, jackrabbit, opossum,
raccoon, armadillo and spotted and striped skunk. The province has 36 species
of snakes. Furthermore, the area is in a major migratory flyway for waterfowl and
other migratory birds. The coast, its wetlands and inland grassy and brushy
zones, combine to provide numerous habitats for birds, so counts of bird species
and populations are high. A sighting of whooping cranes was made during the
fieldwork. The variety of available habitats, especially fresh, brackish and
saltwater aquatic ecozones, has given rise to an abundance of invertebrate life. A
colony of hermit crabs was noted on the survey, several members of which had
been impaled on barbed wire by shrikes or other crabmeat-eating birds. The mammals, reptiles, birds and invertebrates, such as crustaceans and shellfish, were
probable food sources for the prehistoric people and should be kept in mind in
considerations of prehistoric subsistence economy.

CULTURAL BACKGROUND
The cultural-historical sequence of the South Texas Coast and Kleberg
County has been divided into four principal periods: the Paleoindian period (ca.
12,000 to 6,000 B.c.), the Archaic period (6,000 s.c. to A.O. 700), the Late Prehistoric period (A.O. 700 to A.O. 1528) and the Historic period (AD. 1528 to the present).
These periods have been defined on the basis of subsistence strategies, artifacts
and geographic associations. The Historic period, additionally, is defined by the
keeping of written records.
The Paleoindian period began with the arrival of North America's first human
inhabitants, who spread rapidly to all regions of the continent. These people practiced non-specialized gathering strategies and the hunting of Pleistocene
megafauna such as mammoth and mastodon (Hester 1976b: 3-4). Major timediagnostic Paleoindian artifacts are stone tools, notably Clovis, Folsom,
Scottsbluff, Plainview, Meserve and San Patrice projectile point types.
By 6,000 B.C., subsistence strategies had become regionalized and were
based on diversified hunting and gathering, thus defining the Archaic period. In
South Texas, two major Archaic specializations are recognized, an inland savanna and a coastal maritime adaptation. Archaic period traits include several
diagnostic lithic assemblages and cultural features such as hearths, burials, pits,
middens, and burned rock concentrations (Hester 1971 :5, 1976a, 1980).
The Archaic ended about A.O. 700 with the beginning of the Late Prehistoric
period, defined by technological innovations applied to continuing Archaic subsistence strategies. Principally, these innovations were the adoption of the bow and
arrow and the use of pottery. Late Prehistoric pottery in South Texas was a bonetempered plainware.
Significant to Late Prehistoric settlement patterns are the region's clay dunes,
in which Late Prehistoric artifacts and sites (as well as some Archaic materials)
are found embedded. These features doubtlessly offered elevation above flooding and favored game observation. Clay dune sites have been recorded near
creek banks, tidal flats and bay shores; these locations would have placed the
prehistoric people in proximity to the habitats of mammal, bird, fish, crustacean
and molluscan food sources. The ubiquitous shallow surface depressions would
have held potable rainwater. Similar settlement pattern features are recorded in
the coastal zone southward to the mouth of the Rio Grande (Campbell 1960; Price
and Kornicker 1961 :247; Mallouf, Baskin and Killen 1977; Day, Day and Prewitt
1981).

7

8 I KINGSVILLE DOME

The Historic period began in A.O. 1528 with Cabeza de Vaca's transit of South
Texas. Indians of the Coahuiltecan linguistic group, with numerous separate languages, lived in the region and were divided into hundreds of discrete bands
(Campbell 1983). They had a semi-nomadic way of life persisting from the Archaic
and Late Prehistoric periods, inhabiting temporary villages usually located near
streams, and employing hunting and gathering subsistence strategies. They were
patrilineal and patrilocal, with inheritance through the male line. Their society was
egalitarian, in which social status was earned, not inherited. Due to the disruptive
forces unleashed by European contact, the south coastal region was cleared of
its aboriginal population by 1850 (Campbell 1960: 150; Lynn, Fox and O' Malley
1977:Table 3).
The later and modern history of Kleberg County almost entirely concerns the
development of the giant King Ranch on a Spanish land grant to Richard King and
Mifflin Kenedy. This history is dealt with in detail in Nightengale (1983:6) and is
not repeated here.
Seventy-six archeological sites are recorded currently in Kleberg County
(TARL files). Of these, 15 are found in the vicinity of the URI extended lease along
Santa Gertrudis and San Fernando creeks. Five of these sites belong to Late
Prehistoric complexes. Six sites have both Late Prehistoric and Archaic components, two have a single Archaic component each, and two sites have not been
attributed to a time period or cultural complex. Table 1 summarizes the recorded
information about these sites.
The two sites recorded on the original URI lease, 41 KL72 and 41 KL73
(Nightengale 1983:7-11), are both artifact scatters which may have been camping
sites. Shovel probes dug during the survey on 41 KL72 did not recover artifacts
below the surface. On the surface there were burned clay lumps, lithic flakes, core
fragments, an Olmos biface, a unifacial end scraper, and one dart point blade fragment, indicating a Late Archaic or Late Prehistoric occupation. Test excavations
at 41 KL73 showed the site to be larger than 41KL72, and to have both surficial and
buried artifacts, albeit no deeper than five centimeters. The shallow site depth is
probably due entirely to modern plowing. The artifacts recovered were two triangular dart points, one projectile point base, one biface tip, a bone fragment, a
piece of sandstone, and a fragment of worked oyster shell, which suggest an
Archaic or Late Prehistoric date for the site. Other cultural debris found included
burned clay lumps and stone flaking debris.

CULTURAL BACKGROUND I 9

TABLE 1
PREVIOUSLY RECORDED SITES NEAR THE SURVEY AREA
Site Number

Period

41KL25

Late Prehistoric

41KL26

Late Prehistoric

41KL27

Late Prehistoric

41KL29

Late Prehistoric

41KL30

Archaic/
Late Prehistoric

41KL35

Late Prehistoric
Toyah phase
Archaic/
Late Prehistoric
Archaic/
Late Prehistoric
Archaic
unknown
Early Archaic
unknown
Archaic
Aransas Focus/
Late Prehistoric
Archaic/
Late Prehistoric
Archaic/
Late Prehistoric

41KL36
41KL40
41 KL41
41KLSO
41 KL51
41KL68
41KL69

41KL72
41KL73

Setting

Type

Record

creek terrace/
tidal flats
creek terrace/
tidal flats
creek terrace/
tidal flats
creek terrace/
tidal flats
creek terrace/
tidal flats/
clay dunes
creek terrace

camp

Arnold 1941

camp

Arnold 1941

camp

Arnold 1941

shell
midden/camp
shell
midden/camp
burials
camp

Hester 1967

creek terrace/
tidal flats
creek terrace

camp

Hester 1967

camp

Hester 1968a

creek terrace
lower slopes
creek terrace
creek terrace
creek terrace/
tidal flats

camp
camp
undefined
burial
camp

Hester 1968a
Hester 1968b
Tate n.d.
Shuman 1976
Shuman 1976

creek terrace/
tidal flats
upland flats

camp

Nightengale 1983

camp

Nightengale 1983

Hester 1967

Hester 1967

This page intentionally left blank.

FIELD PROCEDURES
The cultural resource inventory of the URI Kingsville extended lease was accomplished in February and April, 1988 by an intensive pedestrian transect survey
of the project area. The fieldworkers walked the lease at spacing appropriate to
ground visibility and the degree of surface modification and displacement exemplified by the modern homesteads, cattle husbandry stations, and oil well
pumping installations. In no instance did spacing exceed 30 meters. Exceptionally dense ground cover and high site probability zones - notably an intermittent
stream drainage flowing through the lease and the creek terrace of Jaboncillos
Creek- received closer coverage. The entire prospect was surveyed by these
procedures.
Potential sites and finds were recorded fully, following Council of Texas
Archeologists (CTA) guidelines, using State of Texas Archeological Site Data
forms; USGS map plottings; photographs of finds and site environments; and scale
drawings of sites. All records are curated at Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin. Copies of all written records are
filed with the Texas Historical Commission, Austin, Texas.

11

This page intentionally left blank.

RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The intensive survey of the URI Kingsville Dome extended lease found only
one prehistoric site, 41 KL77, within its nearly 2,000 acre area, which is described
and evaluated below. This result was surprising considering the generally excellent ground observation conditions afforded by plowed fields which usually make
site discovery easy. Thin scatters of historic material such as glass, china, wire
and sheet metal were observed in widely dispersed areas, but examination of the
objects showed them all to belong to the modern era and of no historical significance. Further, these debris scatters were found invariably near modern roads,
cattle stations, oil well pumping installations, and the occupied homesteads
adjacent to the lease. Modern habitations in the vicinity of the prospect are either
new brick ranch-style homes or older frame houses, the latter usually moved onto
their sites and heavily renovated and refitted for their current occupation. The
study area has been utilized historically as farm and range land, with modern occupation beginning in the last three decades.
Prehistoric occupation of the clay dune interfluves, remote from potable
water, would not be expected given the proximity to more favorable habitats along
the nearby creeks and bays. Furthermore, the geology and soils of the interfluves
are not conducive to the burial of sites beyond the downward displacement of artifacts from shrink and swell. Intensive agricultural use of the area has leveled the
clay dunes, so if cultural material had ever been deposited on the lease, it would
have been visible over a dispersed area. The obvious conclusion is that the upland
prospect environment offered few attractions to the prehistoric inhabitants of the
coastal plain. The distribution of other recorded sites in the vicinity of the study
area clearly gives evidence of the prehistoric preference for more favorable high
resource density areas along the nearby watercourses (Table 1). The location of
41 KL77 on the creek terrace edge overlooking the tidal flats of Jaboncillos Creek
supports and accentuates this settlement pattern.
41KL77

The site is an artifact scatter with at least one remaining partially buried clay
pavement hearth. The site setting is a creek terrace, situated above the tidal flats
of Jaboncillos Creek immediately east of its confluence with an intermittent stream
(Fig. 2b). This location is therefore near periodic fresh and brackish aquatic
ecozones and accompanying riparian floral growth. The site was identified by a
very light surface scatter of burned clay balls, burned rock, and chert flaking
debris. The density of material ranged from zero to three items per m2 . A higher
density area (1-5 items/m 2) was observed on the southwestern side of the site.
Eroding from the terrace cutbank on the edge of this higher density area, about

13
- -

---------

----~-------

14 I KINGSVILLE DOME

20 cm below the modern ground surface, was a fired clay pavement hearth,
originally about two meters in diameter.
Other prehistoric materials on the site included a few pieces of mussel shell,
a stone core fragment, and a second chert core which may have been a
polyhedral, or flake production core. This item suggests a Late Prehistoric date
for the site, as does the medial fragment of a thin and otherwise very crude arrow
point. Two nondiagnostic utilized flakes and an unfinished biface fragment were
also found. The site also yielded a small Olmos biface, which is considered diagnostic of the Transitional Archaic (Turner and Hester 1985:223). From these
artifacts and the observed feature, the site was probably a domestic campsite occupied at various times from the Transitional Archaic into Late Prehistoric times.
Modern disturbance to the site affects its significance and qualifies recommendations for further cultural resource management. Much of the low-density
area inland from the terrace edge has been plowed, and a terrace edge fence runs
through both the low and high-density areas. Further, a modern trash dump has
been superimposed on the high-density area on the south and southwest edges
of the site, with garbage deposited on and spilling over the terrace edge into the
creek bottom below. Natural erosion and slumping is at work on the terrace cutbank, and perhaps 40% of the in situ hearth has been removed by these
processes. Probably no more than 15% of the entire site remains intact, most of
this within the high-density area. Portions of the site actually lying within the URI
lease are in the low-density scatter which has been repeatedly plowed. If any subsurface features ever existed in this zone, they would probably be thoroughly
destroyed by now.
Summary

In view of the completion of the mandated cultural resource survey and the
lack of any identified cultural resources in the main permit area, it is recommended
that the proposed development of the extended lease proceed as planned. The
one recorded site, 41 KL77, is on the outer perimeter of the lease with only
peripheral cultural material included in the permit area. Avoidance of this site is
feasible and is recommended. If later development infringes on 41 KL77, limited
testing of the site deposits along Jaboncillos Creek should be conducted to determine the site's potential to meet the criteria for National Register of Historic Places
eligibility. In addition, if any artifacts, sites or other cultural residues are exposed
in the permit area during construction of the mine, the appropriate agencies should
be notified for additional review and cultural resource management.

REFERENCES CITED
Arnold, G. E.
Report of Archaeological Reconnaissance, South Texas Area,
1941
Brazoria, Matagorda, Kleberg Counties, March, 1941.
Unpublished manuscript on file at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Barnes, Virgil H.
1975
Geologic Atlas of Texas: Corpus Christi Sheet. Bureau of
Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
2(1):93-117.

The Texas Journal of Science.

Campbell, Thomas N.
1960
Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas
Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 29: 145-175.
1983

The Coahuiltecans and Their Neighbors. In The Southwest, edited
by A. Ortiz, pp.343-358. Handbook of North American Indians, vol.
10, William G. Sturtevant, general editor. Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C.

Garan, S. Christopher
1988
Staff consultant at Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of
Texas at Austin. Personal interview.
Dallas Morning News
1980Texas Almanac. Belo Corporation. Dallas.
1981
Day, D. William, Jane Laurens Day and Elton R. Prewitt
1981
Cultural Resources Surveys and Assessments in Portions of
Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations 15,
Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Austin.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938
Physiography of Eastern United States. McGraw-Hill, New York.

15

16 I KINGSVILLE DOME

Gould, Frank W.
1975
The Grasses of Texas.
Station.

Texas A&M University Press.

College

Hester, Thomas A.
1967
A Preliminary Statement on an Archeological Survey of Kleberg and
Kenedy Counties, Texas. Unpublished manuscript on file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas
at Austin.
1968a

University of Texas at Austin Site Survey Form. On file in County
Site Records, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

1968b

Notes on file in County Site Records, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

1971

Hunters of the Rio Grande Plain and the Lower Coast of Texas.
Paper presented at the 74th Annual Meeting, Texas Academy of
Science. Nacogdoches, Texas.

1976a

The Archaic of Southern Texas. In The Texas Archaic: A
Symposium, edited by Thomas R. Hester. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio,
Special Report 2.

1976b

Hunters and Gatherers of the Rio Grande Plain and the Lower Coast
of Texas. Paper issued by the Center for Archaeological Research.
The University of Texas at San Antonio.

1980

Digging into South Texas Prehistory. Corona Publishing Co. San
Antonio.

Inglis, Jack M.
1964
A History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain. Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department Bulletin 45. Austin.
Johnston, M.C.
1955
Vegetation of the Eolian Plain and Associated Coastal Features of
Southern Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of
Botany, The University of Texas at Austin.
Lynn, Warren M., Daniel E. Fox and Nancy O'Malley
1977
Cultural Resource Survey of Choke Canyon Reservoir, Live Oak
and McMullen Counties, Texas. Archeological SuNey Report 20,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

REFERENCES CITED I 17

Mallouf, Robert J., Barbara J. Baskin, and Kay L. Killen
1977
A Predictive Assessment of Cultural Resources in Hildalgo and
Willacy Counties, Texas. Archeological SuNey Report 23, Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.
Nightengale, Bruce A.
1983
A Cultural Resource Assessment of the URI Lease, Kleberg County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Technical Bulletin 71. The
University of Texas at Austin.
Price, W. Armstrong and LS. Kornicker
1961
Marine and Lagoonal Deposits in Clay Dunes, Gulf Coast, Texas.
Journal of Sedimentary Petrology 31 (2): 245-255.
Shuman, M. K.
1976
Texas A&I University Archaeological Survey site forms. On file in
County Site Records, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Tate, R.
n.d.

Notes on file in County Site Records, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Turner, Sue Ellen and Thomas R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly
Press. Austin.

