EXCAVATIONS AT ARENOSA SHELTER, 1965-66

David S. Dibble

with an appendix by Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr.

Originally published by the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, The University of Texas at Austin
August, 1967

Submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas, in accordance with the
terms of Memorandum of Agreement 14-10-0333-1530.

Funding for the reprint of this report was provided by the
Texas Utilities company in honor of David S. Dibble. As
Texas Utilities company developed its energy resources, Dave
became our mentor, counsel, and friend who taught us to
recognize and appreciate archeological resources.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author would like to acknowledge the efforts of the men
who, for varying periods of time, worked hard and well at Arenosa
Shelter. The list includes: Harold L. Beall, Glen S. Green, Bill
R. Harrison, J. David Ing, Mark L. Parsons, and Ronald W. Ralph
of the regular T.A.S.P. staff. Also, local residents of the area
who assisted in the excavation are: Salome Cantu, Cosme Hinojosa,
Florencio Hinojosa, and John L. Johnson, all of Comstock, Texas,
and Reyes Magallanes of Langtry, Texas. I would also like to
express appreciation to Mr. Martin King of Comstock who gave us
permission to excavate on his property and patiently cooperated
with us in many other ways.
The preliminary analysis of the massive lithic collection from
this site was aided by Harold E. Lieck of Austin, Texas. Vaughn M.
Bryant, Jr. and Harry J. Shafer of the T.A.S.P. staff assisted in
the preparation of illustrations for this report.
A special note of thanks is offered to J. Richard Ambler,
Executive Director of the T.A.S.P., who generally oversaw the
excavation and effectively provided all necessary support.

iii

This page intentionally left blank.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION . .

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

The Area

I

I

I

I

1
1

THE SITE .

5

General Description

5

Excavation Procedures and Techniques

8

The Cultural and Natural Stratigraphy .

14

Radiocarbon Dating

29

THE ARTIFACTS

31

Lithic

31

Chipped Stone

31

Ground and Pecked Stone

56

Miscellaneous Lithic .

62

Perishable Artifacts

63

Worked Bone

63

Miscellaneous Worked Antler

64

Shell

65
65

Note on the Fauna! Remains
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

71

REFERENCES CITED . . . .

75

APPENDIX I: Preliminary Pollen Analysis of Arenosa
Shelter by Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr.
. ..... .

77

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure No.
1

View of lower Pecos River Canyon . . . . . .

3

2

View of portion of site area before start of
excavation . . . . .
. . . . . . . .

7

v

3

Backhoe/front loader in process of widening
and deepening erosional gulley . . . . . .

7

4

View of crew in process of trimming walls

11

s

Crew making initial natural level excavation
in outer portion of terrace . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

View of main excavation area from the left
bank of the Pecos River
..... .

13

7

View to north of central area of excavation

17

8

Evidence of heavy erosional activity found in
the central area of excavation . . . . . . . . . . .

19

View of portion of downstream (west) area of
excavation . . . . . . . . . . .

21

View of downstream (westj portion of site
illustrating relationship of deposits to the
roof of the shelter . . . . . . . . . .

2S

11

Mortar in situ near the base of Stratum 9

2S

12

Feature 4 hearth

2S

13

Measured profile at upstream (east) end of
main excavation area . . . . . . . . . . .

27

14

Examples of arrow points .

33

lS

Ensor and Frio points

37

16

Marcos and Marcos-like points

39

17

Shumla points

41

18

Montell points .

43

19

Montell point variants .

47

20

Shumla-like points .

49

21

Langtry points . . .

Sl

22

Miscellaneous lanceolates and Pandale points

S3

23

Val Verde and "Early Barbed" points

SS

24

Examples of handstones . . .

59

6

9

10

vi

25

Examples of mortars and grinding slabs

61

26

Examples of bone tools .

67

27

Miscellaneous ornamental artifacts .

69

28

Idealized, composite profile . . . .

73

LIST OF TABLES
Table No.
1

Vertical distribution of major _artifact
·classes
•

•

•

•

•

e

•

•

vii

•

•

•

•

•

•

I

•

I

I

I

I

I

I

70

This page intentionally left blank.

FOREWORD
On June 1, 1965, Dave Dibble and I visited site 41VV99 for the first time
since John Allen Graham and William A. (Bill) Davis recorded it in the spring of
1958.
It had been described as a 150-feet or more long stratified terrace site
on the west bank of the Pecos River between U.S. Highway 90 and the mouth of the
river.
The spring of 1965 was somewhat wet by Lower Pecos standards (the deadly
Sanderson flood occurred on June 10th), and the vegetation was relatively lush.
We poked around the site for an hour or so trying to get a better handle on site
size and the nature of the materials exposed in the small gully near the center.
In the process, Dave asked me to scramble up the head of the gully and
crawl through the dense brush (with due diligence for rattlesnakes) to measure
the distance to the canyon wall. Much to my surprise, I crawled into a low
alcove that was not visible from the front of the terrace. The curvature of the
overhang suggested there might be a moderate-sized alcove buried at the back of
the terrace. Both of us were favorably impressed with the stratigraphic
potential offered by the site, and we concurred with Graham and Davis's
recommendation that the site should be excavated.
Dave revisited Arenosa Shelter (as it was later named for the sandy nature
of the upper sediments) with his bride Anne in July while I was testing sites
41VV88 and 41VV90 a mile or two upstream. His original opinion of the site's
importance was reinforced, and we resolved to put it next on the list of sites
to be excavated, postponing a third season of work at the Devil's Mouth site
(41VV188) . We spent several evenings at Comstock planning the initial testing
strategy we would use when the fall excavation season started.
Unfortunately for me, President Lyndon Johnson had other plans-I was
drafted into the U.S. Army in August for a two-year tour of duty. Dave preceded
with the excavations in October 1965 as described in this preliminary report.
Major surprises included the size of the shelter, which doubled the width (and
volume) of the site, and the discovery of a huge roof spall (dubbed "Big Mother
Rock"), which effectively protected cultural and natural deposits from being
washed away by the periodic floods experienced along the Pecos River.
Dave led a second season of excavations at Arenosa Shelter from June 26
through September 26, 1967. Work was concentrated in the center of the shelter
behind "Big Mother Rock." The central block excavation was enlarged toward the
rear wall of the shelter in an attempt to find the bottom of the huge roof spall
or to determine if the spall formed the effective floor of the shelter. By the
time the lip along the rear edge of the spall was defined, the season was
drawing to a close and there was room to dig only a 5-feet by 10-feet grid
north-south unit behind the spall. This test unit revealed stratified deposits
extending underneath the giant rock. They contained early Archaic projectile
point forms, and bison bones (cf. Bison antiquus) were found in some of the
lower strata.
A week after my release from the Army, I was back in Comstock and volunteered work on the Arenosa crew for a week or so until I had to return to Austin
for fall classes at The University of Texas.
The field season ended with Dave
fretting over the fact that he still had not found the floor of the shelter and
that the sample of materials from under and behind "Big Mother Rock" was so
limited.
With major efforts being directed toward other sites such as Devil's
Mouth, Parida Cave (41VV187), and Conejo Shelter (41VV162), and with Dave
ix

enrolled in graduate school at Washington State University, there was little
support left for continuing the work at Arenosa. He managed to wrangle one
month of fieldwork with a small crew for the 1968 season. The goal was to open
an east-west line of 5-feet by 5-feet units north of the 5-feet by 5-feet unit
dug in 1967 in order to get a larger sample of the early materials behind and
under "Big Mother Rock."
To accomplish this, it was necessary to remove about 12 or 15 horizontal
feet of unexcavated fill from top to bottom along the rear wall of the 1967
excavations (see Figure 7 of this report for an earlier version of this wall) ,
but Dave did not want to breach the deposits by cutting all the way to the rear
wall of the shelter.
I was dispatched to Comstock a few days ahead of time with
a backhoe and operator ("Uncle" Harold L. Beall) and a small crew to undertake
the chore of moving "Dibble's Hypotenuse." It was gut-wrenching to take a
backhoe to such a beautifully stratified section of deposits and dump them into
the Pecos River, but by the time Dave arrived, the rear wall profile was
straight, clean, and beautiful again-it was simply 15 feet closer to the rear
wall of the shelter.
The line of 5-feet (east-west) by 7-feet (north-south) units was dug
rapidly to sample the lower deposits. As time ran out, the bottom of the units
were stopped at a series of large slabs of rock tightly wedged together at a
depth of about 42 feet below original ground surface. Very sparse charcoal
flecks or stains and little else in the way of cultural materials was noted in
the last 1 foot or so of excavations. We were not sure we were on the floor of
the shelter; I found a gap between two of the slabs large enough to get my hand
and trowel through and found a last charcoal fleck.
We never made it to the
floor of the shelter.
Interestingly, the deepest projectile point we found
looked sort of like an overgrown Perdiz point although the size was clearly that
of a dart point. Dave, volunteer Dessamae Lorrain, and I spent an extra 3 or 4
days making a final measured profile drawing of the entire wall of the central
excavation block. That ended the fieldwork.
Many people have spent countless hours processing and analyzing the
materials and data recovered from Arenosa.
For example, Michael B. Collins
wrote a dissertation on the lithic debris, and Christopher Jurgens is currently
writing a dissertation on the faunal remains. Thomas Patton wrote a thesis on
the sedimentary history of the site on the basis of soil monoliths collected
during excavations; he found the October 1954 flood on the lower Pecos River was
a one in over 10,000-year event.
Dave never completed a final report of the excavations at Arenosa. Shortly
after his return from graduate studies at WSU, he was named Assistant Director
of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, and when Frank W. Eddy resigned in
late 1970, Dave was named Acting Director. He became Director in 1973 after
receiving his Ph.D. Dave was a consummate "dirt archeologist." Those of us who
worked with him in the field were constantly struck by his ability to "read" the
dirt, and this trait was admirably demonstrated at Arenosa. Dave's death in
December 1993 ended an era of Lower Pecos archeology.
I am pleased that Texas
Utilities Service Company has funded this reprinting of the preliminary Arenosa
report. Dave would shuffle his feet, cock his head, and say the report is not
good enough to deserve this fresh attention, that it is too far out of date and
all effort should go toward reporting the subsequent seasons. But, we never did
agree on everything anyway.
Elton R. Prewitt
June 11, 1997

x

INTRODUCTION
The report to follow will briefly describe the findings of
archeological excavations at Arenosa Shelter (41 VV 99), a deep
and well stratified site investigated during the 1965-66 field
season in the Amistad Reservoir area, Val Verde County, Texas.
Archeological salvage activities on the U.S. side of the area to
be flooded by this reservoir have been carried out since 1958 by
the Texas Archeological Salvage Project (T.A.S.P.) of The University of Texas, under a series of contracts with the National Park
Service.
At this writing, preparations for further excavation at this
site are already being made. As this will undoubtedly result in
significant changes in our current understanding and interpretation
of the site, this report is intended as a progress summary of what
was accomplished during the first season.
Excavation at this site required the bulk of the time and
resources available for the 1965-66 season. In addition to this
work, four other smaller and much less informative sites were
tested (41 VV 88, 90, 347, and 348) and small scale surveys were
carried out--all in the area of the lower Pecos River drainage.
Results of these investigations have been previously reported
(Dibble and Prewitt, 1967). Excavations at Arenosa Shelter extended from October 13, 1965 to February 3, 1966. Over this
period the crew averaged eight men; the work was supervised in
the field by the author.
The Area
Arenosa Shelter is situated near the right (here north)
bank of the Pecos River approximately three-quarters of a mile
upstream from the Pecos-Rio Grande confluence. At this point
the river is entrenched in a canyon about 350 ft. in depth (Fig.
1), Bordering the floodplain (which averages some 600 ft. in
total width) are steep, at times nearly vertical, cliffs which
rise to the level of the surrounding plateau. The canyon has
been cut into the Georgetown formation, a Cretaceous limestone
of the Commanche series.
Typical of this general region, the surrounding uplands
have little or no soil mantle and are characterized by a sparse
vegetative cover dominated by thorny, drought-resistant species.
The floodplain of the Pecos, however, has relatively wide bands
(as much as 400 ft. wide in the immediate area) of deep, finegrained alluvial sediments which support a luxuriant and distinctly different vegetation. Common species here include
1

Fig. 1. View of lower Pecos River Canyon from bluff overlooking Pecos-Rio Grande confluence. Arrow points to location of
Arenosa Shelter.

2

Bermuda grass (Cynodon dact~lon), the common reed (Phragmites
communis), giant reed (Arun o donax), castor bean (R1c1nus
commun1s), mesquite (Prosot1s), salt cedar (Tamarix gallica), and
willow (Salix). Most oft e above are of recent introduction.
No sizeable trees are currently growing in this portion of the
lower Pecos Canyon but, according to local informants, were present
previous to a huge flash flood which occurred in the canyon in
1954.

In both upstream and downstream directions from the immediate site area the terraced alluvial deposits are, on the inside
of meanders of the Pecos, relatively broad and flat (Fig. 1).
Exposures of this alluvium show that they are comprised of alternating layers of sands and silts which have accumulated during
periodic rises in the river level. They are d'istinctly terraced
with at least two major "benches" represented. The upper bench,
which is fronted in most areas by a steep cutbank, was measured
in the area of the site at 57 ft. above the normal elevation of
the river; the lower bench about 25 ft. below this. As a result
of excavations at Arenosa Shelter it is clear that deposition
of these sediments, even on the upper bench, has occurred
sporadically at intervals over the past several thousand years-extending, in fact, to recent times. Thus, it is possible that
archeological investigations at this site might contribute some
data pertinent to the understanding of late geological events in
the lower Pecos drainage.

4

-~-

--~--------------

THE SITE
Arenosa Shelter was first recorded in 1958 during the initial
survey of the Amistad (then "Diablo") Reservoir carried out by
John A. Graham and William A. Davis (1958). The site was revisited
by the author in July of 1965 during an evaluative survey of the
area. Both visits led to conclusions that the site showed excellent potential for intensive excavation and, as a result, work
was planned here as part of the field season commencing in
September of 1965.
General Description
On discovery, stratified cultural materials at the site were
exposed in the near-vertical face of a 15. ft. high cutbank, developed along the front (the riverward side) of the upper bench
of alluvium wh1ch was banked against the foot of the right wall
of the canyon (Figs. 2 and 6). Well separated bands of burned
limestone spall, shell, bone, and other cultural debris were
clearly visible in this cutbank as well as in the walls of a short
gulley which headed at the dripline of a slightly overhanging
limestone ledge at the top of the terrace (Fig. 2). This overhang which upon excavation proved to form the ceiling of a sizeable
shelter had been virtually or, in places, completely buried by
recent flood deposits of the Pecos River. Because of the heavy
vegetative cover (primarily mesquite and castor bean) the extent
of the cultural remains were underestimated and much was not
visible until the site area had been cleared.
The top of the upper bench was somewhat irregular due to
runoff from the steep rocky slope immediately above and, probably,
from wind shifting of the uppermost alluvium. Even before excavation it was obvious that considerable slumpage had occurred
along the outer borders of the upper bench and, on the downstream
side of the erosional gulley, a major displacement of the bench
had occurred. The top of the terrace rests at an elevation of
approximately 1,092 ft. above sea level (57 ft. above the normal
river elevation of 1,035 ft.), well below the expected flood pool
limits of the Amistad Reservoir (1,145 ft.). Extensive work at
this site is thus partly prompted by the fact that it will be
completely flooded.
The vertical and horizontal extent of the site is not yet
known. Observation of the cutbank fronting the site indicates
that cultural debris, though concentrated in the area of the 196566 excavations, extends about 270 ft. in the upstream-downstream
di rec ti on. The rear wal 1 of tlie shelter, exposed in a single cut,
5

Fig. 2. View of portion of site area before start of excavation. Crewman is standing at mouth of erosional gulley
(mostly hidden here by mesquite) which heads at front of buried
shelter.

Fig. 3. Backhoe-front loader in process of widening and
deepening erosional gulley. Crewman at top right is standing
near dripline of shelter. Natural cutbank of upper terrace
bench is just beyond machine.

6

is about 120 ft. from the right bank of the Pecos River. Erosive
action of the river which had created the cutbank in front has
undoubtedly destroyed much of the site situated nearest the river.
Excavation demonstrated that cultural materials occurred in place
for a distance of at least 45 ft. toward the river from the exposed portion of the rear wall of the shelter. Upstream from
the area of excavation the upper bench of the terrace is considerably wider, but the horizontal extent of the cultural debris
cannot be estimated with any accuracy. The maximum depth of the
natural and cultural deposits was 31 ft. This depth was achieved
in a limited area near the upstream end of our excavation (Fig.
13). This, I am certain, is not the bottom of the site; attempts
at finding the basal deposits will be one of the main aims of
further excavation here.
Excavation Procedures and Techniques
Prior to excavation a contour map of the site was made with
the use of a telescopic alidade. Because of the benched, highly
irregular nature of the alluvial deposits and the slightly overhanging limestone ledge this proved to be a long and tedious task.
The central area of the site (that showing the heaviest concentration of occupational debris in the cutbank profiles) was
recorded on a small scale map. Additionally, the entire area of
visible cultural material was mapped on a larger scale in four
slightly overlapping sections.
After clearing the area of woody vegetation, excavation in
the upper bench was commenced by deepening and widening the
previously described erosional gulley to about the dripline of
the overhanging ledge (Figs. 2 and 3). An additional 12 ft.
wide cut was made, parallel to the first, 20 ft. west (downstream)
in an area where a major slump had occurred in the deposits, Most
of this work was accomplished with a Massey-Ferguson backhoe/
front loader. A single quadrant grid system was then applied
to the site and the faces of the machine cuts and the intersecting natural cutbank were trimmed by hart~ to conform to
measured grid lines (Fig. 4). Completion of these initial cuts
allowed, with a minimal loss of undisturbed fill, a preview of
what proved to be the upper and middle sequence of cultural
deposits. More importantly; the three-face view of the depositional sequence made it possible to dig confidently in natural
rather than arbitrary units.
Controlled excavation was begun in the above described
block (Fig. S); subsequent attention was directed at digging
(again with prime reliance on a natural level technique) a rectangular block of deposits to the east and north of the initial
backhoe cut. This major area of excavation measured 30 ft. in
length and averaged (from an irregular cutbank in front) about
8

20 ft. in depth (Fig. 7), Work in this area was handicapped by a
huge limestone spall which appears to have fallen from the ledge
above.
Northward from this quadrangle a 10 ft. wide cut was made
to the rear wall of the shelter (Fig. 13)" Additionally, a 4 ft. by
12 ft. pit was dug near the upstream end of the excavated area.
This was a rapid test made just prior to leaving the site and intended to locate the base of the deposits.
Excavation here was
halted when another face of the large roof spall was struck.
As mentioned, horizontal control was maintained by the use of
a grid system. Axes of this grid were established for convenience
with the "north-south" line oriented so as to run as perpendicular
as possible to the trend of the cliff line.
Thus grid north was
approximately 30° west of magnetic north.
Excavation was based largely upon 10 ft, or 5 ft. squares but
a few rectangular excavation units were also utilized for special
purposes.
In all cases units were identified by grid lines intersecting in the southeast corner. Measurements were based on an
arbitrary datum point located well south and east of any possible
area of excavation--thus all measurements fell within a single
quadrant.
Elevations were arbitrary and based upon a bench mark scored
on the limestone ledge. An elevation of 100 ft. was established
for this point.
Secondary bench marks were established later on
the upper face of a large limestone spall uncovered at the front
of the site and on the ceiling of the shelter.
At the start of excavation it was suspected that the alluvium
would not retain high, vertical walls. However, it soon became
obvious that the occasional bands of dense silt functioned to
strengthen the deposit and allowed cuts to a maximum depth of 31
ft. (Fig. 13). The walls were sloped out slightly to reduce the
stress but otherwise no compromises of continuous vertical exposures were necessary.
As noted, excavation was based on natural level 11 peeling"
techniques,
This approach proved feasible over most of the
excavated area because of the unusually distinct nature of the
strata, both natural and cultural, and the intersecting faces
created by the preliminary machine-aided exploratory cuts.
Occasionally it was necessary to cut narrow trenches around the
unexposed edges of excavation units to make certain that the limits
of a given stratum were not exceeded.
This resulted in "strata
blocks 11 which were then peeled from all sides,
Some of the thicker
visually homogeneous cultural strata (such as Strata 5 and 9)
were arbitrarily subdivided into 1 'cuts", These equal depth cuts
were measured along at least two profile faces so as to correspond
to the slope of the individual stratum.
It was felt that this
method could best approximate the sequence of deposition.
9

Fig. 4. View of crew in process of trimming walls of enlarged
gulley (right) and face of natural cutbank along front of upper
terrace bench, Opening of additional cut into site (Backhoe
Cut No. 2) is visible at far left in photo,

Fig. 5. Crew making initial natural level excavation in
outer portion of terrace. Here~ excavation has proceeded to
the top of Stratum 9.

10

Fig. 6. View of main excavation area from the left bank
of the Pecos River. The maximum extent of the 1966 excavations
are shown in this photo.

12

Special problems of fill processing were created by the fact
that it was not possible to set up screens on the narrow upper bench
of the terrace. After some experimentation it was fouhd that our
skillful backhoe operator could raise the bucket of his machine
high enough to accept fill directly from the shovelers working on
this bench, turn around, and shake the fill on the screens set up
on the low bench. Backdirt was then scooped up from underneath
the screen with the same bucket and dumped in to the Pecos (Fig. 6).
This highly efficient and remarkably gentle method allowed us to
process at least 50% more deposit than would otherwise have been
possible.
The very productive cultural deposits necessitated some degree
of selectivity in collecting. All obvious artifacts were saved,
most of the identifiable bone fragments, and large samplings of
the shell from all layers. Conscious efforts were made to be as
uniform as possible so as to minimize skewing of the sample,
Collections from the site also included pollen samples (see
Appendix I for preliminary analysis), soil samples for mechanical
and chemical analysis, and large bags of unscreened fill from all
definable layers,
Notes were taken in duplicate on standard T.A.S.P. data forms.
These notes, plus all maps, sket~hes, negatives~and transparencies
are currently on file at the T.A.S.P. office, Balcones Research
Center, Austin, Texas. After final analysis, all collections will
be permanently housed at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
Balcones Research Center.
The Cultural and Natural Stratigraphy
The origin of the deposits at Arenosa Shelter is largely from
overbank flooding of the Pecos River. From their position with
respect to natural alluvial terrace remnants on both sides of the
present floodplain (Fig. 1), it is obvious that the sediments owe
their character and considerable height to rises in the river level
during periods of heavy runoff. Since the site is situated just
three-quarters of a mile from the Pecos-Rio Grande confluence,
minor rises in the level of the Rio Grande can result in innundation of the lower Pecos floodplain as well. The local area is
thus subject to the effects of flooding along both drainages.
Although a large amount of stratified cultural debris is contained within the matrix of the alluvium (Fig. 7), the addition of
this material to the natural accumulations has not resulted in any
discernible humping or mounding in the site area--the top of the
deposits here being approximately equal in elevation to culturally
sterile or nearly sterile alluvial benches upstream and downstream
from the site.
14

No gravels were encountered. Most natural deposits not
subsequently modified by human agency can be described as fine
grained silts to medium-fine grained sands and, with few exceptions, are assumed to have been deposited during low velocity
flooding of the site. A few strata (for example, Stratum 6) did
show some indication of being eolian in origin--very possibly windshifted alluvial sediments from the immediate area. Most of the
cultural-bearing strata were very rocky (Figs. 8 and 9) and most
of this material appears to have been purposefully brought to the
site. Evidence of rock inclusion from natural processes such as
exfoliation of the bedrock was minimal except in the deposits
situated directly under the overhang.
The lower deposits (that is, Stratum 23a and below) were
represented only in the extreme upstream end of the excavations
where they had apparently been partially protected from erosion
by the huge limestone spall present in front of the shelter (Fig.
7). These strata consisted of relatively thin (usually less than
1.0 ft. in thickness) bandings of burned rock, shell, and other
cultural debris. They were bedded horizontally or sloped slightly
toward the rear of the shelter and were separated by broad layers
of sterile, unstructured alluvial sand (Figs. 7 and 8). Westerly,
beyond the protection of the spall, the uppermost of these strata
(Strata 23a through 26) had been truncated by a distinct erosional
surface (Fig, 8). Subsequently, sediments and cultural debris
deposited on this slope gradually refilled this trough until, at
the top of Stratum 9, the deposits attained a relatively horizontal
east-west bedding over the entire excavated area (Fig. 7).
Horizontal bedding was present under the overhang only. Riverward
from the overhang all the middle deposits sloped~ownward (Fig.
10). The episode of severe erosion responsible for the truncation
of the lower deposits was not unique; other drainage channels and
erosional surfaces were noted in the upstream end of the excavated
area but they appeared to have resulted in no serious or widespread
disruption of the cultural or natural accretion of the fill which
continued into historic times.
The percentage of sterile alluvial deposits in the total
matrix definitely decreased in the middle and upper layers. The
explanation for this is not immediately evident, but quite possibly
it is simply a function of the increased height of the bench which
was, at that elevation, subject to only very high rises in the river
level. At first glance, profiles at this site (see, for example,
Fig. 13) suggest that early occupation of the site occurred less
continuously than in later times. Certainly, the occupational
layers are thinner and more widely spaced (vertically) in the lower
deposits, but this may be merely the result of more frequent and
active alluviation in the earlier period.
In general, the middle and upper cultural deposits were
thickest and most distinct in the downstream area of excavation
15

Fig. 7. View to north of central area of excavation, Huge
limestone spall (right foreground) was apparently responsible
for the survival of lower occupational strata (in profile beyond
spall).

16

Fig. 8. Evidence of heavy erosional activity found in the
central area of excavation. Horizontally bedded, alternating
layers of occupational debris and sterile alluvium (Strata 23a
through 26) were truncated here by an erosional surface,

18

Fig. 9. View of portion of
excavation. Thick, rocky midden
is Stratum 9. Note sterile silt
resulting from periodic flooding

20

downstream (west) area of
in the center of the profile
layers (lightest in color)
of the site.

(Fig. 7, left, and Fig. 9). In the upstream direction, most of the
strata thinned and became less easily separable. A few very difficult
problems of stratum identification were encountered in a cut to the
rear wall of the shelter and on the outer edge of the upper bench
where slumping and other erosive action had obviously occurred (Fig.
13). A considerable portion of the collections made in this area
were thus relegated to the general "no provenience" collection.
A detailed description of the characteristics of the complex
series of strata observed in this excavation is considered superflous
for purposes of this preliminary report. Additional excavation
will undoubtedly modify the stratigraphic picture to some extent.
The following description is intended to give a general idea of
the character, extent, and presently inferred,origin or archeological relevance of the major strata. Strata of limited areal
extent or of minor significance are not described. The sequence
is from top to bottom:
Stratum 1. A layer of unstructured, loosely compacted sand
formed the surface mantle in higher portions of the upper bench.
In most areas, this tan, humus-rich, sand was backed directly
against the roof of the shelter--completely burying the overhang
(Figs. 10 and 13). According to the landowner (Mr. Martin King
of Comstock, Texas) this deposit resulted from the massive flood
in 1954 which rose several feet above the site. Maximum observed
thickness of this sand was 4 ft.
Stratum 2. This light brown, semi-compacted sand included,
on its upper surface, the youngest cultural material found. Here,
late historic material (nails, cans, glass fragments, etc.) were
in association with a few flint chips and arrow points, Within
the stratum were numerous burned and unburned limestone spalls,
snail shells, and considerable artifacts. This stratum was
essentially horizontal and continuous over the higher portion of
the alluvial bench; outward from the shelter it had been truncated
by flooding or slumping (Fig. 13). Maximum thickness was slightly
over 2 ft.
Stratum 3. This layer was of loosely compacted light gray to
medium brown sand, In its darker color and higher percentage of
burned rock spall and mussel and snail shell it contrasted distinctly with the overriding Stratum 2. This layer yielded much
cultural material, was horizontally bedded, and was continuous
in higher portions of the deposits. Toward the rear of the
shelter several distinct lenses occurTed. Maximum observed thickness was 3, 2 ft, '
Stratum 4. Below Stratum 3 was a light-to-medium brown loosely
compacted sand containing some cultural material (primarily lithic
artifacts) but very few burned limestone spalls. The cutural
significance of this stratum is as yet uncertain; possibly the
22

associated materials represent intrusions from the overlying occupational surfaceso It was relatively thin (average: 0,5 of a ft.)
and formed a separation (though not continuous) between Strata 3
and S (Fig. 13).
Stratum 5. A strongly represented layer of light-to-dark
gray, loose sand containing a relatively high percentage of burned
limestone spall, shell, charcoal, ash, and artifacts was found
below Stratum 4. Fish and mammal bones are common. This relatively thick (maximum thickness: 2.8 ft.) stratum showed occasional areas of especially concentrated burned limestone spall but
could not be visually separated into discrete components for
purposes of excaiation.
Strata 6 and 6a. Stratum 6 consisted of a very loose, light
orange sand of apparent eolian origin (possibly localized blow
sand from alluvial deposits in floodplain). This thin (maximum
thickness: 1.1 ft.) layering of sand was situated within the
sheltered area. It did contain some charcoal and bits of shell,
but this material was localized in obvious rodent holes and hence
the stratum is considered sterile. Toward the dripline of the
shelter Stratum 6 merged with Stratum 6a, a light orange to tan
sand which is more compact and includes varve-like, graded laminae.
Probably these different characteristics are due to water periodically draining off the ledge above. The stratum increased in
thickness to about 1.5 ft. toward the front (the riverward side)
of the site.
Stratum 7. This stratum was an occupational layer of variable
thickness (ranging from 0.2 of a ft. to slightly over 1.0 ft.)
which extended over the entire area of excavation. Sandwiched
between sterile sands, this layer was (considering its relative
thinness) very productive of cultural material.
Stratum 8. Stratum 8 was a layer of reddish tan sand containing occasional charcoal flecks and, rarely, shell. These
inclusions appear to be intrusive from cultural layers above and
below. This layer was thickest at the front of the downstream
area of excavation (maximum thickness: 2,8 ft,), thinned under
the shelter overhang, and was pierced by Stratum 7 in the upstream
profile (Fig. 13).
Stratum 9. This layer was the thickest (maximum thickness:
5.3 ft.) cultural deposit thus far exposed at the site. This
stratum varied from light gray to dark gray-brown, was characterized by a very high percentage of burned limestone spall, and
included thin tongues of dense, sterile silt. This layer dipped
sharply downward toward the front and downstream end of the site
and the silt bands were largely restricted to these lower areas
(Fig. 9). Toward the shelter and in the upstream direction,
Stratum 9 thinned to a minimum of 0.3 of a ft. Aside from the
23

Fig. 10. View of downstream (west) portion of site
illustrating relationship of deposits to the roof of the shelter.
The uppermost stratum (Stratum 1) resulted from a massive flood
in 1954 which covered the site.

Fig. 11. Mortar with shallow
grinding basin shown here in situ
near the base of Stratum 9-.- -~-

24

Fig. 12. Feature 4, a
small slab-floored hearth
found associated with Stratum 7.

Fig. 13. Measured profile at upstream (east) end of main
excavation area. Profile shows maximum depth achieved and extent
of overhang in this area.

26

maiimum extent

Norl/J-Sou l/J Profile

-._of

olong

-

-

overho ng

approximate original
- - - - _surface before

- - - ...... _ __ e~cavation

23c

24

26

UNEXCAVATED

•

Sand

filled

Cultural

0

Sterile

B

Ash

fissure

deposits
deposits

lens

0

4
Scale

VMB

in

8
Feet

1966

sterile silt layers, this stratum appeared as a largely homogeneous
mass of rock spall, charcoal, ash, shell, bone, and artifacts. No
obvious layering, except for the natural breaks indicated by the
silt bands in the lower portions, were evident. It was continuous
throughout the excavated area.
Stratum 10. Below Stratum 9 was a culture-bearing stratum of
varying thickness {0.1 to 1.0 ft. +) of compacted to loose tan sand.
Lighter and less rocky than Stratum 9, it was separated from that
layer on the downstream side by a compact layer of sterile silt;
in the upstream portions the transition was less distinct.
Stratum 11. This deposit was one of the most discrete and
easily identified strata. In characteristics it closely resembled
Stratum 9 and, like Stratum 10, was sandwiched between sterile
silt bands in the lower areas of the downstream portion of the
site. It achieved a maximum observed thickness of 2.3 ft. but
averages about 1.0 ft.
Strata 12-18. These seven strata formed a series of often
discrete, very thin (sometimes less than 0.1 of a ft. in thickness)
layers alternating between sterile silt or sand (Strata 12, 13, 15,
and 17) and sand with cultural debris in association (Strata 14,
16, and 18). In the.downstream portion of the site these thin
layerings could be peeled as units; upstream they merged and
appeared to form a single stratum. As a series, these strata
appeared to represent the result of several periods of short-lived
occupancy interrupted by intervals of river flooding.
Stratum 19. A deposit of reddish tan (color somewhat variable)
relatively sterile sand is strongly represented over most areas
of the site. Except for a few thin lines or lenses of charcoal
staining no cultural material was found ~ssociated within the
matrix. This sand vari~s from relatively soft to compact and
grades into a dense silt (Stratum 20) at its base. In the upstream
(north-south) profile it is clear that this material represents
the fill of an old drainage channel which appears to have been
oriented parallel to the rear wall of the shelter, In this area
the channel has cut into a number of definable cultural strata
(Fig. 13). From this point this feature slopes sharply downward
and widens to form the lowest major stratum exposed by our excavation in the downstream area of the site. Based on present
stratigraphic evidence the erosional period represented by the
cutting of this channel and subsequent filling by the Stratum 19
sand appears to represent a time of relatively little or no human
occupancy of this area of the site. That a considerable span of
time is involved in these events is implied by two radiocarbon
dates, 490°!140 B"C. (Tx-311) and 2130°!"380 B.C. (Tx-287), which
roughly bracket this portion of the deposits (see "Radiocarbon
Dating" and Fig. 28J.

28

Strata 21-23. These were complex, medium to dark gray (often
mottled) culturally productive strata which were bedded on a slope
varying zoo to 30° downward in the downstream direction. These
deposits appeared to have been seriously affected by running water
and, where exposed by our excavations, probably represent redepositions from an original upstream locus. Stratum 23 was particularly jumbled in appearance and, at the same time, highly
productive of lithic artifacts. An adequate understanding of these
strata will depend on further exposure in the upstream direction.
Major Erosional Surface. Stratum 23 rested directly upon a
very distinct erosional surface which was found to truncate portions
of the lower cultural and natural strata, These low deposits,
encountered only in the extreme upstream end of our excavated
area, had apparently survived complete erosion because of the
protective effect of the heavy roof spall resting at the front of
the site (Figs. 7, 8, and 28). From field observations alone it
was not possible to determine if this erosive action had resulted
in complete destruction of any cultural deposits of pre-Stratum
23 age, Two dated radiocarbon samples (Tx-324 and Tx-312--see
"Radiocarbon Dating" and Fig. 28) which generally bracket this
interval vary only 690 years in terms of their central dates,
This relatively close correspondence suggests that the unconformity does not represent a very long time span"
Strata 23a-37. This block of alternating layers of sterile
flood deposits (unstructured sands and occasional silt laminae)
and relatively thin cultural strata have been referred to herein
as "the lower deposits". As noted above, these were exposed in a
relatively limited area toward the upstream end of the excavations.
Their thickness, bedding, and general character are illustrated in
Figs. 7, 8, and 13. Strata which are clearly the result of occupation are 23b, 23d, ZS (including components), 28, 30, 32, 34,
and 36. Essentially sterile (except for obviously intru~ive
material included in the fill of rodent holes) were Strata 23a,
23c, 24, 26, 27, 29, 31, ~2a, 33, 35, and 37. Excavation below layer
26 was limited to a rapid test made near the end of the field
season. This was done in an attempt to determine the vertical
extent of the deposits in at least one area of the site. Most of
this fill was screened as a unit and thus the provenience data of
materials recovered are unspecific (see Table 1) .
At the bottom of this test Strata 36 and 37 were found to
rest directly upon the downsloping face of the roof spall (Fig. 13).
It is assumed, but not definitely known, that yet deeper deposits
exist closer to the rear wall of the shelter.
Radiocarbon Dating
A series of eight samples, all charcoal, from Arenosa Shelter
have been dated by the Radiocarbon Dating Laboratory, The University
29

of Texas (Valastro, Pearson, and Davis, 1967). Listed in order of
increasing depth or relative stratigraphic position, the following
results were obtained (see also Fig. 28):
SamEle No,

Provenience

Date

Tx-284

1970±110 B.P.
(20 B.C.)

Feature 2 (a heartN found on
the surface of Stratum 7.

Tx-285

2070~140

Lower portion of Stratum 9.

Tx-286

2410:140 B.P.
(460 B.C.)

Charcoal concentration on
the surf~ce of Stratum 11.

Tx-311

2440:140 B.P.
(490 B.C.)

Middle to basal portion of
Stratum 11.

Tx-287

4080±380 B.P.
(2130 B.Co)

Charcoal concentration in the
upper portion of Stratum 23.

Tx-324

4100°!150 B.P.
(2150 B.C.)

Concentration of charcoal
in Stratum 23d.

Tx-312

4790°!140 B.P.
(2840 B.C.)

From base to top of
Stratum 25.

Tx-313

5360±170 B.P.
(3410 B.C.)

From various concentrations
found near the base of
Stratum 32 and slightly into
the underlying layer.

B.P.
(120 B.C.)

This series is in proper order with respect to the stratigraphic
position of the samples. These dates, as well as providing a skeletal chronology for the lower and middle portion of the known cultural
layers, add weight to field observations that no serious disruption
of the deposits (except for the unconformity created by erosion of
the lower layers and a possible hiatus directly above Stratum 21)
has occurred. At least the two independent lines of evidence
strongly suggest that the established relative sequence is sound.
Radiocarbon dates for the uppermost deposits (above Stratum 7)
and for the deepest (below Stratum 32) are still lacking. Charcoal was present in both but was so diffuse that attempts to
extract suitable samples were frustrated.
The present radiocarbon series, as well as having implications
for dating the approximate span of diagnostic artifact forms (for example, see Fig. 28) and associated cultural assemblages, could be
applied directly to certain geological problems such as alluviation
rates and the age of erosional periods in the lower Pecos River
drainage.
30

THE ARTIFACTS
The collection of artifacts from Arenosa Shelter was massive.
Unfortunately, however, the general openness of the site and its
susceptibility to periodic flooding were apparently responsible
for the almost total lack of certain perishable materials, such as
vegetal remains, which are usually found in abundance at drier
sites in this region. Somewhat surprisingly, bone (both worked
and detritus) was very common in the middle to upper deposits.
Mussel ahd snail shell proved to be common in all major cultural
strata. Worked shell items, however, were extremely rare.
Partially indicative of the intensive and long lasting occupation of Arenosa Shelter was the high productivity of lithic
items. Sampling of this material was liberal, to say the least,
but for practical reasons much of it had to be discarded.
The description of this collection which follows is admittedly
superficial, but hopefully will provide an indication of the variety
and nature of the collection and suggest this site's potential for
providing a stratigraphically well supported sequence of occupation
from early Archaic to historic times in the Amistad region. The
accent at this time will be on what have proved to be the most
diagnostic indicators of cultural change in this area--primarily
projectile points. For purposes of this interim report, some
classes of materials will not be considered at all (for example,
scraping tools, a huge assortment of crude to finely worked bifacial
implements including "blanks" and knives, utilized flakes, and
lithic debris).
The stratigraphic provenience of the following described
artifact categories are given in Table 1.
Lithic
Chipped Stone
ARROW POINTS
A total of 44 projectile points was found which, because of
their relatively small size and thinness, are classed here as arrow
points. Most numerous in this collection were those adhering
closely to the Perdiz type (Fig. 14, a-f)--followed in numerical
order by Toyah (Fig. 14, g-i), Cliffton (Fig. 14, k-m), Scallorn
(Fig. 14, n) and Harrell-like forms (Fig. 14, j). Basic descriptions of these types are found in Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 269, 275,
283, 285, and 291.
31

Fig. 14. Arrow points originating from Strata 2 and 3.
Examples shown resemble Perdiz (a-f), Toyah (g-i), Harrell (j),
Cliffton (k-rn), and Scallorn (n) types.
o is unclassified.

32

a

c

b

I

h

g

f

d

J

k
0

3 cm.

I

I

m

e

n

All of the above types were found to be heavily concentrated
in Stratum 2, the uppermost occupational layer. The general
rockiness of this stratum and the attendant possibility of postdepositional movement within the matrix allow little convincing
data on the relative age of the various arrow point types which
were included. A liberal admixture of late Archaic dart points
of the side-notched Ensor type with these arrow points is at least
suggestive of a degree of contemporaneity. Again, however, the
character of this stratum negates any concretely based assumptions.
DART POINTS
Beginning with the youngest, major classified Archaic dart
point types will be described in approximately their relative
stratigraphic. occurrence at the site.
Ensor (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 189)
Total:

211 (180 with specific provenience)

Remarks: Ensor points are the most numerous type recovered
from the site. In general, these triangular specimens are characterized by low, shallow side notches of highly variable width, bases
which are equal to or greater in width than the blade, and lateral
edges which are predominantly straight to slightly convex. Chipping
is comparatively crude, and the resulting flake scars are usually
broad and unpatterned. Blade edges ate often sinuous, and the points
are relatively thick in relation to overall size when compared to
other dart point types in this collection. An outstanding variation in the specimens placed here is in the form of the base which
varies from convex to straight to concave (Fig. 15, a-i). The
points were sorted on the basis of this attribute, but the resulting
distribution appears to have no chronological significance (Table l)o
These points were found to span several discrete occupational
strata--extending from the base of Stratum 9 upward to Stratum 2.
Frio (Suhm and Jelks, 1962. 195)
Total:

48 (40 with specific provenience)

Remarks: These side and basally-notched, triangular forms
(Fig. 15, j-q) were found well represented in Strata 5 through 9.
Except in the treatment of the base, these specimens are similar
in outline and in the character of the chipping to those classified
as Ensor.
Marcos (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 209)
Total:

35 (24 with specific provenience)
34

Remarks: These broad, triangular specimens have deep diagonal
notches and short, expanding stems. Bases vary from straight (Fig.
16, a-d) to convex (Fig. 16, e-k).
These specimens achieved their heaviest concentration in the
lower portion of Stratum 9.
Shumla (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 247)
Total:

63 (44 with specific provenience)

Remarks: These broad, triangular forms are characterized by
deep notches oriented perpendicular to, or at slight angles to,
the line of the base. Predominantly, bases are slightly rounded;
stems vary from expanding, parallel-sided, to contracting form;
and lateral edges are usually convex and often serrated. One of
the most uniform attributes of this grouping are the barbs which
commonly extend to the base and are usually incurving (Fig. 17).
These specimens do not form an easily defined or consistent
group. Examples of this "type" originated from the lower portions
of Stratum 9 and Stratum 10,
Montell (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 219)
Total:

106 (77 with specific provenience)

Remarks: This is a rather distinctive category--the majority
being broadly triangular in outline with short, slightly expanding
to parallel-sided stems and, most distinctive, deep U to v-shaped basal notches (Fig. 18). Considerable variation was
observed in this large collection (see Fig. 19), but all exhibited
the basal notch feature.
The limited stratigraphic range of this type is considered
remarkable; the great majority were found within Stratum 11 and in
the thin occupational surfaces immediately below, in Stratum 12-18.
Shumla-like
Total:

38 (20 with specific provenience)

Remarks: Many specimens included here were sorted out of an
originally more inclusive "Shumla" category. Compared with the group
herein labeled Shumla, these points are larger and lack the distinctive incurving barbs (Fig. 20). Similar specimens have often been
included with the Shumla type but they appear, at this stage of
analysis, to form a discrete morphological grouping with a demonstrably different stratigraphic distribution at the site (Table 1).
35

Fig, 15. Ensor (a-i) and Frio points (j-q). Examples of these
types were distributed in the upper deposits (Stratum 9 and above).

36

d

a

g

e

b

J

h
p

m

n

0

0

5cm.

I

I

Fig. 16. Marcos and Marcos-like points found concentrated
in the lower portions of Stratum 9 and in Stratum 10 ..

38

a

c

b

e

f
0
I

.
J

h

g
5cm
I
.

k

Fig. 17. Shumla points. Examples of this type were concentrated in the lower portion. of Stratum 9 and in Stratum 10.

40

a

e

J

n

b

c

d

f

g

h

m

k

0

5 cm.

I

I

0

Fig. 18. Montell points.
Strata 11 through 18.

This type heavily predominant in

42

a

b

e

.

k

J

0

5 cm.

I

I

Langtry (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 205)
Total:

69 (37 with specific provenience)

Remarks: With the exception of 21 specimens (listed on Table
1 as "Atypical"), these points fall within the range of variation
currently accepted for the type. Most points placed here exhibit
concave bases with slightly to distinctly contracting sterns (Fig.
21, a-j); others have pointed sterns (Fig. 21, k,l). All variations
included within this type were concentrated in Strata 21-23.
Val Verde (Schuetz, 1956: 141)
Total:

32 (19 with specific provenience)

Remarks: These thin, basically triangular points are very
similar in most features to specimens included under the Langtry
category, These finely executed artifacts differ mainly from the
latter in having expanding sterns (Fig. 23, a-j). Val Verde points
originated from Strata 21-23.
Almagre (Suhrn and Jelks, 1962: 161)
Total:

21 (14 with specific provenience)

Remarks: Almagre points are crudely chipped, broadly triangular
with contracting stems and convex bases. The general similarity
in outline of these specimens to the Langtry type and their close
stratigraphic association with Langtry at this site suggests:
1) that they are distinct types which can be considered at least
partly contemporaneous (that is, "distinct" in the minds of the
makers) or 2) the possibility that they are conceptually identical
to the Langtry type and represent indifferently executed specimens
or blanks. Specimens classed here as Almagre achieved a concentration in Strata 21-23.
Miscellaneous Unstemmed Lanceolates
Total:

16 (13 with specific provenience)

Remarks: These points are long, slender, relatively thickbodied forms with evenly lenticular cross sections. These are
unstemmed but from their size and shape appear to have functioned
as projectile points. One of these (Fig. 22, d) is bi-pointed-the remainder tend to have somewhat rounded bases and a maximum
width which occurs about one-third the distance from base to tip
(Fig. 22, a-c).

44

A concentration of these (7 specimens) in the relatively low
Stratum 23 is suggestive of a culturally significant clustering.
Others included with this grouping which occur higher in the
deposits do not appear to be separable from these on a morphological
basis.
Nolan (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 225)
Total:

6 (3 with specific provenience)

Remarks: These are very similar to the Pandale type (described
below) except they lack beveling of the blade edge.
Pandale (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 231)
Total:

32 (22 with specific provenience)

Remarks: Pandale points are distinctive, characterized by
lanceolate blades, slightly to distinctly indented stems which form
weakly developed shoulders and, most diagnostic, a propeller-like
twist to the point created by beveling of the stem edge in one
direction and the lateral edge of the blade in the opposite direction
(Fig. 22, e-m). Commonly the bases are unthinned and retain a
portion of the original cortex of the core.
Recognized by Johnson (1964) as being a horizon marker for
the early Archaic at the Devil's Mouth site, Pandale points also
originated low in the stratigraphic column at Arenosa Shelter
(Table 1).
"Early Barbed"
Total:

4

Remarks: This small collection of triangular, distinctly
barbed points originated from the rapid testing of the low deposits
at the site. Stylistically inconsistent (all are illustrated in
Fig. 23), they are grouped together here primarily because of their
stratigraphic occurrence rather than morphological similarity.
The label "Early Barbed" was first used by Johnson (1964) to identify a small collection of barbed points of widely varying character
originating from low deposits at the Devil's Mouth site. This term
is borrowed and used here to designate this tiny collection. One
of the specimens (Fig. 23, k) is vaguely reminiscent of an Early
Barbed point reported by Johnson (1964: Fig. 11, m); two others
(Fig. 23, m,n) are similar to those found in an early context at
Eagle Cave (Ross, 1965: 52-3; Fig. 12, m-o). Also, Prewitt (1966)
has reported what are unquestionably early--and barbed--points from
another site in the Amistad Reservoir, Devils Rockshelter. Due to
45

Fig, 19, Examples of Montell points illustrating the wide
range of variation encountered.

46

a

b

c

e

f

g

'

'!·
\,

h

'

\

-.,,_

1,

"I

'

"

0
I

5 cm.
I

Fig. 20.

Shumla-like points found concentrated in Stratum 23.

48

'

\

I

\

I

e

I

\

f

h

g

k
0
J

I

5 cm.
I

Fig. 21. Examples of dart points illustrating the range of
variation of specimens classed as Langtry. These were concentnkted
in Strata 21 and 23.

so

a

c

d

I

'

g

f

h

5
I

J

k

e

Fig. 22. Miscellaneous lanceolates (a-d) and Pandale (~-m)
points. The latter were strongly represented in Strata 23 through
25.

52

c

a

f

g

d

h

e

k

.
J

5 cm.

0

_l___j___L__,_I

LI

m

Fig. 23. Val Verde (a-j) and "Early Barbed" (k-n) points.
The former were restricted primarily to Strata 21 and 23; the
latter, a stylistically inconsistent group, to the lowest deposits
tested (Strata 28 through 36).

54

b

e

m

k
0
I

5 cm.
I

n

the smallness of the sample and imprecise stratigraphic placement,
A~chaic manufactures
with standard typological methods. Additional excavation of the
basal deposits at Arenosa Shelter may contribute data bearing on
this problem.
it remains difficult to deal with these early

Miscellaneous Unclassified Points and Unclassifiable Point Fragments
This large collection (436) includes several specimens which
do not fall within the defined range of variation of the major
types described above (for example, single notched points), are
unique in the collection, or, by far the most abundant, projectile
points which are too fragmentary to classify.· Additionally (and
not included in the above total) several hundred distal tips or midsections from points or knives were found.
DRILLS
A total of 35 (28 with specific provenience) specimens interpreted as representing drills or perforators were found. The largest
group (15) are characterized by narrow, parallel-sided to tapered
bits and bulbous bases. The remainder are simply thick flakes with
crudely chipped points at one end or fragmentary specimens.
Ground and Pecked Stone
Examples of ground and pecked stone artifacts, though of
limited variety, were represented in some degree from all major
occupational strata. A grand total of 305 specimens were collected.
HANDSTONES
Most predominant in this general category (126 out of 277
specimens) were oval water worn cobbles which had been worn on a
single face and bore little or no evidence of further modification
(Fig. 24, c). Many specimens, in fact, were included herein very
tentatively since the extent of human modification from the naturally worn cobble was questionable. Few, even of the well worn
examples, were shaped in any recognizable manner aside from the
development, to a highly variable extent, of a grinding surface.
A total of 81 specimens were bifacially ground. Most commonly
these ground faces were not parallel but oriented at slight angles,
a feature which eventually led, in a few cases, to a wedge-shaped
cross section (Fig. 24, b). Bifacially ground handstones varied
in section from wedge-shaped to bi-convex, plane-convex and subtriangular. In the latter case, two surfaces had been ground on a
single face and intersected near the center of one face of the
artifact.
56

Less common (12 examples) in this collection were specimens
which showed one or more ground edges--often in conjunction with
ground faces (Fig. 24, e),
Thirty-six artifacts included here exhibit, in addition to
unifacially or bifacially ground faces, shallow (usually less than
1.0 cm. in depth) pits situated near the center of one or both
faces (Fig. 24, d) .
Twenty-two handstones exhibited red staining, presumably
ochre, on at least one face or edge. Beyond much question, these
artifacts functioned in the grinding of pigment.
Obviously the above categories are not mutually exclusive
but will serve for the present to charact~rize the general nature
of these implements.
Except for a few specimens of vesicular basalt, material
represented appears to be locally obtainable, dense limestone.
MORTARS
Twenty-seven mortars were found widely distributed at the
site. These varied considerably in overall size and in the size
and shape of the pecked depressions (Fig. 25, a-c; Fig. 11). One
uncollected limestone spall (weighing over 200 pounds) found in
situ within Stratum 9 had 6 circular to elliptical mortar holes
pecked and ground into its upper surface.
In all cases, material was immediately available limestone
and, with a single exception which had been ground overall, were
unmodified, irregular-shaped spalls (Fig. 25, a) or naturally
rounded cobbles (Fig. 25, b,c).
A few elliptical shaped stones of dense limestone were re-

covered from the excavations which might have served as pestles in
conjunction with the above described mortars" None were found,
however, which showed unquestionable evidence of such use. It
is quite conceivable that wooden pestles might have been utilized.
GRINDING SLAB
A single flat, roughly shaped slab found associated with Stratum
2 has a shallow (maximum depth: 1.2 cm.) oval depression pecked and
ground on one face (Fig. 25, d).

57

Fig. 24. Examples of handstones from the site (oblique
views): bifacially ground (a,b); unifacially ground (c); ground
and pitted on one face (d); and ground along two intersecting
edges (e).

58

0

10

5

------

cm.

Fig. 25. Oblique views of mortar holes pecked into an
irregular limestone spall (a) and naturally rounded limestone
cobbles (b,c); d is a shallowly troughed grinding slab.

60

b
0ti__ _ _ _ __ 20I cm.

Miscellaneous Lithic
SCRATCHED PEBBLES
Common in most strata were water worn limestone pebbles,
usually elliptical in shape, which bear clusters of closely spaced
scratches near one or both ends. These striations are oriented
at varying angles to the edge (perpendicularly, obliquely, or
parallel). Additionally, several specimens exhibit battering
marks at their ends. In size, these artifacts average from 10
to 15 cm, in length. A total of 183 were found,
The function or functions of these implements is unknown, but
probably they served as hammerstones in percussion flaking of flint.
Similar specimens are reported from Amistad area sites by Epstein
(1963: 80), Johnson (1964: 72-73), and Dibble (1965: 65),
PAINTED PEBBLES
A large collection (84 with specific provenience) of flat,
water-worn limestone pebbles exhibit painted designs on one or
(rarely) both faces. These interesting specimens, a few of which
retained well preserved designs in black or red pigment, were
almost entirely restricted to the upper deposits (Table 1). The
lack of similar artifacts in the older deposits may be simply a
function of differential preservation. Many like pebbles were
collected from the lower strata which, quite probably, had lost all
visible traces of painting. Widely reported from sites of Archaic
age in the Amistad area (for example, Epstein, 1963; Ross, 1965;
Par&ons, 1965) the site and good stratigraphic context of this
collection should provide data for a soundly based stylistic/
seriational study.
Definitely painted specimens recovered here varied in length
(whole specimens only) from 4.5 to 24.0 cm. Designs varied greatly
from geometric, linear patterns to what appear to be highly abstracted, anthropomorphic representations.

INCISED PIPE FRAGMENTS
Two small pieces of soft limestone appear to be fragments of
tubular pipes. One, a fragment of the proximal end which has
broken longitudinally to expose about one-half of the central
channel. The latter has a maximum width of 1.6 cm.--probably
close to the maximum diameter" Maximum outside diameter is 3.9
cm., again probably close to the maximum on the whole specimen.
The remaining specimen is a small fragment of the bowl and includes
a portion of the rim. This rim is beveled sharply on the inner
surface. The specimen is so fragmentary that no reasonable estimate
of the original size is possible.
62

The first specimen has been decorated with closely spaced,
diagonally oriented line-s incised on the outer surface. The
second bears traces of scratches on the inner side--evidently
resulting from the hollowing out process rather than an atte~pt
at decoration.
SMOOTHED STONES WITH PARALLEL GROOVES
Two smoothed limestone pebbles (one fragmentary) exhibit
closely spaced (about 2 mm. apart), parallel grooves incised near
the center on one flat face. On the complete specimen these grooves
extend from one end of the pebble for 6.0 cm. and end in a rounded
pit 4 mm. in width and 3 mm. in depth. The grooves average 4 mm.
in width and depth and are V-shaped in cross section. The specimen
is 8.7 cm. in length, 2.8 cm. in width,and 1.3 cm, in maximum
thickness. The other specimen is part of a larger pebble which is
broken at one end. It shows almost identical parallel grooves
which end in a similar round pit.
An additional specimen, also fragmentary, is triangular in
cross section, has two parallel grooves similar to the above, and
indications of a shallow pit at the end of the grooves.
No suggestions as to the function of these curious artifacts
can now be offered.
UNIQUES
Unique specimens include a ground pendant of limestone with a
bifacially drilled hole near one end (Fig. 27, b) and a spherical
bead of water worn chert with a central perforation (Fig. 27, c),
Perishable Artifacts
Worked Bone
BEADS
Bone beads were common in the upper deposits (a total of 179
with specific provenience). Both decorated and undecorated specimens were found. Six beads originating from Strata 2 and 3 had
been decorated with evenly spaced, shallow grooves which encircle
the bone transversly (Fig. 27, d-f), and a shorter almost spherical
specimen was similarly decorated with a single groove (Fig. 27, g).
The great majority of bone beads were undecorated. These were
largely segments of the central shaft of long bones which had been
cut in varying lengths (Fig. 27, h-o),

63

In all cases the technique of manufacture
were scored transversly and then snapped off.
cut ends had subsequently been smoothed. Both
and small mammals were utilized. The range in
in Fig. 27.

was the same--they
In some cases the
the bones of birds
size is illustrated

AWLS
Twenty-six complete or nearly complete bone awls were found
with specific provenience. Many other fragments were recovered
but will not be considered here. Most (21) had been formed from
split fragments of long bones with the articular ends not present
or largely obliterated by grinding (Fig. 26, f-j). Two awls formed
from deer ulnae were found with the proximal ends largely intact
(Fig. 26, c,d). One had been made from a split and ground deep
phalanx (Fig. 26, e).
NEEDLES
Four examples of thin, narrow fragments of
well pointed tips and evidence of tight binding
opposite ends (Fig. 26, k,l). They are labeled
primarily on the basis of their size and shape;
modification of the basal ends is not known.

split bone exhibited
or grooving on the
here as "needles"
the reason for the

INCISED BONE FRAGMENTS
A total of 4 (2 with specific provenience) fragmentary pieces
of bone which exhibited incised cross-hatching near the edges of
one face were found (Fig. 27, p,q). Their fragmentary condition
allows no reasonable guess as to their function. Their form is
very similar to the flattened basal portion of some of the split
bone awls.
NOTCHED IMPLEMENTS
Two fragmentary specimens of split and ground bone were alike
in having a well-formed notch at one end (Fig. 26, a,b).
Miscellaneous Worked Antler
Six fragmentary specimens of deer antler tines were recovered.
Four of these show evidence of use and are assumed to represent
flint flaking tools.

64

Shell Bead
Surprisingly, the only unquestionable artifact of shell was a
discoidal shell bead with a centrally located perforation (Fig. 27,
a). It appears to be made of fresh water mussel. A few pieces
of mussei shell were found which had round holes in them, but it
could not be determined whether these had been intentionally
drilled or punched or whether they were fortuitous fractures,

Note on the Fauna! Remains
A very large collection of unworked fauna! remains was recovered from the site, Most numerous was shell, with fresh water
mussel and several species of snail being represented. Both mussel
and snail shell were found throughout the entire column although
the heaviest concentrations of each occurred in the upper and middle
deposits, Bone waste also proved to be common. Various species
of large and small mammals, fish, and reptiles are included in our
sample. Bone, however, quite clearly suffered from differential
preservation; very little of it was recovered from the older
deposits.
Although as yet unstudied, even in a cursory manner, this
large and culturally well associated collection greatly increases
the ultimate interpretive potential of the site.
No efforts were made in the field in sifting for microfaunal
remains. However, large bulk samples from every defined cultural
and natural stratum were saved in the hope that these would suffice
for this purpose.
To the knowledge of the writer, the only definitely human
skeletal remains found were two teeth.

65

Fig. 26. Examples of bone tools. Notched implements of split
bone (a,b ); awls from ulnae (c,d); pointed implement of split and
ground deer phalanx (e); split bone awls (f-j); and bone needles

(k,l).

66

b

e
a

d

f

c

0

2

3

4

CENTI ME.TE RS

g

h

l

J

k

5

Fig. 27. Miscellaneous ornamental artifacts. Discoidal
shell bead (a); perforated stone pendant (b); perforated stone
bead (c); incised bone beads (d-g); undecorated bone beads (~-o);
and fragmentary, incised bone artifacts (p,q).

68

c

a

d

h

e

f
f

.
J

b
k

m

01
----1---L__j_

p

q

n

5 cm.

_L__JI

g

Table 1.

Vertical distribution of major artifact classes.

....
E

E

..," ..,::l
...."' ......"'

.

""....."><
""....."><
E
... ... ~'
.... E ...

"u

....::l

""....."><

""....><"

,..,

u

........ .... .... ....
E
~
..,
00
....::l u" '1" u" 0 .... ....
< .... ....
.... .... ,.., ....
"' u ,..,"'
.;, .... ....
'
'
....
"' "' "'
E
E
E
E
E
E

.
.
"
. ..
.
...... .... .... .... ..... ..,.. ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ..... ...... ..... ......
...... ....... ......... ...."'. ....... ..... ..... ..... ...... ...... .... ....... ...... ...... ..... .... ..... ......
::l

::l

E

::l

I!
::l

E

::l

E

::l

E!

::l

E!

::l

E!

::l

::l

::l

"' "' "' "' "' "' "' "' "' "' "' "' "' "' "' "'
CHIPPED STONE
ARROW POINTS (various)
DART POINTS

35

0

N

I!

Vl

::l

::l

"' "'

::l

Ul

....::l

..."'...

E

..
...."' ....

....::l ...."'

"' "'

<J')

29 16
3

l

23
9
2
1

0

.. .....
"' .......
0

';"

.. ::l
"Ul

"' :::>u=..
::l

Ul

0

2
3

29
4
11
3

4
3
3
2

- 121

1
2
3
1
2

12
1
1 1 1
3 6 1
3 12 15
2 1 13

2
3

3

13 17
1

4
4

1
51 20

8

4
1
1

6

l

5 10
3 6
5 10
3 10

8

1

l
1
1

1

7
2
3

9

4

22 37 65 30
3 4 6 2

15

38
6

8
3

9

3 21
1

"
143
32

22
5
4

36

40
24
20
44
77

8
11
18
19
29

48
35
38
63
106

5

lb

16
11

32

13
7

21
32
21

3

16

3

3

6

22

10

32
4

4

13
1

z

27

13
3

Cl

;:i

32

11
16
10
19
14

5

,..,

<
....
0
....

44

43

4

Ensor

Straight Base
Concave Base
Convex Base
Frio
Marcos
Shumla- like
Shum la
Montell
Langtry
Pointed Stem
Contracting Stem
Atypical
Val Verde
Almagre
Misc. Unstemmed
Lanceolates
Nolan
Panda le
"Early Barbed"
Misc. Unclassified
and Unclassifiable
Fragments
DRILLS

.

"" "
u
.., .... .=
.... .... "'
':'

N

N

=
">

E

.;,

N

N

=
....."

""...."><

2 295 141 436
28
7
35
~

TOTAL
GROUND AND PECKED STONE
HANDSTONES
Uni face
Bi face
Edge-ground
Pitted
Ochre-stained
MORTARS
GRINDING SLAB
MISCELLANEOUS LITHIC
SCRATCHED PEBBLES
PAINTED PEBBLES
INCISED PIPE FRAGMENTS
SMOOTHED STONES WITH
GROOVES AND PITS
PERFORATED PENDANT
PERFORATED BEAD

13

4

5

l

5

1
1
2

1
1
1

15
6
1
3
5

l

26 20
3 2

2

4
3
1
1
1
2

1

10 21 17
6 6 10
1 1 3
1 9 7
7 1
2 7 3

1
4

3
5

2
3

2

2 108
3 65
9

18
16
3

126
81
12

33

3

36

20
26
1

2
1

22
27
1

1

TOTAL
15
4

21

- 13

10 18 14
7 5 6

3
30

6

""'!U'r
169
84
2

3

1

14
9

3
l

1
~

TOTAL
WORKED BONE
BEADS
Undecorated
Decorated
AWLS
Split Bone
Ulna
NEEDLES
INCISED BONE
NOTCHED IMPLEMENTS
MISC. WORKED ANTLER
SHELL BEAD

183
93
2

20

20

15 10 12

9

43 13

180
7

173
6

4

1
2

3
1

3
2
1

1

21
5
4
4
2
3

1

TOTAL

70

25
5

4
4
2
3

6

1

1

21'4"

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The 1965-66 excavations at Arenosa Shelter briefly summarized
in this report revealed an unusually deep and well defined sequence
of culturally productive deposits, The concentration of human
activity here was obviously related to favorable conditions presented by the shallow overhang situated near the river and perhaps
other factors of choice not now apparent, The relatively clear
zonation of the fill allowed excavation based on natural strata-thereby enhancing the interpretive value of the site. Primarily
responsible for the clarity of the stratigraphy are the overbank
flood deposits of the Pecos River. These ·floods have, at various
times, effectively sealed off layerings of contemporaneous cultural
debris. Evidence of erosional activity was also noted; for example,
one major erosional surface at the base of Stratum 23 truncating
some of the lower deposits and resulting in a clear uncomformity,
Most of the cultural strata, especially the upper deposits, appear
to have been little affected by erosion. Corroborative evidence
that no unanticipated breaks in the sequence, or serious reversal
of deposits, have occurred is provided by a series of eight radiocarbon dates (Fig. 28). These dates are all in proper relative
order with respect to their stratigraphic provenience.
In general, occupation of Arenosa Shelter appears to have
been relatively continuous with the possible exception of an interval between the deposition of Stratum 21 and Stratum 18--a
relatively thick block of deposits showing only minimal traces of
human activity at the site. It is possible, however, that cultural
material dating from this time was subsequently removed by erosion.
Otherwise, the alluvial sediments which commonly separate the visible
culture-bearing layers in the exposed stratigraphic column probably
represent rapidly laid down sediments which provide an illusion
of having resulted from long lasting spans of non-occupancy of the
shelter.
A preliminary analysis of the artifact collection from the
past season's excavation at this site indicates that the span of
occupancy here includes a neatly distributed sequence of projectile
point types which have been established by previous excavators as
being diagnostic of early to late phases of the Archaic period in
the Amistad region. Most comparable, in terms of both the general
agreement of the lithic artifact sequence and in the nature of
the physical stratigraphy, is the Devil's Mouth site (41 VV 188)
as reported by Johnson (1964). This site, located approximately
30 miles southeast of Arenosa Shelter at the confluence of the
Rio Grande and the Devils River, contained a well defined series
of cultural strata in an alluvial terrace remnant roughly similar
to that herein reported. Though less productive in the number and
71

Fig. 28. Idealized, composite profile of Arenosa Shelter.
This sketch shows relative vertical and strata provenience of
dated radiocarbon samples (Valastro, Pearson, and Davis, 1967),
the main sequence of cultural and sterile deposits, and the relative
vertical and stratigraphic provenience of major projectile point
styles.

72

VM B

3410! I 10 8.C.

2840+_ 140 8.C.

2150+..!50 8.C

2130:!-3808.c.

12-18

of

rocksheltu

,

..

-""

.,,,.;:;::---

""'

a

=i

f•

_g
~.

*

v

?Jc

C-14

dotes

run

D

~

:::::

of

.

stratum
University

Sterile

--

24

of

Texos

V"

lo/Jorotory

.'~·'i

~

A

Late Historic artifacts
this surface
·
,
Arrow Points ........ ,' ..ii. ..

Rodiocor/Jon

~!S: j:
<::

r

:::::::::::::-1

~
~ •>·:t'.'2''tJ0
~
···.·••''<<'':."/:~ 3··~;1'>:t>r•·~H·' .•;:aj

0

.---

Compos1!e Prof/le

~j_? '"\''!<)l';;;, ·~:\<;~.. 2 ~\'·fl

20:!: 1108.C. ~::::

(eslimote}

A.O. 500

C-14 ·dates and
approximate vertical
provenience*
.

Ceiling

/deo//zed,

1966

variety of artifacts and associated faunal remains than Arenosa
Shelter, the Devil's Mouth site contained an equally well stratified sequence of occupational deposits which extended over a longer
time span--including, in the basal gravels, a collection of PaleoIndian artifacts. Utilizing the results of this excavation,
Johnson (1964~ 92-99), on an admittedly arbitrary basis, set
up a scheme of historical ordering which, because of its simplicity,
clarity, and inter-site applicability has been widely used by subsequent workers in the Amistad region and surrounding areas.
Johnson used major projectile point types essentially as horizon
markers in dividing the Archaic into Early, Middle, and Late periods.
In. large, the Devil's Mouth sequence is upheld in general outline
at Arenosa--at least in the relative chronological positioning of
the major distinctive point types (cf., Johnson, 1964, Fig. 25 and
Fig. 28, this report). Also, Johnson's age estimates for the
duration of manufacture of these types, made without benefit of
radiocarbon dates, are remarkably close to the time spans which
can be inferred from the radiocarbon supported sequence at Arenosa
Shelter. Further excavation at the latter site and a complete
analysis of the results should, in conjunction with information
obtained at the Devil's Mouth site, provide a more refined cultural
chronology for the Amistad area than is presently available. Hopefully, such an analysis will result in the demonstration of
assemblages of contemporaneous traits based on empirical field data
rather than periodizations recognized chiefly or solely by the
occurrence of projectile point types.

74

REFERENCES CITED
Dibble, David S.
1965
Bonfire Shelter: A Stra~ified Bison Kill Site in the
Amistad Reservoir Area, Val Verde County, Texas.
Miscellaneous Papers, No. 5, Texas Archeological
Salvage Project.
Dibble, David S. and Elton R. Prewitt
1967
Survey and Test Excavations at Amistad Reservoir,
1964-65. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey
Reports, No. 3.
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1963
Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde
County, Texas, 1958. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33 (for 1962): 1-129.
Graham, John A. and William A. Davis
1958
Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Diablo
Reservoir, Val Verde County, Texas. Report prepared
by the Archeological Salvage Field Office, Austin,
Texas. U.S. National Park Service,
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1964
The Devil's Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at
Amistad Reservoir, Val Verde County, Texas. Archaeology
Series No. 6, Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas.
Parsons, Mark L,
1965
1963 Test Excavations at Fate Bell Shelter, Amistad
Reservoir, Val Verde County, Texas. Miscellaneous
Papers, No. 4, Texas Archeological Salvage Project.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1966
A Preliminary Report on the Devils Rockshelter Site,
Val Verde County, Texas. The Texas Journal of Science,
Vol. XVIII, No. 2: 206-224.
Ross, Richard E.
1965
The Archeology of Eagle Cave. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 7.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
1956
An Analysis of Val Verde Cave Material. Bulletin of
The Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27: 129-160.

75

Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks (editors)
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
1962
Texas Archeological Society Special Publication, No.
1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin, No. 4.
Valastro, S., Jr., F. J. Pearson, and E. Mott Davis
1967
University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates V, In Radiocarbon,
Vol. 9.

76

APPENDIX I
PRELIMINARY POLLEN ANALYSIS OF ARENOSA SHELTER
by
Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr.
The purpose of this report is to present a preliminary statement outlining the current status of Arenosa Shelter pollen studies.
This will be accomplished through a discussion of: 1) the collection of samples, 2) laboratory procedures, 3) results, 4) interpretation of data, and 5) plans for continued studies.
Materials and Method
On December 11, 1965 the author collected a series of 28
pollen samples from the river terrace portion of Arenosa Shelter.
These samples were designated as Series A.
In January, near the
end of the 1965-66 field season, a second series of 28 pollen
samples (Series B) was collected from the shelter portion of the
site. The provenience of these latter pollen samples is listed in
Table 1.
The fossil pollen samples of both Series A and Series B were
collected from cleaned vertical walls of the excavations pits.
Each sample was collected with a clean trowel and placed in an
uncontaminated polyethylene bag which was quickly sealed. The
bags were then labeled with both the archeological site number
and the sample's provenience before being placed in separate paper
bags for storage and later analysis.
Two modern soil samples were also collected at Arenosa Shelter.
On January 28, 1966,the author collected one modern sample on the
talus slope above the site and the other sample along the terrace
surface south of the site. Each sample consisted of 30-40 pinches
of surface dirt collected over an area of approximately 50 meters
square. The dirt from each sample was placed in a separate
polyethylene bag, sealed, and then shaken to insure a uniform
mixture before being stored for future analysis.
All laboratory work including the extraction, mounting, and
analysis of samples was conducted at The University of Texas
Palynology Laboratory located at the Brackenridge Field Laboratory.
The Palynology Laboratory is especially well suited for pollen
work since it is completely closed and operates with constant
positive atmospheric pressure to prevent unwanted pollen contaminants from entering while the laboratory doors are open. As an
added control, coated slides in the laboratory are periodically
checked·to determine the degree of atmospheric pollen contamination.
77

Table L

Sample
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

Provenience of Series B Soil Samples from Arenosa Shelter,
41 vv 99.
Type of Deposits

Stratum
2
2a
3
4
5
6
7
8
upper 9
lower 9
10
11
12
15-16
18
19
21
22b
23
27
28
29
1st cultural 30
1st non-cult. 30
2nd cultural 30
2nd non-cult. 30
3rd non-cult. 30
3rd cultural 30

cultural
cultural
cultural
cultural
cultural
non-cultural
cultural
non-cultural
cultural
cultural
cultural
cultural
non-cultural
cultural and
cultural
non-cultural
cultural
non-cultural
cultural
non-cultural
cultural
non-cultural
cultural
non-cultural
cultural
non-cultural
non-cultural
cultural

eolian
alluvium

alluvium
non-cultural

alluvium
alluvium
alluvium
alluvium
alluvium

Samples 1-16 were collected at coordinates W200/N108.
Samples 17-28 were collected along the NllO line under the
shelter portion of the site.

78

The extraction techniques used for processing the fossil pollen
samples of Series B were essentially the same as those used in the
analysis of soil deposits from the Devil's Mouth site (Bryant,
1966a). The procedure consists of five basic steps: 1) hydrochloric acid to remove carbonates, 2) hydrofluoric acid to remove
silicates, 3) acetylation to remove cellulose and other nonpolliniferous organic compounds, 4) 10% potassium hydroxide to
remove humic acids, and 5) zinc chloride heavy density separation
to remove any remaining extraneous materials.
After soil digestion, the concentrated pollen residue from
each sample was transferred to five milliliter shell vials containing a few drops of 2000 cs silicone oil and thoroughly mixed
with the oil to insure statistically accurate samples. When this
procedure was completed, portions of each sample were transferred
to one by three inch microscope slides, covered with number 1
cover slips, labeled, and permanently sealed.
Results
For the purposes of this study Samples 1-20 of Series B were
processed and analyzed (Fig. 1). The remaining eight pollen samples
in Series B (Samples 21-28), the two modern pollen samples, and
the pollen samples in Series A are currently being processed and
analyzed. Their results are not included in this preliminary study.
In sediments containing well preserved pollen one or two grams
of sediments will produce ample pollen for a standard analysis,
but the pollen preservation in the samples thus far examined from
Arenosa Shelter is poor. At least 150 grams of soil from each
sample was processed and in some samples (Samples 17-20) an additional 100 grams of soil were processed. A majority of the analyzed
pollen grains were either fractured or in a deteriorated condition
making accurate identification difficult.
A standard 200 grain count was reached in all but 7 of the
processed samples used in this study (Table 2). Microscopic
examination was done at 440 diameters and each identifiable whole
pollen grain was noted and recorded on tabular sheets. The only
exceptions were clusters of pollen grains containing more than
five grains. In such cases clusters were recorded as five grains.
In clusters containing less than five grains, each grain was
individually recorded. Fragments of recognizable pollen grain
types were also included in the standard counts. Each pollen
grain one-third of a grain or larger was counted as a single grain,
with the exception of pine grain fragments which were counted as onethird of a grain for each bladder and one-third of a_ grain for the
body. Smaller fragments were not recorded. Badly crushed and deteriorated grains beyond identification were excluded from the pollen
counts. Spores were also excluded from the pollen counts~
79

Fig. 1.

Pollen from Arenosa Shelter.

80

20

19

18

17

16

15

14

13

12

JI

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

SAMPLE No.
I

Less

Pollen

.,...."

c_,"

..

....."

.;c;,"

·~

.,<>

..,.
~

than
2%=•

,~°'"'

<>"

.

counts =200 per sample

~<:ii"'

<"
()

Pollen

0

No Pollen

No

~
~()

.." .,.
,.,
~
~

;;;~
b

sea I e

30

r.-;o.;.•·•····

"

.:.:::~

<:).

"

c::i""

r:;,b,

.

~""

0.:::..

.,.

.,".
~

(.,.::;.,

c_,"'

60%

Mixed

Non-cultural alluvium

§

deposit

deposit

.
"

'Jq,

.,
~\.

c_,""

[1]

Cultural

_[j'.l-1-1-1-P•-•-•-•-

f:a

.,

·~

.::····~---·-·---·---·-·-·-

c.,

vv 99

~ . c.,
~c.-, ~ ~ :.:::(:,
~ .::::' ~~ ~ -;;;" .::;,<:;:
c:."' CJ.. -.,"' ~ ~ <::i"'-

·~

~
(;)"'

Q."

~"'

b" c,,
~
~q, ~.::;., ~;;,"> ~q_
"-'""~ <i.' -.,"'

.

"..,"'"'

ARENOSA SHELTER 41

-----

DEPOSITS

<(,----

VMB

2130 8.C.

+--460 8.C.

---120 8.C.

+--20 8.C.

C-14 dotes

00
N

TOTAL

11
52
29

-

-

-

2
1

-

-

-

2

2
7
1

-

5
-

-

23
52
31

74

4

-

-

-

1

2
45
-

-

46
23
11
22
2

48

5

200 200 200 200 200

-

-

1

-

1
2

-

11
2
3
2

-

-

-

-

1

-

10

-

1

-

10

-

2
1
1

-

49
35
46
4
2

78
3

61
Ambrosieae
Artemesia
Long-spine
16
Compositae
Cheno-Ams
71
Gramineae
26
6
Pin us
3
Nyctaginaceae
5
Cyperaceae
3
Quercus
Juniperus
3
Malvaceae
Juglans
1
Pros op is
Opuntia
Malcura
Koeberlina
Onagraceae
Eph edra (nev.) Ephedra (torr.) 5
Agave
Cucurbita
Celtis
Ulmus

-

40
3

2

1

3

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2

-

3

2

12
-

-

2

-

-

3

-

11

-

-

-

28
12
23
2
-

5
1

-

-

5

-

6
2
2
7
35

-

12
23
56

46

10

-

3

4

-

38
-

1

36
19
32
8
8

51

11

Sam:ele

11 200 200 200 200 200

-

-

-

2

-

1

1
15

-

-

-

3

23
2
29
56
11

31
22
34
5
8

6

9

57 119

8

84

7

2

6

Arenosa Shelter Pollen Counts.

Pollen Type

Table 2.

1

42

-

-

-

-

-

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1

23

5

-

-

11

7

12
7
32
62
·2

38

16

4 200

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1
1
1
1

-

-

-

15

14

13

-

-

-

-

-

3

-

-

2
5
23
-

9

12

2

4

3

8
6

2

42
13
32
52
2

34

18

18

28

2

35
16
37
34
7

23

19

12 200 200

-

-

-

-

4

1

-

1
4
2

-

17

24

5
7

7

5

20

Many of the individual pollen spectra contained large percentages of Compositae grains. Chenopodiaceae and Amaranthaceae
pollen grains were the dominant types in other spectra (Fig. 1).
Second pollen counts excluding these three types are currently
being conducted for each of the spectra reported in this study.
Second pollen counts of 100-150 grains per sample will offer a
more nearly accurate evaluation of other pollen types presently
being obscured by the over-dominance of Compositae, Chenopodiaceae,
and Amaranthaceae pollen.
The Compositae pollen in this study was divided into three
major categories based upon their morphological differences:
1) Ambrosieae group characterized by pollen grains with spines of
2 microns or less, 2) Artemesis, and 3) ·Compositae types having
pollen grains with spines longer than 2 microns. Grains belonging
to the Liguliflorae group of the Compositaes are fenestrate and are
easily distinguished from the other Compositae types. However,
none of these grains have thus far been found in Arenosa Shelter
deposits.
Pollen grains belonging to the Chenopodiaceae and Amaranthaceae
families were combined into a single artificial group termed
Cheno-Ams since their pollen grains are so similar morphologically
that it is difficult to distinguish one type from another with a
light microscope (Martin, 1963).
The pine grains encountered in this study were compared
morphologically with pollen reference material from both diploxylon and haploxylon pines. Most of the fossil grains were
of the haploxylon group and were smaller than 50 microns in
length. The only known pines of the haploxylon group with pollen
grains smaller than 50 microns growing near the Amistad region
are Pinus cembroides and Pinus edilus (Little, 1966).
The fossil Malvaceae grains closely resemble pollen grains of
the genus Sphaeralcea. The fossil grains are echinate, triporate,
annulate, have a slit in the annulus, and range in size from 30-40
microns in diameter.
The Nyctaginaceae pollen was not assigned to any specific
genus since it consisted of several unknown morphological types.
The predominant fossil type was periporate, echinate with short
spines less than 5 microns long, thick walled, and 50-60 microns
in diameter.
Fourteen other fossil pollen genera were recovered from the
Arenosa Shelter samples. These are listed in Table 2.
Discussion
The preliminary pollen record from Arenosa Shelter corresponds
83

well with pollen records from Bonfire Shelter ~nd the Devil's
Mouth site (Bryant, 1966b and Hevly, 1966)0 However, since this
report represents an incomplete study of the pollen evidence from
Arenosa Shelter, the conclusions will remain tentative until the
complete pollen record is examined and second pollen counts are
completed.
The lowermost analyzed pollen samples (Samples 16-20) indicate a possible cool and moist period when the vegetation may have
been somewhat mesophytic. At both the Devil's Mouth site and
Bonfire Shelter the pollen spectra from deposits of comparable
age record high percentages of pine and grass and reduced percentages of Cheno-Ams. High percentages of Ephedra pollen in deposits
of this period are found in the fossil records of Bonfire Shelter
and Arenosa Shelter, but are not present in deposits from the
Devil's Mouth site. The pine pollen from these early deposits
at Arenosa Shelter is morphologically similar to the pollen from
pinyon pines and is the same type recovered from deposits at both
the Devil's Mouth site and Bonfire Shelter. Today pinyon pines
grow approximately 50 miles north of the Amistad Reservoir area
in several isolated locales and may be the only remaining remnants
of a onetime large pinyon forest (Little, 1966).
In the non-cultural strata (Strata 6, 8, 12, 15, 22b, and 27)
most of the pollen and sediment was probably transported and
deposited at Arenosa Shelter during flood stages of the Pecos
River. However, in flood waters non-fossilized conifer pollen
tends to float on the surface because of its buoyant structure
and therefore is generally deposited either in the delta at the
end of a river or in river bank and shore drift deposits. In
either case much of the pollen would be oxidized as indicated by
studies conducted in the Whitewater Draw region of Arizona by
Paul S, Martin. Samples taken from fresh alluvial deposits contained only a small fraction of the conifer pollen found in surface froth collected at the same time in nearby tributaries
(Martin, 1963). Based upon this evidence, it seems possible that
the percentages of pine pollen in the non-cultural alluvial
deposits at Arenosa Shelter may be underrepresented.
The pollen record from the uppermost deposits (Samples 1-11)
reflect a climatic trend toward aridity. Except for an unexplained
rise in pine pollen in Sample 8, the pollen record of Arenosa
Shelter is characteristic of post 1000 B.C. deposits at the Devil's
Mouth site. The pollen diagrams from both sites note general
decreases in grass, pine, and total arboreal pollen and increases
in Cheno-Ams and xerophytic plant pollen.
It is to early to make conclusive statements about the vegetational and climatic history of Arenosa Shelter. Present data
tends to suggest that the vegetation and climate throughout the
entire Amistad Reservoir area was remarkably similar during
various periods of the late Quaternary. The preliminary pollen
84

analysis of Arenosa Shelter has helped to confirm the probably
existence of a mesic period (ca. 1000 B,C.) in the Amistad region
and the trend toward aridity which followed. It is hoped that
the completed pollen analysis of this site will either confirm
or reject other hypotheses about the late Quaternary paleoenvironment of this region of southwest Texas.
Research in Progress
Current Arenosa Shelter pollen studies now in progress:
1) making second counts of all samples in Series B
2) processing and analyzing the remaining 8 samples (21-28)
of Series B.
Future Research
Plans for continued Arenosa Shelter pollen studies:
1) processing and analyzing the samples in Series A
2) collection of additional fossil pollen samples during
the 1967 excavation season
3) collection of additional modern soil samples from
Arenosa Shelter and vicinity
4) Processing and analyzing of pollen samples collected
during the 1967 excavation season.
References Cited
Bryant, Vaughn M., Jr.
1966a
Pollen Analysis of the Devil's Mouth site. A
Preliminary Study of the Paleoecology of the Amistad
Reservoir Area (Dee Ann Story and Vaughn M. Bryant,
Jr,, assemblers). Final report of research submitted
to the National Science Foundation: 129-164.
1966b
Pollen Analysis: Its Environmental and Cultural
Implications in the Amistad Reservo1.r Area. Master's
thesis on file at the library of The University of Texas.
Hevly, Richard H.
1966
A Preliminary Pollen Analysis of Bonfire Shelter. A
Preliminary Study of the Paleoecology of the Amistad
Reservoir Area (Dee Ann Story and Vaughn M. Bryant,
Jr., assemblers). Final report of research submitted
to the National Science Foundation: 165-178.
Little, Elbert L.
1966
A New Pinyon Variety from Texas, Wrightia, Vol. 3,
No. 8: 181-187.
Martin, Paul S.
1963
The Last 10,000 Years: A Fossil Pollen Record of
the American Southwest. The University of Arizona Press.
85

