-

.:'"

.,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

,

.

AN J\RCHEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT OF.-SITE 41 FY 105

Fayette County, Texas·...
, ,

David S. Dibble

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
The University of Texas at Austin
Technical Bulletin No. 13

1977

,

.

·,

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT OF
SITE 41 FY 105, FAYETTE COUNTY, TEXAS
David

S~

Dibble

INTRODUCTION
At the request of the Fayette County Water Control and Improvement District-­
Monument Hill and Joseph Hild Engineering, Inc., the Texas Archeological Survey
carried out a field assessment of archeological site 41 FY 105, a locality
which would be affected by the proposed route of a sewer main connecting the
Monument Hill area with the existing La Grange City wastewater treatment plant.
This site was discovered on October 22, 1976, during a reconnaissance of this
proposed construction by Mr. W. Hayden Whitsett, archeologist of the Texas
Water Quality Board.*
,

Dense grass cover prevented an adequate evaluation of the site's extent and
general nature at the time of discovery. Too, the possibility-, of buried cul­
tural material was considered high and additional assessment involving sub­
surface testing was therefore recommended.
. .....

."

Further assessment of this site, reported herein, was accomplished by staff
members of the Texas Archeological Survey in five working days over the period
of January 8-17, 1977. Field team members wor~ing under the general super­
vision of the writer included Grant D. Hall, Duford W. Skelton and Kenneth M.
Brown.
Site 41 FY 105 is associated with a left bank sandy terrace remnant of the
Colorado River opposite Monument Hill, a prominent topographic landmark in
the area of the City of La Grange. The terrace escarpment facing the river is
sharply defined on the west and south of the site area; the 'flat top of this
feature is at an elevation of about 250 feet msl.

TESTING PROCEDURES
Evaluation of this'locality was governed by a scope-of-work specified by the
Texas Water Quality Board and consisted primarily of the excavation of four
test pits. Three of these controlled excavations (one 2x2 m. and two !xl m.)
were spaced along or adjoining the proposed construction corridor across the
top of the terrace. A fourth unit (2x2 m.) was dug about 70 m. ESE of this
corridor. Additionally, a stepped facing of the terrace cutbank was made

*

An Archeological Reconnaissance at Monument Hill, Fayette County, Texas
(C-48-0966-0l). Texas Water Quality Board, Austin•

,....

.

~-~-

....- - . - -...

.

£_--------~

-

-

1..

-2- .

in the area to be affected by the proposed construction. The positioning of
numbered test units in relation to naturarfeatures of the site and the pro­
posed modifications can be seen on a copy of the original site plan, a c~py
of which accompanies this report.
Excavation of the initial unit, Test Pit 1, was carried out in increments of
20 cm. to a maximum depth of 2 m.; Test Pits 2, 3, and 4 (Situated within or
near the construction corridor) were dug to depths of 0.8, 1.5 and 1.Om.
respectively, by careful "shaving" of the deposits with shovels. A plane
table contour map of the site was made, locating the test units and other
pertinent features of the locality. Measured profiles of the sediments ex­
posed in Test Pit 1 and the cutbank facing were drawn and, along with verbal
notes and photographs, form a permanent documentation of the testing operation.
Excavation units were refilled but could be easily relocated py referring to
the measured plan map.
.•
Artifacts and cultural debris encountered were collected and will be deposited
with the original field records at the Texas._Archeological Research Laboratory;
Balcones Research Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

,

~

,

THE DEPOSITS:

,

NATURAL AND CULTURAL

Exposure of the sediments downward from the upper terrace surface extended
maximally to a depth of 2 meters. No significant difference in their general
character was noted from exposure-ta-exposure. These alluvial deposits were
sandy, without str.ongly expressed structural development and exhibited a
noticeable increase in percentage of finer particle fraction with depth. The
disruptive effects of burrowing animals were conunon in all areas exposed by
the testing. Figure 1, representing a measured profile of Test Pit 1, is
considered a .typical section of the upper terrace sediments.
Prehistoric cultural debris encountered during the evaluation was largely
buried in terrace fill. Surficially visible material, primarily chert flakes,
was infrequent and mostly associated with recent gopher mounds. A roughly
circular area approximately 30 m. in diameter did exhibit a relatively high
incidence of mussel shell fragments and chert flakes (see accompanying plan
.map). It is likely that this prehistoric camping debris had been displaced
from below by rodent action and/or historic farming of the terrace. A limited
amount of chert flaking debris was observed along the steeply sloped terrace
cutbank. Because of the high probability of slumping here the point of origin
of this exposed material was not certain. Mammal bone fragments exposed in the
cutbank at a depth of about 3 m. from the terrace top included a mandible
which has been identified as modern horse.*

* Identification by personnel of the Vertebrate Paleontology Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.

FIGURE 1
-

11I:"fl>

SITE 41 FY 105
MEASURED PROFILE
W. WALL, TEST PIT 1

'.

'

Soil Color*/Texture

~ULL.;t:.~f-::L---"L-.-X---':"-----:-:-,!--, \ __ dark brown ( 1 OYR3 /3 )
s andy loam
--very dark grayish brown
(10YR3/2) sandy clay
loam
- -dark yellowish brown,
(10YR4/4) clay fraction
. increases with depth

.. Mussel shell

A

~

Rock fragment

t?

Rodent disturbance

Munsel Soil Color Chart, 1973.
Determination on moist samples.

.. ,"'"
,

,'.
","

.

,I

..

-4­
--

..

'!'"

.,

Buried archeological deposits, most of which appeared to be relatively intact,
were exposed in Test Pits 1 and 2 and in t~e facing of the terrace escarpment.
The highest deposits, referred herein as the !TUpper HorizonTl , were concentI:,ated
at depths ranging from 20 to 60 cm. below the modern surface in these excavating
units; the best defined occupational debris being exposed in Test Pit 1. Here
a concentration of quartzite, chert and sandstone rock fragments were interpreted
as representing a portion of an aboriginal hearth (Figure 2). Several mussel
shells, also apparently in situ, were found in close proximity. Excavations at
Test Pit 2 and the terrace cutbank also encountered lithic and mussel shell con­
centrations at roughly equivalent depths below surface. Fragments of modern
bricks were observed above the aboriginal occupational debris in Test Pits 2
and 3--apparently remnants from an historic structure or trash deposit which
once existed in the area.
Occurrences of prehistoric occupational debris were found at depths significantly
below the Upper Horizon in Test Pits 1 and 2 and the cutbank:'facing. In all
observed instances these cultural materials (largely chert flakes and mussel
shell fragments) were widely dispersed at depths ranging from 60 to 180 cm.
With the exception of a weakly expressed but:essentially continuous stratum
observed at a depth of 140 cm. in the cutbank facing, this cu~tural debris ex­
hibited evidence of serious post-depositional disruption. Probably both water
action and rodent activity are responsible fo:r:.J;he heavy disturbance of these
materials.
.'
F

Test Pits 3 and 4, situated along the proposed, construction corridor well away
from the edge of the terrace exposed natural deposits similar to those noted
elsewhere in the site area. No cultural materials were observed in these areas.

CONCLUSIONS
Test excavations completed at Site 41 FY 105 resulted in demonstrating the
presence of a shallowly buried accumulation of prehistoric occupational debris
in portions of the site area to be affected by the proposed sewer line con­
struction. This accumulation, referenced herein as the Upper Horizon, was dem­
onstrated to exhibit a structural feature (fire hearth) in one area as well
as widely dispersed food (mussel) and lithic residues. No time diagnostic
artifacts were recovered and thus the age of this deposit is conjectural.
Because the subsurface sampling was widely spaced, it is assumed rather than
known that demonstrated occurrences of the Upper Horizon represent relatively
contemporaneous deposits. The results of this sampling further suggest that
this archeological deposit is restricted to a relatively narrow zone, about
40 meters in width, inward from the terrace escarpment.
Deeper cultural debris was found to be present but heavily affected by post­
depositional movement. This cultural deposlt is, for this reason, of little
potential archeological value.

-5­

FIGURE 2.
View of Test Pit 1 showing cultural debris'exposed in situ at a depth of
about 35 em. Quartzite, chert, a:ld sandstone cobbles, probably part of
a hearth, are visible in the southern (upper) end of the pit. A con­
centration of mussel shells is also exposed at this depth.

-­'.

j}

~.-.:.---....~~-----.

..,..

-6­

-

..

~

Subsurface testing was limited to a maximum depth of 2 meters. It is "possible
that deeper cultural deposits do exist in the thick alluvial sediments pre­
sent in this locality which were beyond the operational limits of this assess­
ment.
The "Upper Horizon" at Site 41 FY 105 is the only presently known component of
this site which de~onstrated a sufficient degree of intactness to warrant
further consideration as a valuable resource. Although exposure of this
deposit was limited,
testing did strongly suggest the presence of wide­
spread residues from prehistoric occupation of this terrace which retain suf­
ficient structural integrity to qualify the site as being eligible as a
potential Texas Archeological Landmark.

'.

RECOOtENDATIONS

,
'

The described assessment of this archeologicql locality was suffiCient, I feel;
to demonstrate the f9l1owing:

•

(1) substantial portions of the Upper Horizon cultural deposits would
be adversely affected by the constructi.o.n:'of this segment of the sewer
pipeline as currently proposed.
.
(2) the Upper Horizon deposits sampled have the potential of being a
valuable archeological resource.
In view of the above, the following recommendations are respectfully offered: .
(1) It is suggested that the construction corridor be designed to avoid
conflict with the site area as presently known;
(2) If re-routing of the corridor is not feasible, it is highly recom­
mended that a systematic data recovery program be designed to recover a
substantial sampling of those portions of archeological deposits which
would be affected. by construction of this facility. This program should
be implemented by a recognized professional archeological organization
and be coordinated through the State Historical Commission.
(3) If alternative 2 (above) is chosen, occasional sampling of lower
terrace deposits, not tested during this assessment, should be included
as part of any mitigation program.

.

.
.

,'~ .......

,I

,

..I

