A Cultural Resource Survey and Assessment
of the Proposed Overlook Subdivision,
Travis County, Texas

by
Wayne Bartholomew
and
Leland C. Bement

Texas Archeological Survey
Technical Bulletin 83
The University of Texas at Austin

June 1985

INTRODUCTION
This letter report details the results of a June 19, 1985 visual
reconnaissance for cultural resources by members of the Texas
Leland
Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bement, Wayne Bartholomew, Steve Tomka and Scott Jones surveyed the
1265 acre Overlook subdivision which lies within the Barton Creek
drainage system.
Archeological investigations within the Barton Creek watershed
are required by section 13-3-352 of the Austin City Code and were
conducted for Murfee Engineering Company, Austin, Texas. All of the
surveyed area can be located on the 1978 Bee Cave and Signal Hills
7.5 1 Quadrangles, 1:24,000 scale, United States Geological Survey
(USGS) maps.

LOCATION
Dripping Springs, Texas and Austin, Texas are approximately 10.25
miles
southwest and 9.25 miles northwest of the study area,
respectively.
Approximate
bounds
for
the
proposed Overlook
subdivision lie to the south along Circle Orive and to the west and
east adjacent to Rawhide Trail Drive and Thomas Springs Road.
Property lines extend approximately 0.8 miles north of Circle Drive.

PHYSICAL SETTING
Thomas Springs Branch, an intermittent tributary to Barton Creek,
roughly bisects the survey area on a northwest/southeast diagonal. No
other prominent landforms exist within the property boundaries.
Topographical relief ranges from 950' to 1110 1 (289.63 to 338.4
meters) AMSL. Geologie features, from which numerous springs and
seeps issue, include Lower Cretaceous Period limestone, dolomite and
marl of the Upper Glen Rose Formation. Adjacent to the study area and
from the same period are outcroppings of the undivided Fredericksburg
Group limestones and marls. Included within this group is the Edwards
limestone and its associated chert interbeds. Chert is lacking in the
Glen Rose Formation. Soil types forming on these parent materials
consist of Brackett series gravelly clay loams which develop on "steep
breaks along creeks and rivers" (Soil Survey Staff 1974:15), and
Volente series sit1y clay loams developed from slope alluvium. At
present these soils support a variety of herbs and grasses in addition

3

to oak, cedar and yaupon.

CULTURAL BACKGROUND
The project area lies within the Central
defined by Prewitt (1981:71) as the:

Texas

cultural

region

.. eastern half of the Edwards Plateau, the Llano uplift,
most of the Lampassas Cut Plains, the Comanche Plateau, the
southern end of the Grand Prairie, and the Blackland
Prairies bordering the Balcones Escarpment from near Waco to
near Uvalde.
A temporal framework has been established for this region
beginning with the Paleoindian Period at the end of the Pleistocene up
to approximately 8500 years ago.
This period is marked by the
occurrence of now extinct megafauna and projectile point types known
as Clovis, Folsom and Plainview.
Beginning at the end of the Paleoindian Period and continuing
until 1250 years ago is the Archaic Period, characterized by the use
of dart projectile points in combination with the atlatl or spear
thrower. Weir (1976) and Prewitt (1981) utilize changes in projectile
point types to define subdivisions or phases within the Archaic.
A
technological shift from darts and atlatls to bows and arrows occurred
1250 years ago, marking the beginning of the NeoArchaic (Prewitt
1981:74) or Late Prehistoric Period.
Arrow points often found in
association with ceramics are key index markers of
the
Late
Prehistoric.
All of this ended some 200 years ago with the Spanish
explorations ushering in the Historic era.

METHODS
Prior to the field survey, archeologists searched the files and
maps of the Texas ARcheological Research Laboratory to determine the
extent of previous investigations in the area.
No sites had been
recorded within the delineated tract. At this point, field personnel
initiated an intensive ground survey.
Four archeologists walked
zig-zag transects at 25 to 30 meter intervals, with the aid of 111 =
lOa' and 1:24,000 scale maps. No artifacts were collected.
Field
notes and photographs document the survey and all recorded cultural
resources. All records generated by this project are curated at Texas
Archeological Resources Laboratory,

4

RESULTS
Results of this survey include the recording of five prehistoric
sites, 41TVI080 through 41TVI084. No historic sites were found. All
sites overlook the Thomas Springs Branch intermittent drainage.
41TVI080
Site 41TVI080 consists of a very small lithic scatter;
observed
artifacts include several chert flakes, a singled tested chert cobble
and one unifacially modified flake. A tested cobble is here defined
as a piece of raw material which has apparently been deliberately
struck one or two times, perhaps in an effort to determine the quality
of the lithic material for stone tool production. All artifacts are
scattered over a 10 by 10 meter area on a gently sloping bench.
41TVI081
Chert debitage including a single biface fragment and two
projectile point bases identify site 41TVI081, occupying a 15 by 25
meter area along a gentle, westward-facing slope approximately 15
meters above the Thomas Springs Branch. One base is complete enough
to indicate a Late Archaic use for this site, assuming contemporaneity
of contained materials, Location and the light scatter of debitage at
sites 41TV1080 and 41TV1081 indicate short term use, suggestive of
hunting activities.
4lTVI082
Site 41TVI082 is at the head of an ephemeral draw leading into
the Thomas Springs Branch drainage. However, the three non-diagnostic
chert biface fragments, a tested chert nodule and approximately three
dozen chert flakes apparently represent only a small portion of this
site.
Debitage extends beyond the
restricted
survey bounds
established for the Overlook project. Visual observations along the
property line and the distribution of materials indicate that the site
extends to the east towards a topographic saddle and to the northeast,
upslope towards an unnamed hill top.
An outcropping of Edwards
Limestone is extant at this latter location, ( Geologic Atlas of Texas
1974). Chert outcrops associated with the Edwards Formation may have
been a prime focus of prehistoric activity. Such activities would
explain the tested chert nodules observed here and at 41TV1080.
Such
artifacts are not usually observed far from a lithic source area.
Site 41TVI031 provides additional evidence to support the lithic
procurement hypothesis.
Espey Huston and Associates, Inc. (EHA)
recorded this site on March 18, 1985, just north of the aforementioned
hilltop.
Artifacts listed include chert cores, bifaces. unifacial
flakes, flakes and fire spalled chert fragments.
EHA considers the
site to represent lithic procurement activities. The possibility
exists that sites 41TVI082 and 41TVI031 represent the same sort of

~~~-~-~~~~~~~~~~~~~--

~~

-------~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~--

--

~

5

prehistoric activity.
In addition, they may actually be the same
site, although 1500 feet separates these two areas and any
determination of their contemporaneity would be incomplete without
direct visual inspection.
4lTVI083
Site 41TVI083 is a small lithic scatter along the south bank of a
Thomas Springs Branch, into which it empties, lies
minor draw.
approximately 150 feet to the west. A fence demarcating the northern
property line for the survey, runs through the site, which is
therefore not entirely delineated.
Artifactual materials include several chert flakes, a core
fragment and a Late Prehistoric arrow point base, a Seal lorn variety.
Additional materials appear to extend north to the immediate banks of
the draw. Site positioning along the draw suggest the possibility of
natural disturbances due to flooding. It is possible that such events
washed artifacts down from site 41TVI082, located at the head of this
same draw. Archeologists, however, did not observe any intervening
lithic scatter, nor would such a distinct scatter of debitage have
occurred if flooding had relocated the artifacts from 41TVI082.
4lTVI084
Finally, site 41TVI084, which is located on the highest knoll
within the project, includes a single non-diagnostic chert biface
fragment, flakes and a fire fractured flake.
A good vista of the
entire Thomas Springs Branch drainage exists to the north and east.
Although the site has been extensively disturbed by land clearing
activities, it is the general impression of the Texas Archeological
Survey that the site represents an open camp.

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The cultural materials of 41TVI080, 41TVI081, 41TVI083 and
41TVI084 are probably the residue of temporary campsites. Site
41TVI082 appears to
represent
lithic
procurement activities.
Projectile point bases from sites 41TVI081 and 41TVI083 suggest a
period of utilization from the Late Archaic to the Late Prehistoric,
respectively.
These sites, when viewed from a regional perspective, fit into a
broad pattern of prehistoric settlement. Sites located in the upland
reaches and underlain by the chert free Glen Rose Formation tend to be
lithic scatters or open campsites.
Lithic procurement of quarry
sites, in addition to open camps, become
common within
the
Fredericksburg Group which includes the chert-rich Edwards Limestone.
However, none of the aforementioned sites, with the exception of

-

.......

--~--~-

....... -

--

---~.--

........ --.~.-- .....

-----

----------------­

6

411TVI082, can contribute much to the understanding of the Barton
Creek Watershed settlement pattern beyond that achieved by this
recording.
Erosion and land clearing have destroyed the original
internal artifact patterning and features, including task loci, and,
for the most part, time periods of occupation.
Site 41TVI082,
however, appears to represent a relatively isolated quarry within an
expanse of the Glen Rose Formation.
Quarry activities here may vary significantly in terms of the
type of lithic reduction techniques and exploitation of the raw
material from other quarry sites found within the Edwards Limestone
proper. Isolated knobs of Edwards Formation Limestones certainly must
have provided prehistoric peoples with a handy source of lithics in an
area otherwise devoid of such material. Comparisons of quarries where
material was relatively abundant with quarries where material was
considerably more
scarce could provide some insight into the
exploitation of prehistoric resources.
For these
reasons,
we
recommend that prehistoric site 41TVI083 be examined further if and
when the site is affected by construction. At present, it is marginal
to the planned development of the Overlook subdivision and presents no
bar to permitting.

7

REFERENCES CITED
Geologic Atlas of Texas
1974 Austin Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas.
Archeological Society 52:65-89.

Bulletin of the Texas

Soil Survey Staff
United States
1974 Soil Survey of Travis County, Texas.
Department of Agricul ture, Soil Conservation Service.
Washington, D.C.
Weir, Frank A.
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished
Washington State University. Pullman.

Ph.D. Dissertation.

