ARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS FOR THE SHACKELFORD
WATER SUPPLY CORPORATION WATER DISTRIBUTION IMPROVEMENTS
PROJECT IN CALLAHAN, EASTLAND, SHACKELFORD, AND STEPHENS
COUNTIES, TEXAS

Antiquities Permit 5537

By
William E. Moore

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 230

2010

ARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS FOR THE SHACKELFORD
WATER SUPPLY CORPORATION WATER DISTRIBUTION IMPROVEMENTS
PROJECT IN CALLAHAN, EASTLAND, SHACKELFORD, AND STEPHENS
COUNTIES, TEXAS

Antiquities Permit 5537

BVRA Project Number 10-02

Principal Investigator

William E. Moore

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
Shackelford Water Supply Corporation
1180 County Road 109
Albany, Texas 76430

March 2010

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey for a water distribution line, pump station, and
storage tank in Callahan, Eastland, Shackelford, and Stephens counties was
performed by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) under Antiquities Permit
5537 on February 8 and 9, 2010. The area investigated consisted of 34.81 acres.
No archaeological sites were found, and no artifacts were collected. Copies of the
report are on file at the Texas Historical Commission (THC), Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL), Texas State Library, the Shackelford Water Supply
Corporation (WSC), Jacob & Martin, Ltd., and BVRA.

ii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ........................................................................................................... ii
DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA ............................................................................ 1
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ................................................................................. 4
RESEARCH DESIGN ........................................................................................... 5
RESULTS ............................................................................................................. 7
RECOMMENDATIONS ......................................................................................... 8

Appendix I: Project Area on Topographic Quadrangles

Figures
Figure 1. General Location ............................................................................................. 2
Figure 2. Shovel Tests and Boring Beneath Battle Creek ......................................... 3
Figure 3. Sandstone Bedrock Exposure Near Battle Creek ...................................... 6

iii

DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA
The Shackelford WSC proposes to install approximately 14.26 miles of
new water line along State Highway 6, Farm-to-Market Road 1853, and Farm-todiameter, and the water lines will be usually centered in an easement typically
twenty feet wide on private property immediately adjacent to the highway or
county road right-of-way that they parallel within Eastland, Callahan, Shackelford,
and Stephens counties (Figure 1). The pipe will be placed in a trench two feet
wide and with three feet of cover. One pump station and storage tank is also
planned for construction, and these proposed improvements will be located on a
site adjacent to the water line easement with a footprint of 100 x 100 feet. In
addition, there will be an elevated storage tank with a footprint of 150 x 150 feet.
The water line will cross Battle Creek by directional boring. This will occur
approximately 15 feet within the property line on the south side of the highway.
The entry point will be at least 20 feet from the county road on the west bank of
the creek. The entry point will disturb a 4 by 10 foot area to a depth of 36 inches.
The exit point will be at least 75 feet from the center of the creek on its east bank.
It will disturb a 4 by 10 foot area to a depth of thirty-six inches. The engineers
have decided not to use the alternate route. The survey was confined to the
private property, as that is where the water line will be installed. In addition, cut
banks within the highway right-of-way were examined while walking to the Area
of Potential Effect (APE). The agency involved in this project is USDA-RD, and
the representative is Joe Powell. The proposed construction areas are depicted on
four United States Geological 7.5’ topographic maps. They are Albany (3299-424),
Bernie Lake (3299-144), Indian Knoll (3299-411), and Moran (3299-412). The
project area is depicted on these topographic quadrangles. These maps are found
in Appendix I to this report. The location of the boring and the two shovel tests is
depicted in Figure 2.

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

Figure 2. Shovel Tests and Boring Beneath Battle Creek

3

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY
This project was performed in order to identify any cultural resources that
might be present within the route of the proposed water distribution line and the
footprint of the proposed pump station and storage tank. The Sponsor for this
project is the Shackelford WSC, and the engineering firm working with the
Sponsor is Jacob & Martin, Ltd. BVRA is the archaeological firm that was hired
to perform this service. William E. Moore was the Principal Investigator, and he
conducted the field survey with assistance from Mark Gardenhire and one of his
employees (Tyler George). The project was carried out on February 8 and 9,
2010 and involved sixteen person hours by the Principal Investigator, travel
included. A digital camera used to document segments of the project area, and
field notes were taken.

4

RESEARCH DESIGN
Prior to entering the field, the site records at TARL and the Atlas were
checked for the presence of previously recorded archaeological sites in the project
area and vicinity as well as previous projects and surveys in the area. The entire
project area was driven and investigated by a 100% Pedestrian Survey. Most of
the area consists of rocky soils with sandstone bedrock at or near the surface, and
surface visibility in most areas was 100%. Figure 3 illustrates the presence of
sandstone bedrock observed near Battle Creek and throughout the APE.
The primary focus of this study was an investigation of Battle Creek, the only
major creek that will be crossed by the water line. The west bank was examined by
a Pedestrian Survey and two shovel tests. The east bank of Battle Creek was
examined by a Pedestrian Survey, and no shovel tests were necessary because of
the shallow rocky soils and disturbance present. The cut bank on the west bank of
Battle Creek revealed a clay soil that extended to the bottom of the hill. This is the
only area where deep soils were observed. The surface visibility at the top of this
landform was 100%, and there was a thin scatter of small cobbles and
miscellaneous rocks. Two shovel tests were dug within the APE on the top of this
landform in an attempt to see if any of the materials observed on the surface were
present beneath the surface. These tests revealed sterile clay that is consistent
with what was observed in the cut bank. The location of these tests is depicted in
Figure 1. Since the surface visibility was 100%, shovel testing was not necessary
to evaluate this landform. The east bank of Battle Creek was examined by a
Pedestrian Survey, and no shovel tests were necessary because of the shallow
rocky soils and disturbance present.
The other streams are minor tributaries that are not viewed by BVRA as high
probability areas. However, some lithic scatters and quarry sites have been found
in areas away from streams in this part of Texas, especially in the uplands.
Therefore, both banks of these tributaries and segments of the uplands were
walked and visually inspected on the surface. As stated above, the cut banks were
inspected while walking from the highway to the APE. The areas examined using
this method are depicted on the project area maps in Appendix I. The cut banks of
the areas examined were also examined for evidence of buried materials.
Previously recorded prehistoric site 41CA7 is recorded at TARL as being on the
north side of State Highway 380 and on the west bank of Battle Creek. No cultural
materials were observed eroding from the cut bank below the hill, and no evidence
of a site was found on top of the hill within the highway right-of-way. No attempt
was made to investigate across the fence because this was not part of the project
area, and we did not have permission from the landowner to do so. A local collector
said that he had never seen any artifacts in this area. Photographs of the project
area were taken with a digital camera.

5

Figure 3. Sandstone Bedrock Exposure Near Battle Creek

6

RESULTS
Examination of the files at TARL in Austin, Texas and the Atlas revealed no
sites have been recorded within any portion of the project area. In addition, no
previous archaeological projects or surveys had been conducted within the current
project area. One previously recorded prehistoric site (41CA7) is recorded opposite
the project area on the west bank of Battle Creek. This site was originally visited by
R. E. Forrester sometime between 1937 and 1955. He described the site as a lithic
scatter with large sandstone hearths. Artifacts observed and collected include
manos, dart points, and a corner-tang knife. He also mentions a Paleo-Indian
presence, but does not list any artifacts found at the site dating to this period. The
description of the location of this site is difficult to interpret based on the sketchy site
form, but BVRA believes the TARL plotting is not correct. These early sites were
plotted on highway maps and then to 15’ topographic quadrangles. Later, efforts
were made by TARL staff to plot them on the newer 7.5’ topographic quadrangles.
Based on the statement by a local collector, and our visual inspection of the cut
bank below the site and viewing the area across the fence, it is my opinion that site
41CA7 is not on the landform across from the current project area, at least not in
the immediate vicinity of the highway.
The only major creek crossing in the project area is Battle Creek. As stated
above, no cultural materials were found on either bank of this stream. Although
Eubanks Creek is a major stream in the area, the water line will not cross it. Both
banks of Eubanks Creek have been severely disturbed through railroad grade
construction. If the boring beneath Battle Creek is conducted within the present
easement at the depth planned by the engineers, it will be too deep to affect a
prehistoric site. There are several unnamed tributaries that cross the proposed
route of the water distribution line. The channels of most of these are caused by
runoff during periods of rain. According to Mark Gardenhire, there are no springs in
the area. Therefore, the possibility of some of these tributaries being spring-fed
appears to be remote. Both banks of each of these tributaries were walked and
inspected for surface evidence of a prehistoric or historic site. Surface visibility was
virtually 100% and shallow bedrock was present in several areas. Significant
prehistoric sites are not typically found adjacent to these kinds of drainages. The
site of the proposed pump station and storage tank is on rather heavily wooded flat
terrain with no nearby source of water, and no evidence of a site was observed.
The site of the proposed elevated storage tank is on a steep slope of a high hill with
no nearby source of water. No evidence of a site was observed, and prehistoric
sites are not usually found on slopes.

7

RECOMMENDATIONS
No evidence of a prehistoric or historic site was found as a result of this
survey. It is recommended that the client be allowed to proceed with construction
as planned. Should evidence of an archaeological site be encountered during the
construction associated with this project, all work must stop until the THC can
evaluate the situation. If additional routes are added, the THC must be notified, as
archaeological survey in these areas may also be required. This survey was
conducted in accordance with the Minimum Survey Standards as outlined by the
THC.

8

APPENDIX I
PROJECT AREA DEPICTED ON TOPOGRAPHIC QUADRANGLES

