FORT McKAVETT
MENARD COUNTY, TEXAS:
Archeological and Architectural Details of the
Bakery, Barracks and Headquart'ers Building
Spring 1973

E. Suzanne carter

Research Report No. 20
Texas Archeological Sqrvey
(formerly Texas Archeological salvage Project)
The University of Texas at Austin
April, 1974

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Abstract. . . . .
.iii
Introduction. •
• • •
. ••
••. 1
Glossary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
Bakery. • • • • • • .
•. •
. • . • • 13
Headquarters..
. • . . • . . • • • • • • . . • • 31
Barracks. . •
.•....
• • . . • • .
. 75
Figures . . . .
. . . . . . . . . ..
. . . . 86
Acknowledgments •
• • • • •.
. • • • • • • • 117
References Cited.
• • • . . • •
. . • • • 119
Appendix I. 41 MN 2, Bakery - technical description
of materials used in fill for leveling floor • • • . 121
Appendix II. 41 MN 2, Headquarters- corners where
large sections of plaster were removed during in­
vestigation'of walls. • • • . . • . • • . . •
.122
Appendix III. 41 MN 2, Headquarters - projected lock
size and placement on exterior doors. • • • •
.123
Appendix IV. 41 MN 2, Headquarters- whitewash and
paint color sequence for walls and woodwork . • . . 124
Appendix V. 41 MN 2, Bakery - tentative chronology of
structures. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .127

List of Figure§

· · 86
·····
87
·
· · · · · · · · ·· '.::.89
· ··· ····
· · · 90
·
· · · · · ·· ·· ·· 92
··
92
·
·
··
93
· ·· ·
· · · · 94
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
· · · · · · · 95
.
·
····
97

· ·

1. Fort McKavett County Map
· ·
2. Fort McKavett Site Map
..
·
3. Bakery - exterior view
4. Bakery - plan of excavations · .
5. Bakery
interior view, west wall. ·
6. Bakery
foundation detail
7. Bakery
window detail
8. Bakery
sealed window
·
9. Bakery - door detail
subfloor fill detail.
10. Bakery
·
11. Bakery
'flagstone floor detail.
·
12. Bakery - ground level vent
•
· «
13; Bakery - oven flue
14. Headquarters - exterior view, front.
15. Headquarters
exterior view, back ·

-

-

-

-

· · ·
· ·
. . · · ·· · ·· ·· ··
·
·

· · · · ·
· · · · ·
· · ··
·
·
· · ·
· · · · ·

·
· 99
·.101

· :97
99
.101

16. Headquarters - floor plan with component
designations.
·
·
l7a •Headquar,ters
mantel detail, east room ·
l7b.Headquarters
mantel detail, center room
l7c.Headquarters - mantel detail, west wing
18. Headquarters
roofing detail
·
·
19. Headquarters - plaster detail
·
·
20. Headquarters
joist and floorboard plan.
21. Headquarters
exterior door.
·
22. Headquarters - exterior veranda ·
·
23. Headquarters
rafter and ceiling joist
24. Headquarters
veranda rafter support
25. Headquarters
veranda rafter support
26. Headquarters - window sill detail
·
27. Headquarters - window in cross section.
28. Headquarters
door frame detail.
29. Barracks
.
plan view.
· · ·

-

.......·· ·· ·

-

-

-

· ·

· ·
· ··

· · · ·
· ··
· ·

.

·

·

·

··

·· ·

. .

· · ·

·· , .102
.104

···
· · · · · ·
····
· ·· ··
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· ·
····

.104
.104
.106
.106
.107
.109
.109
.110
.112
.112
.113
.114
.115
.116

List of Tables

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Alphabetic designations of building components. • •
Bakery - cross reference to component
designations. • • • . . • . • • • . • •
.
Bakery - gross composition and sequencing of
mortar types. • . . • • • . • . • • . . • • • • •
Bakery - exterior wall height at corners . • • • • •
Bakery - functions of flooring components • • . . •
Headquarters - cross reference to component
designations • . . . • . • • • • • . • . . • • . •
Headquarters - matrix analysis of shingle types • .
Barracks - cross reference to component
designations . • . . • • . . • . . • • • . . . . •

ii

5
16
19
21
26
35
45
77

ABSTRACT
In the spring of 1973 an archeological/architectural
investigation was made of three structures at Fort McKavett,
Texas: the Bakery, Hea9quarters Building and a Barracks.
The bakery was found to have undergone extensive civilian
modification but remnants were found of the original walls,
flagstone flooring, door and window openings as well as
traces of the oven flues, foundations and ground level vents.
A durable roof on the headquarters building has preserved
that structure much as the military built it. The most ex­
tensive modification was to the modified courtyard which has
passed through three structural stages: (l) a veranda, (2) an
enclosed room, and (3) currently an open, roofed courtyard.
The barracks, in almost total ruin, yielded little new infor­
mation. Gable walls indicate the former presence of a pitched
roof; no clear evidence was found for either the type of floor
or an interior dividing wall. Reconstruction for all buildings
is attempted upon the basis of field information combined with
the historical records.

iii

INTRODUCTION
During the winter-spring of 1973, the Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, carried out a 55-day
investigation at Fort McKavett State Historic Site, Texas for
the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (Fig. 1). The intent
of the study was to determine the architectural details of four
buildings. One of those structures, the Officer's Quarters, was
not acquired by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department before
the end of the field season and hence was removed from the work
schedule:iThe following priorities were set in the Inter-Agency
Cooperation Contract (as amended):
1.

Excavation and recording of extant architectural
detail at the Headquarters building (structure X)
(Fig. 2)

2.

Excavation and recording of extant architectural
detail at the Bakery building (structure M2)

3.

Excavation and recording of extant architectural
detail at the Barracks (Structure VI)

This repprt is an account of architectural and archeo­
logical details of those three buildings. In cases where the
structures have been altered, or are in ruin, and yet enough
evidence exists on which to postulate a possible reconstruction,
attempts are made to do so. Minimal reporting of the history
of Fort McKavett has been included, although historical
documentation germane to reconstruction is cited.
All field work was done under the guidance and direction
of Emerson L. Pearson. His wide range of technological
information provided a constant source of inspiration for
dealing with unexpected problems of recording, measuring and
analysing the data. As co-author of the interim report he
is necessarily the originator of many of the ideas contained
1

in this the completed report. Although I must claim final
responsibility for the interpretations contained herein a
major share of the work which this report symbolizes was
done by Emerson Pearson.
l

Operating Methods and Procedures

Site mapping was accomplished with use of an alidade,
plane table, Brunton pocket transit, steel tapes and center­
fall plumb bobs.
Using U.S.G.S./B.M. 2171 as a primary datum, secondary
datum points were established on each of the buildings under
investigation. In addition, T.P.W.D./B.M. 2 was mapped to
provide a datum reference to the structures excavated by
F. E. Green in 1969 (Green 1969). All intra-structure measure­
ments were made from the secondary datum located within the
building being measured.
In-field soil analysis was accomplished with the following
equipment: (l) soil hydrogen-ion values established under
field-moist conditions with a Truog Soil Reaction (pH) Kit;
(2) soil texture approximated with a 7x Peak acromat reticled
comparator; and (3) soil color established with a Munsell Soil
Color Chart in relatively even lighting.
An abundance of both military and civilian artifacts were
recovered; the total volume included about 8,000 items.
Location of material remains was recorded using a combination
of both precise and general provenience systems. In the former,
artifacts were located both horizontally and vertically within
each structure and trench, while in the latter system artifacts
were designated only by structure and trench. Because the
contract specified only that architectural details were to
be reported, an artifact analysis was not undertaken. All items
are presently housed in Austin in the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory collections.
Certain items which may be needed to complete reconstruc­
tion at the headquarters building are present in that collection.

2

They are:
1.

A wooden column, recovered from the yard of
Mr. Curtis Stockton, and believed to be one of
the original exterior veranda columns.

2.

A wooden capital, removed from exterior pillar
P12 and believed to be original to fort construction.

3.

A wooden mantel, removed from fireplace 3 (f3) and
believed to be original to fort construction.

4.

Two escutcheon plates, removed from door 3 and
door 4 (D3,D4) and believed to be original.

5.

Shingles and nails, removed from the roof near
the southwest corner of the modified courtyard
(F6/7) and representative of the earliest type
found.

6.

Glaziers points, removed from miscellaneous window
panes and including one cut nail which may represent
the earliest type of glaziers point used in the
structure.

7.

Mortar samples, removed from specified locations
for further analysis.

8.

Kalsomine, 5 lbs., and Calsom, 5 lbs., donated by
the Menard Lumber Company and believed to be
representative of a type of wall finish used at
the headquarters building during civilian occupation.

9.

Paint sections attached to selected mortar samples
and returned for further analysis.

TO create a precise, consistent terminology with which
to make reference to any Fort McKavett structure, the follow­
ing series of designations and concomitant ground rules was
established.
Structure designations were adopted from Texas Historic
Forts Part II, McKavett, (Taniguchi and otllers 1~68):

3

1.

Structure X:

Headquarters building

2.

Structure M2:

Bakery

3.

Structure Vl:

Barracks

Excavation units received alpha-numeric designations.
Each unit was labeled either 'E' to indicate that it was placed
on the 'exterior' of a structure or 'I' to indicate that it
was on the 'interior' of a structure. Each unit was next given
a numeric designation. Numbers were assigned consecutively
at each building and merely indicate the order in which the
unit was begun, for example, M2:E3 refers to the third, exter­
ior, excavation unit at Structure M2r Vl:I6 refers to the
sixth, interior, excavation unit at structure Vl.
Building components, for example, walls and rooms,
were also given an alpha-numeric label. The alphabetic portion
was derived from the first letter of the common term used when
referring to the component being named, example: R for room.
The only exception to this was the designation of walls as
'features' and thus 'F' rather than 'w' is used when reference
is made to walls (Table 1). When duplication of letters
occurs, an upper case letter is used for exterior components
and a lower case letter for interior components.
The numeric designation indicates the location of the
component within the structure. With the northernmost side of
a building chosen as a starting point and moving in a clockwise
direction all components are numbered in consecutive order as
they occur. Thus, for example, in Figure 4 it will be noted
that the north wall is labeled Fl and the door in that wall is
labeled Dl. Further, it should be noted that there is no
window in the north wall (Fl) and that the first window en­
countered as one moves in a clockwise direction is in the east
wall (F2). It is that window, then, which is labeled Wl. A
need to make precise reference to specific corners in each
structure resulted in a classification system whereby they
receive a designation which indicates their location in refer­
ence to the walls, that is, the label Fl/2 refers to the
corner formed at the juncture of Features 1 and 2.
In addition to using a unique datum point for each

4

structure the concept of taking measurements on a fixed datum
plane was employed. At the bakery building, for example, the
datum point was established on the southeast corner (F2/3) at
a point 30 inches above ground level. To mark that spot
a mason's nail was countersunk in the stone of the building
and secured with epoxy. A line was tied to the datum nail,
run across the east wall (F2), leveled with a line level and
secured to the northeast corner (Fl/2) with another mason's
nail. In this manner a level line was established along the
face of all four walls and measurements for the structure
were made in relationship to that line and the datum point.
The line was conceptualized as the edge of a plane which
cut through the structure and which provided a reference for
an imaginary grid which enclosed the structure and whose
increments were feet and inches.
Table 1.

41 MN 2, alphabetic designation of building
components.
Designation
component
Principal exterior walls
F
(referred to as features
hence the designation F)
R
Room
D
Door - exterior
d
Door - interior
Window
W
P
Pillar - exterior veranda
pillar - interior veranda
P
Chimney
C
Fireplace
f
Modified courtyard
Me
vent
V

Architectural and construction terms vary in usage and
definition not only from region to region but also from
speaker to speaker. Therefore, to facilitate understanding
of the usages adopted here a glossary has peen provided. The
definitions listed on the following pages came from two sources:
A Dictionary of Building, J. S. Scott, 1964 and Building
Construction, W. H. Huntington, 1963. Entries which are marked
with an asterisk are descriptive terms which were employed in
the field and indicate the author's own usage.
5

GLOSSARY
APRON - In:'a window frame the part of the finish below the
stool (Huntingt6n~.633).
ASHLAR - (1) A square-hewn stone. (2) stone walls or fac­
ings finely dressed to given dimensions, lain in
courses with thin joints, about 1/8 inches thick,
(Scott.L 20) •
BEARING WALL - one that supports any vertical load in add­
ition to it's own (Huntington:.208).
BOND - (1) The interlocking of masonry units in the face of
a wall by overlapping them in such a manner as to break
the continuity of vertical joints. (2) The interlocking
of masonry units between the face and back of a wall in
such a manner as to provide mutual support. (Huntington:.2l2).
BOTTOM RAIL - The bottom member of a sash (Huntington: 623).
BRIDGING BEAM - Horizontal boards resting on top of and cros­
sing the capitals of the columns thereby spanning the
distance between columns; also supporting the rafters,
facis and soffit. *
CAP - Upper member forming the top of a column, pier, chimney
etc. (Huntington:; _212) •
CASING - In window and door frames the interior trim at the
sides of the opening (Huntington:. 633).
CEILING JOIST - A joist which carries the ceiling beneath it
but not the floor over it (Scott: 58).
COMMON JOIST - Wooden boards laid on edge to span a gap be­
tween walls. Floorboards are nailed directly to them
(Scott;:.58) •

*

Descriptive term uriginated by author •
6

COMMON RAFTER - The common rafter is a sloping timber braced
between wall plate and ridge pole (after Scott: 73).
CORNICE - A horizontal projecting member at or near the top
of an exterior wall, usually molded for decorative
effect; also a moulding at the junction of the side walls
and ceiling of a room (Huntington: 212).
COUPLED RAFTERS - A name given to the end pair of rafters when
they oversail the gable end (after Scott: 26).
COURSE - A continuous 'horizontal layer of masonry units forming
part of a wall (Huntingtonl_2l2).
CURTAIN WALL - An exterior nonbearing enclosure wall,(Huntington:
208).
DECKING - Horizontal roofing members perpendicular to and
supported by rafters. Shingles are applied to decking.*
EAVES - The lowest, overhanging part of a sloping roof (Scott: 110).
FACIA - A wide board set vertically on edge, fixed to the
rafter ends or wall plate or wall (Scott; 120).
FOOTING - The part of a wall in contact with the ground, de­
signed to spread the wall load over a sufficient area
so that the allowable bearing capacity of the soil is
not exceeded (Huntington:,213).
FOUNDATION - The masonry structure below the first floor on
which a building is supported~ also the structure at
'::;:bhecbotbfom of~a wail~designea~t:o:.:t:i:'ansinit the wall load
to the earth (Huntington:_2l3).
FOUNDATION BED - The soil or rock on which a building rests
may also be called the foundation, and its surface the
foundation bed (Huntington: 104).
FOUNDATION WALL - One built below the ground level, below the
curb level, or below the floor level immediately above
the ground level (Huntington; 208).
GABLE or GABLE END - Triangular piece of wall closing the end
under a gable (Huntington: 213).

7

GABLE BOARD - A sloping board (built in pairs) along a gable,
covering the_ends of roof timbers, (Scott: 26).
GABLE ROOF - A roof with a gable at one or both ends (Scott:. 145) •
GLAZIER'S POINTS - Small triangular or diamond-shaped pieces
of zinc, driven into the rabbet to hold panes of glass
in a wood sash before putty is applied (Huntington': 642).
GLAZING - Placing the glass panes in position (Huntington: 624).
HEAD - Member at the top of a window a~ door frame (Huntington:
213).
HEAD CASING - In window and door frames the interior trim at
the top of the opening (Huntington:,633).
HEADERS - stones which extend entirely through the wall from
face to back (Huntington: 256).
HIP RAFTER - A rafter forming a hip (Scott: 166).
~CK

RAFTER - A short rafter between hip rafter and eave or
between valley and ridge (Scott: 178).

JAMB - A
~MB

siae

member of a window or door frame (Huntington: 213).

CASING - The interior trim on jambs at the opening where
the frame is set to give a reveal on the inside of the
opening (after Huntington: _633) •

JOINT - The mortar-filled space between adjacent masonry
units (Huntington:.2l3).
LUG SILL - A door or window sill with its ends built into the
masonry and bedded only at the ends, the space between
being left entirely free from mortar except for the
pointing mortar which is applied later. ff this prac­
tice is not followed, the sills will be quite certain to
break when the ends become loaded as the work progresses
lHgnbmllgton: .213) •
LUMBER:
DRESSED - Lumber that has been surfaced by a planing
machine (for purposes of attaining smoothness of
surface and uniformity of size) (Huntington: 58).
8

LUMBER:
FINISHED - See under DRESSED
FLAT-SAWN - sawing logs with parallel cuts, a method of
conversion which wastes less timber than any other (Scott).
FULLCUT - Lumber cut to whole, half, or quarter-inch incre­
ments.*
MATCHED - Lumber that has been worked with a tongue on
one edge of each piece and a groove on the opposite edge,
to provide a close tongue-and-groove joining by fitting
two pieces together; when end-matched the tongue and '
greove are,:wGrked oh"tae:enes also 'Hun~ingt:on;58).
ROUGH - Lumber that has not been dressed (surfaced) but
has been sawed, edged, and trimmed at least to the ex­
tent of showing saw marks in the wood on the four long­
itudinal surfaces of each piece for its overall length
(Huntington: 58).
UNDERCUT~- Lumber cut to fractional increments of less
than 1/4 inch.*
MASONRY - May be defined as a built-up construction or combina­
tion of building units of such materials as clay,cshale,
concrete, glass, gypsum, or stone, set in mortar, or
plain concrete. Masonry may consist wholly or in part
of hollow masonry units laid contiguously in mortar
(Huntington; 207).
MEETING oi CHECK RAILS - The adjacent rails of sashes placed
one above another (Huntington:.623).
MORTAR - May be defined as a plastic mixture of cementatious
materials, fine aggregates, and water, used to bond
masonry or other structural units. Mortar of pouring
consistency is called grout (Huntington: 207).
MOULDING - A continuous projection or groove used as decoration
to throw shadow, sometimes also to throw water away from
a wall (after Scott;.2l2).
MULLION - A vertical member that subdivides a frame or a ver­
tical member placed between and attached to adjacent
frames· (Hunting'bOht '(23) •
NONBEARING WALL - A wall ,that supports no vertical load other
than its own weight (Huntington: 208).

9

PANES or LIGHTS - The units of glass included within a window
frame or sash area (Huntington: 624).
PITCH-FACED STONE or PITCHED-FACE STONE - Stone which has
been worked at the quarry with the pitching tool. It
may be rubble or ashlar but is always rough (Scott; ~232).
RAKE - The edge of a sloping roof which overhangs a gable or
pediment_(scott: 255).
REVEAL - The part of the jamb of an ppening which is exposed
between a door or window frame and the face or back of
a wall (Huntington; .214).
ROUGH HEWN - See under PITCH-FACED STONE
RANDOM RUBBLE - Rubble walls built of stones which are of
irregular shape and size and not coursed (Scott; ~256).
RUBBLE - (1) construction stones with little or no shaping
(Huntington). (2) Walling stones which are not smoothed
to give fine joints like ashlar but are sometimes squarQ
ed and coursed (Scott: 270).
SASH - A framed unit which may be included within a window
frame and may be fixed in position or arranged to open
for natural ventilation or cleaning (Huntington: ,623).
SILL - (1) The member at the bottom of a window or door open­
ing. A slip sill has the same width as the opening. The
ends of a lug sill pro~ect into the masonry at each end
of the sill (Huntington; 214).
SINGLE FLOOR - A timber floor in which the joists span from
wall to wall (Scott; 292).
SINGLE HUNG WINDOW - A sash window of which only one sash,
usually the bottom one, is movable (after Scott: 292) •
SHAKES - Hand split shingles (Scott: 285).
SHEATHING - Close-boarding nailed to a' timber frame or to
rafters as a base for wall or roof cladding (Scott: 287).

10

SOFFIT BOARD - A horizontal board nailed to the underside of
rafters, forming the soffit under an overhanging eave
(Scott: _301) •
SPRINGING LINE - The horizontal line in an arch joining the
intersections between the surfaces of the walls and the
surface of the arch intrados at each side. See also
SPRINGINGS (Scott:_308).
SPRINGINGS - The intersections at each side of an arch between
its lower surface (intrados) and the faces of the walls
or piers which carry it (Scott:_308).
STILES - Side members of a sash (Huntington: _623) •
STOOL - In window frames the sill of the interior finish
(Huntington:_633).
STOP Or STOP BEAD - The outer and inner guides for a sash
(Hunt ington.: , 633) •
SQUARED STONE MASONRY - Stone shaped to give a uniform verticle
joints (Huntington~_251).
SQUARED RUBBLE - Rubble walling of stones of varying size which
are squared {S~ott! 309}~~~
TOP RAIL - The top member of a sash (Huntington:_623).
TRIMSTO~

- Cut stone used as a trim around doors and windows
in walls constructed of rubble masonry (Huntrington: 261).

TRIMMER JOIST - A short joist which encloses one side of a
rectangular hole in a wood floor (Scott: 339).
VALLEY RAFTER - The rafter which lies along the line of a
valley carries a valley gutter or a valley board (Scott:
347) •

WALL PLATE - A horizontal timber along the top of a wall at
eaves level. It carries the rafters or joists (Scott:
352) •
WANE - Bark seen on flat sawn timber (after Scott ~ _352) •

11

WEATHER PANEL - An exterior framed panel which is located be­
neath the rake of a veranda roof. It functions to en­
close the open end of the roof so as to protect roofing
timbers from direct exposure to weather.*
WYTHE - A continuous vertical section or layer of a wall one
masonry unit in thickness and tied to its adjacent ver­
tical layer or layers, in front or back, by bonders or
headers, metal ties, orgroutr also called a leaf or
tier (Huntington: 214).
YOKE - The top member of a window or door frame, also called
the head (Huntington:~633).

12

BAKERY

Introduction

The ruin of a two-room building which once functioned
as a military bakery (Structure M2) is approximately 1,312
feet north of U.S.G.S./B.M. 2171 at an average elevation of
2,164 feet Mean Sea Level, m.s.l., (Fig. 2). It is situated
on a grass covered downhill slope which gently fans out to
the north toward the San Saba River. In that vicinity a
thin layer of clayey soil frequently gives way to bedrock
outcroppings of Edwards formation and associated limestones.
The hill in early spring has only a scant floral cover of
mesquite trees and prickly pear cactus.
A search of War Department records obtained from the
National Archives in Washington, D.C., has provided strong
evidence that this north sector of Fort McKavett was devoted
to bakeries throughout most of the 22-year history of military
occupation. However, questions remain concerning the number
and precise location(s) of bakery building(s). A consideration
of the records coupled with data retrieved during field inves­
tigations provided some tenative and interesting answers which
are presented in the following paragraphs.
It is possible that all baking activity during the
first few years at Fort McKavett occurred without the exist­
ence of a formal bakery, as an 1853 list of the fort's build­
ings did not mention such a structure (Jackson 1853). The
first refrence to a bakery appeared in 1856 when Col. J.K.F.
Mansfield, following his inspection of the fort, wrote:
" ... bakery is a very poor apology for a building being entire­
ly of canvas and unsuitable; but good bread." (Crimmins 1939:
364). Therefore, while Mansfield did not make it clear, the
present investigators suggest that the canvas was a super­
structure which either appended or incorporated a stone and/
or brick oven. Thus, Fort McKavett's first bakery may have
been a temporary tent-like affair.
13

A map, which accompanies Mansfield's report, shows
the bakery in the general vicinity of structure M2; however,
as tbe map does not h~~ a scale, the location of the bakery
cannot be determined with any precision.
Support for the suggestion of a tent bakery can be infer­
red from a comment made in a letter approximately one year
after Mansfield1s inspection. On May 26, 1857, sergeant s. B.
Holabird, in partial response to a query from Major D. H.
Vinton (Chief Quarter Master, Department of Texas) I stated, "A
new Bake [sic] house has just been finished of stone, but the
oven is nearly burnt out 'I
(Anonymous 1969: 20).
Though it
is entirely possible that a second structure with a new oven
had been built, it presently seems more tenable to suspect that
in 1857 a stone building was constructed replacing the canvas
superstructure and incorporating the old oven. Thus, the si~
uation was precipitated in which a new bake house had burned
out ovens. Should this be the case, it was not until 1857 that
Fort McKavett contained a reasonably permanent bakery building.
Of the historic documents currently known, none contain
further discussion or illustration of a bakery during the years
between 1857 and 1870. Three points warrant brief mention here.
First, it seems a safe assumption that the building stood the
test of two to three years service until demilitarization of the
hilltop. Secondly, were this the case, then that building was
one of several which experienced disuse, weathering, and lack of
repair during the non-military years of 1859-1868. And finally,
upon reactivation in 1868 the building which would have been at
least 12 years old was not afforded space on a fort map (Tani­
guchi and others 1968: 72). Indeed, an historically identifiable
bakery remains absent until 1870, when, in a report on the in­
stallation, Acting Assistant Surgeon General Redford Sharp indi­
cated "The post bakery is new, .••
(Sharpe 1870: 205). If the
documentation considered in this study is a correct reflection of
reality, negative evidence again argues for a lack of a formal
working bakery at Fort McKavett for about two years.
II

An 1871 map located a bakery building in approximately the
same position as the 1856 map~and is the second map to show such
a structure (Taniguchi and others 1968: 74). Thus, both maps
show bakery buildings in the general vicinity of Structure M2.
Then an 1874 map shows the building, in the same location, but
with a structural-modification, an addition to the southwest
corner (Anonymous 1969).
14

Today, extensive wall patching is apparent in the south­
west corner of structure M2, leading these investigators to
believe that it is the building which was illustrated on the
1874 map.
In 1875 two maps (Taniguchi and others 1968: 75, 76) indi­
cate for the first time a second structure associated with the
bakery, that is, a bakery storehouse. The storehouse is located
northward from the bakery and today, the foundation of a stone
building can be seen in that area (Appendix V).
Pre-Investigation Condition
upon arrival at Fort McKavett, this research team found
structure M2 in a serious state of ill-repair (Fig. 3). The
building, which is constructed of limestone masonry, has the
remnant of a hipped roof. That lack of a substantial roof has
produced the following effects:
1. Chemical and mechanical erosion of the mortar in
the walls, and consequently:
2. Weakening and partial collapse of several walls-­
specifically: north wall (Fl) seriously weakened;
east wall (F2) weakened~ south wall (F3) partially
collapsed; west wall (F4) weakened: interior
division wall completely collapsed .•. (Table 2
for cross reference to feature designations).
3. Almost complete destruction of the wood floor from
both exposure to meteoric water and from the damage
caused by the stone falling out of the wall ••.
Unfortunately, a non-military fireplace and chimney are
the best preserved of the building's components.

15

Table 2.

Component
walls:

41 MN 2, Bakery - cross reference to component
designations. Compare with Figure 4.
Designations
Fl
F2
F3
F4

Compon~nt

north
east
south
west

Doors:

Fl/2
F2/3
F3/4
F4/l

Dl
D2

Windows:
Corners:

Designations

north­
east
south­
east
south­
west
northwest

Wl
W2

W3
vents:

Vl
V2
V3
V4

north",­
wall
east wall
east wall
south wall
north ·wall
south wall
west wall
west wall

post-Investigation Condition

Archeological investigations at the bakery entailed
elements of both immediate and latent destruction. In doc­
umenting arch height and vent details for the two possible
ovens, it was necessary to selectively remove some mid-wall,
limestone blocks from the interior of the west wall (F4).
That extraction, when coupled with earlier deterioration and
continued exposure to weathering shall, undoubtedly, hasten
further degradation of the entire wall. No additional in
situ masonry was altered.
Shortly after commencing 'examination of the building
interior it was necessary to remove much of the intrusive
room fill. Although this action enhanced archeological in­
vestigation, it opened~the floor of the structure to direct
effects of climate, people, and wildlife.
At the conclusion of this projectls field involvement
with Structure M2, a total of 21 excavation units and extensions

16

had been explored. Such action resulted in the exposure of
both exterior wall and oven wall foundations. These compo~
nents are now in urgent need of stabilization to insure their
preservation.

Initial Observations

Structure M2 is rectangular in plan, measuring 41 feet
7-3/4 inches by 24 feet 1 inch and maintains a long-axis
orientation of N63.5 0 W (Fig. 4). It is a one-stor~-bui1ding
with an average height at the corners of 10 feet. The rubble
filled cavity-walls contain evidence of eight intentional
openings, two doors, three windows, two ground level vents,
and one unidentified opening which has been sealed. The ex­
terior walls have an average thickness of 2 feet and have
been whitewashed on both the interior and the exterior sur­
faces. A history of extensive repair and replacement is in­
dicated by the variations in mortar types, whitewash, and
building materials.
The building interior is approximately 37 feet 6 inches
by 20 feet and is divided roughly in half with a wall which
is oriented perpendicular to the long-axis. The wall is in
an advanced state of collapse and contains the remains of one
door, as well as a fireplace and chimney.
The interior wal1s_,of the back room have an additional
structural component which can best be described as a ha1f­
wythe (see Glossary). It starts at ground level and has been
built as though it were intended to be a third wythe, but it
terminates about midway up the wall. That creates the appear­
ance of a 1-foot wide shelf on both the north and south walls
(F1 & 3). It is possible that these shelves represent sprin~
ing lines for the oven arches. The back wall, (F4), likewise
had a half-wythe i-however, the upper portion has been complet­
ed. The presence of the former half-wythe for that wall is
indicated by a horizontal line of tabular limestone blocks at
its midpoint (Fig. 5).
The floor, of pine, tongue-in-groove cut boards, has
joists supported on limestone blocks and was installed by

17

civilian owners.
or a ceiling.

There is no evidence of either baseboards

Architectural Details

Foundation

The walls of structure M2 lack a formal foundation or
footing, instead, the entire building load was intended to
be transmitted, through the first course, to bedrock. As
exemplified in excavation unit M2:E8 (Fig. 6), that first
course was established directly on the top soil. Although,
a lime base mortar with caliche temper was occasionally
spread across the top soil, possibly to fill in localized
depressions.

Mortar

There are four types of mortar which have been used in
construction and repair of the Bakery. The analysis of these
mortar types was accomplished in the field with these goals
in mind:
1. Establishment of the gross mechanical composition
of the mortar, a process which included an estimate
of both the matrix and tempering material.
2. Discovery of whether or not a chronological
type sequence would provide useful information
as to which mortar had been used by the mili':"'­
tary and which by civilians.
Type 1 was found in undisturbed areas of the walls at
foundation level and it is therefore concluded that this is
the original mortar (.Table 3)-. It a1.so oozed into the
cavity area of the walls, where it served to cement the
rubble core, and inside the building it was trowled across
surface depressions in a plastering fashion. Due to the

18

excessive weathering experienced by the walls and the subse­
quent deterioration of the mortar, it was impossible to ascer­
tain the extent to which this mortar was originally used
either to cement the rubble core or to plaster the walls.
Table 3.

41 MN 2, Bakery - gross composition and sequencing
of mortar types.

Mortar
Type

Sample
Provenience

Matrix

Aggregate

Use

Type 1 (M)

M2:F4

Lime

Caliche

1.Original
construction
2.Plastering

Type 2 (M)

M2:F4

Lime

Red sand,
caliche

1.Original
construction
2.Plastering
3.Repointing

Type 3 {C}

M2:F3

Lime

1.Repointing
Grayish
sand,water- 2.Replacement
worn gravel

Type 4 (C)

M2:F4

Cement

Sand &
gravel

1.Repointing
2.Replacement

M - Military
C - Civilian
Type 2 is a red mortar exhibiting a degree of
hardness which surpasses any of the other types found at
Structure M2. It is composed of a lime matrix with two temp­
ering agents: red sand and caliche. The two tempering agents
were used in differing proportions, which could lead to the
reclassification of Type 2 into two separate varieties. How­
ever, such a distinction would have required a level of analy­
sis beyond the scope of this project. Therefore, considering
Type 2 mortar to be in a single class let us proceed to differ­
entiate, as far as is possible, its separate uses. First, a
mixture of lime, red sand and oaliche was found to occur above

19

the mid-wall line in the west wall (F4) in the area which
appears to have been abutted by the arches of the ovens.
Further, chunks of this mortar type were found throughout
the overburden removed from the oven foundations. Specifical­
ly in excavation units M2:13, 13a and 13b (Fig. 4). However,
it should be made clear that Type 2 mortar was not present in
the masonry of the oven foundation which was exposed by unit
M2:15.
The second variety of Type 2 is also lime based with a
red sand temper but it has virtually no caliche. It was
employed sporadically across the surface of the interior walls
as both a supplement to Type 1 plastering and as a repointing
agent.
Both Type 1 and Type 2 mortars were found to have been
whitewashed, a condition not true of the remaining mortar
types to be discussed. Speculation as to whether or not
whitewashing could be attributed to the military and not to
civilians has not proved to be fruitful. Therefore,: it is
merely conjecture that whitewashing was solely a military
activity and that its presence can act as a line of demar­
cation between military and civilian occupations.
Type 3 mortar was found to have been used to point up an
area in the vicinity of the door in the east wall (D2}i the
eastern end of the north walli and as a mortar in repair work
along the east end of the south wall. This type was always
found to override either or both Type 1 and Type 2 and was
never found to have been whitewashed. The contemporary roof,
which is considered to be a civilian product was found to have
been bedded in Type 3 mortar. Thus, on the basis of that fact
of construction, and not on the basis of the presence or
absence of whitewash, this mortar type is felt to be civilian
in origin.
Type 4 mortar was found to have a cement matrix and to
have been used for repointing, replacement, and in construc­
tion of the intrusive chimney and fireplace in the dividing
wall. It was found to override all previously mentioned mor­
tars and no single case of whitewash applied to Type 4 was
found.
It is clearly considered to be civilian in origin.
The mortar type sequence which has been presented

20

attempts to demonstrate which mortars were used by the mili­
tary and which were not. The most which can be asserted wit~
out ambiguity is that Types 1 and 2 were associated with the
original construction of the building. Further, Types 3 and
4 were used solely in replacing and repairing. At this junc~
ture, while it is theoretically impossible to ascertain which
parties, military or civilian, were responsible for the v.arious
building phases which utilized the Type 3 and 4 mortars, it is
strongly suggested that civilians can be held accountable for
these latter two types.
walls
There are four random-rubble, cavity walls. The masonry
is composed of roughly-shaped stones, well bonded and brought
at irregular intervals to discontinuous but approximately
level beds or courses; the inner-wythe void is filled with
cobble size, fragmented, limestone rubble. Often the stones
are nearly squared but there are not enough of them to preclude
classifying the walls as randon-rubble. The stones are finish­
ed with no more than a pitched face. Trimstone at doors and
windows are squared and act as headers to bond the wythes.
Final outside wall height measured from the foundation
level to the top of the present corner stones va~iea consider­
ably due to the slope of the ground surface (Table 4).
Table 4.

41 MN 2, Bakery - exterior wall height at corners.
Height

Corner
Northeast
southeast
southwest
Northwest

9 feet, 10 inches
8 feet, 1-3/4 inches
10 feet, 8-3/4 inches
10 feet, 11 inches

(Fl/2 )
(F2/3 )
(F3/4)
(F4/l)

Finishing treatment afforded interior and exterior wall
surfaces differs. As noted above the stones are finished with
21

a pitch face. The interior surfaces received an initial
attempt at plastering as the excess mortar which oozed out
from the interstices was trowled across the face of the stones.
Secondarily, it appears that Type 2 mortar was applied on the
interior surface, possibly to create a plaster covering which
sealed the surface, although it followed the undulations of the
stone and by no means created a smooth, flat finish. Finally,
there are traces of whitewash on both the interior and exterior
walls. That last surface finishing was applied directly to the
stone outside and on top of the plaster surface inside.
Roof
Today the bakery walls support a hipped roof. That roof
was found to have been constructed with modern cut lumber (see
Glossary) and wire nails (Fontana and Greenleaf 1962: 47,55)
which effectively precludes classifying it as a product of
military construction. Further, the wall plates which support
the contemporary roof are bedded in Type 3 mortar and are also
cut to modern dimensions. If modern cut lumber and Type 3
mortar are reasonable indicators of post-military activity,
then the entire military roof from the wall plates up has been
replaced. Thus, all physical evidence of the original roof
has disappeared.
The only indication of the original design exists in an
1875 perspective drawing of the fort (Taniguchi and others
1968: 76) which shows the bakery with a pitched roof.
Windows
There are presently three windows in Structure M2 and one
area which appears to have been a window but is now sealed with
limestone masonry.
The window in the east wall (Wl) is centered at 16 feet
1-3/4 inches from the datum point on the southeast corner
(F2/3). The placement of this window is probably original as
all trimstones are laid in Type 1 mortar. Only one of the two
nailers currently in situ is thought to be original (the lower

22

left as you face the exterior). The lintel is composed of
both adz-hewn timbers and sawn boards, thus it exhibits a
combination of possibly original and obviously intrusive mat­
erial. The frame is entirely intrusive as it is composed of
modern cut lumber, secured with wire nails and has been bed­
ded with Type 3 mortar. Remnants of whitewash on the frame
suggest that the window once had an interior reveal (Fig. 7).
Window 2 (W2) in the south wall is centered at 16 feet
4-1/2 inches from the datum point on the southeast corner
(F2/3) (Fig. 4). As a consequence of wall collapse on both
sides of this window, very little of the original masonry
frame is left. However, that portion still intact is composed
of trimstone cemented in place with both Type 3 and 1 mortars.
Those stones bedded in Type 1 mortar retain traces of white­
wash and surround one nailer which is thought to be original.
Therefore, it is suggested that Window 2 is the remnant of an
original window opening. The present frame is of modern cut
lumber and is secured with wire nails, for these reasons it
is considered intrusive.
window 3 (W3) is also located in the south wall (F3) and
is centered at 32 feet 9-1/2 inches from the datum corner
(Fig. 4). The frame in this window is of modern cut lumber
and has been attached to the nailers with wire nails. The
sill is well above the plane of true horizon alignment with
Window 1 and 2 and both sill and jamb are secured with Type 3
mortar. For these reasons window 3 is considered entirely
intrusive into the original construction. It will be shown
later that any wall opening at this end of the building would
have opened directly into the oven.
It is evident that a fourth opening existed in the bakery
and was sealed during a time when Type 3 mortar was in use.
The scars of that opening are in the south wall (F3) and occur
in a pattern suggesting that it was centered at 6 feet and 1
inch from the datum corner (F2/3) (Figs. 4,8). A pattern of
massive repair readily apparent in this portion of the south
wall both on the interior and the exterior suggests the
following:
1. A complete opening through the wall.
2. A wall aperture no larger than 5 and 1/2 feet square
commencing 2 feet above the present ground surface.
23

3. One full cut nailer (2 by 6 inches) bedded in Type 1
mortar argues for the former presence of some sort
of frame.
In the above vein and in light of the occurence on the
1874 map of modifications to a structure in this vicinity,
it seems reasonable to assume that M2 is the structure shown
on the 1874 map, and that a framed opening was built into the
south wall (F3) at some point during its military history.
Further, as it was sealed with masonry Bedded in Type 3 mortar,
the opening may have remained functional from its inception
until the end of the military occupation.
In overview, it is proposed that at least two and possib­
ly three windows existed in structure M2 from the time of its
first use until final demilitarization. It is further suggest­
ed that they had interior reveals and were framed. unfortu~
nately no evidence remains of original framing or other window
dressing.

Doors

There are currently two exterior doors in Structure M2.
One of those openings (D2) is original to building construction
while the other (Dl) has been added since 1883.
Door 1 is in the north wall (Fl) and is centered at 34 feet
11-3/4 inches from the northeast corner (Fl/2) (Fig. 4). That
this door and framing members are later additions is attested
to by the following:
1.

Trimstones circumscribing the door are laid in
Type 3 mortar.

2.

Interfaces of the interstices exhibit whitewashing
suggesting that the stones are reused.

3.

As will be pointed out later, any door in this north­
west portion of the north wall (Fl) during military
occupation would have opened into the oven.

4.

Framing members are sawn boards cut to modern dimen­
sions.
24

5.

Lintels show signs of reuse, having mortise cuts
in them which serve no p~rpose in their current
capacity and they also exhibit multiple nail holes.

6.

The space between the frame and the trimstones has
been pointed with Type 4 mortar.

The second door (D2) is in the east wall (F2) and is
centered at 7 feet 7-1/4 inches from the datum corner (F2/3)
(Figs 4,9). While the door frame is a later replacement, the
wall opening is original to building construction and probably
served as the front and only door of M2 during military occu­
pation. Almost aLl:: -trimstonesarebedded,in Type l-mortar, with
Types 3 and 4 occurring sporadically as media for door frame
bedding and pointing. The entire frame and hung door are
thought to be later replacements for reasons identical to those
for Door 1.
In addition, during the field investigation, a possible
stone sill for Door 2 was located outside and immediately in
front of the doorway. Its dimensions were 2 feet 2·' inches by
about 1 foot and it was about 10 inches high. The doorway is
fully 3 feet 8 inches wide and the stone described above clear­
ly would not completely span the opening. However, in a 1961
photograph.a stone appears in place as a sill for Door 2 and
it does not span the doorway opening (Don Wilkinson, photo­
graphic collection). Thus, some support is given to the notion
that the stone found near the door may have been a door sill
for Door 2 at one time. However, there is no evidence which
links the stone sill in the photograph with the military occ~
pation and construction period. It is mentioned here for the
record and as a possible aid to future investigations or recon­
struction efforts.
There is no evidence to indicate that the building ever
contained additional doors.

Flooring

Structure M2 has undergone two periods of major floor
construction:

25

1.

An early flagstone floor believed to be original
to the military construction period, and.

2.

A later wooden floor believed to be a product of
the civilian construction period.

A comparison of bedrock depth between excavation units
I4 and I3b indicated that the natural surface slope inside
the building is sharp enough to require leveling before a
floor could be constructed. That this was accomplished is
evidenced by remnants of flagstone flooring supported on sev­
eral layers of intrusive fill. See Table 5 for a functional
analysis of the fill and Appendix 1 for the technical descrip­
tions.

Table 5.

41 MN 2, Bakery - functions of flooring components.

Materials

FQnctions
Surfacing

LIMESTONE

CALICHE

Tertiary
Fill

C~menting

CLAY

Secondary
Fill

Final leveling
and support

SILTY CLAY

Primary
Fill

Preliminary
leveling

In general, the preliminary leveling was accomplished by
spreading a layer of soil across the interior ground surface.
That soil was very similar to the then existing top soil as it
was dark, almost black and contained gravel and rocks. Note
should be made here that these general descriptions are not
strictly true for the entire structure as there were some

26

variations seen in the fill beneath the ovens. However, the
variations most likely represent separate batches of fill
rather than separate functional components.
The second layer was of quite different composition and
served a more specific function. It was a light yellowish
clay containing virtually no rocks or gravel. In excavation
unit Il this layer was exposed as a stratum and appeared to
be almost level (Fig. 10). It varied from 2-1/2 to 5 inches
thick and formed a solid level foundation for the stone floor.
At that stage of construction the interior was divided
into functional areas and stone flooring was restricted to the
western half. To complete the floor a caliche grout was
spread on top of the clay foundation and well shaped flagstones
were set in place (Fig. 11). Elevation measurements taken from
the surface of the flagstone floor indicate a final leveling
error of less than 1/2 inch off true horizon.
In summary, it was
in the east side of the
blocks, which were well
produce thin joints and

found that the original military floor
bakery was composed of limestone
finished and carefully placed so as to
a smooth level surface.

Superimposed upon the remnants of the flagstone floor was
a layer of wind deposited silt, the ruin of a wooden floor
and a good deal of wall and roof debris. The wooden floor was
found to have been associated with the intrusive civilian fire­
place, specifically some of the floor joists-were secured to
the hearth with Type 4 mortar, and so were considered intrusive.
Further the floor was composed of stock cut •• to modern dimen­
sions and secured with wire nails.

Ovens

Fort records documenting the ovens in the bakery and
their construction are extremely limited. Further.:l'!'esearch
may reveal the existence of other documents but unless, and
until it does, the following quotation must remain as the
primary historical reference:

27

The bakery is of stone, a new building recently
erected, 41 by 24 feet by 8 feet high, contain­
ing an oven-room with two ovens, each 15 by 8
feet, and the bread-room, 20 feet square. The
ovens, floor and sides, are made of small, flat
sawn bricks or blocks of soap-stone, and the
arches, 2 feet high, are of fire-brick~ capacity,
seven hundred and fifty rations of bread each.
It is not believed that there is anywhere in the
Department of Texas a better oven than the one
described (Sharpe 1875).
Field excavations revealed structural components within
the bakery which substantiate the above statements.
Excavations in the western half of the bakery exposed
the remnants of a masonry foundation which is presumed to be
what is left of the bakery's two ovens. That remnant founda­
tion wall divides the western half of the building into two
equal areas of 13 feet 6 inches by 8 feet 6 inches (Fig. 4).
The discrepancy between these dimensions and those reported
by Sharpe are minor and undoubtly simply represent differences
between the reference points used for the measurements. As
can be seen in Figure 4 the recent civilian wall was con­
structed atop the front of the oven foundation.
The remaining foundation for the front wall is 3 feet
9-1/4 inches wide and is abutted by the flagstone floor. The
division wall between the oven areas is 1 foot 11-1/2 inches
wide. The entire foundation was constructed of cobble and
rubble limestone spalls held in a matrix of very loosely
consolidated clay and caliche. In fact, the fill which was
removed from the foundation interior was composed of materials
identical to those in the actual foundation wall. So c~osely
did these materials resemble each other that the discovery
of the foundation wall was a fortuitous event due solely to the
skill of the excavator. The similarity of materials presented
an initial problem in interpretation as it was not at all clear
that the arrangement of stone which strongly resembled a wall
was, in truth, a wall. However, upon exposure of approximately
half of the area, it became obvious that the wall stones were
laid in a pattern with flat stones forming the parallel wall
lines, whereas, the stones in the fill were entirely randomly
distributed.
28

There are several other architectural details which are
believed to be related to the ovens:
1.

The ground level vents in the north and south
walls (VI andV2) "(Figs. 4/l2)~

2.

the vents in the west wall (V3 and V4) (Figs.
4,5,13):

3.

the half-wythes of the north and south walls
(Fl and 3) (Fig. 5)i

4.

a mortar anomalY,'ontbe'-'west wa 11 interior (F4)
which apparently resulted from the presence of
oven arches (Fig. 5)i and

5.

the presence of 2 steatite blocks in the west
wall (F4) which may be in situ remnants of the
oven interior (Fig. 5).

Because the excavations in the oven area revealed no
evidence whatsoever of intense burning, it is not possible
to place the firebox within the oven area.
The floor level vents may have acted as intake vents for
fresh "airdwhile "the-:::steatite-linea(vents c;inthe ",back ,_wall_ (F4)
may have been for exhaust. A metal plate found in one of
those possible exhaust vents was probably part of a flue
mechanism.
The half-wythes on the north (Fl) and south (F3) walls,
as well as the line of stones across the west wall (F4) give
the appearance of being springing lines for the oven arches.
Further, the mortar anomaly on the back wall (F4) occurs in
an arched pattern beginning at the top of the supposed spring­
ing line.
Sharpe reported an oven constructed with soapstone and
fire brick. The presence of these materials in the over­
burden as well as the occurrence of soapstone in the west
wall (F4) and in the exhaust vents supports that historical
record.

29

Summary
Based upon research of historical documents and field
investigation the following reconstruction of the bakery
is offered:
The building under consideration is believed to have
been constructed by the military about 1874. It was a masonry
structure with limestone cavity walls laid in a random-rubble
pattern. A pitched roof was probably shingled with cedar
shakes. Originally there were probably two windows, one door
and an additional fourth opening, whether window or door is
not absolutely clear. The windows probably were framed and
had interior reveals. The door, also framed, may have had a
stone sill. The interior ground surface was leveled and
divided in half, the front being covered with a flagstone
floor and the rear being occupied with two arched ovens.
Finally, the interior received a plaster cover and then both
interior and exterior were whitewashed.

30

HEADQUARTERS BUILDING
Introduction
The headquarters building is situated on the southeast
margin of the main parade ground where the hilltop begins a
slight downward slope to the east. Average elevation of the
lot is 2,174 feet,~m;s;l.', and the structure is approximately
665 feet north of U.S.G.S./B.M. 2171 (Figs. 2,14). A Tarrant
association (Coffee 1967: 3) clayey soil covers the hilltop,
yielding occasionally to outcropings of limestone bedrock.
One large pecan tree dominates several smaller trees in the
grassy yard surrounding the building.
The lot is believed to have been used by the military
as a construction site for two separate buildings. The
earliest was an adjutant,~s,~6ffice ,aadthe' l.ater;'one ..was :.the
headquarters building. However the fort" records do not' ~
clearly iileicate'theyear in which,the change was made. A
rectangular structure labeled adjutant's office is shown on
maps dating from 1856 through 1868 (Taniguchi and others 1968:
79-76). Of the copies of original maps which were studied at
the time of this writing, one dated 1874 is the earliest show­
ing the headquarters building in the location previously occu­
pied by the adjutant's office (Anonymous 1969: 46). An ear~
lili!!r.: date~is 9:i.v~n..:;!?ythe:NationalF:eark Service report which
states that, 1I • • • the adminstration building was begun in 1873"
(Rickey and Pope 1966: 22). However, there is a contradiction
in that report which raises a question about the validity of
the 1873 date. The report contains an historical base map
which is a composite of all the original fort maps and which
lists the date for the initial appearance of each building.
On it the headquarters building is reported to have first ap­
peared on an 1872 map (Rickey and Pope 1966: Appendix: 4).
Because of the use of the labels 'adminstration building in
the text and 'headquarters building' on the map it was thought
that perhaps the references were to two separate structures.
I

I

31

However, the historical base map does not also list an agmin­
istratio~_buildi~gin addition to th~ headquarters_ building-so
it is assumed that the two names refer to the same structure.
In summary, while there is some question as to the year in
which the headquarters building was constructed, it does seem
probable that a few years after the 1868 revival of the fort
the adjutant's office was replaced with the newer building.
In addition, for the following reasons, it seems reasonable
to assume that the adjutant's office was completely removed:
1.

There is no map known on which both of these
buildings are shown to exist contemporaneously:

2.

inspection of the site does not reveal ruins of
a second structure which could have been the ad­
jutant's office:

3.

there is no architectural evidence for incorpora­
tion of the earlier into the later structure;

4.

archeological investigation has not yet suggested
structural superpositioning, and

5.

the headquarters building still exists.

Thus, it is believed that the headquarters building is the
second military structure to occupy the above specified
tract within the Fort McKavett military reservation.
The original design of structure X is unknown. Apparent­
ly by 1875 it was a six room completed structure as a surgeon
general's report in that year describes it thusly:
The headquarters-building at the post is a stone
structure, 56 by 42 feet, by 10 feet high to the
eaves from the floor, which is raised a little over
2 feet from the ground, situated on the eastern side
of the main parade-ground. A']veranda extends along
the front and sides. This building contains six rooms
rooms, of nearly equal size, viz. the commanding
officer's office, adjutant's office, sergeant major's
and clerk's office, the post school-room, the court­
martial room, and the post library, the latter used

32

at night for school for the enlisted men (Sharpe
and Horton 1875: 214).
The only mention of interior accoutrements is in an
1877 surgeon generalIs report:
During the month a dial has been placed in the
building, communicating with the weather vane on
top of the building and indicating the direction ­
of the wind, and very promptly any changes
(Taniguchi and others 1968: 33).
Finally, the building inventory, submitted when the Army
abandoned the fort June 30, 1883, provides scant new infor­
mation (Anonymous 1883). That inventory reads:
Building # [sic]:
,'~:flel?ignation :
capacity and
condition:
Additions alter­
ations and repairs
made during past
year and their
cost:

17
Hd. Qrls. [sic] Building
6 rooms 15 x 16 feet

No alterations or repairs were specifically mentioned
for the headquarters building. However, a general note for
all structures stated that: "No alterations or changes made
during past year, repairs confined to replacing door locks,
hinges and those [sic] of a similar nature". A note at the
bottom of the report: "Measurement is inside all in feet"
(Anonymous 1883).
These limited accounts constitute the sum of the histori­
cal record concerning architectural details.
Shortly after the Army departed, the building was pur­
chased by civilians and used as a hotel. Verbal accounts of
the hotel and civiliam occupation were obtained from former
residents and hotel proprietors who were living in Fort
McKavett, Texas, attae time of' ·this invesbigation. Seemingly
the hotel was actually owned by no less than four people.

33

These owners then leased it to a series of tenants who man­
aged it as a hotel. While the names of the managers and
their actual dates of occupancy are not documented, it is
reported that there were many changes (Olga Landers, personal
communication).
The outward appearance of the building currently re­
flects many superficial renovations and it is suspected that
the majority of them were instigated during the hotel period.
A porch was added on the building and a bathroom (for bathing
only) was constructed in the southeast corner (F7/8) of the
modified courtyard (Fig. 16) lTable 6). In the northeast
wing (Rl) the fireplace had its mantel and its hearth replaced
and enlarged. A wooden partition wall was installed in that
room and screens were put up at all doors and windows. Rem­
nants of gas pipes and electrical wiring throughout the build­
ing give mute testimony to the arrival of a modern age.
The hotel period lasted until about 1938. Although the
building was not used as a hotel continuously from 1883
through 1938, it was never used as a hotel after 1938. Mr.
Curtis stockton, a Menard County rancher, was the owner from
1938 or 1939 until he sold it to the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department about 1968. During that time he alternately lived
in or rented it, often renting to more than one family at a time.
Before selling to the Texas parks and wildlife Department,
Mr. stockton, too, made some changes. He re-roofed the east
and south sides of the main structure and veranda about 1947.
In 1968, he replaced the decaying, wooden, veranda floor with
poured cement and substituted old utility poles for the orig­
inal roof support pillars. Then, in a major renovation at­
tempt, he tore down the exterior wall of the modified court­
yard and ripped out its flooring with the intention of making
that area into a patio (Figs. l5,16). However, that plan was
never pursued to an end and the structure stands today with
an unfloored, open courtyard where there had been a room.
No changes are known to have been made in the building
since its acquisition by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Depart­
ment with the exception of the alterations made during the
course of investigation for this report.

34

Table 6.

41 MN 2, Headquarters - cross reference to component
designations. Compare with Figure 16.

Component

Designation

walls:

Fl
F2
F3
F4
F5
F6
F7
F8

Corners:

Fl/2
F2/3
F3/4
F4/5
F5/6
F6/7
F7/8
F8/l

Rooms:

Rl
R2
R3
R4
R5

north wall-northeast wing
east wall
south wall
west wall
north wall-northwest wing
west wall-modified courtyard
south wall-modified courtyard
east wall-modified cour~yard
northeast
southeast
southwest
northwest
northwest-modified
southwest-modified
southeast-modified
northeast-modified

courtyard
courtyard
courtyard
courtyard

northeast wing
east room
center room
west room
northwest wing

Pre-Investigation Condition

The headquarters building is a one-story U-shaped structure
with three rooms across the front and two wing rooms behind
(Fig. 16). The wing rooms are separated by a roofed but un­
walled,partially open space referred to in this report as
the modified courtyard (Fig. 15).

A pitched roof follows the U shape of the building ending
in twin gables on the north side. The inner slopes are cover­
ed with corrugated, galvanized metal (Fig. 16) while the outer
35

slopes are shingled with juniper (Fig. 14). The entire roof
is in rather poor condition and every storm or high wind
causes further damage.
An exterior veranda abutts the front and sides of the
building. Its roof is currently supported with creosote­
soaked utility poles which rest on a cement floor. _, That~floor
is at the same elevation as the interior floors. Remnants of
limestone block steps are situated approximately in front of
each exterior door. Deterioration due to weathering is seen
in the facia giving the veranda a dilapidated appearance.
There are nine exterior doorways, four to the modified
courtyard and one from each of the five rooms to the exterior
veranda. Some of the doors are completely missing, the extant
ones are in bad condition, exhibiting multiple scars from
successive replacement of door knobs, keyholes, and box locks.
At Door 1 the frame for a screen door, with the screen missing,
bangs in the wind.
The three front rooms are accessible to each other by
way of interior doorways but those rooms are not connected
internally to the wing rooms. Therefore, entry to either
wing room is accomplished by way of the modified courtyard
or the exterior veranda.
Of 17 windows in the building, five open to the modified
courtyard and 12 to the exterior veranda. In several instances
both upper and lower window sashes are missing and some windows
have been boarded up. There are six lights in each of the
extant sashes, although the remaining glass is largely broken
or cracked. Remnants of screening are still in place at
several windows~ in a few instances screening is merely tacked
to the window frame.
The two gable walls are the only ones in the structure
without either doors or windows.
Each room has a fireplace with those of the east room
(R2) and the center room (R3) sharing a common chimney. The
fireplaces and associated chimneys of the wing rooms are in
the gable walls (Fl & 5). The east wing (Rl) has a mantel of
ashlar cut limestone~ the three front rooms (Rl,2, &~3) have

36

wooden mantels (Figs. 17a,17b,17c) and the mantel is missing
from the west wing (R5). All fireplaces, mantels and hearths
are burned, cracked, and worn.
Wooden floors and ceilings, still in fair condition, are
of tongue and groove construction. The worst deterioration
seen has been:--_created by a leak}<iiLthe roof:~over -the-west-::wing~
There, the damaged roof has permitted rain to enter causing
severe rotting in the ceiling and subsequent rotting of the
floor below.
Interior walls have been plastered to a smooth finish
and painted. A variety of colors (non-military) is represented,
the most outstanding occuring in the east wing. Partitioned
by a wooden wall, half of that room is painted a "hot pink and
half of it a chartreuse green (Appendix IV).
ll

Baseboards occur in each room on every wall. All base­
boards. arein::good:: condition. with the exception of those in
the west:wing (R5) which are partially missing and rain damag­
ed.
The courtyard is completely roofed and remnants of a
wooden ceiling dangle about (Fig. 15,19). Its plastered walls
show considerable rain damage and the plaster ends in an
abrupt vertical line on both the east and west walls (F6-&8)
near-.::t;::he back oL~f;:hecbuilding~ (Fig. 19).'"' This -.distinct - .
vertical edge of the plaster marks the location of the back
wall (F9) which has been removed.
Since the floor of the modified courtyard has been re­
moved, it now has only a dirt surface. That surface is 2
feet below the interior floors and merges evenly with the
exterior ground surface at the back of the building (Fig. 15).
Grass and vines are growing in the modified courtyard and a
bad roof leak has created a very noticeable dripline scar in
the middle of the area.
The yard behind the building is grassy and when one walks
out of the courtyard and looks back at the structure the twin
gable walls, covered with ivy, can be seen.

37

Architectural Details
construction Materials
STONE
stone used in construction is of the cherty to fossili­
ferous, dolomitic, limestone available from nearby quarries
and employed elsewhere at the fort. Only a scanty number of
well-cut and finished stones are used in structure X, whereas
large quantities of rubble and reused building blocks do occur.
They range in size from small, fist-sized cobbles to large, 3
by 1-1/2 by 1:-'1/2 foot square cut blocks. Whitewashed faces
and interfaces on a large number of randomly placed wall stones
suggest that extensive use was made of available detrius from
fallen buildings.
MORTAR
The stone is laid up in a bed of lime matrix mortar
tempered with washed or cleaned flood plain silt. This type
of mortar (Type A) also occurs as a plaster covering on the
walls and contains as inclusives numerous plant roots and
freshwater shell. When Type A appears as a mortar, it has
less root and shell inclusions than when used as a plastering
agent. If differential cleaning was purposefully exercised on
different batches of this mortar/plaster, it is possible that
roots, some small twigs, and shell were left in the silt as a
tempering agent when Type A was to be used as a plaster and
intentionally removed when it was used as a mortar.
WOOD
Army chronicles relate the difficulties to be overcome
in obtaining building lumber and shingles. During the early

38

occupation, milled lumber was shipped in from San~Antionio.
After the 1868 reoccupation, 'General Mackenzie established a
sawmill which was supplied by special details sent out on
wood cutting expeditions. They made use of the local stands
of oak and pecan (Taniguchi and others 1968: 12). Nonetheless,
throughout fort history dressed and matched lumber was shipped
in from non-army sources.
GLASS AND HARDWARE
All glass and hardware is presumed to have been obtained
from distant sources as-thete "'ate "no records of ~-these items~'
being produced at the fort.
Main structure
The main structure is the body of the building exclusive
of the veranda and the modified courtyard. The following
material deals only with that part of the building and is
divided into lJ::'sections, each dealing with one major
construction phase or building component.
FOUNDATION
The headquarters building is constructed on top of a
o to 6-inch, clay-soil, mantle which overlies the limestone
bedrock. The thinness of the soil mantle negates it as a
factor affecting the stability of the building. consequent­
ly, the army builders did not construct a formal foundation
for structure X. Rather, th.e we':!:ght, 6f-the,walls i.s ~ supported
by bedrock. An excavation unit in the modified courtyard area
(Fig. 16) revealed that the first course of wall stones, witfr
out a footing, was laid directly upon the ground surface.
'fhen the foundation wall was built and leveled at a height of
from 12 to 26 inches above ground surface. At that point the
flooring was applied.

39

FLOORING
Plates
When a low level wall 18 incheis wide had been achieved
floor plates (consisting of 7-3/4 inch by 2-1/4 inch rough
lumber) were laid flat upon it. Plaltes are bedded with their
ends abutting, no attempt having beeln made to join them
(Figs. 20 .. 21).
I

I

Joists
Common joists (2-inch by 8-inch rough lumber) are laid
on top of and perpendicular to the floor plates. Placed
approximately 22-3/4 inches apart and nailed to the plates,
their ends extend well into the walls. Froltrtne wings and
center room (Rl,3 & 5) they actually penetrate the walls
(F6,7 & 8) and protrude into the modified courtyard (Figs.
20,21). The exposed ends have been sawn off straight across
the grain, producing a flat surface 'flush with the exterior
walls. The flat ands·';of those,'prot]juding joists serve as
nailers for the floor joists of the interior veranda.
Trimmer joists are used to frame the hearth and chimney
foundations. Placed on both sides of each fireplace foundation
and receiving some but not oomplete support from those founda­
tions, they abut common joists (Fig. 20).

piers
Every Common joist is also supported at midspan with
either a piece of scrap lumber, varying in size but generally
2 inches by 4-1/2 inches or by a pi~e of limestone blocks.
The butt ends of the wooden piers rest on either a small block
of limestone or a second piece of sdrap lumber which has been
placed flat on the ground. No regular pattern exists in the
use of construction materials for the piers, although the
majority of them are scrap lumber.

40

Floorboards
The flooring is of tongue and ~roove, pine boards nailed
to the joists. Floorboards are 'trimmed ":to ~f6rm even edges
at the hearths (Fig. l7b) but are cut:unevenly.a~:thewa-11s .. _
This suggests an intention to later cover those jagged ends.
A uniform 1 inch thickness occurred in all boards but the
width varied from approximately 4 to 6 inches.
WALLS

After the completion of the foundation walls and the
framing of the floor, construction df the main walls con­
tinued.
Determination of wall style or type is based on both the
degree of finishing exhibited in the cub-stone~a.s well 8sstone
placement within the wall (Huntingtdn 1963: 251). All con­
clusions as to finishing and placement of masonry units were
inferred from: (1) exterior walls which have only remnants of
paint and plaster covering them thus allowing stones to be
easily seen (Figs. 15,22): (2) intenior walls which have stone
showing due to collapse of plaster ~Fig. l7c); (3) interior
walls from which plaster was intent~onally removed.
While the limestone blocks used in the headquarters
building exhibit a wide variation in size, shape and degree
of finishing, there are two primary classifications present:
rubble and square cut. Rubble is cQmpletely unfinished rock
without even so much as the sharp eqges knocked off. Square
cut stones have at least been trimm~d so as to give a uniform
vertical joint when laid up. Most df the masonry units are
pitch faced ranging in size from a few square inches to over
3 feet square.
The uses to which the different cuts of stone were put
is widely variable. However, it appears that there was a
marked preference for placing the better shaped and larger
stones in the exterior wall faces, ~t corners, and as trim
around the doors and windows. The ~esult is a random pattern
wall of square cut and rubble stone. Trimstones at doors and
windows also serve as headers betwe$n the interior and exterior
wythes.
41

The interior wythes appear to consist of random rubble
with square cut and reused stone occuring infrequently (Fig.
17c). The core between the wythes is filled with small,
loose rubble.
Interior partition walls appear to be entirely of random
rubble construction.
In an effort to discover how interior walls are tied to
exterior walls, a section of plaster 12 inches by 27 inches
was removed from seven corners (Appendix II). It was discover­
ed that bonding does occur between these several walls although
in a very haphazard fashion. Some of the interior partition
walls simply abut the exterior walls.
The headquarters building has rubble core, cavity walls,
exhibiting a random patterning of rubble and square cut lime­
stone masonry. Trimstones at door and window openings also
function as bonds and the better shaped stones are used in the
exterior walls. Haphazardly tied to exterior walls, interior
partition walls are entirely of random rubble construction.
The top of the walls is leveled at approximately 11 feet
above the floor with the gable ends (Fl & 5) continuing to a
peak at about 15 feet 3 inches above floor level.
CEILING
Single ceiling construction has been employed in the
headquarters building. wall plates (8-1/2 by 2 inches) are
mortared to the top of the walls with those on the east and
west walls of both wings (F2 / 4,6 & e) having their ends bed­
ed in the masonry of the gable ends. wall plates are inter­
connected with lap joints.
ceiling joists (2-1/4 by 7 inches) are:rabbeted~ at both
ends to fit over wall plates and placed from 20 to 23 inches
apart. The upper corner of each end is cut off on a diagonal
parallel to the slope of the roof and they are nailed through
that diagonal cut to the wall plates (Fig. 23).
Tongue and groove ceiling boards are 1 inch thick,

42

their widths varying from 4 to 6 inches with the majority
at 4-1/4 inches. They are blind nailed to the joists with
the nail being driven through the tongue. The ceiling
boards are often long enough to have their ends lap over onto
the top of the stone wall although some have been cut off at
the wallIs edge.
The ceiling boards are of variable lengths and in all
cases when a second board is needed to ~pan the distance
across the room it simply abuts the first board. Each room
is ceiled individually and there are no instances of a ceiling
board completely crossing the stone partition wall.
ROOF
The ridge poles for the roof follow the U shape of the
building.
Rafters
Rafters, 2 by 5 inches, are set in opposing pairs on
either side of the ridge pole. The foot of each rafter has
been cut on a diagonal and placed cut side down on top of
the wall plate and immediately adjacent to a ceiling joist
(Fig. 23). It is nailed to the wall plate but not to ±he
joist. The other end of the rafter, also cut on a slight
diagonal, abuts and is nailed to the ridgepole. In every
case two rafters lean together to give each other support and
in no case is the ridgepole the sole support of a rafter.
Decking
All original decking is flat-sawn lumber which still
retains the baz:k or wane. widths vary from 3/4 to 1 inch
and breadths vary from 8 to 15 inches. Decking is laid on
the roof perpendicular to the rafters. Spaces of approxi­
mately 2 inches to 1 foot separate the boards creating a
slatted effect. End joins between decking boards are simple
abutments.

43

Major repair work occurs in the decking, but it involved only
the removal of old worn materials and their replacement with
newer materials. It does not involve structural changes.
The decking on the exterior slope of both the east and
south sides has been completely replaced with 3/4 by 3 inch
white pine, tongue and groove cut lumber. These boards are
used like slats, placed at varying distances from one another
and not fitted together.
Mr. Curtis stockton, a rancher who previously owned the
building, reports that about 1947 he made the repairs to the
roof. Roof repair work, then, involves only the decking and
shingles.

All components of the building which have been discussed
at this point are believed to be original to fort construction
for the following reasons:
1. Walls are of a single construction style and
show no changes in materials used, whether stone
or mortar.
2. Floor joists are bedded in the walls with Type A
mortari floorboards, while showing minor repairs,
do not show evidence of wholesale removal and
replacement.
3. Wall plates are bedded to the tops of the walls
and are _welJ::,3bedded ~in the gable ends~.w±th·'martar
original to building construction.'
4. Rafters and ceiling'c:joists show no signs of re­
placement and are the only ones ever attached to
the original wall plates.
all material used in the
main structure is also original to fort construction and is
generally still in good condition.
witnthe~exceptioh.oL~repairs,

44

SHINGLES
The primary factor in preservation of the headquarters
building has been the continued presence of a sound roof.
That has been accomplished through diligent reshingling. The
shingles then are the one area of the building which has re­
ceived continuous modification, thus presenting some diffi­
culty. in determining,originality'.
In-field investigations of the various kinds of shingles
provided the following chronology.
Table 7.

41 MN 2, Headquarters - matrix analysis of
shingle types.

shingle
Type

Cut
Nails

Original
Decking

Wire
Nails

Juniper shakes

X

X

Metal shingles

X

X

Juniper shingles
(inner slope)

X

X

X

Metal roofing
(flat seam)

X

X

X

Corrugated
metal roofing

X

X

Juniper shingles
(outer slope)

X

X

Intrusive
Decking

X

Juniper shakes from a very early - possibly original ­
shingling episode were found near the southwest corner of
the modified courtyard (F6/7). They are large, 17-1/2 inches
long and as much as 3/8 inch thick. widths remain unknown as
the extant specimens are badly split. They are secured with

45

two sizes of cut nails: (1) 2 inches long, 5/16 inch head:
and (2) 1-5/16 inch long, 3/16 inch head. The shake is
applied directly to the original decking.
The roof of the modified courtyard consists of two
distinctly different construction phases. The earliest is
refered to as the primary roof and the later as the secondary
roof. An explanation of these two phases will be offered in
the section dealing with the modified courtyard. Presently
only the relationships between the shingle<_types associated
with each will be discussed.
Rusty metal shingles secured with cut nails were found
only on the secondary roof of the modified courtyard. They
are 13 by 9-1/2 inch flat pieces of metal which have beveled
corners with at least one and possibly two nailing tabs.
original to construction of the'secondary component,th§lY were
not used on the primary one. At the demarcation of the two
components small juniper shingles from the primary roof
overlapped the metal shingles.
A third episode consisted of juniper shingles and flat­
seam, flexible-metal roofing. The juniper shingle is 16-1/2
inches long and 1/4 inch thick. width is unknown as the
specimens are badly split. There were secured with both wire
and cut nails. The cut nails occur more often in this shingle
than wire nails and are smaller (1-1/4 inch long; 3/16 inch
head) than those used on the juniper shakes. An example of
the juniper shingle was found on the east slope of the west
wing beneath corrugated metal roofing and applied to original
decking.
The flexible-metal roof is composed of oblong panels
2-1/4 feet by 3 feet, interconnected with flattened crimped

seams. This style of roof is obvious over a large area of
the interior veranda. Whether it also occurs on the main
structure was not determined as corrugated metal roofing
covered that area.
The flexible-metal roof is secured with more wire than
cut nails and is applied on top of the juniper shakes.
Corrugated metal roofing covers the entire inner slope

46

of the main structure and part of the interior veranda roof,
stopping short of the secondary roof. Some sort of metal
roofing, covering the entire inner slope, was present when
the 1936 photo was taken; however, due to the poor ~quality~'
of.~ the photo, -"itt is''~impossible Ito ascertain whether that
roofing is flat or corrugated metal. The corrugated metal is
applied only with wire nails.
The shingling history of the hipped::,slopes is unknown
prior to about 1929. Mr. Curtis stockton reports that he
reshingled and redecked the south and east (F2 & 3) slopes
in 1947 and that the west (F4) slope was reshingled after
a 1929 storm •. All three of those slopes have juniper shingles
secured with wire nails.
Juniper shakes were the oldest style of shingle found,
and the military, reportedly, did have juniper available.
Therefore, it is suggested that they probably, very nearly
match the variety used in original construction.
The metal shingle is believed to have been employed in
the original construction of the secondary roof. when the
interior veranda was converted to a room.

WINDOWS
Wooden framing for the windows is an integral part of
masonry wall construction. Sills, of a variety known as lug
sills, have only their ends mortared in place,
.•• the space between being left entirely free
from mortar except for the pointing mortar which
is applied later,
If this practice is not fol­
lowed, the sills will be quite certain to break
when the ends become loaded ••. (Huntington 1963: 254,255).
The sills used at structure X are rather complicated
(Fig. 26) and require that jambs be fitted to them at the time
of placement in the wall. Nailers are also built into the
sides of the window openings and the jambs are nailed to
them. Lintel beams are set at the top of each window opening;
however, because they are behind both the window framing and

47

the masonry, it was not. p0ssibl:e_to ascertain the ..n1l1Dl:>ercof
beams which are present. It is suspected that since four­
piece lintels are commonly used over windows in other struc­
tures, a like number exist in the headquarters building
windows.
An examination of each window was made determining
that:
1. Jambs and sills are firmly embedded in the walls
and are therefore considered original;
2. Sashes (of those which are extant) are all of a
similar type, and none show any evidence of being
intrusive, they likewise are considered original;
3. Glazing is in very bad condition--many window
panes are either broken, cracked, or missing.
It is difficult to believe that any glass could
have survived from the original military install­
ation.
4. Screening is all considered intrusive as in
every instance it appears to be ~he result of
an after thoughti that is, unframed screening
is in some cases simply tacked or nailed directly
to the jamb.
All windows have single-hung sashes, only 'the bottom
half, without ··the~aid ofweigqtsi-. is,c-movahle,i Theccaecompany­
ing drawings best describe construction details (Figs. 26,27).
No hardware, locks or handles were found associated with the
windows.
sashes are glazed from the outside with six panes, the
mullions being rabbeted to accomodate lights. Small cut nails,
(13/16 inches long, 2/16 inch head) as well as glaziers points,
held the panes in place for face puttying.
DOORS

Nailers and lintels are the only part of door frames
which are built into the wallsi other framing members were
48

added later. Door frames are recessed from the exterior of
the building approximately 10 inches and doors are fitted
to swing inward (Figs. 16,21). Door frames are relatively
simple and were installed after the walls had been finished
(Fig. 28). Four-panel doors were attached to frames with
both 3 and 4 inch butt hinges.
Careful measurements of the box locks in restored
barracks V2 were made. Size calculation of various scars on
Structure X doors revealed that most doors had scars similar
to those which would be made by a box lock mechanism (Appendix
III}.
Frames for interior doors between the three front rooms
(R2,3 & 4) are still in place and in good shape. No conclusive
evidence was found which would indicate the type of locks useD
on those doors.
FIREPLACES
Fireplaces, hearth foundation, and chimneys are also an
integral part of the walls and constructed simultaneously
with them.
All chimneys project approximately 12 inches into the
rooms. Hearths and their foundations are generally 16 inches
by 48 inches (Figs. 17a,17b,17c,20).
All fireplaces have keystone constructed flat arches
supported on a metal bar (Fig. 17b). Nailers are bedded in
the masonry fronts for mantel attachment. It seems probable
that the bare masonry was coveEed;jwith some sort of concrete
or plaster as it is today to give a finished look to the
front (Fig. 17c).
Three types of mantels are present. In the east wing (Rl)
the mantel has been removed and replaced with ashlar cut stone.
The east and center rooms (R2 & 3) have the same type of wood­
en mantel and it is considered to be the earliest type found
(Figs.17a,17b). A later style, represented in the west room
(R4), is described by Taniguchi (1968) as typical for the
building~ however, as that mantel is constructed with both

49

wire and cut nails, .it is not considered
gators as representative of fort style.

by~the~

investr­

BASEBOARDS AND PLASTER
Wedge-shaped wood blocks have been driven into the walls
at floor level to act as nailers for baseboards. Baseboards
are 9 inches high and beveled on their upper edg~.
A variation in that style was noted in the west wing (R5).
There the baseboards are of three part construction: a bottom
member 6 inches high is topped with a 3-1/2 inch high, beveled
member, and quarter-round moulding is applied at floor level.
Shims are used in the corners between the baseboard and
wall to hold and tighten them. The wall plaster then over­
rides the baseboard's beveled edge to create a smooth finish.
Finally, a whitewash is applied to all plaster and a white
paint finish to ceilings and all interior woodwork. (Appen­
dix IV).

INTERIOR FINISHING
No special finishing, other than the weather vane mention­
ed in the 1877 s~rgeon general's report, was noted in the
fort documents. No evidence to indicate the placement of that
vane in the building was found - possibly an electrical fix­
ture has been placed in the pole left by the vane.

Exterior Veranda

The headquarters building has attached to it on three
sides a veranda which has suffered a number of changes (Figs.
14,20,22).
In this section the veranda will be discussed in terms
of four separate constructional units, each with its own
history of alterations. The four units are: (1) Foundation
and Flooring: (2) step placement; (3) Supporting columns~ and

50

(4) Roof. Each unit will be presented first with a descrip­
tion of it as it existed at the onset of field investigations;
then with an interpretation of the number and manner of succes­
sive alterationsi and finally with a suggestion as to the
probable reconstruction of its original configuration.
FOUNDATION AND FLOORING
The contemporary veranda has a limestone rubble founda­
tion with a poured concrete slab floor. According to curtis
stockton he constructed the present foundation and flooring
in 1968 and reports that he took no great pains with it, simply
doing the easiest thing possible. He further states that his
primary building material was stone from other structures,
particularly the commanding officers home. This is supported
by the sporadic appearance of whitewashed stones in the founda­
tion wall.
Due to massive modifications made by Mr. stockton,
coupled with the thinness of the soil mantle overlying bed­
rock, it was thought that most traces of an earlier foundation
were probably destroyed. Further, it was thought that an
attempt at wholesale removal of the present flooring and
foundation might destroy any remaining evidence. The chances
of recovering any evidence with spot testing were considered
minimal. On these assumptions limited subsurface reconnaisance
was carried out on the foundation.
Archeological investigation was confined to the removal
of a segment less than 1 foot square of the concrete floor, at
a point near the northwest corner (F4/5) where the floor abuts
~he west wall (F4).
Crowbars, sledge hammers, picks, and
chisels were employed in that process and the information re­
trieved is discussed below.
The present foundation is a low wall of random rubble
construction, built with its perimeter approximately 7 feet
10 inches from the main structure's east, south and west walls
(F2,3 & 4). It parallels the main structure walls making a
right angle turn on the north end to become flush with the
back of the building. Its height varies from 12 to 18 inches
along the west (F4) side and is about 26 inches high along the
east (F2) side. A simple abutment joins it to the main
structure where it is secured with modern concrete.

51

The space enclosed by the wall is filled with rubble
containing wood, glass, and limestone rock. concrete has
been poured on top of the unconsolidated fill to produce a
floor which consists of 16 slabs. The length of each slab
is extremely variable but the widths fall in a range of from
8 feet to 8 feet 4 inches. An overhanging lip, with a 2-5/8
inch face, projects approximately 2 inches past the founda­
tion wall.
Unfortunately, the test area provided no evidence to
substantiate a claim that any foundation and floor, other
than the contemporary one described above, has ever existed.
There were no spots of patching to suggest that a previous
foundation had been joined tb_ the main structure wall. A
ledge (as illustrated in Taniguchi and others 1968) to sup~
port floor joists for a veranda was not discovered. No
remnant of a former flooring was found. Although, it should
be pointed out that the testing was limited and further in­
vestigations may prove more fruitful.
Lack of field data forces a reconstruction based on
available documentary sources. A tentative estimate of an
earlier building phase is therefore presented and is based
upon: (1) an early drawing of the fort which includes the
headquarters building; (2) photographs taken in 1890, 1936,
1968 (Taniguchi and others 1968: 96-117) and 1961 (Don
Wilkinson, Photographic collection) (Figs. 14,22) showing an
earlier and different floor and foundation; (3) statements
made by curtis Stockton who removed the earlier floor: and
(4) the general style of the building.
In the 1875 illustration of Fort McKavett (Taniguchi
and others 1968: 76) the headquarters building is depicted
with a veranda having a floor and foundation. The credibility
of that drawing is in question, however, as it contains many
known inconsistencies. For example, the artist failed to
draw chimneys on all but one structure.
Photographs dating from 1890, 1936, and 1961 indicate
that the veranda did have a foundation and floor and show it
in successive stages of deterioration. It consists of a
limestone wall similar to the existing one, topped with a
wooden plank floor. Curtis stockton reports that when he
built the present unit he removed a wood floor which was
"sagging.~

52

The general style of the building suggests that original­
ly the veranda probably had a floor with a foundation construc­
ted of limestone rubble. On the basis that:
1. The 1968 photo shows a wooden floor;
2. Curtis stockton removed a wood floor in

1968~

3. 1968 was the first time any changes had been made,
other than repairs, since 19387
4. the foundation and floor shown in the 1968 photo­
graph bear a strong resemblance to the one pictured
in the 1961 (Figs. 14,22) and 1936 photographs.
It is concluded that the wood floor and rubble foundation
shown in the 1968 photograph was present at least as early
as 1936. The exact date of its inception is uncertain.
Because the 1936 photo shows square pillars supporting
the roof and resting on the porch floor, and the 1890 pho~o­
graph, although very indistinct, also shows square pillars
supporting the roof and resting on the porch floor, :.i tcan
be.demonstrated -that a structurally similar foundation"-and
floor existed from 1890 through 1968. Since the fort was
abandoned only seven years prior to the snapping of the 1890
photo, and it was reportedly left in good condition. It is
further believed that the foundation and flooring shown in the
1890 photo were present at the end of the military occupation.
In summary there are two separate architectural phases
of the component called the exterior veranda foundation and
flooring. The origin of the existing unit can be absolutely
dated to 1968. The installation date of the previous struc­
ture cannot be ascertained. However, photographic evidence
exists which indicates a date no later than 1936. Indirect
evidence suggests the possibility that at least the style of
the earlier component dates to the military occupation.
Absolutely no proof of a third style for this unit has been
found. The known architectural history of the veranda found­
ation and floor involves only two styles and construction
episodes: the earlier, a limestone rubble foundation with a
wood floor; the later, a limestone rubble foundation with a
concrete floor.

53

The original foundation wall was probably very similar
to the one which exists today; that is, a low limestone rubble
wall in approximately the same location. In the testing area
no evidence was found proving that such a veranda foundation
was ever an integral part of the main structure found at ion­
wall. Undoubtedly they were joined with a simple abutment.
In the 1961 photographs (Don Wilkinson, Photographic
collection) it appears that a board is laid on top of the
foundation wall to serve as a joist for the floorboards (Fig.
14). The photo, although indistinct, seems to indicate that
the joist is laid on edge. Floorboards are placed perpen­
dicular to the joist and abut the exterior wall of the main
structure. Neat corners are produced by trimming the floor­
boards along a straight line running from the corner of the
building to the veranda's exterior corner.
Because the testing area in the veranda floor produced
no evidence that the existing rubble fill or the existing
foundation were part of an earlier construction episode; no
evidence that the interior floor joists protrude through the
wall to provide nailers for porch joists as they do in the
courtyard walls: and no evidence of a stone projection in the
main structure wall to serve as a supporting ledge for veranda
flooring; there exists no empirical proof of the true orien­
tation of the floor joist or the true configuration of joist
supports for the earlier exterior veranda. However, because
the one joist which can be seen in the photo is situated paral­
lel to the exterior walls and perpendicular to the floorboards,
it is felt that the other joists were similarly situated (Fi~
20). Also because the main structure floor joists are support­
ed with scrap lumber and stone, _it. is -:"f~lj::·;that . veranda joist
supports were possibly of similar materials. Further, it is
suggested that with removal of the concrete flooring, interior
floor joists may be found protruding through the wall to serve
as nailers for the veranda joists as they do in the modified
courtyard.
The outer edge of the veranda floor was probably about
8 feet from the main structure. The, eaves of the roof are
approximately 8 feet 8 inches from the main structure and
the exterior side of the support pillars was calculated to
have been no closer to the wall than 7 feet 10 inches.
54

Assuming that the porch floor did not extend past the eaves
and did serve as support for the pillars, its edge must have
been located between 7 feet 10 inches and 8 feet 8 inches from
the building. A distance of 8 feet is felt to be a reasonable
estimate.
STEP PLACEMENT
There is no evidence to suggest original style and place­
ment of veranda steps. The 1890 photograph is too indistinct
to even show steps and the 1875 drawing likewise does not
show steps. Existing steps are very simple, consisting only
of stone blocks placed approximately in front of each of
doorways DI'1 through D5. Further, due to alteration of the
foundation and floor and because their stones are secured with
modern concrete, contemporary steps are felt to be intrusive
to fort construction. Step placement and style cannot be
determined from either presently available archeological or
documentary evidence.
SUPPORTING COLUMNS
The veranda roof is supported with 18 creosote-soaked
pine, reused, utility poles. Curtis stockton reports that
he installed them when renovating the foundation and floor
and that he removed square, wooden columns from the porch when
installing the poles. Fortunately, he retained the old columns
and one of them was recovered and returned to Austin for ex­
amination. Based on the photographic evidence previously me~
tioned~ it is believed that these square columns were part of
fort construction.
Photographic evidence and field observation indicate that
there were originally 20 columns rather than the present 18.
A 1961 photo very clearly shows square columns with boxed
capitals supporting the veranda roof along the east, south and
west walls (F2,3 & 4) (Fig. 14). A second photo shows an
additional column situated immediately adjacent to the west
wall (F4) at its northwest corner (F4/5), serving as support
for the weather panel (Fig. 22). A, close inspe'.ction of~ this
area on. the west w:all~ anrl':az, similar area on the east wall·-', "
revealed:.. a;-,strip of, differential weathering on the wall stones.
55

Apparently support columns covered a vertical section on each
of these walls protecting them from the full extent of weath­
ering.
Remnants of the boxed capitals are still present and at­
tached to the overhead bridging beams (Fig. 25). Capitals
consist of a solid square of wood 12 by 12 inches on top, 1-1/2
inches thick and beveled to an 11 by 11 inch square at the
bottom. Nailed beneath the solid top piece are four strips
of wood forming a square frame. The frame has an 11 inch
square exterior perimeter and an 8 inch square interior
perimeter with miter joints at its corners. on the bottom
and exterior edge of the frame is a line of white paint about
1/4 inch wide implying that something had occupied the central
space to within 1/4 inch of its exterior perimeter.
The remaining capitals are secured to the beams with
cut nails driven from above. Because evidence indicates that
the bridging beams are original, that the capitals were
secured to the beams, and the nails (driven through the beams
and into the tops of the capitals) were then covered with
wooden blocks which are an undisturbed part of the original
roof ••• it is felt that the capitals are original to the
structure.
While the history of the use of columns to support the
roof involves two separate phases and two types of columns,
only one type qf capital and one episode of construction is
represented. Unfortunately a complete specimen of the capitals
was not found.
ROOF
The roof is comprised of five main structural components:
(1) bridging beams; (2) rafter supports and rafters; (3) deck­
ing; (4) facia, soffit, and moulding; and (5) weather panels.
Each of these components will be described as they exist and
an enumeration will be gi~en of the apparent number and manner
of alterations (if any) that they have experienced. Also,
suggestions will be made as to the probable original config­
uration.
56

The roof of the veranda is believed to be original to
fort construction for the following reasons:
1. The roof of the main structure is probably original.
2. The veranda roof is tied to the main structure in

such a way as to preclude the possibility that more
than one veranda roof has been attached to it.
3. with the exception of minor repairs, the material

in the veranda roof matches that of the main struc­
ture roof.
Repair work on the roof is identified by:
1. The cut of the lumber: Lumber used in fort con­
struction is "fullcut." That is, lumber which has
been cut to whole, half-inch, or quarter-inch incre­
ments (example 2 by 4-1/2 inches: 5 by 3"';1/4 inches).
Modern lumber is "undercut... That is, it has been
cut to 1/8 inch increments, (example, 1-5/8 by
3-3/8 inches).
I

2. The condition of the lumber: Lumber used in fort
construction was aged and has not warped or bled.
Repair lumber was green, has warped, and is stained
with bleeding sap.
3. Paint covering:

Lumber used in fort construction
retains either a paint covering or a whitish, chal­
ky residu which may be deteriorated paint. Repair
lumber is unpainted and retains no protective cov­
ering.

4. Nails: Lumber used in fort construction is secured
with cut nails. Repair work is secured with wire
nails. Early repair work probably used cut nails
and would therefore be difficult to distinguish on
this basis alone.
Bridging beams are defined as horizontal boards resting
on top of and across the capitals of the columns, thus spaning
the distance between columns and supporting the rafters, soffit
and facia (Fig. 25).

57

These beams are full cut lumber measuring 2 by 6 inches.
They are placed flat upon the capitals and are interconnected
with lap joints. In all cases, bridging beams original to
fort construction have their joints centered over the top of
a capital and are secured to it with cut nails. The capitals
are 12 inches wide and project 3 inches on either side of
the bridging beams.
The following number, and type of alterations were noted:
1. East side - no variations noted. The beams are
believed to briginal to fort construction.
2. South side - the area of the beam directly over
the capital for P13 has a rectangular cut 12 inches
wide and approximately 3/4 inches deep, which neatly
fits over the top of that capital. No structural
reason for the cut can be determined; it is an
alteration of an unknown date. No other variations
were noted.
3. west side - starting at a point located about mid­
way along the west side and continuing on toward the
north, bridging beam construction changes dramatical­
ly. Beams 2 by 6 inches are joined to 1"":5/8 by 7-1/2
inch beams. The newer beam type is warped, twiste~
and stained with sap. Joints in the intrusive~::Ceams
are lap joints but are not universally supported by
columns. The use of cut nails gives way to the use
of wire nails. Further, these beams are not painted
and have weathered a great deal more than the older
beams.
curtis Stockton reports that the repair work was made
necessary by a storm in the late 1920's (possibly 1929) which
destroyed most of the veranda roof along the west side.
Rafter supports are the structural components which trans­
mit the weight of the rafters to the bridging beams. They are
located on top of the bridging beams at approximately 22 inch
intervals (Fig. 25). These components consist of two wooden
blocks situated one on top of the other. The bottom block is
2 inches wide by 6:;inches c hi.gh -by-S-l/2 inches long. The top
58

block is 2 inches wide by 5_il'lches high by 12-3/4 inches long.
They are arranged in an upside down, L-shaped unit in which
the back and sides of both blocks are flush and the upper
member projects past the lower by 7-1/4 inches. Secured to
each other and to the bridging beams, they present a flat top­
ped surface for the rafter feet.,
Rafters, 2 by 5 inches, with a diagonal cut across the
end grain are placed cut side down on top of the rafter sup­
port. The opposite end is rabbeted to fit over the foot of
a main structure rafter (Figs. 23,24). Every veranda rafter
original to fort construction is.c rabbeted to, the foot"~of a
main structure rafter. Alterations in the rafter pattern
were:
1. East side - no alterations noted.

2. South side - no alterations noted.
3. west side - there were a number of variations in
the rafter pattern on this side. All the veranda
rafters are connected to the ceiling joist rather
than to main structure rafters. Commencing at a
point approximately midway on the west side and
continuing toward the north rafters are of a differ­
ent type. Lumber used for them is modern cut1 the
quality is inferior. In at least one case there are
two narrow boards nailed together longitudinally to
form one rafter. supporting blocks are constructed
in the same way as those original to the fort but
are secured with wire nails.
It is believed that the storm which destroyed most of
the west veranda roof left about half of the bridging beams
intact but disturbed the rest of the roof so much that all
rafters had to be reset and about half of them replaced.
The pattern of rafter supports and rafters as described
for the east and south sides (F2 & 3) is original to fort
construction.
The original veranda decking has been completely altered.
That of the south and east sides is entirely new material and
59

that of the west side, while being original material, has
been reset so it is no longer in~situ.
Decking on the south and east sides is of widely spaced
3/4 by 3-1/2 inch pine, tongue and groove matched lumber
(Fig .. 2,5).. All are secured to rafters with wire nails and
are identical to those of the south and east slopes on the
main structure roof. It should be recalled that Curtis
stockton replaced the decking and reshingled those sections
of the roof about 1947. Therefore, the entire hip slopes of
the south and east sides were part of the same repair work.
The west (F4) veranda roof was the recipient of severe
damage: therefore,: 1. t is ~nbt surprising'to find H:s~·tleGking
altered. Nevertheless, decking is of the same type as that
described for the main structure roof and attributed to fort
construction. The similarity to original fort style is sur~­
prising. However, a close inspection of the decking resulted
in a highly probable explanation:
1. It is known that a section of the west roof blew
off in a storm.
2. Decking, defined as original, is on top of
intrusive rafters.
3. Decking is secured to those rafters with wire nails.
4. A considerable number of cut nails exist in the
decking.
5. In some of the decking boards those cut nails have
their points protruding - not downward as one would
expect after several shingling episodes, but up­
ward (that is, the nail head is on the bottom side
and the point protrudes through to the top).
It is believed that when repairs were made to the west
veranda roof, old decking boards which had blown off were
picked up and reused.
The original veranda decking was probably identical to
that used on the main structure roof: closely spaced, flat

60

sawn boards, 1 inch thick, varying in width from 8 to 15
inches and still retaining the wane.
Facia, soffit and moulding are used to protect roofing
timbers and create a finished exterior face (Fig. 24).
A 1 by 8 inch facia board is set on edge in front of the
bridging beam and on top of the capitals. Thus, it hides
from view both the bridging beams and the lower rafter support
blocks. Its upper edge abuts the underside of the upper
support block. It is nailed to the front of the bottom sup­
port block.
A soffit-board, is secured to the underside of the upper
support block. It abuts the face of the facia board and its
leading edge is flush with the face of the upper support
block.
A second facia board is nailed to the face of the upper
support block. It covers the lead edge of the soffit-board.
A wooden cornice mOl.llding;is nailed-to~the-facia"beneath
the eaves and is covered at the top by the first row of
shingles.
Alterations noted were:
1. east side - no alterations noted.
2. south side - no alterations noted although the
moulding is begining to come off.
3. west side - facia and soffit are of modern cut
lumber exhibiting attributes previously mentioned
for lumber used in repair work. Moulding is
missing.
The facia, soffit and moulding as described for the east
and south sides is original to fort construction.
The weather panel is an exterior framed panel which is
located beneath the rake of the veranda roof. Its function
is to enclose the open end of the roof so as to protect roof
timbers from direct exposure to weather (Fig. 22).
61

The veranda roof has two weather panels, one each on the
north ends of the porch. The panel on the north wall of the
west wing was determined to be completely intrusive to fort
construction. It is located in the section of veranda which
was destroyed by a storm and subsequently replaced. The
panel on the north wall of the east wing wassfound to be
original to fort construction and a description of it follows.
The configuration of that panel is typical of all structure X
weather panels both for exterior and interior verandas.
At the open end of the veranda roof, level with the top
of the capitals, a horizontal board is situated with one end
on top of capital P2. That end abuts the rafter support block
resting on P2 and the opposite end-abuts the east,wall. ~The
end abutting the east wall is presently unsupported but
presumably was originally supported by a column (Pl) which is
now missing (Fig. 16). This horizontal member is connected
by two studs to the rafter above. One stud rests against the
wall; the other is midway between it and the rafter support.
Both are secured with cut nails to the rafter. The studs then
serve as nailers for the siding.
Siding consists of 1 by 5 inch tongue and groove boards
which are horizontally placed on the frame described above and
create a solid panel. A miter joint is formed between facia
and siding. The siding which does not join the facia is trim­
med to match the slope of the roof. Opposite ends of the
siding lap over the edge of the north wall (Fl) approximately
2 inches. Those ends are cut off straight across the grain
to form a finished vertical edge. A strip of moulding is ap­
plied beneath the rake.
Modified courtyard
INTRODUCTION
The term modified courtyard refers to the center area of
the building which is roofed and open to the back of the
structure (Fig. 15).
The original form and function of this area of the head­
quarters building is not entirely clear. presently it is

62

completely roofed but not walled. There is a concert of
evidence to suggest that it was originally a partially roofed
interior veranda and that the army later completely roofed
it over and walled it up to serve as a sixth room.

HISTORY
All field observations indicate that the headquarters
building at one time, had a roofed, u-shaped interior veranda.
A configuration such as that would make it a fi~e-room struc­
ture with two verandas. However, there are no army records
which state that this building ever had an interior veranda.
Inspection reports of 1875 specifically mention the build­
ing and state that it has six rooms. The final inventory of
fort structures which was submitted June 30, 1883, also records
that the headquarters building had six rooms. These are the
earliest first hand reports which were available at the time
of this project. There are also two maps from about 1875, one
a perspective drawing and the other a scaled "General Plan"
(Taniguchi and others 1968: 75). Neither of these show con­
clusively whether this was a five or six-room structure.
To make the structure a six-room building, a wall would
have to have been built between and connecting the two wing
rooms. Indeed a wall was located there at one time. Long
time residents in the"'tewn of Fort McKavett report that the
modified courtyard was enclosed and served as a hotel kitchen.
After Mr. curtis stockton acquired the building, ~t.l:ie
courtyard section continued to be ased for a kitchen until
sometime in the early 1960's. Then he removed the wall and
the floor intending to remake the kitchen into a patio. That
intention was never realized.

INTERIOR VERANDA
considerable and strong structural evidence exists which
indicates that the modified courtyard area was originally de­
signed to serve some function other than that of a room. This
evidence will be presented in detail as each of the following

63

components is considered: (1) walls~ (2) foundation and
floors; (3) roof: (4) windows: (5) fireplaces: (6) ceiling:
and (7) baseboards.
Of the eight walls in structure X which currently are
exterior walls, the east, south, west and both gable walls
(Fl through 5) ·we;t-e 0l::"Q'iotis'ly~soigesigne~:.:::::-"l'he courtyard
walls may have been intended as exterior walls if the space
they encompass was expected to be a veranda. If the initial
plan was to wall the area for use as a room then those three
walls would have been considered interior walls and designed
as such. The evidence which suggests that the walls were de­
signed as exterior walls is considerable.as· the construction
of interior'and exterior walls differs in several respects.
Each of the three walls which enclose the modified court­
yard is a load bearing wall. Unlike interior partition walls,
which carry no weight other than their own, the modified
courtyard walls have been designed to withstand the weight of
the roof. All other loaddbearing walls are also exterior
walls.
Bonding between converging exterior walls is accomplish­
ed by the use of large stones to interlock alternate courses.
At the northeast and northwest corners of the modified court­
yard (F5/6,F8/l) large stones are laid in making a bond be­
tween the adjacent walls (Figs. 15,16). That kind of bond is
common to all other exterior corners. It is not at all similar
to the construction of any other exterior wall at the point of
that walH s juncture·wi-t.h..aninteri:olt' .wall. In short bonds in
the above mentioned corners are constructed like bonds at the
junctures of other exterior load-bearing walls. Th~y'are.not
constructed like the bonds at the junctures of an exterior
bearing wall and in interior non-bearing wall.
Furthermore, no discernible damage was effected to either
the east or west courtyard walls (F6 & B) when the curtain
wall (F9) was removed. While it is true that interior parti­
tion walls were haphazardly tied to other walls, it is not
true that the bonding is so poor that removal of one wall
would leave no trace of disturbance in its neighboring wall.
The curtain wall left no such disturbance (Fig. 19). Since
it was removed very recently, if it had produced a distrubance
which received patching that patch would be very obvious. No
64

such patch exists. The fact that a curtain wall simply
abutted the courtyard walls rather than being bonded to them
further supports the contention that the courtyard walls (F6,
7 & 8) were originally intended to be exterior walls, and
that the curtain wall was a later addition.
If the modified courtyard was initially planned as a
sixth room, then room type floc)!l's,wouid' be~e~pected. -:That
kind of floor structure did not occur. All but one small
area of the floor has been removed. The part which remains
is the section under an old bathroom in the southeast corner
of the courtyard (F7/8). careful inspection of the remnant
showed it to be of original construction. The information
gained from that remnant floor combined with information
gleaned from floor joists projecting through the walls provid­
ed a possible answer as to the original configuration of the
floor.
The extant flooring consisted of joists, joist supports
and floorboards. One common joist placed flat against the
length of the south wall (F7) is nailed to the protruding
vertical face of the center and west room floor joists. A
number of large stones were then wedged beneath the veranda
joist for further support. Another common joist was placed
flat against the east wall {F8} and also nailed to the ver­
tical face of protruding joists and also supported with a .
limestone block. A third joist is set at a diagonal in the
southeast corner (F7/8) so as to produce a 45 0 angle between
the joist and each of the two walls. It is also supported on
stone. Next three remnants of common joists abut the corner
joist, two of them parallel with the south',iwall and one
parallel with the east wall, all supported on stone piers and
attached to the corner joist (Fig. 20).
Floorboards are then laid perpendicular to the joists,
their ends abutting the walls. In the remnant flooring the<,
boards meet along a line which bisects the southeast corner.
This evidence provides good cause to believe that: (I)
interior veranda floor joists were nailed to the projecting
faces of main structure joists and supported on stone piers;
(2) other common joists were parallel to the walls and were
abutted to a corner joist; (3) floorboards were perpendicular
to both walls and joists.
65

That style of floor is not used for any of the room
floors. The pattern of extant floorboards in the southeast
corner is identical to that shown in the 1961 photo of the
exterior veranda floor (Fig. 22). Placement of extant joists
seems tm indicate that flooring was desired along the sides of
the wall rather than across the entire ar~a.
The corner of the floor remnant which projects into the
courtyard has been sawed off at a point very close to a sup~
porting column. A plumb dropped from outer edge of the above
roof, which is ascribed to the interior veranda, would by­
pass that corner. This suggests that the extant corner is
probably very near where the original edge of the porch existed.
The modified courtyard roof has two separate construction
stages: (1) primary, and (2) secondary. In the first stage it
was a U-shaped roof which followed the building plan and left
a rectangular opening at the center back. In the second stage
that rectangular opening was roofed over (Fig. 18).
The first stage was begun by spanning the distance between
the wing rooms with a 2 by 10 inch rafter support beam placed
approximately 6 feet 10 inches from the south wall (F7) and
parallel with it. One end of the beam is well embedded in
the masonry of the west wall (F6). Presumably the other end
is likewise embedded in the east wall (F8). however, theLs~ot
where it enters the east wall was inaccessible.
I

The beam is part of the bridging beam apparatus for the
interior veranda. It is supported on columns as are two other
bridging beams (Fig. 18)~ ~the~thl;'ee::toC3'ether _formca:..:U .:":Tliis
rafter support unit is not as complex as that of the exterior
.verandaand--the -bridging- baams~can,"m0i'e properly'~Be ::f:fiodgIitCef
as soffit-boards.
The soffit-boards are supported on columns and carry the
support blocks whic'!l: ar:e'2'19:t/6 by 7-1/2 inches. The tail of
the rafter cut on a diagonal,.- ie- secured,?cut -~id~ down to
the top of the block. Its opposite end is rabbeted to fit
over the tail of a main structure rafter.
I

Interior veranda rafters are further supported in seven
locations with braces. Five of those braces are nailed to
66

either a door or window lintel, W13, D6, WlS, D9 and W17.
Two are attached to the above mentioned 2 by 10 inch beam,
one each at its juncture with the walls.
Facia for the interior veranda is very simple • It'.
consists of a 1 by 10-1/2 inch board nailed to the front of
the support blocks.
All original columns have now been replaced and the only
traces of them are six unpainted square spots on the bottom
of the soffit-boards. Those spots measure 8-1/2 by 9 inches
and may represent capital size rather than column size.
If
the columns had capitals like those of the exterior veranda
and if, like the exterior veranda, those capitals were wider
than the bridging beams, then the most we can say is that one
dimension of the capitals was 9 inches, and the other remains
unknown. But, as there is a precedent for square capitals,
'Cperh~ps::,a 'guess,.:of -:·9~;lJy~:9 inches wo\rl1l.;d-.Qct be:too -far-wrong.
There are no data available which provide a suggestion a
as to the actual appearance of the columns.
The decking used on this section of the roof is identical
to that which was determined to be original for the main struc­
ture.
Weather panels constructed like the one previously de~
scribed, enclose both north ends of the veranda. Moulding of
the same style used elsewhere on the building is nailed to the
weather panel beneath the rake. An area of differential
weathering on the facia board just beneath the eaves suggests
that moulding was also present there at one time.
It is believed that the original roofing component was
designed for a U-shaped veranda for the following reasons:
1. A support beam which is an integral part of original

walls is placed in such a manner as to also be an
integral part of the primary roofing unit.
2. This roofing unit is constructed with the same type
of material as the main structure and exterior
veranda roofing.
67

3. The rafters are secured to the main structure raf­
ters in the same way as the rafters of the exterior
veranda are secured.
4. The rafters are supported in a manner similar to
that employed in the exterior veranda.
5. This roofing component has a finished facia which
has been cut on a bevel at its outer edge - thus
designed to meet the weather panel boards at right
angles and produce a finished corner.
6. Extant weather paneling is identical to exterior
veranda weather paneling both in material and con~
struction.
7. Facia and soffit boards are painted white indfcating
a desire to produce a finished surface.
8. The soffi t--boards have square scars apparently
indicating column placement.
9. The decking used is identical to that originally
used for the rest of the roof.

Windows
There are five identifiable exterior walls, four identifi­
able interior walls~ and three which cannot be clearly assigned
to either catagory. Three of the five exterior walls have
windows L the other two are gable walls with no openings. None
of the interior walls have windows. These facts suggest that
interior walls were not designed with windows while exterior
walls were so designed. The presence of windows in the court­
yard walls (F6,7 & 8) suggests that those walls were designed
as exterior rather than interior walls.

Fireplaces
There is a fireplace in each room in the building,but
there is not one in the modified courtyard area. It was prob­
ably not designed originally to be a room.

68

ceiling
While all existing rooms have a formal ceiling, the
modified courtyard does not. However, there is evidence
of a canvas ceiling. Every rafter of the primary roofing
component has cut nails tacked to its underside, indicating
that something was formerly attached. In one sppt a piece of
canvas is secured to a rafter with a i-inch strip of lathing
attached longitudinally. Further, remnants of lathing and
canvas are still held in place by piaster at the uppero.edge:
of the wall.~ ·The21ack-of .a?crQom-type~ceilin1J an:d thlE.' ?:', tr.::
possible presence of a canvas ceiling suggests that the area
was originally planned to function as something other than
a room.

Baseboards
Rooms at the headquarters building are given a finished
look by installing baseboards and plastering the walls. The
modified courtyard area has plastered walls but nOLbaseboards.
It is felt that had the area been given an interior room finish
at the same time the other rooms were being finished, base­
boards would have been used. Therefore, it seems unlikely
that this area was developed as a room contemporaneously with
the original construction. Instead, it was converted into a
room after the original building phase was complete.
All field observations have led to the conclusion that
the headquarters was originally a five-room structure with an
exterior veranda and an interior veranda. The interior veran­
da followed the U-shaped building plan and had a widthr:.of~ 6
feet 10 inches. It was roofed with a U-shaped roof that left
an open rectangular space in the back about 6 feet 4 inches
wide and 19 feet 9 inches long~
There is no hard evidence that the floor was supported
on a low rubble foundation wall as was that of the exterior
veranda, but there is a hint of a foundation wall in the 1875
perspective drawing (Taniguchi and others 1968: 76).

69

ENCLOSED ROOM
The historic record mentions that the headquarters building
was a six-room structure. This could have been accomplished
by dividing any of the five rooms with a partition or by con~
stractingawall between the wing rooms. There is no evidence
that one of the rooms was divided with a partition during the
military occupation. Evidence does exist to suggest that a
wall was built between the wings, but since that wall has been
removed there is no direct evidence that it was military.
A photo taken in 1936 by the Historical American Building
Survey (Taniguchi and others 1968: 111) shows the wall. Al­
though,the2photo is hazy, it looks like there are two windows
and a door in the wall. Mr. curtis Stockton reports that he
removed the wall but provided no information as to its form.
In order to create a room out of the modified courtyard,
the open space in the roof had to be closed. That was accomp­
lished with a crudely constructed secondary roofing component
attached to the facia of the primary roofing component (Fig. 18).
To support the rafters a horizontal beam is placed at the north
(F9) end of the veranda.spanning the open space. It is nailed
to the bottom of the soffit-boards. A second harizontal beam
is situated along a center line drawn through the long axis of
the rectangular open space. That second beam is nailed at one
end to the bottom of the south (F7) soffit-board and the other
end rests upon the first beam.
Rafter tails, cut on a diagonal, are placed cut':silile;e,
down, on the central beam. opposite ends of the rafters are
cut squarely across the grain and abut the facias of the primary
component. That kind of cut and abutment results in an awkward
and insecure join between rafter and facia. Therefore, 1 by
3 inch strips of wood are nailed to the facia fronts at the base
of the rafters. Although structurally unsound, it at least
prevented the rafters from slipping.
I

Decking on the secondary roofing component consists of
finished boards, 1 inch thick with widths varying from 7 to
8-1/2 inches. They are closely fitted providing a solid cover­
ing, possibly an attempt to create a more water repellent roof.

70

The north end is finished with a crudely built weather
panel, most of which is now badly deteriorated. It also abuts
the facia and rests on the central beam. Moulding of the same
style and materials as that used throughout the building is
used to finish both the primary and secondary weather panels.
The only direct evidence for the existence of the curtain
wall (F9) is a truncation of the plaster wall covering (Fig. 19).
The truncation occurs on the west courtyard wall (F6) in a ver­
tical line approximately 17-1/2 inches from the face of the north
wall (F5). A similar line of truncation occurs on the east court­
yard wall. Both lines vary from vertical near the top of the
walls, indicating that the curtain wall became more narrow at
its upper edges. The plaster is also truncated at floor level.
It is suggested that a 17-1/2 inch wall was built flush with
the north gable walls (F1 & 5). Its height at each end equal­
led that of the tops of the east and west courtyard walls but
it probably sloped toward the center to a point no higher than
the bottom of the weather panels. It is believed that the cur­
tain wall was not plastered on its:inter±orsside'becal1~e:
1. Plaster accumulation in room corners is quite thick
forming a solid covering which varies in thickness
from 3 to 4 inches.
2. Had the curtain wall been plastered such a thick­
ness would have oecured at::}i:essinterior corners
iF6/9 and F8/9).
3. With the removal of the wall (F9) such an accumula­
tion would have left a jagged scar.in the plaster
on the ajoining walls.

4. The extant plaster on the ajoining walls ends in a
smooth straight line.
The presence of plaster, a preferred interior wall cover­
ing, is a further indication that the area once served as a
room.
Only one small remnant of flooring exists and it is
constructed like veranda flooring rather than like room floor­
ing. There is no extant evidence to indicate how the area was
71

floored when it was a room. Neither are there any known
records which so indicate. Informants who lived in the build­
ing when it was a hotel remember that there was a floor but
do not remembe~ any details concerning it.
It is fairly obvious from the historic record that the
military had a six room headquarters building. A 1936 photo
shows an enclosing wall with two windows and one door. The
physical ... evimence:'at thebuildingrind:i:cates that it was 17­
1/2 inches wide and at leastc as'hdlgh as the courtyars s east
and west walls at its point of juncture with them. Beyond
these facts nothing is known of that wall. Absolutely nothing
is known of the floor except that it did exist and was prob~
ably wood. Interior finishing consisted of plastered and white­
washed walls but no baseboards. There is no fireplace and the
addition to the roof is awkward. The only remnants of a formal
ceiling are attached with wire nails so nothing is known of the
.ceil.iingfor· the~area when.' it was used as a . room:: by the·mili­
taEY.. In short the presence of a sixth room appears to have
been the result of a second thought rather than original in­
tention.
I

Summary
The headquarters building is believed to be the second
structure built by the military at the southeast end of the
parade ground. The earliest positive date for its existence
is 1874 which suggests that construction was started sometime
between 1872 and 1873. No records have been found which doe­
ument the first design of this building, but statements made
in 1875 concerning the finished structure refer to it as a
six-room building.
Architectural investigation provided evidence that the
original design called for a five-room structure with two
verandas. The exterior veranda, which has been modified by
subsequent non-military occupants, probably had a limestone
foundation supporting a wooden plank floor. Early photos
show >its roof resting on wooden box columns with square capitals.
The interior, although changed somewhat, has not suffered
72

the same degree of alteration as the exterior. Three of the
original fireplace mantelS have been either removed or replaced.
Only those in the east and center rooms (R2 and 3) are original.
Extant doors are original although badly damaged and much of
the door hardware has been replaced. Box locks similar to
those on restored barracks building V2 were used on the doors
at the headquarters building. Both 3 and 4-inch butt hinges.
were used, often one of each on the same door. All the windows
had lug sills, single hung sashes with six lights and no
screens. Baseboards were fitted to each wall before the walls
were plastered and then walls, baseboards door and window frames,
mantels and ceilings were all painted white.
The central area of the building refered to in this report
as the modified courtyard has had a complex history of con­
struction changes. Originally a veranda occupied the major
part of the area then the military modified it to create a
sixth room. During the civilian occupation that sixth room
served as a kitchen until the early 1960's when the owner re­
moved the back wall and the floor.
The configuration of the interior veranda has to be in­
ferred from the overhead roof structure, a small piece of ex­
tant floor and the general construction pattern of the rest of
the building. It probably had a foundation wall and floor
similar to that of the exterior veranda. An extzantfaeia and
soffit; .'board .while::-,similar to those of the exterior veranda
are simplified. paint scars on the original soffit boards i~
dicate the former presence of six columns with one dimension
of ~LiGches. sWhe't'her_tbat.9~ineh . scar 'was madecby !t, capit!al
or simply by the top of a column can not be determined. Remnants
of canvas tacked to the underside of the rafters of the earliest
roofing unit hint at the possibility of a canvas ceiling for
the veranda.
The plaster application to the wall of the modified
courtyard was an artifact of the sixth room and probably not
present when the veranda was constructed. That plaster is
truncated at the back of the building and at floor level thus
providing evidence of the wall and floor location. The secon­
dary roofing unit created a compleeed ceiling for the area but
gives the appearance of having been hastilycoand;poorlycon­
structed. No evidence for a military installation of a ceil­
ing was found for this sixth room although the ruin of a
civilian ceiling still exists.
73

originally built to be a five-room structure with two
verandas, the headquarters building was converted to a six­
room building with one veranda while the military still
occupied it. During the civilian occupation, while minor
changes were made, it remained essentially a six-room struc~
ture. Prior to selling it to the Texas Parks and wildlife
Department the last civilian owner removed the wall and floor
for the sixth room and left the building as it stands today.

74

BARRACKS BUILDING
Introduction
The ruin of a building which once functioned as a military
barracks (Sharpe 1870: 203) is approximately 1,134 feet I:lQt'th
of U.S.G.S./B.M. 2171 at an average elevation of 2,167 feet
m.s.l. (Figs. 2,29). That location has situated it on a grass
covered hill which slopes downward in a northwest direction
toward the San saba River. In that vicinity, as for the entire
hilltop occupied by the fort, thin clayey soil frequently gives
way to outcroppings of limestone bedrock. This portion of the
hill has a floral covering of mesquite trees and prickly pear
cactus.
Pre-Investigation Condition
Upon arrival at Fort McKavett these investigators found
Structure Vl in an advanced state of ruin. The building is
rectangular in plan with rubble filled, cavity-walls (Fig. 29).
Because gable ends are extant on the north and south walls, it
can be assumed that the structure once supported a pitched
roof. That roof is no longer present, thus allowing moisture
to be trapped within the rubble core causing further decay.
This has resulted in the:
1. Complete loss of the chimney above the gable's
apex in the north wall (Fl), along with severe
erosion and crumbling of the chimney above the
apex in the south wall. (Table 8)
2. Loosening of all courses near and at the top of
each remaining wythe#
3. partial collapse of the east wall between Door 2
and the southeast corner (F2/3),

75

4. Destruction of Door 4,
5. Rupturing of the southwest corner (F3/4) wall
collapse at the southwest end of the west wall,
6. Entire loss of one door and one window in that
region of the wall,
7. Complete rupture of the northwest corner (F4/l) to
present ground level,
8. Loss of mid-wall stones in the north wall thus
exposing the north fireplace (fl) to the ~uilding
exterior,
9. Cracking of the keystone in the south chimn~y mantel
(~2) and the loss of the keystone in the north
chimney mante 1,
10. Loss of all door and window framing members, in­
cluding some lintels,
11. Shifting or collapse of trimstones at door and
window frames, and
12. Deterioration of interior wall plaster.
In sum, all that is left of Structure Vl is a crumbling
shell of limestone walls with the debris from its collapse
piled at the foundation.
post-Investigation Condition
During archeological investigation of Structure Vl,
15 excavation units and extensions were established. Some
of those were immediately adjacent to walls, two involved
fireplace hearths, two extended through doors, and three
exposed exterior wythe, foundation details. Each of the
units contain a potential for increasing the rate of building
degradation. Exposure and undercutting of fireplace hearth
remnants has caused potential weakening in those areas. Be­
~cause excavation has further exposed some fragile details,
stabilization should be quickly performed.
76

Table 8.
Component

41 MN 2, Barracks - cross reference to component
designations. ~ompare with Figure 29~
Designation

Component

walls:

Fl
F2
F3
F4

north wall
east wall
south wall
west wall

Fireplace:

fl north fireplace
f2 south fireplace

Corners:

Designation
Fl/2
F2/3
F3/4
F4/1

northeast
southeast
southwest
northwest

Initial Observations

structure VI measures 101 feet 9-1/2 inches by 23 feet
4 inches and maintains a long-axis orientation of N290 E
(Fig. 29}. Of the four exterior walls, both the north and
south are gable walls and the east and west exhibit six in­
tentional openings with a probability of an additional three.
The openings are three doors (with the possibility of a fourth
and fifth): and three windows (with the possibility of a four­
th) •
The cavity-walls are now rather variable in thickness but
generally average 1 foot 9 inches. They contain evidence of
having been whitewashed, and indicate a moderate amount of
repair history. Further, the building exterior suggests that
all outside walls have been at least partially plastered, and
that the plaster was scored in a rectangular block design.
Major additions not original to building construction
include a stone fence to the southeast that was once attached
to the southeast corner (F2/3) by a large gate, and parallel
stone walls running perpendicular to and abutting the-"south­
western extremity of the west wall (F4) - creating a chute­
like area.
The building interior is approximately 100 feet 3 inches
77

by 21 feet 10 inches, and has a 19 inch thick dividing wall.
No flooring remains, the interior is now filled with debris
and an immature topsoil which supports a moderate grass cover
and scattered cacti.

Architectural Details

FOUNDATION
Both the exterior and the interior walls of VI lack a
formal foundation or footing of any type. Instead, the entire
building load was transmitted directly to bedrock. This was
accomplished through establishment of a first course of build­
ing stones directly upon ground surface.

MORTAR
There have been five types of cementing agents used in
construction and subsequent repairing of structure VI. Type
1 mortar contains a lime matrix and water-worn sand aggregate.
Because it was found to extend entirely through several sample
sections of wall, in the interstices of all lower courses and
always beneath other mortar types, it is considered both mili­
tary and original to building construction. In addition,
it appears that Type 1 was applied in a grote condition, with
interface oozing used as plaster.
Type 1 mortar exhibits a grayish color when encountered
within the rubble core 6f walls·orwhen protected by-thick
coats of whitewash. However, upon long-term surface exposure
oxidation changes the overall coloring to red.
Type 2 mortar is composed of a lime matrix and flood­
plain silt aggregate simila~ to that encountered in the head­
quarters building. It has an overall gray appearance, and
contains small amounts of randomly distributed freshwater
shell. At points of contact with Type I, Type 2 mortar is al­
ways in superposition. Though several coats of whitewash have
been applied to this later type, they do not reach the number
of levels encountered over what is considered original mortar.

78

Type 3 mortar is a water-worn grayish sand and gravel
aggregate in a lime matrix. While that material was not white­
washed or superimposed upon Type 2, it does override Type 1
mortar at repointing loci. At such repair spots there is some
indication that Type 3 was tooled beyond simple trowel applica­
tion.
Type 4 mortar consists of a very fine, water-worn, gray~
ish, sand aggregate in a lime matrix. Though it was observed
to overlap only Type 1 mortar, there is absolutely no evidence
of it ever having been whitewashed. Greatest concentrations
of Type 4 occur at the northwest corner CF4/l) where massive
repointing and replacement of entire courses is evident.
Type 5 mortar is comprised of water-worn, grayish, sand
and gravel aggregate in a cement matrix. Use of this last
type is primarily restricted to repointing and some trimstone
replacement at winClows and dGors. ',. None: of the Type 5 samples
examined exhibited signs of whitewashing.
-

-

Whitewashing and its limitations as a possible index of
military activity was discussed in dealing with a mortar
sequence for the bakery. But, if it can be accepted that white­
washing of building walls was a military activity, and if
mortar Types 1 and 2 are the only cementatious materials re­
ceiving such surface treatment, it may be that only those two
can be attributable to the military period. Based on that
assumption, locational analysis of type and superpositioning
strongly argues for Type 1 being original to buildingcon~­
struction, Type 2 being employed only in wall repair, and
Types 3 through 5 being solely of civilian usage.
WALLS
There are four rubble filled, cavity-walls to Structure
VI. Each is composed of locally quarried, magnesian to slight­
ly dolomitic limestone. Some of the rock is fossiliferous and
some cherty--each variety occurring in random distribution
throughout all walls. Finished blocks range in size from co&
bles to slightly over 3 feet in diameter and 1-1/2 feet thick-­
the larger usually being restricted to the lower two-thirds of
the walls and the corners. Most of the wall stones have a

79

pitch face finish and are laid up in a random pattern with no
attempt at coursing:call exhibit effects~of weathering. The
inter-wythe void is filled with cobble size, fragmented, lime­
stone rubble.
Wall finishing treatment appears to have involved two
steps. Type 1 mortar was troweled across the wall surfaces
partially filling some of the depressions. Following that,
all walls were whitewashed. There is some superficial tool­
ing of rectangular patterns on the exterior wall surfaces.
One interior wall foundation is present; it is 19 inches
wide and runs perpendicular to the building long-axis roughly
20 feet north,~of-the soath gable wall (F3). It is believed
that the stones are not original to building construction for
the following reasons:
1. Individual stones are in the uppermost layer
of the building fill. Hense, they do not
clearly relate to the army period.
2. Neither end of the foundation remnant is tied
to the side walls.

.~

3. Some of the in situ blocks exhibit white­
washing on upper and/or lower surfaces.
This is not meant to suggest that structure VI was
originally intended to be a one room building. At least two
alternatives remain. Because the interior was not totally
excavated it is entirely possible that information on interior
walls still exists between excavation units Vl:Il and :17
or between :17 and :I2a. Secondly, the field data indicates
the strong possibility that the military had a wooden floor.
If a partition wall was constructed within the building
above the floor planking, it would leave no remnants. In
short, negative evidence does not conclusively disprove the
presence of a pre-1883-::dividing wall.
ROOF
Because the north and south walls exhibit no signs of
major alteration, it is assumed that these gable walls are

80

original. Therefore, it seems highly probable that a pitched
roof was the first building cover. Though all roofing has
been destroyed the slopes of the gable ends offer additional
testimony concerning approximate roof slope. Projection of
a line along the slope suggests a roof angle of 300 off true
horizon, in other words, a roof slope of about 7 inches per
foot. No additional evidence was gained concerning various
materials of manufacture, eave distance, or more specific
construction details.
WINDOWS
Three windows remain in the walls of Structure VIi
all are attributed to original building construction. A
fourth (W4) had been destroyed beyond architectural assess­
ment (Fig. 29). All remaining openings completely lack
framing members, sashes, or any evidence of shutters. All
that exists beyond the trimstones are some lintels (length ­
4 feet 2 inches: cross section--4-l/2 inches by 4-3/8 inches)
and nailers, most of which are bedded in Type 1 mortar.
The first window (WI) is in the east wall and centered
at 16 feet 9-1/2 inches from the northeast corner datum point
(Fl/2). The present aperature is 6 feet 6 inches high and
3 fe~t 1 inch wide. A vertical line of whitewash suggests
that the window once contained an 11 inch interior reveal.
Of five possible lintels only three remain, along with two
original nailers. Serious deterioration of the sill stone is
now in progress.
The second window (W2) is also in the east wall and is
centered at 50 feet 1/2 inch from the datum point corner.
Current height is about 6 feet 4 inches and the width is 3 feet
Jinbhes. As is the case with Window I, this window indicates
a past interior reveal of 11 inches. only two lintels remain
of a possible five: and three mailers are still fairly well
bedded.
The third window (W3) is in the west wall and centered
at 25 feet 6-3/4 inches from the northwest corner (F4/l).
Reconstructed height is about 6 feet 6 inches and it is 3
feet 3-1/2 inches wide. Traces of whitewash on the jambs
indicate a 12 inch interior reveal. The lintel space is
81

completely occupied by three timbers, but only two nailers
are present. All silling and subsill courses have been
reduced to rubble.
A fourth window (W4) is indicated for the southwestern
most extremity of the west wall by a photograph taken in
February of 1962 (Don wilkinson, Photographic collection).
Because that portion of the wall is now in total ruin, it
is impossible to locate the window exactly.
windows seem:.'to have been added after initial construc­
tion and none were closed up.
No

DOORS

Three doors are immediately noticeable in Structure VI,
a probable fourth was encountered during excavation and a
fifth was noticed in a 1961 photograph of the building (Don
wilkinson, Photographic collection)~ All extant doorways are
completely without either doors or framing members, and in
the three door openings only two lintels were in place.
The first door (Dl) is in the east wall and centered at
33 ·feet 8-1/2 inches from the datum point corner. The best
preserved of all the entrances, it stands 8 feet 1 inch high
and is 3 feet 6 inches wide. Whitewash demarcation indicated
a frame 9 inches wide and an exterior reveal of 11 inches.
Though all nailers are in place, of four possible lintels only
two remain.
The second door (D2) is also in the east wall and is
centered at 34 feet 11-3/4 inches from the southeast corner.
Over half the trimstones have collapsed so that the northeast
jamb currently reaches its greatest height at 7 feet 8-1/2
inches. The opening is about 3 feet 7 inches wide. Differ­
ential whitewashing indicates a frame 9 inches wide and an
exterior reveal 11 inches deep. No lintels are present and
none were located which might have been associated with the
door. Two nailers are preserved.
The third door (D3) is in the west wall and centered at
49 feet 8 inches from the southwest corner (F3/4). It is in a
more advanced state of ruin than Door 2, with a height along
82

its northeast margin traceable only to 7 feet 2 inches above
a proposed sill. No lintels are associated with it and no
nailers have been found. However, a whitewash line indicated
a frame that was 8 inches wide and an exterior reveal that
was 12 inches deep.
Excavation revealed the possibility of a fourth door
(D4). It is in the east wall and centered at 18 feet from
the southeast corner. All that remains of the opening is
a discrete break in the wall at foundation level which had
silted in, and was subsequently capped with a second course
of wall stones not original to building construction. Nothing
was found in the immediate vicinity attributable to the open­
ing, and no height reconstruction was possible.
fifth door (DS) is indicated for the southwestern
extremity of the west wall and immediately northwest of
Window 4 by a photograph taken in october 1961 (Don wilkinson,
Photographic Collection). Because that section of the wall
has totally collapsed, it is not possible to~locat€the position
of that early door.
A

FLOORING
Archeological investigation at the barracks building was
designed primarily to recover information concerning the
original floor. Unfortunately, fort documents and field data
provided only suggestions and hints from which to base a
reconstruction and no hard evidence.
The historical record concerning barracks buildings
is limited to a few comments which specifically mention
barracks but do not usually indicate which building is being
discussed. So interpretation of events surrounding the con­
struction or architectural history of anyone barracks is
tenuous at best.
General Mackenzie is known to have ordered cement for
the barracks floors in July of 1869 (Rickey and Pope 1966: 2l)r
however, there is no mention of cement floors having actually
been installed. turther, in 1873 an outbreak of typhoid
fever caused a good deal of concern and led to the following
action:
83

In June, upon recommendation of the medical officer,
the floors in nearly all of the barracks were taken
up, the surface of the ground beneath throughly
scraped off, the rubbish and filth cleaned away, after
which carbolic acid was freely sprinkled upon the 'i
ground (Sharpe and Horton 1875: 18).
The fact that the barracks had floors which could be
removed and beneath which rubbish and filth collected strong­
ly suggests wooden plank construction.
Further, it is known that Structure Vl was, in recent
years, used as a barn and that during that time it had a
wooden floor (Gully Cowsert, personal communication). That
floor was removed completely within the past 5 years. The
job of removal was extremely complete as there is today
absolutely no trace of the barn floor. The only piece of
evidence which might be indicative of a wooden floor was the
occurance of some limestone rocks with fairly flat surfaces
in a line along the interior wall on the east sidei and
three such rocks near the interior of the west side. It is
suggested that these few stones may be all that is left of
stone joist supports for the wooden floor.
structure Vl is on a slope that has a 3-foot maximum
drop within the building. Obviously the first factor in
constructing a floor would be the establishment of a level
surface. Excavation revealed that a primary layer of loosely
consolidated, coarse gravel and cobble limestone was dumped
on top of the old topsoil. A wide range of military arti­
facts found in that layer comfortingly date it to the army
occupation. A second strata of purposefully deposited fill
overlay the first. It consisted mainly of a non-cohesive
soil with pebbles and large limestone cobbles. A diverse
inventory of both military and civilian artifacts were en­
countered within the secondary fill and grass had taken root
in its surface.
Because neither a hardpacked surface, which would have
been created by a dirt floor, nor remnants of a concrete
floor were found, it is cortcludedthatneither of tHese kinds
of floors existed in the barracks. Further, as the woOden
floor was tota'lly:'removed no remnants of it were found.

84

Therefore, one scenario which-takes into account all of
the forgoing _f.acts . is this : The military established a level
surface for a wood plank floor, they mayor may not have re­
moved that floor during the typhoid epidemic, but since that
epidemic occured in 1873 and the fort was not abandoned till
1883, and a hard packed surface was not found, it is highly
unlikely that they had a dirt floor during the last ten years.
It is believed that the army did have a wooden floor which
was subsequently used by the civilian owner and has since
been entirely removed.
The next problem was to determine, as far as waspassible,
just what the elevation of that floor may have been. As
previously mentioned there were a number of possible joist
supports found. The top of these stones was approximately
8 inches below the level of the door sills of both east wall
doors (Dl & 2). The sill of those doors were taken as the
most nearly accurate as these are the only preserved door­
ways and their sills are within 1 inch of being level with
the hearths of both fireplaces (fl & 2). Therefore, it is
proposed that the most likely height for the floor was at a
level even with the hearths and the door sills of Doors 1
<:and 2.
Summary
In summary the barracks building is a limestone, masonry
structure which has, at a minimum three doors and three windows.
The army engineers definitely filled in the interior of the
building in order to provide a level surface for a floor. The
kind of floor Which was used is not absolutely known, although
strong evidence suggests a wooden plank floor. It probably
had a pitched roof. The interior wall surfaces were plastered
and whitewashed and the exterior walls were only whitewashed.
Because the structure is in an advanced state of ruin, -further
facts concerning its original construction are vague at best.
85

Figure 3:

Bakery - exterior view, south wall (F3).

Looking north. Chimney, roof and window at
~left (W3) are civilian artifacts.
outline
of sealed opening occurs at right. Civilian
door (Dl) is partially visible through left
window.
Scale: stadia rod extended to 8 feet.

Figure 5:

Bakery - interior view, west wall (F4).

Looking west~ Composite view of interior wythe.
Note general stage of deteriorationi~half-wythes
on right and leftr t~bular limestone blocks on
west wall which indicate a former half-wyther
arch-like areas of mortar differentiation on west
wall; loci of oven flues (V3 in situ, V4 pro­
jected)r presence of two steatite blocks to the
left of V4 and resting on the half-wythe line.
Scale: stadia rod extended to 9 feet.
Figure 6:

Bakery - exterior foundation detail,
west wa 11 (F4).

Looking east. Note bedrock and tabular lime~3
stone wall block bedded to old top soil with
caliche mortar. Present ground level is seen
in upper left corner.
Scale: 6 inch~ ruie,"

Figure 10:

Bakery - detail subfloor Bill.

Looking west. clay and caliche subfloor com­
ponents after removal of military flagstone
floor. Note limestone block in upper left
corner which served as joist support for later
wood floor. Floor sweepings and other surface
debris tend to override joist support.
Scale: 6 inch rule.
Figure 11:

Bakery - detail flagstone floor.

Looking west. Profile of bedrock. buried top
soil, three levels of sub£loor fill; and mili­
tary flagstone floor.
Scale: 6 inch rule

Figure 12:

Bakery - detail ground level vent (Vl).

Looking north. Interior oblique view of vent
near oven front; opening is to building ex­
terior at ground level. Limestone lining 'of
vent is"badly burned.
Scale: 1 foot north arrow divided into 1, 2,
and 4 inch increments.
Figure 13:

Bakery - det?il pven flue (V4).

Looking west. Oblique view of oven flue. Note
carbonized tabular steatite backplate rising
from springing line at 500 angle; Type 2 mortar
effects bedding. Type 3 mortar is used in re­
pointing.
Scale: 6 inch rule.

Figure 14:

Headquarters - exterior view, south and
east walls (F2 & 3).

Looking generally north. Note square columns,
boxed capitals and wooden floor. Private collec­
tion of Don Wilkinson, 1961.
Scale: Columns .are approximately 7 feet 8 inches.
Figure 15:

Headquarters - exterior view, modified
courtyard.

Looking south. Rear of headquarters building.
Note weather panels: metal roof~ plaster trun­
cation at floor level. The posts supporting
-the roof are located approximately in the same
position occupied by original columns, and
mark what is believed to be the l-imits of the
original interior veranda.
Scale: stadia rod extended to 8 feet.

.

Figure 17a:

Headquarters - mantel detail, east room.

Fireplace with mantel inta"ct, cement on hearth
and around opening believed to be intrusive but
stylistically similar to original finish. Mantel
is earliest type found and believed to be origi­
nal.
Scale: 6 inch rule •

•

Figure 17b:

Headquarters - mantel detail, center
:.:room.

Fireplace with mdntel intact showing flat arch
construction and metal support bar. Note trim­
med floorboards and beveled baseboards.
Scale: 6 inch rule.

•
Figure 17c:

Headquarters - mantel detail, north­
west wing.

Fireplace with mantel removed showing original
"plaster behind mantel and nailers. Note joist
in front of hearth foundation and area where
plaster has fallen revealing random rubble wall
construction~ quarter-round moulding on base­
boards.
Scale: 6 inch rule.

,

Figure 18:

Headquarters - detail secondary roofing
unit.

south, up and into interior veranda,
secondary roofing unit construction. Note:
1. Bridging beams, soffit and facia for primary
roofing component suppo'rted by posts.
2. Support beams of secondary component nailed
to bottom of soffit boards.
3. Secondary rafters abutting facia and sup­
ported by a strip of wood nailed to facia.
4. Sheathing on top of rafters giving complete
coverage.
Scale: distance between posts at rafter level
is about 6 feet 4 inches.
Looki~g

Figure 19:

Headquarfers - plaster detail modified
courtyard.

Looking east, up at vertical plaster trunca­
tion. Note:
1. Narrowing of exposed wall surfa~e near top
of wall.
2. Bottom of weather panel.
3. wall plate on top of wall.
4. Rafter joining wall plate.
5. Frame work on wall in upper right is rem­
nant of recent civilian ceiling.
Scale: widthrof exposed wall'is about 18 ;:;inches.; .

Figure 21:

Headquarters - exterior door, modified
courtyard ~ (D6) •

Note:
1. Foundation wall buile on old top soil.
2. Room joists protruding through the wall.
3. Recessed door frame.
4. Plaster truncation at floor level.
5. Bedroak in center foreground.
6. Joist resting upon floor plates.
Scale: Ooor is about 3 feet 2 inches wide.
Figure 22:

Headquarters - exterior veranda.

Looking north. Dated 1961. Note:
1. ~ooden floor.
2. Square capitals and columns.
3. Pillar 20 can be seen adjacent to west wall
and covered with ivy.
4. Lug sills in windows.
5. Intrusive screen on windows.
6. Gener~l
random pattern of stone placement.
!
7 ; ~We!ft.h.rpanel- enclosing-llorth:eno' of veranda roof.
(Don:cWil1iinso~, Photograpnic Collection);
Scale: columns are about 7 feet 8 inches high.
c

Figure 25:

Headquarters - exterior veranda, rafter
support (P12).

Looking south. View of exterior 'veranda rafter
support blocks, showing bridging beams, rafter
tails y intrusive decking, creosote soaked uti~
ity pole serving as column and intrusive board
for capital. c~t nails protrude from top of
bridging beam because this capital was removed
during the course of field investigations.
Scale: rafter support blocks are 5 and 6 inches
high.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
While the principal author is responsible for all final
interpretations and descriptions found in this report, the
work of Emerson L. Pearson, as field director and co-author
of the interim report, can not be underestimated. His per­
serverance, fresh perspective and considerable efforts ex­
pended in the compilation of the interim report went beyond
normal commitment. Of equal importance in the field were
Marshall R. Eiserer, William G. payne, Robert L. stiba and
Catherine H. Yates. Assistance from each of these individuals
included continuingcintelleetual~feeaback<andp;r±vate=-resslu"'­
tions of discrete site problems. Mr. Eiserer accepted respon­
sibility for delineation and interpretation of many salient
issues addressing floor-subfloor relationships in structure
M2. That research culminated. in a paper now on file at the
offices of the Texas Archeological Survey in Austin. Mr.
Payne assumed the very complex and frustrating task of de­
ciphering early map scales, relating those results to field
computations, and placing both in the perspective of on­
going excavation in an effort to resolve discrepancies sur­
rounding the bakery and bakery storehouse. His research and
conclusions have taken the form of a final paper also deposited
with the above named agency. Each of these drafts were accom­
plished at the personal expense of time and money. Upon Mr.
stiba fell the incredibly befuddling and complicated job of
stratigraphic definition and interpretation of the barracks.
His field techniques, sense of perspective, and tenacity were
unexceeded. As dirt archeologists faced with the standing
headquarters building we found it necessary to complely re­
orient our thinking. The very challenging job of finding an
intellectual and operational approach to that structure was
initially tackled by Ms. Yates. All of the subsequent work
done there was based on both her preliminary assessments and
her extensive and detailed field notes.
Ms. Patience E. Patterson served very admirably as
photographer. Although the general~crew size fluctuated from
117

time to time, each member of the crew brought a sense of per­
sonal involvement so necessary to successful fieldwork. Those
friends are Douglas B. Comstock, Terry Lynn Galloway, Jason
D. Pavlovic, Lucy pavlovic and william R. Hudson.
Texas Parks and wildlife Department was of great aid in
two respects. Park superintendent Gully Cowsert and his
staff of william wright and Malcomb Whitley not only offered
locality perspective, provided the odd tool, and gave a
helping hand--theywere friends. Dessamae Lorrain and
the Austin-based research staff provided available documents
and previous research.

118

REFERENCES CITED
Anonymous
1883

Final inventory of buildings at Fort McKavett Texas.
Unpublished document on file at Texas Parks and
wildlife Departme~t.

Anonymous
1969

Fort McKavett State Historic Park; Menard County,
Texas. Unpublisheq manuscript on file at Texas
Parks and wildlife Department.

Coffee, D.R.
1967 Soil Survey of Menard County, Texas. U.S.D.A.,
Soil Conservation service (February, 1967).
Crimmins, M.L.,ed.
1939 Fort McKavett, Texas. Southwestern Historical
Association Quarterly, Vol. 42: 351-387.
Fontana, B.L. and J.C. Greenleaf
1962 Johnny ward's Ranch: A Study in Historic Archeology.
The Kiva, Vol. 28(1-2): 1-115.
Fontana, B.L.
1965 The Tail of a Nail: On the Ethnological Interpretation
of Historic Artifacts. Florida Anthropologist, Vol.
18(3): 85-102.

Green, F.E.
1969 Report on Preliminary Archaeological Investigations
at Fort McKavett, Texas. A cooperative project
between Texas Tech University and The Texas parks
and wildlife Department, carried out under Inter­
agency Agreement No. lAC (68-69}-457.
Huntington, W.C.
:1963

Construction: Materials and~ Types of Con.,...
stru~ctiOn.
oohn Wilayand Sons, Inc., New York.

~Building

119

Jackson, T.K., 2nd Lt., 8th infantry, U.S.A.
1853 Letter dated August 1853 to Major General T.S.
Jesup, Quartermaster General, U.S.A., unpublished
documents on file at Texas parks and wildlife
Department, Austin, Texas.
scott, J.S.
1964 A Dictionary of Building. penquin Books, Inc.,
Baltimore.
Sharpe, R.
1870 A report on barracks and hospitals with descriptions
of military posts. war Department, Surgeon Generalis
Office (Circular No.4; 5 December 1879). washington:
Army Medical Library #266083. Pp. 203-206.
R., and Horton, S.M.
1875 A report on barracks and hospitals with description
of military posts. Pp. 213-219. war Department,
Surgeon Generalis Office (Circular No.4; 5 December
1879). Washington: Army Medical Library #266083.

Sharp~,

Rickey, D., Jr., and C.S. Pope
1966 Fort McKavett Texas, A Special Report on Potential
for Park Development. United States Department of
the Interior, National Park service.
Taniguchi, A.Y., R.E. Graham, and G.C. Hamblett
1968 Texas Historic Forts Part II, Fort McKavett. School
of Architecture, The University of Texas at Austin.
wilkinson, Don
n.d. Fort McKavett Photographic Collection, private
collection, Menard, Texas.

120

Appendix I.

41 MN 2, Bakery - technical descriptions of materials used in fill for
leveling floor,of east rOOM.

color*
Dark to very
dark grayish
brown
10YR 3/2 to
10YR 4/2
t-'
N
t-'

Light yellowish
brown
10YR 6/4
variable white
10YR 8/2 to
5Y 8/1
Variable white
5YR 8/1

Soil
Matrix

Estimated
particle size

silty
clay

less than
0.002 to
0.01 rom

silty
clay"
'

,

caliche

magnesian to
slightly
dolomitic
limestone

less than
0.002 to
0.005 mm
less than
0.092 tnm.1

Inclusions

stratigraphic
position

moderate
amounts of
course gravel
and cobbled
limestone

Primary fill
(i.e. deposited
on old top soil)

none

secondary fill
(i.e. deposited on
primary fill)

none

Tertiary fill

average
l'x l'7"x 6" to none
l'5"x 2'4"X 6"

*Determined from Munsell Color chart in field moist conditions.

Flagstone
bedded in tertiary
fill

Appendix II.

41 MN 2, Headquarters - corners where large
sections of plaster were removed during in­
vestigations of interior walls.

east
wing
Corners

Fl/2
F2/3
F3/4
F4/1

east
room

center
room

F4/1

Fl/2

122

modified
courtyard
F7/8

Appendix III.

41 MN 2, Headquarters - projected lock size
and placement on exterior doors.

Distance
from bottom
of door to
knob hole

Distance from
Length Height door edge to:
of
knob . . key
Lap*
of
scar
scar
hole
hole
scar

Jamb
catch

36-1/2"
V2**
sample

6-3/4" 4-1/4" 5-1/4" 2-1/4'! yes

lUx 4"

Dl

36-1/2"

3-1/4" 3-1/2" 2-1/2"

in
situ

34-1/2"

6-3/4" 4"

5-1/4" 2-1/4 1t yes

l"x 4"

D3

35"

6-3/4" 4-1/4" 5-1/4" 2-1/4" yes

D4

33-1/2"

9"

1"x'.4"
1-1/4"
x 6"

D5

35-1/2"

6-3/4" 4-1/4" 5-1/4" 2-1/4"

D6

Door is badly damaged and lying on floor. Two knob hol es
33-1/2"
2 1 411
present.
/
1
35"
4-1/4".

Door

D2

I

6"

I

6-3/4"

yes

1

D8

Badly damaged but does have box lock type scars.
1-1/4"x
Door is missinq.
4-1/2"

D9

35"

d2/3

Door is missing

d3/4

Box lock type scars.

D7

6-3/4" 4-1/4" 5-1/4" 2-1/4" yes

l"x 4"

yes

l"x 4"

Blanks indicate that data was unavailable or inconclusive.
*Refers to mortised lip on the mortised box lock type mechanism
which is fitted into the edge of the door.
**The dimensions on the mortised box locks on the restored
Barracks V2 were used as a standard agains which to compare
the data from the Headquarters building.

123

Appendix IV.

4. MN 2, Headquarters - whitewash and paint
color sequence for walls and woodwork.

The following sequence of whitewash and paint colors was
developed by examining plaster with paint adhering to it,
paint chips which had flaked off the walls and by scraping
paint from woodwork. All specimens were inspected under a
microscope and where possible each layer was subjected to a
Hel test to check for the presence of lime.
Most layers were
found to have been applied with a brush as hairs from paint
brushes were still in some layers and the ridges left by a
brush application were clearly visible in ma~y'cases. ~Some
layers were found to be bonded to each other.
Room

Layer

Material~aad

Rl north­
east wing

1 {earliest)

Whitewash
Low porosity sealer, slightly
translucent milk white.
Whitewash
very thin medium to light grey
wash,
White - nonlime base
Biege - nonlime base
White - nonlime base
White - nonlime base
Red - nonlime base

2
3

4
5
6
7
8
9

R2 east

1 (earliest)

room

2
3

4
5
6
7
8
9

10

color sequence

Whitewash
White
White (Kalsamine?)
White (Kalsomine?)
White (Kals6mine?)
White (Kalsomine?)
Tan (Kalsomine?)
White iKalsomine?)
Green- .r;:>aint
White - paint

*

* Kalsomine - a type of wall finish which may have been
used during civilian occupation. See page 3.
124

Appendix IV. cont'd.
Room

Layer

Material and color sequence

center
room

1 (earliest)
2

Whitewash - bonded to plaster
Low porosity sealer, translucent
and slightly milk white to spora­
dically amber
White
White
White
Green - with undissolved crystal
inclusives dense enough to lend
texture to present wall surface
Undissolved green crystals
Very thin coat of white

R3

3

4
5
6

6a
7

R4 west
room

1 (earliest)
2

3
4
5
6

R5 north­
west wing

9

Whitewash
White
White
White
Dirty white
White
White
White
Buff

1 (earliest)
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Whitewash
White
White
White
White
Yellow
Pink
White

1 (earliest)
2

3
4
5
6
7

8

Modifiedcourtyard

Whitewash
White
White
White
White
Blue-grey

125

Appendix IV. cont'd.
Room

Layer

Material and color seguence

Interior
woodwork*

1 (earliest)
White paint
2
White paint - partially cracked
3
Grey
4
Grey - badly cracked
5
White - badly cracked
* Woodwork in the west room (R4) was used as typical example

126

Appendix V.

Years
A.D.

41 MN 2, Bakery - tentative chronology of
structures.

structures

Sources

No formal bakery

1. Jackson 1853.
2. Negative
evidence

1856

stone ovens canvas cover

1. Crimmins 1939: 364.

1857

New stone bakery
with burned out
ovens

1. Anonymous 1969: 20.

1853
1854
1855

1858
1859

D E MIL I TAR I Z A T ION

1870
1871
1872
1873
1874

1875
1876
1877
1878
1879
1880
1881
1882
1883

No working bakery

1. Not shown on July 1868
map (Taniguchi and
others 1968: 72).

New bakery

1. Sharpe 1870: 205.
2. 1871 map (Taniguchi
and others 1968: 74).

Addition to bakery

3. 1874 map (Anonymous
1969).

New stone bakerYi
Bakery storehouse

1. Sharpe.1875.
2. 1875 map (Taniguchi
and others 1968: 75,76).

Final departure from fort.

127

Submitted in fulfillment of Inter-Agency
cooperation Contract No. 1055 (72-73) by
the Texas Archeological Survey, The univ­
ersity of Texas at Austin, to the Texas
Parks and Wildlife Department. This work
was carried out under provisions of Antiq­
uities permit No. 33 granted by the state
Antiquities Committee.

U8

