THEBURNEDROCKMIDDENSOFTEXAS:
ANARCHEOLOGICAL
SYMPOSIUM

Edited by
Thomas R. Hester

with contributions by
Michael B. Collins, Darrell G. Creel,
Glenn T. Goode, Margaret A. Howard, and EIt(!nR. Prewitt

Studies in Archeology 13
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
The University of Texas at Austin

1994

THEBURNEDROCKMIDDENSOFTEXAS:
ANARCHEOLOGICAL
SYMPOSIUM

~',

;.

.,'.

.

FRONTISPIECE.

\
..~\
,..'>

A central Texasburned rock midden. J.W. Gildart site (41UV37),excavatedby A.'T.Jackson of The

University of Texas in April 1934. (Photograph courtesy of the TexasArcheological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin).

THE BURNEDROCKMIDDENSOFTEXAS:
ANARCHEOLOGICAL
SYMPOSIUM
SecondEdition

Edited by
Thomas R. Hester
with contributions by
Michael B. Collins, Darrell G. Creel,
Glenn T. Goode, Margaret A. Howard, and Elton R. Prewitt

Studies in Archeology 13
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
The University of Texas at Austin

1994

I

I

I

I

I

I

Jointly published 1991 by
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
a~
The Council of Texas Archeologists
.

Published 1994 by
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
Printed on 60 pound, acid-free paper.

PREFACE
Thomas R. Hester

In traveling over Texas [Charles Montel, surveyor] has fouod many piles of
stone evidently heaped together - the Indians heap them to roast their meat
on...
[Bexar County District Court 1847]

The papers published in this volume were presented in a symposium held at the April
15, 1988 meeting of the Council of Texas Archeologists. The symposium, "Studying
Burned Rock Middens in the 1980s," was designed to examine the history of burned rock
midden investigations, to review current interpretations, and to discuss future research
objectives. Burned rock middens largely of Archaic age occur at sites across central and
western Texas. They have been investigated for more than 80 years (and known, as the
introductory quote indicates, for nearly 150 years), yet they remain largely enigmatic
features in terms of archeological interpretation.
The 1988 symposium participants
brought a variety of perspectives to burned rock midden studies. Papers were presented
by Michael B. Collins, Darrell Cre_el,Glenn Goode, Margaret Howard, Duane Peter, and
Elton R. Prewitt. [Unfortunately, Peter unable to submit a manuscript for the volume;
the reader should consult Peter (1982) for details of his research in the Williamson
County area of central Texas].
The paper by Collins that leads off the volume provides a thoughtful review of a
number of avenues of burned rock midden research. It further offers innovative approaches aimed at improvements in the behavioral analysis of these phenomena. Strong
arguments are set forth for both "macroscale" studies (setting these sites in better
environmental context) and those at the "microscale", involving detailed analytical
examinations of burned rock midden attributes. While Collins' paper looks toward the
future of burned rock midden research, an equally important historical perspective is
provided by Prewitt. Beginning with the field investigations by J. E. Pearce, Prewitt traces
the trends, themes, and personalities reflected in burned rock midden archeology up to
the late 1980s.
Darrell Creel has summarized a large body of data from west central Texas that suggest
a correlation of burned rock middens and the distribution of oak savanna during the
Archaic. The implications for interpreting burned rock middens in terms of Archaic
subsistence strategies are discussed by Creel. Margaret Howard's paper makes several
important contributions. She presents a comprehensive list of archeological studies at
more than 200 burned rock midden sites in Texas, and maps the geographic extent of
excavated sites. The role of hearths in burned rock midden structure is examined,
utilizing data from her own field work at Wild Turkey Midden in Mills County. She also
presents, from that site and others, a summary of the types of botanical remains that have
been recovered from burned rock middens.

v

The final paper, by Glenn Goode, presents the results of burned rock midden excavations done in the 1980s under the auspices of the State Department of Highways and
Public Transportation. These very useful summaries point to the occurrence of Late
Prehistoric cultural remains in some burned rock middens. Goode also discusses the
possibility that the processing of sotol might be related to this Late Prehistoric pattern.
All of the papers speak to the issue of burned rock midden variability, in terms of
chronology, function, midden morphology, and mechanisms of site formation. We are
not confronted with "the burned rock midden problem," as there are many kinds of
burned rock middens and this variability in itself needs better definition.
In the three years since this symposium, additional burned rock midden studies have
been carried out. Michael Collins, working with Wulf Gose (of the Department of
Geology, The University of Texas at Austin), initiated archeomagnetic studies of burned
rock features at central Texas sites. This research grew out of proposals Collins (this
volume) had set forth in the 1988 symposium. Paleomagnetic data have yielded insight
on the magnetic orientation of the burned rocks, displacement (if any) since their
deposition, and the level of heating involved; such information is clearly applicable to
site formation studies. Thus far, Collins and Gose have utilized this type of investigation
with Early Archaic hearth features in Kerr County (Collins, Ellis, and Dodt-Ellis1990)
and at a burned rock midden excavated near Buda (Hays County), as part of an interagency contract between the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory and the State
Department of Highways and Public Transportation.
In a similar vein, Abbott and Frederick (1990) have applied proton magnetometer
mapping techniques to examine formation processes and burned rock midden structural
variability in the Stacy Reservoir area of west central Texas. Two types middens were
defined. The authors reported "magnetic signatures" suggesting that the accumulation
of their Type 1 middens result from the building of hearths and roasting platforms, and
that their Type 2 middens derive from earth oven activities.
In the Sabinal Canyon of south central Texas, a 1989field school from The University
of Texas at Austin excavated a burned rock midden that was part of a terrace site
(41UV132; Hester et a1.1989). The site was further investigated by the Texas Archeological Society field school in summer 1990(Hester 1990). Several excavation strategies were
used to dissect the midden, including extensive horizontal stripping of the midden surface
(no features or patterns were discerned). UT-Austin student Lori Smith Douglass
worked with Wulf Gose at the site to sample the burned rock midden surface and buried
hearths in the terrace, in a continuation of the archeomagnetic research program
described above.
The role of acorns in food proce~sing technologies possibly associated with burned
rock middens has been ably reviewed by Turner (1989). She has utilized a broad array of
ethnographic accounts 'and experimental data to bring a greater focus to this issue.
Burned rock midden studies in Texas are clearly entering a new era. Such research
will be guided in large part by the kinds of research perspectives that the symposium
participants have presented in this volume.

VI

Acknowledgments
I am grateful to the authors for their perseverance as this volume made its way to
publication. The Council of Texas Archeologists and its President, Joan Few, are to be
thanked for their efforts in support of this volume. Gerry Ross and Kelly Scott of the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory wordprocessed the manuscripts, and Kelly
helped facilitate its speedy publication once all manuscripts had been pulled together in
late summer 1991. I want to also thank Kay Hindes for bringing to my attention the
introductory quote, contained in a court brief, Ygnacio Perez vs. L. Paschal, filed in the

Bexar County District Court in 1847.

.

References Cited
Abbott, J. 1: and C. D. Frederick
1990
Proton Magnetometer
Investigations
of Burned Rock Middens in
West-Central Texas: Clues to Formation Process. Journal of Archaeological
Science 17:535-545.
Collins, M. B., B. Ellis and C. Dodt-Ellis *
1990
Excavations at the Camp Pearl Wheat Site (41KR243), An Early Archaic
Campsite on Towtl Creek, Kerr County, Texas. Studies in Archeology 6.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at

Austin.

.

Hester, T. R.
1990
Summary of Archeological Investigations by the Texas Archeological
Society Field School, Utopia, Texas, 1990. Texas Archeology 34(3):3-6.

Hester, 1: R., J. Huebner, P. Maslyk, C. Ward and J. Hageman
1989 Excavations at Two Sites in Uvalde County, South Central Texas.La Tierra
16(3):3-7.
Peter, D. E.
1982 Alternative Perspectives on Burned Rock Middens. In Archeological
Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, Vol. 2,
edited by 1: R. Hays, pp. 20-1to 20-15. Archaeology Program, Institute of
Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.
Turner, E. S.
1989 Exploring the Possibilities of Acorn Utilization in the Burned Rock
Middens of Texas. Bulletin of the TexasArcheological Society 59:177-192.

Vll

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREFACE
Thomas R. Hester

,

v

THOUGHTS ON FUTURE INVESTIGATION. OF
BURNED ROCK MIDDENS
Micheal B. Collins. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .. 1
BURNED ROCK MIDDENS: A SUMMARY
OF PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
Elton R. Prewitt. . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . , , . . . , . , , . , . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
ASSESSING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
BURNED ROCK MIDDEN DISTRIBUTION AND
ARCHAIC SUBSISTENCE IN WEST CENTRAL TEXAS
Darrell G. Creel. .".. , . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . , . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33

BURNED ROCK MIDDEN EXCAVATIONS,
HEARTHS AND BOTANICAL REMAINS
MargaretAnn Howard. . . . . . . . . . . .",. , , . . . . . , . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . 45
LATE PREHISTORIC
Glenn T. Goode.

BURNED ROCK MIDDENS IN CENTRAL TEXAS
,.
"
,." ,
, . .. . ..

IX

71

THOUGHTS ON FUTURE INVESTIGATION
OF BURNED ROCK MIDDENS
Michael B. Collins

Introduction
Investigation for more than eight decades has done little toward satisfactorily establishing what burned rock middens represent in terms of human behavior. Progress has
been made in establishing the general time frame and physical characteristics of burned
rock middens, and many ideas have been proposed to account for their functions.
Consensus, however, has not been achieved regarding these functional interpretations.
No really new ideas are presented in this essay, and I acknowledge with gratitude
unpublished thoughts I have gleaned from countless discussions the past 30 years with so
many of my colleagues that their individual contributions become blurred in my memory.
My purpose is to perhaps rearrange a selecffew of these many ideas we have been sharing,
adjust the lighting a little, and hope that someone among us will notice something
important that we have overlooked - a clue or lead that brings about a break in the case.
I believe we should:
1) look again at some of our assumptions and units of analysis,
2) consider the various contextual levels appropriate
analysis,

to burned rock midden

3) explore the efficacy of using theoretical models of subsistence and settlement
behavior,
4) increase the attention paid to site formational processes,
5) escalate our application of specialized analytical techniques, and,
6) most importantly, think long and hard before we dig another burned rock
midden; our thoughts should be directed toward formulation of research
strategies and objectives which are specific, explicit, and potent.
Background
Prominent in many prehistoric sites in central and western Texas and beyond are
sizable accumulations of rocks that have been altered by exposure to heat. These are
often heaped together to form obvious mounds, and it is not surprising that they have
consistently attracted attention from archeologists for most of this century. This paper
does not attempt a comprehensive review of burned rock midden studies; more detailed

1

2 / COLLINS

reviews may be found in works by Creel (1986), Weir (1967, 1976a, 1976b, 1979), Howard
(1983), Peter (1981), and Prewitt (n.d.). Only examples of those developments germane
to the argument presented below will be reviewed here.
Many accounts of burned rock middens are descriptive and make no effort to interpret
the phenomenon (e.g. Sayles 1929; Jackson and Woolsey 1938; Sollberger 1948; Kelly
1961; Shafer and Corbin 1965; McClurkan 1968). More substantive research to date has
concerned itself primarily with chronological (e.g. Pearce 1932; Sayles 1935; Jackson
1939; Campbell 1948; Suhm et a1. 1954; Suhm 1959, 1960; Johnson 1962, 1967; Weir 1967;
Sorrow 1968) and overall functional (e.g. Pearce 1919; Wilson 1930; Huskey 1935; Greer
1965; Sorrow 1969; Hester 1973) aspects of burned rock middens. There have been
exceptions, such as concern with site formation processes (e.g. Kelley and Campbell 1942;
Howard 1983) or size of responsible groups (Collins 1973), but these research efforts
have not been long sustained.
In attempting to ascertain the age and function of burned rock middens, the units of
analysis employed almost exclusively have been the midden as a whole, its artifact
content, and, to a lesser extent, the midden as a feature in the larger site. A few studies
have also treated such features as pits, stone alignments, burials, hearths, or slab-lined
pits within, and adjacent to, the middens as discrete units of analysis (e.g. Kelley n.d.;
Weir 1979; Luke 1980; Peter 1981; Prewitt n.d.). These traditional units of analysis are
not adequate for fully answering the many questions that have been posed for burned
rock middens. The (usually unstated) assumptions have been that overall midden form
is primarily an expression of function (e.g. Pearce 1919; Wilson 1930; Sorrow 1969) and
that age can be determined by standard archeological dating techniques (Johnson 1962;
Sorrow 1968; Prewitt 1981). These units of analysis and assumptions are re-examined
below.
It seems clear that there are two fundamentally different forms of these features. One
is domed (Weir's [1976a, b] Type 1) and the other is annular (Weir's [1976a, b] Type 2 and
3), the latter having various forms of central depression or a relatively rock-free core.
The annular forms include what have been variously referred to as ring middens, sotol
pits, and mescal pits (d. Greer 1965, 1967). The attributes defining some of these
distinctions are often observable only upon excavation. For the purposes of this discussion, the general term, burned rock midden, refers to all such features and the terms,
annular burned rock midden and domed burned rock midden, denote informal
categories within the general group.
The domed and annular forms have different, but overlapping, distributions in time
and space. The domed forms are primarily found in central Texas and the southeastern
part of Trans-Pecos Texas and mostly date to the middle Archaic, 5000 to 2500 B.P.
(Prewitt 1985). Annular forms are found in western central Texas, almost all of TransPecos Texas, parts of Coahuila and Chihuahua in northern Mexico, southern and western
New Mexico, southeasternmost Colorado, and much of Arizona (Greer 1965). Most of
the annular forms date between 2500 and 300 B.P. (Greer 1965; Young 1982; Prewitt
1983). Little is known about the distribution of domed burned rock middens in northeastern Mexico.

FUTURE INVESTIGA TIONS / 3

Large accumulations of burned rock often occur in rockshelters such as Fate Bell
(Parsons 1965) and Eagle Cave (Ross 1965) and share many attributes with burned rock
middens in open sites. Occurrences in rockshelters are not directly considered in this
paper where one of the main concerns is with the human behavior that produces the
highly localized build up of burned rock in an open setting. The spatial constraints of
rockshelters undoubtedly contribute significantly to the concentrated nature of burned
rock accumulations found there as well as assure the admixture of materials resulting
from behaviors unrelated to burned rock middens. On the other hand, because of the
favorable conditions of preservation often afforded by rockshelters, their content of
burned rocks along with associated matrix and other cultural content should be systematically tapped as sources of information to be used in the study of open site burned rock
middens.
I should clarify my position in regard to the significance of open site burned rock
middens as products of human behavior. Burned rock middens clearly result from
behavioral patterns distinct from anything else we see in the archeological record within
the time-space frame of these features. I suspect that burned rock middens resulted from
more than one pattern of behavior - that there is more than one "explanation" for burned
rock middens. Some, it seems, are unitary features. Others may, at least in part, be
aggregates of multiple features such as hearths. Proposals that such middens are simply
the accumulated residue of multiple hearths repeatedly built at the same place over a
long period of time imply that these hearths are indistinguishable from isolated hearths
built elsewhere. It may be true that isolated hearths and hearths built in the restricted
area of the midden functioned in the same manner, but repeated construction of hearths
at the midden locus is not random behavior and represents a pattern distinct from the
construction of isolated hearths. Some advantage was perceived in locating hearths in
such proximity. The initial several hearths in this interpretation are in proximity due to
"non-midden" factors, perhaps a suitable clearing in the trees. Subsequent ones, however, are added in spite of, or because of, the burned rock residue already in place. So
even if burned rock middens are simply the result of repeated construction of hearths in
a restricted place, which I doubt in most cases, the factors involved in such a behavioral
pattern are in need of explanation.
The earliest proposed function of burned rock middens was by Pearce (1919), who
interpreted them as "kitchen middens" representing accumulated refuse from general
food preparation (see also, Huskey 1935). This proposal implies the gradual accretion
of middens and is found implicitly or explicitly in much of the subsequent literature. It
has been long established that at least some middens contain large numbers of artifacts
and that typologically a great deal of variability often occurs (Jelks 1951; Suhm 1960;
Weir 1967; Hester 1971). In some cases, considerable time is represented by the types
of artifacts recovered from a single midden, and spatial patterning among these items
suggests that some middens grew by the intermittent addition of lenses or lobes (cf. Jelks
1951; Howard 1983). Geologic evidence for intermittent lenticular accretion has been
noted at some sites (Howard 1983; Gunn and Mahula 1977; Kelley n.d.; Collins 1973).
Some of the most provocative proposals concerning the function of burned rock
middens begin by assuming that they are specialized food-preparation facilities and then

4 / COLLINS

attempt to identify what food or foods may have been prepared. Wilson (1930) noted
that the distribution of burned rock middens correlates to an extent with that of sotol
and, using analogy to an historic account of the preparation of sotol by Lipan Apaches,
suggested that prehistoric burned rock middens resulted from baking sotol in earth ovens.
This general interpretation has prevailed for the annular burned rock middens of the
southwest (d. Mera 1933; Greer 1965, 1968) though elaborated to include other desert
plants, such as lechuguilla or prickly pear (d. Bandy 1980). Skinner (1974) suggested
that burned rock middens with low artifact content could represent earth ovens for the
cooking of large mammals. This hypothesis has not been tested.
It has been inferred that at least some of the domed middens of central Texas resulted
from the processing of acorns (Hester 1973; Weir 1976a, b; Gunn and Mahula 1977; Peter
1981; Creel 1986). Consistently, burned rock middens in central Texas contain relatively
small amounts of bone, tend to co-occur with live oak savannas, and a few have yielded
acorn remains (cf. Peter 1981; Hester 1985). In most discussions of this thesis, the
processing of acorns is implied to result in the gradual accretion of middens (cf. Peter
1981; Creel 1986).
Peter (1981) questions earlier suggestions, such as those by Weir (1976a,b) and Hester
(1973), that leaching of acorns would produce quantities of fire-cracked rock. Instead,
he suggests that roasting of acorns for winter storage could be expected to produce large
quantities of heat altered rock.
Creel (1986) has explicitly formulated the previously informal suggestion that stoneboiling of acorns and the baking of acorn-meal bread could account for much of the
heated rocks making up these features. He argues that stones rather quickly become
unsuited for continued use and must be replaced with fresh ones (cf. Witkind 1977; Jones
1981). Repeated use of the same locality results in midden accumulation over an
extended period of time. This interpretation is consistent with much of the evidence for
most of the domed burned rock middens. The large and often heterogeneous artifact
content of many domed burned rock middens, the lack of internal features, and their
general co-occurence with oak savannas are characteristics that fit particularly well with
Creel's interpretation. If stone boiling is involved, wooden containers or skin-lined pits
are implied; many of the "fire-pits" and "hearths" seen at burned-rock midden sites could
instead be remnants of skin-lined boiling pits subsequently filled with burned rock.
Alternative to implications of gradual accretion is the observation that in some
circumstances middens may accrue in relatively shan time (Sturgis 1956; Collins 1973,
1985). The very low artifact content of most annular middens is consistent with an
interpretation that these are specialized communal cooking facilities used briefly by a
fairly large group (Greer 1968; Collins 1973). Some domed middens, such as Midden
Number 3 at the Rogers Springs Site (Prewitt n.d.), are also characterized by low artifact
yield (cf. Hester 1971)..
.

In contrast to specialized food-processing facilities, burned rock middens have also
been explained as the result of the repeated construction of individual hearths in a highly
localized area (Kelley and Campbell 1942) or as central refuse dumps (Sorrow 1969;
Hester 1970, 1971; Katz 1987). It is also a common suggestion (cf. Weir 1967; Peter 1981;

FUTURE INVESTIGA TIONS / 5

Howard 1983; Prewitt n.d.) that burned rock middens may result from various or complex
activities and that a few, simple explanations of their functions are likely to be inadequate.
Prewitt (n.d.) has summarized the hypotheses put forward to "explain" burned rock
middens in the following four categories:
1) burned rock middens are the result of the construction of intersecting hearths
on a stable surface at a single locality over a long period of time;
2) burned rock middens are the result of the centralized dumping of domestic
refuse, including broken hearth rocks;
3) burned rock middens are the remains of earth ovens; and
4) burned rock middens are accumulations of rock cooking slabs broken by heat.
Prewitt (n.d.) goes on to add the observation that the majority of the central Texas
burned rock middens date to an arid interval between periods of bison relative abundance
in the region. He hypothesizes that, during this arid interval, the geographic range of
sotol may have extended into eastern central Texas and that it was an important subsistence item prepared in earth ovens, the remains of which are the numerous burned rock
middens. A mesic interval beginning sometime near 2500 years ago resulted in a
westward regression of the range of sotol and the return of bison. Use of large earth
ovens to process sotol dwindled as a result. It is important to note that the temporal range
of burned rock middens referred to by Prewitt begins near the end of the Altithermal.
This adds some credence to the suggested xeric conditions necessary for sotol to have
become established in central Texas.
The foregoing are testable propositions, though not in the generalized form in which
they were originally put forward. The salient elements of these propositions, on the other
hand, can be isolated and tested, as discussed below, but only after some antecedent
matters are considered.
Assumptions and Units of Anal~'sis
An assumption that pervades the literature on burned rock middens seems to be that
in some manner the overall form of the midden is the best reflector of the behavior which
created it, but this has not been developed as part of a logical premise. As a consequence
of this view, we may be concentrating our effort in the least informative range on the
scale of analysis (scale is discussed more fully below). It would seem preferable at this
time to make no assumptions about the indicativeness of overall midden form for human
behavior and shift the focus to finer and coarser ranges on the scale. Explicit assumptions
need to be stated as part of logically consistent research designs at whatever scale.
Another assumption concerns the chronology of burned rock middens. Except in the
case of certain annular forms, the use of one or a few radiocarbon determinations or of
diagnostic artifact content to suggest an age for the overall feature or to place it in a local
chronological scheme fails to adequately consider the implications of reuse, gradual

6 / COLLINS

acretion and repeated turbation connected with most of the functions ascribed to such
features.
Closely tied to these assumptions are the traditional units of analysis employed in the
study of burned rock middens. Emphasis has been on describing and analyzing the
midden as a whole, its artifact content, and the nature of the site surrounding the feature.
(Discussions of the sites in which middens occur usually make no distinction between
components that are and are not contemporary with the midden.) The assumption seems
to be that these are of obvious importance, but explicit demonstration of that importance
is generally lacking. Other midden attributes are analyzed and reported inconsistently.
There is often little rationale given for the specific mix of attributes studied. As with
assumptions, units of analysis need to be explicitly and logically derived as part of a
research program.
Scale, Context, and Ethnoarcheological

Models

The concept of scale in archaeological inquiry (Butzer 1982) provides a useful
perspective for assessing the present status of burned rock midden research. If the three
segments of the scale - micro, meso, and macro - are applied to a typical site with one or
more burned rock middens, the microscale segment would extend from the most minute
entity of analysis (attributes of charcoal flecks, perhaps) to the site as a whole with its
contour, structure, stratigraphy, features, artifacts, and other characteristics.
The
mesoscale segment would encompass the local environmental setting of the site outward
to the limits of relative uniformity in attributes of the setting, such as geologic outcrops,
land form, vegetation, substrate, or aspect, typically on the order of one to several
hectares. The macroscale segment would be the aggregate distributions of the relevant
environmental elements, such as limestone, permanent streams, and deciduous forests,
up to several thousand square kilometers in extent.
Typically, but with a few significant exceptions, published studies of burned rock
middens have focused on the one or more middens in a single site, the site, and the
immediate setting of the site, encompassing the upper part of the microscale segment
and part of the mesoscale segment. Usually, the macroscale is invoked only in reference
to comparisons with other, selected sites. Systematic studies at the macroscale, exemplified by the distributional analysis of burned rock middens and live oak savannas in
west central Texas by Darrell Creel (1986), are indeed rare.
Although some excellent studies have been conducted in the lower range of the
microscale, they have so far been too infrequent and too limited in scope to constitute
significant contributions toward establishing midden function. At the Hop Hill Site
(Gunn and Mahula 1977), detailed stratigraphic analysis, snail distributions, detailed
lithic analyses, and experimental stone boiling were brought to bear on interpretation of
the site and its burned rock midden. Similarly, investigations of 41BX300 (Katz 1987)
and the Panther Springs Creek Site (Black and McGraw 1985) variously utilized techniques not ordinarily employed in the study of burned rock middens; these included
thermoluminescent and archeomagnetic dating, detailed soil analysis, phytolith recovery
and analysis, and efforts to identify botanical remains.

FUTURE INVESTIGATIONS

/ 7

In what follows, it is argued that priority should be given to more research effort at
the macroscale and to more rigorous and intensive application of analytical techniques
at all increments of the microscale.
.
Close ethnoarcheological scrutiny of the human behavioral aspects of artifact patterning in sites (O'Connell 1987) suggests that during any but the briefest utilization of a
site - which is likely to leave too few materials for adequate interpretation - shifting of
activities, movement of objects, and general disturbance inhibit the development of
spatial patterning of the sort commonly envisioned by archeologists. This is compounded
by palimpsest overprinting during successive site utilizations. The behavior producing
burned rock middens seems particularly likely to have blurred any horizontal patterning
of material cultural that might have briefly existed. O'Connell (1987:104) suggests that
overcoming this problem of patterning requires shifting to higher and lower than tradi-

tional scales of analysis.

.

The continuum of foraging to logistically-organized collecting behavior discerned
ethnologically (Binford 1980) has the potential of providing a theoretical basis for
interpreting burned. rock midden function. Foragers acquire food largely on an encounter basis, year round, and do not process and store surpluses. Foragers move as
needed to places where food is available. Logistically-organized collectors, on the other
hand, dispatch specialized groups to exploit resources and transport them to central
residential camps. Species that reliably produce large quantities of edible biomass for a
brief season (r-selected species, such as salmon or live oaks) are essential in the subsistence base of collectors. Collector adaptations dependent upon r-selected plant or
animal staples of necessity involve (1) intensive labor on the part of a relatively large
group during the season of resource abundance, (2) marked resource seasonality and
exploitation scheduling, (3) the technology to process and preserve for storage large
quantities of food, and (4) storage technology.
Residential camp sites of collectors are occupied longer, by more people, engaged in
more kinds of activities than are those of foragers. Hence they should have greater
archeological visibility. Also, logistically-organized collecting results in more kinds of
sites, including caches where surpluses are stored. Therefore, complex components
associated with burned rock middens which evidence quantities of remains of anyone or
more r-selected resources to the near exclusion of other kinds of resources imply, at least
to some degree, the adaptive characteristics listed above and would favor an interpretation that burned rock middens were specialized food preparation features. Mesquite
beans, prickly pear tunas, all deciduous nuts such as pecans or acorns, and psoralea are
examples of r-selected plant foods. The geographic distribution of burned rock middens
does not encompass the range of any notable r-selected animal species, however, seasonal
availability of some animals, such as bison or migratory waterfowl could sometimes
trigger behavior similar to that of r-selected resource exploitation, but the availability
of such resources is not sufficiently reliable to result in the establishment of the same
adaptive pattern.
.
In contrast, plant or animal foods that are edible and available for all or much of the
year (sotol, prickly pear pads, lechuguilla, antelope, rabbits, deer, bison in some areas,
fish, mussels, turkey, and many others) can be exploited in the more generalized foraging

8 / COLLINS

strategy and have different behavioral corollaries. Evidence that foods of this kind
provided the principal staples of groups responsible for burned rock middens would be
evidence that these were not specialized food processing facilities, and that those responsible may have been foragers.
Depending upon the results of preliminary investigation of sites containing burned
rock middens from the perspective of foraging versus collecting, more specific inquiry
would need to follow. The continuum discussed by Binford is just that, with foraging at
one end and logistically-organized collecting at the other, with the potential for innumerable variations in between. A single group may operate nearer the foraging end
part of the year and nearer the collector end at other times. The place to begin, however,
is with data on the patterns of seasonal abundance among the subsistence species
evidenced in the middens and their site components.
The emerging ethnological and ethnoarcheological
settlement and subsistence
models available for use in investigating burned rock middens must be viewed as sources
of general principles and not as specific analogs. The majority of hunting and gathering
societies for whom relatively complete data are available occupy marginal environments.
In the ethnographic present, mid-latitude, continental, temperate forests, and savannas
were occupied by more complex societies. In the areas where burned rock middens
occur, most of the more complete ethnohistorical accounts relate to late arrivals from
the plains to the north, principally Athabascans and Shoshoneans (Newcomb 1961).
Where particularistic ethnographic analogy can be drawn, such as the use of earth ovens
by Apaches and others (Beals 1932; Reagan 1930; Gpler 1983; Castetter et a1. 1938; Bell
and Cas tetter 1941), acorn subsistence patterns in California (Kroeber 1925; Heizer
1978), acorn processing in the Eastern woodlands (Yarnell 1964; Keene 1981), reuse of
Capsian-age rammadyat or escargotieres (which resemble burned rock middens) hy
Berbers of Tunisia (Honea 1962) other aspects of the group's composition, behavior, and
overall adaptation are not likely to be analogous to those of the peoples whose burned
rock middens we seek to understand; this is not to say that such analogs are not useful,
only that their use must not go beyond appropriate applications.
The thrust ofresearch with burned rock middens should be to build theory concerning
temperate forest/savanna dwelling foragers or hunter-gatherers using general principles
from world ethnology, specific ethnographic analogs and ethnohistoric accounts where
appropriate, and intensive archeological investigations directed toward fullest possible
understanding of the adaptations represented. It is distinctly possible that patterns of
adaptation different from any documented ethnographically operated prehistorically in
the area with which we are concerned.
The Behavioral Attribute Perspective

The foregoing considerations are diverse, but can be integrated into a coherent
research perspective. From this perspective, explicit, potent research can be designed
for any specific set of burned rock midden data. The research perspective advocates the
use of expected material expressions of distinctive behavior. The argument is made that
certain attributes of burned rock middens and the sites in whichthey occur are indicative

FUTURE INVESTIGA TIONS / 9

of certain behavior on the part of the peoples responsible for creating these features.
The following discussion assumes that burned rock middens are complex and variable as
a result of the multiple factors responsible for their form and content and that, therefore,
the midden is too gross as a unit of analysis. Finer units, "attributes," within Butzer's
(1982) microscale are emphasized.
The attributes and behaviors discussed are not
considered exhaustive of those that should be considered iil any specific research effort,
and certainly all of those discussed will not apply-in every case; some are unproven and
may be of little merit. The intent is to characterize the perspective by presenting selected
midden attributes with explicit behavioral correlates. In any specific research effort,
similar attributes would be the subject of attribute analyses.

Attribute analysis may proceed in either of two general ways- inductively or deductively. In most sets of archeological data, attributes are almost infinite in number. An
inductive attribute analysis begins with an array, usually large, of attributes selected
arbitrarily orintuitively and conducts a study that seeks to discover patterns among those
attributes and posits explanations for any patterns discovered. Deductive attribute
analysis (1) begins with a theoretiCal proposition that identifies attributes and attribute
states and predicts patterns by logical deduction from the theoretical propositions, (2)
seeks to analyze the data for the predicted patterns, and (3) accepts or rejects the
theoretical propositions according to the amount of agreement between predicted and
discerned patterns. The deductive approach is the more productive and, if employed
judiciously, does not preclude the discovery of patterns that were not predicted.
Burned rock middens are comprised predominantly of fragmentary rocks altered by
heat and organic-rich, fine-grained midden soil, referred to, respectively, as the coarse
and fine matrix fractions. Included in this matrix are various biotic and abiotic objects
denoted as midden content. The surrounding site, substrate, and any encroaching and
covering geologic deposits are considered as part of the midden context.
The coarse matrix fraction of heat-altered rocks consists mostly of fragmentary
pieces, but unbroken rocks are also present. Limestone is the predominant lithology,
except in certain localities where it is sandstone. Individual rocks are often angular and
frequently are bluish gray or pink in color; hairline cracks are typically present in many
of the rocks. There is a wide range of sizes, though the majority of stones have a maximum
dimension in the range of 5 to 15 cm. Most excavators note that although burned rock
middens are obviously composed of pieces of larger stones broken up by heat, adjacent
fragments in the midden rarely fit back together, except in slab-lined pits in some annular
middens.
The fine matrix fraction is composed of sand, silt, and clay-sized particles, usually
dark in color, with a high organic content. This is often described as "ashy" and "greasy"
and minute flecks of charcoal are sometimes reported; otherwise, few data exist on the
composition of the fine matrix fraction. In some middens, the coarse matrix is suspended
in the fine matrix whereas in others, or in parts of others, the fine matrix fills or only
partly fills interstices between contiguous rocks. Fine matrix often adheres to individual
rocks. The extent to which the fine matrix fraction includes materials intruded into the
midden after cessation of its use or what mechanisms would be involved in such a process

10 / COLLINS

are not known. Volumetrically, the two matrix fractions constitute all but a very small
part of any midden (probably in excess of 98%, in most cases).
The volumetrically minor content of middens is heterogeneous and variable. It
consists of informal and formal artifacts of both perishable and nonperishable materials.
It may also include items that are not artifacts. Typically, lithic debitage, chipped stone
objects, and ground stone objects are present, sometimes in large numbers. Mussel
shells, bones, ornaments, bone tools, snail shells, and potsherds occur unevenly. Intrusive floral and faunal content is also expectable in middens.
The immediate context of a midden includes the surrounding site, substrate, and any
cultural or natural deposits which cover or partially cover the midden. The substrate may
be bedrock or an unconsolidated deposit; an unconsolidated substrate may be cultural or
natural and mayor may not include soil development. Middens are usually found within
a larger site with other features, possibly other middens, and artifact scatters may be
present in various expressions. Behaviorally, it is only the contemporary component of
a site that is relevant; however, the diachronic data from a multi-component site are
important in understanding the significance of the location of the site. Middens situated
in areas of rapid deposition are potentially in a more informative context than middens
situated on long-stable surfaces. It is desirable to find buried or partially buried burned
rock middens where stratigraphic relationships with the surrounding site may produce
evidence whereby the cultural associations of middens may be better understood.
COARSE FRACTION MATRIX ATTRIBUTES

Rocks making up the coarse matrix fraction of a burned rock midden may be evaluated
for states in the following attributes, among others:
completeness - unbroken rocks have been subjected to relatively less thermal or
mechanical stress; broken rocks have been subjected to relatively greater thermal or
mechanical stress;
thermal

color change

-

discolored

stones have been heated; experimental

data are

needed to evaluate the significance of color differences, such as blue-gray and pink;
thermoremanence - the alignment of magnetic particles in a material is a
heating; multiple stones with a common alignment direction are evidence
disturbance has occurred since the stones were last beated and cooled,
random alignments among stones, each with strong internal alignment,
disturbance since last heating and cooling;
angularity/sharpness

-

sharp, angular

edges of thermally-fractured

result of
that no
whereas
indicate

rocks have not

been subjected to chemical or mechanical attrition subsequent to heating; dulled,
rounded edges and .comers of such rocks indicate chemical or mechanical attrition

subsequent to heating;

.

size - in a popula tion, larger proportions of smaller rocks indicate exposure to greater
stress, other factors being equal;

FUTURE INVESTIGATIONS

/ 11

surface etching - rocks with etching on their surfaces have been exposed to chemical
stress;
thermal cracks - rocks with many thermal cracks have been subjected to relatively
little stress subsequent to heating;
lithology/morphology - the composition and. surface morphology of stones can be
used to indicate the source area;
thermoluminescence - under ideal conditions, certain lithologies are suitable for
thermo luminescent dating of last heating as a clue to internal midden chronology.
FINE FRACTION MATRIX ATTRIBUTES

Charcoal in the fine matrix may be examined for the following attributes,

others:

among

.

size -large lumps of charcoal have been subjected to relatively little stress since
burning and may represent relatively incomplete burning; flecks may represent more
complete burning or result from greater stress after burning;
morphology -lumps and some flecks of charcoal are suitable for taxonomic identification;
Phytoliths constitute another pQtential data set in the fine matrix, as follows:
presence - biosilicate-producing
midden;
form

-

phytoliths

plants were consumed in, or decayed in and on, the

that can be identified

as to plant part and/or taxon permit

inferences

about fuel and/or plant materials processed, consumed, or discarded in the midden;
environmental conditions may also be inferred;
condition -pristine phytoliths have not been subjected to stress; damaged phytoliths
may evidence stress.
Microfaunal attributes to be considered include the following:
microinvertebrates - certain snail species (such as Polygyra mooreana) could be expected to colonize the rocky surface of a burned rock midden and within one to three
years establish breeding populations (represented by juveniles) which, if found at
random deep in a midden would indicate intermittent turbation or, iffound in discrete
zones, would indicate lacunae (soil development); all invertebrates would provide
environmental data; larger snail species could represent human food waste;
microvertebrates - small animals not given to burrowing in rocky ground could have
habitat characteristics useful in interpreting site formational processes; specific interpretations will depend on taxa.
Clastic particles offer a number of potentially informative attributes, a few of which are
the following:

12 / COLLINS

-

standard particle size analysis of the sand, silt, and clay size ranges
and pedogenic observation afford basic descriptive parameters as well as the ability
to identify lacunae;

granulometry

morphology - particle size, mineralogy, and surface characteristics should reflect
sources, such as degradation of coarse fraction or introduction from outside the
midden (such as adhering to plant foods).
Microdebitage is a direct product of stone chipping behavior that, due to its small size,
is not as subject to intentional displacement as larger pieces of debitage, and its relevant
attributes include the following:
homogeneity-uniform
size and form of microdebitage results from consistent and
possibly specialized knapping behavior, such as resharpening finished tools, whereas
greater variability indicates more generalized knapping;
condition - sharp, pristine edges reflect less post-depositional disturbance; significant proportions of heat-damaged pieces may indicate in-situ burning.
Chemical attributes of the fine matrix, like those of any anthrosol, are numerous and
potentially informative, as in the following examples:
phosphate content-patterns
in phosphate concentrations and fractionation within
the midden, between the midden and the surrounding site, and between middens in
a region should reflect the distribution of similar and contrasting activities and give
some indication of the intensity of those activities;
ph -patterns

in soil ph may reflect the location of certain kinds of activities;

amino acid content - under favorable conditions, the presence of amino acids is
detectable as well as any predominance of either plant or animal amino acids; further
taxonomic inferences are sometimes possible.
CONTENT

The artifact content of burned rock middens is potentially very informative in regard
to midden function:
stylistic

variables

of formal artifacts

-

homogeneity

of style is evidence

of relatively

brief temporal dimension and/or social proximity; heterogenity is evidence of relatively long temporal span and/or social distance;
functional variables of formal artifacts-macro-scopic
functional attributes of artifacts (including adhering residues, patterns of breakage, other factors of condition,
form) provide clues to activities; ~icroscopic patterns of use-wear provide evidence
for artifact uses; gI:eater uniformity is expected if specialized activities are repre-

sented;

.

debitage - knappingbehaviorcan be inferred from debitage;microdebitage in quantity strongly implies that at least some knapping occurred at that locus; proportions
of heat-altered debitage may be used to determine patterns of exposure to heat;

FUTURE INVESTIGATIONS

/ 13

functional variables of informal artifacts - expedient tools, such as flakes, need to
be identified as such by the presence of macro- and micro-use wear and the use wear
analyzed to determine use behavior;
macrofloral

remains

-

presence

indicates

rapid burial

turbances; patterns in taxa and parts interpretable
seasonality;

and minimal subsequent

dis-

as fuel, food refuse, other refuse;

macrofaunal remains - patterns of elements, taxa, and condition interpretable
indicators of season, diet, and processing technology.

as

CONTEXT

The attributes of the midden context are informative
process, chronology, and function, as follows:
microenvironment

-

in stratigraphic

context

resides

about midden

evidence

formation

for the depositional

environment, possible sources of some constituents of midden matrix or content, and
site integrity; in site context resides evidence for determining similarities and differences in the activities, seasonality, variability between the midden and the rest of
the site; a clear distinction needs to be maintained between the components of a site
that are contemporary with the midden and those which are not;
mesoenvironment-patterns

in.proximity to resources reflect relative importance;

macroenvironment - regional distributional patterns and environmental reconstructions imply certain constraints on midden function, particularly the availability of
certain plant resources.
The attribute states discussed above are suitable for organization into sets according
to research objectives. In general, these take the form of "if..., then" statements. The
following will serve as examples:
If the heating that altered the rocks making up a burned rock midden occurred at the
locus of the midden, then:
1) the substrate should show evidence of heating;
2) the coarse fraction matrix should include some rocks that remain in place and
share a common archeomagnetic orientation; should include some that were
thermally fractured in place and reside as adjacent refitting fragments;
"
3) the fine fraction matrix should include intact lumps of charcoal;
4) the content should include a high number of pieces evidencing heat alteration;
undisturbed fragile content items, such as mussel shells, should show relatively
low frequencies of breakage.
If burned rock middens are made up of refuse dumped at a locus other than the locus
of burning, then:
1) the substrate should not evidence heat alteration;

14 / COLLINS

2) the coarse fraction matrix should be totally random in regard to archeomagnetic orientation; should not include in-place adjacent fragments that refit
(however, there may be proximity between refitting pieces because they were
transported and dumped together); there is the potential for reduced size
variability depending upon the efficiency of refuse gathering and transporting
technology;
3) the fine fraction matrix attribute will vary with refuse collection/transportation technology in that efficient technology should gather and introduce minor
proportions of fine-grained refuse; some fine fraction should show no evidence
of heat alteration;
4) the content should exhibi t a relatively high incidence of breakage among fragile
objects (such as mussel shells); should include some objects not subjected to
heat;
5) the context should evidence the sou;ce of the refuse; there should be substantial sharing of content attributes in the refuse and the general site; refitting of
broken objects from the midden with pieces found elsewhere in the site should
be common.
If a burned rock midden was used intensively for a short period of time, then:
1) there should be a relatively uniform interface between the substrate
base of the midden;

and the

.

2) the subsurface coarse fraction matrix should exhibit uniform states of weathering; there should be no discernible lacunae between lenses;
3) there should be no discernible lacunae between lenses of fine fraction matrix;
4) the content should be typologically homogeneous; total cultural content should
be relatively low;
5) the context could include evidence for rapid aggradation.
If a burned rock midden was used in the processing of a single commodity, then:
1) the overall configuration of the midden should be consistent with the requirements for processing that commodity;
2) the content should include residue of that commodity to the near exclusion of
others; the content should also include examples of the appropriate tools for
preparing that commodity, and those implements should show wear produced
by preparation of that commodity;
3) the fine fraction matrix should exhibit relatively uniform chemical and possibly physical re'sidues from that commodity;
4) the context may include site evidence for the processing, storing, and consuming of the commodity; there should be reasonable access to a probable source
of the commodity.

FUTURE INVESTIGATIONS

/ 15

If a burned rock midden accrued gradually and intermittently as lenses over a long
period of time, then:
1) the substrate
lenses;

should show variation in its contact with the various midden

2) the coarse fraction matrix should exhibit contrasting degrees of weathering;
there should be lacunae between lenses;
3) the fine fraction matrix attribute should include discernible lenses separated
by lacunae; biotic and abiotic indicators of soil formation could mark the upper
surfaces of some lenses; 4) the content should be typologically heterogeneous;
should be relatively great.

total cultural

content

Site Formational Processes
Natural forces and conditions before, during, and after the human presence as well
as the nature of the human behavior interact in the process of forming the site as it exists
at the time of archeological investigation (Schiffer 1983; Binford 1979, 1980; Butzer 1978,
1982; Collins 1975; Bordes 1975; Rosen 1986). Probably too little attention has been paid
in the investigation of burned r:ock middens to comparative data on the natural factors
in this process. Patterns of high or low correlations between midden attributes and
certain natural environmental factors will indicate aspects of the behavior involved in
forming these features. The obvious example is rates of deposition.
If burned rock middens are only found on stable surfaces, the interpretation that they
are gradual acretion phenomena is favored, but not proven. If some middens are also
found in environments of rapid natural aggradation, at least those particular middens are
the result of relatively short-term behavior; the content and other aspects of middens
found on stable surfaces should be compared as a group with those found in rapid
aggradational contexts to determine what correlates, if any, exist.
The question of the origin of the fine matrix fraction in burned rock middens is
another aspect of site formational process in need of further investigation. What proportion of the fine matrix accumulates from purely natural forces in contrast to that which
is the direct result of human activities? The characteristics of the fine matrices in light
of various natural settings of middens would begin to answer this question and contribute
significantly to isolating and understanding the human behavior involved.
There has been little systematic consideration of the patterns of burned rock features
and natural context. A comprehensive look at all of the kinds of burned rock occurrences
and their contexts could be informative. Within the time and space parameters of burned
rock midden occurrences, there is a remarkable array of burned rock features. We find
isolated burned rocks, distinct hearths, indistinct hearths, burned rock scatters, burned
rock clusters, burned rock lenses, and small burned rock accumulations thought to be
incipient burned rock middens. If we somehow knew which, if any, of these truly
represent interrupted formation of burned rock middens, we would have isolated for

16 / COLLINS

study the constituent elements of burned rock middens and have an opportunity to better
understand the responsible behavior. Since this line of inquiry has not been pursued on
a large scale, it is simply not known how much potential there is for recovering valuable
data. It does seem sufficiently promising to warrant at least an exploratory effort. The
obvious initial strategy would be to begin with the known characteristics of burned rock
midden attributes, investigate a number of the often-ignored small or "incipient" middens found near larger middens, and apply the attributes found to occur in both large and
small middens to a study of burned rock clusters and scatters, hearths, and other occurrences. A data matrix of attributes of burned rock features and natural contexts would
result. Patterns in such a matrix might identify for us constituent elements of burned rock
middens.
This line of research should also be pursued with the 0bjective of isolating the defining
characteristics of the material consequences of some of the behavior thought to contribute to burned rock midden formation. For example, preceramic stone boiling is often
done in pits. If such pits are filled in with burned rock - intentionally or incidently - after
use, it is likely that they could be misidentified as fire-pits unless particular attention is
paid to evidence for in situ burning. Experimental work is also needed to determine if
leaching can be distinguished from parching or roasting of acorns in terms of the expected
attributes of burned rocks, soil chemistry, and other variables.
Natural environmental factors influencing site formational processes must also be
considered from a regional perspective. Data significant in one setting may not be in
another. For example, Creel's suggestion that burned rock middens resulted from acorn
processing is based in part upon a high, but not perfect, correlation between the distributions of such middens and oak savannas in west central Texas. Near the confluence of the
Concho and Colorado rivers are approximately 100 burned rock middens in an area where
live oaks do not occur today. Creel suggests that environmental deterioration in the area
may have resulted in the loss of an oak population that was formerly present, thereby
interpretively improving his distributional correlations. If the middens in the area where
oaks are not found today were investigated and found to contain significant quantities of
charred acorn pieces and/or oak phytoliths, Creel's in-terpretation would be partially
supported. Recovery of oak phytoliths from a midden in an extant oak forest would be
less informative because pedogenic origin would be difficult to exclude. Interestingly,
the middens at the confluence of the Concho and Colorado Rivers also occur in an area
where sotol does not grow today. These middens - which include both annular and.
domed forms-present
an important opportunity to explore two common functional
interpretations - sotol roasting and acorn processing - in an area where neither plant
occurs today.
Long-term alterations in the environment, such as shifts in stream locations, failure
of springs, and change.s in ranges of biotic communities have to be considered in all
distributional studies. To continue with the acorn-processing example, investigating the
alternatives between roasting and leaching of acorns might benefit from examining the
settings of a large sample of burned rock middens. If roasting or parching was used to
preserve acorns, distributional patterns maximizing access to stones and acorns should
prevail; if leaching, as hypothesized by Creel, were employed, water and calcareous rocks

FUTURE INVESTIGATIONS

/ 17

would need to be readily accessible. The tasks of establishing past distributions of oak
forests and adequate water supplies would necessarily precede the search for spatial
patterns among the variables.
Conclusions
Effort in most investigation of burned rock middens has been concentrated on the
midden, its content, and to a lesser extent its site context. Ethnoarcheological evidence
suggests that meaningful patterning of data at this level may be less likely to survive than
patterning at much larger and at smaller scales of inquiry.
At the larger scale, regional distributional studies of burned rock middens and critical
resources are needed; "critical resources" being those variables inferentially or theoretically identified as important to our understanding of the behavior responsible for
producing burned rock middens. Middens in contrasting settings of geologic aggradation
need to be studied and compared with occurrences of other kinds of burned rock features.
The greatest effort in the near future needs to be directed toward the smaller scale
data. From the midden as well as in the site surrounding it, chemical, physical, biotic,
and cultural consequences of human behavior are recoverable which will reflect patterning correlatable to relatively specific behavior. For the most part, these are classes of
data that we have overlooked eith~r because they are not visible, or because the interpretive potential was not realized. By far the major portion of most burned rock middens
consists of burned rock and fine matrix fill. In most excavations, these have been cursorily
examined, minimally described, and discarded. It is likely that we have been throwing
away the very materials with the greatest potential for yielding the behavioral information
we have sought in analyzing other kinds of data.
Realizing the interpretive potential of the kinds of research advocated here demands
that more than the usual levels of experimental, ethnoarcheological, and ethnographic
information be aligned with the archeological effort. The investigation of a burned rock
midden using this approach could be expected to involve a ratio of 1:6 or 1:8, rather than
the customary 1:3, field to non-field effort. This must be considered in the planning of
any such investigation, particularly if it is done in the arena of public archeology. Such
a ratio, I believe, is more easily justified than traditional efforts if those efforts have little
more chance of success than our endeavors have produced over the last 80 years.
References Cited

Bandy, P.A.
1980 Archaeological Investigationsat Sanderson Canyon Watershed,Terrell,Pecos,
and Brewster Counties, Texas. Environmental Consultants, Inc. Dallas.
Beals, R. L.
1932 The Comparative Ethnology
Ibero-Americana 2.

of Northern

Mexico Before

1750.

18 / COLLINS

Bell, W. H. and E. F. Castetter
1941
Ethnobiological Studies in the American Southwest, VII. The Utilization of
Yucca, Sotol and Beargrass by the Aborigines in the A merican Southwest. The
University of New Mexico Bulletin 372.

Binford, L.R.
1979 Organization and Formation Processes: Looking at Curated Technologies.
Journal of Anthropological Research 35(3):255-273.
1980

Willow Smoke and Dog's Tails: Hunter-Gatherer Settlement Systems and
Archaeological Site Formation. American Antiquity 45( 1):4-20.

Black, S. L. and A. J. McGraw
1985
The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change and Continuity in the Upper
Salado Creek Watershed, South Central Texas. Archaeological Survey
Report 100. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio.
Bordes, F.
1975

Sur la notion de sol d'habitat en prehistoire
Societe Prehistorique Francaise 72:139-144.

paleolithique.

Bulletin de la

Butzer, K. W.
1978 Toward an Integrated, Contextual Approach in Archaeology. Journal of
Archaeological Science 5:191-193.
1982

Archaeology as Human Ecology. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.

Castetter, E. F., W. H. Bell, and A. R. Grove
1938 The Early Utilizationand the Distributionof Agave in theAmerican Southwest
VI. University of New Mexico Bulletin 335.
Campbell, 1: N.
1948 The Merrell Site: Archaeological Remains Associated with Alluvial Terrace
Deposits in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society 19:7-35.
Collins, M. B.
1973 The Devil's Hollow Site, A Stratified Archaic Campsite in Central Texas.
Bulletin of the TexasArcheological Society 43:77-100.
1975

Sources of Bias in Processual Data: An Appraisal. In Sampling in
Archaeology, ed. by James W.Mueller, pp. 26-32. The University of Arizona
Press, Tucson.

FUTURE INVESTIGA TlONS / 19

Collins, M.B., continued
1985
Appendix 5: Geomorphology

of the Lakewood Alluvium in the Brantley

Area, Eddy County,New Mexico. In ThePrehistoryof the Carlsbad Basin,

<

Southeastern New Mexico, by Susana R. Katz and Paul Katz, pp. A35-A119.
Incarnate Word College, San Antonio, Texas.
Creel, D. G.
.1986 A Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in West Central Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Arizona, Tucson.
Greer, J. W.
1965 A Typology of Midden Circles and Mescal Pits.
31(3):41-45.

Southwestern Lore

1967

Midden Circles versus Mescal Pits. American Antiquity 32(1):108-109.

1968

Notes 'on Excavated Ring Midden Sites, 1963-1968. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 38:39-44.

Gunn, J. and R. Mahula
1977 Hop Hill: Culture and Climatic Change in Central Texas. Special Report 5.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Te;xas at San
Antonio.
Heizer, R. F.
1978 . Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 8: California.
Institution, Washington, D. C.

Smithsonian

Hester, 1: R.
1970 Burned Rock Middens on the Southwestern Edge of the Edwards Plateau,
Texas. Plains Anthropologist 15(50):237-250.
1971

Archaeological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County, Texas.
Bulletin of the TexasArcheological Society 42:51-148.

1973

The Formation of a "Burned Rock Midden": A California Example. The
Record 29(3):4. Dallas Archeological Society. Dallas.

1985

UTSA Archaeological Field School Excavations in Bandera and Victoria
Counties, Texas. Newsletter, Friends of Archaeology 2:11-15. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texasat San Antonio.

Honea, K. H.
1962 The Rammadyat of Northwest Africa and The Burned Rock Middens of
Texas. Bulletin of the Iexas Archeological Society32:317-320.

20 / COLLINS

Howard, M. A.
1983
A Quantitative Study of the Booker Site and Other Burned Rock Midden
Sites of the Lake Travis Basin, Central Texas. Unpublished Master's thesis,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Huskey, V.
1935

An Archeological Survey of the Nueces Canyon of Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 7: 104-114.

Jackson, A. 1:
1939 A Deep Archeological Site in Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and PaleontologicalSociety 11:203-225.
Jackson, A. 1: and A. M. Woolsey
1938 The Fall Creek Sites andAdditional Buchanan Lake Sites. The University of
Texas Publications 3802. Austin.
Jelks, E. B.
1951
Relationships
Distributional
Archaeological
Texas. Master's

Between Foci of the Edwards Plateau Aspect: A
Analysis of Diagnostic Projectile Point Types from
Sites in the Marshall Ford Dam Reservoir, Travis County,
thesis, The University of Texas, Austin.

Johnson, L., Jr.
1962
Wunderlich: A Burned-Rock Midden Site. In Salvage Archeology of Canyon
Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge, and Oblate Sites, by LeRoy Johnson,
Dee Ann Story, and Curtis D. Tunnell. Bulletin 5. Texas Memorial
Museum, Austin.
1967

Toward a Statistical Overview of the Archaic Cultures of Central and
Southwestern Texas. Bulletin 12. Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.

Jones, C. J.
1981 A Further Experiment in Stone Boiling: A Calcining Process for Acorns.
La Tierra 8(2):31-38.
Katz, P. R.
1987

Archaeological
Mitigation at 41 BX300, Salado Creek Watershed,
South-Central Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 130. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Keene, A. S.
1981 PrehistoricForagingin a TemperateForest. Academic Press, New York.

FUTURE INVESTIGATIONS

/21

Kelley, J. C.
n.d.
Report on Excavation in Travis County Site 52Cl-5, Steve Heffington Place, .
Work Project 15311, August-November 1940. Manuscript on file, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Kelley, J. C. and '[ N. Campbell
1942 What are the Burnt Rock Mounds of Texas? American Antiquity 7:319-322.
Kelly, '[ C.
1961

The Crumley Site: A Stratified Burnt Rock Midden, Travis County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 31 :239-272.

Kroeber, A. E.
1925 Handbook of the Indians of California. Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bulletin 78. Washington, D. C.
Luke, C. J.
1980

Continuing Archaeology on State Highway 16: The Shep Site (41KR109) and
the Wounded Eye Site (41KR107). Publications in Archaeology 19. Texas
State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.

McClurkan, B. B.
1968

.

Test Excavations, Javelina Bluff, Val Verde County, Texas, 1966. Report
submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, The University of Texas at Austin.

Mera, H. P.
1933 "Mescal Pits" -A Misnomer. Science 77(1989):168-169.
Newcomb, W.W.,Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas:From Prehistoricto Modem Times. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
O'Connell, J. F.
1987 Alyawara Site Structure and Its Archaeological Implications. American
Antiquity 52(1):74-108.
Opler, M.
1983

Mescalero Apache. In Handbook of North American Indians 10: Southwest
pp.419-439. Smithsonian Institution, Washington,D. C.

Parsons, M. L.
1965 1963 Test Excavations at Fate Bell Shelter, Amistad Reservoir, Val Verde
County, Texas. Miscellaneous Papers 4. Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, The University of Texas,Austin.

22 / COLLINS

Pearce, J. E.
1919
Indian Mounds and Other Relics of Indian Life in Texas.
Anthropologist 21(3):223-234.
1932

American

The Present Status of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society 4:44-54.

Peter, D. E.
1981 Alternative Perspectives on Burned Rock Middens. Part V, pp. 19.1-19.15,
Final Draft Report, Archaeological Investigations at the San Gabriel
Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, assembled and edited by 1: R. Hays.
Manuscript on file, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.

Prewitt, E. R.
1981 Culture Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the TexasArcheological
Society 52:65-89.
1983

Remote Sensing of Archeological Remains in the Stockton Plateau Region
of Texas: An Experiment in Site Recognition and Prediction.
Master's
thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.

1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology.
Bulletin of thf: Texas Archeological Society 54:201-238.

n.d.

The Rogers Springs Site: 1974 Investigations.
Research Report 54.
Manuscript on file, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Reagan, A. B.
1930 Notes on the Indians of the FortApache Region. Anthropological Papers of
the American Museum of Natural History 31, part 5. New York.
Rosen, A. M.
1986 Cities of Clay, The Geoarcheologyof Tells. The University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Ross, R. E.
1965

The Archeology of Eagle Cave. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project 7. The University of Texas,Austin.

Sayles, E. B.
1929 Some Types of Archeological Sites Near Abilene, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 1:43-49.

FUTURE INVESTIGA TIONS / 23

Sayles, E.B., continued
1935 An Archeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers XVII.
Globe, Arizona.

Gila Pueblo,

Schiffer, M. B.
1983 Toward the Identification of Formation Processes. American Antiquity
48:261-277.
Shafer, H. J. and J. E. Corbin
1965
An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of North Fork, South Fork,
and Laneport Reservoirs, Williamson County, Texas. Report submitted to
the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The
University of Texas, Austin.

Skinner, S. A.
1974

.

Prehistoric Settlement of a "Natural Area." Ph.D. dissertation,
Methodist University, Dallas.

Southern

Sollberger, J. B.
1948 Lamb's Creek Mound. The Record 7(1). Dallas Archeological Society,
Dallas, Tx.
Sorrow, W. M.
1968
Test Excavations at the Nopal Terrace Site, Val Verde County, Texas. Papers
of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 15. The University of Texas,
Austin.
1969

Archeological Investigations at the John Ischy Site:A Burnt Rock Midden in
Williamson County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project 18. The University of Texas, Austin.

Sturgis, H. F.
1956 A Burnt-Rock Midden Site in Travis County. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 27:111-128.
Suhm, D. A.
1959 The Williams Site and Central Texas Archeology. TexasJournal of Science
11(2):218-250.
1960

A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 29:63-107.

Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 25.

24 / COLLINS

Weir, F. A.
1967

The Greenhaw Site: A Burned-Rock Midden Cluster of The Edwards
Plateau Aspect. Master's thesis, The University of Texas, Austin.

1976a

The Central Texas Archaic.
University, Pullman.

1976b

The Central Texas Archaic Reconsidered.
In The Texas Archaic: A
Symposium, ed. by'[ R. Hester, pp. 60-66. Special Report 2. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

1979

Greenhaw: An Archaic Site in Central Texas.
Archeological Society 50:5-67.

Ph.D. dissertation,

Washington

Bulletin

Wilson, E. W.
1930
Burned Rock Mounds of Southwest Texas. Bulletin
Archeological and Paleontological Society 2:59-63.

State

of the Texas

of the Texas

Witkind, W. M.
1977 An Experiment in Stone Boiling. In Hop Hill: Culture and Climatic Change
in Central Texas, by Joel Gunn and Royce Mahula, pp. 205-208. Special
Report 5. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texasat
San Antonio.
Yarnell, R. A.
1964 Aboriginal Relationships Between Culture and Plant Life in the Upper Great
Lakes Region. Anthropological Papers 23. Museum of Anthropology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Young, W.C.
1982 Excavations at the Ram's Head Sit~, 41PC35, Pecos County, Texas.
Publications in Archaeology 23. Texas Department of Highways and Public
Transportation,

Austin.

.

BURNED ROCK MIDDENS:.A SUMMARY OF PREVIOUS
INVESTIGATIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.
Elton R. Prewitt

Introduction
. . . (burnt rock middens) are distinguished by sizable accumulations of
burned and cracked limestone mixed with charcoal and ash-stained soil, as
well as cultural debris. . . . Burnt rock middens are an unusual kind of site.
. . . They vary greatly in size, sometimes reaching over an acre in extent and
six or more feet in thickness. In cross section the middens appear as low
knolls, while in outline they.are circular or oval. . . . they are not usually
referred to as mounds, . . . [that] term being reserved for intentional
structures such as burial or temple mounds.
The discoloration and angularity of the rock fragments comprising the
midden deposits are a result of contact with fire and thermal fra'cturing, and
indicate that the burnt rock middens are largely accumulations of
hearthstones [Suhm 1960:68].
The piles of angular thermally fractured rocks described by archeologists as burned
rock middens can generally be divided into two categories: domed and annular. The
domed variety are as described above by Suhm (1960:68). They are low mounded masses
of closely packed rock fragments containing varied kinds and amounts of waste cultural
debris. Weir (1976) has sorted domed middens into four varieties on the basis of surface
characteristics. Annular middens, referred to in the previous literature as ring, crescent,
or donut middens (and an assortment of other terms such as sotol pits, mescal pits, and
the like), differ in that they exhibit a distinct central depression containing gray ashy fill
mixed with few rock fragments. Greer (1965) has suggested a somewhat confusing
classification scheme that includes either six or seven varieties of annular middens.
The distributions of the two basic variations of burned rock middens overlap but are
distinctly different. Domed middens are generally associated with the region encompassing the eastern portion of the Edwards Plateau of central Texas. This includes the central
Mineral region (or Llano Uplift) where granite is the country rock rather than limestone.
In contrast, the annular middens are associated with the western portion of the Edwards
Plateau, and especially the Trans-Pecos Region (including the Lower Pecos River). The
distributions of both kinds of midden satisfy the basic requirement noted by Suhm
(1959:247) that burned rock middens can only occur where there is sufficient supply of
parent rock suitable for use in whatever function the middens served. The remainder of
thispaper focusesupon the predominantmiddensin the centralTexasregion - the domed
form.

25

26 I PREWI7T

While the general age range of central Texas burned rock middens is fairly well
established to be middle Archaic, or roughly 5000 to 2250 B.p. (Prewitt 1981, 1985), there
remains some question as to the full age range represented. Some middens may be older
while others may be younger. The actual age range is yet to be established, but few will
question that they primarily are middle Archaic in age.
To date, over 140 burned rock midden sites in central Texas have been tested or
excavated. Over 200 individual middens are represented in those sites. Of course,
countless others have been destroyed by various means such as relic hunters, looters, and
land-surface modification activities. The total number of burned rock middens is not
known.
Five basic methods of excavation techniques have been used to explore middens.
These are all variations of mechanical approaches designed to reveal physical evidence
of structure and presumed function. The broadcast method of excavation is one of the
earlier popular techniques used. Subsequently, the horizontal stripping, trench, and
trench and block methods were tried with varying degrees of success in examining midden
structure. In recent years, the isolated block and the mechanical trench and block
methods have become popular in response to fiscal limitations.
History of Investigations

I.

The history of burned rock midden investigations may be divided into six general
periods. The first of these is the Recognition Period. Burned rock middens were first
described in print by Wentworth in 1906; however, Pearce began a 35-year-long persistent investigation of these sites in 1903. Pearce became interested in the peculiar piles of
burned rocks while serving as Principal of Austin High School. A widely known educator,
Pearce completed coursework for the Ph.D. in anthropology at the University of Chicago
in 1896before taking the job at Austin High, but he never wrote a dissertation to complete
his degree. His background as an anthropologist and reputation as an educator resulted
in his appointment to chair the Department of Institutional History at the University of
Texas in 1917. He promptly had the department renamed the Department of Anthropology and set about building an archeology program with which to pursue his interests in
the prehistory of Texas.
The second major period of investigatioJ;lsis the Pre-WPAPeriod from 1918 to 1932.
In 1918,Pearce began excavations at the WalshSite near Round Rock. This was followed
by additional excavations there in 1919 under the supervision of Roy Bedicheck, who
went on to excavate several other sites for Pearce in central Texas during that year. In
the summer of 1919, Pearce learned of the annular middens of west and west-central
Texas. He immediately undertook ~xcavations near Brownwood and at the Paint Rock
locality in Concho County, all with funding from the Bureau of American Ethnology. This
funding was not renewed in 1920, and there was a hiatus in fieldwork until 1924 when
Pearce resumed work with his personal funds. Substantial work began once more in 1927
when he tested the McClure Mound near Cedar Park with student volunteers. This
resulted in a grant from the Board of Regents of $5,000 per year for the next five years

PREVIOUS INVESTIGA TIONS / 27

from the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Foundation. Excavations were carried out at 16
burned rock midden sites before the money ran out in 1932.
Toward the end of this period, other people began to take interest in burned rock
middens. In 1929, Sayles described several of these sites near Abilene (Sayles 1929:46),
and a student at the University of Texas described other middens in 1930 (Wilson
1930:59). By the end of 1932, Pearce had engineered the testing or excavation of 21
burned rock middens. It was also during this time that he hired A. 1: Jackson as foreman
for his family farm near Austin. Jackson doubled as field foreman for Pearce's archeological work and became an accomplished archeologist despite a lack of formal
academic training in anthropology.
The year 1933 ushered in a new period of funding and investigations: the WPA period.
Work was initially funded through the Civil Works Administration (CWA) but was soon
channeled through the Works Progress Administration (WPA). At least 37 burned rock
midden sites were excavated during this period, many of them in Marshall Ford Reservoir
(Lake Travis) and Lake Buchanan, both of which are located on the Colorado River in
central Texas. Numerous individuals became involved in burned rock midden excavations during this period, including A. M. Woolsey, 1: N. Campbell, and J. Charles Kelley.
In addition, other researchers and students such as E. B. Sayles and Vane Huskey
published papers on these types of sites. It was also during this period that Helen
Donovan Barnard (1939) wrote a Master's thesis that included a review of the history of
archeological investigations undertaken by The University of Texas from 1918 to 1938.
While the WPA period excavations wound down in 1940, and ceased in 1941, the loss of
Pearce's driving energy in 1938 further contributed to a decline in burned rock midden
investigations.
From 1942 to 1959, the World War II and Post-War Period, activities regarding burned
rock middens were severely curtailed. Only 10 of these sites were investigated. Notable
among those doing fieldwork were E. O. Miller, Edward B. Jelks, and Dee Ann Suhm.
This period of relative inactivity was followed by the Students, Reservoirs, and
Highways Period which lasted from 1960 to 1987. At least 74 burned rock midden sites
were investigated during that time. As the title of the period indicates, excavations by
students, reservoir salvage, and highway salvage dominate the investigations. However,
several other sources of funding and volunteer efforts resulted in investigations during
this period. Many of the individuals involved are participating in this symposium as
speakers or, are in the audience. This period was marked by chronology building
following the refinement of radiocarbon dating techniques and the discovery of
telephone-booth excavation techniques.
Presumably, another period of burned rock midden investigations will ensue beginning in 1988. The individuals involved, the numbers of sites, and the character of the
investigations are, of course, not predicted. Cautiously viewed as the New Science
Period, it is hoped that burned rock middens will be found to contain more varieties of
information than burned rocks and assorted artifacts.

/

r

28 / PREWI1T

History

I

of Interpretations

Pearce (1919:230) initiated burned rock midden interpretations by presenting a
kitchen-midden hypothesis. He viewed the masses of burned rocks as residue left from
cooking. Presumably, the foodstuffs cooked on the hearths that eventually became
middens are all inclusive. The functional interpretation of kitchen midden remains
unchanged in a manuscript prepared by Pearce in 1920, which was revised in 1925 and
again in 1938 shortly before his death. Embedded in Pearce's interpretation is a suggestion of slab-lined hearths which Huskey repeated in his 1935 discussion of burned rock
middens along the upper Nueces River. Both of these early interpretations emphasize
the cooking of meat by presumed hunter-gatherers
while ignoring the cooking of
foodstuffs which were gathered or collected rather than hunted. As is quite evident, the
emphasis is upon function. Chronology was divided into simple categories: early, middle, and late. These generalized estimates were based upon site-by-site observations and
were not comparable between sites.

I

I

I

I

I

A major contribution to burned rock midden interpretations was offered by Kelley
and Campbell in 1942 when they suggested that these sites accumulated through the
repeated use of small basin-shaped, stone-lined hearths.
Familiarity with these methods of hearth construction makes it easier to
understand the jumbled and more or less homogeneous appearance of a
mound in cross-section. Prolonged or repeated heating caused the hearth
stones to break up into many angular fragments. The hearths were then
cleared of old stones and relined, or else abandoned. Later, other hearths
were built in the same area, the result being a complex assemblage of
superimposed
and intersecting
hearths.
This element of human
disturbance is of course an important factor to consider in connection with
the problem of cultural stratigraphy [Kelley and Campbell 1942:320].
Their conclusion that burned rock middens were developed through the use and reuse
of favored areas for the construction of stone-lined hearths remains a major step in the

interpretation of burned rock middens.

.

A significant challenge to the kitchen, the midden rock slab, and the intersecting or
repeated-use hearth hypotheses was presented by Sorrow in 1969. Based on excavations
at the John Ischy Site in Williamson County, Sorrow (1969:51) concluded that middens
were dump areas where broken hearthstones and other trash were discarded. This
interpretation was indirectly supported in a short article published by Hester (1973) a
few years later. Collins (1973), on the other hand, argued that the actual use of burned
rock middens was open to question and chose to emphasize social function rather than
the mechanics of site formation.
Shortly afterward, both Weir (1976) and Prewitt (n.d.) argued that burned rock
middens represent the remains of earth ovens rather than a multitude of simple hearths.
Weir went on to present a case for dialectic tribes, population density, and dietary staples.
He made a reasonable case for the extensive use of acorns, which would result in burned
rock midden accumulation. This echoes the hint made by Hester (1973) shortly before.

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS

/ 29

Since then, Creel (1978, 1986) has argued even more strongly the case that at least some
burned rock middens are associated with acorn processing.
In short, interpretations to date have concentrated upon the visible physical characteristics of burned rock middens (Howard 1983), an approach that has proved to be of
limited utility during more than 60 years of investigations;
Conclusions
In conclusion, it is clear that while various investigative techniques have been
employed upon burned rock middens, all of them produce similar results. A modicum
of control has been gained over the temporal span of burned rock midden accumulation
and use - they seem to fall within the range of the middle Archaic, although some may
be older and others may be younger. Observations regarding form and composition have
been made, yet they differ little in many respects from those made in 1920. Somewhat
greater progress has been made in the development of theories regarding the function of
burned rock middens, especially in the realm of kinds of foodstuffs processed in them.
However, there still are many questions regarding how these features accumulated and
what specific foodstuffs were processed in them.
The problems with burned rock midden interpretation lie in the excavation approach
and the site-specific questions _.asked of them. As long as form or composition and
chronology are paramount questions, then little progress will be made in the efforts to
understand this kind of site. Questions of a different sort must be posed regarding
content and physical characteristics. For example, what are the characteristics of the
principal component of burned rock middens-the burned rocks? No one has looked at
the rocks; they are discarded as a nuisance that interferes with the collection of "cultural
debris" (e.g., lithics - especially bifacial tools). What can we learn from the angular'
fragments of limestone? No one will know until the right questions are asked. The same
holds true for the soil matrix. What are the appropriate questions that should be asked
of the dirt hosting the burned rocks? What are the questions that should be asked of die
tools beyond form, manufacturing technique, and chronology?
Progress in the investigation of burned rock middens will be made only when the kinds
of questions asked are directed toward the detailed answers that the components of the
middens can reveal. This presumes that the methods appropriate to the pursuit of these
questions are utilized in future investigations. I should hope that the remainder of this
symposium will enlighten us all by suggesting some of the questions to ask and the
methods with which to pursue them, and will indeed usher us into the "New Science"
period of burned rock midden investigation.
Acknowledgments

Much of the information summarized in this paper is presented more fully in the
unpublished Rogers Springs manuscript I completed in 1976. Information on investigations subsequent to 1974have been compiled by Margaret Ann Howard; I thank Margaret

30 / PREWIIT

for allowing me to use her data freely and for our many discussions about burned rock
middens. I also thank other colleagues who have patiently endured my continuing
commentary on burned rock middens, notably Michael B. Collins, Darrell G. Creel,
David S. Dibble, Thomas R. Hester, Robert J. Mallouf, Dee Ann Story, and Frank A.
Weir. Sole responsibility for any errors in facts or omissions of pertinent data rests with
me.
References Cited
Barnard, Helen Donovan
1939
Early History of Research in Texas Archaeology by the Department of
Anthropology, and the History of the Anthropology Museum of the
University of Texas. Master's thesis, Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas, Austin.

Collins, Michael B.
1973 The Devil's Hollow Site: A Stratified Archaic Campsite in Central Texas.
Bulletin of the lexas Archeological Society 19:7-35.
Creel, Darrell G.
1978 An Archaeological Survey in the South Concho River Area, West Central
Texas. Bulletin of the TexasArcheological Society 49:241-307.
1986

A Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in West Central Texas. Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University of Arizona,
Tucson.

Greer, John W.
1965 A Typology of Midden Circles and Mescal Pits. Southwestern Lore
31(3):41-45.
Hester, Thomas R.
1973 The Formation of a "Burned Rock Midden": A California Example. The
Record 29(3):4. Dallas Archeological Society.
Howard, Margaret Ann
1983
A Quantitative Study of the Booker Site and Other Burned Rock Midden
Sites of the Lake Travis Basin, Central Texas. Master's thesis, Department
of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Huskey, Vane
1935 An Archeological Survey of the Nueces Canyon of Texas. Bulletin of the
TexasArcheological and PaleontologicalSociety 7:105-114.

PREVIOUS INVESTIGA TIONS / 31

Kelley, J. Charles and 1: N. Campbell
1942 What are the Burnt Rock Mounds of Texas? American Antiquity
7(3):319-323.
Pearce, J. E.
1919 Indian Mounds and Other Relics of Indian Life in Texas. American
Anthropologist 21(3):223-234.
1920

The Burnt-Rock Kitchen Midden Mounds of Central and West Texas.
(Written in 1920, revised 1925 and 1938). Manuscript on file, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Prewitt, Elton R.
1981 . Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the TexasArcheological
Society 52:65-89.

1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:201-238.

n.d.

The Rogers Springs Site: 1974 Investigations. Manuscript on file, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Sayles, E. B.
1929
Some Types of Archeological Sites Near Abilene, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 1:43-49.

Sorrow, William M.
1969 Archeological Investigations at the John Ischy Site:A Burnt Rock Midden in
Williamson County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project 18. The University of Texas at Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1959 The Williams Site and Central Texas Archeology. The Texas Journal of
Science 11(2):218-250.
1960

A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the TexasArcheological
Society 29:63-107.

Weir, Frank A.
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Ph.D. dissertation,
Anthropology, Washington State University, Pullman.

Department

Wentworth, Irving H.
1906 A Few Notes on "Indian Mounds" in Texas. Science23(595).

of

32 / PREWI1T

Wilson, Ernest W.
1930 Burned Rock Mounds of Southwest Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 2:59-63.

ASSESSING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN BURNED ROCK
MIDDEN DISTRIBUTION AND ARCHAIC SUBSISTENCE
IN WEST CENTRAL TEXAS
Darrell G. Creel

Introduction
Five years ago, I completed a study that sought to determine if there is a correlation
between the distribution of burned rock midden sites and the occurrence of substantial
areas of oak trees in west central Texas (Creel 1986). This was done in an effort to test
the suggestions of other archeologists that burned rock middens somehow related to
extensive utilization of oak acorns. The present paper is a summary and update of that
research effort.
One of the fundamental assumptions in my study was that hunters and gatherers tend
to locate their settlements near major food sources in an effort to minimize costs of
exploitation (Jochim 1976:50; Keene 1981:11-13). A corollary assumption holds that if
processing of a resource leaves distinctive material remains, then the occurrence of these
will correlate with the distribution of that resource, at least in a general way.
As is well known, there are several species of oak occurring on the Edwards Plateau.
In the study area (Fig. 1), the most important and most numerous are live oak (Quercus
fusiformis), Texas oak (Quercus texana), and bigleaf shin oak (Quercus sinuata var.
brevi/oba). The distributions of the various oaks closely overlap one another, but some
of them have considerably more restricted occurrences within the region. In general,
though, the distribution of live oak encompasses the distributions of the other oaks.
Thus, this analysis basically considers as one variable the occurrence of an oak savanna
in which several species of oak may occur locally but which is dominated overall by live
oak. The patchy occurrence of this live oak savanna was one of the principal reasons why
the study was conducted in this particular area, for the patchiness offered the contrast
deemed necessary for detecting differences in distribution.
There are, of course, numerous other plants in west central Texas that are potential
food sources, many known either ethnographically or archeologically to have been eaten
by aboriginal groups in nearby areas. The presence of these other plants within the study
area requires that they be shown not to covary with burned rock middens if a positive
correlation with oak savanna is to be tentatively accepted.

33

34 / CREEL

,~., ,

~.I

,

. I

,I

"h

~

.'

FIGURE1. Map of the study area showing the occurrence of oak savanna (shaded area),
recorded archeological sites (small dots), and burned rock midden sites (large dots).
Some burned rock midden sites, in areas with many such sites, are not individually
represented.

WEST CENTRAL TEXAS / 35

The Sample

Within the study area, nearly 1700 sites (N = 1694) of various kinds were recorded at
TARL as of March, 1988 (Fig. 1). For present purposes, these are best conceived of
simply as points of observation regarding the presence or absence of burned rock
middens. As can be seen in Figure 1, the present sample of sites clearly indicates a
restricted distribution of burned rock middens within the study area. That this is not a
result of sample bias is revealed by comparing the distribution of midden sites to the
overall site sample.
In addition, there is no good evidence that the known distribution of burned rock
midden sites in the study area is recognizably biased by areal differences in exposure and
visibility by burned rock middens. In other words, the absence of middens in certain
localities appears to reflect reality and is evidently not a result of burned rock middens
being unexposed and thus unrecorded.
In west central Texas, two forms of burned rock midden occur: the dome-shaped one
and the kind with a central depression. Because the distributions of the two within the
study area are not recognizably different and given the fact that the two kinds occur
together at numerous sites, it is reasonable to combine them into a single, more general
group for the purposes of distributional analysis. This also permits the inclusion of
middens that cannot be classified as to form on the basis of available information and,
.
thus, substantially increases the sample size.
Occurrence of Burned Rock Midden Sites Relative to Other Major Food Plants

As mentioned previously, in addition to the three oaks common in live oak savanna,
there are numerous plants in west central Texas that are potential major food sources.
Elsewhere I have compared the occurrence of burned rock midden sites with the distributions of pecan, mesquite, and prickly pear, and have determined that there is no
significant correlation with any of these food plants (Creel 1986). This should not be
understood, however, as implying that these food plants were unimportant, for they
undoubtedly were important throughout the prehistoric period.
SOTOL

Several archeologists (e.g. Wilson 1930:61; Prewitt n.d.:91-93) have suggested that
sotol may have been the plant food whose processing resulted in the accumulation of
burned rock middens. At present, sotol has a rather restricted distribution within the
study area (Fig. 2). It occurs in the extreme southwestern comer in Crockett County, and
there is also an isolated population on the slopes of the limestone divide between the
North Concho and Colorado Rivers in western Coke County.
These two areas comprise a very small portion of the study area, and an even smaller
portion of the total site sample occurs in them. As shown in Table 1, the number of
recorded burned rock midden sites in sotol areas is about tbe same as the number that
would be expected if there were no relationship between the occurrence of midden sites

36 / CREEL

.'

,."

~

,

\~". .

-.'

. ..
'"

.

'. ,
\

'.'

...

-':!':~. -.

.'

'II'

.':a.~,.
. "~lL

.

"

~

.

.

::t'
''l.~~'

.

,. !l~
.~ ~

\.

.

. .

'.

:

"

,.e. .

.

.

"

-

f-

I:~~/~

.

.1

.

.,
.

.

..
~
,

~

II,
i'

. '.'

.

.

4:

.
. ".

.

I,

.

FIGURE2. Map of the study area showing the occurrence of sotol (shaded area), recorded
archeological sites (small dots), and burned rock midden sites (large dots). Some burned
rock midden sites, in areas with many such sites, are not individually represented.

WEST CENTRAL TEXAS / 37

TABLE 1
OCCURRENCE OF BURNED ROCK MIDDEN SITES
RELATIVE To AREAS OF SOTOL
Area
(sq. km)
Area with Sotol
Area without Sotol
Total

970
54830
55800

% Study
Area

Sites

% Total

1.7
98.3
100.0

9
1685
1694

0.5
99.5
100.0

Burned Rock Midden Sites
Observed
Expected
1
192
193

1
192
193

would be expected if there were no relationship between the occurrence of midden sites
and sotoL Moreover, Figure 2 shows that sotol is entirely lacking in the areas where most
of the midden sites occur. On this basis, one may conclude that there is no correlation
between the occurrence of burned rock midden sites and the modern distribution of sotoL
Prewitt (n.d.:92), however, has suggested that sotol may once have occurred
throughout the Edwards Plateau but that it was unable to tolerate what may have been
more mesic conditions some 2500 years ago and thus died out over most of the area. If
we were to assume that sotol was present throughout the Edwards Plateau portions of
the study area and was the food 'Yhose processing led to the formation of burned rock
middens, it is difficult to explairi the absence of these features in much of the drier,
western part of the study area. Burned rock middens clearly are not present in several
areas that, given Prewitt's suggested scenario, would seem most likely to have had sotoL
Thus, it seems improbable that the two were correlated in the study area, if elsewhere in
central Texas, although sotol was presumably used to some extent wherever it occurred.
Occurrence of Burned Rock Midden Sites Relative to Live Oak Savanna

In comparing the distributions of burned rock midden sites and live oak savanna, I
would like to look first at a four-county portion of the study area that has the most nearly
representative distribution of sites within and outside live oak savanna and where the
data base is both relatively large and, for the most part, recently acquired.
As can be seen in Figure 3, the present sample indicates a very marked absence of
burned rock midden sites in the largely oak-free western ponion of this area, but a
,substantial number in live oak savanna areas to the east. That live oak savanna and
burned rock middens have very similar distributions while other natural characteristics
of the area such as topography and bedrock type are essentially homogeneous seems
significant and unlikely to be coincidentaL Equally significant is the contrast between
the live oak-occupied limestone uplands and the very largely oak-free valley areas of
Coke and Tom Green counties; burned rock middens are common in or immediately
adjacent to the former but are unrecorded in the latter areas.
Although these distributional differences are readily observed in Figure 3, the
relevant data are presented quantitatively in Table 2. Again usingthe number of recorded

m'"

38 / CREEL

..

.

:
:u. .-

.-.-

I.

-

"::::::'

.
...

..-

.

...
....

.

-

.

...'

'.:::::~:rI~jri}

...
./.
. ~-

FIGURE3. Map of Coke, Sterling, Irion, andTom Green countiesshowingoccurrence of oak
savanna(shadedarea),recordedarcheologicalsites(small dots),andburned rockmiddensites
(large dots). Some burned tock midden sites in areas with many such sites are not individually
represented.

WEST CENTRAL TEXAS / 39

TABLE 2
OCCURRENCE OF BURNED ROCK MIDDEN SITES IN
COKE, IRION, STERLING, AND TOM GREEN COUNTIES

Live Oak Savanna
Non-Live Oak Savanna
Total

%of
Area

No.

24.1
75.9
100.0

187
389
564

Total Sites
..

%

Burned Rock Midden Sites
Recorded
Expected

32.5
67.5
100.0

18
36
54

53
1
54

sites as a measure of sample differences, it is clear that a slightly disproportionate number
of sites occur in live oak savanna, suggesting that the sample may be somewhat biased.
The extent of this bias, however, seems unlikely to account for the almost exclusive
occurrence of burned rock midden sites in live oak savanna areas. Indeed, all but one,
or 98%, of the burned rock midden- sites occur in live oak savanna, a clear indication of
the close relationship between the occurrence of burned rock midden sites and the
occurrence of live oak savanna.
The Distribution

of Burned Rock Midden Sites in West Central Texas

In the entire study area, 24.7% (n = 419) of the total number of sites recorded
(N = 1694) are located within live oak savanna which comprises approximately 29% of
the total area. Taking these similar percentages as evidence for an essentially unbiased
sample, we can compare the number of burned rock midden sites actually recorded to
the number to be expected in oak savanna areas were there no correlation between the
two (Table 3). The difference, 48 expected versus 116 reported, is statistically significant
when evaluated with a chi-square test (chi-square = 49.0, df= 1, P .001 level). A
chi-square test of the observed frequencies relative to a random distribution is also
statistically significant (chi-square = 7.88, df= 1, P .01). Burned rock midden sites
clearly constitute a spatially distinct subset of sites in west central Texas.
Burned Rock Middens Outside Live Oak Savanna

As is evident in Figure 1, a substantial number of burned rock midden sites occur in
the non-oak savanna portions of the study area. Nearly all of these (74 or 94%) are
located in the area of the proposed Stacy Reservoir at the confluence of the Colorado
and Concho rivers. The Concho-Colorado confluence area, thus, differs rather markedly
from the rest of the non-oak savanna areas in having these large numbers of burned rock
midden sites. Indeed, this locality resembles oak savanna areas in the number and density
of burned rock middens. What are we to make of this situation? The explanation
proposed here is that the Concho-Colorado confluence area may well have supported
live oak savanna at the time the middens were formed. My reasoning of this tentative
explanation is as follows.

40 I CREEL

TABLE 3
OCCURRENCE OF BURNED ROCK MIDDEN SITES
IN THE STUDY AREA
Observed

Expected
Live Oak Savanna
Non-Live Oak Savanna
Total

116
77
193

48
145
193

In terms of kinds of vegetation, this confluence area is today little different from the
Colorado and Concho valleys to the west and northwest, but there are significant differences in geologic formation and, thus, in topography and soils. It is these differences
that may well have enabled oaks to exist at an earlier time in the Concho-Colorado
confluence area but not in the flatter portions of the river valleys.
The Concho-Colorado confluence is located with a north-south outcropping of Permian-age, Leonard Series (except the Clear Fork Group

-

hereafter,

this exception

is to

be assumed when not otherwise noted) limestones, dolomites, and shales. It is a rollingto-hilly area, much of it with shallow, stony soil. To the northwest and west of the
confluence area, the outcropping Permian formations are generally less resistant to
erosion, the result being flatter topography and deeper, less rocky soils. To the east, the
earlier Permian and Pennsylvanian formations have a topography similar to that of the
confluence area, but outcrops of sandstone formations in some areas have weathered to
deeper sandy soils.
There is a rather interesting difference between the soils that occur in the Leonard
Series outcrops and those that occur in the limestone areas to the north, west, south, and
east of the confluence area. In all of these areas, the soils formed on weathered
limestones are generally shallow and stony. In the confluence area, shallow indurated
caliche normally seals the underlying fractures in the limestone bedrock. In contrast, the
bedrock fractures elsewhere are not generally sealed by caliche, so plant roots can
penetrate the fractures and take advantage of reserve moisture held there. The principal
exception is in the drier western portion of the study area where most of the bedrock
fractures are also sealed. It is of some interest, and significance, that numerous oaks
occur in those limestone areas where bedrock fractures are not sealed by caliche.
It is equally significant that the soils of the Leonard Series outcrop, despite being
largely free of oaks today, do support significant numbers of live oak neat the major live
oak populations on the adjacent Cretaceous limestone uplands north and south of the
Concho-Colorado confluence. In addition, there is a small population of bigleaf shin oak
on a steep north-facirigslope in the confluence area itself. These occurrences are
important because they demonstrate that live oak and bigleaf shin oak can do well in at
least some of the soils that occur in the Concho-Colorado confluence area. In other
words, there is no known reason that oaks could not have grown throughout much of the
confluence area at an earlier time.

WEST CENTRAL TEXAS /41

Given this distinct possibility, information on vegetation change becomes particularly
interesting. Because of low rainfall, shallow root zone, and relatively limited water-holding capacity, most of the upland soils in the confluence area are referred to by soil
scientists as being "droughty" (e.g., Wiedenfeld et al. 1970:11). For these reasons,
especially the general lack of accessible deep bedrock cracks, these soils are probably
more sensitive to drought conditions than are thQse prevalent in the adjacent Cretaceous
uplands.
Recurrent droughts have been documented in this region from as early as the 1720s
(Campbell 1949;Holden 1928;Lowry 1959) and have likely occurred since a much earlier
time. Studies in nearby areas indicate that tree mortality is often quite high during
droughts, especially in situations where the only moisture available for plant use is a
limited amount of shallowly penetrating precipitation. Competition between oaks and
grasses for such a limited amount of water decidedly favors the grasses when they are in
relatively good condition and not heavily overgrazed. Thus, one or more prolonged
droughts could have virtually wiped out oak populations on the drought-sensitive soils of
the Concho-Colorado confluence area. And, while drought mortality in the Cretaceous
uplands may also have been quite high, some oaks there would probably have survived
because they could draw on the moisture reserves in deep bedrock cracks.
If oaks were common in the confluence area during the Archaic but have mostly died
out since then, the presence of burned rock middens in this area obviously would conform
to the midden-oak-savanna correlation that generally appears so strong elsewhere in the
study area. If oaks were indeed present in the confluence area at the time the middens
there were formed, 98% (n = 189) of the 193burned rock midden sites in the study area
sample would have been in oak savanna. This proportion is essentially the same as in the
previously mentioned four-county area where the distributional data are strongest and
most reliable.
In short, there is a significant relationship between the occurrence of burned rock
midden sites and the distribution of oak savanna. Most known sites with burned rock
middens occur in areas of oak savanna, and a plausible case has been made that most of
the other sites with burned rock middens were in fact in live oak savanna at the time of
midden formation. A compelling argument could be made if excavations at Stacy Reservoir reveal that the postulated Archaic-period populations of oak were in fact present.
But even now, were there no relationship between the occurrence of oak savanna and
burned rock middens, it is highly improbable that this analysis would have shown such a
significant association.
How does this apparent relationship hold up when one considers the overall area
where burned rock middens occur, that is, central Texas, west central Texas, and the
Lower Pecos region? In general, burned rock middens are found only in live oak savanna
areas; but there are many places where live oak, as well as Texasoak and bigleaf shin oak,
are common yet burned rock middens are few or absent altogether. The absence of
middens in parts of the Llano Uplift is but one such example. In this particular case, we
can note that some of the granitic rocks in that area tend to explode when heated and are
not suited for use in the cooking techniques used by American Indian groups who lacked
containers that can be exposed directly to a fire. Availability and type of rock clearly are

42 / CREEL

important factors in the occurrence of burned rock middens, but in areas with suitable
rock, the distribution of middens appears to vary independently of rock availability.
If, as the study area distributions suggest, burned rock middens were closely correlated with oak savanna, one of the most obvious implications is that oak acorns were being
utilized and that the middens were in some way involved in this use. It is quite possible,
in fact, that acorns constituted a major portion of the Archaic subsistence base. The
assumption that burned rock middens are largely the result of activities relating to
intensive exploitation of acorns has a number of significant implications. For example,
the likelihood that Archaic people were utilizing acorns allows us to tie in, and open the
door, so to speak, to their year. It tells us that the people were collecting acorns as they
became available during the autumn months. This may seem like a rather trivial bit of
inference, but it is perhaps less trivial than one first thinks. What we need now is another
test of the idea that burned rock middens reflect acorn exploitation.
Pursuing the relationship between burned rock middens and acorn exploitation
further, I would like to comment on three issues. First, given what has so far been related,
it is incumbent on me to consider possible explanations for the prehistoric generation of
so much burned rock. The extensive ethnographic data for North American Indians
reveals that rock was used in a variety of ways to process and cook not only acorns, but
other foods as well. Heated rocks were used to stone-boil water for leaching acorns and
to stone-boil acorn mushes and gruels. Rocks were also widely used in earth ovens to
bake acorn bread, and heated rocks were sometimes used as griddles or had acorn dough
wrapped around them for baking. All of these uses could, or did, result in quantities of
broken rock, so there is more than one way that the rock in burned rock middens could
have been used.
Experiments in stone boiling have begun to reveal the information potential in the
countless tons of fractured rock comprising middens. The self-evident fact is that there
is quantifiable data in this mass of rock, and we can undoubtedly make some useful
inferences from such quantification. We can, for example, estimate the amount of food
cooked by the rock in a given midden and, with other information, calculate the average
amount of food cooked per year per midden. Such calculations would, of course, be
crude; but the results should be most interesting and should stimulate us improve our
research designs for future investigations.
Finally, we need a more realistic knowledge of the food resources available to the
prehistoric inhabitants of central Texas. In terms of acorns, we have only the most
impressionistic notions of the spatial and temporal variability in acorn production; but
this is certain to have been of critical importance to people intensively utilizing acorns.
The potential is undoubtedly great for research questions dealing with resource
variability and the implications in terms of economic and social organization.

WEST CENTRAL TEXAS / 43

References

Cited

Campbell, 1: N.
1949 The Pioneer Tree-Ring Work of Jacob Kuechler.
15:16-20.

Tree-Ring Bulletin

Creel, Darrell
1986
A Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in West Central Texas. Ph.D.
dissertation, The University of Arizona, Tucson.
Holden, W. C.
1928
West Texas Drouths. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 32: 102-123.
Jochim, Michael
1976
Hunter-Gatherer Subsistence and Settlement: A Predictive Model. Academic
Press, New York.

Keene, Arthur S.
1981 Prehistoric Foragingin a Temperate Forest:A Linear Programming Model.
Academic Press, New York.
Lowry, Robert L., Jr.
1959 A Study of Droughts in Texas. Bulletin 5914. Texas Board of Water
Engineers, Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R.
n.d.

.

The Rogers Springs Site: 1974 Investigations. Research Report 54. Texas
Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, unpublished
manuscript.

Wiedenfeld, C. c., L. J. Barnhill, and C. J. Novosad
1970 Soil Survey of Runnels County, Texas. USDA Soil Conservation Service in
cooperation with Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Wilson, Ernest W.
1930 Burned Rock Mounds of Southwest Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and PaleontologicalSociety 2:59-63.

BURNED ROCK MIDDEN EXCAVATIONS,
HEARTHS AND BOTANICAL REMAINS
Margaret Ann Hdward

Introduction
More than 200 burned rock middens have been excavated in central Texas since 1918
when J. E. Pearce first dug at the Walsh Mound in Williamson County. In the 70 years
following, archeologists have used a variety of excavation and analytical methods to
investigate these accumulations of densely packed angular rock fragments, soil, and
artifacts, yet many questions about their structure and function remain unanswered. It
is time to consider which approaches are most effective in studying burned rock middens.
This paper focuses on three important aspects of burned rock midden investigations:
excavation methods, hearths, and botanical remains. Excavation methods determine
what view is obtained of these complex deposits. Hearths are one of the keys to
unraveling the structure and the. function of burned rock middens. Botanical remains
may indicate whether burned rock middens were vegetal processing features and tell
something about the prehistoric diet and environment.
The Data Base

The present analysis centers on the classic domed middens (Weir's [1976:35] midden
type 1) and excludes ring middens ("midden circles" [Greer 1965],midden types 2 and 3
[Weir 1976:35-40]) as well as deposits consisting of a single layer of burned rock (midden
type 4 [Weir 1976:40]). A few of the middens classed as Weir's type 1 incorporate
characteristics of the other types but are included here.
Data on the 225 Type 1burned rock middens excavated (Table 1)were compiled from
a number of sources. Starting with the list of such excavations up to 1974 in the Rogers
Spring Site report (Prewitt n.d.), a list of midden excavations was compiled from published reports, professional papers, field notes, and manuscripts housed at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) and by soliciting personal communications.
Middens which were investigated only by backhoe trenching or other relatively uncontrolled methods were not included in the data base. The data compiled on each midden
include trinomial site number, excavators and dates of their work, report authors and
dates, geomorphic context, excavation strategy, and information on hearths, botanical
remains, and milling tools. Each burned rock midden is listed individually. The 225
middens excavated represent 141 sites, with some sites having as many as 16 middens.

45

46 / HOWARD

TABLE

1

EXCAVATED BURNED ROCK MIDDENS, 1918-1987

Trinomial Site Name

Report(s)*

Geommphic
Context

Excavation Strategy Hearth(s)

41 BL85

Landslide

Sorrow, Shafer & Ross 1967

buried

trench and block

no

41BLl04

Evoe Terrace (Area A) Sorrow, Shafer & Ross 1967

buried

trench and block

no

41BLl04

Evoe Terrace (Area B) Sorrow, Shafer & Ross 1967

buried

trench and block

no

41BL138

Training

(?)

no data

no data

no

BN

Edwards Point

Beasley 1978

exposed

block

yes

41BNl

1. W. Edwards

(Woolsey 1935)

exposed

broadcast

no

41BN2

Boardray Creek #1

(Evans 1947)

no data

trench

no

41BN2

Boardray Creek #3

(Evans 1947)

no data

broadcast

no

41BN2

Boardray Creek #4

(Evans 1947)

no data

trench

no

41BN63

#1

Hester 1985

exposed?

trench and block

yes

41BN63

#2

Hester 1985

exposed?

no data

no

41BQ57

Six Deer

Henry, Kirby, Justen & Hays 1980

buried

trench and block

no

41BQ61

Bee Bee Buddy

Henry, Kirby, Justen & Hays 1980

exposed

trench and block

no

41BR72

Adam's Midden

Shafer, Baxter & Steams 1976

exposed

trench

no

41BR105 Fisk Branch Mound

Smith 1981

no data

trench

yes

41BRI1O Gilliam Branch Mound

Burleson 1981

no data

trench - modified

yes

41BTl

Grelle #1

(Kelley 1941)

buried

trench and block

yes

41BTl

Grelle #2

(Kelley 1941)

buried

trench and block

yes

41BT35

Page

partly buried

isolated units

no

41BX17

Granberg

buried

trench and block

yes

41BX52

Peacock Bluff

buried

horizontal stripping

yes

(Schuetz 1966)

41BX195 Crystal Rivers

Keller 1976

exposed

trench, isolated
units

no

41BX228 Panther Springs #2

Black & McGraw 1985

buried

trench and block

yes

41BX228 Panther Springs #3

Black & McGraw 1985

buried

trench and block

no

41BX228 Panther Springs #4

Black &-McGraw 1985

buried

trench and block

no

41BX271 Granberg II

Hester & Kohnitz 1975

buried

block?

no

41BX300 Elm Waterhole

Hester, Katz & Kelly 1977;
Katz 1987

partly buried

trench, block. and
isolated units

no

*All reports are on file at T ARL, UT Austin; entries in parentheses are unpublisbed.

MIDDEN EXCAVATIONS

/ 47

TABLE 1, continued
Trinomial Site Name

Report(s)*

Geomorphic
Context

Excavation Strategy Hearth(s)

41BX425

Gerstle. Kelly & Assad 1978

exposed

trench

yes

41 BX428

Gerstle. Kelly & Assad 1978

no data

isolated units

no

41BX444

McGraw & Valdez 1978

exposed

isolated unit

no

41CCI

Sims Ranch # I

(Pearce 1938)

no data

trench

no

41CCI

Sims Ranch #2

(Pearce 1938)

no data

trench

no

41CC1

Sims Ranch #3

(Pearce 1938)

no data

trench

no

41CM3

Wunderlich A

Johnson. Suhm & Tunnell 1962

buried

trench - modified

no

41CM3

Wunderlich B

Johnson. Suhm & Tunnell 1962

exposed

trench - modified

no

(Bailey 1988)

partly buried

trench

no

41CN74
41CV27

Horse Creek

Miller & Jelks 1952

buried

trench

no

41CV28

Jolmson Hole

Miller & Jelks 1952

exposed

block

no

41CV32

Grimes-Houy

Miller & Jelks 1952

exposed

no data

no

41CX11

Riggs 1968

buried

block

no

41CX216 Feature A

Luke 1983

no data

no data

no

41ED4

Lackey #2

(Laxson 1964)

no data

isolated units

no

41ED8

Sticklea[

Keller 1976

exposed?

trench and block

yes

4lGL21

Hop Hill

Gunn & Mahula 1977

exposed

horizontal stripping

yes

41GL27

Sue Robinson

Beadles 1969

no data

no data

yes

HY

(near Wimberley)

(Pearce 1924)

no data

no data

no

41HY21

#1 (Feature 1)

Garber 1985

buried

trench and unit

no

41HY21

#2 (Feature 3)

Garber 1985

buried

block and isolated
units

yes

4IHY21

#3 (Feature 5)

Garber 1985

buried

block

no

41HY21

#4 (Feature 13)

Garber 1985

buried

isolated unit

no

4IHY21

#5 (Feature 16)

Garber 1985

buried

isolated units

no

41HY29

Greenhaw B

Weir 1967

exposed?

blocks

no

41HY29

Greenhaw C

Weir 1967

partly buried

broadcast trench
and blocks

yes

4IHY29

Greenhaw D

Weir 1967

exposed?

isolated unit

no

4IHY29

Greenhaw E

Weir 1967

partly buried

trench

yes

4IHY29

Greenhaw F

Weir 1967

partly buried

isolated units

no

41HY29

Greenhaw G

Weir 1967

buried

isolated units

no

41JN2

Ham Creek

Forrester 1964

exposed

isolated units

no

48 / HOWARD
TABLE 1, continued
Trinomial Site Name

Report(s)*

Geomorphic
Context

Excavation Strategy Hearth(s)

41 KElO

(Fawcett 1970)

exposed

isolated units

yes

41KE46

Valdez & McGraw 1977

exposed

isolated unit

no

41 KE57

Valdez & McGraw 1977

exposed

isolated units

no

Mandel

KR

Lamb's Creek

Sollberger 1948

no data

trench

no

KR

Paris (X41KR1)

Skinner 1979

partly buried

horizontal stripping

yes

KR

Real (X41KRl66)

Skinner 1979

partly buried

trench - modified

no

41KRIO

Hammell

Beadles 1970

buried?

trench

no

41KR77

Fowler

(Goldschmidt 1934)

exposed?

trench

no

41KR92

Crider

(Goldsclunidt 1934)

exposed?

trench

no

41KRlO7 Wounded Eye

Luke 1980

exposed

trench and block

yes

41KRI09

Shep

Luke 1980

partly buried

trench

yes

41KYl

Paul Edwards

(Huskey 1934)

exposed?

trench

yes

41LL4

Lake Buchanan #3
Midden #2

Jackson & Woolsey 1938

no data

broadcast,
stratigraphic test

yes

41LL4

Lake Buchanan #3
Mound #1

Jackson & Woolsey 1938

no data

no data

no

41LL4

Lake Buchanan #3
Mound #2

Jackson & Woolsey 1938

no data

no data

no

41LM3

McCann

Preston 1969. 1985

buried

block

yes

41MI4

Trotter C

(Saylor 1974)

exposed

isolated unit

no

41MI8

Wild Turkey Midden

buried

horizontal stripping

no

RE

Indian Creek

Shiner & Shiner 1977

buried

trench and isolated
units

yes

41RE2

Lackey

(Hester 1963)

no data

isolated unit

no

41SS1

Lake Buchanan #1

Jackson & Woolsey 1938

partly buried

broadcast

no

41SS2

Lake Buchanan #2
Midden #lL

Jackson & Woolsey 1938

broadcast
buried
(superimposed)

no

Lake Buchanan #2

Jackson & Woolsey 1938

isolated units
buried
(superimposed)

no

Jackson & Woolsey 1938

buried

broadcast

yes

no data

no data

no

41SS2

Midden # 1U

41SS2

Lake Buchanan #2
Midden #2

41SS22

Hext Springs

41SU20

Next Week

Doran 1976

buried

trench and block

no

4lSU21

Pop-pop

Luke 1981

exposed

trench

no

Green 1959

exposed

trench

no

41TG5

MIDDEN EXC4. VA TIONS / 49
TABLE 1, continued
Trinomial

Site Name

Report(s)*

Geomorphic
Context

Excavation Strategy Hearth(s)

41TV2

Barton Springs Mound

(Pearce 1938)

buried

no data

no

41TV3

Panorama #1

Sturgis 1956

partly buried

broadcast

no

41TV3

Panorama #3

Sturgis 1956

partly buried

trench

no

41TV4

Larue/Wells

(Campbell 1934)

no data

broadcast

no

4lTV 12

1. C. Bryant

(Anonymous)

no data

trench and block,
isolated units

no

41TV21

Evans

(Woolsey 1938)

exposed?

isolated units

no

41TV22

Covington Estate

(Woolsey 1938)

no data

broadcast

no

41TV23

1. P. SclU1eider#1

Jelks 1951, Nunley 1963

partly buried

no data

no

4lTV23

J. P. Schneider #2

Jelks 1951, Nunley 1963

exposed?

no data

no

4ITV24

Mauem1annSite I #1

Jelks 1951

no data

broadcast

no

41TV24

Mauennann Site 1 #2

Jelks 1951

no data

broadcast

no

41TV24

Mauennann Site I #3

Jelks 1951

no data

broadcast

no

41TV24

Mauennann Site 1 #4

Jelks 1951

exposed

broadcast

no

41TV25

Mauennann Site 2 #1

Jelks 1951. Nichols 1959

exposed

broadcast

no

41TV25

MauennatU1Site 2 #2

(Woolsey 1938)

partly buried

broadcast

yes

41TV25

MaUennatU1Site 2 #3

(Woolsey 1938)

exposed

broadcast

no

4lTV26

Law Brothers Ranch # I (Bliss 1939)

partly buried

broadcast

no

4lTV26

Law Brothers Ranch
#2L

(Bliss 1939)

buried
broadcast
(superimposed)

no

4lTV26

Law Brothers Ranch
#2U

(Bliss 1939)

broadcast
partly buried
(superimposed)

no

4lTV26

Law Brothers Ranch #2 (Bliss 1939)

buried?

broadcast

no

41TV28

Heffington # 1

(Kelley 1940)

buried

trench and
horizontal stripping

yes

41TV28

Heffington #2

(Kelley 1940)

buried

trench and
horizontal stripping

yes

41TV29

Wiley Willia.tl1s
Cf-13CI

(Bliss 1939)

buried

trench

no

41TV29

Wiley Willia.tl1s
Cf-13C2

(Bliss 1939)

buried

trench

no

41TV29

Wiley Willia.tl1s
CT-13C3

(Bliss 1939)

buried

trench and block

no

41TV31

Jessen Place

Mclaurin 1938

exposed

broadcast?

no

4lTV32

1. H. Hudson #1

(Woolsey 1938)

exposed?

broadcast

no

..

SO/HOWARD
TABLE 1, continued
Trinomial

Site Name

Report(s)*

Geomorphic
Context

Excavation Strategy Hearth(s)

41TV32

1. H. Hudson #2

(Woolsey 1938)

exposed?

broadcast

yes

4lTV32

J. H. Hudson #3

(Woolsey 1938)

partly buried

broadcast

no

41TV34

Sid Stewart #I

(Woolsey 1938)

buried

broadcast

yes

41TV34

Sid Stewart #2

(Woolsey 1938)

buried

broadcast

no

41TV35

F. Toungate

Mclaurin 1938

no data

no data

no

41TV36

Percy Hancock # 1

Mclaurin 1938, Jelks 1951

exposed

broadcast

no

41TV36

Percy Hancock #2

Mclaurin 1938, Jelks 1951

partly buried

broadcast

yes

41TV36

Percy Hancock #3

Mclaurin 1938, Jelks 1951

exposed

broadcast

no

41TV36

Percy Hancock #4

Mclaurin 1938, Jelks 1951

no data

broadcast

no

4lTV36

Percy Hancock #5

McLaurin 1938, Jelks 1951

no data

broadcast

no

4lTV36

Percy Hancock #6

Mclaurin 1938, Jelks 1951

exposed

broadcast

no

41TV36

Percy Hancock #7

McLaurin 1938, Jelks 1951

exposed

broadcast

no

41TV36

Percy Hancock #8

McLaurin 1938, Jelks 1951

partly buried

no data

no

41TV36

Percy Hancock #9

McLaurin 1938, Jelks 1951

exposed

no data

no

4lTV36

Percy Hancock #10

McLaurin 1938, Jelks 1951

exposed

broadcast

no

41TV36

Percy Hancock #11

Mclaurin 1938, Jelks 1951

exposed

broadcast

no

41TV36

Percy Hancock #12

McLaurin 1938, Jelks 1951

partly buried

broadcast

no

41TV36

Percy Hancock #13A

McLaurin 1938, Jelks 1951

exposed

broadcast

no

41TV36

Percy Hancock #13B

Mclaurin 1938, Jelks 1951

buried

broadcast

no

41TV36

Percy Hancock #13C

McLaurin 1938, Jelks 1951

buried

broadcast

no

4lTV36

Percy Hancock #14

McLaurin 1938, Jelks 1951

buried

broadcast

no

4lTV37

Henry Williams #1

Jelks 1951

no data

broadcast

no

4lTV37

Henry Williams #2

Jelks 1951

buried

broadcast

no

4lTV38

Devils Hollow

(Fox 1939), Collins 1973

buried

broadcast,
horizontal stripping

yes

41TV39

Rogers Spring #1

(Lathan 1959, Prewitt 1974)

no data

broadcast?

no

4lTV39

Rogers Spring #2

(Lathan 1959, Prewitt 1974)

no data

broadcast?

no

4lTV39

Rogers Spring #3

(Lathan 1959. Prewitt 1974)

no data

broadcast?

yes

4lTV39

Rogers Spring #4

(prewitt 1974)

exposed?

trench and block

no

41TV41

Burnt Hollow

Jackson 1939

buried

block

yes

4lTV43

Dry Creek Mound

(Pearce 1938)

partly buried

broadcast

no

41TV44

L. 1. Waechter

(Laughlin 1935)

no data

broadcast

no

MIDDEN EXCAVATIONS

/ 51

TABLE 1, continued
Trinomial

Site Name

Report(s)*

41TV61

Geomorphic
Context

Excavation Strategy Hearth(s)

no data

isolated units

no

trench, isolated
units

yes

41TV75

Williams

Suhm 1959

partly buried

41TV86

Crumley # 1 (Stratum
2)

Kelly 1960

buried
broadcast
(superimposed)

yes

41TV86

Crumley #2 (Stratum
4)

Kelly 1960

buried
broadcast
(superimposed)

no

4lTV102

Dies Ranch #1

(Oberg 1938)

exposed

broadcast

no

4lTVI02

Dies Ranch #2

(Oberg 1938)

exposed?

broadcast

no

4lTV 102

Dies Ranch #3

(Oberg 1938)

no data

broadcast

no

4lTV103

Bear Creek Mound

(Pearce 1929)

no data

broadcast

no

4lTVll4

Huber #1

(K. Brown 1966)

partly buried?

trench and block,
isolated units

no

41TV1l4

Huber #2

(K. Brown 1966)

partly buried?

trench and block,
isolated units

no

4lTV132

LCRA 40 Acres Unit 5 (Millican 1963)

no data

trench?

no

41TV132

LCRA 40 Acres Unit 1 (Millican 1966)

no data

trench

yes

4lTV133

Trammell #1

(Jackson 1934)

no data

no data

yes

41TV133

Trammell #2

(Jackson 1934)

no data

no data

no

41TV133

Trammell #3

(Jackson 1934)

no data

trench and
broadcast

no

4lTV133

Trammell #4

(Jackson 1934)

no data

no data

no

41TV134

Polecat Hollow

(Christie 1978)

no data

blocks

no

41TV151

Jetta Court (upper)

Wesolowsky, Hester & Brown
1976

exposed
(superimposed

trench, isolated
units

no

4lTV151

Jetta Court (lower)

Wesolowsky, Hester & Brown
1976

buried
trench, isolated
(superimposed) units

no

41TV163

Millican Bench
(Rodgers)

Kelly 1971

no data

trenches

no

41TV177

Steussey I

exposed?

isolated units

no

41TV177

Steussey III

exposed?

isolated units

no

41TV184

Mike Murphy

exposed?

trench and block

no

41TV332

Stillhouse Springs

exposed

trench

no

41TV509

Lakeway

buried

trench, isolated
units

yes

.

52 / HOWARD
TABLE 1, continued
Trinomial

Site Name

Report(s)*

Geomorphic
Context

Excavation Strategy Hearth(s)

4ITV627

Booker

(Oberg 1938), Howard 1983

exposed

broadcast

no

4lUV 1

Nelson

(Huskey 1934)

no data

trench, isolated
units

no

41UV5

Mason Middens

no data

isolated unit

yes

4lUV20

Luce #3

Hester 1970

buried

potted

no

4lUV21

La Jita #1 (B)

Hester 1971

partly buried

trench - modified

no

4lUV21

La Jita #2 (F)

Hester 1971

exposed

isolated unit

no

41UV21

La Jita #3 (1)

Hester 1971

exposed?

isolated unit

no

4lUV37

Gildart Ranch #1

Hester 1970

exposed

trench

yes

4lUV 45

#1 (north)

Lukowski 1987

partly buried

trench, isolated unit no

4lUV45

#2 (south)

Lukowski 1987

partly buried

trench, isolated unit no

4lUV47

#1 (west)

Lukowski 1987

exposed?

trench, isolated unit yes

4lUV47

#2 (east)

Hall 1974, Lukowski 1987

exposed?

trench, isolated unit no

4lUV 48

#1 (Area A)

Lukowski 1987

exposed?

trench and block

yes

Hall 1974

no data

isolated unit

no

trench, isolated
units

no

41UV51
41 VV3

Doss

Nunley, Duffield & Jelks 1965

partly buried

4lVVll

Javelina Bluff (lower)

McClurkan 1968

buried
trench, horizontal
(superimposed) stripping

yes

41VVll

Javelina Bluff (upper)

McClurkan 1968

trench and block
exposed
(superimposed)

no

41VV263

Piedra del Diablo

Dibble & Prewitt 1967, Prewitt
1970

buried

trench and block

no

41VV301

Nopal Terrace

Sorrow 1968

buried

block, isolated
units

no

WM

(near Round Rock)

(pearce 1924)

no data

no data

no

41WMI

Walsh #1

(Bedichek 1919, Pearce 1938)

partly buried?

trench, quadrants

no

41WMl

Walsh #2

(Pearce 1938)

no data

concentric circles

no

41WM2

Merrell #2

Campbell 1948

buried

block

no

41WM2

Merrell #4

Campbell 1948

exposed

block

no

4lWM3

Hamilton Farm #1

(Pearce 1938)

no data

trench

no

41WM3

Hamilton Farm #2

(pearce 1938)

no data

trench

no

41WM3

Hamilton Farm #3

(Pearce 1938)

no data

trench

no

41WM3

Hamilton Farm #4

(pearce 1938)

no data

trench

DO

MIDDEN EXCAVATIONS

/ 53

TABLE 1, continued
Trinomial

Site Name

Report(s)*

Geomorphic
Context

Excavation Strategy Hearth(s)

41WM4

Sclunidt

(Kuhlman 1931)

no data

no data

no

41WM8

McClure Mound

(pearce 1927)

no data

trench and quadrant

yes

41WM9

Gault

no data

no data

no

4lWMlO

Cobb Spring

no data

trenches

no

41WM14

W. G. Bell #1

no data

no data

no

41WM14

W. G. Bell #2

no data

no data

no

41WM14

W. G. Bell #3

no data

no data

no

41WM14

W. G. Bell #4

no data

no data

no

exposed

isolated units

no

Sorrow 1969

partly buried

trench and block

no

Peter, Prikryl, McCormick &
Demuynck 1982

buried

horizontal stripping

yes

4lWM15
4lWM49

. Dedear

John Ischy

41WM53
41WM56

Hawes

Peter, Prikryl, McCormick &
Demuynck 1982

buried

trench and block

yes

41WM57

BRM #3

Peter, Prikryl, McCormick &
Demuynck 1982

partly buried

trench and block,
isolated unit

yes

41WM73

Sorrow 1973; Peter, Prikryl,
McCormick & Demuynck 1982

buried

trench, block, and
isolated unit

yes

41WM88

Sorrow 1973

partly buried

trench and block

no

41WMl24

Bryan Fox

Moore 1976; Peter. Prikryl.
McCormick & Demuynck 1982

exposed

isolated units

no

41WM139

Beaverhead

(Clark 1964)

no data

isolated units

no

41WM235 Wilson/Leonard

buried

trench and block

no

41WM238

Walker Mound

no data

no data

no

41WM244

San Gabriel Mound

no data

no data

no

Peter, Prikryl, McCormick &
Demuynck 1982

buried

trench and block,
horizontal stripping

yes

41WM304
41WM312

Blockhouse Creek #1

Gearhart 1988

no data

trench and block

no

41WM312

Blockhouse Creek #2

Gearhart 1988

no data

trench and block

no

41WM312

Blockhouse Creek #13

Gearhart 1988

no data

trench and block

yes

41WM312

Blockhouse Creek #18

Gearhart 1988

no data

trench and block

no

41WM330

Patterson & Moore 1976

exposed?

isolated unit

no

41WM360

Patterson & Moore 1976

exposed?

no data

no

Gearhart 1988

no data

trench and block

no

41WM640

Blockhouse Creek

54 / HOWARD

A variety of hypotheses on midden formation and function have arisen from the
interpretation of individual burned rock middens. However, when 225 the excavated
burned rock middens are considered as a group, a broad cultural pattern emerges that
may be unique to central Texas. The geographic distribution of the excavated domed
burned rock middens (Fig. 1) corresponds closely to the central Texas cultural areas as
defined by Suhm (1960:65) and Prewitt (1981:72). Most investigations of burned rock
middens have taken place in Travis and Williamson counties. Travis County has been the
location of over one-third (n = 84, 37%) of the burned rock midden excavations, and
Williamson County has seen about 16% (n = 37). Most of the published midden excavations are also from these two counties; thus, on numeric grounds, middens from Travis
and Williamson counties constitute the "classic" image of the burned rock midden. Other
counties with high numbers of excavated burned rock middens are Uvalde (n = 13,6%),
Hays (n= 12,5%), and Bexar (n= 11,5%). The remaining 68 middens are spread over
24 counties, with one to eight per county.
Excavation Methods
The choice of excavation method effectively determines which aspect of a complex
burned rock midden deposit will be viewed and what information it will reveal. If the
same method is used to excavate all burned rock middens, progress in understanding
them will be limited. The range of methods used to excavate burned rock middens is
examined in this section, while the relative effectiveness of these methods in revealing
hearth features is evaluated in the following section.
The excavation methods employed on burned rock middens may be summarized as
trench, block, isolated unit, broadcast, and horizontal stripping; several of these methods
were often used in combination. The two most popular methods - trench and broadcast - provide cross sections of the midden deposit. Of the 197 burned rock midden
excavations where the methods are reported, more than one-third employed trenches,
dug either by backhoe or by hand in a linear sequence of smaller units (Table 2). The
trench method has been used since 1918;its popularity peaked in the 1950s and the 1960s
when it was employed in reservoir salvage projects. The next most popular method is
broadcast excavation, which was commonly used during the 1930s in Works Projects
Administration (WPA) investigations; this method involves establishing a vertical cross
section and working it back across an entire midden (see Pearce n.d.).
The remaining methods - block excavations, isolated units, and horizontal stripping-yield plan views of the midden deposit that differ only in the horizontal extent of
the area exposed. Block units, defined here as greater than 2 x 2 m, were employed on
about one-fifth of the middens. Block units adjoin about 40% of the trenches and were
used in the 1960s and 1970s in a number of reservoir salvage projects in Texas. Isolated
units, defined here as less than 2 x 2 m, were employed in fewer cases but also were most
popular during this period~
One of the least-used excavation methods is horizontal stripping, which has been
employed at only 10 burned rock middens (Table 3). The method involves the removal
of thin strata over broad areas greater than 2 x 2 m, sometimes over an entire midden

MIDDEN EXCAVATIONS

t

..
III
18
E3

>80 per county
>30 per county

>10
<10

per county
per county

FIGURE 1. Geographic distribution of excavated burned rock middens.

/ 55

56 / HOWARD

TABLE 2
BURNED

ROCK MIDDEN

EXCAVATION METHODS

THROUGH

TIME

Method
Period of
Excavation
1918-1929
1930-1939
1940-1949
1950-1959
1960-1969
1970-1979
1980-1988
Total

Trench

Block

Isolated
Unit

Horizontal
Stripping

0
5
2
1
18
15
10
51
19%

0
4
0
1
19
17
7
48
18%

0
1
2
0
1
5
1
10
4%

Broadcast

10
10
7
4
22
27
14
94
36%

3
49
1
3
1
0
0
57
22%

Note: Three middens (1%) which were dug with other methods are excluded;
the use of multiple excavation methods on some middens results in a total
of 260 middens.

surface. Horizontal stripping was employed in a few WPA investigations but was not
widely used until fairly recently.
A unique excavation method not included in Table 3 was devised by Roy Bedichek
(1919). The quadrant method was used on two middens at Walsh Farm (41WM1) and at
the McClure Mound (41 WM8). The midden was staked off in two concentric circles, then
divided into inner and outer quadrants which were excavated individually.

TABLE 3
BURNED
Trinomial
41TV38
41TV28
41VVll
X41KRI
41GL21
41WM53
41WM304
41BX52
41MI8

ROCK MIDDENS
Name
Devils Hollow
Heffington (2)
Javelina Bluff
Paris
Hop Hill

- -- -'-----

Peacock Bluff
Wild Thrkey

EXCAVATED By HORIZONTAL
Year Excavated
1939
1940
1966
1971
1976
1978
1978
1979
1983

Excavator( s)
Fox
Kelley
McClurkan
Skinner
Gunn
Peter & Prikryl
Peter & Prikryl
Henderson
Howard

STRIPPING
Reference
Collins 1973
Klley 1940
McClurkan 1968
Skinner 1979
Gunn & Mahula 1977
Peter et al. 1982
Peter et al. 1982

------

------

MIDDEN EXCAVATIONS

/ .57

To date, most of the excavations of burned rock middens have examined a cross section
of these deposits, which often appeared as a jumbled mass of burned rock. In contrast,
horizontal stripping is well suited to reveal patterning on the midden surface. Generally
speaking, new or unusual methods may yield information on burned rock midden structure that is not apparent in trenches.
Hearths
Sorrow (1969:51) observed that "the function of the burnt rock middens probably can
be resolved when in-place hearths or cooking areas can be isolated." These features
indicate that the parts of middens where contextual integrity is preserved are relicts of
particular food preparation methods or other technologies, and consequently provide
some clue to the mode of midden accumulation.
It is commonly believed that few hearths have been identified in burned rock middens.
On the contrary, 71 hearths have been found in 46 (20%) of the 225 middens examined.
This modest number could indicate that such features are anomalous but also may reflect
the difficulty of identifying hearths in such complex deposits. Around 20% of these
hearths were recorded in the WPA excavations of the 1930s, but most have been identified
since 1960 with a peak in hearth identification (30%) in the 1970s. The increasing
number of hearths found through time is more easily attributed to the increasing perception of the excavators, and to the use of better excavation methods, than to the character
of the middens.
With the exception of a few of the earliest excavations, the position of most (n = 63)
of the hearths found could be related to the midden deposit. Half (n=31, 49%) intersected the bottom surface of the middens, about one-third (n = 22,35%) were found on
the upper surface, and only 16% (n = 10) were found within the midden deposit. Apparently, the relatively undisturbed upper and lower surfaces of burned rock middens are
the contexts where hearths are most visible and where they are most apt to be preserved.
Hearths which intersect the lower surface of the midden arguably are the first hearths
constructed at that location, whereas hearths on the upper surface of the midden may be
the last ones made before abandonment of the site. In the first case, the features were
covered quickly before they were disturbed, while the uppermost hearths escaped alteration because no later hearths were constructed over them.
Because the geomorphic context of burned rock middens affect the preservation of
features, middens were categorized, following Howard (1983), as exposed, partly buried,
or buried (Fig. 2). Both types of buried middens have the potential to preserve a
significant part of the midden surface and any features it may contain. Of the 150 middens
whose geomorphic context could be determined, more than half were buried completely
(n = 59,38%) or in part (n = 32,21 %), whereas less than half (n = 64,41 %) were exposed
across the entire upper surface.
The location of identified hearths and the geomorphic context of burned rock middens is recorded for 56 middens (Table 4). Almost all of the hearths on the top of middens

have been found in buried or partly buried contexts, indicating the importance of

58 / HOWARD

a

b
.,' '~":'Y
""'

:" 0:0/'""'..,
,0.
,,1 /'0"'1>
0 Oo...Q,',o':o'".;.,

"
,,'
0:"
',',.,0:
,o,.C...
.(J. . 0'0',",
/'"1:,'/""1..:.
0 """'"

,'V''''V:~'..O':

,"'.'

0","

0:-'

''':-'''A'
,,'\,/./

'

WI IIIvllllillillllllllllllill

-

,,~,

0' ";''''.:'0

"C" f) .~
Ve.,'

\0

';-:',

'.,:I.~

.~

nJlllllljjljlljjjDJU jJUh

c
",U'X,
"'-':"
",,,,,\oJ"''',,.,.
,~, ,.
'

0

, ",..'.,

, ",'

0'

-. - " ()". "0'''''''.
C;.'" O "'''','
.0"
O ..,'
0'

..,,0,..

;-'..:-.tI.:.o."(,\,,.

' :,Q.I"\

'O' ."~V '-""

-,,~..,

~

==:::::::::

--;-," .",',,- '-"., 'O'.\.J,U-"",~._,
,
.A,otVQ'~;,,:,,:'C!,:,!:',O:.:C:> '0':, ,<:/80: O))',P,:(),", =-=-" . . 0:""":,:.""1', ,~,.-.:
:.~,,::q:, , ,,"~,..'.:(/: ::~ :"~:~::C:;-

r;:'B! Bedrock



Alluvium-Colluvium

[[]J

Burned rock midden

FIGURE 2. Schematic contexts of burned rock middens shown in crosssection (after Howard 1983:78). a, burned rock midden on bedrock, in
unstratified context; b, burned rock midden visible on surface, stratified
context; c, burned rock midden(s) buried, stratified context.

MIDDEN EXCAVATIONS

I 59

4

TABLE

HEARTH LOCATIONS IN BURNED ROCK MIDDENS
RELATIVE To GEOMORPHIC CONTEXTS

Hearth Location
Top
Middle
Bottom
Total

Geomorphic Context of Midden
Buried
Partly"Buried
Exposed
12
9
14
35

4
0
5
9

2
1
9
12

Total
18
10
28
56

deposition as a preservation mechanism. In fact, it is likely that sites in areas of active
deposition are most likely to preserve intact hearths throughout the deposit.
Also, the excavation strategyemployed may be closely related to the identification of
hearths (Table 5). Trench and block excavations were most successful in finding hearths
at the bottom of the midden, while block excavations revealed most of the hearths in the
middle of the midden deposit. Of course, these methods are often used in conjunction.
Horizontal stripping is best suited for finding hearths on the midden surface. At the
Heffington Site Kelley (1940:25) noted that "clearing of each ofthese levels from above,
by the stripping technique, reveals the outline of the hearths and the pits in which their
rock lining is placed." Hearths have been identified at all of the sites where horizontal
stripping was employed (see Table 3). At Wild Turkey Midden in Mills County (Howard
ms.) the plan view photographs show the midden surface to be composed of a number of
small, circular rock alignments which may represent hearths (Fig. 3). A combination of
the trench and horizontal stripping methods maybe the most effectiveway to find hearths
on, within, and below burned rock middens.
What do these hearths look like? Although the level of detail available for each
feature is inconsistent, some generalizations can be made about hearth size, shape, and
content. A wide range of sizes is represented (Table 6), but most of the hearths are
between 60 and 180 cm in diameter. A few hearths are smaller, and a greater number
range from somewhat to considerably larger. The mean hearth diameter is 118 cm.
Most hearths are described in the literature as basins or pits, although these terms
have not been used consistently. Measurements of diameter and depth for 22 of the
hearths allow this subgroup to be compared more systematically. The 16hearths classified
here as basin shaped are less than one-third as deep as they are wide, and range from 71
to 350 cm in diameter. Eleven of the basin hearths intersect the bottom of the middens;
eight of these were dug into subsoil, and one had fired the clay around it. Most of the
basin hearths at the bottom of middens contained burned rocks, described in two cases
as slabs and in three cases as cobbles. In the other six, the feature fill was described as
typical of the rest of the burned rock midden but darker than the surrounding deposit
and in some cases containing ash. The basin hearths contained projectile points,
debitage, bone, snail shell, mussel shells, charcoal, and charred seeds.

60 / HOWARD

TABLE

5

BURNED ROCK MIDDEN EXCAVATION
STRATEGY AND HEARTH LOCATION

Excavation Strategy
Trench and Block
Block
Trench
Broadcast
Horizontal Stripping
Total

Bottom
12
4
6
3
5
30

Hearth Location
Middle
1
7
0
2
0
10

Top

Total

5
4
5
3
8
25

18
15
11
8
13
65

Note: The total number of hearths exceeds that given in Table 4, as a few
hea:ths were found by multiple excavation methods.

FIGURE 3. Plan view of south part of site, with burned rock midden on left. Note gaps
in rocks on midden surface which may indicate hearths.

MIDDEN EXCAVATIONS

/ 61

TABLE 6
RANGE OF HEARTH
Diameter (cm)

DIAMETERS

Number of Hearths

IN BURNED

ROCK MIDDENS

Site number (all preceded by 41)

20-39
40-59
60-79

3

KEI0(2), TV75

14

80-99
100-119

3
8

120-139
140-159
160-179
180-199
200-219
220-239
240-259
260-279
280-299
300-319
320-349
350-369
Total

2
3
2

GL21, HY21(9), KYl, WM53,
WM56, WM73
SS2, UV47, WM57
BX52, BN-' * TV34, TV133,
WM53, WM57, WM73, WM304
TV34, TV36
RE -' * WM53, UV 48
TV32, UV47

2

RE -' * TV133

2
1

TV28, TV38
GL27

1

HY29

1
- 42

BX228

*No trinomial assigned

Two other basin-shaped features intersected the top of middens. One of these, the
feature at the Devil's Hollow Site (Collins 1973), was a depression 240 cm in diameter
and 30 cm deep on the surface of the midden, containing an ash lens. The other
penetrated from the top to the bottom of Midden #1 at the Trammell Site (Jackson 1934),
and was 213 cm in diameter and 30 cm deep. This feature contained ash and burned
artifacts. The size and positioning of these features is suggestive of the ring middens
(midden types 2 and 3; Weir 1976) found farther west in Texas. No data are available on
the position of the three remaining basin-shaped hearths.
Five of the hearths are classified here as pits because their depth is more than
one-third their width. Diameters of these features range from 25 to 110 cm. Three were
found at the bottom of the midden dug into subsoil, one was in the middle of the midden,
and no information is available on the context ofthe fifth. Four of the pit hearths contain
typical burned rock midden fill, while one had fewer burned rock and artifacts than the
surrounding midden fill.
Other types
been described
Indian Springs
1985). Smaller

of hearths are less common. A few examples of large flat hearths have
as pavements of heat-fractured stone slabs. These were found at the
Site in Real County (Shiner and Shiner 1977) and at 41BN63 (Hester
flat hearths constructed of slabs and cobbles were found at 41KR107

62 / HOWARD

(Luke 1980) and 41WM53 (Peter et al. 1982). Most of the flat hearths have been found
on the top of middens, but one was found at the bottom.

c

The shape, size, and contents of the 71 hearths identified in burned rock middens are
varied. The majority are basin-shaped, whereas relatively few are pits. Less than onethird (n = 19, 27%') of the hearths contain slabs. Thus, the model of slab-lined pit hearths
as the fundamental structural unit of burned rock middens (e.g., Prewitt n.d.) is not
supported by these data. In fact, it appears that a range of stone-using practices produced
the variety of hearths found in burned rock middens, even in single sites (e.g. Shiner and
Shiner 1977; Hester 1985). Therefore, the key to the functional interpretation of burned
rock middens may not be in the mode of hearth construction but rather in contents or
other data.
This review of the characteristics of hearths in burned rock middens has implications
for decifering the process of burned rock midden accumulation. First, the presence of
intact hearths in some middens suggests that these deposits were not "community dumps"
(Sorrow 1969) but were at times the locus of specific activities. Because hearths are most
commonly preserved on the surfaces of middens and below the middens, it is reasonable
to infer that the continued use of burned rock middens is a disruptive activity which
destroys patterning (especially hearths) within the deposit. The presence of a majority
of the identified hearths in buried burned rock middens supports the geomorphic explanation for midden accumulation, Le., that middens are composed of many individual,
superimposed hearths which are most clearly discerned in contexts of rapid deposition.
This hypothesis has been posited by many (e.g. Suhm 1959:247) but may have been
originated by Kelley (1940:26), based on observations in an area of stratified hearths
adjoining the burned rock midden at the Heffington Site.
It seems fairly conclusive that the campsite would have actually become a
midden if the rate of cultural deposition had not been less continuous or
less rapid than the rate of natural accumulation of terrace silts. As long as
the silts were accumulating faster than the cultural debris the campsite
levels would be separated by silt layers; and individual hearths would be
only slightly disturbed, if at all, by the building of later hearths, and hence
would be easily identifiable. If the rate of cultural accumulation was faster
than that of silt accumulation on the terraces, the hearth layers would tend
to become directly superimposed; older hearths would be disturbed by later
hearths; individual hearths would be as difficult to identify as individual
pitchforks of hay in a haystack.
Botanical Remains

One of the most promising but neglected avenues for understanding burned rock
middens is the recovery and interpretation of associated botanical remains. Most
hypotheses about the function of burned rock middens propose some form of vegetal
food preparation, an interpretation which is supported by the presence of milling tools
in a majority (83%) of these deposits. Certain plants have been proposed as the
foodstuffs processed in burned rock middens, induding sotol (Wilson 1930:62-63;Prewitt

MIDDEN EXCA VA TIONS / 63

n.d.:106-108) and acorns (e.g. Hester 1973;Creel 1978:299, 1986;Weir 1976:125). Creel
(1986) has demonstrated a partial association between burned rock middens and concentrations of certain oaks in west Texas and proposes stone-boiling as a method of
.leaching the tannic acid from these nuts. This hypothesis fails to account for burned rock
accumulations in areas of sandstone, granite, or other noncalcareous rock.
Attempts to recover macrobotanical and microbotanical remains from central Texas
burned rock midden sites are relatively recent and fairly limited (Table 7). Of the 225
burned rock midden excavations in the data base, 19 (8% of all middens excavated)
reported attempts to recover botanical remains (Table 5). Six analyses were made on
feature fill and the remainder were made on general matrix samples.
Significantly, most of the attempts to find macrobotanical remains in burned rock
middens (n = 13, 87%) were successful. Variousflotation methodswere employed for
almost all of the macrobotanical recovery, but a few investigators used water-screening
through 1116-irichmesh screen. Identification of the macrobotanical remains recovered
yielded evidence of a wide range of taxa (Table 8). Only three species were found at more
than one site, however; Quercus (oak) and Celtis (hackberry) were each found in five
middens, while Juglans (walnut) was found in two. The Celtis seeds were uncharred;
Black and McGraw (1985:216-219) argue for the preservation of prehistoric examples of
these durable seeds in open sites, but Crane (1982:15-6) views them as modern contaminants.
Microbotanical remains have been sought in six attempts, two of which were successful. Standard acetolysis of sediments from three middens at 41HY29 and at 41BX428
failed to yield interpretable quantities of pollen. However, microbotanical remains were
recovered from the Panther Springs Creek Site (41BX228) and Wild Turkey Midden
(41MI8). Panther Springs also yielded plant phytoliths from Midden 2, which were
identified to the Poaceae family (grasses, formerly Graminae). The phytoliths were
interpreted as paleoenvironmental evidence, with some speculation as to their economic
significance (Black and McGraw 1985:370-374).
At Wild Turkey Midden, 20 taxa were identified in a sample of 131 pollen grains
washed from an overturned grinding slab at the bottom of the midden (Holloway 1988).
The most abundant taxon in this sample (28 grains, 21% of the pollen sum) was identified
to the Asteraceae family (sunflowers, formerly Compositae), which has over 70 species
in Texas including the edible Solidago sp. (goldenrod), Ambrosia trifida (ragweed),
Helianthus sp.(sunflower, Jerusalem artichoke), and Cirsium sp. (thistle) (Tull1987:4152). Ambrosia and Helianthus have been identified as prehistoric cultigens in other areas
of the United States (Yarnell 1978:289-299; Heiser 1985:57-62;Tull 1987:38,48). The
Asteraceae family is represented at levels ranging from 0.8% to 19.7%in modern pollen
rain on the Edwards Plateau (Shaw et al. 1980:209), so its abundance at Wild Howard-20
Turkey Midden may not indicate an economic use. The remainder of the identified taxa
indicate a grassland environment, with 25% arboreal species (Holloway 1988:8); the
presence of three grains of Zea mays (corn) pollen in this late Archaic context (Holloway
1988:4,8) may indicate recent contamination, however.

64 / HOWARD

TABLE 7
ATTEMPTS

To RECOVER

Year Excavated
1964
1964
1964
1971
1974
1975
1977
1978
1978
1978
1978
1978
1978
1979
1979
1979
1981
1983
1985

BOTANICAL REMAINS

Investigator
Weir
Weir
Weir
Beadles
Shiner & Shiner
Baxter
Kelly, Gerstle, & Assad
Katz
Peter & Prikryl
Prikryl & Peter
Peter
Peter
Prikryl
Black & McGraw
Black & McGraw
Black & McGraw
Lukowski
Howard
Hester

Midden
41HY29B
41HY29C
41HY29F
41KR10
41RE *
4IBR72
41BX428
4IBX300
41WM53
41WM56
41WM57
41WM73
41WM304
4IBX228 #2
4IBX228 #3
4IBX228 #4
41UV48 #lA
41MI8
41BN63 #1

FROM BURNED

ROCK MIDDENS

Attempted

Recovered

micro
micro
micro
macro
macro
macro
macro, micro
macro
macro
macro
macro
macro
macro
macro, micro
macro
macro
macro
micro
macro

none
none
none
macro
macro
none
macro
macro
macro
macro
macro
macro
none
macro, micro
macro
macro
macro
micro
macro

*No trinomial assigned.

Even though botanical remains have been recovered from burned rock middens, the
small sample sizes and difficulties interpretation have limited the translation of these
data into knowledge about the midden occupant's diet. One of the greatest interpretive
problems is the separation of the environmental component of botanical remains from
possible economic indicators. Sediments and milling tools accumulate pollen rain at the
time of occupation, and charcoal and other charred plant remains may enter hearths as
fuel or drop from plants. Economic microbotanical remains may be distinguishable from
environmental indicators only by their greater abundance, particularly when it contrasts
to the con~entrations of contemporaneous pollen from offsite areas. Also, the ontogenies and physical characteristics of some plants may provide a clue to their use as
food. Most hardwood nuts have durable shells which are likely to be preserved as
macrobotanical remains, whereas pollen of these species in sites is released long before
the seeds mature and will represent the local vegetation and environment. However,
foodstuffs from flowering plants such as sunflowers maybe represented in sites by pollen,
as their seeds mature in tightly packed heads which trap pollen through the period of
seed maturation. Also, a number of flowering plants such as Solidagosp. and Helianthus
sp. are insect pollinated and do not produce large quantities of airborne pollen (Tull
1987:43). Leaf crowns from succulents such as sotol are available throughout the year
but may be represented in sites only by plant epidermis that adheres to the surface of
milling tools. For this reason, interpretation of macro- and micro botanical remains from

)

MIDDEN EXCAVATIONS

/ 65

TABLE 8
MACROBOTANICAL

Taxon

Juniperus sp (Juniper)
Carex sp. (Sedge)
Panicum sp. (Witchgrass)
Amarantheceae (Amaranth family)
Echinocerus sp. (Hedgehog cactus)
Chenopodium sp. (Chenopod)
Asteraceae sp. (Sunflower family)
Crucifereae (Mustard family)
Cucurbita sp. (Gourd)
Acalypha sp. (Copperleaf)
Euphorbia sp. (Spurge)
Quercus sp. (Oak)
Carya sp. (Pecan)
Juglans sp. (Walnut)
Proboscidea sp. (Unicorn plant)
Celtis sp. (Hackberry)
Verbena sp. (Verbena)

REMAINS FROM BURNED

BN63 BX228 BX300 KRIO

ROCK MIDDENS

Sites.
RE- UV48 WM53 WM56 WM57 WM73

X

x
X
X
X
X
X

x
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X

X
X

X

X
X

X

X

X
X

*All site numbers are preceded by 41 except RE (the Indian Creek Site, Shiner and Shiner 1977) which
has not been assigned a trinomial. At 41BX428, charred seeds were recovered but not
identified. Taxomonic order follows Bohrer and Adams (1977)

a number of sampling locales is necessary in attempting any reconstruction of the diet of
burned rock midden dwellers.
Summary
The results of investigations at 225 burned rock middens excavated prior to 1987 can
be used to plan the direction of future work. First, it appears that the cross sections of
burned rock middens obtained by the prevailing trench and broadcast excavation
methods provide the least illuminating views of the internal structure of these deposits.
In contrast, the horizontal stripping method holds particular promise for revealing
patterning in middens, and other experimental methods should be attempted.
Contrary to common belief, many hearths have been found in dome-shaped burned
rock middens, indicating that they are not simply dumps but rather the locus of particular
activities. Hearth features are most likely to be preserved on the upper and lower
surfaces of the midden deposits than in the middle. Middens in areas of rapid sediment
deposition are more likely to preserve intact hearths than middens in areas of relatively
slow deposition. To date, the location of hearths identified in burned rock middens
supports Kelley's geomorphic hypothesis of midden accumulation, commonly known as
the intersecting hearth hypothesis (Kelley 1940; Kelley and Campbell 1942).

66 / HOWARD

The range in size, shape, and contents of the hearths found in burned rock middens
indicates no single, specific cooking technology. The variety of plant species represented
by the botanical remains recovered from middens does not suggest a focal economy based
on a particular vegetal food, but may reflect the opportunistic use of a variety of plant
foods, varying from area to area under diverse environmental conditions. However,
studies of hearths and botanical remains suffer from small sample size and a lack of
comparative data. Yet, the presence of botanical remains in burned rock midden sites
has been demonstrated, and systematic efforts to recover such remains, particularly from
milling tools, should be a part of any midden investigation.
Acknowledgments

I would like to thank LeRoy Johnson, Jr., Jeffrey G. Paine, Christopher Lintz, and
Linda Nance Foster for making critical comments on earlier drafts of this paper. Also I
have benefited from the assistance of St~phen A. Hall in the botanical analyses. Carolyn
Spock and Thomas R. Hester of the TexasArcheological Research Laboratory graciously
provided the records of that institution for review.
References Cited

Bedichek, Roy
1919 Notes on the Excavation of Two Indian Mounds Near Round Rock,
Texas - Williamson' County. Unpublished manuscript on file, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Black, Stephen F., and A. Joachim McGraw
1985 The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change and Continuity Within the
UpperSalado Creek Watershed,South-Central Texas.Archaeological Survey
Report 100. Center for Archaeologi.cal Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio.
Bohrer, Vorsila L., and Karen R. Adams
1977 Ethnobotanical Techniques and Approaches at Salmon Ruin, New Mexico.
Contributions in Anthropology 8(1). Eastern New Mexico State University,
Portales.
Collins, Michael B.
1973 The Devil's Hollow Site, A Stratified Archaic Campsite in Central Texas. ~
Bulletin of the TexasArcheological Society 43:77-100.

MIDDEN EXCAVATIONS

/ 67

Crane, Cathy
1982 Macrobotanical Analysis. In Archaeological Investigations at the San
Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, Volume 3, ed. by T. R. Hays, pp.
15-5 through 15-12. Archaeology Program, Institute of Applied Sciences,
North Texas State University, Denton.
Creel, Darrell
1978
An Archeological Survey in the South Concho River Area, West Central
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49: 159-194.
1986

A Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in West Central Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Arizona, Tucson.

Greer, John W.
1965
A Typology of Midden
31(3):41-55.

Circles

and Mescal Pits.

Southwestern

Lore

Gunn, J. and R. A. Mahula
1977 Hop Hill: Culture and Climatic Change in Central Texas. Special Report 5.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Heiser, Charles B.
1985 Some Botanical Considerations of the Early Domesticated Plants North of
Mexico. In PrehistoricFood Production in North America, ed. by Richard I.
Ford, pp. 57-72. Anthropological Paper 75. Museum of Anthropology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Hester, Thomas R.
1973 The Formation of a Burned Rock Midden: A California Example. The
Record 30(1):4. Dallas Archeological Society, Dallas.
1985

UTSA Archeological Field School Excavations in Bandera and Victoria
Counties, Texas. Friendsof Archaeology Newsletter 2, pp. 11-15. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texasat San Antonio.

Holloway, Richard G.
1988 Pollen Analysis of 41MI8, Mills County, Texas. Laboratory of Quaternary
Studies Contribution 4. Department of Anthropology, Eastern New
Mexico State University, Portales.
Howard, Margaret A.
1983 A Quantitative Study of the Booker Site and other Burned Rock Midden
Sites of the Lake Travis Basin, Central Texas. Unpublished Master's thesis,
The University of Texas at Austin.

l

~,

68 I HOWARD

Howard, Margaret A., continued
ms.
Excavations at Wild Turkey Midden, 41MI8. Unpublished manuscript on
file with author.
Jackson, A. 1:
1934
A. J. Trammel, Travis County, Unpublished manuscript on file, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Kelley, J. Charles
1940
Report on Excavations in Travis County, Site 52CI-5(412) Work Project
15311. Unpublished manuscript on file, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Kelley, J. Charles and 1: N. Campbell
1942 What are the Burned Rock Mounds of Texas? American Antiquity
7(3):319-322.
Luke, C. J.
1980

Continuing Archeology on State Highway 16: The Shep Site (41KRI09) and
The Wounded Eye Site (41KRI07). Publications in Archeology Report 16.
Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Highways
Design Division, Aus~in.
.

McClurkan, Burney B.
1968 Test Excavations, Javelina Bluff, Val Verde County, Texas, Fall 1966.
Report submitted to the U. S. National Park Service by the Texas.
Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Pearce, J. E.
n.d.
Handbook for Field Work in Archeology. Unpublished manuscript, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Peter, Duane, Dan Prikryl, Olin McCormick, and M. A. Demuynck
1982 Site Excavation Reports: Primary Contract. In ArcheologicalInvestigations
at the San Gabriel ReservoirDistricts, Central Texas,Volume 1, ed. by 1: R.
Hays, pp. 8-1 through 8-156. Archaeology Program, Institute of Applied
Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981 Culture Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the TexasArcheological
Society 52:65-89.

n.d.

The Rogers Spring Site: 1974 Investigations. Unpublished manuscript on
file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

MIDDEN EXCAVATIONS

/ 69

Shaw, R. B., K. C. Volman, and F. E. Smeins
1980 Modern Pollen Rain and Vegetation on the Edwards Plateau, Texas.
Palynology4:205-213.
Shiner, Joel L., and Maxine V. Shiner
1977
Structure and Organization of a Burned Rock Midden: The Indian Creek
Site, Real County, Texas. Plains Anthropologist 22-78:263-282.

Skinner, S. Alan
1979 The Paris Site (X41KR1), Kerr County, Texas. La Tierra 6(4):3-15.
Sorrow, William M.
1969 Archeological Investigations at the John Ischy Site: A Burned Rock Midden in
Williamson County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project 18. The University of Texas, Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1959
The Williams Site and Central Texas Archeology.
Science 11(2):218-250.
1960

The Texas Journal of

A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 29:63-107..

Tull, Delena
1987 A Practical Guide to Edible and Useful Plants. Texas Monthly Press, Inc.,
Austin.

Weir, Frank A.
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Washington
State University, Pullman.
Wilson, Ernest W.
1930
Burned Rock Mounds of Southwest Texas. Bulletin
Archeological and Paleontological Society 2:59-63.

of the Texas

Yarnell, Richard A.
1978 Domestication of Sunflower and Sumpweed in Eastern North American. In
The Nature and Status of Ethnobotany, ed. by Richard I. Ford, pp. 289-299.
Anthropological Paper 67. Museum of Anthropology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor.

LATE PREHISTORIC BURNED ROCK MIDDENS
IN CENTRAL TEXAS
Glenn T. Goode

Introduction
In 1935, Vane Huskey reported on burned rock midden excavations in the Nueces
Canyon of Edwards, Real, and Uvalde counties. In this region, Huskey identified two
kinds of middens which he designated as "Type N.' and "Type B." According to Huskey,
"Type N.' is by far the most common of the two - as it is across most of central Texasdating to the Archaic and often producing a variety of dart points along with a wide range
of other tools and debitage.
Although fewer of the "Type B" middens were found, and only three excavations are
described in his report, Huskey was aware of several others which were being excavated
by local relic collectors. The total number of "Type B" middens known to Huskey is not
recorded, but he does state th~t they "are scarce and are found in widely separated

localities" (Huskey 1935a:l05). . Some of them are described as being in the vicinity of
Camp Wood, but, again, an unknown number. In any event, Huskey saw enough "Type
B" middens to be convinced that a clear distinction existed between the two types.
Writing to A. 1: Jackson in 1935, Huskey made an insightful observation about the
middens which contained only "bird points":
In view of all this it would seem to me that these mounds where only the
small arrows are found were occupied by an entirely different tribe, if not
by a later bunch than the mounds where large spears, etc., are found

(Huskey 1935b).

.

Huskey's "Type B" middens differed from "Type N.' in several respects:
1. They occurred singly (described as large, conical mounds), whereas several
"Type N.' middens often occurred at one site;
2. "Type B" middens were of smaller size on the average;
3. "Type B" middens were a single stratum of burned rock and soil; three strata
were present in many "Type N.' middens; and
4. For diagnostic projectile points, the "Type B" middens contained only arrow
points; points that may now be typed as Scallom, Edwards, and Sabinal are
shown in Huskey (1935a:Plate 14).
In Huskey's report, there is no elaboration on the structure of "Type B" middens, no
mention of internal features such as pits or hearths. Huskey was familiar with the ring
middens or sotol pits of southwest Texas, but apparently did not think that "Type B"

71

72 / GOODE

middens were related to the same kind of activity. At least, he made no mention of their
being used as ovens.
It is Huskey's Type B midden, apparently Late Prehistoric in age, that is the subject
of this paper. Most of the data reported here come from State Department of Highways
and Public Transportation (SDHPT) excavations of two widely separated sites -one in
Uvalde County (the Heard Schoolhouse Site) and one in Mason County (the Honey
Creek Site) - with additional information from a few other sites. Some of these lesser
known sites are located in the same general vicinity as the excavations, while the others
are widely dispersed in the broad expanse that separates the two regions.
From south to north, the sites occur in a band of contiguous counties which range from
the southwestern margin up into the heart of central Texas, including Uvalde, Real,
Edwards, Kerr, Gillespie, and Mason counties (Fig. 1). A majority of these sites occur
within the Edwards Plateau; however, the sites in central Uvalde County (Lukowski 1987)
lie somewhat beyond the southern reaches of the Balcones Escarpment and the Mason
County site is located within the Llano Uplift, near its southern border.
Despite certain geologic and physiographic differences between these regions - Ordovician age rocks at the Mason County location, Cretaceous at most of the other
sites-in all cases limestone comprises the"primary surface material of each vicinity. This
is the stone which was of paramount importance to the activities that promoted the
accumulation of these burned rock middens.
Closely tied to the geology, many of the principal species of the biota occurred
throughout the overall area. Among these, two which may have figured prominently in
the diet at these burned rock midden sites are live oak (Quercusfusiformis) and sotol
(Dasyliriontexanum).
The Heard Schoolhouse Site
SITE DESCRIPTION

Of the two excavated sites, the first to be discussed is 41UV86, the Heard Schoolhouse
Site, excavated in the winter of 1982-83. As far as I know, this was one of the first, if not
the first, excavation of a Late Prehistoric burned rock midden since Huskey's day. The
site was located in north-central Uvalde County, 3 miles north of the village of Reagan
Wells, and 6 miles west of Garner State Park. It was situated on a bluff overlooking Mine
Creek, 0.5 mile east of the creek's confluence with the Dry Frio River. Subsequent to
the excavations, the site was destroyed by an extension of FM 1051.
The Heard Schoolhouse Site was relatively small, consisting of sparse lithic scatter

whichcoveredapproximately1/2acre, and a single burned rock midden. The midden was
of moderate proportions, 15 meters in diameter with a maximum depth of 60 cm - small
compared to the Archaic stage middens farther up the road at site 41UV88 and at other
sites along the river. The midden was situated in the area of the site which had the
greatest soil deposit, albeit comparatively shallow, on a relatively flat surface 20 meters
south of the creek bank. At this locus, the dark gray-brown clay loam which comprised

CENTRAL TEXAS / 73

MASON

GILLESPIE

KERR

EDWARDS

N

REAL

v
UVALDE
0

MILES

40

FIGURE 1. Central Texas counties with possible Late Prehistoric burned rock middens.

74 / GOODE

the 20-cm thick A horizon across the site had been incorporated into the burned rock
midden deposit. The soil which underlay this deposit was a reddish brown clay loam,
B2 + horizon, 20 to 30 cm in thickness, which contained abundant limestone pebbles and
cobbles as well as small pebbles of angular chert. Underlying this deposit was the
limestone bedrock which in places was a conglomerate or indurated caliche.
Scattered outcrops across the site or along the foot of the nearby hills may have
provided some of the limestone used in the burned rock midden activities, but the supply
in the nearby creek would have been greater and more readily available. The small chert
pebbles scattered through the soil deposit were too small for tool making. The nearby
hills and creek were not a good chert source at this locale, if the meager samples found
today are a reliable indicator. Gravels of the Dry Frio River are the nearest identified

substantial source.

.

Although somewhat disturbed by mechanical brush clearing activities, the midden's
shape was readily discernible after the surface was cleared by hand. It was roughly
circular, with a low dome-like profile; 10 to 15 cm of the midden had been removed in
places, but it was sufficiently intact to indicate that no unusual structural configuration,
such as the ring or crescent shape, had existed. Despite the lack of a central depression
such as that of southwest Texas hearth/oven middens, an apparent pit or oven-area was
located near the midden's center.
EXCAVATION

PROCEDURES

Excavation of the midden began with a north-south row of contiguous 1 x 1 meter
units. Work in this trench began at both ends

- the midden's

perimeter

-

and progressed

toward the center. The trench bisected the midden through its deepest deposit, creating
a continuous profile and effectively bisecting the central "pit-area." The central pit-area
was characterized by irregularly shaped, relatively shallow depressions which apparently
were dug into the submidden reddish brown clay loam, and by varying, but sometimes
abundant amounts of burned rock. Although not completely excavated, the central
pit-area was determined to have a roughly oval shape with approximate dimensions of
3.25 x 2.25 meters. Two groups of small and medium-size burned rocks lying on the "pit
.
floor" may have been remnants of stone-lined features.
Typical for the most part of burned rock midden deposits, this midden differed from
some in that it had two distinct matrices. Throughout the central pit-area the matrix was
dark gray loam with ahigh ash content and a powdery texture. Then, moving away from
the central pit-area the ash content dropped gradually, then sharply, a situation quite
obvious in the trench profile. The approximate diameter of the central section which
contained the high ash content was 6 meters. Generally, the burned rock midden deposit
outside the central pit-area was more homogeneous, with rather densely packed burned
rocks throughout. The bulk of the rock weight and volume came from large pebble and
small cobble size fragments; rocks as large as medium cobbles were not very numerous.
Small and medium pebble-size burned limestone fragments were abundant but contributed much less weight-volume. General notes of rock size and relative amounts were
made, but weight/volume measurements were not taken.

CENTRAL TEXAS / 75

Within the burned rock midden, but outside the central pit-area, only one anomalous
rock concentration was found which might have represented an activity locus. At best, it
could be described as a possible hearth remnant; and it occurred at a depth of 5-15 cm.
Outside the burned rock midden, in contrast, were found several hearths in varying
states of preservation and at varying depths. For the most part, they were shallowly
buried, within the upper 20 to 30 cm of the clay loam deposit. Composed of burned
limestone rocks, the hearths were relatively small, more or less circular, and had flat to
shallow basin-shaped bases. The only diagnostics found in close proximity to the
hearths - apparently associated in two cases - were Austin Phase arrow points. All of
these hearths were found on the northern side of the burned rock midden, between it and
the creek bank. Here, the clay loam soil deposit reached its maximum depth, sufficient
to preserve, at least partially, features such as hearths.
Testing on other sides of the midden was much more limited due to sparse recovery,
but was adequate to indicate that if any hearths were preserved in these areas, their
horizontal density was extremely low. A few 1x 1meter test units were excavated beyond
the midden perimeter, mostly on the east side. In addition to these test units, upwards
of a dozen unscreened shovel tests were dug in search of hearths, but none were found.
In all cases, the deposit was found to be quite shallow and unproductive. Therefore, as
indicated, extra-midden investigation was concentrated in the more productive northern
sector.
ARTIFACT ASSEMBLAGE

Though as yet unconfirmed by absolute dating techniques, but based on a large sample
of diagnostic artifacts, a substantial portion of the burned rock midden at 41UV86 has
been tentatively attributed to the Late Prehistoric. The midden may have had its
beginnings toward the end of the Archaic, but at this point there is insufficient evidence
to confirm an Archaic origin. Numerous charcoal samples were collected from the
midden deposit, but none have been submitted for assay; therefore, the age approximatic:mis based entirely on the presence and absence of diagnostic projectile points.
To date, none of the artifacts have been processed and, thus, only rough figures are
available, but they should be reasonably accurate. Including the tips of both darts and
arrows, the projectile point is by far the most numerous tool category at 41UV86. The
total is slightly more than 100 identifiable specimens. Although uncounted at this time,
other types of bifacial tools such as knives and gouges are either rare or absent. Likewise,
figures on the number of unifaces are not available yet, but there are not many of these,
either. There are some trimmed flake tools, and use-modified tools such as a large
hard-hammer flake with a heavily nicked edge and polish on both faces.

In the central section of the midct en'-" the centralpit-area- artifactfrequencieswere
relatively low, averaging 10 to 20 flakes per 10-cm level, with very few tools. However,
toward the midden's perimeter the artifact count increased significantly, particularly in
the northern section, and it increased even more beyond the midden deposit.
Approximately 45 arrow points, as well as arrow point fragments and preforms, were
found within the burned rock midden. Of the readily identifiable specimens among

76 / GOODE

these, Sabinal (Hester 1971) is by far the dominant type, followed by almost equal
numbers of Scallorn (Suhm and Jelks 1962)and Edwards (Sollberger 1967). A good many
specimens which resemble both Sabinal and Scallorn have been lumped in the Sabinal
type. Classic Sabinal and this "hybrid" variant also are most abundant outside the midden
where the arrow point sample is substantially larger. Of approximately 124arrow points,
untyped fragments, and arrow point preforms from the site, 79 (64%) were found outside
the burned rock midden.
At this stage, one of the most important aspects of the artifact assemblage is the
predominance of arrow points among the diagnostic categories, and the predominance
of the Sabinal type among these. It would be most helpful to know if the same dominance
existed in the middens excavated by Huskey-in particular, the one in which he reported
finding 200 "bird points" (Huskey 1935a). The Sabinal type was identified at the La Jita
Site (Hester 1971), located only 32 km east of site 41UV86 on the Sabinal River near
Utopia in northeastern Uvalde County. Of the few radiocarbon dates from La Jita, none
could be tied to the Sabinal type, however; and, today, its age is still an undefined span
within the Austin Phase. Thought to be a regional phenomenon, the Sabinal type has
been reported from only a few sites, mainly in Uvalde and adjacent counties. However,
recent observations in southern Mason County suggest a possible wider distribution of
this type up into the heart of central Texas. A few specimens which resemble Sabinal
were noted in local collections and one Sabinal-like point was found in the recent
excavations of 41MS32, the Honey Creek Site.
Fewer than five points each of the Edwards and Scallorn types were found within the
Heard Schoolhouse midden, but somewhat larger samples were found beyond its northern perimeter. In the case of Edwards, the La Jita Site (Hester 1971) did produce
significant radiocarbon data. These dates thought to be associated with the Edwards type
are among the earliest for arrow points in central Texas. Edwards is still a good candidate
for the first major arrow point style in south-central Texas as proposed by Sollberger
(1967) years ago.
Another important aspect of the arrow point assemblage at 41UV86 is its distribution,
both horizontally and vertically. With only three exceptions, the arrow points occurred
in the northern half of the burned rock midden and were concentrated toward its northern
edge. Significantly, arrow points were scattered throughout the deposit, from top to
bottom, and across a broad section -leaving no doubt of their association with the burned
rock midden's development. It is this association which is the basis for suggesting a Late
Prehistoric age for the midden, or at least a substantial section of it.
That some portion of the burned rock midden may have been Archaic in age, on the
other hand, could be argued on the finding of several dart points within it. Looking at
such factors as age and provenience, however, the presence of most of the dart points is
believed most likely to-be fortuitous, rather than an indication of substantial Archaic
contribution to the midden's development.
Of greater significance than their mere presence, it would seem, was the dart points'
vertical position within the burned rock midden. Their presence alone is not conclusive
evidence of an Archaic association; their mostly shallow vertical position and wide range

CENTRAL TEXAS / 77

in age, moreover, is strongly indicative of redeposition, recycling, or curation by some of
the later inhabitants of this site.
lf indeed there was no midden accumulation during the Archaic, then some activity
of the Late Prehistoric inhabitants must have introduced the more ancient dart points
into the deposit. This may have come about through the preparation of pits or hearths,
or any activity which disturbed an underlying, shallow Archaic cultural deposit, thus
incorporating Archaic artifacts into the growing burned rock midden deposit.
Of course, much of the primary activity associated with a hearth/oven midden,
whether Archaic or Late Prehistoric, would not have left readily identifiable traces such
as projectile points within the midden in general, and certainly not within the central
section of it. Therefore, the presence or absence of certain projectile points should not
be viewed as a completely reliable indicator of the midden's age.
From 41UV86 a total of 27 dart points has been assigned to gross time periods of the
Archaic; 22 of these specimens were further identified by type. Representing almost
every major era of the Archaic, nine of these points were found within the limits of the
burned rock midden. Of this number, only seven were actually found within the midden
deposit. The other two points came from beneath the midden in a pure Archaic context.
For a "typical" central Texas burned rock midden this would be a comparatively low
number of dart points in view of the amount of excavation (36 units measuring 1 x 1
meters) but in some contexts these would be sufficient for inferring the involvement of
Archaic people in midden development. In this case, however, the dart points do not
seem to be a reliable measure of the midden's age. Quite the contrary, they could indicate
a range of time for the midden which might be largely, perhaps totally, inaccurate.
The two points found beneath the burned rock midden, a Martindale and a Nolan,
clearly predate it. Likewise, at least four of the seven specimens found within the midden
deposit probably are older than this Feature. These earlier points are an Angostura and
two Martindales from the Early Archaic, and another Nolan from the Middle Archaic.
Among this group, only the Nolan type has been confidently tied to the burned rock
midden era, and the provenience of these two specimens suggests that they also are
unrelated to this midden: one was found in a submidden Archaic context, as noted, while
the other came from the upper 10 cm of an excavation unit, occurring there with Sabinal
and Edwards arrow points. It is such mixing of artifacts which suggests that most of the
Archaic points were found where the activities of later people deposited them.
The other three dart points from within the burned rock midden date to the Late
Archaic, but only one can be confidently typed. It is a Frio found at a depth of 20 to 30
cm near the central pit area of the midden. Only one other dart point, a Martindale, was
found in this central area of the midden, and only a single arrow point

-

an Edwards.

Of

the other two Late Archaic points, one was found on the surface adjacent to two units
which each had a Sabinal point in the first level. The other Late Archaic point was found
at a depth of 10to 20cm near the northern edge of the burned rock midden where arrow
points were common, and occurred as deep as 40 cm.

78 / GOODE

Thus, the number of the Archaic points most likely to have been associated with
midden development are too few and their context too suspect to firmly establish Late
Archaic involvement. This does not rule out the possibility of Late Archaic contribution
to the burned rock midden but demonstrates that such cannot be certified by the mere
presence of a few dart points.
To recount, three, or about half, of the dart points from the midden are of Late Archaic
age. This percentage is about the same for the site as a whole: 14 of 27 specimens date
to the Late Archaic. Dividing this sample further, 9 of those 14 specimens belong to the
Ensor, Fairland, and Frio family of the latest Archaic period. Thus, based on numbers
alone, the most likely time of Archaic involvement in the burned rock midden is the last
1000 years of this stage. It is quite possible that the midden originated during this time,
but probably not earlier.
INTERPRETATIONS

With one of the major questions regarding the burned rock midden - it's age - at least
partly answered, there remains unanswered the equally difficult questions about its
function and method of development.
Of the several possible scenarios regarding the accumulation ofburned rock middens,
perhaps the two most pertinent to central Texas middens are both viable for this midden.
One of these is the trash dump hypot~esis (Sorrow 1969;Hester 1970,1971)which seems
particularly applicable to the eastern half of central Texas. Another kind of activity
produces a type of midden which is abundant in the western quarter of central Texas and
beyond -the hearth/oven midden. Both kinds of activity could have contributed significantly to the Heard Schoolhouse midden, and, in fact, the evidence strongly suggests
that both did.
With little bone and as yet no identified vegetal remains, it is unknownwhat the major
subsistence resources were at 41UV86. However, the presence of a central pit-area in
the burned rock midden suggests that vegetal foods were processed therein and that a
substantial percentage of the midden deposit may have been refuse from such activity.
If indeed they were vegetal foods which were processed here, among the most likely
candidates are acorns, sotol, and lechugilla. All of these resources canbe found in Uvalde
County today, with oaks and sotol growing on or near the site. Lechugilla was not
observed in the immediate vicinity, but has been reported near 41UV3, the Montell
Creek Shelter in the northwestern corner of Uvalde County.
The conclusion that the midden at site 41UV86 was in part a "hearth/oven" type of
midden was based primarily on the unusual character of its central section. This conclusion was reinforced by the general dearth of artifacts there. Conversely, it was the
relative abundance of artifacts in other sections, particularly the northern, which led to
the alternate conclusion - that certain residue was not related to cooking activities. By
no means is it unusual to find artifacts in a hearth/oven midden, although they often are
scarce; but in this case their abundance, kind, and localization are rather telling indicators
of some manner of selective discard. However, this may reflect nothing more than the
close proximity of the dump area to the main camp area. The Late Prehistoric inhabitants

CENTRAL TEXAS / 79

simply could have dumped general camp refuse on the side of the midden

-

the north-

nearest to them. The result of the various activities, then, was a burned rock midden of
heterogeneous character, made up of at least two distinctive matrices - in varying combinations of rock, soil, ash, and artifacts.
In addition to the burned rock midden and hearths, the presence of dart points,
numerous arrow points, a variety of other tools anda.suQstantial amount of lithic debitage
attest to a long history of occupation and many activities at 41UV86. Judging by the
relative scarcity of the only diagnostic artifacts - projectile points - this was a minor
campsite throughout the Archaic. Then, perhaps with the increased availability of some
subsistence resource, an extractive innovation, or the arrival of new people, it became a
more attractive habitation site in the early part of the Late Prehistoric. Based on the
numbers, types, and distribution of projectile points within it, the burned rock midden is
believed to have accumulated predominantly, if not wholly, during the Austin Phase. The
dearth of time-sensitive artifacts from the periods of greatest Archaic burned rock
midden accumulation reinforces this belief. However, to re-emphasize, negative
evidence should be used cautiously in this situation. Therefore, until the radiocarbon
data are analyzed, it would be foolhardy to discount an Archaic origin for this midden,
especially in light of the considerable variability exhibited by burned rock middens in this
regIOn.
The Honey Creek Site
INTRODUCTION

Investigation of the second site with an apparent Late Prehistoric burned rock midden
was completed in April of 1988. This site is 41MS32, the Honey Creek Site, located in
southwestern Mason County at the crossing of RM 1871 over Honey Creek. The site
occupies the high north bank of the creek, approximately 2 miles above its confluence
with the Llano River. Since this was the first controlled excavation of a prehistoric site
in Mason County, and there have been few in adjacent counties, there is not much of a
local or regional data base for making comparisons with this type of site. However, the
burned rock midden at this site is remarkably similar to the one described above for
41UV86, and most points of comparison will be to that site.
As at 41UV86, the single burned rock midden was the dominant feature at Honey
Creek but the total site area was much larger, covering an area of several acres. Typical
of SDHPT investigations, however, this project was limited to the new highway right-ofwaywhich ranged from 80 ft. to 100ft. in width. The western section, perhaps one-fourth,
of the burned rock midden had been destroyed by an old county road. The excavations
and new road construction destroyed an equal or greater amount, but a substantial
portion of the central section remained intact when the excavations were concluded.
Diagnostic artifacts of all major time periods from Late Paleo-Indian through Late
Prehistoric were found at 41MS32. An unusual circumstance, the most substantial
components are two which are separated by several thousand years

-

the Early Archaic

and the Late Prehistoric. Notably, the periods of greatest burned rock midden develop-

80 / GOODE

ment in central Texas, Middle Archaic and Late Archaic, were rather poorly represented
at 41MS32 in general, and apparently not at all within the burned rock midden. At least,
no diagnostic artifacts of those periods were found in the midden. This discussion will
briefly consider only the Late Prehistoric component at 41MS32, including the burned
rock midden and the extra-midden features which are thought to be of comparable age.
In general appearance and size, as well as topographic setting, the Honey Creek
midden was quite similar to the Heard Schoolhouse midden. It had a low dome-like
profile, was somewhat more than 13 meters in diameter, and had a maximum depth of 60
cm; for the most part, it averaged 30 to 40 cm in thickness. In structure, it was an
unstratified, homogeneous deposit of densely packed burned rocks and soil.
The midden was situated atop the highest ground at 41MS32, a small point of land
which is the foot of a long slope extending from the Paleozoic limestone formations to
the northwest. This geologic feature is composed of a calcareous conglomerate which
was exposed on the surface in places and in the road cuts. The burned rock midden rested
immediately upon this conglomerate. The higher elevation of this feature may have been
a consideration when selecting the activity locus which resulted in a burned rock midden,
but there may have been other factors as well- perhaps some heat retention quality of
the bedrock.
Considering the need for a readily available stone supply to conduct "oven" midden
activities, it was thought that the bedrock exposure might have been part of the attraction
to this location, as a material source. However, through observance of the burned rocks
during excavation, it was determined that this outcrop was only a very minor source of
rocks for hearth construction and related activities, no doubt due to its rather soft and
crumbly nature. But, from a combination of weathering and the cultural activity conducted here, a fair amount of this material, mostly unburned, became incorporated into.
the lower level of the burned rock midden deposit.
EXCAVATION PROCEDURES

During the test excavation conducted at 41MS32in 1987, a single 1x 1 meter unit was
placed in what was thought to be the deepest portion of the burned rock midden. This
test revealed a rather homogeneous deposit of abundant burned rock fragments and gray,
ashy soil, somewhat more than 50 cm in depth. The only other significant finding was
that artifact density would be low in at least certain areas of the midden; very few artifacts
were found in the test unit.
For the subsequent excavation, a more or less standard approach to burned rock
midden investigation was adopted but was influenced by certain obstacles and limitations.
Excavation of the midden was hampered by both natural and artificial agents: four large
live oak trees stood near midden center and a goat shed covered the northeast quadrant
and more. Roots from the live oaks were particularly troublesome and the goat shed had
a concrete wall which was left in place to avoid disturbing the midden deposit.
Several goals set for the burned rock midden investigation included:

CENTRAL TEXAS / 81

1. The excavation of two intersecting hand-dug trenches to provide profiles and
reveal any stratigraphy or clues to midden structure and development;
2. The location of intramidden features, with emphasis on the central section;
3. The recovery of diagnostic artifacts for relative dating, other artifacts possibly
related to actual midden activities, and, overall, sufficiently large sample to
determine artifact density and patternin-g throughout the midden;

a

4. The documentation of the volume, density, size, and type of the burned
rocks/fragments; and
5. The collection of feature-related matrix samples, C-14 samples, standardized
column samples, and other samples as warranted.
Earlier described as having a low, dome-like shape, much of the burned rock midden
was relatively flat or had only a gentle slope; therefore, it was decided to excavate in
10-cm levels which would be measured from the ground surface. Prior to excavation, the
first step involved removing a 5-to 20-cm lens of organic material which ranged from leaf
mulch to compacted goat manure. Beneath this material lay a 2-to 5-cm mantle of soil
which covered the burned rocks of the midden. Within this thin deposit, there were very
few aboriginal artifacts but more mid-twentieth century items related to construction and
maintenance of the goat shed, or to the care of its occupants. As the soil veneer was
removed, the burned rocks were left in situ to allow inspection of the midden surface for
anomalies which might have resulted from on-midden activities. None were detected.
With such constraints as the concrete wall, the right-of-way boundary, and the live oak
trees with their tremendous root infestation, it was nowhere possible to open a broad
area of contiguous units as a preferred method of exposing the midden's surface. The
initial excavations into the burned rock midden were the two hand-dug trenches which
were created by 1 x 1 meter units in series. These trenches, one from the east and one
from the north, were started outside the apparent perimeter of the burned rock midden.
The intent was to locate the perimeter and then work inward to the center. This approach
created profiles along two axes and bisected the central section of the midden in the
search for internal features. Fortunately, the trenches intersected squarely over the only
feature (F-22, a large hearth/oven) found in the midden. It is described below.
Typical for a dome-shaped burned rock midden, the deposit along the perimeter was
thin, and in this case, obscured by later deposits, but moving inward the burned rock
midden deposit gradually increased in thickness until an average depth of 40 to 50 cm
was present in the central section.
A typical level in the midden had rather densely packed, thermally altered rocks
throughout, with occasional small rock-free pockets. Also, there were some larger,
obviously recent animal disturbances from which the burned rocks had been removed
and replaced by a variety of vegetal material.
The size of burned rocks ranged from small-pebble and small-cobble size fragments.
Some whole rocks were present but a vast majority were fragmentary. The size range of
rocks and weight/volume statistics were fairly consistent from unit to unit, except in three
units of the midden's central section where Feature 22, a large hearth/oven, was located.

82 I GOODE

Here, rock density differed quite noticeably from that of the adjacent units. From top to
bottom in these units the density of burned rocks was significantly lower and average rock
size was somewhat smaller as well. Of course, this applies only to the burned rock midden
deposit outside and around Feature 22, and is interpreted as the result of hearth/oven
preparation and removal activities.
ARTIFACT ASSEMBLAGE

The artifact return from most of the burned rock midden was extremely small,
particularly in the central section which averaged five-or fewer specimens per 10 cm level.
Most of these artifacts are small, unmodified flakes; however, a few of the larger flakes
appear to be tools, some with trimmed edges.
Nearing the perimeter of the midden, artifact density increased sharply, particularly
in the northern section. It was here, still within the burned rock midden, that Austin
Phase arrow points were found, their occurrence possibly dating the midden, or at least
one component associated with its development. Unfortunately, the arrow points were
few in number but they seemed to have been in good context. They occurred toward the

bottom of the deposit which had decreased to an average thickness of 30 cm. The
diagnostic artifacts in this sample are two Edwards points, two apparent preforms for
Austin Phase types, and an arrow point fragment. Also in this area of the northern trench,
but just north of the burned rock midden, were found one each of the Scallorn, Sabinal,
and Perdiz types.
The only diagnostic artifact from the central hearth/oven area is a small side-notched
dart point found in the third level, near Feature 22. This point resembles Frio and Ensor
and is the kind of point common in the LatelTransitional Archaic. Conceivably, this form
could have persisted up to the time of the earliest arrow points. If so, it might have been
coeval with or only slightly older than the Edwards points which are thought to have been
directly associated with the burned rock midden; but there were no clues to clarify its
relationship to this midden. Coincidentally, a similar point was found near the center of
the Heard Schoolhouse midden in Uvalde County.
Only one other dart point was found within the burned rock midden. This is a
Martindale point, an Early Archaic type which predates the inception of most known
burned rock middens. It was found at the base of the midden deposit, lying on bedrock,
less than 2 meters east of Feature 22. Its presence within the midden, much as the Early
Archaic points found in the Heard Schoolhouse midden, is thought to be unrelated to
midden accumulation.
Moving beyond the burned rock midpen, Late Prehistoric artifacts in substantial
quantity were also found to the northeast and east, then became sparse roughly 8 to 10
meters away. By combining the Scal10rn and Edwards types, the Austin Phase is best
represented, but a good many Perdiz points were present as well. Also, a few small
scrapers and blade fragments -possibly Toyah Phase tools -were recovered, but other
readily identifiable ToyahPhase materials were absent. The four potsherds from 41MS32
came from the terrace near the creek, some 40 meters from the burned rock midden. Of

CENTRAL TEXAS / 83

the suite of tools often found in Toyah components, then, several forms were found near
the midden, but there were no beveled knives or ceramics.
FEATURES

More than 20 well-preserved hearths, representing several time periods, were uncovered at 41MS32. Although a sizeable portion of the burned rock midden was
excavated, and special attention was given to locating features, only one of the hearths
was found within it.
This is Feature 22, a large, circular hearth which was located in the central section of
the midden. Measuring 1.75 meters in diameter, Feature 22 was composed of relatively
large burned limestone and sandstone rocks which were densely packed, two or three
deep in places. Medium cobble-size rocks were common, with a few up to large cobblesize. Manyofthese rocks were unbroken and a good manyothers were broken in situ.
Feature 22 had a shallow basin shape, but its base was detectable only by the absence of
rocks; that is, there was no fire-discolored or hardened soil, or any discernible soil change
until 3 to 5 cm below the rocks. At this point the matrix became less ashy, lighter in color,
and mixed with the submidden soil. Feature 22, then, was lying completely within the
loose and ashy soil which characterized the central midden deposit. The thin, mostly
rock-free - except for small fragments -lens of ashy soil beneath the hearth/oven is
suggestive of previous oven use and removal. This is also true of the deposit around and
above Feature 22, as noted previously.
Other than abundant burned rocks, contents of the hearth were limited to dark gray,
ashy soil and a very small amount of charcoal. The matrix, both around and within the
hearth/oven, was quite homogeneous and in the lower levels had the texture of very dry
flour; it did not have the greasy texture sometimes exhibited by burned rock midden soil.
There was no macroscopic evidence of the material which was processed here, but
hopefully such is preserved in the matrix samples.
In view of its well-preserved condition, it appears that Feature 22 experienced only
minor root damage following its final use. And, by the same reasoning, it is resonable to
suggest that Feature 22 was still a useful hearth. This hearth/oven clearly indicates that
the burned rock midden deposit at 41MS32 was not a "dump midden," but was primarily
the residue of intramidden processing of foods, probably vegetal foods. This conclusion
would seem to be corroborated by the dearth of artifacts in the central section, along with
the absence of bone, shell, and other materials.
In conjunction with the Late Prehistoric artifacts, there were found outside the burned
rock midden a number of hearths, some quite large, which further substantiates the
importance of the Late Prehistoric occupation here. Some of these hearths occurred in
an arc-like arrangement just beyond the midden perimeter, but it could not be determined if there was any design in their location. Surely, though there must be some
significance in their proximity to the burned rock midden. Probable age indicators for
some of the hearths are the Edwards points found in or near three of them, and the Perdiz
points found in or near two others.

84 / GOODE

The hearths ranged up to 1.75 meters in diameter, consisting of relatively large
limestone and sandstone rocks up to boulder size. In size and composition two of the
hearths were similar to the hearth/oven in the midden, Feature 22. Most of the hearths
had shallow basins and contained widely varying amounts of charcoal, quite large samples
in some cases. This recovery contrasts sharply with the hearth/oven in the midden which
had almost none. No recognizable plant or animal remains were observed within the
hearths, so any determination of their use will depend on soil sample analyses.
Several bone fragments, some of cowlbison or goat/deer size, were found near one
hearth and in the general vicinity of others, but their context was not such that they could
be confidently attributed to the Late Prehistoric occupations. Since this area lies within
the goat pen, it is quite possible that some of the bones derive from the recent inhabitants.
Also in this area mussel shell was relatively abundant in the upper levels, but did not
occur in the hearths; only a few fragments were noted within the burned rock midden.
INTERPRETATIONS

Speaking before the analysis has even begun, it is too early to offer any conclusions
about 41MS32, but there are some observations about the Late Prehistoric occupations
which should be emphasized.

I .
I

I

First, from the amount of materials uncovered it is clear that substantial Late Prehistoric occupations existed at 41MS32, represented by both Austin and Toyah phases.
Among the more significant findings is the fact that a great majority of the time diagnostic
artifacts-mostly arrow points-were found outside the burned rock midden. Two possible explanations for this phenomenon quickly come to mind: either the burned rock
midden is not of Late Prehistoric age, or if it is, the activities which produced it did not
involve arrow points or the incorporation of general campsite detritus containing arrow
points; Le., the "dump midden" strategy.
Of course, fractured and useless rocks from outlying hearths could have been discarded on the midden and would not be distinguishable to the naked eye from rocks used
in the midden. This manner of discard could very well have occurred; but, if it did, other
detritus such' as flake debitage or arrow points were not often added to. the hearth
clean-up. This kind of selective camp clean-up - hearth only - would result in a modified
version of the dump midden, leaving a feature which is primarily a hearth/oven midden
and secondarily a dump midden.
The large hearths found outside the burned rock midden suggest food preparation
activities disassociated with the midden. At least, the hearths were spatial.1ydiscrete; but,
this does not rule out the possibility that they could have been in use at the same time as
the burned rock midden. . Presumably, the spatial separation of hearths and midden
reflects a functional dichotomy - one class of foods prepared in the hearths and another

in the midden.

.

Based on current knowledge of burned rock midden activities, it is suggested that sotol
and acorns are among the foods most likely to have been processed here. Both occur
locally today and sotol possibly was more abundant at certain times in the past, perhaps
as recently as the late nineteenth century. Writing about the burned rock middens of

CENTRAL TEXAS / 85

southwest Texas, Wilson (1930) recounted the story of a nineteenth-century
captive
among the Lipan Apache in west central Texas. This account mentions the abundance of
sotol and describes its preparation by the Lipan. Coincidentally, this article was publish-

ed in a local paper, the Mason Herald of 1911.

'

Judging mainly by the similarity of the central hearth/oven to some excavated in west
central Texas, and less by the absence of macroscopic acorn fragments, I am inclined to
think that sotol was the major food prepared in the Honey Creek midden. However, not
far to the northwest, Creel (1986) has developed a convincing argument for an association
between burned rock middens and acorns over a large region. To the east, acorns have
been found by Peter (1982) in burned rock midden sites of the San Gabriel Reservoir,
and to the south by Hester (personal communication) in Bandera County. With solid
evidence from such a broad area, the widespread use of acorns in association with burned
rock middens is no longer in question. Still in question, however, is the importance of
acorns as a dietary supplement, as well as the details of their processing in a burned rock
midden context.
At this stage there are many questions about the complex activities at 41MS32 which
cannot be answered, but perhaps the most perplexing one concerns the burned rock
midden's age. Such evidence, some of it negative and none of it incontrovertible, as bears
on this problem seems adequate to suggest a Late Prehistoric affiliation for some portion
of the midden, perhaps the entire feature. The arrow points found toward the bottom of,
the deposit constitute the singl,e most convincing piece of evidence, but the general
dearth of them says more about the midden's function than its age.
Together forming the basis for an argument, but individually carrying less weight as
age indicators, are such traits of the midden as size and composition, virtual absence of
dart points, and similarity of hearth/oven to extramidden hearths of Late Prehistoric age
at this site.
Comparison of Sites 41UV86 and 41MS32

A comparison of the Heard Schoolhouse and Honey Creek middens reveals several
points of similarity:
1. Each site had a single midden located on the highest ground near a large creek;
2. Midden size and structure were very similar;
3. Both middens had a central "pit-area," but only Honey Creek had an intact
hearth/oven;
4. Both middens had Austin Phase diagnostics in and outside the deposit, but
there were very few in the Honey Creek midden;
5. At midden center, the artifact count was low, with an increase to the north side,
and further increase outside the midden;
6. Each site had features external to the midden, but possibly coeval with it;

86 I GOODE

7. Both sites had substantial Archaic remains but very few Archaic diagnostics
were found within the middens. And, most of those apparently were intermixed by Late Prehistoric activities and thus are not considered to be reliable
age indicators; and
8. Oak trees occur in the immediate vicinity of both middens, with sotol present
in the general vicinity.
With much in common, seemingly, it would not be surprising to learn that these sites
do indeed share a common temporal and functional history. However, some apparent
similarities may prove to be merely coincidental, or to be meaningless, or misleading.
No matter how similar or dissimilar they are judged to be, each site should represent a
significant contribution to the data base of its respective region.
Thinking again of the intriguing sites excavated by Huskey, it is tempting to predict
that investigations of similar sites would significantly enhance our understanding of
critical areas such as subsistence strategies during the Austin Phase. Such facts as a
difference in the location of burned rock middens- between the Archaic and the Late
Prehistoric-should be especially meaningful to any evaluation of cultural continuity or
change toward the end of the first millennium A.D. and the beginning of the second.
Other Possible Late Prehistoric

Burned Rock Middens in Central Texas

Of the other central Texas burned rock midden sites currently known or thought to
have Late Prehistoric affiliation, all but one occur in a contiguous band of counties
ranging from Mason to Uvalde. These counties lie through the heart and toward the
southwestern side of central Texas.
Located near the Mason and Gillespie County line southeast of 41MS32 is another
midden known from nonprofessional excavation to contain only Austin Phase arrow
points. It is reported to be roughly 10 meters in diameter and 50 cm deep. No information regarding internal features is available.
To the south in Kerr County, two burned rock midden sites are thought to have
possible Late Prehistoric associations. One is the Paris Site excavated by the Texas
Archeological Society Field School in 1971 (Skinner 1979). The midden produced both
dart points and Edwards points, and it had a stone-lined hearth in the central section.
Skinner (1979) believed that the midden was not a trash dump and that it could have been
constructed by people who made Edwards points. The other Kerr County site was
described to me by J. B. Sollberger. This is a small, shallow midden which was partly
exposed by a road. Several Edwards points were found across the exposure.
Farther south along ;he Nueces River near Camp Wood, apparently on both the Real
and Edwards County sides, are located some of the sites that Huskey (1935a) excavated.
Continuing southward into Uvalde County, the best evidence of Late Prehistoric burned
rock middens to date comes from two sites along the Leona River north of Uvalde, Texas.
In his 1987 report on these sites, Lukowski describes two small burned rock middens at
41UV47; each produced one date from the earlier part of the Late Prehistoric era, as well

CENTRAL TEXAS I 87

as Late Prehistoric diagnostic artifacts. A much larger midden
points, and a Zavala point. Then, at 41UV 45 Late Prehistoric
top of a burned rock midden of Archaic origin. Other sites
diversity or mixture in a single midden are known in the Indian
of the city of Uvalde.
Distribution

at 41UV 48 also had arrow
materials occurred in the
which exhibit this kind of
Creek drainage northwest

of 80tol and Related Burned Rock Middens

The issue of Late Prehistoric burned rock middens in central Texas is one which has
come into focus comparatively recently. During the 1980s, the excavation of a few sites
helped bring back to light the first of such middens to be investigated, reported more
than 50 years ago (Huskey 1935a). The "Type B" middens described by Huskey were
unquestionably products of the earlier half of the Late Prehistoric Period, the Austin
Phase. Aild they obviously occur within the southern hill country of central Texas.
Therefore, if one accepts Huskey's rather lucid descriptions, there can be little argument
against the existence of Late Prehistoric middens in central Texas.
If more convincing evidence is required, however, there are the burned rock middens
at sites 41UV47 and 41UV48 (Lukowski 1987) which produced arrow points and dates
within the Late Prehistoric era. These sites lie beyond the Balcones Escarpment but are
well within the central Texas cultural sphere as defined by Prewitt (1982). What remains
now is the more difficult task of determining the areal and temporal parameters of the
Late Prehistoric midden phenomenon, and, hopefully, something about its presumed
relationship to subsistence strategies early in the Late Prehistoric.
As noted previously, it appears that a variety of subsistence-related activities contributed to the Heard Schoolhouse midden, while at Honey Creek it is more likely that
a single activity was the chief contributor. Of the resources known to have been
processed in burned rock middens, sotol has been suggested as one of the most likely
candidates for the middens described in this paper. However, these sites are a good
distance east of known sotol-related middens and the country where sotol is most
plentiful today. Therefore, a brief survey of current sotol distribution seems in order;
and, although the central issue of possible sotol use at Heard Schoolhouse and Honey
Creek has not been resolved, the survey might be useful for future investigations.
Some of the easternmost reported occurrences of sotol today are along a south to
north line from New Braunfels to Wimberley and on to Pedernales Fallsin Blanco County.
Usually the stands are quite small and isolated; occasionally, ~owever, more abundant,
but still areally restricted, stands can be found. One such locale in Bell County has been
observed by David Riskind of Texas Parks and Wildlife (personal communication).
Finding sotol this far eastward might lead one to think that at some time sotol was
more abundant in the eastern half of central Texas. For instance, Elton Prewitt (personal
communication) suggests that during the altithermal (6000 to 4000B.P.)sotol might have
spread eastward and become established in sufficient quantity to havebeen an important
resource at some of the large Archaic burned rock midden sites. On the other hand,
Harry Shafer (personal communication) thinks that sotol was never abundant in this

88 / GOODE

region, but with the ongoing drying trend has become more established here in very
recent times.
As far eastward as Gillespie, Kendall, Blanco, and Hays counties - the eastern hill
country-sotol
may never have been sufficiently abundant to be a staple resource, but,
doubtless, its usefulness would have been known. Riskind (personal communication)
feels. that this is the case for at least the last two or three thousand years. One bit of
supporting evidence on sotol distribution involves its use in recent times. In dry winters,
sotol was used by ranchers to sustain livestock in counties such as Kimble and Edwards
(Wilson 1930), but in the eastern hill country there was not enough of it to be a factor.
In addressing the problem of late burned rock middens in central Texas the most
logical starting point is the region investigated by Huskey (1935a) - the upper Nueces
River country of Uvalde, Real, and Edwards counties. Here, and along some adjacent
drainages, can be found most of the Late Prehistoric middens reported thus far. The
descriptions provided by Huskey (1935a) are adequate for roughly dating his "Type B"
middens, but are not sufficiently detailed to understand their use and/or development.
They were relatively small, dome-shaped mounds which produced large numbers of
artifacts, but if any internal features were present they were not mentioned.
The
presence of numerous arrow points in these middens suggests that they were in part, at
least, the refuse piles of people who hunted frequently.
Supportive of the refuse theory of burned rock midden accumulation, but also suggestive of plant food processing, is the midden at Site 41UV86. There are no other
accounts of hearth/oven middens in this vicinity, but ring-shaped middens are reported
to exist near Camp Wood, about 12 miles northwest of 41UV86 (this is the area where
Huskey found "Type B" middens). It is interesting that the people who dug some of these
ring-shaped middens called them "sotol mounds," and found little in the way of artifacts
in them. If this information is accurate, such middens might be related to the recorded
ring-shaped middens found northwestward in Edwards and Sutton counties - a connection which would suggest an involvement in sotol processing.
But, it is much more difficult to confirm that environmental conditions were ever
favorable for substantial sotol growth in the Camp Wood locale, or at other points along
the eastern margin of the primary sotol habitat. A recent attempt to learn about current
sotol habitat has been moderately successful. This information has been compared to
average annual rainfall statistics, usually recorded at county seats (Texas Almanac 1965),
to get some idea of where excessive moisture begins to limit sotol growth.
Located on the Nueces River which divides Edwards and Real counties, Camp Wood
lies west of a line, running northward from Uvalde to Leakey, Junction, and Menard,
along which the average annual rainfall is about 23 inches. The Heard Schoolhouse also
lies just west of this line, or isohyet. About 55 miles to either side of this line, measured
from Junction, there is approximately a 6-inch difference in the average annual rainfall:
6 inches less to the west at Sonora, and 6 inches more to the east at Fredericksburg
(moving east from Sonora, this averages out to a I-inch increase for every 10 miles).
The fact that the distribution/abundance
of sotol, a desert succulent, is closely linked
to rainfall is borne out by the pattern it exhibits today within this 11O-mile-wide study

CENTRAL TEXAS / 89

area. At the west extreme it is abundant; at the eastern it is comparatively rare. Predictably, at these arbitrarily selected boundaries the presence or absence of ring, or
sotol-related, middens is a mirror image of the presence or absence of the resource. Thus
having a clear idea of where sotol-related middens are and are not, the next step would
be to record their distribution-currently
unknown-within
this area. Unfortunately, the
meager regional data base ensures that such a task would be a difficult one.
Therefore, at this time perhaps the only reasonable alternative to considerable
fieldwork is to trace the current distribution of sotol and hope to extrapolate with some
accuracy its prehistoric distribution. From this study, one could hypothesize that sotolrelated middens (regardless of form) might be found at any favorable location within the
range where sotol is, or was, abundant.
Of course, all of this theory is predicated on the assumption that sotol, being an
important foodstuff, was exploited by the indigenous population not only in the TransPecos, but also wherever it occurred in sufficient abundance. In terms of time, sotol use
is best documented archeologically in the Late Prehistoric - the time frame central to
this discussion. As noted, there are many historic accounts of sotol use as well.
In using this sort of approach to explore the possibility of sotol use at sites 41UV86
and 41MS32, one must reckon with a landscape changed in recent times, perhaps giving
a misleading picture of distribution/abundance within the prehistoric biotic community.
In some locales we would see less sotol than existed in earlier times, due to heavy
exploitation by ranchers. In others, there could be more today, if the range of sotol is
expanding. One rancher north of Leakey, in Real County, reports a significant increase
of sotol on a particular "mountain" in recent years (Laverna Taylor, personal communication). From recent inquiry and observation, then, it appears that sotol is relatively
common up to 10 to 20 miles east of Junction, but is rarely seen around Harper, some 15
miles farther east in extreme western Gillespie County. If these observations are
reasonably accurate, it may be that for prolific growth the maximum annual rainfall that
sotol will tolerate is around 23 to 25 inches.
It should be emphasized that both the Heard Schoolhouse and Honey Creek middens
occur relatively near this tentatively projected eastern margin of the "sotol country," but
the significance of this fact has yet to be proven. The Heard Schoolhouse Site lies a short
distance west of this 23 to 25 inch cut-off line or zone, but the Honey Creek Site would
be very near if not beyond the eastern margin along which sotol purportedly ceased to be
plentiful. At present, I am unaware of any confirmed sotol-related middens to the east
of these sites, but there is also a wide gap to the nearest recorded sotol middens west of
here. However, if these middens, this far east, prove to be sotol related, there can be
little doubt that others exist between them and the ring midden country to the west. It
is there, in the Trans-Pecos, that a review of what is known about the form and distribution
of sotol-related middens logically could begin-for this discussion, in the canyons and
mesas of western Crockett County.
The crescent or ring midden, commonly known as a sotol pit, is one of the most
obvious reminders of the displaced native population in the Trans-Pecos region of

southwestern Texas. From their abundance, and from historical accounts such as that of

90 / GOODE

a nineteenth century captive of the Lipan (Wilson 1930), it is clear that sotol was a prolific
resource as well as a dietary staple of the indigenous population. Eastward beyond the
Trans-Pecos into Sutton County, and on into the central Texas cultural sphere which
begins around Sonora (Prewitt 1981), ring middens continue to be common. However,
across most of Sutton County these "sotol pits" usually exhibit a "doughnut" or more
symmetrical shape than the classic Trans-Pecos crescent whose northwestern section is
higher than the remainder (of known crescent middens, one of the easternmost is located
about 10 miles east of Ozona in Crockett County, near its juncture with Schleicher and
Sutton counties, [Gary L. Moore, personal communication]).
A good distance east of the Pecos River this changeor transition to a "doughnut" or
"central depression" form appears to be the first notable difference in the morphology/distribution of sotol-related middens (this assessment is particularly applicable to
what could be viewed as a broad transect along Interstate 10). The change in midden
morphology may coincide very roughly with the western margin of the central Texas
cultural sphere, but there has not been sufficient fieldwork here to even suggest a cultural
connection to the change. Nor has there been sufficient investigation to trace the
distribution of the various midden forms with much accuracy.
There is, however, just enough evidence to comment on an apparent difference in
midden morphology between Sutton and Kimble counties. Central depression middens
are known to occur into the easternmost reaches of Sutton County; then, inexplicably,
somewhere around the Kimble Coul}ty line this form of midden seems to die out. There
is not known to be a drop-off in burned rock midden frequency to the east, just a change
to predominantly dome-shaped middens in Kimble County.
Adding to the puzzle, north and northeastward of Sutton County, central depression
middens continue to be common into Schleicher and Menard counties. The most obvious
difference

here is that Kimble

County is drained

by the Llano River

-

the north

fork

heads in Sutton County-while southeastern Schleicher County and Menard County are
in the San Saba River drainage, but any significance to this phenomenon is not obvious.
According to researchers such as D. G. Creel (personal communication), middens
with central depressions extend through Menard County and on to the northeast, significantly farther eastward than they are known to be in Kimble County. This is not to
say that there are no central depression middens in Kimble County; in fact, one has been
reported in the vicinity of Buckhollow, about 15 miles west of Junction, and others should
be expected in the northwestern corner of Kimble County. Whether the apparent
absence of central depression middens across the rest of Kimble County is a reflection
of cultural or environmental influences, some combination of both, or an incomplete
picture of the cultural resources has not been determined.
In trying to explain the distribution -and morphology of apparent Late Prehistoric
burned rock middens in central Texas, I have concentrated on the possibility of certain
ones being associated with sotol. This relationship was proposed with the knowledge that
sites 41UV86 and 41MS32 occur in locales apparently better suited to live-oak acorn
exploitation, if the heavy growth of live oak at both sites today is meaningful.

CENTRAL TEXAS / 91

Both sites are thought to lie near the extreme eastern margin - a zone of 10 to 20 miles
width - of the area in which sotol was sufficiently abundant to supplement the aboriginal
diet. Along this marginal zone, sotol-related middens could be expected to occur singly
and to be widely separated.
Eastward beyond this zone there should be 'a drastic
reduction in sotol-related middens. Even if the two primary sites discussed here, following analysis, cannot be linked to sotol processing, this thesis still should be considered
viable for this west-central part of the hill country.
It is further predicted that sotol would have been used here throughout the Late
Prehistoric period, as it was farther west, but that the life span of given sotol-related
middens will vary considerably. To some extent, this suggestion is upheld by the Heard
Schoolhouse and Honey Creek middens, but cannot be verified until the analyses are
completed and a connection to sotol is firmly established. Despite the many unresolved
issues one key point that is clear, especially from the Uvalde County excavations as well
as Huskey's work, is that considerable variability exists in Late Prehistoric burned rock
middens. There are middens represented by both Austin and Toyah components, middens with only an Austin component, and middens which are varying combinations of
dump and hearth/oven

activities

-

not to mention

Late Prehistoric

components

piled

onto Archaic middens. It is believed that further work in the "study area" will reveal
more of all of the above: middens related to sotol and/or acorns, and middens which are
dumps related to neither.
If any significance exists in.the distribution of the few apparent Late Prehistoric
burned rock midden sites reported on here, a considerable amount of fieldwork will be
required to confirm it. The several adjacent counties in which the sites have been
reported occur along a rough southwest to northeast axis, extending from the southern
fringe of central Texas up into its heartland. Although suggestive of some kind of spacial
patterning, this preliminary distribution scheme admittedly is derived from very scant
data. However, if it could be demonstrated that Late Prehistoric burned rock middens
are significantly more numerous through this territory than to the east, thus revealing a
genuine distributional pattern, then we might be well on the way to identifying the
cultural or environmental impetus which created it. Were such a pattern to be found,
among the most plausible explanations for it would be one involving a natural resource
such as sotol.
References Cited

Creel, D. G.
1986 A Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in West Central Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Arizona, Tucson.
Hester, T. R.
1970
Burned Rock Middens on the Southwestern Edge of the Edwards Plateau,

Texas. Plains Anthropologist 15(50):237-250.

92 / GOODE

Hester, T R., continued
1971
Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 42:51-148.

Huskey, V.
.1935a An Archeological Survey of the Nueces Canyon of Texas. Bulletin of the
TexasArcheological and PaleontologicalSociety 7:104-114.
1935b

Letter to A.T Jackson at The University ~ofTexas at Austin. On file, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Lukowski, P.D.
1987 Archaeological Investigations Along the Leona River Watershed, Uvalde
County, Texas. Survey Report 132. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Peter, D. E.
1982 Alternative Perspectives on Burned Rock Middens. In Archaeological
Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, Vol. 2,
edited by T R. Hays, pp. 20-1 through 20-15. Institute of Applied Sciences,
North Texas State University, Denton.
Prewitt, E. R.
1981 Culture Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the TexasArcheological
Society 52:65-89.
Skinner, A.S.
1979 The Paris Site (X41KR1), Kerr County, Texas. La Tierra6(4):3-15.
Sollberger, J.B.
1967

.

A New Type of Arrow Point with Speculations as to It's Origin. The Record
23(3).

Sorrow, W.M.
1969
Archeological Investigations at the John Ischy Site, A Burnt Rock Midden in
Williamson County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project 18. The University of Texas, Austin.

Suhm, D.A. and E.B. Jelks
1962

.

.

Handbook of Texas Archeology: 1Ype Descriptions. Texas Archeological
Society, Special Publication 1 and Texas Memorial Musuem, Bulletin 4.

Texas Almanac
1965
A.H. Belo Corp., Dallas.

CENTRAL TEXAS / 93

Wilson, E. W.
1930
Burned Rock Mounds of Southwest Texas. Bulletin
Archeological and Paleontological Society 2:5~-63.

of the Texas

