-rR.. :5;t./~b

t

I
~

"­

f

J
}
:0:

r

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGIC,AL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

~

~
t

~

f;,
~

J

J

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL RECONNAISSANCE DOJI,IIJJSTREAM FROM
THE AMISTAD INTERNATIONAL DAM: RIVER MILES Q.12.6

t
51:"

i

~'-

I
~

L
~

i­

<~

aMd S Dibble

4;1.'

~'l' U::~"

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY

The University of Texas at Austin
Technical Bulletin No. 12
1976

L

~"'r/!'ff:.t

A'-:-.£

",,~~r~ 4~

.if6."k~~

L\\VV {PCo I

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL RECONNAISSANCE DOWNSTREAM
FROM THE AMISTAD INTERNATIONAL DAM:
RIVER MILES 0-12.(i

by
David S. Dibble

A Report Submitted to the Fort Worth District,
Corps of Engineers by the Texas Archeological Survey,
The University of Texas at Austin, in Fulfillment
of the Terms of P.O. DACW63-77-M-0175

November, 1976

I
'~"

INTRODUCTION
The reconnaissance herein reported was directed at assessing the possible effects of con­
struction and operation of the Amistad Hydroelectric Plant on cultural resources
(archeological and historical) situated within a study area limited to the United States side
of the lower floodplain of the Rio Grande from Amistad Dam to the Del Rio weir, a dis­
tance of 12.6 river miles. Special attention was directed at the "steep exposed banks" along
the river channel which are assumed to be subject to sloughing as a result of an estimated
4 ft. rise in water level due to periodic 4,000 CFS releases associated with hydroelectric
power generation at the dam site.
Fieldwork connected with this study was carried out by the author and Duford W.
Skelton of the Texas Archeological Survey on November 6 and 7, 1976. The assistance of
Mr. Richard M. Price, geologist with the International Boundary and Water Commission,
and Mr. Harold Timmons, chief ranger of the Amistad Recreation Area, National Park
Service, in gaining access to federal properties is gratefully acknowledged.

~
i!,
~

~

~.

;'

~

"
~

I

I
t.

l"t
}

The reconnaissance of the area was on foot and by vehicle. Mapping controls included
USGS 7.5' Del Rio SW and Amistad Dam, Texas. These maps post-dated modifications
made during construction of the Amistad International Dam and therefore provided ex­
cellent guides to the areas concerned.
Examination of the floodplain, although concentrated on the immediate riverbank lone,
included periodic transects of areas at elevations in excess of 30 f1. above the current river
level. This lateral widening of the study area made it possible to observe the general
character of the floodplain. In one instance, it led to the discovery of two previously un­
known archeological sites associated with high valley sediments (Fig. l).
The presence of heavy vegetation in many areas of the lower floodplain made observations
of the ground surfaces difficult and. in places, unfeasible. Dense growths of river cane
(Arundo donax). a dominant species, often totally obscured these surfaces. In spite of the
selectivity occasioned by differentially visible surfaces, it was possible to view an estimated
25 percent of the riverbank zone.
Much of the United States portion of the floodplain within the study area has been ar­
tificially modified prior to, during and subsequent to the construction of the Amistad In­
ternational Dam. Substantial land modification in higher portions of the valley were
associated with construction of the Texas and New Orleans Railroad in the 1800's. A seg­
ment of this original right-of-way in the upstream portion of the study area is currently
used as an access road. Extensive quarrying for road bed material and fill for the Amistad
Dam construction has significantly modified the intermediate and higher portions of the
Rio Grande floodplain. Commercial quarrying of gravels deposited in abandoned river
channels is currently active in the downstream segments of the floodplain within the
general study area. Also, the construction of private buildings and moderate modification
for county and private roads has affected portions of the downstream areas. The effects of
scouring and the development of chutes from high flood (pre-impoundment) phases of the
Rio Grande are clearly visible well away from the present channel over much of the area
examined. In sum, moderate-to-severe changes have already occurred in the general study
area with the potential of detrimentally affecting prehistoric and historic resources which
may have been extant. Most disastrous to the structural integrity or visibility of
archeological remains would be natural flooding of the valley. Several severe floods, each
far exceeding the channel holding capacity of the Rio Grande, have been recorded here in
historic times.

L

A-I

~

~;

)"

~:

~
~
~
If

~

I

RESULTS OF THE RECONNAISSANCE
Observations of the lower floodplain in the study area (including the river-facing cutbanks)
failed to discover traces of prehistoric utilization or the existence of features of
recognizable or potential historical importance. This would be the zone within which
adverse project-related impact (i.e .• bank sloughing) would occur. Although one can never
dismiss the factors of differential visibility or sampling error in evaluating the results of
archeological surveyor reconnaissance, our examination did not demonstrate any threat to
cultural resources in this portion of the Rio Grande valley. This result does not, of course,
allow an inference that lower floodplain locations were not used in prehistoric or early
historic times. Rather, it should be assumed that natural processes such as stream plana­
tion or the degrading or aggrading actions of the Rio Grande have effectively removed or
buried traces of past activities in these lones.
Substantial traces of archeological remains were discovered in higher portions of the
valley. Two exposures of cultural debris were recorded in association with a pocket of
remnant sandy alluvium near the mouth of a tributary canyon (Figs. 1-3). The prehistoric
materials visible are characteristics of Archaic Period occupations known from extensive
archeological investigations completed immediately upstream from the study area previou~
to construction of the Amistad Dam (Graham and Davis 1958; Dibble and Prewitt 1967).
Other locations of prehistoric open sites were also observed during this reconnaissance; all
were potentially valuable archeological resources. Fortunately, these sites are at sufficient
height above the river level to be well away from bank sloughing due to project related
discharges through the Amistad Dam.
The few archeological localities observed in the study area fall neatly into the pattern of
riverine associated sites known from the adjoining Amistad Reservoir basin. In the later
case, open sites were relatively common on and within terrace remnants or other sedimen~
tacy features at elevations in excess of 20 ft. plus above the normal water levels of the Rio
Grande, Devils and Pecos Rivers (Dibble 1967; Dibble and Prewitt 1967; Graham and
Davis 1958; Johnson 1964; Sorrow 1968a, 1968b; Prewitt 1966, 1970). Numerous transects
of the lower floodplains of these streams failed to demonstrate the existence of in situ
archeological materials in these zones. The coincidence of site distributional patterns in
these adjoining areas may reflect either like patterns of site choice or simply destruction of
that part of the archeological record once present in stream-side locations.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
A reconnaissance of a 12.6 river mile segment of the lower Rio Grande floodplain (United
States side) below the Amistad International Dam did not demonstrate the existence of
recognizable prehistoric cultural features or artifacts in areas which may be affected by
river level rises associated with use of the proposed Amistad Hydroelectric Plant. Ad­
ditionally, no features of recognizable historic significance were encountered. Although
archeological sites of apparent importance were identified, these localities were situated
well beyond bank sloughing predictable as a result of project operation. It is strongly
recommended that if enlargement of existing borrow source areas is envisioned in the
proposed construction, it should be preceded by careful inspection by professional
archeologists. The archeologically sensitive zones, as suggested by the results of this recon­
naissance, appear to be restricted to intermediate and higher portions of the valley fills.
Areas within the hydroelectric plant construction zone were previously surveyed in connec­
tion with the Amistad Dam archeological salvage program.
~':i,.
,.,(j". i'
I'::';~ , lr' "ret>": <
A~2

L

~

~

.;;

<
\

'"
1
;}

~

.,
~,

The apparent lack of prehistoric cultural features in the study area probably is due to dis­
ruptive geologic processes, rather than lack 'of activities in floodplain areas which would
leave recognizable cultural residues.
The main conclusion derived from this reconnaissance is that significant cultural resources­
-archeological or historical--could not be demonstrated within the narrow riverbank zone
to be affected by project-generated bank sloughing in the study area. The more generai
question of downstream effects of water impoundments on cultural resources is a highly
complex issue and one which should be considered in future water deVelopments.

:~

f

}
:.
i:

{
(

:::.

:~,

REFERENCES CITED

~

Dibble, David S.
1967
Excavations at Arenosa Shelter, 1965-66. Report submitted to the National
Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project.

i

Dibble, David S. and Elton R. Prewitt
1967
Survey and Test Excavations at Amistad Reservoir,
Archeological Salvage Project Survey Reports, No.3.

;$

}.

l
~
}.'".

.~:

:-~

1964-65. Texas
.{,

3'

:;"

Graham, J. A. and W. A. Davis
Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Diablo Reservoir, Val Verde
1958
County, Texas. Report prepared by the Archeological Salvage Field Office,
Austin, Texas. National Park Service.
Johnson LeRoy, Jr.
1964
The Devils Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at Amistad Reservoir, Val
Verde County, Texas. Archaeology Series, No.. 6, Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas.

~~"""
'~f.

,

,;

l

1
?
I

if:'j:
,~

Prewitt, Elton R.
1966
A Preliminary Report on the Devils Rockshelter Site, Val Verde County,
Texas. Texas Journal of Science, VoL XVIII, No.2.
1970

The Piedra del Diablo Site, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas Historical Sur­
vey Committee, Archeological Report, No. 18.

Sorrow, William M.
1968a
The Devils Mouth Site: The Third Season-1967. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 14.
1968b

f

L

Test Excavations at the NopaJ Terrace Site: Val Verde County, Texas.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 15.

A-3

1·

~
,­.­

,~

;'

FIGURE 1.
A view of the Rio Grande Canyon near river mile 1.6. Archeologically significant material
was observed during this reconnaissance in remnant terrace fills in left and right
middleground (denoted by arrows). This material was visible because of cuts made into
this fill by road~nstruction and sand quarrying. These sites are currently situated about
25-30 feet abov the present river level.
~vl.«t \

tfN" (celz...

i

i

L

l tl\

~

,~

it

~
t.

FIGURE 2.

'" I
View of Site 41-no
VV~. Stratified layerings of fire-fractured rock, charcoal, worked chert
and mussell shell are exposed in remnant sandy terrace deposits along edges of borrow pit.
Cultural debris is visible to depths of about 2 meters from the present surface.

""'"

FIGURE 3.

.-:tt-o

~t" I

Field crew member examining aboriginal fire hearth at Site 41 VV~. This buried site.
exposed in the wall of a sand borrow pit near river mile 1.6 (see also Figs. I, 2), is situated
away from anticipated effects of increased water discharges associated with the proposed
Amistad Hydroelectric Plant. However, additional use of the area for sand quarrying
would further damage archeological values.

FIGURE 4•.

View of scoured bedrock bench along Rio Grande in the area of river mile 5. This straight
(apparently fracture controlled) stretch of the floodplain is obviously without archeological
potential.

",
;:

.~.

j

,
~

FIGURE 5.
A segment of the river bank near river mile 11.6. Note the exposures of old channel fill
gravels and bedded fine sediments. Moderately active bank sloughing was observed in this
area, perhaps due partially to test releases through the Amistad Dam. No archeological
materials were observed here or at other near-bank positions in the study area.

1.

I

l
.;

s

.,

:;
;}:

l
~~
.~:

1
f

;

~

~

~

II

