AR Consultants, Inc.
Archaeological and Environmental Consulting
11020 Audelia Road, Suite C105, Dallas, Texas 75243-9085
Phone: (214) 368-0478
Fax:
(214) 221-1519
E-mail: arcdigs@aol.com

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY WITHIN THE

HABITAT FULLER ESTATE
DEVELOPMENT
WICHITA FALLS, TEXAS
Jesse Todd
MS, MA

Submitted to:

CITY OF WICHITA FALLS
P. O. Box 1431
Wichita Falls, Texas 76307
Prepared by:
AR CONSULTANTS, INC.
11020 Audelia Road, Suite C105
Dallas, Texas 75243-9085
Cultural Resources Report 2007-07
February 13, 2007
HISTORICAL BUILDINGS

ARCHAEOLOGY

NATURAL SCIENCES

FULLER ESTATE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY WITHIN THE

HABITAT FULLER ESTATE
DEVELOPMENT
WICHITA FALLS, TEXAS
Jesse Todd
MS, MA

Submitted to:

CITY OF WICHITA FALLS
P. O. Box 1431
Wichita Falls, Texas 76307
Prepared by:
AR CONSULTANTS, INC.
11020 Audelia Road, Suite C105
Dallas, Texas 75243-9085
Cultural Resources Report 2007-07
February 13, 2007

______________________________________________________________________________________
AR CONSULTANTS, INC.

FULLER ESTATE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

i

ABSTRACT

A cultural resources survey was conducted by AR Consultants, Inc. of
approximately 9 acres within the proposed Habitat Fuller Estate on
February 5, 2007. The Fuller Estate is located south of Harding Road, east
of Holliday Creek and west of Otis Polk Drive. The intensive pedestrian
archaeological survey was done for the City of Wichita, Texas which is
the responsible entity for the US Department of Housing and Urban
Development because an environmental analysis, which includes an
archaeological survey, is part of the permitting process.
Residences had been constructed on almost half of the tract and the rest
had been disturbed due to channelization of Holliday Creek in the 1970s
and recent clearing of mesquite by bulldozing as evidenced by a large
push pile. Nonetheless 20 shovel tests were excavated in the clay subsoil
during the pedestrian archaeological survey. No cultural materials older
than 50 years were found on the ground surface or in the shovel tests.
Based upon the absence of archaeological sites, AR Consultants, Inc.
recommends that further cultural resources investigations are unwarranted.
In addition, if buried cultural materials are uncovered during construction,
work should stop immediately in that area and the Archeology Division of
the Texas Historical Commission and the City of Wichita Falls be notified.

______________________________________________________________________________________
AR CONSULTANTS, INC.

FULLER ESTATE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Abstract………………………………………………………………………
Table of Contents……………………………………………………………
List of Figures……………………………………………………………….
List of Tables………………………………………………………………..
Introduction………………………………………………………………….
Natural Environment…………………………………………………………
Culture History………………………………………………………………
Research Design and Methodology…………………………………………
Results……………………………………………………………………….
Recommendations……………………………………………………………
References Cited…………………………………………………………….

i
ii
ii
ii
1
1
3
5
6
10
10

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.

Figure 5.

Habitat Fuller Estate Development Tract plotted on a
portion of the Wichita Falls, Texas 7.5’ USGS map………..
View back to where Habitat for Humanity residences have
been constructed. View is to the north………………………
Bush pile from clearing of mesquite trees. View is to the
southwest……………………………………………………
Southern border of study area and rise/elevation which
suggests that area has been bulldozed/excavated in the past.
View is to the south…………………………………………
Shovel test locations on an aerial photograph taken from
Google Earth showing channelized Holliday Creek and
prior disturbance to the study area…………………………...

2
6
7

8

9

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1.

r-arc Harding Road

Shovel test descriptions. All soil was moist when excavated
and Munsell color chart numbers are listed only the first
time used…………………………………………………….

9

FULLER ESTATE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

2

INTRODUCTION
On February 5, AR Consultants, Inc. conducted an intensive pedestrian archaeological
survey of the approximately 8 to 9 acre Habitat Fuller Estate Development Tract located
in Wichita Falls, Texas. The study area is located at 1219 Harding Road which is south of
Harding Road, west of Otis Polk Drive and east of Holliday Creek (Figure 1). The
purpose of the survey was to locate any cultural resources that might be present within
undisturbed areas, to make recommendations about their significance and how they might
be impacted by construction. The scope of the project included a records review, a field
survey and a final report.
The survey was done at the request of the Texas Historical Commission in a letter dated
September 28, 2006. Habitat for Humanity intends to construct single family residences
upon the property and is requesting grant money from the US Department of Housing and
Urban Development. Wichita Falls acts as the responsible entity for the environmental
review in this process. The survey was done in order to comply with federal guidelines
such as the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended (PL-96-515), the
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (PL-90-190), the Archeological and
Historical Preservation Act of 1974, as amended (PL-93-291), and Executive Order No.
11593 "Protection and Enhancement of the Cultural Environment."
This report was written in accordance with the guidelines for reports adopted by the
Texas Historical Commission, Archeology Department, and developed by the Council of
Texas Archeologists (ND). The following report presents a brief description of the
natural and cultural environmental resources of the area. The research design and
methodology and then the results of the field investigation are presented. A section which
offers recommendations concludes the body of the report. A list of references cited
follows.

NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
Most of Wichita Falls falls within the Central Texas Rolling Red Plains except for the
southeastern corner which belongs to the Central Texas Rolling Red Prairies. The terrain
consists of rolling plains with rounded slopes and shallow, comparatively wide valleys.
Drainages in the northwest portion of the county drain into the Red River while drainages
in the middle drain into the Wichita River and the southeastern portion drains into the
Little Wichita River. Soils include sandy loams, black loams and clay loams.
The study area is included within a vegetative zone referred to as the Mesquite Plains part
of the Rolling Plains (Diamond, Riskind, and Orzell 1987:204). The area is primarily
climax grassland which is interspersed with drainages lined by trees and with limited tree
growth on escarpments and rock remnants. Mesquites have invaded most of the formerly
cleared and maintained pastures. The survey area is west of the Western Cross Timbers
as mapped by Dyksterhuis (1948:Fig. 1).

FULLER ESTATE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

Figure 1.

3

Habitat Fuller Estate Development Tract plotted on a portion of the
Wichita Falls, Texas 7.5’ USGS map.

The geology of the area is relatively uniform. Most of the region is underlain by Permian
"red beds" that are made up of sandstone and shale. However, the Bureau of Economic
Geology (1987) maps the study area as containing Quaternary fluvatile terrace deposits.
Soils within the study area belong to the Clairemont-Mangum Soil Association which
consists of nearly level to steep bottom land soils (Richardson et al. 1974:General Soils
Map). Specific soils include frequently flooded Asa and Port soils and Mangum silty clay
loam (Richardson et al. 1974:Sheet 39). The subsoil is listed as being 8 inches (20 cm)
below the ground surface for the Asa Series and 24 inches (60 cm) for the Port Series
(Richardson et al. 1974:6, 33). The C horizon is described as being 7 inches (18 cm)
below the ground surface for the Mangum Series (Richardson et al. 1974:24).
Holliday Creek is shown as perennial on the USGS map, but is shown as intermittent on
the Soils Map for Wichita County, Texas.

FULLER ESTATE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

4

Wichita County is characterized by rapid changes in temperatures. When “blue northers”
occur, temperatures drop as much as 20 or 30 degrees within an hour. Normally, rainfall
averages about 26 inches per year and most of this occurs from late March to midNovember, but dry periods also can be expected during this time. It usually only snows
two days per year (Richardson et al. 1974:85).

CULTURE HISTORY
Over the past several decades cultural resources investigations in this part of North
Central Texas have lagged behind those reported in other parts of Texas. This is due in
large part to the absence of large construction projects, such as lakes; but it can also be
attributed in part to the absence of active avocational archaeological societies and
professional archaeologists in local universities. The result of this very limited activity,
some of which is listed in the references, has been the publication of virtually no
substantive information about regional archaeology in Wichita County.
The following culture history is derived largely from the monograph "Lower Elm Fork
Prehistory" by Daniel J. Prikryl (1990). Prikryl's framework includes six periods:
Paleoindian
pre-8500 B.P.
Early Archaic
8500 - 6000 B.P.
Middle Archaic 6000 - 3500 B.P.
Late Archaic
3500 - 1250 B.P.
Late Prehistoric I 1250 - 750 B.P.
Late Prehistoric II 750 - 250 B.P.
Using this temporal framework, we present a brief description of the culture history.
The Paleoindian period is distinguished by distinctive projectile point styles such as
Clovis and Folsom. Many of the points are made of exotic cherts that are not native to
North Central Texas. The Lewisville site and the Aubrey Clovis site are the only
excavated Paleoindian sites in the region. Surface artifacts generally are found on stream
terraces above the level of the active floodplain. During this period, large mammals
became extinct, and this extinction is attributed in part to a general environmental drying.
During the Early Archaic, the general drying continued and sites are found on stream
terraces. There is a hint of population increase, and Lynott (1981:103) has suggested an
increased emphasis on the use of bottomland food resources. Prikryl (1990:71) can not
confirm Lynott's suggestion, and in fact reports fewer bottomland sites than during the
previous period. Middle Archaic sites are all found on the first terrace above stream
floodplains. As before, sites tend to be along the Elm Fork rather than along the smaller
tributaries. It appears that population density continued to be low.
Late Archaic sites increase in number over the previous period and sites are located both
along the rivers and along tributaries. There appears to be a strong shift in site location to

FULLER ESTATE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

5

the tributary streams, and there appears to be a pronounced population explosion. Local
Ogallala quartzite was being used prominently at this time and this is taken by some
authors (Skinner 1981; Prewitt 1983) as evidence of increased territorial restrictions.
During the Late Prehistoric I, the bow and arrow and pottery appear in artifact
assemblages. Houses and probable evidence of agriculture first appear during this period.
Site locations mirror those of the Late Archaic and quartzite continued as the common
material for chipped stone projectiles and tools. The West Fork Paleosol is dated to this
period, and environmental drying continued into the subsequent period.
The Late Prehistoric II is highlighted by the prominence of buffalo in archaeological sites
and the appearance of tools normally expected to occur at sites on the High Plains. It also
appears that sites were once again located on sandy terraces above the floodplains.
Very little evidence of historic Native American occupation has been found in the study
area. This is a pattern seen throughout much of Texas and one which has been suggested
is due to the inability of the Native Americans to adapt to the changing climate (Skinner
1988). However, Wichitas and Taovayas migrated to the area from present Kansas and
Nebraska in the middle of the eighteenth century. Their presence placed them in conflict
with the Lipan Apache and the Comanche tribes who occupied the area (Hart 2007:1)
Landscript for the site of Wichita Falls was sold to John A. Scott in 1837 and the town
site was platted in 1876. The first permanent settler did not arrive in Wichita Falls until
1879. The 1880 Census listed thirteen families living in the town, but it became a market
center after 1882 when the Fort Worth and Denver Railroad came to town. The town
became the county seat of Wichita County in 1883 and was incorporated in 1889. Lake
Wichita was constructed in 1901 and the petroleum industry began to flourish during the
1920s. The construction of Sheppard Field, an Army Air Corps training facility, bolstered
the economy during the 1940s. The base was closed during 1946 but was reopened as
Sheppard Air Force Base in 1948. Realizing that the petroleum industry as well as other
economic bases were limited, the city leaders formed the Industrial Development,
Incorporated which brought various industries to the city in the 1960s and helped
diversify the economic base. Wichita Falls took approximately three years to rebuild after
the devastating 1979 tornado that devastated the city. Today, Wichita Falls continues to
thrive both population and business wise (Hendrickson 2007).

Previous Investigations
No major archaeological investigations have been conducted in Wichita County and
although numerous prehistoric archaeological sites are known to ranchers and farmers,
very few sites have been formally recorded at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory or on the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas (2007).
In 1980, a team from Environment Consultants, Inc. evaluated the archaeological and
historical resources of the downtown Wichita Falls area along the river (Polk and Baird
1980). No evidence of prehistoric archaeological sites was found.

FULLER ESTATE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

6

In anticipation of construction of lakes in the area south of Wichita Falls, the
Archaeology Research Program at Southern Methodist conducted a reconnaissance of the
area for the Tulsa District of the Corps of Engineers (Rohrt, Garber, and Wooley 1975).
Two sites were recorded during the study, one in Archer County and the other in Wichita
County north of the Wichita River and along Beaver Creek. A brass point was illustrated
which was found along Holliday Creek which is the western border of the study area.
Approximately 9 miles of Holliday Creek from FM 25 to the upper end of the existing
Lake Wichita were investigated, but no archaeological sites were found.
This summary highlights the lack of investigations in the area. Some important
investigations have been done to the east along the Red River in the Spanish Fort area,
and to the west at the Oklaunion Power Plant site, at Copper Breaks State Park, and at
Medicine Mounds. These are not directly relevant to this survey but will be discussed as
needed below.

RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
Based on previous survey in the surrounding area, it was predicted that prehistoric
habitation in this part of Wichita County was tied directly to the presence of reliable
surface water. Thus, if water was present in the past, habitation was likely since plants,
along with terrestrial animals such as bison and antelope were present in the area.
However, if water was not available, utilization of the area was likely only to be tied to
hunting and gathering on a seasonal basis. If this is the case, briefly occupied residential
sites are to be expected in the vicinity of what are or were reliable water sources while
seasonal/resource occupation is expected in the form of tool resharpening loci, where lost
or broken chipped stone tools were discarded and other maintenance activities were
conducted.
Historic occupation in contrast is likely tied to the availability of transportation, i.e.
county roads, and farmable/pasture lands. Therefore, there is a greater likelihood of
finding historic sites in the area although the landfill is near the end of the road on the
south side of the Wichita River and the closest river crossing is to the east.
A second, and even more basic, research problem guided the survey. Simply stated, the
question asked “How did past people use the land, and what record of this use did they
leave behind?” Most frequently, smaller-scale surveys of this type gather information in
response to this more open-minded research question which guides almost all
archaeological surveys.
The survey area was walked in meandering transects due to prior disturbance from
residential construction. The survey area consists of approximately nine acres and,
normally, 2 shovel tests per acre would be excavated according to the recommendation of
the Council of Texas Archeologists (2002). However, due to approximately one-half the
study area being disturbed, 4 shovel tests were excavated per acre in the undisturbed
portion. In addition, shovel tests were excavated every 50 m along Holliday Creek

FULLER ESTATE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

7

instead of the usual 100 meters. Shovel tests were excavated to approximately 30 cm
below the ground surface. The clay was broken manually and visually examined for
artifacts as were the pit walls. Notes on the topography, soils, vegetation and other
relevant data were made. Photographs were taken.

RESULTS
The survey area is described first and followed by a discussion of the archaeological
survey. This is followed by the conclusions derived from the archaeological survey.
Shovel tests are described generally in the text and are plotted on Figure 5. Specific
shovel test information is provided in Table 1.
The survey area
The northern half of the proposed Habitat Fuller Estate Development tract already has
been disturbed by construction of residences and clearing of land for construction of
residences as shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2.

View back to where Habitat for Humanity residences have been
constructed. View is to the north.

The southern half of the tract is generally level and has been cleared of mesquite in the
past as evidenced by the push pile in Figure 3. Young mesquite, dandelions, milk weed,
saw greenbriar , brush and native grasses had grown between the time of the clearing of

FULLER ESTATE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

8

the mesquite and the archaeological survey. Ground visibility ranged from less than 10 to
greater than 60 percent. Most of the survey area had ground visibility that ranged from 40
to 50 percent. Eye-height visibility was excellent.

Figure 3.

Bush pile from clearing of mesquite trees. View is to the southwest.

The western boundary had been disturbed due to channelization of Holliday Creek in the
1970s and no shovel tests were excavated along the levee. Along the southern boundary,
the elevation drops from a meter to 1.5 meters as shown in Figure 4. This indicates that
possibly at least a meter of soil had been removed before the mesquite clearing. If so,
then the A horizon, which is only 8 inches thick, may have been removed prior to
development by Habitat for Humanity.
The survey
The western portion of the tract which is adjacent to Holliday Creek was walked by the
archaeologists prior to shovel testing and no cultural materials older than 50 years were
found on the ground surface.
The intensive survey began in the southwest corner and transects were oriented northsouth. Shovel tests 1 through 4 were placed approximately 25 m east of the levee. Two
rows of shovel tests (5 through 12) were placed 25 m each from the first row of shovel
tests and from each other and were staggered to cover the ground in a more
comprehensive fashion. The last two rows of shovel tests were placed 50 m from the third
row of shovel tests and each other (Figure 5).

FULLER ESTATE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

Figure 4.

9

Southern border of study area and rise/elevation which suggests that area
has been bulldozed/excavated in the past. View is to the south.

In all, 20 shovel tests were excavated. All of the shovel tests encountered the same clay
subsoil. However, impenetrable quartzite gravel as encountered in shovel test (ST) 5 at
15 cm, in ST 11 at 35 cm and in ST 14 at 25 cm below the ground surface. Sandstone
bedrock was uncovered in ST 6 at 20 cm, in ST 12 at 32 cm and in ST 13 at 28 cm and in
ST 14 at 25 cm below the ground surface A mixture of quartzite gravel and sandstone
bedrock was encountered at 12 cm below the ground surface in ST 20. No buried cultural
materials were found in the shovel tests and no cultural materials older than 50 years
were seen on the ground surface.
Conclusions
The absence of archaeological sites probably is due to the removal of the A horizon in the
past during channelization of the creek, removal of the mesquite trees and possibly before
the removal of the trees. Although no archaeological sites were found during SMU’s
survey of Holliday Creek, this does not mean that sites were not present in the study area.
However, due to previous disturbance, we will never know.

FULLER ESTATE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

10

Figure 5.

Shovel test locations on an aerial photograph taken from Google Earth
showing channelized Holliday Creek and prior disturbance to the study
area.

Table 1.

Shovel test descriptions. All soil was moist when excavated and Munsell
color chart numbers are listed only the first time used.
ST
No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Depth
(cm)
0-39+
0-37+
0-35+
0-35+
0-15
15+
0-20
20+
0-39+
0-37+
0-38+
0-39+
0-35
35+

Description
Reddish brown (5YR4/4) clay
Reddish brown clay
Reddish brown clay
Reddish brown clay
Reddish brown clay
Impenetrable gravel
Reddish brown clay
Sandstone bedrock
Reddish brown clay
Reddish brown clay
Reddish brown clay
Reddish brown clay
Reddish brown clay
Impenetrable gravel

FULLER ESTATE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

12
13
14
15
16
178
18
19
20

0-32
32+
0-28
28+
0-25
25+
0-35+
0-35+
0-33+
0-36+
0-32+
0-12
12+

11

Reddish brown clay
Sandstone bedrock
Reddish brown clay
Sandstone bedrock
Reddish brown clay
Impenetrable gravel
Reddish brown clay
Reddish brown clay
Reddish brown clay
Reddish brown clay
Reddish brown clay
Reddish brown clay
Impenetrable mixture of quartzite gravel and sandstone bedrock

RECOMMENDATIONS
The purpose of this investigation was to determine if significant cultural resources are
present within the limits of the tract to be included in the expansion of the existing
Habitat Fuller Estate. No cultural materials older than 50 years were seen on the
disturbed ground surface or found in 20 shovel tests. AR Consultants, Inc. recommends
that further cultural resource investigations are unwarranted based upon the absence of
archaeological sites.
Although we do not expect that unidentified buried cultural resources are present, should
cultural resources be encountered during construction, work should stop in that area and
the Archeology Division of the Texas Historical Commission and the City of Wichita
Falls be notified.

REFERENCES CITED
Bureau of Economic Geology
1987
Geologic Atlas of Texas, Wichita Falls-Lawton Sheet. The University of Texas at Austin.
Council of Texas Archeologists
ND
Guidelines for the Content of Cultural Resource Management Reports. Manuscript on file with the
membership.
2002
Archeological Survey Standards for Texas. Newsletter of the Council of Texas Archeologists
26(1):8-9.
Diamond, David D., David H. Riskind, and Steve L. Orzell
1987
A Framework for Plant Community Classification and Conservation in Texas. The Texas
Journal of Science 39:203-221.
Dyksterhuis, E.J.
1948
The Vegetation of the Western Cross Timbers. Ecological Monographs 18(3):327-376.
Hart, Bryan
2007
Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. Wichita County,” (accessed February 1, 2007).
http://www. tsha/utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/WW/hcw8.html
Hendrickson, Kenneth E., Jr.
2007
Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. Wichita Falls, TX,” (accessed February 1, 2007).
http://www. tsha/utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/WW/hcw2.html
Lynott, Mark J.
1981
A Model of Prehistoric Adaptations in Northern Texas. Plains Anthropologist 26(92):97-110.

FULLER ESTATE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

12

Polk, Michael R. and LeAnne Baird
1980
An Archaeological and Historical Survey of the Wichita River Development Project, Wichita
Falls, Texas. Environment Consultants, Inc., Cultural Resources Report 80-24.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1983
From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 54:20-38.
Prikryl, Daniel J.
1990
Lower Elm Fork Prehistory: A Redefinition of Cultural Concepts and Chronologies along the
Trinity River, North-Central Texas. Texas Historical Commission, Office of the State
Archeologist, Report 37.
Richardson, Wayne E., Auline R. Goerdell, and K. T. Lofton
1977
Soil Survey of Wichita County, Texas. USDA, Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with
Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Rohrt, Margaret, James Garber, and Nancy Wooley
1975
Assessment of Archaeological and Historical Resources in the Lake Wichita Area, North Central
Texas. Southern Methodist University, Archaeology Research Program, Research Report 62.
Skinner, S. Alan
1981
Aboriginal Demographic Changes in Central Texas. Plains Anthropologist 26(92):111-118.
1988
Where Did All The Indians Go? The Record 42: 101-104.
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas
2007
Search for sites listed for Wichita County, Texas and on the Wichita Falls East, Texas 7.5’ USGS
map. Texas Historical Commission internet site.

