AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE
FRYERS CREEK SEWER LINE EXTENSION
IN BELL COUNTY, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Permit Number 1708

by
William E. Moore, Michael R. Bradle, and Lee Nordt

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 41

1996

AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE FRYERS CREEK SEWER LINE
EXTENSION IN BELL COUNTY, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Permit Number 1708

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore, SOPA

Prepared for
Freese and Nichols, Inc.
4055 International Plaza, Suite 200
Fort Worth, Texas 76109-4895

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
219 North Main Street
Varisco Building - Suite 309
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey of a proposed sewer line extension project in Bell
County, Texas was performed by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) in June
and November of 1996. The area was examined in two stages. First, a 6.84 mile (67
acres) segment with a construction easement of 50 feet and a permanent easement of
35 feet was surveyed. Later, a revised route of approximately 400 meters, also with a
construction easement of 50 feet (6.8 acres) and a permanent easement of 35 feet, was
examined. The total length of the two routes is 73.8 acres. William E. Moore, SOPA*
was the Principal Investigator, and Michael R. Bradle performed the duties of Project
Archaeologist. This project was carried out under Texas Antiquities Permit Number
1708 and was investigated using the pedestrian survey method supported by shovel
testing and backhoe trenching. Although numerous significant prehistoric sites have
been recorded in the area, no prehistoric sites were found within the project area.
Evidence of early 20th century historic utilization was found at several points
along the creek; however, only one historic site (41BL1079) is within the project area.
This site is a house that dates to the early 20th century, is in poor condition, and is not
considered to possess significant research potential. The revised sewer line route will
not affect this structure. The project area is part of a Mexican Land Grant deeded to
Moses Griffin in 1835 out of the Maximo Moreno survey in Bell County.
One previously unrecorded prehistoric site (41BL1078) was found along Texas
Highway 93 on top of a bluff overlooking the Bird Creek floodplain. This site is out of
the project area. It was later recorded by BVRA on personal time.
The pedestrian survey adequately tested the project area for prehistoric sites
with negative results. It was determined through the geo-archaeological investigation
that Holocene soils are present in the project area and buried sites may be present, but
not one was found. Much of the area has been disturbed, and Pleistocene soils are
present in certain segments of the proposed sewer line route. Overall, it appears that
this area was not selected for prehistoric occupation. No additional archaeological
investigation is recommended. No artifacts were collected during the course of this
survey.

* Society of Professional Archeologists

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to those who helped ensure the success of this project.
The field survey was conducted under the supervision of Michael R. Bradle (Project
Archaeologist) of American Archaeology Group in Lampasas, Texas who was assisted
by Max Keele, Allan D. Meyers, and Dwight R. Cropper whose knowledge of early
house construction and materials was most helpful during this project. Mr. Bradle was
responsible for selecting areas for shovel testing and helping arrange access to certain
tracts. He also co-authored the report.
The initial background search was performed by Mary E. McCready of Universal
Curatorial Services in Austin, Texas with the cooperation of Carolyn Spock, Head of
Records, and her staff at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) in
Austin, Texas. Mark Denton of the Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas
Historical Commission, served as our link with the regulatory agency for this project.
Barbara Nickerson, Manager, Environmental Science Group, of Freese and
Nichols, Inc. in Fort Worth, Texas is acknowledged for answering the many questions
that typically come up during a project of this size. The City of Temple is thanked for
providing a backhoe and operator and their generous support. Those city employees
who worked on the project include Leonard Henry, Jr., P.E., Pete Salazar, and Jerry
Kean.
Geoarchaeologist, Lee Nordt, examined the entire length of the 6.84 mile
segment of the sewer line route and selected the locations for backhoe trenching. He
also supervised the excavation of the trenches, described the soils, and authored the
Geoarchaeological Investigations section of this report.
Also acknowledged are the landowners who granted permission for the City of
Temple and others to cross their property during the various stages of this project. We
are especially grateful to H. K. and Raye Virginia (McCreary) Allan who took time out of
their busy schedule to discuss the local history of their property with Barbara Nickerson,
William E. Moore, and Michael R. Bradle; and Hal Rose who allowed the backhoe to
cross his pasture so that section of the sewer line route could be tested. The figures
were prepared for publication by Lili Lyddon of Lyddon Illustrations of Wellborn, Texas.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS..................................................................................................iii
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
FILE SEARCH................................................................................................................. 5
FIELD METHODS ........................................................................................................... 6
GEOARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS ................................................................ 7
RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ....................................................................... 11
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 15
Appendix I: Soil Profile Descriptions
Figures
Figure 1. Project Location Map Depicting Original Route Surveyed................................ 2
Figure 2. Project Location Map Depicting Revised Route Surveyed ............................... 3
Figure 3. Site 41BL1079 (North View)........................................................................... 13
Figure 4. Site 41BL1079 (West View) ........................................................................... 14

iv

INTRODUCTION
The City of Temple, Texas proposes to design and build a sewer line extension
(major trunk line) to serve the recently annexed Fryers Creek area in south Temple.
The proposed sewer line follows two separate routes. The first is within the Texas
Department of Transportation right-of-way along Farm-to-Market Road 93 for 14,800
feet between Taylor's Valley and the existing wastewater treatment plant on the west
side of the Leon River. At Taylor's Valley, the route turns to the northeast and follows
Fryers Creek. Originally, the route followed the creek for a distance of 14,400 feet.
Thus, the total length of the sewer line route is 29,200 feet (67 acres). However, a
revised route was proposed. This new route also follows Fryers Creek for a distance of
about 400 meters (6.8 acres), although the route has been moved to the north of the
original route. With the changes made to the route along Fryers Creek, the total length
of the Fryers Creek portion of the sewer line route is 14,775 feet (33.9 acres). In all,
73.8 acres were examined. The original route is depicted on 7.5' U.S.G.S topographic
quadrangles, Belton and Temple, Texas dated 1965 (photorevised 1993) (Figure 1),
and the revised route is depicted on the 7.5' U.S.G.S. topographic quadrangle Temple,
Texas (Figure 2). The Belton quadrangle does not show the current route of Farm-toMarket Road 93. The construction easement for the project area is 50 feet with a
permanent easement of 35 feet that will vary in the vicinity of historic site 41BL1079.
Bell County contains numerous significant archaeological sites and, because of
the potential for significant archaeological sites within the project area, a Phase I
cultural resources survey was required by the Department of Antiquities Protection,
Texas Historical Commission, who oversees compliance with state and federal
archaeological regulations. In order to comply with this requirement, the City of Temple
through Freese and Nichols, Inc., contracted with BVRA to perform this service under
Texas Antiquities Permit 1708.
William E. Moore, SOPA was the Principal Investigator, and Michael R. Bradle of
American Archaeology Group served as the Project Archeologist. Significant cultural
resources in this area consist of both prehistoric and historic sites. The most recent
professional archaeological investigations in the immediate area have been conducted
within the boundaries of Fort Hood to the north and west. Deeply buried prehistoric
sites have been found along the major rivers and creeks in the Fort Hood area.
Therefore, the integration of a geoarchaeologist into this project is necessary in order to
identify those sites, if any, situated on older landforms too deep to be found through
shovel testing. Lee Nordt was retained to examine the geoarchaeology of the project
area and was a major part of the survey team.

1

Figure 1. Project Location Map Depicting Original Route Surveyed

2

Figure 2. Project Location Map Depicting Revised Route Surveyed

3

The research design for this project was coordinated with the Department of
Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Freese and Nichols, Inc., and the
City of Temple and was designed to intensively survey the affected project area to
identify all prehistoric and historic sites in the project area. In addition, the research
potential of any sites found was to be addressed in terms of State Archeological
Landmark and/or National Register of Historic Places eligibility. The methods used are
discussed below in the Field Methods section of this report.

4

FILE SEARCH
Prior to the field investigations, the Bell County files at TARL on the campus of
The University of Texas at Austin were examined to determine if any archeological or
historical sites had been identified in or near the project area. The files search indicated
that no sites are located within the project area right-of-way. According to the site
records at TARL, two major reservoir projects have been constructed in Bell County,
both requiring archaeological investigations. These are Belton Reservoir on the Leon
River (Stephenson 1949; Miller and Jelks 1952; Shafer et al. 1964) and Stillhouse
Hollow Reservoir (Johnson 1962; Sorrow et al. 1967). The vast majority of
archaeological sites in Bell County have been recorded as part of an on-going survey of
Fort Hood. At least a decade of work has resulted in the recording of 622 prehistoric
sites on the base in this county. Work at Fort Hood has been documented by in-house
projects (Thomas 1978) as well as a number of private contractors (Skinner et al. 1981,
1984; Guderjan et al. 1980), The University of Texas at Austin (Dibble et al. 1985), and
Texas A&M University (Carlson et al. 1986; Carlson 1984; Carlson et al. 1987; Carlson
et al. 1988; Koch et al. 1988; Moore and Thomas 1987). A number of sites at Fort Hood
were recorded by the now defunct Fort Hood Archaeological Society. The above
references are only some of the projects that have been conducted at Fort Hood.
Mention of other references is made in the various reports in the Fort Hood
Archaeological Resource Management Series. Computerization of the site files at Fort
Hood and evaluation of the site inventory is in process, and exact figures regarding
number of sites and other data cannot be obtained at this time. The most recent
professional investigation in the vicinity of the project area was a reconnaissance of
proposed wastewater collection and treatment improvements by the Texas Department
of Water Resources (Fox and Whitsett 1984). Eight prehistoric sites were identified and
one (41BL260) is located in close proximity to the existing wastewater treatment plant
(Figure 1). This site was later tested by Highway Department archaeologists (Young
1987) and found to be not eligible for State Archeological Landmark status (SAL).

5

FIELD METHODS
The project area was examined utilizing the pedestrian survey method supported
by shovel testing and probing and mechanical excavation using a backhoe. The field
survey crew consisted of archaeologists and a geoarchaeologist. The entire project
area was walked, and all surface disturbances and cutbank exposures were examined
for cultural materials. Shovel tests were excavated in areas of high probability for
prehistoric sites and were excavated to 50 centimeters below the surface and measured
30 centimeters in diameter. All soils excavated from these tests were screened through
one-quarter inch mesh hardware cloth. Thirty-six shovel tests were excavated with the
majority (n=29) between Taylor's Valley and the northern end of the project area where
undisturbed Holocene soils appeared to be present. Because of shallow soils and
lengthy segments of previously disturbed areas within the project area, the number of
shovel tests and probes was deemed adequate. The entire 14,800 foot segment (2.80
miles) from Taylor's Valley to the existing wastewater treatment plant was within
highway right-of-way and had been disturbed during road construction. The remaining
4.03 miles contained minor areas of disturbance. The geoarchaeologist also walked the
entire first phase of the project area and examined all stream crossings and landforms
for the presence of Holocene soils that may contain buried sites. In all, eight backhoe
trenches were excavated under his supervision (Figure 1). These trenches were 10 feet
long, 36 inches wide, and varied in depth from 1.5 to 2 meters. Site 41BL1079 was
found in the revised route. This area is very disturbed, primarily along the railroad rightof-way, and contains exposed surface bedrock in several areas. Because of the
disturbed and shallow soils only three shovel tests were dug in the revised route.

6

GEOARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Introduction
The purpose of the geoarchaeological investigation of the project area was to
assess the probability of finding buried cultural components in deposits adjacent to the
Leon River and Fryers Creek. The project area begins to the west of the Leon River on
a Pleistocene Qt terrace, extends to the east across the Qal Holocene floodplain, and
then across another Pleistocene Qt terrace towards Taylor Valley (Barnes 1979). The
project area then follows Fryers Creek to the north. Fryers Creek is shown flowing on
the Cretaceous Austin Chalk Formation with no adjacent alluvial deposits (Barnes
1979). However, local maps show the presence of alluvial soils consistent with a
Quaternary age (Huckabee et al. 1977). Most of these soils are clayey vertisols and
mollisols. The revised route is north of the original route, runs parallel to it, and is within
the same soils. The Therefore, the presence of a geoarchaeologist during this phase
was not considered necessary.
Eight backhoe trenches (BT) were excavated to observe the subsurface
stratigraphy across the project area. The trenches were dug to a depth of 1.5 to 2
meters and described according to standards and procedures of the Soil Survey
Division Staff (1993). The tentative alluvial chronology was based on stratigraphy, soil
development, time-diagnostic artifacts, and one carbon-14 age corrected for variations
in carbon-13 (Beta Analytic, Inc.).
Alluvial Stratigraphy: Leon River
The two backhoe trenches opened in the Leon River floodplain were situated
within a modern meander approximately six meters above the low-water channel
(Figure 1). Backhoe Trench 1 revealed a thin layer of highway construction material
unconformably burying two soils (Appendix I). The upper buried soil consisted of a
weakly developed Ab1-Bwb1 profile, which was probably the surface prior to
disturbance. The lower buried soil was somewhat more developed with an Ab2-Bk1b2Bk2b2 profile (Appendix I). Here, the soil carbonate was in a filament and thread form.
The local soil survey shows weakly developed mollisols mapped adjacent to the project
area in the floodplain (Huckabee et al. 1977). This is consistent with backhoe trench
observations in this investigation.
Backhoe Trench 2 also exposed a veneer of highway construction material
overlying two buried soils (Figure 1; Appendix I). Although sandier in this backhoe
trench, the upper buried soil had an Ab1-Bwb1-Bkb2 profile similar to that in BT 1. The
lower buried soil, however, was clayey and had a more advanced stage of soil
carbonate development than the overlying soil or the two buried soils in BT 1 (Appendix
I; Bkb2). A bulk soil humate sample taken from the upper 10 centimeters of the Bkb2
horizon dated to 2950 ± 80 years before present (Beta 94900).

7

This age is a maximum for the overlying deposit and a minimum on the deposit
that the Bkb2 horizon developed into. A carbon-14 age, minimal pedogenesis, and a
floodplain landscape position within the modern meanderbelt suggests that the majority
of BT 1 and BT 2 were excavated in late Holocene deposits. Furthermore, these
sediments are similar in character to the late Holocene West Range alluvium identified
along the Leon River on the Fort Hood Military Reservation (Nordt 1992).
Backhoe Trench 3 was excavated in an alluvial terrace approximately 15 meters
above the modern low-water channel of the Leon River and Fryers Creek (Figure 1).
Here, 21 centimeters of highway construction material buried a soil with a Bssb1
through Bk2b1 profile sequence (Appendix I). The surface horizons of this soil were
probably removed during highway excavations. The Bk horizons of this soil contained
15% hard carbonate nodules. This is a considerably more advanced stage of carbonate
development than the filaments and threads identified in the floodplain soils. The soil in
BT 3 was similar to the clayey Krum series; a mollisol mapped on this terrace in the
local soil survey (Huckabee, et al. 1977).
Early Archaic cultural materials were discovered during a previous investigation
(Fox and Whitsett 1984) at site 41BL260 on a paired terrace counterpart just west of the
Leon River near the project area (Figure 1). By correlation, this demonstrates that the
terrace in the vicinity of BT 3 is older than 6000 to 7000 years. Furthermore, site
41BL260 occurred on the sandy Bastrop soil, as mapped by Huckabee et al. (1977).
The morphology of this soil is nearly identical to a terrace soil dated to 15,000 years on
a Leon River terrace at Fort Hood (Nordt 1992). At Fort Hood, sandy terrace soils
associated exclusively with the Leon River occurred adjacent to, and at the same
elevation of, clayey terrace soils associated with local tributaries (Nordt 1992). As a
result, these soils were considered coeval. This same relationship appears in the
project area where sandy alfisols occur on terrace edges and clayey vertisols nearer to
local tributaries. Accordingly, these soils are also considered coeval. Based on
stratigraphic position, degree of soil development, time-diagnostic artifacts, and
correlations to the Fort Hood Military Reservation, the terrace in the project area is
probably late Pleistocene, perhaps 15,000 years old.
Alluvial Stratigraphy: Fryers Creek
Backhoe Trench 4 was excavated in a flood terrace approximately four meters
above the modern low-water channel of Fryers Creek (Figure 1). The frequency and
duration of flooding is unknown. The flood terrace alluvium is probably Holocene in age
because it is inset to the late Pleistocene terrace identified at BT 3. Based on angular
and matrix supported carbonate clasts, the entire profile consists in part of clayey
colluvium originating from the adjacent Pleistocene sideslope. Two stratigraphic units
were observed in the backhoe trench. The buried soil exhibits a weathering profile with
an A1b-A1b-Bkb-BCb horizon sequence (Appendix I).

8

The accumulation of 8% carbonate nodules in the Bk horizon suggests an early
to middle Holocene age for sediment deposition and at least 5000 years of landscape
stability and soil development prior to burial. Furthermore, the stratigraphic position and
morphological properties are similar to the early Holocene Royalty paleosol identified in
small drainage basins in the Fort Hood Military Reservation (Nordt, 1992). The upper
32 centimeters are probably late Holocene to historic in age because of weak
pedogenesis (Appendix I).
Backhoe Trench 6 was opened in a flood terrace fill about five meters above the
modern channel (Figure 1). As with BT 4, this deposit is inset to the projected elevation
of the late Pleistocene terrace. An eight centimeter veneer of local road material buried
a soil with similar properties to the buried soil in BT 4. The buried soil in BT 6 contained
two Bk horizons with 12% carbonate nodules (Appendix I). Poorly sorted and grain
supported clasts occurred at the base of BT 6 beginning at a depth of 102 centimeters,
indicating deposition by fluvial processes (Appendix I). Stratigraphic position and
carbonate development suggest that this deposit and soil, as with the buried soil in BT
4, are early to middle Holocene in age.
As with BT 4 and BT 6, BT 7 was situated approximately four to five meters
above the modern low-water channel (Figure 1). Two stratigraphic units were also
exposed in BT 7. The upper 54 centimeters consisted of a clayey A-Bw profile with
matrix-supported angular carbonate clasts (Appendix I). This suggests that this is partly
a colluvial depositional facies, perhaps active during the late Holocene. The buried soil
contained properties similar to the buried soil in BT 4 and BT 6, suggesting an early to
middle Holocene age (Appendix I). In contrast, BT 7 exposed the unconformable
contact to the underlying Cretaceous bedrock at 167 centimeters.
Backhoe Trench 8 was excavated in the upper part of the drainage basin (see
Figure 1). Here, the alluvium filled a broad, flat valley. However, the flood terrace
surface was only about two meters above the channel. Backhoe Trench 8 exposed two
stratigraphic units. The upper unit consisted of a weakly developed A-Bw profile,
indicating a late Holocene age (Appendix I). Distance from the adjacent upland
hillslopes and identifiable flood debris near the backhoe trench indicate that the upper
unit is primarily of flood origin. The buried soil has characteristics similar to the buried
soil in BT 4 and BT 6 and is probably of similar age (Appendix I). Consequently, there
is widespread correlation of the twofold stratigraphic sequence in the Fryers Creek
basin.
Backhoe Trench 5 was located approximately six meters above the modern
channel (Figure 1). This backhoe trench is comprised of 78 centimeters of colluvium,
possibly mixed with alluvium, and resting unconformably on Cretaceous bedrock
(Appendix I). The dusty white appearance of the BC horizon suggests that some
pedogenic carbonate has accumulated. However, the age of this deposit is problematic.
Stratigraphically, it lies between the projected elevations of the late Pleistocene terrace
of BT 3 and the early to middle Holocene flood terrace associated with the other
backhoe trenches of Fryers Creek.

9

Cultural Preservation Potential: Leon River
Based on a carbon-14 age of 2950 ± 80 years before present, stratigraphic
position, and degree of soil development, the upper two meters of alluvium in the Leon
River floodplain of the project area is late Holocene in age. Thus, there is potential for
finding buried sites in the floodplain setting dating to the Middle Archaic and younger.
Two fining upward packages of sediment occur in the floodplain that is capped by
buried soils. The uppermost buried soil was probably the surface soil prior to highway
construction. Surface site visibility associated with this soil, however, will be minimal
because of disturbance from highway construction. Overall, fluvial deposition appears
to have occurred in a fine-grained meanderbelt. Consequently, there is not only
potential for finding buried cultural features, but in a primary context as well.
Preservation potential may be somewhat higher in the buried A horizons.
By stratigraphic position, time-diagnostic artifacts, soil development, and
correlation to the Leon River stratigraphy at Fort Hood, the terrace situated between the
Leon River and Fryers Creek is probably late Pleistocene in age, perhaps around
15,000 years old. Consequently, there is little potential for finding buried cultural
components with the current understanding of the antiquity of people in North America.
Surface sites, however, could span the entire time of prehistoric occupation in Texas.
Surface sites have undoubtedly been destroyed by highway construction, as with the
floodplain setting of the Leon River.
Cultural Preservation Potential: Fryers Creek
Backhoe trenches 4, 6, 7, and 8 have similar stratigraphic histories. At these
locations, a well-developed soil is buried by up to 54 centimeters of colluvium, alluvium,
or some combination of both. The upper unit appears to be late Holocene in age
according to stratigraphic position and degree of pedogenesis. The buried soil in these
trenches is probably early to middle Holocene in age. Accordingly, there is potential for
preservation of cultural materials in both of the major stratigraphic units bordering
Fryers Creek. However, the likelihood that sites are buried in primary contexts is
somewhat less than along the Leon River, because the sediments bordering Fryers
Creek consist of a greater proportion of colluvium deposited under episodic conditions.
The highest probability for finding buried sites probably occurs in the A horizon of the
buried soil. In contrast to the Leon River, surface disturbance along most of Fryers
Creek will be less because the project area leaves the highway right-of-way and
crosses private properties. It should be stated that part of the revised route along
Fryer's Creek follows an existing railroad grade and has been significantly disturbed.
The age of the sediments exposed in BT 5 is unknown. Consequently,
preservation potential for buried sites in the vicinity of BT 5 is difficult to assess.
Stratigraphically, this deposit is slightly lower than the projected elevation of the late
Pleistocene terrace. It may, therefore, be young enough to contain buried sites.
However, preservation potential in primary contexts will be somewhat low because of
burial in an episodic colluvial environment.

10

RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Archival Research
Mrs. Raye Virginia (McCreary) Allan has conducted extensive research regarding
the history of her property. Her sources of information include county histories by
George W. Tyler (1936) and E. A. Limmer, Jr. (1988) as well as early maps and
courthouse records. Part of the archival research presented below was obtained
through an oral interview with her.
The project area is part of a Mexican Land Grant deeded to Moses Griffin in 1835
out of the Maximo Moreno survey in Bell County (Raye Virginia (McCreary) Allan,
personal communication, December 11, 1996). According to Mrs. Allan, Mr. Griffin
settled on his league of land with his wife, Barzilla Curry Griffin, and they had eleven
children. This family is among the first settlers in Bell County. The site of the original
Griffin homestead is out of the project area; however, his daughter, Cornelia Griffin Hurd
Rich, constructed a house in 1882 that is still standing and, although also out of the
project area, is nearby. This house is currently owned by H. K. and Raye Virginia
(McCreary) Allan. According to The Handbook of Texas (Webb 1952, Volume II:488489), this area was part of the Robertson Colony which dates to the 1820s and included
all or part of 30 present Texas counties including Bell County. The major sources of
water in the project area and vicinity consisted of the Leon River, Bird Creek, Fryers
Creek, and various natural springs. Although this report uses the current spelling of
Fryers Creek as depicted on the topographic quadrangle maps Belton and Temple, it is
spelled Friar's Creek on a map dated 1915 in the possession of the Allan family. No
reference to this creek under either spelling was found in The Handbook of Texas.
Settlement in Bell County was sparse until after 1843 when the last of the hostile
Indians were defeated in the "Bird's Creek Indian Fight" (Webb 1952, Volume I:142).
The county was created on January 22, 1850 and named for Peter H. Bell. The
economy of Bell County has been chiefly agricultural with the railroad a major influence
as well. The town of Temple was established and promoted by the Gulf, Colorado, and
Santa Fe Railroad, which sold the first town lots on June 29, 1880 and was named for
B. M. Temple, chief construction engineer for the railroad (Webb 1952, Volume II:722723).
Field Survey
No prehistoric sites were encountered in the shovel tests and shovel probes,
along the creek cutbanks, or on the ground surface within the project area. Also, no
evidence of previously recorded site 41BL260 was found within the right-of-way. One
previously unrecorded prehistoric site was identified outside the project area (Figure 1)
and assigned the field number TS-1. It was later recorded at TARL as 41BL1078. The
site was discovered when a flake was found on the south slope of a hill above Farm-toMarket Road 93 and east of Witter Lane directly across from the firm Transit Mix.

11

The nearest water source is Bird Creek approximately 600 meters to the north. A
brief examination of the top of the hill revealed additional flakes and a possible tool.
The site area is very disturbed. It is described on the site form as a lithic scatter.
One previously unrecorded historic site (41BL1079) was found in the project area
during the survey of the proposed reroute (Figure 2). This site consists of a wooden
frame house that was constructed sometime during the early 20th century. The current
owners of the property (Mr. and Mrs. Allan) were unable to provide any information
regarding the original owners of this house and its age except it was there in 1938. Two
photographs of this structure taken from the right-of-way appear as figures 3 and 4.
The house is a two-room structure with board and batten pine siding. The
battens are unusual in that the edges were milled to a 45 degree angle. The siding
boards are 12 inches wide and the batten boards are four inches wide. The dimensions
of the house are 12 feet by 28 feet with the long axis oriented north south. Due to
missing sections of walls and changes made to convert this structure into a barn, it was
not possible to determine the original number of doors and windows. Present at the
time of this investigation were two doors (one to each room) on the east side and three
windows. The windows are double-hung and contain four-over-four lights. The smaller
room, believed to be the kitchen, is at the south end and contains two windows, one on
the east wall and one opposite it on the west wall. The larger room, believed to be the
living area, is at the north end and contains two windows, both on the east side.
Sections of the north and west walls are missing, and it is not known if windows were
present in these areas. No evidence of a fireplace was found; however, a hole in the
roof and at the top of the wall dividing the two rooms suggests two wood burning stoves
may have been used. The house has a gable roof and was constructed with wire nails
(an indicator of 20th century construction). The floor consists of six inch tongue and
groove pine boards, and the ceiling is constructed from three inch tongue and groove
boards. A corrugated tin roof was present at the time of the survey. The house sits on
wood block foundation piers and has no interior wall sheathing. After the building was
vacated as a residence it was converted into a barn by adding on a corrugated roof,
feeding areas, and stock pens. Some of the posts used for supports in the barn area
appear to be hand hewn and may have been removed from an earlier structure in the
area. No artifacts were observed in the house or collected from the site area. Very few
historic artifacts were observed on the surface; they include window glass and
unidentified metal fragments. The assumption that the house dates to the early 20th
century is based on the use of wire nails, board and batten construction, and the
testimony by Mrs. Allan that it was standing in 1938.
Adjacent to the east side of the house is a badly deteriorated wooden railroad
boxcar that has been converted for use as a barn. This structure, although not part of
the original farmstead, is interesting and measures 8 by 39 feet with its long axis
oriented east-west. A barn has been added to the south side to create additional space
for livestock. Overall, it is in poor condition.

12

Figure 3. Site 41BL1079 (North View)

13

Figure 4. Site 41BL1079 (West View)

Another, similar boxcar was found to the west of the house (Figure 2). It is also
in a deteriorated state and was not assigned a TARL site number. The age of these
wooden boxcars is not known, but Mrs. Allan believes they date to the early 20th
century. How they arrived in their present location is also not known, but the proximity
of the boxcars to the existing railroad track suggests they may have been taken from
the tracks at each location to be used as storage buildings. Recently, they have been
repositories for hay.
Overall, a large percentage of the project area has been disturbed through road
construction, erosion, farming/ranching activities, and the railroad grade that parallels
the revised route. Soils along the revised route are shallow with clay or clay loam at the
surface. The depth of the three tests dug along this segment averaged 24 centimeters
below the existing ground surface. At Shovel Test 35, gravels and numerous pieces of
eroded limestone bedrock were encountered in Level 2 (10-20 cm), and surface
exposures of limestone bedrock were present in several areas along this route.
Historic site 41BL1079 is in very poor condition and is not considered worthy of
additional work. This site lies within the fifty-foot construction easement, but is out of
the permanent 35-foot easement. Construction in this area, as currently planned, will
avoid this site. It is, therefore, recommended that the project be allowed to proceed as
planned. Should the presence of a prehistoric or historic site not discussed in this
report be discovered during construction of the sewer line all work must cease until the
situation can be evaluated by the Department of Antiquities Protection.

14

REFERENCES CITED
Barnes, Virgil E.
1979 Geologic Atlas of Texas: Waco Sheet. The University of Texas, Bureau of
Economic Geology. Austin.
Carlson, David L., Shawn B. Carlson, Frederick L. Briuer, Erwin Roemer, Jr., and
William E. Moore
1986 Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 983, The Eastern
Training Area. United States Army Fort Hood, Archaeological Resource
Management Series, Research Report 11.
Carlson, Shawn Bonath
1984 Ethnoarchaeological Studies at a 20th Century Farmstead in Central
Texas: The W. Jarvis Henderson Site (41BL273). United States Army Fort
Hood, Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report
12.
Carlson, Shawn B., H. Blaine Ensor, David L. Carlson, Elizabeth A. Miller, and Diane E.
Young
1987 Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1984. United
States Army Fort Hood, Archaeological Resource Management Series,
Research Report 14.
Carlson, Shawn B., David L. Carlson,, H. Blaine Ensor, Elizabeth A. Miller, and Diane E.
Young
1988 Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1985, the
Northwestern Training Area. United States Army Fort Hood,
Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report Number
15.
Dibble, David S., Frederick L. Briuer, Henry B. Moncure, Jack Jackson, and George B.
Thomas
1985 Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal Year 1980 (Spring
Season) Final Report. Science Applications International Corporation. San
Diego.
Fox, Daniel E., and W. Hayden Whitsett
1984 An Archeological Reconnaissance of Proposed Wastewater Collection
and Treatment Improvements, Cities of Temple and Belton, Bell County,
Texas - C-48-1535. Texas Department of Water Resources.
Guderjan, Thomas H., George B. Thomas, and Howard R. Cramer
1980 Existing Data Inventory of Cultural Resource and Paleontological
Information, Fort Hood, Texas. Soil Systems, Inc. Marietta, Georgia.

15

Huckabee, J. W., Thompson, D. R., Wyrick, J. C., and Pavlat, E. G.
1977 Soil Survey of Bell County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture-Soil Conservation Service. United States Government Printing
Press, Washington, D.C.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1962 Survey and Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Stillhouse Hollow
Reservoir on the Lampasas River, Bell County, Texas. Report submitted
to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project.
Koch, Joan K., Catherine Mueller-Wille, and Frederick L. Briuer
1988 Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1985, the
Northwestern Perimeter. United States Army Fort Hood, Archaeological
Resource Management Series, Research Report Number 16.
Limmer, E. A., Jr. (Editor-in-Chief and Compiler)
1988 Story of Bell County, Texas. (2 volumes) Eakin Press. Austin.
Miller, E. O., and Edward B. Jelks
1952 Archeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 23:168-217.
Moore, William E., and George B. Thomas
1987 Results of a Monitoring Project of 112 Stratified Random Sample
Quadrats at Fort Hood, Texas. United States Army Fort Hood,
Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report Number
19.
Nordt, Lee C.
1992 Archaeological Geology of the Fort Hood Military Reservation, Fort Hood,
Texas. United States Army Fort Hood Archaeological Resource
Management Series. Research Report Number 25. Texas A&M University,
College Station.
Shafer, Harry J., Dee Ann Suhm, and J. D. Scurlock
1964 An Investigation and Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Belton
Reservoir, Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas: 1962. Texas Archaeological
Salvage Project, Miscellaneous Papers, No. 1. The University of Texas at
Austin.
Skinner, S. Alan, Frederick L. Briuer, George B. Thomas, Ivan Show, and Eli Mishuck
1981 Initial Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal Year 1978.
United States Army, Fort Hood Archaeological Resource Management
Series, Research Report Number 1.

16

Skinner, S. Alan, Frederick L. Briuer, W. A. Meiszner, Ivan Show, and Eli Mishuck
1984 Archaeological Survey, at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal Year 1979. United
States Army, Fort Hood Archaeological Resource Management Series,
Research Report Number 2.
Soil Survey Division Staff
1993 Soil Survey Manual. United States Department of Agriculture Handbook
Number 18. United States Government Printing Press, Washington, D.C.
Sorrow, William M., Harry J. Shafer, and Richard E. Ross
1967 Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, Number 11. Austin.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1949 Archeological Survey of Belton Reservoir on the Leon River, Bell and
Coryell Counties, Texas. Report on file, Smithsonian River Basin Surveys.
Thomas, George B.
1978 A Survey and Assessment of the Archeological Resources of Fort Hood,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:195-240.
Tyler, George W.
1936 The History of Bell County. The Naylor Company. San Antonio.
Webb, Walter Prescott (Editor-in-Chief)
1952 The Handbook of Texas. The Texas State Historical Association. Austin.
Young, Wayne C.
1987 Archeological Testing of Site 41BL260, Bell County, Texas. Texas
Department of Water Resources.

17

Appendix I: Soil Profile Descriptions
Backhoe Trench 1; south wall; Leon River floodplain; calcareous throughout.
fill

0-20 cm; mixed very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) and very dark
gray (10YR 3/1) loam; platy with discontinuous carbonate gravel
lens; abrupt wavy boundary.

Ab1

20-38 cm; very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) silty clay loam; 20%
very dark gray (10YR 3/1); weak coarse subangular blocky
structure; very firm; gradual smooth boundary.

Bwb1 38-51 cm; dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) silty clay loam; 5% brown
(10YR 5/3); weak coarse subangular blocky structure; firm; clear
smooth boundary.
Ab2

51-95 cm; dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) silty clay loam; 5% brown
(10YR 5/3); moderate coarse subangular blocky structure; firm;
gradual smooth boundary.

Bk1b2 95-131 cm; dark grayish-brown (10YR 4.5/2) silty clay loam; 10%
brown (10YR 5/3); moderate medium prismatic structure; firm; 3%
carbonate filaments; gradual smooth boundary.
Bk2b2 131-177 cm; brown (7.5YR 5/3) silty clay loam; weak coarse
prismatic; firm; 2% carbonate filaments.
Backhoe Trench 2; east wall; Leon River floodplain; calcareous throughout.
fill

0-21 cm; black (10YR 2.5/1) clay loam; 25% yellowish-brown
(10YR 5/4); platy to angular blocky structure; 15% matrix supported
carbonate gravels, 0.3 to 1 cm diameter; abrupt wavy.

Ab1

21-55 cm; very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3.5/2) sandy clay loam;
15% brown (10YR 5/3); moderate coarse angular blocky structure;
firm; 1% carbonate filaments; gradual smooth boundary.

Bwb1 55-101 cm; brown (10YR 4.5/3) sandy loam; weak coarse
subangular blocky structure; slightly hard; <1% carbonate
filaments; clear smooth boundary.
Bkb1 101-124 cm; yellowish-brown (10YR 5/4) loam; 20% black (10YR
2.5/1); weak coarse prismatic structure; hard; 3% carbonate
filaments; abrupt smooth boundary.

Backhoe Trench 2 (continued)
Bkb2 124-168 cm; very dark gray (10YR 3.5/1) clay; 5% yellowish-brown
(10YR 5/4); moderate coarse prismatic; very firm; 6% carbonate
filaments; bulk humate sample from 159 to 168 cm.
Backhoe Trench 3; west wall; Leon River/Fryers Creek terrace; calcareous
throughout.
fill

0-21 cm; very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) clay; 3% black (10YR
2/1); platy and angular blocky structure; 5% matrix supported
carbonate gravels, 0.5 to 1 cm diameter; abrupt wavy boundary.

Bss1b 21-58 cm; very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) clay; 5% black
(10YR 2/1); moderate coarse angular blocky structure; very firm;
common distinct slickensides; gradual wavy boundary.
Bss2b 58-88 cm; dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) clay; 3% black (10YR
2/1); moderate coarse angular blocky structure; very firm; common
distinct slickensides; gradual smooth boundary.
Bk1b 88-127 cm; brown (10YR 4/3) clay; 10% yellowish-brown (10YR
5/4) and 5% black (10YR 2/1); weak coarse angular blocky
structure; very firm; 15% pink and hard carbonate nodules, 0.3 to
0.5 cm diameter; gradual smooth boundary.
Bk2b 127-147 cm; yellowish-brown (10YR 5/4) and light yellowish brown
(10YR 6/4) clay loam; 5% black (10YR 2/1); weak coarse angular
blocky structure; very firm; 15% hard and white carbonate nodules,
1 cm diameter.
Backhoe Trench 4; west wall; Fryers Creek flood terrace; calcareous throughout.
Ap

0-32 cm; very dark gray (10YR 3.5/1) clay; moderate medium
subangular blocky structure; very hard; 8% matrix supported
angular carbonate clasts, 2 to 4 mm diameter; clear smooth
boundary.

A1b

32-61 cm; black (10YR 2/1) clay; moderate medium subangular
blocky structure; hard; 8% matrix supported angular carbonate
clasts, 2 to 4 mm diameter; gradual smooth boundary.

A2b

61-85 cm; black (10YR 2.5/1) clay; moderate medium angular
blocky structure; hard; 5% matrix supported angular carbonate
clasts, 3 to 6 mm diameter; clear smooth boundary.

Backhoe Trench 4 (continued)
Bkb 85-116 cm; gray (2.5Y 5/1) clay; common fine distinct olive brown
(2.5Y 4/4) iron oxide soft masses; 8% white and brittle carbonate
nodules, 0.5 cm diameter; gradual smooth boundary.
BCb

116-143 cm; light gray (2.5Y 6/1) clay; common medium distinct
dark yellowish-brown (10YR 4/4) iron oxide soft masses; weak
coarse angular blocky structure; very hard; 8% matrix supported
angular carbonate clasts, 2 to 4 mm diameter; clear smooth
boundary.

Cb

143-165 cm; light gray (2.5Y 6/1) clay; common medium distinct
light olive brown (2.5Y 5/6) iron oxide soft masses; massive; very
hard; 20% matrix supported carbonate clasts, 0.5 to 1 cm diameter.

Backhoe Trench 5; west wall; Fryers Creek terrace; calcareous throughout.
A

0-15 cm; very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) clay; strong medium
subangular blocky structure; very hard; 5% matrix supported
angular carbonate clasts, 0.3 to 0.5 cm diameter; gradual smooth
boundary.

Bw1

15-36 cm; very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) clay; 3% dark
grayish brown (10YR 4/2); moderate medium angular blocky
structure; very hard; 5% matrix supported angular carbonate clasts,
0.3 to 0.5 cm diameter; gradual smooth boundary.

Bw2

36 to 59 cm; brown (10YR 4/3) clay; 30% very dark grayish brown
(10YR 3/2); moderate coarse angular blocky structure; very hard;
5% matrix supported angular carbonate clasts, 0.3 to 0.5 cm
diameter; gradual smooth boundary.

BC

59-78 cm; brown (10YR 4/3) clay; moderate coarse angular blocky
structure; very hard; 30% matrix supported and grain supported
angular carbonate clasts, 0.5 to 1 cm diameter; clear smooth
boundary.

Cr

78-125 cm; 15 cm thick horizontal fractured limestone bed in upper
part; lower part is bedded olive yellow (2.5Y 6/6) and white (2.5Y
8/1) shale.

Backhoe Trench 6; south wall; Fryers Creek flood terrace; calcareous
throughout.

fill

0-8 cm; 50% matrix supported limestone clasts in white matrix;
abrupt wavy.

A1b

8-28 cm; very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) clay loam; strong
medium angular blocky structure; very hard; 3% carbonate clasts, 1
cm diameter; gradual smooth boundary.

Backhoe Trench 6 (continued)
A2b 28-47 cm; very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) and dark grayish
brown (10YR 4/2) clay loam; strong medium subangular blocky
structure; very hard; 10% matrix supported carbonate clasts, 0.5
cm diameter; gradual smooth.
Bk1b 47-75 cm; light yellowish-brown (2.5Y 6/3) silt loam; weak coarse
subangular blocky structure; hard; matrix color is in part from
disseminated carbonate; gradual smooth boundary.
Bk2b 75-102 cm; light yellowish-brown (2.5Y 6/3) silt loam; weak coarse
subangular blocky structure; hard; 12% soft and white carbonate
nodules, 0.5 to 1 cm diameter; matrix color is in part from
disseminated carbonate; clear smooth boundary; clear wavy
boundary.
Cb

102-168 cm; light olive brown (2.5Y 5/6) and white (2.5Y 8/1)
matrix; poorly sorted, angular to subrounded, and grain supported
carbonate gravels, some platy.

Backhoe Trench 7; east wall; Fryers Creek flood terrace; calcareous throughout.
A

0-17 cm; black (10YR 2.5/1) clay; moderate medium subangular
blocky structure; very hard; 5% matrix supported carbonate clasts,
0.5 cm diameter; gradual smooth boundary.

Bw

17-54 cm; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) clay; moderate medium
angular blocky structure; very hard; <5% matrix supported
carbonate clasts; clear smooth boundary.

Ab

54-82 cm; black (10YR 2.5/1) clay; 10% pale brown (10YR 6/3)
biocasts; moderate medium angular blocky structure; very hard;
gradual smooth boundary.

Bkb

82-119 cm; grayish-brown (2.5Y 5/2) clay loam; few fine distinct
yellowish brown iron oxide soft masses; weak coarse angular
blocky structure; very hard; 6% soft and white carbonate nodules,
0.3 to 0.5 cm diameter; 5% matrix supported carbonate clasts, 0.5
cm diameter; clear smooth boundary.

Ck

119-167 cm; light brownish-gray (10YR 6/2) and dark grayishbrown (10YR 4/2) clay loam; massive; very hard; 3% soft and white
carbonate nodules, 0.3 to 0.5 cm diameter; 40% poorly sorted,
angular to subrounded, and grain supported carbonate clasts, 0.5
cm to 1 cm diameter; abrupt wavy boundary.

Crb

167-235 cm; brownish-yellow (10YR 6/6) and white (2.5Y 8/1) shale
and bricky limestone; massive.

Backhoe Trench 8; west wall; Fryers Creek flood terrace; calcareous throughout.
A

0-16 cm; black (10YR 2.5/1) clay; moderate fine angular blocky and
platy structure; very hard; 3% matrix supported carbonate clasts,
0.2 to 0.5 cm diameter; gradual smooth boundary.

Bw

16-38 cm; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) clay; moderate medium
angular blocky structure; very hard; 3% matrix supported carbonate
clasts, 0.2 to 0.5 cm diameter; clear smooth boundary.

Ab

38-66 cm; black (10YR 2.5/1) clay; moderate medium angular
blocky structure; very hard; gradual smooth boundary.

Bwb

66-85 cm; grayish-brown (2.5Y 5/2) silty clay loam; moderate
medium prismatic structure; hard; gradual smooth boundary.

Bk1b 85-138 cm; light gray (2.5Y 7/2) silt loam; moderate medium
prismatic structure; hard; 8% white and brittle carbonate nodules,
0.2 to 0.5 cm diameter; gradual smooth boundary.
Bk2b 138-166 cm; light gray (2.5Y 7/2) silt loam; common medium
distinct yellowish-brown (10YR 5/6) iron oxide soft masses and
pore linings; weak coarse prismatic; slightly hard; 8% white and
brittle carbonate nodules, 0.5 to 1 cm diameter.

