ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED
PILOT KNOB RESERVOIR,
Travis County, Texas

TeehrUeal. BU-Ue:U1'l. 85

Wayne S. Bartholomew

Antiquities Permit #503
Principal Investigator:

Solveig A. Turpin

Black and Veatch, Inc.
Agents for the City of Austin

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
1985

ABSTRACT
At the request of Black and Veatch, Engineers-Architects, agents
for the city of Austin, staff members of the Texas Archeological
Survey (TAS), The University of Texas at Austin, conducted a cultural
resource inventory of the proposed Pilot Knob Reservoir and associated
facilities on July 10 and 15, 1985. At least nine prehistoric and no
historic sites lie in or near the project right-of-way. Previously
In
recorded sites include 41TV404, 41TV405, 41TV406 and 41TV407.
addition, TAS recorded 41TVI092, 41TVI093, 41TVI094, 41TVI095 and
provisional site 41TVI096.
Sites 41TV404, 41TV405 and 41TV406 lie outside the project
boundaries and will not be affected by the proposed project. Site
41TV407, although within the right-of-way. has been badly disturbed,
if not totally destroyed, and the proposed Pilot Knob facility will
not further affect the integrity of the site.
Sites 41TV407,
41TVI092, 41TVI093, 41TVI094 and 41TVI095 do not appear to meet
criteria for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places or
State Archeological Landmark status. Limited testing of provisional
site 41TVI096 was recommended due to its similarity to burial features
found in other areas of Texas.
Provisional site 41TVI096 was tested because, in the opinion of
lAS personnel, it represented an unknown human activity of possible
significance to the area's prehistory.
One half of the site was
excavated but failed to uncover direct evidence of origin or use. As
a result, although the site should be considered a product of human
endeavors, it fails to meet criteria for National Register of Historic
Places nomination and presents no bar to reservoir construction.

ii

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY
Each of the recently recorded sites is associated with a large
complex of cultural activities represented by 75 prehistoric sites
recorded along the lower 15 miles of Onion Creek (Whitsett and Fox
1979). Cultural stages represented at Onion Creek include Paleoindian
(ca. 15,000 - 8,500 BP), Archaic (8,500
1,250 BP) and Late
Prehistoric (1,250 - 200 BP).
A lack of diagnostic artifacts and extensive disturbance at sites
41TVI092 - 41TVI095 precludes their contributing to the understanding
of the Onion Creek settlement pattern beyond that achieved by this
recording.
However, provisional site 41TVI096 presents an anomaly in
this area, both in morphology and
topographic
setting.
Its
resemblance to similar features found west and north of the Central
Texas culture area suggests several interpretations.
The site,
located within the boundaries of the proposed reservoir, consists of a
single rock-filled depression. Volcanic rocks, devoid of vegetative
growth and soil, fill the oval shaped concavity to the level of the
surrounding surface. TAS has considered a variety of natural and
cultural explanations for the feature. At this time, the feature is
regarded as a possible prehistoric burial and test excavation of
one-quarter of the 2 by 3 meter site is recommended to determine its
true origin and function. Any additional recommendations would be
based on those findings. It is further recommended that, in the event
archeological remains are uncovered during the course of construction
at any recorded or unrecorded site location, work cease and the Texas
Antiquities Committee be contacted.

iii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract • . • . .
~'anagement Summary .
Introduction . . . . .
Cultural Background
Methods . . • . . .
Results
Summary and Recommendations . . . • . . . . .
ADDENDUM: Test Excavations of Provisional Site 41TV1096 .
References Cited . . . . . . .

ii

iii
1
3

4
5

7
8

14

LIST OF FIGURES
Fi gure 1.

Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.

..

.

2
Project Location . . . .
..
" 10
41 TVI096, Site Plan Map . .
,
11
41TVI096. Site Pho togra phs
•
4ITVI096, Plan View and Cross Section of Test Pi.t • . 12

.. .

iv
- - - - - - .......

-~--------

---

---­

- - -

INTRODUCTI ON
At the request of BlacK and Veatch, agents for the city of
Austin, the Texas Archeological Survey (TAS), conducted a visual
reconnaissance for cultural resources within the proposed Pilot Knob
Reservoir and along the associated water transmission line (Figure 1)
on July 10 and 15, 1985. The project was designed to conform to the
Texas Historical Commission guidelines for small area survey, in
accordance with the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 and its
implementing
regulations,
36CFR800, and authorized under Texas
Antiquities Permit No. 503. This Technical Bulletin ;s issued in
accordance wi th report gui de 1i nes set forth by the Council of. Texas
Archeologists and endorsed by the Texas Antiquities Committee.
Prior to the inception of the project, the Texas Antiquities
Committee advised Black and Veatch that four sites, 41TV404-407, lie
in the vicinity of the proposed corridor (Arnold 1984).
Of those,
only site 41TV407 is actually within the project right-of-way. and
previous construction of Texas State Highway 183 has severely affected
it.
Reconnaissance archeologists did not locate any historic sites.
All of the surveyed portions are on the 1966 Montopolis 7.5 1
Quadrangle, 1:24,000 scale USGS map.
Location
The proposed water transmission facilities begin east of Austin,
Texas, 1.1 miles south of the Colorado River (Figure 1). The line
trends south-southeast until it reaches the vicinity of Pilot Knob,
Texas.
From here the line bears west-southwest around the north side
of Pilot Knob - a prominent topographical feature due west of its
namesake community, and then due south, roughly bisecting the knob.
Here, a ten acre reservoir is proposed.
Physical Setting
Topographic relief i$ relatively undifferentiated. ranging from
695 1 (211.8 m) AMSL at Pilot Knob to 450 1 (137.2 m) AMSL at Onion
Creek. Pilot Knob, a remnant Cretaceous Period volcano, rises 150 to
300 feet (45.7 - 91.4 m) above the ancient Colorado River terraces and
the Blackland Prairie, dominating the eastern landscape.
West and
southwest of the knob lies the higher broken terrain of the Edwards
Plateau. Soil types and lithologic formations are presented below, in
sequence from the proposed water main terminus to the reservoir.
From Parker Lane to Ben White Boulevard the line crosses Altoga
silty clays, acidy Travis soils forming on old alluvium, Houston Black
soils developing' on calcareous marls and alluvial clays, Trinity clay
soil s associ ated wi th bottoml ands and Eddy seri es gravelly loams (Soil
Survey Staff 1974). Geologic formations include Quaternary Period

n White Blvd.

survey/

Corridor

TRAVIS

..

COUNTY

0

i

0.:5

!
MILES

f·
Pilot
Knob

Figure I. Project Location, Pilot Knob water Transmission Line Survey.

3

high terrace and gravel deposits and Cretaceous age marls (Geologic
Atlas of Texas, Austin sheet 1981).
Located along Burleson Road,
between Ben White Boulevard and Highway 183, are Houston Black,
Burleson and Lewisville clays. Each of these soils ;s associated with
alluvial parent materials and all are relatively deep, ranging from
104 to 60 inches (2.64 - 1.52 m) in depth. Geologic materials still
include Quaternary terrace and gravel deposits and Cretaceous marls.
Several intermittent drainages, including Country Club Creek, flow
through these latter two sections.
The right-of-way along Highway 183 from Burleson Road to near the
community of Pilot Knob includes Altoga, Frio and Lewisville silty
clays. These soils are forming on the recent terrace deposits along
Onion Creek and include some parent materials associated with the
Colorado River alluvium. Approaching the reservoir site, soils are
dominated by Heiden clays and gravelly clays. Geologically, however,
the parent materials are predominantly Cretaceous age igneous rocks,
including pyroclastics and basalts.
Portions of all previously mentioned sections, with the exception
of the latter, contain a rich assortment of siliceous gravels, which
provided prehistoric populations with a ready supply of raw materials
for
tool
production.
These gravels become scarce within the
In addition,. the
relatively
provenience of the
volcano.
unconsolidated nature of the Quaternary strata provides for the
possibility of buried cultural sites.
CULTURAL BACKGROUND
The Central Texas cultural region, which includes a variety of
physiographic provinces (Fenneman 1938; Garner 1973), is defined as
lithe eastern half of the Edwards Plateau, the Llano uplift, most of
the Lampassas Cut Plains, the Comanche Plateau, the southern end of
the Grand Prairie and the Blackland Prairies bordering the Balcones
Escarpment from near Waco to near Uvalde ll (Prewitt 1981:71).
Prewitt (1981) proposed a chronology for Central Texas consisting
of four major stages, based on Willey and Phillips' (1958)
historical model.
These cultural stages
evolutionary cultural
consist of Paleoindian (15,000? - ca. 8,500 BP), Archaic (8,500 ­
1,250 BP), Late Prehistoric (NeoArchaic) (1,250 - 200 BP) and Historic
(200 BP - present).
Paleoindian Stage
Degradation of the Wisconsinan glaciers and megafaunal
extinctions mark the termination of the Pleistocene geologic epoch.
During this time, bands of big game hunters subsisted on the North and
South American continents.
Their remains, however, are relatively
scarce compared to later Native American cultural groups. A few bone
tools and a variety of chipped stone projectile points - Clovis,
Folsom and Plainview, often found in association with mastodon,
mammoth and bison bones, are typical of this stage.

4

Archaic Stage
Archeologists recognize 11 phases of the Archaic for Central
Texas. However, for purposes of simplification, this report will only
consider the broader divisions of the Early, Middle and Late Archaic.
In general, food gathering activities become more diversified and
projectile points and other stone tools proliferate.
Burned rock
middens appear toward the end of the Early Archaic and become a
prominent feature on Middle Archaic sites. Prewitt suggests that the
middens are indicative of the "increasing importance of resource
specifi c . . . food process i ng" (Prewitt 1981: 73).
Burned
rock
middens disappear in the eastern Central Texas region but continue to
persist in the west.
Late Prehistoric Stage
A technological shift from darts and atlatls to bows and arrows
occurred 1250 years ago, marking the beginning of the NeoArchaic
(Prewitt 1981) or Late Prehistoric.
Ceramics and cemeteries also
appear in the archeological record as distinct components.
Historic Stage
Spanish explorations usher in the Historic stage
both European economic practices and material culture.

and

introduce

Any given stage is typified by a dominant economic pattern,
recognizable
by artifact content alone.
A stage is not time
dependent, but, as in Central Texas, if accurate dates are available,
may be attributed to specified periods of time. Stages are defined on
the basis of a phase or phases which are chronologically successive
units of time, and possess an assemblage of traits which make any
given phase unique to all others.
Phases are expressed by the
components found at a site or sites. The presence of diagnostic
artifacts, such as projectile points, ceramics or features, are
critical determinants of cultural stage.
METHODS
Prior to the field survey, the files and maps of the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory were searched to determine the
extent of previous investigations in the area.
A single site,
41TV407, lies within the project right-of-way. Sites 41TV404, 405 and
406 are situated nearby. Each of these sites is associated with a
larger complex of cultural activities consisting of 75 prehistoric and
28 historic sites recorded along the lower 15 miles of Onion Creek
(Whitsett and Fox 1979). Paleoindian, Archaic and Late Prehistoric
components are represented in the Onion Creek sample. Additional work
in this vicinity includes Suhm (1955, 1957), Thurmond (1982), Brown
(1981) and Davis (1984).

5

Field archeologists examined the recorded data for sites 41TV404,
405, 406 and 407 and then initiated a ground survey. Unfortunately,
the 50 - 80 foot right-of-way is oriented along major traffic
corridors;
the adjacent properties are utilized for residential,
commercial or agricultural purposes. Neighborhood lawns, driveways,
sidewalks, parking lots, rail lines and buried communication cables
did not provide the necessary ground surface visibility for a visual
archeological reconnaissance.
Furthermore, any previously existing
sites at such locations would have been destroyed or severely altered
during' construction.
Archeologists had no choice but to spot check
many areas and totally abandon hope of finding sites in others.
The
proposed route lies on the north side of Burleson Road between
Montopolis Drive and Shaw-McCall Lane and crosses to the south side of
Burleson Road between Shaw-McCall Lane and Highway 183. Excellent
ground surface visibility along this portion of the route allowed TAS
personnel to locate and record sites 41TVI092 - 1094. The 10 acre
reservoir was traversed by two archeologists walking 10
15 meter
interval transects, with the aid of 1" == 100' and 1:24,000 scale maps.
Site 41TV407 was spot checked, as were Doyle and Scenic drives.
No
artifacts were collected.
Field notes and photographs document the
survey and recorded cultural resources. All records generated by this
project are curated at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.
RESULTS
Results of this survey include the recording of five prehistoric
sites;
41TVI092, 41TVI093, 41TVI094, 41TVI095 and 41TVI096. All but
the latter site have been affected by recent historic activities,
including agriculture, roadway constr uction and subsu rface cable
emplacement. A brief site description follows for the five newly
recorded sites.
41TVI092 - 41TVI094
These sites probably represent prehistoric quarrying activities.
Lithic remains include primary decortication flakes and numerous
bifacially reduced cores, both whole and fragmented.
No retouched
flakes
nor diagnostic artifacts were noted.
However, because
Paleoindian, Archaic and Late Prehistoric sites are located nearby,
and because chert nodules were a preferred lithic resource, it is
likely that these sites were used repeatedly over time. Whitsett and
Fox (1979) s~ggest that the entire upland area on both sides of Onion
Creek could possibly be considered large lithic quarries; an oplnl0n
also held by the author of this report.
These sites lie along
Burleson Road and those portions within the project right-of-way have
been destroyed by construction and agricultural modifications.

6

41TVI095
A light lithic scatter, consisting solely of sparsely distributed
flakes was recorded at the base of Pilot Knob within the corridor
right-of-way. Quarry activities may also playa role here but raw
materials are scarce in this area. Lithic debitage is not observed
with any great frequency, only one or two flakes per 7 to 10 meters.
The site proper may extend beyond the area surveyed for this project.
41TVI096
Site number 41TVI096 is provisionally assigned to a rock filled
depression located within the boundaries of the proposed reservoir.
What appears to be a natural oval shaped concavity or subsidence
feature is filled to the level of the surrounding surface with
Soil
volcanic rocks measuring up to 15 centimeters in diameter.
formation and vegetative growth, with the exception of lichens, is
absent over the feature. Individual rocks on the surface are lichen
coated, but underlying rocks are not. No prehistoric or historic
artifacts were noted within the immediate vicinity during survey.
TAS members did observe similar depressions, some rock filled, on
the knob, but not within project bounds. Will Pickens of the Bureau
of Economic Geology, UT-Austin, could not, with the limited data
available to him, arrive at any natural causes for the formation of
these features. A number of possible cultural explanations exist.
Among those considered were an historic dump site, prehistoric hearth,
storage area or burial site.
Use as a refuse disposal site by
historic peoples would almost certainly have been revealed by the
presence of some historic artifacts, of which there are none, and the
absence of fire cracked rock rules out its use as a hearth. A cache
or storage pit appears impractical in this location far from primary
habitation sites along Onion Creek (Whitsett and Fox 1979). It is
possible that the feature represents a human burial site.
Cist and cairn burials, most commonly associated with the High
Plains region, are not known within Travis County, yet the Pilot Knob
depression shares features reminiscent of both methods of interment.
Burial sites within the Central Texas cultural region more commonly
consist of shaft or subsurface burials.
Late Archaic and Late
Prehistoric shaft burials, for example, have been recorded in Bexar
and Williamson counties. These sites contained multiple individuals
and included a variety of faunal remains and lithic artifacts.
Although not all cultural considerations are known regarding
burial practices or site selection, it is possible that Pilot Knob, a
relatively isolated and readily identifiable feature on the landscape,
may have been an ideal burial locality for one or more prehistoric
groups. Cairn burials of West and northwest Texas are commonly found
on high topographic features with sweeping views of the surrounding
area. Considering the overall density of the prehistoric population
in Travis County and the relatively prolonged habitation along nearby
Onion Creek, as-yet unidentified burial sites must lie somewhere in

7

the vicinity.
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sites 41TV1092, 1093, 1094 and 1095 appear to be quarry related
activity sites which, when viewed from a regional perspective, fit
well into a broad pattern of prehistoric settlement. Sites located in
the uplands tend to be quarries or open camps. Habitation sites tend
to be located within the larger creek and river canyons.
A lack of
diagnostic artifacts at these sites and their extensive disturbance,
precludes their contributing to the understanding of the Onion Creek
settlement pattern beyond that achieved by this recording.
No additional work is recommended at sites 41TV1092, 41TV1093,
41TV1094 or 41TV1095, all of which fail to meet criteria for
nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. Site 41TV407,
has been badly disturbed and additional construction of the Pilot Knob
facilities will not further affect the site. Sites 41TV404, 41TV405
and 41TV406, are outside of the project boundaries and will not be
affected by the proposed project.
Site 41TV1096, because of its apparent undisturbed context and
the potential data it may contribute regarding local and regional
prehistory, should be researched to determine its eligibility for the
National Register of Historic Places or as a State Archeological
Landmark. A limited test excavation of no less than one-quarter of
the site should be sufficient to determine its origin and function.
Such a program could be accomplished in approximately one week of
field time with subsequent analysis and reporting. If the site proves
to be of cultural value, additional recommendations would be based on
those findings. In addition, in the event that archeological remains
are uncovered during the course of construction activities at any
recorded or unrecorded site(s), it is further recommended that work
cease and the office of the Texas Antiquities Committee be contacted.

ADDENDUM
TEST EXCAVATIONS OF PROVISIONAL SITE 41TVI096,
PILOT KNOB PROJECT, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

Wayne Bartholomew

9

TESTING AND RECOMMENDATIONS
On September 16 and 17, 1985, TAS personnel, Dr. Solveig Turpin,
Leland Bement and Wayne Bartholomew, conducted subsurface testing of
provisional site 41TVI096. The semi-circular rock feature (Figure 2)
was identified during an archeological reconnaissance for the proposed
Testing was recommended
water storage facilities on Pilot Knob.
because of the feature's outward similarity to prehistoric burials
found in other parts of Texas, its proximity to an extensive series of
aboriginal sites along nearby Onion Creek, and because no natural
explanations for its existence could be determined.
Testing was designed only to detect the presence or absence of
cultural remains and was not implemented as a part of mitigation.
Archeologists compiled an extensive photographic record in order to
document the excavation (Figure 3). Essentially. testing occurred in
three stages; removal of the outermost, lichen encrusted rocks,
removal of the underlying rocks, and removal and screening of the
underlying soil/rock matrix.
A 1 by 3 meter section, or one-half of the feature, was removed
in this fashion.
Lichen growth is present on the overlying rocks,
indicating that they have been exposed on the surface for some time.
Lichens are absent on the lower rocks. Underlying rocks exhibit the
same overall size range of 6 - 15 centimeters, but the 6 - 9
centimeter diameter size appears to predominate. A shallow concavity.
50 centimeters deep at the center, appears to represent the original
land surface based on comparisons with the soil profiles obtained from
a nearby 1 by 1 meter test pit excavated as a control unit. In cross
section, (Figure 3) the feature is plano-convex downward and in
general lacks internal structure.
OrganiC matter trapped in the rock interstices, presumably as a
result of natural agencies, was encountered during the excavation.
Soils are somewhat modified due to the accumulation of fine organics
and sediments, but the matrix appears undisturbed and contains no
clear evidence of human disturbance.
Two pieces of chert were
recovered from the vicinity of the rock - soil interface. Neither
piece could be positively attributed to deliberate prehistoric tool
manufacture, although cherts are rare on the surface of Pilot Knob.
In addition, four or five chert flakes were noted on the surface in
the general vicinity of the feature.
In conclusion, no definitive evidence was obtained with which to
strengthen the hypothesis, although it ;s the opinion of TAS that the
feature is indeed a product of human activity.
Unfortunately, this
activity cannot be identified and, at this time, cannot be classified

Access Road

67 A' - - - - - - ­

I
')I

I
I
x
I
I ~
~

i'C

OJ

,..

OJ

1

ffi

)';.

LJ...

I

"f,---

)(,

I

x

rock
feature

G

o

T.A.S.
control excavation

<JQ
Engineering
~O<> test bore

I
I

o

1

2

3m

scale

Figure 2. Site 41TVI096 - A rock filled concavity northeast of Pilot Knob Butte, Travis County, Texas.
Please note that the feature, control excavation, engineering test bore, and tree are all to
scale relative to one another.

Fi gure 3a. Pl an view of anomalou s r ock fe at ure - 41TVI096, on
Pi l ot kn ob, Tr av is County , Texas .

Figure 3b . Cross - sectional view of the ea s t wall - 41TVI0 96,
met r ic sc ale is extended upward 50 cent i meters.

--------__ __________ __________
~

~

~v

r-----

- - - - I

Excavated
Sector
I

L

~/
o

-

0.5

scale

~%?J vol canic
1m

rock

f~i.{;1 tan s~ils and
... .. orgamcs
:~

dark gray clays
D- and
organics

~ unexcavated

Figure 4. Plan view and cross-section of tested site 41TVI096 - Austin • .Travis County, Texas

13

as significant in terms of the region's prehistory or history.
On
this basis, we recommend that the provisional status be dropped but
the site number be maintained. Further, site 41TVI096 fails to meet
criteria for National Register of Historic Places nomination or State
Archeological Landmark status, and presents no bar to construction of
the Pilot Knob reservoir.

14

REFERENCES CITED

Arnold, J. Barto III
1984 Letter from Texas Antiquities Committee to Black and Veatch
regarding the Pilot Knob project, dated December 19, 1984.
Brown, David O.
1981 Archeological Testing Along the Proposed route of Wastewater
Pipelines for the planned Onion Creek Wastewater Treatment
Plant. Texas Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin 50.
The University of Texas at Austin.
Davis, Michael W.
1984 Archeological Investigatins at 41TV285: A Site to be
Affected by Construction of the Onion Creek Wastewater
Treatment Interceptor Line.
Texas Archeological Survey
Technical Bulletin 78. The University of Texas at Austin.
Fenneman, N.M.
1938 Physiography of Eastern
Company. New York.

United States.

McGraw-Hill

Book

Garner, L.E. and K.P. Young
1976 Environmental Geology of the Austin area: an aid to Urban
Planning.
Bureau of
Economic Geology
Report of
Investigations 86. The University of Texas at Austin.
Geologic Atlas of Texas
1974 Austin sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology,
of Texas at Austin.

The

University

Pi ckens, Wi 11
1985 Personal communication, Geologist, Bureau of Economic
Geology,
The University of Texas at Austin to Wayne
Bartholomew, July 1985.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas.
Archeological Society 52:65-89.

Bulletin of the Texas

Suhm, Dee Ann
1955 Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County,
Bulletin __
of _the
__ ____ Archeological Society 26:7-54 .

.......

-------~.

Texas.

15

1957

Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County,
Texas Journal of Science 9(1):26-58.

Texas.

Soil Survey Staff
1974 Soil Survey of Travis County, Texas.
United States
Department of Agricul ture, Soil Conservation Service.
Washington, D.C.
Thurmond, Peter
1982 Archeological Testing and Assessment of 41TV461 and the
Onion Creek Wastewater Plant Site, Travis County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin 49.
The
University of Texas at Austin.
Whitsett, Hayden and Daniel Fox
1979 Cultural Resources of Lower Onion Creek.
of Water Resources. Austin.
Willey, Gordon R. and Philip Phillips
1958 Method and Theory in American Archaeology.
of Chicago Press. Chicago.

-.~~.-

.....

--------­

Texas

Department

The

University

