Cultural Resources Survey of Two
Atascosa County Bridges, Atascosa
County, Texas
Prepared for

Texas Department of Transportation

Prepared by

SWCA Environmental Consultants
Texas Antiquities Permit 4401
SWCA Cultural Resource Report No. 07-67
January 2015

CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY OF TWO ATASCOSA COUNTY BRIDGES,
ATASCOSA COUNTY, TEXAS

Submitted to
TCB INC.
6800 Park Ten Blvd., Suite 180-S
San Antonio, Texas 78213

Prepared for
TEXAS DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
P.O. Box 29928
San Antonio, Texas 78229

Prepared by
Ken Lawrence
SWCA ENVIRONMENTAL CONSULTANTS
4407 Monterey Oaks Boulevard
Building 1, Suite 110
Austin, Texas 78749
www.swca.com

Principal Investigator
Kevin A. Miller
Texas Antiquities Permit 4401

SWCA Project Number 12320-143-AUS
SWCA Cultural Resources Report No. 2007-067
January 2015

ABSTRACT
Cultural resource investigations were conducted by SWCA Environmental Consultants (SWCA)
for the proposed replacement of two bridges located in Atascosa County for TCB INC. on behalf
of the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT). These two project areas consist of the
Byrd Road at Lucas Creek crossing in northeastern Atascosa County and the Jim Brite Road at
Atascosa River crossing in eastern Atascosa County. The Texas Historical Commission (THC)
issued Texas Antiquities Permit 4401 to SWCA to conduct the cultural resource investigations,
which were designed to identify and evaluate any archaeological sites eligible for listing on the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) or that might warrant designation as a State Ar­
cheological Landmark (SAL).
Investigations consisted of a background literature and records review and a pedestrian survey with
shovel testing of relatively intact areas for both project locations. The background literature and
records review revealed that neither of the project areas (i.e., Jim Brite Road at the Atascosa River
or Byrd Road at Lucas Creek) have been previously surveyed and that no archaeological sites are
within or near the project areas. The Leal Cemetery is located about 1.2 miles north of the Jim
Brite Road project area, which could date to the occupation of nearby town of Leal between
1850s and 1860s. However, this cemetery will not be affected by the proposed project. The in­
vestigation of the two bridge crossings primarily encountered extremely constricted and dis­
turbed right-of-way (ROW) with no cultural materials identified during the pedestrian survey or
in the shovel test excavations.
In accordance with 36 CRF 800.4, SWCA has made a reasonable and good faith effort to identify
archeological historic properties within the Area of Potential Effects (APE). The proposed re­
placement of the two bridges in Atascosa County will impact previously disturbed areas with no
significant cultural properties. Thus, the proposed project will not affect any cultural resources.
As no properties were identified that meet the criteria for listing in the NRHP according to 36
CFR 60.4 or for designation as an SAL according to 13 TAC 26.12, SWCA recommends no fur­
ther investigations for these project areas.
No artifacts were collected. Therefore, nothing was curated.

i

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY
PROJECT TITLE:
County, Texas.

Cultural Resources Survey of Two Atascosa County Bridges, Atascosa

SWCA PROJECT NUMBER: 12320-143.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION: The project included a background literature and records review for
previously conducted surveys and recorded sites and an intensive pedestrian survey augmented
with shovel testing of relatively intact areas for the proposed replacement of two rural Atascosa
County bridges.
LOCATION: The project is comprised of two bridge replacement locations in Atascosa County.
One project area is the Byrd Road at Lucas Creek crossing that is located roughly 1.25 miles east
of the intersection of Farm-to-Market (FM) 1784 and State Highway (SH) 97 in northeastern
Atascosa County. The second project area is the Jim Brite Road at Atascosa River crossing,
which is located about 0.75 miles southwest of Leal, Texas in eastern Atascosa County. These
project areas appear on the Saspamco SE and Leal 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle maps, re­
spectively.
NUMBER OF ACRES SURVEYED: Roughly 1.6 acres.
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Kevin A. Miller
TEXAS ANTIQUITIES PERMIT: 4401.
DATES OF WORK: February 2, 2007.
PURPOSE OF WORK: Since the proposed undertaking will involve federal funds from the Federal
Highway Administration (FHWA) and involves state land controlled by the San Antonio District
of the TxDOT, investigations were conducted in compliance with the Texas Antiquities Code;
the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA); and the First Amended Programmatic Agree­
ment among the FHWA, TxDOT, the Texas State Historic Preservation Officer, and the Advi­
sory Council on Historic Preservation regarding the implementation of transportation undertak­
ings.
NUMBER OF SITES: None.
CURATION: No artifacts were observed. Thus, nothing was curated.
COMMENTS: The pedestrian survey utilized shovel testing in the relatively undisturbed locations
of the project areas. No cultural materials were observed on the surface or in the subsurface in­
vestigations of the two project areas. Therefore, SWCA recommends no further archaeological
investigations.

ii

INTRODUCTION

DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA

On behalf of TCB INC. and Texas Depart­
ment of Transportation (TxDOT), SWCA En­
vironmental Consultants (SWCA) conducted a
background literature and records review and
an intensive areal cultural resources survey of
two proposed bridge replacements in Atascosa
County, Texas (Figure 1). The project entails
the replacement and rehabilitation of bridges
by TxDOT on various county roads in Atas­
cosa County, Texas. Because the construction
would involve federal funds from the Federal
Highway Administration (FHWA) and state
land controlled by the San Antonio District of
TxDOT, investigations were conducted in
compliance with the Texas Antiquities Code;
the National Historic Preservation Act
(NHPA); the First Amended Programmatic
Agreement among the FHWA, TxDOT, the
Texas State Historic Preservation Officer, and
the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
regarding the implementation of transportation
undertakings, and the Memorandum of Under­
standing between TxDOT and the Texas His­
torical Commission (THC). The THC issued
Antiquities Permit 4401 to SWCA to conduct
the cultural resource investigations with Kevin
A. Miller serving as the Principal Investigator.

The project consists of two bridge replace­
ment locations on rural Atascosa County roads
(Figure 1). One bridge is located on Byrd
Road at Lucas Creek roughly 1.25 miles east
of the intersection of Farm-to-Market (FM)
1784 and State Highway (SH) 97 in northeast­
ern Atascosa County. The second bridge is
located on Jim Brite Road at the Atascosa
River about 0.75 miles southwest of Leal,
Texas in eastern Atascosa County. Although
some individual project construction areas
may be limited to a single approach, the APE
and survey for the replacement project loca­
tions were contained within the existing right­
of-way (ROW) of the bridges and their ap­
proaches for a distance of 330 feet (100 m)
along each approach. Both individual project
locations are limited to existing ROWs. The
vertical depth of impacts has not been speci­
fied in detail. However, construction within
typical roadway approaches will not impact
deposits to depths greater than four feet. Work
for any required bridge crossings may entail
cutting the banks at the crossing to a depth of
at least ten feet for a distance of at least 25
feet from the existing edge of the banks. Addi­
tionally, SWCA visually inspected from the
ROW an additional 25-foot wide corridor par­
allel to the ROWs to evaluate and address the
potential for adjacent buried and/or significant
archeological deposits. All work by SWCA
was conducted on public (TxDOT) lands.

The purpose of the work was to locate all pre­
historic and historic archaeological sites in the
Area of Potential Effects (APE), establish ver­
tical and horizontal site boundaries as appro­
priate with regard to the APE, and evaluate the
significance and eligibility of any sites re­
corded in the APE for eligibility for listing in
the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP) and designation as a State Archeo­
logical Landmark (SAL). All work was done
in accordance with the standards and guide­
lines of the Antiquities Code of Texas and the
National Historic Preservation Act. SWCA
archaeologists Josh Gibbs and Ken Lawrence
conducted the fieldwork on February 2, 2007.

The Byrd Road bridge replacement project
area is situated on Lucas Creek, a small up­
land drainage that drains into Prieto Creek and
eventually into the Atascosa River (Figure 2).
The geology of the crossing is mapped as Re­
cent Alluvium consisting of floodplain depos­
its (i.e., gravel, sand, clay, silt, and organic
material) (Barnes 1983). The soils of the
crossing are mapped as frequently flooded
Sinton soils that are described as deep soils
found along and above upland stream chan­

1

Atascosa County

0

10

5

SWCA

~,....,~~~:;;=:::::~Mi~
·1~
es Kilometers
,........,
0

10

20

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSULTAN TS
Bnokground Strntll lnp Statewide

a

Trnsn1:>0rrn11on DnLJ$eL. A tJ$CO$n Co

Bridge Location

SWCA ProJect No. 12320
Productton Februaiy 5. 2007. CAC

Figure 1. Project location map.

2

0

3.000

l!!I
N

0

D

LOOO
Project Area

6.000
Feet
Meters
2.000

BYRD ROAD
at LUCAS CREEK
CSJ: 0915-13-021
Atascosa County

Figure 2. Byrd Road at Lucas Creek project location.

3

SWCA

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSULTANTS
Background: USGS 7.5-minute
Saspamco SE Quadrangle.
SWCA Project No. 12178
Production: December 8 , 2007, CAC

nels and Wilco loamy fine sand (0–3 percent
slopes), which are characterized as deep,
loamy soils that occupy gently sloping up­
lands (Dittmar and Stevens 1980).

ject areas through both pedestrian and subsur­
face investigations. The archaeologists exam­
ined the ground surface and erosional profiles
for cultural resources, but the primary means
of investigation included shovel testing. In­
tensive survey was limited to relatively undis­
turbed areas within the project areas. Dis­
turbed portions of the projects were examined
at a reconnaissance level only. Shovel tests
were excavated according to THC standards,
which is roughly 16 per linear mile of 100-ft
wide ROW. Of note, the width of the project
ROW (as marked by fence lines) for the Byrd
Road and Jim Brite Road project areas is 50
feet while the total length of both projects is
relatively consistent (i.e., 700 feet). Thus, for
a project of this size the THC recommends
approximately 1 shovel test per crossing.

The second project area, Jim Brite Road at
Atascosa River, is situated on the Atascosa
River, a drainage that empties into the Nueces
River (Figure 3). The geology of the crossing
is mapped as Recent Alluvium consisting of
floodplain deposits containing gravel, sand,
silt, clay, and organic material (Barnes 1976).
The soils at the crossing are mapped as fre­
quently flooded Sinton soils that are described
as deep soils found along and above upland
stream channels and Odem loamy fine sand
(over wash) and Odem fine sandy loam, which
are both characterized as deep soils that oc­
cupy level to gently sloping areas along flood­
plains and stream terraces (Dittmar and Ste­
vens 1980).

All shovel tests were excavated until bedrock
or a substratum believed to predate human oc­
cupation was encountered. Excavated soil
was screened through ¼-inch mesh to retrieve
any cultural materials that might be present.
Each test performed through the course of the
project was documented with standardized
shovel test forms and recorded with a handheld GPS, which were subsequently plotted on
a map of the project area. During the survey
of the project area, the archaeological crew
photographed the environment and distur­
bances. Also, all available exposures were ex­
amined for the presence of cultural materials.

METHODS
BACKGROUND REVIEW
SWCA conducted a thorough archaeological
literature and records search of both project
areas. An SWCA archaeologist searched site
files and maps at the Texas Archeological Re­
search Laboratory and the THC’s Texas Ar­
cheological Sites Atlas, an online database, for
any previously recorded surveys and historic
or prehistoric archaeological sites located in or
near the project area. In addition to identifying
previously recorded archaeological sites, the
Atlas review included the following types of
information: NRHP properties, SALs, Official
Texas Historical Markers (OTHMs), Regis­
tered Texas Historic Land Marks (RTHLs),
cemeteries, and local neighborhood surveys.

Portions of the project encompass topographic
settings that have the potential for deeply bur­
ied archaeological sites (i.e., Atascosa River).
The primary method for quickly and effi­
ciently exploring these areas is backhoe trench
excavation. Initially, backhoe trench excava­
tion was planned for the Jim Brite Road at the
Atascosa River project area. However, upon
inspecting the project area, the ROW was
found to be too confined for investigation with
heavy machinery. Thus, inspections at this

FIELD METHODS
The cultural resources survey included two
SWCA archaeologists inspecting the two pro­

4

3.000
!!
!!I

0

D

LOOO
Project Area

6.000
Feet
Meters
2.000

JIM BRITE ROAD
at ATASCOSA RIVER
CSJ: 0915-13-020
Atascosa County

Figure 3. Jim Brite Road at Atascosa River project location.

5

SWCA

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSULTANTS
Background: USGS 7.5-minute
Leal Quadrangle.
SWCA Project No. 12320
Production: December 8 . 2007. CAC

The project area is situated in a gently rolling
upland and the Lucas Creek drainage is a mi­
nor upland drainage (see Figure 2). The pro­
ject area is surrounded by pasture land con­
taining short grasses with some scattered tim­
ber (e.g., mesquite, oaks, and elms) while the
drainage has a riparian corridor with various
mixed hardwoods (e.g., elms and oaks). Sur­
face visibility was good, typically 40–60 per­
cent.

crossing were limited to shovel test excava­
tions and examinations of exposed cutbanks.
Also to accommodate future utility adjust­
ments, a visual inspection was made of an ad­
ditional 25 feet beyond the ROW (as marked
by fence lines) along both sides of the road­
way for each crossing. No new ROW is indi­
cated for this project.

RESULTS

The existing bridge consists of a single span
steel stringer bridge that is 50-feet long and
16.5-feet wide and supported by concrete
abutments at the drainage banks (Figure 4).
The Byrd Road roadway runs north to south
and consists of a 20-feet wide gravel road with
no shoulders. The Lucas Creek drainage, at
this crossing, trends northwest to southeast
and is roughly 22-feet wide and exhibits 4­
foot high cutbanks. At the time of evaluation,
the drainage contained over a foot of water
and had a low-energy flow.

BACKGROUND REVIEW
The background review revealed that none of
the project areas have been surveyed for ar­
chaeological resources nor are there any cul­
tural resources documented within or adjacent
to the project areas. Furthermore, no previ­
ously recorded archaeological sites are within
two miles of either of the project locations.

FIELD SURVEY

The project area has been significantly im­
pacted by road construction, utilities, and
fence lines. Specifically, both approaches
along Byrd Road have been cut roughly 2–4
feet below grade (Figure 5). The road cut ex­
tends from the drainage to beyond 350 feet
from each end of the bridge. Also, at the
drainage banks, Byrd Road is underlain with a
2-feet thick fill section that extends 15 feet
from the road centerline, which tapers to grade
about 60 feet from the end of the bridge.

On February 2, 2007, two SWCA archaeolo­
gists conducted an intensive pedestrian survey
of the two proposed bridge replacement cross­
ings in Atascosa County. The pedestrian sur­
vey encountered a very narrow ROW (i.e., 50
feet) that has been disturbed from various con­
struction activities and utilities. The results of
the investigations of each project area are dis­
cussed below.
BYRD ROAD AT LUCAS CREEK

Furthermore, the project area has been dis­
turbed by a buried telephone cable that runs
along the western side of Byrd Road up both
approaches. The buried cable parallels the
road between 18–24 feet from centerline down
the approaches until about 50 feet from the
end of the bridge where it becomes an over­
head utility that crosses the drainage (Figure
6). Similarly, an overhead power line paral­
lels the eastern side of Byrd Road along both

The project area centers upon the bridge lo­
cated along the Byrd Road at Lucas Creek,
roughly 1.25 miles east of the intersection of
FM 1784 and SH 97 in northeastern Atascosa
County (see Figure 1). The project area en­
compasses approximately 0.8 acres of existing
ROW that includes Byrd Road and its bridge
over Lucas Creek.

6

Figure 4. Overview of Byrd Road at Lucas Creek bridge; facing southwest.

Figure 5. Overview of typical cut below grade along Byrd Road; facing south.

7

Figure 6. Overview of buried and overhead utility along Byrd Road; facing northwest.

8

approaches about 30 feet from centerline. Fi­
nally, barbed wire fence lines align both sides
of the road generally 24 feet from the road
centerline (Figure 7).

wide. The eastern approach crosses a narrow
(90-feet wide) first terrace before encounter­
ing the second terrace that continues beyond
the area of investigation. The project area is
surrounded by drainage bottom land contain­
ing short grasses with some scattered timber
(e.g., pecan and oaks) while the drainage has a
riparian corridor with various mixed hard­
woods (e.g., elms and oaks). Surface visibility
was good, typically 50–70 percent.

Due to the extensive disturbances and fill sec­
tions observed within the narrow ROW, no
subsurface investigations were conducted at
this project area. However, the entire project
area was examined and all available cut bank
exposures were inspected. No cultural materi­
als were observed on the surface or in the cut
banks of Lucas Creek.

The existing bridge consists of a single span
welded steel pipe deck with steel I-beam cross
pieces.
The bridge is 50-feet long and
roughly 14.5-feet wide and supported by con­
crete abutments at the drainage banks (Figure
8). The Jim Brite Road roadway generally
runs west to east and consists of a 12-feet
wide gravel road with no shoulders. The Atas­
cosa River, at this crossing, trends northeast to
southwest and is roughly 12-feet wide and ex­
hibits 5-foot high cutbanks. At the time of
evaluation, the drainage contained over 2 feet
of water and had a medium-energy flow.

A visual inspection of private lands up to 25
feet outside of the existing ROW was also
conducted. All areas surrounding the crossing
appear to be minimally disturbed by grazing
and/or vegetation clearing, but are otherwise
intact. The areas outside of the ROW west of
Byrd Road bordering Lucas Creek appear to
be the most intact. Although no evidence of
cultural materials were observed within or
outside of the project area, if construction ac­
tivities extend beyond the fence lines at this
crossing, then further investigations with
shovel tests are recommended.

The project area has been significantly im­
pacted by road construction, utilities, and
fence lines. Specifically, both approaches
along Jim Brite Road have been cut below
grade from the drainage to beyond 350 feet
from the end of the bridge. The cut below
grade on the western approach ranges from 2–
4 feet below grade. The road cut along the
eastern approach, which crosses the first and
second terraces, ranges from 2–6 feet below
grade (Figures 9 and 10). Also, several road­
side field entrances along Jim Brite Road have
impacted the ROW. Two roadside entrances
intersect the Jim Brite ROW about 300 feet
from the end of the bridge on the western ap­
proach while one roadside entrance is along
the eastern approach roughly 200 feet from the
end of the bridge.

JIM BRITE ROAD AT THE ATASCOSA RIVER
The project area centers upon the bridge lo­
cated along the Jim Brite Road at the Atascosa
River, roughly four miles east of the intersec­
tion of Interstate Highway (IH) 37 and Jim
Brite Road in eastern Atascosa County (see
Figure 1). The project area encompasses ap­
proximately 0.8 acres of existing ROW that
includes Jim Brite Road and its bridge over
the Atascosa River.
The project area is situated on the flood plain
terraces of the Atascosa River (see Figure 3).
Specifically, the project area crosses two ter­
races of the Atascosa River. The western ap­
proach almost exclusively crosses the first ter­
race of the drainage, which is roughly 300-feet

Furthermore, the project area has been dis­
turbed by a buried telephone cable that runs

9

Figure 7. Overview of fence line and buried utility along Byrd Road; facing north.

10

Figure 8. Overview of Jim Brite Road at the Atascosa River crossing; facing northwest.

11

Figure 9. Overview of road cut below grade along eastern approach of project area;
facing south.

12

Figure 10. Overview of road cut below grade along eastern approach; facing west.

13

along the southern (down stream) side of Jim
Brite Road up both approaches. The buried
cable parallels the road between 18–30 feet
from centerline down the approaches (Figure
11). Finally, barbed wire fence lines align
both sides of the road, generally 21–25 feet
from the road centerline (Figure 12).

conducted. All areas surrounding the crossing
appear to be minimally disturbed by grazing
and/or vegetation clearing, but are otherwise
intact. The western approach consists of a pe­
can orchard that probably was cleared of vege­
tation at some time. The eastern approach has
been disturbed to a moderate extent on the
down stream side of the roadway for cattle
pasturage while the upstream side of Jim Brite
Road solely contains mixed hardwoods. Al­
though no evidence of cultural materials were
observed within or outside of the APE, should
construction activities extend beyond the
fence lines at this project area, then further
investigation is warranted. Specifically, due
to the relatively intact river terraces surround­
ing the prominent drainage of this crossing,
then further investigations with backhoe
trench excavation is recommended.

Originally, this crossing was scheduled for
subsurface investigations with backhoe trench
excavations. However, upon evaluation of the
project area it was determined that the ROW
is too narrow and disturbed for backhoe trench
excavation. A reasonably intact area was ob­
served along the eastern approach that was
investigated with two shovel test investiga­
tions (ST JB-1 and JB-2). The shovel tests
were placed along the edge of the ROW
within the narrow (5 feet) strip between the
fence line and the cut below grade (Figure 13).
One shovel test (JB-1) was placed on the first
terrace of the Atascosa River while the second
shovel test (JB-2) was placed on the second
terrace of the drainage. Shovel test JB-1 was
excavated to a depth of 80 cm below surface
(bs) before terminating at impassible tree
roots. Shovel test JB-1 encountered a 20-cm
thick horizon of very dark grayish brown
(10YR3/2) silty loam overlying a yellowish
brown (10YR5/4) clay loam that graded into
fine sand, which extends below 80 cmbs (Ta­
ble 1). Shovel test JB-2 located on the second
terrace encountered deep very dark grayish
brown to brown (10YR3/2–4/3) sands that ex­
tended below 120 cmbs (Table 1). Of note,
some of the examined road cuts in this area
exhibited a brown (10YR4/3) clay horizon
below the very dark grayish brown to brown
sand horizon, which began about 135 cmbs
and extends below 140 cmbs. No cultural ma­
terials were observed during the shovel test
excavations or during the road cut profile ex­
aminations (Figure 14).

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
On behalf of TCB INC. and TxDOT, SWCA
conducted a background literature and records
review and an intensive areal cultural re­
sources survey of two proposed bridge re­
placements in Atascosa County, Texas. The
project entails the replacement and rehabilita­
tion of two bridges by TxDOT on two rural
county roads in Atascosa County, Texas. Due
to the project involving federal funds from the
FHWA and state land state land controlled by
the San Antonio District of TxDOT, the inves­
tigations were conducted in compliance of the
Texas Antiquities Code under Texas Antiqui­
ties Permit 4401 and were designed to identify
and evaluate any archaeological sites that may
warrant designation as a SAL for listing in the
NRHP.
The background records and literature re­
search revealed no previously conducted sur­
veys or recorded sites within or immediately
adjacent to the two project areas. The survey
of the Byrd Road at Lucas Creek project area
encountered an extensively disturbed, narrow

A visual inspection of private lands up to 25
feet outside of the existing ROW was also

14

Figure 11. Overview of buried utility along fence line along western approach; facing
east.

15

Figure 12. Overview of fence lines and orchard along western approach; facing east.

16

0.Y

~-

h ~.
I

{

. •

/1····I.

rr
_111" ·.
(

Ii

.././
I

800

-WO

0

~~=~::~~~~~~
e
MetersFeet
0

100
0

200

Negative Shovel Test

.·.

·y
.
··­
I

I

•

~

•

JIM BRITE ROAD
at ATASCOSA RIVER
CSJ: 0915-13-020
Atascosa County

Figme 13. Shovel test locations at Jim Brite Road bridge.

17

SWCA

ENVIRONMENTAL CONSULTANTS
Background: USGS 7.5-minute
Leal Quadrangle.
SWCA Project No. 12320
Production: December 8 , 2007 , CAC

Table 1. Shovel Test Data

Shovel Test

Site

Depth
(cmbs)

0-20
JB-1

-

20-60
60-80

-

Sediment
Texture

Artifacts Recovered

Comments

None

Located on first terrace on
upstream side of eastern bank.

None

Tree roots

None

Tree roots

Very dark grayish
Silty loam
brown (10YR3/2)
Yellowish brown
Clay loam
(10YR5/4)
Yellowish brown
Sand
(10YR5/4)
Very dark grayish
brown (10YR3/2)

Sand

None

100-120+ Brown (10YR4/3)

Sand

None

0-100
JB-2

Soil Color (Munsell)

18

Located on second terrace on
upstream side of eastern bank,
5.5' above road way. No
inclusions.
No inclusions. Stopped due to
depth.

Figure 14. Overview of road cut profile along eastern approach near shovel test JB-2;
facing northwest.

19

cording to 13 TAC 26.12, SWCA recom­
mends no further work.

ROW crossing an upland drainage while the
investigations at the Jim Brite Road at the
Atascosa River encountered a narrow and ex­
tensively disturbed ROW that crosses a promi­
nent drainage. Evidence of significant distur­
bance was observed at both project areas pri­
marily associated with the construction of the
respective roadways and various utilities.

In the event that previously undiscovered ar­
chaeological remains are discovered during
construction, work in the area of discovery
shall cease and emergency discovery proce­
dures will be implemented under the terms
and conditions of the First Amended Pro­
grammatic Agreement among the FHWA,
TxDOT, the Texas State Historic Preservation
Officer, and the Advisory Council on Historic
Preservation and the Memorandum of Under­
standing between TxDOT and the THC.

SWCA’s intensive survey did not encounter
any cultural materials on the surface or sub­
surface of the project areas. Therefore, no
cultural resources will be affected by the pro­
posed projects. Due the narrow width of the
ROW corridor, the survey standards called for
a minimum of one shovel test at each crossing.
Based on the disturbed nature of the Byrd
Road project area, no subsurface excavations
were conducted and no cultural materials were
observed at this project area. At the Jim Brite
Road project area, two shovel test excavations
were conducted within some of the undis­
turbed portions of the ROW that revealed deep
sands and silty loams. No cultural materials
were observed within the subsurface investi­
gations of this project area. Additionally, a
visual inspection was conducted for the por­
tions extending beyond 25 feet beyond the
ROW along both sides of the road in each pro­
ject area. No cultural materials were ob­
served. However, should construction activi­
ties extend beyond the fence lines in either
project area, then further investigations are
recommended. Due to the deep deposits ob­
served at the Jim Brite at the Atascosa River
crossing, these investigations should be con­
ducted with backhoe trench excavation.
In accordance with 36 CRF 800.4, SWCA has
made a reasonable and good faith effort to
identify archeological historic properties
within the APE. As no properties were identi­
fied that meet the criteria for listing in the
NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4 or for desig­
nation as a State Archeological Landmark ac­

20

REFERENCES
Barnes, V. G.
1976 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Crystal
City-Eagle Pass Sheet. Bureau of
Economic Geology, The University
of Texas at Austin.
1983 Geologic Atlas of Texas, San Antonio
Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Dittmar, G. W., and J. W. Stevens
1980 Soil Survey of Atascosa County,
Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Washington, D.C.

21

