TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF ANCILLARY CONSTRUCTION AREAS
TWIN OAK STEAM ELECTRIC STATION

Robertson County, Texas

Bruce A. Nightengale

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN No. sa
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN

s?­

1981

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcones Re.rearch Center
10,100 Burnet Road

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF ANCILLARY CONSTRUCTION
AREAS, TWIN OAK STEAM ELECTRIC STATION
Robertson County, Texas

Bpuae A. Nightengale

Principal Investigator:

David

Teahniaal Bulletin 53
1981

s.

Dibble

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF ANCILLARY CONSTRUCTION AREAS
TWIN OAK STEAM ELECTRIC STATION
Robertson County, Texas
INTRODUCTION
At the request of Texas Utilities Services Inc., the
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin, carried out cultural resource surveys and assess­
ments of four constructed or proposed facilities auxiliary
to the Twin Oak Steam Electric Station in Robertson County,
Texas. From August 10 through 12, 1981, TAS staff members
Bruce A. Nightengale, Ray D. Kenmotsu, and David O. Brown
surveyed a twelve mile long, seventy-five foot wide
pipeline corridor running from Lake Limestone to the Twin
Oak Reservoir (Fig. 1). Eight miles of pipe had been
installed prior to this inspection. Between September 9
and 11, Bruce Nightengale and Carol Fabac assessed three
additional areas: a constructed spur line connecting the
Twin Oak plant site to the railroad in Falls County, a
distance of approximately 10 miles; a proposed dragline
erection site consisting of 10 acres north of Highway 2293
s
miles east of Bremond; and a segment along Walnut Creek
which will be relocated (Fig. 2). On September 25, 1981,
David S. Dibble, the Principal Investigator carried out a
final inspection of the latter two areas.
The objectives of the surveys were:
1) to locate and identify any cultural resources which
might be adversely affected by construction;
2) to evaluate the significance of located resources;
3) to recommend ways of minimizing adverse
ects of
the proposed modifications; and
4) to recommend further investigations beyond the scope
of this initial appraisal.

.EiQure-1_

/'
Plant

site

'"

/'

./
./

41UIII

IF~3

PI !..t!.!..",!..
_____

',
.
~
"
_~:;::.
...... - - ­
- =='::7,/

/'
-----,7';...-r­
/'
,
'\~'

o\)~~,

,

C;r-' ~~

~~/. c,0
.... 0 . ~

,

~"',/~o

L

\}~~'\''\

/
/'

/'

-

/.~o~

0

n

-~

I

I

I

,_IF-2

\

/
I
I
'IF-1

/
/
/
/./

t
j
o

I

1

2

I

mil ••
T.A.S.-Fabac·19SI

3

I

4

SURVEY METHODS

-....

----~---

Prior to the inception of the field surveys, the site files
and maps of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory were
examined to determine if any previously recorded sites lay
within or adjacent to the study areas; none were found.
Listings of the National Register of Historic Places revealed
no site nominees would be affected by the proposed auxilliary
facilities. A review of past surveys in the general vicinity,
and specifically for the Twin Oaks Project, prepared the field
crew for possible site localities in the construction areas.
A paucity of sites are located in the uplands and these are
usually small surface exposures of lithic material. The
majority of the recorded sites are located near permanent water
sources, such as creeks tributary to the mainstem Brazos and
Navasota rivers. With this information in mind, a tentative
survey strategy was formulated.
Since the project areas are in the uplands, those areas
close to water were selected as the most promising for pre­
historic occupation. Specific terrain features such as terraces,
knolls and floodplain terraces were considered of highest
probability. Because of the extent of the modifications which
had taken place prior to this survey, only these high priority
areas were intensively covered along the completed railroad spur
line and the eight miles of installed pipeline. The remainder
of the impacted areas were less intensively inspected.
---­
The four miles of uncompleted pipeline were surveyed by
two crew members walking zig-zag .. transects on either side of
the center line within the right-of way. All exposed surfaces,
such as cutbanks, terraces, and knolls were investigated.
The dragline erection site was surveyed by a crew of two
walking fifty meters apart around the perimeter and then up
the middle to cover two knolls. Dense grasses, sometimes up
to five feet tall, made ground visibility in this area minimal
-

~.---..

-- - - - -

\
\

\

\
\

\

\
\

\

\.

\.

\

\

\
\

Cr.ek
re localion

2

3

mil••

T.A.S.·Fabac·1981

4

BACKGROUND
The survey of the ancillary facilities reported herein
is a continuation of a long-term program of archeological
investigations conducted by TAS for TUSI in preparation for
the construction of the Twin Oak Steam
ectric Station and
reservoir. The initial survey of the plant area was accom­
plished in conjunction with similar efforts at the Oak Knoll
plant site (Prewitt and Grombacher 1974) and in the same
season as the inital survey of the proposed Upper Navasota
Reservoir (now Lake Limestone) (Prewitt 1974). The latter
initiated a series of archeological investigations, including
additional survey and testing, over the next five years
(Prewitt 1975; Prewitt and Mallouf 1976; Mallouf 1979).
Recommendations offered as a result of the preliminary
inspection of the Twin Oak site resulted in the testing
of two sites and additional areal survey of a proposed
mining area (Turpin and Kluge 1980). As a result of the
planned development of much of Robertson County for energy
production, TAS carried out a sampling survey of large
lignite prospects in 1978 (Good, Turpin and Freeman 1980)
and an intensive survey of a smaller tract in 1980
(Moncure 1980). Regional environmental, archeological,
and historical background information is presented in the
above cited reports.

to nonexistent. The Walnut Creek relocation area was
surveyed by a crew of two walking a transect thirty meters
apart for the length of the proposed channel. All cut banks
and terraces along the creek were more intensively examined.
Shovel probes were used to check for subsurface material
in the one flood plain knoll along the transect line.
Located sites were recorded on standard University of
Texas site survey forms, photographed, and plotted on USGS
7.S t topographic maps. Collection of cultural material
was minimal; the one artifact retained is curated at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.

SURVEY RESULTS
One prehistoric site and three isolated chert flakes (IF)
were found along the twelve-mile pipeline corridor. All
were located in the completed eight mile portion (Fig. 1). One
chert flake (IF1) was found on the floodplain of Willow
Creek in an area so disturbed by pipeline construction that
its original provenience was indeterminable. The second, IF2,
was atop a knoll overlookin g the Steele Creek flood plain
about 10 to 15 m. east of the right of way. IF3, a chert flake
of uncertain manufacture, was located on an intermittent
drainage terrace. Intensive searches of the areas surrounding
these flakes produced no associated cultural material.
Survey of the completed ten mile railroad spur resulted in
the discovery of one site, 4lRT147, and one isolated chert
flake (Fig. 2). Scraping and bulldozing in the surrounding
area have accelerated erosion, causing redeposition of the
sediments and the cultural material. Shovel probes at the
site revealed a deflated surface. The isolated find; a
tertiary flake of chert, was found on the north side of the
railroad bed in the borrow area on a terrace between Little
Sandy Creek and a minor drainage. Shovel probes and intensive
survey of the area produced no associated material.
The dragline erection site had been affected by yearly
plowing and subsequent invasion vegetation made ground visibility
poor. Intensive survey augmented by shovel probes failed to
produce any archeological material. Similarly, the survey of
the Walnut Creek relocation area was negative. The proposed
channel cut passes through improved pasture with dense ground
cover but subsurface probes of the only sandy knoll within
the area produced no subsurface artifactual material.
Site Descriptions
4lRTl31
Chert flakes and cores were found amid colluvial sandy
deposits and gravels of chert, petrified wood" and quartzite

.~----~-~--

-

.. - . - - ...•..

--.-- ....•.....

~---

. - - - - -..

-----------.~-----.----

...-

­

on the mid-and-lower slope of a southern terrace of Running
Branch, a tributary of the Navasota River now totally
submerged by Lake Limestone. The cultural material and
gravels appear to have been redeposited from the top of the
terrace by natural erosional processes and pipeline and pump
construction. More of the site may have once existed but,
because of the disturbances, additional material was not
apparent. No further work is recommended because of the
severe modifications to the site area and the shallowness
of the cultural deposit.
41RT147
This lithic scatter is located on the eastern slope of
a southwestern
owing tributary of Big Sandy Creek which
lies approximately 500 meters to the west. Chert flakes
were exposed on the top and mid-slope of the northern
borrow area and at mid-slope in the southern section.
The distal portion of a biface was found in an erosional
rill; a mana fragment directly adjacent to the railroad
bed was collected. Additionally, one utilized flake was
noted in the northern area.
All material was found in the exposed borrow areas,
the majority was on the mid-slope of the northern exposure.
Further search in the wooded areas proximal to the borrows
and subsurface probes failed to produce additional material.
Clearing and borrowing modifications have promoted deflation
of the site area and the movement of artifacts was assumed.
The absence of subsurface deposits and the probable disruption
of the cultural materials seriously reduces this site's
potential; no further work is recommended.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
One site and three isolated flakes were located by survey
of the twelve mile pipeline corridor; one site and one isolated
flake were found along the railroad spur; no sites were recorded
in the dragline erection site or along the proposed relocation
of Walnut Creek. All of the surveyed areas are in the uplands,
and have been subjected to some degree of land modification.
The latter factor plays a major role in the interpretation of
sites of as ephemeral a nature as the majority of upland sites.
Previous research in the region attributes the paucity of
upland sites to the high degree of land modification, the
limited occupations and concomitant shallow, sparse deposits
of cultural material, and the lack of permanent water sources.
Modern land use practices, whether agricultural or industrial,
are highly destruct e to the sites characterist ally found
in this
ion. What little remains of the limited occupational
sites is often destroyed or displaced, rendering interpretations
of site function tenuous.
Site 4lRT131, located on the terrace top and slope over
looking what was once the confluence of Running Branch and
____ . . . . . . ._t_h_e_N._avasota RiverL..is_assumed to be a lithic proc:yrement a_Ie a .
F
shed tools are notably lacking, and representative material
consists of cores, flakes, and gravels of chert,quartzite, and
petrified wood. Byrd (1979: 274) points out the occurrence of
highly silicious gravels on divides, hillsides, and channel lag
along the Navasota River. The proximity of this site to
probable base camps on the flood plain of the Navasota River,
such as 4lRT2, places it within easy reach of the populace who
used this lithic resource for stone tool manufacture.
Little can be proposed from the artifactual remains of
41RT
~iL.aSsJlmed that~omew!tere alo~g the~ope
and terrace of this deposit there once existed a prehistoric
campsite, probably a short term, seasonally occupied foraging
station.

mm

_ _ __

Due to the poorly preserved nature of the cultural deposits
at both sites, the lack of subsurface material, and the
impact of previous construction which has irreparably
altered the site integrity, no further work is recommended.
The isolated finds, found in a state of modified provenience
and without associated material, also require no more extensive
investigation.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Byrd, Thomas
1979
Appendix I: Soils Morphology. In: Archeological
Investigations at Lake Limestone. M.G. Mallouf.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report No.
71, The University of Texas at Austin.
Good, Carolyn E., Solveig A. Turpin and Martha D. Freeman
1980
A Cultural Resource Assessment of the Calvert
and Cole Creek Lignite Prospects, Robertson
County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey
Research Report No. 75, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Mallouf, Michael G.
1979
Archeological Investigations at Lake Limestone.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report No. 71
The University of Texas at Austin.
Moncure, Hank
1980
Cultural Resource Survey of the Diamond No. 1
Lignite Prospect, Robertson County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin
No. 42, The University of Texas at Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1974
Upper Navasota Reservoir: An Archeological
Assessment. Texas Archeological Survey
Research Report No. 47, The University of Texas
at Austin.
1975

Upper Navasota Reservoir: Archeological Test
Excavations at the Barkley and Louie Sadler Sites.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report
No. 53, The University of Texas at Austin.

Prewitt, Elton R. and Kerry Grombacher
1974
An Archeological and Historical Assessment of
The Areas to be Affected by the Twin Oak and Oak
Knoll Projects, East Central Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey Research Report No. 43, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R. and Michael G. Mallouf
1976
Upper Navasota River, Texas: Excavations at Lake
Limestone, Spring 1976. Texas Archeological Survey
Research Report No. 66. The University of Texas
at Austin.

Turpin, Solveig A. and Margaret J. Kluge
1980
Cultural Resource Sampling, Survey and Assessment
in Areas to be Affected by the Twin Oak Steam
Electric Station, Robertson County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report No.
74, The University of Texas at Austin.

