fir<'-?/ o1to,l1~.o3
/Afv

APPRAISAL OF THE ARCHEOLOGICAL RESOURCES OF
DIAB LO RESERVOIR
VAL VERDE COUNTY, TEXAS

AUGUST

A

PROJECT

1958

OF THE INTER-AGENCY

ARCHEOLOGICAL SALVAGE PROGRAM

IHHllllHll I
113411

Prepared •Y
ARCHEOLOGICll SALVAGE PROGRAM FIELD OFFICE, AUSTIN, TEXAS
(£. B. Jelks, Arc•ealo1ist 11 C•111e)
MITl,MAL PARK SERVICE
U. S. DEPARTMENT OF THE lMTUIOR '

r!.--cf'(!,3

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
The Diablo Dam and Reservoir

t

I

Environment of the Reservoir Area

. . . . . ....

1

• . • . . . · . • •

3

••

Previous Archeological Investigations

• . • . . . • • 5

......

Archeological Survey . •
Archeological Complexes

. . . . . • • . • • • .

......
..
...
.....
..... ....

Paleo-American Stage
Archaic Stage . . .
Neo-American Stage
Historic Stage

'

Archeological Sites

• 11
• 11

•. 13

. • 14

. . . • 25

Open Surface Sites

. . . . 26

...

Buried Terrace Sites

. . . .•
........

Stratified Terrace Sites

...

Intermediate Rockshelters .
Small Rockshelters

. 11

. 16

Description of the Artifacts . .

Large Rockshelters

.. 8

...

35

. 39

...

....

. 49

63

Pictograph Sites . . .
Summary and Reconunendations

33

. ..

11

82

Appendix: Archeological Survey of the Mrxioan Part
of Diablo Reservoir . .
. • , . • • • • • • . 87
References Cited • . . . • .

. . . . . . . . . . 90
/

THE DIABLO DAM AND RESERVOIR
On the Rio Grande, approximately 12 river miles above the
city or Del Rio, Texas, and about one mile below the mouth of
Devils River, is the future site of one of the major international storage dams propos~d by the Water Treaty of 1944 between
the United States and Mexico.

Plans for the project, to. be known

as the Diablo Dam and Reservoir proJect,,are being formulated by
the International Boundary and Water. Commission and are soon to
be submitted for approval to the Government of the United States
and Mexico.

Construction is scheduled to begin in i960 end will

require three and one half to four years for completion.

The re•

conunendations in this report call for a program of archeological
salvage to ·extend over a five-year period.

Therefore it is es-

. sentiel that the salvage work begin as soon es practicable.
Under the plan recently agreed upon by the two sections of
the International Boundary and Water Commission, the surface of
the conservation and flood pools will be at elevations 1,117.0
feet and 1,140.4 feet respectively.

This will result in the im-

poundment of water in the canyons of the Rio Grande, Pecos, and
Devils Rivers.

In addition, numerous tributary canyons of all

three rivers will be affected.

It is estimated that the reservoir

will attain a maximum length of some 75 to 80 miles on the Rio
Grande, and will extend 18 to 20 miles up the Pecos and 30 or
more miles up the Devils River.

5,977,000 acre-feet is planned.
1

A total storage capacity of

In the general area or the reservoir the rivers flow
through deep canyons with preclpitous walls.

In the canyon

walls are numerous caves and deep overhangs.

With these ex-

oellent natural shelters located beside permanent streams it
is not surprising that most of the major archeological sites

.

of the region are concentrated in and near the reservoir area.
Furthennore, the natural aridity or the ~rea and the protection
from the elements afforded by the shelters have resulted in the
excellent preservation of ordinarily perishable cultural materials.

The significance of the archeology of this area is thus

greatly increased by the exceptionally complete inventory of
material culture which may be recovered.
Many of these sites will be inundated by the conservation
pool or the reservoir; others will be submerged intermittently
by the flood control pool.

Only one brief flooding of the dry

deposits in the shelters will be sufficient to destroy artifacts
preserved by dessication for thousands of years.

Still other

sites, not directly flooded, will become vulnerable
ism, from which the more inaccessible

site~

to vandal-

have been protected

in the past by the ruggedness ot the terrain.

It is therefore

urgent that a_ thorough study of the archeological data or the
Diablo area be carried out before

2

comple~ion

of the reservoir.

.

l

ENVIRONMENT OF THE RESERVOIR AREA
Reserv~ir

Topographically, the Diablo
hilly region of 900 to 1,500 feet

area is a semi-arid,

el~vatlon,

dissected by nu-

merous steep-walled canyons including the gorges of the Pecos.
Devils River, and the Rio Grande.

Cretaceous limestone of the

Comanche Series forms the country rock and ls responsible for
the rugged, sharply eroded terrain.

Thin limestone-derived

soils are found on the uplands while alluvial soils occur
along the Rio Grande and to a much lesser extent along the
Pecos and the Devils.
Except along the three rivers--the Devils, the Pecos, and
the Rio Grande--water is extremely scarce throughout the region.
Virtually all the tributary
during periods of rain.

canyon~

are dry and carry water only

Most of the canyons have bedrock water

holes fed by rains, however, and these retain standing water
during periods of normal precipitation.

There are several lar.;e

springs within the reservoir area, Goodenough Springs near Comstock and San Felipe Springs near Del Rio being especially notable.
A number of springs are also found along the Devils, particularly
on the upper Devils River.

1

Based on the following sources:

Bray, William L., "Vegetation of the Soto! Country in Texas. 11
Bulletin of the University of Texas, No. 60; Scientific Series, No. 6.
Austin, 1905.
Texas Almanac, 1958-1959.

Dallas, 1957·

3

The climate of the Diablo area is semi-arid.

Based upon

a 47 year record at the nearest weather station, Del Rio, the
average annual rainfall is 15,58 inches.

Temperature varies

from an average of 60° F. in January to 85° F. in July.
maximum recorded is 111° F .. and the minimum 11° F.

The

The wind

speed averages 10.7 miles per hour,
Vegetation is largely like that of the Sotol Country of
the southeastern Trans-Pecos region.

Also present are some

characteristic plants of the Brush Country of the Rio Grande
Plain which borders the area on the east.

Juniper and mesquite

form the chief timber although scattered motts of live oak
occur sporadically and a few pecan and cottonwood trees are
found along the permanent streams.

Yucca, sotol, lechugilla,

ocotillo, catclaw, cenizo, nolina, cresote brush, and a variety
of cacti further cha.:-<J.ct.erize the flora.

In general the vege-

tation is that of an arid to semi-arid' region.
Common fauna include peccary, deer, coyote, jackrabbit,
beaver, rock squirrel, raccoon, skunk, fox, and ringtaiL

The

,,
it•
I

gray wolf, the mountain lion or panther, and the black bear
;re foI'I!lerly numerous but are rarely seen now,

Reptiles are

represented by various lizards and snakes, with the poisonous
diamond-back and rock rattlers being notable examples of the
class,

Centipedes, millipeds, scorpions, and a variety of

spiders are the typical myriapods and arachnids.

Vultures,

ravens, sparrows, wrens, turkeys, ducks, dove, and quail are
the most common birds.

4

J:
'i
Il

<

l

PREVIOUS ARCJJEOLOOICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Witte Memorial Museum and the Southwest Texas Archeologlcal Society carried out limited reconnaissance in the Diablo
area in the early 1930•s, and also undertook limited excavations
at the Shumla Caves in 1933 and at Eagle Cave in 1936 (Davenport
ca. 1938; Davenport and Chelf n.d.; Gardner and Martin n.d.;
Martin n.q., 1933).

Records of this work are inadequate and

the materials collected are largely undocumented.

Recently,

Mardith K. Schuetz, present curator of Witte Museum, has made
a conunendable effort to salvage some data from the collections
. and has published a paper describing some of the artifacts
(Schuetz, 1956).
The University of Texas carried out brief excavations ·at
the Fate Bell Rockshelter (VV 74) in Seminole Canyon in 1932
(Pearce and Jackson, 1933; Thomas, 1933).
directed by A. T. Jackson.

Field work was

Limitations of time prevented

extensive study of the site and only a small portion of it was
tested.

Although much important information was obtained,

artifact collectivns were not sufficiently extensive for
detailed stratigraphic analysis.
Site VV

16~,

a·rockshelter of intermediate size in Eagle

Canyon, was trenched by E. B. Sayles and J. Charles Kelley in
1932 for Gila Pueblo (H. C. Taylor, l949b).

Although the

general results of Sayles' investigation were published in
his Archaeological Survey of Texas (Sayles, 1935), no specific
site reports on his work in the Pecos River area were issued.

In 1933 two interesting shelters on the lower Pecos, VV 55
and VV

67, were excavated by Frank M. Setzler or the Smithsonian

Institution.
obtained.

Apparently, a considerable amount of data was

The work has been reported in very preliminary form

(Setzler, 1934), together with the results of other excavations
in the Trans-Pecos area but complete site reports are lacking.
Horseshoe Cave on Cow Creek,

VV 171, was partially tested

in 1936 by A. M. Woolsey for the University of Texas (Woolsey,
MS; Butler, 1948).

Several well-preserved burials and a variety

of artifacts were found.

Work was of an exploratory nature,

however, and complete data on cultural stratigraphy and assoelation were not obtained.

As yet, these brief excavations

have not been published.
Murrah Cave, a rockshelter of intermediate size 25 to 30
miles up the Pecos from its mouth, was excavated in 1937 for
the West Texas Museum by W. C. Holden.

The site was not com-

pletely excavated and no cultural stratigraphy was recognized.
A brief report of the excavation has been published by Holden

(1937).
Despite the interest shown in the Diablo area by many
archeologists, large scale excavations have not yet been carried out there.

Results of the limited excavations of the 1930's

have not been adequately reported.

These early investigations

did serve, however, to focus attention on the richness of the
archeological remains, and as a result vandalism and looting

6

became rampant, and have continued up to the present.

or the

tive years ago virtually all

Twenty-

archeological sites in the

Diablo area were completely undisturbed; today few sites have
escaped damage from vandalism in one form or another.
Several individuals have undertaken general site and pictograph surveys in the area.

With regard to pictographs, special

attention should be called to the pioneer work or the late .
Forrest Kirkland who devoted considerable time and effort to
making caretul reproductions of many or the pictographs of the
area (Kirkland 1937, 1938, 1939).

A. T. Jackson and his asso-

ciates also carried out periodic pictographic surveys in the
Diablo area over a period of several years.

The results of

this work appear in Jackson's Picture-Writing or Texas Indians.
J. Charles Kelley carried out extensive researches on the
archeology of the Trans-Pecos, including the

lo~er

Pecos River

area, and is largely responsible for the present archeological
concepts of the region (Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer, 1940i
Kelley, 1950, 1957).

Herbert

c.

Taylor, a student or Kelley•s

at The University of Texas, did some reconnaissance and limited
testing in the area in

194-8-19~9

(H. C. Taylor, 1948,

19~9, 19~9b).

ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
DUI'ing January, February, and early March of 1958, the
Austin, Texas Office of the National Park Service began an
archeological survey of the area to be affected by the
posed Diablo Dam and Reservoir.

pro~

Field reconnaissance was

carried out by John A. Graham and W. A. Davis, under the
general supervision of Edward B. Jelks',
summarizes the results of the survey.

The present report
The complete field

records are on file at the Austin Office.
Preliminary work was begun.early in January.
,

Jelks,

Graham, and Davis met with Regional Archeologist Charlie R.
Steen at the reservoir site, and preliminary planning of the
survey was completed.

Several days were also spent in aerial

reconnaissance and in examining some of the more accessible
sites on the ground.

Walter W. Taylor, of the Instituto

Nacional de Antropologia y Historia, later met the group in
Del Rio to represent the Mexican Government.

Dr. Taylor con-

eluded plans for surveying the Mexican portion of the reservoir
. 2

under sponsorship of the Mexican Government.

2The survey of the Mexican portion of the reservoir was
begun early in February and tenninated late in March. The
project was under the supervision of Dr. Taylor, who spent
several weeks in the field at the beginning of the season
and again at its end. Inspector Francisco Gonzales Rul, also
of the Instituto Nacional de Antropologia y Historia, was in
charge of field operations. A summary of the report being
prepared for the Mexican Government is included as an appendix
to the present report.

8

~·,1

The great extent of the reservoir and the ruggedness of
the terrain precluded any attempt to survey the entire area
from the ground in the limited time available.

In the hope

that the more conspicuous sites could be located by aerial
reconnaissance, a small plane was chartered and all the major
canyons were examined carefully from the air.

The sites thus

located were plotted on USGS topographic sheets.

Then the

survey party entered the reservoir area in the general vicinity
of each site seen from the air, the site was examined and
recorded, and the adjacent area was surveyed.

While walking

in to these sites, many a.ddltional ones were discovered.
Each site inspected by the survey party was recorded on
a site survey form.

The extent of the site, depth of the cul-

tural deposits, and other pertinent data were noted.

Photographs

of each site were made and its location plotted as precisely as
possible on USGS topographic sheets.

Surface collections of

artifacts were made, but no testing of the sites was undertaken.
The pictographs which were found at many of the cave· sites were
photoeraphed in color.
At the conclusion of the survey, a few of the more sign!ficant sites were revisited by the survey party.
at that time were:

Also present

John M. Corbett, Charlie R. Steen, and

Edward B. Jelks of the National Park Service; T. N. Campbell
and E. Mott Davis of the University of Texas; and David Gebhart, ·
Director of the Roswell, New Mexico, Museum,

9

Near the end of the field season, a river survey along
the Rio Grande was undertaken.

A boat was put in the river

near the head or the reservoir and the entire canyon down to
the mouth or the Devils was searched for archeological sites,
Although dense growth on the narrow terraces along the canyon
floor partly obscured visibility of the lower bluffs, it is
probable that no major sites were overlooked.

To have com-

pletely examined all of the bluffs would have required another
two months or more.

Participating in the four day boat trip

were John Graham, W. A. Davis, E. B. Jelks, and E, Mott Davis.

...

·~

ARCHEOLOGICAL COMPLEXES
In the following paragraphs a very-brief sketch or the
archeologlcal sequences of the lower Pecos River area is
presented.

The numerous problems and the great gaps in know-

ledge of the culture history should be evident.

This brief

sununary follows Kelley, Campbell, and,Lehmer (1940) and Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks

(195~).

Paleo-American Stage
No sites or artifacts affiliated with this staee are
known from the Diablo area or even from the general southern
Trans-Pecos region.

This

ci~cumstance

may possibly be a

reflection of the limited nature of previous explorations,
rather than an indication that the early, big game hunting
pattern failed to penetrate the area.
Archaic Stage
In the Big Bend area of the Rio Grande, west of Diablo,
the early Archaic is represented by the Pecos River Focus and
three other complexes, all imperfectly understood:
villas, Santiago, and Red Bluff.

The Mara-

Maravillas appears to repre-

sent the 'earliest known cultural manifestation in the region
and precedes Pecos River Focus.

Santiago has been regarded

as apprax1mately contemporaneous with the first appearance
of Pecos River Focus, while the temporal position·of Red Bluff

11.

·,

can only be placed vaguely as earlier thnn the Livennore Focus.
Data relating to these complexes are very scarce, and it ls
not known what role. if any, they played in the lower Pecos
River developments,
The best known culture unit of the Archaic Stage in South-

western Texas is the Pecos River Focus.

As de.fined by Kelley,

this focus includes most of the archeoiogical materials kno'Wn
from the Diablo area (Kelley,, Campbell, and Lehmer, 1940,p.

2~-27).

The Fate Bell Rockshelter, VV 74, has been designated type component for the Pecos River Focus and other components have been
recognized in the area.

Recent radiocarbon age determinations

from.Frightful Cave in Coahuila suggest that Pecos River Focus
may have considerable antiquity (W._ W. Taylor, 1956).
In the Big Bend area, Pecos River Focus is followed by the
.chisos Focus of the Big Bend Aspect, which apparently makes its

No clear-cut

appearance near the close of Pecos River Focus.

Chisos Focus components have yet been defined in the lower Pecos
River area, although both Kelley (1950) and Herbert Taylor (1949b,
'.
p. 72~74) have suggested that Chisos Focus influences are present.

Kelley believes it likely that the upper levels of the

Shumla Caves represent Chisos Focus (Kelley, 1950, p. 72).
Herbert Taylor (1949b, p,

11~)

has suggested that the Pecos River

Focus, after a long period of independent existence, took on
I
11

Chisoid overtones" at a relatively late time ih the

12

Archai~

; '

''

period, after which there was a "Pecos Rlver Focus and Chisoid
ama lgruna t ion with later groups. 11

Chisos Focus is believed to

have entered the lower Pecos River region from the Big Bend
area to the west, where it apparently appeared at an earlier

time.

Taylor's suggestions appear largely speculative to the

present writers, however, since as yet'very little evidence
has been presented to support the contention that Chisos Focus
actually occurs in the Diablo area.
Neo-American Stage
At present, the Livermore Focus represents the only defined culture unit of this stage thought to h8ve occupied the
eastern part of Trans-Pecos Texas.
Lehmer

(19~0,

Kelley, Campbell, and

p, 163) have suggested that the Livermore. Focus

appeared in the Big Bend area about the same time as the Chisos
Focus (ca.

Boo

A.D.) and that the two foci existed contemporane-

ously until approximately A.D. 1200. ·Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks,
however, question such a long time span for Livermore Focus as
it is presently known (1954, p. 60).

Kelley has recently re-

affirmed his original conclusions (Kelley, 1957).
In the lower Pecos River region little is known of the
period subsequent to the Pecos River Focus.

Strong evidence

for the presence of Livermore Focus has nJt been presented to
date, though both Kelley and Herbert Taylor see some indications
of Livermore Focus in the area.

That a late horizon is present

at Diablo is obvious from the consistent occurrence of arrowpoints in the upper layers of the shelters and on the surfaces

13

of open sites.

Most of these points fall in the general pattern

of the Perdiz type, but with local variations in style.

one

arrow point 1'ound during the survey might be classified as a
Livermore p·oint.

The cultural affiliations of these arrow

points have not yet been adequately explained.

Further ev1-

dence or Neo-American occupation is seen in a late, monochrome
pictograph style with illustrations of bows and arrows, Kelley,
1950).

Historic Sta.cu~
-----···-·
No sites of this stage are known from the area with the
exception of a single historic pictograph site, VV 77.

Lipan

Apache and other nomadic groups were reported in the region at
the time or European colonization, but no archeological remains
attributable to any of the historic groups have been recognized.
Most of the materials collected during the present survey
are attributable to Pecos River Focus, as it has been defined.
Very few, if any, of the artifacts can definitely be related
to Chisos Focus or to Livermore Focus,

Although a number of

arrow points were collected, only one approaches the Livermore
type in.form.

The two snub-nose and scrapers found during the

survey may have derived from Livermore Focus occupation since
this trait is not listed for either the Pecos River Focus or
the Chisos Focus and is considered by Kelley to be a charac-.
teristic trait of Livermore Focus (Kelley, 1957, p. 46).

Snub-

nose scrapers, however, are consistently associated with Perdiz

points over a maJor portion of Texas, and their Primary assocla tion at Diablo may Well be with the Perdiz points rather
than wlth the Livermore Focus.

The several Fresno points

found during the survey mny possibly be attributable to
Livermore Focus, but, as Kelley has pointed out; Fresno is
found in several 'fexas cotnplexes and is non-diaGnostic by
itself (K~lley, 1957, p, 46).

With regard to Chisos Focus,

it may be of significance that the present collection consists
predominately of chipped stone artifacts, which are said to
be relatively rare in Chisos Focus components.

DESCRIPTION OF AR'rIFACTS

The artifacts described below are those collected during
the survey,

All were surface finds: no test excavations were

made,
Dart Points
The projectile point typology followed in the present
report is that set up by Suhm, Krieger; and Jelks (1954).

For

some of the types with considerab1e-·varfat1on in fonn, an indication of the range of variation is given for the present materials.
Langtry
Mardith Schuetz (1956, p. 141) has called attention to
·variations in the Langtry type in her recent study of the Val
Verde County collections at the Witte Museum,

She ·refers to

-

three deviations from "typical" Langtry points and tabulates
one of these separately as "Langtry deviation" or "Val Verde
points".

All three of the deviations or varieties recosn1zed

by Mrs. Schuetz are clearly discerniole in the present collection and will be treated as distinct varieties of the type,
. Two additional varieties are also described briefly.
Th~

varieties of Langtry described below generally conform

to the definition of Langtry. points presented' by Suhm, Krieger,
and Jelks (1954, p. 438).

The several tentative varieties are

given separate designations to facilitate reference.

16

~-~).

Langtry "A" (Pl. 5A,

The stem of this variety is

.contracting and is usually reiatively long.
straight.

The base is

In general the point is comparatively long and
Variety "A 11 is illustrated by specimen C and possibly

narrow.

by E in Suhm, trleger, and Jelks (Pl. 98),
~-!:!_).

Langtry "B" (Pl. 5A.
is usually wider than that

or

The stem is contracting and

Langtry

11

A", the points as a

whole being somewhat broader than Langtry "A".

The base, as

a rule, is slightly concave, although'one specimen has a
straight base.

Characteristically, barbs are strongly devel-

oped and may flare.

The well developed barbs and the concave

base make Variety "B" readily distinguishable from the others,
Points R, U, V, and several others illustrated in Suhm, Krieger,
and Jelks (199i, Pl. 98} are of this variety.
Langtry

11

C11 (Pl. 5A, .!_-!!!_).

The stem is expanding with

flaring tips, while the base varies from deeply concave to
al.most straight.

This variety represents the "Langtry devia-

tion" or "Val Verde Point" of Schuetz (1956, p. 141 and Pl. 16,
R-W).

Of

the "397 points she classifies as Langtry, over 100

are of this variety.

Points Land M in Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks

(1954, Pl. 98) illustrate the same variety.
Langtry

11

0 11 (Pl. 5B,

~-~).

the base is convex to pointed.

The ste"l is contracting, and
Fourteen percent of Schuetzrs.

397 l'..angtry points .are of this type (Schuetz, 1956, p. 141).
Only one of the Langtry points illustrated in Suhm, Krieger,
and Jelks (1954, Pl.

98,

G) conforms to this variety.

17

L'lngtry

11

E11 (Pl. 5U, d-f).

The otem is contracting; the

base ls straieht to sli6htly convex.

The chief diagnostic

feature of this variety, however, ls crudeness in style and
manufacture, n strlkinr, contrast to the usually thin and finely
made forms of the other varieties of Langtry.

Most specimens

are thick and relatively large, although a few smaller examples
are

pre~ent.

As indicated, the above va1•ieties have been differentiated
in order to lend greater control to reference and description.
Present data are not sufficient to reveal the significance of
variational differences within the Langtry type.

When more

data on the distribution of the several varieties are available,
perhaps the various forms will reflect cultural differentials.
Until then, however, the present distinctions have value only
for reference and description.

I

I:

Ensor (Pl. 6A, ~-!)
The specimens identified as Ensor points present the same
range of variation as those illustrated for the type by Suhrn,
Krieger, and Jelks (1954, Pl. 98).

In

add~tion,

several·of

the specimens exhibit a marked tendency toward extremely broad
corner notching,

Nine specimens, although conforming in general

to the Ensor category, were excluded from that classification
because of their excessively broad corner notches.

In.this

latter group, the bases tend ·to· be slightly narrower than the

18

'!

~------------------------shoulders,

Sayles illustrates several broad, cornernotchcd

projectile points which he considers the most typical artifact
of his Lipan Phase (Sayles, 1935, p. 62 and Pl. 16A, !•£}.
These are almost identical to some of the specimens in the
present broad corner-notched collection.

Frio (Pl. 6B,

~-£)

The present collec.tion of Frio points reflects the full
range of variation illustrated in Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks

(1954, Pl. 98), some of whose specimens came from site VV 74.
Pedernales (Pl. 7A,

~

~)

and

The specimens identified as type Pedernales are evenly
distributed between two groups.

The first group is character-

ized by pronounced shoulders and shallow basal indentions.
Except for the shallow basal concavity, the form strongly resembles the type Bulverde.

The second group is characterized

by weak shoulders and pronounced basal indentions.

specimens resemble points A and E

(Pi.

11~

These latter

and 113, respectively)

of Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (195ll-),

Other Dart Point Types
Specimens of a-11 other recognized dart point types conform

in general to the definitions of Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954)
although slight variations were

occa~ionally

observed.

Arrow Points
Perdiz (Pl. 9A,

~-.!)

Perdiz points from the Diablo sites are quite distinct
from the Perdiz points found in Central and Eastern Texas.

19

For the most part,

howove~,

they closely resemble Perdiz points

from the Big Bend area west of Dlablo.

The laterally projecting

shoulders of some specimens are reminiscent of the Livermore
type •.
Other Arrow Points
In addition to Perdiz, arrow types Fresno, Cliffton, and
Eddy were· recognized.

One incomplete specimen is possibly a

Livermore point, and three miscellaneous arrow points are
unidentified as to type.
Other Stone Artifacts
Choppers (Pl. llA,

~-£and ~-£)

A total of 48 specimens were grouped under the general
term chopper.

These are uniformly crude and heavily chipped,

Most are bi-facial but several are plano-convex and approach
a crude form of scraper.

Some choppers grade into the fist

axe class.
Fist axes (Pl. llA,

~)

Nine specimens were grouped as fist axes,

These are

differentiated from the general chopper group on the basis of
a thinner and better-formed cutting edge.
Scrapers
Three varieties are represented: (1) Side scrapers,
(2) Snub-nose end scrapers, and (3) Miscellaneous end scrapers.

20

Side scrapers (Pl. 9B, ~-!) represent the most common torm
and exhibit a wide range of variation.

They grade from lieht

flake scrapers to heavy, chipped nodules.
Snub-nose scrapers (Pl.
only two specimens.
noses,

9n,

~and ~)

are represented by

Both nre Plano-convex with steep, blunt

They resemble some of the

othe~

end scrapers 1n form

but are much more finely chipped.
Spear points
Most of these specimens resemble dart point types Langtry
and Gary but are considerably larger.

Some, or even most, may

have been hafted and used as knives rather than as spear points,
Drills
Drills made from rechipped projectile points, and drills
with 1ar6e, bulbous, intentionally shaped bases are both represented.
Knives (Pl. 10)
Five general categories of knives are outlined below.
Three of the categories--round base, straight base, and concave base--follow Schuetz (1956, p. 149) and in general conform
to her definitions,
(1) Round base knives are the most common form,

The range

is broad, extending from long, slender flake knives with rounded
bases to heavy core knives.

Although the flake knives may be

fairly thin, work is usually crude with little fine pressure
flaking,

21

(2) Straight base knives generally show much finer work·
manship.

They are typically thin in cross-section and frequent-

ly are finely chipped,

. (3) Concave base knives are poorly represented. The few
specimens available, however,
manship,

exhi~it

by far the finest work-

Bases are ordinarily.thinned, perhaps to facilitate

hafting.
(4) Pointed base, or double-pointed, knives range from

~·

the crude to the very finely made.
this group (Pl. lOA,

£)

approaches

One of the examples of
da~t

point type Lerma in

form.

(5) Circular knives as a rule are crudely chipped and biconvex.

There is rarely any evidence of secondary chipping.

The group as a whole approaches the scraper category in fonn.
Miscellaneous Chipped Stone Implements
Numerous core and flake tools of heterogeneous forms were
collected.

As no significant consistency of form was observed,

the specimens were grouped into a general miscellaneous category.
Manos
A total of 28 manos were found, most of them apparently
fashioned from stream cobbles.

Limestone specimens are .most

common but a few examples made of igneous materials are present.
The collection is heterogeneous in form.
Painted pebbles (Pl. llB,

~)

The few examples of painted pebbles are in the general
Pecos River Focus tradition (Davenport and Chelf, n.d.),

22

',

(

: ;

Numerous thin, flat, streamworn atones were found in the shelters where they could only have been carried by man.

Some ot

these undoubtedly represent painted pebbles from which the
original painted designs have disappeared,

It seems likely,

however, that some or these may have had other functions.
Other Artifacts
Sandals .
Four sal'f'&als were found during the survey.

Three of them

are large enough to have been used by adults; the fourth apparently was a child's.
Three of the four sandals appear to have been constructed
by the

11

bi-parallel warp frame'' me'thod described by Schuetz

(1956, p. 130) for her Val Verde County materials.
sanda~s

Of the 171

she studied, this method was the second most popular.

The fourth sandal was constructed by the "bent frame"
method, third in popularity in Schuetz•s series.
The tylng-thone;s were too poorly preserved to allow ident1f1cat1on of construction methods.
Matting and basketry
Several small fragments of matting and basketry were
recovered from the shelters, none large enough to indicate form.
Plain weave, twilling, and twining are all represented.
Various fragments of string, cord, and knotted grass were
also collected.

23

Bone tools
The only bone tools recovered during the survey are tour
awls made from deer cannon bones.

ARCllEOLOGICAL Sl'l'ES

To simplify ordering and description, the archeological
sites recorded in the survey hnve been categorized as follows:
a.

Open surface sites

b,

Buried terrace sites

c,

Stratified terrace sites

d.

Large rocksheltors

e.

Intermediate rockshelters

t.

Small rockshelters

Pictograph sites, which cut across several of the above
categories, are treated separately.
In the following sections, a general discussion of the
sites in each category is given.

The discussion is followed

by descriptions of the more important sites in each group.
Complete field descriptions, photographs, and specimen inven~
tor1es for all sites are on file at the office of the Texas
Archeolog1cal Salvage Project, University of Texas, Austin,
Texas.
'
Sites are designated in accordance with the
county system

now employed by·the University of Texas,

A typical number would

be 41VV1, where 41 indicates the alphabetical position of Texas
among the 48 states; VV, Val Verde County; and 1, the site number
within the county.

Whenever possible site numbers were painted

on the walls of rockshelters by the survey party to facilitate
later identification.

Open Surface Sites
Open sites on stream terraces, on the tops of limestone
bluffs, and in upland country some distance from the streams
are quite numerous.

They vary from lightly occupied areas

conststing of very thinly scattered midden material, to highly
concentrated heaps of rubbish several feet thick.

The rubbish

consists predominently of fire-cracked limestone.

In addition,

numerqus flint chips, chipped stone artifacts, mussel shells,
and snail shells are usually present.
may

exte~d

A thin layer of rubbish

over an area of considerable size, or may be confined

to a small restricted area.

Concentrated middens range in dia-

meter from 10 to 75 fe'et or more, and may occur singly or in
unpatterned groups.
Distribution of these sites is not entirely erratic.

A

preference is apparent for stream terraces, especially terraces
situated at the confluence of two canyons or streams.

Sites

removed from streams or canyons reveal no consistent patterning.
41VV11

Site VVll is an extensive open site at the mouth of a large
'

canyon tributary to Lake Walk.

Springs a few hundred yards up

the canyon feed a small creek which empties into the lake at
the mouth of the canyon, and an extensive area of midden occupies both banks of the creek.

On the south bank, there are

several midden covered ridges.

26

The midden area on the north bank of the creek consists
of a fairly level deposit of rubbish extending over an area
of about two acres.

The midden here has been damaged by road

construction, but much of it is otill intact,
The surface collection from the site includes dart points
of the types Langtry 11 A" (2), Ensor (2), Panda le (2), Martindale

(1), Pedernales (1), broad corner-notched (1), unclassified (}),
and

5 miscellaneous fragments. One arrow point of the Perdiz

type was recovered.

Nine knives were found:

5 of the round

base variety, 2 with square bases, and 2 of the pointed base
variety,

Various miscellaneous core and flake tools were also

collected.
Site VVll is well below the conservation pool level.

Be-

cause.of the size and apparent productivity of the site, it
should be possible to salvage a considerable amount of data
before the site is destroyed by the reservoir.

Extensive exca-

vations are recommended.
l.f.lVVl'+
Site VVl'+ is located near the mouth of San Pedro Canyon
on Devils River.

On one of the points of land formed by the

confluence or-the tributary canyon and the river is a ridge
,

standing 8 to 10 feet high.

The surface ot the ridge is cov-

ered with midden rubbish and is lightly silted over.

The

depth of the midden was not detennined, but certainly a
considerable portion of the ridge is made up of midden material.
The area covered by the ridge is about

27

t

acre.

Surface collecting at this site produced an Ensor point,
a broad co.rner-notched point, 2 unclassified dattt points, 3
dart point fragments, 6 round base k11ives, 1 straight base
knife, 3 flake side scrapers, 1 end scraper, 2 choppers, and
miscellaneous unclassified artifacts,
Site VV14 Will be completely inundated by the reservoir.
Therefore salvage excavations at the site are reconunended.

41vv36
This site ls located in Satan Canyon about two miles up
the canyon from Devils River.

The site consists of a small

point of land formed by the intersection -0f a side canyon with
Satan Canyon.

The point is covered with a very concentrated

deposit of burned rock and other midden rubbish.
the deposit is unknown,

The depth of

Although the extent of the site is not

great (about 2,500 square feet), the concentration of midden
suegests that the site would be productive.

Furthermore, it

is of importance to learn something of the relationships of
,..

this site to a nearby buried site and to several
adjacent rock,
shelters which are also recommended for excavation.
It is uncertain whether this site is below the conservation
pool level; however, it is clearly below the flood pool level.
Excavation is recommended.

Site VV44 is, an extensive open site located on a small
tributary canyon at the confluence of Big Satan Canyon and the

28

i

i

I

·1'. I :

i

I:'

:

,

Devils 'River.

A low limestone bluff lies along the edge of

the site, and e midden deposit extends from the bluff out onto
a low alluvial terrace.

The deposits, which are lightly.silted
0

over, extend across an area of two to three acres and appear to
vary considerably in depth.

At one end of the site are several

sharply pronounced, narrow ridges which are covered with midden
rubbish,

One ridge reaches a maximum height of some 15 feet,

The superficial appearance suggests that the midden deposits
are relatively thick.
Surface collecting at site VV44 produced 3 Ensor dart
points, 1 Refugio, 1 Perdiz arrow point, 1 unclassified dart
point, and fragments of 6 other dart points.

Four round base

knives, 1 snub-nose end scraper, 3 flake side scrapers, and
several miscellaneous chipped stone artifacts were recovered.
The size and general appearance of Site VV44 promise a
large amount of scientific data,

The presence of arrow points

adds considerably to the importance of the site.

As VV44 will

be below the conservation pool level, its excavation is recommended.
The following three sites, VV3, VV21, and VV27, seem to
approximate each other in their potential contribution of
scientific data.

It is suggested that two of the three sites

be selected to complete the minimum excavation recommendation
of six open sites.

29

41VV3
Site VV} is located on a high bluff overlooking Devils
River a short distance below Lake Walk.

This site consists of

a burnt rock midden resting on a thin zone of soil overlying
the bedrock of the bluff,

The midden is roughly clrcular·in

outline, with a diameter of about 66 feet, reaching
height of 2.5 to 3.0 feet above the ground.

a maximum

The highly concen-

trated midden promises to be productive.
Surface collection at Site VV3 produced l Langtry "B",
2 Ensor, l Frio, o.nd 6 unclass.ified dart points; 12 round base
knives, 2 straight base knives, and l concave base knife; 5
flake side scrapers, and various miscellaneous chipped stone
tools.
Site VV3 is located below the conservation pool level.
41VV21
Site VV21 is located on Devils River at the mouth of a
small draw near the headwaters of Devils Lake.

Situated on a

small terrace in the mouth of the draw, this site consists of
an area Of concentrated midden soil covered by a thin layer Of
silt.

A road cuts through a portion of the midden, exposing

a cross section of midden deposit about one foot thick.
Artifacts collected from the surface of VV21 include l
Ensor point and l Refugio point; 3 unclassified dart points
and

7 dart point fragments; 1 arrow point each of the types
30

Perdiz and Fresno.

Other artifacts include 2 round base and

1 straight base knives, 1 end scraper, 2 flake Side scrapers,
1 fist axe, and 1 mano.

Site VV21 is below the conservation pool level.

!f1vv27
Site VV27 is located on a low.terrace at the point ot
confluence of an unnamed canyon and Devils River, about two
miles upstream from Slte VV21.

The site consists of midden

material deposited along the terrace for some 200 to 300 feet.
The site is lightly silted over and was heavily grown up in
brush and grass when recorded by the survey party; the depth

.~f the deposits, however, could be roughly estimated at about
two feet.

Several springs are nearby and a creek skirts one

side of the site, making it an especially attractive occupation
site.
Surface collection at Site VV27 yielded dart points of
types Martindale (2), Langtry "B" (l}, Shwnla (l), and Marshall
(l}.

One

unclassifie~ dart point was also found, as

fragments of four others.
type.

well as

The one arrow point is of the Fresno

Miscellaneous core and flake tools were also collected,

including a round base knife and a flake side scraper.
Site VV27 is located below the conservation pool level ot
the reservoir,

31

Additional Open Surface Sites
l./.1VV4
II

8

"

9

II

10
20
22

II

23

II
II

" 25
26

II
II

34

" 1./.6
II 1./.7
II 48
II 49

41vv53

" 58
It

II
11

72

78
Bo

85
143
" 147
II 15'4ll 168
II

II

II

169

II

170

II

172

Buried Terrace Sites
Broadly speaking. the sites of this cateeory are comparable
to many of those in the precedlne group.
difference, however:

There is one important

these are buried in terrace fol"l!lations.

Superficially there appear to be no significant differences in
the general midden materials.

Burned rock. chipped stone, and

mussel shells form the chief midden constituents.

Surface col-

lections 'rrom the buried sites are understandably inadequate
and do not provide many clues to cultural affiliations.

'

Depend-

1ng upon terrace correlations, however, there may be significant
temporal differentials between the buried sites and those on the
terrace surfaces.

Also, there seems to be a good possibility

of isolating relatively pure, single cultural components in the
buried sites.
Sites or this category usually appear as single zones of
midden material, two to three feet thick, exposed in eroded
faces of stream terraces.

At some sites the exposed occupation

zone may be only 10 feet or less in length, while at others the
midden exposures extend for a distance pf 50 to 100 feet or more.
Occasional buried midden deposits were found some distance from
the present stream channels.

In these cases the sites were
i

exposed by gullies or arroyos cutting through the terraces.

41VV37
Site VV37 is located within a terrace of Satan Canyon a
short distance up the canyon from Devils River.

The site con-

sists of scattered midden materials in a broad alluvial terrace

33

~

r

.,..

remnant several hundred feet in length and about 15 feet in
depth.

It is not posBible to estimate the extent or the midden.

The indications are, however, that this is a relatively large
site.

As this site is not far from sites VV36, vv38, VV39, and
.

.

VWO, which were also chosen for testlne;, it is recommended·
.

.,

that this site be tested at the sn.me time.

It would be of

considerable importance to determine whether cultural relationships exist between these closely placed sites.
Site VV37 is clearly below the flood pool level and may
possibly be inundated by the conservation pool.

Limited test-

ing of the site is recommended,
41vv125, 126, and 130
These three sites are located in an alluvial terrace of
the Pecos River about two miles upstream from the Rio Grande,
VV125 and vv126 are marked by midden rubbish appearing in
arroyos cut through the terrace.

The thickness of the two

middens was difficult to determine, but they both appear to
be at least two feet thick.

'

Both sites extend for a consider-

able distance along the terrace but their exact size could not
be determined.
Site VV130 is similar to VV125 and vv126 but the terrace
.extends under a long overhang of the cliff.

No cross section

of the deposit is available and the depth cannot be estimated
with accuracy.

There seems to be a good possibility of strati-

fled deposits.

34

These three sites will be below the level of the conservation pooL

It is reconunendcd that preliminary tests be made

in all three, and that extensive excavations be carried out at
the most promlsing one.

41vv137
Site VV137 is located in a terrace remnant of the Pecos
River a .short distance upstream from the Southern Pacific
.Railroad bridge.

The laree terrace which must have existed

there in the past has been lareely destroyed by erosion, but
in the section still intact a zone of buried midden rubbish can
be seen.

As revealed by the exposures, the midden is two to

three feet thick and extends for some 30 feet along the face
of the terrace.

It consists of highly concentrated fire-

cracked rock, ash, shell, and chipped stone.
Although it is not entirely certain that this site will
be below the conservation pool level, i t will surely be below
flood pool level.

Testing of the site is recommended.

Additional Buried Terrace Sites

41vv7
" 95
11
135
Stratified Terrace Sites
Few sites can confidently be placed in this category, but
their possible significance is sufficient to justify separate
treatment.

These sites are identical to those of the preceding

35

~--------........-2........

group except that, instead of having a single buried occupation
zone, they are composed

or

n series of stratigraphically differ-

entlated occupational layers.
The potential importance of the sites can scarcely be over-

estimated.

Burnt rock middens are notorious for their lack

or

stratification, and consequently few attempts have been made to
detennlne cultural sequences wlthln'indlvidual midden sites,

Here, however, there appears to be clear-cut stratification

as

a result of terrace accretions during periods of site occupation.
Furthermore, the stratification appears to be ideal -- occupational zones sealed off from those above and below by sterile
layers of silt or sand,

The possibilities seem excellent for

obtaining a good cultural column.

41VV99
This site lies in an alluvial terrace of the Pecos River
near its confluence with the Rio Grande.

Erosion of the terrace

has exposed a vertical face some 15 feet in depth in which
stratified bands of midden material were observed.

The bands,

cons is ting of ash, burned rock, she 11 anq' chipped stone, vary
in thickness from an inch or two to as much as l! feet.

They

occur from the surface to the lowest exposed portion of the
terrace.

The midden zones are separated by apparently sterile

layers of silt or sand which are from an inch or so to as
as a foot or more in thickness.

36

much

The exposures or midden materials extend alone the face
of the terrace for a distance of about 50 feet.

The buried

layers of detritus probably extend back into the terrace for
at least 25 feet, where the terrace passes beneath a limestone
overha~,

the surface of the terrace comine to within about a

foot of the lower surface of the overhane;.

Before the terrace

had built up to its present thickness there must have been
sufficient head clearance for human occupation of the shelter
formed by the overhang, and it is quite likely that Site VV99
ls actually a rockshelter site with a developmental terra6e
involvement.
Surface collection at the site produced 3 round base knives
and a mano.

Several large bone fragments removed from a lower

occupational stratum strongly resemble bison.
Site VV99 offers the possibility of a well-defined stratified sequence in a combination rock shelter-stream terrace site.
Since it will be entirely beneath the conservation pool of Diablo
Reservoir, its excavation is strongly urged.

ij1vv188
This extensive buried site is located in a terrace fonnation
at the mouth of Devils River.

The Rio Grande terrace in this

area achieves a considerable length and breadth and reaches a
depth of some 20 feet.

Midden material is scattered over the

surface of the terrace across an area of three to four acres.

31

In the eroded face of the terrace n number of small lenses composed or fire-cracked stone and other detritus were observed,
extending to a depth of at least 8 to 10 feet below the surface.
Surface collecting at this site yielded various chipped
stone artifacts, including one dart point each of the Ensor and
, Montell types,

A round base knife and a flake side scraper were

·~.

also reco'vered.
The large size of this site1 its considerable depth, and
the excellent prospect of clear-cut stratification promise great
archeological potential.

Its location near the deepest portion

of the proposed Diablo Reservoir strongly calls for intensive
excavation prior to inundation.

38

IHree Roclrnhclters
'11he sites ln this cntcr.;ory are by far the most spectacular

or

the entire reCTlon,

of the

~anyons,

Occurring in the massive limestone bluffs·

some of these enormous rockshelters reach dimen-

sions of over 500 feet broad by 200 feet deep,

Ceilings are

frequently as much as 50 feet above the floor so that lightin.5
and ventilation arc usually excellent.

As a result of their

ereat size and suitablllty for human habitation, the shelters
received long and intensive use by the aboriginal population.
This is attested by the enormous midden deposits which have
built up in the shelters and

by

such secondary features as rock

mortars, highly polished surfaces on boulders, and extensive
panels of pictographs.
The aridity of the area combined with the natural protec·
tion afforded

by

the shelters, has resulted in the preservation

of large quantities of perishable materials,

The rabbit skin

cloth, nets, mats, basketry, sandals, wooden artifacts, and
many other objects of daily life which are still well preserved
can·providc valuable insights into the native cultures.

The

scientific importance of these sites, promising such a broad
picture of ancient life, cannot be overemphasized.
The rockshelters included in this category stand apart
from the other rockshelters of the area because of their
enormous size.

Most are further characterized by pictographs

39

in polychromatic style, nnd by extensive, dry midden deposits.
As a group the sites are largely confined to one section of the
reservoir--along the lower Pecos River and nd.1o1ning stretches
of the Rio Grande.

There are no large rockshelters on the

lower Rio Grande or on the lower or middle Devils River.

Two

large rockshelters were located on the upper Devils, however.
This distribution pattern is probably due to differences in the
limestone deposits, those of the lower Rio Grande being thinly
bedded and extensively Jointed in comparison to the more massive
deposits farther upstream,
Archeological investigation of the large rockshelters
poses difficult field problems.

The extreme dryness of the

deposits, the fragile nature of many of the cultural remains,
and other complicating factors all demand special field techniques.

Finally, the great size and depth of the deposits require

extensive excavation if scientifically adequate samples are to
be obtained.
Two of the more spectacular large shelters have already
received some attention from scientific investigators.
Fate Bell Rockshelter,

VV7~,

The

was trenched in 1932 by the Uni-

versity of Texas (Pearce and Jackson, 1933).

Eagle Cave, vv167,

was trenched in 1936 by the Witte Memorial Museum (Davenport,
ca. 1938).

These investigations were inadequate, however, and

only gross archeologicai' techniques were employed,

Furthermore,

none of the excavations have been adequately reported.

uO

The flooding of these sites will result in the destruction
of fragile cultural materials preserved for thousands of years.
The lake will open the area to the public, and those sites visible
from the lake, althoueh not directly flooded, will surely be subjected to the depredations of looters and vandals.

Already many

of the more outstandi05 sites in accessible locations have been
severely.damaeed by indiscriminate

and large panels of

d~Bging,

pictographs have been deliberately defaced at some site.
In view of the unique cultural materials preserved in' the
large roclcshelters, and because most of the s:t tes will be des-

troyed or severely damaeed once the reservoir has been completed,.
it is imperative, from the scientific viewpoint, that representative sites be excavated and thoroughly studied prior to construction of the reservoir.
ti.1vv39

Site VV39 is situated in Satan Canyon a short distance from
Devils River.

It is located high up in the bluff where it

commands an excellent view of the

cany~n.

It measures 170 feet

in width and is over 100 feet deep; the ceiling is 30 to 50 feet
above the floor.

A huge rock fall lies at the mouth of the

shelter.
The deposits are dry and appear rich in cultural materials,
but do not cover a ereat area because the large rock fall takes
up much of the space within the shelter.

The deposits may extend

beneath the fallen rocks, however.

or

41

Depth

the deposits is

estimated at 2. to 3 feet.

Collection from the surface produced

a Pandale dart point, an unclassified dart point, and a possible
spear point.

A series of pictographs covers the walls of the shelter,
but unfortunately they are badly faded.

A large panel of picto-

graphs in the ad Joining shelte'r, VV40, is much better preserved.

In addition to pictographs, an outstanding feature of site VV39
is an impressive series of petroslyphs carved on top of the
rock fall.
This site lies above the flood elevation of the reservoir,
but water will bo impounded in the
providing easy access for looters.

ca~yon

beneath the shelter,

Testing of the site, in

conjunction with study of adjoining sites, is recommended.
41W74
Site VV74 is located in Seminole Canyon several miles above
the.mouth of the canyon.

This is the Fate Bell Rockshelter which

has been referred to frequently ln archeological literature
I

(Pearce and Jackson, 1933; Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer. 1940;
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954).

Excavations in 1932 by the

University of Texas produced well preserved cultural material,
and in spite of the limited nature of the excavations and the
lack of adequate published reports, the Fate Bell Shelter has
been designated as the type site for the Pecos River Focus,

42

The shelter measures over 500 feet across and haB a depth
of 110 to 1tw feet,

'l'he deposits are very extensive; materials

are quite dry and well preserved.

Ash, cordaBe, fragments of

matting and basketry, wooden tools, and other ordinarily perishable artifacts occur in quantity,

The depth of the deposits

is estimated to be 10 to 15 feet.
A s'eries of pictoernphs, artistically executed in the Pecos

River Focus style, covers a major portion of the shelter walls.
Some of the pictographs are reproduced in Jackson's PictureWritine of Texas Indlans.

Porrest Klrkland also recorded some

of the pictographs but his work ls largely unpublished.

Site VV74 lies above the conservation pool level, but it
will be readily accessible to vandnls once the reservoir has
been completed.

Despite serious damaee by looters in the past,

a great deal of information can still be salvaged to supplement
the limited datn obtained previously by Pearce and Jackson.

41VV75
Site

'

VV75 ls a laree rockGhelter in Seminole Canyon a short

distance above the Hio Grande,

long by 66 feet deep.

It is approximately 250 feet

Several large boulders in the mouth of

the shelter contain very deep mortars.
The midden deposits are extensive, dry, and rich, and they
appear to be at least 10 feet thick.

Unfortunately, the site

has been badly do.maged by looters, who are reported to have
found baslrntry, nets, and several human burials in the shelter.
I'

I

uJ

Traces of polychrome pictographs appear on the walls, but
they have been badly defaced.
Artifacts collected from the surface include 4 Langtry 11 B11
points, 1 La.netry
dart points.

11

c11 , 3 Shumla, 2 Ensor, and 4 unclassified

Six flake side scrapers, a possible spear point,

5 round base knives, and 2 straight base knives were also
recovered~

Site

VV75 lies below the flood pool elevation of the reser•

voir at or near the conservation pool level.

Extensive testing

is recommended.
41vv90

Site VV90 is a large rockshelter overlooking the Pecos River
above the US Highway 90 bride;e.

It measures 175 feet across and

has an average depth of 40 feet.

A number of boulders scattered

about the mouth of the shelter contain mortars and metates.
The deposits are extensive and appear to be very dry and
quite rich •. A considerable amount of ash, fiber, and matting
are present.

Although there is clear evide.nce'of recent pothunt-

ing activities, damaee is not severe.
Several panels of polychrome pictographs are present,.some
of which are reproduced in Jackson's Picture-Writing of Texas
Indians.
A total of 37 lithic artifacts were collected from the
surface.

Dart points include types Ensor (2), and Frio (3).

44

Two dart polntn were uncl::1.1rnJ.fled and 3 are too fracmcntary for

typine.

Throe round. base knivcn, a flake side scraper, a pos·

sible painted pebble, and 2 bone awln were also found.
Site W90 will probably be submereed durinc flood stage.
Certainly once the renervoir is completed the site will rapidly
be destroyed by looters.

Extensive

t~sting

is therefore recom-

moncled,

41VV100
Site VVlOO is located in Crooked Trail Canyon a short
distance above the Rio Grande.
and 200 feet wide.

'!'his shelter is 135 feet deep

There is little burned rock at the mouth

of the shelter, but clear evidence of occupation is seen in the
smoke-blackened roof and in the scattered ashy deposits beneath
the overhang.

Part of the deposits are damp, but those in the

higher part of the shelter appear dry and should be productive.
Depth of the deposits appears to be substantial.
Site VVlOO lies below flood pool elevation and test1ne·1s
recommended.
41VV144
Site

vv11~4

is located in Infierno Canyon, a short tributary

of Seminole Canyon.
feet deep.

The shelter is about 500 feet wide by 40

The ceiling is rather low and a laree portion of

the floor consists of roof fall.

The deposits are not extensive.

The site was damaged by floods in 1954. but some of the
higher sections of the deposits were not affected.
deposits are estimated to be several feet thick.

h5

The surviving

Surface collectine at VV14.li produced 15 lithlc artifacts,

7 of which are do.rt points. Two Ensor points, 2 Martindale
points, and 5 unclassified dart points were recovered; 2 flake
side scrapers and 1 round base knife were also found.
Site

vv11~lj.

the reservoir.

lies approximately at the flood pool level of
L.lmlted testing or the site is recommended.

41w167 ·
Site

vv167 is an 1mposine rockshelter located in Eagle

Canyon a short distance from the Rio Grande.

This cave, measur-

ine almost 200 feet across by about 80 feet deep, is known in
archeolo~lcal

literature as Eaele Cave.

The extent of the deposits at this site is enormous.

At

the rear of the shelter they appear to reach depths of 15 to 20
feet,

The surface zones are very dry, containincr a large amount

of ash and fibrous materlal.

Cross sections provided by potholes

in the deposlts reveal that the upper strata are dry and rich in ·
vegetal materials.
damp.

Apparently, however, the lower strata are

Davenport, who excavated a trench in the site in 1936,

reported that the lower strata were moist and barren of perishable materials.
Nineteen 11 thic artifacts were collected from the surface,
including 1 Fresno arrow point, 4 untyped dart points, l round
base knife, l straieht base knife, and 5 flake side scrapers.
Almost 2,000 projectile points were recovered from the trench
dug by Davenport in 1936 (Schuetz, 1956, pp. 137-138).

u6

L'angtry,

Ensor, Ahnnolo, Frlo, and Shuml:i were the predominate dart point
types, while Pcrdlz, Scallorn, Fresno, and Alba (perhaps these
are actually Eddy points) are the 'lrrow point types reported by
Schuetz.
There o.ro several pictoc;raphs at Eagle Cave, some of which
are reproduced :ln Jackson's Picture Writing of Texas Indians.
Unfo.rtunately, there has been a great deal of indiscriminate

digging at the site, and much slenlficant information has undoubtedly been destroyed.

The only previous work of a scientific

nature was that undertaken by Davenport.

Only a very small

portion of the site was sampled, however, and the methods of
control were not adequate.

As the site obviously contains exten-

sive archeologic data, carefully controlled scientific studies
are ureently needed before the site is destroyed.

Since Site

vv167 lies below the flood pool elevation of the reservoir and
will be subject to :tntermittcmt

floodi~,

ci;:tensive testins is

recommended.

41vv187
Site vv187 is an impressive shelter overlool<ing the Rio
G1•0.ndc not far below the mouth of the Pecos River.

Known locally

as Parida Cave, this shelter is 230 feet across by 115 feet deep.
There is a small spring at the rear of the shelter.

On the walls

are a number of very fine polychrome pictographs, some of which
are reproduced in color in Jackson's Picture-Writing of Texas
Indians.

47

Ii

I

The m.ldden deposits arc enormous.

At the rear

or

shelter they may attain a depth of more than 20 feet.
upper zones are dry o.nd rlch ln veeetal materials.

the
The

Two unclas-

•
sified dart po:lnts were obtained from the site, toeether with
n sandal fragment, several pieces of matting, several fragments
of cord, and various knotted fibers and strines.

It is apparent

that a creat deal of infonnation may be obtained by careful
excavation and study of th:l.s site,
Unfortunately, drunacre from vandalism has been quite exten-

sive at Parido. cave, and evidence of very recent lootlne was
discovered by the survey party,

Because of the enormous size

of the site, however, a major portion of the deposits are still
undisturbed.

The site lies below

t~e

flood pool elevation of

the reservoir, and will be subject to intennittent flooding.
Extensive excavation is recommended.
Additional Sites of the Large Rockshelter Category

41VV40
II
55
II

68
76

II

79

II

81
" 83
II

48

Rockshelters of Intermediate Size
The sites in this category lack the spectacular dimensions
of those of the preceding group, but in other respects they
are largely identical.

Deposits are frequently extremely dry.

Some of the better sites appear to have deposits almost as
deep as some of the large rockshelters, and some have outstanding pictographs.

For present purposes, the intermediate

size category represents simply a convenient ordering in the
data, providing a useful break between the very large shelters
and the smaller ones.
The intermediate shelters certainly have as much archeological
importance as the large ones.

Their deposits are extensive and

artifacts are well preserved.

Many have not been damaged by looters,

and there is much important information to be obtained from these sites.
The distribution of the intermediate rockshelters is similar
to that of the large shelters.

41VV35
Site VV35 is located on a low blu'ff overlooking a tributary
branch of Big Satan Canyon.

The bluff faces south and thus the

shelter receives maximum protection from north winds in the winter.
Large water. holes are located nearby.

The deep midden deposits

inside the shelter and the extensive m.idden talus in front indicate
that the shelter was occupied intensively during aboriginal times.

49

The mouth of the shelter measures about 70 feet across,
while the depth of the shelter averages

35 feet. The ceiling

is high, and lighting and ventilation are good.

There are

several large boulders at the mouth of the shelter but otherwise the floor is almost level.

The surface deposits are

darkly stained with organic matter and are rich in fibrous
materials.

A pothole near the rear wall revealed a cross

section of very rich and dry midden soil, about four feet
in thickness.

Considerable ash, fiber, bone, and other

rubbish are present.
With the exception of this one pothole, the site appears
to be virtually undisturbed by vandals.

The remarkable pre-

servation of the site is undoubtedly the result of its isolation
and inaccessibility.
Site VV35 was visited by Joan Ablon, John Graham, and
Dee Ann Suhrn during a brief reconnaissance of the area in

1955.

At that time well preserved skeletal remains of two young
infants were discovered in the pothole.

No associated burial

objects were discovered, but some may have been removed by
the persons who dug the hole.
31 projectile points.

Surface collecting produced

Dart points include 1 Pandale, 1 Langtry

"A 11 , 1 Langtry 11 B11 , a possible second Langtry "B 11 , a possible
Langtry "C", 2 Marcos, 1 Frio, 1 Kinney, and 1 Pedernales.

A

total of 13 unidentifiable dart point fragments were found, as

50

well as 6 unclassified dart points.

Th~ee

arrow points

were collected, 2 of the Pertliz type and 1 of the F.ddy
type.

Various fragments of fiber and other vegetal arti-

facts were also found.

The collection made by the present

survey includes l Langtry "A", 1 Ensor, 1 Frio, 1 Shurnla.,
1 Ellis, 2 "broad side-notched" points, J unclassified dart
points, and

5 dart

point fra©nents.

Site VV35 will be above the flood pool level of Diablo

Reservoir.

However, it will overlook the lake, and the

isolation which has protected it in the past will be gone.
Unless excavated scientifically before the reservoir is
completed, it will surely be destroyed by looters.

The

richness of this site, combined t-•ith its location in an
important peripheral area, makes site VV35 of great archeological importance.

Extensive excavation is strongly urged.

41VV38
Site VV38 is an interesting site on Satan Canyon.

Part

of the ceiling has collapsed, leaving an entrance only about

25

feet wide.

Inside, the shelter widens considerably and

extends back about 50 feet.

The interior of the shelter is

dark, which will make excavation rather difficult.

Midden

material is present at the mouth of the shelter and the interior
shows evidence of numerous fires.
dry and should be productive.

51

This shelter is excessively

~~----------------iiii--•llllll

Sito VVJ13 fo clorirly below tho flood pool clev.1tion .and
mny be

affected by tho conocrvation pool.

'l'eattng o.f tho

slto is recommended in con,1unction with tho study of the
adjoining open siteo VVJ6 and VVJ7, and tho large shelters

VVJ9 and VVl.10.
u1VV61

Site VV61 is located in tho Pecos Ri.ver canyon downstream
from the Southern Pacific Railroad bridge.

50 feet across and al.most JO feet deep.

of a shelter measuring

Bedrock mortars are present and dim
appear on the walls.

The site consists

trace~

of pictographs

An extensive midden talus covers the

slope in front of the shelter.
The midden deposits at this si.te exhibit no evidence
of extensive looting, although a few potholes are present.
The deposits are dry, seem to be fairly deep, and will
probably be productive.

Surface collecting produced 20

lithic artifacts including 2 Frio dart points, 2 unclassified
dart points, 2 rnanos, 2 round base knives, 8 flake side
scrapers, 1 chopper, and several miscellaneous tools and
unclassified objects.
The site lies above the level of the conservation pool
and perhaps above the flood pool elevation also.

It overlooks

a principal branch of the reservoir, however, and will undoubtedly

52

~~~---------------------------..

be destroyed through vandalism unless salvai~e measures are
effected.

Although the site probably contains a great amount

of archeological data, other sites of the category seem to be
mo.re important.

Only limited testine is recommended.

LlVV82
Site VV82 is a shelter in a bluff of the Rio Grande
upstream from the mouth of Painted Canyon.

Although situated

just above the river, the site shows no evidence of vandalism.
Undoubtedly this is the result of the remoteness and inaccessibility of this section of the river and the absence of any
obvious occupation indications such as a midden talus.
The shelter is approximately 300 feet wide and averages

25

feet to

ho

feet in depth.

The ceiling is high and slopes

sharply upward toward the mouth, permitting maximum light and
ventilation.

The midden deposits are quite dry, and perishable

items were recovered from the surface.

The depth of the deposits

appears to be substantial, and the midden soil contains a great
deal of fiber, ash, charred wood, and other detritus.

Artifacts

coll.ected from the surface include 2 dart points, 1 of the Shumla
type, the other unclassified.

Other stone artifacts are 2 round

base knives, a straight base knife, a double pointed knife, 2
flake side scrapers, a mano, and several flat stream pebbles
which possibly were painted at one time.

Perishable materials

include 2 fragments of matting, a sandal fragment, a section of
skin, knotted fibers, and 2 fragments of wooden artifacts.
\._

53

/

ThP. undisturbed condition and rich appear~ncn of the denosits
j.ndicate that excavation should be rewarding.

Since it lies

below the flood pool elevation of the reservoir, extensive
testing and excavation is strongly recommended.

hlVV87
Site VV87 is located high up on,a blu£f overlooking the
Rio Grande River several miles below the mouth of the Pecos.
Across the mouth this shelter measures
of some

uO £eet and

75

the ceiling is high.

feet, it has a depth
The present floor

consists of ceiling spalls which fonn a sterile zone almost a
foot in thickness, overlying a midden deposit.

Several potholes

reveal dry, productive-appearing midden material beneath the
sterile surf ace zone.

There are several bedrock mortars at the

mouth of the shelter.
Most of the deposits are still intact, perhaps because
the thick sterile zone of ceiling spalls has discouraged looting.
There is an excellent chance that this site may contain exceptionally clearcut stratification.
Surface collecting at the site produced 1 Ensor, 1 Abasolo,
and 1 unclassified dart point; 2 round base knives, 2 flake side
scrapers, and 2 manos.
Site VV87 will be directly above a long section of the
main reservoir pool, and as nearly as can be determined, will
probably be within the flood pool area., Irrespective of this,

51.i

it should be possible to J.:md

ci

boat ab1ost in the mouth of the

shelter after construction of the reservoir.
in its certain destruetion by looters.

This will result

Excavation of the site

is recommended.
LlVV88

Site VV88 is a shelter in a bluff of the Pecos River canyon
about a mile upstream from the Rio Grande.

The shelter measures

almost 70 feet in width at, its mouth and has a depth of some 32
feet.

The ceiling is high and irregular.

Most of the floor is

covered with a zone of ceiling spalls several inches thick.

Pot-

holes reveal a deep, dry deposit of midden detritus with a high
percentage of fibrous material.

A great deal of burned rock and

other midden rubbish appear on the talus slope.
The surface collection from this site includes l unclassified
dart point, 2 round base knives, and 3 miscellaneous blade fragments.
Although there are several potholes in the deposits, there
is sufficient undisturbed midden to allow salvage of a representative
sample of cultural material.

In view of the dryness and apparent

richness of the deposits, it appears that' a great deal of infonnation
may be obtained.
The situation at VV88 is similar to that at site VV87.

It

will directly ove.rloolc a principal secti0n of the conservation
pool and will probably be subject to inundation during flood
seasons.

In addition, easy access

by the lake.

~o

the site will be provided

Excavation of the site is recommended.

55

LlVV98

Site VV98 is located a short distance up an unnamed canyon
which joins the Pecos River near its mouth.

The shelter measures

approximately 175 feet. across and has a depth of 20 feet.
ceiline is high and sloping.

The

There are numerous potholes in the

shelter which reveal dry, productive-appearing midden soil.
Considerable fibrous material, ash, and burned rock are present,
and the deposits appear to be several feet thick.

A very large

midden talus lies on the slope in front of the shelter.

An old

trench through the talus reveals a cross section of midden deposits
about 3 feet thick.

In addition to the midden talus, a number of

shallow bedrock mortars are present, and faint traces of pictographs
appear on the walls.

There are several potholes in the floor but the site appears
largely undisturbed.

A considerable amount of scientific data

should be obtained from this site.

Surface collecting produced

dart points of the Ensor type (1) and Montell type (1) as well as
2 unclassified dart point fragments.

A p~ssible painted pebble,

9 flake side scrapers, a fragment of cordage, and other miscellaneous
items were also collected.
This site overlooks a portion of the Rio Grande which will
become a principal section of the reservoir.

Although above the

normal level of the lake, it will be submerged during flood stage.
Furthennore, as a result of its location, the shelter will surely
be subject to damage through vandalism.

is recommended.

56

Excavation of the site

lilVV109

This shelter is located in n hir,h bluff of the
canyon several miles above the mouth of the Pecos.
about 6o feet across and has a depth of JO feet.
adds considerably to the size of the shelter.

There

extensive burned rock talus in front of the shelter,
lone and ·intensive habitation of the site.

The deposits within

the shelter are dry and may be expected to be ver'f productive.
The midden soil probably attains a depth of

5 fcot or more.

An additiona..l item of interest is a zigzag petroglyph
carved in the rear wall of the shelter.
of pictographs, however.

Thero is no evidence

Artifacts collected at the site

include 2 Ensor type dart points as well as l example each of
the types Langtry "D 11 , Castroville, a."1d Tortugas.

One unclassified

dart point, l dart point fragment, 2 round base knives, l straight
base knife, 6 flake side scrapers, 2 choppers, l drill, and various
miscellaneous, unclassified artifacts were also found.
Site VV109 is of particular interest as it represents one of
'

the relatively few outstanding shelters of this category with a
minimum of looting.

E.."Ctensive excavation will undoubtedly

be rewarding.
Although situated above the conservation pool level, this
site will be subject to periodic flooding; furthermore, its location
will make it especially vulnerable to looting after completion of the
reservoir.

Extensive testing or excavation is recommended.

5?

LlVVlJu
.,

Site VV134 is situated in a bluff overlooking the Pecos
River in the vicinity of the Southern Pacific Railroad bridge.
The shelter is about 80 feet across the front and

uO

feet deep;

the ceiling is high, averaging 10 feet to 18 feet above the
floor.

The interior deposits are very dry and should be productive.

Stratigraphic sections revealed by potholes show midden deposits
with an exceptionally high incidence of fibrous material, ash, and
burned rock.

A minimum depth of about 5 feet is indicated, but

it appears certain that the deposits are substantially deeper.
Surface collecting produced 1 Langtry "B" dart point, a round
base knife, and a flake side scraper.
In addition to the richness of the midden, the shelter is
outstanding for its exceptionally fine pictographs.

These appear

to have completely covered the walls of the shelter at one time •
.Unfortunately, however, several of the pictographs have been
damaged by·vandals.

The undamaged sections reveal outstanding

artistry of the polychromatic Pecos River Focus style.
Site VVl.34 is above the conservation pool level.

It will

be subject to periodic flooding, however, and also will be made
accessible to looters.

While there has been a considerable amount

of looting, undisturbed deposits are still preserved.

In view of

its potential productivity, extensive study of the site before
completion of the reservoir is strongly reconunendedo

SB

l11VV156

Site VV156 is an important shelter located in the bluff
of a tributary canyon of the Pecos River.

There are water

holes nearby and the site is only a short distance from the
river.

This shelter measures almost 80 feet across and reaches

a depth ~f some 30 feet.

The ceiling is high, providing excellent

lighting and ventilation.
The midden deposits are quite dry at the surface and contain
i

large quantities of ash, fiber, bone, and burned rock.

Although

i'

no cross sections were available for examination, the deposits
appear to be rather thick.
disturbances.

Fortunately, there are no extensive

Artifacts collected from the midden total 21 specimens,

including a Langtry "C" dart poi!'"lt, a Pandale type dart point, an
unclassified dart point, 2 round base knives, and a drill.
-

-·
'

Site VV156 is outstanding in many respects.

The extent and

richness of the deposits and their excellent state of preservation
make the shelter one of the most important sites in the area.
The site lies above the conservation pool level but, as nearly
as could be determined, is below the flood pool elevation.

Furthennore,

it will be made readily accessible to looters once the reservoir has
been completed.

Extensive excavation is strongly recommended.

tr
I,

u1VV16o

i;

Site VV160 is situated in a high, steep, limestone bluff of
the Rio Grande canyon a few miles above the mouth of the Pecos.

59

Because of the almost verticn1 bluff below the shelter there is
no midden talus present, but a thick deposit of carbon on the
ceiling makes it obvious--even from a considerable distance-that the shelter has been occupied.

The shelter measures L2 feet across the front and reaches
a maximum depth of 30 feet.

The midden deposits are dry at the

surface and contain ash, fiber, and other detritus.

No cross

section was available for examination, but the depth was estimated
to be several feet.

No definite evidence of looting was observed.

Artifacts collected from the shelter surface include 2 round base
knives,_ 2 flake side scrapers, a drill, and a bone awl.
The size, the apparent richness, and the absence of disturbance
indicate that a great deal of data
upon excavation.

m~y

be obtained from the site

It is situated at or near the max:Untnn flood pool

elevation where it may be damaged by wave action.

In any event,

its location on a principal section of the reservoir will certainly
invite destruction by vandals.

Testing is recommended.

~1VV161

Site VV161 is situated. in the Rio Grande canyon a short
distance upstream from site VV160o
feet across and is

25

feet deep.

This shelter is almost 60
The deposits appear to be very

dry and rich, containing a considerable amount of fibrous material,
and are estimated to extend to a depth of at least

4 feet.

Although

there are several disturbances in the deposits, important data can
be obtained from the undisturbed areas.

60

Several lithic artifacts were recovered from the extensive
midden talus in front of the shelter.

A Shumla type dart point,

a poss1.ble Livermore arrow potnt, a round base knife, and a
straight base knife are included in the surface collection.
From inside the shelter came a larr,e, well preserved sandal.
Site VV161 lies above the level of the conservation pool
and possibly above the flood stage elevation also.

The site

will be located in a principal section of the reservoir, however,
'and will certainly be destroyed by looting and vandalimn once
the reservoir is filled.

Extensive study of the site is recommended.

ulVV162
Site VV162 is located at the mouth of a tributary canyon
of the Rio Grande River, upstream from the mouth of the Pecos.
This shelter, mea.suring 115 feet across and
an extensj.ve, dry midden deposit.

uO

feet deep, contains

Evidence of long, intensive

habitation is afforded by a large midden talus lying at the mouth.
Numerous bedrock mortars and metates are also present.
The deposits contain a high percentage of fiber and other
perishable materials; likewise ash and burned rock are present
in considerable quantity.

Little superficial evidence of looting

was noted; consequently a great deal of data should be obtained
from the site by excavation.
Site VV162 probably lies below the maxi.mum flood stage level.
It is located in a main section of the reservoir where it will be
destruction through vandalisn1.
site is recommended.

61

Extensive testing of

ulVV186
Site VV186 is a particularly promising shelter located
in a bluff of the Rio Grande canyon above the mouth of the
Pecos.

An enormous midden talus lies on the slope in front

of the shelter, sugresting long and intensive use of the
As the area is especially difficult to reach, the

site.

site appears to have escaped damage from looters despite
its conspicuousness.
Interior midden deposits are dry and

app~ar

to have

A thin layer of limestone dust and

substantial depth.

ceiling spalls mantles the surface of the midden.

If the

shelter exhibited this tendency to deposit dust and spalls
over the floor in the past, differer!t occupation levels
may be separated by this material into stratigraphically
significant components.
Site VV186 is probably situated below the flood stage
level.

In any event, its conspicuous location at the edge
'

of the future lake will surely result in its eventual
destruction by vandals.

Extensive testing or excavation

is recorunended.
Additional Sites of the Intermediate Rockshelter Category:

ulVV?
II 12
II 15
II
41
II
II
II

42

5'1

54

41VV62
rr 63
II

41VV105
II 112

65

II

II

II

121
127
129

II

ll.i2

II

II

II

II

62

II

113

II

67
71
" 73
II 101

41VV157
II

II

164

165
171
178
185

Small Rockshclters
In addition to bei.ng smaller than the intermediate
shelters, the sites of this category differ qualitatively
in some respects from those of tho preceding two groups.
Deposits usually are relatively shallow, and many are not
dry.

Furthermore, with some notable exceptions the deposits

do not promise to be especially productive.

In terms of

distribution there is also a slight difference: the smal1
shelters occur more widely throughout the reservoir area
than do either the large or intermediate ones.
The sites described below are among the most promising
of the small shelters, and are recomnended for further study.
Since the sites of this category are more or less evenly
distributed over the reservoir area, they may provide data
for portions of the reservoir not well represented in the
other shelter categories.
A number of the sites falling within this group are
remarkably small, the ceilings of some being so low that
'

a man cannot stand erect in them.

The horizontal dimensions,

too, are frequently quite restricted, so that no more than
three or four persons could possibly have crowded into some
of them.

Yet these tiny shelters frequently exhibit abundant

evidence of occupation in the form of midden deposits and

63

smoke-blackened ceilings.

Artifact collections reveal.no

appreciable dif fercnces in artifact types between these
sites and the lareer shelters, although the collections are
perhaps too small for completely accurate comparisons.

Site VVl is located in a side csnyon of the Devils

River near the confluence of the Devils and the Rio Grande.
The shelter has a breadth of 21 feet and adepth of about 25
feet.

The deposits appear to be dry and rich in cultural

material, with little indication of disturbance.
ness of the deposits is probably several feet.

The thickA substantial

midden talus lies at the front of the shelter.
Specimens collected from the surface consist of 10
lithic artifacts, including 1 Desmuke dart point, 1 round
base knife, 1 straight base knife, 1 flake side scraper,
. 2 choppers, and a heavy blade.

Site VV1 is of special interest because of its peripheral
location.

It is the only shelter on the lower portion of the

Devils River that promises to repay study.

Since the site is

far below the conservation pool elevation, intensive excavation

is recommended.
41VV31
Site VVjl is located in a side canyon joining the Devils

River above Devils Lake.
and 14 to

This shelter measures 34 feet across

24 feet deep. The deposits are only about 2 feet

thick, but they are almost completely undisturbed and appear
dry and productive.

In front of the shelter is an enonnoue

midden talus.
Surface collecting at the site produced 10 1ithic art.ifacts r

4 Langtry 11 E11 points, 1 possible spear point, 1 Perdiz arrow
point, and

4 miscellaneous

fra~ents.

Although the deposits are not extensive, the peripheral
location lends interest to the site.

It lies above the fiood

pool elevation, but reservoir waters will extend·Up the canyon
below the site arrl will open the way to destructive looting.
J.imited testing is recommended.

l.ilVVl.iJ
Site VV43 is located near the confluence of Big Satan
Canyon and Devils River.

This shelter measures 17 feet at

its maximum 'Width and if1 16 feet deep.

The deposits are dry,

appear to be quite rich, and there is little evidence of
disturbance.

In front of the shelter lies a large midden talus.

Sixteen lithic artifacts were recovered from the site.
These include 1 Nolan type dart point, 2 unclassified dart
points, 1 arrow point fragment, 2 round base knives, 2 fiake side
scrapers, 1 chopper, and 2 manes.

or

particular interest is the close geographical relationship

between Site

VV43

and open sites

VV4h

and

VV46.

This circ\ll11stance

provides an excellent opportunity to detennine the nature

or

the

cultural relationships between the shelter and the adjacent open

65

sites.

Of further int.crest is the possibility of obtaining

dat.a from the arrow point horizon.

An arrow point fragment

of indeterminate type was found at Site VVlLJ, a Perd.iz point
crone from Site VVL4, and Site VV!i6 y:i.elded 3 Perdiz. points
and 1 Cliffton point.
The location and potential productivity 'of Site VV43
are
.
significant.

While the site may lie above the flood pool

elevation, it overlooks a principal branch of the reservoir
an:l will be subject to'looting.

Testing of the site is

recommended in conjunction with the study of adjacent Sites

VVuu and VV46, which lie below the conservation pool elevation.

ulVV45
Site VVu5 is located near the wouth of a Devils River
side canyon p. few miles upstream from Devils Lake.

An

enormous midden talus which covers the slope in front of
the shelter bespeaks long and intensive occupation of the site.
This shelter has a breadth of about
of 20 feet.

1~0

feet and a depth

Along the rear wall is a low limestone bench

bearing numerous bedrock mortars and metates.

Abrasion cuts

are present on the walls, as are faint traces of pictographs.
Unfortunately, the deposits have been badly vandalized.
Undisturbed areas remain, however, which are dry and productive
ln appearance.

It seems likely that a good deal of scientific

data can be salvaged despite the disturbed condition of the site.

66

Included in the 18 lithic artifacts recovered from the
surface are a Langtry 11 0 11 point, a Frio point,, a Castroville
point, an unclassified dart point, 3 dart point frat'Tllents, a
round base knife, Ir flake side scrapers, and a fist axe.

Site

VVhS

is of special significance because of its

peripheral location.

Since this site promises to provide

iJTlportant data it should receive careful study.

It probably

lies .iust above flood pool elevation, but will certainly be
looted when the site becomes more accessible.
Site

VVLS

Testing of

is recommended.

lrlVVlll
Site VVlll lies in a tributary canyon of the Rio Grande
several miles above the mouth of the Pecos.

This shelter is

36 feet wide at the mouth and 22 feet deen.

Fragments of fire-

cracked stone and other debris lie in the mouth of the shelter.
Superficially the deposits do not appear greatly disturbed,
although there was evidence of disturbance in the
and digging tools left behind by pothunters.

~onn of screens

The deposits are

moderately dry and should be reasonably productive.

They appear

to have substantial depth.
This shelter lies near the floor of the canyon.

It is

possibly below the conservation pool elevation and is surely
below the flood pool level.

Limited te'sting is recommended.

67

LlVV131
Site VVlJl is located in a canyon which joins the Pecos
River above the Southern Pacific Railroad. bridee.
measures Lo feet across and 21 feet deep.

The shelter

Althoupp the floor

has been churned about by liveotock, no deep disturbances are
evident.

The deposits are dry and should be productive, although

their depth is probably not great.

Two manos, a chopper, a round

base knife, and an unclassified dart point were collected from
the surface.
Site VVlJl appears to lie above the conservation pool
elevation but is well below the flood stase level.

Testing

of the site is recommended.

Site VV152 is located in a bluff of

th~

Pecos Canyon

downstream from the Southern Pacific Railroad bridge.
shelter measures

This

35 feet in width by 15 feet deep, and an

extensive midden talus is present.

Bedrock mortars and metates

were observed in an adjoining shelter.
The deposits, which are probably somewhat over two feet
in thickness, exhibit little sup'erficial evidence of disturbance.
They appear dry and may be quite productive although no artifacts
were found on the surf ace.
Site VV152 lies above the flood pool elevation.
directly above

It will be

a principal section of the reservoir, however, and

since the site is visible from the river, limited testing is
·• recommended in conjunction w:i. th the study of VV15J.
68

...

LlVV153
Site VV153, which lies adjacent to Site VV152, is similar
to it in many respects.

The maxinnun width is 63 feot while the

depth reaches a max.imum of 12 feot.
is present.

An extensive midden talus

There are bedrock mortars and metntes inside the

shelter, and also beneath an adjoining overhang.
No superficial evidence of disturbances was evident and,

from surface inspection, the deposits appear moderately dry
and rich.

Ono unclassified dart point, 3 dart point fragments,

a round base lmife, and a flake side scraper were collected from
the surf ace.
The site is at approximately the same elevation as VV15Z.
Testing of the site, in con.iunction w:tth testing of VV152,
is recommended.
41VV155
Site VV155 is located in a Pecos River side canyon downstream
from the Southern Pacific Railroad bridge.

50

feet across by 19 feet deep.

The shelter measures

Bedrock mortars and metates are

present, and a large midden talus lies in front of the shelter.

The deposits show little evidence of disturbance.
most part, they are dry and should be productive.

For the

Surface col-

lectine resulted in the recovery of 24 lithic artifacts:
11 A11 ,

1 Langtry

11 B11 ,

1 Langtry

1 Martindale, 2 unclassifed dart points; an

unclassified arrow point, a possible spear point,

4 round

knives, 2 straight base knives, and a flake side scraper.

69

base

Site

VV155

lies above the flood pool elevation.

Reservoir

waters will be :llnpounded in the canyon, however, after which

access to the site will be easy.
su~ely

Consequently looting will

follow construction of the reservoir.

Testing of the

site is recommended.

u1m63
Site VV16J is located in an unnamed canyon joiriing the

Rio Grande several miles above the mouth of the Pecos. This
shelter measures 38 feet across and 17 feet deep.

An extensive

midden talus lies on the slope before the shelter.
The deposits are dry and rich in detritus, but appear to
be relatively shallow.

Surface collection from the midden

produced 11 lithic artifacts, including a round base knife
arrl

4 flake side scrapers.
Site VV16J lies above the flood pool of the reservoir •

.Since the site will be subject to looting, however, testing
is reconnnended.
41VV176

Site VV176 is located at the mouth of a side canyon of
the Rio Grande several miles above the mouth of the Pecoso

A

: large midden talus lies in front of the shelter, and bedrock
mortars and metates are present.
The shelter measures about

45

feet across and 12 feet

The deposits are dry and undisturbed, and, although

70

they do not apnear to be very thick, promise to be productive.
Three artifacts were collected:

an Ensor type dart point, a

chopner, and a miscellaneous blade.
Site VV176 lies above the flood pool elevation, but since
the site will overlook a principal section of the reservoir, it
will be sub,iect to destruction through vandalism.

Testing of the

site is therefore recommended.

hlVV177
Site VV177 is located a short distance up the Rio Grande
from Site VV176.

This site lies high up the face of the bluff,

and has a very large midden talus on the
of the shelter.

slop~

before the mouth

At the front of the shelter are several large

boulders, the tops of which are highly

po~ished.

They contain

numerous mortars, metates, and abrasion cuts.
The surface zones of the midden deposits are very dry,
suggesting that perishable materials are probably preserved.
Thickness of the deposits is at least 2 or 3 feet.

Since

• there is no evidence of looting a great amount of data should
be provided by this site.

Surface collection produced 2 Frio

type dart points, a Shumla type dart point, an Eddy type. arrow
point, 2 round base knives, 3 flake side scrapers, and

5 mis-

cellaneous chipped stone objects.
Site VV177 is one of the finest sites in the small rockshelter
Its apparent richness and undisturbed condition make it a
site of high potential. The finding of an Eddy type arrow point
the site's interest.

Although it may be above the .flood

71

pool level, Sito VV177 will undoubtedly be destroyed by
vandalism when the reservoir is completed.

Therefore thorough

s'!',udy of the site is recommended.

Alternate Sites for Excavation
The following four sites are recommended as possible

alternates to the small rockshelters reconunended above for

They do not promise to produce as much data as

testing.

the. latter, but if, for any reason, excavation at any of
the first priority sites is not feasible, or i f one or more
of them do not live up to expectations, the following sites

appear to conta:Ln significant archeological data and could
be excavated as substitutes.

hl VV60. Site VV60 is situated in a side canyon of the
' Pecos River downstream from the Southern Pacific Railroad
This shelter measures 28 feet across and 12 to
feet deep.

14

The deposits are 2 to 3 feet thick, or possibly

,'more; they are dry and show little evidence of disturbance.
In front of the shelter is a sizeable midden accumulation.

Nine lit.hie art if acts were collected at VV6o.

These

: include a Castroville type dart point, 3 round base knives,
: a straight base knife, and a chopper.

Site
reservoir.

VV&J

lies above the flood pool elevation of the

Water will be impounded in the canyon beneath

site, however, and the shelter will be subject to looting.

72

hlVVJ.58.

Sito 158 is located in the Pecos River Canyon

upstream from tho Southern Pacific Railroad bridee.
shelter has a width of JJ feot and a depth of

25

This

feet.

The

deposits appear dry and fairly productive, and are at least
~

feet thick.

Two large potholes are present.

In front of

shelter is an extensive midden talus.
Six lithic artifacts comprise the surface collection
• from Site VV158.

These include a Shumla dart point, a

Pedernales point, a round base knife, and a mano.
Site VVJ.58 is sit.uated .immediately above flood pool
It overlooks what will be a principal branch
however, where it will be subject to

hlVV173.

Located in the Rio Grande Canyon several
from the mouth of the Pecos, this shelter

feet across by 18 feet deep.

Bedrock mortars

nearby and a very extensive midden talus lies
The deposits appear moderately
Several large potholes have been dug
is difficult to estimate.the
extent of the looting.
Surface collection produced 1 unclassified dart point,
arrow point, a round base knife,, a chopper, and

73

Site VV173 lies above flocxl. pool elevation.

It overlooks

a principal section of the proposed reservoir, however, where

it will be easily accessible and vulnerable to looting.
lt1VV182.

Site

VV182

Grande bolow Langtry.

is located in a bluff of the Rio

The shelter measures JO feet across

by 18 feet deep. The deposits appear
at least 2 feet.

dry and productive,

Some evidence of looting

is present, but it is difficult to determine to what degree
,·the deposits have been disturbed.

Bedrock mortars are present

and a very large midden talus lies in front of the shelter.

Nine artifadis, all lithic, were collected from the
• surface of the site.

These include a Refugio type dart

, p6int, a dart point fragment, and 2 l'lake side scrapers.

Site VV182 lies above flood pool elevation, but since
,'it_ will be on a principal section of the reservoir, will be
subject to destruction throueh vandalism.
;Additional Small Shelter Sites

;41VV13
II
16
17
II
19
I

II
II

II

69
70

84
86

24

II

It

28

II

91

11·

29
32

II

92
93

II
: It
:

41VV64

"'

: II

II

33

II

1)6

II

57

91.i

96

1.ilVV97
II 102
II 10).j.
II 106
" 108
II 110
II 114
11
115

41VVll9
II
120
II
122·
II
132
II·
139
II
140
11.
141
II

145

II

116

Ill

II

117

Jli8

118

149

II

"'

74

41VV150
II
151
II
159
II
166
II
169
II

174

II

175
179
181

II'

fl
II

183

II

184

T ABLR I.

Site
Category
[I)

Site

No.
ltl VVJ

Below
Below
Test Intenaive
Conservation Flood Vulnerable Exe av. Exe av.
Pool
Pool To woting Rec om. Recom.

x
x
x

x
x

27

x
x

x
x

36

?

x

" 44

x

x

?

x

II

12~

II

126

II

l)Q

x
x
x

II

137

?

x
x
x
x

x
x

x
x

II

11

II

14

"
,,

21

Q)

~
ti)

Sunun.i.ry of si to datn.

x

x

x
x

Q)

0

ell

~

f..i
;;:1

ti)

r.:
Q)

II

p,

0

ulVVJ7

-g

(I)

0

ro

II)
Q)

..-! f..i +'
~ C1l
f..i•r-1
Cl)
E-i

~
.... w
~

u

•r-1 ell

41VV99
Cl.!
C1l

~~~

II

188

x

x
x
x

x

x
x

x

x
x

x

x

x
x

f..iWCl.l
+' E-4
Cl)

~
Q)

;ti

14lVV j;J

x

x

II

66

x

x

"

74

x

II

75

"

x

x

x

x

90

?

x

x

II

100

x

x

x

II

Jlih

?

x

x

II

167

x

x

x

II

187

x

x

?

Q)

..i::
I'll

~

0

s
Q)

bO

~

H

75

x

TABLE I.
Below

Site
Cate o

Site

~
(J.l

.cCl)

Below

0

II>

~

~

~Cl>

,c:

61

?

x

II

82

x

x

x

II

87

?

x

x

II

DB

?

x

x

II

98

x

x

x

" 109

x

x

x

II

13U

x

x

x

II

156

?

x

x

II

160

?

x

II

161

?

x

" 162

?

x

lf36

?

x

x

x

JS

x
x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

·x

x

x

x

152

x

x

II

153

x

x

II

155

x

ti

163

x
x

II

176

x

x

II

43

II

4~

II

111

II

lJl

II

&

~

x

x

31
?

?

" 177

76

x

x

x

x

"

en

-u

Recom.

II

lVVl

H
II>

Exe av.

x

II

Ill

Intensive

38

•r-1

'g
~
(J.l

Excav.
Rec om.

II

..!.::

s

Test

Flood Vulnerable
Pool To I.ootinB

x
x

tr.I

Joi

Q)

Conservation
Pool

(continued)

x
x

PIGI'OGRAPH SITF.S

Extensive panels of superbly executed pictographs-many
of them in an excellent state of preservation--are found widely ·
throughout the Diablo Reservoir area.

Indian pictographs occur

in other parts of North America, but those of the· lower Pecos
area

·a~e

unique in several respects.

Color, form, and com-

position have been combined into a highly developed style of
p:riroitive art which is probably without parallel in the New
World.

Another unique feature of the Diablo pictographs is

their great abundance in a small geographical area.

Finally,

the potential ethnographic data which may be obtained through
systematic study of pictograph elements lends special anthropological significance to these cave murals.
There can be no doubt that tho Diablo area is one of the
major pictograph regions of the world.

Therefore it is not

surprising that they have attracted the attention of pictograph
specialists.

In the 19JO's Forrest Kirkland embarked ' upon a

long tenn project for locating the major pictograph sites in
. the area and executing 3caled reproductions of the paintings
. in their original colors.

It.

highly qua.lified artist, Kirkland's

work was accurate and professional in all respects.

His

untimel~

death before the completion and publication of his work was an

77

irreparable loss.

Another attempt to record the pictographs

of the region was made by A. T. Jackson in the 19JO's.

He

made black and white photographs and sketches of many pictographs, but there was little attempt to record the paintings

in their original colors. The results of Jackson's pictographs
survey were included in his

Picture-Wr~~ing

of Texas Indians.
'

Although helpful, this work gives only the palest renection
_of the great artistry of the paintings.

The pictographs are concentrated in the large shelters
and overhangs of the lower Pecos River and ad.1acent stretches
of the Rio Grande.

They are virtually absent from the lower

Devils but there are several outstanding sites on the upper
Devils.

At some sites only a few paintings are to be found;

at other there are extensive panels.

Physically, the sites

vary from slight overhangs to large shelters.
At least two broad pictographic styles have been recognized.
The first aPJ>ears to be related to the Pecos River Focus (Kirkland.,

1939, PP• u7-51; Kelley, 1950, PP• 71-74), and features a polychromatic technique employing orange, dark red, light red, black,
white, and yellow pigments.

An element rendered in .one color ·

is frequently outlined with a narrow band of another color.
Fine straight or wavy lines of alternating colors are also
characteristic (Kirkland, 1939, p. 52).

Forms tend to be

highly stylized, although naturalistic representations do occur.

78

Stylized anthropomorphic figures, frequently holding what

appear to be atlatls and other objects, are a favorite theme.
A variety of geometric forma also ocr.ur as well as naturalistic
representations of mountain lions, deer, serpents, and other
animals.

In terms of artistic merit, Kirkland finds the style

highly developed, with such advanced artistic qualities as
accurate drawing, conventionalization, color harmony, balance,
rhythm, and action. With respect to color hannony, Kirkland

(1936, PP• 31-32) wrote:
"Not only do we find a pleasing variety and combination
of colors on individual pictures, but the arrangement
of color masses in large groups is much more than
accidental.

It indicates a sense of color balance

unsurpassed by painters of our own time. 11
With regard to other esthetic qualities, Kirkland found
the Diablo pictographs to be superb examples of aboriginal art.
The Pecos River Focus style is the dominant tradition of
the area and accounts for the vast majority of pictograph sites
recorded by the survey.

In all sections of the reservoir where

pictographs occur the Pecos River Focus style is present.
The second general style of pictographs has generally
been regarded as a late intrusion into the area.

Murals of

this style are found at Pecos River Focus sites, where they
are often superimposed upon the earlier Pecos River
79

Focu~

pictographs, but they also occur at separate sites where
Pecos River Focus paintings are not present.

Individual

elements of this later style are monochromatic and may
be either red or black.

Realism in the depiction of natural

fonna is the dominant characteristic, and the artistic style
is readily distinguishable .froni that of the Pecos River Focus.
Human figures frequentiy hold bows and arrows rather than
atlatls, and hunting scenes are common.

The elaborate and

conventionalized elements of the Pecos River Focus do not
appear in these later paintings (Kelley, 1950, p. 74).

At

one site, VV77, pictographs of the monochromatic style include
historical elements such as horses, missions, and men in
European dress.
A total of 49 pictograph sites were recorded during the
survey. The paintings at

45

of them are well enough preserved

to allow recording by color photography or by hand copying.
The paintings at 38 sites are in the Pecos River Focus style,
while those at 7 other sites represent the later monochromatic
style.

At least 4 sites have both styles present.

It is highly desirable that a program be implemented for
securing accurate reproductions of these unique pictographs
before completion of Diablo reservoir.

In this regard, it

must be strongly recommended that not only those pictograph

80

sites which will be directly affected by the reservoir, but
also those which will be easily accessible from the lake, be
included in the program.

Many of the more accessible picto•

graphs of the area have already been def aced by irresponsible
persons.

Fortunately, however, some excellent examples have

thus far escaped damage because of their remote locations.

'When access is 'facilitated by construct.ion of Dia'blo Reservoir,
these also will be in danger of de1truotion by vMdili ai &

direct consequence of the construction of the reeorvoir.
Therefore recording of pictographs, both above and below the
maximum pool elevation, is a justified part of the archeologi.cal
salvage program.

81

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Reconnaissance in approxj.ma.tely 70% of tho total area
to be affected by tho proposed Diablo Reservoir has resulted
in the location of 188 archeologic8l sites.

Of these, about

25% have been recommended for preliminary test excavations
prior to completion of the reservoir

construct~on

project.

The selected sites have been briefly described in the present
report, the remainder of the sites being tabulated in summary
fonno

After the test excavations have been completed, 32

sites should be selected for thorough archeological study
in the form of intensive field excavation and laboratory
analysis.

It is estimated that a total of 21 excavation

units will be required to carry out the provisions of the
recommended program of archeological salvage; It is suggested
that the excavation units be proportioned among the several
I

· 3At1 excavation unit is defined as follows:
1 archeologist, for 9 months • • • • • • , ••• ~~4,0.50.00
1 assistant archeologist, for 9 months • • • • 2,700.00
1 laboratory assistant, for 6 months • • • • • 1,500.00
1 clerk-typist, for 3 months • • • • • • • • •
750.00
8 laborers, for 3 months • • • • • • • • • • • 5,200.00
Per diem and travel expenses • • • • • • • • • 1,200.00
Transportation • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
6oo.oo
Equipment. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 300.00
Equipment rental • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
200.00
Supplies and materials • • • • • • • • • • • •
300•00
Administrative overhead. • • • • • • • • • • • 2,608.00
591.00
Miscellaneous and reserve for contingencies· •
TOTAL

82

1

$20,000.00

site categories approximately as set forth in Table 2 so that
a representative sample of archeological data may be obtained.
A final schedule of sites to be thoroup,hly excavated must await
completion of the preliminary tests.
For maximum effectiveness of the excavation program, it is
recommenqed. that field operations be distributed, over a five year
period.

The following table summarizes the proposed distribution

of excavation units per year in tenns of the various site categories.
TABLE 2.

Proposed schedule of field work.

Site Category

Large Rocksheltera
Intermediate Rockshelters
Small Rockshelters

No. Sites
to be
Studied

Excavation
Units Per Year Tota1
-·
year year year year year Units Per
1
Category
2
4
3
5

3

2

2

2

10

1

1

2

8
6

Buried Single Components

3

Stratified Terrace Sites

2

Total Exca.vation Units Per Year

l

1

2

1

2

3

'

\

1

2

l

l.i

5

5

1

1

4

4

3

For recording pictographs in the Diablo area it is tentatively
estimated that

$15,ooo.oo

will be requiredo

83

6

5

1

'

'

Open Surface Sites

.

21

For salvaging paleontological, ecological, and historical
data a tentative estimate of

$25,ooo.oo

is submitted.

This

estimate may require some revision after appraisal of the area
by specialists in those fields.

It is recommended that the sum of

$35,ooo.oo

be made

available to aid in defraying the costs of publishing the
scientific studies recommended under the salvage,program.
The effectiveness of the salvage project will be seriously
handicapped if provisions are not made for publishing and
disseminating the results of the research.
TABLE 3.. Estimated cost of the proposed salvage program.
For archeological excavations
and studies (21 excavation units
@ $20,000.00 per unit) • • • • • • • • • • $420,000.00
For recording and analyzing
pictographs • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

15,ooo.oo

For paleontological, ecological,
and historical studies. • • • • • • • • •

25,000.00

For publication costs

...•
. . . .TOTAL

• •

35,000.00

$495,ooo.oo

In several respects the Diablo Reservoir area is one of the
unique archeological regions of North America.

Probably no area

of comparable size can boast of so rich a series of archeological
and pictographic sites.

In the dessicated rockshelters, in the

open midden sites, and in the stratified terrace sites are pre~
served an unusually complete array of material remains, representing,
all in all, several thousand years of htnnan history and prehistory.

84

For this reason alone the archeology of the area is of
exceptiona.1 scientific significance.

But in addition to

this rich inventory of archeologic materials, here exists
one of the truly unique pictograph rep;ions of tho world.

The magnificent galleries of superb ca.ve murals, executed
in

polych~omatic

and monochromatic styles, in styli?.ed and

naturalistic f orn1s, are perhaps comparable only to the
famous cave paintings of Europe.
The scientific, archeoloRical importance of the region

arrl the desirability of recovering the fullest amotmt of data

possible before completion of Diablo Reservoir are so apparent
as to render further emphasis superfluous.

The cultural and

historical value of these data is especially apparent in these

times when the ureent need for a better understanding of mankind
is almost universally recosnized.

And unless the proposed sal-

vage progrmn is undertaken prior to construction of Diablo Reservoir,
a ·unique segment of human history will be lost beyond recovery.

Since virtually all the

ma~or

archeoloeical sites of this

eeneral region will be endangered by the Diablo Reservoir Project,
it is urged that the re:onunendat.ions set forth herein for archeological salvage, for recording pictographs, and for complementary
historical, paleontological, and ecolor,ical studies be given prompt
conside~ation.

The recommendations embodied in this report rep-

resent the minimum amount of salvage that, in the estimation of

85

the writers, will be required to obtain a representative
series of cultural data from the area.

Because of the great

extent of Diablo Reservoir a five year salvage project has
been proposed, and in order to attain the desired objectives
before the dam and reservoir are completed, it is imperative
that the initial phases of the field work be begun no later
than calenda~ year 1959.

Survey and Report by:

John Allen Graham
and

William A. Davis

86

APPENDIX:

Archeologicnl Survey of the Mexican Part of Diablo Reservoirit

In the fall of 1957 a cooperative project between Mexican
and American authorities was set up to carry out archeological
investigations in the area to be flooded by the waters of the
Diablo Dam.

On the Mexican side, Dr. Ignacio Bernal, Director

of Prehispanic Monuments, was instrumental in making and carrying
.

'

through arrangements.

Tho actual work, however, was conducted

/

by the Direccion de Prehistoria, which is a part of the Mexican

National Institute of Anthropology and History.

Dr. Walter W.

Taylor was put in charge of the work, and Inspector Francisco
Gonz~'iez Rul was selected to conduct the actual field operations.

After preliminary arrangements had been made with the Americans
and after aerial reconnaissance, Sr. Rul was left in the field to
continue the survey.

In approximately six weeks, Sr. Rul had covered

the reservoir area from the mouth of the Devils River to the vicinity
of Langtry, Texas.

He found a total of 63 sites including caves,

shelters, rock middens, mortar holes, and pictographs.
Throughout the area, there was little

evi.denc~

of vandalism,

althougn at the mouth of the Pecos River most of the sites had

*This summary statement describing the reconnaissance carried
out in Mexico' was provided by Dr. W.W. Taylor, Direccibn de
Prehiatoria, Instituto Nacional de Anthropologi~ e Historia.

87

suffen'<i soma druna.ge.

Tho overwhelminP, majority of sheltered

sites was clustered in this region, and sites were µrogressively
rarer the farther one went downstream.

Although rock mounds were

present at the mouth of the Pecos, they were relatively scarce
there and increa.sed in numbers downstream so that, in effect,
.'. :i

they had a complementary distribution to that of sheltered sites •
It may be said, however, that sites of any sort were relatively
rare on the MeJ...-ican side as compared with the American.

This

differential frequency constitutes a problem of major importance
and great cu1tura1 and geographic interest.

It is now felt that,

with time in the field and a broa.d,interdisdplj_nary study, this
problem is capable of solution and should produce infonnation and

conclusions of considerable value,
Contrar'J to expectations, on the Mexican side the distinctive
pictographs which are associated with the Pecos River Focus on the
American side are virtually absent.:

only one series was encountered

and only one other recorded through henrsay.

It is also noteworthy

that surface finds of cultural material were very scarce in comparison with the J\nierican side.

In part, this may be due to relatively

less vandalism and resulting disturbr.nce of ·deposits; but it seems
most probable that it also represents
aboriginal occupancy.

ClI1

actual condition of less

As ·a very preliminary and most tentative

judgement, one may say that the general., over-all picture gained

from this cursory reconnaissance is one of extremely sparce and

88

localized occupntion

a people or peoples whor.e cultural hearth

by

lay across the Rio Grande in the now United States.

For some at-

preaent unknol-m geolop,ical reason, the ma.1or springs in tho region
are on the American side; and this m;zy- be at least one cause of the
differential occupation.

It seems that, from a more native location

in the United states, groups of aborigines crossed the Rio Grande
only sporadically except in the vicinity of the mouth of the Pecos

River. These forays were possibly for the purpose of hunting, and
it is further possible that the reason for their not tarrying on
the Mexican side was because in the long stretch of country.between
the Rio Grande and the hospitable mountains of Mexico, there was
little inducement to stay:

water was scarce· to absent, probably

even in the best of times.
There is much that should be done, and much that can be done,
on the Mexican side, to throw light on the cultural and historical
picture of aboriginal occupation along the banks of the Rio Grande
in Texas and Coahuila..

There are several important and fascinating

problems which our work has merely indicated.

But one thing is

certain, the whole picture, and thus the really important picture,
will not and cannot be developed without coordinated work on both
sides of the river.

Work on either side alone, will merely raise

problems and will most certainly not produce the significant results
that can be expected from a combined attack on this single but
interestingly differentiated cultural entity.

Walter W. Taylor
Direccion de Prehistoria
Instituto Nacional de A'ntropologia
e Historia,
Mexico, D. F.
22 May, 19.58

89

REFl':RENCJ•:s CITED

Bray 1 William L.

"Vegetation of the Sotol Country in Texas. 11

1905.

2£

~University

No. 6.
Butler,

c.

2f. Texas,

Bulletin

No. &J, Scientific Series

Austin.

T.

· (1948).

11

A West Texas Rock Shelter."

University of Texas.

Unpublished M. A. thesis,

Austin.

Davenport, J. Walker
ca. 19J8. · "Archaeological Exploration of Eagle Cave, Langtry,
Texas. •t Witte Memorial Museum Bulletin, No.

4.

San Antonio.

Davenport, J. Walker and Carl

n.d.

Che~.f

"Painted Pebbles from the Lower Pecos and Big Bend Regions
of Texas. 11 · ~Memorial Museum Bulletin, No.

5.

San Antonio.

Gardner, Fletcher and George
n.d.

11

c.

Martin

A New Type of Atlatl from a Cave Shel~er on the Rio Grande

Near Shumla, Valverde County, Texas. 11 Witte Memorial
Museum
Holden, W.

c.

1937.

11

~tin,

No. 2.

San Antonio.

Excavation of Murrah Cave." Bulletin

~chaeological

PP•

of~

Texas

and Paleontological Society, Vol. 91

h8-7J. Abilene.
90

Jackson, A. T.

1938.

1tPicture-Writing of Texas Indians. 11

Anthropological

Papers, Vol. 2, University of Texas Publication
No.

3809.

Austin.

Kelley, J. Charles

1950.

11

Atl.'.i.tls, Bows and Arrows, Pictographs, and the Pecos

River Focus. 11· .American AntiguitY;, Vol. 16, No. 1,

PP• 71-7L.
1957.

11

The Livermore Focus:

Vol.

6L,

Nos. 1

A Clarification. 11

El Palacio,

& 2, pp. LL-52. Santa Fe.

Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell, and Donald J. Lehmer

19LO.

The Association of Archeologica.1 Materials with Geological
Deposits in the Big Bend Regio!1. of Texa.s.

West Texas

Historical and Scientific Society, No. 10. Alpine.
Kirkland, Forrest

1937.

'A Study of Indian Pictures in Texas. 11

11

Bulletin of

~

Texas Archaeological and PaleontoloP,ical Society, Vol.
PP• 89-1190

1938.

9,

Abilene.

"A Description of Texas Pictographs. 11

Bulletin of the Texas

Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10,
PP• 11-39.

1939.

Abilene.

"Indian Pictures in the Dry Shelters of Val Verde County;
Texas. 11

Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleon-

- -

tological Society, Vol. 11, pp.

91

-

47-76.

Abilene.

Martin, GeorBe

n.d.

c.

The Big Bend Basket Maker. 11

11

Witte Memorial Museum

Bulletin, No. 1. San Antonio.

1933·

"Archaeological Exploration of the Shumla Caves."
~Memorial

Museum Bulletin, No. 3.

San Antonio

Pearce, J. E. and A. T. Jackson

1933.

"A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Val Verde County,

Anthropological Papers, Vol. 1, No. 3,

Texas. •t

University of Texas Publication No. 3327.

Austino

Sayles, E. B.

1935.

11

An Archaeological Survey

No. 17.

of •rexas. 11 Medallion Papers,

Gila Pueblo, Globe.

Setzler, Frank

1934.

"Cave Burials in Southwestern Texas. 11
Fieldwor~

Explorations~

of the SmHhsonian Institution in 1933, PP• 35-37.

Washine-t;on.

1935.

11

A Prehistoric Cave Culture in Southwestern Texas."

American AnthroRo_3:_?_gist, Vol. 37, No. 1, pp. 104-110.

Schuetz, Mardith K.

1956.

"An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Material. 11 ·
of~

Bulletin

Texas Archeological Society_, Vol. 27, pp. 129-160.

Suhin, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and &lward. B. Jelks
1954.

11

An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. 11

of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.

92

Bulletin

25. Austin.

Taylor, Herbert

19u8.

c.

"An Archaeological Reconnaissance in NorthemCoa.huila."

Bulletin of the

~ Arcl].~eological

Society, Vol. 19, pp. 74-87.

l9u9a

11

an<! Paleontological,

Lubbock.
~ea About

A Tentative Cultural Sequence for the

Mouth of the Pecos."

Bull~tin of the~

the

Archaeological

and Paleontological Society, Vol. 20, pp. 73-88.

Abilene.

(19h9b) "The Archaeology of the Area About the Mouth of tho Pecos."
Unpublished M.A. thesis, University of Texas.
Taylor, Walter

Austin.

w.

1956. "Some

Implications of the Carbon-lb. Dates From a Cave in

Coahuila, Mexico."

Bullet ill of the Te~ Archeologic~

Society, Vol. 27, pp. 215-?.Jh.

Austin.

Texas Almanac for 1957-1958
Thomas,

s.

J.

(1933).

The Archaeology of Fa:te Bell Shelter."
M. A. thesis, University of Texas.

Unpublished

Austin.

Woolsey, A. M.

(1936).

"Horseshoe Ranch Cave.u Unpublished manuscript, Department
of Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin.

93

PLATE l
A.

View of Rio Grande canyon above the mouth of the Pecos
River, looking upstream.

Note numerous caves and rock-

shelters in bluffs.
B.

View

of

bluffs on upper Devils River

PLATE

>S

PLATE 2
A:.

Sites VV39 and VVhO in Satan Canyon, typical examples

or

the

large rockshelter category.
B.

Site VV167, Eagle Cave, near

rocksbelter.

Lan~ry;

an outstanding large

PLATE

of the

large

2

PLATE

A.

Site

VV74,

3

the Fate Bell Shelter, in Seminole Canyon, an

outstanding large rockshelter.
B.

Site

VV45

in bluff of the upper Devils River; an intermediate

rockshelter.

.

. ,.

...

.,.,._•. .

PLATE

3

an

mnediate

I

I,

A

PLATE

A. Site VVluB,

a small

4

rookshelter in the Rio Grande canyon.

Note burnt rock talus.
B.

Site VV188, a stratified

terr~oe

Devils River and the Rio Grande.

site at the confluence

or

ron.

~e

of

PLATE

5

A.

Dart points.

a-d,, Langtcy "A" J e-h, Langtry 11 B11 ; i-m, Langtry

B.

Dart points.

a-c, Langtry 11n11·; d-f, Langtry 11 E11 ; g-h, Montell;

i-1, Pandale.

11

PLATE 5

Langtry

11

Montell;

, -A
0

2

3

4

5
CM.

6

7

8

9

10

PLATE 6
A.

Dart points.

a-1, Ensor; .1-n, broad corner notched.

B.

Dart. points.

a-f, Frio; g-1, Martindale.

I·

PLATE 6

a

c

b

e

d

f

I

g

.,

-.
,A

'ii

"i-~ . f
,{'.-- .:

..~ ~
j

h

m

I

k

A
2
I

3
I

4
I

5
I

.CM.

. b

•

g

c

h

B

6
I

7
I

8
I

9
I

10
t

n

----------------

&

PLATE 7
A.

Dart points.

.

a

a and b, Ellis; c and d,
Nolan; e and f, Marshall;

g-i, Shumla; .1 and k, Pedernales.

B. Dart points.

a-d., Refugio; e and' f, Tortugas;
g and h, Desmuke;
i, Matamoras; .1-1, Abasolo •

a

g

PLATE 7

, Marshall;

h, Desmuke;

A

O

I

2

3

4

5

CM.

6

7

8

9

10

PLATE 8

A.

Miscellaneous unclassified dart points.

B. Miscellaneous unclassified dart points.

PLATE 8
•

""'

A

0

2

3

4

5

CM.

6

7

8

9

10

PLATE 9

A.

Arrow points.

a-1, Perdi~J

j

and k, Cliffton; 1, Livennore (?);

m-q, Perdiz variations (?); r-t,

F.ddyJ

u-w,

~resno;

x-z, unclassfied,

B. Chipped stone tools. a and b, snub nose end scrapers; c and d
miscellaneous scrapers; e-f, heavy blades; g-i, flake side scrapers.

I~

PLATE 9

I"\
\ 1

I

I

11

t

I

e

d

c

b

0

II

h

g

f

11
1"

>re (?);
unclassfied

and d
l e scrapers.

-- L. -- - - -

k

4

3

2

I

0

·-·

-n·-- ....

.•.

6

5

p

--

7

8

10

9

CM .

t
r

s

•

'IC

u

t

•

.
v

;i .,

w

A

c
Q

I

2

3

4

d
5

CM.

g

6

7

8

9

10

x

q

.
PLATE 10

A.
B.

Knives.

a-d, pointed base, or double pointed; e-i, round base.

Knives.

I
a-d, straight base; e-g, concave base; h and i circUl.ar1'

i

j

r
I

PLATE 10

r
:

\.1

1 base.

'I
circular

a

\1
I

h
0
I

2
I

3 4
I

'

5 6
CM.
I

A

7I

8
I

9
I

10
I

- "'

PLATE 11

A.

Chipped stone art.i£acts.

a-c, choppersJ d, fist axe; e and

r,

choppers.
B. Miscellaneous artifacts.
miss~ng);

a,

fin~ly

chipped blade or knife (base

b, painted pebble; c, bone awl; d and e, cordage; f

matting; h, quid.

uce ; e and

r'

or knife (base
, cordage; f an

A

PLATE 12

A.

a, matting; b, sandal.

B.

Representative portion of a large panel of pictographs, Site VV83J
Panther Cave, in Seminole Canyon.

;

I
I
t

~

I1·

Site VV83

A
I
'

I

I'

I'
11

I

...... _,,,,,,. ...\..,..··-··-·· ...,,,,,-···-···

r,. ____/

...

,,,-··.

/""

-...

SHEET

f .". ,'
1-'

VICINITY

I

~

DIAB LO DAM

a

RESERVOIR

i

>

MAP

~-~.t:,·'
,·

ti

'

PROJECT \11

)

; .. -~!:_'Iv
y
-···-

............. _ ...!'···

...... ---<.
,Y . ... -···-- ...-..;::
eas-t,
... .,,.

TO ACCOMPANY MAP OF
ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY

·•

10

SCALE

IN

5

0

MILES

... ./···-··

10

I

SHEET 5

......... ··· /

.f!~o
.. .

......... ·

!

/

.·

.• ...._, •l'i-,.~~JSI.·
°'\..
•\I:~

I

.··~

.

·:?=(-

....·

....,....,...--

...;-

DETAIL "A"

-~-------

------

---~- ----------------~-----~~-------

ll)

/

PRE.FIX VV ACCOMPANIE.S

ALL SITE

NUMBE.R

DETAIL "B"

,,

;...;,;

PREFIX VV

DETAIL "G"

~·

ll)

,,

'<"'

~···

/~
_./

~·
'---._!

.,,,

.r
...

.

/

~
,,~· ~~~-·,
,;;,·

)··

(~: .

I ,. .

Sheet 2 of 3

0

\.)

~

I

/

/~., • '

I

-

I /

I ,..,.._,_ -

.~P

l

'\ \..

.......

I

_;'

~···

---'

..

~.~

.

r;··.·.·

~-.

,,,.,---- ...

-----<.

if{~;,

1l__..

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SITE

' .:~';' -:~- }~:£;

DIABLO RESERVOIR

PROPiOSED
I

MAP

Ri"o~'·GRANDE
:._. '

.

.

'-;

··'°~'.{.'-

°TE XAS ..t£AND. MEXICO
k.-:·'.'.,#4;~"'-:t;~;-

ADAPTED FROM U.S. C()~fS
. ,,-~~~~~---'

1tz

'

Of ENGINEERS

~'.' :,--~---

MAPS-1944

.:::- Scale1:in Miles
0

• .-;;• I . ·.'

2

3

4

·-~~~

NATIONAL _PARK SERVICE
.·_)r~ ..:~t _::i'.···

·Sheet 3 of 3

