TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY OF THE CAMBRIDGE PROSPECT

Waller County, Texas

David O. Brown

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN No. 53
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
1981

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcones Research Center
10,100 Burnet Road

PRINCIPAL

I~~TlGATOR

David S. Dibble

A report submitted to Camp 'Dresser and McKee Inc. in partial
fulfillment of the terms of a letter of agreement dated August 21, 1981.

---

~--

.......

-----

~---

---------­

A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY OF THE CAMBRIDGE PROSPECT
Waller County, Texas

David O. Brown

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY

TeahniaaZ BuZZetin No. 53
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
1981

TABLE OF CONTENTS

In troduc tion ..•....................•................... 1
Environmen tal Background .........•.......•...•......... 1
Archeological Background .....•..•...................... 4
Survey Procedures ...•••................................ 7
His toric Background ......................•...•..•...... 8
Survey Resul ts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . 9
Conclusions and Recommenda tions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Summary ....•..•.....•.....••......................•.... 14
References Cited ................•........•........•.... 16

List of Figures
Figure 1.

Map of Project Area ........•..•............. 2

Figure 2.

Plot of Radiocarbon Dates
from Core Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

1

INTRODUCTION
In August of 1981, the Texas Archeological Survey conducted a cultural
resources survey of portions of a uranium prospect area located on Bessies
Creek a few kilometers south of Brookshire, Texas (Fig. 1).
undertaken at the request of Camp, Dresser and McKee, Inc.

The survey was
That part of the

prospect area surveyed included all those portions of the Bains and Sterns
tracts which lie within the prospect boundaries as defined at that time.
Access was refused by the third landowner in the prospect area, Cletus Brown,
and his land was not surveyed.
Field work for the project was carried out by David Brown and Leland
Bement during the last week in August.

Field notes and project records will

be placed on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at the
University of Texas.

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
The study area is located in southwestern Waller County, southwest of
Brookshire (Fig. 1).

It falls within the Upper Coast climatic division with

maximum precipitation occuring during the summer months (Carr 1967).
annual precipitation is 41.67 inches (Pass and Harris 1979).
daily temperature is 39

0

while July maximum is 95

~---

--~

0

.

Average

January minimum

Growing season is 283 days.

- - - - - - -

CAMBRIDGE

PROSPECT

Peach Ridge

/

I
I
I
I

. I
I
1

I PROSPECT,_,.
BOUNDARY

Figure

o

I

1
,

I

I

kilometers

I

1

3

The project area lies within the Gulf Coast physiographic province as
defined by Fenneman (1938).

SpecificallYt it is in the alluvial valley of the

Brazos River where it cuts through the early Pleistocene deposits of the Pine
Flats Region below the Hockley scarp, which marks the divide between Pleistocene
upland and Pleistocene coastal plain (Fenneman 1938: 110-111).

Bounding the

Holocene sediment of the Brazos alluvial valley are fluviatile deposits of
Beaumont Formation age, which cut into and overlie earlier Lissie Formation
deposits (Barnes 1979).
The alluvial valley of the Brazos is essentially a Holocene terrace of the
river which t although the river is relatively deeply entrenched, has continued
a slow aggradation during the historic period.

According to Mr. Bains, one of

the project area landowners, several feet of sediment was deposited in places
-

during the 1913 flood.
.~~

~--

--

-

---

---

----

Bessies Creek itself is the northern segment of an abandoned meander belt
of the Brazos River.

This belt, which becomes Oyster Creek south of the project

area, is a relatively mature system with numerous meanders and oxbow lakes.
Occupied by the river for a period of about 3000. years, it was abandoned approx­
imately 1000 years ago (Bernard et al 1970).
The project area is centered around several prominent meanders of the
Bessies Creek channel ( cf. Fig. 1).

The central meander loop is cut into by

two adjacent meanders which have come very close to cutting off the larger loop.
Most of the project area is comprised of point bar sediments formed behind these
advancing meanders and is characterized by the distinctive alternating ridge and
swale topography characteristic of such features (Bernard and LeBlanc 1965).
Along portions of the creek banks is a moderate'ly well-developed natural levee
system, in places standing as high as a meter or more above the surrounding point
bar sediments.

Also along the bank of the creek, channel fill sediments

are visible in some places.
Located at the extreme eastern edge of the Texan biotic province where it
borders the Austroriparian province (Blair 1950), the characteristic modern
vegetation of oak, pecan, hackberry and elm appears to place it firmly with
the oak dominated Texan rather than the pine dominated Austroriparian. Soils

4

in the alluvial valley of the Brazos River are classified as part of the
Miller-Norwood-Pledger association, generally cracking clay and friable loamy
soils found on the floodplain of the Colorado and Brazos Rivers (Godfrey et al
1973).

The respective Great Group classification (Soil Survey Staff 1975) of

these three soils are Haplustolls, Udifluvents and Hapludolls.

Within the

project area soil development was minimal in a large number of the profiles
observed. suggesting Entisols (i.e. Udifluvents). Alluvial stratigraphy is a
more dominant feature of the sediments of the study area.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Relatively little is known about the archeological resources of Waller
County.

Only 14 archeological sites had been recorded prior to this survey

(Texas Archeological Research Laboratory Files).

'Two large archeological

survey projects have extended into Waller County but have recorded relatively
few sites.

A survey of the plant area and associated power transmission lines

for the proposed Allen's Creek nuclear plant located 54 sites, only 3 of which
were in Waller County (Dillehay and Mallouf 1972).

None of the 58 sites

recorded during the survey of the Cypress Creek watershed (Hale and Freeman
1978) were located in Waller County, even though the upper portion of the
survey area did extend westward into the county.

The only other recent

archeological work in the county, a transmission line survey near Hempstead
conducted by the Texas Archeological Survey, did not locate any significant
sites (Pliska 1979).
As indicated by research in neighboring areas, the cultural sequence is
broadly similar to that of the region (Thoms and Montgomery 1977: 39).

Although

a number of specific archeological phases and foci have been defined for the
adjacent portion of Texas (Hall 1981), the status of research in the area precludes
a definitive subdivision of the main periods.

The following general periods are

suggested.
Paleo indian Period (Prior to 5000 B.C.)
Although some evidence exists for Paleoindian occupations along the inland
areas of the Texas coastal plain (Hester 1980; Campbell 1960: 166; Birmingham
and Hester 1976; Sellards 1940), there is very little data available from the

5

lower Brazos River segment.

One Angostura style projectile point from a

private collection has been reported f,rom nearby Austin County (Dillehay and
Mallouf 1972: 7).

Despite this lack, the adjacent coastal plain finds and

material from farther to the north (Sorrow and Cox 1973), suggest that this
area would have been utilized by Paleoindian peoples.
Archaic Period (5000 B.C. - 500 A.D.)
Several Archaic cultural complexes have been proposed by the surrounding
region.

These include the

Aransas Focus:

a coastal complex extending southward along

the coast toward Corpus Christi, originally defined by
Campbell (1947; 1952; 1956; 1958) and more recently reassessed
by Corbin (1974).
Morhiss Focus:

a coastal and inland coastal plain culture complex

proposed by Calhoun (1965).
La Harpe Aspect:

an Archaic complex originally defined by Johnson

(1962) as including a large part of east Texas and extending at
least as far southwest as Harris County.
Central Texas Archaic:

originally termed the Edwards Plateau Aspect

(Kelly 1947), this period has been subdivided by a number of different
investigators.

Although most often simply divided into Early, Middle,

and Late, a series of phase names proposed by Weir (1976) has grown
in acceptance.

These are, from earliest to latest, San Geronimo,

Clear Fork, Round Rock, San Marcos and Twin Sisters.
Early Archaic sites and artifactual materials are as rare as Paleoindian
remains along the lower Brazos.

More recent Archaic sites are somewhat more

common, occuring generally in erosional gullies in the bluff at the edge of
the.prairie (Hall 1981: 388).

Several combined habitation and cemetery sites

have been found in this context.

6

Late Prehistoric Period (500 A.D. - 1600 A.D.)
As with the Archaic Period, the Late Prehistoric Period has been subdivided
into a number of spatially and temporally discrete culture complexes.

The basic

divisions are:
Austin Focus:

this central Texas complex represents the earlier of
two temporal units.

Isolated by Jelks (1962) at the

Kyle Site, this complex may have been superceded by
the later Toyah Focus by 1300-1400 A.D.
Toyah Focus:

the later of the two central Texas Late Prehistoric
culture complexes, it probably represents the remains
of the early historic inhabitants of coastal and
south Texas as well.

Rockport Focus: distinguished primarily by a distinctive asphatum­
coated pottery termed Rockport (Suhm and Jelks 1962:
131-6), this complex extends south and west away from
the study area.
Galveston Bay Focus: extending south and east of the project area, this cul­
tural complex includes a considerable amount of internal
stylistic change (Aten and Bollich 1969).
The Late Prehistoric period generally represents the introduction of the
bow and arrow and ceramics as well as less easily defined changes in settlement
and subsistence patterns.

The individual cultural complexes have been defined

on the basis of distinctive arrow point and ceramic styles.

Late Prehistoric

sites are located not only in erosional gullies along the prairie bluff, as are
their Archaic counterparts, but along steep-faced sections of the bluff
(Hall 1981: 388).
Historic Period (1528 A.D. - Present)
The historic era in coastal Texas began with the arrival of the shipwrecked
Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca and his companions in 1528.

Located on Galveston

Island and the surrounding mainland during the early portion of his journey, it
is not inconceivable that his wanderings may have taken him close to the project

7

area.

No clear physical evidence of his journey remains, however, and, indeed,

it was many years before the advance of European culture was to have a strong
effect on the aboriginal peoples.
Although Indian peoples were to remain a part of Texas history throughout
much of the 19th century, the European culture was already well-established by
the mid-18th century. Presidios, missions and colonial settlements began to
dot the landscape during this period.

Located roughly midway between the Spanish

mission at Goliad (Gilmore 1974) and at El Orcoquisac (Tunnell and Atnbler 1967),
the project area did not see concentrated settlement until the Anglo infusion of
the early 19th century.
By 1820, however, Stephen F. Austin founded his colony at San Felipe, only
a few kilometers northwest of the project area (and on the opposite bank of the
Brazos).
SURVEY PROCEDURES
The assessment of cultural resources in the project area consisted of
preliminary background research followed by an intensive field survey.

Preliminary

research included inspection of the archeological site files at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory and a scan of archeological project reports
from surrounding areas.

Basic sources on the geology and history of the area

were also consulted.
Field survey of the area consisted of surface inspection of the entire
project area by the two person crew.

The area was traversed in variable width

transects concentrating attention on topographic highs among the floodplain
ridges and swales and on the sandy levees along the creek.

All surface exposures,

such as roads and anthills, and subsurface exposures, such as irrigation ditches
and erosional gullies, were carefully inspected for indication of buried cultural
material.

The entire length of the creek bank, which was remarkably free of

vegetation, was given particular attention during the field survey.
,

Some consideration was given during the survey to potential differential
impacts of the project.

Thus, the surface of the projected plant site east of

the existing Cambridge Royalty Company field trailer was very carefully
inspected given the Rossibility of more extensive surface disturbances in this
area.

8

Further potential for differential disturbances could not be assessed because
the boundaries of the ore body were not available at the time of the survey.
In addition, considerable use was made of test trenches open during the
time of the survey.

Although the excavation of such trenches prior to survey

could lead to potential destruction of resources, no sites had actually been
impacted.

The ultimate benefit of being able to view the subsurface stratigraphy

is this case outweighed the risk of destroying resources.
HISTORIC BACKGROUND
The project area is included within the area of a land grant made to
William Cooper on July 7, 1824 (General Land Office Archives).

Cooper,

one of Stephen F. Austin's Old Three Hundred colonists, acquired one and
one-half sitios and two labors of land in Waller and Austin counties (Haskew
1969: 50).

Listed as a farmer and stockraiser in the early census records

(Mullins 1962: 44), Cooper soon became a partner in a mercantile business
in San Felipe (Haskew 1969: 50).
One of Cooper's three sons, William Jr., was killed by Indians on nearby
Caney Creek in 1830 (ibid.).

According to Haskew (1969: 51), the elder

Cooper was dead by 1832, but this is apparently contradicted by the 1850 census
records (also quoted in Haskew 1969: 77) which show a 68 year old William
Cooper living in the area.

At any rate, someone named William Cooper continued

to appear on the county tax rolls for portions of the original grant as late
as 1860 (Waller County Tax Records).

And as late as 1850, Cooper still owned

6642 acres of the original grant as well as 38 slaves, 300 cattle, and 60
horses (ibid.).

Shortly after this the bulk of the property was divided among

a number of Cooper family members.
It is likely that the property was used during Cooper's ownership for
grazing of cattle and horses.

Although the remains of some farm structures

from this period might be found, it is unlikely that any permanent dwellings
were located here.

According the the project area landowner, Mr. Bains,

settlement was limited to the higher terrace and upland areas before the
advent of flood control on the Brazos during the early part of this century.
Cooper's home was located just west of Brookshire (Haskew 1969: 51),
apparently well out of the project area.

9

SURVEY RESULTS
Only a single prehistoric site was located during field survey of the area.
This site, designated 41 WL 8, is described below. The location of the site is
shown tn Fig. 2.

Note that this number had been previously erroneously assigned

to a site in Fort Bend County, 41 FB 20, reported in the survey of lines associated
with the Allen's Creek proj ect (Dillehay and MaHouf 1972).
41 WL 8

This prehistoric site is. located on the slopes of a low rise to the south of
a partially filled-in abandoned river channel which is now dammed up and used as
a stock tank.

It

is bounded on the eas.t by a shallow and somewhat regular low

grassy drainage which may have been modified at some time in the past.

To the

south and west the boundaries are less distinct but the observable scatter of
material is some JO meters east-west by 30 meters north-south, with a minimum
total area of 2100 square meters.

Since this figure represents material eroding

from the slopes of this rise. it is conceivable, and indeed, perhaps likely, that
the site covers a much greater extent to the south and west.
Cultural material found on the slope included lithic chipping debris, a small
utilized flake-scraper, thermally altered chert and mussel shell.

A single shovel

test located slightly above and south of the limits of surface material yielded a
relatively large quantity of thermally altered chert to a depth of about 30 cm.
No immediately obvious chipping debris was recovered from the test. No materials
were collected from the site.
Soil in the test was a very compact and dry fine sandy clay or clay loam
with a relatively coarse strong subangular blocky structure.

Although no plow

zone was observed in the profile wall of the shovel test it is almost certain that
the top 15-20 cm.

have been disturbed by plowing.

Since most of the cultural

material recovered was from below this zone, it follows that the site may contain
intact deposits though certain types of plowing and clearing could easily disturb
deposits 30 cm. below the ground surface.
In addition to the single prehistoric site, the remains of three historic
structures were located during the field survey.
Figure 1.

These three are shown in

All of these sites appear to be relatively recent

(~a.

post 1920)

10

and none is considered a significant cultural resource.

Because of this they

were not aSSigned state numbers and are described below under their field numbers.
II-I

This site is marked by a scatter of ceramics, glass, metal and brick adjacent
to a still standing complex of wooden and wire pens and fences.

According to

Mr. Bains, the current landowner, a collapsing house, originally built as a
tenant farmer or sharecropper house in the 1920 f s, had been recently removed from
here.

Artifacts observed at the site generally supported this data.

One fragment

of a ginger beer bottle may be somewhat earlier, however.
With two Cambridge Royalty Co. trailers and a barn under construction on the
site, disturbances have been considerable.

It is unlikely that this relatively

recent and somewhat disturbed site could ever yield significant cultural data.
II-2

This site, which stands on a low ridge in a large pasture some 500 m. southwest
of II-I, is marked by a collapsed wooden structure.

The house was of board and

batten construction, with a pier and beam foundation using log pilings.

The roof,

originally covered with cedar or cypress shake shingles, had been recovered with
corrugated tin.
in construction.

Wire nails and lumber milled to modern specifications were used
Artifacts observed nearby appeared relatively recent, though the

house must have been abandoned for some time.

According to Mr. Bains, this

structure was built by his father sometime after 1930.

It is not considered

significant.

H-3
Located on a natural levee of Bes.sies Creek at the extreme northwest corner
of the Bains property, this site is. a still standing but dilapidated structure
quite similar in construction to
the same time.
observed.

H~2.

According to Mr. Bains, it dates to roughly

No artifacts clearly diagnostic of any earlier occupation were

One mother-of-pearl or mussel shell button was observed.

Beside

site is a deep gully marking the site of an old ford crossing the creek.
is unknown, but it could conceivably predate the house.

this

Its age

Neither the structure

11

nor the crossing site is considered to be historically significant.

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Only one potentially significant archeological site was encountered
during field survey of the project area.

The actual significance of this

prehistoric site, 41 WL 8, remains undetermined at present, but it may offer
a unique opportunity to investigate a site located in the alluvial valley,
below the Pleistocene terrace scarp where most of the prehistoric sites
in the area are found.

The combination of this rare location with the

potential for in situ buried materials suggests that this site may be
highly significant.
Should subsurface test drilling, mining, or any subsurface disturbance
be carried out in the vicinity of this site; archeological testing will be
necessary to ascertain the nature and depth of artifactual remains.

On the

other hand, if this area is excluded from mining, avoidance of the site
area may be more practical.

The alternative of avoidance is preferable if

it can be achieved.
The remains of three historic structures located during the survey
are neither sufficiently unique nor well-preserved enough to meet criteria
for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places.

Although the

area of the prospect itself is of minor historic interest as the property
of one of Austin's original colonists, a prominent early settler, it is
unlikely that any physical remains relating to this period would be located
within the prospect.
The lack of early historic remains is generally understandable in
terms of a settlement pattern which favored agricultural utilization of
the bottomlands and residential construction on the higher prairie.

The

relative scarcity of prehistoric sites cannot be so easily explained.
Despite settlement pattern evidence which shows an overwhelming concentration
of prehistoric sites along the edge of the prairie (Hall 1981), it is
unlikely that the bottomlands were not exploited by aboriginal peoples.

12

The paucity of evidence for such bottomland occupations is a function
of the activity of alluvial processes.

Along the lower Brazos River these

processes have been quite active, destroying sites through erosion and
covering others with many feet of flood sediments.

The lack of settlement

evidence may be related, in part, to emphemeral utilization of the bottom­
land, resulting in sites that are easily washed away or buried by moderate
amounts of silt.

It may equally be the case that many or all of the sites

in the floodplain are buried under large quantities of sediment.

This

is especially likely in the case of sites occupied during the time that the
Bessies Creek channel was active.

The potential depth of fill covering

relatively recent sites is shown in the graph of radiocarbon dates from
the upper sections of borings across the Oyster Creek meander belt near
Dewalt (Fig. 2).

As can be seen here, sediments 500 to 600 years old can

be covered by 25 to 30 ft. of more recent deposits.

These depths suggest

the difficulties in finding such a site; in fact, given this information,
it is quite surprising that sites, such as 41 WL 8 located during this
project, are found on the surface at all.
Considering the problems in locating sites in this alluvial environment,
it is highly likely that a surface survey, limited to shovel tests and
examination of cutbanks, will not succeed in locating some, if not most, of
the sites in the area.

Therefore, it is recommended that testing and mining

operations be monitored by the company in order to avoid undue destruction
of buried cultural resources.
Both prior to and during the survey, there were indications that the
mining boundaries and the location of the facilities were still somewhat
flexible.

Any additional area encompassed by the project will, of course,

require additional survey, but a few observations may be useful for planning.
Generally speaking, the density of sites on the actual floodplain of the
river will be quite low, but any sites found there are likely to be
significant because of their rarity.

Any inclusion of the upper terrace

surfaces along the edge of the floodplain will probably encounter both
prehistoric and historic sites.

Since several aboriginal cemeteries,

o

e p t h

In

Feet

o

1 0

20

.5S0!.

180
2680,;t220

480,;!:150

30

690±.150

. 1640 ±

40

170

\.1640 + 160
1580 + 150

-

-

2570 + 280

5 0
9l0:t

2620!.

150

180

72201:.350

2300:t 170

60

o

1 000

2000

3000

4000
Years

Figure
the
from

2.

Oyster

Plot

of

Creek

Bernard

et

radiocarbon

meander
al

1970.

belt

5000

6000

7000

samples

along

B. P.

dates

from

south

of

core

the

study

area.

Data

14

which are extremely valuable sources of data on prehistoric cultural practices,
have been found in such locations, most sites found in these areas will need
some subsurface investigation.
Higher terrace remnants may also be the location of valuable archeological
sites.

One such remnant, Peach Ridge, has been considered as an area of

potential expansion, even for possible plant location.

Inspection of this

broad, low mound located in the northeast corner of the intersection of
Peach Ridge and

Donigan Road, was not possible because of land access,

but a brief look at the adjacent road ditches showed the presence of pre­
historic cultural material.

This natural mound is most certainly a site,

and if it is included within the project area, should be examined by an
archeologist prior to any subsurface disturbance.
One further specific caution m?y be added with respect to potential
inclusions

within the project boundaries.

In a conversation with Mr.

Bains, one of the project landowners, he noted that his grandmother had
told him that Indian Creek or Indian Slough had been named for a group
of Indians who had camped at its confluence with Bessies Creek periodically
sometime during the nineteenth century.

This information, and the generally

high probability of site locations at stream confluences, suggests at least
moderate potential for site presence here.

Since this area is just outside

the project boundaries and could possibly be affected, subsurface disturbances
should be avoided until the area is examined by an archeologist.
SUMMARY

After the complete field survey of the accessible portions of the
survey area, one prehistoric and three historic sites were located.

While

none of the three historic localities is considered significant, the single
prehistoric site, located near the southern edge of the Sterns property,
will require further examination.

If this particular area is not within

the mining area and destructive impacts can be averted, such avoidance
would be preferable.

In addition to the potentially valuable site

located within the project boundaries, two other localities outside of the
present project area, Peach Ridge and the confluence of Indian and Bessies

..............

---~~

- ....•....

---~~

.

15

Creeks, are high probability prehistoric site locations and care should
be exercised in those areas if they are included within the project area
by any future boundary changes.

16

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L.E. and C.N. Bollich
1969
A Preliminary Report on the Development of a Ceramic Chronology
for the Sabine Lake Area of Texas and Louisiana. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 40: 241-258.
Barnes, Virgil E.
1979
Geologic Atlas of Texas. Houston Sheet.
Geology, University of Texas at Austin.

Bureau of Economic

Bernard, H.A. and R.J. LeBlanc
1965
Resume of the Quaternary Geology of the Northwestern Gulf of
Mexico. IN The Quaternary of the United States. H.E. Wright,
Jr. and D.G. Frey, editors. Princeton University Press.
Bernard, H.A., C.F. Major, Jr., B.S. Parrott and R.J. LeBlanc, Sr.
1970
Recent Sediments of Southeast Texas: A Field Guide to the
Brazos Alluvial and Deltaic Plains and the Galveston Barrier
Island Complex. Bureau of Economic Geology Guidebook No. II,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Birmingham, W.W. and T.R. Hester
1976
Late Pleistocene Archaeological Remains from the Johnston­
Heller Site, Texas Coastal Plain. Center for Archaeological
Research Survey Report 3: 15-33, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.
Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
Calhoun, C.A.
Archeology of the Coastal Bend.
1965
Archeological Society, Houston.

Texas Journal of Science II(l): 93-117.
Paper presented to the Houston

Campbell, T.N.
1947
The Johnson Site: Type Site of the Aransas Focus of the Texas Coast

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
18: 40-75.
1952

The Kent-Crane Site: A Shell Midden on the Texas Coast.

Bulletin

of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 23: 39-77.
1956

Archeological Materials from Five Islands in the Laguna Madre,
Texas Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 27: 7-46.

1958

Archeological Remains from the Live Oak Point Site, Aransas County,
Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2(4): 448-471.

1960

Archeology of the Central and South_ Secti.ons

ot

the Texas Coast..

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 29(for

~958); 177-254~

17
~",,'

Carr, John T., Jr.
1967
The Climate and Physiography of Texas.
Board Repopt 53, Austin.

'"

'_'~'V"'~"

Texas Water Development

Corbin, James E.
1974
A Model for the Cultural Succession of the Coastal Bend Area of
Texas. BulZetin of the Texas ApcheoZogical society 45: 29-54.
Dillehay, Tom D., Michael G. Mallouf and David S. Dibble
1972
An Archeological Reconnaissance of Areas to be Affected by the
Proposed Nuclear Power Plant, Austin County, Texas and Associated
Power Transmission Lines in Austin, Waller, Fort Bend and Harris
Counties, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Reseapah
Repopt No. 16, The University of Texas at Austin.
Fenneman, Nevin M.

1931

Physiogpaphy of the Western United states.

McGraw-Hill Book

Company, Inc., New York.
1938

Physiogpaphy of the Eastern United states.

McGraw-Hill Book

Company, Inc., New York.
Gilmore, Kathleen
1974
Mission Rosario: Archeological Investigations 1974. Historic
Sites and Restoration Branch, Parks Division, Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department ApcheoZogicaZ Repopt 14(2), Austin.
Godfrey, C.L., G.S. McKee and H. Oakes
1973
General Soil Map of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station,
Texas A & M University, with the Soil Conservation Service, United
States Department of Agriculture
Hale, Thomas H., Jr. and Martha Doty Freeman
1978
A Reconnaissance Survey and Assessment of Prehistoric and Historic
Resources, Cypress Creek Watershed in Harris and Waller Counties.
Texas Archeological Survey ReseaPch Repopt No. 68, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Hall, Grant D.
1981
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower
Brazos River Valley, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Reseapch
Repopt No. 61, The University of Texas at Austin.
Haskew, C.P.
1969

HistoricaZ Records of Austin and Wallep Counties.
Printing, Houston.

Premier

18

Hester, Thomas R.
1980
A Survey of Paleo-Indian Archaeological Remains Along the Texas
Coast. IN Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas Coast, Lynn
Highley and T.R. Hester, editors. Center for Archaeological
Research Special Report No. 11, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962
The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in
Hill County, Texas. Department of Anthropology Archaeology
Series 5, The University of Texas at Austin.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1962
The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with
a Preliminary Definition of the LaHarpe Aspect. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 32 (for 1961).
Kelley, J. Charles
1947
The Cultural Affiliation and Chronological Position of the
Clear Fork Focus. American Antiquity 13(2): 97-109.
Mullins, Marion Day
1962
The First Census of Texas, 1829-1836 To Which Are Added Texas
Citizenship Lists, 1821-1845 and other Early Records of the
Republic of Texas. National Genealogical Society, Washington. D.C.
Pass, Fred and Ruth Harris, eds.
1979
Texas Almanac and State Industrial Guide 1980-1981.

.H. Belo Corp.

Pliska, James R.
1979
A Cultural Resource Assessment of the Bellville South to Waller
Transmission Line, Austin and Waller Counties, Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin No. 27, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Sellards, E.H.
Pleistocene Artifacts and Associated Fossils from Bee County,
1940
Texas. Bulletin of the Geological Society of America 51: 373-432.
Soil Survey Staff
1975
Soil Taxonomy: A Basic System of Soil Classification for Making
Interpretive Soil Surveys. Soil Conservation Service
Agricultural Handbook 436, United States Department of Agriculture.
Sorrow, W.M. and W.N. Cox
1973
A Reconnaissance of the Archeological and Historical Resources of
the Navasota River Basin. Texas Archeological Survey
No. 26, The University of Texas at Austin.
- - - - - - -

19

Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962

Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Memorial
Museum Bulletin No.4, The University of Texas at Austin.

Tunnell, Curtis and J.R. Ambler
1967
Archeological Excavations at Presidio San Agustine de Ahumada.
Texas State Building Commission Archeological Program Report No.6,
Austin.
Thoms, A.V. and J.L. Montgomery
1977
The Archeological Resources of the Brazos River Basin: A Summary
Statement. Department of Anthropology, Texas Tech University.
Lubbock.
Waller County
var.
Waller County Tax Records.

Texas State Archives, Austin.

Weir; Frank A.
1976
The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
Washington State University, Pullman.

