A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY OF THE
BRENHAM WALLER SPLIT TO BRENHAM NORTH SUBSTATION
138 KV TRANSMISSION CORRIDOR
Washington County, Texas

TechnicaZ BuZZetin 72

Leland C. Bement

Principal Investigator: Solveig A. Turpin

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
Antiquities Permit 252
October, 1983

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcones Research Center
10100 Burnet Road

A report submitted to
Lower Colorado River Authority
in fulfillment of P.O. 14d330
State Antiquities Committee
Permit No. 252

- - -...

ABSTRACT
June l3, and again on July 27, 1983, aI'aheologists fporn the Texas
Apaheologiaal Survey, The Univepsity of Texas at Austin, aonauated an in­
tensive pedestPian survey in Washington County, Texas. A 70 foot wide, 6
mi le long ppoposed 1J 8 KV tJ:'ansmission line aopPidop from the Bpenham Nopth
substation to the Bpenham to WalZep existing tpansmission line was the sub­
jeat of this survey. The ppojeat was sponsoped by the Lowep CoZopado Rivep
AuthoPity and impZemented undep Antiquities PePmit Numbep 252, issued to
that enti ty by the Texas Antiquities Commi ttee. No ppehistoPia op histoPia
sites wepe Zoaated duPing the supvey. The laak of desiPable lithia outapops
and the limited available watep pesoupaes ape ppesented as peasons fop the
laak of ppehistoPia sites.
On

-i

~

- - - -

--------- -------------­

<

TABLE OF CONTENTS

. Abstract . . . .
Introduction .
Field Methods
Environmental Background .
Archeological Background
Historic Background
Results and Recommendations
References Cited . . . . . • .

i

1
1

....

1
4
4
5

7

List Of Figures
Figure 1.

Map of Surveyed Transmission Corridor

ii

2

1

INTRODUCTION

Under agreement with the Lower Colorado River Authority, The Texas Archeo­
logical Survey conducted a pedestrian survey of a proposed six mile transmission
line corridor between the Brenham-Waller Split to Brenham North Substation,
Washington County, Texas (Fig. 1). The survey was conducted under the provisions
of Antiquities Permit No. 252 and the Texas Historical Commission guidelines.
Bruce Nightengale and Andy Cloud of the Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin, conducted the survey of a 3.8 mile segment of
the corridor on June 13, 1983. The remaining 2.2 miles were surveyed by Jack
M. Jackson and Leland Bement, also of the Texas Archeological Survey, on July
27, 1983.

FIELD METHODS
The survey consisted of the two archeologists walking abreast and following
a serpentine course for the length of the transmission corridor. The corridor
is 70 feet wide, which allowed for very intensive coverage of the area. A
daily journal was kept, noting any pertinent information such as land forms,
soils, vegetation and land use. The notes are curated at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
GEOLOGY
The transmission line crosses geologic formations of Miocene age (Bureau
of Economic Geology 1974:Austin sheet). The Flemming Formation underlies 9/10
of the line. This formation is comprised mainly of clay and sandstone, primarily
calcareous clay and silt which forms brownish black soil. The northernmost
section of the line crosses the Oakville Formation. This formation is comprised
mainly of sandstone and clay.

j

/
:/

/

,
...-l

,I

.

_../ . <\
J

(

!
j

Figure 1

Project Locat ion Map
0

.5
milet

1.0

J..\..

3

SOILS
Two major soil types were observed along the transmission corridor. One
was the dark brown to black clay covering 9/10 of the surveyed area. Land
with this soil type is predominantly used as improved pasture or fields planted
in Coastal Bermuda. A second soil type was observed in the northernmost section
of the transmission corridor along Hog Branch. In this area the hills are
capped with sandstone and the low areas and drainages are comprised of sandy
loams. These sandy areas are also used for improved pasture.
The USDA Soil Survey of Washington County divides the clays and sands into
the following major groups!
Clay: Bleiberville Clay, Brenham Clay Loam, Carbangle Clay Loam, Bosque
Clay Loam
Sand: Silawa Loamy Fine Sand, Arol Fine Sandy Loam, Axtell Fine Sandy Loam
(SCS :1981 ).

HYDROLOGY
The transmission line corridor follows a route which begins within the Caney
Creek catchment area, traverses the interfluvial to the north of Caney Creek,
and then descends into the Ralston Creek and Little Sandy Creek catchments of
the New Year Creek dendritic system.
The transmission corridor traverses equal portions .of the uplands and
lowland drainage areas.
Both Caney Creek and New Year Creek are within the Brazos River drainage
bas in.

FLORA AND FAUNA
The transmission corridor falls within Blair's (1950:93,117) Texan Biotic
Province. This province is a north-south trending ecotone running from
Oklahoma to the Texas Coast.
The area is located near the border line between moisture surplus9-n~ ...
moisture deficit climates (ibid:l00). Sandy soils in this province support
an oak.hickory forest of post oak, blackjack oak and hickory. Clay soils.
which are for the most part under cultivation, support a tall grass prairie
of little bluestem. indian grass, switchgrass. big bluestem, side oats grama.

4

meadow dropseed, silver bluestem and Texas wintergrass (Gould 1975:3), These
two vegetational areas correspond to Gould's (op. cit.) Post Oak Savannah and
Blackland Prairie. Blair (ibid:101) refers to this interdigitation of forest
and grassland as the "outstanding biogeographic phenomenon of the region".
Though no species of vertebrates are endemic to the province (Blair
1950:101), numerous vertebrates co-occur here and in other of Blair's provinces.
These include: opossum, eastern mole, fox squirrel, gopher, harvest mouse,
white foot mouse, cotton rat, cottontail rabbit, swans rabbit, picket mouse,
badger, red fox, raccoon, gray fox, coyote, bobcat, striped skunk, ringtail
and white deer.

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
The transmission line corridor lies within a broad transitional zone be­
tween the central and coastal archeological regions. This area is defined as
transitional because of the recovery of archeological materials affiliated
with both the central and coastal Texas regions, indicating an overlap of
influence from both areas. The cultural history is broadly defined for this
area by a four part classification. The earliest time span is termed the
Paleoindian Stage, dated to before 9000 B.P. This is followed by the Archaic
Stage from 9000 to 1250 B.P. The introduction of two technological innovations,
the bow and arrow and ceramics, marks the next stage, known as the Late Pre­
historic (1250 B.P. to approximately 350 B.P .• or the time of contact with
Europeans). The final stage is the Historic. Descriptions and summaries for
each of these stages can be found in Kelley l1955), Kenmotsu and Freeman (1980:
10-11. 55-57), Skelton (1977:13-16), l~eir (1976) and Prewitt (1981:65-89).
A total of 36 sites have been recorded in Washington County. Sites .have
been found in all physiographiC settings, although the upland areas have fewer
sites while' the lowland areas along rivers and creeks have higher site densities.

HISTORIC BACKGROUND
The Brenham to Brenham North Transmission corridor transits three Sitio
size land grants made by the Austin Colony before the Texas Revolution. Each

5

of these large grants was originally 4428.4 acres. The first of these to be
granted was that of James Walker, a member of the select Hold three hundred"
colonists (Webb 1952, Vol. 11:853). Walker was granted his land July 21, 1824.
He may have been James F. Walker the brother of John Williams Walker, United
States Senator from Alabama (1819-1822)~ but the identification has not been
firmly established. The census of the colony taken in 1826 indicates that
Walker was farming and raising cattle on the parcel in question. The family
consisted of a wife, two sons and a daughter. He owned four slaves. Walker
was over 50 years old in 1826 and was apparently dead by 1837. His estate in
Washington County was being administered by Gideon Walker at that time.
Sanford Woodward was granted the adjoining sitio (4428.4 acres) on March
11, 1831. He is not mentioned in The Handbook of Texas, nor does he appear to
have participated in the Revolution, not being listed in Miller's (1967)
Bounty and Donation Land Grants of Texas.

The case is much the same for Isaac Lee who was granted his sitio four
days after Woodward, on March 15, 1831.
It is not clear from any of the foregoing records exactly where on the
sitio the houses, if any, were located. One suspects, however, that the Walker
house was located in the vicinity of the Walker cemetery, which is located well
west of the transmission corridor about midway along ·the line. It would also
appear reasonable that the small meandering county road off of which the access
road to the Walker cemetery turns, may be quite an old road, at least that
portion that is east of the corridor. The portion west of the corridor does not
have the characteristic wandering layout, but follows straight property lines.
One would suspect that the Lee and Woodward homes, then, might have been found
somewhere along this road. At any rate, the transmission corridor affects only
a very small percentage of the large Austin Colony grants and the probability
that it would cross the ruins of, or the site of, one of the original habitations
is quite low. Nevertheless, the field crew was alert to any trace of an
historic residence.

RESUL TS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The intensive pedestrian survey of this six mile long transmission corridor
recorded no prehistoric or historic sites. The lack of prehistoric cultural

6

materials is thought to be attributable to the absence of lithic outcrops on
the upland areas and the scarcity of dependable water in the drainages. An
exception is the deeply incised Hog Branch of Little Sandy Creek, located
near the northern end of the line. Here the drainage is incised nearly two
meters into the surrounding sandy soils. The areas adjacent to this drainage
were thought to have the highest potential for cultural materials. However,
none were exposed on the terrace surfaces or in the cut banks of the drainway.
Ground visibility in this area was good, with the added advantage of cattle
trails and rodent burrows present for observation. It can only be concluded
that either no cultural materials are present within the corridor or that
those materials are substantially buried.
Since no sites were reported along the transmission line corridor,
no recommendations can be set forth. However, should any cultural material
be exposed during the course of construction, the Texas Historical Commission
shoul d be notified immediately.

7

REFERENCES CITED
Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
2(1}:93-117.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1974

Geologic Atlas of

Texas~

Austin sheet.

The University of Texas at

Austin.
Gould~

1975

Frank W.
GPasses of Texas.

Texas A & M University, College Station.

Kelley. J. Charles
1955
The Archaic Culture in Central, Southern and Western Texas. Paper
presented at the 1955 Archaic Conference, Indiana University,
Bloomington.
Kenmotsu, Ray D. and Martha Doty Freeman
1980
Cultural Resource Survey and Monitoring in the Fayette to Lytton
Springs Transmission Corridor, Bastrop. Caldwell and Fayette
counties, Texas. Research Report 76. Texas Archeological Survey.
The UniverSity of Texas at Austin.
Miller, Thomas Lloyd
1967

Bounty and Donation Land Grants of Texas 1835-1888.

University of

Texas Press, Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981
A Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:65-89.

Soil Conservation Service
1981
Soil Survey of Washington County. Texas. United States Department
of Agriculture and the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Webb, Walter Prescott
1952

The Handbook of Texas Vol. II.

Texas State Historical Association,

Austin.
Weir, Frank A.
1976
The Central Texas Archaic Reconsidered. In: The Texas Archaic: A
Symposium. Thomas R. Hester, editor. Special Report 2. Center for
Archeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

