UNDER THE JAIL:
HISTORICAL ARCHEOLOGY AT THE
BASTROP COUNTY COURTHOUSE AND OLD JAIL,
BASTROP COUNTY, TEXAS

David G. Robinson and Dan K. Utley

Technical Series 14
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
The University of Texas at Austin
March, 1990

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
The Univeristy of Texas at Austin
Thomas R. Hester, Director
The Technical Series was initiated in 1988 to disseminate the results of small projects
conducted by the Sponsored Projects unit of the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory_ The series replaces the Technical Bulletin published by the former Texas
Archeological Survey. The Technical Bulletin ended with issue number 102 in 1987.
Persons interested in the earlier Technical Bulletins or in issues of Technical Series
should contact the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (Attention:
Publications), Balcones Research Center, 10,100 Burnet Road, Austin, TX
78758-4497 _

UNDER THE JAIL:
.
HISTORICAL ARCHEOLOGY AT THE
BASTROP COUNTY COURTHOUSE AND OLD JAIL,
BASTROP COUNTY, TEXAS

David G. Robinson and Dan K. Utley

Principal Investigator: Dr. Solveig A. Turpin
Texas Antiquities Permit 873

Technical Series 14
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
The University of Texas at Austin
March, 1990

COLLEGE OF LIBERAL ARTS

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
Texas ArcheologicalResearch Laboratory Sponsored Projects
10100BlIrnetRoad-AIIJtin, Texas 78758-4497 (512) 471-5980
0

0

A report submitted to:
The Williams Co., AlA
and
The County of Bastrop
In partial fulfillment of
an agreement dated 12/21/89
Principal Investigator: Dr. Solveig A. Turpin
Editor: Kelly Scott

ABSTRACT
In January, 1990, the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) , The
University of Texas at Austin, conducted archival research and field testing at the
Bastrop County Courthouse and 1892 Old Jail in Bastrop County, Texas. Carried out
for The Williams Company, AlA, and the County of Bastrop, the research was
mandated by the Texas Antiquities Committee to satisfy the provisions of the Texas
Courthouse Law. The fieldwork consisted of backhoe trenching in areas of a
proposed heat pump well system to be installed under lawns and parking lots around
the courthouse and Old Jail. The major finds of the project were the remnant
construction zone around the Old Jail and the sequence of parking lot fills south of
the courthouse and jail. A large concrete building slab and an out-of-context
tombstone were inadvertently exposed during construction. The slab was probably
the foundation of a garage dating to the 1930s or later, and the Sarah Harvey
tombstone did not mark an actual gravesite. It was probably brought to the court­
house block after being removed from its cemetery. The identity of Sarah Harvey and
the location of her grave remain a mystery.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project would not have been possible without the interest in preservation
shown by the people and government of Bastrop County. County Judge Jimmy
Copeland and Third Precinct Commissioner Pat Meuth were specially helpful and
instrumental in facilitating the fieldwork. Mr. Britton Barr of The Williams Co., AlA, was
an energetic coordinator of the project. Mr. Mark Denton of the Texas Antiquities
Committee was a keen interpretor of state regulations. Dr. Solveig A. Turpin, the
Principal Investigator provided deft guidance of the research in all of its phases. Mr.
George Riha of the Bastrop County Third Precinct may be the best backhoe operator
ever. Mr. Clyde Reynolds and Mr. Ken Kesselus gave generously of their time and
knowledge of Bastrop's history. As always, Nan Olsen, Chairman of the Bastrop
County Historical Commission, stood ready with sage advice. Dr. Dan Julien
produced the computer-generated map and soil profiles, and Ms. Kelly Scott served
ably as editor of the report.

Iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract .............................................................iii
List Of Figures ........................................................ v
Introduction .......................................................... 1
Methodology .........................................................3
Historical Background .................................................5
Results ..............................................................9
Recommendations ................................................... 17
References Cited ..................................................... 18

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. Plan Map of Courthouse Complex .............................. vi
Figure 2. Profile of BHT A and BHT B ................................... 10
Figure 3. Profile of BHT C ............................................. 13

v

Pine st.

GOO

~ Backhoe Trench A

~

=

Backhoe Trench B

~
~

Courthouse
....;
(/)

Annex

C

Annex

Annex

D

E

~

Backhoe
Trench
C

Walnut St.

O~E4~0I!!!!!!!5OiOOI!!!!!5!50i;;;;;;;;;iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii100

Figure 1. Plan map of Courthouse and Old Jail.

vi

ft

c

o

()

v
a..

INTRODUCTION
On January 8 and 9,1990, the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL),
The University of Texas at Austin, conducted field investigations at the Bastrop County
Courthouse and Old Jail, Bastrop, Texas (Fig. 1). The research was carried out as
part of a program of renovation of the courthouse and jail, both National Register of
Historic Places properties. The upgrading and refurbishing plan was designed and
directed by The Williams Company, AlA, for Bastrop County. The archeological
research conformed to recommended guidelines set forth by the Texas Antiquities
Committee (TAC) in accordance with the Texas Courthouse Law. The overall purpose
of the fieldwork was to find any significant historic subsurface features which might
be damaged or destroyed by the renovation program in areas outside the courthouse
block buildings. As stipulated in the TAC guidelines, letter of August 17, 1989 from
Mark H. Denton to Kim A. Williams, the fieldwork was designed to (1) test, preferably
by means of backhoe trenching, areas around the Old Jail where the underground
heat pump well system was to be installed, and (2) impose units for hand excavation
to clear and record significant cultural features or contexts revealed by the machine
excavation. As a practical matter, it was anticipated that the system of underground
utilities would be complex, and additional archival research on the courthouse block
would be necessary to locate utility lines. This effort was conducted in advance of
fieldwork so that gas, water, and sewage lines would not be struck during excavation.
The field research was supervised by TARL staff archeologist David G. Robinson,
accompanied by TARL staff historian Dan K. Utley, who conducted the archival and
historical background research. The principal field operations were accomplished on
January 8 and 9, 1990. Follow-up visits were made on January 25, 1990 to examine
a concrete slab exposed in the parking lot, and on January 27, 1990 to record the
Sarah Harvey tombstone, unearthed from beneath the slab. All research on the
project was performed under Antiquities Permit No. 873.

This page intentionally left blank.

METHODOLOGY
Archival Research

Initial investigations of the Bastrop County Courthouse, the Old Jail, and the city
block on which the courthouse sits were conducted by examination of documents
provided generously by The Williams Company, an Austin architectural firm. Their
papers provided a good overview of the project area, along with important back­
ground information on the architectural development of the site. Additionally,
holdings of the Eugene C. Barker Texas History Center on the campus of The
University of Texas at Austin were reviewed. Of special importance was the Sanborn
Insurance Company map collection, which includes detailed plats o'f Bastrop County's
governmental square 'from 1891 through 1934.
Other archival collections that were utilized include those at TARL and the Texas
State Archives. Since a review of TARL files showed that the Bastrop County
Courthouse Square had not been recorded previously as a historic site, a site form
was completed and the site number 41 BP340 assigned.
In addition to the archival collections, a number of published sources were
consulted and many of them are cited in this report. Local residents also provided
valuable information about the history of the courthouse square. Their knowledge of
the site was helpful in determining the location of the stable and the subsequent
alignment of the south parking lot. Of those individuals that assisted in this regard,
special recognition is given to Clyde Reynolds, Ken Kesselus, and Nan Olsen.
Fieldwork

As mandated by TAC, the fieldwork consisted principally of the excavation of
backhoe trenches in areas which were likely to contain significant historic or ar­
cheological features within the proposed heat pump well system. Trenches were
thought sufficient to give a reasonable chance of discovering any remaining features.
Should structural or other features be exposed, hand excavated units would be placed
on them for careful clearing and definition of the feature. Systematic collection for
quantified studies of artifacts and cultural residues such as glass or brick fragments,
would not be attempted unless warranted by findings. Otherwise, artifacts were
collected only for diagnostic purposes. The location of trenches was controlled by
the mapped area of the heat pump well system and the avoidance of underground
utility lines. An effort to determine the routes of underground utilities was made prior
to the trenching by examination of all available courthouse plans. Backhoe services
were provided by Bastrop County Precinct 3 Commissioner Pat Meuth, and George
Riha, operator.

3

4 I BASTROP COUNTY

Excavated trenches were photographed and described in the project field notes.
Additionally, measured soil profiles were drawn of a representative section of each
trench. The locations and positions of trenches and identified features were mapped
on the construction plan provided by The Williams Company. Pertinent surface
information and the progress of work were recorded photographically and in field
notes.
The courthouse block, the Courthouse, and the Old Jail were recorded on a State
of Texas Archeological Site Data form. This and all other project notes, forms, maps,
diagrams, photographs, artifacts and supporting documentation are curated at TARL.

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
Anglo-American settlers began moving into the vicinity of present Bastrop in the
late 1820s. Early in the following decade, land was set aside for a townsite on the
east side of the Colorado River at the crossing of the Old San Antonio Road, one of
the most important routes of immigration and trade in early Texas. The land was then
part of Stephen F. Austin's Little Colony. Austin's land commissioner, Miguel Ar­
ciniega, began issuing titles in 1831. In his capacity as overseer of the colonization
contracts, Arciniega was successor to Felipe Enrique Neri, Baron de Bastrop, for
whom the town was eventually named (Webb 1952:67, 120).
As part of his charge from the government regarding the formation of towns,
Arciniega was instructed to
designate a public square one hundred and twenty varas
on each side, exclusive of the streets, which shall be called
the principal, or constitutional square, and this shall be the
central point from which the streets shall run ...
(Gammel 1898:57)
Such an alignment would have led to a central square form of development, a
pattern still common in many of the state's counties. In Bastrop, however, the
courthouse construction sequence removed the government offices from a central
location, resulting in the present configuration.
County offices were housed in various structures off the present square until the
1850s. When officials began planning for the current courthouse in 1851, there was
debate over the proposed location. Local business leaders, sensing the economic
potential associated with the new square and the development of surrounding
property, proposed two sites on Main Street. In the end, however, the decision was
made to relocate county offices to a tract bounded by the streets of Pecan, Pine,
Walnut, and Water, one block from the early commercial district (Kessel us 1987:52).
The new courthouse was to be constructed on land owned by early settler
Thomas Jefferson Gazley (1801-1853). A native of New York, Gazley trained as a
physician in Baltimore and practiced in Louisiana before moving to Texas in 1829. He
immediately settled in the vicinity of Bastrop, where he eventually operated a general
store in addition to his medical practice. He was awarded one of the first town grants
in 1831 and later received a larger grant of land along the Colorado River near present
Smithville (Jenkins 1958:213-214; Kesselus 1986:51, 285, 288).
Gazley became one of the area's first political leaders. Delegates to the Con­
vention of 1832 appointed him to the important subcommittee on Safety and Vigilance
5

6 / BASTROP COUNTY

for Bastrop. He then represented his chosen community at the subsequent conven­
tion in 1833, a continuation of the colonists' efforts to secure additional rights and
considerations under Mexican rule, and served as a surgeon in the Texas Army of
1835. In March 1836, Gazley was one of three Bastrop residents to sign the
Declaration of Independence at Washington-on-the-Brazos (Webb 1952:677).
Following the Texas Revolution, Gazley joined others choosing to make their
homes farther east in Texas. He lived for a time in Houston, where he became an
attorney and established a successful law firm with John Birdsall. He later returned
to Bastrop County and settled near Smithville. He died in 1853, the year the
cornerstone was laid on the new courthouse (Webb 1952:677).
There is no conclusive documentation that shows how Gazley's property was
utilized prior to 1851. Local tradition holds that it was the site of a stockade or other
fortification in the 1840s. The basis for this belief is probably found in the writings of
John Holland Jenkins (1822-1890), who, toward the end of the nineteenth century,
hastily sketched a map showing Bastrop as it was in the 1830s (Jenkins 1958:15). If
a stockade did exist at the site, evidence of the installation was not uncovered in either
the archeological or archival research associated with this project. It is possible that
the stockade was no more than a temporary fortification that left few traces on the
ground or in official records, or that it was located where the present courthouse
(1883) or jail (1892) are situated.
The 1853 Bastrop County Courthouse burned in the early 1880s and was
replaced by the current structure in 1883. The Sanborn Insurance Company map
collection at the Eugene C. Barker Texas History Center provided an interesting
overview of subsequent construction phases on the square. The Sanborn collection
for Bastrop covers the time from the late nineteenth century to the Great Depression
and includes maps from 1885,1891,1896,1906,1912,1921, and 1934 (Sanborn
Insurance Company map collection).
The earliest map covered only a limited area of the town's commercial district,
excluding the courthouse and adjoining properties. The governmental square is first
shown on the 1891 map, although the 1892 jail, then under construction, was not
included. There was a two-story jail, however, on the southeast corner. West of that
jail was a sheriff's department office complex, evidently built of frame construction in
three separate phases (Sanborn Insurance Company map collection).
The 1892 jail was shown on the 1896 Sanborn map, along with a color code that
denoted a roof of slate or tin. In 1906, a one-and-one-half-story frame structure was
located south of the new jail and directly adjacent to Water Street. The rectangular
building, with a primary east-west axis, had a hipped roof and a full-length, one-story
gallery on the south side (Sanborn Insurance Company map collection). Local
informants believe the structure served as a stable for the sheriff's department
(Reynolds 1990). An aerial photo (ca. 1934) currently on display in the 1892 jail shows
the stable, along with a series of fences that enclosed a yard area.

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND / 7

On the 1912 map, a frame partition structure is shown immediately west of the
sheriff's office and adjacent to Walnut Street. Designated for "autos," it was a
one-story building of minimal construction. The next improvements to the square,
noted on the 1934 map, included t~lree structures: two that were metal-clad and one
of frame construction. The two metal-clad buildings were located south of the jail, in
the southwest corner of the square. Both fronted on Water Street, with the larger of
the two located to the north. The frame structure, much smaller in size, was situated
southeast of the northern-most metal-clad building. In addition to the new buildings,
there was also a second-story iron passageway between the jail and the courthouse.
It exited the jail at the southeast corner and entered the courthouse at the second-floor
hall (Sanborn Insurance Company map collection).
While Sanborn maps are useful in reconstructing original building footprints and
materials, along with subsequent additions, they have a limited scope. Primarily used
for fire insurance purposes, they frequently did not include such structural elements
as driveways, culverts, and curbs.

------~~-~---~---

~~~

-~~~~-~--------

This page intentionally left blank.

RESULTS
At the completion of fieldwork, three backhoe trenches had been dug in the
proposed heat pump well system, two north of the Old Jail and one south of it.
Additional field investigations took place when the contractor unearthed a concrete
slab and a historic tombstone. The trenches revealed subsurface contexts of fill
sequences for landscaping and construction projects, all overlying the natural sandy
clay Colorado River terrace on which Bastrop was founded. The concrete slab was
not identified on any known photographs of the courthouse block, but informants
state that it was the foundation for a Sheriff's garage dating well within the twentieth
century (Reynolds 1990). The tombstone was unearthed from beneath the southeast
corner of the concrete slab, but was not identified before it was removed from its find
spot. It is highly improbable that it marked a gravesite in the courthouse block.
Detailed descriptions of the backhoe trenches and findings follow.
Backhoe Trenches

BACKHOE TRENCH A (BHT A)

BHT A was located north of the courthouse and was aligned on a north-south
axis (see Fig. 1). At 41.2 feet (12.5 meters) long, it was the longest trench in the
program. Its maximum depth was just over 4 feet. An active ceramic-pipe sewage
line was struck in the north end of BHT A. The unmapped line was cracked when
encountered by the backhoe but not breached. Its discovery brought the trench
excavation to a halt.
The trench profile revealed two strata (Fig. 2a). The upper stratum extends from
the surface down to about 65 cm and is composed of a medium clay loam. The
second, lower, stratum is a dark brown to purplish black clay. Both strata contain
occasional pebbles and cobbles of chert and quartzite Colorado River gravels. The
upper zone has a few brushy and woody roots below the surface grass root zone,
but the lower stratum is virtually devoid of organics. The lower zone is part of the
alluvial terrace of the third Colorado River channel system, dating to about 4,000 B. P.
(Before Present).
Cultural materials are confined to the upper soil zone. A few widely dispersed
bits of metal and broken ceramics were unearthed throughout the upper zone, but
quantities of historic debris were concentrated in the lower 5 to 10 cm of the stratum.
The materials comprise an artifactual zone at the base of Stratum A. The artifactual
zone or lens does not extend into the lower clay zone. Further observations showed

9

10 I BASTROP COUNTY

rY

I

~--r-l~y...l-t",...-----tr---+-t----+-l­

I
I

I
I

@

I
I

;--.

I
I

I

104 em to south end
of Backhoe Trench A
I - - - - - - - - - -..
.
I
I
I
I
I
I

I
I

©

I

I
I
I

I

I

I
I
I

I
I
I

Ml",--+1-"1;~--1t--4t_~

28 cm to weat end

T'lU-TOP

of Backhoe Trench

~

of
cultural

I

zone

I
I

"t
.........

-..

L:
• .-l....-...........
..
--~ • •
r .::.....

II

~

'I
4

•

,....

~r·o·o·t

"

co.

•
•

to·

1~ Bottom

/' rOI

II

I

I

zone

I

I

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

of

cultura'

I

I

II

I
I
I
.'J

I

II

©

I
I

o

~I~~~

__

50 __________,
100 em

~~

Figure 2. Profiles of Backhoe Trenches A and B. a) Profile of BHT A. A-clay loam,
predominantly landscaping fill; no horizonation, structureless; 7.5RY3/2 dark brown.
B-Ash and mortar, flecks of bricks. C-clay; structureless to massive; few roots; slick
sides; 10YR3/2 very dark grayish brown. b) Profile of BHT B. A-clay loam,
predominantly landscaping fill; no horizonation, structureless; 7.5YR3/2 dark brown.
C-clay, structureless to massive; few roots; slick sides; 10YR3/2 very dark grayish
brown.

RESULTS I 11

that the thickness of this cultural zone is greater toward the Old Jail, and both its
thickness and the density of artifacts within it decrease northward away from the
building. Artifacts and debris include brick fragments, iron spikes, a few pieces of
white ironstone ware, bits of limestone, mortar, ash pockets, a few glass sherds, and
one flat fragment of slate.
The brick fragments included a handmade type likely used in foundations and
basements, and terra cotta and light mustard yellow bricks that correspond to the
exterior bricks of the Old Jail. The iron spikes have various head types, but all were
likely used in construction, especially as supplies used in the assembly ofthe jail cells.
The slate fragment is probably material from the slate roof on the jail. The ash, mortar,
and limestone bits are expectable as debris in a construction yard, and together they
comprise the principal clue that the artifact lens is the remains of the construction
work area formed during the erection of the Old Jail in 1891 and 1892. The
thinning-out of these materials away from the jail building supports this interpretation.
BACKHOE TRENCH B (BHT B)

The second excavated backhoe trench was also north of the jail, positioned east
of the sidewalk and parallel to the north front of the jail. BHT B was therefore oriented
east and west and at right angles to BHT A. Its total length was 12 feet (3.78 meters)
(Fig. 1). The deepest point in the trench was about 4 feet. The placement and length
of the trench was constrained by efforts to avoid known or suspected routes of
underground utilities. Despite this concern, a 1.5 inch pipe was exposed in the east
end of BHT B. The route of this probable water line was previously unknown and
unmapped. Its encounter halted further excavation of the trench.
The stratification and cultural content of BHT B was the same as BHT A with one
exception. Because the trench ran parallel to the Old Jail, the thickness and density
of the cultural zone remained fairly constant the length of the trench (Fig. 2b). The
lensing-out of this zone away from the structure, seen in BHT A, was not observed in
BHT B. This evidence lends support to the interpretation that the cultural zone is the
remains of the yard formed around the Old Jail during its construction.
BACKHOE TRENCH C (BHT C)

Backhoe Trench C was located in the heat pump well system south of the Old
Jail (Fig. 1) in the modern asphalt parking lot. An aerial photo dated to 1931 shows
the area within a fenced corral and stable system (see Historical Background). It was
expected that stratification and artifacts here would reflect corral and animal hus­
bandry functions. On-ground inspection identified a circular depression in the
asphalt. Such a depression could be formed when the fill in an abandoned cistern

12 I BASTROP COUNTY

slumped at some time after the asphalt parking lot was laid over it. The backhoe
operator, George Riha, stated that he helped build the parking lot in the early 1980s.
BHT C was oriented north and south so as to transect the circular depression as well
as to expose any remaining corral contexts.
The finished trench was 27.4 feet (8.35 meters) long, and its depth varied
between four and five feet. The trench lacked any evidence of a cistern or former use
as a corral. The stratification (Fig. 3) showed a sequence of fills used as preparation
for the asphalt finishing of the parking lot. These extend downward and lie on the
dark grayish clay of the alluvial terrace. Mr. Riha, the backhoe operator, said that the
fill, primarily zones Band E, were transported from a county gravel pit in western
Bastrop County. The material is the late Pleistocene red-brown, very gravelly, sandy
and silty clay alluvial deposit abundant in the Colorado River valley. Therefore, the
rare fragments of brick, glass and metal in the parking lot fill therefore could not be
related to the history of the courthouse block. The underlying clay alluvial terrace
lacked any stone artifacts or other evidence of prehistoric activity.
Additional Findings

After the principal fieldwork was accomplished, the general contractor exposed
a buried length of poured concrete while trenching for new utility lines south of the
Old Jail and west of the courthouse. See Figure 1 for the exact location. Additional
investigations initiated by TARL determined the concrete to be a poured, rectangular
slab, 26 x 20 feet in size and four inches thick.
Iron reinforcing bars protruded from the concrete on its south face. In profile
the slab was seen to lie on the alluvial terrace clays and under and within the parking
lot fill. The surface of the slab was about a foot beneath the asphalt. There was no
evidence of excavation into the parking lot fill to form and pour the slab. From these
observations it was determined that the slab was poured on the surface of the alluvial
clay terrace, which was effectively the ground surface at the time of the slab's
construction.
The parking lot fill was later spread over the concrete slab during parking lot
construction. It was observed in the utility trench also that the parking lot fill was
thicker toward the courthouse and thinner toward Water Street. This filling pattern
was probably intentional, designed to improve drainage away from the courthouse.
If this were so, leaving the slab in place rather than removing it would assist in bringing
the surface up to the desired grade. The structure originally supported by the slab
was not identified on any map or aerial photograph, but long-time residents (Reynolds
1990) remembered it as the sheriff's garage.
An additional find was made by the general contractor while removing the
concrete slab with a bulldozer. A marble obelisk tombstone was unearthed from
beneath the southeast corner of the slab. The tombstone was removed from its find

RESULTS I 13

P

I
I
I
I

Asphalt Surface

Ph

"Ii

.101 .1111 1,,1 liif Oli

o

011

lip 1iJ! IIII@t::Il'=II':::'=II:I:'iI:"rtii:::all::C::":::'!!!"====I::JJII:C:":::J:!lID'~i:l!iE!rI:!iii:r;::,::aO!:":::I{l

•

I

.'

- - -...........

I
I

••

~

...-

I

. ..

.•......-

I
I

------­

Figure 3. Profile of BHT C. A-asphalt surfacing; well-mixed; gravel binder; mature,
becoming brittle, medium blue-black color. B-red brown gravelly, sandy, and silty clay
"fill (brought from gravel pit in western Bastrop County). C-medium brown fine and
medium sand; occasional metal fragment. D-dark brown sandy clay mixed with
overlying sand (C). E-red-brown gravelly, sandy, and silty clay, fill same material as B.
F-clay; structureless to massive; few roots; slick sides. Alluvial terrace of Colorado
River.

14 I BASTROP COUNTY

spot before its nature was apparent, so the stratigraphic context of the monument
could not be assessed beyond noting that it was out of its upright marker position,
lying at an angle or on its side directly beneath the slab. The name on the tombstone
was Sarah Harvey, wife of W. C. Harvey, Jife dates December 11, 1849 to October 4,
1895 or 1899. The exact year of death was obscured by a chip taken from the marble
by the bulldozer which unearthed it. The epitaph read:
"Mother, thou hast from us flown
to the regions far above,
We to thee erect this stone,
consecrated by our love"
The name, or names, "Peterson Davis" was inscribed at an angle near the bottom of
the monument, and is either the stone carver's name or that of the manufacturing
company.
A variety of census and cemetery records have been consulted to find informa·
tion on Sarah Harvey since the stone was unearthed, but direct references have not
been found. Continuing research may yet find her and provide clues as to why her
tombstone came to lie in the courthouse block under a concrete slab. The best, but
still unsatisfying, hypothesis currently is that a county sheriff found it removed from
its cemetery and brought it to the Old Jail yard and corral for storage. The stone was
used for foundation support when the garage slab was poured after efforts failed to
find and replace it at its gravesite.
The possible death dates in the 1890s, after construction of the courthouse and
Old Jail, make it highly improbable that the gravesite is under the slab, in what was
the courthouse block, not a formal cemetery.

DiScussion
The findings at the Bastrop County Courthouse and Old Jail testing program
show that subsurface cultural patterning relates almost entirely to the period of the
block's use as the seat of county government. The cultural zone below the surface
of BHT A and BHT B is reliably interpreted as comprising the remains of the
construction yard formed around the Old Jail as it was being built in 1891-92. Red
brick fragments correspond in color with architectural detailing of the 1892 jail, most
notably the brick coursing, window hood molds, corner quoins, and chimneys. The
single piece of slate, not native to the local geology, resolves the question posed by
the 1892 Sanborn map where the symbol indicated either slate or tin. The cultural
zone lies on the native alluvial terrace, which at this locale is lacking in earlier cultural
remains, either historic or prehistoric. The construction yard debris is mixed into the
overlying sandy loam deposit. The considerable depth of this upper deposit is much
greater than could be formed naturally in just less than 100 years. This soil is most
likely the result of repeated cycles of grading and landscaping on the courthouse

RESULTS / 15

lawns, with most of the material brought in from commercial yards and soil pits. The
sequence of events that formed the lawns is fairly simple. The jail construction yard
in 1891-1892 disrupted the poorly developed native clayey soil formed on the alluvial
terrace. This likely created muddy working conditions. After construction was
completed, equipment and salvageable supplies were removed, as were localized
waste piles. Widely dispersed debris was raked, scattered, plowed, and the initial
landscaping material was spread over it. This formed the identified construction yard
zone. Subsequent landscaping brought the grade up to its modern position, two feet
above the construction zone in some places.
The sequence of events south of the Old Jail varied from this picture. Early on,
the area was a corral and stable for maintaining the sheriff's horses and for parking
buggies at the courthouse. The yard thus felt heavy traffic and was also prone to
mud. Later, a garage was built in the former corral, incorporating Sarah Harvey's
tombstone under its foundation. The parking lot was not paved with asphalt until the
1980s, after the completion of the various annexes to the courthouse. Deposits
overlying the native alluvial terrace may have been scraped away before parking lot
construction, or they may have been negligible and the parking lot fill was spread
directly on the terrace clay without preliminaries other than the dismantling of the
sheriff's garage. Problems with drainage were corrected at this time, as the fill was
graded to allow the flow of rainwater away from the courthouse and jail. The parking
lot fill came from various gravel and soil pits in the region. The lot was finished with
two inches of asphalt, the present surface.
The research uncovered no evidence of the block's use in Bastrop before the
present courthouse was built. The block's possible use as the site of a stockade in
the 1840s (see Historical Background) was not indicated. The current investigations
did not take place near the center of the block, however, where a stockade may have
been centered, now under the courthouse. The backhoe trenching method, further­
more, has poor capability for exposing palisade postmolds, the likely remnant of a
stockade. Such archeological remains are found better by extensive horizontal
excavations, which lie beyond the scope of this project. The former existence of a
stockade on the Site, although poorly documented, cannot be either proved or
disproved by current investigations.

This page intentionally left blank.

RECOMMENDATIONS
The major finds of the testing program at the Bastrop County Courthouse and
Old Jail were the subsurface jail construction zone, concrete slab south of the Old
Jail, and the Sarah Harvey tombstone. The zone formed of Old Jail construction
debris in stratigraphic context is not significant intrinsically, and does not warrant
further investigation or preservation beyond its identification and interpretation,
reported herein. The concrete slab, site of a late structure, possibly a garage, also
lacks significance. The Sarah Harvey tombstone is highly significant, but it is quite
improbable that its find spot marked a grave. The tombstone has been removed from
the active area of renovation and presents no barriers to the heat pump well system
or the proposed utility upgrades. Further research to find Sarah Harvey's
gravesite--beyond the scope of this project--and return of the monument to its proper
place would be a small but worthwhile showcase of the public-interest benefits of
historic preservation.
The archival research and trenching program have assessed the subsurface
contexts on the sites of the proposed heat pump well system for the Bastrop County
Courthouse and Old Jail. Further research in these areas is unwarranted, and it is
recommended that the proposed construction programs proceed as planned.
Should additional potentially significant find be made, such as the concrete slab and
the Sarah Harvey tombstone, the Texas Antiquities Committee should be consulted
for further planning and review.

17

REFERENCES CITED
Gammel, Hans Peter Nielsen, ed.
1898
The Laws of Texas, 1822-1897, Vol. 1.
Austin.

Gammel Book Company,

Jenkins, John Holmes, ed.
1958
Recollections of Early Texas: The Memoirs of John HoI/and Jenkins.
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Kesselus, Kenneth
1986
History of Bastrop County. Texas, Before Statehood.
Publishing Company, Austin.
1987

History of Bastrop County, Texas, 1846-1865.
Company, Austin.

Jenkins

Jenkins Publishing

Reynolds, Clyde
1990
Conversation with David G. Robinson and Dan K. Utley, Bastrop,
Texas, January 8, 1990.
Sanborn Insurance Company Map Collection
ms.
Eugene C. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Webb, Walter Prescott, ed.
1952
The Handbook of Texas, Vol. 1. Texas State Historical Association,
Austin.

18

