TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

ARCHEOLOGICAL TESTING ALONG THE PROPOSED ROUTE
OF WASTEWATER PIPELINES FOR THE PLANNED
ONION CREEK WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT

Travis County, Texas

David O. Brown

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN NO. 50
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Baleones Research Center
10,100 Burnet Road

PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR

David S. Dibble

A report submitted to Tye F. Collins and Associates,
in partial fulfillment of the terms of a subcontract
agreement dated March 17, 1981

ARCHEDllXHCAL TESTING ALONG THE PROroSED ROUTE OF
WASTEWATER PIPELINES roR THE PLANNED ONION CREEK
WASTEWATER TREA'IMENT PLANT

David O. Brown

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
July, 1981

TABLE OF (X)N'I'EtiJTS

. . . . .. .
Introduction • • • •
Onion Creek Basin
................
The Onion Creek wastewater Lines
.........
project Area • • • • • • • . . . . . .
Method of Investigation
..........
Results . . . . . . . . . . .

3
10
12

Recommendations

41

Appendix • • • •

46

Bibliography •

54

Management Summary •

............
•

•

•

•

Ii

•

•

•

•

•

•

1
2

22

23

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1.

Southeastern Travis County showing Archeological Testing
along Proposed Onion Creek Wastewater Pipelines •

Figure 2.

Plan Map of Archeological Testing at 41 TV 462

Figure 3.

Plan Map of Archeological Testing at 41 TV 462

••••

4

11

Figure 4.

Plan Map of Archeological Testing at 41 TV 456

....
......

13
14

Figure 5.

41 TV 462 - East End - Composite Profile west Wall Back­
hoe Trenches 1-4, 6, 15 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • ••

27

Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.

41 TV 462 - West End - Composite Profile South Wall Back­
hoe Trenches 7-12 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • ••
41 TV 456 - Composite Profile West Wall Backhoe
Trenches 1-10 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Additional Archeological Survey and Assessment along
the proposed Onion Creek Wastewater Pipelines • • • •

30
33

...

47

A Test Unit #1

Prehistoric Cultural and Non-Cultural Debris Area
. . . . . . . . .. .. . . . . . . . . . . ....

39

Test Pit #1 (41 TV 456) North Bank of Meander Scar
Reoovered Material
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • ••

42

Test Pit #2 (41 TV 456) South Bank of Meander Scar
Recovered Material
• • • • • • • • • • • • • •

42

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1.
Table 2.
Table 3.

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

At the request of 'rye F. Collins and Associates, the Texas Archeologi­
cal Survey conducted archeological testing at two sites which are potentially
endangered by construction of proposed wastewater pipelines into and out of
the City of Austin's planned Onion Creek wastewater Treatment Plant. These
two sites, 41 TV 456 and 41 TV 462, are located primarily on upper terraces
of the Colorado River near the proposed plant location. Two other terrace
sites, 41 TV 457 and 41 TV 454, were found to be outside the area of impact
of the wastewater lines and were not tested. In addition to the testing at
these two sites, additional archeological survey and assessments were con­
ducted along several alternative pipeline routes and are presented as an
appendix to the present report.
Located partly on upper Colorado River terrace and partly on a lower
and more recent Onion Creek terrace, 41 TV 456 is a large site containing
both prehistoric and historic components. Prehistoric cultural material is
densest along the edge of the upper terrace, while historic material occurs
in several discrete clusters, none of which will be crossed by the proposed
pipeline easement. Ten backhoe trenches and two one-meter square excavation
units, located along the proposed route, yielded aJJnost no cultural material.
It was concluded, therefore, that no intact archeological remains were
located within the easement area.
The other site tested, 41 TV 462, lies on the eroded edge of the same
high Colorado River terrace as does 41 TV 456. At its eastern end it will
be crossed by the outfall line from the treatment plant and, at its western
end, by both the interceptor line from the Williamson Creek Treatment Plant
and the sludge line to the Hornsby Bend Sludge Ponds. Eight backhoe trenches
were placed at either end across the route and a one meter square test pit
was excavated at the western end. A small amount of prehistoric and historic
cultural material was recovered from the test unit and some surface material
was collected from the western portion of the outfall line. Both areas con­
tained few artifactua1 materials, concentrated mostly near the surface and
probably highly disturbed, suggesting that further investigation at the site
would provide no significant information.
Neither 41 TV 456 nor 41 TV 462 should require further archeological
investigations if the pipeline routes are constructed as planned. If,

2

ONION CREEK

however, the routes are modified, further testing may be required at 41 TV
456 because of the restrictions placed upon archeological testing by the
landowner, who allowed testing of only a small portion of the site. Because
of the irrmense size of 41 'IV 462, major modifications of pipeline routes
should require additional archeological testing. In addition, if construc­
tion of the outfall line forces removal of the older structure south of the
center of the line, some archeological testing may be required.
Four alternate pipeline routes were visited. These include portions
near where Onion Creek crosses U.S. 183, an alternate lift station along
Elroy Road, a realignment to avoid a quarry north of Pearce Lane, and an
alternate sludge line route. Three new sites, 41 'IV 540, 41 TV 541, and
41 'IV 542 were recorded, and two previously recorded sites, 41 'IV 406 and
41 'IV 411, were examined. Of these five sites, only two may require further
work. As recoIllllended by the Texas Department of Water Resources, 41 TV 411,
a historic crossing site, should be documented before construction and
41 TV 540, a large prehistoric site on either side of Pearce Lane, may
require minimal testing to determine the depth of cultural materials.
INTRODUcrION
In May and June of 1981, the Texas Archeological Survey conducted
testing operations at two multicomponent archeological sites, 41 TV 462 and
41 TV 456. The testing, initiated at the request of Tye F. Collins and
Associates, was intended to evaluate the nature and condition of these
in the areas where they are to be crossed by proposed subsurface lines into
and out of the City of Austin's planned Onion Creek Wastewater Treatment
Plant, and to determine the necessity and scope of any further work needed to
mitigate the adverse effects of construction.
These archeological sites were recorded in an archeological survey of
the Onion Creek project area by the Texas Department of Water Resources
(Whitsett and Fox 1979), and along with two other archeological sites on the
terraces of the Colorado River near the plant end of the line, were
recormnended for testing by the Department of Water Resources (Long 1981).
In conSUltation with the archeologists from the Department of Water Resources
and the project engineers, it was decided that two of these four sites,
41 'IV 454 and 41 'IV 457, were not endangered by the present proposed route;

INTRovucnON

3

and did not justify the expense and potential destructive impact of
testing.
The following report summarizes the investigations at 41 TV 462 and
41 TV 456. These investigations were carried out by a Texas Archeological
Survey crew consisting of Andy Cloud and Christopher Taylor under the super­
vision of the author and with the assistance of a backhoe operator from the
City of Austin. Field work lasted just over two weeks. All field notes,
profiles, photos, and materials collected from the sites have been inven­
toried and will be stored permanently at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory of The University of Texas at Austin.
ONION CREEK BASIN

The sites to be tested lie just upstream of the confluence of Onion
Creek and the COlorado River, near the proposed wastewater plant location
(Fig. 1). The climatic, physiographic and biotic background of the region
has been described in some detail in the two previous archeological reports
resulting fram the treatment plant project (Whitsett and Fox 1979, Thurmond
n.d.), and only the most general details will be repeated here. For further
detail, the reader should refer to these reports.
CLIMATE

The climate
the area is humid subtropical, with hot SUITUlErs and
mild winters (Werchan e;t al. 1974). Occasional winter cold fronts bring
rapid temperature drops, but there are an average of fewer than 25 days a
year below freezing. Mean temperature is 68.30 Farenheit. Mean annual
rainfall is 32.6 inches, relatively evenly distributed throughout the year
wi th peaks occurr ing during spr ing and late SUITUlEr, when intense thunder­
storms can cause occasional serious flooding.
PHYSIOORAPHY AND BIOI'A
The headwaters of Onion Creek lie on the Edwards Plateau in eastern
Blanco County, near the southeastern extent of the Great Plains physio­
graphic province (Fenneman 1931). This area, which lies within Blair's
(1950) Balconian biotic province, is characterized by two major vegetation
assemblages: the Juniper-Gak Hill Country and the Oak Savannah (Garner

4

ONION CREEK

4

.'

).

j

'7

J

1

j

r

\

/

\..'.

,r'

1.
'7

~

c'"

t·'.

...........

'--., "t.

.'. -,,- ..

,

"'"' ..

\....

I
\
I

t,

"-

'.

'....t"".
:J\....

(

I

I
I

PROPOSED
ONION
CREEK
..... WAS T E W ATE R
... TREATMENT
"'-.,. P LAN T A R E A

"

/

/

I

/
/"

"

....-- .:::~::......""'"!::/,/ /
, ... -... ...\. ...J, ../.
"
/
/:
,,/
(' .............. ...-.........:/

..~.)... _ ... r-

J

.'\

\ . rY·
"

;"\1"''-.'/"', /

.. .N.......,..

('

(.

./)

__ .. ~:.

.r

f

" ""

,/

/ "

"

" ',/ /
,

FIGURE 1

j"J"

/ "
,,/
/

,
:

,-

/

/

.. / "

/,/

,,/ SOU THE A 5 T ERN
TRAVIS COUNTY
SHOWING
ARCHEOLOGICAL
TESTING ALONG
THE PROPOSED
ONION CREEK
WASTEWATER
PIPELINES
SCALE

,­

o

4

I

I
MIL E S

I

/

l ...

"

.. J

y

/

ONION CREEK BASIN

5

1973). The vertebrate fauna consists of an intermixture of faunal elements
from surrounding biotic provinces (Blair 1950: 112). Flowing down across
the Balcones Fault zone, the stream enters the Rolling Prairies physiographic
region (Garner 1973: 34), a moderately dissected grassland area with
abundant live oaks and some cedar (op. cLt.: 39) that forms a transitional
zone between the Edwards Plateau and Fenneman's (1939) west Gulf COast
Physiographic Province.
The easternmost physiographic region along Onion Creek is the Blackland
Prairie, a grassland with scattered mesquites (Garner 1973: 39) which lies
within Blair's (1950) Texan biotic province. Blair notes that this zone is
actually a broad ecozone between the forests of the Austroriparian and
Carolinian provinces of the east and the grasslands of the west (op. eit.:
100). In addition to the dominant vegetation of the Blackland Prairie, river
terrace and bottomland vegetation patterns are found along the lower part of
Onion Creek. These include: Elm-Mesquite terraces with elms, mesquites,
some oaks and a thick growth of scrub; Post Oak-Blackjack terraces with a
heavy growth of post oaks, blackjack oaks and a few live oaks; and Bottomland
vegetation which includes cottonwood, sycamore, willow, pecan, ash, hackberry
and bois d'arc (Garner 1973: 39-40).
GEOLCGY

The bedrock of the Onion Creek drainage basin is formed by Cretaceous
marine sediments belonging to the COmanche and Gulf series. On the upthrown
side of the Balcones Fault, on the Edwards Plateau, Lower Cretaceous sedi­
ments of the Glen Rose, Walnut and Edwards formations are common (Urbanec
1963: 11). The lowest and thickest of these, the Glen Rose, is typically
alternating strata of hard limestone and marl or marly limestone which reach
a thickness of more than a thousand feet in eastern Travis COunty (Sellards
e;t a1.. 1978: 316-317). Above this lies the much thinner walnut formation,
generally a 10 to 15 foot thick stratum of shell marl or yellow calcareous
clay south and west of Williamson COunty (op. c.Lt.: 331-332). Above the
Walnut formation lies 300
or more of the Edwards formation limestone,
containing several distinctive bands of flint (op. eit.: 345).
Outcropping in small areas along the fault zone are the thinner lime­
stones and shales of the Georgetown, Del Rio, Buda and Eagle Ford formations
(Urbanec 1963: 11-12), forming the upper three units of the Lower Cretaceous

6

ONION CREEK

Comanche series and the lowest unit (Eagle Ford) of the Upper Cretaceous
Gulf series. South and east of the Balcones Fault zone the underlying bed­
rock formations are the various members of the Austin, Taylor and Navarro
groups. Near the upper end of the Onion Creek wastewater line, a marly,
calcareous clay of the Taylor group, the Ozan formation is the dominant bed­
rock (Barnes 1974). Also in this area are basalt flows and pyroclastic clays
from the exhumed Cretaceous marine volcano at Pilot Knob (Whitsett and Fox
1979). South along Onion Creek, the sandy clays and black carbonaceous
shales of the Navarro group form the south eastern valley wall of the Onion
Creek drainage (Sellards et ale 1978: 498; Barnes 1974).
The majority of the area of lower Onion Creek consists of Pleistocene
and Holocene alluvial deposits formed by Onion Creek and the Colorado River.
The formation of the alluvial deposits along the Colorado and its tributaries
has been discussed at great length by geologists, beginning in the latter
part of the nineteenth century when Hill and Vaughn (1896-1897) studied the
geology of the Edwards Plateau and the coastal plain. They recognized a
series of six distinct depositional units from the flood plain up to the
Uvalde lag gravels (Looney 1977: 32).
A number of other studies have examined the various terrace relation­
ships along the Colorado River (cf. Deussen 1924; Weeks 1941, 1945; Nickell
1941; Mathis 1942; Urbanec 1963; Weber 1968; Baker and Pentead~rellana
1977). An excellent critical summary of these works is included in Looney
(1977) •
One of the rrost recent works, by Baker and Pentead~rellana, provides
the rrost detailed and up-to-date study of the sequence of paleochannels and
terraces present along the middle reaches of the Colorado. They propose a
series of eight terrace levels (not including the Uvalde gravels) on which
can be traced the remains of at least ten sequences of paleochannels (Baker
and Penead~rellana 1977: 399). The lower portion of Onion Creek flows
through a section of terrace level four, Weeks' (1941) First Street terrace,
which is crosscut by paleochannel assemblage 6 (Baker and Penead~rellana
1977: 402).
Along Onion Creek itself, the three terrace levels recognized by
Urbanec (1963) correspond to levels 3, 4 and a combined level 5 and 6 from
Baker and Pentead~rellana. A rrore recent study of the alluvial terraces
along lower Onion Creek was conducted by Skolasky (1978). Using color

-----~----~

---~--------------------------------------

ONION CREEK BASIN

7

infrared and panchromatic aerial photography, he mapped drainage densities
along the creek and examined the relationship of soil mottling to terrace
sequences. 'Ihurmond (n.d.) mapped the relationship of the Onion Creek and
Colorado River terraces in the vicinity of the wastewater treatment plant in
conjunction with the archeological investigations at 41 TV 461.
SOILS
'!he soils of the lower Onion Creek drainage basin have been mapped to
the series level by the Soil Conservation Service (Werchan e;t al. 1974), and
the relationship of these mapped soils to the known archeological sites has
been noted in Whitsett and Fox (1979). The general trend is for soil develop­
ment and depth to increase as one moves down off the Edwards Plateau onto the
Blackland Prairie. The shallow Inceptisols and Entisols of the plateau are
gradually replaced by Mollisols and vertisols which become fairly deep in the
Blackland Prairie on the lower stretch of the Creek (Thurmond n.d.).
Essentially all of the soils of the basin are calcareous. All are generally
fine-textured and slowly permeable, with a low infiltration rate and
potentially high runoff (Thurmond n.d.).
The soils of the Colorado River and Onion Creek terraces within the
immediate project area, the Bergstrom, Frio and Lewisville series, are all
Haplustolls in the current taxonomic classification system of the Soil Con­
servation Service (Werchan e;t al. 1974: 116). FOund mainly on land surfaces
of late Pleistocene or Holocene age, their vegetation has been predominantly
grasses and forbs. 'Ihese soils, products of subhumid and semiarid climates,
have a thick, dark surface layer with some accumulation of organic matter or
humus and with only slightly altered parent materials below this surface
layer (Soil Survey Staff 1975: 303).
ARCHEOLCGlCAL BACKGROUND

nearly as can be ascertained, the aboriginal inhabitants of central
Texas were, like their historically documented successors, seminornadic
hunters and gatherers. Changes through time took the form of technological
advances, as the addition of the bow and arrow and pottery during the first
milleniurn A.D., or of differential exploitation of resources, perhaps brought
about as adaptive responses to environmental changes. The succession of
hunter and gatherer lifestyles in central Texas has been a topic of concern
As

8

ONION CREEK

to archeologists for many years. Suhm (1960) summarizes the early research
which forms the foundation for current theories. Later work has sought to
refine the chronological scheme, resulting in several not dissimilar
sequences (cf. Johnson e;t 11£. 1962: Sorroo e;t 11£. 1967: Johnson 1967; Weir
1976; Gerstle, Kelly and Assad 1978). Gerstle, Kelly and Assad (1978) have
presented a brief comparison of these various sequences in tabular form for
their report of the archeological survey of Canp Bullis, north of San Antonio.
Greatly simplified, the basic form of these chronologies follows that given
00100.

Paleoindian Period (ca. 11,500 B.P. - 8,000 B.P.)
During the late Pleistocene and Early Holocene, central Texas was
inhabited by various groups of large mammal hunters. Often characterized by
their association with the remains of mammoth and extinct bison, they probably
exploited a wide variety of food resources. The material remains of their
culture are primarily chipped stone with occasional bone artifacts: quite
distinctive of their culture are the finely worked projectile points, such
as Ciov-<..o, FoUom and PiMI1VJ..e.w, with which they are associated.
Archaic Period (8,000 B.P. - 1,500 B.P.)
This period, variously subdivided, marks the full regional diversifica­
tion of aboriginal cultures and the development of stylistic trends which
set central Texas apart as a prehistoric culture area. The cultures of this
period apparently exploited a more diverse resource base, perhaps utilizing
more plant resources as indicated by the use of ground stone as well as
chipped stone.
Late Prehistoric Period (1,500 B.P. - 450 B.P.)
The introduction of the bow and arrow and, later, ceramics characterizes
this period. In central Texas, the division into an earlier Austin phase
and later TOyah phase (cf. Jelks 1962) is generally recognized.
PREVIOUS AROIEOUXHCAL INVESTIGATIONS
The earliest archeological excavations recorded in the Onion Creek
basin were conducted at the Collins site, 41 TV 40, located on a high terrace
of Onion Creek about ten miles upstream from its confluence with the Colorado

ONION CREEK BASIN

9

River (Suhm 1955: 8). This site, which was excavated by The University of
Texas students during 1953 and 1954, yielded evidence of occupations through­
out the Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods. The naximum depth of excava­
tions was 88 inches (223.5 em.), although IIDSt of the cultural material Call1€!
from the upper five feet of the excavations.
During 1954 and 1955, The University of Texas students excavated another
prehistoric site on Onion Creek, the Smith Rockshelter (41 TV 42). This
shelter, which is approximately 130 feet long and has an 18 foot overhang,
has alluvial deposits extending to a naximum depth of eight and a half feet
in the front and middle portions (Suhm 1957: 28). This site is located on
the south bank of the creek about a quarter mile upstream from the Collins
site. Cultural material found at the site was grouped into three major zones:
Late Archaic (Late Edwards Plateau Aspect), and the Austin and Toyah foci
the Late Prehistoric Period (Central Texas Aspect) (Suhm 1957: 54-56).
In 1974, the Texas Archeological Society conducted their annual field
school at McKinney Falls State Park, the focus of their efforts being the
Thomas F. McKinney Homestead (McEachern and Ralph 1980). McKinney, with his
business partner Samuel May Williams, founded the first legally incorporated
private bank in Texas in 1835 and provided financial support to the new
government during the revolution and during the early days of the Republic
(Frantz 1952). The TAS investigations and subsequent Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department excavations examined the McKinney house and mill, two associated
cisterns and a horse trainer's cabin, as well as a prehistoric site (41 TV
314) partially destroyed during park construction (McEachern and Ralph 1980:
21).
The archeological survey for the proposed Onion Creek wastewater treat­
ment plant and the force main connecting the proposed plant to the existing
Williamson Creek plant was conducted by archeologists from the Texas Depart­
ment of Water Resources (Whitsett and Fox 1979). This survey located ninety­
two archeological sites spanning the time period from Archaic (6,000 B.C. to
3,500 B.C.) to recent historic. Seventy-five of the sites had prehistoric
components which were grouped into four spatially discrete clusters on the
basis of site type and physical environment. Many of the 34 prehistoric
sites located were occupation sites or quarries (14) or some mix of the two
(15). TWenty-eight sites located during the survey had historic components
consisting primarily of occupation areas, but also including cemeteries and
stream crossings.

10

ONION CREEK

The lTOst recent work in the lower Onion Creek area is that of Thurrrond
(n.d.) who conducted archeological testing at the treatment plant site for
the Texas Archeological Survey in early 1980. utilizing extensive backhoe
trenching in conjunction with controlled excavation units, he found that the
site which had been previously designated as 41 TV 461 was shallow and dis­
turbed by plowing, making the recovery of significant cultural information
unlikely. During the excavation, a deeply buried component of this site was
encountered and recorded when two hearths were uncovered more than two
meters below the surface in a backhoe trench placed in an Onion Creek
terrace. Fbrtunately this area was not in immediate danger fram plant con­
struction.
THE ONION CREEK WASTEWATER LINES

The Onion Creek wastewater treatment plant will be located just south
of the Shiloh Ranch headquarters complex on a fossil terrace of the Colorado
River. The proposed outfall line exits the plant at its northeast corner
and heads alrrost due east, emptying into the Colorado River at a large gully
east of the Shiloh Ranch headquarters (Fig. 2). The construction easement
for this line is 50 feet wide, while the actual trench will be 12 feet wide
and 15 feet deep (Richard Stolleis, pers. comrn. 1981). On the land access
map used as the basis of testing, the outfall line is shown crossing the
extreme eastern end of 41 TV 462. However, this line meets the river bank
just downstream of where the terrace scarp along which 41 TV 462 is recorded
merges with the bank.
At the time of investigations, the western half of the line had been
recently plowed and surface visibility was excellent. The eastern half was
covered with a well-grazed Bermuda grass, and visibility, while not as good
as in the plowed field, was reasonably good. The top of the river bank was
covered in somewhat denser grass and the side was covered with a rroderately
dense cover of riparian trees, shrubs, and vines. Some recent historic
garbage and pile of dirt were found along the edge of the bank, apparently
for erosion control.
At the western edge of the Shiloh Ranch property, near the main gate on
Fallwell Lane, both the wastewater interceptor and force main which will run
from the Williamson Creek treatment plant near McKinney Falls to the Onion

THE ONION CREEK WASTEWATER LINES

11

FIGURE 2

--....,

"­

--

-......

"­

"­

"'­

"',

~

"­

~N

""­ "'-...
...........

~

="

J""

"

"'6

'"

-?

""­

j

"­

McMorris Ranch
Headquarters

"'" "­

" "\.

"

'-....

"­

""­ \
J

"­

/

/-~1 Line

/ou tfa1

\ ---­
----~6·
--;-­ - _.­ ...

Treatment \ ----­
Plant Area I
I

$::)

7
PLAN MAP OF
ARCHEOLOGICAL
TESTING AT
41 TV 462
EAST END

Site

limits - - - -

-

SCAl E

o

200
I

I

meters

...J

0
()

12

ONION CREEK

Creek plant and the sludge line which will run from the Onion Creek plant
to the Hornsby Bend settling ponds are mapped as crossing the western end of
41 TV 462 (Fig. 3). construction easement for each of these lines is 50
feet although in the immediate area where the lines will cross the site the
total easement will be restr icted to 75 feet. The depth to the bottom of
the pipe for both of these trenches will be 8 feet. The force main trench
width will be 8 feet while the sludge line trench width will be 4 feet
(R. Stolleis, pers. comm. 1981).
The point at which these lines cross the site is well-defined in rela­
tion to various existing roads and fences. Surface visibility at the time
of the testing in this area was moderately good due to the presence of well­
grazed short stem grass. Although the original terrace edge has been modi­
fied in this area by road construction, it is still easy to trace it from
west to east across the proposed lines. West of this crossing, hCMever, the
terrace edge becomes less distinct where recent erosion and a possible paleo­
channel scar have obscured it.
West of where the lines cross 41 TV 462, they follCM Fallwell Lane to
the existing pCMer line and natural gas pipeline which cross the river some
200 m. to the west. The sludge line turns north across the river and the
force main turns south, paralleling the existing pCMer line on its western
edge for a distance of several kilometers. In this area the proposed force
main easement of 25 feet will begin 35.5 feet west of the center line of the
power line; the center line of the initial trench, which will be 8 feet deep
and 8 feet wide, will be 7.5 feet west of the eastern edge of this easement.
Approximately 600 m. south of where the proposed line begins to parallel
the existing lines, it crosses the multicomponent site, 41 TV 456 (Fig. 4).
Because of the existing pCMer line, the route of the proposed line through
the site can be precisely defined. At the time of the first visit to the
site, it had been planted in milo, but the crop was still lCM enough to
allCM some surface visibility. Later, hCMever I when the testing was under­
taken, the milo was nearly full grCMn and surface visibility was nil.
PROJECT AREA

Botb of the sites examined during this project were located during the
survey of the plant and wastewater line areas conducted by the Texas Depart­

PROJECT AREA

13

PLAN
MAP
OF
ARCHEOLOGICAL
TESTING
AT
41 TV 462
WEST

END

-

- -­

---- --- ---- --­

Backhoe

Trenches

o

I

I I
300

met e.r s '

FIGURE 3

- - - _...........

_­

14

ONION CREEK
FIGURE 4

,
I

I
I

I

I

1
I

I
I
I

i

\

\~

e

I

~/

\\

Y
/ I ,c

/1

'bo

('/ / /
"
",1/0

~/

,,/"
0/ /v
"/ /

. ....--- _ _ _ _ _ -

'

'/
0/ "

-

--....... «/

r

I I/~

(

~

,I

'/ '

0

('

...

~

TV

456

/7/ 1
/1/ 2

Test
Pit

1

I

/

I

1

/7 '

"'~}:/5~
74~/<~ /"-----"

/

8~>(

!

'-./

91/Test/

I

(

J

10

/'

I /

Pit

1/

/ :'-'"
/ ,/

.........

l

II

1

/ /

I ,'I:'to
/

,/
I

/ /

q.

v

\ 0
•

OF
MAP
PLAN
ARCHEOLOGICAL

TESTING
41

AT

TV 456

Lim its
Revised Limits _ _ _ _

/\

('"

~

.

II/I

0

0

~

)

/"

/"

\_/

~

2,/
/

it'

\J. //1

I
/

\

//

____\,~,-{3

\

t

0

/ 0' "'­

41

Backhoe

Trenches _ _

\

\

41 TV 457
¥.

./'

o
i

200
I
meters

_

PROJECT AREA

15

ment of Water Resources (Whitsett and Fox 1979). These sites, each of which
contain both historic and prehistoric components, are described below on the
basis of data contained in the survey report and preliminary surface inspec­
tion and historic research by the author.
41 TV 456
The prehistoric component of this large site is described by the survey
report as follows:
Shaped like an irregular "Y", this site occupies a fossil terrace of
Onion Creek and possibly the Colorado River. Lithic debitage, mussel
shell, bone fragments, and an occasional piece of burned rock may be
found eroding out of the reddish-brown soils of the terrace slopes.
The gray-brown soils overlying this zone are relatively sterile but one
basal fragment of an En60n dart point was noted.
Area is estimated at 250,000 m2 , depth is probably greater than 50 ern.
and there is a potential for in situ deposits, although plowing makes
this somewhat conjectural (Whitsett and Fox 1979).
Whitsett and Fox rate the prehistoric component at 41 TV 456 in their
highest significance category, that is, known to be eligible for the National
Register of Historic Places, and recommend further testing to document that
significance. Significant in its own right as a prehistoric site, it is a
member of Whitsett and Fox's "Confluence Cluster" of sites regarding which
they stated that:
This combination of excellent preservation and possible paleosols offers
a rarely seen opportunity to study Central Texas Archaic responses to
changing climate and biota (Whitsett and Fox 1979).
A preliminary assessment of the site in the field indicated that pre­
historic cultural material was visible on the surfaces of two terraces around
an apparent cut off meander loop of Onion Creek. The density of materials
is quite variable but seems everywhere to be greatest on the slope at the
base of the eroded edge of the highest terrace. Artifacts are found on both
banks of the old meander channel.
The high terrace on which a large portion of the site is situated is
associated with paleochannels of Phase 6 age, identifying the terrace as a
Level 4 or First Street terrace (Baker and Penteado-Orellana 1977: 399,
402). One of these channels forms the northeastern boundary of the site.

16

ONION CREEK

These channels are thought to date to a period of terrace aggradation during
the Late Wisconsin, beginning sometime after 30,000 years B.P. and continuing
to 13,000 years B.P. (Op. W.: 411-412). A subsequent phase of incision cut
into the Level 4 terraces with the eventual return to an aggrading phase
resulting in the formation of the next lower, Fish Hatchery terrace.
Since the distribution of prehistoric cultural materials on the upper
surface of the terrace appears to parallel the edge of the scarp, it appears
likely that the occupation of the site postdates the formation of the higher
terrace and dates sometime during or subsequent to the period of incision
beginning around 13,000 B.P.
Within the meander scar that cuts into the old Colorado River terrace
and more than 2 m. beneath it, lies a second terrace level, apparently formed
by the channel which cut away the older terrace. Judging from the channel
width, the narrow meander radius, and the dark color of the sediments con­
tained in this lower level terrace, it was formed by Onion Creek subsequent
to the incision of the Colorado River terrace. Although direct correlation
between the Onion Creek terraces and those of the Colorado River is difficult,
this terrace might be the approximate equivalent of the next lower Colorado
River terrace, the Fish Hatchery terrace (Urbanec 1963), or Baker and
Penteado-Ore11ana 1 s (1977) terrace Level 3 which they tentatively date to
sometime between 13,000 and 2,000 B.P.
The fill of the meander channel itself may be partially terrace fill,
although this is difficult to determine. At any rate, the depth of the scar
suggests that the river may have begun another period of incision before this
channel was abandoned.
The soil on the upper terrace surface at the northern end of 41 TV 456
is mapped as a Bergstrom silty clay loam occurring on slopes from 0 to 1
percent (Werchan et al. 1974: 14). The Bergstrom series
consists of
deep, well-drained, nearly level to gently Sloping soils • • • on low
terraces above flood plains" (op. cit.: 13). These soils have m:Xlerate
permeability and high available water capacity. They have developed in
calcareous alluvium under mid to tall grasses (~b~d.). Specifically, the
Bergstrom silty clay loam is described as occupying:
If • • •

••• broad, srrooth, nearly level benches on flood plains. Areas are
irregularly shaped and range from about 40 to 250 acres in size. Most
areas slope about 0.25 percent.

PROJECT AREA

17

This soil has a surface layer of dark-brown silty clay loam about 25
inches thick. The next layer is reddish-brown silt loam to a depth of
about 60 inches (op. Qit.: 14).
The lower terrace surface, lying to the south of the older terrace scarp,
is mapped as a Lewisville silty clay occurring on slopes between 1 and 2 per­
cent (op. cit.: 30). The Lewisville series includes soils which are
"
. deep, nearly level to gently sloping, well-drained silty clays (on)
terraces along the major streams" (ibid.). Like the Bergstrom series,
these soils are moderately permeable with high available water capacity. They
have developed under a mid and tall grass cover and are calcareous and
moderately alkaline throughout.
The one to two percent sloping Lewisville silty clay occupies generally
broad, and occasionally long and narrow, complex slopes below the flatter zero
to one percent sloping Lewisville silty clay (ibid.). In a representative
profile, the A horizon is a silty clay to a depth of 13 inches, the B horizon
a slightly lighter color silty clay to a depth of about 29 inches. Generally
the solum thickness ranges from 25 to 46 inches. The C horizon, a silt loam,
often rests on a bed of gravel at 10-25 feet in depth (ibid.).
Adjacent to the site but not directly within its boundaries are steeper
sloping Bergstrom silt loam (1 to 3 percent) soils along the northwestern
boundary and Frio silty clay loam, frequently flooded, along the Onion Creek
channel. As mentioned in the Onion Creek basin description, all of these
soils are Haplustolls. Both the Bergstrom and Frio series are Curnulic
Haplustolls of the fine (Bergstrom is fine-silty), mixed, thermic family.
The Lewisville series is a fine-silty, carbonatic, thermic Typic Haplustoll
(op. Qit.: 116).
The entire area of both terraces is under cultivation; at the time of
the current investigations they were planted in milo. Along the gully which
follows the meander scar and along the bank of the creek hackberries and
pecans grow as well as a dense lower story shrubs and grasses.
Two clusters of historic debris are recorded for the site (Texas Archeo­
logical Research Laboratory files, site records) one in the northeast corner
of the site near the creek and the other at a point in the axis of the ''Y''
approximately 150 m. from the Colorado River. Neither of these clusters is
located in the proposed line easement. Material observed at the site during
the survey included brick, ironstone, glass fragments and square nails and

18

ONION CREEK

is listed as potentially pre-1900 (ibid.), although the survey report
suggests the site may
to the twentieth century (Whitsett and Fox 1979).
One or both of these clusters may be houses shown on the 1896 USGS map
of the Austin quadrangle (TARL site records) and both are near the old road
shown on this map which ran around the long meander of Onion Creek and out
to Three Island Ford on the Colorado River. A 1932 Travis County map shows
a "Negro School" on or near 41 'IV 456 (Whitsett and Fox 1979).
Historically, the site is rated as uncertain with minimal historic
archeological potential due to plowing disturbances. Despite this disturbance
and the fact that the site does not clearly appear to have been occupied long
before the turn of the century, it lies in an area which contains some of
the earliest settlement in Travis County. Further background research is
suggested for the site (op. ciZ.). This research is summarized below.
Both of the sites tested in conjunction with the proposed wastewater
lines are located on an 11 league tract of land originally granted to Santiago
del Valle, once Secretary of State of the Mexican State of Coahuilla (TeXM
Gaz~te 1829).
Stephen F. Austin purchased the tract from Del Valle at a
cost of less than one cent an acre when he was in Saltillo in 1831 (Henson
1976: 46), but it was the following year before all the papers had been comr
pleted and the land survey was conducted (ibid.). Samuel May Williams, later
the business partner of Thomas F. McKinney, handled sale of the land for
Austin.
The land was initially purchased by M.B. Menard, but by 1839 McKinney
had acquired the property (McEachern and Ralph 1980: 19) in a land deal which
included both Albert C. Horton and Nathaniel H. Watrous (Hawkins 1950: 15).
One league was sold to Bartlett Sims and on May 25, 1841, the land on which
41 'IV 456 and 41 'IV 462
located became the sole property of Watrous when
his undivided one-fourth interest in the property was formally divided
(Travis County Deed Records, Vol. A, p. 371). In all, Watrous was deeded
three tracts totaling nearly 10,000 acres, 4,941 of which lie at the con­
fluence of onion Creek with the Colorado River.
Watrous, who was born in 1808 in Connecticut, came to Texas during the
days of the Republic and was eventually elected to the Texas legislature as
a representative from Travis County (Teleg~aph and TeXM Reg~t~ l842a).
Unfortunately he died of congestive fever on the 19th of September in 1842
before actually beginning the term (op. ciZ. 1942b). The newspaper account

PROJECT AREA

19

states that "He had travelled a long distance before the election and the
fever was probably induced by the exposure on the journey" (,£b,£d.).
Although the only tax record for Watrous in 1840 shows him as owner of two
town lots in Galveston (on which the taxes were delinquent - Gifford 1966:
53), Hawkins I (1950: 15) statement that he died at his II • • • large and
beautiful plantation at the intersection of Onion Creek and the Colorado
River" suggests that he may have developed the property rapidly after its
initial division.
After Watrous' death, Thomas McKinney became the executor of the estate,
selling 1,967 acres of the property in July of 1846 to his brother, James
McKinney, in order to payoff claims against the property (Travis County
Deed Records, Vol. B, pp. 233-238). Nathaniel watrous' brother, Daniel E.
Watrous, came to Texas from Alabama. to manage the remaining property,
including the land in the present project area, after the death of their
ruther in 1856. By 1860, the Watrous property at Onion Creek had acquired a
total value of $37,000 and included 34 slaves (Gracy 1967). Daniel died in
Austin in 1863 but the property was not immediately divided arrong the heirs
(Hawkins 1950: 64). Finally in 1872, the property was divided under a pro­
bate document filed in the County Commissioners Court (Travis County Probate
Minutes, Vol. E, p. 427). The heirs included two sisters of Nathanial H.
and Daniel, Nancy B. Watrous and Mary J. Gillett, a brother, John Charles
Watrous, and the wife and children of another brother, Frederick A.: Maria
Watrous, Nathanial H. Watrous and Elizabeth G. Shearer.
The land on which 41 TV 456 lies was deeded at this time to Mary J.
Gillett as part of more than 704 acres valued at $7,641.42 (Travis County
Deed Records, vol. W, 730ff). In 1879, her husband, Solomon L. Gillett,
then living with his family in Chewwing County, New York, sold his then
deceased wife's land to John O. Johnson (Travis County Deed Records, Vol. 43,
pp. 496-498) who in turn sold it to W.D. Hunter in 1886 (op. c{t., Vol. 68,
pp.134-l38). Hunter's descendants, the Arrnstrongs, still own the property
today.
41 TV 462
The survey report describes the prehistoric component as follows:
This is an immense site, following a fossil terrace of the Colorado
River for approximately 1.75 kID. and having an average width of 50 m.

20

ONION CREEK

Cultural rerrains consisting of lithic debitage, burned rock and mussel
shell are best seen along the slopes of the terrace, which rises 2 to
3 m. above the flood plain, in a zone of reddish-brown soils, although
plowed at the
of reconnaissance, produce far fewer cultural
rerrains. One distal fragment of dart point was collected from this
area (Whitsett and Fox 1979: no pagination).
This component is judged by Whitsett and Fox to belong to their highest sig­
nificance category, that is, known to be eligible for the National Register
of Historic Places. They recommend that it be tested further.
The prehistoric component is distributed along the entire length of the
eroded terrace margin from where the Colorado River bends northward where
Fallwell Lane turns away from the river bank to where the river turns back
eastward to Hunter Bend. The density of prehistoric artifacts visible on
the surface and the distance which they extend southward away from the terrace
edge vary considerably. Some of the variation rray be due to differential land
use practices, while some of it probably reflects the pattern of overlapping
occupations which must have created this enormous site.
The terrace edge along which 41 TV 462 lies is, like the upper terrace
at 41 TV 456, associated with paleochannels of Phase 6 age, and is thus a
Level 4 or First Street terrace (Baker and Penteado-Orellana 1977). The edge
itself is mapped as rrarking a Phase 5 channel, thus dating formation of the
scarp to the period of incision immediately following the cessation of
terrace aggradation during Phase 6 (ibid.). Since the site lies along this
scarp which was created after the formation of the terrace had ceased, it
is quite likely that the
was formed by a number of aboriginal occupa­
tions which postdated the formation of the higher terrace. By the same
token, many of the occupations at the site may have predated the later
Holocene channel phases of the river which would have been some distance
north of the site.
The rrajority of the site is rrapped as a Bergstrom silty clay loam on 0
to 1 percent slopes, as is described for 41 TV 456 (Werchan et al. 1974).
At the extreme western end of the site is a small section of Bergstrom silt
loam occurring on 1 to 3 percent slopes. This soil differs from the silty
clay loam described above in having less clayey surface layers (ibid.).
The modern vegetation on the site consists almost entirely of low
grasses with occasional srrall trees along the edge of the terrace. One
large field adjacent to the eastern half of the site had been recently plowed

PROJECT AREA

21

prior to the present field work. A partly paved and partly graveled road
runs the length of the site and has obviously caused some damage to the sur­
ficial components of the site. The entire site, except for perhaps only
the extreme edge of the scarp, has probably been plowed a nurrber of times.
With regard to the historic components, Whitsett and Fox note that
41 TV 462 (along with the nearby 41 TV 457 and 41 TV 460) are anPng the
earliest sites in the group of historic sites along Fallwell Lane, potentially
dating as early as the 1860s or 1870s.
The historic component of the site is manifested as a number of small
discrete areas of historic artifact scatter located at several points along
the length of the terrace edge. In a cursory examination of the entire site,
four such areas were found, one of which was related to a recently rerroved
structure and another which showed evidence of structural remains: bricks,
nails and window glass. Several standing structures on or immediately
adjacent to the site may represent earlier structures which have been super­
ficially rerrodeled or may mark the sites of earlier structures.
Two structures show on the 1896 USGS topographic map of Austin (U.S.
Geological Survey 1895-1896) in the area of the outfall structure. The
southernmost may be the house still standing to the southeast of the ease­
ment, while the northernmost structure could be one of the buildings in the
current headquarters complex or perhaps an earlier structure associated with
the scatter of historic debris found north of the construction easement.
More than a kilometer to the west of the outfall line easement, where
the force main and sludge line enter the treatment plant, no structures are
shown on the 1896 map of the area (USGS 1895-1896). At that time, access to
the area was not by way of Fallwell Lane which apparently did not exist, but
by Three Island Road which wound around the large meander of Onion Creek
adjacent to 41 TV 456 and cut across the center of the oxbow bend of the
COlorado River to the north, leading to the Three Island ford at the
northernmost tip. The structure adjacent to the force main/sludge line
easement may date to the initial construction of Fallwell Lane.
The early history of the land surrounding 41 TV 462 is the same as that
of 41 TV 456 described above. It remained a part of the watrous estate
until its division among the heirs of Daniel E. Watrous in 1872. At that
time the area surrounding the outfall line and all of the area directly above
the confluence of Onion Creek and the COlorado River became the property of

ONION CREEK

22

John Charles Watrous, attorney general for the Republic of Texas in 1838
and 1839, and later the first federal district judge in Texas (Hawkins 1950).
Watrous, who died in Baltimore in 1874 after a long illness (op. c{x.: 64),
probably never lived on the property, but may have visited it a number of
times while it was owned by his brother. The association of Watrous with
this property is interesting since the judge fought a 20 year battle against
the demands for resignation and atterrpts at irrpeachment over his involvement
in several land cases dealing with the legality of similar eleven-league
grants (op. c{X.). Watrous' wife, Melinda, sold the property shortly after
her husband's death (Travis County Deed Records, Vol. 27, p. 345), after
which it passed through a number of hands up until the present owner, William
D. McMorris.
In the probated division of the watrous estate in 1872, the portion of
land where the force main and sludge line cross 41 TV 462 was included in a
420.3896 acre tract deeded to Nancy B. Watrous, a sister of Daniel and John
Charles (Travis County Deed Records, Vol. W, pp. 732-734). One hundred
acres of this land, including the pipeline crossing area, was deeded to her
nephew Nathaniel H. Watrous in May of 1875 (op. c{X., Vol. 30, p. 72). When
he died in Austin the following year, his lands were divided among his
mother, Maria, and his sister, Lissie Shearer. The crossing area, listed
then as timbered land, became the property of Lissie in 1877 (op. c{X., Vol.
37, p. 84). After being sold by the Shearers in the 1880s, it passed to a
number of different people down to the present owner, McMorris.
METHOD OF INVESTIGATION
stated in the introduction, the primary purpose of the investigation
was to evaluate the nature and condition of the sites in the areas where
they are to be crossed by wastewater lines. The first step consisted in
ascertaining whether or not the sites actually existed in the impacted area.
Having confirmed that part of the site did extend across the irrpact area,
an assessment of the significance of the site based on controlled testing
was necessary. Finally, if either site was determined to contain valuable
archeological or historical data, assessments of potential alternate routes
would have to be made.
visible on
At both 41 TV 456 and 41 TV 462, cultural debris is
the surface of the ground. Therefore the preliminary work at the site con­
As

METHOD OF INVESTIGATION

23

sisted of surface inspection of affected areas. This was followed by a
series of backhoe trenches in order to determine not only the obvious sub­
surface extent of the site but also the sedimentary potential for subsurface
materials. Profiles were recorded for most of the trenches and sediment
samples taken from selected trenches at either area. The excavation of each
backhoe trench was carefully watched by one of the crew members for signs of
buried cultural remains. After excavation, the walls of each trench were
examined carefully for cultural material.
Three controlled 1 m. square test units were considered necessary: two
at 41 TV 456 and another at 41 TV 462. Each was excavated in 10 em. arbi­
trary levels. All of the matrix from each level was passed through a one­
quarter inch mesh screen and all cultural debris, rocks and shell fragments
were collected and bagged separately for each level. These were returned to
the lab for washing, identification and inventory.
Careful notes were kept on all stages of the field operation and all
locations were mapped using transit and stadia. At 41 TV 462, elevations
above mean sea level and the horizontal datums used for mapping purposes were
provided courtesy of the S.A. Garza survey crew who were working to set up
map controls in the area for Tye Collins and Associates.
RESULTS
Trenching, Excavation, and Surface Collections
Outfall Line
41 TV 462
Surface inspection of the eastern end of the Shiloh ranch headquarters
complex indicated that the cultural debris associated with 41 TV 462 all but
disappears after the terrace scarp merges with the modern river bank. No
prehistoric cultural material of any sort was found near the bank in this
area. A small concentration of recent historic materials was found in the
northwest corner of the easternmost pasture which the line crosses. This
area was completely north of the outfall line easement; no cultural material
was found in the easement in this area.
Although this may be the remains of a structure, no structural materials
were observed. Historic debris included white earthenware, stoneware, clear
and colored bottle glass and a few metal fragments. A few fragments of glass

24

ONION CREEK

were purple-tinted, suggesting the use of manganese decolorant, and indicating
the site was probably used at some time prior to World War I. A small sherd
of decalcomania decorated earthenware may be contemporaneous with these
glass fragments or even more recent. None of the material observed sug­
gested an earlier date. No collection was made.
A separate distinct cluster of historic debris was observed scattered
throughout the western one-third of the line easement. This wide, but
sparsely scattered, material is apparently related to the structure which
still stands south of the easement in this area. The densest concentration
of materials
nearest to this house which probably dates to the latter part
of the nineteenth century or the first part of the twentieth. Historic
cultural material observed in this area included white earthenware, several
types of stoneware, porcelain, clear and colored bottle glass, window glass,
square nails and limestone. A small collection of potentially diagnostic
materials was made.
Also occurring in this area was a very thin scatter of prehistoric
cultural debris, also apparently concentrated toward the house and away from
the easement. This parallel distribution reflects the fact that the house is
in the corner of the field closest to Onion Creek. This prehistoric debris,
which included only a half-dozen flakes and chips and a possible metate frag­
ment, is relatively far from the terrace edge and does not appear to be
linked with 41 TV 462. Because of its proximity to Onion Creek, it is more
likely to have been associated with the surficial extent of 41 TV 461 which
lies just a bit south of here. For this reason, the historic and prehistoric
material from this area has been listed as 41 TV 46l.
Subsequent to surface inspection of the outfall line area, eight back­
hoe trenches were placed along the approximate course of the easement (Fig.
2). The area closest to the modern river bank, where construction might be
most likely to encounter a subsurface eastward extension of 41 TV 462, was
examined most thoroughly. From this area, trenches continued westward into
the plowed field north of the standing structure at the edge of the easement.
No cultural material was encountered in any of these trenches. Additionally,
the stratigraphy observed in these trenches did not suggest any buried
cultural deposits.
The stratigraphy of these trenches exhibited a considerable amount of
minor variations in soil texture and color which may reflect differences in

RESULTS

25

depositional history. Differences in the upper section of the profile, on
the other hand, may be due to differential land use practices. Along the
length of this relatively short line are three different fields which repre­
sent three different current uses or stages of the same use. Near the
river, in the outfall structure area, a small section is rarely grazed and
has thick grass and weeds. West of this is a well-grazed horse pasture.
Further west, the ground has been plowed and seeded with grass for hay.
Profiles were recorded for six of the eight trenches excavated in this
area. All of these profiles were recorded hastily in the field using field
estimates of texture and structure. A Munsell color chart was used to
determine the color. All descriptions were done on slightly moist profiles,
on the same day that they were excavated. Five of the trenches were back­
filled the same day that they were excavated because of the presence of live­
stock; Trenches #6, #15, and #16 were filled later.
The profile of Trench #1 is given below. Although there has been some
degree of soil development here, the boundaries of texture, color and struc­
ture do not clearly match. It is therefore difficult to tell to what degree
difference in the profile reflects depositional variation or soil genesis.
Soil horizons are only suggested.
Backhoe Trench #1
Zone 1 - (Ap) 0 to 18 ern. (0 to 7 in.) Dark brown (7.5YR3/2) silty clay loam;
weak, medium to coarse, subangular blocky structure; slightly cal­
careous with a few gastropod fragments; gradual, smooth boundary;
plow zone indistinct - probably not plowed in a number of years.
Zone 2 - (Al) 18 to 72 em. (7 to 28 in.) Brown (7.5YR4/4) fine sandy clay
loami compact, hard; weak, medium to coarse, subangular blocky
structure; diffuse, smooth boundary; perhaps less clay than plow
zone; texture between silty and fine sand.
Zone 3 - (AI) 72 to 87 em. (28 to 34 in.) Brown (7.5YR5/4) fine sandy or
silty clay loami compact, hard; weak, medium to coarse, subangular
blocky structure; gradual, smooth boundaryi only distinguishable
from Zone 2 because of slightly lighter color.
Zone 4 - (B) 87 to 110 em. (34 to 43 in.) Dark brown (7.5YR4/2) fine sandy
clay loam or loamy clay: weak, coarse, subangular blocky structure;
compact; slightly calcareous with some gastropod fragments: gradual,
wavy boundary.

26

ONION CREEK

Zone 5 - (Cl) 110 to 147 em. (43 to 58 in.) Dark brown (7.5YR4/4) fine sandy
clay; m:x:lerate, coarse, subangular blocky structure; slightly cal­
careous with a few gastropcrls; gradual, SIf(X)th boundary; perhaps
IIDre clay than Zone 4; there is no clear indication of soil develop­
rent (other than carbonate formation in or below this zone;
texturally this zone is closer to those below, in color, it is
closer to those above) •
Zone 6 - (C2) 147 to 192 em. (58 to 76 in.) Yellowish red (SYR4/6) fine
sandy clay; moderate, coarse, subangular blocky structure; very
calcareous with abundant gastropod fragrrents; diffuse,. SIf(X)th
boundary.
Zone 7 - (C3) 192 to 280 em. (75 to 110 in.) Yellowish red (5YR5/6) sandy
clay; less compact than upper zones; massive structure; only slightly
calcareous; sandier,. with less clay than Zone 6.
The differences between the profiles of the various trenches were pri­
marily evidenced in the distinctiveness of some of the smaller intermediate
horizons. Figure 5 shows a diagrammatic section through the six trenches pro­
filed. stratum numbers refer to the descriptions given for Trench #1. Ele­
vations are given in meters above mean sea level and the actual relationships
between the trenches are shown in Figure 2.
In addition to the visibility of the less distinct horizons, there was
some apparent variation in sediment texture between the trenches. The two
outer trenches, #15 and #6, had the least clayey soils of any of the trenches
and, on the whole, the simplest profiles. In these two trenches, the zone
of highest clay content appeared to occur higher than in the middle four
trenches, although all of the trenches had decreasing clay content toward the
bottom. The same strongly calcareous zone occurred throughout the trenches
at approximately the same elevation and approximately the same thickness.
Slight variations in color were probably a factor of recording more than
actual differences but the upper one or two zones were clearly darker in
those trenches closest to the river and creek. Throughout the profile in
IIDst of the trenches, there was evidence of considerable worm and insect
activity.
The soil described above is quite similar to the description given for
the Bergstrom series soils which are mapped in this area (Werchan e.t al.

TRENCH

:if.
1
129.0

2

T R E N C H

t 5

l,',
'

I"

"r:
""­

2

...........

-3

'4

6

TRENCH

--­

....

.

,...---­

2

--­
---

-L

1

2

--..-

........

,

---

"7

I

""I

~---~--------II---

127.0

7

/'

/'

7

--

7

----­

r

"

2/3

2
/'

---

/'

/'"

5/6

5

128.0
A)

6

6

/'

.-..-"'-

6

129.0

4

5

TRENCH

1

3

i]j
c::

/"

------

/'

7

r-­

/'

~

7
127.0

41 TV 462
East End
COMPOSITE
WALL

B A C K HOE

FIGURE 5

--­

.r'_ _

4

--'"

WEST

S t r

TRENCH

................

6
--- ____

3

2

---

5

/,"""'"

6

r

---

3

128.0

5

TRENCH

PROFILE
SECTIONS

T R E N C H E S 1· 4, 6, 15

tum n u m b e r $ _r e fer t o p r 0 f i I e
description
for
trench
Elevations
are
in
meters
above
mean
sea
level

8

N
--J

28

ONION CREEK

1974: 13). This series is classified as a Fine-silty, mixed, thermic Cumu­
lic Haplustoll. These soils are characterized by a Mollic epipedon of
varying thickness underlain by only minimally altered parent materials, and
typically show subsurface carbonate accumulations (Soil Survey Staff 1975:
303). They have generally developed in late-Pleistocene or Holocene sedi­
ments under grasses and forbs (ibid.).
Force Main
41 TV 462
The proposed force main and sludge line both cross the scarp along
which 41 TV 462 is recorded near the gate at the northwestern edge of the
MCMorris property and follows the east side of the fence line which separates
his property from the River Estates sulxUvision to the west (Fig. 3). The
paved road which enters the property at this point climbs from the lower
terrace level up to the 41 TV 462 terrace at this point and there has been
some apparent land leveling associated with the construction of this road.
In addition, a subsurface telephone line runs underneath and adjacent to the
road. As a result of this, at the edge of the terrace scarp in the vicinity
of the force main crossing, any potential subsurface cultural remains may
have been considerably disturbed.
Located just east of the easement is the site of an older house which
had been removed several years prior to the present testing (Dan Slater,
pers. cornm. 1981). Several small hackberries I a covered well and a punp
house clearly define its former location. A considerable amount of recent
and historic refuse litters the immediate area and extends westward into the
easement, although there is no evidence of structural remains within the
easement area. In addition to the obviously recent garbage, a small amount
of the observed debris suggests that the occupation there may have dated as
early as the turn of the century. No collection of surface materials was
made, however.
The only prehistoric remains observed on the surface anywhere in the
immediate area were a couple of flakes found in eroded patches south of the
road. Nothing was found in the field away from the road. None of this
material was collected.
Eight backhoe trenches were excavated along the course of the easement
extending more than a hundred meters south into the field. Seven of these

RESULTS

29

trenches were aligned perpendicular to the fence and an eighth was located
parallel to the fence in the area closest to the road, where the only surfi­
cial prehistoric remains were encountered. Only one trench, the second south
of the road, #8, yielded any prehistoric cultural material; one flake was
found at a depth of approximately 65 em. below the surface while trowelling
the profile. A modern glass bottle fragment came up from just beneath the
surface in the eastrnost trench, #14.
Stratigraphic variation in these trenches was negligible. All exhibit
a simple, fairly straightforward profile. The basic appearance of these
profiles is not greatly different than those observed at the other end of the
site in the outfall line easement. They are on the whole, however, less
complex, with less variation, and generally coarser sediments. With regard
to the latter, the grain size of the sand particles appear to be somewhat
larger and there is considerably less clay present. Also, in contrast to the
other trenches, these have a highly calcareous zone which is not quite as
prominent and occurs at a higher elevation in the profile, coinciding with
the clay maxima and apparent B horizon. A description of Trench #7 is
included below.
Backhoe Trench #7
Zone 1 - (Al) 0 to 57 em. (0 to 22 in.) Brown (7.5YR5/2) loam; compact; weak,
moderate to coarse subangular blocky structure; few gastropod frag­
ments; diffuse, smooth boundaries; plow zone not evident.
Zone 2 - (B2) 57 to 90 ern. (22 to 35 in.) sandy clay loam; compact, hard;
massive structure; diffuse, smooth boundaries; this zone probably
contains clay maxima.
Zone 3 - (Cl) 90 to 134 ern. (35 to 53 in.) Yellowish red (5YR5/6) sandy clay
loam; compact, hard; massive structure; very calcareous with cal­
careous threaded pores and abundant gastropod fragments; diffuse,
smooth boundaries.
Zone 4 - (C2) 134 to 260 ern. (53 to 102 in.) Strong brown (7.5YR5/8) sandy
clay loam; very compact, hard; massive structure; slightly cal­
careous; perhaps slightly more clay than Zone 3.
Figure 6 shows a diagrammatic cross section of six of the profiles along
the force main easement section at the western end of 41 TV 462. The

TRENCH

7

¥

131.0

~l

lRENCH

------

-

3

r

130.0

~

WJ
WJ

(::.::

I

...-

9

___
.L

'Y

10

rf

?{:
•

=='1­

1

-...­
I 3

.........

---+---1.. . . . . . .

.........

TRENCH

11

TRENCH

--n I. I
---

1

---r

21

12

"­ "\.

.::;::

4

t-I

:<:

I 129.0

131.0

1

1--'­
130.0

3

I

4

.........

3

0::::.
0::::.

TRENCH

1

4

<:J

¥-l--­
I

.........

2

TRENCH

8

3
3

"

L,//f-­
4
129.0

4

L­

4

~

41 TV 462
West

128.0

End

~

PROFILE

COMPOSITE

128.0

SECTIONS
SOUTH
WALL
B A C K HOE
T R E N C H E S 7· 12

Stratum

numbers

description
Elevations

o

(Y')

above

refer
or

are

melln

to

pro

trench
n

sea

meters
level

Ie

1

FIGURE 6

RESULTS

31

remaining two trenches, #13 and #14, were not profiled due to a lack of time.
As is evident from this figure there is little variation among the trenches.
The surface and the lower boundary of the upper zone are nearly flat with a
slight downward slope to the south away from the river. The upper boundary
of the lower zone shows some variability but trends downward to the south at
a comparable slope. Zone 2, probably a weakly developed B horizon, was only
recognized in two of the trenches: in the other trenches, this transitional
zone between the upper mollic epidedon and the calcareous threaded parent
material below was not apparent.
Two rocks were encountered in the pr~file of Trench #10 at a depth
approximately 2 m. below the surface. Other than the flake found in the
upper portion of Trench #8, these were the only lithic materials found in any
the trenches on 41 'IV 462. Both are apparently limestone. One is an
angular fragment of cobble size and the other is a stream rounded pebble.
Neither appears to be burned. Careful treM'eling of the profile face in this
area revealed no cultural materials. A section approximately 50 em. long
and 30 em. high was troweled back 10 em. into the wall around the rocks but
nothing other than one gastropod (Rabdotu.6 sp.) was found.
A one meter square test pit was excavated between Trenches #7 (north of
which are surficial prehistoric materials) and #8 (in which the flake was
found). Digging in 10 em. arbitrary levels and screening with quarter inch
screen, this unit was taken down to a depth of one meter. Both historic and
prehistoric cultural material were recovered from the top level. BeleM' this,
five of nine levels yielded prehistoric cultural debris. No historic
material was recovered from any of the levels beleM' the first one. A de­
scription of these materials is included in the following section.
The profile of the test pit was essentially the same as the upper sec­
tions of the backhoe trench profiles. The most obvious difference was that
with a cleanly shaved upper profile, the plow zone was quite obvious with
an abrupt, wavy lower boundary. Otherwise, the boundary between what is
labelled in the backhoe trenches as Zones 1 and 2 occurred at about 60 em.
beleM' the surface.
41 'IV 456
Preliminary surface inspection of the cultural remains at 41 'IV 456
indicated that both prehistoric and historic cultural material could be found

32

ONION CREEK

on both banks of the abandoned meander scar which had previously been defined
as the boundary of the site (Site Records, TARL). Under an agreement with
the current landowner, investigations at the site were restricted to the area
immediately surrounding the proposed pipeline. Within this area, a thin
scatter of prehistoric material extended from 100 m. north of the upper
terrace edge to 50 m. south of the edge of the lower terrace inside the
meander scar. This material included burned chert, quartzite and sandstone
and some lithic debitage. The densest concentration of material was
encountered on the eroded slope of the upper terrace edge. A small arrount of
historic material, observed on both banks of the meander scar, included
green, blue and aquamarine glass fragments. No historic structural materials
were observed in the area of the proposed right-of-way. No surface collec­
tion was made.
Ten backhoe trenches were placed along the proposed course of the line,
six on the north side of the meander scar and four on the south side (Fig.
4). In an attempt to minimize damage to the crops standing in the field at
the time of the investigations, all of the trenches were oriented parallel
to the right-of-way near its approximate center line. Three trenches were
located on the upper terrace tread. Three others were placed on the long
gently sloping riser; one at the top, one in the middle and another at the
base. On the other bank of the meander scar one trench was located at the
base of the lower terrace riser, one at the top and the other two back along
the tread of the lower terrace. One tiny fragment of russel shell found in
the upper 50 em. of the lowest riser trench on the south bank of the meander
scar was the only possibly cultural material found in any of the trenches.
Stratigraphic variation in the backhoe trenches placed at 41 TV 456
was clearly dependent upon the position of the trenches with respect to the
terraces. Thus, the four trenches placed upon the upper terrace tread dis­
played nearly identical profiles, as did the three on the lower terrace
tread across the meander scar to the south. The two trenches placed below
the terraces in or on the edge of the channel fill also showed numerous simi­
larities. Figure 7 shows the relationship of the various trenches in a
diagrammatic cross-section.
The profile description of Trench #1 given below is generally repre­
sentative of the four trenches located on this upper terrace surface.
Although the identification of the various strata differs somewhat, these

Trench 10

Tr.nch 9

Tr.nch •

Tr.nch 7

Tr.nch 6

Trench 5

Tr.nch 4

Tr.nch 3

Tr.nch 2

Tr.nch 1

103

102
ONION

CREEK TERRACE

CHANNEL

I

ONION
CREEK
TERRACE

fILL

............1

4-1

II

I

1

4

101

,
""

r
-

4

I

99

5

I

I

5

/:

//1

'[1

//

/f(
2

I

2

I I4

I/IL=J'"

I

5

1 5

5

100

3/4

6

100
AI

~

I

C

3

99
COLORADO

RIVER

TERRACE

t-

V;

2/3 . "
3

- - I

98

98

41 TV 456
97

4

COMPOSITE PROFILE
WEST WALL SECTIONS
BACKHOE TRENCHES 1-10

Ele ...at;ons in meters
abo .... arbitrary datum

96

Stratum numbers ref.r to
profile descriptions in tex t
Cr.ek T.rrac....
Trench 10
Chann.1 Fill......
Trench (I
River T.rrac....
Trench

97

96

FIGURE 7
w
w

34

ONION CREEK

trenches are quite similar in terms of general grain size, structure and
color gradations to the trenches in Area A at 41 TV 462. As at 41 TV 462,
soil horizons are only suggested. Although absolute elevations were not
available for the trenches at 41 TV 456, the USGS map elevations and actual
observations in the field suggest that they are located on the same terrace
level. The most distinctive difference between the upper terrace trenches
at 41 TV 456 was found in the trench placed at the riser edge, where the
darker brown top soil layer was much thinner due to erosion and where a
10Vler sandy stratum was found at the bottom
the trench.
Backhoe Trench #1
Zone 1 - (Ap) 0 to 20 ern. (0 to 8 in.) Dark yellowish brown (10YR3/4) silty
loam: weak, fine granular structure; abundant roots; no carbonates
or gastropod fragments observed; abrupt, smooth boundary; very
little clay or coarse sand present.
ZOne 2 - (Al) 20 to 65 ern. (8 to 26 in.) Dark brown (10YR3/3) silt loami
moderate coarse, subangular blocky with weak, medium granular struc­
ture; some worm casts; moderate arrount of fine roots; very few land
snail fragments near bottom of horizon: clear, smooth boundary:
tiny micaceous flecks present.
Zone 3 - (B21) 65 to 90 ern. (26 to 35 in.) Strong brown (7.5YR5/6) silty
clay loam; moderate, medium granular structure; abundant land snail
fragments; gradual, smooth boundary: micaceous flecks less abun­
dant: barely enough clay to distinguish a clay loam.
Zone 4 - (B22) 90 to 187 ern. (35 to 74 in.) Strong brown (7.5YR5/6) silt
loam; moderate, medium structure: few worm casts; SOI'l'e carbonate
threading but not as much as at 41 TV 462; clear, smooth boundarYi
micaceous flecks still present.
Zone 5 - (c) 187 to 230 ern. (74 to 91 in.) Yellowish red (5YR5/6) silt loami
moderate, ITedium granular structure; conpact, hard; moderate
amounts of land snail present; micaceous flecks larger.
The profile description of backhoe Trench #6, included below, is
characteristic also of Trench #7. Both of these trenches are at the base of
the terrace riser and appear to be in channel fill sediITents.

RESULTS

35

Backhoe Trench #6
Zone 1 - (Ap) 0 to 17 em. (0 to 7 in.) Very dark grayish brown (10YR3/2)
clay loam; structureless; abundant roots; few land

snails~

abrupt,

smooth boundary.
Zone 2 - (Al) 17 to 63 em. (7 to 25 in.) Very dark grayish brown (10YR3/2)
clay and weak, medium granular loami fOClderate, coarse subangular
blocky structure; abundant land and water snail present; clear,
Slll.X)th

boundary~

very clayey, alnost a clay; some clay skins visible

on ped faces.
Zone 3 - (B2) 63 to 178 em. (25 to 70 in.) Very dark grayish brown (10YR3/2)
clay loam; weak, coarse, subangular blocky and noderate medium
granular structure; abundant snail; gradual, smooth boundary;
occasional clay skins on pedsi increasing clay content.
Zone 4 - (C) 178 to 299 em. (70 to lIB in.) Very dark grayish brown (l0YR3/2)
clay; fOClderate, medium granular structure; abundant snails.
The profile of backhoe Trench #10, shown below, is generally charac­
teristic of the three southernmost trenches placed on the lower terrace level
south of the meander scar.

In trenches #B and #9, the boundary between

strata 3 and 4 could not be distinguished and in Trench #B a lens of gastro­
pods bisected stratum 5.

The dark gray and brown sediments found throughout

these trenches appear to confirm that this terrace level was formed by Onion
Creek rather than the Colorado River.

The sediments found in these trenches

are similar to those recorded in the profile of Trench #5 on the north bank
of the meander scar, suggesting that a small terrace area had been formed on
that side also.

In Trench #5, however, the eroded base of the Colorado

River terrace is clearly visible near the bottom of the trench.
Backhoe Trench #10
Zone 1 - (Ap) 0 to 16 em. (0 to 6 in.) Very dark grayish brown (l0YR3/2)
silt loami structurelessj abundant roots; fOClderate anount of land
snails; abrupt, Slll.X>th boundary.
ZOne 2 - (Al) 16 to 52 em. (6 to 20 in.) Dark grayish brown (lOYR4/2) silty
clay loami fOClderate, coarse, subangular blocky and medium granular
structure; fOClderate root activity; rroderate anount of land snails;
clear, SIlPOth boundary; some clay skins on peds.

36

ONION CREEK

Zone 3 - (B2) 52 to 91 em. (20 to 36 in.) Dark grayish brown (lOYR4/2)
silty clay loam; mJderate, coarse granular and weak, coarse, sub­
angular blocky structure; mJderate land snails; clear, smooth
boundary; increasing clay.
Zone 4 - (Cl) 91 to 118 em. (36 to 46 in.) Dark grayish brown (lOYR4/2)
silty clay loam; mJderate, coarse granular structure; compact, hard,
friable; gradual, smooth boundary; decreased clay content.
Zone 5 - (C2) 118 to 248 em. (46 to 98 in.) Dark yellowish brown (lOYRS/4)
silty clay loam; weak, fine granular structure; hard, less friable;
abrupt, smooth boundary; higher clay content.
Zone 6 - (llC) 248 to 275 em. (98 to 108 in.) Dark yellowish brown (10YRS/4)
loamy fine sand; structureless; loose; some clay.
Two one meter square test units were excavated by hand on either side of

the meander scar (Fig. 4). On the north bank, a unit was placed between
trenches #5 and #6 (designated Unit #1). On the south bank, one was placed
between trenches #7 and #8 (designated Unit #2). Both of these units were
excavated to a depth of 50 em. in 10 em. levels. A small amount of cultural
debris was found in each and is described in the following section. In
general, the miniscule amount of material found in these two units did not
suggest any potential for a significant buried cultural deposit.
Material Culture
Outfall Line
41 TV 461
The only material collected from the area of the outfall line easement
came from the surface in the plowed field in the western half of the line.
As noted above, the densest cluster of both historic and prehistoric
materials was located near the existing structure which is just to the south
of the easement. Most of the prehistoric material, in fact, came from out­
side of the easement to the south, as did some of the historic material.
All observed prehistoric lithic materials and a sample of the larger frag­
ments of mussel shell were collected; only the historic material considered
potentially diagnostic of the earliest dates of occupation of the site was
collected. This material is listed below.

37

RESULTS

Prehistoric
Chipped stone
1 Interior Flake
2 Secondary Flakes
3 Corticate Chips
Ground stone
1 Metate Fragment
Burned Rock
1 Fire-fractured Quartzite Cobble
Faunal
5 Mussel Shell Fragments (Unidentified)
Historic
Ceramic
1 White Earthenware, Black Monochrome Floral Transfer
2 Red Paste Earthenware, Reddish-brown Interior Lead Glaze
1 Tan Paste Earthenware, Thin, Ridged, Lead Glaze
1 Stoneware Jug Handle, Greenish-brown Alkaline Glaze
2 Stoneware Body Sherds, Brown Interior/Exterior and Gray Exterior/
Brown Interior Glaze
Glass
1 Amber Bottle Base Fragment with " •• C Co" inside ridged circle
1 Amber Bottle Side Panel marked"
U D L T •• "
VANCO (UVER)
CA (NADA)

1
1
1
1
1

Aqua Bottle Fragment
Clear Bottle Side Panel marked "MOR•• (OLINE)"
Clear Bottle Side Panel marked "•• AGES •• "
Clear Bottle Side Panel with illegible lettering
Light Purple Pressed Glass Fragment

Metal
1 Cast Iron Fragment (stove?) with Floral Decoration
1 Square Nail
Nothing can be said of the prehistoric occupation of this area on the
basis of the artifactual material. Density of the prehistoric material away
from the structure is extremely light, estimated at one item per 1,000 square
meters or more. The increase of prehistoric material near the house suggests

~-----~---~-

- - -

38

ONION CREEK

that the central locus of this occupation was somewhere near the creek and
that material in the field was either in the low density artifact scatter
area surrounding the site or has been disturbed outward from the site by
plowing. It appears likely that this material is related to 41 TV 461 which
is located just to the south of this area, since it appears to be separated
from 41 TV 462 by a large area of sterile terrace. Testing at this site
found scattered prehistoric material with no indication of depth (Thurmond
n.d.) •
No indication of historic structural remains was found within the ease­
ment area, although scattered structural materials such as stone, glass and
nails were visible. More than likely, these materials, along with the rest,
have been plowed outward after having been dumped near the edge of the house.
There is no fence between the field and housei only a narrow grassy strip
separates the two.
The historic artifacts collected from the site do not offer a firm early
date for occupation of this area, however, the presence of the alkaline
glaze stoneware and the Mexican lead glazes suggest occupation during the
mid-nineteenth century. The board and batten siding pyramidal roof house
which stands in this area today does not appear to be quite this old and may
be a later construction. The house may date to the latter part of the
nineteenth century, however.
Force Main
41 TV 462
Table I shows the distribution of prehistoric artifacts in the test unit
located between backhoe trenches #7 and #8. The total amount of debitage is
rather small and not in itself indicative of any particular culture or time
period. No tools were identified, and although there is some random edge
damage on sane of the larger flakes, no use wear was observed. Most of the
material is very small, less than 2 em. in diameter. Only three pieces are
larger: two are interior flakes, one is a dubiously cultural large corti­
cate chip from the upper level. Three of the four interior flakes have
broad, narrav single facet platforms; the fourth has a multi-faceted, lipped
platform and could be described as a biface thinning flake.
All of the chipped stone debitage is relatively fine-grained chert.
Material colors are predominantly varying shades of gray and brown. The

39

RESULTS

Table 1.

Prehistoric Cultural and Non-Cultural Debris
Area A Test Unit #1

til
~

(I)

00

0
'M

c;j

.u

(J)

p.
Ul
(I)

..\G
c;j

.--I

""
"'"
0

''';

.--I
(I)

~

...J

..c:::
+J

P.
(I)

0

1

0-10

2

10-20

3

20-30

4

30-40

5

40-50

6

50-60

7

60-70

8

70-80

9

80-90

10

90-100

Total

0-100

*

"'(I)"
.u

~
H

2

1

'M

..c
U

Ul

p.
'M

(I)

0

(I)

.u

"'(I)"
..c
U

"'"

Ul

H
0

.--I

+J

'r-!

.--I
c;j

Ul

0

U

0

~

~

0
"t:l
.0

6

1

c;j

()

'M

+J
()
(I)

1

(I)

c;j
()

.u

"'0"
3

.u

(I)
(J)

.--I

~

:>

"t:l

(!)

H

.u

tt:J

c;j

""

::l

~

Cd

>"'"

00

;:..,

.--I

0
p..

5

1

c;j
~
''';
()
.,-4

c;j
(I)

~

'r-!
()

.--I

()

::c

tt:J

(I)

::l

~
c;j

.--I
C\l

c;j
(J
-,-4

0

c;j

~

,0

*
*

36

.,-4

c;j

8

9

3

7

2

1

10

3

20

6

1

27

1

27

4

1

2

24

2

1

27

14

7

1

22

18

5

1

24

1 119

28

9

1 157

16

.u

H

3

'f

(I)

(I)

U

2

8

0

U

tt:J

1

I

"'"

"'~"

.--I

0

4

2

Cd

()

.u

1

1

(I)

~

1
1

(I)

'M
c;j

.u

(I)

.u

..c
U

.u

.--I

Ul
+J
~

e
00

2

4

'M
.0

5

1

33

40

44

40

snails not saved from upper levels

Historic material found in Level 1 of this test unit is reported in 'text.

40

ONION CREEK

gray is opaque with occasional white mottles while the brown tends toward
translucence in the thinner specimens. Five of the chipped stone specimens
are partially patinated. One small corticate chip from Level 6 has been
thermally altered.
The vertical distribution of prehistoric materials shown in Table 1 is
interesting. Although the rtPst material occurs in the surface level, this
level is clearly in the plow zone and these materials are certainly mixed.
Below the first level, the concentration of materials in Levels 5 and 6 may
possibly indicate a buried occupation zone but the overall density of
materials is too light to verify this. On the other hand, alrost all of
the materials below the first level are quite small and could have been dis­
placed downward by bioturbation. With the small sample size it is difficult
to argue that the two level gap in cultural material in Levels 2 and 3
actually represent a sterile layer overlying a buried occupation stratum.
The historic material from Area A of 41 TV 462, which is itemized below,
is all fram Level 1 of Test unit #1. No historic artifacts were collected
from the surface in this area. Since the plow zone was seen to extend doWn­
ward to a depth of 12 to 14 em., all of these artifacts would have been
within the plow zone. None of these materials is particularly indicative of
an early occupation at this location.
Historic Material from Area A, Test Unit #1
Ceramics
1 Plain White Earthenware
Glass
1 Amber Bottle Fragment, Patinated
1 Clear Light Bulb Fragment
1 Light Purple Bottle Glass
2 Milk Glass Fragments
Metal
4 Flat Metal Fragments
Miscellaneous
1 Pebble with Cement Encrustation
Force Main
41 'IV 456
Because of restrictions placed upon the testing of 41 'IV 456 by the owner

RESULTS

41

of the land, no surface collection was made at the site. However, nothing
which would be diagnostic of any particular time period or cultural adapta­
tion was observed. The only material collected from the site came from the
two 1 m. test units placed on either side of the meander scar. This material
was donated to the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory by the owner, Ted
~mstrong.
None of the material from these two units, shown in Tables 2
and 3, is of any great value in understanding the prehistoric or historic
occupations at the site.
RECCMMENDATIONS
Outfall Line
41 TV 461
Although 41 TV 461 was not originally scheduled for testing, it was
found that material relating to this site extended northward into the western
half of the outfall line easement. When first recorded, this site was
thought to be eligible for the National Register of Historic Places (Whitsett
and Fox 1979). Subsequently, later testing to the east of the wastewater
plant location found a buried component which is most certainly of National
Register quality (Thurmond n.d.). This buried component was located in the
terrace of Onion Creek, slightly below and to the east of the main Colorado
River terrace upon which the plant and outfall line will be constructed. In
this same Colorado River terrace, Thurmond (n.d.) found that the majority of
cultural material was within the plow zone, with no indication if ~J1 f.JUu.
materials occurring at any depth. If the early Holocene date offered by
Baker and Penteado-Orellana (1977: 412) for the Phase 5 channel degradation
is correct, then formation of the terrace would have ceased not long after
the first human occupation of the area, and this lack of depth is to be
expected.
Given that the sediments exposed in the eight backhoe trenches located
ln the outfall area are Colorado River terrace deposits apparently located
on the same level as the terrace on which the wastewater plant is located,
it is unlikely that any prehistoric cultural remains will be found in ~Uu
anywhere near where this site extends into the outfall easement area. The
upper component of this site, partially, if not totally destroyed by long
cultivation, could not be eligible for the National Register of Historic

---~--

42

Table 2.

ONION CREEK

Test Pit #1 (41 TV 456)
North Bank of Meander Scar

p..
(l)

~
CIj

r-1

I't.;

'M

r-1
(l)

:>
(l)
H

--

r-1

.j..J

~

(l)

CIl

(l)

.j..J

OJ)

S

~

(l)

(l)

til
I-<

S

:>
CIj

OJ)

til

I't.;

CIl

'M

'M

til
I-<

r-1

I't.;

.;.J

(l)
.;.J
~

CIl
CIl

(l)

(J
(l)

0
'1J

I-<

H

(J

I-<
0

Cl

1

(l)

..8
.....

(J

'M

r-1

r-1

p...

::r::

0

(l)

21

3

8

1

63

1

20

14

62

14

18

51

1

5
1

p::

'M

1

3
5

.g

~

1

2

1

0

f;l:I

~
OJ)
~

til

6

1

4

~

::J

til
I-<

5

2

Table 3.

CIl
CIl

CIl

..c:
u
.j..J

I-<
0

Recovered Material

til
I-<

'M

~

p..

I-<

CIl

.;.J

'M

::J

OJ)
~

<

r-1

til

0

CIl

'M

..c:
p..
S

~

0

(fl

~

(l)
.;.J

CIl

I-<
(l)

0

(fl

.j..J

f;l:I

r-1
til
.;.J

0
H

'M

I-<
til

'M

r-1

(J

r-1

(fl

24

11

1

73

10

96

3

1

1

.j..J
.j..J

CIj

1

2

(l)

r-1

~

CIj
~

2

1

~

'M

22

15

til
r-1

87

Test Pit #2 (41 TV 456)
South Bank of Meander Scar Recovered Material

(l)

u

1

RECOMMENDATIONS

43

Places. There is little chance that construction in this area will damage
a valuable cultural resource.
The historic material present near the currently standing structure
beside the western end of the outfall line suggests a nineteenth century
occupation of the site. However, the limited collection available from this
area does not set a firm date for the initial period of occupation. The
current structure (which is not in the outfall line easement), while it may
have been constructed prior to the turn of the century, probably postdates
the material collected.
The association of this early historic material suggests a potential
link to the Watrous plantation located here between the 1840s and 1870s, and
Nathaniel and Judge John Charles Watrous, prominent citizens of the Republic
of Texas. It is possible, although not known, that the early plantation
headquarters was located in this area. Unfortunately, any significant re­
mains which might lie within the outfall line easement have been considerably
disturbed by plowing. No J...n. !.Jilu. historical materials should be expected in
this area.
However, if the currently standing structure was moved in or built to
replace an earlier one that was burned or torn down, the area beneath and
immediately surrounding this structure may not have been plowed and may con­
tain intact historic foundation remains. This possibility should be kept in
mind if realignment of the outfall line or associated plant construction
activities force· the removal or destruction of this house.
41 TV 462
The prehistoric component of this site was found not to extend into the
outfall line easement. One small historic scatter in the northwestern
corner of the present pasture through which the line runs may be an eastern
extension of the historic components that dot this site. Nevertheless, this
scatter does not extend into the outfall line easement and will probably not
be damaged by construction. In any case, it does not seem to be eligible
for the National Register of Historic Places on the basis of its apparent
age or the condition of the remains.

44

ONION CREEK

Force Main
41 TV 462
In the area where the force main and sludge line cross the terrace edge
northwest of the treatment plant area, both prehistoric and historic compo­
nents of 41 TV 462 were found. Although chipped stone debitage was found
well below the plow ~ne in this area, it occurred in such small quantities,
that it could easily have been transported downward by root and rodent acti­
vities. While the testing does not clearly eliminate the possibility of
buried cultural deposits in the nearby area, it does not support the possi­
bility of significant cultural remains in the vicinity of the force main ease­
ment. And while the location of an undisturbed site deeply buried in such a
fossil terrace would be a major find of potentially enormous significance,
the upper half meter of the terrace is obviously the lTOst recent segment, and
could conceivably even have been deposited in an unusually high flood after
incision of the earlier terrace had begun. Therefore, even if the material
were in /.:;au, it may not be of great antiquity. On the whole, even though
the entire length of the site may be eligible for the National Register of
Historic Places, it is unlikely that construction
the force main in this
area will destroy any significant cultural remains. However, other portions
of this large site may contain significant archeological material and major
rrodifications of the wastewater pipeline routes which would cross the site
in other areas should be accompanied by archeological testing.
41 TV 456
Although lTOre prehistoric cultural material was visible on the surface
of this site than at 41 TV 462, alrrost no cultural material was recovered in
subsurface testing in the area where the force main will cross the site.
All of the cultural material from the test units is quite small and has pro­
bably worked its way downward into the soil from pedoturbation. The dark,
uniform clayey fill of the lower backhoe trenches and test unit areas, filled
with both land and water snails, appears to be channel fill rather than
terrace accumulation and may be quite recent. It is even possible that the
cultural material present was washed down off of the slopes and been buried
here.
The upper terrace surface at 41 TV 456 is the equivalent of that at
41 TV 462 and could not be expected to yield deeply buried deposits. And,

RECOMMENDATIONS

45

unlike 41 TV 462, no cultural material was observed in any of the trenches
on this surface. All indications point to a strictly surficial component on
this terrace. Although the lower and rrore recent Onion Creek within the
meander scar is probably young enough to contain buried cultural materials,
very little cultural material was observed on the surface in this area and
none at all in the backhoe trenches.
The main clusters of historic material at this site are not crossed by
the proposed wastewater pipeline. The few small historic artifacts observed
on the surface near the easement were probably brought there either by plowing
or simply deposited as trash along the old road which ran around Onion Creek
here. In any case, long cultivation of this field has certainly destroyed
any intact historic remains.
Although no damage will be done to a significant cultural resource by
trenching through this portion of the site, it is still rerrotely possible
that other areas of the site may contain significant, less disturbed materials.
In other words, because of the restrictions placed upon the testing it is
not possible to gauge the significance of the entire site. Future realign­
ments of the force main in this area would require, at the least, consulta­
tion with an archeologist and, possibly, further testing.

46

ONION CREEK
APPENDIX

In addition to the archeological testing undertaken at 41 TV 456 and
41 TV 462, assesSIrents were made of the archeological resources of several
potential pipeline realignments. The following section briefly describes
the results of records searches and field survey for these areas and provides
recommendations for further work where necessary. The four alternative
routes considered are shawn in Figure 8 and are described below.
(1) U.S. 183 crossing - this is a short stretch of line (about one­
quarter mile in length) between the eastern end of the pipeline tunnel and
the bridge over Onion Creek at present u.s. Highway 183. Realignment involves
moving the line north from the bed of the creek to the bench and terrace
bordering the creek.
(2) Alternate Lift Station Site - Modification of the original plan
would locate the lift station somewhere in the field north of Elroy Road
between F.M. 973 and the existing electric power line. wastewater lines would
run across the creek north of the Moore's Crossing bridge and along the north
side of Elroy Road to the station and then north along the power line
rejoining the previously proposed alignment north of Pearce Lane.
(3) Pearce Lane Quarry Site - This realignment would move a short section
of the line 50 to 200 m. east of its proposed route parallel to the existing
electric line north of Pearce Lane to avoid a large gravel quarry.
(4) Hornsby Bend Sludge Line - This realignment of the sludge line
running northwest out of the treatment plant crosses the upper Colorado River
terrace running straight across from just south of the river crossing to the
northeast corner of the sludge tanks at Hornsby Bend.
For each site, Travis County archeological records were consulted to
determine the previously recorded archeological sites located in the general
area of the realignment and the nature and significance of these sites.
After consulting geological and soil reference maps to determine the nature
of potential site deposition and preservation processes active in each area,
the proposed routes were briefly surveyed on foot, augmented by shovel tests
as necessary to verify
mapped soils and to assess the potential depth of
archeological deposits. A sumnary of the results of the work in each area
follows.

Ii,,;':::: ..
~I "#, ":.':"
41 TV 542
Ita " ,
":'.
II"
1I. ,.. : ....
~I

.

~I·J

.'""-.

\

....

~

~

1/

I

"a

I}s

U\

•

I

.~~I

I

'"
~ ",

.. I

'"

01
4.,

~

,

/

.

I

"

'\

»
-.;j
-.;j

m

r',.:
1

'-- . .. J

~

>-I

><

./(

I

/'

--""- .
'-...

Additional Archeological Survey
and Assessment along the Proposed
Onion Creek Wastewater Pipelines

'"

~

\..r.. ......- ... 1

.' .

~

I

I

)f

c;....

)

SURVEY

AREA

LIMITS

............................... .

tONIO"
SCALE

~./!.,

'~I
I
i-'L

.

&41 TV 541

o

2

I

Kilometers

"'"
--..]

48

ONION CREEK

u.s. 183 CROSSING
Much of the alignment is situated on Austin Group limestone in the form
of an eroded limestone bench which parallels the creek on both sides (Garner
and Young 1976). A short section of the line below the old u.S. 183 bridge
crosses recent Onion Creek alluvial terrace deposits. Above the realign­
ment to the north are lower Colorado River terrace deposits which have been
quarried for gravel. Along the creek is mixed alluvial land consisting of
gravel, gravelly alluvium, limestone and calcareous alluvium (Werchan ~ ale
1974). Above the creek to the north is an area of 5 to 10 percent slope
Patrick soils generally a brown clay over gravelly loamy sand (ibid.).
This realignment is totally within an area originally surveyed by the
Texas Department of Water Resources. Two sites had been recorded nearby; 41
TV 406 and 41 TV 411. One of these sites, 41 TV 411, is a historic graffiti
site which will be directly impacted by the proposed realignment. Whitsett
and Fox (1979) describe the site as follows:
Carved in the limestone bedrock of Onion Creek directly below the Sassman
House are names, dates, and other graffiti of 19th and early 20th
century residents of the area. The site area (41 TV 411) appears on the
1896 USGS Austin Quadrangle as a road crossing. It is possible that the
crossing was a popular gathering place and swimming hole.
The other site, 41 TV 406, is an occupation and quarry site lying atop
the old terrace to the north of the creek.
This site appears to have utilized the gravels eroding out of a terrace
of Onion Creek. Much of the site has been damaged by gravel pits and
roads. Atop the terrace, and well back from its edge, some scattered
fragments of burned rock intermixed with debitage may be found. Depth
is surficial or nearly so, area is about 400,000 m2 (Whitsett and Fox
1979).
If the proposed line follows the benches along the edge of the creek and does
not go onto the upper terrace surface, this site will not be impacted.
Whitsett and Fox (1979) regard the prehistoric site (41 TV 406) as
having undetermined significance and do not make any recommendations for
further work there. It has been heavily disturbed and may have little or no
depth of cultural deposits anywhere. As presently proposed, however, the
realignment will totally miss this site and no work is needed. The historic
crossing site, 41 TV 411, cannot be missed if the line runs along the bank
of the creek. This site is also regarded as being of undetermined signifi­

APPENDIX

49

cance, but further background research and documentation in advance of dis­
turbance are recommended. This research and documentation will probably be
necessary unless the line can be run along the bed of the creek just far
enough to miss the site.
In addition to these known sites, the possibility remains that sites
are buried in the low terraces just downstream of the graffiti site; these
would not be apparent to a surficial survey. In the same terrace area, the
low concrete bridge which
apparently the old highway crossing is a
potentially significant historic resource which should be avoided during con­
struction.
ALTERNATE LIFT STATION SITE

The alternate lift station, and the entire associated line realignment,
are located on Quaternary terrace deposits of Onion Creek (Garner and Young
1976). Just east of the existing power line right-of-way is a bluff formed
by the eroded edge of the Upper Cretaceous Navarro Group (and a small seg­
ment of Taylor Group at the southern edge near the lift station). Three soil
series are mapped in this area: Houston Black, Lewisville and Al toga. All
three are primarily deep, well-drained clay and silty clay soils (Werchan
e;t a..t. 1974).
This area was not surveyed by the original Texas Department of water
Resources survey (Hayden Whitsett, pers. comn. 1981). Survey across this
area located two prehistoric sites, designated as 41 TV 540 and 41 TV 541.
On the south end of the proposed realignment, running along the north side of
Elroy Road, is a large quarry site (41 TV 541) which covers the area of most
of the probable locations of the lift station in addition to almost a fifth
of the total right-of-way realignment. Quantities of prehistoric lithic
debitage and unmodified chert cobbles were strewn across the southern half
of the field at the corner of Elroy Road and F.M. 973. Because of the size
of the site the exact boundaries of the site beyond the realignment were not
determined precisely but the site may cover more than 100,000 m2 • The
density of materials was quite variable across the site, although the charac­
ter of the materials remained generally the same; cores, large flakes, crude
tool blanks and tested cobbles. One small area to the north of the main
site along the power line right-of-way contained only a few small flakes and
no large quarry materials, perhaps indicating a distinct occupation area.

------------~-

-

... ..........

--------------.--.~-

..............

_--------------

-

...

_----------­

50

ONION CREEK

At the northern end of the lift station wastewater line realignment is
another large prehistoric quarry site, 41 TV 450. This site extends across
200,000 m2 of old Onion Creek terrace deposits on the Ammons property south
of Pearce Lane and continues north across the road from there. The density
of materials at this site is also quite variable, although, in general, there
appears to be a greater amount of prehistoric cultural material here than at
41 TV 541. In addition, the intrasite variability of materials is more
apparent here, with quarry materials occurring along most of the terrace
below the Navarro bluffs and some occupation debris mixed with a lesser amount
of quarry materials found along the edge of the abandoned channel of Onion
Creek which forms the western boundary of the site.
One artifact, a small unfinished biface, was collected from the site.
Two other artifacts reportedly collected from the site were donated by the
landowner, Isabell Ammons. These include a patinated Butv~de-like projec­
tile point (Suhm and Jelks 1962: 169-170) and a slab of sandstone with a
number of small arrows and crosses incised upon it.
Due to supersaturated soil conditions at the time of the survey, only one
shovel test was conducted at either of the above sites. This test, located
north of Pearce Lane on 41 TV 540, revealed cultural materials to a depth of
at least 40 em. Since the age of these tributary terrace deposits cannot be
clearly established and since material found was below the plow zone, it was
felt necessary to conduct further subsurface testing at 41 TV 540 in order to
investigate the possibility of buried cultural deposits.
Assisted by a City of Austin backhoe and driver, four backhoe trenches,
averaging four meters in length and two and a quarter meters in depth, were
placed along the course of the proposed line south of Pearce Lane. These
four trenches all showed silty or sandy clay Onion Creek terrace deposits
mixed with a moderate amount of chert gravels throughout the profile. Only
one trench, the furthest south along the line, contained subsurface cultural
material; a small patinated flake fragment was found at 70 em. depth in the
first trench dug.
The near absence of subsurface material from the backhoe trenches and
the general paucity of surface material across much of the planned route of
the pipeline suggests that no significant cultural deposits will be affected
by construction in this area. Some parts of the site, however, may contain
buried deposits, especially along the old channel of Onion Creek which

APPENDIX

51

borders the site on the west. Therefore, any change in the course of the
line which would bring it closer to the old creek bed may require archeolo­
gical consultation. The arrount of cultural material at 41 TiT 541 is much
sparser and the distance from the creek much greater, precluding the possibi­
1ityof any great depth of alluvial deposits there. It is unlikely, there­
fore, that a pipeline trench placed across this site, 41 TV 541, will destroy
any significant archeological remains. If, on the other hand, the lift
station is placed here, some testing may be required.
PEARCE LANE QUARRY

Like the alternate lift station realignment route to the south of Pearce
Lane, this proposed route lies across Quaternary terrace deposits of Onion
Creek. Soil series present in the area are Houston Black, Altoga and
Lewisville although most of the site in this area is located on the Houston
Black clay.
The extension of 41 TV 540 into this area fo11CMs the southeast bank of
a small drainage which appears to follCM an old meander scar of Onion Creek.
The prehistoric cultural material observed in this portion of the site
reflected a mixture of obvious quarry materials with some occupation debris.
A single shovel test was conducted at this site which recovered several
flakes and a core fragment from belCM the plCM zone. Although the surface of
the site has been disturbed in many areas by the quarrying operations, it
appears that there may be intact subsurface deposits in the area to be
crossed by the proposed wastewater line realignment. If it is necessary to
be crossed, this area should be tested to determine the potential of the
site for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places.
The need for further testing at this site will be determined by the
placement of the pipeline with respect to the existing pCMer line. If the
pipeline remains on the western edge of the pCMer line, it is improbable
that any significant archeological remains will be destroyed. If it must
cross to the eastern side of the pCMer line, testing may be required.
HORNSBY BEND SLUIXiE LINE

This realignment of the sludge line runs across Quaternary terraces of
the Colorado River. The greater part of the line crosses the First street
terrace of the Colorado River (Weber 1963), tentatively suggested to have

52

ONION CREEK

been formed by as early as 13,000 years B.P. (Baker and Pentead~rellana
1977). A small segment of less than 100 m. crosses the lower and more
recent Fish Hatchery terrace. The upper terrace area is mapped as Bergstrom
series soils while the small segment of lower terracy is a Lincoln series
soil. Both are deep, loamy, calcareous soils developed in alluvium.
No previously recorded sites lie in this area. Survey along the pro­
posed realignment did not locate any prehistoric cultural material, although
several small scatters of European artifacts were encountered. Two of these
scatters were located in plowed areas and did not contain evidence of early
occupation. These are therefore not thought to be historically or archeolo­
gically significant. A third scatter of artifacts was located along the
terrace edge in an area which may have never been plowed and several glass
fragments observed here appeared to date to the turn of the century or
earlier. Two white earthenware sherds, one a portion of a maker's mark and
the other a possible fragment of a hand-painted bawl, and two glass bottle
bases were collected from this site.
Conversation with a local resident indicated that a house once stood
here and was burned or torn down perhaps fifty or more years ago. Although
no intact foundations were located in several visits to the site, structural
remains in the form of bricks and window glass were noted. Examination of
1937 aerial photographs of the area (Edgar Tobin Aerial Surveys 1937) showed
a structure standing in the same location as a small, currently standing,
rectangular structure. Although it is unclear whether this structure was
ever used as a dwelling, it does not appear to be as old as the artifactual
material nearby suggests. This location, however, appears to be the most
logical for a house in this area and is probably the site of any earlier
structure. If this is the case, then neither of the proposed alternative
sludge line routes, which run at least 50 to 100 m. north and south of the
structure, will endanger historic archeological remains in this area and no
further testing will be required.
SUMMARY

The archeological recommendations are briefly summarized below for each
proposed alignment.
1)

U.S. 183 Crossing - background research and documentation of 41 TV
411 as recommended by the Texas Department of Water Resources
archeologists.

APPENDIX
2)

3)

4)

53

Alternate Lift Station Site - testing at 41 TV 540 only if the line
is shifted west closer to the old creek channel; testing at 41 TV
541 only if lift station is located near Elroy Road.
Pearce Lane Quarry Site - archeological testing will be necessary
only if the pipeline must run along the eastern side of the
existing power line.
Hornsby Bend Sludge Line - avoidance of area of small existing farm
building located between the two proposed realignments (41 TV 542) ;
testing and background research may be necessary if it cannot be
avoided.

54

ONION CREEK

BIBLI(X;RAPHY
Baker, Victor R. and Margarida Maria Penteado-Orellana
1977 Adjustment to Quaternary Climatic Change by the Colorado River
in Central Texas. 10unnal 06 Geology 85: 395-422.
Barnes, virgil E.
1974 Geologic Atlas of Texas. Austin Sheet. University of Texas.
Bureau of Economic Geology.
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texa4 lounnal 06 Science 11(1):
93-117.
Deussen, A.
1924 Geology of the Coastal Plain of Texas west of the Brazos River.
U.S. Geolog~eal Sunvey P~06e¢~~onal Pap~ No. 126.
Edgar Tobin Aerial Survey
1937 Aerial Survey Photo 2N-19F-2. Texas Natural Resources Informa­
tion Service. Texas Department of Water Resources. Austin.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1931
Phy~~oglLaphy 06 the We¢teILn Uniled State~. McGraw-Hill Book
Company, Inc. New York.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938
Phy~iog~aphy 06 the EMteILn Uniled State¢.
McGraw-Hill Book
Company, Inc. New York.
Frantz, Joe Bertram
1952 The Mercantile House of McKinney & Williams, Underwriters of the
Texas Revolution. Bulletin 06 the BU6inu~ HMto~cal Society
26: 3-20.
Garner, Lee Edwin
1973 Environmental Geology of the Austin Area, Texas. Unpublished
M.A. thesis. University of Texas. Austin.
Garner, L.E., and K.P. Young
1976 Environmental Geology of the Austin Area: An Aid to urban
Planning. University of Texas. Buneau. 06 Economic. Geology
Repou 06 InvuUgatioitO No. 86.

55

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Gerstle, Andrea, Thomas C. Kelly and Chisti Assad
1978

The Port Sam Houston Project:

An Archaeological and Historical

Assessment Center for Archaeological Research.

The University

of Texas at San Antonio. AILc.hae.otog,[c.al. SLtfLve.y Re.poJtt No. 40.
Gracy, Alice Duggan, and ErrIrra Seale Gentry
1967

Travis County, Texas:

The Five Schedules of the 1860 Federal

Census with Sample Reproductions of Each Schedule and Map of
Travis County, Texas.

Privately Printed.

Austin.

Hawkins, Wallace
1950

The. Ca..6e.

06

John. C. Wa:tJtOCL6, Un.Ue.d state..6 Judge. nOlL Te.Xa..6:

Po,f",Wca.l stolLY

06

H,[gh CIUme..6 and M<..6de.me.anolL6.

A

University

Press in Dallas.
Henson, Margaret Swett
1976

Samue.t Ma.!:f W,[U,[am4:

Ea.Jtt!:f Te.x.a..o Err.tJte.pILe.ne.LtfL.

Texas A&M Uni­

versity Press.
Hill, R.T. and T.W. Vaughn
1896-7 Geology of the Edwards Plateau and Rio Grande Plain Adjacent to
Austin and San Antonio, Texas, with Reference to the Occurrence
of Underground Waters.

USGS An.n.aal. Re.poJtt No. 18, part II, pp.

195-321.
Jelks, E.B.
1962

The Kyle Site:

A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill

County, Texas. Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas at Austin. AnthILopotogy Se.Jt,[e~ No.5.
Johnson, Leroy, Jr.
1967

TOward a Statistical Overview of the Archaic Cultures of Central

and Southwestern Texas. Te.Xa..6 Me.moual. MCL6e.u.m BaUilin. 12.
Johnson, Leroy, Jr., Dee Ann Suhm and Curtis D. Tunnell
1962

Salvage Archeology of canyon Reservoir:

bridge and Oblate Sites.
Long, Errory G.
1980

Texa..6

Me.mo~

The Wunderlich, Foot­
MCL6e.um BaUilin 5.

Letter to Tye F. Collins concerning archeological testing along
the proposed Onion Creek pipeline route from E.G. Long of the
Texas Department of Water Resources, Construction Grants and
Water Quality Planning Division, dated 14 February 1980.

ONION

56

CREEK

Looney, R.M.
1976 Late Quaternary Geomorphic Evolution of the Colorado River,
Bastrop and Fayette Counties, Texas. Unpublished M.A. thesis.
University of Texas. Austin.
McEachern, Michael, and Ronald W. Ralph
1980 Archeological Investigations at the Thomas F. McKinney Homestead,
Travis County, Texas: An Experiment in Historic Archeology
Part 1.

BuUe;Un 06 the.

Te.XM Afl.c.he.o.togic.al Soc.ie.tlj 51: 5-208.

Mathis, R.W.
1942 Heavy Minerals of the Colorado River Terraces. Unpublished M.A.
thesis. University of Texas. Austin.
Nickell, c.o.
1941 Report of the Mineral Resources of Travis County, Texas. Uni­
versity of Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology. MinVtal RuoUltc.u
SUltve.lj, CifLc.u..taJr. No. 39.
Quinn, J .H.
1957
Paired River Terraces and Pleistocene Glaciation. JOUltYl.al 06
Ge.o.toglj 65: 149-166.
Skolasky, Robert A.
1978
The Use of Color Infrared and Panchromatic Aerial Photography for
Drainage Density Analysis and Soil Mottling Studies of Onion
Creek Terraces, Travis and Hays Counties, Texas. Unpublished
M.A. thesis. University of Texas. Austin.
Slater, Dan
1981 Personal communication. McMorris ranch foreman.
Sellards, E.H., W.S. Adkins and F.B. Plummer
1978
The. Ge.o.toglj 06 TeXM. Vo.t. 1: StfLatigfl.aphlj. University of
Texas Bulletin No. 3232.
Soil Survey Staff
1975 Soil Taxonomy: A Basic System of Soil Classification for Making
Interpreting Soil Surveys. United States Department of Agri­
culture. Soil COn6Vtvation SVtvic.e.. Ag/7..ic.u..ttUlte Handbook. No.
436.
Sollberger, J.B., and T.R. Hester
1972 The Strohacker Site: A Review of Pre-Archaic Manifestations in
Texas.

P.tain6 Ant~opo.tog~t 17(58): 326-344.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Sorrow, WID. M., Harry J. Shafer and R.E. Ross
1967 Excavations at stillhouse Hollow Reservoir.
A~cheological

Salvage

P~oject

57

Pap~

06 the Texa¢

11.

Stolleis, Richard
1981 Personal conmunication. Design Engineer II with Tye F. Collins
& Associates.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1955 Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County, Texas. BU-U.wn
06 the Texa¢ A~cheolagica£ Society 26: 7-54.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1957 Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis COunty, Texas.
Texa¢ Jounnal 06 Science IX(l): 26-58.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1960 A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bu.U.wn 06 the Texa¢
A~cheologica£ Society 29: 63-108.
Suhm, D.A., and E.B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texa¢ Memoual

Mu.6eum Bullwn 4.
Telegraph and Texas Register
1842a Vol. VII, No. 39, Whole No. 354. 14 September 1842. Houston.
Texas Newspaper Collection. Barker Texas History Center. Univer­
sity of Texas. Austin.
1842b Vol. VII, No. 42, Whole No. 357. 5 October 1842. Houston.
Barker Texas History Center. University of Texas. Austin.
Texas Gazette
1829 Vol. I, No.6. 7 November 1829. Austin.
Thurrrond, Peter
n.d.
Archeological Testing at 41 TV 461. Draft Report. Texas Archeo­
logical Survey.
Travis County Deed Records
Various dates and volumes. Travis County Courthouse. Austin.
Travis County Probate Court Records
1872 Minutes. Book E. p. 427. Travis County COurthouse. Austin.
U.S. Geological Survey
1895-6 Topographic Map of the Austin Quadrange, Texas. Edition of
March 1910. Barker Texas History Center. University of Texas.
Austin.

58

ONION CREEK

Urbanec, D.A.
1963 stream Terraces and Related Deposits in the Austin Area, Texas.
Unpublished M.A. thesis. University of Texas. Austin.
Weber, G.E.
1968 Geology of the Fluvial Deposits of the Colorado River, Central
Texas. Unpublished M.A. thesis. University of Texas. Austin.
Weeks, A.W.
1941 Late Cenozoic Deposits of the Texas Coastal Plain between the
Brazos River and the Rio Grande. Ph.D. Dissertation. University
of Texas. Austin.
Weeks, A.W.
1945 Quaternary Deposits of the Texas Coastal Plain between the Brazos
River and the Rio Grande. AmvUcal1 A-6-6oc.ia:0i..ol1 06 Pe..Vr..ofeum
Geofogif.!t¢ Buttetil1 29: 1693-1720.
Weir, Frank A.
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation.
washington State University. Pullman.
Werchan, L.E., A.C. Lowther and R.N. Rarrsey
1974
SoU SuJtvey 06 TILa.vif.! Coun.ty, TeXM. USDA Soil Conservation
Service.
White, Gifford
1966
The 1840 Cel1-6U-6 06 the Republic 06 Texa-6. The Pemberton Press.
Austin.
Whitsett, Hayden
1981 Personal communication. Texas Department of Water Resources
archeologist.
Whitsett, Hayden, and Daniel E. Fox
1979
CuUulLa.£. RuoulLcu 06 LOWelL OMOI1 ClLeeR.. Texas Department of
Water Resources. Construction Grants and Water Quality Planning
Division. Austin, Texas.

