A Cultural Resources Background Review of 180
Acres Proposed for the Christine Compressor
Facility Expansion, Atascosa County, Texas

Prepared for Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd.
San Antonio, Texas
by
David L. Nickels, Principal Investigator
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations
September 2015

Introduction
In September 2015,
Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological
Investigations (TAAI)
conducted a review of
c u l t u ral resour c e s
documented within a
180-acre Project Area in
south-central Atascosa
County for Flatrock
Engineering and
Environmental, Ltd. The
180 acres was proposed
for an expansion of an
existing compressor
facility named the
Christine Compressor
Facility, and the 180
acres is occasionally
hereinafter referred to as
the Project Area (PA)
(Figures 1 and 2). The
research by TAAI
Figure 1. Location of the Christine Compressor Facility Expansion
included:
Project Area in Texas.
1) A review of the most current literature documenting the prehistory and history of the
immediate area
2) A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas to identify
what cultural resource surveys have been conducted, and what archaeological sites have been
documented within Project Area
3) A search of various websites that offer old maps of the PA
4) A literature review of both published and unpublished reports and manuscripts that describe
the types of archaeological sites that have been documented, and thus provide insight as to the
type of sites that may be expected within the PA
5) A review of local soils maps in order to evaluate the potential for intact and buried cultural
materials within the PA
1

Figure 2. Christine Compressor Facility Expansion Project Area on large topographic map.

2

Figure 3. Project Area on Caballos Creek (1965) 7.5' USGS topographic map.

Cultural Chronology
The Christine Compressor Facility Expansion Project Area lies within the South Texas
Archaeological region as defined by Hester (1980, 1995, 2004; Figure 4). Refining a cultural
chronology for south Texas is problematic, due to the compressed nature of the archaeological
record and the scarcity of stratified sites excavated within the region. Hester (1995:433)
acknowledges the paucity of information that exists for south Texas and as such offers only a
“general framework” for prehistoric periods particular to the region (Figure 4). All dates are given
as approximate years before present (B.P.), i.e., before 1950.
Paleoindian (11,200 - 7950 B.P.)
This period is estimated at between ca.11,200–7950 B.P. in south Texas (Hester 1999). The
Paleoindian period began toward the close of the Pleistocene. Diagnostic artifacts of the early
Paleoindian interval include Clovis and Folsom projectile points. The wide distribution of Clovis-

3

type points across most of North
America and even into Central
America suggests a wide
dispersal and interaction of the
people who made them. Other
artifacts associated with the
Clovis culture include bifaces
and prismatic blades, engraved
stones, bone and ivory points,
stone bolas, ochre, and shaft
straighteners. During the late
Paleoindian interval, the first
stemmed lanceolate points, such
as Angostura, Golondrina, St.
Mary’s Hall, and Barber (among
a few others) appear.
In general, the Paleoindian
adaptation has been considered
to be one of small bands of
nomadic, big-game hunters
following herds of Late
Pleistocene fauna, including
mammoth, mastodons, bison,
camel, and horse, across North
America (Black 1989). More
recently, emphasis has been
placed on the wide diversity of
plants and animals used for
subsistence by these early
Americans, such as turtles and
tortoises, alligators, mice,
badgers, and raccoons, although
they undoubtedly hunted the
large animals as well (Collins
1995:381). Known Clovis sites
include killsites, quarries, caches,
open campsites, ritual sites, and
burials (Hester 1995:433–436).
A Folsom interval follows the
Clovis. Folsom artifacts are fairly
common in south Texas;
however, no camp sites or Figure 4. South Texas Archaeological region chronology.
killsites have been found south
4

of a large workshop, Pavo Real (41BX52), in Bexar County (Hester 1995:434–435). Most
Paleoindian finds in south Texas have consisted of surface lithic scatters on upland terraces and
ridges (Black 1989).
As the warming that marks the transition from Pleistocene to Holocene climates began to take
effect in Texas, prehistoric inhabitants adapted with changes in lifestyle. This climatic shift is also
marked by the decline and extinction of mammoth, mastodon, horse, camel, and giant bison (Bison
antiquus). Large gregarious game animals were perhaps extinct in Texas. Human hunters were
forced to concentrate on deer, antelope, and other medium-size or smaller game. Changes in the
subsistence base required technological shifts that mark the beginning of a new cultural period
known as the Archaic.
Early Archaic (7950 - 4450 B.P.)
Hester (1995:436–438) identifies the Early Archaic, with Early Corner Notched and Early Basal
Notched dart points, as roughly dating between 7950 to 4450 B.P. The extinction of large herds
of megafauna and the changing climate at the beginning of the Holocene stimulated a behavioral
change by the Prehistoric inhabitants of south Texas (McKinney 1981). While the basic huntergatherer adaptation probably remained intact, an economic shift away from big game hunting was
necessary. In general, more intensive exploitation of local and smaller resources such as deer, fish,
and plant bulbs is indicated by greater densities of ground-stone artifacts, fire-cracked rock
cooking features, and more specialized tools. Weir (1976) speculates that Early Archaic groups
were small and highly mobile, an inference based on the fact that Early Archaic sites are thinly
distributed and that diagnostic projectile point types are seen across a wide area, including most
of Texas and northern Mexico. Story (1985) believes that population densities were low during
the Early Archaic, and that groups consisted of related individuals in small bands with “few
constraints on their mobility” (Story 1985:39). Their economy was based on the utilization of a
wide range of resources, especially such year-round resources as prickly pear and lechugilla, as
well as rodents, rabbits, and deer.
Middle Archaic (4450 - 2350 B.P.)
Hester (1995:438–441) suggests that the period between 4450 and 2350 B.P. reflects the Middle
Archaic in south Texas. The Middle Archaic appears to have been a time of increased population,
based on the large number of sites from this period (Story 1985:40; Weir 1976:125, 128). On the
South Texas Plains, exploitation of widely scattered, year-round resources such as prickly pear
continued (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13–15), as did hunting deer and rabbit. Weir (1976)
believes that the widely scattered bands prevalent in the Early Archaic now began to coalesce, at
least during the acorn-gathering season, into larger groups who shared the intensive work of
gathering and processing the acorn harvest (Weir 1976:126). Many researchers believe burned
rock middens are a result of this endeavor (Creel 1986; Prewitt 1991; Weir 1976). The common
presence of deer remains in burned rock middens encourages the view that deer processing took
place at burned rock midden sites. Bison bone is encountered in archaeological sites in south
Texas, at least occasionally, during all but the earliest part of the Middle Archaic (Dillehay 1974).
Cemeteries make their first appearance during this period, suggesting a movement toward less
mobility and perhaps territorialism. One of the earliest occurrences dating to the south Texas
5

Middle Archaic, is Loma Sandia in Live Oak County, which dates between ca. 2550 and 2750 B.P.
(Taylor and Highley 1995).
Late Archaic (2350 - 1250 B.P.)
Hester believes the Late Archaic in south Texas may be defined as between 2350–1250 B.P, Some
researchers believe populations increased throughout the Late Archaic (Prewitt 1985), while others
feel populations remained the same or fell during this period (Black 1989:30). Subsistence is
assumed to have become less specialized on acorns, in favor of a broad spectrum subsistence base
(Black 1989:30). Story (1985:44–45) believes the presence of cemeteries indicates that Late
Archaic populations in central and south Texas were increasing and becoming more territorial.
Although inhabitants of the South Texas Plain near Brownsville and Rockport had begun to make
pottery by about 1750 B.P., the northern part of the plain was still “pre-ceramic” until 1,000 years
later (Story 1985:45–47). Late Archaic points tend to be much smaller than Middle Archaic points.
Transitional Archaic (2250 - 1250 B.P.)
A late subperiod or interval of the Late Archaic is frequently referred to as the Terminal Archaic
or Transitional Archaic. Turner and Hester (1993) cite data placing the Transitional Archaic as
2250–1250 B.P. Although Hester may lump current data into a Late Archaic period, he cautions
that more evidence will likely result in what may be termed as a “Terminal Archaic” period during
the latter part of the Late Archaic in south Texas. This Terminal Archaic period is represented by
diagnostics such as Ensor, Frio, and Matamoras points which appear to overlap the Late Archaic
and Late Prehistoric periods (Hester 1995:442). Weir (1976) believes this marked a transition
period to localized area sites, a disappearance of burned rock middens and bison, and a
reappearance of highly mobile hunters and gatherers. Others (Black and McGraw 1985; Peter
1982; Skelton 1977) argue that in some locations burned rock middens did not disappear and sites
were more intensely occupied during the Transitional Archaic period.
Late Prehistoric (1250 - 420 B.P.)
The term “Late Prehistoric” is commonly used to designate the period following the Late Archaic
in south Texas. Generally, the Late Prehistoric period is thought of as spanning the period between
A. D. 700 - 1530 ([1250 - 420 B.P.] [Hester 1995]). A series of distinctive traits mark the shift
from the Archaic to the Late Prehistoric period, including the technological shift to the bow and
arrow and the introduction of pottery to central Texas and the northern South Texas Plain (Black
1989:32; Story 1985:45–47). Two distinct phases recognized within the Late Prehistoric are the
Austin and Toyah. During the Austin phase, there appears to be a subtle transition from expanding
stem projectile points that may have been used as dart points, as well as early arrow points. The
most prevalent point found in Austin phase sites is the Scallorn arrow point. Settlement shifts into
rockshelters such as Scorpion Cave in Medina County (Highley et al. 1978) and Classen
Rockshelter in northern Bexar County (Fox and Fox 1967) have been noted. Cemeteries from this
period often reveal evidence of conflict (Black 1989:32).
Beginning rather abruptly at about 650 B.P., a shift in technology occurred. The Perdiz arrow
point may best represent the appearance of a distinct culture in south-central Texas lasting for
about 300 years, which archaeologists have labeled the Toyah phase. Hester (1995:444)
6

recognizes this phase as the “best documented Late Prehistoric pattern” throughout south Texas,
with dates ranging between ca. 650/700 to 300/350 B.P. (A.D. 1250/1300 to 1600/1650).
In addition to Perdiz points, evidence of a Toyah culture is manifested as bone-tempered pottery,
bone spatulates, awls, and beads, stone endscrapers, beveled knives, and expediently utilized
flakes. Briefly, expedient lithic technology involves removing flakes from a core in a nonstandard
manner; the purpose is to knock off sharp flakes for immediate use, selecting the ones that best
suit the need at the time. This technology differs from formal, standardized core reduction and the
manufacturing of formal, usually bifacial tools. Expedient lithic technology is a continent-wide
phenomonon indicative of increased sedentism, and is observed in Toyah assemblages in Texas.
Whether the Toyah phase seen in the south-central Texas archaeological record is a result of a
group of people moving into the region, or adapted technologies from the region’s periphery is
a matter of conjecture. Steele and Assad-Hunter (1986) argue for the occurrence of a distinct
change in diet between the Late Archaic and the Late Prehistoric components in two sites in the
Choke Canyon Reservoir area in south Texas. Analysis of the number of identified specimens
(NISP) shows a marked increase in artiodactyla elements present during the later part of the Late
Prehistoric, an increase largely due to the addition of bison to the “menu” (Steele and AssadHunter 1986:468).
Whether or not agriculture was practiced during this period in south Texas has not been
documented. There simply is not enough evidence to postulate there was ever a significant
presence of maize in the area. The later arrival of the Spanish during the later
Protohistoric/Historic period brought significant cultivars to south Texas.
Protohistoric/Historic (420 B.P. - present)
The end of the Late Prehistoric and beginning of the Historic period in south Texas is
characterized by written accounts of European contact with indigenous groups. The Protohistoric
period begins in 1528 when Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts of southeast and
south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the hunter-gatherers of Texas
and northern Mexico (e.g., Hallenbeck 1971). Cabeza de Vaca’s account of his stay with the
Miriami in 1533-34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves
to the easily exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter and summer, occasionally sending
a hunting party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live near each
other in the semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other succulents
(Campbell and Campbell 1981:13-37).
Linguistically, early protohistoric accounts of the late 1500s indicate that a large group which
spoke Cohuilteco inhabited the area now known as south-central Texas. Coahuiltecan is a term
coined by Mexican linguists in the 1800s, and the name refers to the many small bands of Native
Americans who lived in northeastern Coahuila, Mexico and south Texas. The Coahuiltecans were
rapidly dispersed or killed during the Protohistoric period.

7

By the 1540s and 1550s Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico, with
several hundred thousand cattle, using Indian slaves as labor. Large mining ventures in northern
Mexico did the same. This encroachment from the south forced Native Americans to escape into
the south-central Texas region.
The period between de Vaca’s written account and the advent of Spanish missions in the late
1600s and early 1700s is referred to as the Protohistoric; a time when few, scant written
documents exist detailing Native American life outside the missions. The Historic period then, is
generally thought of as beginning in the 1700s.
Some 30 miles south of Eagle Pass, the Spanish established Mission San Juan Bautista in 1700
(now modern-day Guerrero). Early Spanish explorers then repeatedly traveled the Camino Real
enroute to newly established missions and settlements in today’s modern Texas throughout the
1700s and 1800s. Mexican families from across the river expanded into Texas, and these families
trace their roots to the early development of the area. In the ensuing years, lawlessness prevailed,
with saloons, gambling houses, outlaws, and slave hunters prevalent.

Site Types to be Expected within the Project Area
Prehistoric Open Campsites
Most numerous among the sites recorded in Atascosa County are prehistoric open campsites
ranging in age from the Paleoindian period through the Historic period (see Figure 3). Some of
these represent a single campfire where a very small group of Native Americans may have camped
for one night. Others are very large, covering very extensive areas representing large groups of
people that stayed for long periods, perhaps seasonally, with ancestral groups returning to these
same campsites over a period of several thousands of years. Cultural remains to be found at these
large campsites include among other items, an abundance of fire-cracked rocks representing
multiple hearths, a wide variety of chipped stone tools and the lithic debris that results from
making them, ground and smoothed stones used to grind nuts and seeds, faunal remains from
terrestrial and aquatic animals consumed, bone tools, pottery sherds, and mussel and snail shells.
Open campsites occur in all types of environments, whether that be in a plush riverine environment
that offered a wide variety banquet of plant and animal foodstuffs, or in the uplands away from
flowing water sources. Seasonally, the upland grasses, shrubs, cacti offered a different food source
that could be exploited such as various grass seeds, mesquite beans, prickly pear pads and tunas,
and agave hearts. In addition, at various times, bison were known to graze on the northern South
Texas Plains, and were highly sought after for use as food, hides, and bone tools (Dilley 1974).
Depending upon the integrity of these open campsites, archaeologists and the Texas Historical
Commission consider these as perhaps the most significant types of sites in regard to their ability
to contribute to our understanding of south Texas prehistory. A few of the desired ingredients that
can indicate significance include cultural material that is buried beneath the surface in a well8

preserved, stratified, and relatively undisturbed context. Although these situations most frequently
occur within stratified terrace deposits adjacent to streams, they can also occur in upland settings
where the landscape has been generally stable through time. Other ingredients that archaeologists
look for in potentially significant campsites include good organic preservation in the form of
charcoal and/or charred plant remains, faunal preservation, temporally diagnostic stone tools or
ceramics, and intact features such as hearths.
Prehistoric Lithic Scatters or Procurement Sites
Lithic scatters are the next most common type of archaeological site that can be expectedwithin
the Project Area. These sites simply represent the chipped stone debris and broken tools that were
left behind when Native Americans made new tools or re-sharpened their old ones. The general
absence of fire-cracked rocks and other cultural material normally found at open campsites suggest
that they did not camp there, or remain there for any extended period of time (however, small
camp fires may have been used to heat-treat chert or quartzite cobbles to make them more
knappable). Yet, they were drawn to these isolated locales because of the natural outcroppings or
surface exposures of good quality raw material such as chert or quartzite cobbles. Examples of
chipped stone most commonly found at these sites include cobbles with one or two flakes
removed, called ‘tested cobbles’. That is, the Native Americans knew from experience the quality
of stone that could most easily be flaked and reduced for stone tool production, so they ‘tested’
the cobble to judge whether it was useable or not. If the quality was judged to be inferior, then the
cobble was tossed aside. That is why the majority of tested cobbles found on these sites are of
poor quality, coarse-grained material. While the finished stone tool products are carried away from
these sites, what remains are those tools broken during the manufacturing process, and the
thousands of pieces of debitage in the form of flakes and angular debris. Also unique to lithic
scatters where large cobbles are present are snapped ‘quarry blanks’. These are simply cobbles
flakes on both sides, reducing the cobble into a transportable ‘blank’ that can be used to further
reduce it and make finished stone tools from the flakes taken off of it. The unbroken quarry blanks
are usually not found on these sites because they have been carried off, presumably to areas of
south Texas where raw material is not readily available. The snapped or broken quarry blanks are
of little or no use, so they are discarded and left behind.
Lithic scatters range in age from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods and can be found
on any landscape setting where gravels or cobbles have been exposed. Notably, gravel outcrops
that were exposed to the surface a few hundred or thousand years ago could be deeply buried
today, and the opposite could also be true; it all depends on the terrain setting and the dynamics
of landscape evolution through time. Most lithic scatters in the Atascosa County area have been
documented along upper stream terraces abutting the eroded upland slopes.
Prehistoric Quarries and Procurement Sites
Prehistoric quarries and procurement also can range in age from the Paleoindian through Historic
periods, but differ from lithic scatters in that at those sites Native Americans exploited loose
gravels, but at times they specifically sought quarry sites where raw material such as cherts or
quartzites were not yet freed from their parent geologic formation, and they had to be ‘quarried’.
9

These types of sites are rare in south Texas for two reasons: 1) the geological exposures generally
do not present themselves, and 2) throughout Texas, even in central Texas, it is much easier to
pick up gravels from the surface than to try to mine them from hard rock. Quarried and chipped
stone remains likely to be found at these sites include large chunks of angular cherts or quartzites,
as well as parent material detritus, and flaking debris. Snapped quarry blanks can also be expected.
Although a handful of prehistoric quarries or procurement sites have been recorded in south Texas,
they are rare.
Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens
The documentation of burned rock middens is rare in Atascosa county. Burned rock middens
result from a series of multiple-use earth ovens that were constructed much like modern-day
roasting pits are dug into the earth for roasting a pig. With repetitive uses, as the larger rocks that
serve as heating elements in the earthen pit fracture and thus become less effective as a thermal
source, they are ‘pitched out’ around the edge of the pit. As the pit becomes unusable, another is
dug near by, and the procedure repeated. Over time, these multiple pits and the ‘pitched out’ firecracked rocks coalesce together, obscuring each pit as indiscernible. (For a full discussion of the
formation of burned rock middens and their documented presence in Texas, see Leach and
Bousman 2001; Leach et al. 2001; Mauldin et al. 2003).
Prehistoric Burial and Cemetery Sites
Although not common, isolated prehistoric burials and cemeteries have been documented in south
Texas. Individual and isolated burials have been found in association with open campsites in both
upland settings as well as in alluvial terraces along streams, but the largest prehistoric cemetery
found in close proximity to Project Area is 41LK28, in Live Oak County.
Historic Sites
As discussed above in the Cultural Chronology portion of this report, although Spanish ranchers
had established large ranches in northern Mexico by the mid-16th century, and Spanish entradas
began penetrating south Texas in the 1700s and 1800s, there is no record of any sort of permanent
structures in the area during those periods (Chipman 1992), the area was generally not considered
safe for settlement by whites until after the Civil War in 1865, and white settlers then began
establishing smaller ranches and farmlands (Leffler 1996).
Because of the vastness of the landscape and the relatively late settlement and development of
south Texas compared to east and central Texas and northern Mexico, historic sites are not
abundant, but they certainly do exist. The most common types to be encountered are related to
ranching and farming endeavors, or small communities from the 19th and 20th centuries. Site types
most commonly include farmsteads or ranches with corrals, cisterns, chimney and foundation
remains from both main houses and outbuildings, related trash dumps, an occasional family burial
or cemetery, school houses, churches, community buildings, and industry-related structures or
construction projects.

10

Atascosa County Prehistory and History

Because of its modern political association, the prehistory and history of Atascosa County share
the same affinities with most of South Texas. That is, diagnostic dart and arrow points found
within the county suggest that the area has been occupied over the past 11,000 years (Atlas 2015;
Peterson 1996). Historical accounts indicate that Coahuiltecan-speaking Native Americans
inhabited the land in the 16th and 17th centuries, followed by the arrival of Comanche and Lipan
Apache groups.
By the 1750s, large ranches were established in the area by ranchers encroaching from northern
Mexico. Although the Lower Presidio “Royal Road, or Camino Real” passed through the area, no
permanent structures are known to exist prior to about the 1840s, when Anglo settlers began to
occupy the area. By 1856, the area was still sparsely populated, but sufficiently so that Atascosa
County was cut out of Bexar County. Through the 1850s, Indian depredations and poor roads
kept the local population limited, and at bay.
Following the Civil War, the area thrived on ranching and cattle production. This enticed not only
Mexicans from south of the border, but also an influx of Germans and Englishmen. In 1881, an
extension of the Great Northern Railway provided for a railhead at Lytle. Farm production also
increased accordingly, with corn and cotton being the main cash crops. However, ranching rhas
been the staple in Atascosa County over the past 150 years, and is only being surpassed in more
recent years by the production of oil and gas (Peterson 1996).

Archaeological Atlas Research

Archaeological Atlas Site Results
We preface this section by stating that although it presents the number of sites and their types
documented within each of the two counties, the results simply provide the data that is available.
In reality, the number of documented sites and their types are very heavily skewed based upon the
types of cultural resource surveys, and the areas of those surveys. That said, the data that is
available on the Texas Atlas is only as good as the areas of south Texas that the surveys represent.
Most of south Texas has never been subjected to formal cultural resource surveys, so it is
conceded that the true character of the archaeological record is very poorly understood.
Nevertheless, the few surveys that have been accomplished provide at least some aspect of what
the region looks like from an archaeological perspective.
A review of the Texas Atlas indicated that with exception of a few linear pipeline surveys, the
Project Area had not been subjected to a cultural resources survey, but there were two recorded
11

archaeological sites within one mile (see Figure 3). The only known professional cultural resources
surveys within one mile was along two pipeline corridors for EOG Resources, Inc., and reported
by archaeologists with Goshawk Environmental Consultants in 2014. Although as shown in Figure
3, there is an old pipeline coursing through the southeastern portion of the Project Area, there is
no record of that pipeline right-of-way being subjected to a cultural resources survey; undoubtedly
it was installed before the current existing laws and codes regarding surveys were enacted.
Also shown in Figure 3 is an old railroad grade running through the length of the Project Area.
This grade is thought to be a remnant leg and abandoned segment of the San Antonio, Uvalde &
Gulf Railway (commonly referred to as the ‘Sausage’ Railway). Originally incorporated as the
Crystal City and Uvalde Railway, the corporation was re-organized as the San Antonio, Uvalde
& Gulf (SAU&G) Railway in 1912. They then built a new line from San Antonio to Corpus
Christi, passing from Pleasanton south to just east of Christine and through the Project Area. In
1925, the SAU&G Line was acquired by the Missouri Pacific Railway (MOPAC) as part of its
new Gulf Coast Lines division. It is not clear what year the rail line through the Project Area, but
it was likely in the late 1920s or early 1930s (Hemphill 2006:76-77). On a 1936 U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers Map of the Whitsett area, the rail line through the Project Area is mapped as “Old
Railroad Grade” (Map 2015). Technically, the old railroad grade qualifies as an historic site, and
if Tierras Antiguas surveys the Project Area, we intend to document it as such. However, because
of the significant disturbance that has occurred to the railroad grade, we do not assess it as
significant, and therefore will not impede plans for development within the Project Area.
The two documented archaeological sites as shown in Figure 3 are briefly described as follows:
41AT53 – This prehistoric open campsite of an unknown age is situated in a farmed and heavily
disturbed pasture on a gentle slope toward Turkey Creek. When this site was documented in 1974
for the Brazos Valley Electric Co-op by Texas A&M archaeologists, they described it as a scatter
of fire-cracked rocks and lithic debitage (Atlas 2015).
41AT274 – This prehistoric open campsite of an unknown age was documented by Goshawk
Environmental Consultants archaeologists during a pipeline right-of-way survey in 2014. At that
time they described it as a surficial scatter of lithic debitage and fire-cracked rocks on an old
alluvial terrace and floodplain adjacent to Turkey Creek. Chipped stone tools observed included
4 bifaces, 3 scrapers, and 4 cores. The results of shovel testing indicated that the scatter was
surficial in nature.
As of September 16, 2015 archaeologists had documented 237 archaeological sites within the
modern political boundary of Atascosa County. Evidence of ancient hearths, along with diagnostic
projectile points indicate that 131 of these sites had been used as open campsites from as early as
the Paleoindian period, and through as late as the Late Prehistoric periods (see Figure 3). In
addition, 95 of the 225 sites consisted of simply lithic scatters, where pieces of chipped stone
represent the technology used to fashion stone tools through time. Three sites were emphasized
for their abundance of lithic raw material, and where Native Americans exploited gravel outcrops
for making stone tools. Burned rock middens are rare in south Texas, but they were documented
on three archaeological sites in Atascosa County. Of particular note was the discovery of a single
12

prehistoric human burial found along a county roadway, but where additional burials have been
reported on private property nearby. Finally, historic archaeological sites that have been
documented within the county include: (a) ranches with the remains of chimneys, cisterns, and
corrals, (b) numerous historic artifact trash scatters, (c) a limestone an earthen dam, (d) a rock
church with an adjoining cemetery dating to 1869, (e) a Masonic Lodge and school in use from
1876-1934, and (f) a cross in a large oak tree on the old San Antonio to Laredo Road (Atlas of
either prehistoric or historic cultural material; it is likely that the site was not plotted correctly in

Soils
Figure 5 illustrates the soil classifications within the 180-acre Project area. Following are typical
soil pedons of the four soil types. Following that, Table 1 presents the probable potential for
deeply buried, intact, and significant archaeological deposits.

Figure 5. Soils within the Project Area.

13

Campbellton Series
The Campbellton series consists of deep, well drained, loamy soils on uplands. Campbellton soils
formed in calcareous loamy and clayey sediment. The slopes range from 1 to 5 percent.
0 to 6 inches (0-15 centimeters [cm]); dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) loam, very dark grayish
brown (10YR 3/2) moist; moderate fine and medium subangular blockystructure; hard, friable;
common fine roots; few fine pores and old root channels; about 7 percent calcium carbonate
equivalent; calcareous; moderately alkaline; clear smooth boundary.
6 to 12 inches (15-30 cm); dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR
3/2) moist; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; hard, friable; common fine roots; few
fine pores and old root channels; few fine flecks of calcium carbonate; about 11 percent calcium
carbonate equivalent; calcareous; moderately alkaline; gradual wavy boundary.
12 to 17 inches (30-43 cm); grayish brown (10YR 5/2) clay loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2)
moist; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; very hard, firm; few fine roots; few fine
pores and old root channels; few fine flecks and few threads of calcium carbonate; about 12
percent calcium carbonate equivalent; calcareous; moderately alkaline; gradual wavy boundary.
17 to 25 inches (43-64 cm); light gray (10YR 7/2) clay, light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) moist;
moderate fine and medium angular blocky structure; very hard, very firm; patchy clay films on
faces of peds; few fine roots; few fine pores and old root channels; few krotovinas; few fine flecks
and few threads of calcium carbonate; about 14 percent calcium carbonate equivalent; calcareous;
moderately alkaline; gradual wavy boundary.
25 to 35 inches (43-89 cm); light gray (10YR 7/2) clay, light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) moist;
weak and moderate fine and medium angular blocky structure; very hard, very firm; patchy clay
films on faces of peds; few fine roots; few fine pores and old root channels; few threads of neutral
salts; few fine flecks and threads of calcium carbonate; about 16 percent calcium carbonate
equivalent; calcareous; moderately alkaline; gradual wavy boundary.
35 to 47 inches (89-119 cm); light gray (10YR 7/2) clay, light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) moist;
weak fine and medium subangular blocky structure; very hard, very firm; few patchy clay films on
faces of peds; few old root channels filled with decaying root residue; few fine pores; few threads
of neutral salts; few flecks and threads of calcium carbonate; about 18 percent calcium carbonate
equivalent; calcareous; moderately alkaline; gradual wavy boundary.
47 to 65 inches (119-165 cm); white (10YR 8/2) clay loam, light gray (10YR 7/2) moist; massive;
hard, friable; common fine pores; few very fine black particles, apparently igneous material; few
threads of neutral salts; about 5 percent flecks, soft bodies, and threads of calcium carbonate; the
soil is of light weight and low bulk density; about 19 percent calcium carbonate equivalent;
moderately alkaline; gradual wavy boundary.

14

65 to 80 inches (165-203 cm); white (2.5Y 8/2) loam, light gray (2.5Y 7/2) moist; massive; slightly
hard, very friable; few threads of neutral salts; about 2 or 3 percent calcium carbonate, mainly in
soft bodies; a few very fine black particles, apparently igneous material; about 13 percent calcium
carbonate equivalent; calcareous; moderately alkaline.
Christine Series
The Christine series consists of deep, somewhat poorly drained, loamy soils on uplands. Christine
soils formed in clayey and loamy sediment. The slopes are 0 to 1 percent. A typical pedon of
Christine soils is as follows:
0 to 5 inches (0-13 cm); grayish brown (10YR 5/2) clay loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR
3/2) moist; weak subangular blocky structure; hard, friable; common fine roots; few fine pores;
slightly acid; abrupt smooth boundary.
5 to 23 inches (13-58 cm); dark gray (10YR 4/1) clay loam, very dark gray (10YR 3/1) moist;
weak coarse prismatic structure parting to moderate medium blocky; extremely hard, very firm;
few roots between peds; patchy clay films on faces of prisms; neutral; gradual smooth boundary.
23 to 31 inches (58-79 cm); gray (10YR 5/1) clay loam, dark gray (10YR 4/1) moist; weak fine
subangular blocky structure; hard, friable; mildly alkaline; gradual smooth boundary.
31 to 46 inches (79-119 cm); light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) clay loam, grayish brown (10YR
5/2) moist; weak fine subangular blocky structure; hard, friable; about 5 percent weakly cemented
calcium carbonate concretions; matrix is noncalcareous; moderately alkaline; diffuse wavy
boundary.
46 to 72 inches (19-180 cm); pale brown (10YR 6/3) clay loam, brown (10YR 5/3) moist;
massive; friable; few fine weakly cemented calcium carbonate concretions; matrix is noncalcareous;
moderately alkaline.
Floresville Series
The Floresville series consists of deep, well drained, loamy soils on uplands. Floresville soils
formed in loamy material several feet thick that has thin strata of sandstone. The slopes range from
0 to 5 percent. A typical pedon of Floresville fine sandy loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes is as follows:
0 to 7 inches (0-18 cm); reddish brown (5YR 4/4) fine sandy loam, dark reddish brown (5YR 3/4)
moist; weak fine subangular blocky structure; hard, friable; many fine roots; slightly acid; abrupt
smooth boundary.
7 to 12 inches (18-30 cm); reddish brown (5YR 4/4) fine sandy loam, dark reddish brown (5YR
3/4) moist; weak fine subangular blocky structure; hard, friable; many fine roots; few fine streaks
of lighter colored material; slightly acid; clear smooth boundary.

15

12 to 28 inches (30-71 cm); red (2.5YR 4/6) clay, dark red (2.5YR 3/6) moist; weak prismatic to
moderate fine angular blocky structure; very hard, firm; many fine roots; few pores and old root
channels; neutral; distinct clay films; diffuse wavy boundary.
28 to 38 inches (71-97 cm); red (2.5YR 5/6) clay, red (2.5YR 4/6) moist; weak medium blocky
structure; very hard, firm; few discontinuous clay films; few fine roots; few fine pores; few weakly
cemented masses of calcium carbonate; few sandstone fragments as much as 1 inch across;
calcareous; moderately alkaline; gradual wavy boundary.
38 to 50 inches (71-127 cm); yellowish red (5YR 5/6) sandy clay, yellowish red (5YR 4/6) moist;
weak fine subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable; few fine roots; about 10 percent fine,
weakly cemented and strongly cemented concretions of calcium carbonate; calcareous; moderately
alkaline; gradual wavy boundary.
50 to 72 inches (127-183 cm); reddish yellow (5YR 6/8) sandy clay loam, yellowish red (5YR 5/8)
moist; common medium distinct yellowish red (5YR 5/6), reddish yellow (5YR 7/8), pinkish gray
(5YR 7/2), and dark red (2.5YR 3/6) mottles; structureless; hard, friable; about 20 percent
concretions and weakly cemented bodies of calcium carbonate; calcareous; moderately alkaline.
Imogene Series
The Imogene series consists of deep, moderately well drained, loamy soils on uplands. Imogene
soils formed in loamy sediment. The slopes range from 0 to 2 percent.
A typical pedon of Imogene fine sandy loam is as follows:
0 to 5 inches (0-13 cm); grayish brown (10YR 5/2) fine sandy loam, dark grayish brown (10YR
4/2) moist; massive; hard, friable; common fine roots; noncalcareous; slightly acid; abrupt smooth
boundary.
5 to 12 inches (13-30 cm); dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) sandy clay loam, very dark grayish
brown (10YR 3/2) moist; moderate coarse columnar structure parting to moderate fine and
medium subangular blocky; hard, friable; common fine roots; few fine soft bodies of calcium
carbonate; noncalcareous; mildly alkaline; clear wavy boundary.
12 to 28 inches (30-71 cm); grayish brown (10YR 5/2) sandy clay loam, dark grayish brown
(10YR 4/2) moist; moderate coarse columnar structure parting to moderate fine and medium
subangular blocky; hard, friable; common fine roots; common fine soft bodies of calcium
carbonate; noncalcareous; moderately alkaline; gradual wavy boundary.
28 to 48 inches (71-122 cm); light gray (2.5Y 7/2) sandy clay loam, light brownish gray (2.5Y 6/2)
moist; massive; hard, friable; few fine soft bodies of calcium carbonate; few threads of other
neutral salts; few fine yellowish brown streaks; noncalcareous; moderately alkaline; gradual wavy
boundary.

16

48 to 64 inches (122-183 cm); light gray (2.5Y 7/2) sandy clay loam, light brownish gray (2.5Y
6/2) moist; massive; very hard, friable; few fine bodies of calcium carbonate; few threads of other
neutral salts; few shale fragments; few fine yellowish brown streaks; calcareous; moderately
alkaline.
Table 1. Soils to be Impacted within the 180-acre Project Area.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Buried and Intact
Archaeological Potential

Campbellton loam, 1 to 3%
slopes (4)

Shallow loams on interfluve ridges and
slopes

Minimal to about 7 inches
below the surface

Christine soils, occasionally
flooded (6)

Deep, poorly drained, loamy soils on
uplands

Minimal to Moderate to about
23 inches below the surface

Floresville fine sandy loam,
1 to 3% slopes (14)

Deep, well drained loamy soils on
uplands

Moderate to about 28 inches
below the surface

Imogene fine sandy loam, 02% slopes (20)

Deep sandy loam on low stream terraces
and flood plains along creeks

Moderate to about 22 inches
below the surface

In sum, based upon the soils described above, it would seem that there is at best a moderate
potential for deeply buried, intact, and significant archaeological deposits to exist within the 180acre Project Area. However, in our opinion, that potentials increases exponentially along the
eastern portion of the Project Area, along the periphery of an upper tributary of Turkey Creek.

Summary and Recommendations

From this preliminary cultural resources background review, it is clear that there may very well
several archaeological sites within the Project Area, of which most have not been recorded. Some
of those may be heavily disturbed and/or redundant site types, and as such have little to contribute
to the prehistory or history of south Texas. These sites should be considered as non-significant,
and should not impede construction as planned. However, it is also clear from this review that
there is a moderate to high probability that archaeological sites of significance could lie within the
Project Area.
The vast majority of the Project Area has never been subjected to a cultural resources survey, and
therefore the number of undocumented sites, as well as their potential significance can only be
modeled. In addition, one of the two pipeline right-of-way cultural resources surveys that have
been conducted, was accomplished in 1974, under far less stringent standards that are currently
prescribed by the Texas Historical Commission (THC) and the Council of Texas Archeologists
(CTA).
Therefore, TAAI recommends a 100-percent cultural resources survey of the 180-acre Project
Area.
17

References Cited

Atlas
2015

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
September 16, 2015].

Ditmar, G. W., and J. W. Stevens
1980 Soil Survey of Atascosa County, Texas. U.S Department of Agriculture,
Washington, D.C., in cooperation with the Texas Soil Conservation Service,
College Station.
Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986

Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas; Choke Canyon Series: Volume 12. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Hall, G. D, S. L. Black, and C. Graves
1981 Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5: Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon
Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase I Findings. Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hemphill, H.
2006 The Railroads of San Antonio and South Central Texas. Maverick Publishing
Company. San Antonio, TX.
Hester, T. R.
1995 The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:427–459.
1980 Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur Archaeologists.
Corona Press, San Antonio.
Leach, J. D., and C. B. Bousman
2001 Cultural and Secondary Formation Processes: On the Dynamic Accumulation of
Burned Rock Middens, Chapter 7. In Test Excavations at the Culebra Creek Site,
41BX126, San Antonio, Texas by D. L. Nickels, C. B. Bousman, J. D. Leach, and
D. A. Cargill, pp. 119-145. Archaeological Survey Report, No. 265, Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio and
Archeological Studies, Report 3, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.

18

Leach, J. D., D. L. Nickels, B. K. Moses, and R. Jones
2001 Appendix D. Estimating Rates of Burned Rock Discard: Results from an
Experimental Earth Oven. In Test Excavations at the Culebra Creek Site,
41BX126, San Antonio, Texas by D. L. Nickels, C. B. Bousman, J. D. Leach, and
D. A. Cargill, pp. 119-145. Archaeological Survey Report, No. 265, Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio and
Archeological Studies, Report 3, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Map
2015

Whitsett, 1936, 1:62500 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Topographic Map. Perry
Castañeda Library Map Collection. Http://www.lib.utexas.edu [Accessed
September 16, 2015].

Mauldin, R. P., D. L. Nickels, and C. J. Broehm
2003 Archaeological Testing to Determine the National Register Eligibility Status of
18 Prehistoric Sites on Camp Bowie, Brown County, Texas. Archaeological
Survey Report, No. 334, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio and the Adjutant General’s Department of Texas,
Department of Facilities and Engineering Environmental Branch, Austin, Texas.
Peterson, L.
1996

Atascosa County. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 1, pp. 272-274.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Taylor, A. J., and L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Volume I. Studies in
Archaeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Web Soil Survey
2015 Atascosa County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed
September 15, 2015].

19

