ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY ALONG BEAR CREEK
Travis and Hays Counties, Texas

by
David O. Brown

Principal Investigator:

Solveig A. Turpin

Texas Archeological Survey
Technical Bulletin 84
The University of Texas at Austin
Februa ry 1986

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcones Research Cmlt'r
10100 Burnet Road

Sumbitted to Randy!,1orine Developments, Inc. in partial fulfillment of
a Letter of Agreement, April 29, 1985

Edited
by
Deborah L. Smi th

--

.......... _---_ ..

ABSTRACT
During May of 1985, a cultural resource survey of a planned
housing subdivision was conducted along Bear Creek in Travis and Hays
counties. The development, a project of Randy Morine Developments,
Inc., is a 351.31 acre tract which will include single family and
multi-family housing units, as well as a wastewater treatment plant
facility.
The tract is located in the Balcones Fault zone on Edwards
Formation limestone and the soils in the project area are shallow,
stony and clayey_ Six sites were recorded during the survey_ Three
prehistoric sites were found to be surficial, disturbed and not worthy
of further consideration.
Two of the three historic sites recorded
are either too young or too disturbed to be eligible for the National
The third historic site, a small
Register of Historic Places.
structural ruin possibly occupied between 1871 and 1893, was examined
in greater detail subsequent to the original field work and, despite
its age and state of preservation, also failed to meet National
Register criteria.

iii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract . . . . . . .
Introduction . . • . .
Environmental Setting
Cultural Background
Results
Historic Background Research
Summary and Conclusions
..•.
References Ci ted

iii
1

2
5

10
20

23
24

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. Map of Project Area
Figure 2. Site Plan: 41TVI049
Figure 3. Site Photographs, 41TVI049

3

15
16

iv

- - _....

_ _....._ - - - -

-------

----_. _

.....

- - - -..... -

---­

INTRODUCTION
During May of 1985, the Texas Archeological Survey surveyed a
351.31 acre tract of land marked for imminent development by Randy
Morine Developments, Inc. The tract is located between Bear Creek and
Bliss Spillar Road, approximately a kilometer east of its intersection
with FM 1626 southwest of Manchaca, Texas. The larger part of the
tract
lies within Travis County, but a small portion in the
southwestern corner, less than 20 acres, extends just across the line
into Hays County. Plans for this tract include a large area of single
family housing and smaller areas for multi-family housing
and
commercial developments. Several drainage easements are set aside as
is an area of greenbelt paralleling Bear Creek in the northwestern
corner of the property. This greenbelt includes all of the critical
water zone, an area approximately equal to the 100 year floodplain,
and a large portion of the water quality buffer zone.
In accordance with the current regulations of the Environmental
Protection Agency and the Texas Historical Commission, a survey and
assessment of archeological resources is considered the first step
toward
the
protection of potentially significant archeological
resources. The archeological survey reported here is designed to
include the following:
1) Intensive on-the-ground survey of the designated tract intended
to locate and describe all cultural resources within the area.
2) A brief overview of the cultural and environmental background of
the area and a preliminary assessment of the potential cultural,
historic and scientific value of all resources within the project
boundaries.
3) Where sufficient information is available from surface cultural
materials
and brief subsurface probes, evaluation of site
potential in terms of the established criteria of eligibility for
the National Register of Historic Places.
4) Where such information is not available, recommendations will be
provided for a testing program intended to determine National
Register eligibility.
The survey was designed to meet the standards of applicable Federal
regulations and is specifically intended to comply with the Council of
Texas Archeologists performance and reporting guidelines currently
utilized by the Texas Historic Commission.

2

The project area was surveyed during the last week of May, 1985
by David Brown, Abbie Treece and Dana Anthony of the Texas
Altogether,
Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
ten and one half person days were expended on the survey. A total of
six archeological and architectural sites, three prehistoric and three
historic, were recorded by the survey team. These sites are described
in detail in a later portion of this report.
No artifacts were
collected from any of the sites. All notes, sketches and photographs
from the survey will be placed on file at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory of The University of Texas at Austin.
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The climate of Travis County has been described as humid
subtropical with hot summers and mild winters (Werchan et al. 1974).
Occasional winter cold fronts bring rapid temperature drops, with an
average of fewer than 25 days a year below freezing. Mean annual
temperature is 68.3 degrees F. Mean annual rainfall in Travis County
is 83 centimeters or 32.6 inches, distributed relatively evenly
throughout the year with peaks occurring during spring and late
summer, when intense thunderstorms can cause occasional serious
flooding. Mean precipitation in Hays County is about the same at 86
centimeters or 33.8 inches (Grimshaw 1976).
The project area lies along the right bank of Bear Creek near
Manchaca, Texas (Figure 1).
At the eastern edge of the Balcones
Escarpment, it falls into the transitional zone between the Great
Plains physiographic province to the west and the West Gulf Coastal
Plain to the east (Fenneman 1931, 1938). Garner and Young (1976:5-6)
divide the Austin area into three major physiographic regions: the
Edwards Plateau of the Great Plains province, the Rolling Prairie,
which lies along the Balcones Fault zone and the Blackland Prairie,
east of the other two.
The Shavano Woods tract lies within the
Rolling Prairie, an area described as moderately dissected and
characterized in southern Travis County by an oak savannah vegetation
assemblage.
A secondary physiographic zone, including the valley of
the Colorado River and its major tributaries, follows Onion Creek and
its headwater tributaries and extends into the eastern portion of the
project area.
Underlying the project area is limestone of the Edwards
Formation.
This formation includes several members which range from
hard, dolomitic to nodular marly limestone, and includes at least one
major solution collapse zone.
Although slightly east of the major
faults which have created the dissected eastern edge of the Edwards
Plateau, the Shavano Woods tract is in an area of relatively intense
faulting. Several fault traces run through the project area from
northeast to southwest (Garner and Young 1976:plate VII). The eastern
half and southern edge of the tract are mapped as tributary terrace
deposits, although a closer inspection of the southern area suggests

FIG URE L

PROJ ECT LOCATI ON MA P'

"'Tl

~

IV

<:::>
IJ)
r--.

W

o.p.

Project

Area

"

Q

' , '/'",;/-- .

..y " , /s C

'o~
s C "/)lj.

<jY,

0/.

v/) ~

'Y

,

,

Area of Map
,

Travis
County

-....:: ...

Z//: </

l'/e

,
L>

o

1000

2000

'.
..........

<TeQr

••• _

•••

_

••• _

Feet

4000

4

that terrace deposits are probably
primarily of surficial gravels.

negligible

here,

consisting

Physiographically, the project area is divided into three major
zones.
The largest, occupying the central and westernmost portions,
is a broad, flat expanse of upland covered in many areas by dense
chert cobble gravels.
North of this, along Bear Creek, is a small
strip of gently sloping terrain, marked by very shallow soils with
gravels and large limestone fragments as well as exposed bedrock in
places. The eastern third of the project is set off from the upland
areas by a low but pronounced ridge running northwest to southeast.
Below the rocky and densely vegetated ridge is a flat, clayey soil
which is less gravelly on the surface than the western soil. The
ridge apparently marks the edge of an old valley of Bear Creek.
An
examination of the soils below the ridge shows that, while somewhat
deeper than those in the western portion, they are nonetheless
shallow, gravelly and apparently residual soils derived from the
underlying limestone bedrock. Since there is no clear indication of
alluvial soils remaining in this area, it is thought to be an
erosional terrace, carved out of the bedrock, and it is described
herein as an alluvial bench.
Soils in the project area are typical of those derived from
limestone.
Speck stony clay loams, a clayey, mixed thermic Lithic
Argiustoll, are dominant, occurring across the central and western
portions of the project area. This soil is described as shallow and
well drained, developing over limestone under a cover of mid and tall
grasses (Werchan et al. 1974). A typical profile is described as 14
inches of reddish-brown stony clay loam over 4 inches of dark
reddish-brown gravelly clay.
The stony nature of the soil is
emphasized.
Reddish-brown chert pebbles and cobblestones 2 to 10 inches in
diameter cover 30 to 50 percent of the surface in most areas, and
up to 80 percent in a few areas. Chert makes up 5 to 10 percent
of the A horizon and 15 to 30 percent of the B horizon. Some
areas have scattered large, outcropping limestone fragments.
(Werchan et al. 1974:38)
The eastern third of the project area is primarily mapped as
Crawford clay, a well drained, moderately deep, noncalcareous clay
developed over hard limestone under bunch and short grasses and
scattered clumps of trees.
A typical profile shows 14 inches of
dark-brown clay over 18 inches of reddish-brown clay (Werchan et a1.
1974).
Crawford clay is classified as a fine, montmorillonitic,
thermic Udic Chromustert.
In the southwestern corner of the Shavano Woods tract, within
Hays County, the Speck stony clay loam soil is not recognized.
Instead, the Hays County Soil Survey (Batte 1984) shows most of the
eastern portion of this area as Tarpley clay, while the western

5

portion is mapped as belonging to the Rumple-Comfort association.
Tarpley clay is classified as a clayey, montmorillonitic, thermic
Lithic Vertic Argiustoll, a designation that differs from Speck stony
clay loam primarily in the recognition of the vertic properties of the
former.
Tarpley
is described as a shallow,
well-drained,
gently-sloping, clayey upland soil, formed from weathered, indurated
limestone. A typical pedon is listed as 6 inches of dark brown clay
over 11 inches of dark reddish-brown clay (Batte 1984:79).
The Rumple-Comfort association includes primarily Rumple very
cherty clay loam and Comfort extremely stony clay as well as some
Tarpley clay.
Rumple soils, located primarily on broad, gently
sloping ridge tops, are the more likely representative of this
association in the project area. Classsified as a clayey-skeletal,
mixed, thermic Udic Argiustoll, it is described as a moderately deep,
well drained, undulating clayey and cherty upland soil formed over
indurated fractured limestone (Batte 1984:77).
A typical pedon
consists of 10 inches of dark reddish-brown very cherty clay loam over
4 inches of dark reddish-brown very cherty clay over 14 inches of dark
reddish-brown extremely stony clay.
Garner and Young (1976:8-9) describe the typical vegetation of
the Rolling Prairie as a live oak-grassland assemblage, but note that
an oak-savannah assemblage, with heavily wooded areas of post oak and
black jack oak, predominates in the southern portion of their mapped
area. This deciduous oak woodland occurs in a band along most of the
western edge of the project area. East of this, the land has been
previously cleared for pasture and is now predominantly mesquite
woodland or savannah. Wooded areas east of the center of the survey
tract are dominated by live oak and juniper. Some grasslands remain
along the eastern boundary of the project area.
CULTURAL BACKGROUND
PREVIOUS ARCHEOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Extensive archeological research has been conducted in the middle
and lower portions of Onion Creek, but little work has been done along
the upper reaches of Onion Creek or the Bear Creek tributary drainage.
Prehistoric and historic sites have been excavated in the vicinity of
McKinney Falls State Park, including the Collins Site (Suhm 1955), the
Smith Rockshelter (Suhm 1957) and the McKinney homestead (McEachern
and Ralph 1980). Several recent survey and testing projects have been
conducted downstream from this near the planned Onion Creek Wastewater
Treatment Plant. A number of sites were located in and around the
plant area and the interceptor lines and several have been tested
(Whitsett and Fox 1979; Brown 1981;
Thurmond 1982;
Davis 1984).
North of the project area, increasing development in the Williamson
Creek and Barton Creek watersheds has resulted in some considerable

6

archeological work in the past few years (McCormick 1974; Espey,
Huston and Associates 1979, 1982; Nightengale 1983; Brown 1984). No
archeological work has been conducted in or immediately adjacent to
the project area and no sites are recorded there.
PREHISTORY
The prehistoric inhabitants of central Texas were, like their
historically documented descendants, probably semi-nomadic hunters and
gatherers. Technological and cultural changes through time have
historically been divided into a tripartite scheme consisting of the
Paleoindian, Archaic and Late Prehistoric (also called the Neo-Archaic
or Post Archaic) periods (Suhm 1960). Further refinements of a scheme
originally proposed by Kelley (1947) have been made by Weir (1976) and
Prewitt (1981).
The history of the post contact Indian tribes is
described with that of the early European settlers in the subsequent
section.
The Paleoindian Period (>11,500 to 8,500 B. P.)
Although there are some signs that suggest hUman presence in
North America prior to eleven or twelve thousand years ago, the best
documented early New World cultures date to the period immediately
after twelve thousand years ago. These early Paleoindian peoples are
often characterized as nomadic bands emphasizing hunting as a way of
life.
Recently accumulating evidence, however, suggests that outside
of the major continental grasslands, where these cultures are often
found with the remains of large, extinct mammals, the economy may have
emphasized small game and gathered plant resources more than had
previously been thought.
Their occupation of the central Texas area occurred during
environmental conditions transitional from the generally wetter and
cooler climates of the Late Pleistocene to the warmer and dryer
climates of the Holocene. At the beginning of this period, numerous
species of large herbivores roamed a countryside that was densely
wooded with arboreal species such as spruce and hemlock, species now
common only much farther to the north. By the end of the period, a
number of these large mammals had become extinct, perhaps due in part
to hunting pressure from human groups, and the cold climate woodlands
were beginning to give way to drier forests and grasslands.
The classic chronological division of these peoples into three
succeeding cultures, the Llano, Folsom and Plano, has recently become
somewhat muddled by overlapping dates and parallel
cultural
traditions, but the scheme is still generally valid. The earliest of
these cultures, the
Llano,
;s marked by
the distinctive,
lanceolate-style Clovis projectile point. The remains of these Llano
peoples, generally dated between 10,500 and 11.500 years B. P., are

7

often found in association with the bones of now - extinct Late
Pleistocene fauna such as mammoth, mastodon, ground sloth, camel and
the American horse.
A later Paleoindian cultural development, generally identified by
the
very distinctive, fluted lanceolate-style Folsom projectile
points, apparently arose after the extinction of the various North
American elephants, but prior to the demise of the large, extinct
bison, Bison antiquus. Subsequent to the Folsom period, there is
evidence of divergence in the late Paleoindian cultural traditions. A
number of stylistically different projectile points are identified
with this period, including Plainview, Scottsbluff, Eden, Angostura,
Firstview and Meserve.
The Archaic Period (8,500 to 1,250 B.P.)
The transition from the Paleoindian Period into the Archaic was a
gradual process, occurring over several thousand years. It was marked
by the increasingly efficient exploitation of a gradually changing
cultural adaptations during this period apparently
environment;
paralleled the post-Pleistocene trend toward warmer
and
drier
climates.
The Archaic Period cultures are generally characterized as
having a more diversified resource base than earlier groups, although,
as noted, the full extent of the Paleoindian subsistence base has yet
to be completely documented. Another characteristic of the Archaic,
the regional differentiation of cultural traditions, is often noted.
Again, it may well be that archeologists have not only underestimated
the regional fragmentation of Paleoindian cultures, particularly in
the late Paleoindian Period, but have ignored
the
widespread
distribution of many early Archaic cultures. An example of the latter
is the deeply notched point style, variously typed as Bell, Andice and
Calf Creek, which occurs from south Texas up into Missouri (Prewitt
1983).
The long Archaic Period is most often split into three or more
subdivisions.
The most common has been the simple tripartite
separation into Early, Middle and Late periods.
Recently, Prewitt
(1981) has further subdivided these into eleven named phases. These
phases, each of which purportedly represents cultural and perhaps
geographic differences, are identified by Prewitt on the basis of key
index markers, primarily projectile points.
The Early Archaic is composed of four separate named phases:
Circleville (8,500 to 7,000 B.P), San Geronimo (7,000 to 6,000 B.P.),
Jarrell (6,000 to 5,000 B.P.) and Oakalla (5,000 to 4,600 B.P.). Many
of the projectile points from this period are well made and exhibit
some typical Paleoindian technological characteristics such as lateral
edge grinding. The variety of projectile point types distributed over
a large area has prompted Prewitt (1983:73) to suggest that these
people were organized in small dispersed bands which roamed broad
territories. The last phase of this period is seen as transitional

8

into the Middle Archaic.
Prewitt has divided the Middle Archaic into four named phases:
Clear Fork (4,600 to 4,000 B.P.), Marshall Ford (4,000 to 3,400 B.P.),
Round Rock (3,400 to 2,600 B.P.) and. San Marcos (2,600 to 2,250 B.P.).
The Middle Archaic in central Texas is characterized by the rise of
the burned rock midden as a specialized site type.
This site type
becomes extremely common during this period, suggesting an intense and
perhaps rather specialized plant processing economy. Weir (1976) has
population increases during this period and possible
suggested
developments in social organization.
Projectile points from this
period are diverse, occurring in large numbers at some sites. They
tend to be large, straight-stemmed and are often not as well made as
the points from earlier or later periods.
The Late Archaic is divided into three phases by Prewitt (1981):
Uvalde (2,250 to 1,750 B.P.), Twin Sisters (1,750 to 1,400 B.P.) and
Driftwood (1,400 to 1,250 B.P.). Although many of the burned rock
midden
sites continue to be occupied during this period, the
accumulation of the middens slows or ceases altogether throughout much
of central Texas.
Prewitt has suggested that the proliferation of
projectile points during the earliest phase of the Late Archaic may
represent a return to the Early Archaic pattern of small, dispersed
bands with wide ranging territorial areas. The latter part of this
period appears to be marked by an emphasis on the utilization of a
wide variety of food resources, perhaps indicative of population or
climatic stress.
Along the fringes of north central Texas, a
population increase has been suggested for this period (Skinner et al
1978) .
The Late Prehistoric Period (1,250 to 200 B.P.)
This period, which Prewitt (1981) terms the Neo-Archaic, marks
the introduction of several technological advances into central Texas,
most notably the bow and arrow and pottery. The bow and arrow quickly
becomes the standard weapon, replacing the throwing stick or atlatl,
and small, thin stone arrow points become a key diagnostic indicator
among the material remains of the period. Pottery, never a major
component of the Late Prehistoric cultures in central Texas, was slow
to take hold, only becoming noticeable during the latter part of the
period. At the same time, technological and cultural changes in
nearby areas, such as the rise of agriculture and the development of
hierarchical societies in the Caddo area to the east (Story 1981), did
not go unnoticed by the peoples of central Texas. The presence of a
single corn cob at Kyle Shelter (Jelks 1962) and Caddo trade vessels
along the Brazos (Watt 1953) do not necessarily indicate more
extensive cultural developments in the central Texas culture area.

9

Jelks (1962) divided the Late Prehistoric (then the Central Texas
Aspect) into two phases, the Austin and Toyah. Prewitt (1981) retains
this division, dating the Austin phase to between 1,250 B.P. and 650
B.P.
and the Toyah phase to between 650 B.P. and 200 B.P. Although
the evidence is far from clear, there may be a discontinuity between
the Austin and Toyah phases, marking the rapid adoption of a new
subsistence-settlement pattern or even the intrusion of new groups
into the area.
HISTORY
The identities of the earliest historic Indian inhabitants of
central Texas are not clearly recorded.
By the time the first
European settlers had made their way into central Texas in the early
nineteenth century most, if not all, of these early groups had been
decimated by disease or displaced by stronger Indian groups.
Newcomb
and Campbell (1982) suggest that the Tonkawa, who were frequent
visitors to the Austin area during the early nineteenth century, may
have been on the Plains during the early Historic period. In addition
to the Tonkawa, the Apache and later the Comanche were recorded as
present in the Hill Country during the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries. The nineteenth century also saw small bands and numerous
individuals from tribes of the eastern United States pass through
central Texas, drifting westward after the confiscation of their lands
and the breakup of their traditional social groups.
Although the arrival of Cabeza de Vaca and his small party to the
Texas coast in 1528 is often considered the beginning of the Historic
Period in Texas, European settlement did not begin in earnest for
nearly two centuries afterwards.
Although several early Spanish
entradas crossed parts of what is now Travis County on their way to
the missions of East Texas, the settlement of Travis County began
relatively late. Other than a brief attempt in 1730 to relocate the
east Texas missions along Barton Creek near the Colorado, the area was
not seriously considered for European settlement until 1827 when
Stephen F. Austin founded his Little Colony with its headquarters at
Bastrop. The earliest settlement in the Austin area was on the
prairie to the east where such pioneers as Josiah Wilbarger, Reuben
Hornsby and James Gilleland obtained grants in the early 1830's.
Travis County itself was created from Bastrop County in 1840.
To the early settlers who began dividing up the land east of
Austin, agriculture was an important part of their existence. Thus,
the shallow, rocky soils along and above the Balcones Escarpment were
not particularly attractive at this time. While a few hardy souls
made the attempt, some of the land was simply acquired for speculation
on future growth of the area. The present project area was part of a
grant acquired by John G. McGehee in 1835 through the efforts of
William Hornsby.
As is discussed in a later section of this report,
the project area tract was apparently held without any permanent

10

settlement until the 1870's.
This southern portion of the county was apparently slow in
developing, but with the entrance of the International and Great
Northern Railroad in 1876, growth was rapid. The town of Manchaca, a
few kilometers east of the project area was laid out in 1890 and the
1910 USGS map of the area (surveyed in 1894-95) shows many more roads
and creek crossings than exist in the area today. Interestingly, the
1935 highway map of the area shows fewer roads, suggesting that many
of those older roads were no longer used at that time.
RESULTS
Three historic and three prehistoric sites were located during
the survey of the property. Only one site, the historic site 41HY177,
was located in Hays County;
the remainder are in Travis County.
Under the present criteria for inclusion on the National Register of
Historic Places, none of the sites are considered eligible, although
one of the historic sites does exhibit a moderately good state of
preservation and is certainly interesting.
All of the sites are
discussed in more detail below.
PREHISTORIC SITES
4lTV1050
Evidence for prehistoric occupations at this site consists of
thinly scattered flakes, chips, chunks and cores of chert in an area
at least 100 meters in diameter.
The site is near - the extreme
northwestern corner of the property and is mostly outside the
boundaries of the tract. It is located on a rocky bench above and
about 150 meters from the right bank of Bear Creek. The bench slopes
gently toward the creek. Underlying bedrock at the site is Edwards
Formation limestone.
Soil in the area, listed in the Travis County
1974), is
Soil Survey as Speck stony clay loam (Werchan et al.
extremely thin.
Bedrock shows through in several places and the
surface is strewn with large and medium size boulders.
Attempts to
conduct shovel tests encountered rock a few centimeters beneath the
surface. Vegetation in the immediate area of the site is an oak
juniper woodland with open areas of short grasses, forbs and annuals.
Among the identified plant types are live oak, juniper, cedar elm,
persimmon, agarita, little blue stem and various compositae.
Cultural materials at 41TV1050 were widely and thinly scattered
on the surface and showed no indication of concentration into activity
or use areas. No features were noted. One tool, a possible utilized
flake scraper, was observed on the surface. Natural chert cobbles of
various sizes were available on the surface throughout the area and it
is assumed that the site was utilized for the procurement of raw

------------~------------~------~

11

materials for stone tools. The lack of tools other than the one
dubious utilized specimen may indicate the site was not used for
camping or processing activities.
The complete lack of blanks,
roughouts or preforms, however, may be an indication that a camping
site where such activities were carried out may have been nearby.
Very careful inspection of the creek bank in this area showed no
evidence of a site and very little geomorphic possibility for site
preservation. Because of the lack of diagnostic materials, no date is
possible.
Due to its surficial nature and the very thin scatter of
materials which essentially includes nothing but debitage, the site ;s
not considered to have any potential research value and preservation
is not recommended.
It is not considered to be eligible for the
National Register of Historic Places. Nonetheless, that part of the
site within the Shavano Woods property boundaries is located in the
proposed greenbelt and critical water quality buffer zone and should
not be greatly disturbed.
41TVI052
Like the other prehistoric sites in the Shavano Woods area,
evidence for prehistoric occupation of 41TVI052 is in the form of
thinly scattered cores, flakes and chunks of chert. This site, which
is on the upland flat in the north central portion of the property, is
slightly larger than 41TVI050, approximately 150 meters in diameter.
Underlying bedrock at the site is Edwards Formation limestone and soil
in the area ;s also listed by the Travis County Soil Survey (Werchan
et al.
1974) as Speck stony clay loam. Soil depth is somewhat
greater than at 41TVI050 and the surface is strewn with cobble rather
than boulder size stones. Vegetation in the area of the site is mixed
oak juniper woodland and mesquite savannah.
Mesquite predominates,
apparently in areas which may have been cleared at one time, while the
wooded areas contain live oak, post oak and juniper.
Cultural materials are thinly and somewhat patchily distributed
over a large area; this may be partly a result of extensive historic
clearing, evidenced by large piles of chert cobbles along rock walls
The site may have been more extensive
running through this area.
prior to this disturbance. All of the observed material seems to be
related to procurement and primary reduction of stone tool materials.
In addition to the cores and flakes, one thin biface basal fragment, a
preform with a somewhat rounded base, and a large, intact bifacial
quarry blank were noted. No other tools or tool blanks were observed.
Nothing
indicating campsite debris
or specialized processing
activities was observed. No date can be given the site.
A single shovel test showed very compact reddish-brown clay loam,
similar to the description of the Speck stony clay loam, but no
artifacts were encountered. The nature of the upland landform in this

12

area and the type of soils suggests that deposition is minimal and the
sediments forming the present soil are ancient t
limiting the
possibility for a buried site in this area. The presence of a nearby
farm complex (41TVI051), rock walls and field clearing piles, as well
as the distribution of vegetation, strongly suggest that the area has
been plowed historically, disturbing any possible contextual integrity
the site may have had. The thin and potentially disturbed scatter on
the surface, and the relative paucity of tool forms, do not offer any
promise for useful information to be contained at this site. Although
it will be destroyed by construction of residential housing areas in
the development, there is little to indicate that 41TV1052 is eligible
for the National Register of Historic Places.
The site does not
appear to justify any further investigation.
4lTV1053
This prehistoric site, marked by unevenly distributed chert cores
and flakes in an area 120 meters by 150 meters, is located on a broad
flat alluvial bench high above Bear Creek. The site extends up onto
the gently sloping ridge which marks the edge of the upland in this
area.
The underlying bedrock
is
probably Edwards
Formation
limestones, but there has certainly been some alluvial modification of
the bedrock surface. Garner and Young (1976:plate VII) map this area
with their tributary terrace deposits. The soil mapped in the site
area ;s Speck stony clay loam, said to derive directly from weathered
limestone parent materials (Werchan et al. 1974). A shovel test,
placed near the center of the site, encountered very gravelly.
reddish-brown clay loam. The gently sloping upland ridge is covered
by a relatively well developed oak - juniper woodland, while most of
the site, on the bench below the ridge has been previously cleared and
is covered by scattered young mesquites in one area and a dense cedar
break in another.
Cultural materials are very unevenly distributed across the site.
On the whole, density of cultural materials is somewhat greater than
at 41TVIOSO or 41TV1052, but the concentration seems to be related to
the higher density of unmodified gravels on the ground surface and may
reflect some erosion. Much like the other prehistoric sites within
the Shavano Woods boundaries, 41TVI053 appears to be a lithic
procurement and primary reduction area, based on the absence of any
lithic debris other than cores and primary and secondary flakes. More
smaller flakes may be present here than at 41TVI051, but there is
still very little to suggest a campsite or any other activity beside
stone tool manufacture. No tools or tool blanks were observed on the
surface.
As at the other prehistoric sites located during this
survey, because of the lack of diagnostic materials, the site cannot
be dated.

13

Although the single shovel test at the site was hampered by the
gravelly soil, sediments are probably shallow, particularly near the
ridge where bedrock is exposed in places. Bedrock is also exposed in
places along an eroded fence row trail that runs beside the northern
edge of the site. Various subsurface exposures indicate that the
gravelly layer at the site is just above bedrock. It appears that
much, if not all, of the site has been cleared and plowed for
agricultural uses. A small portion of the site, extending up onto the
shallow soils of the ridge, may be relatively undisturbed. Because of
the shallow soil matrix, the paucity and lack of variety of material,
and the historic disturbances, it is very unlikely that further
investigations would yield any information of significant value in
elucidating the cultural behavior patterns of the area.
Despite
proposed destruction by the housing development, the site does not
appear to meet any of the criteria for inclusion to the National
Register of Historic Places.
HISTORIC SITES
41HY177
This site, the first located during the survey, is the only site
within the small southwestern corner of the project area which extends
into Hays County. Historic debris is strewn across an area 150 by 50
meters, with the long axis roughly paralleling the modern road.
Geomorphically, the area lies upon flat uplands apparently underlain
by Edwards Formation limestone. Garner and Young (1976:piate VII) map
this area as part of the tributary terrace deposits of Onion Creek,
but there is very little evidence here for major alluvial action.
Soil types listed in the site area include Rumple-Comfort association
soils and Tarpley clay in Hays County (Batte 1984), while that portion
of the site which may extend over the line into Travis County is
mapped as Speck stony clay loam (Werchan et al. 1974). Vegetation is
mesquite woodland;
the age of the mesquites suggests that the
property has been cleared within the last several decades. Near the
structural remains are an old hackberry and several retamas.
The site is tentatively identified as the location of a
previously standing house, on the basis of a mortared, cut limestone
block cistern near a small depression in the ground surface.
In
addition, a cement cattle trough and small, roofed, wooden feeder are
a few meters southeast of the cistern and just east of the depression.
A pile of stone, perhaps the bulldozed remains of a structure, lies
adjacent to the trough. Some household debris and various building
materials were scattered about the area. Artifactual debris observed
included white ironstone, stoneware, brick, cut stone, clear glass,
colored glass, milk glass, clear bottle bases with bottle making
machine imprints, brick building blocks, sewer pipe, roofing tin, wire
nails and lumber. None of the artifactual material, however, could be
identified as very old; some, in fact, had obviously been recently
dumped at the site.

--

-----~---~~-~------~--

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

14

The age of this site cannot be precisely determined from the
artifactual material present, but certainly nothing observed even
remotely suggests occupation prior to the early twentieth century.
Most of the material is somewhat more recent. The trough and feeder
are not new, however, and, because of their proximity to where the
house probably stood, were apparently built after abandonment and
possibly after destruction of the house. A rough guess as to the
chronology of occupation suggests that the house may have been first
occupied in the early twentieth century, perhaps around World War I,
abandoned prior to the Second World War and torn down no later than
the late 1950 l s or early 1960 1 s. The area is likely to be disturbed
by planned construction, but the site does not appear particularly
unique and is undoubtedly disturbed. Although it may barely be old
enough to be considered a historic ruin, it does not meet any of the
other criteria for inclusion on the National Register of Historic
Places.
4ITV1049
Located in a wooded area along the edge of the upland ridge
paralleling the valley of Bear Creek, this small historic home site
(Figure 2) demonstrates excellent preservation. On the upland edge,
it is probably underlain by Edwards Formation limestone, but, again,
Garner and Young (1976:plate VII) map this area with the tributary
terrace deposits of Onion Creek. The mapped soil type is Speck stony
clay loam (Werchan et al. 1974), but along the ridge itself bare
bedrock is visible in many places, suggesting the extreme shallowness
of the soils in this area. The ridge is densely wooded with oak, elm
and juniper.
The age of the trees and the nature of the topography,
as well as the preservation of the site itself suggests that this area
has never been cleared. In the immediate vicinity are three large and
several smaller live oaks, as well as cedar elm, eastern juniper,
persimmon, agarita, greenbriar, grapevine, frostweed, moonseed and
prickly pear. Ground surface is covered with a heavy mat of leaf
litter in many places.
Structural remnants at the site include a cut limestone cistern
(Figure 3a), stone chimney footing, and a stone wall tightly circling
the house on all four sides. Remains of the stone chimney are strewn
about the footing and some possible stone foundation blocks are
located along one edge of the former structure.
The remalnlng
foundation stones and the arrangement of the cistern and chimney
suggest that the house was quite small, perhaps no more than 12 by 20
feet.
Artifactual remains primarily included metal debris such as
barrel hoops, springs, cans and parts of an old automobile.
Although
the artifacts present on the surface at the site do not indicate any
particular time period, the cistern construction, the chimney footing
and the small size of the house may well indicate a nineteenth century
occupation for the site.

ENLARGEMENT

a:

CHIMNEY FALL

0 I (l ,
000(] 0 (JOCO "

~o

o~oo{

ROCQ fallen downlloP6
c
PO
.-<f'0I
II
';U

,g~~&o\) £g,~Nz)o~g 'bcaa~O~'3

0-'3

I

I

I

" OJ 000

o~rQ:tJo

dX
°ccPOO (l 0.,QOo

c£q, g
80 go:::tP

,
028! 0
0"6 8 or1l.g g0

d~l' o~a
t:J (]

G CJo

(ft?~~

lGq:Q8!?-r
0

u.. "'"

_

• Shovel Test 5
• Shovel Test 3

~Ciltern

Datum.~
METEIIS

L..

N

o.W

~C:-ftb

~o

• Shovel

a::P~~
g<t 0 0 00
0
o

Test 4

0

or>

0

QLiveOak

Chimney fall

41TVI049
SITE PLAN MAP

o

3

4

5

• Shovel Test 2

Shovel Test I

000

Q

R~k ~liQnment

~

M!TERS

~\..JArtifoctlinrock

pill

a. The cut limestone and cement cister n -on the nor theast
corner of 1he structure.

b. Clearing away dirt, leaves and fal len stones from
the rock pi le at the center of the site reavealed
the chimney f ooting.

-----

17
Because of the apparently good preservation of structural remains
at 41TVI049, further testing was ~onsidered essential to assess the
National Register potential of the site.
Therefore, an additional
three person days were spent recording and shovel testing this site.
Field crew for this project included Abby Treece, Wayne Bartholomew
and this author.
During this period, the map shown in Figure 2 was
prepared using tape and compass.
Re-examination of the site area confirmed the original estimate
of the structure size at approximately 12 by 20 feet, although an
addition could have been possible to the northwest.
Additions in
other directions would have been blocked by the arrangement of the
large live oaks (each estimated to be greater than a hundred years of
age) surrounding the house and the rock wall enclosure. Beside the
features previously noted, a possible rock pavement, about two meters
square, was observed behind the house.
Whether it is natural or
possibly the foundation of some small structure is not known.
During the brief testing phase, the
fallen
chimney was
photographed and examined in some detail (Figure 3b). Detritus was
cleared from the top to ascertain how much of
the
original
construction remained. From the orientation of scattered rock around
the hearth, it is apparent the chimney fell to the southwest, into
where the structure would have been. It may therefore have fallen
after the collapse or dismantling of the orginal structure.
The
footing of the chimney is about 7.4 by 5.7 feet or 2.3 by 1.8 meters
and the base, rising above the hearth, was about 4.9 by 3.3 feet or
1.5 by 1.0 meters.
The quantity of stone remaining in the chimney
area suggests that at least some of the original stone had been taken
for reuse.
Five shovel tests were dug at the site (Figure 2). Shovel Test 1
was placed at the western edge of a line of rocks south of the chimney
fall. The alignment of these rocks suggested that they might have
been the foundation of the south wall of the cabin and the shovel test
was positioned close to where the wall corner might be expected.
The
initial test was 25 by 25 centimeters, later expanded to 25 by 100
centimeters. The fill from this unit was a reddish-brown clay with
This material appears to be fill from
packed limestone gravels.
cistern construction and may have been intentionally placed beneath
the wall as foundation support, but no clear wall outlines were
observed in the expanded trench. Artifacts recovered from this test
are discussed below.
A second shovel test was located about 10 meters due west of
Shovel Test 1.
No artifacts were recovered from this test or from
Shovel Test 5 about six meters north of Shovel Test 2.
Both tests
were within the rock walled compound area, but outside of the apparent
cabin boundaries. The stony clay matrix in each of these units
appears to be the natural soil of this hillside.

18

Shovel Test 3 was dug northwest of the cistern in an area thought
to be the possible location of the northwestern corner of the
structure. No indication of this corner was found and no artifacts
were recovered from this test. The matrix from this test, however,
appeared to be backdirt from excavation of this cistern rather than
the normal soil. The surrounding ground surface between this test and
the cistern is noticeably higher. Since the natural ground surface
slopes down at this point, it is probable that the cistern fill was
used to level the foundation for the construction of the cabin.
Estimating from the surface contours, the cistern fill was distributed
evenly immediately around its mouth, while a lobe of fill trails off
to the south toward the predicted corner. As previously noted, the
matrix of Shovel Test 1 also may have been cistern fill used to level
the base of the structure.
Shovel Test 4 was placed in the approximate center of the
supposed cabin area and the fill in this area is dark and clayey,
clearly unlike the stony cistern fill and looking very much like soil
which might build up under a cabin. Artifacts from this shovel test
are also described below.
Artifacts recovered from Shovel Test 1 include 4 pieces of glass,
2 ceramic sherds, 7 machine-cut square nails, 1 unidentified metal
fragment, 1 plastic comb tang, and 2 broken pieces of flint, one a
possible prehistoric primary flake. One of the pieces of glass is a
fragment of dark green wine bottle glass. The other thr,ee are small
fragments of clear, pressed or cut glass.
One of the sherds is
, identified as "banded ware", while the other smaller sherd may be from
the same vessel. The larger sherd has one horizontal brown and part
of a blue band.
Two machine-cut square nails were the only identifiable artifacts
from Shovel Test 4. An unidentified small chunk of rusted iron was
also recovered, as well as a possible chert primary flake.
General
surface collection in the structure area at the site yielded 4 pieces
of glass and 1 machine-cut square nail. The glass, all patinated or
weathered, includes 1 clear bottle fragment, 1 brown bottle fragment,
1 clear window glass fragment and one bottle stopper.
The brief re-examination of 41TVI049 does not allow a confident
assessment of the date of occupation of this structure. None of the
material is clearly recent. The artifacts recovered or observed at
the site do not, however, confirm an early date of occupation. Use of
the machine-cut square nails, as early as the late nineteenth century,
continues well into the twentieth century. The glass recovered from
the site is similarly non-diagnostic, dating through the
late
nineteenth into the twentieth centuries. Only the sherd of banded
ware, found in nineteenth century contexts in other Texas historic
sites, has temporal significance. However, this is insufficient by
itself to confirm the date of occupation.
In addition to the
collected materials, several metal automobile parts, thought to be

19
from a Model T Ford, were observed near the rock walls at the site.
It is not clear that they are related to the occupation of the site,
however.
The information gathered from excavations at the site suggests
that despite the apparent preservation of structural remains, very
little subsurface evidence has been retained. The cistern fill found
under the western corners of the structure was utilized to level the
ground surface before construction, but no wall outlines or foundation
trenches remain.
This re-examination suggests, therefore, that the
possibility of recovering further useful architectural information
from excavations at the site is minimal.
The construction of this house might well date to the early part
of the latter half of the nineteenth century although it is likely to
have been somewhat later. A more detailed historic background search
was conducted on this portion of the property to determine, if
possible, when, and by who, was the house built. The results of this
research are presented in a following section.
41TV1051
This historic farm complex, near the center of the Shavano Park
project area, is marked by several sheds and barn structures near the
remains of a small house and cistern. It is located on flat upland
areas underlain by Edwards Formation limestones mapped as Speck stony
clay loam soil (Werchan et al. 1974). The site is only 50 to 100
meters from the ridge marking the edge of the upland flat above the
alluvial bench-terrace system above Bear Creek.
Vegetation
is
primarily live oak-mesquite woodland, with several large live oaks
near the house and barns suggesting selective clearing in these areas.
Parts of the complex are still in use and relatively clear, but unused
portions have grown up in a dense undergrowth of vines and brush.
The site consists primarily of a cluster of structural remains
associated with a twentieth century farm complex. Two clusters of
structures can be identified. At the southern edge of the site is a
large pole barn and loading pen, surrounded by several small sheds,
concrete feed troughs and several small cement slab foundations which
apparently are the remains of other small shed structures. Parts of
this complex were still in active use at the time of the survey.
A
second cluster of remains, now abandoned, occurs just to the north of
the barn complex. This cluster includes the dilapidated remains of a
board and batten shotgun house used recently as a feeder or hay
storage shed, a cement cistern and a small, square, barbed wire fenced
pen.
Fences, in various states of disrepair, crisscross both
complexes. Artifactual material is almost completely limited to metal
wire and various iron objects related to the modern use of the
structures for cattle raising.

20
Most of the barn and shed structures are obviously quite recent,
dating to within the last thirty or forty years. The abandoned board
and batten house may be somewhat older, although neither its design
nor its state of preservation indicate any historic value. The
construction of the house and the cement cistern suggest an early to
mid-twentieth century age, although the paucity of artifacts does not
allow for solid confirmation of this fact. All in all, this structure
is thought to be younger than the remains of structures at both
41HY177 and 41TVI049.
Nothing present at the site supports the
eligibility of these remains for the National Register of Historic
Places and no further work is recommended.
HISTORIC BACKGROUND RESEARCH
The land on which the entire project area is situated is part of
a large grant to John Gilmer McGehee titled April 5, 1835. McGehee
was born in Carroll County, Georgia on September 17, 1797, the third
child of Thomas and Elizabeth McGehee. Having visited Texas once with
his brother, Thomas, in 1833, he organized a group of Alabamans and
Georgians who returned to settle at Bastrop by January of 1835.
Wounded at the battle of Concepcion on October 28, 1835, McGehee and
his group fled before the advancing Mexican armies after the fall of
the Alamo in March of 1836. McGehee returned to Bastrop where he
reportedly died in December of 1838 (McGehee 1899)
After McGehee's death, the portion of the Bear Creek grant upon
which the Shavano Woods tract is located became the property of his
oldest son, John Thomas, who had been born in Alabama on December 20,
1829.
On the 1st of March, 1855, John Thomas deeded the land to his
father's youngest brother, William Blair McGehee, who, according to
the deed records, held the land as guardian of the minor children of
another brother, Charles Lewis (Travis County Deed Records L:89).
Charles Lewis McGehee, who was born in Georgia on July 20, 1806, came
to Texas in 1847 and apparently amassed quite a fortune in the few
years before his death on September 1, 1850. At the time of his death
he was a contractor for the foundation of the new State Capitol
(McGehee 1899).
In November of 1856, William Blair transferred title of the land,
listed as one-half of three-fourths of a league, and, apparently,
guardianship of the children, Sarah V. and Charles L., to his friend
from Bastrop, James H. Gillespie (Travis County Deed Records L:89).
William Blair McGehee died at the battle of Crowley's Ridge, Arkansas
on May 14, 1863. The fate of Gillespie is not clear, but a lawsuit
led by Charles Word and Sarah V. McGehee Word of San Antonio, forced
sale of the land at auction on the 7th of March 1871 (Travis County
Deed Records V:198-201). At the auction, Word promptly bought all of
the included tracts for between $.50 and $3.40 an acre. The three
40-acre tracts upon which the house sites recorded during the survey
are located were among the most valuable, selling for between $3.05

21
and $3.40. The lots enclosing the project area structural remains
were purchased from Charles Word by J. S. Wilkins a short time
later, on July 26, 1871 (Travis County Deed Records V:339-40).
From the original land grant to the sale to Wilkins in 1871,
there is little evidence that any of the McGehee family actually lived
on the land. John Gilmer, Charles Lewis and William Blair McGehee all
reportedly lived in Bastrop County, a fact confirmed by the 1850
census of the State of Texas. Wilkins, who was born in Tennessee in
1840, is listed as residing in Bexar County at the time of the
original sale but may have moved to the Bear Creek property shortly
thereafter.
In the 1880 census Wilkins, his wife Mary C., and their
six children are listed as residing in Travis County next door to a
Labenski who is listed in the deed records as owning the adjacent
property. Although Wilkins sold the property in 1893, an 1894-95
Travis County Directory still listed Wilkins as residing on a 160 acre
tract near Manchaca.
Wilkins originally purchased an area which encompassed the
locations of the three houses on the Shavano Woods property, but later
apparently sold off the northern portion.
This northern tract was
owned by a Walter Lee Wilkins, possibly a relative of John S., as late
as 1954. On the southern portion of the Shavano Woods property,
Wilkins built his home, possibly the historic house site recorded as
41TVI049. This structure was probably built shortly after purchase of
the property in 1871.
Wilkins and his wife sold the property to W.J. Elliot in 1893
(Travis County Deed Records 126:29). In the 1898-99 Travis County
Directory, Elliot is listed on 160 acres near Manchaca and Wilkins ;s
no longer listed. On the earliest available detailed map of the area,
the 1910 USGS Austin sheet (surveyed in 1894-95), a house is shown
along the edge of the county line in Travis County, near where
41TVI049 is found today.
Unfortunately, the roads have changed
somewhat and the scale of the map is such that the location cannot be
precisely confirmed.
Despite its location
in Travis County,
measurement of several relative distances and the approximate
configuration of the roads suggest that this structure is the one
which once stood at 41HY177 rather than that at 41TVI049. Thus, the
structure perhaps first built by Wilkins in 1871 or shortly thereafter
was no longer in use and perhaps torn down before Elliot was
established on the property in 1894-95.
The only other available
early map is a 1936 Texas county highway map on which the roads begin
to approach their modern configuration, clearly indicating a structure
present at 41HY177 and no other structures present anywhere else on
the Shavano Woods tract. It is interesting to note that even on this
1936 map, 41HY177 is shown in Travis County, but the measured
distances, the bends of the roads and a still - existing house across
the road to the south, all support a later resurvey of the county
boundary.

22
A 1958 version of the county highway map shows the country line
boundary in its present place with respect to the roads and no house
present at the original 41HY177 location.
The more recent cabin,
noted in the discussion of this site, is indicated on this map. No
other structures, however, are shown in the project area at this time.
The 1966 USGS map of the survey tract shows only the large barn at
41TV1051.
A comparison of the all the maps and available data suggests the
first house constructed on the property was built by J.S. Wilkins
shortly after he acquired the property in 1871. This small house was
probably abandoned and destroyed sometime around the sale of the
property to W.S. Elliot in 1893, when a second house was built.
This
latter structure was occupied by Elliot and possibly by his successor,
Jackson Hammett, who bought the property in January of 1907 (Travis
County Deed Records 293:302-3). Hammett died a short time thereafter,
and the southern portion was sold in 1917 by the estate administrator,
after a lawsuit recorded in the Hays County Court, to J.L. Heller who
held onto the land until 1954 (Travis County Deed Records 293:544;
1411: 108-11).
In conclusion, with the exception of the ruins at 41HY177 and
41TV1049, all of the structures on the Shavano Woods property were
probably built after 1936 when the first county highway map was drawn
up.
These later structures are less than fifty years old and not
likely to be eligible for inclusion on the National Register of
Historic Places.
The structure at 41HY177 existed at least between
1895 and 1936, probably the actual span of its occupancy.
It was
probab ly buil tin 1893 or 1894 and may have been torn down by the
Second World War. Although this structure may be old enough to meet
the criteria for National Register inclusion, it is badly damaged by
later construction of a cattle feeder shed and trough on the same
site.
The earlier structure at 41TV1049 was probably built around 1871
and stood until perhaps 1893 when the property was sold. Not only was
this site possibly in use for only a relatively short period of time,
but its fortuitous location along the uncleared, rocky edge of the
uplands has left its foundation incredibly well preserved.
Certainly
the site has never been plowed.
Unfortunately, the shallow to
nonexistent soils leave little depth for the preservation of buried
artifacts.
In addition, it is clear that Wilkins, the farmer who
built the house, does not meet the criteria of importance in local
affairs. A scan of a number of documents pertaining the Travis County
and Manchaca history failed to turn up any mention of his name.
Thus
despite its age and excellent state of preservation, the historic
house foundation at 41TV1049 cannot be clearly tied to a person or
event of local or regional significance and is not eligible for
inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places.

- 23

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Six sites were located during the cultural resource survey of the
planned housing and wastewater treatment tract at Bear Creek. Three
41TVI052 and
41TV1053,
are
prehistoric
of these, 41TVI050,
archeological
sites.
All
exhibit very thinly
scattered,
non-diagnostic cultural materials and are apparently surficial. These
sites, which are thought to be lithic procurement and primary
reduction sites typical of many along the Balcones Fault zone, are not
unique or particularly well preserved, and, in the case of 41TV1052
and 41TV1053, are highly disturbed. None of these sites meets the
eligibility criteria for the National Register of Historic Places.
Three historic sites were recorded during the survey of the
project area.
One of these, 41TV1051, is a farm complex with barns,
The entire site is
sheds and a small board and batten structure.
thought to be relatively recent, and is in no way unique enough to be
considered for inclusion to the National Register.
A second site,
41HY177, is notable for the presence of a cut stone cistern and the
site of a former house. Although historic research suggests that the
house ;s old enough for consideration, probably existing between the
mid-1890 1 s and the 1940 1 s, recent disturbances in the area have
probably removed much of its archeological significance.
A third historic structural ruin, designated 41TVI049,
;s
tentatively dated to the period between 1871 and 1893 and is
associated with a John S. Wilkins, a farmer born in Tennessee in 1840.
According to the 1880 Federal Census of Texas, his oldest child was
born in Texas in 1868, three years before he acquired the McGehee
property. Since his wifels birthplace ;s also listed as Tennessee, it
is possible, although by no means certain, that he was married in
Tennessee and only came to Texas in the 1860 1 s. In any case, the
small house occupied by the Wilkins and their six children during the
two decades following 1871 is now nothing more than a cjstern, a
chimney footing and several foundation blocks.
What little that
remains is thought to be moderately well preserved, disturbed only by
possible reuse of stone for other local structures.
Despite the age of this structure, the information available
seems to indicate that 41TVI049 is not eligible for the National
Register of Historic Places as an historic archeological site since it
is not associated with events or persons significant in local history.
Although the loss of any historic site is unfortunate, it is felt that
the additional documentation gained in brief testing at the site helps
to mitigate that loss and no further work ;s recommended.

24

REFERENCES CITED
Batte, Charles D.
1984 Soil Survey of Coma 1 and Hays
States Department of Agriculture
Washington, D.C.

United
Service.

Brown, D.O.
1981 Archeological Testing Along the Proposed Route of Wastewater
Pipelines for the Planned Onion Creek Wastewater Treatment
Plant, Travis County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey
~~~i~~
lletin 50. The University of Texas at Austin.
1984

A Cultural Resource Survey and Assessment of Section VIII of
the Village at Western Oaks Subdivision, Travis County
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin 74.
The University of Texas At Austin.

Davis. Michael W.
1984 An Archeological Survey and Assessment at the San Marcos
(Wood)
Fi sh Hatchery,
Hays County,
Texas.
Texas
Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin 79. The University
of Texas at Austin.
Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc.
1979 Barton Creek Cultural Resources Reconnaissance. Appendix B
in report prepared for Texas Parks and Wildlife Department.
1982

Ecological and Archeological Investigations of the Proposed
Barton - Oak Hill 138kV Transmission Line. Report prepared
for City of Austin Department of Power and Light.

Fenneman, N.M.
1931
Physiography of Western
Company. New York.
1938

Physiography of Eastern
Company. New York.

United States.

McGraw-Hill

Book

United

McGraw-Hill

Book

States.

25

Garner, L.E. and K.P. Young
1976
Environmental Geology of the Austin Area: An Aid to Urban
Planning.
Bureau of Economic Geology
Report of
Investigations 86. The University of Texas at Austin.
Grimshaw, T.W.
1976 Environmental Geology of Urban and Urbanizing Areas: A Case
Study from the San Marcos Area, Texas. Ph.D dissertation.
The University of Texas at Austin.
Jelks, LB.
1962 The Kyle Site, A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in
Hill County, Texas.
University of Texas Department of
Anthropology Archeology Series 5.
Ke 11 ey, J. C.
1947 The Lehman Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah,
Uvalde
and
Round Rock Foci.
Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 18:115-128.
McCormick, Olin
1974 Barton Creek Archaeological Reconnaissance. Appendix D in
Environmental
Analysis
of Barton
Creek Wastewater
Interceptor, Volume II. Submitted to the City of Austin by
Tracor, Inc.
McEachern, Michael and R.W. Ralph
1980 Archeological Investigations at the Thomas
F. McKinney
Homestead, Travis County, Texas: An Experiment in Historic
Archeology, Part I. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
51:5-208.
Soci
McGehee, George T.
1899 ~ Brief History of One Branch of the McGehee
1771 to the Present. PrivatelY-Printed.

Family

from

Newcomb, W.W., Jr. and T.N. Campbell
1982 Southern Plains Ethnohistory:
A Re-examination of the
Escanjaques, Ahijados, and Cuitoas. In: Pathways to Plains
Prehistory.
D.G. Wyckoff
and J.L. Hoffman,
editors.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Memoirs 3 and Cross Timbers
Heritage Association _~2ntributions 1.
Nightengale, Bruce A.
1983 Cultural Resource Survey and Assessment in the Barton Creek
Watershed, Travis County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey
62. The University of Texas at Austin .
Technical
.:=...::.;...:...c....;;,--,--,-",-­

26
Prewitt, E.R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas.
Archeological Society 52:65-89.
1983

Bulletin of the Texas

Andice: An Early Archaic Dart Point Type.
La Tierra.
Journal of the Southern Texa Archaeological ASsociation
10( 3): 1-6-.

Skinner, S.A., C. Shaw, K. Huckaby and M.L. Bartsch
1978 An Evaluation of the Archeological Resources at Aguilla
Lake.
Southern Methodist University, Archeology Research
Program.
Story, D.A.
1981 An Overview of the Archeology
Anthropologist. 26-92:139-156.

of

Suhm, D.A.
1955
Excavations at the Collins Site,
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
1957

East Texas.

Travis

Plains

County,
26:7-54.

Texas.

Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County,
Texas Journal of Science IX(1):26-58.

Texas.

Thurmond, Peter
1982 Archeological Testing and Assessment of 41TV461 and the
Onion Creek Wastewater Plant Site, Travis County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Technical
The
n 49.
University of Texas at Austin.
Travis County Deed Records
various years Various volumes of Travis
Travis County Courthouse, Austin.
Watt, F.H.
1953 Pottery Diffusion of the Central
Texas Archeologist 6:57-85.

County Deed

Brazos

Valley.

Weir, F.A.
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D.
Washington State University, Pullman.

Records.

Central

Dissertation,

Werchan, L.E., A.C. Lowther and R.N. Ramsey
1974 Soil Survey of Travis County, Texas.
United States
Department of Agriculture Soi,---conservation Service.
Washington, D.C.

27

Whitsett, Hayden and D.E. Fox
1979 Cultural Resources of Lower Onion Creek.
Texas Department
of Water Resource~ Construction Grants and Water Quality
Planning Division. Austin.

