rrl. - -~.
L(l

f):1?

w~ CtCt~

ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT OF
THE ANDERSON MILL RESERVOIR
Travis and Williamson Counties. Texas

Steven M.

Kotter

A Letter Report Submitted to Black and Veatch
Agents for the City of Austin

Texas Archeological Survey
Technical Bulletin 87
The University of Texas at Austin
November 1985

If~ ~

~

~

.

'Ie;t. l(;:;'ede4t!::'t: Lr:~::f,

~~~1~~

t

•

Archeological Survey and Assessment of
The Anderson Mill Reservoir
Steven M.

Kotter

The following summarizes the results of an archeological survey
of the proposed City of Austin Anderson Mill Reservoir in Travis and
Williamson counties, Texas. ' Cultural resources identified are limited
to a single prehistoric site, but material occurs over approximately
80 percent of the five acre project area. The site appears to, be a
continuation of previously recorded 41WM664 (Robert Gerheart 1985)
which was assessed as not eligible for nomination to the National
Register of Historic Places. Although nothing was observed during the
current surve~ to alter this assessment, constructfonmay be affected
by Federal review of the earlier project, contain1ngthe major portion
of 41WM664 and other associated sites.
It is, projected that the
proposed reservoir will not impact significant cultural resources,
conditional on review of this and the previous survey results. '
The project area·is located at the northern end of the Jollyvil1e
Plateau on the upland divide between Bull and Cypress creeks. Shallow
clayey soil s developed over limestone support, a juniper!l ive oak
woodland. ApprOXimately 2S percent of the area' has been disturbed by
recent clearing, but remaining portions are largely intact. Ground
surface visibility was good due to the sparsity of vegetative cover
and all cultural materials are assumed to be surficial. Approximately
1.S hours ,were required to accomplish an intensive examination using
transects spaced at 25 meter intervals. Documentation consists of an
addendum to the existing site form for 41WM664 in the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory files. No artifacts were collected.
A scatter of prehistoric cultural material was observed over most
of the project area. Cores and cortical flake debitage are evidence
of on-site lithic procurement and initial reduction. A few interior
or utilized flakes indicate other activities represented are minor in
nature. No features or scattered burned rocks were noted.
Results
are consistent with those reported during the original investigations
of 41WM664, with the exception of stage bifaces which were not
observed during the current survey. The absence of complete on-site
tool production, formal tool use, and hearth construction indicate a
low information yield potential. Cultural materials to be affected by
reservoir construction do not appear to represent a significant
resource, eligible for nomination to the National Register of Historic
Places or for State Archeological Landmark status.
Reference Cited
Gerheart, Robert
1985 Personal Communication, Archeologist, Espey
Huston and Associates, Inc.

