CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND
ASSESSMENT IN THE BARTON CREEK
WATERSHED
Travis County, Texas
Texas Archeological Survey
Technical Bulletin 62

Bpuce A. Nightengale

Principal Investigator:

David S. Dibble

A report submitted to Community Engineering Company in fulfillment
of the terms
a letter of agreement dated March 16, 1983 by the
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

-----------_

May 1983

..............•••••••

_ . . _ - - - - - - •........

_

.............

_ - - - - - - _ ........•_ ......•..._---_._-_._-.------ .. - . - - - - - -.....- - - - - ­

ABSTRACT
Be;tween FebltualLY 28 and MMC.h 10,1983, the Tex.M Attc.heotog),.c.at
SWtvelj, The UMVeJL.6ay 06 Tex.M at A/.L6Un, c.ondu.c.:ted a c.u1:tWtat ItUOU!l.c.e
-6Wtvelj 06 588 ac.lte-6 06 fund to be /.L6ed nolt hO/.L6),.ng development blj Gtenn
NeaM. Thl-6 Mea ~ wUhln the BMton Clteek wateMhed whlc.h lteqi.UJLu
c.u.t:tuJLat ltuoWtc.e M-6U-6ment ),.n ac.c.oltdance wUh A/.L6Un Code -6ec.. 13-3-352.
The -6Wtvey a.L6o c.ompUu wUh Fedettat 1te.gu.la-tioM govettrU.ng pote~ toan
guManteu and mew lteqi.UJLemen:t-6 06 the Nailonat H~touc Pltuettvailon Act
06 1966 and ),.;t-6 ~ptem~ng ltegu.la-tioM, 36CFR, PMt 800. The BMton Clteek
Mea hM been -6ubjected to numetto/.L6 -6ultveY-6 pltov~ng a bac.kgltound 60lt the
plte-6ent upland Mea -6:tudy. A totat 06 twelve pltehu,to~c. -6au and one
iU-6touc. -6ile WM toc.a:ted and aMu-6ed. One 06 the plteiU-6,to4ic. -6ile-6,
41TV578, (.I}(.t.6 1te.c.olLde.d M pMt 06 anothett -6U!l.vey and 60und to be art exteM..ton
06 a -6 lie. d~g the pJte-6 ent -6.tudlj. Te.n -6lie-6 Me UM-6 ed M Whlc. pltO­
c.Wtement MeM. Two 06 the plteh-i-6to~c. -6au, both bUltned Jtoc.k m..{ddeM,
WMMnt 6utt:thett ),.nve-6Ugailon to de:teJtm.ine -6ae. ..tntegwlj and e.Ug)"b~1j
601t the. Na..tionat Re.g~tett 06 H~tolL..tc. Ptac.e-6. An aUettncttive Jtec.ommendcttion
.i-6 pJte-6ettvailon by avoidanc.e..

;

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract . .
Introduction .
Environmental Background .
Archeological Background .
Methods and Techniques
Results of the Survey
Recommendations
Summary
References Cited

i
1
1

4
8

9

18
18
19

FIGURES
Figure 1.

Map of Study Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

INTRODUCTION
At the request of Jack K. Dempsey, agent for Glenn Neans
of Austin, Texas, a cultural resource survey of 588 acres destined
for future residential development in the Barton Creek watershed
was carried out from February 28 to March 10, 1983, by Bruce A.
Nightengale, Andy Cloud and Jeff Turpin of the Texas Archeological
Survey eTAS), The University of Texas at Austin. In 1976 the
current study area was included in an Environmental Impact State­
ment completed by Housing and Urban Development for Travis County.
The Texas Historical Commission, at that time, recommended that
a survey for cultural reSBurces be accomplished in anticipation
of compliance with Federal regulations governing potential
Veterans Administration and Federal Housing Authority loan
guarantees. Thus, this survey is intended to meet requirements
established by the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as
amended, and its implementing regulations, 36CFR, part 800. In
addition, the study area lies within the Barton Creek watershed
and is subect to Austin Code 13-3-352 which requires archeological
investigations in these major drainways. The research is in
conformance with Texas Historical Commission guidelines for inten­
sive survey and adheres to performance standards recommended by
the Council of Texas Archeologists.

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
The study area is located in the uplands of Barton Creek
drainage. Maximum elevation is 800' M4SL with a minimum of 650'
AMSL. The topography is level to fairly gentle to steep slopes
along interfluves and margins. The numerous drainages range from

Figure t.

Project and Site Location Map

, . Archeological

sit~

All site numbers are prec;:eded by 41

o

.5

1.0

3

steep-sided maln tributaries of Barton Creek in the northeast
to shallow gullies further upland in the western section of the
study area.

Most of the drainages have cut into the limestone

bedrock, often exposing broad faces where chert nodules and
tabular cherts were weathering from the limestone.

Bedrock

outcrops were noted throughout the area with chert nodules and
limestone fragments exposed on the face and mixed in with the
residual soil matrix.

Soils in the area are hard, shallow, stony

clay and stony clay loams of the Speck and Tarrant soil series.
Vegetation consists primarily of a dense overstory of cedar and
live oak with numerous clearings in short and tall field grasses.
Many trails and ranch roads cross the area, providing some measure
of visibility.

There was evidence of local neighborhood land

disturbances such as tree houses, camping areas and graffiti in
one likely rockshelter which contained no evidence of prehistoric
use.

The proximity of the study area to the Travis Country

Estates makes it a prime area for collecting artifacts.

The

southwest area along Boston Lane Road was once used as a horse
riding stable.

Numerous horse trails were found with broken chert

fragments and many pseudo-flakes; the result of shod hooves
striking the many chert nodules exposed along the trails.

Other·

land disturbances including clearing, bulldozing broken-up lime­
stone to fill drainages and to clear areas for housing development.
One site, 4lTV654, a burned rock midden, is now only a remnant of
its former size due to bulldozing.

As this was done prior to the

enactment of the Austin City Code sec. 13-3-352, no cultural
resource survey was then required.

Impact was also noted in the

northern part of the study area around sites 41TV653 and 663,

.

where, in the case of 41TV663, soil borrowing for construction of
a holding pond had caused considerable damage.
pipes criss-cross the entire study area.

Numerous irrigation

4

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
The study area lies within the Central Texas archeological
region. Based on numerous surveys and excavations, a cultural
chronology of prehistoric occupation has been developed. Defined
periods are the Paleoindian, Archaic and Late Prehistoric (Neo­
Archaic).
Paleoindian Period (prior to 10,000 to 8,500 B.P.)
The evidence for this, the earliest known cultural period
in Texas prehistory, is based in Central Texas on surface finds
and excavated material. Buried cultural deposits associated with
this period have been unearthed in the Levi Rockshelter on the
Pedernales River (Alexander 1963), the Loeve Site (Eddy 1973;
Prewitt 1982), Tombstone Bluff on the San Gabriel River (Prewitt
1974a, 1982), and 41BXS2 on the outskirts of San Antonio (Henderson
1980). Stone tool types known to be assignable to the Paleoindian
occupation of the region are Clovis~ Folsom~ Plainview~ SaottsbZuff~
Mesepve~ Angostupa and GoZondpina lanceolate points.
Direct stratigraphic associations for the traditionally
accepted subsistence of Paleoindian groups, that of dependence
on now-extinct Pleistocene megafauna, is lacking in Central Texas.
It is assumed that here their economy depended on hunting and
gathering, a mode of existence which was retained until the time
of contact with the first Europeans.
Archaic Period (8,500 to 1,250 B.P.)
The Archaic hunters and gatherers of Central Texas were
highly dependent on the variable environmental factors -- the
availability of water, game and edible vegetation. Tool kits in­
cluded contracting and expanding stem dart points, food processing
tools such as manos and metates, and various auxilIary implements.
Based on the changes that took place within the tool kit and other

5

cultural markers, such as the increase and decrease of burned rock
middens, a cultural construct containing eleven chronological
phases for the Central Texas area has been proposed by Prewitt
(1981). This chronology combines and expands on earlier syntheses
(Weir 1976a, 1976b; Prewitt 1974a, 1974b, 1976, 1982, n.d.) and
earlier studies (Kelley 1947; Jelks 1951; Suhm, Krieger and Jelks
1954; Johnson 1967) and adds new phases to accomodate various
changes. These eleven phases correspond to previous chronologies
as follows:
Driftwood
1400-1250 B.P.
Late Archaic
Twin Sisters
1750-1400 B.P.
Uvalde
2250-1750 B.P.
San Marcos
2600-2250 B.P.
Middle Archaic
Round Rock
3400-2600 B.P.
Marshall Ford 4000-3400 B.P.
4600-4000 B.P.
Clear Fork
5000-4600 B.P.
Late Paleoindian/
Oakalla
Jarrell
6000-5000 B.P.
Early Archaic
San Geronimo
7000-6000 B.P.
Circleville
8500-7000 B.P.
This chronology is considered by Prewitt to be a base for
the expansion of ideas and as new archeological data appear the
chronology is subject to revision.
Late Prehistoric (Neoarchaic) {1,250 to 200 B.P.)
This period, referred to by Prewitt (1981) as the Neoarchaic
stage in Central Texas, is one of gradual change. This became
apparent with the replacement of the atlat1 and dart by the bow
and arrow. Pottery made its appearance during the later part of
this period and, in parts of Texas, although not readily documented
in Central Texas, incipient agriculture emerged. Certain time
diagnostics are used to delineate subdivisions within the period,
the Granbury and Seallorn arrow points characterize the Austin
Focus (1250-650 B.P.) and the Perdiz and Cliffton arrow points,
along with the bone-tempered Leon Plain pottery, characterize
the Toyah Focus (650 - 200 B.P.). These are foci of the Central
Texas Aspect (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954) and phases of the

6

Neoarchaic (Prewitt 1981). Prewitt (1981:68, 74) has proposed
that the appearance of cemeteries during the Late Prehistoric
is a chronological delineator for this period in Central Texas.
Historic (1836 A.D. to present)
Historic settlement in Travis County began during the
period of the Republic (1836 to 1846 A.D.), stimulated primarily
by the selection of the village of Waterloo as the renamed
capital of the Republic, Austin. Although it was to serve as
the official capital throughout the era, Austin remained on the
frontier. For a long period it was virtually abandoned because
President Sam Houston preferred administering the young nation
from a city named for him. Effective settlement of the marginal
lands in the juniper covered hills along Barton Creek did not
occur until after the Civil War (post 1865).
A total of 664 sites have been recorded to date in Travis
County. Only those sites immediate to the study area and located
along Barton Creek and its tributaries will be discussed herein
(see Fig. 1). All of these sites were recorded or rerecorded by
Espey, Huston &Assoc. during their Barton Creek project in 1979
(TARL files). The majority of these sites did not contain datable
diagnostics. Sites 41TV384, 386, 387 and 388 are believed to be
areas used primarily for reduction of lithic material. These sites
are situated at an elevation of 600' AMSL or lower. All are
surficial scatters associated with shallow soils. Cultural material
observed at these sites consisted of chert debitage (flakes and
chips), cores and bifaces without temporal diagnostics.
41TV398, also a lithic scatter, is believed to be buried
under deep alluvium. The one temporal diagnostic found at this
site dated to the Middle Archaic. 4lTV391, a possible upland camp­
site, without datable prehistoric material, contained lithic
debitage, burned rock and historic rock walls. This historic/
prehistoric site is believed to be within the site boundaries of
41TV324. Sites 41TV345 and 352 are burned rock middenS/lithic
scatters. 41TV345,
rst recorded by E.R. Prewitt, is a large

7

half-acre, heavily disturbed and collected site with hearths,
flakes, large bifaces and a Darl dart point which dates to the
Late Archaic. Though burned rock middens are believed to be
prevalent during the Middle Archaic (Prewitt 1981), 4lTV352,
first recorded in 1977, contains four burned rock middens with
flakes, cores, scrapers, a possible mano and Darl~ Bulverde and
triangular dart points. Based on dates proposed for the diagnostic
dart points and burned rock middens, this site appears to have
been occupied during the late Early Archaic, Middle Archaic and
Late Archaic. Site 41TV338, a floodplain site first recorded
in 1975 by the Texas Highway Department, is believed to be a
single component terrace site. Two culturally sterile test pits
were dug to a depth of .Sm by Espey, Huston & Assoc. in 1979.
Two cores and three flakes were found in nearby backdirt of a
borrowing animal. Further testing may reveal deeply buried
deposits. No datable diagnostic material was listed for this site.
Site 41TV357, first recorded in 1977, is two levels of rockshelters
in a cli
face. Four small shelters were noted in the upper
level about S
10 m from the cliff base. Hearths were located
in the shelters with cores, flakes and chips. Chert deposits were
noted weathering from the cliff face. This site is believed to
have served as a shelter and primary manufacturing center. No
datable diagnostic material was found at the site. 4lTV324 was
nominated to the National Register of Historic Places in 1975 by
the Texas Historical Commission. This site is a series of dry laid
stone walls and enclosures (corrals) with evidence of a wagon road
from ruts worn into the limestone. Historic artifacts date the
site from the mid- to late 1800's. Also included in the site
inventory were prehistoric artifacts dating to the Middle Archaic.
Based on recorded sites in the Barton Creek drainage proximal
to the study area, a predominance of lithic procurement sites would
be the expected site type. This is due to the location of the
study area within the uplands amid dense deposits of both nodular
and tabular chert resources and easy accessibility from this
Barton Creek area. Secondarily, the possibility of more permanent

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - _..................................._ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ­

8

encampments would exist close to reliable seep/spring water
sources. Tentative dating of the expected sites in the study
area, based on previously recorded sites, would span the Middle­
Late Archaic with some dates lying in the Transitional Late
Archaic Driftwood phase to Late Prehistoric Austin phase.

METHODS AND TECHNIQUES
Prior to the survey, files at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL) were examined for previously recorded
archeological sites located within the study area and to ascertain
the extent of previous investigations in the area. On March 16,
1983, two new site plottings were submitted to TARL, 41TV577 and
41TV578. Both border the subject area. 41TV578 is an extension
of a site recorded during the present survey (Figure 1).
Survey methods were adapted to changes in terrain. Where
fairly level areas were encountered, the method was to walk
parallel transects in a zigzag fashion dependent upon vegetation.
Where mainstem drainages were encountered, a contour sweep--method
was employed whereby the bank, creek bottom and upper slopes were
walked the length of the drainage. Visibility in most of the study
area was good in areas of erosional wash along slopes and on trails
and roads in level areas. Grass cover and cedar/live oak litter
obscured ground visibility in places but not severely enough to
completely hinder observation. Where feasible, shovel and pickl
mattock probes were attempted to ascertain soil matrix and depth
of cultural deposits. In many cases, the hard stony clay and stony
clay loams were impenetrable to any significant depth. No artifacts
were collected from the area. Those of diagnostic value were
drawn in the field.

9

RESULTS OF THE SURVEY
As a result of the 588 acre intensive survey, 12 prehistoric
sites and 1 historic site were located in the predominantly
upland area of Barton Creek. One of these sites, 41TV578, is an
extension of a site recorded by Espey, Huston & Assoc. which had
not yet been listed in the TARL site
les at the time of this
survey. Also recorded at that time was site 41TV577, a lithic
scatter which extends into the project area (TARL files).
Ten of the prehistoric sites are areas of lithic procurement
and possible upland campsites. These areas exhibited use of the
plentiful upland chert resources by prehistoric peoples. The two
other prehistoric sites, 41TV654 and 659, are burned rock middens
wi th associated Ii thic material. 41 TV6,"54, now heavily damaged"
(see Site Descriptions), was reported to have contained diagnostic
dart points dating to aa. 4000 years ago. 41TV659, a smaller and
shallower burned rock midden, contained diagnostic dart points
that would date the site to aa. 4500 years ago. This site also
contained artifacts characteristic of procurement areas.
All that remains of the 2-room central hall historic house
site, 41TV662, is a standing chimney of native limestone with brick
lined firebox and scattered wood with square nails. The original
structure was estimated to be of 1875-1885 age, subsequent add-ons
and remodeling were modern.
Site Descriptions
41TV651
The site is located on a relatively level surface; its
margins on the inside of a southeast meander of a north flowing
tributary of Barton Creek. The creek itself lies 800 m north
of the site. The site is situated in a clearing and extends into
surrounding dense woodlands comprised mainly of oak and cedar
with short grasses. This lithic scatter of chert debitage and

10

biface preforms lies on stony clay loam amid limestone bedrock
exposures. Concentrations of debitage were noted in areas of
sheet wash. Numerous nodular and tabular chert fragments were
scattered about the site. Cultural material was dispersed over
an 80 x 63 m area. The area reflects use as a lithic pro­
curement area.
41TV652
This site is located on a fairly level area atop an inter­
fluvial divide between two east flowing drainages of Barton Creek.
The creek lies approximately 800 m to the north, site 41TV651
200 m to the southeast. 41TV652 is situated in an open area
of short grasses surrounded by oak and cedar woodlands. It was
defined on the basis of limited chert debitage and a biface
fragment exposed in a roadbed. Soils consisted of stony clay
loams with limestone fragments and nodular chert fragments inter
spersed throughout the matrix. Shovel probes revealed no
subsurface deposits.
41TV663
This site is located in the uplands of Barton Creek which
lies 1.5 km to the east. It is partially situated in an open
exposed b~rrow area that is now fairly overgrown with field
grasses and partially in oak and cedar woodlands. The majority
of the material appears to have been linearly redeposited from
bulldozing/soil borrowing for use in the construction of a holding
pond about 200 m to the southeast. Site definition was based
on surficial and, to a limited degree, subsurface cultural
deposits of chert debitage and cores. The few biface preforms
and a thinned biface tip (dart point) were found on the surface.
41TV653
This lithic scatter was found along a
irly level upland
area near the headwaters of a southeast flowing intermittent
drainage of a main tributary of Barton Creek. The creek lies
2 km to the east. The majority of the site is situated in an

11

open field of grasses surrounded by dense cedar/oak woodlands.
Cultural material, consisting of chert debitage (mostly secondary
flakes), cores, 3 biface preforms and 1 thinned biface fragment,
was found in an open exposed erosional area amid chert nodular
fragments and limestone bedrock. Soil probes revealed limited
cultural debris mixed with stony clay loam soils to a depth of
approximately 5 cm. Most of the material is sur cially concen­
trated in the south end of the site.
41TV654
This once fairly large burned rock midden was found along the
northeast slopes of a southeast flowing intermittent tributary of
a maln drainage of Barton Creek. The creek is 1.5 km to the north­
east. Slope vegetation was composed mainly of cedar in the midden
area. From information supplied by a local informant, the site
recorders learned that only about 1/3 to 1/2 of the original midden
area remains undisturbed. Bulldozing of the area in conjunction
with housing construction, as well as removal of midden deposits
for probable use in construction, has left only a portion of the
burned rock midden. This remnant has 2 small (lxlm) shallow pot
holes and a large pot hole of 2x2 m areal extent and a depth of
approximately 1 m. Backdirt of burned rock from this latter hole
can be seen in pi s immediately adjacent to the site. Chert
debi tage, cons ting of both secondary and tertiary flakes, was
found in the midden and scattered in areas around the pot holes.
The large pot hole has exposed a rather good, but limited, cross
section of the midden. From this exposure it appears that the base
of the midden had not been reached and that the chances of further
intact deposits is good. Though only a small area remains, further
work in the form of limited testing may demonstrate that 4lTV654
ister of Historic
meets criteria for nomination to the National
Places. If its cultural affiliation can be determined and if the
possibly intact lower levels yield significant information leading
to a further understanding of regional prehistory, 41TV654 may
achieve National Register status. Only additional study can make
this determination. An alternative to the recommended limited
testing is avoidance and protection.

12

4lTV558 - extension of Espey, Huston

& Assoc.

site

This very large lithic procurement area is situated along
a southeast slope of exposed limestone bedrock and chert nodule
fragments.

The site extends linearly to the northeast along the

slopes from the banks of a southeast flowing intermittent
tributary.

Barton Creek is located approximately 2 km to the

northeast.

Vegetation along the slopes consists of dense oak/

cedar woodland with several clearings of short field grasses
along the upper slopes and benches.

Cultural material has been

exposed by downslope erosion and consists of a fairly evenly
dispersed scatter of chert debitage with cores and bifaces inter­
mixed.

Most of the bifaces fall within the category of preforms.

Flakes are mostly secondary with evidence of retouch on a few.
All material lies amid chert nodules that have been deposited
from the weathering of the limestone bedrock.
has also contributed to soil development.

This weathering

Areas of noticeable

soil deposition were probed for subsurface cultural material
deposits.

The shallow stony clay loams were hard packed with

limestone and chert fragments mixed within the matrix.

Limited

cultural material was noted within the 5 cm deep probes.
4lTV656
This light lithic scatter is located on a fairly level section
of uplands about 70 m southeast of an east flowing intermittent
drainage.
east.

The terrain at the site's edge begins to slope to the

Most of the site is situated in dense oak/cedar woodlands

with partial exposure in a clearing of short field grasses to
the west.

Cultural material was observed in areas of erosional

exposure on the bench and crests where limestone bedrock and
chert nodules have begun to outcrop.

The cultural material

consisted of chert debitage - mostly secondary flakes, cores and
two biface preforms.

Three bifaces were found in a pile on a

fence post about 40 m west of the site.
collected fr@m the site area.

- - - - - - - - - - ------------------

These may have been

14

4lTV657
This very extensive scatter runs linearly from northwest to
southeast along a southeast flowing shallow drainage.
vegetation is predominantly dense oak/cedar woodland
clearings of short field grasses.

The
with

Again, cultural material was

found exposed by erosional processes and is dispersed over a large
area with several concentrations noted.

Material consisted of

chert debitage, mostly secondary and tertiary flakes, cores,
some biface preforms with one bifacially worked flake.

Shovel

probes dug into the hard stony clay loam soils revealed no
cultural material in the area of the probes.

Some material

could be mixed within the matrix but to a small degree.
4lTV658
This light lithic scatter is located on the northeast
trending slopes of a primary tributary which flows east to a
tributary of Barton Creek 25 km to the east.

The site is

situated on a bedrock outcrop where chert nodules and fragments
have eroded from the limestone bedrock.
pocket¢

within the bedrock.

Soils are deposited in

Vegetation consists of dense oak/

cedar woodlands with short field grasses in open areas.

Cultural

material was limited to scattered chert debitage and a few cores
and bifaces.
are pocketed.

Shovel probes were attempted in areas where soils
The soil matrix is hard stony clay loam with

limestone and chert fragments mixed in.

Probes revealed no

subsurface cultural material.
4lTV659
This large lithic and burned rock scatter is located on the
northwest and southeast banks and slopes of an easterly flowing
tributary of Barton Creek which lies approximately 2.5 km to
the east.

The site follows the northwest slopes and banks to the

west then continues around to the south where two primary tribu­
taries conjoin then up the southeast bank to the east.

A rather

shallow burned rock midden is situated at the confluence.
Judging from the bedrock formation and wear, it is possible that

15

seeps once flowed in the area. Pools of water were noted on the
bottom of the drainage in the limestone bedrock. Vegetation
at the site consisted of oak/cedar woodland with clearings
along the northwest slopes of short field grasses. Cultural
material was found deposited and redeposited along slopes and
banks of limestone bedrock with shallow soil catchments of hard
stony clay and stony clay loams. Artifacts were exposed along
a trail and erosional wash areas on the northwest side and along
the limestone banks on the southeast side, as well as in the
creek bottoms. Cultural debris was varied and scattered but
tended to be of the type associated with procurement areas. This
material consisted of secondary and tertiary flakes, biface pre­
forms and some cores. Dart points were found at the site:
one Bulverde point missing the tip and one unidentified point
with tip missing from midblade to tip from what appears to be
a snap fracture. Both dart points were sketched. The burned
rock midden is about 10 x 10 m and approximately 50 cm in depth.
Some chert flakes were found in the vicinity of the midden.
Burned rock was found along the southeast bank. Also noted in
the drainage was a mussel shell fragment, flakes and a biface
preform. This material appears to have been redeposited from
downslope erosion and drainage gradation around the midden. Soils
were too shallow to warrant subsurface probes.
41TV660
This light lithic scatter is located in a clearing at the
western end of an east trending interfluve dividing two east
flowing intermittent tributaries of a main drainage of Barton
Creek. The creek is located 1.5 km to the northeast. Vegetation
surrounding the clearing is dense oak/cedar woodlands and
the clearing itself is in short field grasses. Cultural material
consisting of chert debitage, mostly secondary flakes and cores,
was noted on the surface. Most of this material is exposed by
erosion. Material is fairly well distributed over the site.
Hard stony clay loams made shovel probes ineffectual through
they were attempted.

16

41TV661
This lithic scatter is located along the south banks and
benches of an east flowing intermittent tributary which drains
into an unnamed tributary of Barton Creek. The creek lies 1.2 km
northeast of the site. Vegetation consists of oak/cedar woodlands
with clearings of short field grasses. Cultural material,
dispersed over a large area, consisted of chert debitage, cores,
bifaces and chunks. One unidentified dart point was found in an
area of sheet wash and was sketched. Material was also exposed
in a trail running through the site area. Soils are shallow
stony clay loams with chert nodules and limestone fragments in
the matrix. The site was not probed because of the shallowness of
the soil.
4lTV662
This historic house site is located adjacent to Boston Lane
Road in an area that was used for a riding stable. The site is
situated in an open area of thick short grasses and scattered oak.
The main feature of the site is a standing chimney of native
limestone masonry with a brick relined firebox. The general out
lines of the house can still be seen from the remaining stones of
a pier and beam foundation and the periphery is well defined by
poured concrete slabs for rooms added to the original structure.
Some scraps of sawn and milled lumber were found suggesting that
the house was originally of ballon frame construction. No great
amount of charcoal or ash was found which leads us to conclude
that the house was dismantled or moved rather than demolished.
The sparseness of the artifact scatter tends to confirm this im
pression. The position of the chimney and the front walkway imply
that the original structure was a two room central hall house
typical of the folk architecture of central Texas. Its rsther
modest size, with main rooms estimated to have been about 16 feet
square and a relatively narrow hall, suggests the more modest
homes erected in rural Texas after the Civil War. The native
limestone chimney rather than heating by cast iron stoves, in
such a house further suggests that such items were not easily

17

available or fashionable when the house was built. This leads to
the conclusion that the original structure was erected only a few
years after the railroads brought such items into Austin in
quantity. On a somewhat conjectural basis we estimate that the
original building was erected sometime between 1875 and 1885.
The apparent add-on rooms and relining of the fireplace show that
it was used well into the current century. The condition of
the extant galvanized steel tank (cistern) to provide running
water from the windmill pump to the house suggests that the house
was occupied into perhaps the 1950's.
Because the bulk of the area behind the house had been bull­
dozed into a great spoil heap and the entire vicinity badly
disturbed, buried archeological deposits cannot be expected. The
current condition of the site precludes its eligibility for the
National Register of Historic Places.

18

RECOMMENDATIONS
Prehistoric sites 4lTV6S1, 652, 653, 656, 657, 658, 660,
661, 663 and 578 (extension) are surficial exposures of lithic
artifacts characteristic of resource procurement. Situated on
shallow stony clays and stony clay loams they hold little or no
cultural depth. These sites have been amply recorded and mapped
and in our opinion do not warrant further investigation for
determination of eligibility to the National Register of Historic
Places.
Prehistoric sites 4lTV654 and 659 are burned rock middens
with diagnostic artifacts dating to ca. 4000 B.P. Further testing
to establish the integrity of the deposits and their eligibility
for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places is
warranted at these two sites. An alternative to limited exca­
vation is protection of the cultural deposits by such methods as
burial with clean soil and subsequent planting of protective
grasses. As the second approch precludes further development of
the area, the sponsor may wish to consider testing if these two
sites are to be affected by construction.
The single historic site, 4lTV662, has been virtually
destroyed but the remnants show no potential for eligibility
to the National Register of Historic Places.

SUMN1ARY
In summary, ten of the prehistoric sites found during this
survey have been recorded, plotted on USGS topographic maps and
filed with TARL. Site photographs and drawings accomp
the
standard site survey forms. These sites do not warrant further
investigation since little additional information beyond that
produced by site recording would be gained by additional study,
The two burned rock middens have been recommended for further
testing or preservation. The one historic site has been destroyed.

19

REFERENCES CITED
Alexander, Herbert L.
The Levi Site: A Paleo-Indian Campsite in Central
1963
Texas. Amepican Antiquity 28(4):510-528.
Eddy, Frank W.
1973

Salvage Apcheology in the Lanepopt Resepvoip Distpict~
Centpal Texas.
Report submitted to the National Park

Service by the Texas Archeological Survey, The Uni­
versity of Texas at Austin.
Espey, Huston &Associates
1979
Site forms on file at Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Henderson, Jerry
Preliminary Report of the Texas Highway Department
1980
Excavations at 41BX52 - the Paleo Component. Texas
Apcheology, newsletter of the Texas Archeological
Society 24(2):14-15.
Jelks, Edward B.
1951
Relationships Between Foci of the Edwards Plateau
Aspect: A Distributional Analysis of Diagnostic Pro­
jectile Point Types from Archeological Sites in the
Marshall Ford Dam Reservoir, Travis County, Texas.
Master's thesis on file at the library, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Johnson, Leroy Jr.
1967
Toward a Statistical Overview of the Archaic Cultures
of Central and Southwestern Texas. Texas Memorial
Museum Bulletin 12, Austin.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947
The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of Toyah,
Uvalde and Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of the Texas
Apcheological and Paleontological Society Vol. 18.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1974a
Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site,
Williamson County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey
Reseapch Repopt 49, The University of Texas at Austin.
1974b

Upper Navasota Reservoir: An Archeological Assessment.
Texas Archeological Survey Researah Report 47, The
University of Texas at Austin.

20

1976

Late Archaic Occupations at the Loeve-Fox Site: The
San Marcos and Twin Sisters Phases. In: The Texas
The Uni­
Arahaia: A Symposium~ T.R. Hester (Ed.).
versity of Texas at San Antonio.

1981

Cultural Chronology in Central Texas.
logical Society BuZZetin 4:65-89.

1982

AraheoZogiaaZ Investigations at the San GabrieZ
Reservoir Distriats~ CentraZ Texas Vol. 4.
Institute

Texas Archeo­

of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University,
Denton.
n.d.

The Rogers Spring Site: 1974 Investigations. Texas
Archeological Survey. Unpublished Research Report on
file at The University of Texas at Austin.

Suhrn, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
of the Texas AraheoZogiaaZ Society No. 25.

--~~~-----------~--

BuZZetin

