TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT
OF THE PROPOSED LAKE CREEK-JEWETT·TWIN OAK 345KV LOOP

Robertson and limestone Counties, Texas

Bruce A. Nightengale

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN NO. 55
THE UNfVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN

1981

A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND
ASSESSMENT OF THE PROPOSED
LAKE CREEK-JEWETT-TWIN OAK 345KV LOOP
Robertson and Limestone Counties

Technical Bulletin No. 55

Bruce A. Nightengale

Texas Archeological Survey
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
February 1982

I)
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcones Research Center
10,100 Burnet Road

Principal Investigator
David S. Dibble

A report submitted to Texas Power and Light Company in partial
fulfillment of the terms of Purchase Order No. 81-13277-ED

January 1982

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction . . . . . . .

1

Environmental Background.

1

Archeological Background

3

Survey Methods

7

Results of the Survey and Conclusions

9

References Cited . . . . .

11

Figure
Figure.

Project Location Map

..

. . . .

..

. .

iv

....

-­

,....­1- ..... - - ­

-­ -'­

.--- .......

-'"

-­ .;s--­

Fig u re

\

/

\

\

Surveyed

Not surveyed (no access)

o

Surveyed

1974

a

1960

A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT OF
THE PROPOSED LAKE CREEK-JEWETT-TWIN OAK 345KV LOOP,
Robertson and limestone Counties
INTRODUCTION
From December 1 to December 5, 1981, the Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, conducted a cultural
resource survey and assessment of a 17.5 mi. long, 230 to 280
ft. wide, transmission line corridor for Texas Power and Light
Company (Fig. 1). The line runs from the proposed Twin Oak Steam
Electric Station in Robertson County northwest, then north into
Limestone County, where it connects with an existing power 1 ine.
The field survey was conducted by TAS staff members Bruce A.
Nightengale and Jeff P. Turpin with David S. Dibble, Director of
the Survey, as the Principal Investigator.
The objectives of the survey were:
1) to locate and identify any cultural resources which
may be adversely affected by construction;
2} to evaluate the significance of these resources;
3) to recommend means of minimizing any adverse effects
of construction upon the identified resources; and
4) to recommend further work, where necessary, which
extends beyond the scope of the present study.
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
The Texas Power and Light transmission line traverses an
area of relief ranging from 360 ft. AMSL on the Steele Creek
flood plain to 490 ft. on the surrounding upland. The corridor
crosses a predominantly upland environment between the Brazos and
Navasota rivers.
Geology
The study area is considered to be a part of the Gulf Coast
Tertiary province. The majority is underlain by the Calvert

2

Bluff Formation, the predominantly fluvial Eocene formation
which is the uppermost level of the Wilcox Group (Bureau of
Economic Geology 1970). The Calvert Bluff Formation is composed
of mudstone with various amounts of sandstone, lignite, ironstone
con c ret ion s, and i nth e u p per 1 eve 1 1 0 cally, g1 a IJ con i t e (ib id. ) .
Recent alluvial deposits fringe the flood plains of Steele and
Cox creeks.
So il s
Most of the soils represented in the study area are of the
Axtell-Tabor and the Padina series of upland soils. The Nahatche­
Uhland series ;s found along Steele Creek. The Axtell-Tabor soils
are deep upland soils with hard, fine, sandy loam surfaces over
clayey subsoils which are slowly permeable and have a high shrink­
swell potential. Padina soils are sandy upland soils with loamy
subsoils which are moderately well-drained. Present land use in
the area is for pasturage. The Nahatche soils have a brown clay
loam surface over mottled brown and gray clay loam lower layers.
The Uhland are brown sandy loam surfaces overlying stratified
layers of loamy and sandy texture (General Soils Map for Robertson
and Limestone counties 1978, 1979).
Hydrology
Underground potable water is supplied by the Wilcox and
Carrizo sands which in combination form the Carrizo-Wilcox aquifer
(Southwest Research Institute 1975). The primary drainages in
the study area, Steele and Cox creeks flow so~the~st to the
Navasota River.
Climate
Located on the western edge of Carrts (1967:6) East Texas
Climatic Region, both counties receive between 35 and 38 in. of
precipitation annually with a maximum in May and December and a
minimum in August and September. The latter falls within the

3

summer drought period in this region. Monthly mean temperatures
range from 48 0 in January to 83 0 in July and August; the average
for the year is 67 0 to 68 0 F. (Carr 1967: 8, 19).
Flora and Fauna
The study area falls within Blair's (1950) Texas Biotic
Province, a transitional zone between the forested Austroriparian
province to the east and the grasslands of the Kansan province to
the west. Most species living within this transitional zone are
not endemic; of the forty-nine mammalian species listed, forty­
one are native to the Austroriparian province and eight to the
Kansan (op. ait.: 101). Among the most common mammal s are
opposum, raccon, deer, armadillo, coyote, bobcat, and cottontail
and swamp rabbit.
Vegetation also reflects the transitional nature of the
environment, blending the characteristics of the Blackland
Prairie to the west and the East Texas Timberlands. Tall grasses,
such as little b1uestem, silver b1uestem, switchgrass, indiangrass,
Texas wintergrass and purp1etop form the understory with an over­
story of post oak and blackjack oak (Gould 1962).
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Previously recorded sites in Robertson County number 149 and
in Limestone County 151. Most of the more recent reportings
resulted from cultural resource surveys of areas to be developed
for energy production, many of which included both counties.
An early survey of the Upper Navasota River Reservoir by
TAS (Prewitt 1974b) recorded sixty-four sites in Robertson,
Limestone and Leon counties; ten are located in Robertson and
forty-eight in Limestone County. The majority were on the flood
plain of the Navasota River and have since been inundated by the
Reservoir (now Lake Limestone). Two sites located by this survey
were subsequently tested (Prewitt 1975); 41RTZ in Robertson
County proved to have been occupied from the Early Archaic to the

4

Prehistoric period. Continuations of the cultural resource
program at Lake Limestone are reported in Prewitt and Mallouf
(1976) and Mallouf (1979). These excavations indicate prehistoric
occupation of the Navasota River area from Paleoindian to Late
Prehistoric times.
Archeological and historic investigations at the Twin Oak
and Oak Knoll Steam Electric Stations were initiated concurrent­
ly with the first Upper Navasota survey (Prewitt and Grombacher
1974). Sixteen sites were recorded in the Twin Oak reservoir
basin; two were subsequently tested in conjunction with further
survey of proposed mining tracts (Turpin and Kluge 1980). The
latter resulted in the recording of an additional twenty pre­
historic and one historic sites. Additional survey of facilities
ancillary to the Twin Oak Station produced two additional sites;
neither merited further investigation (Nightengale 1981).
Two projects conducted by Espey, Huston and Associates in
1979 and 1980 (Voellinger et al. 1980; Wooldridge and Freeman
1980) included portions of Limestone, Leon and Freestone counties;
the twenty-eight sites recorded in lower Limestone County range
in age from Archaic to Historic.
A sampling survey of 75,000 acres contained within two
proposed lignite prospects in Robertson County was carried out
by TAS (Good, Turpin and Freeman 1980). This predictive survey
was based on a random sample of approximately 12 percent of the
area, stratified by topographic zone. Sixty-four sites were
recorded; the majority were found along major tributaries to the
Brazos River.
A survey of a 918-acre mining tract in Robertson County
(Moncure 1980) was primarily contained within the upland environ­
mental zone. Only one historic site was documented. The most
recently reported sites resulted from small area investigations
by the Texas Highway Department (Crawford n.d,) the Texas Depart­
ment of Water Resources (Fox n.d.) and Espey, Huston and Associates
(Wooldridge, personal communication) .
~ate

...............

- - - - - - - - -

...

~~

.....

----~

...............- ..

~--

...

-­

-~

5

As a result of the considerable area of both counties
which has been sampled by these various projects, the probabil­
ity of predicting areas of high archeological site frequency
has been greatly improved. Thus, the approach to archeological
survey has been refined, allowing incorporation of much of the
previously acquired information into the study methods. Based
on data gathered during these and other regional surveys and
excavations, a probably chronology of prehistoric and early
historic occupations within this region has been developed.
Paleoindian Period (prior to 10,000 to 8,000 B.P.)
The evidence for this, the earliest known cultural period
in Texas prehistory, is based in Central Texas on surface finds
and excavated material. Buried cultural deposits associated
with this period have been unearthed at the Levi Rockshelter
on the Pedernales River (Alexander 1963); the Loeve Site (Eddy
1973; Prewitt n.d.b.) and Tombstone Bluff on the San Gabriel
River (Prewitt 1974a, n.d.b.), and 41BX52 on the outskirts of
San Antonio (Henderson 1980). Stone tool types known to be
assignable to the Paleoindian occupation of the region are
CZovi~ FoZsom~ PZainview~ scottsbZuff~ Meoorve~ Angostura and
GoZondrina dart points.
Direct stratigraphic associations for the traditionally
accepted subsistence of Paleoindian groups, dependency on now­
extinct Pleistocene megafauna, is lacking in Central Texas.
Thus, the assumption is that their economy depended upon hunting
and gathering, a mode of existence which was retained until the
time of contact with the first Europeans.
Archaic Period (8,000 to 1,250 B.P.)
The Archaic peoples of Central Texas presumably led a
nomadic life sustained by mixed hunting and gathering. Their
lifeway was sensitively dependent on many environmental factors­
the availability of water, game and edible vegetation. Tool

6

kits included contracting and expanding stem dart points, food
processing tools such as manos and metates, and various auxillary
implements. Six chronological phases, proposed for the Central
Texas area, are based on recent synthesis (Weir 1976a, 1976b
Prewitt 1974a, 1974b, n.d.a. in press) and earlier studies
{Kelley 1947; Jelks 1951; Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954; Johnson
1967). These phases, the Circleville (8000-6000 B.P.), San
Geronimo (6000-5000 B.P.). Clear Fork (5000-4000 B.P.), Round
Rock (4000-2600 B.P.), San Marcos (2600-1750 B.P.) and Twin
Sisters (1750-1250 B.P.) correspond to the Terminal Paleoindian,
Incipient, Early, Middle, Late and Terminal Archaic periods in
the old terminology.
Late Prehistoric Period (1250-l50 B.P.)
The Late Prehistoric Period was one of marked change.
During the early phases, a gradual change is notable in the tool
technology, and by implication, in the culture. The bow and
arrow replaced the atlatl and dart as the weapon and hunting
implement. Pottery made its appearance and, in some parts of
Texas, incipient agriculture was introduced. Important time
diagnostics used to delineate subdivisions in the period are
the Granbury and Scallorn arrow points characteristic of the
Austin Focus (1250-650 B.P.), the earliest division of the
Central Texas Aspect (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954). Although
subsistence modes were apparently maintained, the later Toyah
Focus (650-150 B.P.) sites are identified by the presence of
Perdiz and Cliffton arrow pOints and bone-tempered pottery.
(Leon Plain).
Historic Period (European contact to Present)
For an in-depth summary of the early history of Robertson
County. the reader is referred to the Historic Resource section
(Part II) of the Calvert and Cole Creek survey report {Good,
Turpin and Freeman 1980: 57-107}. A brief resume of the history
,

7

of Limestone County is of some peptinence to site 41LTll, a
pottery kiln located adjacent to the transmission line corridor
under construction.
Early settlements included the Fort Parker Colony established
in 1834 by James W. and Silas M. Parker. Historically documented
Indian groups, such as the Waco and Tehuacana, still occupied
the area, causing problems for these early settlers (Webb 1952).
The county was formally organized in 1846 when it was separated
from Robertson County. The county seat, originally at Springfield,
was moved to Groesbeck in 1873. Important industries included
lumbering and pottery making. 41LTll in the vicinity of Oletha
was one of these early industrial sites, specializing in the
production of churns, bowls, jugs and jars with various glazes
such as salt and alkaline (TARL files). Shops such as 41LTll
made use of the kaolin clay common to the area.
More rapid industrial development came to the area with
the construction of the Houston and Texas Central Railroad in
1869. Energy production initiated with the discovery of gas
in 1912; the town of Mexia was the oil center until the 1920 5
(Webb 1952: Vol 2, 57-58).
1

SURVEY METHODS
Prior to the inception of field work, the appropriate
USGS Topographic Quadrangle maps and site files of the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory were examined for previously
recorded sites in the vicinity of the proposed corridor. Five
sites in Limestone County lie adjacent to the right-of-way; none
will be affected by construction. Four are prehistoric sites
located during the Oak Knoll and Twin Oak survey of 1974 (Prewitt
and Grombacner 1974). The fifth, 41LTll, is a historic pottery
shop recorded in 1973. Project area maps indicate that the site
lies closer to the line than is the actual case. Field reexam­
ination confirms the plottings at TARL; the site is 200 m. from
the nearest boundary of the corridor.

8

Prior archeological surveys in the region provided the
baseline data for an assessment of high probability areas along
the transmission line. Generally, sites are sparsely distribu­
ted in the upland areas; in the lowland areas, prehistoric
occupation centered around the major drainages such as the
Brazos and Navasota rivers or the larger tributaries such as
Steele, Walnut and Duck creeks.
The proposed transmission line corridor crosses two areas
which had been previously surveyed by TAS in 1974 and 1979 in
conjunction with preparation for the development of the Twin
Oak Steam Electric Station (Prewitt and Grombacher 1974; Turpin
and Kluge 1980), Thus, those segments of the line were excluded
from coverage and the survey was initiated approximately 3 mi.
northwest and 1.5 mi. north of its start at Twin Oak (Fig. 1).
Also omitted from inspection was approximately 0,5 mi. of
property for which access had not been obtained.
The surveyed portions of the line were examined by walking
parallel transects at an interval of 30 to 50 m. depending on
the terrain. Where possible, serpentine transects were employed.
The staked center line was used as a bearing. Areas of high
visibility included cut banks, pocket gopher dirt piles, barrow­
ing back dirt, and erosional areas with little vegetation.
SpeCial attention was paid to high probability areas where it
was expected prehistoric occupational remains would 5e preserved,
These included alluvial terraces, stream confluences and meanders,
flood plain knolls and areas proximal to seep springs, In some
cases, shovel probes were used to test for subsurface material­
for example, in the high probability areas where vegetation
obscured the ground surface and in the vicinity of the one arti­
fact found on this survey. No attendant cultural material was
found in association with this one chert flake.
Ground control was maintained by the use of 1 ~600 aerial
mosaics with the line plotted and 1 :200 plan and terrain maps
provided by Texas Power and Light. Coverage was also plotted

9

Qn USGS Topographic Quadrangle Maps.
RESULTS OF THE SURVEY AND CONCLUSIONS
Only one isolated tertiary chert flake was found in the
survey of 12 mi. of transmission corridor, This artifact was
located in a rodent burrow dirt pile on cleared land, atop a
knoll overlooking the south-flowing Cox Creek to the east.
Shovel probes were dug to a depth in excess of 75 cm. in the
sandy loam soil; no additional cultural material was found.
The area was photographed and plotted on the maps.
No other evidence of prehistoric occupation along the
line was located nor were any historic structures or residues
found. The line will not conflict with any archeological sites
currently recorded in the Robertson or Limestone county files
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin. No sites listed on, or nominated to the
National Register of Historic Places will be affected by this
construction. The one site in the vicinity which bears a Texas
Historical Marker, 41LTl1, lies some 200 m. northeast of the
line. This area should be carefully avoided by any activities
associated with construction of the line.
In addition to the general paucity of prehistoric sites
in upland regions as a whole, the absence of visible evidence
for aboriginal occupation in this area can be partially attribu­
ted to the heavy land modification over the modern era. Sites
as ephemeral as those usually found in the upland settings are
easily destroyed or displaced by agricultural procedures, animal
traffic, and erosion. Also, portions of the line traverse heavily
forested woodlands with resultant dense leaf litter which impedes
visibility.
It is our opinion, based on the results of the current
survey, that construction of the Lake Creek-Jewett-Twin-Oak
transmission line will not affect cultural resources of deter­
mined merit. Care should be exercised in the vicinity of 41LTll

.

10

and when crossing the area surrounding the isolated find of
prehistoric material, In the event additional cultural
material is exposed during clearing or construction of the
line, the location should be reported to the Texas Historical
Commission,

---

-----

---

- - -

11

REFERENCES CITED
Alexander. Herbert L.
1963 The Levi Site: A Paleo-Indian Campsite in Central
Texas. Ame4~can Ant~qu~ty 28(4): 510-528.
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
Sc~ence 2(1): 93-117.

The

Texa~

Bureau of Economic Geology
1970 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Waco Sheet.
of Texas at Austin.

]ou4nal 06

The University

Carr. John T., Jr.
1967 The Climate and Physiography of Texas. Texas Water
Development Board Repo4t no. 53, Austin.
Crawford, Daymond
n.d. Texas Highway Department. TARL files.
Dallas Morning News
1980-81 Texas Almanac.

Belo Corporation, Dallas.

Eddy, Frank W.
1973 Salvage A4eheology ~n the Lanepo4t Re~e4vo~4 V~~t4~ct,
Cent4al Texa~. Report submitted to the National Park
Service by the Texas Archeological Survey, The Univer~
sity of Texas at Austin.
Fox, Dan
n.d. Texas Department of Water Resources.
General Soils Map for Robertson County and Limestone County
1978-79 Soil Conservation Service.
Good, Carolyn E.. Solveig A. Turpin and Martha Doty Freeman
1980 A Cultural Resource Assessment of the Calvert and Cole
Creek Lignite Prospects. Robertson County. Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Re~ea4ch Repo4t no. 75, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Gould, Frank W.
1962

Texa~ Plant~ -- A Check Li~t and Eeologieal
Texas A & M University, College Station.

Summa~q.

12

Henderson, Jerry
1980 Preliminary Report of the Texas Highway Department
Excavations at 41BX52 - the Paleo Component. T~xa~
A~eh~otogy, Newsletter of the Texas Archeological
Soc i e ty 24 ( 2 ): 14 -1 5 .
Jelks, Edward B.
1951 Relationships between Foci of the Edwards Plateau
Aspect: A Distributional Analysis of Diagnostic
Projectile Point Types from Archeological sites in the
Marshall Ford Dam Reservoir, Travis County, Texas.
Master's Thesis on file at the Library. The University
of Texas at Austin.
Johnson, Leroy, Jr..
967
Toward a Statistical Overview of the Archaic Cultures
of Central and Southwestern Texas. Texas Memorial
Museum Bull~tin no. 12, Austin.
Kelley. J. Charles
1947 The Lehman Rock Shelter: A Stratified site of Toyah.
Uvalde and Round Rock Foci. Bull~tin ob th~ T~xa~
A~eheologieat and Pal~ontologieat Soeiety 18.
Mallouf. Michael G.
1979 Archeological Investigations at Lake Limestone: Fall
and Winter, 1977. Texas Archeological Survey Re~ea~eh
Repont no. 71, The University of Texas at Austin.
Nightengale, Bruce A.
1981 Archeological Investigations at the Twin Oak Electric
Generating Station Auxilary Facilities, Robertson
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Teehnieat
Bulletin no. 52, The University of Texas at Austin.
Moncure, Hank
1980 Cultural Resource Survey of the Diamond No.1 Lignite
Prospect, Robertson County, Texas. Texas Archeological
Survey Teehnieat Bulletin no. 42, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1974a Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site,
Williamson County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey
Re~eaneh Repont
no. 49, The University of Texas at
Austin.
1974b Upper Navasota Reservoir: An Archeological Assessment.
Texas Archeological Survey Re~eaneh Repant no. 47, The
University of Texas at Austin.

13

1975

Upper Navasota Reservoir: Archeological Test Exca­
vations at the Barkley and Louie Sadler Sites. Texas
Archeological Survey R~~~~~ch R~po~t no. 53, The Uni­
versity of Texas at Austin.

1976

Late Archaic Occupations at the Loeve-Fox Site: The
San Marcos and Twin Sisters Phases. In: Th~ T~x~~
A~ch~~e:
~ Sympo~~um, T.R. Hester (ed.).
The University
of Texas at San Antonio.

NO.a

The Rogers Spring Site: Everything You Always Wanted
to Know About Burned Rock Middens. Unpublished manu­
script on file at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

NO.b

Archeological Investigations at the loeve-Fox, loeve
and Tombstone Bluff Sites in the Granger Lake District
of Central Texas. Manuscript in review with the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers.

in
Cultural Chronologies in Central Texas.
press gical Society Bullet~n no. 4, 1981.

Texas Archeolo­

Prewitt, Elton R. and Kerry Grombacher
1974 An Archeological and Historic Assessment of the areas
to be Affected by the Twin Oak and Oak Knoll Projects,
East Central Texas. Texas Archeological Survey R~~~~~ch
R~po~t
no. 43, The University of Texas at Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R. and Michael G. Mallouf
1976 Upper Navasota River, Texas: Excavations at lake
limestone, Spring 1976. Texas Archeological Survey
Re~e~~Qh Repa~t no.66, The University of Texas at Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
06 the Texa~ A~Qh~ologic~l Soci~ty no. 25.

Bullet~n

Southwest Research Institute
1975 Envi~onm~ntal Impact A~~~~~m~nt R~pa~t: Twin Oak ~nd
Oak Knoll Ste~m-El~ct~ic Pow~~ G~n~h~ting F~cilit~~~.
San Antonio, Texas.
Turpin, Solveig A., and Margaret J. Kluge
1980 Cultural Resource Sampling. Survey and Assessment in
Areas to be Affected by the Twin Oak Steam-Electric
Station, Robertson County, Texas. Texas Archeological
Survey Re~~a~ch Repo~t no. 74, The University of Texas
at Austin.

14

Voellinger, Leonard R., Martha D. Freeman, Thomas H. Hale, Jr.,
and Melissa W. Voellinger
1980 An Assessment of the Cultural Resources of the Jewett
Mine Project Area. VOQument no. 80011, Espey, Huston
and Associates, Inc.
Webb, Walter P~escott, editor
1952 The Handboo~ 06 Texa~ (2 vOls.).
Association, Austin.

Texas State Historical

Weir, Frank A.
1976a The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Doctoral dis­
sertation. Washington State University, Pullman.
1976b The Central Texas Archaic Reconsidered. In: The Texa~
Aftc.ha,[c.: a Sympo~,[um, T.R. Hester (ed.). Center for
Archeological Research Spec.,[al Repoftt no. 2, The Univer­
sity of Texas at Austin.
Wooldridge, H.G. and Martha D. Freeman
1980 A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of the
Limestone Electric Generating Station, Limestone and
Freestone Counties, Texas. Voc.ument no. 80023, Espey,
Huston and Associates, Inc.
Wooldridge, H.G.
1981 Personal Communication.

