ARCHEOLOGICAL TESTING
AT THE VERA DANIEL SITE (41TV1364)
ZILKER PARK, AUSTIN, TEXAS

by
Robert A. Ricklis, Michael D. Blum, and Michael B. Collins

Texas Antiquities Committee Permit # 789
Principal Investigator
Michael B. Collins

Studies in Archeology 12
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
The University of Texas at Austin

1991

Errata
Page 15, line 4
"1bis was obscured.... " should read "This obscured .... "
Page 46, Figure 15, symbol key should read
"LPEMHC= Late Pleistocene to Early-Middle Holocene Colluvium"
"LPEMHA =Late Pleistocene to Early-Middle Holocene Alluvium"
Page 52, Second Heading
"INTERSITE VARIABLILI1Y ... " should read "INTRASITE V ARIABIL11Y"
Page 54, Figure 16, Label
"Outfill Right-of-Way" should read "Outfall Right-of-Way"

Printed 1991
The University of Texas at Austin
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
Balcones Research Center 5
Austin, Texas 78712-1100
Submitted to
City of Austin
in partial fulfillment of an agreement between
.
The City of Austin and The University of Texas at Austm
dated May 16, 1989.

ABSTRACT
Archeological testing of the Vera Daniel Site (41 TV1364) in Zilker Park, City of
Austin, Texas, by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas
at Austin, in the summer of 1989 established the presence of cultural materials stratified
in deep alluvial and colluvial valley fill deposits. The cultural vestiges derive from the
Paleoindian and Archaic periods of the regional archeological record. Radiocarbon ages
of the geologic deposits hosting these cultural remains span the period from 11,000 to
500 years ago. The site is deemed to be significant with considerable potential to
contribute to scientific knowledge about the prehistoric inhabitants of the area.
The area of the site tested falls within the right-of-way of the proposed South Austin
Outfall Interceptor Main, a wastewater line. Construction of this line as planned would
destroy a large volume of the site and result in loss of valuable archeological data. It is,
therefore, recommended that construction plans be altered to eliminate or greatly reduce
the impact to this site. If this cannot be achieved, then mitigation of the impact by
archeological excavation in a portion of the area to be disturbed by construction is
recommended.

111

Page intentionally left blank.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT .................................................................. 111
LIST OF FIGURES ........................................................... vii
LIST OF TABLES ............................................................ viii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ........................................................ ix
INTRODUCTION ............................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENTAL AND ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ................ 3
General Setting ............................................................. 3
Environment ................................................................ 5
Archeological Chronology ................................................... 6
Archeology at The Vera Daniel Site ........................................... 9
Discussion ................................................................. 10
GOALS AND METHODS ..................................................... 13
GEOMORPHOLOGY ......................................................... 19
Introduction and Purpose ................................................... 19
Methods ................................................................... 19
Results of Geoarcheological Investigations ................................... 20
Summary and Implications .................................................. 24
EXCAVATIONS .............................................................. 27
Trench 1 ................................................................... 27
Trench 2 ................................................................... 29
Trench 3 ................................................................... 29
Trench 4 ................................................................... 30
Trench 5 ................................................................... 30
Trench 6 ................................................................... 33
Trench 7 ................................................................... 33
Trench 8 ................................................................... 33
CULTURAL MATERIAL ..................................................... 37
Diagnostic Lithic Artifacts .................................................. 37
Non-diagnostic Lithic Artifacts .............................................. 43
Discussion ................................................................. 43
RADIOCARBON AGES ...................................................... 45
DISCUSSION OF SITE SIGNIFICANCE ....................................... 51
Site Potential For Chronological Study ....................................... 51
Site Potential For Study Of Cultural-behavioral Patterns ....................... 52
lntersite Variability In Potential Archeological Significance .................... 52
RECOMMENDATIONS ....................................................... 57
REFERENCES CITED ........................................................ 59
APPENDIX 1 ................................................................. 67
APPENDIX 2 ................................................................. 69

v

Page intentionally left blank.

LIST OF FIGURES
1. Generalized geomorphic map of the area surrounding 41 TV1364 ............... 4
2. The southeastern part of the Vera Daniel Site (41 TV1364)
in Zilker Park, Austin, Texas ............................................... 11
3. Large trackhoe used to excavate 6-meter deep trenches with
sediment piles for each 40-cm level ......................................... 14
4. Hydraulic aluminum shoring installed in a deep trench for
examination of profile by Michael Blum and Robert Ricklis ................... 15
5. Installation of oak-timber shoring in the hand-excavated trench 8 ............. 16
6. Schematic geologic cross section of 41TV1364 ............................... 21
7. General model illustrating relationships between rates of
fluvial sedimentation and development and preservation
of the archeological record ................................................. 25
8. Histograms of artifact occurrences by excavation level
for trenches 1-4, 41 TV1364 ................................................. 28
9. Plan view of cultural debris at the east end of trench 3
at 105-115 cm depth ....................................................... 31
10. Histograms of artifact occurrences by excavation level
for trenches 5-8, 41TV1364 ................................................ 32
11. Plan view of trench 8 showing location of burned rock and chert artifacts
at 134-141 cm depth ....................................................... 35
12. Paleoindian and Archaic dart points from 41TV1364, 1989 season ............. 39
13. Clovis preform, 41TV1364, 1989 season ..................................... 41
14. Chipped stone artifacts from 41TV1364, 1989 season ......................... 42
15. Synoptic cross section of 41TV1364 showing
all sources of subsurface data ............................................... 46
16. Three levels of inferred archeological significance at Vera Daniel Site ......... 54
17. Schematic cross section showing expected compression or
expansion of cultural zones related to geomorphic setting ..................... 55

vii

LIST OF TABLES
Radiocarbon ages for sediments from the Vera Daniel Site
(41TV1364) ............................................................... 45
2. Depth, in centimeters, of levels in machine-excavated trenches ................ 67
3. Findings by trench level from 41TV1364 .................................... 69
1.

Vlll

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many individuals contributed to making the testing at the Vera Daniel Site both
effective and enjoyable. We would especially like to thank Jonathan Janek, of the City
of Austin, Transportation and Public Service Department, who was the project manager
during the fieldwork, for his help and cooperation in expediting the project. In addition,
Matthew Kite, Gary Kosut, and Doug Rademaker, also of Transportation and Public
Services Department, assisted in coordinating some project details. Jim Rhodes, city
arborist, was helpful in discussing the logistics of avoiding damage to the Zilker Park
trees. Sarah Macias, Zilker Park manager, and the park staff were most helpful in
supplying us with wooden barricades. Rick Fuszek, of the City of Austin, Parks and
Recreation Department, helped to coordinate efforts between the various city departments that were involved. Peter Marsh, staff engineer with the Parks and Recreation
Department, ensured that signs, explaining the nature of our project to the public, were
delivered and installed. Billy Akers, of the City of Austin, Water and Wastewater
Department is thanked for prompt installation of erosion control fencing around the
trench areas. Final completion of this report has been facilitated by James Clarno, who
has replaced Jonathan Janek as project manager.
We appreciate the efficiency with which Dr. Solveig A. Turpin, as Co-Principal
Investigator, handled the administrative responsiblities. The field crew was made up of
the following able individuals: Bon Davis, David W. Dibble, Dave Driver, Anne Kerr,
Yorke Rowan, Lauren Sullivan, Abby Treece, and Raul Troxler. In addition, Paul Keeler
voluntarily helped on the screens. David W. Dibble served as on-site photographer.
Anne Kerr deserves special thanks for supervising on-site bagging and prelimnary counting of artifacts, as well as editing this report. At TARL, Kelly Scott helped with
coordination of logistical details, and Laura Hillier received and processed material in
the lab. Pamela Headrick produced most of the artifact illustrations for this report.
Kathryn Reese and Pamela Headrick drafted the maps and graphs. Dan Julien developed
and printed the photographs.
Special thanks go to Sam Valastro, of the Radiocarbon Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin, for fitting our samples into a demanding schedule so the results
reported here could be available on a timely basis.
We greatly appreciate the professional expertise of Kirby Meyer, Susan Ham, and
Frank Allen of MLA Labs, Inc. Mr. Meyer's geotechnical data input and trench safety
recommendations were indispensable in completing the deep trench excavations efficiently and safely. Frank Allen was with us on a daily basis and his help and advice in
installing and removing trench shoring were essential. Melvin Collard, of MLA Labs,
Inc., made the initial borings necessary for the development of the trench safety plan.
Rick Schmidt, of Capital Equipment, provided us with prompt delivery and servicing
of machinery. The skill of Kenneth Smith, the machine operator, was largely responsible

IX

for the level of vertical resolution which we were able to achieve in the machine-excavated trenches. Richard Gresham, of The Plank Company, is thanked for prompt
delivery of the shoring devises. We also thank Bill Waring, of Campbell Light and
Barricade, for the timely delivery of the visiguard fencing. We appreciate the services of
Felix Warwas, of Greener Pastures Lawn and Landscaping, who provided and installed
grass sod subsequent to the excavation of the trenches.
We extend our appreciation to Mark Denton and J. Barto Arnold III, of the Texas
Antiquities Committee for their input in the formulation of the research design and
continuing interest in the project.

x

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION
During June and July of 1989, archeological testing was conducted at the Vera Daniel
Site (41TV1364), located in Zilker Park, Austin, Texas, by the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL) of The University of Texas at Austin. The purpose of this
work was to assess the archeological potential of that part of the site to be disturbed by
the proposed South Austin Outfall Interceptor Main wastewater line to be constructed
by the City of Austin, and to make recommendations to the City as to whether or not
additional archeological excavations would be required in order to mitigate the impact
of construction. The work was under the overall supervision of Dr. Michael B. Collins,
Principal Investigator. Dr. Solveig A. Turpin, as Co-Principal Investigator, handled
administrative duties. Robert A. Ricklis served as Project Archeologist, and Michael D.
Blum was retained as geoarcheological consultant. Materials and documentation
generated in this and the previous work by Espey, Huston and Associates (EHA), are
being permanently curated at TARL.
The testing by TARL involved the excavation of eight trenches across the site, in most
cases to and below culturally relevant depths. Significant evidence of prehistoric human
occupation of the site was uncovered. The present report summarizes the findings at the
site, discusses their significance, and makes appropriate recommendations.
Some of the findings pose interpretive dilemmas. In part this is because of the limited
amount of subsurface exposure produced by testing of such modest scale in comparison
to the extensive area investigated. It is also due to the complex nature of certain kinds
of geologic deposits encountered, colluvial slopes in particular. The reader will find that
the geological perspective differs somewhat from the archeological one in interpreting
the evidence generated in this project. Although the perspectives and interpretations
vary somewhat, the conclusion is that the colluvial slope areas of the Vera Daniel Site are
of less archeological value than are other areas.
Because of the importance of this site for the scientific study of the early human
prehistory of Central Texas, it is suggested in our recommendations that construction
impact to the site be avoided or minimized; if this cannot be done, then substantial
mitigative excavation is recommended.

1

Page intentionally left blank.

CHAPTER2

ENVIRONMENTAL AND ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
GENERAL SETTING

Zilker Park is located at the confluence of Barton Creek with the Colorado River, just
downstream from the point where the Colorado emerges from a deep canyon at the
Balcones Escarpment. Barton Creek is a small but perennial, spring-fed stream that has
a drainage areaof311 km 2 (Tovar and Maldonado 1981), most of which consist of a deeply
dissected landscape underlain by chert-bearing carbonate rocks of Cretaceous age (Barnes 1981a, 1981b). By contrast, the Colorado River is the trunk stream of a large and
complex fluvial system that heads on the Southern High Plains and Edwards Plateau of
West Texas, and eventually flows to the Gulf of Mexico some 300 km to the southeast of
Austin. Contributing area for the Colorado River at the mouth of Barton Creek is
100,635 km 2 (Tovar and Maldonado 1981). The most important rock units that crop out
in the basin, in terms of the contribution of sediment to the Colorado channel at Zilker
Park, are the red Triassic and Permian sandstones and mudstones in the uppermost
reaches of the Colorado system, the Precambrian igneous and metamorphic rocks of the
Llano Basin farther downstream, and the chert-bearing Cretaceous carbonate rocks of
the Edwards Plateau where most major tributaries to the Colorado originate (Barnes
1974, 1975, 1981a, 1981b). Thus fluvial deposits of the Colorado River can be easily
distinguished from those of Barton Creek on the basis of constituent mineralogical
assemblages: Barton Creek deposits consists solely of limestone and chert gravels, and
fine calcareous brown muds, whereas those transported by the Colorado River contain a
diverse suite of siliceous materials as well, most importantly the reddish sands and muds
from the Triassic and Permian redbeds, and the easily identified micaceous rock fragments derived from the crystalline basement of the Llano region.
The landscape in the vicinity of Zilker Park consists of erosional bedrock valley walls
and uplands that flank both the Barton Creek and Colorado valleys, the active floodplain
and older terraces 1 of Barton Creek, and the active floodplain and older terraces of the
Colorado River (Fig. 1). In the Barton Creek valley, landforms that predate the
demonstrated human occupation in this area include the bedrock valley walls and an
extensive Pleistocene terrace that forms much of the flat to gently rolling uplands in
1.

The term floodplain, as used in this report, represents an active constructional feature of a fluvial system
that is inundated on a relatively frequent basis (on average every 2-3 years). By contrast, the term
terrace represents an abandoned or fossil floodplain, no longer flooded regularly, and usually at a
considerable elevation above the modern channel and active constructional floodplain. Lower
elevation terraces may, however, be flooded during relatively infrequent, high magnitude flood events,
especially in the Central Texas area.

3

4 I ENVIRONMENTAL AND ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

FIGURE 1. Generalized geomorphic map of the area surrounding 41TV1364 (adapted from
Rodda et al. 1970). Note that landforms east of present day Barton Creek were not investigated
during this study. A' -A indicates cross section in Figure 6.

ENVIRONMENT I 5

Zilker Park, including the landscape immediately to the west of the excavations reported
on herein. Deposits underlying this terrace consist of limestone and chert gravels, and
fine calcareous muds typical of the Barton Creek drainage, all of which are now strongly
cemented due to post-depositional pedogenic processes, and the development of a
laminated petrocalcic, or K horizon: the over lying A and B horizons from this soil profile,
which must have at one time existed on top of this petrocalcic horizon in order for it to
form (see Birkeland 1984), have been removed by erosional stripping. Younger depositional landforms, which are inset against the bedrock valley walls and this older
Pleistocene terrace, consist of the extensive two-tiered Holocene alluvial terrace complex that begins along the Colorado River and continues a short distance up the Barton
Creek valley, and the essentially modern or pre-dam floodplains of the Colorado River
and Barton Creek.
ENVIRONMENT
The Balcones Escarpment marks an ecotonal (transitional) environment, situated as
it is between the Blackland Prairie to the east and the Edwards Plateau to the west.
According to Blair ( 1950), the eastern edge of the escarpment marks an abrupt boundary
between two major biotic provinces, the Texan and the Balconian.
The Texan province is itself a broad ecotone between the wooded Austroriparian
environment of eastern Texas and the drier grasslands of western Texas (Blair 1950).
Rainfall in the Texan province provides only a marginal moisture surplus. The Blackland
prairie, just to the east of the Balcones Escarpment is thus dominated by various tall grass
species. The Balconian province of the Edwards Plateau is somewhat drier still, with
average annual rainfall of less than 35 inches in the east dropping to 26 inches or less to
the west (Carr 1967). The characteristic plant association is a scrub forest of juniper, oak,
live oak, and grasses, though prior to historic settlement arboreal vegetation was less
extensive, and open grasslands more widespread, than they are today (Weniger 1984).
The patterns of paleoclimate, and, by extension, of past patterns of floral and faunal
distributions, have yet to be defined with full confidence. According to Bryant and
Shafer(1977) and Bryant and Holloway (1985), the available palynological data suggests
a gradual trend toward increasingly dry climatic conditions from late Pleistocene glacial
times and throughout the Holocene. By contrast, Story (1985) posits a less linear
trajectory of climatic change, with a marked xeric interval between about 5000 and
3000/2500 B.C. (7000 and 5000/4500 years B.P.), and fluctuating climatic conditions from
about 2500 to 1500 B.C. ( 4500 to 3500 years B.P.) prior to the establishment of essentially
modern conditions. However Story (1985) relies on studies which had little or no
chronological control. Recent geomorphological and geoarcheological research at locations to the north and west of Central Texas does appear to support the postulation of
mid-Holocene xeric conditions in the greater Texas-Southern Plains region (Holliday
1989; S. Hall 1988; Meltzer 1987). The more recent Holocene may have seen significant
climatic fluctuations as well. Hall (1988:206) believes that a variety of paleoenvironmental data from the South Plains indicate a relatively mesic interval about 1000-2000 years
B.P. (before present), and a shift to drier conditions about 1000 years B.P. Examination

6 I ENVIRONMENTAL AND ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

of sedimentary stratigraphy on the Pedernales River of Central Texas indicates changes
in stream sinuosity, a fining of sediment load and decrease in channel width-depth ratio,
all of which are geomorphic responses suggesting drier conditions that likely occurred
about 1000 years B.P. (Blum and Valastro 1989).
In short, the paleoclimatic/environmental history of Central Texas and the larger
encompassing region are only beginning to be understood in terms of a complex of
significant shifts and oscillations. The relevance to prehistoric human adaptive patterns
will doubtless ultimately prove highly significant, and syntheses of paleoenvironmental
and archeological research, with the goal of defining the articulation of cultures with
changing environmental conditions, should be given high priority.
ARCHEOLOGICAL CHRONOLOGY

Since its beginnings over a half century ago, scientific archeological research in
Central Texas has strongly emphasized the development of a regional chronology. This
is understandable in view of the wide range of observable variation in prehistoric artifact
forms, particularly projectile points; chronological placement of each of the various point
types is one essential baseline for further study of culture history and change through
time. A long series of studies has resulted in the establishment, and progressive refinement, of the projectile point type sequence, and the temporal ordering of periods or
phases, each characterized by one or more time-diagnostic types (Kelley 1947a, 1947b;
Suhm et al. 1954; Suhm 1957; L. Johnson et al. 1962; L. Johnson 1967; Sorrow et al. 1967;
Weir 1976, 1979; Jelks 1978; Prewitt 1981, 1985).
At a summary level, these researchers have defined three broad prehistoric
chronological periods. The oldest of these is the Paleoindian Period, dated between
about 10,000 and 6000 B.C. (12,000-8000 years B.P.). This was followed by the Archaic
Period which began about 6000 B.C. and lasted until about A.D. 700 (8000-1250 years
B.P.). The latest period of prehistory, the Late Prehistoric, is marked by the technological
shift to the bow and arrow and, slightly later, the introduction of ceramics (Hester and
Parker 1970; T. Hester 1980; Prewitt 1981; Suhm et al. 1954). It dates to between about
A.D. 700 and the period of ongoing European contact, about A.D. 1600-1700 (1250-250
years B.P. ).
Following the Late Prehistoric is the Historic Period, characterized archeologically
by aboriginal sites containing items of European trade and by the early historic occupation of the region by Hispanic colonials and later by Anglo-American settlers. Since all
of the archeologically significant materials found at 41TV1364 pertain to prehistoric
occupations, this period will not be treated in the following descriptive survey.
The Paleoindian Period

How long ago people first arrived in the Americas continues to be a subject of debate
and controversy (see discussion in Meltzer 1989). A very early human presence (more
than 30,000 years ago) in the western hemisphere has been postulated in some quarters

ARCHEOLOGICAL CHRONOLOGY I 7

(e.g., Carter 1978), and recent evidence from North America (e.g., Adovasio et al. 1980)
and South America (Dillehay and Collins 1988) have lent considerable credence to
arguments for occupation prior to 15,000/20,000 years B.P.
Still, the oldest fully accepted cultural remains in North America are those of the
Clovis people, the earliest of a series of Paleoindian cultures defined by distinctive
typological artifacts. The most diagnostic artifact of the Clovis culture is the large
unstemmed, lanceolate fluted Clovis point, which has been found in virtually all the
contiguous United States, and in widespread locations throughout Texas (Meltzer 1987).
These points have been found in association with the bones of extinct mammoths on the
High Plains (Haury 1953; Leonhardy 1966; J. Hester 1972), leading to the inference that
Clovis subsistence relied significantly upon hunting of these large Pleistocene mammals.
Radiocarbon assays from a number of sites place Clovis points at about 11,000-11,500
years B.P.
A slightly later, and geographically more restricted, Paleoindian manifestation is that
of the Folsom culture. As with Clovis, the most diagnostic trait is an unstemmed
lanceolate fluted point. Folsom points are the result of a different manufacturing
technology, however, and are smaller, thinner, and more finely flaked than Clovis points.
Folsom points have been found in stratigraphic contexts in Texas at Bonfire Shelter in
the Lower Pecos River region (Dibble and Lorrain 1968) and the Lubbock Lake Site on
the Llano Estacado (E. Johnson 1987). Folsom points have been radiocarbon dated to
between 10,000 and 11,000 years B.P. at a number of locations. From the time of the first
discovery of Folsom points in association with extinct Pleistocene bison (Wormington
1957), a big game hunting subsistence base has been inferred for the Folsom people.
Later Paleoindian occupation of Texas is evident from several distinctive projectile
point types, the most common of which are Plainview, Golondrina, and Angostura.
While, like Clovis and Folsom, these points are unstemmed and of basic lanceolate shape,
they are unfluted. Plainview is the earliest, dating to about 10,000 years B.P; Golondrina
and Angostura are somewhat later, with radiocarbon dates of around 9000 years B.P. for
Golondrina (T. Hester 1983; Turner and Hester 1985) and 8500-8000 years B.P. for
Angostura (Turner and Hester 1985:66).
In general, all of these Paleoindian dart point types are related by basic morphological

and technological features: they are unstemmed and lanceolate in shape, tend to be of
excellent workmanship, and bear moderate to heavy edge grinding near the basal, hafted
ends. However, the big game subsistence patterns which apparently characterized, at
least to some degree, the Clovis and Folsom cultures, probably gave way during later,
Paleoindian times to a more broad-based subsistence regime which foreshadowed succeeding Archaic adaptive patterns. For examples, subsistence remains from the
Golondrina level in Baker Cave in Val Verde County suggest a dietary pattern broadly
adapted to essentially modern biotic resources (T. Hester 1978, 1983). Considerable
research is needed in Central Texas to define the cultural ecology of the transition from
late Paleoindian lifeways to Archaic adaptive patterns.

8 I ENVIRONMENTALANDARCHEOLOGICALBACKGROUND

The Archaic Period

The term Archaic in American archeology was originally coined to refer to a
preceramic and pre-horticultural, broad-based hunting/fishing/gathering lifeway
(Ritchie 1932; Willey and Phillips 1958). The concept has gained wide acceptance, and
has been used in Texas archeological studies for several decades. Intensive chronological
studies, alluded to above, have succeeded in defining a sequence of phases, or temporally
discrete periods, for the approximately seven millennia of the Archaic in Central Texas.
The most recent chronology, and that which appears to most completely account for
the range of variation in Archaic point types, is that developed by Prewitt (1981, 1985).
Prewitt's construct, based in part on previous works, draws upon a large number of
radiocarbon dates, and defines a total of 11 Archaic phases. These phases are placed
within the more general time periods of the Early, Middle and Late Archaic, concepts
introduced previously through the work of Johnson, Suhm, and Tunnell {1962) at Canyon
Reservoir and by Sorrow, Shafer, and Ross (1967) at Stillhouse Hollow, and by Black and
McGraw (1985) but modified and updated by Story (1985).
A detailed description of the phase characteristics listed by Prewitt is unnecessary for
the purposes of this brief background survey. A few basic points, however, can be noted.
Prewitt includes the aforementioned Golondrina and Angostura point types, as well
as the less commonly found Meserve and Scottsbluff types, within his earliest Archaic
Circleville Phase. While these point types are generally considered diagnostic of late
Paleoindian, Prewitt believes that the subsistence patterns of the period involved essentially a broad-based Archaic adaptation (Prewitt 1981:77). Though this may be the case,
it can be noted that these point types are of much wider geographical distribution than
most later Archaic types, suggesting more mobile, wide-ranging adaptive patterns than
that generally considered to be characteristically Archaic (cf., Sollberger and Hester
1972). Prewitt's placement of the Circleville Phase into the Archaic does highlight the
need for a better understanding of fundamental cultural-ecological patterns and processes during the transition from Paleoindian to Archaic, and brings into focus the fact that
cultural phases must be defined on the basis of more than projectile point styles.
Toward the end of the Early Archaic (Prewi tt's Oakalla Phase), a characteristic feature
of the Central Texas Archaic -the burned rock midden - appears in the archeological
record. These highly visible features have received considerable attention by Central
Texas archeologists, perhaps a disproportionate amount as suggested by Collins (Collins
1988). Nonetheless, their precise function in Archaic adaptations, and the formation
processes by which they were created, remain to be definitively determined {Collins
1988). Burned rock middens have been variously interpreted as resulting from in situ
accumulations of hearths or secondary deposition of used hearth stones from hearths
located in primary activity areas of sites (e.g., T. Hester 1970; Weir 1979). Whatever the
function and cultural origin of these features, they disappear from the record during the
Late Archaic, a fact which suggests some significant, but poorly understood, shifts in
adaptive strategies.

ARCHEOLOGYAT THE VERA DANIEL SITE I 9

The various stemmed and notched dart point forms of the Middle and Late Archaic
phases are for the most part restricted in their distributions to Central Texas and adjacent
regions. This contrasts with the broad distributional patterns of earlier types, notably the
various Paleoindian forms and such Early Archaic types as Bell/Andice. Though the
points and the respective phases may not represent discrete socio-ethnic groupings (e.g.,
L. Johnson 1987), it is apparent that spheres of sociocultural interaction and/or group
operational areas had become more geographically restricted by the Middle Archaic.
This is in accord with a postulated localization and regional specialization of adaptive
patterns during the Archaic (see Willey and Phillips 1958).
The Late Prehistoric Period

The Central Texas Late Prehistoric Period is divided into two sequential phases. The
Austin Phase (A.D. 700-1300 or 1250-650 years B.P.) is marked by the shift to the bow
and arrow, represented in the archeological record by side-notched Scallorn type arrow
points. Available data indicate some change in lifeways during this phase with increased
use as rockshelters and cemeteries. The Toyah Phase (A.D. 1300-1750 650-200 years B.P.)
saw the emergence of a tradition of bone tempered pottery, a shift to the contracting stem
Perdiz type arrow point, beveled knives, end scrapers,and a major new emphasis on bison
hunting. The Toyah Phase extended well beyond Central Texas into Southern Texas and
the Gulf Coastal Plain, an expansion which may have corresponded to a southward
movement of bison herds after A.D. 1300 (Dillehay 1974). Because the diagnostic traits
and subsistence patterns of the Toyah Phase diffused widely, and probably quite rapidly
(Black 1986; Ricklis 1989), beyond Central Texas, it has been suggested that the
phenomenon should be defined as a Horizon rather than a true regional phase (Black
1986).
ARCHEOLOGY AT THE VERA DANIEL SITE
In anticipation of construction of a segment of the South Austin Outfall Interceptor
Main, a reconnaissance-level study which included surface as well as subsurface exploration for archeological vestiges was conducted along a route from near the city Coliseum
to Barton Springs (EHA 1988). This route traversed alluvial terraces on the south bank
of the Colorado River (Town Lake) and it was recognized that buried cultural materials
were likely to be discovered. Surprisingly, only one significant prehistoric site was found.
This was designated 41 TV1364 (and named the Vera Daniel Site) by EHA personnel in
1988, as recorded in the records housed at TARL. Of particular note in the subsurface
reconnaissance results was the presence of deeply buried and seemingly stratified cultural components in Late Quaternary alluvial deposits of the Colorado River and/or
Barton Creek. It was deemed potentially significant and recommended for testing (EHA
1988).
Diagnostic artifacts encountered suggested that most of the local prehistoric era
might be present within the natural deposits. The evidence for Paleoindian, Archaic, and
possibly Late Prehistoric human presence was found by EHA below the surface in the

10 I ENVIRONMENTAL AND ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

southeastern part of Zilker Park. Almost no surface exposure of 41TV1364 archeological
evidence occurs and the site boundaries proposed by EHA are little more than an
educated guess (EHA 1988; TARL site files). However, as is appropriate at the reconnaissance level, the information recovered was not sufficient to fully evaluate the site nor
provide a basis for its excavation should this become necessary. Nonetheless, it was
clearly demonstrated that a large and important site was present. The present, moredetailed study was restricted to the proposed construction right-of-way in the
southeastern part of the site (Fig. 2). See EHA (1988) for site description.
DISCUSSION
This brief discussion highlights a significant point: while chronology or culture history
in Central Texas is reasonably well defined, thanks to the efforts of numerous researchers
over several decades, our understanding of cultural ecological patterns and processes of
change remains, for the most part, at a rudimentary level. This fact in no way detracts
from the considerable accomplishments in chronology building; indeed, without a sound
chronology, cultural processes cannot be studied since archeological cultures themselves
cannot be isolated from the array of artifacts representing millennia of human occupation.
With a useful chronology as a baseline, though, archeological research in the region
can begin to explicitly address basic issues of prehistoric adaptive continuity and change,
and at the same time employ alternative field methods and techniques appropriate to the
questions asked. With a sound delineation of regional cultural time periods, research
can move toward defining fundamental patterns of subsistence and behavior and how
these articulated with environmental opportunities and limitations through patterns of
settlement location, sizes of resident human groups, and group seasonal mobility. By
these criteria, adaptive patterns during definable time periods can be identified. The
insights to be thus gained, when synthesized with various lines of information about
paleoenvironmental change, will ultimately permit explanations of why cultural patterns
at times saw periods of stability (reflected archeologically as definable phases), and at
other times were marked by relatively rapid change (the temporal shift from one phase
to another).
The archeological testing at the Vera Daniel Site was explicitly designed to determine
the site's potential for addressing these kinds of issues. It was expected from the outset
that this potential could be very high given the presence of cultural materials in thick
alluvial valley fill.

l/
'~I

c_) - . . . . . .

1

t

.....

.,

I

......... ,

/

'',,
'-....,

I
'.J

I

/

/'

/

1

I

I

/

,._,

/

l....._

r----

I

.........

.......... ~

I

/

1

... ....,

',,,
',
..........

TAAL 7

ir _______Q_________ \
TARL3\

\

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

II

l____ ___________

\I
J

meters

Site boundary suggested by
EHA 1988

Cross section in Figure 12
Espey, Huston and Associates
trenches

r··

~

r;.,:j

FIGURE

2. The southeastern part of the Vera Daniel Site (41TV1364) in Zilker Park, Austin, Texas.

(")

~
~

~

...._

.....
.....

Page intentionally left blank.

CHAPTER3

GOALS AND METHODS
The archeological testing at the Vera Daniel Site was designed to determine the site's
potential to provide data relevant to past behavioral patterns as well as questions of
chronology. The two primary archeological questions upon which the work was based
were (a) does the site contain prehistoric cultural material in primary stratigraphic and
chronological context and (b) are time periods represented by cultural deposits sufficiently discrete to permit recovery of data concerning adaptive patterns and cultural
behavior during a given segment of the temporal continuum? Initial testing at the site
(EHA 1988) had already indicated the presence of prehistoric material, not surprising in
view of the location at the confluence of Barton Creek and the Colorado River, which
would have been highly suited to prehistoric human use.
Of predicted significance as regards the two questions just mentioned was the geomorphological context of the site. The site's situation in an alluvial depositional environment
indicated that prehistoric cultural material would be resting within alluvial sediments laid
down, over the millennia of the Holocene, by recurrent flooding of Barton Creek and/or
the Colorado River. It has long been recognized that such floodplain deposits may
contain "sealed" deposits in which the cultural remains of specific time periods are
readily definable as stratigraphic units. Such contexts provide archeologists with excellent opportunities to examine prehistoric behavioral patterns during discrete time
periods, without the mixing of remains of numerous occupations which is the case on
long-stable ground surfaces with little or no sediment accretion. Despite the long
emphasis in Central Texas archeological work on chronological investigation in stratified
site contexts, relatively little work has been done in deep alluvial contexts.
The specific goals of the testing phase at Zilker Park were as follows:
1. Determine the relative density of prehistoric cultural material in terms of
horizontal distributions across that part of the site to be impacted by construction of the wasterwater line.

2. Define the vertical or stratigraphic nature of deposition of cultural material.
3. Correlate these horizontal and vertical distributions with a geomorphological
analysis of the sequence of alluvial deposition at the site.
4. Obtain radiocarbon dates on samples of clay-rich alluvium from which the
history of occupation at the site, and its articulation with the geomorphological
history, could be determined.
5. Assess, based on these lines of evidence, the site's potential for contributing
to the body of knowledge concerning culture history and prehistoric adaptive
patterns in Central Texas.

13

14 I GOALSANDMETHODS

In order to realize these goals, eight trenches were excavated at points in the site along
the proposed route of the wasterwater line (Fig. 2). The horizontal spacing of the
trenches was determined on the basis of predicted archeological significance, as inferred
from surface topography, as well as by the practical constraints of existing urban features
such as roads and parking lots.
A critical factor in planning the trench excavations was the need to reach sufficient
depth to obtain a complete vertical profile of archeologically relevant deposits. It was
initially predicted that prehistoric cultural material would occur at rather deep levels,
due to the probability of recurrent alluvial deposition throughout the last 12,000 or so
years of the terminal Pleistocene and Holocene. Thus a large trackhoe (Fig. 3), capable
of excavating to a depth of about 6 meters, was used in those trenches where alluvial
deposition was likely to have been greatest. In all, five of the eight trenches (numbers
3-7) were excavated with the trackhoe. Two trenches (numbers 1 and 2), located closer
to limestone bedrock outcroppings and thus in areas of predictably shallower alluvium,
were excavated with a smaller backhoe, capable of reaching to a depth of about four
meters. The final trench, number 8, was located on a narrow bench-like topographic
feature adjacent to the limestone outcrop which overlooks the present Barton Springs
pool area. Here excavation was accomplished completely by hand, and reached a final
depth of 2.8 meters below the modern ground surface.
Because of the anticipated depths of these trenches, a trench safety plan was engineered by Kirby Meyer of MLA Labs, Inc., and was implemented in the field by Frank

FIGURE 3. Large trackhoe used to excavate 6-meter deep trenches with
sediment piles for each 40-cm level.

DISCUSSION I 15

Allen. Central to this plan was the use of shoring. In deep, machine-excavated trenches
we used hydraulic aluminum shoring planks with gaps between them which allowed full
examination of the profile (Fig. 4 ). In the hand-excavated trench, oak-timber shoring
with plywood sheeting was used (Fig. 5). This was obscured most of the profile behind
sheeting, but sufficient exposure was maintained to allow profile data to be recorded.
The methods employed in the excavations were designed to maximize three kinds of
data recovery. First, excavations were vertically controlled, so that recovered material
could be identified by appropriate stratigraphic contexts. By this means a relative
chronology of deposition could be established. In the machine-excavated trenches,
vertical control was successfully maintained by removing the sediments in trench-long
horizontal levels. Each level was approximately 40 cm thick, and was created through
the sequential removal of sediment in individual cuts approximately 10 to 15 cm thick.

FIGURE 4. Hydraulic aluminum shoring installed in a deep trench for examination of
profile by Michael Blum and Robert Ricklis.

16 I GOALS AND METHODS

FIGURE 5. Installation of oak-timber shoring in the hand-excavated
trench 8.

The machine operator was instructed to deposit the excavated sediment from each 40-cm
level in a separate backdirt pile (Fig. 3), and a constant volume sampling of these piles,
and thus of each level, was obtained by screening 30 full hand-shovel loads of sediment
through one-quarter-inch wire mesh. Additionally, five full hand-shovel loads of sediment from each pile were put through fine mesh window screen to ensure a sampling of
very small items such as land snails and chert microdebitage. In trench 8, the hand-excavated unit, excavation was controlled in 20 cm arbitrary levels, and all excavated
sediment was put through one-quarter-inch mesh. Here, constant volume samples of
sediment were recovered and bagged for subsequent water screening in the lab.
The second basic method in the trench excavations was exposure and documentation
of trench-wall profiles. Upon completion of excavation in each trench, hydraulic
aluminum shoring was installed (except in trench 8, which was shored with oak beams as
work progressed), a ladder was placed in the end of the trench, and the trench was entered
and the profiles examined. Notations were made of sediment stratigraphy as observable
through changes in color, grain size, and cultural inclusions. By these means data were
gathered relevant to the depositional history as it was articulated with episodes of
prehistoric human occupation at each trench location.
The final method of data acquisition was the recovery of sediment samples suitable
for radiocarbon dating. Recent geomorphological research in the Central Texas region
has demonstrated that alluvial sediments containing organic matter contemporaneous
with flood depositional episodes can be dated with accuracy sufficient for establishing
absolute chronologies of sediment deposition (Blum and Valastro 1989). By examining

DISCUSSION I 17

trench-wall profiles, it was possible to locate sediment strata suitable for this procedure.
A total of 13 samples were collected, with an eye to dating those sedimentary zones
deemed most significant in terms of both the geomorphological and archeological histories of the site. Ten samples were assayed at the Radiocarbon Laboratory of The
University of Texas at Austin. The results of these analyses will be discussed in succeeding chapters.

Page intentionally left blank.

CHAPTER4

GEOMORPHOLOGY
INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE
In recent years, many archeological investigations have focused on the multi-dimensional environmental context within which the cultural record is found, and have
routinely incorporated natural scientists, in particular those trained in geomorphology
and Quaternary geology, into archeological research efforts. This is in part due to the
recognition that many important issues, such as the specific landscape setting, and the
range of natural site formation processes, can be more comprehensively addressed by
appropriately framed geological questions (Stein and Farrand 1985). This is the essence
of what has been referred to as geoarcheology, namely the examination of archeological
problems using techniques of the earth sciences (Gladfelter 1981; Butzer 1982; Gifford
and Rapp 1985).

At 41TV1364, initial cultural resource management efforts documented the occurrence of archeological material within deep alluvial deposits of the Colorado River
and/or Barton Creek (EHA 1988). The purpose of geoarcheological research during this
second phase of activity was to develop a more complete understanding of the nature and
origin of these sedimentary deposits and provide a preliminary, spatially and temporally
defined landscape context for interpretation of the recovered archeological record.
METHODS

The proposed construction zone cuts across a complex alluvial terrace, with two
distinct surfaces that are underlain by sediments deposited during the culturally relevant
time period (EHA 1988). Characterization of these deposits was accomplished by field
examination and description of soil and sediment 1 profiles in both mechanical and
hand-excavated trenches, and radiocarbon dating of suitable samples within the most
significant profiles. Soils and sediments were described in terms of texture, presence or
absence of carbonate minerals, presence or absence of pedogenic and/or primary
sedimentary structures, and Munsell color in accordance with standard methods and

1.

Soils, as used in this report, differ from sediments due to post-depositional modification by some
combination of physical, chemical, or biological processes acting in association with a stable land
surface, without active depositional and/or erosional processes for some time period. The properties
of sediments, by contrast, are those imparted by the original depositional process, or are a result of
post-depositional biological and/or chemical processes at depths below the land surface and the
influence of soil forming processes.

19

20 I GEOMORPHOLOGY

terminology outlined in Folk (1980) and Birkeland (1984). Samples selected for
radiocarbon dating consisted of organic-rich muds within the soil and sediment columns,
and were processed at the Radiocarbon Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin
according to methods outlined in White and Valastro (1984). Radiocarbon ages from
fluvial sediments that show no evidence of soil development are believed to represent
the approximate time of deposition (Haas et al. 1986), whereas those taken from the soil
profile, where some of the organic matter was introduced post-depositionally, represent
mean residence times for the organic carbon and minimum ages for deposition of the
host sediments (Sharpenspeel 1971; Matthews 1985).
RESULTS OF GEOARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

All of the mechanically excavated trenches (trenches 1-7), and the single hand
excavated block (trench 8) were located on the Holocene terrace complex, and exposed
underlying sediments consisting of three separate stratigraphic units, two of which are
buried and not exposed at the surface. These deposits were the focus of geoarcheological
investigations and are described below. Figure 6 summarizes the general stratigraphic
framework at 41TV1364, including the relative positions of radiocarbon ages.
Latest Pleistocene To Early-Middle Holocene Colluvial Deposits

Abutted against bedrock valley walls and the overlying Pleistocene terrace surface,
and now buried at depths ranging from 0.8 to 1.8 meters below the higher of the two
surfaces comprising the Holocene terrace complex, is a suite of deposits that consist of
strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) to yellowish red (5YR 5/6), strongly calcareous, silty clays and
clayey silts that are interbedded with lenses of mostly limestone and chert gravels and
reworked carbonate nodules. Overall thickness ranges from less than 3 meters near the
bedrock valley wall to more than 5 meters farther downdip. The top of these deposits is
marked by a weakly developed soil profile consisting of a partially leached B horizon with
weak, coarse blocky structures and films of secondary carbonate on ped faces, and the in
situ growth of secondary nodules of calcium carbonate and manganese in the underlying
Ck horizon. It is important to note that the modest degree of soil development apparent
in these profiles is discordant with the intense reddish colors of the matrix. The
anomolous color, in combination with the presence of reworked carbonate nodules,
suggest that this body of sediment was, in large part, derived from erosion and downslope
movement of already deeply weathered, reddish soil profiles on the adjacent Pleistocene
terrace surface, and deposited as a valley margin colluvial fan wedge. At depths below
the soil zone, in all three of the trenches that expose these sediments, are secondary
carbonate cements that appear to have precipitated from ground water.
The age of these deposits is partially constrained by temporally diagnostic artifacts
with Paleoindian through early Archaic affiliations, found stratified and in buried context
within these sediments. The archeological materials thus suggest that slope instability,
soil erosion, and deposition of the colluvial wedge occurred from latest Pleistocene
through early-middle Holocene times. Two radiocarbon ages have been obtained from

m

ft

no horizontal scale

145

142

u;

Upper Surface

~460

E 139
Q)

>

0
.0
IO

I- 450

c

~

0

'i>ii 136

~

Q)

ill

t;j
440

~
~

133

~

430

g
trj
g

130

L.:::J Late Holocene Alluvium

n

~

Late Pleistocene Terrace

P:l

~

Cretaceous Bedrock

L;J Latest Pleistocene to
Early-Middle Holocene Alluvium

rBl

Latest Pleistocene to
Early-Middle Holocene Colluvium

6. Schematic geologic cross section of 41TV1364, illustrating generalized geomorphic and
stratigraphic relationships, as well as the general position of radiocarbon ages.

FIGURE

a

Q

~

~

Vi

~

S2
~
a
~

-N
,.....

22 I GEOMORPHOLOGY

this suite of deposits as well. The first, from a depth of 2.1 meters below the present day
surface in trench 2, and in association with a preform believed to be from the Clovis time
period, yielded an uncorrected radiocarbon age of 5540±90 years B.P. (TX-6530). The
second, from a depth of 3.2 meters below the present land surface in trench 1, yielded an
age of 5010± 100 years B.P. (TX-6529). Unfortunately, both assays are considerably
younger than the archeological materials would suggest these deposits should be, and are
also much younger than radiocarbon ages from the laterally adjacent and coeval fluvial
deposits (see below). Possible reasons for the discrepancies are the introduction of
younger organic carbon by the same pedogenic processes that produced secondary calcite
and manganese nodules from downward percolating rainwater, or by through-flowing
ground water that resulted in the precipitation of secondary calcite cements at greater
depths. As a result, chronological control on colluvial deposits should be considered
tentative at the present time until more detailed stratigraphic work can be completed.
Latest Pleistocene To Early-Middle Holocene Fluvial Deposits

Valley margin colluvial sediments, in particular the limestone gravel and reworked
caliche-rich facies, pinch out in the direction of Barton Creek and the Colorado River,
where they are replaced by coeval, siliceous fluvial sediments, most of which appear to
have been deposited on active constructional floodplains of the Colorado River, or by
flood waters backing up the Barton Creek valley from the much larger master stream.
These deposits, exposed at depths greater than 1.5 to 1.8 meters in trenches 3-6, consist
of interbedded strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) to reddish yellow (7.SYR 6/6), calcareous silty
sands and sandy silts, with occasional lenses of clayey silts and a rich terrestrial gastropod
fauna. Primary sedimentary structures are rare, and when present consist of poorlydefined horizontal laminations, or syndepositional root and burrow traces that are
truncated upwards in the profile. There is little to no clear-cut evidence for significant
soil development and/or leaching of carbonate minerals or gastropod shells at the top of
these deposits, either because they were not exposed for a significant time period prior
to burial, or soil profiles that did develop were subsequently eroded and removed prior
to burial. By contrast, secondary carbonate cements, most likely derived from throughflowing ground water, occur at greater depths within all trenches.
Timing of deposition for this suite of floodplain sediments is again partially constrained by temporally diagnostic archeological materials. Projectile points of
Paleoindian through Early Archaic age, for example, occur in stratified buried context,
suggesting that floodplain construction began during the latest Pleistocene, and continued until the early to middle Holocene period. This time range is corroborated by
four internally consistent radiocarbon ages, which range from 11,050±220 years B.P.
(TX-6527) at a depth of 6.5 meters below the surface in trench 6 to 8960±200 years B.P.
(TX-6532) at a depth of 3.3 meters below the present surface in trench 3.

RESULTS OF GEOARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS I 23

Late Holocene Fluvial Deposits
Unconformably overlying both the latest Pleistocene to early-middle Holocene colluvial and fluvial deposits on the upper surface of this terrace complex is up to 1.8 meters
of fine sandy silts to silty sands, again deposited mostly by the Colorado River. These
sediments have been altered by the development of soil profiles and consist of dark brown
to dark yellowish brown (lOYR 4/3 to 4/4), overthickened, mildly calcareous mollic A
horizons, overlying cambic B horizons with yellowish brown (lOYR 5/4) colors, weak
coarse blocky structures, and films and/or filaments of secondary calcium carbonate that
have precipitated on ped faces. Gastropod shell fragments are not characteristic of the
A horizon, and are partially dissolved in the B horizon, indicating the degree of leaching
of primary carbonates that has occurred since deposition ceased. Root and burrow traces
are also pervasive throughout the upper parts of these soil profiles, as is evidence of
human modification during the historic time period. The underlying C horizon, which in
some cases appears to have penetrated down into underlying latest Pleistocene to
early-middle Holocene strata, is typically strong brown (7 .5YR 4/6) in color, with little
to no pedogenic structure, but some films and filaments of secondary carbonates
throughout. Although this stratigraphic unit is very thin where it overlies older deposits,
on the lower of the two surfaces that form this terrace complex, as exposed in trench 7
and deep bore holes, deposits are in excess of 10 meters in thickness, and consist of
interbedded medium to coarse sands and strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) clayey silts. The
tremendous differences in thickness are believed to be a result of frequent deposition on
channel-proximal floodplains and overflow swales (the lower of the two surfaces) that
were inset against the latest Pleistocene to early-middle Holocene fill, with periodic
scour and slow deposition by more infrequent high magnitude floods that spilled over
onto the higher surface.
Timing of deposition for this younger stratigraphic unit is again partially constrained
by both temporally diagnostic artifacts and a number of internally consistent radiocarbon
ages. Projectile points with Middle and Late Archaic affinities were found in stratified
context within the thin overbank deposits on the upper of the two surfaces that comprise
this terrace complex, suggesting deposition during the late Holocene time period.
Radiocarbon ages of 3340±90 years B.P. (TX-6533) at a depth of 1.1 meters in trench 3,
and 3320±90 years B.P. (TX-6534) at a depth of 1.2 meters in trench 6 confirm this general
time frame for overbank deposition on this higher surface. From trench 7, which exposed
the thicker sequence of swale fill deposits underlying the lower of the two surfaces,
additional radiocarbon ages of 2610±80 years B.P. (TX-6535) at a depth of 5.5 meters,
and 1090±80 years B.P. (TX-6536) at a depth of 1.2 meters support both a late Holocene
age for this stratigraphic unit, and the interpretation that the deposits on these two
distinct surfaces are genetically related, but different components of the Colorado River
depositional system, with vastly different rates of sedimentation. Abandonment of these
surfaces as frequently active depositional environments probably occurred around 1000
years ago, contemporaneous with many other streams in the southcentral United States
that incised their channels at that time (Blum and Valastro 1989; Blum 1989; Hall 1990),
although infrequent high-magnitude floods probably overtopped these surfaces, producing localized scour and fill, until dam construction in the historic time period.

24 I GEOMORPHOLOGY

SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS

The archeological record at 41TV1364 occurs in buried sealed context, within sediments that represent dynamic geomorphic activity and evolving landscapes during the
culturally relevant time period. To summarize, based on stratigraphic, archeologic, and
chronometric (radiocarbon) data, the latest Pleistocene and early Holocene time periods
were characterized by slope instability, soil erosion, and deposition of colluvial fan
wedges along the Barton Creek valley margin, that was contemporaneous with active
floodplain construction by the Colorado River, and backflooding of Colorado River water
and sediment up the Barton creek valley. Although not well constrained by archeological
or chronometric dates at 41TV1364, similar alluvial sequences in the Upper Colorado
drainage with good chronological control (e.g., Blum and Valastro 1989; Blum 1989) can
be used to infer that this period of geomorphic activity probably ended by 5000 years ago,
when channel incision and floodplain abandonment occurred. Prior to 3300 years ago,
and perhaps as early as 4500 years ago if alluvial sequences from the Upper Colorado
drainage are any indication, active channel aggradation and/or floodplain construction
was again underway adjacent to the Colorado River, with occasional flooding, accompanied by scour and slow sedimentation, onto the higher surface underlain by the latest
Pleistocene to early-middle Holocene colluvial and alluvial deposits. This period of
activity probably ended around 1000 years ago when the Colorado River incised its
channel and abandoned late Holocene floodplains, then began constructing the low
surfaces adjacent to the modern channel.
This general geomorphological trajectory means that the archeological record contained within these deposits is largely one that represents temporally discrete periods of
cultural activity on frequently active, aggrading floodplain surfaces throughout the
Paleoindian and Archaic time periods. It was only during the Late Prehistoric that this
area was represented by a stable land surface, where long-term continuous occupation
and/or utilization of a particular locality, free from the hazards associated with an active
floodplain environment, became possible. Ferring (1986) has proposed a general model
that relates the rates of fluvial sedimentation to formation of the archeological record,
which has considerable implications for this study (Fig. 7). His model suggests that in
areas where sedimentation rates are high the archeological record will consist of a series
of components that are isolated in three-dimensional space, with the possibility of good
spatial, temporal, and behavioral resolution. At the other end of the spectrum, where
sedimentation rates are relatively low to non-existent, the archeological record may range
from single, isolated components to multiple component, horizontally extensive sites that
represent a palimpsest of activities spanning the entire period of subaerial exposure.
Based on the data presented herein, it can be argued that the latest Pleistocene to
early-middle Holocene and late Holocene fluvial deposits at 41TV1364 are a good
example of the former, and that the proposed construction zone will contain a rich
archeological record, but one that consists of a series of stratigraphically isolated components, with each representing brief periods of time within a horizontally restricted
space. Because most of the sediments that would be disturbed by construction activities
are latest Pleistocene to early-middle Holocene in age, the impact will be heaviest on
archeological records of this kind from the Paleoindian and early Archaic time periods.

SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS I 25

Rapid Deposition
Slow Deposition

No Deposition

•
•
•

chipped stone
burned rock
mussel shell

FIGURE 7. General model illustrating relationships between rates of fluvial sedimentation and
development and preservation of the archeological record (modified from F erring 1986). The
Paleoindian through Late Archaic archeological record found within the proposed construction zone at 41TV1364 occurs in a context best approximated by the block diagram on the left,
which illustrates a series of horizontally and vertically isolated components that represent
short-term utilization of active depositional settings.

Page intentionally left blank.

CHAPTER 5

EXCAVATIONS
This section briefly describes the salient features of, and the archeological findings
made in, each of the eight excavated trenches.
As may be seen in Figure 1, the trenches are located in a roughly northeast-southwest
line across Zilker Park. While the trenches and findings will be discussed sequentially
according to trench numbers, it should be kept in mind that this order does not completely
correspond to the consecutive position of the trenches across the site.
For exact depths of the excavated levels in each trench, the reader is referred to
Appendix 1.
TRENCH 1

This trench, the closest of all the trenches to Barton Creek, was excavated with the
backhoe. The first two levels (0-65 cm) contained dark brown sediments oflate Holocene
alluvium. The strong brown to reddish yellow silty sands of the latest Pleistocene to
early-middle Holocene alluvium were encountered from level 3 to level 9 (310 cm), at
which point scattered water-worn gravel was found. In level 10 cemented gravel was
encountered. Also, some latest Pleistocene to early-middle Holocene colluvial sediments were interfingered with the same-age alluvium.
This trench did not produce a large quantity of cultural material. Relatively small
quantities of chert debitage were found in the one-quarter-inch constant volume samples
from levels 1 through 4. No debitage was found in the samplings of levels 5 through 8.
Level 9 yielded 3 pieces of debitage (Fig. 8a). Level 10 was by far the most productive,
producing a total of 30 pieces of debitage. No diagnostic artifacts were found in this
trench.
Burned rocks were likewise scarce. One piece was found in level 7, a few were
scattered in level 8, and one was found in level 9.
In summary, trench 1 was generally of low productivity in terms of cultural remains,
though level 10 produced a fair number of debitage specimens. Given the fact that this
level was immediately above cemented gravels, a terminal Pleistocene/early Holocene
occupation may be indicated.

27

28 I EXCAVATIONS

road related disturbance:
redeposited soil

1
2

3
4

Ci5 5
>
~

Q)

•

> 6 ...

~

6

CLOVIS PREFORM

7

7

8

8

a. Trench 1

9

9

b. Trench 2

10
.........--.--..........--..;=10 15 20 25 30
debitage count

10._--.~

o

5

•
•

1

11..._--.~.........--.--.........--..--.....

0

5

10 15 20 25 30
debitage count

1 lithic artifact
(other than debitage)
diagnostic artifact type

2

1

3

2

4

3

5

4

6

5
•UVALDE

Q;

8

-

9

>
Q)

6

~7
..m
8

10

9

11

c. Trench 3

12

10

d. Trench 4

11

13

12

14

13

151---.---.--.-.--....--...----.

0

5

10 15 20 25 30

0

5

10 15 20 25 30

debitage count

debitage count

FIGURE 8. Histograms of artifact occurrences m matrix samples by excavation level for

trenches 1-4, 41TV1364.

TRENCH2 I 29

TRENCH2

Trench 2 was also excavated with the backhoe. The first two levels (to 65 cm) were
disturbed, redeposited soil and gravel, probably deposited in connection with construction of the nearby park road. Level 3 contained a dark brown soil formed on the late
Holocene alluvium, the original A horizon which was later covered by the redeposited
material. Levels 4 through 10 were characterized by strong brown to yellowish red
sediments of latest Pleistocene to early-middle Holocene colluvium. Level 7 (at 230-240
cm depth) was particularly clay-rich and contained small calcium carbonate nodules, as
did all lower levels. Scattered limestone gravels increased in levels 9 and 10.
As may be seen in Figure 8b, chert debitage increased in abundance with increasing
depth from levels 3 through 6, then rapidly decreased in abundance in levels 7 and 8, so
that none were recovered from level 9.

At a depth of 210 cm, at the interface between levels 6 and 7, was found, in situ, a
large chert biface (Fig. 13), believed to be a preform (early manufacturing stage) of a
Clovis type dart point.
The cultural materials in this trench occur in a relatively narrow vertical distribution.
Keeping in mind that the top 65 cm represent recent modern redeposition, and that level
3 contained the modem A horizon soil formation, it is apparent that cultural material
was restricted to an approximately 2 meter depth range (i.e., 65 to 280 cm), with most
material coming from levels 5 and 6 (150-210 cm). The presence of the probable Clovis
point preform at 210 cm suggests that the lower portion of the culturally relevant deposit
is of early Paleoindian, or terminal Pleistocene age.
TRENCH3

This was the most productive trench excavated, in terms of the yield of information
on the occupational history of the site. Excavation was with the trackhoe, and terminated
at a depth of 590 cm.
The uppermost 40 cm contained the dark brown sediments of late Holocene alluvium.
Below 40 cm and extending through level 10 (320-360 cm) were the strong brown to
reddish yellow silty sands and sandy silts of latest Pleistocene to early-middle Holocene
alluvium. In levels 12 through 15, limestone gravels were encountered, with the size of
the gravel increasing with depth. In level 15 (520-590 cm) sizeable cobbles of limestone
were encountered.
Cultural material was found in highly variable amounts in levels 1 through 13 (from
the surface to a depth of 470 cm). Basically, there is a bimodality in the vertical
distribution of lithic material (Fig. 8c). The upper mode peaks in level 5 (120-170 cm).
In addition to being the most productive in terms of debitage, this level also produced a
Marcos dart point (Fig. 12e), a time marker of the Late Archaic in Central Texas (about
600 B.C. to A.D. 200 [2550-1750 years B.P.]-see Turner and Hester 1985:117). This
specimen was found in situ in the west end of the trench at a depth of 165 cm. Level 7

30 I EXCAVATIONS

(210-250 cm) yielded a basal fragment of an Uvalde dart point (Fig. 12b), an Early
Archaic time marker estimated to date to about 5100 to 6100 years B.P. (Prewitt 1985).
The lower modal point of artifact abundance peaks in levels 11 and 12 (360-445 cm).
Debitage was by no means abundant in the standard screening samples, but did show a
notable increase over levels 8-10. Also, a number of chert flakes were visible in the
trench walls at depths between 400 and 420 cm, suggesting the presence of a rather
discrete zone from which most or all of the material found on the screens was derived.
Because this possible zone might have represented a Paleoindian occupational surface
(being at a depth considerably below the find of the Early Archaic Uvalde point), a
larger-than-usual sample of backdirt- 448 full hand-shovel loads - from level 12 was put
through the one-quarter-inch screen. This yielded an additional 50 pieces of debitage
and an edge-beveled unifacial chert tool (Fig. 14d).
The implication of the vertical distribution of cultural material in trench 3 is that this
portion of the site was a major zone of recurrent Archaic occupation (levels 3 through 7),
and a deeper, earlier zone of occupation, probably of Paleoindian age, in levels 11 and
12.
In addition to these chronological implications, it is significant that trench 3 produced
what appears to be a discrete occupation surface in level 4. Exposed and documented in
situ, mainly in the east end of the trench, were a number of fragments of burned rock,
several chert flakes, a chert core, and two fragments of fresh water mussel shell (Fig. 9).
All of these items rested between 105 and 115 cm depths. This find suggests that the site
does contain identifiable occupational surfaces sealed by alluvial deposition.
TRENCH4
Trench 4 was also excavated with the trackhoe. The upper 50-60 cm consisted of dark
brown clayey silt soil of late Holocene alluvium. The remaining sediments in the trench,
to its maximum depth ( 630 cm), were characterized by the strong brown to reddish yellow
silty sands of the latest Pleistocene to early-middle Holocene alluvium. Interestingly, the
occurrence of lithic debitage in trench 4 suggests a bimodality similar to that observed in
trench 3, since debitage was relatively abundant in levels 3 through 5 (70-170 cm), absent
in levels 8 through 10 (270-390 cm) and present as a trace in levels 11 and 12 (390-540
cm) (Fig. 8d). No time-diagnostic artifacts were found in this trench.
TRENCHS
Trench 5 was located not far from trench 4 (Fig. 2). With the exception of a somewhat
thicker dark brown soil oflate Holocene alluvium in the top 90-100 cm, the sediments
were essentially the same as in trench 4. Again, debitage occurred in a vertically bimodal
distributional pattern (Fig. lOa), peaking in abundance in the upper node in level 4
(115-140 cm) and in the lower node in level 12 (370-420 cm). No time-diagnostic artifacts
were found.

TRENCH3 I 31

TRENCH END-SLOPE
,_

_____________ _
.t.

~~
@

0

(J .~ ...

•

.t.

~

.t.

'

0

0

• Debitage
0 Mussel Shell
fragment
Core

e

eJ Burned Rock

1 meter

FIGURE 9. Plan view of cultural debris at the east end of trench 3 at 105-115

cm depth.

32 I EXCAVATIONS

1

1

2

• MONTELL POINT
{adjacent to trench)

2

3
3

4

4

5

5

6

6

7

7

~8

~

8

Q)

9

>

~9

10
11

10

12

11

12

13

a. Trench 5

14

b. Trench 6

13

15

14

16~~~~~~~~

0

5

15"---.--.-~.--.....---.--,

10 15 .20 25 30
0
debitage count
..------------

"'
•

1

5

10 15 20 25 30
debitage count

1 lithic artifact
(other than debitage)
diagnostic artifact type

2

1

3

• BIFACIAL CLEAR
FORK GOUGE

2 ....

4

............

3

5

4 ....

6

5 ....
> 6 ........

7

Q)

1a

~

~

1

9

8 ................
9 ....

10
11

10

12

c. Trench 7

13

11

14

12

15.L---..---..~...---.---T---.

0

5

10 15 20 25 30
debitage count

d. Trench 8

0

100

200
300
400
debitage count

500

FIGURE 10. Histograms of artifact occurrences in matrix samples by excavation level for

trenches 5-8, 41TV1364.

TRENCH6 I 33

TRENCH6

This trench was located at the western edge of a swale which transects the site area
(Fig. 2). The distinct dark brown soil of late Holocene alluvium which characterized the
uppermost parts of trenches 3, 4, and 5 was less evident here, probably due to erosion on
the sloping edge of the swale. The sediments in the trench were, as in trenches 4 and 5,
strong brown to reddish yellow silty sands of latest Pleistocene to early-middle Holocene
alluvium. Lithic debitage was relatively abundant only in level 11 (350-410 cm). There
is just a hint at bimodal vertical distribution, with three pieces of debitage coming from
the one-quarter-inch screen samples in levels 1and2 (0-70 cm), only one piece from level
6 (170-200 cm), and the majority of pieces from the trench from levels 9 through 11 (Fig.
lOb ). Though no diagnostic artifacts were found in the trench itself, one Montell type
dart point (Fig. 12f) was found at a depth of 30 cm from the surface in a shallow trough
adjacent to the trench made by the trackhoe as the machine was maneuvered in order to
gain a workable purchase on the slope. This is a Late Archaic type, dated to about 1000
B.C.-A.D. 200, or 2950-1750 years B.P. (Turner and Hester 1985:126; Prewitt 1981:81).
TRENCH 7

Trench 7 was located on the eastern margin of the aforementioned swale. The
sediments encountered in this trench were the thick deposits of late Holocene alluvium.
The trench was excavated to a depth of 630 cm, and was characterized by interbedded
medium to coarse sands and strong brown clayey silts.
Trench 7 was by far the least productive of evidence of prehistoric occupation. Only
a single piece of chert debitage was found (Fig. lOc), this in level 13 (470-540 cm).
Because this trench is located at a lower elevation and closer to the Colorado River than
the other trenches, it is inferred that the sediments represent rapid and relatively recent
alluvial deposition, an inference which accounts for the low density of cultural remains.
TRENCHS

As already noted, this trench was excavated entirely by hand in 20-cm arbitrary levels.
Because all sediment, rather than a constant volume sample, was screened through
one-quarter-inch mesh, the artifact yield was relatively high. Lithic artifacts include 4011
pieces of debitage, 14 unifacial and bifacial tools, and 7 small bifacial cores.
Trench 8 was placed adjacent to the Woodward-Clyde (W-C) Bore Hole 2. The log
of W-C Bore Hole 2 noted surface soil, limestone rock, and - beneath limestone rockvalley alluvium. This pattern raised the strong possibility that a buried rockshelter was
present along the bluff in this part of Barton Creek valley. Trench 8 was positioned to
test the rockshelter hypothesis. What had been understandably logged as limestone rock
proved to be crushed limestone road bed material.
The trench, in plan dimensions, measured 2 x 3 meters at the surface. At a depth of
50 cm these dimensions were reduced to 1.5 x 2 meters. The upper 40-50 cm of the trench

34 I EXCAVATIONS

consisted of modern artificial deposits, including a thin layer of light brown sediment
underlain by a darker sediment on which rested an old asphalt pavement, apparently the
remnant of Old Bee Cave Road, which ran the length of the bench-like topographic
feature on which the trench was located. Beneath the asphalt layer was a compact layer
of gravel and sand, 20-40 cm thick.
The original soil surface was reached at a depth of 40-50 cm. It was at this level that
the 20 cm arbitrary levels were initiated, so that the modern overburden is not considered
in the level depths as discussed here or as presented in the Appendices. From this
surface, a dark brown A horizon of late Holocene alluvium extended to a depth of
approximately 60 cm and graded into a dark yellowish brown silty clay. A distinct
depositional unconformity was noted at about 110 cm in the north end of the trench and
136-140 cm in the south end. Below the unconformity were the strong brown to yellowish
red sediments of latest Pleistocene to early-middle Holocene colluvium. Below 140 cm,
these sediments contained scattered limestone gravels and cobbles up to 15-20 cm long,
and an occasional larger limestone clast up to 30 cm long. Below about 175 cm, calcium
carbonate nodules, up to 1-2 cm in diameter, were present.
The vertical distribution of cultural material showed an approximate correspondence
with the sediment deposits. While artifact yield was relatively high in levels below level
2, there was a marked peak in abundance in level 7, just that level which contained the
stratigraphic unconformity (Fig. lOd). The lower stratum may in fact represent a longstable surface on which recurrent occupation took place, thus accounting for the
numerous lithic artifacts in level 7. This inference is apparently supported by artifact
typology, since level 7 produced both Early Archaic Uvalde points (Fig. 12c,d) and a
Paleoindian Plainview point (Fig. 12a). Uvalde points are believed to date to about 6000
years B.P. (Prewitt 1981;1985), while Plainview points are placed at about 10,000 years
B.P. (Dibble 1970; Turner and Hester 1985:141-142). A small cluster of burned rock and
chert flakes, and an apparently associated crude Uvalde-like point (Fig. 12d), was
exposed in level 7 (134-141 cm), resting on the same unconformity (Fig. 11).
Artifact yield decreased in level 8, but was still relatively high. Below level 8, yield
dropped markedly, suggesting that the base of the culturally relevant deposits had been
reached.

TRENCH8 I 35

~

1 meter

Mag.N

I

ft~ Burned Rocks

D Large Flake

t

Uvalde-like Point

FIGURE 11. Plan view of trench 8 showing location of burned

rock and chert artifacts at 134-141 cm depth.

Page intentionally left blank.

CHAPTER6

CULTURAL MATERIAL
The artifacts recovered during the testing at 41 TV1364 are confined soley to the lithic
category. Bone preservation was virtually non-existent at the site, so that no implements
or ornaments of bone were present; similarly, no animal bones which would reflect
dietary practices were present. Ceramic materials were likewise completely absent, a
fact attributable to the general lack of Late Prehistoric remains at the site. All of the
diagnostic projectile points found at the site, both during the TARL excavations and in
earlier work carried out by EHA, are referable to either the Archaic or Paleoindian
periods. The small, thin arrow points characteristic of the Central Texas Late Prehistoric
(beginning about A.D. 800 or 1150 years B.P.; see Prewitt 1981; 1985) are absent in the
samples recovered during both projects (We are confident that a small elongated bifacial
fragment, categorized by EHA [1988] as an arrow point, is actually a barb fragment from
an Early Archaic Andice type dart point).
Unlike bone, shell was preserved. Freshwater mussel shells (Unio sp.), whole and
fragmentary, were found in very light scatters in those trench levels most productive of
lithic artifacts, and there can be little doubt that these items reflect a degree of dietary
reliance on mussel by prehistoric occupants of the site. However, the lack of any
concentration of these shells suggests that mussels were a minor constituent in prehistoric
diets at this location. Land snails (Rabdotus sp. and Helicina sp.) were scattered
throughout nearly all trenches and levels independently, it would seem, of the
presence/absence of cultural remains. These are thus believed to represent natural
deaths in local snail populations.
Fragments of burned limestone rock, a common indicator of cultural activity in
Central Texas, occurred only in some of the trench levels, and then only sporadically. As
with the mussel shells, there is a general correspondence with the occurrence of lithic
artifact material.
The occurrences of these various categories of materials by trench and level are
presented in Appendix 2. The descriptions of artifacts which follow are confined to those
lithic specimens which are temporally and/or functionally diagnostic.
DIAGNOSTIC LITHIC ARTIFACTS
Dart Points

Six specimens were found which can be attributed to established projectile point
types. Five are from various time periods within the Archaic, while the sixth represents

37

38 I CULTURAL MATERIAL

the earlier Paleoindian Period. These are briefly described in their chronological order,
from earliest to latest.
Plainview (N = 1; Fig. 12a). A single Plainview point was found in trench 8, level 7. This
type is very widespread in Texas, having been reported from virtually all parts of the state
and beyond (Suhm and Jelks 1962; Turner and Hester 1985:141; L. Johnson 1989). The
type is well established as a Paleoindian diagnostic, and is dated to about 8000 B.C. or
10,000 years B.P. (Turner and Hester 1985:141).
The specimen from trench 8 is incomplete, consisting of the medial section and part
of the base. Maximum thickness is 7 mm and maximum width 27 mm. It is manufactured
of gray chert and bears moderate patination. Both surfaces show well-controlled, parallel
oblique pressure flaking. The one remaining basal section exhibited rather heavy edge
grinding. Though the base of the point is incomplete, enough remains to indicate that it
may have had a basal concavity.
Uvalde (N = 3). Two basal fragments and one complete but unfinished specimen are
attributed to this dart point type. The first specimen (Fig. 12b) was recovered from trench
3, level 7. The fragment is large enough to indicate a concave base and a markedly
constricted stem, which together form distinct basal projections. Maximum width of the
base is 19 mm.
A second basal fragment (Fig. 12c) was recovered from trench 8, level 7. This has a
moderate basal concavity, basal thinning and a slightly constricted stem. Maximum basal
width is 19 mm.
The complete but unfinished specimen (Fig. 12d) is also from trench 8, level 7. This
was found in apparent association with a small cluster of burned rocks, resting on a
stratigraphic unconformity (Figs. lOd and 11). The point has the type's characteristic
concave base and stem constriction. It was clearly manufactured from a flake of gray
chert. One of the lateral edges was not susceptible to final thinning, thus accounting for
the fact that the point was not finished. Length is 33 mm, maximum width (at the
shoulders) 15 mm, and maximum thickness 6.5 mm.
Marcos (N = 1; Fig. 12e ). A specimen of this Late Archaic dart point type, dated to
about 600/300 B.C.-A.D. 200 or 2550/2250-1750 years B.P. (Prewitt 1981; Turner and
Hester 1985), was found in the west end of trench 3 at a depth of 165 cm. It exhibits the
deep corner notching characteristic of the type. The distal end and one edge are heavily
damaged by an impact fracture. Stem width at the base is 20 mm.
Montell (N = 1; Fig. 12f). This specimen was found at a depth of about 30 cm next to
trench 6. It is manufactured from dark brown chert. The distal tip and one shoulder barb
are broken off. Estimated original width at the shoulders is 46 mm. The type is considered contemporaneous with the Marcos type, with an estimated time range of 1000/300
B.C.-A.D. 200 or 2950/2250-1750 years B.P. (Prewitt 1981; Turner and Hester 1985).

DIAGNOSTIC LITHICARTIFACTS I 39

b

a

c

e

d

I

I

I

2

0

I

3

cm

f

12. Paleoindian and Archaic dart points from 41TV1364, 1989 season. a, Plainview;
b,c, Uvalde stem fragments; d, unfinished Uvalde; e, Marcos; f, Montell.

FIGURE

40 I CULTURAL MATERIAL

Clovis Preform

This highly significant specimen (Fig. 13) was found in trench 2 at a depth of 210 cm.
Though broken by the backhoe, the three resulting fragments were easily refitted, and
virtually the entire artifact was recovered. While two of the fragments were recovered
from the backhoe backdirt pile, the third was found in situ in the trench end wall, still
clearly embedded in its sediment matrix. The refitted specimen measures 156 mm in
length, 58 mm in width, and 22 mm in maximum thickness. It is manufactured from a
dark gray-brown, almost black, moderately fine-grained chert. The specimen bears a very
thick (2-3 mm) white patination on all surfaces. Chert with visual, macroscopic attributes
identical to the unpatinated interior of this specimen occurs in gravels of a tributary
stream that enters the Colorado from the southwest about 750 meters west of this site.
In terms of attributes of size, shape, and technology, this specimen fits remarkably
well into an hypothesized bifacial reduction sequence for Clovis type dart points (Collins
et al. 1989). The size and shape are clearly prototypical of finished Clovis points from
Texas (Turner and Hester 1985:81; Meltzer 1987:57). Technologically, the artifact appears to represent an intermediate stage between initial bifacial reduction and a nearly
finished Clovis point. Broad percussion flake scars, present on both faces, have been
struck toward and somewhat past the center of the preform to create a distinctive
biconvex transverse section. The base of the artifact exhibits a beveling produced by the
removal of a series of short flakes; the longitudinal section (Fig. 13) is very regular with
a taper toward the point, the basal bevel, and a uniform thickness in between. Both of
these are characteristics of a Clovis reduction sequence identified in a stratigraphically
controlled sample of specimens from Kincaid Shelter in Uvalde County, Texas (Collins
et al. 1989).
Given these empirical observations, and the position of the specimen at the base of
the culturally relevant deposits in trench 2, along with the fact that its size and form are
not characteristic of later Archaic lithic forms, it is highly probable that this artifact
represents a Clovis occupation at 41TV1364.
Clear Fork Tool

This is a common late Paleoindian and Archaic tool form in Central and South Texas
(e.g., G. Hall et al. 1982: 342-346; Turner and Hester 1985:205). The specimen from
41TV1364 was found in trench 8, level 2 (Fig. 14a). It is piano-convex in profile, but is
bifacially worked. The distal, beveled end, which exhibits minute flake scars evidently
created by use, is slightly convex. Length is at least 39 mm (proximal end is probably
missing), width at the distal end is 42 mm, and maximum thickness is 8 mm. The specimen
is thus fairly small, triangular, and thin, which is apparently more characteristic of later
Archaic examples of the type (see discussion in G. Hall et al. 1982:346). A relatively late
Archaic placement for this artifact is also suggested by its vertical position in trench 8.

NON-DIAGNOSTICLITHICARTIFACTS I 41

I

\

2

0

3

cm

FIGURE 13. Clovis preform, 41TV1364, 1989 season.

42 I CULTURAL MATERIAL

a

,
/

b

0

2

1

3

cm

c

FIGURE 14. Chipped stone artifacts from 41TV1364, 1989 season. a, Clear Fork tool; b,c,
biface fragments; d, uniface.

NON-DIAGNOSTICLITHICARTIFACTS I 43

NON-DIAGNOSTIC LITHIC ARTIFACTS
A number of uniface and biface fragments (Fig. 14b-d) were recovered in the excavations. These specimens cannot be assigned to diagnostic types, either because they are
the distal ends of projectile points or knives, and thus do not reveal the proximal-end
morphologies which characterize the various types, or because they represent strictly
functional, rather than stylistic, tool forms. These will not be described in detail, since
they do not contribute to chronological interpretation of the site, and since the narrow
trenches could not produce spatial data for contextual interpretations of locations of
functionally different tool categories.
Most of these items were found in trench 8, doubtless in large part because this trench
was hand excavated and all sediment screened through one-quarter-inch mesh. These
consisted of four distal biface or dart point fragments, the medial section of a bifacial
drill, a medial biface fragment, a unifacial scraping/cutting tool fragment, two medial
biface/dart point fragments, and a flake bearing concave edge trimming on one edge.
From trench 3, level 12, was recovered a uniface beveled on three sides (Fig. 14d).
DISCUSSION
The diagnostic artifacts clearly indicate that the site was occupied during the Paleoindian and Archaic periods. Furthermore, the range of types indicates that recurrent
occupations occurred over most, if not all, of these two lengthy periods. The early
Paleoindian Period is indicated by the probable Clovis point preform, while the late
Paleoindian Period is indicated by the Plainview point. Early Archaic Period is represented by the Uvalde points, while Late Archaic occupation is indicated by the Marcos
and Montell points.
Findings of time-diagnostic dart points during previous testing by Espey, Huston and
Associates (1988) further support the inference of occupations spanning the Paleoindian
and Archaic periods. In EHA trench 6, the crew found a Plainview point at a depth of
2. 7 meters and a possible Angostura point at a depth of between 2.5 and 3. 7 meters. What
we confidently believe is an Early Archaic Bell point was found in EHA trench 5 at a
depth of 1.2 meters. Middle Archaic occupation is indicated by the recovery of a
Pedernales point in EHA trench 9 at a depth of 1.5 meters.
Certain of these finds by EHA are significant in terms of their vertical positions. The
Plainview and Angostura points in EHA trench 6 are at expectable depths in relation to
findings in TARL trench 3, located in the same general area of the site. In TARL trench
3 we found Early Archaic (Uvalde point) and Late Archaic (Marcos point) diagnostics at
depths of 1.65 meters and 2.1-2.5 meters, respectively. These finds are vertically above
the late Paleoindian Plainview and Angostura points, thus further strengthening the
impression ofstratigraphic/chronological integrity of the archeological materials in this
part of the site.
A Pedernales point came from EHA trench 9, located further to the east than those
just mentioned, in the same part of the site as TARL trenches 4 and 5. This point came

44 I CULTURAL MATERIAL

from a depth of 1.5 meters, suggesting a Middle to Late Archaic time range for the upper
node of artifact abundance in the vertically bimodal pattern, already discussed, documented for these trenches.
In sum, it is concluded that the sediments at the site contain cultural material in their
expected stratigraphic/chronological positions. In trenches 3 through 6, located in areas
of relatively deep alluvial deposition, considerable depth is evident for culturally relevant
time periods, with corresponding vertical zonation of materials. In these areas, alluvial
deposition was of sufficient volume and frequency to create, to some extent, definable
periods of cultural deposition. The zonation of cultural material is more expanded
vertically in trenches 4-6 than in trench 3, presumably because these trenches are closer
to the Colorado River, and thus, in an area which, over time, received a somewhat greater
volume of flood-borne sediments. Trench 3 showed zonation of cultural material in a
slightly more compressed vertical context and more accessible for archeological excavation. In trenches 1, 2, and 8, depth of cultural material is not as great, a fact here
interpreted as reflecting lower rates of alluvial deposition in the western part of the site,
which is farthest from the Colorado River.·

CHAPTER 7

RADIOCARBON AGES
As previously mentioned, samples of clay-rich alluvial sediments were taken at
various depths in several trenches for the purpose of obtaining radiocarbon ages on
inclusive organic materials. A total of 10 samples was submitted to the Radiocarbon
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin. The results (S. Valastro, Jr., personal
communication 1989), are in Table 1:
TABLE 1
RADIOCARBON AGES FOR SEDIMENTS
FROM THE VERA DANIEL SITE (41 TV1364)
Sample
Number

Trench

Depth
(meters)

Ages*
(years B.P.)

TX-6529
TX-6530
TX-6531
TX-6532
TX-6533
TX-6528
TX-6527
TX-6534
TX-6535
TX-6536

1
2
3
3
3
4
6
6
7
7

3.2
2.1
4.0
3.3
1.1
5.5
6.1
1.2
5.5
1.2

5010±100
5540±90
9030±160
8960±200
3340±90
9870±220
11,050±220
3320±90
2610±80
1090±80

*The samples were not corrected for o13C.

These ages provide, on the whole, excellent confirmation of the depositional sequence
inferred from the vertical locations of diagnostic artifact types and the postulated articulation between the sequences of cultural and sediment deposition at the site.
Figure 15 presents a somewhat schematized, synoptic cross section of the site, showing
trench locations (both TARL and EHA trenches), MLA Labs and Woodward-Clyde bore
holes, ground surface elevations, densities of cultural material as represented in the
TARL trenches by debitage counts, locations and ages ofTAR~s 10 radiocarbon samples
as well as one collected by EHA (the other EHA radiocarbon sample provenience is

45

46 I RADIOCARBON AGES

West
ft

...

470

~
w

LHA

460

I
I

/ ,

(ii

E
Q)

> 450

0

.0

I

I

I

I

EA?

/t
I

I

----

I
L.,

L,
I

N=4009

LPEMHC

}

N=62

5010 :!: 100·

~

I

Pl

N=39

I
470 :!: 50

ca
c

0
·.;::

ca
>

no horizontal scale

Q)

jjJ

440

EHA =Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc. backhoe trenches
430

MLA = MLA Labs borings
TARL=Texas Archeological Research Laboratory backhoe trenches
W-C =Woodward-Clyde borings
LHA =Late Holocene Alluvium
LPEMHC =Late Pleistocene to Early-Middle Holocene Alluvium
LPEMHA =Late Pleistocene to Early-Middle Holocene Colluvium

FIGURE

"'
~

w

15. Synoptic cross section of 41TV1364 showing all sources of subsurface data.

DISCUSSION I 47

East

...

~

....

"'
u

...

co

...J

a:
<(

...J

a:
<(

J:

w

w

I-

~

"'

Ol
<(

<(

J:

~
w

I-

<(

J:

3

:::

"'::5

<(

w

J:

LHA

---

---

...

::;:

w

...J

a:
~

--

MA

........ .....

/

/

LA

EA

1090

LPEMHA
9870

± 220

N=37
N=54

N=27

N=91

2610

± 80
N=1

/I

Pl= Paleoindian

7111'

Bedrock

EA= Early Archaic

D

Gravel

MA= Middle Archaic

0

Hearths

LA= Late Archaic

•

Radiocarbon samples

± 80

48 I RADIOCARBON AGES

unknown), and locations of diagnostic artifact finds. Taking these variables together,
three basic stratigraphic units, with cultural-chronological correlates, are apparent (see
section on Geomorphology herein, for more definitive discussion of the alluvial stratigraphy).
First, at the western end of the site, are two radiocarbon samples (TX-6529 and
TX-6530) with assayed ages of 5010± 100 and 5540±90 years B.P., from the lowest
culturally relevant deposits in trenches 1 and 2, respectively. These dates appear at first
glance to be incongruent with the relatively deep and presumably old cultural remains
(as indicated by the Clovis preform at the same depth as the radiocarbon sample in trench
2) in the respective trenches. However, considering the fact that the depositional context
is apparently colluvial, it is possible that the cultural material was redeposited by colluvial
processes. This would be consistent with the heavy patina on the Clovis preform, since
this artifact could have rested exposed on an upslope, stable surface for a considerable
time prior to its final deposition in colluvial fill. The approximately 5000-year-old ages
thus may reflect mid-Holocene colluvial deposition or, as suggested earlier, some form
of post-depositional contamination by younger carbon.
Farther to the east, away from the limestone outcrops of the valley margin and toward
the Colorado River, the radiocarbon ages are in concert with an expected sequence of
late Pleistocene through late Holocene alluvial deposition. The radiocarbon ages,
together with the generally bimodal vertical zonation of cultural debris, suggest discernable periods of (a) latest Pleistocene to early-middle Holocene and (b) late Holocene
deposition.
The radiocarbon ages on samples from trench 3 best indicate this Holocene alluvial
sequence. The lowest sample, at 4.0 meters depth, was taken from just above the narrow
vertical zone of lithic artifacts in levels 11 and 12, and the age of 9030± 160 years
(TX-6531) supports the inference that these materials represent a Paleoindian component. The sample at 3.3 meters below surface yielded an age of 8960±200 years B.P.
(TX-6532). This age is congruent both with the older age and with the fact that an Early
Archaic Uvalde point was found in level 7, at a 2.1-2.5 meters depth. The final sample
from trench 3, from a depth of 1.1 meters, produced an age of 3340±90 years B.P.
(TX-6533), thus supporting the inference of Middle to Late Archaic deposition of the
lithic materials which were relatively abundant in levels 4 though 6 ( 1.0-2.1 meters below
surface).
The samples from trenches 4 and 6 yielded corresponding results. A radiocarbon age
of 9870±220 (TX-6528) was obtained from a depth of 5.5 meters in trench 4. This
corresponds with the lower mode of debitage abundance in this trench, indicating an
apparent Paleoindian occupational period approximately corresponding with that indicated in trench 3. The age of 11,050±220 years B.P. (TX-6527), from a depth of 6.1 meters
in trench 6, supports these data, since the sample was taken from just below the lower
mode of debitage abundance in this trench. Also from trench 6 is the age of 3320±90
years B.P. (TX-6534) from a depth of 1.2 meters. This corresponds exceptionally well
with the similar age, from a similar depth, of the shallowest sample from trench 3. The
finding of a Montell dart point, estimated to date to about 2000 years B.P. (Prewitt
1985:81) at 0.3 meters, fits well with these data, further indicating a Middle to Late

DISCUSSION I 49

Archaic chronological position for the upper modes of lithic abundance in trenches 3
through 6.
The dates from trench 7 are in accord with a topographic location at a lower elevation
than the other TARL trenches. The initial inference that this surface represented
relatively recent and rapid alluvial deposition associated with late Holocene flooding of
the Colorado River is substantiated. The sample from a depth of 5.5 meters produced
an age of only 2610± 80 years B.P. (TX-6535), while the sample from a depth of 1.2 meters
yielded an age of only 1090±80 years B.P. (TX-6536). Lower elevation, in combination
with greater proximity to the Colorado River, accounts for more rapid alluvial deposition
at this location. The dearth of artifacts in this trench thus may be explainable in terms
of marked vertical dispersal of cultural remains in the context of rapid aggradation, or
the avoidance of high risk environments when conducting activities, that would leave a
tangible archeological record.
In conclusion, the radiocarbon ages, alluvial stratigraphy, and vertical zonation of
cultural debris appear to be mutually supportive data sets. Excepting the colluvial
context in trenches 1 and 2 (and probably, it should be added, trench 8), and the thick
alluvium in trench 7, we seem to be looking at roughly bimodal peaks in artifact densities.
In light of the chronometric data, the lower mode in artifact abundance is referable to
the Paleoindian Period in the terminal Pleistocene/early Holocene, while the upper mode
corresponds to Archaic occupations during the mid to late Holocene (see section on
Geomorphology).
An important aspect of these findings is that net sediment deposition was quite high
for the period 11,000 to 9000 years B.P. In TARL trenches 3, 4, and 6 documented and
recovered evidence indicates that late Pleistocene and early Holocene alluviation was
relatively constant and rapid. The average rate of net vertical accretion can be calculated
at 0.135 cm per year (2.7 meters in 2000 years). This rate contributes to a site formational
context highly favorable for the isolation of separate episodes of human activity (components). That this environment of rapid, low-energy natural deposition occurs near a
major spring, at the confluence of a perennial creek and a major river, and within a major
ecotone between the Edwards Plateau and the Gulf Coastal Plain - optimal for food
collecting peoples- completes the equation for an unusually significant archeological
site.
The net sediment from 9000 years B.P. to present averaged 0.036 cm per year (3.3
meters in 9000 years). This figure is probably misleading in terms of site formation
process for two reasons. It is based on only 3 radiocarbon ages of 8960±200, 3340±90,
and 3320±90 years B.P. and present ground surface, which constitute too few data points
for an accurate characterization. Also, an episode of erosion is inferred sometime prior
to 3000 years B.P. so that the rate of deposition is based on net accretion after the loss of
deposits of unknown thickness to erosion. This does not detract from the site's significance, because the cultural components may occur in intervals of sufficiently rapid
deposition for adequate component isolation, and because these later components occur
somewhat more commonly in Central Texas than do those dating from 11,000 to 9000
years B.P.

Page intentionally left blank.

CHAPTER 8

DISCUSSION OF SITE SIGNIFICANCE
Based on the findings discussed in previous sections, it is concluded that 41 TV1364,
the Vera Daniel Site, has considerable potential to provide significant information
concerning the Paleoindian and Archaic occupations of Central Texas. The points upon
which this conclusion is based can be summarized as follows:
SITE POTENTIAL FOR CHRONOLOGICAL STUDY
As already noted, the site was used intermittently by prehistoric peoples throughout
the long Paleoindian and Archaic periods. In those parts of the site with deep Holocene
alluvial deposition histories, namely, the areas immediately north and south of Barton
Creek Road, the available evidence points to a more or less intact occupational sequence
from Paleoindian through Late Archaic. It is significant that in this area of the site
alluvial deposition has been sufficient to create vertical separation of cultural materials
according to the temporal sequence of their deposition. Considering the success of the
technique of radiocarbon dating of clay-rich alluvial sediment, it is apparent that cultural
material within the site deposits can be satisfactorily dated from containment and/or
bracketing sediments.
While a detailed chronological sequence has been established for Central Texas,
further testing and/or refinements are called for (e.g., L. Johnson 1987). The dating of
discrete occupational periods at the Vera Daniel Site can contribute to a resolution of
remaining questions of the cultural-historical sequence in the region.
Specifically, for example, the most troublesome portion of the Central Texas archeological chronology is at the early end, that is, for ages before about 8000 years. Hints
appear in the archeological record that significant changes occurred in projectile point
styles and in tool kit compositions during the period between about 10,000 and 8000 years
ago in Central Texas (Patterson 1989). Because these changes possibly imply greater
variation in fundamental patterns of human adaptations than is generally believed to have
existed and because the archeological picture for the period is presently very unclear,
good archeological resolution of the artifact assemblages and chronology is needed. This
interval is represented by the presence of considerable archeological material and the
highest depositional rates at the Vera Daniel Site, precisely the setting which has the
potential for such resolution.

51

52 I DISCUSSION OF SITE SIGNIFICANCE

SITE POTENTIAL FOR STUDY OF CULTURAL-BEHAVIORAL PATTERNS

The chronological orientation of most of the archeological work accomplished to date
in Central Texas has been alluded to repeatedly. An important complementary approach
to the archeological record is synchronic, or spatial, investigation. Such studies can be
implemented at regional, subregional, local, and intra-site scales. The Vera Daniel Site
holds significant potential for spatial analysis at the intra-site scale.
The data from the site indicate a useful degree of vertical stratigraphic isolation of
periods of cultural deposition. This was particularly notable in trench 3, where a vertically discrete scatter of burned rock, lithic debitage, and mussel shell was exposed at
105-115 cm below surface (Fig. 9), and a fairly discrete zone of lithic debris was noted at
400-420 cm below surface. In both cases, a prehistoric occupational surface, sealed by
alluvium, appears to be indicated. Given the extremely limited horizontal view of the
site afforded by these test trenches, it is virtually certain that other such discrete occupational zones are present. These would be identifiable within horizontally extensive
excavations at the site.
It is in this kind of situation-where occupational remains are found in primary, or
near-primary, context on identifiable prehistoric surfaces - that prehistoric behavioral
patterns can best be studied. The articulation of past activities with cultural features such
as hearths and debris disposal areas can be inferred based upon the spatial arrangement
of features and distributions of activity-specific debris. In some cases, even the approximate number of people involved in these activities can be determined with
reasonable accuracy. When placed in the larger synchronic context of regional settlement and subsistence patterns, these kinds of data can contribute to reconstruction of
past lifeways and modes of human adaptation. Fairly broad horizontal excavation at the
Vera Daniel Site, particularly in the vicinity of trench 3, would predictably yield the kinds
of site-specific spatial data required for this important level of archeological interpretation.
As a specific example, Shiner (1983) suggested that the large springs along the
Balcones Escarpment were such exceptionally favorable habitats for humans that even
presumably nomadic Paleoindian peoples may have lived near them on a virtually
permanent basis as evident from high concentrations of early artifacts. As E. Johnson
and Holliday (1984) and Meltzer (1987) note, artifact concentrations are not of themselves evidence for permanence of occupation and Shiner's notion requires more
sophisticated investigation. Of first importance in such inquiry is data on the nature of
individual components - size, number, and diversity of features and artifacts, and
seasonality. Although because of poor preservation of organic materials, the Vera Daniel
Site does not have great potential for yielding data on seasonality, its Paleoindian
depositional context is ideal for investigating the other aspects of this issue.
INTERSITE VARIABILITY IN POTENTIAL ARCHEOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE

Excavated data from the TARL trenches indicate that there is considerable variability
in archeological significance across the Vera Daniel Site. This variability is linked to the

INTERS/TE VAR/ABILITY IN POTENTIALARCHEOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE I 53

degree of compression or vertical expansion of cultural deposition, which in turn correlates to the different rates and volumes of sediment deposition across the site. The
findings in trench 3 suggest that the rugby field area just south of Barton Springs Road
holds the highest potential for yielding important archeological information. The total
thickness of the culturally relevant deposits in trench 3 was about 4.5 meters, somewhat
less than in trenches 4-6 , located north of Barton Springs Road. The entire Holocene
period is encompassed by the trench 3 deposits, and there is good vertical separation of
discrete cultural zones, as well as practical access for archeological excavation. Vertical
zonation is also present in trenches 4-6, but the depth of excavation needed to fully
explore the culturally relevant deposits would be somewhat greater. Additionally, the
yield of cultural material in trenches 4, 5, and 6 was substantially lower than in trench 3.
Trenches 2 and 8 produced relatively high artifact densities. However, the great
majority of specimens in these trenches were concentrated vertically at or near the
unconformable contact between the colluvial wedge and the overlying mid to late
Holocene alluvium. This suggests a nearly stable land surface in this area from Paleoindian times into the Archaic, since both Paleoindian and Early Archaic diagnostic
materials were found on, or in close vertical proximity to, the surface of the colluvium.
Considering the range of these artifacts (including the Clovis preform, the Plainview
point, and Uvalde points), a period of as much as 5,000 years of accumulation and mixing
of cultural debris may be represented. Thus, along the colluvial facies at the base of the
Pleistocene terrace and the Cretaceous bedrock, vertical zonation of materials - crucial
for sophisticated archeological interpretation - may not be present.
Considering these kinds of factors in the relation between cultural occupation and
sediment deposition, it is apparent that the extensive site designated as 41TV1364 is not
internally homogeneous in terms of potential data yield. Based on the findings in the
TARL trenches, and on the inferred geomorphic history of the site, three levels of
archeological significance (Fig. 16) can be defined as follows:
1. Areas of low significance for data recovery. Three kinds of geomorphic settings
can be expected to have low significance for archeological data yield:

A. On the lower Holocene terrace, sediment deposition was of suffiently high rate
and volume that cultural materials are vertically dispersed and deeply buried.
In order to recover sufficient cultural material for meaningful interpetation,
excavations would have to be so deep and so extensive as to be highly impractical.
B. On the wedge along the base of the Cretaceous and Pleistocene uplands,
alluvial deposition is minimal. Thus cultural materials accumulated on a
stable, or nearly stable surface, at least during the archeologically critical
Paleoindian and Early Archaic periods. Thus cultural materials are too mixed
to permit useful interpretations of either a chronological or a behavioral kind.
C. Cultural materials are present on the Pleistocene and Cretaceous surfaces of
the upland margins overlooking the Barton Creek and Colorado River valleys.
However, cultural deposits here can also be expected to be highly compressed

54 I DISCUSSION OF SITE SIGNIFICANCE

Co\oradO f).\"Vef

.........·.·.·.·.·.··:·:-:-:-:-:-:-:-:-:·.· ..\.... ~ ....~,(Upper Surface)',,',,,''',, ·.;.::::::-:-:-:-:-:-:........ :. ..-:· ...·... ·-:-:-:-:·:-·

'' '''''''' '''' '''

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::\\::.;}\:~
~ ,,,,,,,,,,, ,,,,,,,,,,
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ,,,,,
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ,,,,,,,,
~,~,·~ti"~::;:::::::::::::::::;::
................................ .;.;. ................. ·z.:: .. :~'
~,,, """""""""
::c
...R.. E.'T"A''c'..E.. a·.·u·'s'. {::::~:::~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ~~~~~·~,~~~~.;t.;.~::~:::~:::,:::~r----o.---J

:·
·:~.:·:<·~~:-:-.\.~''''''''''''''''''''''
,,,,,, ~ ,,,,,, ·.·: ....
:: BEDROCK :::::::::::::::.x::::::.~~:::}~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ~ ~~~~~~ '~'' '~~~~~~~~~.::::::::::::·
:·.

·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:~·:·:·:·:·~~··:·:·~' '' ''' '' '' ,, '' '' ''''

'''' ''''' ~:·:·:·:·:··

Low Archeologlcal
Significance Inferred
Moderate Archeologlcal
Significance Inferred

~
~

High Archeologlcal
Significance Inferred

FIGURE 16. Three levels of inferred archeological significance at the Vera Daniel Site. A-A'
indicates cross section of Figure 17.

INTERS/TE VARIABILITY IN POTENTIALARCHEOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE I 55

and mixed, since these surfaces did not experience significant sediment deposition during culturally relevant (terminal-to-post Pleistocene) time periods.
2. Area of moderate significance for data recovery. This area encompasses the upper
surface of the Holocene terrace nearest to the Colorado River, north of Barton
Springs Road. This is the portion of the site in which TARL trenches 4-6 were
excavated. As noted, the alluvial deposits here are sufficiently deep, and cultural
debris sufficiently expanded vertically, that excavations would need to be quite
deep and extensive in order to yield sufficient data for meaningful interpretations.
Also, the trench excavations seem to indicate that cultural debris is not particularly
abundant in this area.
3. Area of high significance for archeological recovery. This consists essentially of
the rugby field area in which TARL trench 3 was excavated. Here alluvial deposition was of a sufficient rate and volume as to produce vertically segregated zones
of cultural material. At the same time, the area was far enough from the Colorado

A'

A

Cretaceous/
Pleistocene
Surfaces
/

COMPRESSED
CULTURAL DEPOSITS

MAXIMUM POTENTIAL
ARCHEOLOGICAL DATA
RECOVERY
.------.A_~--

CULTURAL DEPOSITS
HIGHLY EXPANDED

\
Hypothetical
...- Cultural
Horizons

~Bedrock
~) ~~ Colluvial Wedge

17. Schematic cross section showing expected compression or expansion of cultural
zones related to geomorphic setting.
FIGURE

56 I DISCUSSION OF SITE SIGNIFICANCE

River that flood-borne sediments did not accumulate so rapidly, or in such great
volume, that cultural materials are so deeply buried and/or vertically dispersed as
to be inaccessible to efficient recovery. This area of relatively high potential is
wedged between adjoining areas of very high volume alluvial deposition on the
one hand, and areas of little or no sediment accretion on the other. Thus, despite
the large size of the Vera Daniel Site, a relatively restricted area appears to hold
optimal potential for effective archeological investigation.
The intrasite horizontal extent of these predictable areas of varying archeological
potential can be seen on the map, Figure 17. The rationale for the relevant geoarcheological inferences is explicated in Figure 17, a schematic cross section of the site
showing how cultural zones can be expected to be either compressed or expanded
according to their relation to the site's geomorphic setting.

CHAPTER9

RECOMMENDATIONS
It is fitting that a site with late Pleistocene to early Holocene (11,000 to 9000 years

old) cultural vestiges of the high significance documented for 41TV1364 is situated in
Austin's premier city park. Such a setting should insure the conservation and preservation of this evidence of some of the first human inhabitants of central Texas.
We strongly urge that construction disturbance of the area of potentially high datayield be avoided; if it is unavoidable then it has to be minimized. We further recommend
that the fullest possible scrutiny of construction alternatives be made by the City of
Austin.
Open trench excavation, as currently planned for the installation of this wastewater
line, could disrupt as much as 800,000 cubic feet of archeologically relevant deposits in
the right-of-way including the area of high potential around trench 3. To mitigate this
loss of valuable archeological data by controlled excavation of only 1% of this volume
would be very costly and still result in the irreversible loss of 99% of that portion of the
site cut by the wastewater line trench.
Such engineering alternatives as boring beneath the culturally-relevant deposits,
re-routing the line, or installing a large lift station and raising the grade of the line to
permit a greatly reduced installation excavation must be considered.
To reroute the line around the optimal part of the site with the least likelihood of
encountering similar archeological problems, an alignment across the high terrace west
of the present Barton Springs Pool entrance road north across Barton Springs Road and
then east to the Barton Creek crossing should be considered. It is probable that some
archeological testing along such a route would be necessary, but our findings suggest that
much less significant archeological deposits would be encountered.
Failing these alternatives for avoiding or minimizing disturbance to the most significant part of the site, adequate mitigation of the archeological data loss is
recommended. In light of the scientific potential of the Vera Daniel Site, particularly in
regard to Early Archaic and Paleoindian studies, the following broad outlines of a data
recovery excavation are proposed.
Should the city decide that the most feasible method with which to lay the wastewater
line is by continuous trenching from the ground surface across the site, significant
archeological mitigation is recommended. So that costs to the city would be kept at the
most reasonable level possible, it is recommended that archeological excavation be
confined to one excavation block in the area of the present rugby field, in the vicinity of
TARL trench 3. It is in this area that cultural remains are both sufficiently abundant and
of sufficient vertical segregation that the scientific potential of the site can be most

57

58 I RECOMMENDATIONS

effectively investigated. This is also an area where bedrock is less deeply buried than it
is farther north in the site.
More specifically, our recommendation is for excavation of a fairly broad horizontal
area, the exact location of which will depend upon the route through this part of the site
to be taken in constructing the wasterwater line. In order that this excavation should
encompass enough area to yield the kinds of spatial data referred to previously, a surface
area approximately 14 x 14 meters in extent should be opened. Excavation would
proceed to a depth of approximately 2 to 2.5 meters, which would allow exposure and
documentation of the Archaic occupational zones. Below this level, mechanical equipment could be feasibly used to remove culturally sterile or nearly-sterile sediments to
just above the 4 meter-deep occupational zone which is believed to represent Paleoindian
occupation of the site. A "pilot" excavation by hand of a limited area would precede
mechanical stripping and monitoring of the mechanical stripping would insure minimal
data loss in this process. At this point excavation by hand would resume.
Effectively, then, three stages of excavation are envisioned. The first would involve
hand excavation of the Archaic levels, with perhaps initial mechanical removal of relatively shallow low-productivity overburden. The second stage would involve major, but
monitored, mechanical removal of sediments between the Archaic and probable Paleoindian zones. At this point the dimensions of the excavation would be reduced to 10 x 10
meters, creating a stair-step configuration which would reduce the complexity- and thus
the cost- of shoring required to meet OSHA safety requirements. The third stage would
involve hand excavation of the lowest culturally relevant zone at the 4.0-4.2 meter depth
level.
Should the city determine that the most feasible approach to construction of the
wastewater line is to bore tunnel, and should this operation be of sufficient depth to pass
under the archeologically significant deposits at the site, large scale mitigation would be
unnecessary. f{owever, should the locations where access pits or manholes are to be dug
be located in archeologically sensitive areas, as determinable from the data already
recovered, archeological excavation at these loci, to the base of culturally relevant
sediments, are recommended.
Finally, if the line could be placed at less depth and the volume of disturbance be
geometrically reduced, an appropriately-scaled archeological excavation would be
recommended only to the depth of disturbance.
Our recommendations are predicated on the two principles of (1) avoidance or (2)
archeological treatment only in areas that are to be disturbed by construction if avoidance
cannot be achieved. Once construction alternatives have been considered and the final
plan for the installation of this line determined, specific archeological treatment based
on these principles and the general recommendations above can be negotiated between
representatives of the City of Austin and the Texas Antiquities Committee.

REFERENCES CITED
Adovasio, J., J. Gunn, J. Donahue, R. Stuckenrath, J.E. Guilday and K. Volman
1980
Yes, Virginia, It Really is that Old: A Reply to Haynes and Mead.
American Antiquity 45:588-595.
Barnes, V.E.
1974

Geologic Atlas of Texas: The Big Spring Sheet. Bureau of Economic
Geology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin.

1975

Geologic Atlas of Texas: The San Angelo Sheet. Bureau of Economic
Geology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin.

1981a

Geologic Atlas of Texas: The Austin Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology,
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin.

1981b

Geologic Atlas of Texas: The Llano Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology,
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin.

1986

Geologic Atlas of Texas: The Brownwood Sheet. Bureau of Economic
Geology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin.

Birkeland, P.W.
1984
Soils and Geomorphology. Oxford University Press. New York.
Black, S.L.
1986

The Clemente and Herminia Hinojosa Site, 41JW8: A Toyah Horizon
Campsite in Southern Texas. Special Report 18, Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Black, S.L. and A.J. McGraw
1985
The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change and Continuity Within the
Upper Slado Creek Watershed, South-Central Texas. Archaeological Survey
Report 100, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio.
Blair, W.F.
1950
Blum, M.D.
1989

The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2( 1):93-117.
Geoarchaeology and Quaternary Stratigraphy on the Concho and Upper
Colorado Rivers, West Texas. Abstracts with Programs, Southcentral
Section of the Geological Society of America 21:4.

59

60 I REFERENCES CITED

Blum, M.D. and S. Valastro, Jr.
1989
Response of the Pedernales River of Central Texas to Late Holocene
Climatic Change. Annals of the Association of American Geographers
79(3):435-456.
Bryant, V.M. and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview
of the Pollen Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North
American Sediments, edited by V.M. Bryant and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70.
American Association of Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation.
Bryant, V.M. Jr. and H.J. Shafer
1977
The Late Quaternary Paleoenvironment of Texas: A Model for the
Archeologist. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 48: 1-25.
Butzer, K.W
1982
Carr, J.T., Jr.
1967
Carter, G.
1978

Archaeology as Human Ecology: Method and Theory for Contextual
Approach. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.
The Climate and Physiography of Texas. Texas Water Development Board
Report 53.

The American Paleolithic. In Early Man in America, edited by A. Bryan,
pp. 10-19. Occasional Papers 1, Department of Anthropology, University
of Alberta, Edmonton.

Collins, M.B.
Thoughts on Future Investigations of Burned Rock Middens. Paper
1988
presented to the Spring, 1988 meeting of the Council of Texas
Archaeologists, Austin.
Collins, M.B., G.L. Evans, T.N. Campbell, M.C. Winans, and C.E. Mear
1989
Clovis Occupation at Kincaid Shelter, Texas. Current Research in the
Pleistocene 6:3-4.
Dibble, D.S.
1970

On the Significance of Additional Radiocarbon Dates from Bonfire
Shelter, Texas. Plains Anthropologist 15(50):251-254.

Dibble, D.S. and D. Lorrain
1968
Bonfire Shelter: A Stratified Bison Ki.ll Site, Val Verde County, Texas.
Miscellaneous Papers of the Texas Memorial Museum 1, The University
of Texas at Austin.

REFERENCES CITED I 61

Dillehay, T.D.
1974
Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19:180-196.
Dillehay, T.D. and M.B. Collins
1988
Early Cultural Evidence from Monte Verde in Chile. Nature 332:150-152.
Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc. (EHA)
1988
A Mechanically Augmented Archaeological Survey of the South Austin
Outfall, Phase II Travis County, Texas. EHA Document 880195, Espey,
Huston and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Ferring, C.R.
1986
Folk, R.L.
1980

Rates of Fluvial Sedimentation: Implications for Archaeological
Variability. Geoarchaeology 1:259-274.

Petrology of Sedimentary Rocks, 2nd edition. Hemphill Press, Austin.

Gifford, J .A. and G. Rapp
1985
History, Philosophy, and Perspectives. InArchaeological Geology, edited
by G. Rapp and J.A. Gifford, pp. 1-24. Yale University Press. New Haven,
Connecticut.
Gladfelter, B.G.
1981
Developments and Directions in Geoarchaeology. In Advances in
Archaeological Method and Theory, edited by M.B. Schiffer, 4:343-364.
Academic Press. New York.
Haas, H., V.T. Holliday, and R. Stuckenrath
1986
Dating of Holocene Stratigraphy with Soluble and Insoluble Organic
Fractions at the Lubbock Lake Archaeological Site: An Ideal Case Study.
Radiocarbon 28:473-485.
Hall, G.D., S.L. Black and C. Graves.
1982
Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir, South Texas:
Phase I Findings. Choke Canyon Series 5, Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hall, S.A.
1988
1990

Environment and Archaeology of the Central Osage Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 33:203-218.
Channel Trenching and Climatic Change in the Southern U.S. Great
Plains. Geology 18:342-345.

62 I REFERENCES CITED

Haury, E.W.
1953

Hester, J.J.
1972

Hester, T.R.
1970

Artifacts with Mammoth Remains, Naco Arizona: 1. Discovery of the
Naco Mammoth and Associated Projectile Points. American Antiquity
19:1-14.
Blackwater Locality No. 1: A Stratified Early Man Site in Eastern New
Mexico. Publications of the Fort Burgwin Research Center 8, Taos, New
Mexico.

Burned Rock Middens on the Southwestern Edge of the Edwards Plateau,
Texas. Plains Anthropologist 15:237-250.

1971

Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41 :51-148.

1978

Early Human Occupations in South Central and Southwestern Texas:
Preliminary Papers on the Baker Cave and St. Mary's Hall Sites. Center for
Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio.

1980

Digging into South Texas Prehistory. Corona Publishing Co., San Antonio.

1983

Late Paleo-Indian Occupations at Baker Cave, Southwestern Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 53: 101-119.

Hester, T.R. and R. Parker
1970
The Berclair Site: A Late Prehistoric Component in Goliad County,
Southern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:1-24.
Holliday, V.T.
Middle Holocene Drought on the Southern High Plains. Quaternary
1989
Research 31:74-82.
Jelks, E.B.
1978

Diablo Range. In Chronologies in New World Archeology, edited by R.E.
Taylor and C.W. Meighan, pp. 71-111. Academic Press, New York.

Johnson, E. (editor)
Lubbock Lake: Late Quaternary Studies on the Southern High Plains. Texas
1987
A&M University Press, College Station.
Johnson, E. and V.T. Holliday
1984
Comments on "Large Springs and Early American Indians" by Joel L.
Shiner. Plains Anthropologist 29:65-70.

REFERENCES CITED I 63

Johnson, L., Jr.
1967
Toward a Statistical Overview of the Archaic Cultures of Central and
Southwestern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Memorial Museum 12, The
University of Texas, Austin.
1987

A Plague of Phases: Recent Sociocultural Taxonomy in Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57: 1-26.

1989

Great Plains Interlopers in the Eastern Woodlands During Late Paleo-Indian
Times: The Evidence from Oklahoma, Texas andAreas Close By. Office of
the State Archeologist Report 36, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Johnson, L., Jr., D.A. Suhm and C.D. Tunnell
1962
Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge and
Oblate Sites. Bulletin of the Texas Memorial Museum 5, The University
of Texas, Austin.
Kelley, J.C.
1947a
1947b

The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Composition of the Clear
Fork Focus. American Antiquity 13(2):97-108.
The Lehman Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde and
Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of the Texas Paleontological and Archeologi,cal
Society 18: 115-128.

Leonhardy, F.C. (editor)
1966
Domebo: A Paleoindian Mammoth Kill in the Prairie Plains. Contribution
1, Museum of the Great Plains, Lawton, Oklahoma.
Matthews, J .A.
1985
Radiocarbon Dating of Surface and Buried Soils: Principles, Problems,
and Prospects. In Geomorphology and Soils, edited by K.S. Richards, R.R.
Arnett, and S. Ellis, pp. 269-288. Allen and Unwin. London.
Meltzer, D.J.
The Archaeology and Paleoecology of Mustang Springs (41MT2),
1986
Southern Llano Estacado. Paper presented at the 57th Annual Meeting of
the Texas Archeological Society, Laredo, Texas.
1987

The Clovis Paleoindian Occupation of Texas: Results of the Texas Clovis
Fluted Point Survey. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:27-68.

1989

Why Don't We Known When the First People Came to North America?
American Antiquity 54:471-490.

64 I REFERENCES CITED

Patterson, L. W.
1989
Early Notched Projectile Points in Texas. Current Research in the
Pleistocene 6:34-36.
Prewitt, E.R.
1981
1985

Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 52:65-89.
From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:201-238.

Ritchie, W.A.
The Lamoka Lake Site. Researches and Transactions 7, New York State
1932
Archeological Association.
Ricklis, R.A.
1989

Some Preliminary Observations on a Late Prehistoric Bison Processing
Site (41RF21) on the Central Part of the Texas Coastal Plain. Texas
Archeology 33 (2): 12-13.

Rodda, P.U., L.E. Garner, and G.L. Dawe
1970
Geologic Quadrangle Map 38: Austin West, Travis County, Texas. Bureau
of Economic Geology, University of Texas Austin, Austin.
Scharpenspeel, H. W.
1971
Radiocarbon Dating of Soils - Problems, Troubles, and Hopes. In
Paleopedology-Origin, Nature, and Dating of Paleosols, edited by D.H.
Yaalon, pp. 77-78. Israel University Press. Jerusalem.
Shiner, J.L.
1983

Large Springs and Early American Indians. Plains Anthropologist 28:1-7.

Sollberger, J.B. and T.R. Hester
1972
The Strohaker Site: A Review of Pre-Archaic Manifestations in Texas.
Plains Anthropologist 17(58):327-344.
Sorrow, W.M., H.J. Shafer, and R.E. Ross
1967
Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project 11, The University of Texas, Austin.
Stein, J .K. and W.R. Farrand
1985
Context and Geoarchaeology: An Introduction. In Archaeological
Sediments in Context, edited by J .K. Stein and W.R. Farrand, pp. 1-4.
Center for the Study of Early Man, University of Maine at Orono.

REFERENCES CITED I 65

Story, D.A.
1985

Suhm,D.A.
1957

Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coast Plain. In
Prehistoric Food Production in North America, edited by R.I. Ford, pp.
19-56. Anthropological Paper 75, Museum of Anthropology, University
of Michigan. Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Excavations at Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas. Texas Journal of
Science 9(1):26-58.

Suhm, D.A. and E.B. Jelks
Handbook of Texas Archeology: zype Descriptions. Texas Archeological
1962
Society Special Publication 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 4.
Suhm, D.A., A.D. Krieger, E.B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 25.
Tovar, F.E. and B.N. Maldonado
1981
Drainage Areas of Texas Streams: The Colorado River Basin. Report
LP-145, Texas Department of Water Resources, Austin, Texas.
Turner, E.S. and T.R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of the Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press,
Austin.
Weir, F.A.
1976
1979
Weniger, D.
1984

The Central Texas Archaic.
University, Pullman.

Ph.D. dissertation, Washington State

Greenhaw: An Archaic Site in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 50:5-68.
The Ex.plorers' Texas: The Lands and Waters. Eakin Press, Austin.

White, S.E. and S. Valastro, Jr.
1984
Pleistocene Glaciation of Volcano Ajusco, Central Mexico, and
Comparison with the Standard Mexican Glacial Sequence. Quaternary
Research 21:21-35.
Willey. G.R. and P. Phillips.
1958
Method and Theory in American Archaeology. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.

66 I REFERENCES CITED

Wormington, H.M.
Ancient Man in North America. Popular Series 4, Denver Museum of
1957
Natural History, Denver.

APPENDIX 1

TABLE2
DEPTHS, IN CENTIMETERS, OF LEVELS IN MACHINE-EXCAVATED TRENCHES
(Measured from ground surface at center of trench)
Level

1

2

3

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

35
65
105
150
185
220
255
295
330
370

35
65
110
150
185
210
250
280
315
380

40
60
80
120
170
210
250
280
320
360
400
445
470
520
590

13

14
15
16
17

Trench
4
45
70
100
140
170
215
270
315
360
390
430
540
630

67

5

6

7

50
90
115
140
170
190
210
250
300
340
370
420
470
530
570
610
650

45
70
100
140
170
200
230
260
310
350
410
450
510
570
630

40
75
110
140
180
205
250
290
330
370
410
470
540
620
630

Page intentionally left blank.

APPENDIX 2

TABLE3
FINDINGS BY TRENCH LEVEL, FROM 41TV1364

Trench
1

Level
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

2

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Debitage

Cores

Other
Lithics

Burned
Rock

Mussel Shell
Fragments

1
1
1
1

x
x
x

3
30

x

x

5

x
x
x
x

4
5
15
17
4
2

Clovis preform

x
x

10

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

7
1
8
21
25
13
3

8
9

3

1
1 Marcos point
1 Uvalde point
1 biface fragment

10

11
12
13
14
15

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

10

11
3

Land
Snails

5
4
1

1 uniface

69

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x

x
x
x

x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

70 I APPENDIX 2

TABLE 3 continued

Trench

Level

4

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

12

Debitage

Cores

Other
Lithics

Burned
Rock

Mussel Shell
Fragments

x
x

x
x
x
x

7
14
8
4
1
1

x
x
x
x

1
1

x

13

5

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

x
x
x
x

6
4
9
17
5
4
2

x
x

x
x

2

11

12
13

14
15.
16
17
6

5
1
1
1
1(?)

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x

2

x

1

x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
12
13
14
15

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x

1

11

Land
Snails

1 Montell point
(near trench)

x
3
3
15
1
1

x
x

x
x
x

APPENDIX 2 I 71

TABLE 3 continued

Trench
7

Level

Debitage

Cores

Other
Lithics

Burned
Rock

Mussel Shell
Fragments

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

1
2
3
4
5

6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
8

x=present

1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

64
199
526
494
383
560
928

8
9

651
154

10
11
12

49
3

Land
Snails

4
15

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

13
2

x
x

1
1
1

3

1 Clear Fork tool
2 biface fragments
1 drill fragment
1 biface
2 Uvalde points
1 Plainview point
3 biface fragments
1 uniface

2

5

17
26
10
14
9

12
1 biface fragment
1 "spokeshave"

1
1
1

2

x
x

