Historical Research
at the
George Washington Jones Homestead
41 BPS6, Bastrop County, Texas
David G. Robinson

---~

- -.. - - - - -

...

Technical Series 11
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
The University of Texas at Austin

March, 1989

Historical Research
at the
George Washington Jones Homestead
41BP86, Bastrop County, Texas
David G. Robinson

Technical Series 11
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
The University of Texas at Austin

March, 1989

ABSTRACT
Between February, 1986 and July 1987, the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL), The University of Texas at Austin, conducted cultural resource
investigations and a monitoring program at the George Washington Jones
Homestead, 41 BP8S, in Bastrop County, Texas. Supported by a grant to The
University of Texas at Austin from Mr. Terry Bray, the site's landowner, the research
accomplished on-site recording of the homestead's structures and a background
archival study of the site's history. Demolition and salvage of the unreconstructable
Jones House was monitored for observation of architectural details and recovery of
historically diagnostic artifacts. The combined field and archival research allowed the
determination of the property's history. growth and changes from its initial granting
to Stephen F. Austin in 1827 to the present day. Assessment of the site's previously
recorded prehistoric component showed it to lack significance. An unexpected find
was a collection of documents incorporated into a rat's nest in the house. Dating
between the 1850s and 1860s, the papers related directly to the law practice of Jones
and Elijah P. Petty and have potential for research into regional law and politics.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The historical research at the George Washington Jones Homestead, 41 BPS6,
was sponsored by Mr. and Mrs. William Terry Bray, who funded the work with a
generous grant to The University of Texas at Austin. Dr. Solveig A. Turpin, Associate
Director of Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. directed the research as its
principal investigator. The 'field crew, supervised by Henry B. Moncure, included Dr.
Solveig A. Turpin, David G. Robinson, Herbert H. Eling, Jr., and Abby C. Treece.
Follow-up archival research was pursued by Henry B. Moncure and Dan K. Utley.
Photography in the field and studio was conducted ably by Herbert H. Eling, Jr. and
Daniel G. Julien. Mapping. drafting. site monitoring, and artifact and site analysis
were accomplished by David G. Robinson. The computer map (IBM-Autocad) of the
site was made by Daniel G. Julien. Bob Parvin of the Bastrop County Historical
Commission gave of his time to serve as tour guide and all-purpose resource person
in the early phases of the project. A special thank-you goes to Nan Olsen, Chairman
of the Bastrop County Historical Commission, Texas historian, caterer, and general
facilitator of all phases of the research on the George Washington Jones Homestead.

iI

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract ................................................' ............. i
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..: . . . . . . . . . .... ii
List of Figures ....................................................... iii
Introduction ......................................................... 1
Investigations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 4
Results ............................................................. 5
Documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 23
Summary and Discussions ............................................ 42
References Cited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45

LIST OF FIGURES
1. Views of George Was~lington Jones Homestead, 41 BP86, in 1986 .......... 2
2. Ratchford photographs of Jones House, 1936 ......................... 10
3. Single pen cabin. . ................................................ 13
4. Barn complex .................................................... 16
5. Map of George Washington Homestead, 41 BP86 .......... ~ ............ 19
6. Document 3, land grant of 640 acres to William Dunbar, March 3, 1857 ..... 24

Iii

INTRODUCTION
During February and March, 1986, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL), The University of Texas at Austin, conducted field and archival research on
the George Washington Jones House, 41 BP86, in Bastrop County, Texas. Carried
out in advance of land-altering development of the property, the research fulfilled
terms of a grant from Mr. William Terry Bray of Austin, the property owner. As
stipulated in the grant proposal, the study proceeded in two primary research
directions:
(1) archival study to trace the history of ownership and occupancy of the
homestead from its initial granting as part of Stephen F. Austin's Little Colony through
the modern era, and
(2) on-site study to map and precisely record all structures and features, paying
close attention to architectural and artifactual details of historical and chronological
significance.
A secondary effort was to establish the presence and nature of a possibly
significant prehistoric component reported in the site's original 1977 recording. This
first report was part of the Texas Historical Commission's architectural survey of
Bastrop (TARL site files). Unless warranted by findings, subsurface investigations
more extensive than diagnostic shovel probes would not be conducted during the
proposed research program.
At the inception of research it was known that the homestead and its large
nineteenth century ruined structure had belonged to George Washington Jones-­
lawyer, orator, statesman, and one of Bastrop's more prominent early residents. It
was also known that the site, located in the original town limits of Bastrop on the low
Colorado river terrace just south of Gills Branch, still held Jones' two story frame
modified "I" house in dilapidated condition (Fig. 1); a hand-dug well; a single pen log
cabin which is almost totally deteriorated; a large, well-preserved double pen log barn;
an old-fashioned metal bath tub mortared with hand-made bricks to fashion a watering
trough; a metal windmill; a system of old fences; and various twentieth century
pier-and-beam, board-and-batten sheds. Chert flakes and a stone core had been
reported as evidence of a possible prehistoric component at the site (TARL site files).
Preliminary visits by TARL showed that most, if not all, of the earlier buildings remained
in their original locations. The site, therefore, retained its original layout, information
possibly unique in the area and potentially capable of providing new information on
original Bastrop town lots and their patterns of growth. This historical and archeologi­
cal significance justified the research program proposed for the site.

2 / GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

a

b

Figure 1. Views of George Washington Jones Homestead, 41 BP86 , in 1986. a,
north and west elevations; b, east elevation. Note that frame construction is
now askew.

2

INTRODUCTION /3

The fieldwork was begun promptly after grant acceptance. The field research
was supervised by TARL staff historian Henry B. Moncure with assistance from David
G. Robinson, Solveig A. Turpin, Abby C. Treece, and Herbert H. Eling. Henry B.
Moncure and Dan K. Utley pursued the archival research, and follow-up monitoring
of the site was conducted by David G. Robinson.

INVESTIGATIONS
Principal fieldwork at the George Washington Jones House (41 BP86) was
conducted between February 10 and 16, 1986. The field crew, led by Henry B.
Moncure, fluctuated between two and five members. The initial effort was to positively
identify all remaining structures, features, layout on the property, and to remove trash
and weeds. Upon completion of these tasks, the photographic and mapping pha.ses
began. The photographic record was taken in color prints and slides and black-and­
white prints with 35 mm and 4 x 5 inch format cameras. Structures in their original
locations were recorded with panoramic shots, and a complete record of architectural
materials and details was made with closeup pictures. Mapping was accomplished
with the use of a surveying transit. Mapped points were recorded in the field and
plotted onto a map grid in the lab. Descriptive notes were written about the buildings,
their layout, and the hand-dug well behind the house. Although grass, trash, and
weed coverage inhibited direct observation of the ground surface, an all-over ground
survey was conducted to discover any diagnostic artifacts, artifact patterning, and
the presence and location of the reported prehistoric component of the site. Similarly,
within the Jones House, spaces beneath the floor, above ceilings and between walls
were examined for historical debris. This latter effort yielded the important documen­
tary finds which were widely reported (Moncure 1986; Bastrop Advertiser and COlJnty
News, March 20, 1986) and reprinted in the Documents section of this report. Final
investigation of the subfloor areas awaited the commercial salvage of the house
remains and entailed three visits to the site seperated by long intervals, the last in
July, 1987.
The archival research proceeded after the principal fieldwork was completed,
from February to March 30, 1986. The research was conducted by Henry B. Moncure
and Dan K. Utley, who culled published sources, the Texas State Archives, and the
Barker Texas History Collection at the University of Texas at Austin for background
on the site and its inhabitants. All records, documents, photographs, drawings,
maps, sketches, photocopies, and other data generated by the field and archival
research are curated under existing agreements at Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL). The University of Texas at Austin.

4

RESULTS
The completed field and archival research resulted in material and written data
which when considered together, produced a text of place and time, varied in texture
and abundant in detail. This section organizes the findings by presenting an overview
of the known historical generalities and then adding the more specific descriptions
and details to this larger picture.
Historical Summary

The G. W. Jones property was originally a part of a Stephen F. Austin League,
granted as part of Austin's Little Colony. The colony was a grant of the Ernpresario
Period and was ratified in 1827. Organized by Moses Austin and carried through by
his son Stephen after Moses' death, the colony provided for the emigration of 300
families to Texas, the first of whom settled on the banks of the Brazos River (Kesselus
1986:32, Figure 5, 286). The Colorado leagues attracted little attention except for
their proximity to the Old San Antonio Road. The Austin league under discussion here
(as Empresario, Austin held several) was choicely located on the eastern bank on the
Old San Antonio Road crossing of the Colorado River. There, Gills Branch incises the
alluvial terrace of the river, and, at its mouth, forms a low river bank, valued in helping
wagon traffic move easily in and out of the river floodplain. The Jones House and
property. built much later, lay just south of Gills Branch and the road. The strategic
importance of major river crossings in a time of conflict with aboriginals and contest
among colonial European powers was not lost on empresarios or the Mexican
government. To take advantage of and protect the crossing, Stephen F. Austin
contracted with Mexico for a four-league grant to establish a town at the Colorado
crOSSing of the road. The town was founded by the Mexican government and named
Bastrop, on June 8, 1832. Austin's crossing league bordered the town grant on the
south (Kesselus 1986:21-26,54-57, 286).
Legal transactions of this land are not recorded from this time until 1838, and
with good reason. Indian conflict intensified in the early 1830s as aboriginal groups
felt pressure from White settlement. Furthermore, Bastrop's critical position on the
Old San Antonio Road between such points as San Antonio, San Felipe, and the
Brazos crOSSing placed it in the middle of the events of the Revolution, from 1835-36.
The town and muniCipality, at the time renamed Mina, was abandoned entirely in the
Runaway Scrape and destroyed by the occupying Mexican forces of General Gaona.
Even after San Jacinto, the Bastrop area was slow to be resettled in fear of further
Mexican invasions (Kesselus 1986:118-178).
Sale of 75 acres of the Austin league to W. Pinkney Hill, June 29, 1838, reflects
the return of settlement to Bastrop during the Republic. Hill was a co-owner of the

5

6/ GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

Bastrop Steam Mill, incorporated December 24, 1838 as a saw mill, grist mill, and
machinery lathe. He prospered and entered public life, serving as Bastrop Mayor in
1839. Hill speculated in real estate and outfitted expeditions against the Indians
(Bastrop County Deed Records Vol. B:200; Kesselus 1986:151-184, 199-200, 234­
239,295,299).
Hill's sale of 12.5 acres of his 1838 property on October 9, 1840 to William
Gammell mentions "the rights, members. hereditaments and appurtenances" of the
property (Bastrop County Deed Records, Vol. C:649). This is a formulaic phrase
signifying little, but sometimes used to include improvements to pr4>perty as part of a
transaction. Hill lived in the middle of town and may not have visit~d the property or
improved it except for speculative purposes. This point is mentioned, however, to
establish the earliest possible date for improvements to the land. The single pen log
cabin behind the Jones House is a likely candidate for such an early improvement
and is discussed further below.
Gammell, a resident of Harris County, sold the homestead to Andrew E.
Castleman, an 1845 Bastrop alderman, on March 31, 1851. Castleman offered the
property and four other town lots for sale to George Washington Jones for $1000.00.
The transaction was entered in the Deed Records December ~8, 1855 (Bastrop
County Deed Records Vol. H:3; Vol. K:28). Jones, the central figure of this study,
held and lived on the land until his death in 1903.
PERSONAL HISTORIES

George Washington "Wash" Jones was born September 5, 1828 in Marion
County, Alabama, to Welsh parents. The family had migrated to America before the
Revolution. Jones spent most of his boyhood in Tennessee, and moved with his family
to Texas in 1848, settling near Alum Creek in Bastrop County. Beginning about 1849,
Jones bagan farming and the study of law under Phil Claiborne, ia prominent legal
practitioner. Jones must have been a quick study by modern standards because two
years later, in 1851, he was admitted to the bar, hung out his shindle in Bastrop. and
began his practice. Jones made his first bid for the Texas State House of Repre­
sentatives in 1853 but lost to Jesse Billingsley, hero of the Revolution, by the slim
margin of eighteen votes (Brown n.d.:54; Texas State Gazette, August 6, 1853,
recounted in Kesselus 1987:41).
At this time Jones must have been honing and testing his famed oratorical skills.
It was said that the Academy in Bastrop would have to dismiss ~Iass when Jones
argued a case at the courthouse because if school remained in session, all the boys
would play hooky to hear Jones speak (McDowall 1978:36). Jones befriended,
among others, the Nicholson family: "Colonel Jones was an old friend of our family,
and I have sat and listened to many of his and uncle's conversations. Unfortunately,
he was addicted to drink--the spree kind" (McDowall 1978:37). Jones practiced law
with Major Sayers and later with H. M. Garwood. He also practiced with Captain Elijah

RESULTS/7
i

P. Petty in the 1850s. Documents found in the Jones House attest to the Petty
partnership and suggested the use of the house in some of their legal work, if for
nothing more than the storage of records.

Jones prospered and on August 1, 1855 married Ledora Ann Mullin, of Fayette
County. In December of the same year Jones paid $1,000 in cash fpr a large amount
of land. He could not have tarried long in building a house befitting his young bride.
Undoubtedly. the newlyweds resided in the small cabin while the two-story frame
house was being built. Jones was elected Bastrop District Attorney as a Democrat
in 1856. He served one term, and in 1859 ran for the Texas Senate,lbut was defeated
by E.D. Townes of Travis County (Brown n.d.:54; Kesselus 1987:1~1-163).
States' rights, abolition, and secession became the dominant :topics of the day,
and Jones was an ardent Unionist. Before the election of 1860, he s~pported Douglas
vocally. But since Douglas was not on the ballot in Texas, Jones caJ[npaigned actively
for John Bell, a Unionist running on the Union Democratic ticket (Ke~selus 1987:174).
When secession was ratified by an overwhelming popular vote in 1~61, Jones bowed
to the wishes of the people, declaring, "It is a foolish undertaking, but I will fight it out
with my people" (Brown n.d.:54).
He enlisted in 1861, and from April. 1862 to the end of the ~ar, he served in
Colonel R. T. P. Allen's regiment of the Seventeenth Texas Infantry~ He was elected
lieutenant colonel, and when Allen resigned after the battle of Milliken's Bend, Jones
was promoted to colonel and commander of the regiment, where l1e served until the
Confederacy's ultimate defeat. As in other aspects of his life, in i war Jones distin­
guished himself as a capable leader.
Jones attended the Texas Constitutional Convention in 18661 and was elected
lieutenant governor on the Throckmorton ticket in 1866. He was ilikewise removed
from office with Throckmorton in the turmoil of the Reconstruqtion period. His
involvement in public life remained strong, however, and he was elected to two terms
in the U.S. Congress, in 1878 and 1880. The last time he ran ~or office was for
governor on the Greenback Party ticket in 1884. He was defeated by Gov. John
Ireland (Brown n.d.:54). Jones retired to Bastrop, where he resided until his death
on July 11, 1903. He and Ledora Ann are buried in Fairview Cemetery (Johnson
1914:671-672; Webb 1952:924).
I

Elijah P. Petty was Jones' law partner, fast friend, and comra;de-in-arms. Petty
entered Texas in 1852, already a practicing lawyer, and lived a short time in Seguin
before moving to Bastrop. He was married to Margaret E. Pe~y, with whom he
produced four children, Van Alvin, Dabney E., Don G., and Olive S. (Johnson
1914:2256-7).
I

As strongly as Jones upheld the Union, Petty upheld sece$sion and slavery.
While Jones supported the Union cause in 1860, Petty served as a ~ub-elector for the
Secessionist ticket of John C. Breckinridge. Of his activism Petty declared, "I will state

8/ GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE
i

that I was a Secessionist per se. Spoke, electioneered and voted for it. Helped to
carry Texas triumphantly out of the accursed old Union" (Browr 1982:299, 325,
quoted in Kesselus 1987:179). After Texas seceded, Petty enlistedl~n the 26th Texas
Militia, Precinct 2, as a lieutenant, September 28. 1861 (Kesselus'1987: 213). This
unit was absorbed into Colonel R. T. P. Allen's regiment of the S~venteenth Texas
Infantry. May 13, 1862 (Texas State Archives, Drawer 190). petty~was promoted to
the rank of captain and commander of company F. In this position, etty served under
George Washington Jones who was a lieutenant colonel at the ti e and eventually
.
became the colonel and commander of the regiment.
Petty was known as an able and courageous commander and,~·in all areas of life,
a man of strong values about which he was forthright and outsp ken. During his
military service, he expressed his ideas in voluminous letters to hi. wife and others,
collected in the volume Journey to Pleasant Hill, published in 1982i (Brown 1982). In
his letters, he recorded his admiration for and continuing friendshi~. with Jones.
Petty failed to survive the war, falling to grapeshot at the batt e of Pleasant Hill,
Louisiana, April 9, 1864. The conflict, a winning effort on the part o. the Confederacy,
was one battle of the Red River Campaign (Moore 1977:79).
Margaret Petty survived until 1911 when she died in San An1onio in residence
with one of her sons. Elijah Petty had been buried at the Pleasan~ Hill battleground,
but in 1985 his remains were moved by his descendants to Fai~view Cemetery in
Bastrop and reinterred beside Margaret (Bastrop Advertiser and County News Oct.
31,1985 and Nov. 11, 1985).
i
The twentieth century history of the Jones property mirrors thJ economic history
of the region. After Jones' death in 1903, his property passed by Will to Ledora Ann.
The executor of her estate, one J. S. Jones, sold the land to 1. C. Osborne for
$2,000.00, May 1, 1906 (Bastro p County Deed Records Vol. 41: 1JO).

T. C. Osborne had been a cowboy and rancher, making seven trips up the
Chisholm Trail. His purchase of the former Jones property signaled! a career change,
for he planted the land in cotton. The Osbornes lived on Hill streetl'in Bastrop, off the
actual property. Instead, Osborne settled three tenant families 0 Spanish descent
on the land. One family resided in the Jones homestead; the othe two families lived
in tenant houses, one of which was 41 BP314, built by Osborne about 1910 (Gore
1987, personal communication). The tenants tended the cotton arid raised their own
subsistence crops. From about 1925 until 1952, the Martinez faf' ily resided in the
old Jones homestead (Martinez 1987, personal communication).
T. C. Osborne died in 1939, but the property remained in the ifamily. During the
1940s the property was leased for crops and cattle ranching. In 1 52' the lease was
taken by Walter Gore, the husband of Mary Belle Turner G re, who was the
granddaughter of T.C. Osborne. Mary Gore inherited the propert outright by will of

r
i

RESULTS /9

Mrs. T. C. Osborne, June 22, 1955 (Bastrop County Deed Records Vir· I. 365:335; Gore
1987, personal communication).
The Gores lived in Bastrop and leased the property for cattle r. nching since the
early 1950s. At this time, the Jones House still stood intact. In ab9ut 1953 or 1954,
the Gores sponsored a party for the Bastrop High School. Almost the entire high
school attended, and the house contained the party comfortably (Gqre 1987, personal
communication; Martinez 1987, personal communication).
I
Over Ihe next 30 years, the land was leased exclusively for callie raising during
which period the historically significant features deteriorated. The Jones House was
used for hay and feed storage. Eventually the eastern brick chimhey fell, its hand­
made bricks destroyed or hauled off. The Gores put additional siding on the double
pen log barn and sheet metal on its roof. These simple meas~es have left the
structure in the best condition of the site's buildings. By the time t. e Gores sold the
property to Terry Bray in 1985, the Jones House was dilapidat d, home to the
occasional transient off the railroad; and the 1838 vintage single en log cabin had
long since succumbed to time, with only the lower stone portions of its fireplace still
standing (Bastrop County Deed Records Vol. 365:332; Gore 1987, personal com­
munication).
I
•

.

I

I
GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

I

The George Washington Jones House (Fig. 2), even in the fallen state in which
it was recorded, amply showed the investment of skill and wealth ,which must have
made it one of Bastrop's most impressive dwellings when newly b~ilt. The structure
originally was a simple rectangle, or "I" plan, about 17.5 meters long east-west and
7.5 meters wide, a ratio of about 2.3 to 1. The house faced north toward Bastrop,
with a pillared, balconied, and gabled portico in the center third of t e house's length.
From the balcony Jones delivered orations to neighbors and aqmirers (Kesselus
1987:106). The portico was flanked by four large double-sash, six-over-six windows
paired vertically on either side, a total of eight windows on the fro~.. The roof had a
foreset peak. By virture of this feature, the house had off-center abies on the east
and west ends. To the rear, three regularly spaced dormers faced south. The main
fireplace stood on the west end, enclosed entirely within the hous . frame except for
the upper part of the chimney. Two more fireplaces stood externally on the east end
of the house. It should be noted that many of these features hati been destroyed
before the 1986 survey but were observable in photographs in the Hornaday Collec­
tion of the Texas State Archives. The Jones House photographs (t'g. 2) were taken
by Fannie Ratchford, a University of Texas librarian with an interest in photographing
houses of historical importance. The photographs are of great v lue to this study
and are referred to hereafter as the Ratchford photographs.
I

The ground floor plan may have been more symmetrical than the exterior, with
five or six large rooms. Inside the imposing front entrance was thel waiting room/hall
I

.....

a

--

(j)

~
::0

(j)
".,

~

~

(j)

o
~

Cs

~
en

6
55
".,

a
b

Figure 2. Ratchford photographs of Jones House, 1936. a, north elevation; b, east and south elevations. Compare
with Figure 1.

RESULTS /11

which had doorways to the east and west, opening to large front rooms, each with
its own fireplace. In the south end of the waiting room/hall, toward the back of the
house, was the stairway. The stairway was not straight, but turned one right angle
clockwise in its ascent to the second floor. Significant finds of historic documents
were made in a rat's nest behind and within the c-:fchitrave, or supporting framework
and walls, of the stairway. The southeast ground floor room of the house, with its
own fireplace, was the kitchen (Martinez 1987, personal communication). Parts of
the eastern end of the house had been destroyed by the time the house was recorded,
and it could not be determined if the kitchen occupied a sixth of the ground floor area
or extended westward behind the waiting room/hall. One of the Ratchford
photographs shows two exterior doors along the south wall in the kitchen area,
suggesting two possibilities. First, the kitchen may have had two outside south doors.
Second, the kitchen may have had a single south door if there was a center-south
small entry room. The last ground floor room was in the southwest corner, with a
door to the south and the only west-facing window in the house.
On the second floor, the stairs opened onto a middle room 'flanked by doors to
rooms all around and a large door onto the portico balcony. The regularly spaced
dormers suggest three rooms on the south, each with its own dormer window.
The materials that went into the Jones House give insight on its original imposing
nature. The pier-and-beam foundation was entirely cedar, a wood renowned for-its
resistance to decay. When foundation beams were cut during the salvage process,
they retained their bark and enough aromatic resin to give off the strong fragrance of
a cedar chest. These foundation beams and the beams that formed the rectangular
box frame of the house were all squared with adzes. The erected frame was enclosed
with milled lumber clapboard, set horizontally except on the dormers where it was laid
diagonally, in harmony with the roof's pitch. The roof was finished with a covering of
wooden shingles or shakes. The front doors in the Ratchford photographs were
paneled.
The western fireplace was built of large, craggy blocks of sandstone and
ironstone, both available in Bastrop County. Most of this fireplace was mortared with
ordinary mud. Only the exterior facing stones were mortared with a limey setting
plaster. Of particular interest are the eastern fireplaces, both of which contrasted with
the western fireplace which was built of hand-made brick (Gore 1987, personal
communication; Texas State Archives). The significance of the brick is difficult to
assess. Regionally, in the 1850s the commercial brick industry was just beginning.
By 1858 the firm of Neely and Beck operated a brickyard one half mile east of the
courthouse in Bastrop and announced their capability to "wall wells or cisterns (and)
build houses or chimneys" (Bastrop Advertiser August 14, 1858, quoted in Kesselus
1987:91). A list of working masons compiled from advertisements and accounts in
the Bastrop Advertiser for 1857 and 1858 includes Neely and Beck, J. B. Cowan, B.
Straud. R. B. White, H. Stetgart, and Antona Jung (Kesselus 1987:107-108). Further­
more, small scale commercial operations produced their bricks by hand, and builders
had to either buy commercial hand-made bricks or expend the effort to make their

12/ GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

own bricks, usually on-site. Regardless of the option chosen in the case of the Jones
House, hand-made bricks indicate a large investment of effort and expense in
planning and building the fireplaces.
Milled flooring and window glass were similarly valued in the 1850s. Altogether,
the house's materials speak unequivocably of a state-of-the-art construction pro­
gram.
Details completed the house and also revealed building techniques of the period.
Features to included the remains of tongue-and-groove fitting and pegging
throughout the construction. Examples of chiseled slots, peg holes, and in situ pegs
were common and observed from the foundation and flooring to the frame, roof, and
finishing panels around the eaves. Slots and grooves were usually begun with a drill
to the desired depth and then chiseled out to the required shape. The use of pegs
did not preclude the use of nails, however; square nails fastened the clapboard and
roofing material. Inside the house, the baseboards had carved detailing in narrow
rows along the top of each board. The front of the western fireplace had a front flush
with the wall and a wooden mantle over it. On either side of the paneled front first
and second story doors were narrow, full length windows; the front of the house must
have been exceptionally well-lit by day. The north portico pillars were squared,
constructed of milled lumber planks. The pillars were echoed inside the waiting
room/hall by the squared newel post and corner post of the staircase. These details
showed a wholeness or unity of concept and design in keeping with the implications
of floor plan, construction, and materials.
SINGLE PEN LOG CABIN

A single pen log cabin once stood south of the Jones House and southeast of
the hand-dug well (Fig. 3). Only the lower, stone portions of the ¢himney remained
of potentially the earliest structure on the site, dating to the 1840s or perhaps earlier.
If this dating is correct, as discussed previously, then the cabin was built by W.
Pinckney Hill. The house was once about five meters square, with the fireplace on
the east side. The site of the cabin was slightly mounded, covered and obscured by
weeds, sumac branches and greenbriar vines. Several logs in advanced stages of
deterioration lay about. Although the ends of the logs were the most rotten, it could
be determined by inspecting several log ends that at least two notching styles were
used, the simple V-notch (self explanatory) and the quarter-notch. The latter notch
is cut by adzing away a quarter of the log's thickness on the top and bottom of the
log end, leaving a tongue half the log's thickness projecting from the middle of the
end. This tongue seats with other similarly notched logs.
The Ratchford photograph (Texas State Archives) showed the walls standing
firmly in 1936 (Fig. 3). The shingled roof was gabled east and west. The cabin also
boasted a shed-style porch roof supported by vertical poles on its north side, facing
the big house. The area sheltered by this roofing lacked the flooring of a porch. The

RESULTS /13

a

b

Figure 3. Single pen cabin. a, Ratchford photograph, 1936, east and south elevations;
b, modern ruin.

.--­

-------------------------------------14/ GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

photograph's viewpoint on the eastern, chimney side of the cabin records no windows
but reveals a door in the middle of the south wall. Rudy Martinez, born in the Jones
House in 1939, recalls no windows in the structure, which stood vacant in the 1940s,
perhaps earlier (Martinez 1987, personal communication).
The chimney is shown in the photograph to have been exceptionally high,
perhaps five or six meters. The actual chimney segment was brick, well-finished, but
is now fallen away. Scattered bricks around the site today are mostly hand-made,
with a few commercial bricks; the original chimney was probably of the hand-made
bricks with a commercial brick refurbishing sometime in the twentieth century. The
lower, standing portion of the chimney included its foundation, hearth and mantle, up
to where the masonry narrowed at the flue, a total height of about 2.5 meters. This
lower portion is stone, and the construction apparently broke just above the juncture
of stone and brick. Part of one layer of bricks remained mortared to the uppermost
stone layer. Rock types included sandstone and ferruginous sandstone blocks which
could well have been quarried from outcrops nearby, perhaps from the Jones property
eastward on the upper river terrace. An oddity in the stone masonry is a fine,
well-made brick set end-out in the outside center of the hearth at chest height. Mortar
around the brick looks the same as the mortar elsewhere on the fireplace, suggesting
that this single brick was set in when the structure was built, not inserted later to fill
a gap or hole in the stonework. The Ratchford photograph shows the overall pattern
of stones in the fireplace in complete correspondence with the 1986 observations,
inCidentally confirming the 1936 photograph's authenticity; but the photo's resolution
is insufficient to show the actual brick in question. Given a matching mortar pattern,
however, it may be presumed that the brick was in place in 1936.
WELL

A hand-dug well was located behind the Jones House to the south, northwest
of the log cabin. About fifteen meters deep, the well was lined with rectangular
mortared bricks that extended about 20 cm above the ground surface to form a
curbing around the well. The curbing and two wooden posts on opposite sides of
the well were all that remained of the superstructure, coverings, and means for
drawing water from the well.
The dating and historical associations of the well are difficult to determine
currently. Such a well could have been dug during the earliest historic habitation of
the site in the late 1830s or at any time into the early twentieth century. The well had
surely been in place, providing water for the Jones Homestead until 1952 when city
water lines were extended to the iron bathtub watering trough east of the house
(Martinez 1987, personal communication). The brick lining could have been added
upon completion of the well or as an improvement anytime since then. A brickyard
in Bastrop produced trapezoidal bricks specially for lining circular hand-dug wells and
cisterns, beginning in the late 1840s or 1850s. Such a specialty brick lining, lacking
in the Jones well, could be seen until recently in a nearby hand-dug well at the T. C.

RESULTS /15

Osborne tenant house (41 BP314), now destroyed by highway improvements. This
house was built around 1910 by T. C. Osborne, who built a second tenant house on
the property as well, also now destroyed. It is assumed that Osborne put in the wells
at these houses (Gore 1987, personal communication). The difference in linings
between these wells and the Jones well could indicate a difference in the time of well
digging, but unfortunately the second Osborne well could not be relocated by the
1986 survey. The relocation of a second well would have established and bolstered
this pattern of differences. It is nevertheless logical and likely that G. W. Jones had
the homestead well dug for the convenience of the house, but this cannot be proved
beyond a doubt with the current material evidence.
DOUBLE PEN LOG BARN

The double pen log barn (Fig. 4) stood some 65 meters east of the Jones House,
surrounded by fences, accoutrements of animal husbandry, debris, and roofed with
protective corrugated metal. This latter feature left the logs in exceptionally good
condition. The log ends showed a variety of notch styles (Fig. 4b). and the construc­
tion was assisted in places with spikes. Further, some of the log fits left wide criblike
gaps between logs. The barn was surrounded by a fence system, and the windmill
and watering troughs, discussed below, lie north of the barn. The name "Hal Jones",
a nephew of Jones, is carved into a lower log of the eastern pen in the dog run (Fig.
4c).
The barn showed continuous use until its recent dismantling for reconstruction
elsewhere. Improvements included galvanized corral gates, hasp locks, a concrete
watering trough, galvanized barbed wire and a milled lumber cattle ramp. The barn's
origins cannot be directly proved. The barn complex stood in place as long as anyone
can remember, probably as early as the 1920s (Gore 1987, personal communication;
Martinez 1987, personal communication). Earlier, T. C. Osborne built his tenant
houses, including 41BP314, and two board-and-batten sheds near the Jones House
from scrap milled lumber and materials procured elsewhere. It is unlikely, given this
materials selection, that Osborne would opt for the additional time and energy
investment of either dismantling log cabins on other sites to build the barn or felling
trees and building an original double pen log barn, by the 1900s long out of style.
These two possibilities become even more remote after considering that Osborne's
interest in the land was cotton farming, not animal husbandry. The greatest likelihood
is that had Osborne had an incidental interest in a barn, he would have built a
board-and-batten frame barn with recycled milled lumber. The owner before Osborne
was George Washington Jones, who farmed and owned livestock even before he
became a lawyer and public ·figure. It is most likely, therefore, that Jones built the
barn, perhaps as early as the 1850s, and his nephew later autographed it.

16/ GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

c

Figure 4. Barn complex. a, south elevation; b, entryway; c, Hal Jones carving in dog
run.

- - - - - -- - - -

RESULTS /17

WINDMILl/TROUGH COMPLEX

The windmill and iron bathtub-trough are located northwest of the double pen
barn in the midst of a cattle ramp and fence system. The windmill construction is
metal, but not of a recent type or style. A pipe from the windmill feeds the bathtub­
trough. The trough is an ornate cast iron bathtub with short legs set into a foundation
of mortared hand-made bricks.
Both the windmill and iron bathtub-trough, along with the entire log barn
complex, have been in place as long as anyone can remember (Gore 1987, personal
communication; Martinez 1987, personal communication). Additionally, it is remem­
bered that the Bastrop municipal water system was extended onto the property in
1952 by a water line terminating at the bathtub-trough. This improvement was
accomplished by W. R. Gore (Martinez 1987, personal communication). The material
features of greatest antiquity are the bathtub style and the hand made bricks which
supported it. The construction likely dates to the Jones occupation, coordinate with
the entire log barn complex. The all metal, out-of-kit windmill and the well probably
date later than the 1850s.
FENCES AND TRAILS

The mapped and photographed fences provide little information on the mid­
nineteenth century occupations. Fence posts are cut branches and logs with
creosoted railroad tie corner posts. The occasional modern commercial steel fen­
cepost has been incorporated at irregular intervals to keep the fence from sagging.
South of the house a few scattered logs from the single pen cabin have been pressed
into service as posts. The earliest wiring appears to have been with unbarbed hog
wire, some of which is shown in the 1936 Ratchford photographs. This initial wiring
was followed by re-wiring, heightening. and repair at various time$ with barbed wire.
Some of the barbed wire is rusted, some of it galvanized. Finally, long lengths of the
fencing have been bolstered naturally by greenbriar and other vines.
Around the double pen log barn on the south and east sides are remnants of an
old split-rail wooden fence, its longest remaining length was on the east side. The
barn complex fencing has also received continual upgrading, with galvanized barbed
wire, chain-link corral gates, and creosote railroad tie corner posts.
The antiquity of the fence lines can only be partially established and most of the
evidence is inferred. The issue is worthy of discussion, however, as the position of
the fences and trails bears importantly on the issue of the original homestead layout,
studied below. The Ratchford photograph of the north elevation of the Jones House
includes part of the hog wire fence described above. Similarly, although no wire is
shown in the photograph of the single pen log cabin, the perspective and angle on
the cabin are the same as those of a person standing outside the fence and looking
at the old fireplace today. Therefore, the north and east fenceline$ around the Jones

181 GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

House were the same as those in 1936. A complication is encount~red in the attempt
to push the date of the fencelines all the way back to the 1850s however, because
the north and east fencelines deviate from right angles with the hduse.
In contrast to this disparity is the trail/street north of the Jo~es House which,
although gently curved, runs parallel to the front of the house. thus the house is
oriented more to the street than the front fence. The street is the only significant trail
identified by the 1986 survey. Its relation to the Jones House dat~s it to the 1850s.
Northeast of the house the street forks, the northward branch toward Marion Street
and Bastrop, its course discernible through the modern pasture. Tne southward fork
runs between the house and barn complex into the southern past~res.
I

The fence west of the homestead does not enter the discussipn as it runs off at
an angle to all the other fences on the site, roughly paralleling the M~T railroad tracks.
The western fenceline was undoubtedly established no earlier th~n the 1880s when
the railroad came to Bastrop County.
The fences around the barn complex form a coordinated system with the barn,
watering troughs, windmill and cattle ramp. This simply means that the fences
facilitated the intended function of the barn complex - holding anin1als, keeping them
out of stores, controlling their movements and storing farming equipment. As the
barn complex was probably built in the 1850s, so logically were the barn fences,
originally of wooden split-rail construction.

LAYOUT
The structures, fencelines, trails, and other features of 41 BPa6 allow a general
picture to be drawn of the pattern of growth of the homestead. This pattern is
indicated in the site plan (Fig. 5).
.
The first historic feature was the single pen log cabin, which pates to ca. 1840.
Little can be said of the site plan from this single structure beyonq noting the door's
southward orientation, opposite to the later Jones House.
'
The 1850s building phase included the Jones House, probably the well behind
the house, and the double pen log barn complex, with the b,thtub-trough and
possibly the well over which the metal windmill later stood. It is interesting to note
that the Jones House and barn complex were aligned at right an files to each other
and oriented close to true north, thus also towards Bastrop. Furtnermore, the front
of the Jones House paralleled the former street 20 meters north of the structure. This
means that the street ran almost directly east and west in front of the Jones House
and was probably contemporary with it. The town site of Bastrop Mad been surveyed
by 1832, the year of its founding, and the Jones House lay withi~ the original town
tract. The town streets were surveyed north and south, east arhd west (Kesselus
1986:54-56). If the street in front of the house was not surveyed at this time, it was

------------­
-----------

original street

00

boar d and
batten sheds

I

I
I city water

supply-1952

G. W.

well 0

~
log
cabin

1~,.?'ls- 18408
18505

18808
1900s-19308
1950s
0

.. _---­

•

5

10

20

r~

Bastrop County

meters

Figure 5. Map of George Washington Jones Homestead, 41 BP86.

George Washington Jones House
41BP86

Bast rop County, Texas

~I

February 6 & 7, 1986
David G. Robinson - Abby C. Treece

~

I~
~

~

-co

20 I GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

at least coordinated with the town streets. As discussed previously, only the fences
around the barn complex indicate space partitioning from the 18505, and the effective
area of the total 1850s homestead can only be approximated. The estimate can be
made by deriving probable east-west and north-south dimensions of the town lot. In
this case the dimensions used are from the eastern fence of the barn complex west
to an arbitrary point 20 meters west of the Jones House and from the street south to
an arbitrary point 10 meters south of the single pen log cabin (still functioning in the
1850s). These pOints give measurements of 426.5 feet east and west by 196.8 feet
north and south. This lot covers an area of about 1.9 acres. How these approximate
dimensions and area compare with home lots in Bastrop at the time is not known
currently. It can be stated that the Jones homestead was an oblong or rectangle with
its long side running east and west, the short side north and south. It can be observed
that the Jones home faced Bastrop; what other aspects of his homestead borrowed
from Bastrop, the stage of Jones's career, perhaps cannot be determined.
The MKT Railroad 'crossed the property in the 1880s from south-southwest to
north-northeast, without regard to other alignments on the property. The modern
western fenceline of the homestead is the MKT right-of-way fence.
The next phase of the homestead's growth was during T. C. Osborne's tenure,
1906-1952. At various times Osborne or his lessees built the fences around the Jones
House and old cabin (1920s or 1930s). the board-and-batten sheds, and the improve­
ments to the barn complex.
This was the last actual building phase before the homestead's decline, although
W. R. Gore brought the municipal water system to the property in 1952 and made
protective maintenance efforts, especially to the barn complex. Currently, all features
of the site have been removed, except for the fences. This has been done by the
latest owner, Mr. Terry Bray, in anticipation of the building of an industrial park and
another economic transformation of the land, one which will reorder the layout of the
property.
Artifacts

PREHISTORIC

The only evidence of a prehistoric component at 41 BP86 consisted of a few
material items scattered around the grounds of the site, and the area lacked remains
or suggestions o'f middens, features, or other prehistoric constructions either above
or below ground. The prehistoric component therefore is discussed entirely in this
section.
The prehistoric occupation is indicated by two chert cobble cores or tested
cobbles, and no more than five chert primary flakes, all of indeterminate antiquity. It

RESULTS /21

was known from the outset that the river terrace on which the site I,es is formed of an
alluvial sandy clay loam, is fertile, and has been used to the economic advantage of
all the site's historic occupants. Chert cobbles and gravels are 'flot a natural com­
ponent of this terrace, and so the ones identified on the site must have been brought
in. The chert is available short distances westward in Colorado 1·ver gravel bars or
eastward on the high Pleistocene river terrace under the Lost Pine plant community.
The question is whether they were brought in prehistorically or hi torically.
If the materials are prehistoric, then the cobbles appear only t6 have been tested
for their flaking qualities by striking flakes, an activity which may a~o accidentally split
the subject cobble. The observed primary flakes, i.e. flakes wit cortex over their
exterior faces, may well be the waste products of this material testing activity, although
none of the flakes could be fitted back to the original core. Lithic .aterial testing was
usually conducted at the point of acquisition (Robinson 1987), ~efore transport of
heavy stone to campsites for tool finishing. Lacking other mate~ials, this suggests
that the 41 BP8S prehistoric component may have been a limited aClivity site for testing
cobbles at an intermediate point between the quarry and campsit~. This situation is
difficult to interpret behaviorally and must remain tentative.
I

The chert may also have been brought in historically. The street in front of the
Jones House has been gravelled, a common reason for historici transport of chert
gravels and cobbles. The tested cobbles could as easily be explained as having
suffered impacts from vehicles and farm implements as having ~een tested prehis­
torically for stone toolmaking. For this reason, the prehistoric explanation for the site
must remain in doubt. It should be noted that 150 years of histori¢ occupation could
have resulted in the removal of any diagnostic and distinctiv~· artifacts through
souvenir hunting. This process could only further diminish any significance the
prehistoric component may have had. The prehistoric component lacks significance
according to criteria for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places and as
a State Archaeological Landmark and is ineligible for nomination ,anyway due to the
site's private ownerShip.
.
HISTORIC
i

The preponderance of the historic artifact assemblage, except for the documents
found in the house, belongs to the twentieth century occupatio~. s of the site. The
general site grounds were littered with modern trash when surve ed, principally with
feed sacks, baling wire, food containers, lengths of barbed wire, a d broken furniture.
Also present near the house, single pen cabin, and barn were flat ened tin cans, bits
of rusted sheet metal and square, or cut, nails; these items r~late to the earlier
occupations of the site but seemed not to form spatial patterns s~ggestive of yard or
other material or behavioral patterning. Rather, the earlier artifa ts were most com­
mon close to the buildings, and their frequency decreased directl with distance from
the structures. The nail patterning, especially, relates more to the deterioration of the
buildings than to behavioral patterning. Large numbers of squar~ nails were used in

22/ GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

the clapboard and roofing of the Jones House, and these were ~istributed around
the house as clapboard and roofing fell off or were removed. Thi{process began in
the period of decay, from about the late 1950s, long after the ho~se and site was a
i
domestic occupation.
Investigation of the Jones House and monitoring during its salvaging for
materials by a private contractor resulted in additional contributi ns to the material
inventory. Foremost among these are the historic documents rei ling to Jones' law
practice in the 1850s. The documents are discussed in the folio ing section. The
papers were found in rats' nests behind the stair's architrave and between the walls
of the waiting room/hall. Also stored in the nests were a small red p astic clown charm
such as might be found in a box of Crackerjacks, a Bennington styl fired-clay marble,
a metallic button, and unidentifiable shreds of shoe leather and cl thing.
i

Elsewhere in the house - notably under the floors - sheet met$l, metal fasteners,
hinges, patent medicine and cosmetic containers, snuff bottles; bits of porcelain
figurines, porcelain marbles, sherds of ironstone ware, window glass, plain and
colored bottle glass, bits of composition and linoleum and varioos forms of plastic
came to light. The more recent periods of habitation are reflected in this assemblage.
Few items indicate times before the 1880s; one of these is the Bennington clay marble
found in the rats next. Only a few bits of the usually ubiquitous purple manganese
glass, indicative of the period 1880-1920, were observed. Every glass bottle and vial
showed a mold seam over the lip, thus revealing manufacture by the Automatic Bottle
Machine, a process that began in the early 1900s. In general, the artifacts date from
late in Jones's life well into the tenant period.
.

DOCUMENTS

.
w

The historic documents found behind the architrave and bet een the walls had
been used over the years by rats to build their nests. The doduments as rodent
domiciliary raw material were derived from elsewhere in the house~ None of the finds
in situ gave the appearance of having been cached deliberately py human beings.
As might be expected, the papers were wadded, folded, and soilecjL The high quality
of nineteenth century paper resisted these forces well (Fig. 6). but the papers suffered
from the rodent penchant for gnawing. Almost all the documents Ihad holes chewed
in them, and chewed paper lay everywhere in the general area. :Doubtlessly, other
documents of equal or greater importance were destroyed in thEfl nests. Common
sense efforts to render the papers readable met with success. ' The papers were
carefully unfolded and straightened, and dirt was brushed awayl with a soft, clean
brush. A more expensive, expert program of document conservaticlm and stabilization
has not been undertaken at this time. The remainder of this section inventories and
describes the major documents, gives transcriptions of the readable articles, and
briefly discusses their significance.
Inventory

Fifteen documents were recovered from the rodent archive:
1. Abolitionist periodical, The Negro, His Ethological Status, Etc.
2. Secessionist periodical, title unknown.
3. Land grant of 640 acres to William Dunbar, March 3, 1851.
4. Ledger of legal fees 1851-52.
5. R.L. Reding estate documents.
6. Writ lifting ferry injunction on Edward Irwin.
7. Jones-Petty partnership statement.
8. Brooks to Petty business letter December 5, 1859.
9. Chandler to Jones business letter July 2, _ _
10. William G. Ogbourn power of attorney.

23

24/ GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

C')

..c

()
....

as
:::E
....as

.n
c

:::J

Cl

E

as

~
o

-....
( f)

Q)

()

as
a'¢
CD

-

15
c

....as

0>
"0

c

as

-

C')

cQ)
E
:::J

()

o

Cl
CD
Q)
....

:::J
0>

u:::

DOCUMENTS /25

11. Bill to Petty.
12. Letter fragment to Petty.
13. Letter fragment to Jones.
14. Envelope addressed to Petty.
15. Envelope addressed to Petty.

DOCUMENT 1
Periodical, The Negro: His Ethological Status, Etc.
Much too long for reproduction here, the document is nevertheless only a partial
record due to rodent gnawing and page fraying; large gaps interrupt the text. It can
be determined, however, that the periodical is an organ of the AbOlitionist cause, its
prose declaiming the necessity for abolishing the institution of slavery. Its advocacy
dates to before the Civil War. Archival research failed to locate any reference to the
periodical. A valuable resource examined was Dumond's (1961) A Bibliography of
Antis/avery in America, a sourcebook on Abolitionist pamphlet literature. The ab­
sence of any reference indicates the obscurity of the periodioai. Certainly the
publication lacked the statLire of such Abolitionist organs as Liberator, published by
William Lloyd Garrison; the Emancipator; or the National Anti-Slavery Standard. The
presence of the document in the Jones House creates a minor mystery in that all such
Abolitionist literature was contraband in slave states, including Texas.

DOCUMENT 2
Periodical, title unknown
Very much the opposite of Document 1, this periodical espouses the seces­
sionist cause, and in pulp prose the essay inveighs against the abolitionist conspiracy
and its destructive effects on the South. References to the completed elections of
1858 and 1859 and the "soon to take place" election of 1860 date t~e tabloid narrowly
to 1860. It also is too long and in too poor condition for reproduction here.

26/ GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

DOCUMENT 3
Land grant of 640 acres to William Dunbar, March 3, 1857.

P. Priestley
No. 756
Vol.4
In the name of the State of Texas
To all whom these presents shall come, Know ye I E. M. peaf.'e Governor of the
State abovesaid by virtue of the power vested in me by law and 'n accordance with
the laws of said state in such case made and provided do by thes presents grant to
William (Dunbar) _____ forever, Six hundred and forty acr . s of Land situated
and described as follows: In Milam District, Coryell County
the Lampasas
about 10 miles above its junction with the same, by virtue of unconditional
the Board of Land Commissioners of Bastrop County June 17th 184_. b-e-g-in-ning at
the W corner of Survey No.19 _ N 19 W 1141 varas to the NW c rner of said No,19
1551 varas Burnets Creek 2041 varas a stone mound from which a panish Oak bears
S33 W 9 varas another bears N 77 W 7 varas. Thence S 71 W 5 varas to a spring
branch, 535 varas Burnets Creek 1770 varas _ Stone mound fr m which a Spanish
Oak bears N 46 W 6 varas another bears N 84 E 12 varas. Th nce S 19 E 2041
varas to a stone mound. Thence N 71 E 1770 varas to the .Iace of beginning.
Thereby relinquishing to him the said William Dunbar and his heir~ or assigns forever
all the right and title in and for said land heretofore held and pos~essed by the said
State and I do hereby issue this letter patent for the same. In testimony whereof I
have caused the seal of the State to be affixed as well as the seal G>f the General Land
Office. Done at the City of Austin on the seventeenth day of Ja~uary in the year of
our Lord one thousand eight hundred and fifty-five.
G. Crosby

E.M. Pease

Commissioner of the GI. Ld. Office
General Land Office
Austin March 3th 1857

Governor
i

I Crosby Commissioner of the General Land Office of the stJte of Texas hereby
certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the Record Kept in thisl office.
In testimony whereof I
I
hereunto set my hand
and affix the seal of
i
said office the day
and date last above
written

DOCUMENTS /27

G. CROSBY

DOCUMENT 4

Ledger 01 legal1ees, 1851-52, page format

----~

----------1851 ----------November, 1852
"09 C.S. Phillips vs. _ _ _ _ _ __

vs. _ __

"47 C.S.

360

& Case vs. I.S. Smith

285

1173 R. & Rogers vs. I.S. Smith

285

"72

G.

Gamble vs. C.

Gille

285

C.C.McGinnis vs. W. Daniels
"81 . Smith

285

vs. A. Lohnitz

11103 C.K. Hale

vs. I.

205
205

--

11110 R.V. Carterman vs. R. Cobb

345

11117 Moore & Hill vs. Elj. Williams

95

11118 C.M. Workman vs. W. Hartman

260

11125 S.A. Turner vs. P. Miner

295

Jacob Roberts vs. J. Doherty

205

Joseph Miller vs. W.S. Tyson

225

________ vs. _ _ __

95

_ _ _ _ _ vs. M.P. Smith

95

F.M. Chandler vs. A.B. Faith

....

205

205

11151 M.1. Hutchinson vs. I.W. Moore

395

11152 Do.

395

~~-~

.........

~

vs.

Do.

............

-~----

- - - - - - - _........

_--­

28/ GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

"141 Moore & Hill vs. A.W. Avery

205

"142 C. Nash

300

vs. I.C. Bradley

"148 Moore & Hill vs. P. Cassaday

205

"144 Do.

205

Do. vs. W.H. Coulter

"171 A.A. Rutherford vs. Steph Jackson
"172

H.

vs. E.E. Darcy

--

"190 Moore & Hill vs. J.M. Christian
"192 Rutherford assgn. vs. F.M. Nash

215
215
205
95

"201 Do.

vs. Martin

95

"206 Do.

vs. I. Rogers

95

"212 I. Sherman

vs. I.

"217

vs. J.A. Snelling

See

--

"218 Snelling & Nash vs. W.1. Tyson

205
205

lli
8600
7185
1587

DOCUMENT 5

R. L. Reding estate documents, obverse, page format.
Bastrop 2nd March 1849
One day after date we promise to pay to...
press or order Fifteen Hundred and Ten 26/100 Dollars ...
Due received
State of Texas

Reding to Rogers

DOCUMENTS /29

(Coun)ty of Bastrop. Before Mr. James H. GiII(espie)
_(Cou)nty Court for the County of Bastrop
_ _ B.A. Shepherd, to m__
_ _-ing by Mr. Duty, surviv
_ _-at there is due to him _ _
_ _not for Fifteen hundred and _ _
(d)ated Bastrop March 2nd 1849, execu(ted)
(by) Rogers. After deducting all legal _ _
payments upon the same, the sum __
(eig)ht hundred and forty-five 34/100 Dollars
(prin)ciple and the interest thereon, which
(am)ount remains due and unpaid.
(S)worn to and subscribed
(bef)ore me this 29th day of
(M)ay A.D. 1850
James H. Gillespie
Clerk County Court
Bastrop County
R. L. Reding estate documents, reverse

COLUMN LEFT
(m)ade to this date the
(sum) of six hundred and
(six) (ty) four 92/100 Dollars .

. ~~

..............

- -......

~

~---

..........

-~-.--

30 I GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

(B)astrop 29 May 1850 B.A. Shepherd
I accept the payment
of the within note, so far
as the Estate of R.L. Red­
ing deo. is bound in law
for the payment of the same
Bastrop May 29th 1850.
Wm. M. Perry
Exc._Reding
deo.
Examined & All (owe)d.
June 24th 18

.

James Smi(th) J. B_
COLUMN CENTER
_ _ _ _ within aff
_ _ _ _t as just for

- -nt so far as
_ _estate of M.M. Rogers
s bound for the
same in law
June 24th 1851
Preston Conlee
Administrator

DOCUMENTS /31

of M. M. Rogers dide
The State of Texas
County of Bastrop
Examined and Allowed
August 25 A.D. 185_
William H. Garrot(t)
Chief Justice B- COLUMN RIGHT
hinds of J.C.
part of the_ _ _ _ __
Recd this 12th

Wm.

M. Perry Exc. of __-ing
five hundred and _-teen33/100
on the estate of J.C.

land

In. A. Wren(?)
atty. for B.A. Shepherd

DOCUMENT 6

Writ lifting ferry Injunction on Edward Irwin, obverse, page format.
The State of Texas
To the Sheriff of Bastrop County Greetings,
In the name and by the authority
of the State of Texas,
You are hereby commanded

32/ GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

(to) notify Edward Irwin that the Injunction
_ _upon his boat ferry privileges (?) ___
the care of McDonald and Bastrop Corporation
of Edwd. Irwin is countermanded and is
cleared from the same ­
Herein - - - Given under my (name?)
& seal of Office at Bastrop _

this June 14, 1858
(H.S. Morgan clerk)
ferry injunction reverse (cover), page format.
(Legal Notice?)
_ _ _ _-d

Corporation

(of? for?)
Edwd. Irwin
_ _-d June 14, 1858
H.S. Morgan clk.
(Came?) to hand same
day issued and
executed same day by
delivry E. Irwin a copy
of this original notice

P. Conlee Shff.

DOCUMENTS I 33

By S.C. _Dept.
DOCUMENT 7

Jones-Petty partnership statement
_ _ing County

by _ _

acts_ _
do hereby constitute a _ _ __
_ _ _ _G.W. Jones and (E.P.)
Petty partners and attor(nies)
under the (name) a _ _ _ _ __
of Jones & Petty _ _._ _ _.
the town of Bastrop a _ _ _ __
State of Texas, to be _ _ _ __
_ _ _ _ _ _and lawful
_ _ _ and have given _ _ __

- - - - - - - - - -said ------ - - - - - - - -and a - - - - -

DOCUMENTS

Brooks to Petty business letter, December 5, 1859, page format.
At Home Dec. 5/59
E.P. Petty. Esq.
Bastrop

Dr. Sir

- - - ..........- - -.......

~

-----­

..

34/ GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

yours of 29 ult
Came to hand informing me
of the change in the Draft
Drawn in favor of Whitmores.
It will suit me beter (sic) to
pay it here in that way I maid (sic)
the arrangement to pay it to Whitm.
he owed me $75 Dollars and
I told him that the draft wo
uld be drawn (?) and I cald (sic) one
day last week to take it up
he said it had not arived (sic).
I have Ritern (?) to John Sims
to pay an other Judgement
in Highsmiths ofice (sic) and
draw on me for it If you
cant make the Draft suit
you let me know by Return
mail and I will send
you the money by Return
mail again.
I will Right (sic) to you again
soon.

DOCUMENTS /35

Respectfully.
A.M. Brooks

DOCUMENT 9

Chandler to Jones business letter, July 2, __ page format, page 1.
Austin. July 2._ __
G.W. Jones. Esqu.

our mutu(al?)
(frien)d G.A. Green and ours(elves?)

- - - -determined to
professional courtesy of _ __
_ _ _ _ conflict with yo(ur?)

- - - -interest endorsed - - - _ _ _ _two petitions against
_ _ _Wm. M. Perry our Exec _ _
_ _ _ _ _ _Robert L. Reding
_ _ _ soft bath fo _ _ _ _ __

- - - - - -until ac --- - - assisted them - - taken

----

two _ _ _ __

_ _ _ _ _friend _______
_ _ __tendingly _ _

------- had the - - - -

361 GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

_____ foundthm ______________

----four or five di
-----be

------

ed

fifteen Dollars an acre
Chandler to Jones business letter, page format, page 2.
have been informed and - - - - - -

---known

and now we are

-----

_ _with a sharp sti _ _ _ _ __

----- conflict with
- - - - -fill there blo- - - - - - - ____ (ma)nner of their _ _ _ _,
- -ke after him

-------

___if it will ___(meet)_ _ __
with your interest in
___ hand over (?) all ac_ _ __
___ mutual freind (sic) the ___
_ _these lines and tell ____

- - -the damn thing, re

- -the old

fair

-ises we found over a­
_____ we got from ______
____ our cleints (sic) and the
___-pie amt. due belongs to _ _

DOCUMENTS / 37

_ _ _-he need it.
Yours respectfully,
F.W. Chandler

DOCUMENT 10
William H. Ogbourn power of attorney, page format.

-----------lands -------_ _ _ _ _attorney _______
_______think p(roper?)_
contract for, to the a ____,
and behalf of me - - - - - William H. Ogbourn

------- forever

Given

granting to my __________,
my full power (and) a-_ __
in the __________to execute
form and fulfill in _ _ __
manner, all and __________
m(atters?) and things wh _ _
shall be expedi(tious?)
, (concessioning)__

-------,in as - - - - manner as I might _ _ _ __

- - - - - _..................

__ __..__ _
.

...

. .

_.

_._--

.........................._

---

_

..................

_ _. __._......... __

........

38 / GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

personally _ _ _ _ _ _ __

- - whereof I have this
13th day of June A. (D.) _ __
herunto set my
hand
Wm. H. Ogbourn)
Attest
(name)
DOCUMENT 11
Bill to Petty, December 20, 1852

Petty

to John Hunt _ _ __
_ _ _ itself, he
not persist in the cha_ _
__ not probably _ _ it
_ _ voucher the chg. of 15$
is

a singular no. but
lIow it also 2$ for

In. T. _ __
Memphis

DOCUMENTS I 39

20th Dec. 1852 M . _ __
Remit the money to Davis Titus
Left marginal note:
Allow the

& (?) if he can ___ a voucher for the

40$ I would like to see it. In. _ _.

DOCUMENT 12
Letter fragment to Petty, page format
San Marcos
E.P. Petty, Esq.
Dear

-­

find an accoun(t) _

John J. _ _ _.

living on _ _ _ Creek, _ _ _ _ __
town of

----

have for

---­

DOCUMENT 13
Letter fragment to Jones, page format.
George W. Jones. Esq.
Bastrop
_ _ Esq.

40 I GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

DOCUMENT 14
Envelope addressed to Petty_

W.p. _ _ _ _ __
May 18th 1860
E.P. Petty Esquire
Bastrop
Texas

DOCUMENT 15
Envelope addressed to Petty

E.P. Petty
Esq.
Seguin
Texas
Summary of Records

Documents 1 and 2 appear to have the greatest significance of all the rat cache
finds. The periodicals reflect Jones's and Petty's opposing views on the national
issue of slavery and states' rights. This reflection is indeed accurate in its outlines,
but the documents present the law partners' views with less than the eloquence and
dignity for which both men are remembered. The documents thus actually are more
significant for revealing something of the political ambience and flavor of the imme­
diate pre-Civil War years in Bastrop. In particular, Abolitionist literature was
contraband in Texas, and the presence of Document 1 in the Jones House invites
speculation.
Document 3, the land grant to William O. Dunbar, is intrinsically more important
than the above periodicals because it is an original instrument validating Dunbar's
right and claim to the land described in the deed. As with many of the documents,
how an official instrument unrelated to Jones or Petty came to be lodged in the Jones
House cannot be determined unequivocally; the best hypothesis is that it was stored

DOCUMENTS I 41

there for safekeeping, perhaps for matters regarding Dunbar's estate or transactions
involving the land. The Dunbar grant instrument and the other official legal docu­
ments - notably documents 5,6,8,9, and 10--strongly suggest that the Jones House
was used at least for storing the Jones and Petty files, and some rooms of the house
served as offices out of which their legal practice was conducted.
The ledger of legal fees, Document 4, is interesting for the list of clients of Jones
and Petty and names of local people that were involved in legal activity. Interesting
also are the fees charged in the cases. Unfortunately, the list fails to describe the
nature of the suits and legal actions. This document should retain value in the future
as source material for period studies of public life in Bastrop.
The writ lifting the injunction against Edward Irwin, Document 6, also has aspects
of note. Bastrop Police Court Records (Book C:47) show Irwin operating a ferry under
a permit issued to Hugh K. McDonald, the probable chief of McDonald and Bastrop
Corporation, named in Document 6. The location of the ferry operation is not
specified, but when McDonald renewed his permit in 1856, Pine Street was given as
his location. Court records also show the settlement of a suit brought by John Moore.
The original writ against Irwin may have been issued while Moore's suit, grievance
unknown, was pending. The writ lifting the injunction coincides with the settlement
of the suit, outcome unknown except that McDonald and Bastrop Corporation was
allowed to continue ferry operations under terms of the settlement. District Court
Records also show Irwin involved in litigation later in 1858. On October 8, the court
ruled in John H. Moore's favor ($130.87) in a suit brought by Moore against Irwin.
On October 20, a suit against Moore by McDonald Corporation was transferred to
Fayette County due to an unstated conflict of interest.
The remaining documents are significant primarily for the names on them, mostly
public figures in Bastrop in the 1850s. The papers may bolster other period records
of government and economic and political life. The documents provide a record of
place and people and collectively comprise a small and inadvertent time capsule.

SUMMARY AND DISCUSSIONS
Research at the George Washington Jones Homestead, 41 BP86, established the
sequence of growth and change of the property from Stephen F. Austin's ownership
to Terry Bray's. The first improvement to the property was the single pen log cabin,
built circa 1840 by W. Pinkney Hill. The property was held by William Gammell and
Andrew Castleman before coming into the hands of George Washington Jones in
1855. Jones built the imposing two story, milled lumber "I" house no later than 1856.
The brick-lined hand-dug well was probably in use by this time as well. The double
pen log barn complex was also built in the 1850s. The windmill-well and iron
bathtub-trough north of the double pen barn could have been added at this time or
any time later during Jones' ownership, but most likely close to the time when the
barn was erected. The house, the barn complex, and the street north of the house
delineate the outlines of the original Jones homestead. From these indicators an
estimate of approximately a two acre homestead is derived. The layout was a rough
rectangle with its long side running east-west. Buildings were oriented northward
toward Bastrop. The MKT Railroad crossed the property in the 1880s, at an oblique
angle to this layout.
Jones' heirs sold the property to T. C. Osborne in 1906. The Osbornes were
non-residents and planted the land in cotton. Osborne built two board-and-batten
sheds northeast of the Jones House and two board-and-batten tenant houses
elsewhere on the property. One of these houses, 41BP314, was excavated by the
Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation. The final improve­
ment to the land was the extension of the municipal water system to the property in
1952. After that time the pasturage was leased for cattle grazing, and the appurtenan­
ces to the land fell into decline. This period ended in 1985 when the property was
purchased by Terry Bray, who implemented plans for an industrial park on the site.
The prehistoric site component, reported when the site was originally recorded,
remains problematic at best. Amounting to a few primary flakes and a chert core, the
material may have been brought in as road fill for the street and flaked accidentally
by farm implements. If the materials are indeed anCient, they nevertheless lack
significance according to all established criteria.
The documentary and archival research helped outline the sequence of owner­
ship and changes of the land. The Bastrop County Deed Records were especially
helpful in this regard. Photographs taken in 1936 by Fanny Ratchford were of great
value in determining architectural features of the Jones House and the single pen log
cabin. The original pictures are in the Hornaday Collection of the Texas State
Archives.

42

SUMMARYAND DISCUSSIONS I 43

An unexpected documentary find was the 1850s documents packed by rats
between the walls and in the stairway of the house. Fifteen salvageable papers were
recovered, although even these were largely fragmentary. The documents relate to
the partnership of George Washington Jones and Elijah P. Petty; they record clients,
cases, and legal fees. The tenor of the times is indicated by two tabloid-type
periodicals, one abolitionist, one pro-slavery. The land grant to William Dunbar, the
R.L. Reding estate instrument, and the William H. Ogbourn power of attorney were
probably held for use in estate work by heirs who hired Jones and Petty. Altogether,
the documents show something of the variety of 1850s legal practice and may support
future historical research.
The George Washington Jones House research as a whole shows that the
material and archival finds were significant and contributory to the history of Bastrop.
The documentary finds were not entirely antiCipated; they were a great serendipity,
one much appreciated and helpful in putting the site and its historic owners in
perspective. The material 'finds, buildings, and their layout reflect the history of the
region from the modest beginnings of small log cabins built literally beyond the
frontier, to eminence before the Civil War, through Reconstruction, sharecropping
agriculture, and the drive toward diversified economies in the late twentieth century.
The archival and oral history research have helped place the additions and changes
to the property in their proper sequence and have helped attribute the phases of
growth to the property's various owners.
The documentary finds from the Jones House cluster in date from the early- to
late-1850s. The pro-slavery pamphlet, Document 2, dates to 1860. This time covers
the beginning of George Washington Jones' law career and partnership with Elijah P.
Petty. The documents give a blurred, incomplete, but recognizable picture of legal
practice in the 1850s. Currently, they contribute to the identification of legal and
economic activity among public and private figures in Bastrop. Dated records with
the names of public officeholders, such as the Jones documents, are rare and
valuable in placing the dates of office of public officials. These in turn help evaluate
political issues and activity within fairly strict time frames. Thus, as source material
added to further studies, the Jones documents may help form a clearer picture of
their times. Considered in combination with the rich materials, design, and construc­
tion of Jones' home, the documents also indicate the lucrative nature of the legal
profeSSion, then as now.
As a project of historical archeology, the George Washington Jones research
examined historical matters from the perspective of material remains, in part from that
of archives and written records. Historians, who use written records, and ar­
cheologists, who use material remains, often war over their methods. Usually, the
issue is the superiority of records or material remains in interpreting the past. The
research at 41 BP86 has used both forms of data equally in reconstructing the history
of the George Washington Jones homestead. The investigation has drawn on the
strengths of known and discovered records as well as material evidence on the
ground to synthesize the history of the property. The two forms of data comple­

..

~----

-~-.--

.....

-~~-

...

----- ...

---~-~-----

.....

44/ GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

mented each other, each at variolJs times bolstering the other when some narrative
or logical dead end was encountered. Neither written records nor material evidence
emerged as superior to the other. Both were necessary to the completion of what
grew to be quite a colorful story. Aside from its other accomplishments, the George
Washington Jones study proved itself a valuable research demonstration of the
application of written records and material evidence in tandem.

REFERENCES CITED
Bastrop Advertiser and County News
1985
Confederate Captain's Remains Brought Home. October 31, 1985.
Bastrop. Texas.
1985

Captain Petty Returned to Bastrop Resting Place. November 11, 1985.
Bastrop, Texas.

1986

Old Jones House Attracts Archeologists. March 20, 1986. Bastrop,
Texas.

Bastrop County Deed Records
n.d.
Deed Record Volumes B,C,H,K,41 ,365.
Bastrop, Texas.

County Clerk's Office.

Bastrop Police Court Records
n.d.
Book C. County Clerk's Office. Bastrop. Texas.
Brown, Frank
n.d.
Annals of Travis County and of the City of Austin.
manuscript in the Texas State Archives.

Unpublished

Brown, Norman D., editor
1982
Journey to Pleasant Hill, the Civil War Letters of Captain Elijah P. Petty,
Walker's Texas Division, C.S.A. The Institute of Texan Cultures, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Dumond, Dwight Lowell
1961
A Bibliography of Antislavery in America. The University of Michigan
Press, Ann Arbor.
Gore, Mary Belle Turner
1987
Personal Communication. Resident of Bastrop, Texas. Interviewed
September 25, 1987 by David G. Robinson.
Johnson, Frank W. (edited by Eugene C. Barker)
1914
A History of Texas and Texans, 5 vols. American Historical Society,
Chicago.
Kesselus, Kenneth
History of Bastrop County, Texas Before Statehood.
1986
Publishing Co., Austin.
45

Jenkins

46/ GEORGE WASHINGTON JONES HOUSE

1987

History of Bastrop County, Texas, 1846-1865. Jenkins Publishing Co.,
Austin.

Martinez, Rudolph
1987
Personal Communication. Resident of Bastrop, Texas. Interviewed
September 25, 1987 by David G. Robinson.
McDowall, Mollie
1978
Memoirs of Mollie McDowall (Mary Ann Nicholson) 1843-1931.
National Society of the Colonial Dames of America in the State of
Texas, Waco.
Moncure, Henry B.
1986
In a State of Unusual Preservation.
Historical Foundation. Austin, Texas.
Moore, Bill
1977

Heritage 4(2): 31-33.

Texas

Bastrop County, 1691-1900. Nortex Press, Wichita Falls.

Robinson, David G.
1987
The Bastrop County Sesquicentennial Project: Cultural Resource
Investigations Along the Colorado River, Bastrop County, Texas.
Archeology Series 2. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL)
n.d.
County Site Files. The University of Texas at Austin.
Texas State Archives
n.d.
Drawer 190. Austin, Texas.
n.d.

The Hornaday Collection. File AC70/101. Austin, Texas.

Webb, Walter Prescott (editor)
1952
The Handbook of Texas, vol. 1. Texas State Historical Commission,
Austin.

