Cultural Resources Survey of Potions of Fannie Robinson Park
Williamson County, Texas
Apex Project No. 7010817N004-001

TAC Permit 8012
by
Debra L. Beene
Principal Investigator
Prepared for:
City of Taylor
400 Porter Street
Taylor, Texas 76574
and
Sledge Engineering
481 Tucker Road
Taylor, Texas 76574
May 2017

Apex TITAN, Inc., a subsidiary of Apex Companies, LLC
13640 Briarwick Drive, Suite 110 Austin, TX 78726 T 512.473.8313 F 512.473.8314 www.apexcos.com

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

May 2017
Page i

ABSTRACT
The City of Taylor is proposing to construct a new Splash-Pad feature at the Fannie Robinson
Park in Williamson County, Texas. Fannie Robinson Park is located on city of Taylor land;
therefore, a Texas Antiquities Code (TAC) Permit from the Texas Historical Commission (THC)
was required prior to the field investigation. TAC Permit Number 8012 was issued to the Principal
Investigator on April 27, 2017. In addition, the proposed park is partially funded through
TPWD’s Recreational Park Grant Program and may include federal funds; therefore, it may be
subject to the provisions of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA).
A cultural literature review followed by an intensive pedestrian survey of the proposed Splash Pad
feature, as well as a general reconnaissance of the remainder of the park was carried out to
identify archeological and historical resources. Additional improvements, identified upon meeting
with the Taylor Parks Director on site, include the proposed replacement of several
existing baseball fence posts and a new picnic table slab; these areas were intensively
surveyed. The survey methodology followed the Survey Standards of Texas developed by
the Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA) and THC and included an intensive and
reconnaissance pedestrian survey, augmented with strategically placed shovel tests (STs) in
areas with evidence of soil deposition.
The location of the proposed Project, proposed improvements, and shovel test locations
are presented in Appendix A, Figure 1.
The intensive pedestrian survey was conducted in accordance with the Antiquities Code of
Texas and Section 106 of the NHPA (Section 106) in the areas of proposed improvements; a
general reconnaissance survey was carried out in the surrounding areas of the park. The
cultural resources investigation was negative for cultural resources; therefore, Apex
recommends that the proposed Project proceed without further cultural resources investigation
as the proposed Project would have no effect on cultural resources eligible for inclusion in the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) or listing as State Antiquities Landmarks (SALs).
This report format follows the Short Report guidelines developed by the THC and CTA for very
small projects with negative results. The Management Summary is followed by the Introduction,
Cultural Background, Methodology, Results, Recommendations, and References Cited.

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

May 2017
Page ii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract........................................................................................................................................ i
1.0 Management Summary ....................................................................................................... 1
2.0 Introduction ......................................................................................................................... 2
3.0 Cultural History and Previous Investigations........................................................................ 3
4.0 Methodology........................................................................................................................ 5
5.0 Results ................................................................................................................................ 7
6.0 Summary and Recommendations ..................................................................................... 16
7.0 References ........................................................................................................................17

TABLE
Table 1: Shovel Test Data within the APE ....…………………………………………………….…….7
APPENDIX A
Map Figure
Figure 1: Project Location on Aerial Imagery with Proposed Improvements and Shovel Test
Locations………………………………………………………………………………………………. A-1

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

1.0

May 2017
Page 1

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

PROJECT TITLE: Cultural Resources Survey of Potions of Fannie Robinson Park, Williamson
County, Texas.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION: On behalf of the City of Taylor, Apex conducted a cultural
resources survey of the proposed improvement areas, as well as a general reconnaissance of
the remainder of the park within Williamson County Texas (Apex Project No.
7010817N004-001). The proposed APE consists of one new Splash-Pad feature, replacement
of existing baseball fence posts, and a concrete slab for a picnic table.
PROJECT LOCATION: The proposed Project is located within Fannie Robinson Park at 260
South Dolan Street in southeast Taylor, Texas.
DATE OF WORK: April 27, 2017
PURPOSE OF WORK: Apex assisted the City of Taylor in their due diligence under the Antiquities
Code of Texas and Section 106 of the NHPA (Section 106).
PRINCIPLAL INVESTIGATOR: Debra L. Beene
NEWLY RECORDED SITE: none
PREVIOUSLY RECORDED SITES: none
COMMENTS: The cultural resources investigation resulted in negative findings; therefore, Apex
recommends that the proposed Project proceed without further cultural resources investigation
as the proposed Project would have no effect on cultural resources eligible for inclusion in the
NRHP.

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

2.0

May 2017
Page 2

INTRODUCTION

The City of Taylor is proposing to construct one new Splash-Pad feature, replacement of existing
baseball fence posts, and a concrete slab for a picnic table within Fannie Robinson Park. The
location of the proposed Project, proposed improvements, and shovel test locations are presented
in Appendix A, Figure 1.
Fannie Robinson Park is located on City of Taylor land; therefore, a Texas Antiquities Code (TAC)
Permit from the Texas Historical Commission (THC) was required prior to the field investigation.
TAC Permit Number 8012 was issued to the Principal Investigator on April 27, 2017. In addition,
the proposed park is partially funded through TPWD’s Recreational Park Grant Program, and may
include federal funds; therefore, it may be subject to the provisions of Section 106 of the National
Historic Preservation Act (NHPA).
The proposed Area of Potential Effect (APE) consists of proposed improvements within the
Fannie Robinson Park, located on City of Taylor property approximately 0.48-mile east of the
intersection of South Main Street and East Walnut Street. The park is bound by East Walnut
Street to the south, South Dolan Street to the east, a railroad berm to the north, and Threadgill
Street to the west.
Proposed projects located on State or local public land are subject to the rules of the TAC (Texas
Natural Resource Code, Title 9, Chapter 191) and accompanying Rules of Practice and
Procedure (Texas Administrative Code, Title 13, Chapter 26). The proposed Project is located on
city public land; therefore, it is subject to the provisions of the TAC. A TAC Permit from the THC
was issued to the Principal Investigator on April 27, 2017.
The proposed APE for the cultural resources survey consists of one new Splash-Pad
feature, replacement of existing baseball fence posts, and a concrete slab for a picnic table
within Fannie Robinson Park (Appendix A, Figure 1). An intensive pedestrian survey was
carried out at the proposed improvements along with a general reconnaissance survey of the
surrounding area. The intensive archeological survey was augmented with strategically placed
shovel tests in areas with the potential for containing intact cultural resources. On April 27,
2017, Apex’s archeological staff, on behalf of the City of Taylor, conducted a cultural resources
investigation of the APE.

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

3.0

May 2017
Page 3

CULTURAL HISTORY AND PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS

The traditional cultural sequence of central Texas includes the Paleoindian period (11,500 to 8800
BP) followed by the Early (8800 to 6000 BP), Middle (6000 to 4000 BP), and Late (4000 to 1300
or 1200 BP) Archaic periods; the latter Late Prehistoric period (approximately 1200 to around 250
BP) is followed by the Historic period (250 BP into the mid-to late 19th century) (Collins 2004).
These temporal divisions are reflected in changes in technologies and subsistence adaptations.
Archeological site types range from lithic scatters and isolated heaths to open camps, burned rock
middens, hearth fields, lithic procurement/quarries, rockshelters and cemeteries. Within the
general area of the proposed Project, most of the prehistoric sites are open camps situated on
alluvial terraces near streams or rivers. The cultural assemblage may include fire cracked rock
(FCR), lithic debitage, lithic tools (hammerstones, unifaces, bifaces, diagnostic projectile points),
ground stones, and ceramic sherds. Historic site types range from Mexican period ranchos, early
Anglo farmsteads and settlements to the Camino Real de los Tejas, a network of roads linking
outposts and supply towns. Most of the historic sites, within the general area of the proposed
Project, are homesteads and tenant farms dating to the late 19th century.
A search of the restricted use online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas Database (ATLAS),
maintained by the THC and the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), was
conducted to identify any known cultural resource sites (including cemeteries) and previous
investigations conducted within 0.5-mile of the APE. Two cultural resource investigations have
taken place and two archeological sites, one historic district, and seven historical markers
have been documented within the 0.5-mile study area (ATLAS 2017). None will be
impacted by the proposed Project. The limited number of cultural resources is likely due to
the paucity of cultural resource surveys in the general area.
According to the ATLAS (2017), a cultural resources survey of Bull Branch (tributary to Mustang
Creek to the south) was surveyed as part of a TPWD grant funded project in May 1997. Other
than the plotting of this negative survey, no additional information is provided on the ATLAS
database. This linear survey follows Bull Branch from just south of City Lake (in Murphy Park) to
East Walnut Street and intersects the proposed Project area (Fannie Robinson Park). At the time
of the current investigation, the City Parks Director was unaware that a survey had been
previously conducted within the park.
A linear survey was carried out under TAC Permit Number 1770 for the Texas Water Development
Board (TWDB) in 1997 (ATLAS 2017). It is located approximately 0.24- to 1.09-mile
west southwest of the proposed Project and two archeological sites were recorded nearby.
Both sites are located beyond the 0.5-mile study area of the APE and will not be impacted
by the proposed Project. 0ther than the digitized location, no site data is available on the
ATLAS (2017).
The City of Taylor Cemetery (WM-CO93) is located approximately 0.30 mile north of the
northern boundary of the proposed Project; it is not considered a Texas Historic Cemetery. Two
Historical Markers (THC Numbers 9091 and 9344) are located within the
cemetery. Historical Marker Number 9091 is obviously mis-plotted; this Gothic Revival
First Christian Church of Taylor is located at 6th & Talbot Streets approximately 0.75
mile west of the cemetery. The church was built in 1891 and is recorded as a Texas
Historic Landmark. Marker Number 9344 is a grave marker for Luther Stearns, Sr. (1784
– 1859) who was buried near his home in the family cemetery, which was destroyed

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

May 2017
Page 4

early in the 20th century; the marker is located near the grave of his youngest son. The
Historical Markers are plotted approximately 0.47- and 0.58-mile north of the proposed Project,
respectively. These are located a sufficient distance from the proposed Project and will not be
impacted.
The NRHP Listed Taylor Downtown Historic District is roughly bounded by Fifth
Street, Washburn, First Street, and Vance Street and is located between 0.35 and 0.80 mile
west of the proposed Project. Its significance criteria include historic events and design/
architectures with local significance in the areas of Commerce, Community Planning and
Development, and Architecture. Four Historical Markers (Number 9354, Taylor National
Bank; Number 9083; the Eikel-Prewitt Building; Number 9320, City Hall Marker acknowledging
Bill Pickett, son of a former slave and cowboy who pioneered the art of ‘bulldogging’; and
Number 13070, the Preslar-Hewitt Building) are located within the district. The district is
located a sufficient distance from the proposed Project and will not be impacted.
One additional Historical Marker (Number 13616) is located at 500 Burkett Street in honor of Dr.
James Lee Dickey (1893-1959), physician, humanitarian, civil rights advocate, and
concerned citizen. Dr. Dickey was the city’s only African American doctor until his death;
he received numerous awards and honors, including distinction by the Taylor Chamber of
Commerce as Man of the Year in 1952. The structure at this marker is located approximately
0.42 mile northwest of the proposed Project and will not be impacted.

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

4.0

May 2017
Page 5

METHODOLOGY

Prior to the field investigation, the proposed Project was assessed for existing cultural resources
and/or recorded archeological sites. The THC’s ATLAS database (ATLAS 2017) was
reviewed with negative results; no standing structures or cultural resources sites were found
within the proposed Project. The City of Taylor and Sledge Engineering provided data to Apex
in the form of electronic engineering drawings and noted that cultural resource surveys
had not been requested by the THC for previous phases of park development. However, a
negative pedestrian survey of Bull Branch, which intersects the park from north to south, was
conducted within the park in 1997 (ATLAS 2017).
The proposed project is located in a developed park; existing facilities include a swimming pool,
playscape, basketball court, deteriorated tennis court, fenced baseball field, a few small
buildings, and concrete trails. Several areas were not shovel tested due to the landscape
or existing development. These included the margins of the park and southeast and southwest
corners of the park, which are steeply sloped; the area located between the basketball court
and playscape which is located just above the water table with standing water; and the north
and east sides of the baseball field which have buried utilities and a building. The fieldwork
was restricted to the areas with proposed development and areas with relatively intact soils.
The current field investigation was designed to comply with appropriate archeological
field methods as defined in the Department of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines (NPS
1983), the Guidelines of the CTA (1987), and the survey standards developed by the
THC (n.d.) in conjunction with the CTA. The primary intent of the survey was to identify and
describe all cultural resources discovered within the APE, evaluate their eligibility for inclusion in
the NRHP or listing as SALs, and, should eligible cultural sites be located, make
recommendations for future management options, such as avoidance and preservation or
further investigations.
The cultural resources investigation did not commence until the Principal Investigator
received the TAC permit from the THC. The APE was pedestrian surveyed and, when
appropriate, shovel tested to identify prehistoric and historic cultural resources. The intensive
survey was conducted using the engineering drawings of the proposed improvements provided
by Sledge Engineering. As well, the City of Taylor Parks Director and Park Maintenance
Manager walked the site with us to identify areas for future proposed development and
identification of subsurface utilities consisting of french drains near the swimming pool, a
sewer line that roughly parallels Bull Branch, and utilities between the baseball field
and nearby buildings. A general reconnaissance was proposed for the areas
surrounding the identified improvements.
The crew made thorough field notes about ground exposure, soil types, and disturbed areas
and digital photographs were taken at each location. Table 1 summarizes the results of
the shovel testing which are plotted on Appendix A, Figure 1.
The draft technical report adheres to the Council of Texas Archeologists Guidelines for Cultural
Resource Management Reports (CTA 1987). The report includes a brief cultural history of
the project area, survey methodology, results of the survey, and site recommendations
regarding site significance (if applicable), and whether further archeological work is
warranted. The draft report will be submitted for review and comment to the THC (TAC
permit requirement) and TPWD (funding requirement); as well, a copy will be provided to
the City of Taylor. Once approved, the final report completion requirements of the TAC permit

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

May 2017
Page 6

will be met including curation of project records at TARL, a certified curatorial facility. Hard
copies of the final report will be submitted to the City of Taylor, THC, TPWD, and the Texas
State Library and Archives Commission. Additionally, one tagged formatted PDF electronic
copy on CD along with the Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology Summary form and
abstract will be provided to the THC. Shapefiles showing the boundary of the project area and
areas surveyed will be submitted to the THC.

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

5.0

May 2017
Page 7

RESULTS

The proposed improvements were subjected to an intensive pedestrian survey and a
general reconnaissance survey was carried out in the surrounding areas. Shovel tests
could not be excavated in the area surrounding the proposed Splash-Pad feature and the west
and north sides of the baseball field. The Splash-Pad feature is proposed either to the east or
north of the existing playground; both areas are located on steep slopes which were not
conducive to shovel testing. However, one ST was excavated just north of the proposed
Splash-Pad feature location; ST 4 was placed downslope from the swimming pool and north of
a buried french drain in an area with minimal to moderate slope. Shovel Test 1 was
excavated on the flat terrace closer to Bull Branch; it was located west of the playscape and
an area of standing water. Both STs 1 and 4 were negative for cultural resources.
Shovel tests could not be excavated to the north and west of the baseball field; buried utility
lines lie between the north side of the baseball field and adjacent small buildings and steep
slopes are located immediately west of the field. Two STs (STs 5 and 7) were excavated
between the baseball field and Bull Branch with negative results. Two STs (STs 2 and 3) were
excavated in the area proposed for the placement of a picnic table on a small concrete pad;
both were negative for cultural resources with the exception of a modern flower pot just below
the surface in ST 2. Shovel Test 6 was excavated on the west side of Bull Branch opposite the
proposed picnic table placement; it was negative for cultural resources. See Table 1 for ST
descriptions and Appendix A, Figure 1 for the location of STs.

Table 1: Shovel Tests within the APE
Trowel
Test

Depth
(inches)

Soil Description

Artifacts

Salt Creek Tributary (T3)

ST 01

ST 02

0 to 23

0 to 16

Very dark gray (2.5Y 3/1) clay, dry to slightly
moist, few gravels; one cluster of gravel between
10 and 12” below the surface (bs), solid gravel layer
at 23” bs (rootlets 0 -4” bs); located approximately
45 feet east of Bull Branch within a natural park with
facilities.
setting
(lawn) with
Dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) clay, dry, giant flower
pot fragment (16 by 16" with curved decorative lip just
below the surface); minor rootlets (0-4” bs); few to a
moderate number of gravels becoming dense mixed
with concrete; solid gravels at 16” bs; one small
piece of plastic; disturbed soils; located approx. 15
approximately
15Branch within a natural park (lawn)
feet
east of Bull
setting with facilities. Three large chunks of concrete
mixed with gravel lying on the surface and two areas
of stacked brick and burned charcoal.

None

None

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

Trowel
Test

ST 03

ST 04

ST 05

ST 06

ST 07

Depth
(inches)

0-13

0-17

0-28

0-27

0-16

May 2017
Page 8

Soil Description
Same as ST 2; slightly moist; mixed gravels but
without concrete or plastic; located approximately 15
feet east of Bull Branch within a natural park (lawn)
setting with facilities.
Grayish brown (10YR 5/2) loamy clay; dry; solid
mixed gravels but smaller in size than ST 2 and 3
(pea-sized to marble sized); larger gravels on top;
located on downward slope toward Bull Branch
approximately
100 feet to Branch
the east.
B
Bull BranchBranch
Very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) loamy clay;
slightly moist; with 2” layer located between 2 and 4”
bs consisting of very dark grayish brown with 50%
yellowish red loamy clay (hydric soil with redox
features); located adjacent to baseball field
approximately 49 feet northwest of fringe wetland.
Very dark gray (10YR 3/1) loamy clay; slightly moist;
rootlets (0-4” bs); mixed gravels (0-8” bs); few onion
bulbs, mixed gravels, and fire ants; located
approximately 15 feet west of Bull Branch within a
natural park (lawn) setting.
Dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) clay; dry; top soil with
rootlets and mixed gravels (0-2” bs); gray (10YR 6/1)
concrete dust and soil mixture with mixed gravels;
hard pan at 16” bs; disturbed soils; located
approximately 49.75 feet west of Bull Branch and
fringe wetland within a natural park (lawn) setting.

Artifacts

None

None

None

None

None

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

Figure 1: From ST 1 facing east toward proposed Splash-Pad
feature located on slopes behind the playground

May 2017
Page 9

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

Figure 2: Facing west toward Bull Branch from ST 2

Figure 3: Large chunk of concrete and gravel observed in area of ST 2

May 2017
Page 10

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

May 2017
Page 11

Figure 4: Large ceramic flower pot from ST 2

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

May 2017
Page 12

Figure 5: Facing fringe wetland from ST 3

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

May 2017
Page 13

Figure 6: From ST 4 facing east southeast toward proposed Splash-Pad feature
located behind field technician

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

May 2017
Page 14

Figure 7: From ST 5 facing southeast toward Bull Branch

Figure 8: From ST 6 facing east toward Bull Branch

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

May 2017
Page 15

Figure 9: From ST 7 facing east toward Bull Branch

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

6.0

May 2017
Page 16

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The areas of the proposed park improvements were subjected to a systematic pedestrian survey
supplemented with shovel testing, when appropriate. Seven STs were excavated within the
proposed APE; STs 1 and 4 were placed in the area of the proposed Splash-Pad feature; STs 2,
3, and 6 were placed in the area of the proposed picnic table, and STs 5 and 7 were placed in
the area of the proposed baseball field post replacements. All shovel tests were negative for
cultural resources. The intensive pedestrian survey was conducted in accordance with the
Antiquities Code of Texas and Section 106 of the NHPA (Section 106) in the areas of proposed
improvements; a general reconnaissance survey was carried out in the surrounding areas of the
park.
It is the opinion of Apex that there is negligible potential for the proposed Project to contain
intact archeological or historic resources eligible for inclusion in the NRHP or listing as SALs
that could contribute new or valuable information to our understanding of regional or local
prehistory and history. Apex recommends that the proposed construction would have no
effect on historic properties and should proceed as planned without additional investigations.
If an inadvertent discovery of intact archeological or historic resources are identified during
construction, work in the immediate area should cease until the resources can be assessed by
a professional archeologist.

City of Taylor, Texas
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

7.0

May 2017
Page 17

REFERENCES

(ATLAS) Texas Archeological Sites Atlas restricted use website. 2017. Texas Historical
Commission, Austin, Texas. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us. (Accessed in April l2017)
Collins, M. B. 2004. Archeology in Central Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, edited by Timothy
K. Perttula. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
(CTA) Council of Texas Archeologists. 1987. Guidelines for Professional Performance Standards.
Austin, Texas.
(NPS) National Park Service. 1983. Archeology and Historic Preservation: Secretary of the
Interior’s Standards and Guidelines. Federal Register 48(190):44734-44742.
(THC) Texas Historical Commission. n.d. Survey Standards for Texas. Austin, Texas.

City of Taylor Gathering
Fannie Robinson Park CRS

May 2017
Appendix A

APPENDIX A
MAP FIGURE

Sources: Esri, HERE,
DeLorme, USGS, Intermap,
increment P Corp., NRCAN,
Esri Japan, METI, Esri China

ST2
ST6

ST3

ST5
ST7

ST4

ST1

Figure 1: Project Location on Aerial Imagery
Cultural Resources Survey
Fannie Robinson Park
City of Taylor
May 2017
Apex No. 7010817N004-001

Source: Esri, DigitalGlobe, GeoEye, Earthstar Geographics, CNES/Airbus DS,
USDA, USGS, AEX, Getmapping, Aerogrid, IGN, IGP, swisstopo, and the GIS
User Community, Esri, HERE, DeLorme, MapmyIndia, © OpenStreetMap
contributors, USGS The National Map: National Hydrography Dataset. Data
Refreshed April, 2017.

Legend
Project and Survey Boundary

Proposed Improvements

(
!

Negative Shovel Tests

0

125
1:3,000

250

500
1 in = 250 feet

Feet

´

