Phase I Archaeological Investigations at the
Mulberry Street Sidewalk Project, Allison Park,
San Antonio,
Bexar County, Texas
By
Harry J. Shafer and Thomas R. Hester
SUBMITTED TO

City of San Antonio
Parks and Recreation Department
San Antonio, Texas
By

ABASOLO ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONSULTANTS
San Antonio, Texas

TAC Permit #5680

Report No. 91
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants
San Antonio, Texas
July 2010

1

Abstract
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants conducted archaeological investigations to locate
the Upper Labor acequia in Allison Park as part of the Mulberry Avenue sidewalk
project in San Antonio, and to also test for buried prehistoric deposits. TAC Permit
#5680 was issued in order to perform the work. The acequia was located during backhoe
testing, and it had been used to install a concrete-capped sewer line sometime in the first
half of the 20th century. Investigations for prehistoric sites were negative except for a
trace at the back part of the terrace near the acequia. No further archaeological work is
recommended.

2

Introduction
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants conducted a Phase I archaeological investigations
along the planned sidewalk route along West Mulberry Avenue from North St. Mary’s
east to the San Antonio River in Allison Park. The focus of the investigations was to
locate the Upper Labor acequia and test for buried prehistoric deposits. The project was
carried out under a contract with Parks and Recreation Department, City of San Antonio
(see Fig. 1). Since the proposed project is on public land, the research was performed
under the Antiquities Code of Texas, and Permit #5680 was issued for the project from
the Texas Historical Commission prior to field work. The project was carried out in
accordance with the “Archeological Survey Standards for Texas” in order to assess the
significance of any potential site regarding potential eligibility to National Register of
Historic Places and as a potential State Archeological Landmark.

The project involves the construction of a sidewalk (Figs. 1 and 2) from North St Marys
Street eastward along the south side of West Mulberry Avenue to River Road. The
route of the sidewalk will avoid disturbing the large trees on the north side (Fig. 2), and
will be immediately south of the wood fence that currently borders the north side of the
park. The path of the sidewalk as seen on the plans is like a recurved bow (Fig. 2).

The main concern expressed by the Parks and Recreation Department and the Office of
Historic Preservation was that the sidewalk project crossed the Upper Labor acequia, one
the Spanish Mission era acequias. Early maps (Figs. 3-5) showed the Upper Labor
acequia along the back portion of the San Antonio River terrace along the property line
on the west side of the park, but the precise location was unknown as it is not visible on
the surface.

3

The field work was carried out with two main objectives: locate the acequia and test the
terrace deposits for buried archaeological sites. The concern regarding the latter objective
was based on the presence of a prehistoric archaeological site (41BX264) on the same
terrace in the polo field (now a golf driving range) north of West Mulberry Avenue.

The Spanish acequia system has been mapped out by the late Waynne Cox and described
in his book The Spanish Acequias of San Antonio, (2005). A copy of his master map is
filed at the City of San Antonio Office of Historic Preservation and a copy is in the
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants library. Part of is map illustrated in Figure 3 shows
the Upper Labor acequia crossing Mulberry Avenue west of the river. This map is not
sufficiently detailed, however, to be certain as to precisely where the acequia is located
relative to the Allison Park boundary.

Geology and Soils
The Brackenridge Park area (including Allison Park) lies south of the Balcones
Escarpment, though faulting that formed the escarpment created major springs in the area
(e.g., San Pedro Springs, Blue Hole) coming out of the Edwards Aquifer. Geologic
deposits within the Parkare dominated by Holocene silts and clays, capped by recent
fluviatile terrace deposits . More detailed studies are in Meskill and Frederick (1996; see
also Houk et al. 1999). Much earlier geological outcrops are notable around the Sunken
Gardens, specifically the Austin limestone (upper Cretaceous) quarried for building stone
in early San Antonio.

The park is mostly a relatively flat terrace composed of Lewisville silty clay soils (0-1
percent slope) (Taylor, et al. 1991: 25). The soils are described as very firm and are one
of the most productive agricultural soils in Bexar county. There is no wonder that the
Spanish selected this terrace for cultivation. The stony soils of the Tarrant series occur
on the rocky slopes of the valley wall along St Marys Street at the western margin of the
project area (ibid.: 30).

4

Archaeological and Historical Background

Prehistoric Archaeology
Prehistoric sites in the upper San Antonio River drainage have often been damaged or
eliminated by development and river modification.

Based on archaeological research

in the general region, one could predict that the remnants of 11,500 years of human
occupation would be found along the river and adjacent terraces (see Houk et al. 1999).
The earliest human presence was likely in the Paleoindian period, 11,500-8,800 years
ago. Indicators of such occupation would be spear points of distinctive style and date,
such as Clovis, Folsom, Golondrina, and Angostura. In the following Archaic period
(8,800-1,500 years ago), the Native American population greatly expanded, and their
sites are often found on terraces overlooking local streams. Sites are typified by large
numbers of flint (chert) flakes resulting from tool making, dart points (used on spears
thrown with the spear thrower, or atlatl), and fragments of limestone rock for cooking
and for earth-oven techniques that often result in major accumulations of fire-cracked
rock fragments. It would be expected that sites from the long-lived Archaic would be
indicated by burned rock fragments, burned rock midden, diagnostic spear points and
tools used in wood-working or other tasks, and the flake debris resulting from toolmaking. The Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 500-1700) is most clearly indicated by the
occurrence of tiny arrow points, indicating the introduction of the bow and arrow into
the area around A.D. 500-700. Later in this period, around A.D. 1250-1700, there was a
regional emphasis on bison-hunting, and the material culture from this era is notable for
the presence of pottery and other distinctive artifacts.
With the establishment of the Spanish Colonial missions early in the 18th century, and
the arrival of Lipan Apache raiding parties by the 1720s, the Native American
populations were greatly modified. Those who went into the San Antonio missions,
where they were joined by groups from south Texas and northeast Mexico, continued
their distinctive bone-tempered pottery, along with stone-tool making, throughout the
Spanish Colonial period.

These Native Americans still used the San Antonio River for

hunting and fishing, for plant food gathering, and for short-term occupations. It is

5

likely that established Late Prehistoric campsites along this part of the river would have
been reoccupied at different times after Historic contact. Given the proximity of
Mission San Jose and Mission San Juan Capistrano to the south, there well could be
Historic Native American remains, likely dating to the 1700s, in the project area.

The best known archaeological remains near downtown San Antonio are related to the
Spanish Colonial and early Anglo periods of occupation.

Along the San Antonio

River are the four 18th century Spanish missions that are now part of the San Antonio
Missions National Historical Park and the former mission of San Antonio de Valero
(the Alamo). The missions, and features linked to the missions (such as acequias,
gristmills and dams), have received a great deal of archaeological attention

In

particular, the acequias have been researched extensively, both archival and
archaeological, over the years as part of the planning process for city projects (e.g.,
Frkuska 1979, Cox 1986; Fox and Cox 1990; Nickels and Cox 1996; and the synthesis
by Cox 2005).

Archaeological Sites in the Park Area.

The first comprehensive review of historic and prehistoric cultural resources in the
Brackenridge Park area was carried out by the Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio in 1978 (Katz and Fox 1979). This provided
a baseline view of such resources, some well known and some located during the Katz
and Fox field work.

Along the banks of the San Antonio River from the headwater springs to south San
Antonio are many historic and prehistoric archaeological sites. Just within a kilometer
of the Mulberry Avenue Sidewalk Project are several recorded prehistoric sites. For
example, 41BX264 is a large prehistoric campsite located across the road in the Polo
Field. Site 41BX293 just south of the project area is another prehistoric campsite.
Other nearby sites includes 41BX170, 321, 322, 323, 1425, and 1773. Site 41BX323
has been the most extensively excavated and reported (Houk et al. 1999 see also

6

Meskill and Frederick 1995; Meskill et al. 2000).

It was an area used from Late

PaleoIndian times (Angostura points), into the Early Archaic (Martindale; Guadalupe
tool), Middle Archaic (Pedernales) and Late Archaic (Castroville, Frio) and
intermittently into the Late Prehistoric (Scallorn, Perdiz)

Among the numerous historic sites in the general area of the Park (Katz and Fox
1979), several are of particular relevance to the Mulberry Avenue Project. This
include a section of the Upper Labor acequia exposed near the San Antonio Zoo and
the Upper Labor diversion dam, which provided water to that well known acequia,
found in 1996 (Cox et al. 1999).

With the known archaeological background, the fieldwork by AAC had to consider the
potential for the occurrence of both prehistoric and early historic (Spanish Colonial to
ca. 1870) sites. Because Brackenridge Park is situated partly on the floodplain and
partly on a low terrace, it is a high probability area for buried prehistoric cultural
remains. These remains could date at any time during the long prehistoric period of
occupation in the San Antonio River Valley.

Previous Archaeology of the Upper Labor Acequia

Among the most fascinating remnants of the early period of San Antonio is the system of
acequias. Built in Spanish colonial times, beginning in 1719, there are a number of
different acequias along the San Antonio River and other drainages and springs. It
appears that most acequias were named and drawings exist to show the locations of their
channels (“ditches) over the centuries. The archives hold records that detail the
construction of dams to provide water for the acequias, the ongoing maintenance of the
channels, and the allocation of property along them. The acequia in the area of the
Espada mission remains partly in use today, many others were used until the early 1900s,
and some were shut down beginning in the 1870s, as wells began to provide water for the
city.

7

One very significant acequia system is known as the Upper Labor (Labor Alta) acequia,
construction of which was carried out in 1776-1777. It was 3.5 miles long and irrigated
300 acres in the area between the San Antonio River and San Pedro Creek (see Cox
2005:18-19). Its history is documented in detail in Cox et al. (1999), including details on
the “wingdam” built, in Spanish Colonial times and upgraded in the 19th century, to
divert water into the acequia (see also Cox 2005). The acequia was badly deteriorating
by the 1870s, and much of it was filled with debris by 1904. The Upper Labor acequia
and several other major acequias were shut down shortly thereafter, with city engineers
using some of them as “drainage channels” (Cox et al. 1999).

Except for exposures above the old City Water Works and in the San Antonio Zoo
(ibid.), the route of the Upper Labor acequia is not apparent on the present surface
although its approximate location is known. Prior to the construction of the Mulberry
Avenue sidewalk, we carried out fieldwork to try determining the location of the
acequia so that it would not be damaged during sidewalk construction. In addition, the
City of San Antonio archaeologist requested that the sidewalk route be further tested to
determine if a buried prehistoric archaeological site exists along the construction route
on the terrace west of the river. Site 41BX264, a large prehistoric site, lies across
Mulberry Street in the Polo Field.

Scope of Work
The following tasks were conducted during the course of the work:
1. Conducted background research by consulting relevant maps in an attempt
determine the location of the acequia within the project area.
2. Excavated a backhoe trench at the suspected location of the acequia in order
to confirm its location.
3. Excavated two backhoe trenches between the suspected acequia and the San
Antonio River to determine if buried archaeological deposits exist. All trenches were
backfilled.

8

4. If found, we were to document any archaeological sites and isolated finds
encountered in the survey by obtaining GPS coordinates on the location and plotting
the resources on a project map.
5. We committed to provide interpretations of the survey findings and assess the
significance of any archaeological sites encountered within the project area with regards
to their potential for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places and as a
Texas Archeological Landmark.
6. Prepared this written report detailing the area surveyed, methods
used, archaeological background, historical background, survey findings as specified
under the Texas Antiquities Code to fulfill the TAC permit requirements.

Any diagnostic artifacts encountered were to be drawn or photographed for
documentation. Since completion of field work, we have prepared a written draft
report. This will be submitted to the Texas Historical Commission, Parks and
Recreation Department, and the Historic Preservation Division, for review. The report
is accompanied by a site plan with the investigated areas precisely located.

Results of Investigation
Prior to the field work Hester conducted a background review of the previous
archaeology and history pertinent to the project area. Shafer consulted with Larry Clark
of Bender-Wells-Clark Design at the request of Kay Hindes; Mr. Clark had traced a
portion of the acequiea within and in the proximity of the project area; Mr. Clark also
provided the authors with a copy of the map illustrated in Figure 4. Waynne Cox’s
master map of the San Antonio acequia network was also examined to assess his plotting
of the Upper Labor acequia at Mulberry Avenue.

The surface inspection did not provide any indication as to where the acequia crossed the
path of the sidewalk Therefore, we chose to conduct backhoe testing to locate the
acequia.

9

Three backhoe trenches were excavated in order to fulfill the objectives and scope of
work. The locations are shown in Figure 6, and the trenches will be described
individually.

BHT#1. This 9-meter long, 70 cm wide trench was excavated in an effort to locate the
route of the Upper Labor acequia (Figs. 7 and 8). The UTM coordinates at the west end
of the trench are 14R 55617E/3258695N. It reached a depth of 1.2 meters. It was started
near the western boundary and in the northwest corner of Allison Park where the location
of the acequia was expected based on extant maps. The backhoe soon encountered a
concrete cap of a buried sewer line ca. 50 cm below the surface at the west end of the
trench (Fig. 9). Further investigation showed that this sewer line was dug into the
acequia as the eastern slope of the acequia ditch was detected in the profile, three views
of which are shown below (Figs. 9-11). Prior to the excavation of the sewer line, dead
brush was apparently dumped into the canal and burned and the south profile provides the
best view of this feature (Figs. 9 and 10). Charcoal and ash deposit marked the canal
boundary, and this deposit was intersected by the sewer ditch. Once the sewer line was
capped, and the ditch backfilled, a caliche cap was placed over the sewer line (Figs. 9 and
11). While it is unfortunate that the sewer line fills the acequia at this location, the
practice of placing sewer lines in acequias was not unusual according the COSA
archaeologist Kay Hindes as a similar situation was encountered in the Main Plaza in
downtown San Antonio. Placing sewer lines in acequias made sense from an engineering
standpoint, since the grade was already defined.

Elsewhere in the trench and in addition to the sewer line and acequia, we did detect a
trace of prehistoric material beneath the layer of disturbed fill within an A horizon from a
depth of about 35 to 55 cm below surface (Fig. 10). This trace consisted of several chert
thinning flakes found along the 9-meter long profile and an occasional land snail
(Rabdotus) shell, a species of snail that was a common food source for prehistoric groups
in the region. These materials are unlikely in situ, but are part of a colluvial wash that
originated on the higher terrace slope to the west. Although a couple of burned rocks

10

were found and there was no indication that cultural features such as rock-lined hearths
were present at the location of the backhoe trench. Therefore, we consider the integrity
of the prehistoric material to be lacking.

Beneath the A horizon was a B horizon that graded into a Bk horizon at a depth of about
75 cm below surface with gravels and calcium carbonate. No cultural material was
observed in these deeper deposits.

BHT#2.

This trench was placed about 45 meters east of BHT#1 (at UTM coordinates 14 R
550659E/3258680N) to test for buried prehistoric deposits (Fig. 12). It was about 3
meters long and reached a depth of one meter. The upper 55 cm was badly disturbed and
contained late 20th century trash (bottle glass, plastic, brick fragments, etc.) indicating
efforts to level the park surface. Beneath this was an A horizon consisting of dark grayish
brown clay that was sterile of prehistoric cultural material (Fig. 14).

BHT#3

Located another 75 meters east of BHT#2 (UTM coordinates 14R 550734E/3258659N)
along the sidewalk route, this three meter-long trench reached a depth of 80 cm. A
natural soil profile was encountered beneath an upper disturbed layer that showed the
area has had little disturbance (Fig. 13). The upper 20-25 cm was a dry blocky brown
clay that did contain some evidence of disturbance (broken bottle glass). Beneath this
upper disturbed horizon is an A horizon consisting of very dark brown clayey soil, no
gravel. The B horizon is a very dark brown soil naturally grades into a lighter gray
brown clay soil. No prehistoric cultural material was encountered in this trench.

11

Summary of Investigations
The first objective of the archaeological investigations was to attempt to locate the
acequia that we knew crossed the route of the proposed sidewalk. This objective was
accomplished but with the surprise that the acequia was used to install a sewer line
capped with concrete sometime in the first half of the 20th century. We had no record or
indication that the sewer line was present, but once found, we did locate manholes on the
north side of Mulberry and also at the end of Huisache Street which were both in line
with the location in BHT#1. The profile also showed a trace of the eastern edge of the
acequia which had been cut into by the sewer trench. The bottom of the acequia was
identified by a deposit of charcoal that extended from near the surface at that time along
the sloping ditch surface. Apparently the acequia was partly filled with wood and brush
which was later burned.

Efforts to find buried prehistoric deposits were largely negative. A trace was noted in the
A-horizon soils beneath the disturbed surface east of the acequia. The evidence consisted
of several small chert thinning flakes and an occasional land snail (Rabdotus). There was
no concentrated cultural refuse and only a very few fire-cracked rocks. Because the
deposit in which the flakes were found consisted of colluvium mixed with alluvium, we
considered the flakes as being the result of down slope erosion from a more concentrated
deposit on the higher terrace immediately to the west. For that reason, we did not
consider the cultural material to have any stratigraphic integrity, and was not given a site
number. No further archaeological work is recommended for this project.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge several individuals who aided in this project. Bill
Pennell of the San Antonio Parks and Recreation Department was the department’s liason
and was helpful with the direction of the study. Mr. Larry Clark of Bender-Wells-Clark
Design provided useful information on the location of the acequia within and in
proximity of the project area, and made available the map used in Figure 4. City of San
Antonio archaeologist Kay Hindes also was very helpful in providing information on

12

previous work in the area. Finally, we wish to thank the backhoe operator, Dale Morris
of Boerne, Texas. Dale’s skill and professionalism were greatly appreciated

References Cited
Cox, I. W.
1986

Excavations of Portions of the San Pedro Acequia (41BX337) and a
Search for the Arocha Acequia, San Antonio, Texas. Archaeological
Survey Report 161. Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio.

1999

The Spanish Colonial Acequias of San Antonio. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 70:315-326.

2005

The Spanish Acequias of San Antonio. Maverick Press, San Antonio,
Texas.

Cox, I. W., E. D. Johnson, and C. B. Bousman
1999

Excavations for the Upper Labor Dam Site, BrackenridgePark, San
Antonio, Bexar County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 268. Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Fox, A. A. and I. W. Cox
1990

Archaeological Excavations at the Alamo Acequia, Southwest Hemisfair
Plaza, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report
192. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

Frkuska, A. J., Jr.

13

1981

Archaeological Investigations at the San Pedro Acequia,San Antonio,
Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 103. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio

Guerra, M. N.
1987

The San Antonio River. The Alamo Press, San Antonio.

Houk, B. A., K. A. Miller, R. K. Meadows and C. W. Ringstaff
1999

Archaeological Excavations at 41BX323, Brackenridge Park, San
Antonio, Bexar County, Texas. SWCA Cultural Resource Report 99-67.
Austin, Texas.

Katz, S. and A. A. Fox
1979

Archaeological and Historical Assessment of BrackenridgePark, City of
San Antonio, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 33. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Meskill, F. H. and C. D. Frederick
1995

Archeological Testing at the Witte Museum Science CenterFacility
Construction Site: An Archaeological and Geoarchaeological Study on the
East Bank of the San Antonio River.

Technical Series 48.

Texas

Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Meskill, F. H. , L.C. Shaw and S. L. Black
2000

Excavations at 41BX323, The Witte Museum Parcel: Archaic Period
Occupation on the Banks of the San Antonio River, Bexar County, Texas.
Technical Series 50. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Nickels, D. L. and I. W. Cox

14

1996

An Archaeological Assessment of the Alazan Acequia (41BX620) in the
Five Points Area of San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas. Archaeological
Survey Report 253. Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio.

Taylor, F. B., R. B. Hailey, and D. L. Richmond
1991

Soil Survey of Bexar County. Series 1962, No. 12. Reissued June 1991.
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
Washington, D.C.

15

Figures

W es

t Mu
lberr
y Av
enue
Sidew
alk r o
ute

Allison Park

Figure 1. Aerial view showing the general location of the sidewalk along West
Mulberry avenue.

Figure 2. Plan map of the sidewalk along West Mulberry Avenue.

16

Figure 3. Waynne Cox’s (2005: 21) Map of the Alamo acequia showing the Upper
Labor acequia crossing Mulberry Avenue east of St Marys Street.

17

Location of BHT#1

Figure 4. Map ca. 1920s clearly showing the path of the Upper Labor acequia at the
end of West Mulberry. Map courtesy of Bender Wells Clark Design.

18

Figure 5. This map originally published in Katz and Fox (1979) and revised in
Hauk et al. (1999) shows the location of the Upper Labor acequia relative
to
Mulberry Avenue and the Polo Field.

19

BHT#1

BHT#2
Upper Labor
Acequia

BHT#3

Figure 6. Approximate location of the three backhoe trenches excavated by Abasolo
Archaeological Consultants.

Figure 7. This is a view of BHT#1 looking west showing its relative location to West
Mulberry Street (seen to the right), and the park property line.

20

Figure 8 . A close-up view of BHT#1 shows the location relative to the property line.
The sewer line cap is visible at the west end of the trench.

21

Acequia
Sewer trench

Concrete sewer cap

Figure 9. This view in the south profile of BHT#1 shows the sewer line trench
intruding into the acequia.
0

50

1M

Scale

Surface

Mixed clay fill with glass and plastic
Caliche cap over sewer trench
Gray brown clay
10YR3/2

Charcoal

Sewer line trench wall
Acequia border

Gray brown colluvium, some
gravel, 10YR3/4

Mixed fill over sewer line

Brown colluvium with gravels, 10YR4/2

Concrete cap over sewer line

Unexcavated gravels

Figure 10. Simplified field sketch of the south profile that shows the relationship of
the acequia border to the sewer trench.

22

Acequia
Sewer trench wall

Concrete sewer cap

Figure 11. This figure shows the sewer line trench intruding into the acequia as seen
on the north side of BHT#1.

23

Figure 12. Photo show BHT#2 being excavated.

Dark brown gravely
clay
Very dark brown clay;
some gravel
Lighter brown clay

Figure 13. North profile of BHT#3 showing the stratigraphy.

24

South Profile, BHT#2
Surface

South Profile, BHT#3
Surface

0 cm

Dark brown gravely soil, disturbed
Disturbed brown mixed clay with
glass, plastic, bottle fragments.

10YR 3/2
Very dark brown clay; little gravel
10YR3/1
55 cm

Dark grayish-brown clay

Lighter brown clay
10YR/3/3 to 3/4

10YR 3/2

Unexcavated
Unexcavated

0

50

1m

Scale

Figure 14. Profile sketches of BHT

25

