Cultural Resources Survey
for the Cottonwood Creek Wastewater Collection System
Phase C1 Wastewater Line,
City of Cedar Park, Williamson County, Texas
January 2013
Final Report
Texas Historical Commission
TAC Permit # 6196
Submitted to:
LAN
10801 North Mopac Expressway
Building 1, Suite 120
Austin, Texas 78759
By:
Environmental and Planning Associates, Inc.
7200 Twilight Mesa
Austin, Texas 78737
and
aci consulting
1001 Mopac Circle
Austin, Texas 78746
By:
Robin Benson Barnes, PhD
and Ann M. Scott, PhD, RPA

Abstract
In October and November of 2012, archeologists from aci consulting conducted a
pedestrian survey, shovel testing (n=2), and backhoe trenching (n=3) in accordance with
Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA) and Texas Historical Commission (THC)
guidelines along a 1,200- foot-long by 30-foot wide (0.83 acres) section of a proposed
5,100 foot long wastewater line in Cedar Park, Texas. The remaining 3,900 linear feet of
the proposed wastewater line had either been subject to a previous cultural resources
survey or would be avoided through boring beneath potentially intact cultural deposits. In
addition, archeologists revisited the site 41WM234 Extension, a State Archeological
Landmark (SAL) and National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) eligible portion of site
41WM234 located in the previous surveyed section of the proposed easement, which
would be avoided through boring (Stotts et al. 2007). This work was conducted in
compliance with Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26.20[2]) under Permit #6196. Ann
M. Scott served as Principal Investigator and Robin Benson Barnes served as Project
Archeologist. Records from this investigation will be curated at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory.
No artifacts or intact prehistoric or historic deposits were discovered on the surface or
during sub surface investigations of the 1,200-foot long surveyed segment of the proposed
wastewater line. In addition, an avoidance area for the location of the bore pits was
defined encompassing the portion of site 41WM234 (Extension) that contributes to
eligibility of the site for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places and
designation as a State Archeological Landmark. It was also noted that small section of the
site 41WM234 Extension has been subject to recent looting. Based on the results of this
archeological survey and the avoidance strategies presented in the design of the wastewater
line, no further archeological work is recommended.

i

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract ................................................................................................................................ i
1.0
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................... 1
2.0
BACKGROUND INFORMATION ........................................................................ 4
3.0
REGIONAL HISTORY AND CULTURE CHRONOLOGY ................................. 7
4.0
LITERATURE REVIEW ...................................................................................... 10
5.0
SURVEY METHODOLOGY ............................................................................... 14
6.0
RESULTS OF INVESTIGATION ........................................................................ 15
7.0
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................ 22
8.0
REFERENCES CITED.......................................................................................... 23

List of Tables
Table 1. Regional Prehistoric Chronology of Central Texas.............................................. 7
Table 2. Sites within 1 km of the proposed project alignment ......................................... 10
Table 3. Results of Shovel Tests....................................................................................... 18

List of Figures
Figure 1. Project Area ......................................................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Project Area on Leander 7.5” Topographic Quad ............................................... 3
Figure 3. Soils ..................................................................................................................... 5
Figure 4. Location of previously recorded sites in and adjacent to the APE .................... 13
Figure 5. Location of shovel tests, backhoe trenches, and avoidance area ....................... 16
Figure 6. Setting of ST 1................................................................................................... 17
Figure 7. Location of ST 2 with cut bank of Spanish Oak Creek in the background ....... 17
Figure 8. Cut bank on north side of Spanish Oak Creek across from ST 1 ...................... 19
Figure 9. BHT 1 overview with re-deposited sediment near surface ............................... 20
Figure 10. BHT 2 overview .............................................................................................. 20
Figure 11. Looting at site 41WM234 ................................................................................ 21

Appendix 1: Backhoe trench descriptions

ii

1.0
INTRODUCTION
The City of Cedar Park is proposing to construct this wastewater line for the Cottonwood
Creek Wastewater Collection System Phase C1 project in order to eliminate an existing
lift station and provide sewer service for future development. This cultural resources
survey evaluates a 1,200-foot long portion of a 5,100 foot long by 30 foot wide alignment
easement of which over half is in existing road right-of way (ROW) or has been subject
to previous investigations (Figure 1).
The proposed alignment begins in the western ROW of Ronald W. Reagan Blvd.
approximately 400 feet south of CR 272. The alignment then extends south within the
ROW for approximately 2,000 feet to Spanish Oak Creek. The pipeline will be bored
southeast underneath Ronald W. Reagan Boulevard and Spanish Oak Creek to the eastern
ROW. There it will be placed just outside of the eastern ROW to avoid previously
installed utility lines existing in the ROW. This part of the pipeline adjacent to the ROW
traverses south for approximately 500 feet before turning to the east and paralleling
Spanish Oak Creek for approximately 2,000 feet, of which the southern 200 feet will be
bored. The alignment then parallels RM 1431 within the RM 1431 TXDOT ROW and
travels east for approximately 400 feet across Spanish Oak Creek and Brushy Creek. A
150-foot stub of the pipeline extends to the northeast across Spanish Oak Creek to a
privately-owned tract. The stub is located 300 feet south of the Ronald W. Reagan Blvd.
bore location.
This investigation consists of an intensive archeological survey of the portion of the
proposed the Cottonwood Creek Wastewater Collection System Phase C1 line
(approximately 1,200 linear feet) that is not in existing road ROW or previously
investigated by archeologists, pursuant to the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC
26.20[2]) (See Figure 1). The Area of Potential Effects (APE) consists of this 1,200-foot
long by 30-foot wide section of the proposed wastewater line. Portions of the proposed
alignment near Spanish Oak Creek intersect areas of known significant archeological
resources that may be eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP) or for listing as a State Archeological Landmark (SAL). These areas are
proposed to be bored and will not be subject to additional field investigations. The
section of the proposed alignment that was subject to this intensive cultural resources
survey includes the portion that parallels Spanish Oak Creek between the area of previous
investigation (Stotts et al. 2007) and the Ronald W. Reagan Blvd ROW (Nash et al.
2002).
The overall investigation includes pedestrian survey, photography, subsurface testing
(shovel testing/backhoe trenching), site recording and site relocation, basic archival
research and NRHP and SAL eligibility assessment, data analysis, and report preparation
in accordance with THC and CTA standards, and Section 106 compliance for Section 404
of the Clean Water Act.
1

2.0

BACKGROUND INFORMATION

2.1
Environmental Setting
The project area is located in central Texas in the south end of the Lampasas Cut Plain.
The Lampasas Cut Plain is characterized by rolling hills bisected by the Brazos River and
its tributaries to form broad, shallow valleys. In this region, the hills provide
approximately 30 meters of relief along the creeks. Karst features including sinks, caves,
and rock shelters are present but not common. (Collins and Mear 1998)
Hydrologically, Spanish Oak Creek flows into Brushy Creek just to the south of the
project area. Brushy Creek flows east/northeast eventually reaching the Brazos River
(Collins and Mear 1998).
The Blackland Prairie lies just to the east of the project area on the eastern side of the
Balcones Escarpment, a fault zone with hills to the west and north and low relief to the
east and south. The Blackland Prairie supports prairie vegetation along with small woods
often found along low gradient streams. The Edwards Plateau is located just to the south
of the project area. This region differs from the Lampasas Cut Plain in that the stream cut
valleys are more deeply incised. Springs, karstic sinks, caves, and rock shelters are
characteristic of the region.
Prehistoric and historic peoples living in the region would have had access to resources of
the Blackland Prairie and Edwards Plateau in addition to Lampasas Cut Plain resources.
The diversity of biotic resources found in this ecotonal region would have been very
high. In addition, there is access to reliable water sources as well as chert for making
stone tools.
2.2
Soils
Soils in this area are classified as Denton-Eckrant-Doss Association (Figure 3). This
association is comprised of very shallow to moderately deep, calcareous, clayey soils that
often contain cobbly and stony inclusions. They are formed from fractured limestone or
limy earth. Upland soils along the rounded hilltops are thin to absent on the bedrock.
Valley floors contain shallow to deep clayey to loamy soils. Soils types (SCS 1974)
include:
Denton silty clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes. (DnB) – This soil is found in narrow
drainageways and shallow valleys. The surface layer is dark brown silt clay roughly 33
inches thick. The following layer is very pale brown silty clay loam that extends to a
depth of about 36 inches with an underlying fractured limestone. The available water
capacity is medium. The permeability is slow due to the shallow depth of the limestone.

4

Eckrant cobbly clay, 1 to 8 percent slopes. (EaD) – This soil is generally found in
irregular shapes on undulating uplands. The surface layer is a dark grayish brown cobbly
layer approximately 13 inches thick. The underlying material in this soil is calcareous and
moderately alkaline and consists of coarsely fractured indurated limestone. The soil is
moderately permeable as long as it does not dry out to the point of cracking. It is well
drained and the available water capacity is very low.
Eckrant-Rock, outcrop complex, rolling. (ErE) – This complex occupies uplands and rock
outcrop on hills and the ridges of drainageways. The surface layer is moderately alkaline
and calcareous with a layer of dark grayish-brown silty clay loam about 8 inches thick.
The underlying material is pale-brown clay loam. This unit is slowly permeable, and the
available water capacity is very low.
Oakalla soils, frequently flooded. (Of) – This calcareous and moderately permeable soil
occupies long, narrow bottom lands. The upper layer is dark grayish-brown for the first
34 inches, followed by a sandier material in the lower layers. The subsoil material to a
depth of 60 inches is grayish brown clay loam. This soil is moderately permeable and has
a high available water capacity.
Sunev silty clay loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes. (SuA) – Found along smooth stream terraces
in long narrow to irregular 25 to 75 acre areas. The surface layer is grayish-brown silty
clay loam about 18 inches thick. It overlies a layer to 60 inches of yellowish-brown in
the upper most part and reddish-yellow in the lower. The soil is calcareous and
moderately alkaline and is well drained with moderate permeability and moderate
available water capacity.
Sites with intact cultural deposits have been found primarily in the clays and clay loams
located along creeks as shown by a group of sites near the intersection of Brushy Creek
and Spanish Oak Creek (41WM234, 41WM235, 41WM964). While cultural resources
have been found in the uplands atop Eckrant cobbly clay, these sites generally do not
have intact deposits due to lack of deposition. Upland sites have often been subject to
erosion and redeposition while intact sites are palimpsests.
2.3
Geology
Bedrock in the area includes three Cretaceous formations: the Comanche Peak Formation
(Kc), Edwards Limestone (Ked), and Keys Valley Marl (Kkv). Edwards Limestone caps
the Comanche Peak Formation in the uplands. The Comanche Peak Formation is
exposed in the drainage basins. In some of the drainage basins, Keys Valley Marl, which
lies below the Comanche Peak Formation, is the bedrock. The Edwards consists of hard
micritic limestone beds which may contain chert deposits. The Comanche Peak is
composed of fine-grained, fossiliferous, medium hard, nodular limestone. The Keys

6

centered on the live-oak savanna, while a shift in emphasis toward xerophytes may have
occurred during xeric intervals.
The Late Prehistoric saw the migration of several new linguistic groups, primarily from
the Great Plains, into the region. The introduction of ceramics into the archeological
record takes place in the region during this time as well. The movement of Europeans
inland from the coast and north from Mexico ended the prehistoric era.
3.2
Historic Background
Historic exploration and settlement of the Williamson County area began in the late
seventeenth and early eighteenth century when Spanish explorers traveled through the
region searching for better routes to the missions in East Texas. Captain Alonso De León
followed the Camino Real from San Antonio to Bastrop several times during the 1680s,
and, at least once, he traveled on the Camino de Arriba, which crossed Brushy Creek and
the San Gabriel River. In 1716, Louis Juchereau de St. Denis, a French explorer, and
Captain Domingo Ramon, a Spanish explorer, led an expedition through the area and
camped on the banks of Brushy Creek and the San Gabriel River. They named them
Arroyo do las Bendítas Ánimas and Rio de San Xavier, respectively. In 1721, Marques
de Aguayo led a large group of soldiers, livestock, and provisions through present-day
Williamson County to replenish supplies at the eastern missions. In the mid-eighteenth
century, the San Xavier missions were established along the San Gabriel River, just east
of the Williamson/Milam County line. By 1753, drought and disease made the missions
uninhabitable and Spanish influence in the area declined (Odintz 2002).
Anglo-American influence in the area began with a series of land grants from the
Mexican government in the late-eighteenth and early-nineteenth century. In 1835,
continual attacks by local Indians prompted Captain John J. Tumlinson and his company
of Texas Rangers to construct a fort and Indian lookout near the headwaters of Brushy
Creek, in southwestern Williamson County. Tumlinson Fort, as it was called, was
abandoned in 1836 when General Santa Ana invaded Texas (Odintz 2002).
Following the defeat of General Santa Ana at the Battle of San Jacinto, several veterans
of the battle settled in Williamson County. In 1838, Dr. Thomas Kenney and his family
built a fort on Brushy Creek, in what is now eastern Williamson County. Kenney’s Fort
became the first civilian settlement in Williamson County. By the 1840s, several
settlements existed along Brushy Creek. However, Indian attacks were a frequent
problem, and numerous settlers, including Kenney, were killed by Indians. By 1846, the
Indian threat had waned and settlement in the region increased. In 1848, the Texas
legislature established Williamson County, naming it after Robert Williamson, a Milam
County Judge and state senator.

8

By 1850, the county had a population of 1,379 whites and 155 slaves. Most of the
population was located in the eastern part of the county on Brushy Creek and the San
Gabriel (Odintz 2002), but a few families were living in the western half. During the
1850’s and 1860’s, towns, lumber mills, and tanneries sprang up around the county.
Although urbanization and industrialization increased somewhat, the bulk of the county
remained rural and agricultural. The majority of the families lived on subsistence farms
in log houses and raised corn. During the 1850s and early 1860s, the slave population
increased and the agricultural patterns within the county became more diverse. Wheat
and corn were the predominant crops in the Blackland prairies, and cattle and sheep
ranching was widespread throughout the county. Cotton was introduced in 1850s, but it
was not a significant cash crop.
The economy of Williamson County slumped during the Civil War, but picked up again
in the 1870s with the growth of the cattle and sheep industry and the expansion of cotton
farming. The cattle industry was sustained by the Chisholm trail, which was established
in 1864 and passed close to Round Rock. Many cattle drives passed through or
originated in Williamson County. The 1870s and 1880s was also marked by the arrival
of railroads to Williamson County (Odintz 2002).
By the early-twentieth century, cotton farming had preceded the cattle industry. With the
dramatic growth in cotton farming, a shift in farm tenancy developed. As late as 1880,
77 percent of the farms were still worked by owners. By 1890, 43 percent of the farms
were worked by owners. By 1930, only 29 percent of the farms were worked by owners.
The tenancy rates continued to drop during the Great Depression (Odintz 2002).
The cotton industry suffered economically during the 1920s from the effects of soil
depletion, falling prices brought on by overproduction, and the boll weevil infestation.
The Great Depression of the 1930s worsened the economic situation and encouraged
farmers to shift away from cotton to livestock. Cotton production was reduced by nearly
half, while sorghum and wheat became important crops. Along with cattle and sheep,
poultry farming intensified (Odintz 2002).
Significant population and economic changes occurred in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s.
The construction and expansion of roads throughout the undeveloped areas of
Williamson County meant urban populations now had easier access to the Hill Country
and vice versa. The consolidation of rural schools also meant children could now attend
schools outside of their rural communities. For example, during the 1910s and 1920s,
Rock House School was one of the largest schools in Williamson County. In 1903, the
school boasted a population of 96 students and 2 teachers. The school was consolidated
with Liberty Hill School in 1947, and by the 1990s, Rock House had become a dispersed
agricultural community.

9

within the RM 1431 ROW, where no contributing archeological components are present,
while the northern bore pit was recommended to be placed 50 feet north of the site
“extension” boundary. It was also recommended that this portion of the site be protected
from vehicular traffic by fencing during the construction phase. Intact cultural deposits
were not found in any of the backhoe trenches in the remainder of site 41WM234 located
within the proposed alignment, and the wastewater line was recommended to be installed
via open trenching for the remainder of the proposed alignment. Although the cultural
resources investigation was completed for the project, the 2007 wastewater line was
never installed.
Site 41WM234 is adjacent to two other sites with intact prehistoric cultural deposits,
Sites 41WM235 and 41WM964 (see Figure 4). Site 41WM235, the Wilson-Leonard
Site, is a Paleoindian, multi-component prehistoric SAL recorded south of RM 1431
(Collins 1998). Site 41WM964, which contains a Late Prehistoric component, is located
in between Spanish Oak Creek and Brushy Creek north of RM 1431. Site 41WM964 has
also been recommended as eligible for inclusion on the NRHP (Brownlow 2001). The
boundaries for site 41WM964 do not extend into the RM 1431 ROW. The portion of the
APE within the TXDOT ROW adjacent to site 41WM964 has been extensively modified
by road construction, construction of a culvert for Spanish Oak Creek, and the placement
of pipelines within the ROW.
The northern sections of the proposed Cottonwood Creek wastewater alignment fall
within the ROW of Ronald W. Reagan Blvd. (See Figure 1). This section of the
proposed wastewater alignment was previously subjected to an intensive cultural
resources survey prior to construction of Ronald W. Reagan Blvd. by Nash et al. (2002)
where eight new sites (both of prehistoric and historic age) were recorded. Two historic
sites were recommended as eligible for inclusion on the NRHP (41WM1033 and
41WM1034); neither one of these sites are near the proposed wastewater alignment and
fall outside of the one kilometer buffer of the proposed project area. Two other historic
sites, 41WM1031 and 41WM1032, that are not recommended as NRHP eligible, are
located within one kilometer of the proposed wastewater alignment; however, no sites
were discovered within the location of the currently proposed wastewater alignment.
The reports from projects conducted within one kilometer of the proposed alignment and
cited in Table 2 are listed in the References Cited section.
In addition to these reports, a TXDOT letter report by Ross Fields of Prewitt &
Associates including the results of a survey of Parmer Lane south of FM 1431 for Permit
#2718 was written in 2003.

12

5.0
SURVEY METHODOLOGY
Pedestrian Survey
A 100% pedestrian survey of the portion of the wastewater alignment, which had not
been subject to previous archeological survey, was conducted to locate any archeological
or historical sites that may be adversely affected by construction of the wastewater line.
Methodologies of sub-surface testing consisted of shovel testing (n=2) and backhoe
trenching (n=3) depending on the depth of deposits and likelihood of encountering deeply
buried, intact cultural remains.
Survey methods complied with THC/ CTA survey standards for the overall project area.
A pedestrian survey of the APE was conducted to locate any archeological or historical
sites that may be adversely affected by construction. The subject area was walked in
parallel transects spaced no greater than 30 meters apart.
No new sites were discovered eliminating the need for additional shovel tests to delimit
site boundaries, the recording of diagnostic artifacts, the submission TexSite
Archaeological Data Collection forms (digital) for submittal to TARL, and evaluation of
sites for potential significance, NRHP inclusion or SAL listing eligibility. The portion of
site 41WM234 within the APE was re-evaluated and a site revisit form will be filed at
TARL.
Subsurface Examination
Shovel Tests
Shovel tests were excavated in settings with low ground visibility and the potential for
buried cultural horizons. Two shovel tests were excavated in area with relatively shallow
deposition while backhoe trenches were excavated in areas with deeper deposits. The
shovels tests were at least 30 centimeters (cm) in diameter and excavated to the bottom of
Holocene deposits. The shovel tests were dug in levels no thicker than 20 cm, and the
excavated sediments were screened through ¼-inch hardware cloth.
Deep Soil Testing
As required by the THC minimum standards, backhoe trenching was used to test for
archeological deposits in areas with deposition too deep to be assessed through shovel
testing. Three backhoe trenches were dug in order to adequately examine deposits along
Spanish Oak Creek east of the section of the proposed alignment parallel to Ronald
Reagan Blvd. This testing was monitored by two archeologists, one who examined the
progress in the trench examining the walls for cultural materials and one who examined
the sediments being removed. Trench data was recorded and described. Photographs of
trench walls were taken.

14

6.0
RESULTS OF INVESTIGATION
In summary, a pedestrian survey of an approximately 1200 feet of the 30 foot wide
segment of the proposed easement was conducted. The original research design
submitted with the permit application included the survey of 2,500 feet of the proposed
easement. However, construction plans were changed to avoid site 41WM234 by boring
beneath any potentially intact deposits and moving the line to the TxDOT ROW to avoid
potentially intact portions of site 41WM964 thus eliminating 1,300 feet from the cultural
resources survey.
Two shovel tests were dug in the portion of the APE parallel to Ronald Reagan
Boulevard and three backhoe trenches were excavated in the portion of the APE parallel
to Spanish Oak Creek (Figure 5). No cultural material was observed on the surface,
within the shovel tests, or in the backhoe trenches.
The portion of the proposed easement east of and parallel to Ronald Reagan Blvd. is on a
terrace of Spanish Oak Creek that is slightly lower in elevation than the remainder of the
proposed easement paralleling Spanish Oak Creek. Downed brush and trash in
understory shrub indicate that the area is in a higher energy environment due to run off
during rain events or flooding of Spanish Oak Creek. Due to the position of the easement
in a relatively narrow strip of land between Ronald Reagan Blvd. and the cut bank of
Spanish Oak Creek, there was not enough space to accommodate a backhoe. In order to
adequately assess the deposits, two shovel tests were excavated and the cut banks of
Spanish Oak Creek were examined and photographed.
The first shovel test (ST 1) was dug at the intersection of the main portion of the
proposed easement and the spur that crossed Spanish Oak Creek (Figure 6). The shovel
test was dug to 60 cm below surface where dense gravels were encountered. The
deposits appeared to be intact with lighter sediments containing more carbonates found
below the dark sediments. No artifacts were observed. The second shovel test (ST 2)
was dug toward the northwest end of the proposed easement east of Ronald Reagan Blvd
(Figure 7). Gravels were encountered near the surface and wire from a fence was
discovered 10 cm below the surface. The shovel test results are summarized in Table 3.

15

Figure 6. Setting of ST 1

Figure 7. Location of ST 2 with cut bank of Spanish Oak Creek in the background
17

Figure 8. Cut bank on north side of Spanish Oak Creek across from ST 1
The three backhoe trenches were excavated within the proposed easement near the banks
of Spanish Oak Creek. A trench was excavated at both ends and in the middle of the
portion of the easement requiring deep soil testing. No artifacts or other evidence of
cultural activity was found in the backhoe profiles or the screened samples. Complete
descriptions of the backhoe trenches are found in Appendix 1.
The first backhoe trench, BHT 1, was dug where Spanish Oak Creek begins to diverge
from Ronald Reagan Blvd. This trench was located fairly close to the Ronald Reagan
Blvd. ROW (see Figure 5). The two other backhoe trenches were evenly spaced along
the remaining portion of the easement. The trenches were placed perpendicular to
Spanish Oak Creek and are oriented basically north to south. All three trenches showed
similar profiles with dark black to very dark grayish brown sediment grading toward
more yellow sediment underlain by gravel layers and increased carbonates down to the
caliche bedrock (Figures 9 and 10). A layer of re-deposited older sediment was found on
the surface of BHT 1 likely as a result of roadway or pipeline construction in the adjacent
easement.

19

Figure 9. BHT 1 overview with re-deposited sediment near surface

Figure 10. BHT 2 overview

20

In addition to the intensive cultural resources survey of the segment requiring a
pedestrian survey and subsurface testing, archeologists from aci consulting walked
transects along the remainder of the proposed easement east of Ronald Reagan Blvd.
south to RM 1431. Much of this segment had been previously surveyed for cultural
resources (Stotts et al. 2007) (see Figure 5). No artifacts or other evidence of prehistoric
or historic occupation were noted with the exception of previously recorded site
41WM234. Most of site 41WM234 Extension is located outside the proposed easement
and is now covered with a deep layer of gravel fill. A small section of the site can be
observed on the surface on the edge of the bank of Spanish Oak Creek (see Figures 5 and
11). Stotts et al. (2007) also noted that the site was exposed in this same location five
years ago. This sliver of the site has not gone unnoticed and was pocked with looter’s
pits. Non diagnostic lithic artifacts had been stacked in piles, including a large piles
sitting on tree stumps. Shell and burned rock were scattered on the surface and in the
back dirt. The sharp edges of one of the pits appeared to have been dug within the
previous two weeks following the most recent rain.

Figure 11. Looting at site 41WM234

21

Based on the mapped location of the site 41WM234 Extension (Stotts et al. 2007) and a
re-visit of this portion of the site, an avoidance area has been defined to restrict any
further disturbances at the site (see Figure 5). Activities to be avoided include ground
disturbing activities such as open trenching, the placement of the bore pits, and vehicular
traffic.
7.0
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
In advance of the construction of a proposed wastewater line in Cedar Park, Texas,
archeologists from aci consulting conducted a pedestrian survey, shovel testing (n=2),
and backhoe trenching (n=3) in accordance with CTA and THC guidelines along a 1,200foot-long by 30-foot wide (0.83 acres) section of the proposed wastewater line. The
remainder of the proposed wastewater line had either been subject to a previous cultural
resources survey or would be avoided through boring beneath potentially intact cultural
deposits. This work was conducted in compliance with Texas Administrative Code (13
TAC 26.20[2]) under Permit #6196. No artifacts or intact prehistoric or historic deposits
were discovered. In addition, an avoidance area around the site 41WM234 Extension
was defined. Based on the results of this archeological survey, no further archeological
work is recommended.

22

8.0
REFERENCES CITED
Brownlow, Russ
2001 An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey and Subsequent Testing Along a
Proposed Water/Wastewater Line Within the Northern Right-of-Way of FM 1431
East, Williamson County, Texas. Horizon Environmental Consultants. Permit#
2385, Permit #2433.
Collins, Michael B.
1995 Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Volume 66.
Collins, Michael B. (editor)
1998 Wilson-Leonard: An 11,000-year Archeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers in
Central Texas, Volumes I-V. Studies in Archeology 31, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin. Archeology Studies
Program Report 10, Texas Department of Transportation Environmental Affairs
Division. Texas Antiquities Committee Permit Number 300.
Collins, Michael B. and C.E. Mear
1998 The Site and Its Setting in Wilson-Leonard: An 11,000-year Archeological
Record of Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas, Volumes I-V. Studies in
Archeology 31, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at
Austin. Archeology Studies Program Report 10, Texas Department of
Transportation Environmental Affairs Division. Texas Antiquities Committee
Permit Number 300.
Keller, John E.
1998 A Cultural Resources Assessment and Archaeological Survey of a Proposed
Cedar Park Wastewater Pipeline, Williamson County, Texas. Report prepared for
Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. by Southern Archaeological Consultants,
Inc. Permit #1907
Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1999 Addendum to Cultural Resources Assessment and Archeological Survey of a
Proposed Cedar Park Wastewater Pipeline, Williamson County, Texas. Permit
#1907
Iruegas, Sergio A. and Melinda T. Iruegas
2007 An Intensive Archeology Survey of Kitchell Development’s Proposed
Development at FM 1431 and Parmer Lane, Williamson County, Texas. GTI
Environmental, Inc.
23

Leezer, Carole and Eric Oksanen
2006 Archaeological Evaluation of the Southwestern Portion of the Wilson-Leonard
State Archaeological Landmark (41WM235), Williamson County, Texas. Center
for Archaeological Studies Technical Report No. 24. Texas State University, San
Marcos, Texas. Permit #4181
Nash, Sean R., Gregory D. Staples, and Martha Doty Freeman
2002 Cultural Resource Survey of the Parmer Lane Extension Project, FM 1431 to FM
2243, Williamson County, Texas. Archaeological and Cultural Sciences Group,
Austin, Texas. Permit #2736
Odintz, Mark
2002 Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Williamson County”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/WW/hcw11_print.html
Owens, Jeffrey D.
2007 Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the North Brushy Creek Interceptor
Extension, Phase 1, Cedar Park, Williamson County, Texas. Permit #4374
(SCS) Soil Conservation Survey
1974 Soil Survey of Williamson County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture. Texas Agriculture Experiment Station.
Stotts, Matthew C., Rachel Feit, and Mason Miller
2007 Results of Archeological Investigations for a Proposed Wastewater Line Along
Spanish Oak Creek in Williamson County, Texas. Archeology Series No. 192.
Hicks & Company, Austin, Texas. Permit #4615

24

Appendix 1: Backhoe trench descriptions
BHT 1 (5 m in length, 90 cm in width, average depth of 1 m)
Strat 1: dark, yellowish brown; loose, mostly gravels, likely re-deposited from pipeline
or road construction; some rootlets; 10 cm thickness
Munsell: 10YR4/4 dark yellowish brown
% Lithics: 90
Distinct boundary
Strat 2: black, chunky clay with larger roots; 26 cm in thickness
Munsell: 10YR 2/1 black
% Lithics: <5
Gradual boundary
Strat 3: gradual change to redder sediments; dark brown friable clay with snail shell
fragments; 10 cm in thickness
Munsell: 10YR3/3 dark brown
% Lithics: <5, tiny to small gravels
Gradual boundary
Strat 4: yellowish brown gravels and sand similar to re-deposited fill in Strat 1;
carbonates; 26 cm in thickness
Munsell 10YR5/4 yellowish brown
% Lithics: 80
Gradual boundary
Strat 5: larger gravels in compact caliche; 32 cm to bottom of trench where bedrock was
exposed
Munsell: 10YR7/2 light gray
% Lithics: 80-90
BHT 2 (4.8 m in length, 90 cm in width, average depth of 1 m)
Strat 1: loamy clay with roots; very dark grayish brown; slightly gritty; 12 cm in
thickness
Munsell: 10YR3/2 very dark grayish brown
% Lithics: <5
Gradual boundary
Strat 2: black clay; chunky and friable with large roots; 20-28 cm in thickness
Munsell: 10YR3/1 very dark gray
% Lithics: <5
Distinct boundary
Strat 3: fine silty clay with grit; interbedded sediments; friable with snail shell fragments
and small gravels; 10-25 cm in thickness
Munsell: 10YR4/3 brown
% Lithics: 40
Distinct boundary
Strat 4: mostly loose gravel in a matrix of fine silty clay; 5-15 cm in thickness
25

Munsell: 10YR 4/3 brown
% Lithics:70
Gradual boundary
Strat 5: compact gravels; mostly gravel with caliche; 30 cm in thickness
Munsell: 10YR 6/3 pale brown
% Lithics: 90
Distinct boundary
Stat 6: caliche; almost solid carbonates; over 50 cm exposed
Munsell: 10YR7/4 very pale brown
% Lithics <5

BHT 3 (5.2 m in length, 95 cm in width, average depth of 1.8 m)
Strat 1: dark loamy clay with roots; 6 cm in thickness
Munsell: 10YR3/2 very dark grayish brown
<5% Lithics
Gradual boundary
Strat 2: dark friable clay with shell fragments similar to Strat 2 in BHT 2; 15 cm in
thickness
Munsell: 10YR3/1 very dark gray
<5% Lithics
Gradual boundary
Strat 3: reddish friable clay; lighter in color that Strat 2; gravels with shell; 12 cm in
thickness
Munsell: 10YR4/3 brown
<5% Lithics
Distinct boundary
Strat 4: Loose gravels; 25 cm in thickness
Munsell: 10YR6/3 pale brown
80% Lithics
Strat 5: compact gravels; 48 cm in thickness
Munsell: 10YR6/3 pale brown
90% Lithics
Distinct boundary
Strat 6: compact, yellowish caliche; 65 cm exposed
Munsell: 10YR6/4 light yellowish brown
0% Lithics

26

