Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant
Improvements Project,
Converse, Bexar County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8720
H030-190011

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

CP&Y, Inc.
Austin, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

January 2019

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the
Proposed Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant
Improvements Project,
Converse, Bexar County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

CP&Y, Inc.
One Countryside Place
12500 San Pedro Avenue, Suite 450
San Antonio, Texas 78216

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 S. Interstate 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
H030-190011

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8720

January 2019

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by CP&Y, Inc. (CP&Y) to
conduct an intensive cultural resources inventory and assessment for the proposed Salitrillo
Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) Improvements Project. The San Antonio River Authority’s
(SARA) existing Salitrillo WWTP is located at 9638 Schaefer Road in Converse, Bexar County,
Texas. SARA’s property at this location covers an area of approximately 15.4 hectares
(38.0 acres), while the existing Salitrillo WWTP covers an area of approximately 6.3 hectares
(15.6 acres). For purposes of the cultural resources survey, the project area is considered to
consist of the entire 15.4-hectare (38.0-acre) tract, including the existing 6.3-hectare (15.6-acre)
WWTP facility and the surrounding 9.1 hectares (22.4 acres) of undeveloped land.
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by SARA, a political subdivision of the state
of Texas; as such, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas
(Natural Resources Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). At this time, no federal permits, licenses, or
funds have been identified for the project. As the project represents a publicly sponsored
undertaking, the project sponsor is required to provide the Texas Historical Commission (THC),
which serves as the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) for the state of Texas, with an
opportunity to review and comment on the project’s potential to adversely affect historic properties
listed on or considered eligible for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL).
On January 16, 2019, Horizon archeologists Briana Nicole Smith and Emily McCurdy
conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. The survey was conducted
under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, under Texas Antiquities
Permit no. 8720. The purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural resources that
potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s archeologists traversed
the tract and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age
cultural resources. The project area is situated on the terraces and uplands adjacent to Salitrillo
Creek, which flows through the western portion of the property. The existing WWTP facility has
been extensively disturbed via the construction, use, and ongoing maintenance of the existing
industrial facilities, including sewage treatment ponds, process equipment, administrative
buildings, parking lots, and driveways. The remainder of the property surrounding the existing
facility is relatively open, consisting of short to tall grasses and scattered trees. A linear earthen
embankment measuring approximately 1.8 meters (6.0 feet) in height frames the western margin
of the tract along the western bank of Salitrillo Creek. Linear furrows were observed on the

H030-190011

v

Management Summary

modern ground surface in the eastern portion of the project area, suggesting that portion of the
tract has been under cultivation in the past, though the landscape was overgrown and not under
active cultivation at the time of the survey. Visibility of the modern ground surface was typically
less than 30%.
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of two shovel tests per acre for project areas between
4.5 and 40.5 hectares (11.0 and 100.0 acres) in size. As such, a minimum of 19 shovel tests
would be required within the 15.4-hectare (38.0-acre) project area. Horizon excavated a total of
16 shovel tests during the survey, all of which were excavated within the 9.1 hectares (22.4 acres)
of undeveloped land surrounding the existing WWTP. The extent of prior disturbances within the
existing WWTP argued against shovel testing in this area. Thus, while the TSMASS requirements
were not quite met for the project area as a whole, they were exceeded for the undeveloped
portion of the overall property that has the highest potential to contain cultural resources. Shovel
testing typically revealed clay loam, gravelly clay loam, and gravelly clay transitioning to dense
clay at depths ranging from 15.0 to 25.0 centimeters (5.9 to 9.8 inches) below surface, though
dense clay sediments were observed on the modern ground surface in many areas. Sediments
in more than half of the shovel tests were mottled and exhibited signs of disturbance. It is
Horizon’s opinion that sediments with the potential to contain subsurface archeological deposits
were fully penetrated and that the project area was adequately assessed for cultural resources.
Modern garbage is relatively abundant within the Salitrillo Creek channel, though no
cultural resources of historic or prehistoric age were observed on the modern ground surface or
within any of the shovel tests excavated within the project area during the survey.
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified within the project
area that meet the criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26. Horizon recommends
a finding of “no historic properties affected,” and no further archeological work is recommended
in connection with the proposed undertaking. However, human burials, both prehistoric and
historic, are protected under the Texas Health and Safety Code. In the event that any human
remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or
ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should
cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent discovery, and the THC should be notified
immediately.

vi

190011_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... v

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 7
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 7
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 8
2.3
Climate .......................................................................................................... 8
2.4
Biota.............................................................................................................11

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................13
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (ca. 12,000 to 8,500 years B.P.) ....................................13
3.2
Archaic Period (ca. 8,500 to 1,200 years B.P.) .............................................14
3.3
Late Prehistoric Period (ca. 1,200 to 350 years B.P.) ...................................14
3.4
Historic Period (ca. 350 years B.P. to Present) ............................................14

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ..........................................................................................21

5.0

SURVEY METHODOLOGY .....................................................................................25

6.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................33

7.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................35
7.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................35
7.2
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Antiquities Landmark........................36
7.3
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................37
7.4
Management Recommendations ..................................................................38

8.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................39
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

H030-190011

vii

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.
Figure 10.
Figure 11.
Figure 12.
Figure 13.

Vicinity Map of Project Area ...................................................................................... 2
Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Map ............................................... 3
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ......................................................... 4
Soils Mapped within Project Area ............................................................................. 9
Locations of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area ...................22
Overview of Existing WWTP (Facing South) ............................................................26
Overview of Existing WWTP (Facing North).............................................................26
Administrative Building on Existing WWTP (Facing East) ........................................27
Existing Outfall on Salitrillo WWTP (Facing East) ....................................................27
Salitrillo Creek in Western Portion of Project Area (Facing South-Southeast) ..........28
Artificial Berm along Western Margin of Project Area (Facing West) ........................28
Overview of Undeveloped Southern Portion of Project Area (Facing West) .............29
Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Project Area ........................................30

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 1.
Table 2.

viii

Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area ........................................................10
Summary of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area ...................23

190011_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by CP&Y, Inc. (CP&Y) to
conduct an intensive cultural resources inventory and assessment for the proposed Salitrillo
Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) Improvements Project. The San Antonio River Authority’s
(SARA) existing Salitrillo WWTP is located at 9638 Schaefer Road in Converse, Bexar County,
Texas. SARA’s property at this location covers an area of approximately 15.4 hectares
(38.0 acres), while the existing Salitrillo WWTP covers an area of approximately 6.3 hectares
(15.6 acres). For purposes of the cultural resources survey, the project area is considered to
consist of the entire 15.4-hectare (38.0-acre) tract, including the existing 6.3-hectare (15.6-acre)
WWTP facility and the surrounding 9.1 hectares (22.4 acres) of undeveloped land (Figures 1
to 3).
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by SARA, a political subdivision of the state
of Texas; as such, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas
(Natural Resources Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). At this time, no federal permits, licenses, or
funds have been identified for the project. As the project represents a publicly sponsored
undertaking, the project sponsor is required to provide the Texas Historical Commission (THC),
which serves as the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) for the state of Texas, with an
opportunity to review and comment on the project’s potential to adversely affect historic properties
listed on or considered eligible for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL).
On January 16, 2019, Horizon archeologists Briana Nicole Smith and Emily McCurdy
conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. The survey was conducted
under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, under Texas Antiquities
Permit no. 8720. The purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural resources that
potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking. The cultural resources investigation
consisted of an archival review, an intensive pedestrian survey of the project area, and the
production of a report suitable for review by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in
accordance with the THC’s Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the
Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports.
Following this introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and
cultural backgrounds, respectively, of the project area. Chapter 4.0 describes the results of
background archival research, and Chapter 5.0 discusses cultural resources survey methods.

H030-190011

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Vicinity Map of Project Area

2

190011_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Map

H030-190011

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 3. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph
4

190011_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

Chapter 6.0 presents the results of the cultural resources survey, and Chapter 7.0 presents
cultural resources management recommendations for the project. Chapter 8.0 lists the
references cited in the report, and Appendix A summarizes shovel test data.

H030-190011

5

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located within the community of Converse in eastern Bexar County in
south-central Texas near the common junction of three significant physiographic provinces—the
Edwards Plateau, the Balcones Canyonlands, and the Gulf Coastal Plain. The Edwards Plateau
and Balcones Escarpment are associated with a great fault system that arcs across Texas to form
a distinct boundary between uplands composed primarily of limestone bedrock and lower plains
composed mostly of softer rocks. In places, this boundary is marked by an abrupt scarp (the
Balcones Escarpment) and in others by a more gradational ramp, but the entire length of this
transition zone is a major ecotone in terms of topography, bedrock, hydrology, soil, vegetation,
and animal life.
The Gulf Coastal Plain, which extends as far north as the Ouachita uplift in southern
Oklahoma and westward to the Balcones Escarpment, consists of seaward-dipping bodies of
sedimentary rock, most of which are of terrigenous clastic origin, that reflect the gradual infilling
of the basin from its margins (Abbott 2001). The fluviodeltaic sedimentary rocks are arranged in
an offlapped sequence, with interdigitated and capping eolian, littoral, and estuarine facies making
up a relatively minor component of the lithology. Major bounding disconformities between these
formations are usually interpreted to represent depositional hiatuses that occurred during periods
of low sea level. The oldest rocks in this sequence are of Late Cretaceous age.
Hydrologically, the project area is situated within the San Antonio River and Guadalupe
river basins. The project area is situated on the terraces and uplands adjacent to Salitrillo Creek,
which flows through the western portion of the property. Salitrillo Creek flows generally
southeastward, discharging into Martinez Creek in eastern Bexar County. Martinez Creek, in
turn, flows eastward into Cibolo Creek near the intersection of the Bexar, Wilson, and Guadalupe
county lines. Cibolo Creek meanders southeastward, flowing into the San Antonio River north of
Karnes City in Karnes County. The San Antonio River flows generally southeastward across the
Gulf Coastal Plain, ultimately discharging into the Guadalupe River near Tivoli along the RefugioCalhoun county line. The Guadalupe River continues southeastward a short distance,
discharging into the Gulf of Mexico at San Antonio Bay. Elevations within the project area slope
gently down toward Salitrillo Creek, ranging from approximately 198.1 to 210.3 meters (650.0 to
690.0 feet) above mean sea level (amsl).

H030-190011

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

In general, the bedrock throughout central Texas is composed of Late Cretaceous
formations that dip slightly to the east and are predominantly composed of calcareous clay, shale,
limestone, and marl, with a small portion of sandstone (Barnes 1983). These geologic units are
overlain in some areas by unconsolidated Quaternary alluvial floodplain and fluviatile terrace
deposits. On the surface, these formations weather into a rounded, gently rolling topography with
a few bluff faces exposed in stream valleys where more resistant strata are present.
Specifically, the project area is situated on the Upper Cretaceous Navarro Group and
Marlbrook Marl (“Upper Taylor Marl”) formations (Kknm), which consist of marl, clay, sandstone,
and siltstone (BEG 1983). Stream valleys below the Balcones Escarpment tend to be entrenched
and lack active floodplains, and terrace structures are typically located above flood level along
entrenched streams, resulting in preservation of fluviatile morphology in point bars, oxbows, and
abandoned channel segments. The nearby Edwards Formation is composed of hard, micritic
limestone beds, some of which are chert-bearing. Other beds are extensively burrowed and
weathered into “honeycombed” porous rock. Caverns and sinkholes are known to occur
throughout central and southwestern Texas in the Edwards Formation and Austin Chalk
limestones, but they are not especially common. The nearby Edwards Limestone constitutes one
of the largest chert resources on the Great Plains (Frederick and Ringstaff 1994; Frederick et al.
1994), and expansive outcrops of Edwards Group chert are often accompanied by extensive
aboriginal lithic scatters created during raw material procurement (or “quarrying”) activities. In the
absence of aggrading depositional environments, such lithic procurement sites are typically
restricted to the deflated modern ground surface, on which the native limestone bedrock is
typically exposed over large areas.
Soils in Bexar County, Texas, formed from the underlying sedimentary formations,
including limestone, chalky limestone, chalk, shaly clay, marly clay, sandy clay, calcareous clay,
sand, and sandstone (Taylor et al. 1991). Alluvial deposits of recent or ancient age occur along
the principal rivers and streams of the county, but soil thickness in upland environments is typically
minimal, and extensive bedrock outcrops are commonly exposed on the modern ground surface.
The majority of the soils in the project area consist of Pleistocene-age clayey deposits of
the Heiden, Ferris, and Houston Black soils series, which formed in situ via weathering from
underlying shale and marl bedrock (Figure 5; Table 1) (NRCS 2019). The narrow floodplain of
Salitrillo Creek along the western margin of the project area is characterized by Holocene-age
clayey and loamy alluvium of the Tinn and Frio soil units.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995). Bryant
and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas from
the Wisconsin Full Glacial period (22,500 to 14,000 years Before Present [B.P.]) through the Late
Glacial period (14,000 to 10,000 years B.P.) to the Post-Glacial period (10,000 years B.P. to
present). Evidence from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period suggests that the climate in east-

8

190011_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 4. Soils Mapped within Project Area

H030-190011

9

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Table 1. Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area
NRCS
Soil Code

Soil Name

Typical Profile
(inches)

Parent Material

HoD3

Heiden-Ferris
complex, 5 to 10%
slopes, severely
eroded

Clayey residuum weathered from clayey
shale of the Eagleford Shale or Taylor
Marl formations on ridges

0-14: Clay
14-25: Clay
25-62: Clay
62-80: Clay

HsB

Houston Black clay,
1 to 3% slopes

Clayey residuum weathered from
calcareous mudstone of Upper
Cretaceous age on ridges

0-6: Clay (Ap)
6-70: Clay (Bkss)
70-80: Clay (BCkss)

HsC

Houston Black clay,
3 to 5% slopes

Clayey residuum weathered from
calcareous mudstone of Upper
Cretaceous age on ridges

0-6: Clay (Ap)
6-70: Clay (Bkss)
70-80: Clay (BCkss)

Tf

Tinn and Frio soils,
0 to 1% slopes,
frequently flooded

Tinn:
Clayey alluvium of Holocene age on
floodplains

Tinn:
0-8: Clay
8-65: Clay
65-80: Clay
Frio:
0-30: Silty clay loam
30-50: Silty clay loam
50-80: Clay loam

Frio:
Loamy alluvium of Holocene age on
floodplains
Source: NRCS 2019
NRCS = Natural Resources Conservation Service

central Texas was considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that
the Late Glacial period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow warming
and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands were
gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985). During
the Post-Glacial period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more stable
than during the Late Glacial. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and
post oak savannas. The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial period
continued into the mid-Holocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration
to more mesic conditions lasting from roughly 6,000 to 5,000 years B.P. Recent studies by Bryant
and Holloway (1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were
probably achieved by 1,500 years ago.
Bexar County is now located within the South-Central Climatic Division. The modern
climate is typically dry to subhumid with long, hot summers and short, mild winters. The climate
is influenced primarily by tropical Maritime air masses from the Gulf of Mexico, but it is modified
by polar air masses. Tropical Maritime air masses predominate throughout spring, summer, and
fall. Modified polar air masses are dominant in winter and provide a continental climate
characterized by considerable variations in temperature.
On average throughout the past century, precipitation and temperature manifest regional
clines with mean annual precipitation totals declining fairly regularly from east to west and mean
annual temperature declining equally evenly from northwest to southeast (Larkin and Bomar

10

190011_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

1983:18, 50). Regional temperature ranges from 4 to 36 degrees Celsius (°C) (39 to 96 degrees
Fahrenheit (°F), with an average annual temperature of 18°C (64 F).
Average annual precipitation in the region is approximately 78.7 centimeters
(31.0 inches). Two annual precipitation peaks, which typically occur in May and September, are
associated with frontal storms that form when southward-moving cool air masses collide with
warm, moist air masses moving inland from the Gulf of Mexico (Bomar 1983; Carr 1967). The
topographic discontinuity along the Balcones Escarpment lies directly in the path of the Gulf storm
trace and increases the lift in convective storms to produce extreme amounts of rainfall (Baker
1975). Two extreme examples are the excess of 91.4 centimeters (36.0 inches) of rain that fell
within an 18-hour period in the vicinity of Thrall, Texas, in September 1921, and the 55.9centimeter (22.0-inch) deluge that fell in less than three hours near O’Harris, Texas in May 1935
(Baker 1975). Lower rainfall amounts are characteristic of winter and late summer. In winter,
frontal storms pass so frequently that there is little time for moisture to increase, and prevailing
upper-level winds from west to east often dominate over meridional flow, meaning that much of
the available moisture is derived from the Pacific rather than from the Gulf of Mexico. In summer,
cool fronts rarely penetrate into the region, and rainfall occurs primarily as localized, thermal
convective storms.

2.4

BIOTA

The project area is located in the Balconian Biotic Province on the southern fringes of the
Edwards Plateau (Blair 1950). The Edwards Plateau and associated Balcones Escarpment is
characterized by a mixture of species from the Austroriparian, Tamaulipan, Chihuahuan, and
Kansan, Balconian provinces. While three vegetation regions are recognized by Tharp (1939)
within the limits of the Balconian Province, the project area is situated in the oak-cedar region that
corresponds to the dissected southern and eastern part of the Edwards Plateau.
Fifty-seven species of mammals are known from the Balconian Province, though none of
these species are restricted to this province. Common mammalian species include white-tailed
deer, opossum, eastern cottontail rabbit, raccoon, striped skunk, hispid cotton rat, white-footed
mouse, nine-banded armadillo, and fox squirrel. Common bird species include northern bobwhite,
eastern meadowlark, mourning dove, killdeer, field sparrow, red-tailed hawk, turkey vulture, belted
kingfisher, and mockingbird. Reptile and amphibian species common to this biotic zone include
six-lined racerunner, rat snake, eastern hognose snake, Gulf Coast toad, Texas spiny lizard,
rough green snake, copperhead, western diamondback rattlesnake, green tree frog, Blanchard’s
cricket frog, diamondback water snake, Houston toad, and green anole. Although small herds of
bison and antelope were common during the late prehistoric and early historic periods, these
species are no longer native to this region (Jurney et al. 1989:13-14).

H030-190011

11

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located near the southern boundary of Prewitt’s (1981, 1985) Central
Texas Archeological Region. The indigenous human inhabitants of central Texas practiced a
generally nomadic hunting and gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory, and, in contrast to
much of the rest of North America, mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have
changed markedly through time in this region.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (CA. 12,000 TO 8,500 YEARS B.P.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 12,000 B.P. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists have historically discounted claims of much earlier human
occupation during the Pleistocene glacial period. However, recent investigations of the Buttermilk
Creek Complex in Bell County, Texas, have raised the possibility that a pre-Clovis culture may
have been present in North America as early as 15,500 years ago (Waters et al. 2011).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Central Texas is represented by
the PaleoIndian period (12,000 to 8500 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This stage coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various periods
within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted, lanceolate
projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end scrapers, gravers, and
bone foreshafts. PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian
bands consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and
settlement pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Central
Texas are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the
exploitation of plants, small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There
is little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented
elsewhere in North America. Rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been
practiced throughout all prehistoric time periods. In Central Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is
divided into two periods based on recognizable differences in projectile point styles. These

H030-190011

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

include the Early PaleoIndian period, which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile points
(i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian period, which
is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview, Scottsbluff, Meserve, and
Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (CA. 8,500 TO 1,200 YEARS B.P.)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend marks the beginning of the Archaic period
(8500 to 1200 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant
reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Central Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding
decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Central Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture shows
greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of groundstone
technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
Changes in projectile point morphology are often used as markers differentiating these
3 subperiods, though other changes in material culture occurred as well. Perhaps most markedly,
burned rock middens appear during the Middle Archaic subperiod, continuing into the Late
Archaic subperiod, and large cemeteries appear during the Late Archaic subperiod. In addition,
the increasing density of prehistoric sites through time is often considered to constitute evidence
of population growth, though differential preservation probably at least partially accounts for the
lower numbers of older sites.

3.3

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1,200 TO 350 YEARS B.P.)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (1200 to 350 B.P.) (Collins 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. In Central Texas, pottery also appears during the Late
Prehistoric period (though ceramics appear earlier in Southeast Texas). Use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion of Southeast Texas along with the bow and
arrow through the Late Prehistoric period (Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In Texas, unifacial
arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. The Late
Prehistoric period is generally divided into two phases, the Austin and Toyah phases. Austin
phase sites occur earliest to the north, which has led some researchers (e.g., Prewitt 1985) to
suggest that the Austin-phase populations of Central Texas were migrants from the north, and
lack the ceramic industry of the later Toyah phase.

3.4

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 350 YEARS B.P. TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when Álvarez
de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Cabeza de Vaca crossed

14

190011_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

south Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay. However,
European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The first half of
the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as the first
effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native cultures and social systems.
This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site on Galveston Island in Galveston
County, Texas, where burial data suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994),
as well as increased participation on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade.
By the time that heavy settlement of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the
indigenous Indian population was greatly diminished.
The first Europeans to explore the Bexar County region came with an expedition in 1691
led by Domingo Terán de los Ríos and Fray Damián Massanet, who evidently reached the San
Antonio River near where the San Juan Capistrano Mission was later founded.1 Nearby, they
found a group of Payaya Indians living on the riverbank. The Indians, as Massanet recorded in
his diary, called the place Yanaguana; he, however, renamed the site San Antonio de Padua to
celebrate the memorial day of St. Anthony—June 13. The next group of Spanish explorers, an
expedition led by two Franciscans, fathers Antonio de San Buenaventura y Olivares and Isidro
Félix de Espinosa, and a military officer, Pedro de Aguirre, did not reach the area until April 1709.
Much impressed by the setting and the availability of water, they noted that the area might make
a promising site for future settlement. In 1714, Louis Juchereau de St. Denis crossed the region
on his way to San Juan Bautista. Espinosa again visited the site in 1716 on his way to East Texas
with the expedition of Domingo Ramón and this time recommended San Pedro Springs as a
mission site. Near that spot, in May 1718, Martín de Alarcón led the expedition that founded San
Antonio de Valero Mission and San Antonio de Béxar (or Béjar) Presidio, named for Viceroy
Balthasar Manuel de Zúñiga y Guzmán Sotomayor y Sarmiento, second son of the duke of Bexar.
By the end of the winter of 1718, numerous Indians of the Jamrame, Payaya, and Pamaya groups
had joined the mission. In 1720, Fray Antonio Margil de Jesús founded the San José y San
Miguel de Aguayo Mission a short distance to the south. Another mission, San Francisco Xavier
de Naxara, was established in 1722 but proved unsuccessful and was merged with San Antonio
de Valero in 1726. In 1724, the San Antonio de Valero mission compound, which had originally
been located at the site of the present-day Chapel of Miracles south of San Pedro Springs, was
moved to Alamo Plaza. In 1731, after the removal of the missions from East Texas, 3 additional
missions—Nuestra Señora de la Purísima Concepción de Acuña, San Francisco de la Espada,
and San Juan Capistrano—were founded along the San Antonio River.
During the 1720s, the Spanish population of the area was about 200, including 53 soldiers
and their families and four civilians with their families. On March 9, 1731, 55 Canary Islanders
arrived at Bexar, and the villa of San Fernando de Béxar became the first municipality in the
Spanish province of Texas. The five missions, together with the presidio and the villa of San
Fernando, constituted the most important Spanish concentration in Texas. By the mid-1730s, the
total population of the area was some 900, including 300 Spanish and 600 Indian converts. An

1

The following discussion of San Antonio history is excerpted from TSHA (2019).

H030-190011

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

epidemic in 1738 and 1739 devastated the missions, killing perhaps three-fourths of the Indian
population. At Mission San Antonio de Valero alone, only 182 of 837 Indians who had been
baptized survived. By 1740, however, the missions' populations began to recover. The number
of converts at the five missions reached more than 500, as many of the indigenous Coahuilatecan
peoples living in the region fled to them as a refuge from the Apaches and Comanches.
The missions developed as self-supporting communities, each ringed with farmland
irrigated by a comprehensive system of acequias, or irrigation ditches. Crops included grain,
cotton, flax, beans, sugarcane, and vegetables. Each of the missions also maintained sizable
herds of cattle, sheep, and goats on extensive ranchlands located around Bexar. Governor
Manuel M. de Salcedo described Mission Concepción's ranch in 1809 as comprising some
38 square miles and extending east and northeast from the mission to Cibolo Creek. An inventory
in 1756 recorded that the Concepción ranch had 700 cattle, 1,800 sheep, and large herds of goats
and horses.
Both the missions and the villa of Bexar were subject to sporadic attacks of Apaches and
Comanches; nearly a quarter of the Spanish who died between 1718 and 1731 were reportedly
victims of Apache attacks. A truce was signed with the Apaches in August 1749, but occasional
attacks by Comanches and Apaches continued well into the 19th century.
In 1772, the government offices of Spanish Texas were moved from Los Adaes to Bexar,
and some of the East Texas settlers also moved. Nonetheless, Bexar remained a small frontier
outpost, as Father Juan A. Morfi described in a report of the late 1770s, with "fifty-nine houses of
stone and mud, seventy-nine of wood, all poorly built without a preconceived plan. The whole
town," he continued, "resembles a poor village rather than the capital of a province."
After the secularization of the missions in 1793 and 1794, they gradually became satellite
civilian communities under the authority of the town of Bexar. The mission lands were distributed
to the few remaining Indians and the increasing number of Spanish settlers; most of the better
land nearest the settled areas was controlled by the town's elite, which was made up of the
descendants of the original Canary Islanders and presidial soldiers. The complex network of
irrigation systems that had been operated by the missions was partially abandoned, and, by 1815,
the amount of irrigated farmland had declined markedly.
Despite the downturn brought on by the secularization of the Spanish missions, San
Antonio de Béxar continued to be an overwhelmingly agricultural community. Subsistence
farming was the rule. The largest number of cultivators worked small family plots, though many
farms were also worked by tenant farmers or day laborers. The elite landowners increased the
size of their holdings after the secularization of the missions, and some of the largest ranchers
exported horses and cattle to Coahuila or Louisiana.
During the late colonial period, Bexar continued to serve as the capital of the province of
Texas as well as the main shipping point for supplies headed for Nacogdoches and La Bahía.
Between 1811 and 1813, the city was also the center of revolutionary activity against Spanish
rule. In 1811, a former militia captain, Juan Bautista de Las Casas, following the lead of Miguel
Hidalgo y Costilla in Mexico, mounted an insurrection in Bexar that quickly spread throughout the

16

190011_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

province of Texas. Las Casas's band of followers, which included the poorer soldiers and civilians
of the lower social stratum who resented the rule of the Spanish elite, scored early successes,
arresting the governor and his military staff and seizing the property of the most ardent royalists.
On March 1, 1811, however, some of the conservative military officers and clergy supported by
the isleños (aristocratic descendents of the original Canary Island settlers) staged a
counterrevolution. Las Casas was captured in Chihuahua and executed, and his head was salted
and shipped in a box to Bexar for display on Military Plaza in an attempt to dissuade others from
taking up his cause.
After Las Casas’s death, the leadership of the insurrectionists fell to Bernardo Gutiérrez
de Lara, who led an army of Mexican revolutionaries and sympathetic Americans from Louisiana
that seized San Antonio in the spring of 1813 and proclaimed Texas an independent state. In
August, however, royalist forces commanded by José Joaquín Arredondo succeeded in routing
the insurrectionists and restoring order. Arredondo's victory was followed by a period of reprisals
that included confiscation, detentions, and executions; in San Antonio alone, loyalists shot
327 supporters of the rebellion.
In the wake of the rebellion, the population of Bexar and the surrounding region fell
markedly and did not begin to grow again until the end of the decade. By 1820, however, Bexar
had some 2,000 inhabitants, with slightly more females (1,021) than males (973); several hundred
more lived on ranches in the outlying countryside. During the 1830s, the population again
increased slightly, although the number of inhabitants in Bexar declined as more town dwellers
moved out to adjoining farms and ranches.
Soon after the first Anglo-American colonists came to Texas in 1821, San Antonio became
the western outpost of settlement. In 1824, Texas and Coahuila were united into 1 state with the
capital at Saltillo; a Department of Bexar was created with a political chief to have authority over
the Texas portion of the state. During the late 1820s and early 1830s, increasing numbers of
American settlers began moving to San Antonio, though the city remained predominantly Mexican
at the beginning of the Texas Revolution.
In late October 1835, Texas volunteers laid siege to the city, which was garrisoned by the
Mexican army under Martín Perfecto de Cos. On December 10, after fierce hand-to-hand fighting,
it was occupied by Texan forces. San Antonio was retaken by government forces commanded
by Antonio López de Santa Anna during the battle of the Alamo on March 6 of the following year.
After the subsequent defeat of Santa Anna's army in the battle of San Jacinto, the city was
reoccupied by Texan forces, but the area, claimed by both sides, continued to be fought over. In
March 1842, six years after Texas independence, Mexican general Rafael Vásquez briefly
occupied San Antonio, and, in September of the same year, Adrián Woll led another Mexican
invasion force that seized the city.
Because of the uncertainty posed by the frequent invasions, San Antonio and the
surrounding area were largely depopulated. Many settlers fled during the Runaway Scrape of
1836 or during subsequent attacks and did not return in large numbers until after Texas joined
the Union. As late as 1844, San Antonio had only some 1,000 residents, nine-tenths of whom
were of Mexican descent.

H030-190011

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

The newly formed Bexar County covered much of the western edge of settlement in Texas.
During the late Mexican period, Texas had been divided into four departments, with the
department of Bexar stretching from the Rio Grande to the Panhandle and as far west as El Paso.
With the winning of Texas independence, the departments became counties, and on
December 20, 1836, Bexar County was established, with San Antonio as county seat. Since
1860, when the partitioning of Bexar County began, 128 counties have been carved from the
original county.
Despite the steady growth of the population in the late 1840s, fueled by large numbers of
immigrants from the Old South and from Germany, Bexar County was still a sparsely populated
region during the early years of statehood. In 1850, the county had a total population of 5,633,
3,488 of whom lived in San Antonio. The economy, as during the Spanish and Mexican periods,
was still based on ranching and subsistence agriculture. Most of the farms were small; on the
eve of the Civil War only 1 farm in the county was larger than 1,000 acres, and most were smaller
than 50 acres. The main source of revenue for the county was trade carried on by team trains
between San Antonio and Mexico and New Orleans. A number of German and Anglo immigrants
opened mercantile establishments in the city, but there was little in the way of industry. In 1860,
the county had only 28 manufacturing establishments with 135 employees.
In contrast to many other areas of Texas, slaves played only a minor role in the Bexar
County economy. In 1850, there were only 419 African Americans living in the county, 30 of
whom were free. By 1860, the number of slaves had grown to 1,395, or slightly less than 10% of
the county's total population. Most of the county’s 294 slaveholders owned five or fewer slaves,
and only two owned more than 40.
Bexar County, with its large German population, was a center for antislavery sentiment.
Nevertheless, county residents voted for secession 827 to 709 (54% for, 46% against). On
February 16, 1861, General David E. Twiggs, commander of the federal Department of Texas,
which was headquartered in San Antonio, surrendered all United States forces, arms, and
equipment to a committee of local secessionists backed by a large force of Texas Rangers under
Major Benjamin McCulloch. Although Bexar County escaped the destruction that devastated
other parts of the South, the war years were difficult for the county's citizens, who were forced to
deal with the lack of markets and wild fluctuations in Confederate currency, as well as with
concern for those on the battlefield. With many of the men away fighting, the county and the
surrounding region experienced an upsurge of cattle rustling and other crimes, and a committee
of vigilantes organized “necktie parties” for bandits, cattle thieves, and Union sympathizers.
After the war San Antonio was occupied by Union soldiers, but the county was spared
much of the political violence that consumed other parts of Texas. The war and its aftermath,
however, had a serious effect on the county’s economy. Land prices fell significantly—by as
much as half—and most of the county’s businesses suffered. Many of the county’s farms also
fell idle. The amount of improved farmland declined by more than 60% between 1860 and 1870,
from 13,697 to 5,546 acres. With little tax money coming in, San Antonio and county officials
were unable to fund many services. Public sanitation suffered, and as a result the county had a
serious cholera outbreak in 1866.

18

190011_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

Except for San Antonio, which continued to be a commercial and military center, the
county remained scantily settled and undeveloped. Most of the population continued to be
concentrated in the San Antonio River valley, with only a few small settlements in the northern,
eastern, and western parts of the county. Economic recovery did not begin until the late 1860s
and early 1870s with the start of the great cattle drives. Because Bexar County was located at
the northern apex of the diamond-shaped area that was the original Texas cattle kingdom, it
became an increasingly important center for the ranching industry. By 1870, the number of beef
cattle in the county reached 55,325, nearly double the figure for 1860. A sharp increase in the
price of wool and the large amount of free range west and south of the city also spurred the
development of sheep ranching, particularly in the decade between 1870 and 1880.
The economic recovery, however, found its most important stimulus with the arrival of the
first railroad, the Galveston, Harrisburg and San Antonio Railway, which reached San Antonio in
February 1877. The completion of the rail link with the coast made the shipment of local products
far easier and helped to fuel a rapid growth in population. The number of inhabitants in the county,
which had grown by less than 2,000 between 1860 and 1870, nearly doubled over the next
decade, increasing from 16,043 in 1870 to 30,470 in 1880. Many of the new residents were recent
immigrants from Europe and Mexico. Of the total population in 1880, 7,912 were foreign-born,
with the largest numbers coming from Mexico (3,498), Germany (2,621), Ireland (471), England
(334), and France (293). After the Civil War, the county’s black population also grew dramatically
as many freed slaves settled in and around San Antonio. By 1880, the number of AfricanAmerican inhabitants had reached 3,867, nearly three times what it had been in 1860.
In 1881, a second railroad, the International-Great Northern, reached the city from the
northeast. The completion of the two railroads not only brought new prosperity, but helped to
change the physical face of the county. Before the 1870s, most visitors had been struck by the
fact that San Antonio and environs, despite relatively large numbers of English, Irish, and
Germans, still more resembled a Mexican community than an American one. The influx of new
settlers and manufactured building products gradually transformed the city and county, altering
its appearance to more closely resemble that of other communities in Texas. The changing
character of Bexar was perhaps most tellingly revealed in 1890, when for the first time the number
of the county's inhabitants born in Germany (4,039) actually outnumbered those who had been
born in Mexico (3,561).
The construction of the railroads also stimulated the establishment or greatly spurred the
growth of numerous new communities, including Macdona, Von Ormy, Cassin, Atascosa, Thelma,
Beckman, Luxello, Converse, and Kirby, though the overwhelming majority of the county's
inhabitants still lived in San Antonio.
The 1880s also saw many new industries. By 1887, San Antonio listed among its
businesses three bookbinderies, four breweries, three carriage factories, four ice factories, three
tanneries, one wool-scouring plant, and an iron foundry. Between 1880 and 1890, employees in
manufactures in the county grew from 362 to 2,518. After the turn of the century, the
manufacturing sector continued to show impressive growth. By 1920, the county had
328 factories employing 6,860 persons.

H030-190011

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Despite the area’s relatively diversified economy, the depression hit Bexar County hard.
By the mid-1930s, many people were out of work and very glad of the New Deal programs that
gave them work paving streets and building bridges, sewers, and parks. Among the largest
projects of the period were the renovation of La Villita and the San Antonio missions, and the
construction of the Paseo del Rio along the San Antonio River in the center of the city.
During World War II, Bexar County’s already large military presence grew even more, as
the area’s bases became an important center for the training of army air corps cadets under the
auspices of the San Antonio Aviation Cadet Center. At the height of the war, more than
21,000 civilian war workers were employed at Kelly Field alone. After the war, the presence of
so many military personnel continued to bring changes to the county. Thousands of returning
veterans enrolled in local colleges and universities, and many others, attracted by the area during
their service years, moved to the city. San Antonio also developed into a major retirement center
for military families, drawn by the relatively low cost of living and the access to the two large area
military medical centers, Wilford Hall and Brooke Army Medical Center. Since the end of the
Second World War, the economy of the area has continued to depend heavily on a large federal
payroll from the various military bases and research facilities, and from the large number of retired
military residents.
Beginning in the second half of the 19th century, San Antonio also developed as an
important military center. The San Antonio Arsenal was opened in 1858, and, in 1878, the city
deeded 90 acres to the federal government for what eventually became Fort Sam Houston.
During World War I, Kelly and Brooks fields (which later became Kelly Air Force Base and Brooks
Air Force Base) were established to train pilots, and Camp Bullis and Camp Travis were opened.
At the end of the war, a part of Kelly Field became Duncan Field, and, in 1931, Randolph Field
was established as a primary flight training base. During World War II, Duncan Field was
reintegrated with Kelly, and Camp Normoyle, a motor base, was added.

20

190011_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon performed background archival research on the THC’s
online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas (TASA) for information on previously recorded cultural
resources sites and historic properties in and near the project area as well as previous cultural
resources investigations conducted in the vicinity of the project area. Based on this archival
research, two known archeological sites and three cemeteries are present within a 1.6-kilometer
(1.0-mile) radius of the project area (Figure 5; Table 2) (THC 2019). No archeological sites,
cemeteries, or historic properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) or
designated as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL) are located within or adjacent to the project
area.
Based on the THC’s TASA, one prior cultural resources survey was conducted within the
project area. This prior survey was conducted in 2012 in connection with the proposed
construction of SARA’s Salitrillo Creek Reuse Water System Pipeline (Galindo and Acuna 2012).
The survey followed the course of Salitrillo Creek, entering the project area at its northwestern
boundary and terminating at the existing WWTP. The remainder of the project area has not been
previously surveyed for cultural resources.
Examination of historical aerial photographs dating from 1955 to the present and US
Geological Survey (USGS) topographic maps dating from 1959 to present indicates that the
project area was utilized for agricultural purposes prior to construction of the existing Salitrillo
WWTP on the site between 1973 and 1986 (NETR 2018).

H030-190011

21

Chapter 4.0: Archival Research

Figure 5. Locations of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area

22

190011_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

Table 2. Summary of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area

Site Type

NRHP/SAL
Eligibility
Status1

Distance/Direction
from Project Area

41BX698

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Determined
ineligible

0.8 mile westsouthwest

No

41BX2151

Historic-age farmstead
(mid- to late 20th
centuries)

Determined
ineligible

0.7 mile eastnortheast

No

Site
No./Name

Potential to
be Impacted
by Project?

Archeological Sites

Cemeteries
Hermann Sons
Converse
Cemetery
(BX-C074)

Cemetery

N/A

0.5 mile southwest

No

Panteon de
Guadalupe
Cemetery
(BX-C203)

Cemetery

N/A

0.5 mile southwest

No

San Pedro
Cemetery
(BX-C075)

Cemetery

N/A

0.5 mile southwest

No

1

Determined eligible/ineligible = Site determined eligible/ineligible by SHPO
Recommended eligible/eligible = Site recommended as eligible/ineligible by site recorder and/or sponsoring
agency but eligibility has not been determined by SHPO
Undetermined = Eligibility not assessed or no information available
NRHP National Register of Historic Places
SAL State Antiquities Landmark
SHPO State Historic Preservation Office

H030-190011

23

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

5.0 SURVEY METHODOLOGY

On January 16, 2019, Horizon archeologists Briana Nicole Smith and Emily McCurdy
conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. The survey was conducted
under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator. The purpose of the survey
was to locate any significant cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed
undertaking. Horizon’s archeologists traversed the tract and thoroughly inspected the modern
ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The project area is situated on
the terraces and uplands adjacent to Salitrillo Creek, which flows through the western portion of
the property. The existing WWTP facility has been extensively disturbed via the construction,
use, and ongoing maintenance of the existing industrial facilities, including sewage treatment
ponds, process equipment, administrative buildings, parking lots, and driveways. The remainder
of the property surrounding the existing facility is relatively open, consisting of short to tall grasses
and scattered trees. A linear earthen embankment measuring approximately 1.8 meters (6.0 feet)
in height frames the western margin of the tract along the western bank of Salitrillo Creek. Linear
furrows were observed on the modern ground surface in the eastern portion of the project area,
suggesting that portion of the tract has been under cultivation in the past, though the landscape
was overgrown and not under active cultivation at the time of the survey. Visibility of the modern
ground surface was typically less than 30% (Figures 6 to 12).
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of two shovel tests per acre for project areas between
4.5 and 40.5 hectares (11.0 and 100.0 acres) in size. As such, a minimum of 19 shovel tests
would be required within the 15.4-hectare (38.0-acre) project area. Horizon excavated a total of
16 shovel tests during the survey, all of which were excavated within the 9.1 hectares (22.4 acres)
of undeveloped land surrounding the existing WWTP (Figure13). The extent of prior disturbances
within the existing WWTP argued against shovel testing in this area. Thus, while the TSMASS
requirements were not quite met for the project area as a whole, they were exceeded for the
undeveloped portion of the overall property that has the highest potential to contain cultural
resources. Shovel testing revealed clay loam, gravelly clay loam, and gravelly clay transitioning
to dense clay at depths ranging from 15.0 to 25.0 centimeters (5.9 to 9.8 inches) below surface,
though dense clay sediments were observed on the modern ground surface in many areas.
Sediments in more than half of the shovel tests were mottled and exhibited signs of disturbance.
It is Horizon’s opinion that sediments with the potential to contain subsurface archeological

H030-190011

25

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 6. Overview of Existing WWTP (Facing South)

Figure 7. Overview of Existing WWTP (Facing North)

26

190011_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 8. Administrative Building on Existing WWTP (Facing East)

Figure 9. Existing Outfall on Salitrillo WWTP (Facing East)

H030-190011

27

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 10. Salitrillo Creek in Western Portion of Project Area (Facing South-Southeast)

Figure 11. Artificial Berm along Western Margin of Project Area (Facing West)
28

190011_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 12. Overview of Undeveloped Southern Portion of Project Area (Facing West)

deposits were fully penetrated and that the project area was adequately assessed for cultural
resources.
Shovel tests generally measured 30.0 centimeters (11.8 inches) in diameter and were
excavated to a target depth of 1.0 meter (3.3 feet) below surface, to the top of pre-Holocene
deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable. In practice, shovel tests were terminated at depths
ranging from 30.0 to 40.0 centimeters (11.8 to 15.7 inches) below surface due to the presence of
dense, pre-Holocene sandy clay sediments. All sediments were screened through 6.35-millimeter
(mm) (0.25-inch) hardware cloth. Standard shovel test logs were completed for each shovel test
describing the location, strata, soil texture and color, archeological materials (if present), and any
unusual characteristics of the surrounding landscape. All sediments excavated from shovel tests
were replaced in the shovel test hole upon completion of recording. The Universal Transverse
Mercator (UTM) coordinates of each shovel test were determined using hand-held Garmin
Foretrex or eTrex Global Positioning System (GPS) devices using the North American Datum of
1983 (NAD 83). Specific shovel test data are summarized in Appendix A.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel testing and backhoe trenching results. Digital photographs were
taken, and a photographic log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for
cultural resources. Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with
maker’s marks) and non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and
metal scrap) were to be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced

H030-190011

29

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 13. Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Project Area
30

190011_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

in the same location in which they were found. As no cultural materials were observed during the
survey, the collection policy was not brought into play.
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project area as defined in 36 CFR
800.3.

H030-190011

31

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

6.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

Horizon was selected by CP&Y to conduct an intensive cultural resources inventory and
assessment for the proposed Salitrillo WWTP Improvements Project. The San Antonio River
Authority’s (SARA) existing Salitrillo WWTP is located at 9638 Schaefer Road in Converse, Bexar
County, Texas. SARA’s property at this location covers an area of approximately 15.4 hectares
(38.0 acres), while the existing Salitrillo WWTP covers an area of approximately 6.3 hectares
(15.6 acres). For purposes of the cultural resources survey, the project area is considered to
consist of the entire 15.4-hectare (38.0-acre) tract, including the existing 6.3-hectare (15.6-acre)
WWTP facility and the surrounding 9.1 hectares (22.4 acres) of undeveloped land.
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by SARA, a political subdivision of the state
of Texas; as such, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas
(Natural Resources Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). At this time, no federal permits, licenses, or
funds have been identified for the project. As the project represents a publicly sponsored
undertaking, the project sponsor is required to provide the THC, which serves as the State Historic
Preservation Office (SHPO) for the state of Texas, with an opportunity to review and comment on
the project’s potential to adversely affect historic properties listed on or considered eligible for
designation as SALs.
On January 16, 2019, Horizon archeologists Briana Nicole Smith and Emily McCurdy
conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. The survey was conducted
under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, under Texas Antiquities
Permit no. 8720. The purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural resources that
potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s archeologists traversed
the tract and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age
cultural resources. The project area is situated on the terraces and uplands adjacent to Salitrillo
Creek, which flows through the western portion of the property. The existing WWTP facility has
been extensively disturbed via the construction, use, and ongoing maintenance of the existing
industrial facilities, including sewage treatment ponds, process equipment, administrative
buildings, parking lots, and driveways. The remainder of the property surrounding the existing
facility is relatively open, consisting of short to tall grasses and scattered trees. A linear earthen
embankment measuring approximately 1.8 meters (6.0 feet) in height frames the western margin
of the tract along the western bank of Salitrillo Creek. Linear furrows were observed on the
modern ground surface in the eastern portion of the project area, suggesting that portion of the
tract has been under cultivation in the past, though the landscape was overgrown and not under

H030-190011

33

Chapter 6.0: Results of Investigations

active cultivation at the time of the survey. Visibility of the modern ground surface was typically
less than 30%.
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the TSMASS require a minimum of two shovel tests
per acre for project areas between 4.5 and 40.5 hectares (11.0 and 100.0 acres) in size. As such,
a minimum of 19 shovel tests would be required within the 15.4-hectare (38.0-acre) project area.
Horizon excavated a total of 16 shovel tests during the survey, all of which were excavated within
the 9.1 hectares (22.4 acres) of undeveloped land surrounding the existing WWTP. The extent
of prior disturbances within the existing WWTP argued against shovel testing in this area. Thus,
while the TSMASS requirements were not quite met for the project area as a whole, they were
exceeded for the undeveloped portion of the overall property that has the highest potential to
contain cultural resources. Shovel testing typically revealed clay loam, gravelly clay loam, and
gravelly clay transitioning to dense clay at depths ranging from 15.0 to 25.0 centimeters (5.9 to
9.8 inches) below surface, though dense clay sediments were observed on the modern ground
surface in many areas. Sediments in more than half of the shovel tests were mottled and exhibited
signs of disturbance. It is Horizon’s opinion that sediments with the potential to contain subsurface
archeological deposits were fully penetrated and that the project area was adequately assessed
for cultural resources.
Modern garbage is relatively abundant within the Salitrillo Creek channel, though no
cultural resources of historic or prehistoric age were observed on the modern ground surface or
within any of the shovel tests excavated within the project area during the survey.

34

190011_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

7.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with three
primary management goals in mind:



Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.



Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for designation
as SALs.



Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their SAL
evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the project area and to make preliminary determinations of whether or
not the resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
properties are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with important
historic events and/or personages. Under the Antiquities Code of Texas, archeological resources
are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the significance of archeological
resources for designation as SALs.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory process.

H030-190011

35

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

7.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ANTIQUITIES LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are located
in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any county,
city, or political subdivision of the state are state antiquities landmarks and are eligible for
designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
building, structure, cultural landscape, or non-archeological site, object, or district as an SAL if it
meets at least on one of following criteria:
A. [T]he property is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history, including importance to a particular cultural or ethnic
group;
B. [T]he property is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. [T]he property embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, represents the work of a master, possesses high artistic values, or
represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction;
D. [T]he property has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in Texas
culture or history.

36

190011_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

Furthermore, the THC may designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets
one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

7.3

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

On January 16, 2019, Horizon archeologists Briana Nicole Smith and Emily McCurdy
conducted an intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. The survey was conducted
under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, under Texas Antiquities
Permit no. 8720. The purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural resources that
potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s archeologists traversed
the tract and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age
cultural resources. The project area is situated on the terraces and uplands adjacent to Salitrillo
Creek, which flows through the western portion of the property. The existing WWTP facility has
been extensively disturbed via the construction, use, and ongoing maintenance of the existing
industrial facilities, including sewage treatment ponds, process equipment, administrative
buildings, parking lots, and driveways. The remainder of the property surrounding the existing
facility is relatively open, consisting of short to tall grasses and scattered trees. A linear earthen
embankment measuring approximately 1.8 meters (6.0 feet) in height frames the western margin
of the tract along the western bank of Salitrillo Creek. Linear furrows were observed on the
modern ground surface in the eastern portion of the project area, suggesting that portion of the
tract has been under cultivation in the past, though the landscape was overgrown and not under
active cultivation at the time of the survey. Visibility of the modern ground surface was typically
less than 30%.
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the TSMASS require a minimum of two shovel tests
per acre for project areas between 4.5 and 40.5 hectares (11.0 and 100.0 acres) in size. As such,
a minimum of 19 shovel tests would be required within the 15.4-hectare (38.0-acre) project area.
Horizon excavated a total of 16 shovel tests during the survey, all of which were excavated within
the 9.1 hectares (22.4 acres) of undeveloped land surrounding the existing WWTP. The extent
of prior disturbances within the existing WWTP argued against shovel testing in this area. Thus,
while the TSMASS requirements were not quite met for the project area as a whole, they were

H030-190011

37

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

exceeded for the undeveloped portion of the overall property that has the highest potential to
contain cultural resources. Shovel testing typically revealed clay loam, gravelly clay loam, and
gravelly clay transitioning to dense clay at depths ranging from 15.0 to 25.0 centimeters (5.9 to
9.8 inches) below surface, though dense clay sediments were observed on the modern ground
surface in many areas. Sediments in more than half of the shovel tests were mottled and exhibited
signs of disturbance. It is Horizon’s opinion that sediments with the potential to contain subsurface
archeological deposits were fully penetrated and that the project area was adequately assessed
for cultural resources.
Modern garbage is relatively abundant within the Salitrillo Creek channel, though no
cultural resources of historic or prehistoric age were observed on the modern ground surface or
within any of the shovel tests excavated within the project area during the survey.

7.4

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified within the project
area that meet the criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26. Horizon recommends
a finding of “no historic properties affected,” and no further archeological work is recommended
in connection with the proposed undertaking. However, human burials, both prehistoric and
historic, are protected under the Texas Health and Safety Code. In the event that any human
remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or
ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should
cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent discovery, and the THC should be notified
immediately.

38

190011_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

8.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J.T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Report No. 27, Archeological Studies Program, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation. Austin.
Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Baker, V.R.
1975
Flood Hazards Along the Balcones Escarpment in Central Texas—Alternative
Approaches to the Recognition, Mapping, and Management. Geological Circular
No. 75-5. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bomar, G.W.
1983
Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Bureau of Economic Geology (BEG)
1983
Geologic Atlas of Texas—San Antonio Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Carr, J.T.
1967
Climate and Physiography of Texas. Texas Water Development Board, Report No. 53,
Austin.

H030-190011

39

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Frederick, C.D, and C. Ringstaff
1994
Lithic Resources at Fort Hood: Further Investigations. In Archeological Investigations
on 571 Prehistoric Sites at Fort Hood, Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas, edited by W.N.
Trierweiler. United States Army Fort Hood, Archeological Resource Management
Series, No. 31, pp. 125-181.
Frederick, C.D., M.D. Glascock, H. Neff, and C.M. Stevenson
1994
Evaluation of Chert Patination as a Dating Technique: A Cast Study from Fort Hood,
Texas. US Army Fort Hood, Archeological Resource Management Series, No. 32.
Acuna
2012

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the San Antonio River Authority Salitrillo Creek
Reuse Water System Pipeline Project, Bexar County, Texas. SWCA Cultural
Resources Report No. 12-283. SWCA Environmental Consultants, Austin, Texas.

Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J.T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Jurney, D.H., F. Winchell, and R.W. Moir
1989
Cultural Resources Overview of the National Grasslands in North Texas: Studies in
Predictive Archaeological Modeling for the Caddo and LBJ Grasslands. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas, Texas. US Forest Service, Lufkin, Texas.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country: Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility. American Antiquity
53:231-244.
Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas. Publication LP-192. Texas Department of Water Resources,
Austin.

40

190011_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
National Environmental Title Research (NETR)
2019
Historic Aerials by NETR Online.
January 15, 2019.

<http://www.historicaerials.com>.

Accessed

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2018
Web Soil Survey. <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed January 23, 2019. US Department of Agriculture.
Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. In Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 53:201-238.

Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Toyah Components: Evidence for Occupation in the Project Area During the Latter
Part of the Late Prehistoric Period. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in
the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R.A. Ricklis and M.B. Collins,
pp. 207-316. Studies in Archeology, No. 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Taylor, F.B., R.B. Hailey, and D.L. Richmond
1991
Soil Survey of Bexar County, Texas. US Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service, in cooperation with Texas Agricultural Experiment Station. Washington, D.C.
Tharp, B.C.
1939
The Vegetation of Texas. Texas Academy of Science, Publications in Natural History,
Series 1:i-xvi, 1-74.

H030-190011

41

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2019
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas Restricted Database. <https://www.thc.atlas.state.
tx.us/>. Accessed January 15, 2019.
Texas State Historical Association (TSHA)
2019
San Antonio.
The Handbook of Texas Online <http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/
handbook/online/articles/BB/hds02.html>. Accessed January 23, 2019.
US Department of Agriculture (USDA)
2016
Digital orthophoto, Bexar County, Texas. National Agriculture Imagery Program, Farm
Service Agency, Aerial Photography Field Office.
US Geological Survey (USGS)
1982
7.5-minute series topographic map, Schertz, Texas, quadrangle.
Waters, M.R., S.L. Forman, T.A. Jennings, L.C. Nordt, S.G. Driese, J.M. Feinberg, J.L. Keene, J.
Halligan, A. Lindquist, J. Pierson, C.T. Hallmark, M.B. Collins, and J.E. Wiederhold
2011
The Buttermilk Creek Complex and the Origins of Clovis at the Debra L. Friedkin Site,
Texas. Science 331:1599-1603.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

42

190011_arch_survey_report

APPENDIX A:
Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey for the Proposed
Salitrillo Wastewater Treatment Plant Improvements Project, Converse, Bexar County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

BS1

567889

3264480

0-25

Soils

Artifacts

Mottled dark grayish-brown, yellowishbrown, and yellowish-red gravelly clay

None

Very dark gray clay

None

Very dark grayish-brown gravelly clay
loam

None

Very dark gray gravelly clay

None

Very dark grayish-brown clay loam

None

25-35+

Dark grayish-brown dense clay

None

0-15

Dark grayish-brown clay loam

None

15-30+

Dark grayish-brown dense clay

None

0-20

Very dark grayish-brown gravelly clay

None

20-30+

Mottled dark yellowish-brown and very
dark grayish-brown clay

None

Mottled very dark grayish-brown and
yellowish-brown silty clay loam

None

Very dark gray clay

None

Very dark gray gravelly clay

None

Mottled yellowish-brown, gray, light
gray, and pale brown disturbed clay

None

Very dark gray gravelly clay

None

20-40+

Mottled yellowish-brown, pale brown,
and light gray silty clay with 5% CaCO3
inclusions

None

25-30+
BS2

567894

3264425

0-20
20-30+

BS3

BS4

BS5

BS6

567932

567930

567994

568051

3264332

3264406

3264340

3264341

0-25

0-20
20-30+

BS7

568085

3264376

0-15
15-30+

BS8

568154

3264357

0-20

BS9

568176

3264416

0-30+

Mottled very dark gray, black, and
yellowish-brown gravelly clay

None

BS10

568251

3264375

0-30+

Very dark gray wet clay

None

BS11

568262

3264427

0-30+

Very dark gray dense clay

None

BS12

568251

3264483

0-30+

Very dark gray dense clay

None

BS13

568202

3264519

0-30+

Very dark gray dense clay

None

BS14

568219

3264598

0-30+

Very dark gray wet clay

None

BS15

568160

3264645

0-30+

Very dark gray wet clay

None

BS16

568180

3264712

0-30+

Very dark gray wet clay

None

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 15 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
CaCO3 = Calcium carbonate
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

H030-190011

A-1

