-

.:'P

·t

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

..

'
, .

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE.PROPOSED
FEDERAL YOUTH CENTER

Bastrop County, Texas"

William 8. Fawcett, Jr.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
The University of Texas at Austin
Technical Bulletin No. 10
1975

..

.,

..
-.

.

,"

An Archeological Survey
of the Proposed Federal Youth Center,
Bastrop County, Texas
by William B. Fawcett, Jr.

Introduction
With concern for the planned development of a portion
of Camp Swift (approx. 160 acres) into a Federal Youth Center,
an archeological survey of this area was carried out in order
to assess the definable archeological resources which might
be affected by associated construction activities. The nature
of previous archeological investigations within the vicinity
of the study area are discussed in order to better evaluate
the significance of archeologicaL sites within.'the study area:
This section will be followed by "a discussion of the results
of an on-site survey. Lastly, recommendations ~re offered
in order to meet the requirements ·for archeological resource
mitigation and the issuance of cl~atance for the area of
investigation.
The Archeological Environment
Very little published archeological research resulted
from work done within Bastrop County; however, a number of
archeologic~l site records are on file at the Texas Arche­
ological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin, and these were consulted in preparation for the
actual fieldwork.
All of these known archeological sites were recorded by
members of the University of Texas Archeological Society in
1966 and are located along Big Sandy Creek, a major trib­
utary of the Colorado River. Environmentally this area is
quite similar to that along Piney creek (within which our
study area is located), and therefore the archeological
remains should be quite similar to those in the Camp Swift
area.
Sites known from the area tend to be characterized by
large, scattered distributions of lithic artifacts, a few
pieces of burned rock, and occasional fragments of freshwater
mussel shell. All known sites (4IBP54-57) are located either
on sandy alluvial terraces or in association with bluff top
sandy soils, and date from the M~ddle Archaic (ca.2000 B.C.)
through the late Prehistoric (ca. A.D. 500 to A.D. 1500) •

..
"

,t

<I

Page 2

.,

No "burned rock middens" have been been reported, and most
of the sites appear to have been oriented toward the use' of
either dense localized scatters of cobbles necessary for the
manufacture of stone tools or oriented towards the use of
resources adjacent to and within the riparian environment
along Big Sandy creek. No detailed excavations were carried
out by this survey although limited testing indicated that
these sites appear to be stratigraphically complex.
It might be expected, therefore, to find very similar
sites along the upper part of Piney creek; in particular
it might be anticipated to encounter the remains of small
hunting camps or lithic associated with resourc,e areas.
Based on the information from previously recorded
archeological sites ~ear the study area, and from exca~ations
in other portions of the Colorado and Guadalupe river valleys,
(e.g. Johnson et. a1. 1962; Suhm .a957) we would expect pre­
historic hunters and gatherers within the study.area to be
primarily hunting deer (Odicoi1eus ~.) for their primary
source of meat. Very little iscurrent1y known about the
plant resources exploited prehisterlcally. Water was also
an important resource and large sites are usually associated
with water sources. Suitable lithic sources were also needed
in order to maintain and manufacture certain types of tools
that enabled the prehistoric inhabitants to utilize the
natural environment.
The ar.ea now encompassed by C~mp Swift contains, or
would have contained, these resources. The dense woodland
with adjacent open clearings, and water within the creek
would support a fairly dense deer population. Lithic resources
are present in the form of dense cobble beds, and the creek
bottoms and adjacent uplands support a wide variety of edible
plants.
Survey Methodology
A one day survey was conducted of the 160 acre study
area. The area was visually inspected by transects at in­
tervals of about 100 meters. Most of the barracks areas
had undergone intensive modification of the natural ground
surface (such as paving over large areas) and these were
only superficially examined.
Most of the survey effort was expended in the Bouthwestern
portion of the study area, in particular along the tributary

.. ,,""

.

"

"

,t

,.

Page 3

.,

of Piney Creek. Portions of thls area were overgrown with
dense grass vegetation making visual examination of the'
ground difficult.
Upon finding the cobble area, time was spent defin~ng
the limits, photographing the artifact concetrations, and
examining the lithic material.
A standard University of
Texas site survey form was filled out, and notes made of
the site environment.
The site was also plotted on a plan
map of the project area and on a copy of the Bastrop 15
minute U.S.G.S topographic quadrangle map.

Survey Results:

., .

csP

Site 41JK68

Although this site extends o.:ver much of tlie study area
(about 25%) most of the site was destroyed or d~sturbed by
earlier construction df buildings at Camp Swift~
In the southwest portion of·the study area (see attached
project map) is the primary concentration of cobbles and
prehistoric lithic artifacts.
Artifacts tend to occur in
localized concentrations 10-20 meters in diameter.
The site is located above the'primary alluvial flood­
plain of sandy silts, and below the sandy upland soils
within a dense bed of cobbles. The estimated area is 300
meters by lSOO meters (long axis is north-south).
Temporal placement of this site is difficult due to the
absence of time diagnostic projectile points.
Based on the
lithic ~echnology (use of large cores, large amounts of
debris, and absence of blades. An Archaic period age (5000 B.C.
A.D. 500) appears to be represented.
The lithic artifact assemblage observed consisted of
primary and secondary flakes and chips that were struck from
cobbles.
Examples of the latter also occur on the site.
Cores consist of cobbles with one to five flakes removed,
but no really intensive utilization of individual cobbles
was observed.
No bifaces or projectile points were found.
Tools consist of a few scattered retouched pieces, side
and multiple edge scrapers. Hammerstones are probably present
but were not observed.

.

,'"
~, .

,t

,

-.. ---=-:..~- ..--.----.-..­

- ..
,

.

Page 4

Within the southwestern portion of the site most of
the artifacts are restricted to the surface of the site.
However, in areas where erosion activity or construction
had cut into the cobble concentrations lithic "artifacts"
were observed.
In some cases these appeared to be the result
of battering ~obbles together by running heavy vehicles over
them or scraping the ground surface.
This may cause
problems if any further archeological investigations are
undertaken, in distinguishing cultural artifacts from
manufactured flakes and debris formed fortuitously in this
manner.
Mitigation and Recommendations
The mitigation of the archeological resources within the
proposed Federal Youth Center at Jormer Camp Swift depends
to a large extent on the development of more detailed con­
struction plans.
~
On the basis of the previous dIsturbance to the arche­
ological resources in most of th~'~tudy area that" archeological
clearance should be given for all but the southwest portion
of the study area (defined by area south of 10th street
and west of the barracks as shown on accompanying project map.).
If the southwest portion of site 4lBP68 is not to be
affected directly by construction or land modification then
only Phase I (described below) will be needed.
If however,
the southwest section is to be affected by construction then
Phases I and II should be implemented.
Phase I'
This would consist of controlled surface collection of
artifactual material and sampling the cobbles within the
southwest area (see project map). Limited subsurface testing
may also be necessary.
Phase II
This phase
would be implemented following phase I, if
project related surface modification of the southwestern
portion of the site is necessary. Phase II will consist of
intensive archeological testing to reveal the horizontal
patterning of artifacts in relation to the natural cobble
deposits at the site. Mechanical testing may also be needed
to stratigrapnically relate these cobble deposits to adjacent
alluvial and upland deposits.

.~

,

.

.

.,

Page 5
R.eferenc~

Cited

Johnson, LeRoy; DeeAnn Suhm~ and Curtis D. Tunnell 1962,
Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: the Wunderlich,
Footbridge, and Oblate Sites. Bulletin No.5, Texas
Memorial Museum, Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, 1957, Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter,
Travis County, Texas. Texas Journal of Science 9(1):

'.~

."

.......

26-58.

