ARCHEOLOGICAL ENVIRONMENTAL
STATEMENT, TEXAS COAST

A study of the effects of petroleum
exploration and production activities on
archeological and historical resources
along the Texas coast prepared for
the Galveston District, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers

by
Lawrence E. Aten
Research Archeologist

Research Report No. 3
Texas Archeological Salvage Project
The University of Texas at Austin
May, 1971

Mr. D. T. Graham
Chief, Engineering Division
Galveston District, Corps of Engineers
P.O. Box 1229
Galveston, Texas 77550
Dear Mr. Graham:
The purpose of this letter is to report the results of our study of the effects
of petroleum exploration and production activities (drilling, dredging, and pipeline
excavations) upon preservation of archeological and historical resources of the
Texas coast pursuant to U.S. Corps of Engineers Purchase Order No. DACW 6471-M-0668.
A.

General Appraisal of Archeological and Historical Resources

The area covered by this appraisal extends from approximately one mile
inland along the coastal lagoons, estuaries, and navigable streams to the limit of
legal jurisdiction of the State of Texas in offshore waters—the 3-league line. As
of the date of this report, approximately ten percent of the land area and less
than one percent of the water-covered area outlined above has been
systematically searched for archeological and historical sites (hereafter referred
to simply as “sites”), with an estimated thoroughness of coverage generally
ranging between 50 to 80 percent. The results of these site surveying activities
are summarized on Map 1 1 which is attached to this report.
The most obvious and most common type of site known for the Texas coast
from Sabine Lake to Corpus Christi Bay is the shell midden. Ranging in size from
very small accumulations representing only one or two day’s occupation refuse to
very large, mounded deposits representing periodic occupation for hundreds of
years; these middens consist principally of varying mixtures of clams and oysters
as well as animal bones and tools such as pottery and projectile points. South of
Corpus Christi Bay shell middens become quite rare and instead the sites are
generally thin, sparse accumulations of animal and fish bone, and chipped stone
artifacts. Some more extensive and stratified sites are found sandwiched
between the seasonal accumulations of clay on the extensive clay dune deposits
of the south coast.
1

Map 1 appended (in 4 parts) at end of publication (pages 21-24).

2

Outlined on Map 1 are the geographic limits of the various site surveys and
their results in terms of source of data, estimated thoroughness of coverage,
average number of sites per square mile, and, in certain cases as indicated by
shading and slanted letters, the number of sites per square mile for particularly
dense site concentrations (arbitrarily selected as three or more per square mile).
Also indicated on Map 1 are areas that are not likely to contain sites (in the
surface sediments at least) due to the very recent deposition of these sediments.
There are other areas of recent deposition that are not indicated on the map
either because of their relatively small size or because of the absence of reliable
data. Usually these areas are associated with present river deltas and the delta
margin or peripheral areas and with portions of the barrier islands and barrier
peninsulas.
The general implication of Map 1 is that sites are fairly common on most
parts of the Texas coast. The total number of sites recorded thus far is 717 and
the best estimate that can now be made of average site density for any given
square mile of land area on the Texas coast is approximately 3.4 sites per
square mile. Locally, however, these densities were recorded to be as low as 0.5
per square mile and as high as 16.6 per square mile.
Certain qualifications do need to be made regarding the onshore data
presented on Map 1. First, it would probably not be correct to try to compensate
the site quantities presented by estimating the number of sites likely to be
present in a survey area on the basis of whatever additional factor would be
required to represent 100 percent coverage of the area. Thus, for example, an
area known to contain 21 sites and to have had about 75 percent survey
coverage could not realistically be estimated to contain 28 sites if the coverage
had actually been 100 percent. We can, however, assume that the data
presented on Map 1 represents a conservative estimate of site occurrences in
the areas surveyed and, assuming these surveyed areas to be more or less
representative of the coast as a whole, it is probably safe to think in terms of an
average site density of at least four sites per square mile even in the coastal
areas for which no survey data is indicated on Map 1.
The second important qualification to mention concerns differential
preservation of sites. As a result of a variety of site destroying processes, there
are some areas along the coast where very few sites now remain. For example,
around the southern margin of Baffin Bay in Kleberg County a recent survey
(Hester, 1969) located eight sites with a resulting site density of approximately
0.5 sites per square mile. In 1941, an earlier survey in essentially the same area
was conducted (manuscript by G. E. Arnold in the files of the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Balcones Research Center, Austin, Texas)
in which 15 sites were located. Arnold then notes:
Up to the present time, no shell middens have been found
in Kleberg County. However, Mr. John Kenedy reports that
up to ten years ago [1931] large ‘deposits’ of oyster and

3

conch shells were found along the west shore of Laguna
Madre. Since then, storms have washed away as much as
fifty feet of the bluffs facing the shore. Mr. Goodman of
Caroline Beach also reports shell heps [heaps] on the east
shore of Grulio Bayou [an extension of Baffin Bay]. These
were washed away some eight years ago [about 1933].
Virtually every estuary along the coast suffers this problem to one degree or
another with estuaries such as Baffin Bay, Corpus Christi Bay, and Galveston
Bay suffering especially severe damage. Petroleum exploration and production
related activities are not directly responsible for this problem and are only locally
responsible in an indirect sense (where barge transportation induces or adds to
erosion problems). The principal point to be made, however, is that whatever the
reason for site loss in the past, there is an increasing number of locations on the
coast where we cannot afford to lose any more sites (at least prior to intensive
investigation) without suffering an irreparable loss—irreparable in the sense of
being unable to duplicate or compensate for such lost information at another site.
The third qualification is that the 717 sites tabulated here are the total
number that have ever been known for the areas surveyed and are presented to
give some appreciation of the density of archeological resources. However,
documentation of these sites spans the last four decades and many are known to
no longer exist. An exact count is not available, but a conservative estimate
would be that at least one-third of the 717 sites no longer exist.
In the water-covered areas of the estuaries, coastal lagoons, and offshore,
the problem of determining and dealing with archeological and historical
resources is extremely difficult. One class of sites that can be dealt with to a
degree consists of sunken vessels. Numerous vessels of historical significance
are known to have sunk on the Texas coast over the past 400 years. For many of
these there exists historical documentation. The Office of the State Archeologist,
Texas State Historical Survey Committee, is currently conducting a document
search for data pertaining to such vessels and a preliminary list of their results for
some coastal bay regions is presented in Table 1. Many of the coastal bays
were, for the most part, too shallow for navigation and so it is not expected that
many vessels are likely to be found in such places as Aransas Bay. However,
Corpus Christi Bay is expected to contain vessels of interest as well as virtually
any other coastal area of navigable waters. Probably the most unique of these
presently known are the La Belle and the Amiable which were part of La Salle’s
expedition and are known to have sunk somewhere in Matagorda Bay.
The vessels listed in Table 12 were all involved in travel to one point or
another on the Texas coast. Offshore, however, are found wrecks of vessels
involved in longer range activities which were sunk for various reasons. In this
class, of course, occur the well known Spanish vessels of the 16th Century. In
general, it is the opinion of archeologists concerned with the problem of
2

Table 1 appended at end of publication after Maps 1 and 2 (pages 29-30).

4

shipwrecks that on the Texas coast these vessels will most likely be located
within one-half mile of the shoreline because this is the region in which the
vessels actually went aground and broke up. Other sunken vessels no doubt are
present in deeper waters but are more scattered and considerably more difficult
to locate. The Texas State Historical Survey Committee has contracted the
Institute for Underwater Research, Inc., to conduct magnetometer surveys of
portions of the coast from the shoreline to about one-half mile offshore principally
in the vicinity of Yarborough Pass and Mansfield Cut as well as a small area
around Brazos Santiago. This survey (the surveyed areas are indicated on Map
1) reported the location of about ten vessels (Hays and Herrin, 1970).
Also to be found under the waters of the Gulf and of the coastal estuaries
are prehistoric archeological sites from periods of lower sea level. Excellent
evidence that the Gulf area was inhabited at least as early as 12,000 years ago
(Gagliano, 1970) is now available and sea level position at that time, by relatively
conservative estimates (Shepard, 1960) would have been at least 140 feet lower
than present. This means that archeological sites could be expected anywhere
on the Texas coast as far offshore as the 3-league line. Unfortunately, we have
almost no technology at present to enable archeologists to find and investigate
such sites in a satisfactory manner. It further seems unlikely that offshore
petroleum industry-related activities (beyond one-half mile from the
shoreline) will seriously damage these underwater site resources unless a
substantial intensification of industrial activity occurs.
B.

The Significance of These Resources

Archeology, as a branch of anthropology, is a young discipline which only in
recent years has been developing maturity as a science; that is, we are only now
getting beyond the relic collecting stage. It is in no sense our goal to collect as
many artifacts or as many different kinds of artifacts as is possible, nor do our
contemporary goals include that of showing, in museum fashion, objects used by
extinct peoples. Although there is a legitimate educational purpose in this type of
activity, it emphatically is not the object of archeology as a science (nor is it the
end result of the relatively small sum of money spent for archeological research),
but rather is a by-product. Our objective is to gain a rational understanding of
human behavior. This objective is being pursued on many investigative “fronts”.
Thus, some archeologists, as anthropologists, study the most primitive cultures
of the distant past while others study the civilizations of the present; and between
these extremes lie a great variety of other interests. The objectives of these
varied interests are the same, however, and that is to gain a systematic
understanding of human behavior.
Theories of culture of varying scope abound in our profession with generally
the more bizarre or spectacular ones being brought to popular attention. This is
decidedly unfortunate in that these often bring ridicule upon the science of
anthropology or else generate a considerable degree of confusion among the
public. In general, however, anthropologists view culture as a complex system in
which an enormous variety of activities (e.g., technology, religion, economy,

5

language, etc.) are linked together in complex, but understandable and regular
ways. The archeologist as an anthropologist also perceives that much of these
complex systems are reflected in the patterns of association of material remains
of prehistoric life as they are preserved in the ground, and that, as a result, it is
possible to reconstruct and then study many aspects of extinct cultures. The
principal advantage the archeologist has over his colleagues studying the richer
data of contemporary societies is that he can view his cultural systems over long
periods of time and thus observe the long-term processes that operate to
generate change in these systems.
The circuitously routed point of these comments is that our great concern is
not in being able to collect as many pots or stone tools as possible from as many
sites as possible. Our concern is in being able to record for each area of the
coast and for as short intervals of time as we are able to measure, such things as
where native populations resided and at what times of year, population sizes,
natural resources utilized (for food and other purposes), activities undertaken at
each site location, etc. This is not to say that every site must be intensively
excavated; but it is to say that there is an essential minimum amount of
information that must be recorded for each site in order to learn anything about
larger patterns of population dynamics.
It is also important to emphasize that small sites are of no less importance
or consequence than large sites, for the small sites represent lack of intensive
occupancy at a particular location and we should like to know for what reasons
this occurred. (It is reasonably clear now that the coastal Indians did not
thoroughly utilize the resources of their environment and so lack of food is no
obvious explanation. Political alignments, territorial encroachment by other
groups—ultimately including the European settler—and culturally determined
food restrictions [taboos] as well as other factors all combine to make
explanations of settlement patterns a complicated matter indeed.) These small
sites are also important since it is often easier for the archeologist to collect high
quality data because of less physical mixing of remains from multiple periods of
occupation.
There was a great deal of cultural variability on the Texas coast. We have
already noted that good evidence exists for human occupation of the Gulf Coast
as early as 12,000 years ago. At that time sea level was much lower than at
present and the coastal environment was many miles seaward with the cultures
situated in the area of the present coast at that time representing inland hunting
and gathering economies.
Rising sea level finally placed the coastal zone (and therefore coastal
environment sites) in its present position 3,500 to 4,000 years ago. Little is
known of subsequent historical developments until roughly 2,000 years ago after
which time at least three different cultural patterns are recognizable which
correspond in a very rough manner to the groups encountered by early European
explorers and travelers. These were the Atakapa (from Sabine Lake to Galveston
Bay), the Karankawa (from west of Galveston Bay to Corpus Christi Bay), and

6

the Coahuiltecans (from Corpus Christi Bay to south of the Rio Grande). To
pursue this topic further, the best source for general reading is Newcomb (1961)
although this volume is somewhat outdated now. A bibliography of significant
technical literature on the Texas coast is provided at the end of this report.
Finally, we must emphasize that the archeological and historical sites being
destroyed today, for whatever reason (and on the Texas coast, erosion is the
principal cause), constitute destruction of our society’s only direct link with the
earlier activities of mankind in Texas. They also constitute the only materials that
can be studied to learn about human behavior as it developed over the long
perspective of history. These resources are unique and non-renewable; once
destroyed, there is no way in which to recover the information that has been lost.
We urge, of course, that a site be intensively investigated if it is going to be
destroyed, but even this recommendation is unsatisfactory because future
generations of anthropologists will be unable to study these sites with their
different viewpoints and more advanced techniques. In the language of the
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, any destruction of an archeological or
historical site will constitute an “…irreversible and irretrievable commitment of
resources…” and becomes increasingly intolerable.
C.

Potential Effects of Facility Construction and Operation

In general, activities related to petroleum exploration and production have
not been major sources of site destruction, at least in the surveyed areas
indicated on Map 1.
There are four principal sources of damage from the petroleum industry
which are: (1) pipeline excavations; (2) canal excavation to provide barge access
to well sites; (3) shell mining; and (4) well locations. More instances of site
destruction due to pipeline routing have been reported than any other activity
and, although an exact figure is hard to come by due to the casualness of some
of the older survey records, an approximate figure would be about 20 sites
destroyed or severely damaged. Probably the most significant of the sites so
damaged are those comprising the historic Spanish mission and presidio
complex and the French trading post at Wallisville on the lower Trinity River.
Even though one of these sites was subsequently almost totally destroyed by the
excavation of a borrow pit for highway construction (Tunnell and Ambler, 1967),
the initial damage was by pipeline construction.
Canal excavation to provide access to well sites is only done in marsh and
mudflat terrain in river deltas, coastal marshes and, in places, on the landward
margins of barrier islands. We have a few reported instances of site destruction,
but in most cases the locations of these canals have not been surveyed. These
marshy areas, however, have very high food productivity and frequently contain
numerous aboriginal sites.

7

The placement of well locations has resulted in only one definite report of
damage to a site and although more instances probably exist, it would appear
that this has not been a serious problem.
Another problem which is quite serious but which as of this time we have
not been able to attribute to petroleum exploration and production activity except
in two instances in the Wallisville Reservoir area is the mining of shell from
aboriginal shell middens to surface dirt roads leading to well sites or tank
facilities. This practice is extremely serious because of the large quantities of
shell used and, as a result, causes extensive damage to archeological sites.
In the area of offshore operations, as was previously noted, no significant
problem presently exists beyond one-half mile from the beach, and barring a
major increase in drilling activity, these operations probably need not be a
concern for the immediate future. For the offshore activities in the estuaries and
within one-half mile of coastal beaches, the possibility does exist that a
drilling platform might do considerable damage to a sunken vessel.
D.

Recommended Means of Mitigating Damage or Destruction

In order to mitigate potential damage to archeological and historical
resources, we recommend the following policies and procedures be considered:
1. That any construction permit requestor be required to obtain a survey
and evaluation of the archeological resources of the geographic area to
be covered by the requested permit (any surveying on state, county, or
municipally-owned property in Texas requires an Antiquities Permit from
the Texas Antiquities Committee);
2. That evaluations be accepted only from a professional archeological
organization, institution, or individual archeologist recommended for this
purpose by the National Park Service. With respect to offshore site
potential, we suggest that evaluations be accepted from a professional
organization, institution, or individual recommended for this purpose by
the Texas State Archeologist and/or the Texas Antiquities Committee;
3. That such an evaluation will stipulate:
a. the location of all archeological or historical sites located within
the geographic limits covered by the requested permit,
b. the location of all archeological or historical sites that will be
disturbed by any earth-moving activity, or be covered by or
exposed to any caustic substance, organic chemicals, or
hydrocarbons,
c. the location of all archeological or historical sites whose
preservation might be adversely affected by conditions directly
or indirectly resulting from activities for which the permit is
requested, such as increased erosion resulting from destruction
of vegetation cover.
4. That such an archeological evaluation include augering, excavation of
small test pits, collection of artifacts lying about the surface, or other

8

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

appropriate techniques for the purpose of determining the lateral extent
and depth of the deposits containing archeological and/or historical
materials and for the purpose of determining, if possible, the nature and
age of these materials so as to be able to evaluate their scientific and
historic significance and potential for additional investigation;
That the archeological evaluation of each affected site will contain a
detailed statement of the site’s significance in terms of providing useful
archeological information, and to what extent it would not be possible to
determine and verify this information at another locality;
That the archeological evaluation provide quantified estimates,
expressed in terms of guidelines suggested by the Southwest
Archeological Center of the National Park Service (Appendix I) of the
archeological or historic site loss that would result from execution of the
proposed construction as well as an estimated budget for a program of
salvage excavations where these are deemed necessary;
That in the event the archeological and historical site evaluation reveals
potentially informative sites likely to be affected by construction
activities, ways be sought to relocate the construction in a less harmful
area;
That in event construction plans cannot possibly be modified and if the
site or sites to be affected have a potential to provide useful information,
the permit requestor be required to finance excavations to salvage
archeological and/or historical data; and
That no permit request be approved without prohibiting the use of shell
obtained from prehistoric archeological sites for use as a construction or
road-surfacing material.

Several comments need to be made in conjunction with the preceding
recommendations. First, recommendations 1 through 6 basically refer to a single
recommendation—that an archeological evaluation be obtained prior to issuance
of any permits entailing significant modification of the landscape.
Recommendations 1 through 6 are simply an attempt to suggest the structure of
such an evaluation.
Second, the apparently extreme stipulations of recommendation 3b are
specified because caustic and organic chemicals and hydrocarbons have
extremely severe affects upon archeological remains in the ground. In one
instance in our recent experience on the coast, a site situated very near a
chemical plant showed severe effects of caustic chemicals up to a depth of five
feet under poorly permeable silty clay. Organic chemicals and hydrocarbons also
render impossible such analyses as radiocarbon dating. Our general thinking in
this regard is with respect to encouraging a judicious placement of drilling mud
and chemical pits as well sites situated near archeological or historic sites.
Third, that in order for some idea to be had regarding the costs involved in
carrying out the recommendations for site survey and for site excavation, we
have included in Appendix II a semi-detailed cost breakdown on these activities

9

based on Texas Archeological Salvage Project cost estimates, which are more or
less representative of those prevailing in Texas.
Fourth, we should like to note that there is ample precedent for industrial
support of such site salvage as recommended here. El Paso Natural Gas
Company has financed archeological salvage on several hundred miles of
pipeline right-of-way in Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and Colorado (Wendorf, et
al., 1956).
And, finally, we suggest that this archeological environmental statement for
petroleum exploration and production activities be professionally reviewed again
in approximately three years.
E.

Recommendations for Prohibition of Petroleum Exploration,
Production, and/or Transportation Activities
We do not at this time recommend a prohibition of exploration and
production related activities in any locality on the Texas coast. We believe,
however, the point has been amply made that important archeological and
historical resources are present along the entire Texas coast as well as
under the waters of the coastal estuaries and the Gulf of Mexico. Also, it
has been stated (and we wish to re-emphasize this) that there are some
areas of the coast where we cannot afford to unnecessarily lose any more
sites. We urge that extreme caution be exercised in those areas. Map 2 3
has been prepared as a general guide to their location.

F.

Summary of Report
1. General appraisal: The areas extending from the fringes of the mainland
offshore to the 3-league line are reviewed for the impact of petroleum
exploration and production operations upon archeological and historical
resources. Less than ten percent of this area has been surveyed but it
is estimated that archeological and historical sites are found generally
along the coast with average site densities of up to four sites per square
mile, although in some areas sites are more densely distributed than
this. Numerous sunken vessels are known to occur under the offshore
and estuarine waters but actual survey data is as yet sparse.
2. Their significance: Archeological and historical resources are our
society’s only direct link with the past and constitute truly unique basic
scientific resources for the study of human behavior. These resources
are distinctly non-renewable and to damage or destroy a site is
considered an irreversible and irretrievable severing of such inks with
the past.
3. Potential effects of construction: In general, petroleum exploration and
production operations have not been major sources of site destruction,
although this is not the case for other petroleum-related activities such

3

Map 2 appended (in 4 parts) at end of publication (pages 25-28).

10

as refinery and petrochemical plant construction and product
transportation by ship and barge. Pipeline excavations, well-site access
canals, and shell mining for construction and road surfacing are the
principal sources of site damage or destruction by exploration and
production activities. In offshore areas, damage to sites is less likely at
present, except in the shallow nearshore and estuarine waters where
sunken shipwrecks may be encountered.
4. Recommended means of mitigating damage: Our basic
recommendations are that a survey and evaluation of archeological and
historical resources be obtained prior to approval of any construction
permit requests; that ways be sought to effect small-scale relocations of
construction activities that threaten sites which have a potential to
provide useful information; in the event that such relocation is
impossible that salvage excavations be financed by the permit
requestor; and that use of shell from aboriginal campsites for any
construction purposes be stipulated against as one condition of permit
approval. We also suggest, in view of the fluid nature of site
preservation, site investigation, and industrial activity on the Texas
coast, that this archeological environmental statement be professionally
reviewed again in approximately three years.
5. Recommendations for prohibition of activities: we recommend no
prohibition at this time, but urge that serious consideration be given to
the status of site preservation and site information potential (as outlined
in sections A and B and on Maps 1 and 2) when considering permits for
approval.
Lawrence E. Aten
Research Archeologist

Approved for submission:
David S. Dibble
Acting Director

11

APPENDIX I
Preliminary Guidelines on Quantified Valuation
of Archeological Resources
These guidelines were presented to the Recreation and Environmental
Planning Conference, Greers Ferry Lake, Arkansas (May 5-7, 1971) by Douglas
H. Scovill, Assistant Chief of Archeological Research, Southwest Archeological
Center, National Park Service.
In order to provide quantified valuations of the “…presently unquantified
environmental amenities and values…” as stipulated by section 102 of the
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, the following guidelines for
determining the valuation are recommended:
1. Determination of the dollar cost of archeological studies that would fully
satisfy the requirements of a thorough investigation of the archeological
resources to be destroyed using our most advanced techniques of
research;
2. Determination of a subjectively assigned evaluation of the loss of an
essential element of scientific inquiry—the ability of future investigators to
return to the archeological resource to undertake research that would
validate or bring into question the work of earlier researchers or would
deal with new techniques, methods or theories not known at the time of
the original work;
3. Determination of the subjective assessment of opportunities missed by
not saving an undamaged resource for scientific use and inquiry by future
generations of Americans.

12

APPENDIX II
Approximate Costs of Archeological Survey and Excavation
This appendix presents a semi-detailed breakdown of average costs (based
on current costs at The University of Texas at Austin) of four types of work units
(the field excavation work unit, the field survey work unit, the laboratory
preparation work unit, and the laboratory analysis work unit). These work units
are the estimated daily costs involved in carrying out the major categories of
archeological research and through proper combination of these work unit costs
a rough estimate of the cost of a particular project may be determined (all
estimates are rounded off to the nearest dollar).
Work Unit Descriptions
Field Excavation Work Unit: This is the cost of operating and supporting a single
field crew (1 archeologist, 5 laborers) for one day.
Per Day
1 supervising archeologist @ $4/hr. (average)
5 crew laborers @ $2.50/hr. (average)
Sub Total
Social security & workmens’ compensation (approx. 6%)
Institutional overhead (36% of salaries and wages on
field-based studies)
Food and lodging (per diem allowance for supervising
archeologist = $14; for laborers = $4 each)
Expendable and non-expendable equipment costs
(includes hand tools, machinery, and vehicles)
Home office secretarial services (1/4 time)
4
Radiocarbon measurement services (average of
0.5 sample taken per day)
5
Pollen analysis (average of 0.5 sample taken
per day
TOTAL

4

$

32.00
84.00
116.00
7.00
42.00
34.00
14.00
8.00
25.00
17.00

$ 263.00

Radiocarbon and pollen analyses are properly part of laboratory analysis but their costs are
more accurately measured in relation to the duration of field work where an average number of
samples taken can be determined.
5
See Footnote 4.

13

Field Survey Work Unit: This is the cost of operating a party of survey
archeologists in the field for one day.
Per Day
1 supervising archeologist @ $4/hr. (average)
2 survey assistants @ $2.10/hr. (average)
Sub Total

$

Social security & workmens’ compensation (approx. 6%)
Institutional overhead (36%)
Food and lodging
Per diem allowance for supervising archeologist = $14
for survey assistants = $8 each
Expendable and non-expendable equipment utilization
Home office secretarial services (1/8 time)
TOTAL

32.00
34.00
66.00
4.00
24.00

30.00
12.00
4.00
$ 140.00

Laboratory Preparation Work Unit: This is the amount of work (washing,
cataloging, sorting, preservation, and restoration) that can be accomplished in
one day using the laboratory facilities available at The University of Texas at
Austin. As an average and generalized estimate, approximately 3.0 laboratory
preparation work units are necessary to process the material derived from one
field excavation work unit, and 1.5 laboratory preparation work units to process
the materials derived from one field survey work unit.
Per Day
2 laboratory technicians @ $2/hr. (for washing, cataloging,
restoration, etc.)
1 laboratory technician @ $2/hr. (for separation of materials
to be distributed to specialist consultants)
Sub Total

$

16.00
48.00

Social security & workmens’ compensation (approx. 6%)
Institutional overhead (36%)
Expendable supplies (special detergents, glue, ink, bags,
chemical preservatives and ingredients for special
processes such as density separation)
TOTAL

32.00

3.00
17.00

8.00
$

76.00

14

Laboratory Analysis Work Unit: This is the work involved in analyzing data and
preparing a technical report. As a general estimate, it usually takes six days of
laboratory analysis to process the material recovered from one day of excavation
field work and three days of laboratory analysis to process the material recovered
from one day of survey and evaluation field work.
Per Day
1 supervising archeologist @ $4/hr. (average)
1 laboratory assistant @ $2/hr. (average)
6
1 draftsman (0.5 hr., $2.10/hr., average)
7
1 photographer (0.5 hrs., $2.10/hr., average)
8
1 typist (0.5 hr., $2.10/hr., average)
9
1 manuscript editor (0.5 hr., $2.10/hr., average)
1 macro and micro faunal identification specialist (1.5 hr.
@ $2.10/hr., average)
1 macro botanical identification specialist (1.5 hrs.,
@ $2.10/hr., average)
Sub Total

$

3.15

$

Social security & workmens’ compensation (approx. 6%)
Institutional overhead (36%)
Expendable supplies (secretarial, photographics, drafting,
reproduction expenses, etc.)
TOTAL

32.00
16.00
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.05

3.15
59.00
4.00
21.00
5.00

$

89.00

The principal estimate to be made when planning a project is either the
number of “field excavation work units” or “field survey work units” that will be
required to execute a particular field problem. In general then, costs can be
roughly estimated as follows:
Survey project cost

=

[(no. of survey work units) (1) (survey
work unit cost)] +
[(no. of survey work units) (1.5) (laboratory
preparation work unit cost)] +
[(no. of survey work units) (3) (laboratory
analysis work unit cost)].

Thus, for example, a survey estimated to require five days of field work
would be estimated to cost:

6

These services are not generally required on a daily basis; a general estimate is that they can be
prorated at a rate of 0.5 hours per day of laboratory analysis.
7
See Footnote 6.
8
See Footnote 6.
9
See Footnote 6.

15

Cost

=

[(5) (1) (140)] + [(5) (1.5) (76)] + [(5) (3) (89)]

=

700 + 570 + 1,330

=

$2,600

Excavation project cost

=

[(no. of excavation work units) (1)
(excavation work unit cost)] +
[(no. of excavation work units) (3)
(laboratory preparation work unit
cost)] +
[(no. of excavation work units (6)
(laboratory analysis work unit
cost)].

Thus, the cost of a project estimated to involve 10 days of excavation could
be estimated as:
Cost

=

[(10) (1) (263)] + [(10) (3) (76)] + [(10) (6) (89)]

=

2,630 + 2,280 + 5,340

=

$10,250

The principal sources of fluctuation in costs from these rough estimates will
derive from:
1. salary differences among personnel due to differences in experience,
qualifications, and longevity;
2. differing requirements for laboratory assistants due to differences in types
of materials recovered from sites;
3. period of field work. Short field periods (e.g., one week) will have greater
unit costs and longer periods (e.g., three weeks or more) will have
somewhat lower costs than the averages given here.

16

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Site Location Surveys
All survey data taken from county record files maintained at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), The University of Texas at Austin,
except for the following published reports or manuscripts:
Ambler, J. Richard
1970 Additional Archeological Survey of the Wallisville Reservoir Area,
Southeast Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey
Reports, No. 6.
Corbin, James E.
1963 Archeological Materials from the Northern Short of Corpus Christi
Bay, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 34, pp.
5-30.
Corbin, James E., and Thomas Roy Hester
1968 Preliminary Statement on an Archeological Reconnaissance of Clear
Creek, Texas. Report submitted to the National Park Service.
Hays, T. R., and Eugene Herrin
1970 Padre Island Project, July, 1970. Report to the Texas Antiquities
Committee. Submitted by Institute for Underwater Research, Inc.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1969 Archeological Investigations in Kleberg and Kenedy Counties, Texas,
in August, 1967. State Building Commission, Archeological Program
Report No. 15.
Martin, George C.
n.d.
Preliminary Archaeological Survey of a Portion of the Texas Coast
Made by George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in 1927, 1928, and
1929. Privately printed.
Shafer, Harry J.
1966 An Archeological Survey of Wallisville Reservoir, Chambers County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey Reports, No. 2.
References to Coastal Shipwrecks
Anonymous
1968 The Texas Navy. Naval History Division, Navy Department.
Washington, D.C.
Bolton, Herbert Eugene

17

1915

The Location of La Salle’s Colony on the Gulf of Mexico. Mississippi
Valley Historical Review, Vol. 11, No. 2, pp. 165-182.

Boozer, Jessie Beryl
1942 The History of Indianola, Texas. MA Thesis, The University of Texas,
Austin.
Davenport, Harvard
n.d.
Shipwrecks of the Texas Revolution. Texas State Library, Archives
Division, Austin.
Dienst, Alex
1909 The Navy of the Republic of Texas. The Quarterly of the Texas State
Historical Association, Vol. XII, No. 3, pp. 165-203.
Dunn, W. E.
1917 Spanish and French Rivalry in Gulf Region, 1678-1702. The
University of Texas Bulletin No. 1705.
Garner, Ruby Lee
1927 Galveston During the Civil War. MA Thesis, The University of Texas,
Austin.
Joutel, Henri
1906 Joutel’s Journal of La Salle’s Last Voyage, 1686-87. New York.
Victoria Advocate (compilers)
1936 Indianola Scrap Book. Victoria.
General References on Texas Coast Archeology
Ambler, J. Richard
1967 Three Prehistoric Sites Near Cedar Bayou, Galveston Bay Area, State
Building Commission, Archeological Program Report No. 8.
Anderson, A. E.
1932 Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, pp. 29-31
Aten, Lawrence E.
1965 Five Crania From the Jamaica Beach Site (41 GV 5), Galveston
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 36,
pp. 153-62.
1967

Excavation at the Jamison Site (41 LB 2), Liberty County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society Report No. 1.

Aten, Lawrence E., and Charles N. Bollich

18

1969

A Preliminary Report on the Development of a Ceramic Chronology
for the Sabine Lake Area of Texas and Louisiana, Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 40, pp. 241-58.

Calhoun, C. A.
1961 Scored Pottery of the Texas Coastal Bend. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, The George C. Engerrand Volume, Vol. 32, pp.
321-26.
Campbell, T. N.
1947 The Johnson Site: Type Site of the Aransas Focus of the Texas
Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 18, pp. 40-75.
1952

The Kent-Crane Site: A Shell Midden on the Texas Coast. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23, pp. 3977.

1956

Archeological Material from Five Islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas
Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 7-46.

1957

Archeological Investigations at the Capien Site, Galveston County,
Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 449-471.

1958

Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas Coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29, pp. 145-76.

Campbell, T. N., and Jack Q. Frizzell
1949 Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Grande Valley, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 20, pp. 6372.
Covey, Cyclone (translator)
1961 Cabeza De Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America.
New York.
Dyer, J. O.
1917 The Lake Charles Atakapas (Cannibals): Period of 1817 to 1820.
Galveston.
Ewers, John C. (Editor)
1969 The Indians of Texas in 1830 by Jean Louis Berlandier. Washington.
Fitzpatrick, W. S., Joan Fitzpatrick, and T. N. Campbell
1964 A Rockport Black-on-Gray Vessel From the Vicinity of Corpus Christi,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 35, pp. 193204.

19

Gatschet, Albert S.
1891 The Karankawa Indians, The Coast People of Texas. Archeological
and Ethnological Papers of the Peabody Museum, Vol. I, No. 2.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1969 Archeological Investigations in Kleberg and Kenedy Counties, Texas,
in August, 1967. State Building Commission, Archeological Program
Report No. 15.
Hester, Thomas Roy, Michael B. Collins, Frank A. Weir, and Frederick Ruecking,
Jr.
1969 Two Prehistoric Cemetery Sites in the Lower Rio Grande Valley of
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 40, pp.
119.66.
Martin, Goerge Castor
1929 Notes on Some Texas Coast Campsites and Other Remains. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 1, pp.
50-57.
1930

Two Sites on the Callo Del Oso, Nueces County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 2, pp. 7-17.

1931

Texas Coastal Pottery. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 3, pp. 53-56.

Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas From Prehistoric to Modern Times. The
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Newman, Marshall T.
1953 Indian Skeletal Remains from the Doering and Kobs Sites, Addicks
Reservoir, Texas. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 154.
Reed, Clyde T.
1937 A Carankawa Fire Implement. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 9, pp. 218-21.
Ring, E. Raymond, Jr.
1960 An Evaluation of Radiocarbon Dates From the Galena Site,
Southeastern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
31, pp. 317-26.
Schaedel, Richard P.
1949 The Karankawa of the Texas Gulf Coast. Southwestern Journal of
Anthropology, Vol. 5.
Story, Dee Ann

20

1968

Archeological Investigations at Two Central Texas Gulf Coast Sites.
State Building Commission, Archeological Program Report, No. 13.

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Tunnell, Curtis D., and J. Richard Ambler
1967 Archeological Excavations at Presidio San Augustin de Ahumada.
State Building Commission, Archeological Program Report, No. 6.
Wakefield, Walter H.
1968 Archeological Survey of Palmetto Bend and Choke Canyon
Reservoirs, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey
Reports, No. 5.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1953 An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas.
Smithsonian Institution Bulletin 154, pp. 143-243.
Miscellaneous References
Gagliano, Sherwood M.
1970 Progress Report: Archeological and Geological Studies at Avery
Island, 1968-1970. Coastal Studies Institute, Louisiana State
University.
Shepard, Francis P.
1960 Rise of Sea Level Along Northwest Gulf of Mexico. In: Recent
Sediments, Northwest Gulf of Mexico.
Wendorf, Fred, Nancy Fox, and Orian L. Lewis (Editors)
1956 Pipeline Archeology. Santa Fe and Flagstaff.

21

Map 1
(In 4 parts; some overlapping occurred)

Map 1, Part 1

22

Map 1, Part 2

23

Map 1, Part 3

24

Map 1, Part 4

25

Map 2
(In 4 parts; some overlapping occurred)

Map 2, Part 1

26

Map 2, Part 2

27

Map 2, Part 3

28

Map 2, Part 4

29

Table 1:

Some Shipwrecks on the Texas Coast
(data compiled by State Archeologist, Texas State Historical
Survey Committee)

Name of
Vessel

Type

Galveston Bay and vicinity
Emeline
Schooner
Flash
Schooner

Site of Wreck

Date

Brutus

Schooner

Galveston Bay
West end of
Galveston Island
Galveston Bay

Invincible

Schooner

Galveston Bay

8-27-1837

Louisiana
Westfield

Steamship
Steamship

Neptune

?

?
(Confederate)
Le Compte

Sloop

5-31-1857
January
1863
January
1863
2-29-1864

Will-o’-theWisp
Denbigh

?

Galveston Bay
Offshore from
Galveston
Near end of
Galveston Wharf
Inside of Galveston
Island
Bolivar Point,
Galveston Bay
Off Galveston
Island
Bird Key,
Galveston Bay

Near Sand Point,
Matagorda Bay
Cavallo Pass,
Matagorda Bay
Cavallo Pass,
Matagorda Bay
Cavallo Pass,
Matagorda Bay
Matagorda Bay
Cavallo Pass,
Matagorda Bay
Off Indianola,
Matagorda Bay
Off Indianola,
Matagorda Bay
Off Indianola,
Matagorda Bay
Off Indianola,
Matagorda Bay
Off Indianola,
Matagorda Bay

Schooner

Blockade
Runner

Matagorda Bay and vicinity
La Belle
Amiable
San Felipe

Schooner

Hannah
Elizabeth
Palmetto
Meteor

Schooner

Perseverance

Steamship

Edith Belle
Nason Dover
Commodore
Morbitt
Phoenix

Schooner
Schooner

Tidal Wave

Schooner

Steamship
Steamship

Schooner

Source

June 1836
May 1837

Davenport, N.D.
Dienst, 1909

8-27-1837

Naval History
Division, 1968
Naval History
Division, 1968
Baughman, 1968
Garner, 1927
Garner, 1927
Garner, 1927

1864?

Garner, 1927

2-9-1865

Garner, 1927

5-24-1865

Garner, 1927

1685

Joutel

1685

Joutel

1835

Dienst, 1909

11-19-1835

Dienst, 1909

1-9-1851
4-29-1852

Baughman, 1968
Baughman, 1968

10-3-1856

Baughman, 1968

9-16-1875

Victoria Advocate,
1936
Victoria Advocate,
1936
Victoria Advocate,
1936
Victoria Advocate,
1936

9-16-1875
9-16-1875
9-16-1875

30

Name of
Vessel

Type

Site of Wreck

Matagorda Bay and vicinity (continued)
Floundes
Schooner
Off Indianola,
Matagorda Bay
Agnes Grey
Schooner
Off Indianola,
Matagorda Bay
Emory
Mail Boat
Off Indianola,
Matagorda Bay
Agnes
Mail Boat
Off Indianola,
Matagorda Bay
Alice
Mail Boat
Off Indianola,
Matagorda Bay
Delmore
Sloop
Off Indianola,
Matagorda Bay
Royinia
Sloop
Off Indianola,
Matagorda Bay
Shell Fish
Sloop
Off Indianola,
Matagorda Bay
Star of the
Sloop
Off Indianola,
South
Matagorda Bay
Quintana
Schooner
Cavallo Pass,
Matagorda Bay
Flower of
Schooner
Near Grass Island,
France
Matagorda Bay
Buffalo Bill
Fishing
Off Indianola
Boat
Peninsula,
Matagorda Bay
Aransas Bay and vicinity
Mary
?
Brazos Santiago
Giobe
Steamship
Cincinnati

Steamship

Location unknown
Columbus
Schooner
Mary Jane
Schooner
America
Schooner
Tamaulipas
Schooner

Date

9-16-1875
9-16-1875
9-16-1875
9-16-1875
9-16-1875
9-16-1875
9-16-1875
9-16-1875
9-16-1875
1887
8-20-1886
8-20-1886?

Source

Victoria Advocate,
1936
Victoria Advocate,
1936
Victoria Advocate,
1936
Victoria Advocate,
1936
Victoria Advocate,
1936
Victoria Advocate,
1936
Victoria Advocate,
1936
Victoria Advocate,
1936
Victoria Advocate,
1936
Victoria Advocate,
1936
Victoria Advocate,
1936
Victoria Advocate,
1936

Inner Aransas bar

11-30-1876

Baughman, 1958

Brazos Santiago
bar
Off Brazos
Santiago

6-17-1851

Baughman, 1968

5-23-1853

Baughman, 1968

1835 or 36
1835 or 36
12-20-1835
1835 or 36

Davenport, N.D.
Davenport, N.D.
Davenport, N.D.
Davenport, N.D.

?
?
?
?

