CULTURAL RESEARCH INVESTIGATIONS AT
COLLEGE STATION’S GEORGIE K. FITCH PARK
BRAZOS COUNTY, TEXAS
Antiquities Permit 7922

Prepared By:
Ed Baxter Consulting
8558 Smith Lane
College Station, Texas 77845

Principal Investigator:
Ed Baxter, RPA

Prepared For:
The City of College Station
P.O. Box 9960
College Station, Texas 77842

April, 2017

Abstract
Ed Baxter, RPA, of Ed Baxter Consulting conducted a cultural resource investigation on behalf
of the City of College Station, Texas under Antiquities Permit number 7922. The proposed
Georgie K. Fitch Park project is located in Brazos County at 1100 Balcones Drive, College
Station, Texas. The investigation was conducted to meet Section 106 requirements as part of
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) funding involvement
of the project. The proposed project is linear in nature and spans one tenth mile (161 meters). It
consists of the construction of a concrete sidewalk and a 50 foot (15.24 meter) iron bridge that
will link the park facilities with the Ringer Library. The maximum construction depth will occur at
the bridge with 14 foot (4.27 meter) piers.
A pedestrian survey was performed along with subsurface testing. A total of five shovel tests
and one backhoe trench were excavated. These investigations were negative for the presence
of cultural resources and all tests were terminated in clay. The area had been disturbed by land
clearing, creek channelization activities, and the construction of a large sewer main.

i

I. Definition of Project Area
The proposed Georgie K. Fitch Park project is located at 1100 Balcones Drive College Station,
Texas. It is in the northwestern portion of the southeast Texas Archaeological Region in central
Brazos County on the United States Geological Survey (USGS) Wellborn, Texas quadrangle
(Figure 1). The proposed project is linear in nature and spans one tenth mile (161 meters). It
consists of the construction of a concrete sidewalk and a 50 foot (15.24 meter) iron bridge that
will link the park facilities with the Ringer Library. The maximum construction depth will occur at
the bridge with 14 foot (4.27 meter) piers. The total project area is less than one acre (0.4
hectare). The area lies between 275-280 feet above mean sea level (ABMSL). Bee Creek in
this area has been channelized resulting in the northern section of the proposed project
following the old creek channel center. The new channel proceeds northeast. A second area of
disturbance is the past construction of a large sewer main paralleling the creek channel. The
north and south ends of the project area are in an oak/elm canopy with yaupon and greenbrier.
The remaining 50% has been cleared and is in short mowed grass (Figure 2).

1

Figure 1. General Location of the Project Area

Figure 2. View of the Project Area

II. Management Summary
Ed Baxter, RPA, of Ed Baxter Consulting conducted a cultural resource investigation on behalf
of the City of College Station, Texas under Antiquities Permit number 7922. He served as
Principal Investigator, Project Archaeologist, report author, GIS specialist, and report graphics
specialist. The investigation was conducted to meet Section 106 requirements as part of the
HUD funding involvement of the project. Fieldwork was performed on February 27 and March 2,
2017. To date a total of 24 person hours have been invested in the project.

III. Research Design
The following research design was followed where applicable during the course of the project.
Fieldwork and reporting will follow the Council of Texas Archaeologists (CTA) and Texas
Historical Commission (THC) guidelines.
Background research will be conducted prior to fieldwork.

2

The Project Archaeologist will visit the project area and conduct a thorough surface inspection
and shovel testing along the proposed route. All excavated earth from shovel testing will be
passed through ¼ inch (6.4 millimeter) hardware cloth. Artifacts found in shovel tests will be
collected and analyzed in the laboratory prior to curation. Shovel tests will be dug to the
underlying clay subsoil when possible and to depths of 100 cm when sandy soil is present, and
clay or water is not reached. One backhoe trench will be excavated on the most favorable side
of the creek for cultural deposits. The trench wall will be inspected for artifacts and/or features.
A sample of each zone will be screened for artifacts. A profile will be made of one face of the
trench. When a prehistoric site is found, an attempt to determine its boundaries through shovel
testing and surface inspection will be made. Historic sites will be delineated by surface features.
The project will be documented through a digital shovel test log, digital field notes, and digital
photography. A map will be drafted that depicts the location of all areas surveyed, including
shovel tests and surface features, if any. All newly discovered archaeological sites will be
plotted on the proper USGS topographic quadrangle. Field numbers will be assigned to all sites
until an official trinomial can be obtained from the Texas Archaeological Research Laboratory
(TARL).
All artifacts recovered through shovel testing will be collected for analysis in the laboratory as well
as diagnostic artifacts found on the surface. They will be described and measured. Those
specimens deemed worthy of permanent curation will be processed and turned over to TARL. All
artifacts not viewed as containing research potential for future researchers will be discarded
following a written document authorizing this action from the Texas Historical Commission,
Archeology Division. All original survey data will be submitted to TARL for curation.
A report documenting the findings of this project will be written by the Principal Investigator.
This report will follow the guidelines established by the CTA and THC for short reports. One
draft copy will be submitted to the THC for review. Upon acceptance of this report, 2 copies as
well as a CD containing the report in a tagged pdf format will be submitted to the THC. Two
copies of the final report without site locations will be distributed to TARL and the State Library.

IV. Results
File searches at the Texas Archaeological Sites Atlas (Atlas), the Texas Natural Resources
Information System (TNRIS) Texas Historic Overlay, the U. S. Department of Agriculture Natural
Resources Conservation Service (USDA-NRCS) the USGS Earth Resources Observation and
Science (EROS) Center and the USGS Earth Resources Observation and Science (EROS)
Center’ were conducted.
Background research on the Atlas found no previously recorded sites, surveys or properties
listed on the National Register of Recorded Places in the project area. A review of historic
USGS quadrangles and historic aerials did not indicate the presence of historic cultural
resources. Quadrangles reviewed included Bryan 1956 1:62500, Wellborn 1960 1:24000,
Wellborn 1971 1:24000, the USDA Brazos County Soils 1914, 1:63000. Historic single frame
aerials reviewed included 25 January 1953, 09 March 1960, 18 November 1970, and 29 March
1977. The U. S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service (USDANRCS) review found two soil mapping units within the project area. Soils of the project area
consist of BrB-Boonville Urban land complex , sandy loam over clay loam, over clay found on
ridges; Sb-Sandow-Urban land complex, frequently flooded, loam over stratified loamy sand to
clay loam and clay found in floodplains; and Ur-Urban Land 0-40 inches variable.
3

The pedestrian survey, shovel testing and backhoe trenching found no evidence of historic or
prehistoric cultural resources within the project area. A total of five shovel tests and one
backhoe trench were excavated to clay (Figure 3). The northeast wall of the trench was profiled
(Figure 4).

Figure 3. Shovel tests and backhoe trench locations
Shovel Test Log
Project: G.K. Fitch Park Survey
Recorder: Ed Baxter
February 27, 2017
Shov Dept Artifac
el
h
ts
Soils
Comments
Test

(cm)

Y/N

1

40

N

2

55

N

3

45

N

4

20

N

5

20

N

Sandy clay
loam/clay
Sandy clay
loam/clay
Sandy clay
loam/clay
Sandy clay
loam/clay
Clay

Date:

0-30 cm sandy clay loam, 30-40 cm clay
0-40 cm sandy clay loam, 40-55 cm clay
0-30 cm sandy clay loam, 30-40 cm clay
Old Creek Channel filled in 0-10 sandy clay loam, 1020 cm clay
Old Creek Channel filled in 0-20 cm hard yellow clay

Table 1. Shovel Test Log
4

Figure 4. Backhoe trench northeast wall profile

V. Recommendations:
The background research, pedestrian survey, shovel testing and backhoe testing found no trace
of any previously recorded or new cultural resource sites. Therefore it is recommended that the
project be allowed to proceed as proposed.

5

VI. References:
Texas Archaeological Sites Atlas located at https://atlas.thc.state.tx.us/ accessed on February 9,
2017.
TNRIS Texas Historic Overlay located at http://tnris-txhistoricoverlay.s3-website-us-east1.amazonaws.com/ accessed on February 9, 2017.
U. S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service (USDA-NRCS)
located at https://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/HomePage.htm accessed on February 10,
2017.
USGS Earth Resources Observation and Science (EROS) Center located at
https://eros.usgs.gov/#/Find_Data/Products_and_Data_Available/Single_Frame_Records
accessed February 10, 2017.
USGS Historical Topographic Map Explorer located at
https:/historicalmaps.arcgis.com/usgs/index.html accessed February 10, 2017.

6

