A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND
ASSESSMENT OF SECTION VIII OF
THE VILLAGE AT WESTERN OAKS
SUBDIVISION
Travis County, Texas

Technical Bulletin 74

David O. Brown

Principal Investigator:

Solveig A. Turpin

Report Submitted to
Nash Phillips/Copus, Inc.
P.O. Box 14508
Austin, Texas 78761

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
February 1984

ABSTRACT
In January of 1984, the Texas Archeological Survey conducted an
intensive cultural resource survey of a 56.544 acre tract of land in
the planned Section VIII of the Village at Western Oaks subdivision.
Two
prehistoric archeological sites, 41TV717 and 41TV718, were
recorded at that time.
These sites, described herein as lithic
procurement/primary reduction workshops, are more or less typical of
large, thinly spread procurement sites along the Balcones Escarpment.
Because of a lack of identifiable activity areas and the absence of
soil depth at either site, neither site could realistically be
expected to yield significant prehistoric cultural information. They
are therefore not eligible for nomination to the National Register of
Historic Places and no further work is recommended for them.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION . . . .

1

RESEARCH PROCEDURES

3

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND

3

CULTURAL BACKGROUND
SURVEY RESULTS .

~

,

.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
REFERENCES CITED . . . .

..

.

..

5

10
. 12
13

I NTRODUCTI ON
In January of 1984, the Texas Archeological Survey was contacted
by Nash Phillips/Copus, Inc. to conduct a cultural resource survey of
a 56.544 acre tract of land in the Village at Western Oaks subdivision
at Oak Hill. This tract, designated as Section VIII, is scheduled for
residential, single family dwelling development.
The study area,
shown in Figure 1, is located south of the existing developed sections
of the Village at Western Oaks, south of Convict Hill Road west of its
intersection with Beckett Road. It is on the U.S.G.S. Oak Hill 7.5
minute quadrangle. The survey is bounded on the west by Abilene
Trail, on the north and east by small intermittent drainages, and on
the south by the southern end of lots facing the south end of Brown
Rock Trai 1.
As a result of recommendations by Housing and Urban Development,
in
compliance with
Federal
regulations
governing
Veterans
Administration and Federal Housing Authority loan guarantees, cultural
resource surveys have become standard procedure in such residential
developments. The survey is designed to meet the broad requirements
of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 and the more
specific regulations contained in applicable Federal codes
and
guidelines.
As outlined in the proposal submitted to Nash Phillips/Copus,
Inc., the general aims of this study were to identify archeological
and significant historical resources within the designated area which
would be affected by the modifications and construction of residential
properties, and to assess, in a regional perspective, their scientific
potential.
More specifically, this survey is designed to develop and
report information relative to:
(1) the precise location and description of
any
resource area or feature to be directly or indirectly
affected by the proposed development;
(2) an evaluation of the identified resources in
of their scientific or historic value;

terms

(3) provide recommendations to the sponsor to 1essen
any predictable adverse effects on the resources; and
(4) provide recommendations for any additional studies
related to the interpretation of the resources which may be
beyond the investigative scope of this study.

Figure 1.

Project Location Map

I

~

j

/

.~~,

~

,

Page 3

RESEARCH PROCEDURES
Prior to the start of the fieldwork, a records search was
conducted in the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory files at
Balcones Research Center. The National Register of Historic Places
was also consulted for sites which might be nearby. No previously
recorded sites were found in or adjacent to the survey tract.
In
addition, preliminary data on local environment and history was
gathered to facilitate the location, recording and assessment of any
sites which might be found in the area.
Field work for this survey project was conducted on Monday,
January 30, 1984 by the author and David G. Robinson. The survey
area was covered in approximate 30 meter transects with special
emphasis on the creek bank and floodplain areas which bound the area
to the north and east.
Frequent outcrops of limestone bedrock
throughout the area suggested little soil depth, a fact substantiated
by occasional shovel probes which reached bedrock within a few
centimeters.
Sites located within the project area were recorded on standard
State of Texas Archeological Site Data forms. Only one artifact, a
projectile point from 41TV718, was collected during the project. This
artifact, all notes, and copies of the site forms will be placed on
file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Balcones Research
Center, Austin, Texas.
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
Climate
Travis County lies at the northernmost edge of the South Central
Texas Climatic division (Carr 1967), where it abuts both the North
Central and Edwards Plateau divisions.
The climate
is
humid
subtropical with hot summers (Werchan et al. 1974). Average annual
rainfall for Travis County is moderate, totalling 32.58 inches (based
on U.S. Weather Service data for the period from 1931 to 1960); with
peaks in May and September. Highest monthly average totals fall in
April, May and September with a maximum of 3.71 inches in May. The
lowest monthly total is in August, with just less than 2 inches.
Travis County's precipitation curve follows that of the South Central
Texas Climatic division closely with the exception of the secondary
peak in April and lower totals in July and August. Except for a much
less pronounced May peak and a more pronounced September peak, the
monthly distribution pattern is even more similar to that of the North
Central Texas area.
Travis County winters are mild with generally less than 25
freezing days each year. Cold temperatures are generated by frequent
dry artic air masses moving down off the plains, often bringing rapid
drops in temperature along with the strong north winds. The remainder

Page 4
of the year, the weather pattern is dominated by moisture laden south
and southeasterly breezes off of the Gulf of Mexico. Thunderstorms
are frequent in the Spring and Fall as the cold artic air masses are
overridden by the moisture laden warm Gulf air masses. These storms
Summers
can be particularly violent along the Balcones Escarpment.
are hot and generally dry with sporadic heavy thunderstorms making up
much of the precipitation.
Physiography and Geology
The project area lies along the Balcones Escarpment south of
Oakhill, Texas. As such, it falls into the transitional zone between
the Great Plains physiographic province to the west and the West Gulf
Coastal Plain to the east (Fenneman 1931, 1938). Garner and Young
(1976:5-6) divide the Austin area into three physiographic regions:
the Edwards Plateau of the Great Plains province, the Rolling Prairie,
which lies along the Balcones Fault Zone and the Blackland Prairie
which lies east of the Balcones Fault Zone. The Village at Western
Oaks project area lies along the transition between the Edwards
Plateau and Rolling Prairie zones, both of which are marked by varying
combinations of live oak and juniper woodlands and grasslands.
The
Rolling Prairie zone is marked by less heavily dissected slopes and
more open grasslands than the Edwards Plateau zone.
Underlying the project area is a broad band of Edwards Formation
limestone.
The Edwards Limestone, with a maximum thickness of about
300 feet in the Austin area, consists primarily of dolomite, dolomitic
limestone and hard limestone, but also includes some marly limestone,
brecciated limestone, clay, calcite and chert. This formation, often
of considerable significance in aboriginal site location because of
the presence of relatively high quality chert, is bounded on the west
by a large outcrop of Glen Rose Formation, separated by the trace of
the Mount Bonnell Fault (Barnes 1972). Convict Hill, just northwest
of the project area, is located on the upthrust edge of the Glen Rose
Formation. The Glen Rose, whose maximum thickness in Travis County is
about 1000 feet, is the oldest geologic unit exposed in the Austin
area. It is composed of alternating beds of marl, dolomite and
limestone.
East of the study area are a series of Upper Cretaceous
formation outcrops separated by a series of smaller fault traces. The
westernmost of these are the Georgetown, Del Rio and Buda formations.
The Georgetown and Buda formations are primarily limestone or marly
limestone, while the Del Rio is a calcareous and fossiliferous clay.
Still further east is an extensive outcrop of the Austin Group which
consists of II • • • about 350 feet of light gray chalk, limestone, marly
limestone and marl ll (Garner and Young 1976:35).
In the project area, the Edwards Limestone is not highly
dissected, forming a gently sloping, rolling topography. Elevations
range from about 780 to 810 feet above mean sea level in the survey
area.
Intermittent creeks bound the survey area on the north and
east, flowing together at the northeast corner of the area.
This
creek flows into Williamson Creek southwest of Sunset Valley. Both

Page 5
creeks have cut shallow channels down into the bedrock, although the
northern one has a deeper and more clearly defined channel in most
places. The northern creek is bounded by rocky banks with no real
floodplain or alluvial valley. The eastern creek, Kincheon Branch,
has a low flat bench bounding it to the west. This bench has a thin
layer of calcareous soil over bedrock. Drainage in the project area
may be primarily subsurface, with surface runoff soaking into the
limestone or disappearing into one of the seve ral small sinkh oles
observed throughout the area.
Soil sand Bi ota
Soils in the project area are shallow and calcareous. These are
mapped by the Soil Conservation Service (Werchan et al 1974) as
undifferentiated Tarrant and Speck series soils. Tarrant soils, which
comprise about 63 percent of this area, are described as II ••• shallow
to very shallow, well-drained, stony,
clayey
soils overlying
limestone ll (op.
cit., p.
39).
These soils are thought to have
developed under tall grass with an open canopy of trees, a vegetation
perhaps slightly more open than the juniper-oak woodland which covers
much of the area today. A typical profile is described as a 10 inch
(25 centimeter) layer of dark grayish-brown clay overlying limestone.
The soil contains approximately 45 percent flaggy limestone fragments
and about 70 percent of the surface is covered by large limestone
fragments (ibid.). A typical Speck soil has a surface layer of about
14 inches (35 centimeters) reddish-brown clay loam over 4 inches of
dark reddish-brown gravelly clay over hard limestone.
The vegetation of the project area is juniper-oak woodland with
about 60 percent woodland in which the dominant tree species are
juniper and live oak and 40 percent grassland with scattered junipers
and live oaks. Minor species include agarita, prickly pear and winged
elm. Gould (1975) lists some of the more important grasses of the
Edwards Plateau region, including Switchgrass (Panicum virgatum), Cane
bluestem (Bothriochloa barbinodis), Silver bluestem (B.
saccharoides
var.
torreyana), Little bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium var.
frequens), Sideoats grama (Bouteloua curtipendula), Canada wildrye
(Elymus canadensis), Common curlymesquite (Hilaria belangeri) and
Buffalograss (Buchloe dactyloides).
CULTURAL BACKGROUND
Previous Archeological Research
Because of the presence of the University of Texas and its long
active interest in archeology, Travis County has more recorded sites
than any other Texas county.
Extensive archeological research has
been conducted in the middle and lower portions of the Onion Creek
basin but very little work has been done in the upper reaches of Onion
Creek or along Williamson Creek. Several prehistoric and historic
sites have been excavated in the general vicinity of McKinney Falls

Page 6
state park, including the Collins Site (Suhm 1955), the Smith
Rockshelter (Suhm 1957) and the McKinney homestead (McEachern and
Ralph 1980).
Several recent survey and testing projects have been
conducted farther downstream in conjunction with a proposed wastewater
treatment plant (Whitsett and Fox 1979; Brown 1981; Thurmond 1982).
Considerable archeological effort has been expended recently on nearby
Barton Creek watershed where cultural resource surveys have been
conducted for the City of Austin by Tracor (McCormick 1974), Espey,
Huston and Associates (1979; 1982) and the Texas Archeological Survey
(Nightengale 1983). In addition, a few archeological sites have been
recorded east of the project area by independent archeological
contractors (Texas Archeological Research Laboratory files).
Prehistory
The prehistoric inhabitants of central Texas were, like their
historically documented descendents, probably semi-nomadic hunters and
gatherers. Technological and cultural changes through time have been
sorted into a number of cultural periods. The divisions utilized
here, outlined by. Prewitt (1981), are refinements of a culture
chronology scheme that has been many years in formulation by Texas
archeologists (cf Weir 1976, Suhm 1960, Kelley 1947).
The major
division
of Texas prehistory is tripartite, consisting of the
Paleoindian, Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods, each of which has
been divided into various phases or subperiods.
The subsequent
history of the historic Indian tribes and the early European settlers
is placed into the undivided Historic Period.
The Paleoindian Period (>11,000 to 8,500 B.P.)
Although there are some signs that suggest human presence in
North America prior to 11 or 12 thousand years ago, the best
documented early New World cultures date to after about 11,000 years
ago.
These
early peoples, called Paleoindians, are generally
characterized as nomadic, band societies emphasizing hunting as a way
of life.
Recent archeological evidence has shed new light on their
subsistence economies, suggesting that outside of the major grasslands
of the continent, where they are often found in association with the
remains of large mammals, these cultures may have placed a much
greater emphasis on small game and the gathering of plant resources
than had been previously thought.
What perhaps differentiated these people most from their Archaic
successors was their environment which was in transition from the
generally wetter and cooler climates of the Late Pleistocene to the
warmer and dryer climates of the Holocene in central Texas. At the
beginning of this period, numerous species of large herbivores roamed
a countryside that was more densely wooded with tree species such as
spruce and hemlock that are common to much colder climates at present.
By the end of the period, a number of these large mammals were
extinct, perhaps in part due to hunting pressures by human groups, and
the cold climate woodlands were beginning to give way to drier forests
and grasslands. Central issues in Paleoindian research in central

Page 7
Texas include a more precise understanding of the actual composition
of the fauna and flora of the area, and the utilization of these
resources by the Paleoindian peoples.
The classic chronological division of these peoples into three
succeeding cultures, the Llano, the Folsom and the Plano, has recently
become somewhat muddled by overlapping dates and parallel cultural
traditions but there is still some general validity in this scheme.
The earliest of these cultures, the Llano, is marked by
the
distinctive lanceolate style Clovis projectile point. The remains of
these peoples, which are generally dated between 10,500 and 11,500
years B.P., have quite often been found in association with the bones
of now extinct Late Pleistocene fauna, including mammoth, mastodon,
ground sloth, camel and the American horse.
A later Paleoindian cultural development, generally identified by
the very distinctive, fluted lanceolate style Folsom projectile
points, apparently arose after the extinction of the large proboscid
herbivores. The remains of these people are often associated with the
large species of extinct bison such as Bison antiquus. Following the
Folsom period, the late Paleoindian cultural traditions begin to
diverge somewhat, leaving behind a number of similar lanceolate forms,
many of which are loosely grouped together as Plainview or Plainview
variants.
Angostura,
Golondrina,
Meserve,
Firstview,
Eden,
Scottsbluff and Lerma are among the many types which have been
variously identified as late Paleoindian or very early in the Archaic
period.
The Archaic Period (8,500 B.P.

to 1,250 B.P.)

The transition from the Paleoindian period into the Archaic was a
gradual process, occurring over a several thousand year period, and
marked by the "increasingly efficient exploitation of an environment
which was itself in transition. There is at least some support for
the correlation between this cultural change and the post-Pleistocene
trend toward warmer and dryer climates. The Archaic period cultures
are generally characterized as having a more diversified resource base
than the earlier groups, although, as noted above, it is quite
possible that archeologists have underestimated the breadth of the
Paleoindian subsistence base. Another traditional characteristic of
the Archaic, the regional differentiation of cultural traditions, is
often noted.
Again, it may well be that archeologists have not only
underestimated the regional fragmentation of Paleoindian cultures
(suggested by the proliferation of Late Paleoindian projectile point
types), but have ignored the widespread distribution of many early
Archaic cultures.
An example of the latter is the deeply notched
point style, variously typed as Bell, Andice and Calf Creek, which
occurs from south Texas up into Missouri (Prewitt 1983). ---­
The long Archaic period is most often subdivided into three or
more subdivisions.
The most common subdivision has been the simple
tripartite separation into Early, Middle and Late periods.
Recently,
Prewitt (1981) has further subdivided these basic periods into a total

Page 8
of eleven named phases.
These phases, each of which purportedly
represents cultural and perhaps geographic differences, are identified
by Prewitt on the basis of key index markers, primarily projectile
points.
The Early Archaic is composed of four separate named phases:
Circleville (8,500 B.P. to 7,000 B.P), San Geronimo (7,000 B.P. to
6,000 B.P.), Jarrell (6,000 B.P. to 5,000 B.P.) and Oakalla (5,000
to 4,600 B.P.). Many of the projectile points from this period
B.P.
are quite well made and exhibit some typical Paleoindian technological
characteristics such as lateral edge grinding.
The variety of
projectile point types distributed over a large area prompts Prewitt
(1983:73) to suggest that these people were organized in small
dispersed bands which roamed broad territories.
The last phase of
this period is seen as transitional into the Middle Archaic.
Prewitt has divided the Middle Archaic into four named phases:
Clear Fork (4,600 B.P. to 4,000 B.P.), Marshall Ford (4,000 B.P. to
3,400 B.P.), Round Rock (3,400 B.P. to 2,600 B.P.) and San Marcos
(2,600 B.P.
to 2,250 B.P.). The Middle Archaic in central Texas is
characterized by the rise of the burned rock midden as a specialized
site type.
This site type becomes extremely common during this
period, suggesting an intense and perhaps rather specialized plant
processing
economy.
Weir (1976) has even suggested population
increases during this period and possible developments in social
organization.
Projectile points from this period are quite numerous,
occurring in large frequencies at some sites. They tend to be large,
straight-stemmed and are often not as well made as the points from
earlier or later periods.
The Late Archaic is divided into three phases by Prewitt (1981):
Uvalde (2,250 B.P. to 1,750 B.P.), Twin Sisters (1,750 B.P. to 1,400
B.P.) and Driftwood (1,400 B.P. to 1,250 B.P.). Although many of the
burned rock midden sites continue to be occupied during this period,
the accumulation of the middens slows or ceases altogether throughout
much of central Texas.
Prewitt suggests that the proliferation of
projectile points during the earliest phase of this subperiod may
represent a return to the early Archaic pattern of small, dispersed
bands with wide ranging territorial areas. The latter part of this
period appears to be marked by an emphasis on the utilization of a
wide variety of food resources, perhaps indicative of population or
climatic stress at this time.
Along the fringes of north central
Texas, a population increase has been suggested for this period
(Skinner et al 1978).
The Late Prehistoric Period (1,250 B.P.

to 200 B.P.)

This period, which Prewitt (1981) terms the Neo-Archaic, marks
the introduction of several technological advances into central Texas,
most notably the bow and arrow and pottery. The bow and arrow quickly
becomes the standard weapon, replacing the throwing stick or atlatl,
and small, thin stone arrowpoints become a key diagnostic indicator
among the material remains of the period. Pottery, never a major

Page 9
component of the Late Prehistoric cultures, was slow to take hold,
only becoming noticeable during the latter part of the period. At the
same time, technological and cultural changes in nearby areas, such as
the rise of agriculture and the development of hierarchical societies
in the Caddo area to the east (Story 1981), did not go unnoticed by
the central Texas native. However, the presence of a single corn cob
at Kyle shelter (Jelks 1962) and Caddo trade vessels along the Brazos
(Watt 1953) do not seem to indicate more extensive cultural
developments in the central Texas culture area.
Jelks (1962) divided the Late Prehistoric (then the Central Texas
Aspect) into two subperiods, the Austin and Toyah. Prewitt (1981)
retains this division, dating the Austin phase to between 1,250 B.P.
and 650 B.P. and the Toyah phase to between 650 B.P. and 200 B.P.
Hi story
The identities of the earliest historic Indian inhabitants of
central Texas are not clearly recorded.
By the time the first
European settlers had made their way into central Texas in the early
nineteenth century, most if not all of these early groups had been
decimated by disease or displaced by stronger Indian groups.
Newcomb
and Campbell (1982) suggest that the Tonkawa, who were a frequent
visitors to the Austin area during the early nineteenth century, may
have been located on the Plains during the early Historic period. In
addition to the Tonkawa, the Apache and later the Comanche were
recorded as present in the Hill Country during the eighteenth and
nineteenth century. The nineteenth century also saw small bands and
numerous individuals from tribes of the eastern United States,
drifting westward after the confiscation of their lands and the
breakup of their traditional social groups, pass through the central
Texas area.
Although the arrival of Cabeza de Vaca and his small party to the
Texas coast in 1528 is often considered the beginning of the historic
period in Texas, European settlement did not begin in earnest for
nearly two centuries afterwards.
Although several early Spanish
entradas crossed parts of what is now Travis County on their way to
the missions of East Texas, the settlement of Travis County began
relatively late. Other than a brief attempt in 1730 to relocate the
east Texas missions along Barton Creek near the Colorado, the area was
not seriously considered for European settlement until 1827 when
Stephen F. Austin founded his Little Colony with its headquarters at
Bastrop. The earliest settlement in the Austin area was on the
prairie east where such pioneers as Josiah Wilbarger, Reuben Hornsby
and James Gilleland obtained grants in the early 1830's.
Travis
County itself was created from Bastrop County in 1840.
To the early settlers who began dividing up the land east of
Austin, agriculture was an important part of their existence. Thus,
the shallow, rocky soils along and above the Balcones Escarpment were
not particularly attractive at this time. The project area lies on
one of the westernmost of the early land grants, that of Thomas

Page 10
Anderson.
This league tract, listed as 4,428.4 acres, was granted to
Anderson by the Mexican Government on March 14, 1835. An additional,
adjacent labor tract of land, listed as 177.1 acres, was granted as a
first class headright on March 26, 1841.
Anderson, who arrived in Texas with his sons Washington and John
D.
in 1835, was born in Buckingham County, Virginia on June 16, 1789
(Morris 1977:375-6). According to the same source, he served as a
doctor at the battle of San Jacinto and helped to guard the baggage
train for which he was awarded 640 acres of land in Burnet County on
September 16, 1846 (cf.
Miller 1967:720). The Travis County tax
records show Anderson paying taxes on the land as late as 1848, but
the one dollar an acre value of the land suggests that it had not been
extensively developed at that time. Apparently, Anderson continued to
practice as a doctor after the war, living in Webberville until his
death on April 26, 1857.

SURVEY RESULTS
Two prehistoric sites were recorded during the field survey of
These sites, 41TV717 and 41TV718, are both large
the project area.
lithic procurement/primary reduction workshops which exhibit a patchy
distribution over a large area. The location of these sites is shown
in Fig 1. Descriptions of each site are included below.
41TV717
This site is a large lithic procurement/primary workshop area
located southwest of the confluence of Kincheon Branch and an unnamed
tributary of Williamson Creek. It lies on a broad, gently sloping,
east facing hillslope south of Convict Hill. Limestone bedrock, which
crops out in many areas of the surface of the site, is mapped as
belonging to the Edwards Formation (Garner and Young 1976). Natural
chert gravels are spread widely across the project area. Both of the
major drainages have channels which are incised, but not deeplY, into
the bedrock.
Vegetation in the area of the site is primarily
juniper-live oak woodland with some open grassy areas.
Cultural material at the site is thinly spread over an area
approximately 450 meters by 250 meters, extending from Kincheon Branch
to Abilene Trail and south of the unnamed tributary which forms the
northern boundary of the Section VIII project area. The distribution
of this material parallels the occurrence of natural chert gravels at
the site and includes cores of all shapes and sizes and other lithic
debitage. Primary flakes and large secondary and tertiary flakes are
common, and a moderate amount of smaller flake debitage is visible in
scattered areas. Several thick bifaces (plus a number of bifacial
cores) and at least three thin bifaces or biface fragments were
observed on the surface. A few large flakes and biface fragments
exhibited signs of possible use wear but such edge damage could have
been generated by natural processes.
No diagnostics or cultural
features were observed at the site.

Page 11
Observations in the site area and limited shovel probes suggest
little or no soil depth throughout the site, a fact corroborated by
the typical profile descriptions given in the Travis County Soil
Survey (Werchan et al 1974). This lack of depth coupled with the lack
of any defineable surface activity areas which might be promising for
controlled surface collection, suggests that further investigations at
the site would be unlikely to yield anything more than a surface
collection of procurement/workshop materials which could neither be
dated accurately nor associated with each other in any realistic
manner.
It is unlikely, therefore, that this site meets the
requirements of eligibility to the National Register of Historic
Places.
41TV718
Like 41TV717, this site is a large lithic procurement/primary
It is located south of and approximately parallel to
workshop area.
41TV717, running westward from Kincheon Branch. It is separated from
that site by a narrow strip of land where little or no chert was
observed on the surface. A small, ephemeral drainage, part of which
drains into a shallow sinkhole, divides the sites in places. It lies
on the same broad, gently sloping, east facing hillslope as 41TV717.
Limestone bedrock, which crops out in many areas of the surface of the
site, is also mapped as Edwards Formation (Garner and Young 1976).
Natural chert gravels are spread widely across the project area, but
slightly less dense than at 41TV717. Vegetation in the area of the
site consists primarily of open grassy areas with patches of
juniper-live oak woodland.
Cultural material at the site is thinly spread over an area
approximately 400 meters by 250 meters, extending from Kincheon Branch
almost to Abilene Trail and south to near the southeastern boundary of
the Section VIII project area. This material, the distribution of
which parallels the occurrence of natural chert gravels at the site,
includes cores of all shapes and sizes and other lithic debitage.
Although lithic debris ;s on the whole slightly less dense than at
41TV717, primary flakes and large secondary and tertiary flakes are
relatively common, and smaller flake debitage appears to be slightly
more common than at 41TV717. Several small crude bifaces or biface
fragments were observed on the surface of the site and a single
projectile point was collected from the surface about 50 meters west
of the creek near the eastern edge of the site. This projectile point
is classified as an example of the Bell type (cf. Prewitt 1983). It
is manufactured from a grayish-brown chert common in the area. It has
a short, slightly asymmetrical triangular blade with a slightly
expanding well-thinned base. Both barbs are broken off.
Overall
length
is 4.5 centimeters.
Maximum remaining width is 3.6
centimeters. The base, 1.3 centimeters in length, expands from 1.7 to
1.9 centimeters. No cultural features were observed at the site.
As as 41TV717, observations in the site area and limited shovel
probes suggest little or no soil depth throughout the site. This lack
of depth coupled with the lack of any defineable surface activity

Page 12
areas which might be promlslng for controlled surface collection,
suggests that further investigations at the site would be unlikely to
yield anything more than a surface collection of procurement/workshop
materials which could neither be dated accurately nor associated with
other in any realistic manner. The single projectile point from the
site, dated by Prewitt (1981) to the Jarrell phase of the Early
Archaic (6,000 to 5,000 B.P.), does partially date the occupation at
the site but it would be unrealistic to expect that this single
specimen accurately reflects the occupation and utilization of the
entire area of the site. It is unlikely, therefore, that this site
meets the requirements of eligibility to the National Register of
Historic Places.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Two prehistoric archeological sites were located during the field
survey of the planned Section VIII of the Village at Western Oaks
subdivision. These two sites, 41TV717 and 41TV718, are both lithic
procurement/primary workshop sites which consist of numerous cores and
large flakes strewn about the surface of a relatively large portion of
the subdivision area. The distribution of cultural materials at both
of these sites is patchy, but there is no clear evidence that
aboriginal activity areas are preserved within these patches. A few
possible utilized pieces within the area may be an indication of
activities other than material procurement and tool manufacture, but
the possibility for natural edge damage is quite high at such
surficial sites.
Some construction clearing had begun around the periphery of the
project area prior to the survey, but other portions of the area may
well have been cleared historically. At least some of the project
area, dotted with larger live oaks, has not been cleared in many
years, if at all. Soils in the project area range from shallow to
nonexistent, suggesting a complete lack of any buried stratigraphic
contexts for cultural materials.
Residential housing construction will effectively destroy a large
portion of the area of both of these sites. Small parts of both will
remain preserved within the creekside greenbelt/floodplain areas
planned for the subdivision.
Because of the lack of any apparent
surficial activity areas and the absence of any potentially datable
stratigraphic contexts in the shallow soils, neither of these sites
are deemed worthy of nomination to the National Register of Historic
Places
nor
are
they
eligible for consideration as a State
Archeological Landmark. No further work is considered necessary for
either of these sites.

Page 13

REFERENCES CITED

Brown, D.O.
1981 Archeological Testing Along the Proposed Route of Wastewater
Pipelines for the Planned Onion Creek Wastewater Treatment
Plant, Travis County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey
Technical Bulletin 50. The University of Texas at Austin.
Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc.
1979
Barton Creek Cultural Resources Reconnaissance. Appendix B
in report prepared for Texas Parks and Wildlife Department.
1982

Ecological and Archaeological Investigations of the Proposed
Barton - Oak Hill 138kV Transmission Line. Report prepared
for City of Austin Department of Power and Light.

Fenneman, N.M.
1931
Physiography of the Western United States.
Company. New York.
1938

Physiography of the Eastern United States.
Company. New York.

McGraw-Hill Book
McGraw-Hill Book

Garner, L.E. and K.P. Young
1976
Environmental Geology of the Austin Area: An Aid to Urban
Planning.
Bureau
of
Economic Geology
Report
of
Investigations 86. The University of Texas at Austin.
Gould, F.W.
1975 The Grasses of Texas.
Station.

-

---

Texas A&M University Press.

College

Jelks, E.B.
1962 The Kyle Site, A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in
University of Texas Department of
Hill County, Texas.
Anthropology Archaeology Series 5.
Ke 11 ey, J. C.
1947 The Lehman Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah,
and
Round Rock Foci.
Bulletin of the Texas
Uvalde
Archeological and Paleontological Society 18:115-128.

----~~~------

-~~~~-----~-

---~--------

Page 14
McCormick, Olin
1974 Barton Creek Archaeological Reconnaissance. Appendix D in
Environmental
Analysis
of
Barton
Creek Wastewater
Interceptor, Volume II. Submitted to the City of Austin by
Tracor, Inc.
McEachern, Michael and R.W. Ralph
1980 Archeological Investigations at the Thomas F.
McKinney
Homestead, Travis County, Texas: An Experiment in Historic
Archeology, Part I. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 51:5-208.
Miller, T.L.
1967 Bounty and Donation Land Grants
University of Texas Pre~ Austin.
Morris, Mrs. H.J.
1977 Citizens of the Republic of Texas.
Society.

of

Texas,

1835-1888.

Texas State Genealogical

Newcomb, W.W., Jr. and T.N. Campbell
1982 Southern Plains Ethnohistory:
A Re-examination of the
Escanjaques, Ahijados, and Cuitoas. Plains Anthropologist
Memoirs
Nightengale, B.A.
1983 Cultural Resource Survey and Assessment in the Barton Creek
Watershed, Travis County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey
Technical Bullet-in 62. The University of Texas at Austin.
Prewitt, E.R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas.
Archeological Society 52:65-89.
1983

Andice: An Early Archaic
Journal of the Southern
10(3): 1-6-.

Bulletin of the Texas

Dart Point Type.
La Tierra.
Texas Archeological ASsociation

Skinner, S.A., C. Shaw, K. Huckaby and M.L. Bartsch
1978 An Evaluation of the Archaeological Resources at Aquilla
Lake.
Southern Methodist University, Archaeology Research
Program.
Story, D.A.
1981 An Overview of
Anthropologist.

the Archaeology
26-92:139-156.

of

East Texas.

----

~~

Plains

~~----~~------------------

Page 15
Suhm, D.A.
1955 Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County,
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 26:7-54.
1957

Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County,
Texas Journal of Science. IX(1):26-58.

1960

A Review of Central Texas Archeology.
Archeological Society 29:63-108.

Texas.
Texas.

Bulletin of the Texas

Thurmond, Peter
1982 Archeological Testing and Assessment of 41TV461 and the
Onion Creek Wastewater Plant Site, Travis County, Texas.
The
Texas Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin 49.
University of Texas at Austin.
Watt, F.H.
1953 Pottery Diffusion of the Central
Texas Archeologist 6:57-85.

Brazos Va 11 ey.

Weir, F.A.
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D.
Washington State University, Pullman.

Central

Dissertation,

Werchan, L.E., A.C. Lowther and R.N. Ramsey
United States
1974 Soil Survey of Travis County, Texas.
Department of' Agriculture Soil Conservation Service.
Washington, D.C.
Whitsett, Hayden and D.E. Fox
Texas Department
1979 Cultural Resources of Lower Onion Creek.
of Water Resource~ Construction Grants and Water Quality
Planning Division. Austin, Texas.

