A Cultural Resource Survey in

MARTIN LAKE AREA D:
INTENSIVE SURVEY I

RUSK COUNTY, TEXAS

Jack M. Jackson

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY RESEARCH REPORT NO. 85
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
1982

A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY IN
MARTIN LAKE AREA D:
INTENSIVE SURVEY I
RUSK COUNTY, TEXAS

Jack M.

Principal Investigator:

Jack~on

David

s.

Dibble

Texas Archeological Survey
Re~ea~ch Repo~t

85

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN

1982

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcones Research Center
10,100 B11rnet Road

EDITORS

A report submitted to Texas Utilities Services, Inc. in
partial fulf illrnent of the terms of Purchase Order MLD-011

ABSTRACT

Vwr.ing May, June. and Jui_y 06 1982, the. Te.xcv.i Nz.c.he.ologic.al.. Su.Jtve.y,
The. UniveJrAity 06 Te.xcv.i at Auotin, c.onducte.d an 1nte.n.o1ve. c.ui.tu.Jtal..
Jte,6ou.Jtc.e. -Ou.Jtve.y 06 a 6, 500 ac.Jte. pJto.ope.c.tive. lignite. mining tJtact ,i_n
Ruok. County, Te.xcv.i, fioJt Te.xcv.i Utili;t,i_e,6 Se.Jtv,{_c.e,6, Irr.c.oJtpoJtate.d, 06
VaUcv.i. The. Me.a UllL6 cv.,,oe,6,oe.d dwr.ing an e.Mlie.Jt Jte.c.onnMManc.e. le.ve.l
-Ou.Jtve.y cu, holcii.ng a law p!tobability fioJt .o1gn161c.ant Mc.he.ologic.al.. and
hl.otoJt,[.c. Jte,6ou.Jtc.e,6. ThJte.e. pJte.viou.oly unJte.poJtte.d pJte.hl.otoJt,[.c. -Oite,6
We.Jte. loc.ate.d. FouJtte.e.n .otancii.ng .otJtuc.tU/te,6 and .oix o.the.Jt hl.otouc.
-Oite,6 We.Jte. Jte.c.oJtde.d. The. Jte.-6 e.Mc.h de,6ig n add!te,6-6 e,6 the. e.6 6e.ct on
both pJte.hl.otouc. and hi,c,toJt,[.c. l.letti.eme.nt patte.Jtn.o 06 the. lac.k. 06 J.iu.Jt6ac.e. wa.te.Jt in bJtoad upland Jte.gion.o. The. ve.Jtnac.ui.M Mc.hite.c.tu.Jte.
Jte.c.oJtde.d 1-6 u.oe.d to e.xploJte. hypothetic.al.. c.ui.tU!taJ.. c.ontinuity in the.
A6Jto-Ame.ft,{_c.an and Anglo-Ame.Jt,(_c.an Jtu.Jta1.. hou.oe. tJtadl:tlon.o.

This page intentionally left blank.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Abstract . . .

.

Acknowledgements
Introduction . .

1

Environmental Background .

3

Archeological Background

8

Research Design

13

Survey Procedures

16

Results of the Survey

17

Discussion of Site Distribution

51

Survey Results and Research Questions

53

Cultural Resource Management Recommendations

57

References Cited . . . .

60

LIST OF FIGURES

. . . . . . . . .

Figure 1.

Project Area location map

Figure 2.

Site Location within the Survey Area

2

Figure 3.

Visibility typical of environments within
the Survey Area

5

Figure 6.

. . . . . . . . .
Prehistoric Art if acts . . . . . .
The ·Richard Magee Grant
.
The Lonnie Dixon farm, old house .

Figure 7.

The Lonnie Dixon farm, new house

Figure 8.

The J.R. Young homestead, 41RK113

30

Figure 9.

34

Figure 10.

The Killer Bee Site, 41RK117
The Cabin Corner Site, 41RK118

36

Figure 11.

New Hope Church, 41RK120

37

Figure 12.

The L.N. Newsome house, 41RK122.
Mount Vernon Baptist Church, 41RK124

Figure 4 .
Figure 5.

Figure 13.

v

. . .
. . . . .

V -<:.A.A..

.

.

. . . . .
. . . . . .

. . . .. . . .
. ... .
. . .
. . .
. . . .
.

20
25.
27
29

40
42

Table of Contents (cont.)

. .
. . .

Figure 14.

The Watkins-Friar house, 41RK125

45

Figure 15.

The Trimble house

46

Figure 16.

The Enix Wright house

Figure 17.
Figure 18.

The Black Hamlet Site, 41RK126
Later houses in the Black Hamlet

Figure 19.

Land Grants in the Survey Area

. . . . . . .

.

..

..

47
49
50

55

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This report is the result of the combined efforts of a
number of people on the staff of the Texas Archeological Survey.
Bruce Nightengale was field supervisor for the survey work.
Kevin Jolly assisted him for the entire field period. Deborah
Smith not only walked the land but typed the manuscript. Val
Whitley walked the land during the survey then remained in the
field with the author to record historic houses and get badly
stung by angry bees in the process. Jeff Turpin and Dana
Anthony also braved the sweltering east Texas sun and sifted
their share of sterile sandy loam.
Carol Fabac deserves special mention as editor of the first
draft of the manuscript, consulting geologist, and cartographer.
Without her help this manuscript might never have been published. The author also acknowledges the debt to Solveig
Turpin with whom a number of the knottier problems in the
manuscript were discussed before the first draft was written
and who edited the final product. The similar insights and
suggestions of Ms. Patience Patterson of the Texas Historical
Commission staff in pointing out problem areas that would require some resolution are also acknowledged with gratitude.
Mrs. Nancy Kenrnotsu of the THC staff assisted the author
materially in carefully checking and correcting the UTM coordinates on all of our original site notes.
The assistance of Mr. Dick Robertson of Texas Utilities
Services, Inc. in Dallas in a number of matters is gratefully
noted. The hospitality and assistance of Mr. Jim Commons, Mr.
Foy Brown, Mr. Bill Price, Mr. Daniel Webster and Mrs. Karen
Jackson of the Texas Utilities Land Office in Henderson in
aiding the author in the tedious business of tracking down and
contacting a large number of landowners deserves special mention.
Very special thanks are also due to Mr. James A. McMillan
of Henderson Clay Products, Mr .. R. Max Ballenger of Henderson,
Mr. M. Kangerga, Mr. John Mims and his sons Angus and Jake, all
of whom allowed our crews free access to the rather considerable
acreages they control within the survey area without restriction.
Their cooperation was absolutely essential to the successful
completion of the project and is gratefully acknowledged as is
the cooperation of a host of other owners of smaller parcels
who allowed us to cross their pastures in pursuit of the past.
Two ladies who know a great deal about the history of their
county and who care enough to furnish accurate information to
replace inaccurate are due very special thanks. Mrs. Maida
Jaggers and Mrs. Margaret Brown of the Rusk County Historical
Commission were kind enough to furnish us with some exce'llent
material on the Montgomery plantation and the other antebellum
plantations north of Henderson, their contribution is acknowledged
both here and in the bibliography.

Figure 1.

Project area location map
94°40'

94°45'

94°50'

,,

I
I
I

GREGG COUNTY

'

'

RUSK COUNTY

I
I
\
I
,, I

'-..

N

·... . . ._

> ··""°·..

I

\
\

',

·..,

\
\

""·
\

\

\.

~-...,rm
-~''
\ ~---~ \+\

+

32"20'

~

\\
\

..........-

-.._

~--·-...._·-·--·-·-·-·

I

I

-, _ I
X...__ -.

'· I

\.

..:=--·.., .\
I

~ ... ~--..

·,,

·..

'""'"'-

'··. '-··

1
. ..

2

0

3

miles

32010
•

"t'"-'-IBl&lllmi~+

T.A.S. / Fabac/1982

Rusk
County

INTRODUCTION
During June and July, 1982, an intensive level cultural
resource survey of 6,812 acres of Rusk County, Texas {Fig. 1)
was conducted for Texas Utilities Services, Inc. {TUSI) by the
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin,
pursuant to obtaining a permit for lignite mining in the area
and in conformance with the National Historic Preservation Act,
1966, and its regulations, 36 CFR, Part 800, and The National
Environmental Policy Act and its related regulations 50CFR4, as
implemented by the Environmental Protection Agency. The survey
was designed to conform to criteria and guidelines set forth by
the Texas Historical Commission for Phase II intensive survey.
The Martin Lake Area D Prospect first five year area, the subject of the first intensive survey in the Prospect, is part of
a larger tract which was surveyed at the Phase I reconnaissance
level in 1980 (Moncure and Jackson 1980). Other parcels within
the prospect will be scheduled for intensive survey on an incremental basis as the mining proceeds.
On the basis of the original reconnaissance, the first five
year area was contained within the zone assessed as low in
cultural resource sensitivity. The primary goals of the Phase
II intensive survey were to test the reliability of the predicted
site density and to locate, record and evaluate all cultural
resources within the designated area.
·
The Martin Lake Area D Prospect encompasses several large
irregularly shaped primary mining zones surrounded by parcels
not scheduled for lignite extraction. All sites within the
specific study area were recorded regardless of their location
within the permit zone and assessed as endangered by future
mining development.
Nominally, the first five year permit portion, Area D, encompasses 6,812 acres. Access to some properties not owned by
TUSI was denied, reducing the areal coverage to approximately
6,500 acres. The study.area is properly named Area D, Intensive
Survey I but for ease of reference throughout the remainder of
this report the study area is referred to as Area D:IS-I and
specifically implies the 6,500 acre tract surveyed (Fig. 2).

/

/

>

;:
"

a

.;"
0

..

~

li

I _,. , ....__

...~ ···

3

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION
Area D:IS-I begins about 2 miles north of the town of
Henderson at the Texas Power and Light transmission line and
extends about 3.5 miles northeast to the existing Texas Eastern
underground pipeline (Fig. 1). The area runs generally southwest to northeast and is bounded on the northwest by Mill Creek
and on the east by FM Road 1716 which runs nearly due northsouth. FM Road 782 cuts through the center of the southern
portion of the prospect.
GEOMORPHOLOGY/GEOLOGY
Rusk County lies within Fennernan's (1938:100-103) West Gulf
Coastal Plain physiographic province, which is characterized
by gently rolling hills and ridges rarely exceeding 500 feet
AMSL on the east and to 300 feet AMSL on the northwest where
Mill Creek empties into Lake Cherokee.
The study area lies on the Sabine Uplift on an outcrop of
Carrizo Sand, a late Upper Cretaceous Claiborne Group formation
of sand, silt and clay. Underlying the Carrizo Sand is the
Wilcox Group Formation, the uppermost part of which contains
light-colored kaolinitic clays (Fisher 1965:32). Lignite
occurs in thin, irregular-shaped beds at relatively shallow
depths below the clays in other members of the Wilcox Group
(ibid.:280). Pleistocene gravels are found in a narrow border
on the northwestern side of the study area - the flood plain of
Mill Creek. An open gravel pit straddles FM 782 about 1 mile
south of New Hope Cemetery. FM 1716, the eastern boundary of
the study area, follows the approximate center of a narrow outcrop of the Reklaw Formation of the Claiborne Group (Bureau of
Economic Geology 1967), another clay-bearing formation.
The clays
and gravels have been, and still are, economically important to
the area but lignite mining has only recently become advantageous.
The high sand content of both the Carrizo Sand and Reklaw
Formation contribute to an unconsolidated soil. The effect of
such soil is a fragile, easily disrupted environment with high
rates of site erosion and redeposition.
HYDROLOGY
The major aquifer is composed of the Wilcox Group and the
overlying Carrizo Sand of the Claiborne Group.
The CarrizoWilcox strata are considered a single aquifer (Henry and Basciano 1979:4) which consists in the main of hydrologically
connected ferruginous, cross-bedded sand with clay, sandstone,

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND

4

silt, lignite and gravel.
It is recharged by precipitation
and by streams crossing the outcrop area (Muller and Price
1979:17). Within the study area the aquifer is saturated to
near the land surf ace which causes much potential recharge to
be rejected and turned into stream runoff.
STREAM ORDER AND DRAINAGE
Ordering of streams is based on the premise that the first
order streams of a drainage basin are the smallest gullies or
channels with well-defined banks. Most such streams are intermittent. Ordering then follows a hierarchy developed by the
joining of first order streams to form a second order stream,
two second order streams to form a third order, and so on.
The areal division supplied by stream ordering assists in highlighting archeologically potential areas and forms a natural,
permanent reference grid useful in future studies.
This ordering system is chosen because it is well defined
by Butzer (1976:185-186) in a generally available elementary
text on geomorphology. There are a number of other systems in
informal use in various state and federal agencies. Some number
major rivers as first order streams if they flow into the ocean,
but this does not differentiate between the Mississippi and a
very short coastal stream draining a minor basin. Most writers
avoid the issue by speaking only of major and minor streams.
In the Butzer system used here the Sabine would be a fifth or
high order stream.
Area D:IS-I lies within the Sabine River Basin. The three
first order streams which traverse the study area are intermittent drainages which empty into Mill Creek, a second order
perennial stream. Aboriginal sites were found only near this
second order, permanent water source.
CLIMATE
Rusk County lies within Carr's (1967:17) East Texas climatic
division. Average rainfall is between 44 and 48 inches. Maximum precipitation has dual peaks in May and December with minimum occuring in August. This pattern results in a winter
surplus-summer deficit of water (Arbingast et ~l. 1973:map).
Mean annual evaporation (1940-1957) for the county is 10 inches,
a factor which contributes significantly to the summer water
deficit (Keir, Garner and Brown 1977:map). The mean annual
temperature is 66.4°F (1940-1978); thus a mild climate. The
seasonal pattern provides an average annual growing season just
above 250 days (Vines 1977:xvii map).
VEGETATION
The study area is located in Gould's (1975:2) Texas Vegetational Region 1, the Pineywoods. The area, also known as the

Figure 3.
Visibility typical of environments
within the survey area

a. Old field with hardwood forest at border

b. Open pastureland with scattered trees

c. Dense second growth pine forest

6

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUNV

Timber Belt and the East Texas Forest Region, is the southeastern extremity of the pine-hardwood forests of the southeastern United States. Plant distribution is most directly
linked to soil and climate.
Two basic associations of woody plant species occur in the
region; upland pine-oak and bottomland hardwood. Changes in
vegetation between these two are distinct. Streams which are
effluent most of the year are within the bottomland division;
those which are dry for lengthy periods are within the upland
division.
The drier, sandy uplands such as those of the Prospect, are
dominated by shortleaf pine (Pinuh eehinata), with loblolly
pine (Pinu~ taeda) in most locations (Holm 1975:17). A secondary canopy is composed of southern red oak (Que4eu~ ma4ilandiea),
with minor inclusions of hickory, blackgum, water oak, sugarberry, and winged elm (Little 1980:355, 401, 412, 418). The
understory shrubs include American beautyberry, dogwood, yaupon,
hawthorn, sumac, southern bayberry, sparkleberry and fringetree.
Common vine species are greenbriar, trumpet creeper, poison
ivy, peppervine and jessamine (Holm 1975:19) (Fig. 3).
In areas adjacent to Area D:IS-I, the typically wet, lowlying swampy bottomlands fringe the major streams. Bottomland
soils have a higher silt and clay content than the uplands,
accounting, in part, for vegetational differences. Generally,
the bottoms have not been fully cleared or heavily grazed.
Hardwoods are dominant with the following species most prevalent:
swamp chestnut, oak, shumard oak, laurel oak, water hickory,
butternut, hickory, sweetgum and sycamore. A second story
is composed mostly of red maple, American holly, American hornbeam, and magnolia. The shrub understory includes waxmyrtle,
dogwood, buttonbush, arrowwood, leatherwood, American elder,
snowbell, and poison sumac.
In places, poison ivy, grape,
supplejack and greenbriar form dense thickets (Holm 1975:19).
Cottonwood is present throughout the bottoms. A few wet area
species, such as river birch, black willow and hazel alder grow
along the stream banks (Little 1980:335, 363, 366). Non-native
but extensively cultivated types such as crepe myrtle and the
Babylon weeping willow suggest historic occupations nearby.
Climax grasses in the Pineywoods include switchgrass, red
love grass, sea oats, indiangrass, little bluestem and broomsedge bluestem. The introduction of grasses and legumes to
improve pasture has caused a high level of mixing with native
grasses; carpetgrass, bermudagrass, dallisgrass and vaseygrass
are the most common overseeds.
Invaders, arriving naturally
where land clearing has removed the forest, include smutgrass,
yankeeweed, green briar, yaupon and western ragweed (Gould
1969:3). For most of the Holocene, the deciduous species, the
nut-bearing varieties among them, were probably much more
numerous and assumed major importance in the native economies
(Keller 1974:139-156). Remnant stands of such trees are worthy
of archeological investigation.

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

7

FAUNA
The study area falls within the Austroriparian biotic
province, which includes the Gulf Coastal plain from the Atlantic to eastern Texas (Blair 1958:99). The vertebrate fauna
of the Austroriparian of Texas is typical of the province as a
whole. Blair cites forty-seven manunalian species either
present or recently occurring. Representative small manunals
are the opposum, mole, plainnose bat, red bat, eastern fox
squirrel, eastern gray squirrel, southern flying squirrel,
plains pocket gopher, fulvous harvest mouse, whitefooted mouse,
rice rat, hispid cotton rat, eastern cottontail, swamp rabbit,
and raccoon (Burt and Grossenheider 1976).
Carnivore species
include the omnipresent coyote, longtail weasel, both spotted
and striped skunks, red fox, gray fox and bobcat. The area
is within the range ascribed to the red wolf (Burt and Grossenheider 1976:71). From an archeological standpoint, the presence
of the gophers and moles is especially important because their
burrowing frequently rearranges cultural material. Gophers
are particularly active during the Spring and have a great
effect on the soil's porosity, organic matter and phosphorous
content, and nitrogen level (Lee 1980:36, 38).
The array of reptile and amphibian species was a significant
additional resource available for exploitation by an aboriginal
population. The populations of these species are large, reflecting the wet, mild bottomlands climate, a suitable ecotone
for cold blooded species. They were, beyond doubt, exploited
by Native American inhabitants of the area (Butzer 1971:149).
Representative species are the western box turtle, eastern
fence lizard, six-lined racerunner, rough green snake, conunon
water snake, tiger salamander, Woodhouse's toad, leopard frog,
bullfrog and green frog (Stebbins 1966). According to Blair
(1950:100), the Austroriparian is the richest in urodele
(amphibians with tails throughout life, e.g. newts) fauna of
any biotic province in the states; thirteen species are present.
The faunal array currently in the Austroriparian province
is not necessarily that available to a prehistoric or even
historic Native American population. Archeological excavations
within the province have yielded bones of bison, puma, black
bear and lynx, all now missing from the province (House 1978) .
These large-bodied manunals represent a considerable potential
food source and were no doubt so utilized. Despite the poor
preservation of bone in the acid soils characteristic of much
of East Texas, the remains of amphibians, reptiles, fish, birds
and mammals of a wide range of species have been identified
in Austroriparian area archeological sites (House 1978:Table 2).
CURRENT LAND USE
Agriculture is the study area's dominant land use. Most
cleared land in the uplands is in pasture, much of it improved.
Only a comparatively small and constantly decreasing amount

8

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND

of land is being cropped.
In 1968, 50 percent of the county was forested (Branda
1976:824). Within the study area, 20 to 25 percent was forested
in 1982. The bottomlands, with their own vegetational array,
constitute a small portion of the forested land, but one
which is still significant due to the water-tolerant hardwoods
found within them.

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Earlier work in Rusk County has been summarized and
reported in Moncure and Jackson (1980, 1982). Only recent investigations pertinent to the present study are presented here.
In 1972, the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin, conducted an archeological survey
of the Martin Lake area of Rusk and Panola counties under the
sponsorship of Texas Utilities Services, Inc. (McDonald 1972).
Following that initial survey, investigations of the areas to
be affected by the construction of the Martin Creek Dam and
subsequent inundation were carried out (Clark and Ivey 1974).
Sites recorded in this series of studies account for 41 of
the 108 recorded sites in Rusk County. This level of cultural
resource density is the result of close attention paid to a
specific area, and riverine environments receiving the same
level of attention can be expected to show a similar site
density.
In 1980, TAS conducted a reconnaissance level survey of the
Mill Creek area and of the Prospect Area 363 which contains the
study area (Moncure and Jackson 1980). The objective of this
survey was to generate a predictive model of archeological sensitivity for use as a planning tool in later development.
Area D:IS-I was assessed as low in cultural resource potential.
In addition to reassessing several known sites and the generation
of a predictive map, this survey located four new sites. Two
of these, 41RK106, a prehistoric site, and 41RK87, the Montgomery House, are within the area of the present study.
An intensive level survey of the railroad and transmission
line corridor which will connect the proposed lignite mining
area with the generating facility on Martin Lake was conducted
in January and February of 1982 (Moncure and Jackson 1982) .
No prehistoric sites were located during this project. Two
historic sites were reported; one of these, the Thomas Jefferson
Walling cabin, has since been found eligible for the National
Register of Historic Places and is the subject of a separate
investigation (Moncure, in preparation). Both historic sites
lie just south of the present study area.
The high site densities reported in previous intensive

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

9

surveys in the region are in sharp contrast to the low site
density found in the current study. High site density such as
that in the Martin Creek drainage (Clark and Ivey 1974) is comparable to that found in nearby Harrison County. Here, Espey
Huston and Associates (1979) surveyed 20 percent of the 6885hectare South Hallsville Prospect, another lignite mining area
in the Sabine River Valley.
In 50 man-days of field work they
recorded 119 sites in a 1457-hectare area (ibid.: 1-2). The
present survey required 152 man-days and covered 2631 hectares
in which only three aboriginal and fourteen historic sites were
recorded. Thus an area twice the size of the South Hallsville
Prospect received almost three times the manpower effort, yet
yielded only one-sixth as many sites. As previously noted,
this low site density in the uplands was not unexpected. The
total lack of cultural remains in the uplands was, however, unexpected. Human occupations are far from random events; they
are determined by human needs and human preferences. River
valley surveys and surveys in broad uplands where only minor
drainages are found help define these needs and preferences.
Because this report is one of the few that has addressed the
survey of a large upland area, this issue will be discussed at
several points in this report.
CHRONOLOGY
The 108 archeological sites recorded in Rusk County prior
to the present study are assigned to one or more periods of
North American history and prehistory. These periods are not
precise time horizons, but rather time markers based on major
cultural developments. The occurrence of recognizable cultural
developments and hence the beginning of the associated periods
varies from area to area within the State and beyond.
In most
cases, precise boundaries cannot be established and the assignment of an arbitrary round figure date is more appropriate.
The broad periods or "eras" (not cultural stages) most commonly
cited are Late Paleoindian, Archaic, Late Prehistoric and
Historic. These periods, in brief, are described below.
Late Paleoindian Period (before 10,000 to 8,000 B.P.)
Artifacts relating to the Paleoindian Period are found in
East Texas but as yet, none have been recovered in satisfactory
stratigraphic context nor sufficient quantity for meaningful
analysis (Davis 1970) . Paleoindian subsistence is customarily
associated with megafauna exploitation but due to the rarity
of sites, this association has not as yet been demonstrated for
East Texas. The period's diagnostic artifacts, which include

Clovi-0, Fol-Oum, SQott-0blu66, Plainview,

Me-0e~ve,

Golondhina,

and Ango-0tu~a projectile points, reflect this exploitation
strategy. It is quite possible that most Paleoindian occupation
in the East Texas area followed a pattern in which small groups
engaged in generalized hunting and gathering, occupying sites

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUNV

10

for short periods of time.
Archaic Period (8,000 to 1,250 B.P.)
Although better known in East Texas than the preceeding
period, the span and scope of the Archaic are still being refined. Early efforts to develop a chronology centered on projectile point typologies (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks 1965). The
Ya~b~ough and Elli-0 dart points were found to be temporally
diagnostic of the period (Davis 1970) • Attempts to bring together the several facets of the Archaic lifeway and authenticate a list of diagnostic artifacts have served to highlight
the difficulties involved in such a synthesis, and the existence
of numerous regional artifact style differences have been noted
(c.f. Davis and Davis 1960; Tunnell 1961; Webb 1960). A
series of areally delimiting terms have been applied to cope
with the problem, spawning, in turn, more divisions as further
artifact assemblage differences were defined. The Red River
Aspect (Davis and Davis 1960:56), the East Texas Aspect (Suhm,
Krieger and Jelks 1965:149), and the La Harpe Aspect (Johnson
1962), the latter further divided into north, central and
southern divisions, are all applicable East Texas Archaic terms
within their authors' specified setting. Davis and Davis (1960:
56) summarize the situation well:
"It is evident that the history of the Archaic stage
is not uniform throughout the forests between the
Lower Mississippi and the prairies."
Ga~y

dart points collected in shovel probes at the sites recorded
in this survey are diagnostic of Terminal Late Archaic.

Late Prehistoric Period (1,450 to 350 B.P.)
The Late Prehistoric Period, which emerges from the Archaic,
is the best known of the prehistoric occupations of East Texas.
This period, called the Formative (Davis 1970) , is divided into
a pre-Caddo Formative, Caddo I, Caddo II, Caddo III, and Caddo
IV. These divisions and their temporally diagnostic artifacts
are as follows:
Pre-Caddo Formative

Ma~k-0ville-Tehe6unete
C~eek ceramic styles.

Caddo I

Alba points, Copena knives, Holly
Fine Eng~aved, Hieko~y Eng~aved,
C~oekett Inei-0ed, Pennington Inei-0ed,
Vavi-0 Inei-0ed, Vunean Inei-0ed, and
Weehe-0 Finge~nail Imp~e-0-0ed ceramics.

and Cole-0

Long, narrow-necked bottles, carinated bowls.
Caddo II

Bonham points, Plains-like knives,
Canton Inei-0ed, Monk-0town Finge~nail
Imp~e-0-0ed, red-filmed Maxey Noded,
and Sande~-0 Eng~aved ceramics.
Plain bowls, carinated bowls, flaringrim jars, and long-necked bottles.

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

Caddo III

Alba points, PeaJe B~u-0hed-InQiJed,
Maddox Eng~aved, BelQhe~ Ridged,
Ripley Eng~aved, Taylo~ Eng~aved,
Bulla~d B~u-Ohed, and Maydell InQiJed
ceramics. Jars with
rims, bowls, rimless
pipes. The paste is
grit (grog) tempered
bone.

Caddo IV

11

high flairing
jars, elbow
normally claywith occasional

BaJJett, TalQo, and Maud points,
Ripley Eng~aved, Taylo~ Eng~aved,
Wilde~ Eng~aved, Ba~kman Eng~aved,
Ave~y Eng~aved, SimmJ Eng~aved,
Ha~leton Appliqued, Maydelle InQiJed,
Bulla4d B~u-0hed, Na-0h NeQk Banded,
and Fo-0te~ T~ailed InQi-Oed ceramics.

Grog and bone temper, carinated
bowls, long-necked bottles, and
effigy vessels.
It is important to note that the above chronology and artifact
framework results from a series of site datings and artifact
inventories which are nowhere near as numerous or areally dense
as desired. There is a need for chronological refinement which
can be resolved only by more excavation, analysis and synthesis.
Ceramics recovered from shovel probes at sites recorded during
this survey suggest Caddoan affiliation.
There is no simple explanation of the designation Caddo.
The word has served to designate a linguistic family, a subdivision of related dialects within the family, a collective
term for a number of tribes or bands, a confederacy of tribes,
a single tribe within that confederacy, the geographic area
containing a set or remains and a collection of prehistoric and
historic archeological manifestations (Story 1978:46). The
latter usage is applied in this report.
Historic Period (European contact to present)
The first recorded contact between European and East Texas
Native Americans was in A.D. 1541 when the DeSoto expedition
moved through the area (Newcomb 1961:284). Though other explorers and their expeditions passed through the area in the
next half century, the accounts of their visits are sketchy and
usually secondhand. Continuous, well-documented incursions
of a type which were to have major effects on the Native American
lifeway began about A.D. 1600. These effects mark the change
from the Late Prehistoric (Formative) period to the Historic
and from Caddo IV to Caddo v.
When the French and Spanish arrived in East Texas, they
found it inhabited by groups of Native Americans who shared
religious beliefs, linguistic background, and other interests.
Despite such commonalities, these groups were not organized
under one governing aegis but were separate political units.

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUNV

12

They lived in fixed villages and planted crops for their basic
subsistence (Bolton 1908:271). These people and their predecessors left behind the cultural remains which are classified
as Caddoan. These remains, it should be noted, are not those
of large numbers of inhabitants but rather of many generations
of occupation by relatively small numbers of people. Bolton
(1908:175-176), citing Spanish records, comes to the conclusion
that in 1716, the general area was occupied by perhaps 4,000
Indians.
Caddo v, as given above, begins after A.D. 1600 and is
marked by.the appearance of European trade goods in the artifact
inventory along with Womack Eng4aved, Emo4y Punetated, Nateh~toehe-0 Eng4aved, Hud-0on Pla~n and Naeoma Pla~n ceramics.
The use of shell tempering for ceramics is more common in this
period (Davis 1970) .
The framework for historic archeology in Texas coincides
with the division of Texas history as follows (Pass 1974-75):
I.

Indian Era: Pre-European arrival in 1519
(the conquest of Mexico) •

II.

Conquest and Colonization (1519-1835)
A. Early exploration and missionaries (1519-1690)
B. Mission period and Spanish domination (1690-1793)
c. Spanish decline and filibustering era (1793-1821)
D. Mexican era and Anglo-American colonization
(1821-1835)

III.

Revolution and Republic (1835-1845)
A. Revolution (.1835-1836)
B. Republic (1836-1845)

IV.

Texas in the United States (1845-present)
A. Pre-Civil War (1845-1861)
B. Confederate state (1861-1865)
c. Reconstruction (1865-1874)
D. Early economic development (1874-1899)
E.
Industrialization and urbanization (1899-present)

A large number of Indian tribes lived in Rusk County during
historic times. A village of the Anadarko tribe of the Caddoanspeaking Hasinai Confederation was found by the Spanish near
the center of the county's southern boundary (Bolton 1908:256),
and a Nabiti village was found in the southwest corner. Somewhat later, Shawnee and Cherokee people, forced west by Anglo
settlement, moved into the county. A major Shawnee village was
located on land now occupied by the southern quarter of the
town of Henderson. When the last battle between the army of the
Republic of Texas and the Cherokees and their allies was fought
in 1839, the Cherokee treaty lands, which included portions of
western Rusk County, were opened to Anglo settlement. The sword
carried by Chief Bowles, the paramount chief of the Cherokee,
was kept as a battle trophy for many years in the Masonic Hall
in Henderson (Winfrey 1951:31). The sword had been given to
Bowles by Sam Houston, who had signed the treaty granting the

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

13

Indian land. When the Texas Senate failed to confirm the treaty,
President Lamar abrogated the pact and Chief Bowles was killed
in the battle that followed (Reagan 1898).
Because of the generally upland nature of the designated
survey area, historic sites of periods before 1845 were not
expected due to the difficulty of tapping subterranean water
through the deep clay capping deposits prior to the development
of mechanical well drilling equipment. The well at the Walling
Cabin (41RK104) had been dug through at least 38 feet of wellpacked clay (Moncure and Jackson 1982:32) .. The landforms in
Area D:IS-I suggested a water table that deep or deeper. At
least one known pre-Civil War site, the Montgomery House, 41RK87,
was identified in the reconnaissance.
It is expected that the
majority of historic sites will date to periods well after that
time when the arrival of railroads brought heavy steam-driven
well drilling equipment and inexpensive prefabricated windmills
to pump water from deep underground. This proposition, too,
was made an explicit part of the research design.

RESEARCH DESIGN
Background
The major portion of rural Rusk County contains lignite
deposits at some depth but of sufficient quality and quantity
to warrant mining it today. As the second most populous county
in the state before the Civil War, it probably contains a high
percentage of Texas' antebellum historic sites. The eastern
part of the county was part of the great land grant from Mexico
to the Cherokee Nation and certain allied refugee eastern Indian tribes. A large Shawnee village once existed where the
city of Henderson now stands.
In early prehistoric times the
area was occupied by Caddoan-speaking peoples, a sedentary
agricultural culture. The evidence for early occupations by
Archaic and Paleoindian hunters is rare but has been found as
buried components (Story 1981:142).
The largely upland Area D:IS-I was not expected to contain
many prehistoric sites but some antebellum sites had already
been identified.
It was clear that the most useful research
design was one that could be built upon and expanded as mining
activity extends to other parts of the county. The data retrievable from a few thousand acres of rural uplands, plowed
and planted for 150 years, is, of course, insufficient to answer
meaningful archeological questions of a regional nature. Therefore, the following was designed with the larger data base in
mind and with the expectation that information from the current
project would do more to refine our questions and suggest new

14

RESEARCH VESIGN

ones, than yield any definitive answers.
Theoretical Basis
Bruce Trigger's (1968) essay on settlement pattern offers
a clear, useful definition of the levels of analysis in settlement pattern studies. The lowest level is that of the individual structure where very simple societies theoretically
build simple unspecialized structures. More complex societies
erect more highly specialized, functionally specific structures.
The study area offers an opportunity for broadly based comparisons of changing land use over time by various cultural
groups that occupied Rusk County.
The cultural group that occupied the area in the Late
Prehistoric period and at the time of first European contact
has most often been termed the Caddos. This largely linguistic
designation does not imply a unified political entity such as
a tribe. Our existing model of their material culture and the
nature of their settlements is not, as yet, fully developed.
The complexity of their social organization is demonstrated by
their construction of large villages containing ceremonial precincts, temple mounds and burial mounds. The George C. Davis
site in Cherokee County which borders Rusk County to the west,
was apparently such a large ceremonial center village.
A number of smaller sites have been found containing artifacts of Caddoan affiliation. These appear to be briefly occupied seasonal camps used for hunting, food procurement or
trading, and isolated farmsteads or small hamlets occupied by
one or a few families over most of the growing season. All of
these sites are in areas with easy and relatively quick access
to potable water.
The Anglo-American settlers were also an agricultural folk
and tended to erect a single, central-ordered town in each
county. The acceptable pattern seems to have been for the central place, or county seat, to be located within a day's ride
(20 miles nominally) of any part of the county. This town was
also normally located where a roadway into the new county crossed
a stream. The first settlers usually occupied lands located
along streams and preferred spring-fed upper branches. The
dispersed hamlet, 10 to 12 clustered farmsteads, was the prevailing settlement pattern of small farmers.
In Rusk County,
great plantations with numerous slaves often constituted a
community within itself, although the owner may have lived most
of the year in the county seat or elsewhere. At least one such
ruined plantation, the Montgomery House (41RK87), is included
within the present study area. The New Hope community along
Highway 782 (Chickenfeather Road) appears a survivor of a rural
Anglo hamlet. Another hamlet called Millville, now largely
defunct, was located in an earlier reconnaissance and is north
of the present study area. An unnamed hamlet, just north of
the New Prospect community, in the midst of the permit area,

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

15

held an exclusively black population. All of these were built
away from major streams but where good wells could be dug. The
development of entirely black rural hamlets along the general
pattern of the Anglo hamlets is an interesting phenomenon. A
preference for certain vernacular housing arrangements may
allow one to distinguish a black or Afro-American hamlet from
a mixed or Anglo one on the basis of material culture alone.
The persistence of vernacular house forms from African models
has been postulated by Vlach (1977); equally persistent forms
appear to dominate the early period of Anglo settlement. .The
ethnic identification of house form in vernacular architecture
is a subject that could be explored with the data base that will
eventually be present in Rusk County. The data acquired by
this survey of a limited area, Area D:IS-I, can contribute to
the testing of this hypothesis only if the race of the builder
is established.
The Prehistoric Settlement Model
The settlement of aboriginal peoples seems to have followed
the major streams. Old pot hunters' lore calls for seeking
east Texas sites along the secondary tributaries within a few
miles of the major streams. Most of the sites located in Rusk,
Cherokee and Harrison counties conform to this pattern.
Based on the data acquired in the earlier reconnaissance
level study, Area D:IS-I was specifically assessed as low in
cultural resource potential. Thus, the intensive survey can
be considered as a null hypothesis test of that prediction.
The model of settlement patterning in east Texas proposes
that prehistoric sites would be rare or absent in the study
area because the majority consists of upland regions with only
fourth-order seasonal drainages. The extreme western end of
the survey area along the flood plain and first terrace of Mill
Creek was the only portion expected to yield any aboriginal
sites, if our model is correct.
Specific Hypothesis for Testing
With the somewhat limited data expected from the survey,
the following specific hypothetical propositions were tested:
Hypothesis I. Except for ephemeral camps, no aboriginal
sites could be expected in the current survey area except along
the immediate corridor of Mill Creek.
Hypothesis II. Very early historic settlement will be
equally rare in the uplands because of the density of the underlying clay deposits and the depth of the water table.
Hypothesis III. Vernacular architecture will tend to signal
the race of the builder in preindustrial buildings, with AfroAmerican houses tended toward the "shotgun" model defined by
Vlach (1977, 1978) and the Anglo houses tending toward a grammar

16

RESEARCH VESIGN

defined by the dogtrot cabin with gable end chimneys. It is
expected that this distinction will be masked, as standard
"lumber yard" plans for rural houses come into wide usage in
the 1920's, but may have persisted in owner-designed houses.
Testing this hypothesis requires that the race of the house
builder be determined.

SURVEY PROCEDURES
This survey was intended to cover 100% of the entire area
specified. Only about 60% of the area was owned by TUSI at
the time of the survey and therefore the supervising archeologist telephoned or wrote a large number of land owners to
obtain access. Because this was a major factor and because our
goal was a 100 percent sample, the most convenient unit for
organizing the work was the existing cadastral survey tracts.
The current ownership blocks are usually clearly marked with
fencelines.
This allowed our crew to comply with specific instructions and limitations set by individual owners. Some did
not permit vehicles on their property; others, approximately
10 percent, forbade shovel testing; most allowed full access
and freely volunteered information about historic structures
on their property. Most long term residents informed us in
various tactful ways that if we were really looking for aboriginal artifacts they had never seen any on the land in question,
but they could suggest other areas where we might be more
successful.
Very few landowners refused access permission. The bulk
of the inaccessable land, estimated to be about 300 acres total,
was confined to two large properties at the southeast corner
of the designated survey area.
One other landowner of 7.25
acres who also controlled access to 22.75 acres refused entry.
The latter two small tracts are located near New Hope Church.
Survey of these areas will be conducted when access is possible
if future mining development will affect the property.
Routine Survey Procedure
The sponsor owned roughly 60 percent of the land and the
majority of other landowners imposed no restrictions on our
activities. All the land was covered in a walking survey conducted by a field crew of six. The transect intervals were
adjusted to compensate for limited ground visibility (Fig. 3)
and shovel probes were made at frequent intervals to minimize
the concealment effect of heavy vegetation. Large areas of
the surveyed property have been heavily modified by clay mining

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

17

and gravel recovery during recent years.
In these areas, cutbanks were examined where the remnants of the original soil
profile could be seen.
All field work was carried out in a minimally destructive
manner; collected artifacts were limited to items of value in
determining age, function or cultural affiliation of the sites.
The field notes, photographs, site record forms and artifacts
will be permanently curated at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
The locations of all historic sites were checked against
aerial photographs taken in 1939 (TNRIS) as a measure of the
age of a house. It was assumed that houses which appeared on
the 1939 photograph were 50 years old, unless the existing
structure was clearly a recent replacement of an earlier one or
when the property owner could give us a building date between
1932 and 1939. This procedure gave us some control over the
problem of radically remodeled older houses and relatively new
houses in an older tradition.

RESULTS OF THE SURVEY
Prehistoric Resources
Three prehistoric sites were recorded in this survey.
All were located through shovel probes; there was no surface
indication of aboriginal activity. All three are in the same
general locale as 41RK106, a site located in an earlier reconnaissance of the prospect (Moncure and Jackson 1980), but the
areas of cultural material do not coincide. The three sites
recorded were found on sandy erosional remnant knolls overlooking the flood plain of Mill Creek at the extreme northwestern
corner of the designated survey area. This location conforms
well with our predictive hypothesis for prehistoric site distribution. The complete absence of evidence for ephemeral camps
in the uplands was not expected and may be attributed to
the limitation on surface visibility.
The close physical proximity of the three sites discovered
during this survey and 41RK106 suggest the possibility that
they may be one large site rather than four small ones.
If
this is the case then the earliest site number, 41RK106, will
apply to the combined site. The evidence obtained from the
shovel probing of the general area, however, suggests that four
separate sites are present.
41RK106
This site is on the steep slope of a ridge that blends into
the second terrace of Mill Creek.
It was originally located

RESULTS OF THE SURVEY

18

during the 1980 reconnaissance (Moncure and Jackson 1980:26).
Because the surface artifacts were found in a colluvial context,
the search for additional material was made upslope rather
than downslope into the flood plain of Mill Creek. A grinding
stone, decorated ceramic sherds, some burned clay lumps and
lithic debitage were found in a shallow was area overlooking
the flood plain.
The sites listed below were found in the immediate vicinity
of 41RK106 during the intensive survey using subsurface probes.
41RK109
This site is located on a low erosional remnant knoll overlooking the flood plain of Mill Creek.
It is the most northerly
of the three sites located in this survey and is west of 41RK106.
The land is currently used as pasture and is planted with improved grasses. The sandy matrix of the soil profile shows
evidence of plowing to a maximum depth of about 25 cm.
Eleven shovel probes were made in an effort to define the
site extent after initial shovel probes encountered cultural
material. The base of a small dart point of the Ga.~y type was
found at a depth of 20-23 cm. on the northwest downslope edge
of the knoll. Chert and petrified wood debitage were frequent.
Three pottery fragments were found in three separate probes.
Two sherds were below the plow zone in the southwest quadrant
of the site. A very hard packed surface of brown sandy loam
was encountered at a depth of 17 to 18 cm; possibly a hardpacked
living floor.
This hard surface may be the base of the plow
zone at this point rather than an aboriginal occupation feature
but bears some further investigation.
41RK109

Shovel Probe Table

Probe
No.

Depth

Soil

Position

Cultural
Material

1

60 cm.

thin sandy loam

Crest

no cultural
material

2

100 cm.

thin sandy loam

mids lope 6. Sm.
ENE of #1

Debitage bone
frags. begin
Bern. below surface

3

60 cm.

grey mottled
yellow loam

TDE of slope
25m. N of #1

no cultural
material

lB

90 cm.

tan sandy loam

crest

2 flakes, 7080cm.

2B

80 cm.

tan sandy loam

lC

86 cm.

tan sandy loam
no clay

midslope, N
side
top

debitage, charcoal 20-80cm.
chert flakes,
petrified wood
at 80cm.

2C

80 cm.

tan sandy loam

mids lope

Ga.~y

point base
20-23cm.

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

19

3C

80cm.

tan sandy loam

mids lope

flake near surf ace, sterile
below

4C

80 cm.

tan sandy loam

crest, west
end

debitage at
40cm.

lD

72 cm.

tan sandy loam

midslope,
north

debitage, charcoal above 40cm.
sterile below

2D

60 cm.

tan sandy loam

midslope,
northside

sherd 0-20cm.
sterile below

3D

35 cm.

tan sandy loam

downslope,
northside

sterile

40

80 cm.

tan sandy loam

crest

bone frag. charcoal 20-40cm.
sherd 40-60cm.

SD

80 cm.

tan sandy loam

mids lope,
westend

1 flake sandstone
hardpacked floor
@ 17cm. 20-40cm.
sherd,.debitage
40-60cm. debitage
60cm. ochre

The site boundary was defined, somewhat arbitrarily, as
an oval 50 meters long and 30 meters wide (the long axis running east-west) containing all of the probes which yielded
cultural material. As noted above, further investigation may
disclose continuity between this site and two others located to
the south, as well as 41RK106. Our random probes in the intervening areas were sterile of cultural material. Further discussion of the one or four site issue is contained in the
section on recommendations.
41RK110
This site, too, is located on an erosional remnant overlooking the flood plain of Mill Creek 350 meters south of 41RK109
and was located by subsurface probing; no artifacts were seen
on the surface. Cultural material was found in a deposit
ranging between 18 and 40 cm. below the surface. Some evidence
of plow disturbance and gopher activity was noted.
The diagnostic artifacts recovered were a small Ga~y type
dart point (Fig. 4) recovered at a depth of 35 cm. in probe
number 2, and a pottery sherd with 3 incised lines (Fig. 4)
found in probe number 1 at a depth of 40 cm. Debitage of quartzite, chert and petrified wood was quite frequent in other
shovel probes at this location. The morphology of the dart
point is similar to the Elam type, but Gany are more characteristic of the region.

Figure 4.

Prehistoric artifacts

a.
b.
c.
d.

Base of Gary point from 41 RK109
Ceramic sherd from 41RK109
Small Gary point from 41RK110
Ceramic sherd with three incised lines from 41RKl10

e.
f.

Gary point found in roadside gravels
Large dart point found in roadside borrowed gravels

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

41RK110

21

Shovel Probe Table
Position

Deposit

Probe
No.

Depth

Soil

lA

60 cm.

tan sandy loam
to 50cm. red
clay below

crest

debitage 0-30crn.
decorated sherd
at 40cm.

2A

110 cm.

tan sandy loam

mids lope

debitage to 43cm.

3A

tan sandy loam

mids lope

debitage to 60crn.

lB

60 cm.
60 cm.

tan sandy loam
to 40cm. clay
loam below

crest

debitage to 40cm.
one flake below

2B

60 cm.

tan sandy loam

mids lope

debitage to 40cm.
sterile below

3B

80 cm.

tan sandy loam
to 80 cm.

toe slope

cultural material
to 60cm.

4B

60 cm.

tan sandy loam
to 60cm.

mids lope

3 flakes, 2 below 40cm.

lC

56 cm.

tan sandy loam ?
to clay loam
red clay @40cm.

2 flakes 2040Cm.

2C

68 cm.

tan sandy loam ?
to red clay loam

Ga.Jtlj

point at

35cm.

3C

40 cm.

tan sandy loam ?
to red clay loam

sterile

4C

60 cm.

tan sandy loam ?
clay loam @50cm

2 flakes above 40cm.
sterile below

SC

80 cm.

tan sandy loam

2 flakes, 10-20
cm. , 1 @40-60cm.

?

The shovel probes that yielded cultural material at this
location grouped conveniently into a rough oval 30 meters long
and 20 meters wide oriented northwest along its long axis.
This arbitrary site boundary may be due to erosion rather than
human activity.
41RK111
This site is the smallest and most southern of the series.
It is located 350 meters south of 41RK110 on an erosional remnant which rises above the flood plain of Mill Creek. As with
the other two sites, there was no surface indication of a site it was located by shovel probing. The soil matrix here is much
the same as that encountered to the north. Plowing, done perhaps 20 years ago, according to a local informant_, is still
evident in the soil.

RESULTS OF THE SURVEY

22

41RK111

Shovel Probe Table

Probe
No.

Depth

Soil

Position

Deposit

lA

80 cm.

tan sandy loam
to 27cm. red
brown bed

knoll crest
creek end

debitage to 60cm.

2A

7 2 cm.

tan sandy loam

crest, west side

debitage to 72cm.

3A

70 cm.

tan sandy loam crest, west side
to 65cm. red
brown loam below

debitage to 65cm.

lC

65 cm.

tan sandy loam

midslope, SW
side

no cultural
material

2C

50 cm.

tan sandy loam

midslope, SW

no cult. mat.

3C

40 cm.

tan sandy loam

midslope, SW

no cult. mat.

4C

60 cm.

tan sandy loam mids lope, SW
to 40cm. orange
clay loam below

no cult. mat.

SC

30 cm.

tan sandy loam midslope, SE
to stone @30cm.

petrified wood
flake

6C

80 cm.

tan sandy loam
to 20cm. reddish below

southeast

1 flake 0-20cm.

7C

70 cm.

tan sandy loam
to 20cm., red
below

midslope, SE

1 flake,

BC

20 cm.

tan sandy loam
clay @20cm.

crest, upslope

no material

0-20cm.

No diagnostic artifacts such as projectile points or pottery
sherds were uncovered in this location.
Again the site boundary is defined by the locations of
shovel probes showing some cultural material - a roughly circular area about 60 meters in diameter.
It is assumed that because of the close proximity and general similarity of the
debitage found here with that of the two other sites to the
north, that this site is of the same general cultural affiliation
and time period.
Isolated Finds
A number of the gravel-rich erosional remnants along Mill
Creek have been utilized for gravel to stabilize road surfaces
in the area and for many other purposes. A number of aboriginal
sites may have been destroyed by this quarrying.
Two of the
isolated finds came from these roadbed gravels. Both these
projectile points are illustrated in Figure 4.
IF6, a small
Ga~y dart point, was found at the roadside in gravel used for

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

23

the roadbed.
IFl, a larger projectile point, was found on the
margin of an unpaved county road than runs parallel to FM 1716,
where, again, gravel appears to have been added to the clay
roadbed.
The Historic Resources
The reconnaissance-level survey report (Moncure and Jackson 1980) predicted that Area D:IS-I would hold a far greater
number of historic sites than prehistoric sites. The intensive
survey of the area confirmed this prediction. Texas Historical
Commission policy of recording all structures over 50 years
old was followed. Where the building date of a house was in
doubt, and could not be derived from local informants or real
estate records, the structure was recorded. One black hamlet
than contains a number of vernacular houses, all possibly less
than 50 years old, was recorded as a site in its entirety. The
only antebellum site in the survey, the Montgomery House,
(41RK87) , was identified in the reconnaissance report.
41RK87, The Montgomery House
The Montgomery House is located on the west side of FM 1716
south of Oak Hill and within the designated survey area.
Testing of the area south and west of this now-collapsed antebellum plantation house was recommended (Moncure and Jackson
1980) to determine the pattern and layout of outbuildings and
possible slave quarters. Earlier research established the
fact that Benjamin F. Montgomery, the house's original owner,
had also been a slave owner taxed on eight slaves in 1860.
The continuity of the material culture of blacks from Africa
through slavery into the twentieth century, as well as the
relationships and contrasts with white mainstream culture at
any given time period, is a field of considerable research interest.
It was in this area that the melon fields around the
Montgomery House which also carried a rich burden of glass and
ceramic sherds on the surface, were expected to yield some
remains with research potential.
When this site was revisited preparatory to the intensive
survey reported here, this research potential had been badly
reduced.
The collapsed ruin of the house was intact but the
fields south and west of the house had been bulldozed down to
the basal subsoil. The topsoil had been mounded up, along with
any traces of the archeological features it might have once
contained.
The research potential of 41RK87 has thus been diminished by
these activities. Any testing for intact deposits and features
appears futile.
Therefore, no action is recommended.
Data recovery from the immediate area of the house would not be likely
to contribute any significant information about life in the
antebellum South that is not already available in conventional
historical sources. Upper class planter families left a solid

24

RESULTS OF THE SURVEY

trail in the census, tax records, wills, deeds, lawsuits, marriages and the like. Their slaves are seldom mentioned except
in gross numbers in tax documents or by individual value in
a probate inventory.
Other Plantations
Historical background research conducted in 1980 disclosed
three other large holdings north of Henderson that might be
expected to yield similar antebellum slave quarter/plantation
remains. Two of these lie entirely outside the boundary of
the proposed mining area surveyed. The Richard B. Tutt plantation was located on the John Frazier Grant which lies about
one mile west of Mill Creek outside ·the survey bounds. The
John Vinson Sr. plantation (41RK128} occupied portions of the
Alfred G. Walling survey and the E.C. Young survey. Only a tiny
fraction of the Walling survey is touched by the extreme northeast corner of the survey area. The Vinson plantation is outside these bounds to the north.
Based on our earlier publication Mrs. Maida Jaggers and
Mrs. Margaret Brown of the Rusk County Historical Commission
have furnished information {personal communication} concerning
both the Vinson and James B. Tutt plantation sites. Neither
falls within the survey being reported here.
The John Vinson Sr. plantation house is still standing
although not in good repair.
It is a rather modest singlestory classic Anglo center-hall house.
It is strikingly unpretentious when compared with the Montgomery House. Vinson,
who purchased his land in 1852 (Rusk County Deed Book G, page
590} was far more wealthy when he died in 1861 than B.F. Montgonery; Vinson's will left 2,316 acres of land, 56 slaves
valued at $25,000, and livestock valued at $1,860.
John Vinson Sr. and a number of other family members were
originally buried in a private cemetery on the plantation.
These graves have since been moved to the New Prospect Cemetery.
Dr. John A. Vinson Jr. who practiced medicine in the county
from a modest office added to the front porch of the house his
father built, was interred in a grave with a spectacularly
large stone marked by a masonic emblem said to have required
a 20-mule team to haul it to the cemetery in 1903 (Jaggers &
Brown, pers. comm.).
The Richard B. Tutt plantation was also located outside the
bounds of the designated five year mining area.
It appears
that Tutt, like many other antebellum planters, preferred
living in town. He built a house called the "White Tavern" on
East Main street in Henderson in 1848 (Jaggers & Brown, pers.
comm.). No dwelling is known to have existed on his rural land.
!.n any case, both the Vinson and Tutt lands are outside the
bounds of the present permit area and are mentioned here only
because they were identified in our earlier report (Moncure and
Jackson 1980) as potential historic resources.
The fourth plantation mentioned in the reconnaissance report
was that owned by Richard MaGee, the original grantee of a large

Figure 5.

,
,'

The Richard Magee Grant (545 acres)

//

surveyed

I
I
I

Grant boundar

survevec1

\

\
1----- ---not surveyed

I
I
I
I
Im
I
I
I
I
f
not surveyed
I
I
I

not surveyed

Grant boundary

I
I

lili ;ij'i1'1il

Southwest corner of Project area

•

26

RESULTS OF THE SURVEY

survey which falls partially within the bounds of this survey
at the southwest corner. The map in Figure 5 shows the original
extent of the MaGee Survey and indicates that the northeast
segment, roughly a third of the originally granted acreage,
is included in the prospective mining zone.
The owner of two large segments of this area refused permission for our crews to enter his land. Another large segment depicted on the map has been the property of Henderson
Clay Products for some years has been extensively mined.
Pits 40 feet deep and waste dirt heaps 20 feet tall cover a
high percentage of this area. Although these pits afford
numerous views of the typical soil profile, very little of the
original surface remains undisturbed.
The relatively intact portions of this land were examined
by the field crew and again by the supervising archeologist
for indications of an antebellum occupation; none was found.
Tracts 359 and 601 contained only a brick residence of late
1950 or early 1960 vintage and a mobile home. No recordable
structures or archeological remains were found.
It is entirely possible that the MaGee house will be located outside the mining zone by Mrs. Jaggers and her associates on the Rusk County Historical Conunission. The conclusion
reached in the present study is that no identifiable remains
of this plantation could be located in the areas we were permitted to survey.
Historic Sites recorded in this Survey
41RK112 - The Lonnie Dixon Farm
Two standirl'g residential structures are present. The older
house is a classic two-room shotgun house of board and batten,
balloon frame construction (Fig. 6). The house was built, or at
least now rests, directly on the ground without foundation p±ers.
This house appears to be the first modest dwelling erected by
Lonnie Dixon on his 50-acre farm shortly after he bought the
land. The deed, dated November 6, 1918, is recorded in book 100,
page 382, of the Rusk County Clerk's deed records. The grave of
Dixon's daughter and executrix of his estate, Arbia Marioneaux,
is in the Mount Vernon Baptist Church cemetery. Since this is
a black family church and cemetery by local custom, we can infer
that Dixon was a black man.
In a few years when the 1910 and
1920 census returns become available for public examination this
can be independently determined.
The second house built on the Dixon farm is far more substantial and not overtly related to the vernacular tradition of
the shotgun house. The newer house is square in plan with a
pyramid roof. The broad porch across the front presents two
front doors flanked by two windows. The house was heated by a
double hearth fireplace constructed of pressed brick marked
"Cole" with no union mark. The house is covered with narrow,
milled shiplap wooden siding used during the 1920's and 1930's.

Figure 6.

The Lonnie Dixon farm, old house

a. Detail of rear door

b. Rear gable end (note board and batten siding and lack of
foundation piers

c

c. Floorplan illustrating the simple
classic shotgun house

28

RESULTS OF THE SURVEY

These indicate a construction date between 1925 and 1935 with
logic favoring a date before 1929. Very few black farmers in
rural Texas constructed new houses during the Great Depression.
Examination of 1939 aerial photographs (TNRIS) of the area
shows the house in its present location.
The internal layout of the later Dixon house reveals its
cultural affiliation more clearly. The floor plan illustrated
in Figure 6 indicates that the main body of the house is two
one-room shotgun houses that communicated only across a front
and back porch; there are no internal doors. A third room has
been added on the right side of the rear porch but the two
halves of the house still have no internal communication
Recommendation: No significant artifact scatter was present
around either house. Most of the debris present was the common
construction material detritus found around any abandoned decaying structure. These structures do not merit nomination
to the National Register of Historic Places. Both, however,
support Vlach's hypothesized Afro-American continuity in house
forms.
41RK113 - The J.R. Young Homestead
The J.R. Young homestead is of the generally traditional
Anglo-American center hall type with a broad veranda across
the south facing long side and another, now collapsed, on the
west gable end. The house is somewhat unusual in that it has
seven outside doors. A double hearth fireplace heated the two
western rooms while a metal chimney in the southeast room marks
it as the evident kitchen (Fig. 8).
As can be seen clearly in the photographs in Figure 8, the
house has vertical board and batten siding. This house was
probably erected in the 1880's by J.R. Young who purchased the
124 acre farm on which it stands in i883 (Rusk County Deed book
31, page 535). The land and house remained in the same family
for nearly a century. The house which once stood at site 41RK114, the Three Wells Site, seems to have replaced this house
as the main dwelling on the farm sometime in the 1940's. A
deed of partition executed in 1970 (Rusk County Deed book 917,
page 422) subdivided the original Young farm among a number of
heirs. This house stands on the 15.6 acre tract (149H) assigned
to W.F. Young by that deed.
Recommendations: Although this is a charming vernacular
house, it has little to recommend it in terms of either historical significance or architectural merit. There was no surface evidence of artifact deposits which would hold sufficient
research potential to merit nomination of the site to the
National Register of Historic Places under current criteria.
41RK114 - The Three Wells Site
This tract (319) was purchased by Texas Utilities from
the same owner as 41RK113. The house that once stood on this
site appears to have been a twentieth-century replacement for
the J.R. Young house; both were on the same 124-acre farm at

Figure 7.

The Lonnie Dixon farm,
new house

a. Front with dual doors

b. Inset rear porch with
dual doors

Front
p_o rch

c. Floorplan showing double shotgun
nature of the house

c

~
~

Rear
porch

~/

H

~

"W Nllll

~

WNM

Figure 8.

The J. R. Young homestead

a. Front elevation of house, looking north

b. East gable end of house
outside doors)

c. Fenestration of front,
southwest end of porch

d. Fireplace

e. Floor plan

-- J
I

Porch

F

Veranda

~

32

RESULTS OF THE SURVEY

one time. The three wells that suggested the name of the site,
some small outbuildings and a quantity of building debris define the site. The main residential structure has been moved.
The remains of a shed addition, some brick foundation piers
and the fireplace base all suggest a twentieth century, perhaps late 1930's, building date, and a structure appears in
this position on the 1939 aerial photographs of the region.
Recommendations: The site has been recorded as a precaution against the needs for data on rural settlement pattern
in the region at a later date. Nomination to the National
Register of Historic Places cannot be recommended.
41RK115 - McLemore-Williams House
The McLemore-Williams House stands on the east side of FM
782 across from New Hope Church and is clearly visible on the
1939 aerial photographs of the area. We did not have access
to the interior of this house, but it appears to be a traditional Anglo center hall house with a "T" shaped floor plan,
a broad veranda across the front, and another on the rear
kitchen wing.
Tne land records suggest that this house was originally
erected by C.B. McLemore between 1895 and 1905. This gentleman gave the land across the road to the New Hope community
for a church and common school in 1901 (Deed book 47, page 601),
and his daughter and heir, Mrs. Mariah McLemore Camp, gave
additional land to the New Hope Baptist Church for the cemetery
and other uses (Deed book 334, page 433) in 1939.
The general cultural affiliation of the house and the originnal builder are Anglo-American. The exterior of the structure
conforms to the classic Anglo-American type and stands in support
of our third hypothesis.
The house is now owned by the
Boze Williams estate. Mrs. Maxie Williams, his widow, lives on
the property in a mobile home.
The house is currently rented.
The Williams family and the current tenants of the house are
black.
Recommendations: Under the current plan for mining development, the house will not be disturbed. Although the house has
some significance to local history, it does not appear to
merit nomination to the National Register of Historic Places
at this time.
In the event, modifications in construction plans
will affect the McLemore-Williams house, preservation or more
complete documentation of the structure is recommended. Should
the current owners then grant access to the house interior, or
should the property be acquired by Texas Utilities, a more complete recording of the house and its environs can be made. A
more complete assessment will be possible based on co~plete
information about the current condition of the structure, the
associated archeological deposits, and evidence of modification.
41RK116 - The Paul G. Brown House
The concrete foundation and brick chimney of a dwelling
that originally measured about 24 feet by 36 feet define this
site. Abundant charcoal suggests a balloon frame house which

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

33

burned. A significant percentage of the debris was, apparently,
gathered up and hauled away leaving a sparse surface deposit
of nails and other small artifacts in the charcoal.
A structure was present on this site in the 1939 aerial
photographs. Pressed red brick of the chimney, poured concrete
porch and footings suggest a twentieth century building date.
No cultural affiliation can be attached to these remains and
the configuration of the house itself cannot be determined.
Mr. Paul G. Brown, current owner of the 117.5 acre tract
on which the site is located, lives in Henderson, Texas.
Recommendations: The house appears to have been erected
about fifty years ago and to have burned sometime recently.
The site has been recorded for its possible future use in rural
settlement pattern studies but does not merit nomination to
the National Register of Historic Places.
41RK117 - The Killer Bee Site
This site consists of the remains of a burned residence
and a standing barn or cattle shed. The core of this standing
structure is a single log pen to which sheds of sawn lumber
were attached. The site was named for a swarm of angry bees
that now occupies the barn.
The residence which once stood here is estimated at roughly
1000 square feet of floor space. Distorted corrugated metal
sheets from the roof and the major appliances are still on the
ground where they lay after the fire.
Two recent vintage automobiles with 1982 license tags also burned in what is presumed
to be the remains of a car port next to the house.
The foundation piers of the house and the standing fireplace
and chimney are constructed of red sandstone. A section of
railroad rail used across the lintle of the fireplace suggests
a vernacular owner-built house of post-industrial construction
date. The neat sawcut ends of the pine logs used in the barn
give a similar indication (Fig. 9).
The property on which these features are located was
purchased in 1893 by W. Tom Pool (Deed book 46, page 387) as
part of a 145-acre parcel.
In 1930 the thirty-acre parcel on
which these buildings stand was deeded to Sam J. Pool (Deed book
148, page 78) who now lives in Henderson. The type of barn
built here is within the Anglo-American folk tradition and
could date the barn to the turn of the century. However, barns
of this type were still being constructed in East Texas during
the Great Depression.
Recommendations: Although the dwelling at this site may
have had some merit as an example of vernacular architecture
its burned out ruin is of little archeological value. The
abandoned single crib log barn does not of itself merit nomination to the National Register of Historic Places and the site
as a whole does not exhibit significant research potential.

Figure 9.

b.

The Killer Bee Site, 41RK117

Fireplace of the burned-out residence

d.
a.

Corner notching of log barn (note sawn
ends of logs)

c.

Recent automobiles burned with the house, roof debris
in foreground

Rear door of log barn

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

35

41RK118 - Cabin Corner Site
This site was found well off the roadway in an area of
pine forest.
The remains of a very small (15ft. x 15ft.)
structure made from 6-inch diameter pine logs and scrap lumber
suggest either a temporary or unfinished project. Most of the
wood has rotted away; a single corner of pine logs and a milled
oak board that functioned as a door sill remains {Fig. 10).
A bristol glazed broken stoneware jug was found in the
area - no other signs of occupation or domestic aritfacts were
encountered. The property was purchased by Texas Utilities
from an absentee landowner who lives in Canada (Deed book 1021,
page 613). No cultural affiliation could be established.
Reconunendations: The site has been recorded. Significant
research potential sufficient to merit National Register status
cannot be demonstrated.
41RK119 - Grandfather Gillespie's
This site is well off any present road; however, the traces
of a narrow lane leading east are visible. A house was present
in this location on the 1939 aerial photographs of Rusk County,
however, no structure is depicted on the 1973 USGS 7.5 minure
Quadrangle. The site is defined by scattered stone foundation
piers, a collapsed brick fireplace, -a trash scatter, a hand-dug
well and some surviving domestic vegetation. The foundation
piers define a frame house roughly 18 by 24 feet with an entrance at the southern and northern gable ends and a fireplace
on the east wall of the south room. The fireplace is of at
least two brands of pressed brick, "Cole" and "Lonestar", indicating that it was constructed from salvaged material. The
trash scatter is modest and unremarkable, containing items from
the Depression era to perhaps the 1950's. A pear tree, a pecan
tree and a juniper grow near the house.
A local informant, Mr. Gillespie, told our field crew that
his grandfather lived in a house on this site. Mr. Gillespie
is black and the house appears to have been a two room shotgun
house with rooms that measured 12 b 18 feet.
Thus, the inferred
floor plan is consistent with the hypothesized Afro-American
tradition in house construction.
Recommendations: The site has been recorded.
It does not
appear to merit further consideration as a National Register
site because it does not appear to have significant research
potential.
41RK120 - New Hope Church and Cemetery
The New Hope Church and cemetery were assigned a trinomial
designation and recorded solely for archival purposes. As
discussed at some length in the reconnaissance report (Moncure
and Jackson 1980:43-45), cemeteries enjoy a special status in
Texas Land Law.
The current church, parish hall and parsonage on Highway 782
all appear to be less than 30 years old {see Fig. 11) and are

Figure 11.

New Hope Church, 41RK120

a. The church (concrete block masonry)

b. The Parish Hall or Sunday School
building (frame construction)

38

RESULTS OF THE SURVEY

presumed to be replacements for the structures that were originally erected here about 1901. A church building of earlier
vintage and a rural. school house once occupied this tract
(Deed book 47, page 601).
Recorrunendations: Avoidance. However, neither cemeteries
nor churches are normally eligible for National Register status,
while only exceptionally significant structures less than 50
years old are eligible.
41RK121 - The Abe Jackson Homestead
This standing modest vernacular farmhouse is in good repair.
It was occupied by a tenant during the survey period and the
crew did not have access to the interior or the immediate
vicinity of the house. The house is of balloon frame construction with narrow shiplap siding of the type used commonly in
the late 1920's and the 1930's. A house was located on this
spot in the 1939 aerial photographs and presumably is the same
one.
Abe Jackson bought this parcel of land in 1917 (Deed book
95, page 44). His heirs sold their interest in 1941 (Deed book
347, page 470). Therefore it is probable that this family built
the house. No racial data was available on the Jackson family
and the house itself presents a certain post-industrial ambiguity, belonging to neither the Anglo nor Afro traditions.
Recommendations: Based on present information no nomination
to the National Register of Historic Places can be made.
41RK122 - The L.N. Newsome Site
The present owner of this property, for whom the site is
named, did not build the house which stands on it and does not
know who did. A telephone conversation with Mr. Newsome on
September 16, 1982 drew the additional opinion that the structure
had once functioned as a restaurant during the 1930's oil field
boom.
The structure is a modest balloon frame house with vertical
board and batten siding set on a series of sandstone and pressed
brick piers (Fig. 12). The house has been open and abandoned
for some time. A house appears on the 1939 Rusk County aerial
photographs in this position. The low ceilings and hardware on
the doors suggests a building date in the 1920's.
The floor plan indicates that the house may have originally
been a five room "double" shotgun house of the Afro-American
vernacular tradition. The plan depicted in Figure 12 again
shows a house with no communicating doors down the center. The
two halves of the house only communicate on the front porch each half has a separate back door. An interior wall appears
to have been removed from the right hand side of rooms leaving
a large (30ft. by lSft.) room. Perhaps this room may have
been put to use as a restaurant at one time.
No material could be obtained on the racial-cultural affiliation of the builder and the builder could not be reasonably
identified from the deed records.

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

39

Recommendations: The site has been recorded for purposes
of settlement pattern analysis. The site does not exhibit
sufficient research potential, arch·itectural merit or other
significance to merit nomination to the National Register of
Historic Places.
41RK123 - The Harkless House
This house could be viewed only from the outside; our field
crew had no interior access. The structure appears to be a
traditional Anglo center hall house with a broad, south-facing
veranda across the front.
The building is of balloon frame
construction with narrow milled shiplap wooden siding.
The property was purchased by Leonard Harkless, a black,
in 1921. The house may have been on the property at that time,
or may have been moved in later. The house is, however, clearly
of a different cultural tradition than that of the Harkless
family who still live on the property.
The house is currently occupied and in good repair.
Recommendations: The house has been recorded from the outside. Should the property by purchased by Texas Utilities and
scheduled for demolition or moving, a floor plan and more detailed photographs should be made a part of the record, and
a specific determination of eligibility for nomination to the
National Register of Historic Places made on the basis of more
complete information.
41RK124 - Mount Vernon Baptist Church
The church is a wooden balloon frame structure (Fig. 13}
set well off the road on a tract of land donated by Owen King
in 1932. The extant building appears to have been erected at
that time. The church is well painted and in good repair.
It
was recorded here as an archeological site solely for archival
purposes.
An adjoining quarter-acre lot was donated to the Union Aid
Society in 1917; meetings of this society may have been held
here, however, no trace of a structure was found.
Discarded
narrow shiplap siding and other scrap lumber may have come from
an earlier church but no documentary evidence confirms a prior
structure. On November 1, 1922, A.W. Pryor donated one acre for
use by the Mount Vernon Baptist Church as a cemetery (Deed book
119, page 11). This cemetery is located 400m. east of thee
church.
Recommendations: The building itself is of no great age
or particular architectural merit and does not present any
research potential historically or archeologically. Therefore,
nomination to the National Register of Historic Places is not
recommended.
Mount Vernon Cemetery
The cemetery belonging to this church is legally protected,
as are all cemeteries, and must be avoided unless a district
court allows its relocation. As stated above, the cemetery is
400 meters east of the church building.

Figure 12
The L. N. Newsome house

a.

Front porch (note two doors)

b.

c.

Rear of house (note dual doors)

South side of house

: -=i

J
I

'J

i

~~~====~~11======y~'
a

:
I

-=::::i~'===='-~.

M::::::=:=(

d
d.

-- - ____

j

Floor plan; double shotgun type with no
interior communication between the two
halves of the house

e.

An outbuilding at the rear of the house

Figure 13

Mount Vernon Baptist Church
a. Oblique view of front and south sides
b. Detail of front door (with scale)
c. Cast concrete gravestone in Mount Vernon Cemetery

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

43

41RK125 - The Watkins-Friar House
This standing, modest, late Victorian farmhouse is of balloon frame construction with vertical board and batten siding.
It has high ceilings, tall narrow windows, and a steeply angled
currugated metal roof. The fireplace and chimney are made
of red pressed (FERRIS) brick and the foundation piers of local
sandstone.
The house stands on property that was part of a 100-acre
farm purchased by Mrs. C.L. Watkins in 1897 (Deed book 45, page
2) and by W.B. Friar in 1902 (Deed book 51, page 444}. Either
of these owners could have built the house. Friar held the
property until 1921.
The interior of this house was not accessible because of
the near state of collapse of the porch roof and most of the
flooring.
However, the rough outlines could be approximated
from outside (Fig. 14).
The proportions of the house suggest that it is a central
hall house but the exact arrangement of the front part of the
house could not be determined.
In any case, there appear to be
no practical source for ethnic/racial data on the builders.
Reconunendations: The house has been recorded for future
data to support rural settlement pattern studies. Nomination
to the National Register of Historic Places appears to be -ruled
out both by the current condition and lack of research potential.
41RK126 - Black Hamlet
This rural black hamlet is found along an unnamed and unnumbered county road north of the New Prospect conununity.
Eleven houses are shown on the 1960 edition of the 15 minute
Minden USGS Quadrangle map. When the site was visited in the
summer of 1982 only four houses were still standing, seven had
been moved to other locations or dismantled. An analysis of
the 1939 aerial photographs of this area indicates that only
two of these houses were present at that date. Thus only these
two may be qualified for individual recording under the 50 year
standard. Nevertheless, the entire conununity was recorded for
archival purposes.
This small settlement seems to have originated from the
partition of two family farms into small tracts. One of these
transactions was recorded 27 March 1942 in Deed book 358, page
591. This deed partitions a fifty acre farm between eight
female heirs of Sam Weldon and his wife, Maggie. The Weldons
began acquiring this land in 1887 when they purchased 15 acres
from T.E. Strong (Deed book 125, page 256). They either built
or purchased and moved to the site one of the houses that stood
here in 1939. This house was inherited by Thelma Trimble and
her husband, Luther.
It was still their property in 1982,
forty years later, even though they now live in Henderson. The
house is pictured in Figure 15.

44

RESULTS OF THE SURVEY

The other heirs of the Weldons

were:

Cora Dixon and husband, Robert
Artelia Blair and husband, Lee
Neb Harkless and husband, Willie
Bessie Mae McKinney and husband, George
Sedalia Smith and husband, Donald
Gennie Mills and husband, Johnnie
Senia Jones and husband, J.D.
Subsequent to the partition, houses were erected on most
of the small tracts that resulted. Some of these were owned
by third generation families, that is grandchildren of the
Weldons, at the time they were sold to Texas Utilities.
The second house that stood in the site area in 1939 was
the home of Enix Wright (Fig. 16). There is little doubt
that this house was constructed on the site. A large well
that predates the house was enclosed by a rear porch. The
Wright house is a complex but modest bungalow of balloon frame
construction with a corrugated metal roof.
It appears to have
been built from standard plans typical of the 1930's.
The land on which the Wright's house stands was purchased
from the estate of J.T. Montgomery by Paul Rogers (Deed book
335, page 143) in December, 1939. Thus, if this is the same
house as that shown on the aerial photographs taken earlier
that year, it was built before that time. The house and land
parcel became part of the Montgomery estate in a transfer from
L.H. Evans (Deed book 335, page 142) also recorded in December
1939. We know·, from other material and from local informants,
that J.T. Montgomery was of the same white family that built
the Montgomery House (41RK87) in the nineteenth century. No
racial identification of L.H. Evans could be made. We know,
however, that he purchased this 57 acre parcel in 1896 (Deed
book 44, page 225) and thus must have erected the house which
appeared on this location when it was photographed in 1939.
The house pictured in Figure 16 does not belong to the late
19th century, but is of a type in vogue during the late 1920's
and early 1930's.
The Wright house conforms internally to the modest California bungalow plan rather than the vernacular folk tradition of
the Afro-American shotgun house or double shotgun. As discussed above, the race of the probable builder is also ambiguous,
thus this house neither supports nor refutes our Hypothesis
three.
It appears to be one of the later industrial "lumber
yard" precut plans (Pillsbury 1981) that tend to blur the
lines of strictly vernacular folk housing in the early 20th
century. A 1935 date on newspaper used to paper one of the
back rooms in this house gives us that year as a not-laterthan date for the construction of this house.
The map of this site shown in Figure 17 indicates the
location of the Enix Wright and Trimble houses. Two other
structures are still standing. Both of these houses (Figure
18) appear to be owner-built vernacular houses with entrances

Figure 14
The Watkins-Friar house

a.

South gable end of main wing

b.

c.

Detail of window, board and batten siding

Floor plan

c
Porch
(roof

I

collapsed)

I

\

I

1
T
I

l

Added
shed

Porch

~

Figure 15.
Th e Trimble house

a. Obi ique view of front and side
(note foursquare design)

b. Detail of rear porch with one of two
small room-on-the-porch additions

c. Garage, well head in foreground

Figure 16
The Enix Wright house

(f

48

RESULTS OF THE SURVEY

in the gable end. Although of recent construction, both conform to the double shotgun plan and show a clear relationship
with the Afro-American vernacular house tradition.
Discussion: Only one of these houses is surely more than
50 years old. This is the Trimble house, more correctly, the
Weldon-Trimble house. This house cannot be securely dated
earlier than the 1920's. The narrow shiplap siding that
covers both the house and garage is typical of the late 1920'~.
In that a garage rather than a horse barn was constructed at
the same time as the house, implies a building date after the
First World War. Automobiles were rare in East Texas before
that date. When the site was recorded in the summer of 1982
the Trimble house was still privately owned and was for sale
to be moved off the property to another location. The house
has no great architectural merit (Fig. 15) and does not appear
to be of any historical significance, although ~t is certainly
the oldest and most substantial house in this small hamlet.
Although we could not gain access to the interior of the
Trimble house it appears from the outside to be a standard
"lumber yard" design, of the square type with a pyramid roof.
Farrar Lumber Company of Dalton, Georgia, sold the material
and plans of a quite similar house for $217.00 in their 1918
catalog (Pillsbury 1981:57).
In any case, the Trimble house
clearly does not conform to the Afro-American folk tradition
as defined by Vlach (l977, 1978).
To sum up the evidence of the Black Hamlet relative to our
research design, two of the four standing houses tend to
support our Hypothesis three, relating to vernacular housing.
These are the later two. Both of the structures that may be
over 50 years old, the Trimble house and the Enix Wright house,
are of ambiguous types conforming closely to precut standard
construction packages sold by mail by various lumber yards
across the South during the early 20th century (Pillsbury 1981) .
Recommendations: The standing structures and physical
remains of removed and dismantled houses here do not constitute
either an archeological or historical information resource of
great value. No nomination to the National Register of Historic
Places appears to be warranted at this time primarily because
only one of the structures meets the minimal 50 year rule.
41RK127 - Slab Garage Site
This rural homesite has some minor outbuildings still
standing. Only the foundation piers and collapsed chimney of
the residence remain. The house was evidently moved. The
concrete slab floor of a double garage is also present but the
rest of the structure was dismantled or moved.
A house appears in this location on the 1939 aerial photographs indicating that the house was at least that old. Such
diagnostics as are present on the site suggest an occupation
beginning in the 1930's.
Recommendations: The site has been photographed and recorded for data base purposes. No evidence of any potential

9···

111 ~
~

Figure 17

.

~

....;
AI

Arthur Wright

37 A
Enix Wright
house

.. -'·
D

D

'-::\

-~

~..,,3·
. '-'l-,
v·

ti/}

.a{)

·:·w

Building
debris

D
DD

41RK126
Black Hamlet Site

Roy Harkless
house
Harvey Phelps
house

N. Harkless
7 A

B. M.

McKinney

7 A
Senia Jones

G. Mills

5 A

7 A

A. Blair
7 A
0

50

100

200
Cora Dixon
7A

•• •" • Building

.o.t~"8 debris
~v.._v

..

·'

Figure 18.

Later houses in the Black Hamlet

a . The Harkless house

b.

The Harvey Phelps house

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

51

for research or significance sufficient to warrant nomination
to the National Register of Historic Places was found.

DISCUSSION OF SITE DISTRIBUTION
A survey report of such a large acreage in east Texas with
so few recorded prehistoric sites will raise some questions.
Comparisions will inevitably be made between this survey
and other recent surveys in more favorable environments.
It
seems appropriate, therefore, to offer some observations relative to the sparse distribution of prehistoric sites in
Area D:IS-I.
GEOMORPHOLOGY
The environmental setting of the study area was a major
factor in including the study area in the zone of low
cultural resource potential in the Reconnaissance report.
From the standpoint of landform alone, all but a small percentage of the area is upland. No major stream traverses the
area. Only a short segment of one shore of a perennial creek
(Mill Creek) was part of the area surveyed. Only about twothirds of this flood plain was surveyed because two major
landowners in the southwest corner of the survey area refused
us access.
The ratio of creek bottom and river bottom sites to upland
sites in east Texas is a matter of considerable comment in the
literature. A recent survey in Harrison County (Espey, Houston
and Assoc. 1979:5-86) of the South Hallisville area found 88
prehistoric sites, 83 of which were in the creek bottoms or
along the Sabine River. Only five sites were found in upland
regions.
This, too, was predicted from an earlier reconnaissance (Dibble 1977:2-4) which stated:
In terms of anticipated frequency of archeological
sites in these zones, the upland areas are rated as
low; the Sabine River flood plain as moderate; the
tributary stream valley bottoms and flanks as high.

SITE VISIBILITY
As in most areas of east Texas, surface conditions make
detecting prehistoric sites very difficult. Vegetation ranges
from stands of pines (see Fig. 3), where the surface is covered
by several inches of fallen pine needles, through weed-choked

52

VISCUSSION OF SITE VISTRIBUTION

abandoned fields made almost impassible by greenbriar. In
an effort to counter such adverse conditions, the crew spent
25 percent of their field time conducting shovel tests. Areas
were selected for shovel testing on a judgemental basis rather
than by some mathematical scheme. Sandy capped knolls along
flood plains were specifically selected for shovel testing as
were similar mound-like features in the upland zone. Except
where specifically forbidden to do so by the landowner, the
crews were encouraged to shovel probe any area that they felt
might have been attractive as an aboriginal campsite.
It is significant that only isolated finds of aboriginal
artifacts were made through surface examination. The three
sites which were found were located through subsurface probes.
None of these sites presented any surface material even though
gopher activity was apparent. This is not surprising :especially
since the richest site thus far excavated in east Texas in
terms of subsurface artifact density, the George c. Davis site,
has very few artifacts on the surface.
SITE INTERPRETATION
At the Davis site, dart points tend to occur in separate
contexts from pottery and arrow points. This would suggest
that 41RK109 and 41RK110 may be multi-component sites (Dee
Ann Story, pers. comm.}. However, it is singularly difficult
to make such an assessment based on the limited artifact
sample recovered.
It also remains possible that 41RK106, 41RK110 and 41RK111
all represent isolated portions of a small village. Without
diagnostic artifacts or features it is doubtful that we can
establish the fact that all sites were occupied at one time.
The more statistically probable, and therefore more conservative interpretation is that the general area was favored as
an isolated farmstead or temporary camp and the various knolls
were used by a number of unrelated occupants in several brief
episodes.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Given the rarity of intact Archaic period sites in east
Texas and the equal scarcity of small early farming sites,
testing of these four sites is recommended to determine if they
meet criteria for National Register nomination by such standards
as:
a.
the integrity of the deposits
b. chronology
c. presence of intact structural features such as
living floors and postholes.
For this purpose it is recommended that large but shallow randomly placed 2x2m. squares be excavated within the confines

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

53

of each site. Backhoe trenching of the areas between the sites
which were devoid of cultural material in the limited shovel
probes should determine if natural or cultural processes influenced the separation of these sites.

SURVEY RESULTS AND RESEARCH QUESTIONS
Three hypotheses were formulated for testing the data
from this survey. These propositions were selected from a
universe of questions relating to the prehistoric and historic
settlement patterns in east Texas and were not the primary
purpose of the survey which was to locate and evaluate the
research potential of all prehistoric and historic sites
within the area proposed for lignite mining. These primary
considerations are considered in the following chapter which
sununarizes the recommendations for conservation or further
study of the cultural resources of the Prospect. The conclusions offered here are those which can be drawn from the
results of the survey and which bear upon the study of east
Texas settlement patterns.
Hypothesis I treats with the well-known, but seldom articulated, proposition that prehistoric aboriginal sites will
cluster along the major tributaries of rivers within a few
miles of the river bottom. Fewer sites will be found in the
bottomlands and in the uplands which are cut only by lesser
drainages. The implication in the literature has been that
this rarity of upland sites is an artifact of "little systematic
data collection in the region which samples the total environmental range including the really broad uplands" (Espey,
Houston and Associates 1979:A2-28).
Because the bulk of the land surveyed in Area D:IS-I falls
in the broad upland zone, our prime prehistoric hypothesis
states:
I. Except for ephemeral camps, no significant aboriginal
sites can be expected in the current survey area except
along the immediate corridor of Mill Creek.
As detailed previously, no sites were found in the uplands.
Some isolated artifacts were found along roadways, probably
transported from the creek margin with borrowed gravels.
In
spite of the use of extensive shovel probes, only three prehistoric sites were discovered. All three were located along
the first terrace/flood plain of Mill Creek in the vicinity
of an aboriginal site found in the earlier reconnaissance
(Moncure and Jackson 1980:26). The selection of high probability areas for shovel probing was a judgemental decision
excercised by the field supervisor. Some bias may have been
introduced by using the predictive rather than a random model

54

SURVEY RESULTS ANV RESEARCH QUESTIONS

to define promising areas. However, the numerous probes in
mounds, knolls and open fields were sterile of cultural material.
Thus, either the upland sites are of such an ephemeral
and concealed nature as to be virtually undetectable, or they
are indeed very rare to absent in the broad upland regions.
Recognizing that little can be established from the negative
evidence, the predictive validity of the hypothesis is at
least underscored.
The second proposed hypothesis concerned historic settlement of the upland regions.
II. Very early historic settlement will be equally rare
in the uplands because of the density of the underlying
clay deposits and the depth of the water table.
Early historic settlement here means the era before the
1850's. Rusk County was organized in l843 from Nacogdoches
County.
It was subject to very rapid settlement, becoming the
second most populous county in the state by 1850.
A large percentage of the land within the designated
survey boundary was originally patented to, or acquired quite
early, by various members of the Walling family or the closely
allied Chisum family (Moncure and Jackson 1980:34-45).
The map in Figure 19 indicates the property held by Isham
Chisum on the Rusk County tax roll of 1846 even though some
patents were not issued on these tracts until 1848. There is
some discrepancy between the tax records and the size of the
final surveys shown on this map. Chisum was taxed on only
half of the E.R. Jones 1280-acre grant, while his son-in-law,
Jesse Walling, was taxed on the other half. This appears to
have been an undivided interest.
Isham Chisum was also taxed
on a mill, two slaves, 35 cattle and a watch. The possibility
of a mill along Mill Creek on the Jones survey was explored
but no traces of an early home or a mill structure were found.
The 1850 census found Permelia [sic] Chisum aged 70 (born
1780, Kentucky) living with her son Isaac (born 1820, Mississippi)
and his wife, Charlotte.
In other records (Deed book E, page
179, Deed book G, page 584) the son's name appears as Isham,
not Isaac. In any case, it would appear that the Chisum's
mill was located to the north near Millville where Jesse
Walling and a number of other relatives lived.
The bulk of the land in the survey area was patented in
the six years between 1848 and 1854, after the county was
formed in 1843 and contributing to its dense population by
1850. It is plain that these lands were not considered among
the most choice portions of the county. One small parcel
between two major surveys remained part of the public domain
until 1904. This is the 70 acre Jonas Shepard (Abstract 754)
survey which was patented to John B. Harrell.
Both the archival research and the field work confirm that
early historic settlement was rare in this upland region.
That field' evidence is essentially negative.
It can not be
presumed that because no early historic sites were found that
none existed. The archival evidence is much stronger because

\
\

Walling

Jno. C.

---

F.

Richard Magee

\

II Lane

IJamfJ
, .

Lane

John C.

~--.---

t>ound•

Juan JoJe Ybarbo

Aooroxlmat•

~

I

Pannelta Chism

E. R. JoneJ

lS.

~

/

I

I

Figure 19.

/
1

IThru
B~er

Land Grants in th e survey area

William T. Davis

------

I

I

I

/

I

G. H/Wright

I

I

___ _,

Alfred G. Walling

Isham Chisum/

William
Baggett

Henry B. Dance

Davis

~~ct

I

.................

------of

........ . . . ._ . . . ._

Solis

56

SURVEY RESULTS AND RESEARCH QUESTIONS

it demonstrates that no land in the area was patented before
1848.
Hypothesis II is generally supported by the evidence
obtained from the survey. However, it should be noted that
the original reasoning behind the hypothesis, which supposed
that the depth of the water table and hardness of the clay
subsoil was a barrier to settlement until well drilling and
windmill equipment were available, is weakened by the number
of hand dug wells without windmills that were found even in
the Black Hamlet where they must have been dug after 1942.
Our third hypothesis proposed cultural continuity in
Afro-American and Anglo-American vernacular houses that might
still be standing in the survey area. As originally stated
it was:
III. Vernacular architecture will tend to signal the
race of the builder in preindustrial buildings, with AfroAmerican houses tending toward the "shotgun" model defined by
John Vlach (1978) and the Anglo houses tending toward a grammar
defined by the dogtrot cabin with gable and chimneys.
It is
expected that this distinction will be masked, as standard
"lumber yard" plans for rural houses come into use in the 1920's
but will persist in owner designed houses even then.
The fourteen historic sites recorded are hardly an exhaustive sampling of the total universe of vernacular houses
in either Rusk County or east Texas. In addition, the problem
of determining the race of the original builder proved to be
beyond our powers in so~e cases.
In other cases, ambiguity
was created by no interior access to the house.
These problems forced us to devise some extra categories
to contain sites with undefined parameters. To recapitulate
the data in site descriptions:
Site

Type

Race of Builder

41RK112a
41RK112b
41RK113
41RK114
41RK115
41RK116
41RK117
41RK118
41RK119
41RK120
41RK121
41RK122

shotgun
double shotgun
centerhall
unknown
centerhall
unknown
unknown
unknown
probably shotgun
church
possibly centerhall
probably double
shotgun
possibly centerhall
church
unknown
unknown
unknown interior
postindustrial
double shotgun
modern shotgun

Black
Black
White
White
White
unknown
unknown
unknown
Black
White
unknown

41RK123
41RK124
41RK125
41RK127
41RK126a
41RK126b
41RK126c
41RK126d

- - - - - - - - - - - - ---------

-

-

unknown
possibly Black
Black
unknown
unknown
Black
probably Black
Black
Black

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

57

Generally, Hypothesis III was upheld in seven cases where
the house type was clear and the race of the builder could be
established. Eleven cases are ambiguous because one or both
factors could not be established. Two of these cases were, of
course, churches which do not fit the pattern and several were
sites of houses that had been dismantled or moved.
In two
cases, the Trimble House (41RK126a) and particularly the Harkless House (41RK123), houses of the generally centerhall Anglo
type are occupied by Black families.
The Trimble house could
be a case of the standard plan prevailing, but without access
to the interior this is unclear. The Harkless house appears
to be a classic centerhall type from the outside and has been
in the same Black family for a long period of time.
On balance then, the hypothesis is seen as having some
basis although it does not offer a clear cut guide to all
houses. It is at least a start toward a classification of
east Texas vernacular houses into cultural traditions.

CULTURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
This first intensive survey of a portion of the larger
mining area, Martin Lake Area D:IS-I, was conducted under the
terms of a Memorandum of Agreement between Texas Utilities, Inc.
and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation. The remaining tracts will be intensively surveyed at staged intervals
in the future.
Specific recommendations for the management
of the cultural resources offered here pertain only to historic
and prehistoric sites located in this first intensive survey.
PREHISTORIC RESOURCES
The three prehistoric sites, 41RK109, 41RKllO, and 41RK111
all lie in close proximity to site 41RK106, recorded during
the reconnaissance level survey of 1980 (Moncure and Jackson
1980). It is quite possible that these sites do not constitute separate small occupations but are rather erosional
remnants of a single, larger multi-component site. The recovery of both dart points and pottery in two of these sites
strongly suggests multiple components.
The Musgano site, 41RK19, is a small upland caddoan hamlet
originally located in the first Martin Lake survey (Clark and
Ivey 1974) and since listed on the National Register of Historic
Places. This site contained the well-preserved occupational
features of at least one Caddoan house and was not associated
with a burial mound or ceremonial precinct. The sites recorded
in the two most recent surveys of Martin Lake Area D are
similar in some characteristics to the Musgano site and appear

58

CULTURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT RECOMMENVATIONS

to hold research potential for elucidating the role of the
small farming hamlet in Caddoan culture. Testing of the subsurface deposits is recommended to determine if the cultural
material is retained in its original context and if the sites
are remnants of one village or four separate occupational areas.
If a single site, then the earliest designation 41RK106 would
apply to the entire complex.
The scientific and archeological significance of the sites
cannot be adequately assessed from the limited shovel probes
used to define the site area. A tentative plan for future
excavations is outlined at the conclusion of the site descriptions (p.
).
HISTORIC RESOURCES
The research potential of the Montgomery House (41RK87)
has been significantly diminished by bulldozing since it was
first located during the reconnaissance survey (Moncure and
Jackson 1980). Recommendations for selective test excavations
at this site are withdrawn.
Other historic houses and standing structures within the
Prospect do not merit National Register nomination based on
the data available. However, access to the interior of the
Harkless House (41RK123) and the McLemore-Williams House
(41RK114) was not available during this study.
If these
properties are acquired by TUSI or access becomes possible,
more complete photographic documentatio.n and drawing of
their floor plans should be accomplished. The McLemoreWilliams house has some local historic significance as the
home of the family which contributed land to the New Hope
community school and church. This might merit placement of
a historical marker but does not constitute minimal criteria
for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places
The two cemeteries which lie within the Prospect have
been given archeological site numbers along with their associated structures, the Mount Vernon and New Prospect churches.
The Black Hamlet Site
An effort has been made to report in considerable detail
the composition, origin, and vernacular housing characteristics
of the Black Hamlet located in the mining area. As Andrea
Kirsten Mullen (1981) has pointed out, the development and
evolution of black settlements in the rural South is an area
neglected by the bulk of the scholarly community. She has set
the probable number of such communities in Texas at around 225
(ibid. :82). Thus, 41RK126 cannot be considered a unique or even
rare cultural resource.
The post-1939 date of the hamlet's
growth and development also put it well into the era of detailed
census data. Although these data are not available to the public
or generally to scholars in detail, they are recorded. While
it might be argued that census data are far from perfect,

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

59

especially when Black families were being recorded, it still
constitutes a far more detailed picture of the conununity,
its occupants, kinship structure, and economy than could be
reconstructed from the structures and trash heaps which remain.
The photographic record and archeological information collected
in this survey, coupled with the census data, constitute an
adequate base for future studies of Black community dynamics.
SUMMARY
Reconunendations for further work in the first five year
permit area of Martin Lake Area D are:
1) testing of prehistoric sites 41RK106, 41RK109, 41RK110,
and 41RK111 to determine their structural integrity and
significance according to National Register of Historic
Places criteria; and
2) no further action on other sites within the prospective
mining tract unless the McLemore-Williams house is affected
by developmental plans, in which case a more complete
documentation of this structure should be accomplished.

60

REFERENCES CITED
Arbingast, S.A., L. Kennamer, R.H. Ryon, A. Lo, D.L. Karney,
C.P. Zlatkovich, M.E. Bonnie and R.G. Steele
1973
Atla-0 06 Texa-0. Bureau of Business Research,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas.

The Texa-0 Jounnal

06 Science, 2(1) :93-117.
Branda, Eldon S.

1976

(Editor)

The Handbook 06 Texa-0, A Supplement, Vol. III.
The Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Bryant, Mavis, and Deolece Parmelee

1976

Some note-0 on the Law-0 Govenning Oun Hi-Otonic

Texa~

Cemetenie-0.

Unpublished Flyer, Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.
Bureau of Economic Geology

1967

Geologic Atla-0 06 Texa-0, Palestine Sheet. Bureau
of Economic Geology, The University of Texas, Austin.

Burt, William H., and Richard P Grossenheider
1976
A Field Guide to the Mammals, Third Edition.
The
Houghton
Peten~on Field Guide Senie~, No. 5.
Mifflin, Co., Boston.
Butzer, Karl

1971
1976

w.

Envinonment and Ancheology.
Geomonphology 6nom the Eanth.

Aldine, Chicago.
Harper and Row,

New York.
Carpenter, V. K.

1969

The State 06 Texa-0 Fedenal Population Schedule-0,
Seventh Cen-0u-0 06 the United State-0,

1850, 5 Volumes.

Century Enterprises, Huntsville, Arkansas.
Carr, John T., Jr.
1967
The Climate and Physiography of Texas.
Texas Water
Development Board, Repont No. 53, Austin.
Clark, John W., Jr., and James E. Ivey
1974
Archeological and Historical Investigations at Martin
Lake, Rush and Panola Counties, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey, Re-0eanch Repont No. 32, The Univ-ersity
of Texas at Austin.

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

61

Dibble, David S.
1977
Cultural Resource Survey-Phase I Reconnaissance,
South Hallsville Project. Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc., VoQument ~o. 7737. Austin, Texas.
Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc.
1979
Cultural Resources survey Phase II Plant Site/
Cooling Pond Survey Mine Area Predictive Model
South Hallsville Project.
Document No. 78102.
Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938
Phy-0iog~aphy 06
New York.

Ea-0te~n

United State-0.

McGraw Hill,

Fisher, W. L.
1965
Rock and Mineral Resources of East Texas. Bureau of
Economic Geology Repo~t 06 Inve-0tigation No. 54.
The University of Texas at Austin.
Gould, Frank W.
1969
Texa-0 Plant-0, A Chec~li-Ot and EcologiQal Summa~y.
Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Texas A&M
University, College Station.

1975

The G~a-0-0e-0 06 Texa-0. Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station, Texas A&M University, College Station.

Henry, Christopher D., and Joyce M. Basciano
1979
Environmental Geology of the_Wilcox Group Lignite
Belt, East Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology,
Repo~t 06 Inve-0tigation No. 98, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Holm, Melody
1975
A Preliminary Study of Biologic Assemblages of East
Texas Lignite Belt. Bureau of Economic Geology
Re-0ea~ch Note 1.
The University of Texas at Austin.
House, Kurt D.
1978
Texa-0 A~cheology. Southern Methodist University
Press, Dallas, Texas.
Jaggers, Mrs. Carl (Maida), and Mrs. Gordon (Margaret) Brown
1982
Letter to the author dated October 16, 1982, containing (with enclosures) information on the antebellum
plantations north of Henderson. On file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory with the original
research notes on this project.

REFERENCES CITEV

62

Keller, J. E.
1974
The Subsistence Paleoecology of the Middle Neches
Region of Eastern Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Kier, R.S., L.E. Garner, and L.F. Brown, Jr.
1977
Land Re~ou~ce~ 06 Texa~ (map). Bureau of Economic
Geology, Land Resources Laboratory Series. The
University of Texas at Austin.
Lee, David S.
1980
The Pocket Gopher Mound Probe.
89(6) :36-38.

Na:tu~al

Hi~:to~y

Little, Elbert L.
1980
The Audubon Society Field Guide :to No~:th Ame~iean
T~ee~, Ea~:te~n Region.
Audubon Society, New York.
Moncure, Henry B., and Jack M. Jackson
1980
A Reconnaissance Survey of Cultural Resources, Mill
Creek Area, Rusk County, Texas. Texas Archeological
Survey Re~ea~ch Repo4:t No. 80. The University of
Texas at Austin.
1981

A Cultural Resource Survey of the Proposed Martin
Lake Area D. Railroad and Transmission Line. Texas
Archeological Survey Teehnieal Bulletin No. 57.
The University of Texas at Austin.

Mullen, Andrea K.
1981
The Historiography of Black Texas Settlements: A
Survey and Critique.
Pionee4 Ame~iea Society T4an~­
ac:tion~ 4:75-85.
Muller, Daniel A., and Robert D. Price
1979
Ground-water Availability in Texas. Texas Department
of Water Resources Repo~:t No. 238. Austin.
Pillsbury, Richard
1981
Farrar Lumber Company: Farrar Made Houses, A Georgia
Product.
Pionee4 Ame4ica 13(1) :49-61.
Rusk County
ms.
Deed Record Books.
Texas.

County Clerk's Office, Henderson

Stebbins, Robert C.
1966
A Field Guide to Western Reptiles and Amphibians.
The Pe:te~~on Field Guide Se4ie~, No. 16. Houghton
Mifflin, Boston.

MARTIN LAKE AREA V

63

Story, Dee Ann
1981
An Overview of the Archaeology of East Texas.
Plain~ Anth~opologi~t 26:139-156.
Texas Natural Resource Information Service (TNRIS)
1939
Aerial photographs of the study area. Austin.
Texas State Archives
ms.
Tax Rolls for Rusk County. Microfilm of original
manustripts, Texas State Library and Archives, Austin.
Trigger, Bruce
1968
The Determinants of Settlement Patterns. In
Settlement A4eheology, K. C. Chang, editor, pp.53-78.
National Press Books, Palo Alto, California.
Vines, Robert A.
1977
T~ee~ 06 Ea-0t
Austin.

Texa~.

Vlach, John M.
1977
Shotgun Houses.
1978

The

University of Texas Press,

Natu~al

Hi~to~y

A6~o-Ame4iean T~adition

86(2) :50-57.

in the Veeo4ative

Cleveland Museum, Cleveland, Ohio.

A~t~.

