A CULTURAL RESOURCE ASSESSMENT OF THE URI LEASE
Kleberg County, Texas

Technical Bulletin 71

Bruce A.

Nightengale

Principal Investigator: Solveig A. Turpin

Editor: Carol R. Fabac

A report submitted to Uranium Resources, Inc.
by
Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
April 1984

Abstract
In September, 1983, the Texas Archeological
Survey,
The
University of Texas at Austin, carried out an intensive survey and
assessment of the cultural resources of a 900 acre plot in Kleberg
This area is under
County, Texas for Uranium Resources, Inc.
consideration for in situ uranium mining which requires compliance
with the Texas Radiation Control Act as set forth by the Bureau of
Radiation Control and implemented by the Texas Department of Health.
The cultural resource survey was designed to meet these regulatory
requirements and to conform to criteria and guidelines set forth by
the Texas Historical Commission for intensive survey. The entire plot
was intensively surveyed, locating two prehistoric sites, 41KL72 and
41KL73.
To adequately assess the potential of these localities for
the National Register of Historic Places, shovel probes were executed
at 41KL72 and two lxl m test units were placed in 41KL73. Both sites
were assessed as containing sparse, thinly distributed cultural
materials in an eroded and displaced context. Based on the results of
the limited subsurface probes, neither site meets current criteria for
nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. However. the
large size of 41KL73 and the variety of surface exposed artifacts
suggests it may hold some potential for additional research as an
example of ephemeral utilization of the littoral zone.
Avoidance of
this site is recommended.

Table of Contents
Abstract . .

i;

Introduction

1

Environmental Background

1

Archeological Background

4

Historic Background

5

Survey Methods and Techniques

7

Results of the Survey

7

Summary and Conclusions

11

References Cited . . . .

12
List of Figures

Figure 1.

Project Location Map

Figure 2.

Site map, 41KL73

Figure 3.

Test pit profiles, 41KL73

iii
9

10

1

"

!

""

f

:

!

\ ..

1

...,.
••

0

ill

r

!

It

:0

11
~

"~
.'It

"

/
I

/

Figure 1.

•

-•
:1'1:

C
fit

Page 1

INTRODUCTION
At the request of Uranium Resources, Inc.
and their agent,
Eggleston Holmes and Associates, the Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin carried out an intensive level survey of
the cultural resources in a 900 acre plot in Kleberg County, Texas
during September, 1983.
The area is under consideration
for
development as an in situ mining facility which requires compliance of
the Texas Department of Health as set forth by the Bureau of Radiation
Control pursuant to the Texas Radiation Control Act as implemented in
the Texas Regulations for the Control of Radiation, Part 43.26,
subparagraphs D and E. The cultural resource study conforms to the
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 and its implementing
regulations, 36CFR800, and adheres to criteria and guidelines set
forth by the Texas Historical Commission for intensive level survey.
The goal of this assessment was to locate and record all prehistoric
and historic sites within the 900 acre plot, to assess them in their
regional context, and to formulate recommendations for the prudent
consideration of these resources.
The field survey was carried out between August 29 and September
2, 1983 by field archeologists Jeff Turpin and Andy Cloud under the
supervision of Bruce Nightengale.
Limited subsurface testing of
41KL73 was accomplished amidst heavy rains the week of September 11
through 16. Thirty-one work days, including several interrupted by
torrential rains, were expended on both aspects of this study.
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
Project Location
The 900 acre tract is roughly centered around a right angle turn
in State Road 1118 (Fig. 1), five miles east of the town of Ricardo.
This small town lies eight miles south of the county seat, Kingsville.
Geology, Topography and Soils
Kleberg County lies on the southern edge of Fenneman's (1938)
West Gulf Coastal Plain.
The coastal plain consists of overlying,
southeast-sloping rock formations formed from marine and fluvial
deposits. The plain is broken by four major escarpments. The project
area lies between the Hockley Scarp and the Kisatche-Oakville-Bordas
Scarp.
The latter ;s approximately 90 km west of Kleberg County (op.
cit., 102).

Page 2
In central Kleberg County, the surface geology is typical of the
eolian nature of the lower Texas coast - windblown sand, silts and
clay/silt dunes overlie the deltaic sands, clays and marls of the
Pleistocene Beaumont Formation (Geologic Atlas of Texas 1975). The
Beaumont Formation does not outcrop in the study area although this
formation can be observed across San Fernando Creek about 1.5 km to
the northeast.
Topographic relief in the project area results from wind (eolian)
and water erosion and ranges from 50 feet AMSL on the clay dunes in
the western project area to 25 feet AMSL at the San Fernando Creek
terraces (Fig.
1).
The remainder of the area is made up of gently
sloping cultivated fields.
The soils of K1eberg County have not yet been fully surveyed and
described in modern soil taxonomic terms. However, in the study area
they appear to be similar to the Pachic Agristolls described for
Nueces County which lies just north (SCS, USDA 1976:172f). On the
generalized soil map of the United States (SCS, USDA 1975:412) the
entire southern tip of Texas is depicted as an area of "Typic sub­
groups of Ustolls and Ustalfs ... " The study area is no exception to
this general rule.
That these soils sometimes develop deep cracks
during very dry periods and a\~e subject to both wind and water erosion
is archeologically significant.
Prehistoric cultural remains are
subjected to both covering and uncovering, and to movement by both
wind and water.
Clay dunes are eolian deposits. In this area they are of fairly
recent origin and are frequently reworked by major storms to the
extent that modern glass sherds and other shoreline flotsam are often
encountered at some depth (Price and Kornicher 1961:254). The forma­
tion of such dunes was described in 1909 by Coffey (pp. 754-755) and
most standard references acknowledge their eolian origins (cf. Bates
and Jackson 1980:116).
Detailed descriptions of the
formation
processes can be found in W. Armstrong Price (1963) and George G.
Huffman (1949).
Hydrology
Two drainages flow on the periphery of the study area, the San
Fernando Creek on the northeast and Jaboncillos Creek on the south.
Both eventually flow into Cayo de Grullo approximately 7 km east of
the project. The study area itself is drained in the northwest sector
by an intermittent south-flowing tributary to Jaboncillos Creek.
The
central sector ;s drained by a south-flowing, dammed erosional
gully/tributary to Jaboncillos Creek, the northeast sector by an
erosional gully cutting the southern margins of San Fernando Creek.
One intermittent lake, dry at the time of this study, was observed in
the northwest section of the project area.
Three topographic
depressions can be seen in the study area, one in the northern part
and two in the eastern (Fig.
1).
These are dry depressions in
cultivated fields where they have been leveled by repeated plowing.
They may once have been intermittent lakes and potable water sources

Page 3
for prehistoric groups. Presently, fresh water for the area must be
tapped from underlying aquifers.
Johnston (1955:2) noted wells
drilled to 1000 feet along the coast in order to tap the Goliad
Formation.
Climate
Evidence of the ever-present winds is seen in the eolian
deposition and erosion of the area. Moisture laden trade winds from
the southeast prevail for ten months of the year and winds blow from
the north for the remaining two months (Johnston 1955:31). Average
rainfall for a period ending 1979 was 4.75 inches maximum in September
and a m~nimum of 1.30 inches in March (Dallas Morning News
1980-81:139). Temperatures range from the maximum 96 degrees in July
to 48 degrees minimum in January (ibid).
Flora
According to Gould (1975:2), the study area;s within the Gulf
Prairie vegetation area, a region characterized by climax vegetation
of post oak savannah and tall prairie grasses.
Invading species
include mesquite, oaks, several acacias and prickly pear (ibid.).
During the 1840s, early travelers in Kleberg County noted rich
mesquite prairies along the Santa Gertrudis Creek watershed (Inglis
1964:40). During the survey, vegetation observed in the area ranged
from mesquite with associated thick grasses and forbes along the clay
dunes to cultivated fields of milo, feed corn and cotton on the flats.
Fauna
Sixty-one
species of mammals are
listed for Blair's
(1955:102-105) Tamaulipan Biotic Province of Texas. in which the study
area lies. They include armadillo, opossum, raccoon, striped and
spotted skunks, badger, gray fox, coyote and cottontail (Davis 1974).
Also included are 36 species of snakes. Travelers in the 18405 and
1850s reported large herds of wild cattle, horses and antelope in
western Kleberg County (Inglis 1964).
Natural and Artificial Land Modification
Three major forces modify the land "in the area - wind, water and
man.
These forces, in combination, are constantly scouring and
redepositing the soil. Crop cultivation has modified at least 90 per
cent of the study area. Modification on a lesser scale ;s seen in
mesquite clearing in the northwest portion of the area around the clay
dunes. Here, strips of mesquite have been bulldozed to clear land for
pasturage or cultivation. Both natural and artificial modifications
affect cultural resources, particularly prehistoric remains. PlOWing
and bulldozing churn and move artifacts, wind or water erosion can
undercut and wash away whole sites or preserve them under thick layers
of redeposited soils.
Artifacts found on the surface in areas
subjected to these modifications are seldom in their original context.

----

-----_

....................................._ - - ­

Page 4
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
The study area lies on the inland flats of an archelogical region
known as the South Texas Coast (Campbell 1960:146). This 50-75 mi
wide region is bounded on the north by the southern shore of Corpus
Christi Bay and by the Rio Grande on the south. Prehistoric groups
within
this
region
exploited maritime
resources.
Numerous
investigations
have
led to the present understanding of this
subsistence base and only a orief overview will be presented here.
Good summaries of the south coast area can be found in Campbell
(1960:145-175) and in Mallouf, Baskin and Killen (1977: 56-88).
Unique to the South Texas Coast are the eolian clay dune deposits
which frequently contain cultural material. Clay dunes are believed
to have been attractive prehistoric campsites, offering well-drained,
elevated habitation areas near marine resources. Examples come from
Corpus Christi Bay and Cayo de Grulla. At Oso Creek on the south
shore of Corpus Christi Bay, Price and Kormicker (1961:247) found
Archaic and Late Prehistoric materials embedded in clay dunes. Hester
(1971:92) found evidence at 41KL13 of predominantly Late Prehistoric
occupations in an eroding clay dune on the western shore of Cayo de
Grulla.
This site had the added attraction of potable water from a
nearby catchment such as those found in the study area.
Similar settlement patterns were found in Hidalgo and Willacy
counties (Mallouf, Baskin and Killen 1977;
Day, Day and Prewitt
1981). Sites were found near potable water catchments.
The sparse
and shallow cultural deposits were considered to be the remains of
recurring, short-term exploitation of the many resources of the
littoral zone. Their ephemeral nature is in part due to the dynamics
of wind and water which destroy, mix or consecutively expose and
rebury cultural material. Consequently, often materials from several
The two sites
time periods are intermingled by natural processes.
found in the present survey are typical of these ephemeral campsites
of the littoral zone.
Sites along this portion of the coast, devoid of natural lithic
deposits, often hold burned or baked clay lumps which may have been
substitutes for hearth stones or boiling stones (Hester 1971:102).
Lithic material probably had to be acquired through trade with inland
groups or by forays to inland deposits. This scarcity of material for
stone tools seems to have made coastal groups utilize it more
effiCiently than did groups further inland in Texas.
Hester and
Shafer (1975) found evidence of a blade tool technology, which
minimizes lithic waste by predetermined removal of blades, at sites
along the central and south coasts. Also found at Coastal sites are
tools such as adzes, projectile points and scrapers made from shell
and conch columella.
In 1967 t Hester surveyed areas of Kenedy and Kleberg counties
which included part of the present study area. That U-shaped area
included both the east and west shores of Cayo de Grullo. the
confluence of Santa Gertrudis and San Fernando creeks, the east and

- - - - - - -

---.~

---~

Page 5
west banks of San Fernando Creek and the south shore of Baffin Bay in
Kenedy County. Hester (1969:2) recorded 12 new sites and revisited 15
previously recorded sites in Kleberg County.
None of the recorded Kleberg County sites have associated Paleo­
indian remains.
This period is the most poorly known time of
prehistoric occupation of the South Texas coast.
Representative
artifacts from the period have been found on the surface in Nueces
County (Patterson and Ford 1974:12) and at the mouth of the Rio Grande
(Suhm and others 1954). The former is a Scottsbluff projectile point
base and Angostura projectile points;
the latter, a Clovis point
base.
Pre-ceramic Archaic components at sites in Hester's study area
were associated with both Aransas focus cultural groups (Campbell
1947:49) and inland South Texas cultural groups (Suhm and others
1954).
Dart points are one of the predominant temporal identifiers
for these groups and include Matamoros, Tortugas, Ensor and Refugio,
which are common to both groups (Hester 1969:56). Shell middens
common at Aransas focus sites were absent in Hester's study, as were
the various lithic artifacts associated with the South Texas culture.
Hester attributes this absence to short term occupations by hunting
and gathering groups exploiting maritime resources along this portion
of the coast.
The majority of sites in the area can be attributed to Late
Prehistoric occupation. Artifacts common to groups from the mouth of
the Rio Grande area, the Central Texas coast and South Texas were
identified at various sites (Hester 1969), Some of these were Perdiz
and Scallorn arrow points and Olmos bifaces from South Texas, Perdiz,
Clifton and Fresno arrow points, Rockport pottery and marine shell
artifacts of the Rockport focus from the Central Texas Coast, and
Fresno and Cameron triangular arrow points, small unifacial end
scrapers and shell scrapers from the Brownsville complex at the mouth
of the Rio Grande.
Based on the known site frequency, it could be hypothesized that
Late
Prehistoric groups were more numerous in the Cayo de
Grulla/Baffin Bay area. They occupied, and buried their dead at,
various sites along the Cayo. Occupational and burial sites in this
area suggest more lengthy habitation than is suggested for Archaic
short-term encampments.
However,
the
effects of
selective
preservation are not adequately defined.
In a rapidly altering
environment such as the Texas coast, much of the earlier cultural
remains may have been erased.
HISTORIC BACKGROUND
This area of the coast was occupied by Coahuiltecan Indians.
Little is known about these bands; few sites attributable to them
have been found. This may be due to little or no change in the
material
culture from the Late Prehistoric to Historic times.

Page 6
According to Campbell (1960:150), the Texas coast was cleared of its
original inhabitants by 1850 as a result of advancing Anglo settlers
and encroaching Apaches and Comanches.
The flat, once almost treeless, coastal plain region of Kleberg
County was first visited by Europeans when the Spanish party of Cabeza
de Vaca traversed the area in 1531 but settlement was far from rapid.
Some scattered Spanish colonial ranches were founded along Santa
Gertrudis and Los Olmos creeks in the early part of the 19th century,
but were soon abandoned because of the Indian threat in the area (Webb
1952:969).
Herds of wild horses, arising from abandoned Spanish stock,
roamed this area and were a major attraction for the purchase of a
large Spanish land grant by Richard King and his partner, Mifflin
Kenedy.
The partners had made considerable profits from their ferry
boats on the Rio Grande during the Mexican War. King, a native of New
York, was once apprenticed to a jeweler but ran away to become a
steamboat pilot and, later, to found the gigantic King Ranch in south
Texas.
When the partnership between King and Kenedy was dissolved in
1868, both partners had profited from wartime dealing in southern
cotton (ibid., 959) and had used the profits to enlarge their land
holdings.
King retained the huge Santa Gertrudis land grant of about
75,000 acres that became the nucleus of his famous ranch. The town of
Kingsville is situated on a portion of that grant. The project area
surveyed and reported here is located on another Spanish land grant
which lies along the southern boundary of the Santa Gertrudis grant.
This smaller grant, over 20,000 acres, was formally patented by the
State of Texas to the heirs of Leonardo Longorio de la Garza on March
23, 1880. It appears that the heirs may have been assisted in
pressing their claim with the Texas General Land Office by Captain
King's lawyers. The tax records of Nueces County reveal that most of
this parcel was a part of the King ranch practically from the date of
patent. In 1886, 22,140 acres of the grant were rendered for taxation
by King's widow (microfilm archive, Texas Comptroller's Office, Nueces
County roll, 1886). The land was assessed at slightly over $1.50 per
acre at that time. By 1901, when the entire parcel had become King
land, the resurveyed 28,646-acre "Del Grullo" grant was valued at
$38,672, or slightly less than $1.35 per acre. Before Captain King
died in 1885 he had hired a young Texas lawyer from Cuero, Robert J.
Kleberg, to handle some of his affairs. Kleberg, born in 1853 to
German immigrant parents, graduated from the University of Virginia in
1880.
After King's death, the widow asked Kleberg to take over
management of the ranch. He not only added to King's holdings but
married the youngest daughter and became one of King's heirs. The new
county was named for him when it was formed in 1913. Kingsville, the
county seat, was founded along the railroad that allowed the ranch
more direct access to the eastern markets.
The
St.
Louis,
Brownsville and Mexico Railroad's first train arrived on July 4, 1904,
and Kingsville was officially established on that date.

Page 7
SURVEY METHODS AND TECHNIQUES
Prior to actual field work the files at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory were checked for known sites in the survey area.
None were listed within the project boundaries but numerous sites have
been located along the main drainages on the periphery of the project
area. Many of these were recorded during Hester's 1967 survey.
The
nature of the sites near the project area was noted, as well as the
settlement pattern they represented. No sites listed on or nominated
to the National Register of Historic Places lie within the study area.
The boundaries of the survey were plotted on a 7.5 minute USGS
topographic Quadrangle map.
The area was divided into six sections
for ground control. County roads and State Highway 1118 were used as
limits.
Surface survey was accomplished by walking transects at 30 m
intervals; transects in cultivated fields followed the direction of
furrows.
Surface visibility was better in open fields than in
cultivated areas where the ground was sometimes obscured by field
grasses, weeds, corn stalks and remnant furrows. Where feasible,
shovel and pick mattock probes were done to determine the nature of
the soil and the depth of deposit. Hard compact soils at one of the
sites limited probe depth. A few diagnostic artifacts were collected
for analysis;
others,
not diagnostic but pertinent to site
interpretation, were sketched on site survey forms.
All sites were
recorded on State of Texas Archeological Site Data forms and all
information generated by this project is on file with the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
RESULTS OF THE SURVEY
During the intensive survey of the 900-acre area, two prehistoric
sites were located.
80th are scatters of lithic debris with a few
tools. Site 41KL72 yielded three formal artifacts;
it is believed
that this site was a temporary camp between the Late Archaic and Late
Prehistoric periods. Site 41KL73 is larger and had two diagnostic
triangular dart points. The two points date this open campsite to the
Late Archaic or before A. D. 1000.
Site Descriptions
41KL72
This light scatter of lithic tools and flakes is located on the
edge of a milo field where two erosional gullies flow northeast and
north, cutting the eroding margins of San Fernando Creek.
A
concentration of flakes and tools lay on the surface adjacent to a low
mound or remnant clay dune. This area of the field has not been
plowed but sheet wash and wind have caused heavy deflation and exposed
artifacts. Shovel probes were attempted but the hard soil prevented
any of the probes reaching significant depth - the maximum was 30 cm.

Page 8
Soils were screened through 1/4 inch mesh but no cultural materials
were recovered from the subsurface.
Surface materials observed
included a small triangular biface (L:20 mm, W:16 mm, T:5 mm) with
beveled base on one face and on the opposite, a right-hand bevel along
one lateral edge. This type of biface is very similar to Hester's
(1969:29-30) Olmos biface.
Other artifacts were a small unifacial
thumbnail end scraper, four flakes, three of which appear to have been
utilized, one chip and one dart point blade minus stem and shoulder.
Numerous baked clay lumps were observed scattered about the site. The
dart point blade was found in a furrow 15 m from the area of main
concentration. A small gully separated this artifact from the main
site area.
Isolated flakes and one chunk were found in the adjacent
milo field about 150 m. away. All lithic materials observed within
and without the site are chert.
Due to the eroded nature of the site, the sparsity of artifacts,
and the surficial context of cultural material, no potential for the
National Register of Historic Places is indicated.
4lKL73
This site is situated on a low rise amid flat to gently sloping
cultivated fields.
Cotton had been planted on the site and in the
fields to the north, east and west. The cotton was noticeably thinner
on the rise where 4lKL73 was found. About 100 m west of the site ;s a
south-flowing gully which used to feed directly into Jaboncillos Creek
but is now dammed to contain runoff. A large catchment area or playa
lake once lay about 400 m north of the site. It is now obscured by
plowing but may once have contained potable water during mesic times
of the year.
This site held a variety of surficial artifacts.
Observed were
two triangular dart points, one projectile point base, one biface tip,
numerous secondary and tertiary flakes, an unidentified bone fragment,
baked clay lumps, one large piece of sandstone (function unknown),
several pieces of quartzite, one shaped piece of oyster shell about 18
mm in diameter, and chert chips.
All flakes and worked lithic
material are chert. Very few of the flakes appear to have been
utilized.
All material has been moved by east-west plowing but is
noticeably confined to the low rise.
Since the field was still
planted in cotton, no shovel probes were attempted at the time the
site was recorded. Further evaluation was necessary. however, to
determine the extent of subsurface cultural material and whether or
After the
not more information could be gained from this site.
harvest and subsequent plowing two lxl m test pits were excavated
(Fig. 2).
Test Pit A was placed atop the low rise in the area where flakes,
a projectile point and some lumps of burned clay had been found on the
surface. The recent plowing had removed the surface concentration and
the furrows it created were about 30 cm deep. This test unit was
excavated to 75 cm below the base of the furrows in arbitrary 20 cm
intervals after a 5 cm plow zone level. The excavated soil was

FurroWl
."".

/

/

...............
"""".,.-.--

-

I"Mil.l&

_....... ......
-.

"",,"

' ' ' '- ,1/ ·~
•

.,

•

lit. Locatla"

"-.... . ., .....

.---'--'.""-F""" -'-',

I
II

___ ~
'L_::;L
J

..........

....'-

~

-- ""'" 1 • t:I Tnt Ph ..

I

~

,__~.~tM\n..
~
--.-----.-

FunoWf

I

I.

:z

-

"Th

, / umbnlW'

~

'''.

'\
\I

)

FUtrOWI

Shovel Probe

!

ScrlPff

.'g!!t Pit.
,'t\tIf.-" ~

' ....._"'MI',.

/)
~.."..../

.---~.

,/

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------..
,-4

.........

0

I

10

Selle

15

20m

Dltu",
SurflCl4l conc.ntrltlOl'l

IhovtIIProbi
.....,
Slope
....... $I. ,*,ndMv

farm Implement Acc8lt ROid.

•

-

Figure 2. Site Map, 41KL73. Sitl area " • cotton field.

Plowed Field

I

-c

D>
I.Q
(1)

1.0

Page 10

TEST PIT A

A

fItow 1CIftI; Ifti lIIId, silty . .;

......

StIndint ......

in fwnNrs;
......... etay IuMpI

•

10

HInt ....ed

Iitty etay with
cndts; IIuI'Md etay IumpI;

I ftIbI

C

em
A

•
LEVEL 2

HInt ..... tIIty etay with
GIIcium CIItIGI... 1ClCl1ICions;

30
C

.......... - W

......

20

............

LEVEL 3

-.~

D P.:Ic.ed Iitty to . . . etay

..........

D

with CIIdum . . . . . .
lCICIetionl; No cuhurII ........

40
IiO

LEVEL"

TEST PIT B

.....
•

fItow 1CIftI; IIIIiud. tItty . .

A

HInt ....ed, Iitty
cuhurII...-

fib

HInt ..... tItty etay with
-'«:ium ......... lCICIelioll';
fib IIIhunII .........

C

D

1IIind;

A

LEVEL 1

B

to

C

D

20
LEVEL 2

"**ed Iitty
to_
. .aa:ntionI;
. etay
CIIdum
__

30

No CiUhurIII .........

No

Figure 3

.xcMtio..

Page 11

screened through 1/4 inch hardware mesh.
Nine small flakes and
several pea-sized lumps of baked clay were recovered in the first 25
cm; no cultural material was found below this level.
The soil was
hard packed silty clays with shrink/swell cracks.
Test Pit B was placed downslope and east of Pit A, in an area
where a concentration of flakes and a thumbnail end scraper had been
found on the surface. The excavation was continued to 25 cm in two
arbitrary levels. Six flakes were found in the first level, the 0 - 5
cm plow zone; no cultural materials were recovered from lower levels.
The soil was first hard packed silty clay with shrink/swell cracks,
then silty clay with calcium carbonate concretions.
In both test pits excavation was discontinued at sterile hard
The artifact yield was minimal and no cultural
packed silty clay.
stratigraphy beyond detection of the basal plow zone was discernible
in the test units (Fig. 3).
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The intensive survey of this 900 acre plot resulted in the
recording of two prehistoric sites, 41KL72 and 41KL73. Both were
campsites dating from the Late Archaic at 41KL73 and the Late Archaic
and Late Prehistoric at 41KL72.
Based on surface examination and
limited shovel probes, 41KL72 was evaluated as sparse cultural
material in an eroded context with little potential for adding
significantly to the understanding of prehistory.
Sites similar to 41KL72 and 73, found in Hidalgo and W11lacy
counties (Day, Day and Prewitt 1981;
Mallouf, Baskin and Killen
1977), contained evidence of numerous short term hunter and gatherer
encampments. Due to environmental conditions and cultural lifeways of
the maritime hunters and gatherers, these sites were basically
ephemeral in nature.
Numerous encampments at the same site but in
different locales would result in artifact dispersement over the area.
The quantity and varied nature of cultural deposits at 4·1KL73 suggest
such use and reuse by groups of hunters and gatherers exploiting the
resources of the littoral and potable water catched in nearby
depressions.
The two 1 by 1 meter test pits excavated at 41KL73 are inadequate
to demonstrate scientific potential sufficient to warrant a nomination
to the National Register of Historic Places.
Subsurface yield was
minimal and did not reflect the variety seen on the surface. However,
given the large area untested, it is possible that this site retains
limited information on the prehistoric lifeways of coastal hunter and
gatherers. Under present construction plans, 41KL73 will not be
affected by the proposed development and can be protected by
avoidance. In the event plans change in the course of construction,
monitoring
of any potential disturbance to site integrity or
additional testing should be initiated to determine eligibility for
the National Register of Historic Places.

Page 12

REFERENCES CITED
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
2(1) :93-115.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1975 Geologic Atlas of Texas:

The Texas Journal of Science

Corpus Christi sheet.

Campbe 11, T. N.
1960 Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas
Coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
29:145-175.
Coffey. G.N.
1909 Clay Dunes.

Journal of Geology 17:754-755.

Dallas Morning News
1980
Almanac.

Belo Corporation, Dallas.

Davis, William B.
1974 The Mammals of Texas.
Bulletin 41. Austin.

Texas Parks and Wildlife

Department

Day, D. William. Jane Laurens Day and Elton R. Prewitt
1981 Cultural Resources Surveys and Assessments in Portions of
Hidalgo and Willacy Counties,
Texas.
Reports of
Investigations 15, Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Austin.
Fenneman, N.M.
1938 Physiography of the Western
New York.
..:::-:-:::..=.:=-=.

of Texas.

United

States.

McGraw-Hill.

Texas A&M University Press .

College

on.

Hester, T.R.
1969 Archeological Investigations
in
Kleberg and
Kennedy
Counties, Texas, in August 1967. State Building Commission
Archeological Program Report 15. Austin.
1971

Loyola Beach: An Example of Aboriginal Adaptation
Maritime Environment of the Lower Texas Coast.
Anthropologist 24(3):91-106.

1976

Hunters and Gatherers of the Rio Grande Plain and the Lower
Coast of Texas.
Center for Archeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

-~------~~~~~~~~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

--~~-~

-

-~---------

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

<-«<

to the
Florida

Page 13
Hester, T.R. and H.J. Shafer
1975 A Preliminary Study of Blade Technology on the Central and
Southern Texas Coast. Plains Anthropologist 20(69):175-185.
Huffman, George G. and W. Armstrong Price
1949 Clay Dune Formation Near Corpus Christi, Texas.
Sedimentary Petrology 19(3):118-127.

Journal

Inglis, J.M.
1964 A History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain.
Parks and Wildlife Department Bulletin 45. Austin.

of

Texas

Johnston, M.C.
1955 Vegetation of the Eolian Plain and Associated Coastal
Features
of
Southern
Texas.
Unpublished
Ph.D.
Dissertation. Department of Botany, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Mallouf, R.J., B.J. Baskin and K.L. Killen
1977 A Predictive Assessment of Cultural Resources in Hildalgo
and Willacy Counties, Texas. Texas Historical Commission
Archeological Survey Report 23. Austin.
Price, W. Armstrong
1963 Physiochemical and Environmental Factors in Clay Dune
Genesis. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology 33(3):766-778.
Price, W. Armstrong and L. S. Kornicker
1961 Marine and Lagoonal Deposits in Clay Dunes, Gulf Coast,
Texas. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology 31(2):245-255.

