AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT AT
THE SAN MARCOS (WOOD) FISH HATCHERY,
Hays County, Texas

Antiquities Permit #442

by Michael Davis

Principal Investigator: Solveig A. Turpin

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
January 1985

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

BaJcones Research Center
10100 Burnet Road

Submitted to the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department in partial
ful fill ment of the terms of IAC"74-75 -1971.
11

Edited
by

Deborah Smith

ABSTRACT
Reported herein are the
procedures and results of an
archeological survey and assessment at the San Marcos (Wood) Fish
Hatchery in Hays County, Texas.
The project was undertaken in
November of 1984 by the Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin, for the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, 4200
Smith School Road, Austin, Texas. Intensive survey of 30 acres at the
fish hatchery was augmented by backhoe trenching to ascertain areas
with intact subsurface deposits. Two prehistoric archeological sites
(41HY166 and 41HY167) were recorded and site specific cultural
resource management recommendations were made. Selected portions of
both sites warrant avoidance during any construction or modifications
planned at the hatchery.

iii

-----

----------

--------------------------------

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Several individuals aided the progress and completion of this
project.
Ron Ralph, archeologist for Texas Parks and Wildlife Master
Planning Branch, initiated the study and provided advice and support
throughout the project.
Stan Evans, engineer for Texas Parks and
Wildlife, acted as Project Manager and supplied a high quality set of
topographic maps which were invaluable.
At the San Marcos Fish
Hatchery, Pat Hutson, manager, and Don Chumley, equipment operator,
facilitated access to both the property and necessary equipment,
thereby making our task much simpler.
Dr. Solveig A. Turpin served as Principal Investigator for the
project and supervised the work from the proposal stage through report
completion. Abby Treece typed the manuscript, compiled the figures
and offered editorial comments on this document.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract . . . . .
Acknowledgments
Introduction . .
Environmental Background . .
Cultural History . . . . .
Procedures and Results .
Conclusions and Recommendations
References Cited . . . . . . . •
Appendix.

. iii

iv
1
1
5
8

12
17

Artifact Descriptions •.

20

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Project Location Map
Site Plan Map . .
Site Photographs
.
Site Photographs
Backhoe Trench 1~ 41HY166, Profile
Backhoe Trench 2, 41HY166, Profile
Artifact Illustrations . . . . . .

.

v

2
3

10
11

13
14
21

Figure

Project Lo cation Map.

.I
.y})Vt:M •

San Marcos (Wood )
Fish Hatcheries

j

)
<"'"J
N

»

:::'"'
~

.~
Hays County

~

2
VJ

W·

1008\

"000

40,0

feet

o

?=;o·

SOD

!

1000

?

meICfS

ACT/84

INTRODUCTION
The Texas Archeological Survey of The University of Texas at
Austin has completed a two phase archeological investigation at the
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD) San Marcos (Wood) Fish
Hatchery (SMFH) in Hays County, Texas (Figure 1). Phase I called for
an intensive pedestrian surface survey augmented by subsurface shovel
testing with 114" mesh sample screening in order to locate and
identify any archeological sites which might exist on the property.
Two archeological sites, 41HY166 and 41HY167, were recorded. Phase II
utilized a series of 24" wide backhoe trenches (BHT) to assess the
integrity and significance of buried cultural deposits documented in
Phase I. The project area, a portion of which will be affected by the
construction of a new intake structure, supply line and outfall
trench, consists of approximately 30 acres of land roughly paralleling
the San Marcos River. The goal of this project was to provide SMFH
with an inventory of existing archeological sites and to formulate a
comprehensive cultural resources management plan prior to inception of
current renovative efforts.
Field work, which totaled 128 person hours, was conducted over an
eight day period in November 1984, was performed by Michael Davis, who
served as field supervisor and authored this report, and Andy Cloud.
This document, which was completed immediately after the field
segment, follows the format of previous Texas Archeological Survey
Technical Bulletins which adhere, in general,to outlines approved by
the Council of Texas Archeologists and Texas Historical Commission.
Included in this report, as requested by Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department, are site specific maps (Figure 2) showing their exact
location, topographic contours and features and the precise location
of all subsurface tests. Larger scale maps, identical to these. have
been supplied both to the sponsor and the Texas Antiquities Committee
for future reference. All materials generated during the project will
be permanently housed at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL) of the University of Texas at Austin.

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
Project Area
The study area is located on the south side of the San Marcos
River at and just below (east) of its confluence with Willow Springs
Creek. The source of the river is San Marcos Springs. averaging 107
million gallons flow per day (Batte 1984), located approximately 4.8

•

Sho••1 Teot

a.ckhoe Sc r.p~
Beckhoe Tr.nch

81t. Bound.ry
Propoled Conltructlon
Ar••
Dllturbed Ar..
Ar.. of Intect
Depolltl

/

/
One

.....

100

E

met.r

a

contour Int.rve.

100

200

I•• t

Figure 3.

Site photographs .

a.

Backhoeing in progress at 41 HY166 .

b.

Profiling
BHT 2,

41HY166.

4

kilometers upstream in the city. Topographically, the project area is
located in the Blackland Prairie just 3 kilometers east of the
Balcones Escarpment. Both sites ericompass the river terrace and the
upland slope leading away from the river. Elevations range from 545
feet (165 meters) to 575 feet (174 meters) above mean sea level.
Climate
The overall climate of Hays County is subtropical and humid
(Grimshaw 1976) with hot summers and mild winters.
Maximum
temperatures occasionally reach 100 degrees Fahrenheit although the
average summer temperature is 84 degrees Fahrenheit. Subfreezing days
average less than 25 per year with the average winter temperature
being 52 degrees Fahrenheit and average daily minimum being 40 degrees
Fahrenheit. Rainfall totals approximately 33 inches per year, 57% of
which falls in April through September (Batte 1984).
Soils
Two major soil associations are present in the study area:
Heiden-Houston Black and Lewisville-Gruene-Krum (Batte 1984). The
former group is made up of deep, sloping to gently sloping soils
underlain by clay and shale on the uplands of the Blackland Prairie
while the latter ;s characterized by "deep, shallow, and very shallow,
nearly level to gently sloping soils over loamy. clayey, and gravelly
sediments; on stream terraces and valley fills of Blackland Prairie
and Edwards Plateau" (Batte 1984:8). On the terraces at 41HY166 and
41HY167, the particular soil encountered was the Oakalla (Ok) typified
by a grayish brown silty clay loam upper zone over a brown silty clay
loam underlain by a yellowish brown silty clay loam.
On the upper
elevations, Heiden (HeB) soils were seen. In general, they are dark
grayish brown clays above grayish brown clay with yellow and olive
mottling underlain by pale yellow clay.
Biota
The project area lies at the extreme western boundary of Blair1s
(1950) Texan Province.
Two plant communities were historically
present in the area of interest, mesic forest containing pecan, oak
and hackberry along river valleys and terraces and tall-grass prairies
on clay soils on the uplands (Blair 1950:100-101).
The trees
immediately adjacent to the riverbank still remain but extensive
agriculture centered on the adjacent rich soil has supplanted original
species.
At the SMFH, supplemental planting of Bermuda and St.
Augustine grasses has been undertaken to retard erosion.

5

Agricultural elimination of habitat has severely reduced the
population of mammals in the project area. White tail deer, once
common east of the Balcones Escarpment and an important aboriginal
food source, are no longer seen east of Interstate Highway 35.
Smaller mammals such as armadillo, skunk, squirrel, raccoon, rabbit,
nutria and beaver are still present.
CULTURE HISTORY
The study area is situated within the Central Texas Archeological
Region (Suhm 1960:63) where a cultural history of at least 10,000
years duration is known. Traditionally, this broad expanse of time
has been divided into a four stage (Paleoindian, Archaic, Neo-American
and Historic) sequence based on changes in lithic technology and
subsistence modes (Suhm et al.
1954).
Prewitt (1981:65-89) has
refined this chronology, dividing the two middle stages into thirteen
phases.
His discussion, which lists key artifact markers and
representative archeological sites for each stage, will be followed in
this description.
The Paleoindian stage (before 8500 BP) in Central Texas is
represented by three lanceolate projectile points: Clovis, Folsom and
Plainview. Historically, peoples of this era were thought to subsist
primarily on species of now extinct megafauna. However, more recent
investigations appear to indicate a more varied
system which
supplemented hunting with gathering (Bryant and Shafer 1977). Recent
excavations at two of these early sites, 41WM235 and 41BX52, are
currently in the reporting stage and their publication will contribute
significantly to the Paleoindian data base.
The Early Archaic Stage is divided into four phases: Circleville
(8500-7000 BP), San Geronimo (7000-6000 BP), Jarrell (6000-5000 BP)
and Oakalla (5000-4600~ BP) (Prewitt 1981:75).
Technologically. the
two phases display some remnants of the Paleoindian lithic traits such
as basal edge grinding and some parallel flaking as the projectile
styles evolve from lanceolate to a wide variety of stemmed points such
as Gower, Hoxie, Wells, Bell and Martindale (Prewitt 1981:76-78).
Fooa--Qathering, indicatea--by the appearance of grinding stones and
freshwater mussels, appears to increase in importance through time.
In the later phase, burned rock middens make their appearance and are
associated with two distinctive triangular projectile points, Baird
and Taylor.
-­
The Middle Archaic is also divided into four phases: Clear Fork
(4600-4000 BP), Marshall Ford (4000-3400 BP), Round Rock (3400-2600
BP) and San Marcos (2600-2250 BP). Marker projectile points for the
stage include Nolan, Travis, Pedernales and Bulverde. Burned rock
middens, a type of specialized cooking oven, proliferate through the
first three phases to the point of being the predominant feature type,
indicating a heavy reliance on plant food. However, a roughly equal

6

ratio between the presence of projectile points and other tools in the
archeological remains is indicative of continuing reliance on hunting.
During the first phase of the Late Archaic (Uvalde, 2250-1750
BP), burned rock midden usage diminishes significantly and bison bone,
which has been absent since approximately 5000 SP, begins to reappear
in the archeological remains.
Of interest is a slightly higher
percentage of tools other than projectile points in the total artifact
assemblage during this phase, indicating a probable increase in plant
procurement. When viewed with the decline in midden accumulation, a
new adaptation in processing seems apparent. A variety of dart points
serve as key indicators for this phase: Marcos,Montell, Castroville,
Frio and Fairland.
The later two phases of the Late Archaic, Twin
Sisters (1750-1400 BP) and Driftwood (1400-1250 BP) continue to
evidence these disproportionate
fractions
in lithic typology
demonstrating a continued heavy reliance on vegetal subsistence.
Included in this non-projectile point category are distinctive
bifaces, Erath, San Gabriel and Hare, various unifaces and scrapers,
perforators and gravers (Prewitt 1981:81-82).
The Austin (1250-650 BP) and Toyah (650-200 BP)
phases,
originally defined by Jelks (1962), constitute the Neo-American or Neo
Archaic Stage as renamed by Prewitt (1981:68).
The technological
achievements which heralded this stage were the replacement of the
atlatl by the advent of the bow and arrow and the beginning of the
manufacture of ceramic vessels.
Projectile point markers, in this
case arrow points, for the Austin phase are Scallorn and Granbury,
while Perdiz and Cliffton represent the Toyah phase. Hearths of
various sizes are the predominant cooking features and the use of
rockshelters for habitation increases.
Hunting, as a means of
subsistence, seems to increase in importance to a point where it is
equal to or greater than food gathering.
Cemeteries with both
cremated and noncremated interments appear to be the preferred
mortuary practice (Prewitt 1981:82-83).
During Historic times (after 200 BP), several Indian tribes
inhabited Central Texas, including Tonkawa, the native inhabitants and
Witchita, Comanche and Apache, tribes which moved into Texas from the
north (Newcomb 1961:134-135). Few archeological sites attributable to
these nomadic tribes have been identified, in part due to their
ephemeral nature.
When located they display a mixture of native
American artifacts and European goods such as seen at Mission San
Xavier, situated near the confluence of Brushy Creek and the San
Gabriel River (Gilmore 1969) in Williamson County, Texas.
A Spanish expedition (entrada) passed through San Marcos in 1709,
camping at the springs which form the headwaters of the San Marcos
River on April 15 (Gonzalez 1982). The goal of the mission, known as
the Espinosa - Olivares - Aguirre Expedition, was to establish contact
with groups of Tejas Indians. The group consisted of two Franciscan
priests and 15 soldiers crossing Texas from a point approximately 30

-------~--------~----

7

miles from Eagle Pass to the vicinity of Elgin, Texas (Gonzales
1982:4). No Tejas were encountered, but several "rancherias" of other
groups were visited in the area of the Colorado River.
Campbell
(1983) has identified four of these groups - Cantona, Yojuane, Simaomo
and Tusoniki - and noted that only one of the group (Cantona) is
possibly native to the area and, interestingly, that none appear to be
related to the Tonkawa, generally thought to be the
original
inhabitants of the Central Texas area. Spanish activity in the area
included temporary establishment of the Mission San Xavier and
Presidio San Francisco Xavier at the present location of San Marcos
and the establishment of a permanent community in 1808 (Webb
1952:789).
Anglo settlment of the area started with a Mexican land grant to
Thomas G.
McGeehee in 1835.
The county, named for Texas Ranger
Captain John Coffee (Jack) Hays, was organized on March 1, 1848 with
San Marcos as county seat. The population in 1850 was listed as 347
(Webb 1952).
Previous Investigations
Weir (1967) reported on the excavation of six burned rock middens
at the Greenhaw site (41HY29), located just west of the Balcones
Escarpment near Buda, Texas. Investigations at the site revealed that
aboriginals had intermittently occupied the location from the Early
Archaic through Neo-American times. The most intensive utilization of
the site occurred during the Middle Archaic when midden accumulation
was accelerated. The predominant projectile points recovered were
Pedernales, Bulverde, Travis, Nolan and Tortugas. Weir (1967:109)
concluded that "burned rock middens were the site for various forms of
cooking, the manufacture of artifacts, burial of the dead, and
possibly the build'ing of structures. II
Patterson (1974) surveyed 1574 acres in Hays County to evaluate
archeological resources to be affected by construction of seven
floodwater retarding structures. Twenty two prehistoric sites were
recorded.
At 41HY72, a controlled surface collection was done in
three 10 foot square blocks situated in areas where
lithic
concentration appeared to be highest. A total of 3050 chert artifacts
were recovered. Diagnostic projectile points collected during the
survey included Bulverde, Castroville, Golondrina, Martindale and
Uvalde.
Scott and Prewitt (1976) revisited seven of the sites recorded by
Patterson (1974). Their goal was additional archeological assessment
directed specifically at determining the eligibility of each site for
nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. No further
work was warranted at five of the sites.
However, at 41HY75 and
41HY86 definable artifact clusters and discrete activity areas
necessitated detailed mapping and selected artifact collection.

8

Cole (1978) surveyed six proposed borrow areas at two floodwater
retarding structures on the Upper San Marcos River watershed. Four
prehistoric sites were recorded.
Three were badly eroded lithic
procurement locations which required no further work beyond initial
documentation. 41HY143 (Robinson Site), an intact open campsite with
research potential, was nominated to the National Register of Historic
Places.
Brown (1982) conducted
kilometers) west of San
corridor. Eight new sites
surficial in nature and
recent cultural activity.

an archeological survey of 4.5 miles (7.2
Marcos along a proposed transmission line
were encountered.
All the sites were
all had been disturbed by either nature or

Southwest Texas State University conducted a field school at
Aquarena Springs Golf Course at the Tee Box 6 Site (41HYI60) in 1982
(Garber et al).
Excavations revealed in situ remains indicating
aboriginal occupation from the Early Archaic to the Late Prehistoric.
Some Paleoindian materials were encountered but more work is necessary
before the nature of their deposition can be determined. Future
research is planned at the site to enhance the results of the first
field season.
A continuing program of underwater archeological excavation at
41HY147 (Spring Lake Site formed by San Marcos Springs) has yielded an
exceptionally large sample of lanceolate Paleoindian projectile points
as well as Archaic dart points. At the termination of the 1982 field
season, three Clovis, five Plainview and twenty-six generalized
"Plainview-Angostura", all pre-Archaic, specimens had been recovered
(Shiner 1983:2). Shiner (1983) has gathered data from several other
Central Texas sites where large numbers of Paleoindian diagnostics
have been found closely associated with large springs. As a result of
this work, he has proposed that at least certain groups of previously
considered nomadics may have altered their life style to a more
sedentary state to take advantage of an ideal ecological and
environmental situation created by these constant sources of pure,
constant temperature waters.
PROCEDURES AND RESULTS
The initial segment of this investigation involved a pedestrian
transect coverage of the entire project area.
Spacing between
surveyors varied from 10 to 20 meters according to ground visibility,
which ranged from poor, in grassy areas, to good in eroded and
disturbed locations. Surface inspection was augmented by subsurface
shovel testing with 1/4" mesh sample screening at selected locations.
This procedure was designed to locate and identify prehistoric
archeological sites on the property. Shovel testing was done in 20
centimeter levels and tally sheets were compiled on recovery.
Black
and white print and color slide photographs of the area were taken and

9

a written narrative of each day's activities waS kept.
The survey portion of the project located and documented (State
of Texas Archeological Site Data Form) two archeological sites at the
SMFH. Both are now registered in the permanent files of the Texas
Archeological
Research Laboratory and have been assigned state
trinomial identification numbers, 41HY166 and 41HY167 (Figure 2).
Surface and aboriginal
remains were present at both sites.
Additionally, at 41HY166 there was a light scatter of white ceramic
and purple glass fragments along the southeastern edge of the site.
Phase II utilized a series of 24 inch wide backhoe trenches to
determine the depth, integrity and significance of buried deposits
encountered during Phase I (Figure 3). Both walls of every trench
were visually inspected and one wall was hand trowelled smooth with
all indication of cultural activity being left in place in the cleaned
profile.
A scale map of each trench and some portion of its profile,
showing stratigraphic soil zones and positioning of archeological
debris, was done (Figure 3).
At 41HY166, a portion of which is to be impacted by the upcoming
renovations, five backhoe trenches of varying length and depth and
four short, shallow backhoe probes (Figure 2) were employed to
facilitate the appraisal of subsurface deposits. All the backhoe
Depths of the debris
trenches revealed buried cultural materials.
ranged from 10 centimeters to 150 centimeters below present ground
surface. Significantly, in BHT 5, a burned limestone concentration
(hearth) (Figure 4) was uncovered which displayed a high degree of
integrity through the tight clustering and stacking of the stones and
a very minimal horizontal displacement of those rocks which had been
thermally fractured. The feature, which measured 60 centimeters by 70
centimeters, consisted of large cobbles and slabs of limestone and was
located at 140 centimeters below present ground surface at the
northern end of the trench. A large charcoal sample was discovered in
situ within the feature. The material was carefully collected and
will be curated at TARL so that in the event further archeological
work is conducted at the site, the hearth may be dated as a part of
the recovery program.
Prior, to backfilling, three layers of thick
plastic were used to cover the feature. Dirt was then carefully hand
packed over the plastic in an effort to minimize disturbance.
At 41HY167, buried cultural remains were encountered in one of
two mechanically excavated trenches (BHT 2, Figure 2). An intact,
basin shaped, burned clay and charcoal feature was also exposed in
this trench (Figure 4). Located in the south wall, near the center of
the trench, at 55 centimeters below the present ground surface, the
feature was 5-8 centimeters thick and 18 centimeters in length.
Several layers of plastic were nailed to the face of the excavation
wall over the feature as an aide in preservation and relocation should
future work be undertaken.

· Figure 4.

Site photographs.--j

a.

h.

Hearth

In

BHT 5, 41HY166.

Burned clay feature

In

BHT 2, 41 HY167.

Fi2:urc 5. Backhoe Tre nch 1. 41 HY16
Backhoe Trench 1
North Wall

?

Section I
168.471m AMSL

c

, t

1

meters

one 2

II

Zone 3

String
Line A
one 4

Section I

Section HI

o1 __

1

..........

2

:-:- ~

meters
SOI L DESC RIPTIONS
Zone 1: Brownish gray (10 YR3/3); claye y loam; crumbly; roots , snails
Zone 2: Reddish brown (SYR3.S/4) ; sandy clay loam; threads and films of calcium carbonate; fe w
snails, rootlets
Zone 3 : Medium brown (7 .SYR4/3) ; clayey loam; very compacted; few snails
Zone 4: White (SYR8/ 1); caliche lens; small pea-sized gravels
Zone S: Gray with orange mo ttles (7.SYR4.S/2) ; sandy clay ; few small gravels
Zone 6: Light bro wn (7 .SYR4/4 ); sandy loam ; moderately compacted
Zone 7: Gray (l OYR6. S/1); gravel lens, cobble to pea sized, silty basal material; slightly cemen ted
Zone 8: Dark brown to black ( lOYR2 .S/1) ; loose gumbo clay; few snail shells; may be intrusive
Zone 9 : Grayish brown mottle (7 .SYR4.S/ 1) ; silty clay; caliche and yellowis h calcium carbon ate gravels;
very compacted; decaying limestone

CULTU RAL MATERIALS

= Charcoal
F

= :Clake

B = Lon e
M = Mussell Shell
R

= Burner!

Rock­

12

Prior to termination of field work, a transit was used to exactly
locate all mechanically excavated units and each shovel test. The
position of each was plotted on the high quality topographic maps
supplied by TPWD at the beginning of the project. Also plotted on the
map for 41HY166 was the location of two dart points, Montell and
Ensor, and a very thin preform for either a Castroville or Montell
projectile point, all of which were collected from the surface.
An
extensive search was made for a Travis-type seen by Ron Ralph during
his preliminary reconnaissance of the area.
It was not relocated.
Two small personal collections from the property were photographed.
Unfortunately, a large group of artifacts, reportedly collected over a
span of 15 years, is no longer available.

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
This limited archeological investigation has determined that
buried, intact, prehistoric cultural remains are present at both
41HY166 and 41HY167 on the SMFH property.
Exact age of these
subsurface deposits was not ascertained during this study. Diagnostic
projectile points, either collected or recorded during this work,
indicate aboriginal activity at the sites ranging from the Middle
Archaic to the NeoAmerican Stage. The presence of in situ features as
well as related, accumulated debris such as bone, charcoal and mussel
shell indicates the possible scientific potential of cultural strata
at the sites. Current renovative plans and the possibility of future
construction activities have been considered in formulating the site
specific recommendations listed below.
41HY166
The demonstrated presence of intact, potentially significant
prehistoric remains within and immediately adjacent to the area
currently deSignated for refurbishing indicates an immediate need for
a comprehensive plan designed to protect the archeology while
facilitating necessary expansion efforts. All areas at 41HY166, below
the 555 1 contour line shown on the enclosed topographic map. are
deemed archeologically sensitive by this study. Fortunately, only a
small portion of this area is to be affected by current plans, as
stated, and this portion has been so heavily disturbed by long past
construction that the two backhoe trenches (figures 5 and 6) placed in
the location will suffice to provide archeological
clearance.
Therefore, the entire area currently denoted as impact zone is
cleared. Additionally, that part of the site lying above the 555 1
contour up to the impact boundary has been used as a borrow area for
dirt in the past and this activity and subsequent erosion have negated
the possibility for recovery of meaningful data. Two recommendations
are pertinent for this site. First, if further fill is needed for
rebuilding pond berms it should be extracted from the area previously

Figure 6. Back hoe T rench 2, 41HY16 6, Profile

169.745m AMSL

String Lin e

Bac hoe Trench 2
North Wall

o,
meters

Section I

Section 11
Zone 1
Zone 1
Zone 2

.'

:.. : ...;

Zone 2

Zone 3

Zone 4
Zone 4

meter

Zone 1: Black (lOYR2. 5/ 1); sod, roots, blocky structured cl ay
Zon e 2: Dark brown with black mottles (7 .5YR3/2) ; large roots,
snails; friable sandy clay loam
Zone 3: Brown (7 .5YR3.5/2) ; sandy clay, dry, friable ; threads and
films of calcium carbonate, sn ails, rootlets
Zone 4 : Brown (7 .5YR3. 5/4) ; friabl e sandy clay; few large roots,
very few snails
a: Red and black mottles in a packet; may be a rodent

0

e

Figure 7. Artifact Ifl ust rations.

d.

c.

a.
h.
c.
d.

Ensor dart point.
Mon tell dart point.
Preform (dart point).
Preform (arrow point).

15

utilized for this activity. Secondly, it is highly recommended that,
should current plans be altered to include or if future activities
should call for disturbance of the area below the 555 1 contour line, a
program of controlled archeological testing of the area be instituted.
The historic materials observed during the survey, totaling no
more than 20 fragments of plain white ceramic and purple glass, appear
to represent the remains of some very temporary Anglo activity,
possibly camping, on the riverbank. They do not appear to warrant
further work beyond initial documentation.
4lTV167
This site also has the potential of yielding data on the
prehistoric occupation of the area. Subsurface deposits such as chert
flakes, bone, mussel shell, burned clay and charcoal were encountered
in both shovel tests and BHT 2.
Additionally, the previously
described intact burned lense was exposed in BHT 2 at a depth of 55
centimeters below present ground surface. As a result of these tests
and on site sedimentary depositional assumptions, it is suggested that
the area below the 560 1 contour could yield significant archeological
information. Fortunately, the current TPWD construction plan will not
affect this area and archeologically speaking preservation is always
the optimal alternative. If, however, future plans are formulated
which would impact property below the 560 1 contour line, it is
recommended that a limited controlled testing program be implemented
to further assess the deposits encountered during this project.
Regionally, sites of this type are not unique but each has the
potential for significant data yield.
Weir (1967:5) states that
current knowledge of Central Texas archeology has come from three
types of sites:
rockshelter, river terrace site and burned rock
midden. Wier (1976:30) further notes four types of Central Texas
Archaic sites - rockshelter, campsite, quarry site and kill site - and
states that a prerequisite for site location is a relatively reliable
water supply.
Sites 41HY166 and 41HY167 adhere perfectly to this
model as they are both river terrace campsites (without middens)
obviously tied to the permanently flowing San Marcos River. The lack
of middens, in this case, is attributed to the fact that the sites are
located off (east) of the Balcones Escarpment, thereby eliminating the
limestone rock necessary for midden construction. In Central Texas, a
sample of sites of this type which have yielded significant cultural
data are: Centerline Site, 41WM21; Loeve-Fox Site, 41WM230;
Loeve
Site, 41WM133; and Cervenka Site, 41WM267.
On the basis of the limited work conducted at 41HY166 and
41HY167, it appears that both sites may warrant assignment of State
Archeological Landmark status. However, it is suggested that further
work is necessary to affirm this preliminary assumption. Likewise, no
recommendation as to the eligibility for National Register nomination

16

is considered appropriate at this time.

17

REFERENCES CITED
Batte, Charles D.
1984 Soil Survey of Comal and Hays Counties, Texas.
U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
Washington, D.C.
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
2(1):93-115.

Texas Journal

of Science

Brown, David O.
1982 An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Ranch Road 12 to San
Texas
Marcos Transmission
Line, Hays County, Texas.
Archeological Survey Techni.cal Bulletin 56. The University
of Texas at Austin.
Bryant, Vaughn M., Jr. and Harry J. Shafer
1977 The Late Quaternary Paleoenvironment of Texas: A Model for
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
the Archeologist.
Society 48:1-25.
Campbe 11, T. N.
1983

Espinosa, Olivares and the Colorado River
Sayersville Historical Bulletin No.3.

Indians,

1709.

Cole, Nancy M.
1978 An Archeological and Historical Survey of Six Auxiliary
Borrow Areas for Floodwater Retarding Structures Numbers 1
and ~ ~ San Marcos River Watershed, Hays County, Texas.
U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
Washington, D.C.
Garber, James F. et al.
1982 Excavations at Aquarena Springs, 41HY160, San Marcos, Texas.
Unpublished
paper.
Department
of Sociology and
Anthropology, Southwest Texas State University, San Marcos.
Gilmore, Kathleen Kirk
1969 The San Xavier Missions:
A Study in Historical Site
Identification.
State Building Commission Archeological
Program Report 16. Austin.

18

Gonzales, Anibal
1982

The Overlooked Entrada,
The
Espinosa-Olivares-Aguirre
Expedition of 1709. Sayersville Historical Bulletin No.2.

Grimshaw, T.W.
1976 Environmental Geology of Urban and Urbanizing Areas: A Case
Study from the San Marcos Area, Texas. Unpublished Doctoral
Dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in
Hill County, Texas. Department of Anthropology Archaeology
Series 5. The University of Texas at Austin.
Newcomb, W.W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas.

University of Texas Press, Austin.

Patterson, Patience E.
1974 Upper San Marcos River Watershed, Hays County, Texas:
An
Archeological Survey of Areas Proposed for Modification.
Texas Archeological Survey Research
Report 42.
The
University of Texas at Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas.
Archeological Society 52:65-89.

Bulletin of the Texas

Scott, R.F., IV and E.R. Prewitt
1976 Upper San Marcos Watershed, Hays County, Texas:
Additional
Assessments of Selected Archeological Resources.
Texas
Archeological Survey Research Report 64. The University of
Texas at Austin.
Shi ner, Joel L.
1983 Large Springs and Early American
Indians.
Plains
Anthropologist:
Journal of the Plains Anthropological
Society 28(99):1-7.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1960 A Review of Central Texas Archeology.
Archeological Society 29:63-107.

Bulletin of the Texas

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
the Texas Archeological Society 25.

Bulletin

of

Webb, Walter Prescott (Editor-in-Chief)
1952

The Handbook of Texas, Volume
Historical Association, Austin.

I.

The

Texas

State

19

Weir, Frank A.
1967 The Greenhaw Site: A Burned Rock Cluster of the Edwards
Plateau Aspect. Unpublished Master's Thesis, The University
of Texas at
1976
The Central Texas Archaic.
Unpublished
Doctoral
Dissertation, Washington State University. Austin.

20

Appendix:

Artifact Descriptions

Four prehistoric chert artifacts were collected during the course
of the field work.
Descriptive information on each is presented
below. All measurements are given in millimeters (mm).
Ensor dart point (1 specimen, Figure 7a)
Description:

triangular blade (distal tip missing);
straight
lateral blade edges;
side notched; expanding stem;
straight base; patinated along flake scars on both
faces.

Dimensions:

length, 27mm*; maximum blade width, 24mm;
24mm; maximum thickness, 7mm.

Provenience:

base width,

41HY166 - Surface.

Temporal Affiliation:

Late Archaic/Twin Sisters Phase.

* - indicates incomplete specimen.
Montell dart point (1 specimen, Figure 7b)
Description:

triangular blade (distal tip missing;
one lateral
blade edge straight - other edge convex; deeply corner
notched producing long barbs; expanding stem with deep
V-shaped notched distinctive to type; concave base;
large step fractures on both faces.

Dimensions:

length, 63mm*; maximum blade width, 43mm;
24mm; maximum width, 7mm.

Provenience:

41HI166 - Surface

Temporal Affiliation:

Late Archaic/Uvalde Phase.

Preform (1 specimen, Figure 7c)

base width,

21

Description:

triangular (distal tip missing);
blade edges; convex base.

Dimensions:

length, 64mm;
9mm.

Provenience:

maximum width, 52mm;

straight

lateral

maximum thickness,

41HI166 - Surface

Temporal Affiliation: Probable Archaic - specimen appears to
preform for either a Montell or Castroville.

be

a

Preform (Arrow point) (1 specimen, Figure 7d)
Description:

specimen almost square;
straight lateral edges;
pressure flaking on one lateral edge of each face.

Dimensions:

length, 20mm;

Provenience:

41HY167 - Shovel
surface.

Temporal Affiliation:

width, 22mm;
Test 1 -

maximum thickness, 4mm.
0-20

centimeters below

Probable Late Prehistoric/Neo-American.

