Data Recovery and Analysis at the
Texas State University Ticket Kiosk Project,
Located at 41HY160,
Spring Lake, Hays County, Texas
by Jon C. Lohse, Amy E. Reid, David M. Yelacic, and Cinda L. Timperley
with contributions by M. Katherine Spradley and Michelle D. Hamilton
drawings by Richard L. McReynolds

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5938
Archaeological Studies Report No. 32
Center for Archaeological Studies
Texas State University-San Marcos
2013

Data Recovery and Analysis at the
Texas State University Ticket Kiosk Project,
Located at 41HY160,
Spring Lake, Hays County, Texas

Report issued in compliance with
Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5938
Jon C. Lohse, Principal Investigator

Data Recovery and Analysis at the
Texas State University Ticket Kiosk Project,
Located at 41HY160,
Spring Lake, Hays County, Texas

by Jon C. Lohse, Amy E. Reid, David M. Yelacic, and Cinda L. Timperley
with contributions by M. Katherine Spradley and Michelle D. Hamilton
drawings by Richard L. McReynolds

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5938
Archaeological Studies Report No. 32
Center for Archaeological Studies
Texas State University-San Marcos
August 2013

The following information is provided in accordance with the General Rules of Practice and Procedures, Title 13, Chapter
26, Texas Administrative Code
1.

Type of investigation: Data Recovery and Archaeological Monitoring

2.

Project Name: Archaeological Data Recovery Investigations for the Texas State University Ticket Kiosk

3.

County: Hays

4.

Principal Investigator: Jon C. Lohse

5.

Name and location of sponsoring agency: Texas State University, 601 University Drive, San Marcos, TX 78666-4616

6.

Published by the Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas State University-San Marcos, 601 University Drive,
San Marcos, TX 78666-4616

Copyright © 2013 by
the Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas State University-San Marcos

All rights reserved

No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information
storage and retrieval system without permission in writing.

For further information about this and other publications by
the Center for Archaeological Studies, please contact:
Center for Archaeological Studies
Texas State University-San Marcos
601 University Drive
San Marcos, Texas 78666-4616
www.txstate.edu/anthropology/cas
Texas State University-San Marcos is a member of the Texas State University System

Printed in the United States of America

Contents
List of Figures
List of Tables

vii
x

Management Summary

xi

Chapter 1. Introduction

1

Project Description

3

Primary Contributions of this report

4

Calf Creek in Central Texas Context

5

Understanding People Who Occupied Spring Lake

7

Chapter 2. Environmental and Cultural Context
Environmental Context

11
11

Geology and Soils

12

Weather and Climate

14

Flora and Fauna

18

Cultural Context of Study Area

19

Paleoindian

21

Archaic

21

Late Prehistoric

26

Protohistoric (Spanish Entrada)

27

Previous Investigations
Chapter 3. Data Recovery Objectives and Methods

28
31

Excavation

32

Monitoring

33

Laboratory Methods and Analyses

35

Chapter 4. Geoarchaeology

37

Sediment Analysis

37

Profile Descriptions

39

Particle Size and Magnetic Susceptibility

41

Chapter 5. Radiocarbon Dates and Dating
Presentation of Radiocarbon Results

43
43

XAD Purification and the Reliability of Bone Dates

44

Problematic Dates

46

Discussion of Radiocarbon Results

47

Chapter 6. Faunal Remains

53

Trends in Faunal Data

56

Observations about Recovery Patterns by Animal Size and Type

58

Reptiles, Amphibians, and Birds and their Occurrence

58

v

Small Mammals and their Occurrence

59

Medium Mammals and their Occurrence

59

Bison and its Occurrence

60

Unidentifiable Bone and its Occurrence

60

Discussions of the Faunal Data
Chapter 7. Artifacts
Lithics

60
63
63

Projectile Points

64

Bifaces

80

Unifaces and Flake Tools

87

Flake Cores

88

Debitage

94

Fire-cracked rock

96

Modified Bone

100

Shell Bead

100

Ceramics

101

Chapter 8. Monitoring Activities

105

Sidewall Benching Monitoring

105

Auger Monitoring

105

Plumbing Trenches

108

Electric Line Trench

109

Waterline Monitoring

110

Water Main Trench Monitoring

111

Irrigation Line Monitoring

112

Walkway and Access Drive Monitoring

114

Burial Documentation, Excavation, and Analysis

115

Burial Excavation

117

Cultural Material

118

Bioarchaeological Analysis

120

Isotopic Analyses

126

Chapter 9. Conclusions and Recommendations

137

What We Know and Wish We Knew about Calf Creek

138

Summary

144

Appendix A. Projectile Point Metric Data

143

Appendix B. Biface data from all excavation units

147

Appendix C. Biface data from all monitoring and mechanical excavation activities

149

References

151

vi

List of Figures
Figure 1-1

Project area location.

2

Figure 1-2

Floor plan design of the ticket kiosk facility.

4

Figure 1-3

Excavations of the relocated Units 3 and 4 underway.

5

Figure 1-4

Calf Creek horizon (Andice) point recovered from 41HY160.

6

Figure 1-5

Calibrated dates associated with Calf Creek deposits from Texas and
nearby areas.

7

Figure 2-1

Physiographic map of project area location.

12

Figure 2-2

Cross-section of depositional units in the San Marcos Springs valley.

13

Figure2-3

Age-depth model of radiocarbon dates by depth from an excavation block
near the ticket kiosk.

15

Figure 2-4

Regional environmental models for Central and Coastal Texas.

16

Figure 2-5

Reconstructed mean annual precipitation and mean annual temperature
from phytolith data from Hall’s Cave, Kerr County, Texas.

17

Figure 2-6

Record of directly dated bison from in and around Spring Lake site.

18

Figure 2-7

Reconstructed tree cover from pollen records at Boriak and Weakley bogs
in greater Central Texas.

19

Figure 3-1

Overview of project area prior to excavation.

32

Figure 3-2

Units 3 and 4 after the gas line was encountered.

33

Figure 3-3

Cleaning out water-logged lowermost sediments from Units 3 and 4.

34

Figure 3-4

Map of areas of controlled units and mechanical excavation that were
monitored.

35

Figure 4-1

Technical profile of western wall of Units 3 and 4.

39

Figure 4-2

Results of particle size and magnetic susceptibility analysis.

42

Figure 5-1

Results of AMS radiocarbon dates from the ticket kiosk excavation.

47

Figure 5-2

Calibrated AMS dates plotted on technical profile of excavation units.

50

Figure 6-1

Faunal assemblage from Units 3 and 4.

57

Figure 7-1

Early Archaic projectile points, Martindale and Merrell.

67

Figure 7-2

Early Archaic projectile points, Uvalde and Gower.

68

Figure 7-3

Early Archaic projectile points, Bell (Calf Creek horizon).

69

Figure 7-4

Middle Archaic projectile points, Almagre/Langtry and Baird.

70

Figure 7-5

Middle Archaic Nolan projectile points.

71

Figure 7-6

Middle Archaic Travis projectile points.

72

Figure 7-7

Late Archaic I Bulverde and Pedernales projectile points.

73

Figure 7-8

Examples of Late Archaic I Pedernales projectile points.

74

Figure 7-9

Late Archaic I Lange projectile points.

75

Figure 7-10

Late Archaic II Castroville projectile points.

76

Figure 7-11

Late Archaic III projectile points, Ensor, Ellis, Edgewood, and Fairland.

77

vii

Figure 7-12

Transitional Archaic/Austin projectile points, Darl and Scallorn.

78

Figure 7-13

Late Prehistoric/Toyah arrow points, Perdiz.

79

Figure 7-14

Untypable dart points.

80

Figure 7-15

Untypable dart point fragments.

81

Figure 7-16

Untypable arrow point fragment.

81

Figure 7-17

Ovate bifaces.

84

Figure 7-18

Pointed ovate bifaces.

85

Figure 7-19

Lanceolate bifaces.

86

Figure 7-20

Examples of distal biface fragments of indeterminate bifaces.

89

Figure 7-21

Examples of medial fragments of indeterminate bifaces.

90

Figure 7-22

Examples of edge fragments of indeterminate bifaces.

91

Figure 7-23

Flake tools from excavation units 3 and 4.

92

Figure 7-24

MRUs from excavation units 3 and 4.

93

Figure 7-25

Proximal fragments of edge modified pieces that possibly represent the
haft element of scrapers that were broken during use.

94

Figure 7-26

Other lithic tools: Awl, Graver fragment, Multi-edge graver.

95

Figure 7-27

Unidirectional core.

96

Figure 7-28

Bidirectional cores.

97

Figure 7-29

Examples of multidirectional flake cores.

98

Figure 7-30

Recovery of debitage compared with faunal recovery.

Figure 7-31

Recovery data for FCR compared with fauna and debitage.

101

Figure 7-32

Bone tools fragments and bead from Units 3 and 4.

102

Figure 7-33

Marine columella bead

102

Figure 7-34

Ceramic fragments.

104

Figure 8-1

Mechanical stripping of an area around Units 3 and 4.

106

Figure 8-2

Auger excavations.

108

Figure 8-3

Overview of north building plumbing project.

108

Figure 8-4

Formal unifaces fragment recovered during monitoring of trenches for
plumbing utilities.

109

Figure 8-5

CAS archaeologist David Yelacic investigating prehistoric burial.

110

Figure 8-6

Close up of a buried fence post with cement base.

111

Figure 8-7

Exploratory trench for main water line.

112

Figure 8-8

Meter box and trench.

113

Figure 8-9

Two trenches and one pit for connecting restroom facility with lift
station, with new recommissioned irrigation line.

114

Figure 8-10

Overview of crescent-shaped access drive.

115

Figure 8-11

THC archaeologist Tiffany Osborne conducting GPR survey of area
around burial location.

116

Figure 8-12

Excavation unit for burial excavation.

117

viii

99

Figure 8-13

Plan view of burial feature and associated artifacts.

119

Figure 8-14

Three projectile points from burial excavation

119

Figure 8-15

Dental inventory of burial.

124

Figure 8-16

Two-dimensional plot of D2 matrix

128

Figure 8-17

Stable carbon and nitrogen isotope values for six San Marcos burials.

130

Figure 8-18

Prehistoric burial isotope data plotted against protein group regression
lines.

132

Figure 8-19

Average isotopic variation with standard deviations for archaeological
bison remains from Spring Lake and nearby sites.

134

Figure 8-20

Discriminant function temporal values from Central Texas burial data
plotted against dietary clusters.

136

Figure 9-1

Bandy and Merrell points from Spring Lake compared with Calf Creek
(Bell) points.

139

ix

List of Tables
Table 2-1

Cultural Chronology for Central Texas

20

Table 2-2

Previously Investigated Sites in the Spring Lake Vicinity

29

Table 5-1

Radiocarbon Assays from Ticket Kiosk Excavation

51

Table 6-1

Faunal Remains by Level and Elevation

54

Table 7-1

Projectile Points by Elevation

64

Table 7-2

Bifaces from Units 3 and 4

82

Table 7-3

Flake tools MRUs and Unifaces from Units 3 and 4

87

Table 7-4

Flake Cores from Excavation Units 3 and 4

91

Table 7-5

Metric and Observed Data for Ceramic Fragments

103

Table 8-1

Cultural Material from Auger Excavations

107

Table 8-2

Cultural Material from Burial Unit

118

Table 8-3

Skeletal Analysis Summary

120

Table 8-4

Available Metric Data

123

Table 8-5

Native American Comparative Groups for Ancestry Analysis

125

Table 8-6

Isotope Data from Three Sites

129

Table 8-7

Cluster Diets Defined through k-means Cluster Analysis

133

x

Management Summary
This report describes the results of data recovery-level archaeological investigations carried
out under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5938 at State Antiquities Landmark 41HY160. The
purpose of the project was to offset the impact to cultural deposits at the site stemming from
the installation of service utilities for a new restroom facility and ticket kiosk at The Meadows
Center for Water and the Environment, (formerly the River Systems Institute) at Texas State
University-San Marcos (TxSt). Sponsored by TxSt, the Center for Archaeological Studies
excavated a 1×2 meter unit and monitored construction activities. Resulting cultural materials
and other archaeological evidence were analyzed and are discussed in the report.
Excavations exposed and documented a near-continuous occupation sequence spanning
the time periods of Late Prehistoric Toyah into the Early Archaic. Cultural deposits were
found to extend beyond the lowermost depth of excavations. A series of radiocarbon dates on
mammalian bone provide temporal control for this sequence. Of particular importance to the
analysis presented here is an intact Calf Creek component, bracketed between Middle Archaic
materials and late Early Archaic remains. This component, which dates to approximately
5750–5900 calibrated years ago, is characterized by the presence of Bell type projectile points
and bison remains.
In addition to excavations, archaeological monitoring was also conducted in conjunction
with the construction and installation of associated utilities. During the monitoring phase of
the project, a single prehistoric human interment was discovered within the planned alignment
for electrical utilities. Inasmuch as this part of the project area would become a high-traffic
area for the ticket kiosk after project completion, the burial was removed and is a component of
the analyses described here. The report evaluates isotope data from the burial remains within
a regional context.
Results of the project show that this part of the Spring Lake site is a rich source of
archaeological evidence with the potential for addressing numerous significant issues in local
and regional Central Texas prehistory.

xi

Chapter 1
Introduction
by Jon C. Lohse
In 2011–2012, Texas State University-San Marcos (TxSt) built a new ticket kiosk and restroom
facility at The Meadows Center for Water and the Environment (formerly the River Systems
Institute), located at Spring Lake, on the TxSt campus. The construction and related utility
installations, located within the boundaries of State Archeological Landmark (SAL) 41HY160
(Figure 1-1), were carried out entirely on TxSt property and used University funds. The facility
replaces the former visitor center at Aquarena Springs, which was demolished during the
comprehensive Spring Lake Aquatic Ecosystem Restoration Project (SLAERP), a Section 206
undertaking that was cosponsored by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and TxSt.
The new ticket kiosk is located immediately adjacent to but outside the SLAERP project area.
Considering the source of funds for this construction and its location on TxSt property,
TxSt was required to comply with provisions of the Antiquities Code of Texas, which requires
that such undertakings be coordinated with the Texas Historical Commission (THC) and to
evaluate possible impact of the project on important archaeological resources. In addition to
its registry listing as an SAL, 41HY160 has been determined to be eligible for listing to the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and is therefore considered highly significant
for the information it contains regarding historic and prehistoric events in Texas. Working
with the Office of Facilities Planning Design and Construction (OFPDC) at TxSt, the Center
for Archaeological Studies (CAS) designed and carried out a plan for data recovery and
archaeological monitoring in order to recover information representative of the archaeological
record in the immediate area so as to offset the loss of additional information stemming from
the construction of the ticket kiosk.
Excavations consisted of a single 1×2 m unit excavated to a depth of 3.0 m below the
current ground level. Monitoring was conducted based on the planned locations of utilities
installation. All excavations and monitoring were carried out under Texas Antiquities Permit
No. 5938 (Jon C. Lohse, Principal Investigator). Excavations were conducted in the fall and

Chapter 1

Figure 1-1. Project area location. Yellow polygon indicated by red arrow, on 7.5" United States Geological Survey
topographic map; San Marcos North and South sheets.

winter of 2011, and monitoring activities continued into the late spring of 2012. This report
presents the methods and findings of those investigations.
The report is organized into several chapters. Chapter 1 describes the undertaking,
introduces the investigations, and contextualizes the main contributions of this report to
local, regional, and statewide prehistory. Chapter 2 presents the environmental and cultural
context of Spring Lake. Archaeological understanding of this important site has grown steadily
since initial excavations in the 1970s, but has rapidly increased in recent years as a result
of compliance-driven investigations (Lohse 2013a; Nickels and Bousman 2010; Oksanen
2011), especially the SLAERP (Leezer et al. 2011; Lohse 2013b). The current basis for how we

2

Chapter 1
understand prehistoric cultural and environmental processes, including regional chronologies
and previous work, is summarized in order to contextualize these investigations. Chapter 3
discusses the methods used for excavation and monitoring activities and briefly helps readers
understand the approaches taken to addressing key, highly dynamic field conditions over the
course of the project. Chapters 4–8 present the results of the fieldwork. Geoarchaeology at
the site is discussed in Chapter 4. Chapter 5 discusses dates and dating. Chapter 6 describes
recovered faunal remains and their analysis. Chapter 7 considers artifacts recovered during
the project, and Chapter 8 explains the results of the monitoring phase of the project, including
data from the discovery of a prehistoric human burial and a summarization of other finds from
the monitoring work. It should be noted in general that monitoring is a poor way to record
archaeological data; by the time field technicians observe in situ deposits, they will almost
certainly have been disturbed by construction or other mechanical activities. Nonetheless, the
monitoring efforts in conjunction with this project were sufficient to demonstrate that intact
archaeological deposits surround the entire project area, beginning almost immediately at
the base of the paved parking and driving surfaces of the Spring Lake area. Moreover, it was
through careful monitoring that the burial feature was recognized and exposed before any
serious damage was incurred. The final chapter, Chapter 9, presents the overall conclusions
of this investigation and provides an update of the understanding of prehistoric human
occupation at Spring Lake.

Project Description
According to TxSt plans, the ticket kiosk was designed as a two-part structure with an
open-air walkway between the two buildings. The construction was designed to take place
on a pad of fill dirt that was brought in specifically to minimize impacts to archaeological
resources. Initially, all impacts were to result from the installation of a lift station to a depth of
approximately 8 ft to provide head pressure to the restroom facilities and from the installation
of utility service to bring water and electricity to the building (Figure 1-2). Following a
geotechnical assessment of the project area, however, planners determined the need for deep
piers (n = 36) to be driven into the ground to a depth of more than 20 ft to anchor the structure
in place.
In response to these impacts, CAS submitted a proposal to the OFPDC and the THC to
perform controlled hand excavation of a 1×2 m unit in the location of the lift station to a depth
of 3 m. The size of the unit would be approximately one-half the overall size of the lift station,
and would be sufficient to recover enough information so as to satisfactorily mitigate the
overall impact from this construction. Additionally, all ground-disturbing utility work would be
monitored by on-site archaeologists.
The initial excavation unit was laid out as a 1×2 m block, under the assumption that all
existing utilities had been marked and that none would be encountered. At approximately 60
cm below surface, however, an active gas line was encountered running diagonally through one

3

Chapter 1

Figure 1-2. Floor plan design of the new ticket kiosk facility near the upper end of Spring Lake. The location of the lift
station is marked in red, and the 3x4 m excavation block conducted by field schools in 2001–2006 is in yellow. This block
is discussed in more detail in Chapter 2.

of the 1 m squares and partially through the other (designated as Units 1 and 2). In response,
the excavation was relocated 1 m to the west and 1 m to the north (Figure 1-3). Units 1 and 2,
disturbed by this earlier gas line installation, are not discussed in detail in this report.

Primary Contributions of this Report
Excavations documented the record of continuous or almost continuous prehistoric occupation
at Spring Lake from the end of the Late Prehistoric period, called Toyah in the regional
cultural chronology, well into the Early Archaic. Of particular importance in this sequence
is what appears to be an intact terminal Early Archaic Calf Creek component, just less than
6000 years old, that was first recognized in 2001–2006 excavations conducted nearby (see
Figure 1-2 and discussion in Chapter 2) but never completely sampled until the present
project. Considering the continuous nature of deposits here, emphasis is placed on generating
a robust record of radiocarbon dates for certain key intervals and components (see Chapter 5).
In addition to securely placing Calf Creek in the regional chronological sequence, monitoring
efforts resulted in the discovery, documentation, and removal of a single human burial. This

4

Chapter 1

Figure 1-3. Excavations of the relocated Units 3 and 4 underway. Units 1 and 2 are visible at left of seated figure. The
chain link fence surrounding this work site marks the project area boundaries of the SLAERP.

interment represents the third human burial to have been recovered from the TxSt campus,
and is the seventh individual recovered by CAS from the general San Marcos area. Descriptive
analysis and radiometric data from this individual are presented in Chapter 5.

Calf Creek in Central Texas Context
What Don Wyckoff (1994, 1995) has called the Calf Creek Horizon is noteworthy for its close
association with Middle Holocene bison exploitation. Named for the Calf Creek shelter in
Arkansas (Dickson 1970), this widespread series of cultural traits has been identified across
the Southern Great Plains and adjoining areas of Kansas, Missouri, Arkansas, Oklahoma, and
Texas. Typologically, dart points found in Texas that comprise the Calf Creek style include
Bell, defined at the Landslide site in the Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir (Sorrow et al. 1967)
and Andice, defined from specimens from the Gault site (Prewitt 1983). Both types fall into
the range of variation associated with Calf Creek points elsewhere and are characterized by
triangular bodies with deep basal notches that result in long barbs and typical squared stems
(Figure 1-4).

5

Chapter 1
Direct evidence for the use of Calf Creek points in hunting bison has been reported from
Oklahoma (Bement et al. 2005), where a juvenile bison skull was uncovered in a stream bed
with a Calf Creek point embedded in the base of one of the horns. Bison remains are commonly
reported from multicomponent sites where Calf Creek material is also present. Because of
unfavorable climatic conditions for this time period, Calf Creek material from greater Central
Texas has proven difficult to date precisely. As a result of sediment loss and mixing,
components from this period are often found with earlier and/or later remains. For example,
the compilation of dates reported from Texas and nearby regions described as associated with
Calf Creek (Figure 1-5) produces an untenably wide distribution. The outside span of time
covers more than 2,000 years while even a conservative reading of these data approaches 700
years in duration. This interval is presently used to define the end of the Early Archaic; the
Middle Archaic period in regional chronologies begins immediately following Calf Creek (Lohse
2013a).
Precisely dating this cultural adaptation and understanding environmental and other
associated behavioral changes, would contribute significantly to the understanding of
regional and local prehistoric sequences. Presently, archaeologists do not clearly understand
the technological and typological antecedents to Calf Creek styles in the region, nor do they
understand very well what additional styles might also be associated with this horizon. In
addition, models are not available to explain shifts that might have occurred with respect
to hunting and prey-choice behaviors during this period of bison presence. If the Calf Creek
horizon represents cultural influences from outside the Central Texas region, nonlocal styles
might be expected to appear suddenly and without precedent in local assemblages. Answering
these and other related questions first requires a considerably more precise understanding of
the timing of this event than any currently available data can provide.

Figure 1-4. Calf Creek horizon (Andice) point recovered from 41HY160, immediately adjacent to the Ticket Kiosk
excavation.

6

Chapter 1

Figure 1-5. Some calibrated dates reportedly associated with Calf Creek deposits from Texas and nearby areas. The
extreme span of these dates covers more than 2,000 years, and even the central cluster covers approximately 700 years.

Understanding People Who Occupied Spring Lake
In addition to the opportunity to date for the first time an intact Calf Creek component,
investigations at the Ticket Kiosk recovered an intact prehistoric human interment. To date,
only three sets of human remains have been recovered from the TxSt campus, and the overall
record of burials from San Marcos includes only four complete individuals (including the
one discussed in this report) and three fragmentary ones. Essentially, very little is known

7

Chapter 1
physically about the people who inhabited this area in the past. While the addition of one more
individual does not begin to fill this void, this set of remains does add important information
about the kinds of people who inhabited this site for more than 13,000 years.

An important aspect of the current project involves plans for the ultimate disposition of
these remains, along with others presently under the curatorship of CAS. Prior to the removal
of these remains, TxSt was obligated to comply with the Texas Health and Safety Code, which
requires either a signed permit to disinter remains from the State Registrar’s Office or a signed
order from the district court before the remains can be removed. After discussing the project
design and circumstances with the OFPDC, CAS recommended that the remains be removed,
inasmuch as their former location would be in an area of high traffic and was considered
inappropriate for the location of a cemetery (under the Health and Safety Code, even a single
interment is defined as a cemetery). Once the remains are removed, however, TxSt and
CAS are required to comply with the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation
Act (NAGPRA) in order to determine cultural affiliation and, ultimately, negotiate or find
arrangements for the final disposition of the remains. Under NAGPRA, CAS qualifies as a
museum, and is obligated to consult with federally recognized tribes and other potentially
interested parties, including Native American groups who may have a historical interest in
the area but who are not federally recognized, in order to determine the cultural affiliation
of these remains. The University’s NAGPRA obligations are only triggered when burials are
removed and officially taken into possession; if exposed but left in place, no such consultation
requirements exist.
When NAGPRA was passed into law in 1990, it addressed some long-standing concerns
among Native Americans and others about how the scientific and/or scholarly (archaeological)
community had historically treated and controlled Native American human remains (Trope
and Echo-Hawk 2000). NAGPRA deals with the disposition of human remains, objects of
cultural patrimony, and sacred cultural objects. Importantly, it provides an avenue for Native
Americans to participate in decisions about how such objects (and the remains of people) are
dealt with and, in some cases, the location to which they are returned. As such, NAGPRA is
part property law, part civil rights law, and part Native American law, and it is fundamentally
concerned with helping to rectify the longstanding omission of American Indians from
discussions of the disposition of their cultural heritage. Along the way, the views held by some
archaeologists about the privileged place of science and research relative to the concerns of
indigenous groups have come under scrutiny. Many outcomes reached under NAGPRA reflect
some manner of compromise between scientific research and the cultural and humanistic
concerns of indigenous peoples regarding a shared cultural heritage that is commonly the
subject of archaeological research (Goldstein and Kintigh 2000).
In addition to an opportunity to understand Calf Creek more clearly in a regional
context, this investigation presents an opportunity to consider how TxSt and CAS will or
should approach the study of recovered human remains from the Spring Lake area. Clearly,

8

Chapter 1
certain minimal data should be recorded in order for scholars and others to make informed
assessments concerning cultural affiliation, needed for ultimate disposition of the remains
under state and federal law. These minimal data can easily be augmented through additional
kinds of analyses in order to recover all possible information about the people (or this person)
who inhabited the Spring Lake area during prehistoric times. In the future, technological
advances may make it possible to learn more from these remains than is possible today, a
possibility that may serve as scientific justification for housing such remains for years.

9

Chapter 2
Environmental and Cultural Context
by Jon C. Lohse and David M. Yelacic
A description of the environmental and cultural contexts of the study area is important in
order to characterize and understand the issues that define archaeology and human occupation
at Spring Lake. In addition to describing the environmental and cultural contexts of the project
area, this chapter also summerizes previous investigations in and around the immediate
vicinity of the Ticket Kiosk area.

Environmental Context
The Spring Lake project area (29°53'38.17" N, 97°55'45.54" W) is located within the City of
San Marcos in south central Hays County, Texas. This location is centrally located in the
Austin–San Antonio Corridor, one of the fastest growing areas in the nation (Quintero 2007).
Spring Lake is situated along the base of the Balcones Escarpment in eastern central Texas.
The Balcones Escarpment is a prominent physiographic feature created where Cretaceous
limestone was uplifted (west) and downthrust (east) along a normal fault until the Eocene
(Sellards et al. 1932). This rich and diverse environment contains biological aspects of the Hill
Country to the west and Blackland Prairie to the east (Figure 2-1). Transitional environments
such as this are referred to as ecotones and have the capacity to support tremendous
biodiversity and species richness (Crumley 1994).
Reconstructing paleoenvironmental conditions, often by modeling past climatic as
well as floral and faunal variables, is an important means of understanding prehistoric
human adaptations. As ancient conditions cannot be directly observed, paleoenvironmental
reconstructions rely on proxy measures, which include but are not limited to stable isotopes,
phytoliths, fossil pollens, faunal remains, and sediment properties. Paleoenvironmental proxies
do not directly reflect past environments, but can be used to infer characteristics of those
conditions in which they formed (Ellis et al. 1995). There is much variety in the response of
these proxies to their environments and additional variety in the resolution (i.e., accuracy) at

Chapter 2

Figure 2-1. Physiographic map showing project area location (black star) in southeast-central Texas.

which proxies record ambient conditions. Consequently, the use of more lines of evidence (i.e.,
more proxies) results in better paleoenvironmental interpretations.

Geology and Soils
The entire project area is exclusively within Quaternary Alluvium (Qal), as mapped by the
Bureau of Economic Geology (Barnes 1974). Qal are recent flood deposits and therefore
composed of unconsolidated materials from surrounding geologic mapping units. The springfed headwaters of the San Marcos River, issuing from Edwards Limestone, are at this
location. Sink Creek, also a spring-fed stream, joins the San Marcos River approximately 300
m southwest of the project area. Sink Creek drains a considerable portion of the adjacent
uplands, which are composed of a variety of Lower Cretaceous limestones, clays, and shales,
namely Edwards Limestone, Del Rio Clay, Georgetown Formation, Eagle Ford Group, and
Buda limestone (Barnes 1974). In addition to containing fresh water and contributing to the

12

Chapter 2
sedimentary matrix of the site, chert-bearing limestone strata, specifically Edwards Limestone,
were an important resource for the indigenous, stone toolmaking populations of the region.
Soils in the area, as described by Batte (1984), include Okalla (Ok) and Tinn (Tn) series.
Both soil series are deep and form in floodplain settings, and both are typically dark grayishbrown in color, moderately alkaline, and calcareous throughout. Differences in distance from
the main channel during floods result in the deposition of differently sized particles. Closer
to the stream, Okalla series are composed of slightly coarser (i.e., clay loam) material than
the Tinn series (i.e., clay), which is often located at a greater distance from flooding channels.
Different proportions of clay fractions in each series influence the degree to which shrink–swell
processes, which occur as clay-rich soils alternately dry out and then become wet through
seasonal rainfall or floods, affect archaeological deposits. The Tinn series soils have greater
potential to disturb archaeological sites through argilliturbation (i.e., mixing of soil as a result
of shrink–swell processes).
Combining methods of sedimentary geology and soil science, six depositional units (units)
of the Sink Creek/San Marcos Springs valley were identified by Lee C. Nordt (2010) during the
2001 investigations of 41HY160 (Figure 2-2). Units A through F reflect changes in the behavior
of Sink Creek, including periods of increased and decreased stream flow, and changes in the
resulting depositional regimes. These units were deposited in chronological order, from oldest
to most recent, from Paleoindian (A) to Late Prehistoric and Historical periods (F). Incision of
the San Marcos River and Sink Creek very late in the Pleistocene flushed out a portion of the
valley. Incision was followed by the deposition of channel gravels and fine-grained sediment in
a marshy environment during Paleoindian times (A). Another period of incision was followed
by similar marsh formation and slow aggradation of flood deposits during the Early Holocene,
or Late Paleoindian and Early Archaic times (B and C). Increased deposition of fine-grained
sediment marking the middle Holocene, Middle and Late Archaic times (D), was potentially
caused by slack water from the Blanco River less than five miles downstream. Diminishing
depositional rates, incision of Sink Creek, and gradual accumulation of flood deposits during
the late Holocene characterize the environment from Late Archaic/Late Prehistoric times (E) to
historical times and the present (F).

Figure 2-2. Cross section of depositional units in the San Marcos Springs valley (after Nordt 2010: Figure 6-8).

13

Chapter 2
Recent analysis of TxSt-sponsored field school excavations at 41HY160 yields additional
site-specific information about past environments and depositional regimes at Spring
Lake, including some data that bear directly on the period of the Calf Creek horizon. Using
radiocarbon analyses of bison and charcoal and each sample’s vertical provenience, an agedepth model of depositional history at the site was created. This model shows relatively high
depositional rates from before ca. 6000 cal B.P. to ca. 4300 cal B.P., a period that includes the
Calf Creek horizon (Figure 2-3).
Beginning by ca. 4300 years ago, deposits became increasingly mixed, seen in a series
of age reversals, where younger dates occur below older ones. This period lasted until
approximately 2800 years ago, encompassing the very end of the Middle Archaic and much
of the early Late Archaic and generally corresponding with regional-scale environmental
perturbations including a sea level rise/highstand suggested by Ricklis (1995) and the warm
Edwards Interval posited by Johnson and Goode (1994) (Figure 2-4). Nordt (2010) also notes
a decrease in depositional rates across the Sink Creek Valley during this time. Based on
available evidence, it seems likely that this portion of 41HY160 was subjected to natural and
cultural disturbances of site matrix during a period of relative surface stability.

Weather and Climate
The Balcones Escarpment strongly influences the weather and climate of Central Texas.
Climate in Hays County varies from moist with mild winters and long hot summers, wet
all seasons to dry summers (Köppen Climatic Classification: Cfa-Csa, east to west). Climate
records of recent history show summers having mean maximum temperatures approaching
97oF and winters having mean minimum temperatures near 40oF. December and January are
the coolest months, but subfreezing temperatures have been recorded between October and
April (Dixon 2000). Mean annual precipitation recorded for Hays County is 33.75 inches, and
falls with bimodal distribution across the year. Late spring and early fall typically experience
the most precipitation, but droughts are common to the region (Bomar 1983:153). Not a decade
in the twentieth century passed without moisture-deficient conditions.
Central Texas weather is also quite dynamic when viewed along archaeological time scales.
Topographic relief from the escarpment can cause orographic cloudbursts to unload relatively
high amounts of rainfall over short periods of time. Topography and thin soils, coupled with
these precipitation events, can result in flash flooding (Woodruff 1979). These high-energy
events have the potential to erode and deposit considerable amounts of sediment within the
drainage basins of the region.
For Central Texas, the end of the Pleistocene was generally cooler and wetter than
contemporary conditions (Bousman 1998; Musgrove et al. 2001; Nordt et al. 2002). Evidence
in the presence/absence of microfauna (Toomey 1993) and phytoliths (Joines 2005) at Hall’s
Cave, fossil pollens in bogs (Bousman 1998), and stable carbon isotopes in soil (Nordt et al.
2002) suggests that within the generally cool and wet late Pleistocene, there were warmer,

14

Chapter 2

Figure 2-3. Age-depth model of radiocarbon dates by depth from an excavation block near the Ticket Kiosk. The series
of reversals between approximately 128–95 cm below datum, dating to ~4300–2800 cal B.P., corresponds with climatic
perturbations noted elsewhere in Texas and the Western Hemisphere.

15

Figure 2-4. Regional environmental models for Central Texas (left) and Coastal Texas (right) showing corresponding perturbations ~4300–2800 cal B.P., noted as
“Dry Edwards Interval” (Johnson and Goode 1994: Figure 2) and “possible highstand” (Ricklis 1995: Figure 53).

Chapter 2

16

Chapter 2
drier intervals. The transition from the Pleistocene to the Holocene is marked by gradual
warming, interrupted by a sharp transition to a cool spell known as the Younger Dryas from
approximately 12,900 to 11,600 cal B.P. (see Eren 2012), followed by gradually increasing
temperatures. Moisture varies independently of temperature, making local and regional
reconstructions exceedingly complicated.
During the Holocene, not only did seasonal variation in precipitation and temperature
increase (Toomey 1993), but these two variables (temperature and moisture) increasingly
varied independently of one another (Figure 2-5). Overall, conditions became warmer, leading
to the mid-to late-Holocene Altithermal (Meltzer 1999). It was during this extended event
that Calf Creek appeared in the study area. Across much of the Southern Great Plains, the
peak of the Altithermal was approximately 5000–6000 years ago. However, in Central Texas,
temperature maximums were gradually attained during a trend from ca. 6000 to 2000 B.P.
Generally, the middle and late Holocene is characterized by increasing warmth along with
increasing amplitude in precipitation variation. Immediately prior to this trend, temperatures
were slightly cooler (compared with later times) but climate was significantly drier. While
precipitation fluctuated until around 2000 years ago, temperatures increased rather steadily.
Periods of bison exploitation occur during this extended period, beginning with Calf Creek
after 6000 years ago (Lohse et al. 2014; see Chapter 5). Gastropods and phytoliths from
archaeological contexts in Bexar County confirm the environmental and climatic shifts to xeric
conditions (Munoz et al. 2011). Microfauna (Toomey 1993), fossil pollens (Bousman 1998), and
stable isotopes (Nordt et al. 2002), as well as alluvial sediment (Blum and Valastro 1989) and

Figure 2-5. Reconstructed mean annual precipitation (blue) and mean annual temperature (red) from phytolith data from
Hall’s Cave, Kerr County, Texas. These two variables are in general accordance in the Pleistocene record, but they begin
to fluctuate independently during the Holocene, after ca. 13,000 B.P. Sample interval is approximately 500 years, which
reduces much of the variation that would otherwise be evident (redrawn from Joines 2005: Figures 4 and 5).

17

Chapter 2
tree rings (Alley 1984; Cook et al. 1999; Mauldin et al. 2012), all indicate that climate following
the Edwards Interval was comparably cooler (see Figure 2-5), with oscillations in precipitation.
Interpreting regional records of temperature and precipitation is a challenge for many
reasons. Some of the reasons relate to the degree(s) of precision and representativeness of
selected proxy lines of evidence. Compounding this issue is the fact that different studies apply
different temporal controls, for example using either uncalibrated or calibrated radiocarbon
ages, rely on different degrees of temporal precision, and are defined by association issues
between actual control dates from a sequence and the proxy evidence used to reconstruct
certain variables. In addition to these factors, conditions varied even within study areas such
as Central Texas. Given these considerations, the most useful records are those reconstructed
directly from data taken from an area under study (such as Spring Lake) that utilize directly
dated proxy data (rather than relying on dating-by-association) insofar as possible.

Flora and Fauna
Floral and faunal species of the adjacent Edwards Plateau and Blackland Prairie commingle
along the Balcones Escarpment. Blair (1950) calls this ecotone the Balconian Province, noting
that it contains wildlife from every region in the state as well as its own endemic species.
Typical modern fauna include armadillo, beaver, black rat, coyote, crayfish, domestic dog,
eastern cottontail, eastern gray squirrel, eastern wood rat, muskrat, common opossum, pig,
raccoon, red fox, turkey, western diamondback rattlesnake, white-tailed deer, and white-tailed
jackrabbit. During some prehistoric times, antelope and bison were also present (Figure 2-6).

Figure 2-6. Record of directly dated bison from in and around Spring Lake. Cultural periods are discussed below. This
model includes bison specimens dated during this project (see Chapter 4).

18

Chapter 2
The region’s natural vegetation is generally a grassland–woodland–forest mosaic, where
grasslands separate stands of woody vegetation (Ellis et al 1995). Reconstructed patterns of
arboreal cover based on a record of pollen from Boriak and Weakley bogs, not far to the east
of the study area, show volatile oscillations between these three zones, oftentimes occurring
over relatively brief intervals (Figure 2-7). Many of these oscillations occur too frequently to be
strongly associated with clear patterns of cultural adaptation, yet would have posed significant
changes to available biomass for foraging populations.

Cultural Context of Study Area
Human presence in the study region extends from at least Clovis times onward into modern
times (Lohse 2013b). Following general convention, this time is divided into three periods:
Prehistoric (including Paleoindian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric), Protohistoric, and
Historical. Table 2-1 shows the cultural chronology for Central Texas and identifies timediagnostic point types for each period. All these types, as well as others not listed, are present
at Spring Lake. Evidence for prehistoric occupation in and around the San Marcos Springs
extends from the Clovis period, approximately 13,500 years ago, up until the arrival of Spanish
explorers in the early 1500s.

Figure 2-7. Reconstructed tree cover from pollen records at Boriak and Weakley bogs in greater Central Texas, showing
sharp oscillations primarily within and between woodland and grassland settings. Forest cover, over 55% tree canopy,
was very infrequent in the study area over the last 15,000 years (from Bousman 1998: Figure 7).

19

Chapter 2

Table 2-1.
Cultural Chronology for Central Texas

Pleistocene

Holocene

Epoch

20

Period

Selected Diagnostic Types

Age
(yrs. Before Present)

Historical

~AD 1650/1700

Protohistoric

~AD 1550–1650/1700

Late Prehistoric/
Toyah

Perdiz

650– ≤300

Transitional
Archaic/Austin

Darl, Scallorn, Edwards

1270–650

Late Archaic III

Ensor, Fairland, Frio, Ellis

2150–1270

Late Archaic II

Montell, Castroville, Marcos

3100–2150

Late Archaic I

Bulverde, Pedernales,
Marshall, Lange, Williams

4200/4100–3100

Middle Archaic

Early Triangular (Baird,
Taylor), Nolan, Travis

5750–4200/4100

Early Archaic III

Calf Creek (Bell, Andice),
Martindale, Bandy

6000(?)–5750

Early Archaic II

Uvalde, Gower, Hoxie, Jetta

8000–6300 (?)

Early Archaic I

Angostura

8800–8000

Late Paleoindian

Golondrina, St. Mary’s Hall

10,200–8800

Early Paleoindian

Clovis, Folsom

13,500–10,200

Chapter 2

Paleoindian
The Paleoindian period marks the earliest human occupation of North America and extends
until approximately 8800 B.P. Generally, Paleoindian peoples, especially Early Paleoindians,
have long been thought of as nomadic wanderers that relied heavily on hunting large game
animals such as mammoth, mastodon, bison, camel, and horse (cf. Black 1989). Some large
sites, like Gault in Bell County, contain evidence for serial Clovis occupations, suggesting that
settlement models for this period also need to account for central place-type camps. Recent
research shows that Paleoindians also utilized a variety of plants and animals including
badgers, mice, alligators, turtles and tortoises (Black 1989; Collins and Brown 2000; Hester
1983; Lemke and Timperley 2008). Large Pleistocene animal remains have been reported from
Spring Lake, including horse, mammoth, and perhaps bison. However, none of these is dated,
and fine-recovery methods needed to record evidence of smaller animals have not yet been
applied here.
Whereas Clovis points are associated both with large-mammal kill sites and broadspectrum diet linked to encampments like Gault, Folsom points are more closely associated
with specialized bison hunting and high mobility across portions of the Great Plains (Meltzer
2006). Indeed, many (but not all; see LaBelle [2012]) Folsom sites suggest a high degree of
specialized bison hunting. Most Folsom sites occur as surface scatters, although deeply buried
deposits have been uncovered and some sites reportedly contain evidence of structures.
Diagnostic Early Paleoindian point types, including Clovis, Folsom, and Midland, are
followed by a number of Late Paleoindian styles, including Golondrina, St. Mary’s Hall, Barber,
Scottsbluff, and others (Bousman et al. 2004). The diversification of distinctive styles at this
time implies population growth and expansion, as sparsely settled parts of the continental
landscape became infilled. Spring Lake is notable for the large number of St. Mary’s Hall
points found here (Shafer and Hester 2013), second only perhaps to the Wilson County Sand
Pit. Other Late Paleoindian types from Spring Lake include Angostura, San Patrice, and
Wilson. Archaeological evidence suggests that, with the exception of bison (Bison antiquus),
large animals of earlier times were extinct before 10,000 years ago. Hunters instead began
concentrating on deer, antelope, and other game (Bousman et al. 2002, 2004). Reduced mobility
is implied by the concentration of extensive deposits in some sites (like Spring Lake), and also
by the diversification of point styles. This behavioral and technological shift followed a sudden
warming trend in early Holocene climate, approximately 11,000 years ago. Concurrent with
these changes, and also as a result of climate, diets were also transformed as habitats became
more diverse. Collectively, these changes signal a new period in prehistoric chronologies, one
that archaeologists refer to as the Archaic.

Archaic
Based on data from numerous sites across North America, archaeologists define the Archaic
on the basis of a subsistence pattern heavily reliant on plant foods; new cooking technologies

21

Chapter 2
involving heating stones for their thermal retention properties, grinding stones for processing
nuts and seeds, and earth ovens; and, in some locales, the systematic burial of the dead in
established cemeteries.
Dating from as early as ~8800 years ago until approximately 600 years ago, the long
Archaic is divided into three parts: the Early, the Middle, and the Late (Weir 1976).
Traditionally, scholars have defined the end of the period by the appearance of bow and arrow
technology, around 1200 years ago. However, recent research by CAS (Lohse et al. 2014)
suggests that this shift, although important, was relatively insignificant in comparison with
other evidence for strong cultural continuity until approximately 650 years ago, and even up
until the arrival of Spanish explorers. Accordingly, we describe the Archaic as lasting until
almost exactly AD 1300. This limits the ensuing Late Prehistoric to a narrow interval from
~AD 1300 to the early 1500s.
Early Archaic
As previously noted, the beginning of the Holocene is marked by significant climate changes
associated with megafaunal extinctions, a turning point that stimulated behavioral changes in
land use. For example, groups focused more intensively on the exploitation of local resources
such as deer, fish, and geophytes (Thoms 2008, 2009). This dietary adjustment is evidenced
by the increased number of ground stone artifacts, accumulated middens of burned and firecracked rock, and woodworking tools such as Clear Fork gouges and Guadalupe bifaces (Turner
et al. 2011). The reuse of St. Mary’s Hall point fragments from Spring Lake as gouges used in
woodworking suggests that many of these activities significantly predate the Archaic (Shafer
and Hester 2013).
Michael Collins (1995) places Angostura at the beginning of the Early Archaic, although
this point type has traditionally been viewed as a Late Paleoindian style. Regardless,
Angostura points mark the stylistic transition from Paleoindian into Archaic times. Although
points with well made stems appear earlier (e.g., Wilson points), following Angostura, all
Archaic forms are stemmed until the Middle Archaic. Early types falling into this category
have bifurcated or split stem morphologies that often grade into one another in terms of style
and design. Archaeologists call groups of point types that strongly resemble one another in
form a series (Jelks 1978); the Early Archaic series has proven extremely difficult for Texas
archaeologists to separate with greater precision. From Spring Lake, these include Jetta,
Hoxie, Uvalde, and Gower points, all of which bear stylistic similarities.
Based on theoretical expectations derived from global studies of hunter–gatherer–fishers
as well as data from South and Central Texas (e.g., Johnson and Hard 2008), the cultural
landscape of the study area probably surpassed a significant threshold in population density by
the Early Archaic. A number of important adaptations and behaviors are evident in response
to this development. First, since at least 7000 years ago, regional population dynamics reached
a relative degree of stability, with territorial limitations imposed by what archaeologists

22

Chapter 2
call “population packing,” or densities of more than 9 individuals per 100 km2 (Thoms 2008)
“Stability” is seen here minimally in the appearance of cemeteries that show repeated use. In
particular, two from Victoria County—the Morhiss Site (Hard and Katzenberg 2011) and the
Buckeye Knoll Site (Ricklis 2011)—are among the oldest cemeteries in North America. Each
had human interments by at least 7000 years ago, and both were used intensively for long
periods of time. Additionally, style intervals for many diagnostic tool forms commonly endured
for 300 years or more, suggesting conservative rates of change and innovation. For example, the
types characterizing the Early Archaic II subperiod (see Table 2-1) are all stylistically similar,
and span approximately 1700 years. This technological and stylistic longevity illustrates a
conservative rate of technological change and provides additional evidence of stability.
Lewis Binford (2001) notes that this kind of population packing is only possible through
subsistence intensification (also described by Johnson and Hard 2008, and Thoms 2008), or
the production of greater quantities of food through increasingly labor-intensive techniques
and processes. The use of hot-rock cooking technology to process wild bulbs and tubers and
an increased reliance on riverine resources exemplify the subsistence intensification that
occurred in Central Texas. (Prehistoric groups in the study area never practiced agriculture,
which would have been the culmination of this process of subsistence intensification.) Still,
within this gradually evolving land-use system, food resources that returned high yields with
relatively low labor requirements to procure or process would have remained important;
specifically, these resources included large game animals.
Tom Dillehay (1974) proposed a model for the Southern Plains that described the
widespread presence of bison, including both Bison antiquus and modern Bison bison,
throughout the Early Archaic. When exactly the modern form appeared is not well known, but
the antique species would have been extinct before the end of the Early Archaic. Data from
the region surrounding San Marcos confirming the continual presence of bison throughout the
Early Archaic is lacking. However, a number of directly dated bison remains from Spring Lake
establish the presence of modern bison in the region during a narrow interval of 6000–5750
years ago (Lohse et al. 2012). These dates begin to define the Calf Creek horizon (Wyckoff 1994,
1995) as it occurred at Spring Lake. The present study adds important chronometric, stylistic,
and geoarchaeological context to the Calf Creek component at Spring Lake. Based on previous
work (Lohse 2013a), Calf Creek defines the terminus of the Early Archaic.
Based on these theoretical models plus available data, which remain limited in many
respects, the Early Archaic can be understood as a period of “settling in” across Central Texas
and elsewhere. This process almost certainly started in earlier, Late Paleoindian times,
even though established regional traditions become clearly evident, based on cemeteries,
in the Early Archaic. In addition to other labor-intensive food-procurement activities, the
reliance on large game, specifically bison, was a very important aspect of lifeways during this
period. Technologically, a great deal of continuity is seen in tool and point forms during the
early period of the Early Archaic. Late in the period, Calf Creek materials, distinguished by

23

Chapter 2
characteristically deep basally notched, triangular-form Bell and Andice points (see Figure
1-4), may have emerged from preceding point types that are similar in shape but that are
corner notched.
Middle Archaic
Based in large measure on the absence of bison in the archaeological record at Spring Lake
following the Calf Creek interval, the Middle Archaic begins approximately 5750 years ago (see
Table 2-1). Regionally, this period is closely associated with the Altithermal (see above). As
the Altithermal progressed, conditions in South and Central Texas became ever warmer and
drier, to the degree that locating campsites near reliable water sources became increasingly
important. Regionally, finding any sites with intact deposits from this time period is difficult.
Arid conditions led to reduced ground cover, which in turn is associated with increased soil
erosion during rainfall events. As a consequence, relatively few landforms containing wellpreserved remains from this period have been identified for investigation by archaeologists.
Middle Archaic deposits from Spring Lake, however, are comparably extensive, even if they are
somewhat mixed, especially near the top of this stratum (Lohse 2013a; see Figure 2-3).
Stylistically, stemmed projectile points disappeared along with the bison at the beginning
of this period. Instead, triangular forms called Taylor and Baird, commonly subsumed into one
type called Early Triangular, are common. Impact damage on some of these projectile points
indicate that they were used in hunting. However, many were also clearly used as knives
and for other, more general purposes. Other than the absence of bison, subsistence practices
remained largely unchanged from the previous period. An important possible exception to this
statement is what appears as a distinct increase in fire-cracked rock at the end of the Middle
Archaic and beginning of the ensuing Late Archaic (Yelacic 2013). This increase constitutes
a shift toward greater dietary intensification through increased usage of earth ovens for
processing geophytes (cf. Thoms 2008).
By the latter part of the Middle Archaic, stemmed projectile points, including types such
as Nolan and Travis replaced Early Triangular styles. Given the poor geologic context of many
sites from this period, the exact timing of this transition has not yet been well dated. While
both Nolan and Travis are distinct from earlier styles, they are highly comparable to each
other, and also to newly defined types, such as Evant (see Shafer and Hester 2013) that grade
into the early part of the following period, the Late Archaic. The end of this period is dated at
around 4200–4100 years ago (Lohse et al. 2014).
Late Archaic
The Late Archaic represents in many ways continuity from the preceding period. However,
this period lasted longer, from around 4200 years ago until AD 1300 (approximately 700 years
ago), a total duration of approximately 3500 years. Accordingly, it encompassed much more
variation in terms of projectile point styles and associated cultural patterns than the Middle

24

Chapter 2
Archaic. Late Archaic 1 lasted from approximately 4200 to 3100 years ago. Late Archaic 2
dates from about 3100 to 2150 years ago. The final period, Late Archaic 3, lasted from 2150
to around 1270 years ago. (Precision implied by these dates should not be taken literally;
these age ranges are only approximations based on available data). Important periods of bison
hunting, indicated by 55 high-precision dates taken directly from remains excavated from
Spring Lake and a nearby site (41HY188) help to provide a basis for distinguishing between
these subperiods (Lohse et al. 2014; see Figure 2-6).
In terms of diagnostic types, Late Archaic 1 is characterized by Bulverde and Pedernales
points, as well as other, less common forms. Pedernales points, in particular, are among the
most common point types of any prehistoric period in the region, and some archaeologists have
argued that the frequency of this type is a reflection of high overall populations in Central
Texas. Considering that this period coincided with the peak of Johnson and Goode’s (1994)
Edwards Interval (see Figure 2-4), archaeologists can surmise that environmental conditions
might not have been ideal for supporting any sudden or large population growth. This period
included, and concluded with, the first reappearance of bison into the region since Calf Creek
times, around 3200 years ago. Whether Pedernales points are associated with bison has yet to
be demonstrated; Marshall may be a more probable candidate for this technological adaptation.
Late Archaic 2 is defined almost exclusively by the close association of a distinctive series
of types, including Montell, Castroville, and Marcos, with bison hunting across much of Central
Texas and beyond. All three of these types occur at Spring Lake, and a number of bison
remains have been directly dated to this interval.
The Late Archaic 3 period seems to represent the onset of another prolonged absence
of bison remains from the study area. Work at Spring Lake indicates that these important
animals disappeared from the regional landscape somewhat abruptly around 2150 years ago.
Sites to the north, close to the Texas–Oklahoma border, commonly show strong evidence for
continued bison hunting, and it seems that regional climates at this time changed to the point
that better or more desirable forage was no longer available in hunting grounds anywhere close
to Spring Lake. Diagnostic points from this period that have been recovered from Spring Lake
include Ensor, Fairland, Frio and others.
Aside from the changes in bison frequencies in the region throughout the Late Archaic,
archaeologists view this period as one of relative continuity and cultural stability. Many of the
site location patterns, subsistence strategies, and technological choices remained relatively
constant over these 3,000-plus years. One important development includes the appearance
(again) of several large cemeteries that seem to mark regional territories. Although some
Middle Archaic interments are known, the scale and magnitude of burial practices in the
Late Archaic exceeds that known for any previous time period in terms of cemeteries on the
landscape. Cemeteries at sites such as Ernest Witte in Austin County (Hall 1981) and Olmos
Dam in San Antonio (Lukowski 1988) have been used to postulate that populations increased
and that some groups were perhaps once again becoming territorial (Story 1985:44–45).

25

Chapter 2
Transitional Archaic/Austin
Traditionally, the appearance of the bow and arrow, visible in the record with the introduction
of Scallorn points around AD 800, has been used to mark the end of the Archaic and the
beginning of what archaeologists call the Late Prehistoric period. However, no one yet knows
precisely when the bow and arrow was adopted in Central Texas, and it seems most likely that
this technological adaptation was gradual rather than abrupt. Although the bow and arrow
was an important development over previous methods for propelling spears and darts at game
animals or people, the overall record of the region shows a great deal of continuity in almost
all other respects, suggesting that the bow and arrow did not actually mark a significant shift
in many cultural patterns (see recent summary by Arnn 2012:167–168). Some examples of
behavioral continuity include a broad-spectrum diet, continued reliance on bifacial stone tool
technologies, mortuary practices, and site distribution and settlement patterning. As a result,
Lohse et al. (2014) define the end of the Archaic by combining what some have called the
Transitional Archaic with the Austin phase, characterized by the bow and arrow and which
marks the beginning of the Late Prehistoric.
Bison data provide another compelling reason for defining the end of the Archaic in this
manner. Following the period of bison hunting that defines Late Archaic II, no bison remains
from the study area are dated earlier than AD 1300. Among all available classes of data, this
distinction is among the clearest and best defined (see Figure 2-6). In contrast, our review of
existing radiocarbon dates from across the region shows the continual, gradually changing
preference for time-diagnostic point types, from Ensor and Frio to Darl and Scallorn, the
earliest arrow point type known in the study area.

Late Prehistoric
Historically, the Late Prehistoric is separated into two phases, Austin and Toyah (Jelks 1962).
As discussed above, we include Austin with the Transitional Archaic, and limit the Late
Prehistoric in Central Texas to the Toyah interval, which seems to start immediately around
AD 1300. Archaeologist John Arnn (2012) describes Toyah as a time when coalitions of Native
American groups were actively traversing the Central Texas region, resulting in widely shared
artifact technologies and styles. Others have argued, persuasively we think, that one primary
impetus to this shift in mobility and cultural interaction was an intense, focused exploitation
of bison. At this time, many Plains cultures far to the north of Central Texas were actively
exchanging bison meat and hides with Pueblo villages to the west and complex societies in the
Mississippi River drainages and tributaries to the east (Spielmann 1991). Trade goods from
external areas, including obsidian, turquoise, and exotic ceramic styles appear more commonly
than in previous times, supporting this view of the Late Prehistoric.
Dating the end of Toyah is complicated, as several material traits clearly extend into
the early part of the Historical period. Perdiz arrow points are the most common type from
this period, although others are also found in Late Prehistoric assemblages from elsewhere.

26

Chapter 2
Some Perdiz styles, made of glass, have been recovered from Spanish Mission contexts in San
Antonio (Lohse 1999), attesting to the prolonged interaction between Native American peoples
and early European colonizers. Reasonably, it is difficult to recognize “Toyah” patterns in the
material record after around AD 1700 or so, and even this late date is problematic in many
respects. Rather, as the Spanish and French mission era took hold across parts of Texas, most
aboriginal societies were assimilated, died off from disease or conflict, or left. A few remain, but
most are gone forever.

Protohistoric (Spanish Entrada) Period
The Protohistoric represents a period of time when European explorers began traversing and
settling the region. This transitional period contains a few written records that, although
fragmentary, are important for characterizing the rich cultural diversity of the region that
assuredly was also present prior to Spanish arrival as well (Arnn 2012). Historical documents
record the use of the springs by Spanish and Native American groups in the seventeenth,
eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries, and as early as the mid-nineteenth century by AngloAmericans such as General Edward Burleson.
The Protohistoric period was marked by Spanish entradas, formal expeditions into Texas
in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries. Hester defines this as “the transition
period between the Prehistoric and Historical period denoting a phase for which few written
records are available, and for which most evidence is derived from archaeology” (1995:449–
450). This period began with the venture by the Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca and the
Narvaez expedition in 1528 and extended to the establishment and abandonment of Spanish
missions, including the Mission San Antonio de Valero (the Alamo) in 1718 and others.
When the Spanish missions were established in East Texas in the late 1600s, entradas
began to travel regularly through the study area. These expeditions provide the first detailed
observations on the original Native American inhabitants of the region. With Alonso de León’s
expedition of 1680, El Camino Real (the King’s Road) was established from Villa Santiago de la
Monclova in Mexico to East Texas. This roadway followed established Native American trade
routes and trails, and became a vital link between Mission San Juan Bautista in Northern
Mexico and the Spanish settlement of Los Adaes in East Texas (McGraw et al. 1991).
Spanish priests accompanying entradas provided most of the available information on
Native American cultures of early Texas. The few surviving accounts of indigenous groups in
Texas reveal a dynamic cultural environment in which numerous tribes passed through or
inhabited Central Texas at different periods. Little is known about most of these tribes, but
those documented around the springs at San Marcos include the Cantona, Muruam, Payaya,
Sana, and Yojuane. Other tribes encountered at San Marcos included mobile hunting parties
from villages in South and West Texas, including the Catequeza, Cayanaaya, Chalome, Cibolo,
and Jumano, who were heading for bison hunting grounds in the Blackland Prairies (Foster
1995:265–289; Johnson and Campbell 1992; Newcomb 1993). Later groups migrated into the

27

Chapter 2
region, displacing the former groups or tribes. These included the Tonkawa from Oklahoma,
and Lipan and Comanche from the Plains (Campbell and Campbell 1985; Dunn 1911;
Newcomb 1961, 1993). Archaeological sites dated to this period typically contain a mix of both
imported European goods, such as metal objects and glass beads, and chipped stone tools.
Spanish settlement in Central Texas first occurred in San Antonio with the establishment
of Mission San Antonio de Valero, and the later founding of San Antonio de Béxar (Bolton
1970; de la Teja 1995; Habig 1977). Between 1746 and 1755, three missions, San Francisco
Xavier de Horcasitas, San Ildefonso, and Nuestra Señora de la Canderlaria were located
somewhere along the San Gabriel River (known at the time as the San Xavier) in present-day
Milam County. The three missions were eventually coalesced into one, the San Xavier Mission,
and moved to the San Marcos River in 1755. A petition to permanently establish a mission in
Apache territory resulted in the founding of the San Sabá Mission, near present-day Menard,
in 1757. Neophytes from the San Xavier Mission in San Marcos were transferred to the San
Antonio missions and the mission’s property and presidio were reassigned to the San Sabá
Mission. A small group of local San Xavier Indians, the Mayeyes, persuaded the missionaries
to set up a new mission for them on the Guadalupe River, to be named the San Francisco
Xavier Mission, but it only lasted until 1758 (Bolton 1970[1915]). The precise location of the
San Xavier Mission along the San Marcos River has not yet been determined.
Besides the mission town of San Antonio, the only other Spanish settlement in the region
was the town San Marcos de Neve, established in 1808, four miles south of present-day San
Marcos. San Marcos de Neve was abandoned in 1812 as a result of constant raids by local
tribes (Dobie 1932). During this time, massive depopulation occurred among Native Americans
due to diseases to which indigenous people had little resistance. Those few remaining were
gradually displaced to reservations beginning in the mid-1850s (Fisher 1998).

Previous Investigations
Six archaeological sites are recorded within the vicinity of the Ticket Kiosk excavation.
These are 41HY37, 41HY147, 41HY160, 41HY161, 41HY165, and 41HY306. Work has been
conducted intermittently at these sites for a number of years (Table 2-2). Cumulatively, the
results of this work, as well as the ongoing analyses discussed previously in this chapter,
have resulted in an increasingly complete picture of the overall extent, nature, and timing of
prehistoric and protohistoric occupation at this important site.

28

Chapter 2
Table 2-2
Previously Investigated Sites in the Spring Lake Vicinity
Site

Components

Citations

41HY37

Historical Burleson homestead;
Late Prehistoric and Late Archaic
(Late Archaic: Pedernales and
Edgewood points)

Bousman and Nickels 2003;
Garber and Orlof 1984

41HY147

Archaic, Late and Early Paleoindian, Pleistocene fauna

Shiner 1983;
Takac 1990, 1991a, 1991b

41HY160

Discrete components from Late
Prehistoric through Early Archaic,
domestic features

Aery 2007;
Nickels and Bousman 2010;
Garber et al. 1983;
Oksanen 2006;
Ramsey 1997

41HY161

Mixed historical and Archaic, Late
Archaic, Late and Early Paleoindian, human remains, Pleistocene
fauna

Ford and Lyle 1998;
Garber and Glassman 1992;
Jones 2002;
Leezer et al. 2010;
Lyle et al. 2000;
Oksanen 2008;
Shiner 1979, 1981, 1984;
Stull and Hamilton 2011;
Yelacic et al. 2008b

41HY165

Prehistoric, Middle Archaic, bison,
historical, mixed historical and
prehistoric

Giesecke 1998;
Ringstaff 2000;
Soucie and Nickels 2003;
Soucie et al. 2004

41HY306

Late Archaic, Late Paleoindian

Arnn and Kibler 1999

29

Chapter 3
Data Recovery Objectives and Methods
by Jon C. Lohse
Inasmuch as previous investigations at 41HY160 had concluded that archaeological materials
in this area are well preserved and in good stratigraphic context, data recovery excavation and
monitoring focused on compensating for the potential loss of information from the proposed
construction. The primary goal of the mitigation activities described in this report was to
acquire a high-quality dataset that would contribute to a better understanding of prehistoric
occupations within the project area, specifically with respect to chronological precision around
the end of the Early Archaic and the subsequent transition into the Middle Archaic period.
In order to achieve a suitable dataset, project objectives were aimed at recovering stratified
time-diagnostic material. A related objective was to recover datable organic materials from
primary contexts, either associated with archaeological features or from clearly identifed
stratigraphic units. Existing data from the nearby 2001–2006 field school block allowed
analytical attention to be focused on portions of the deposits that minimally overlap with
previously defined portions of the cultural sequence present in this part of 41HY160. In
addition to attention to dating the deposits in this location, descriptive analyses of lithic and
faunal materials and also of features were conducted with stratigraphic contexts in mind.
Combined with existing data, the information acquired from the present project contributes
to overlying research questions that consider prehistoric economy, technology, and mobility
within the context of environmental changes through time at Spring Lake.
Fieldwork consisted of two separate activities: controlled hand excavations of 1×2 m units and
the monitoring of mechanical scraping and trench excavation for the installation of associated
utilities. Each set of activities required an appropriate methodology in order to address the stated
research objectives while also recovering potentially important information or recording sensitive
deposits that were likely to be exposed during the project. Careful attention to the monitoring
phase of this project, in particular, was important, inasmuch as on-site archaeologists were able to
identify an intact burial cairn feature during the excavation of a utility trench before the feature

Chapter 3
was unduly damaged. In addition to field methodologies, laboratory approaches to cataloging and
inventorying recovered remains are described in this chapter.

Excavation
Fieldwork initially was to involve the excavation by hand of two 1×1 m units (Units 1 and 2)
in order to determine the nature of cultural deposits in the proposed location of the lift station.
The area of excavation was first scraped by backhoe in order to remove the paving surface and
sub-pavement base. Next, the two units were laid out adjacent to each other (Figure 3-1), and
excavations commenced in arbitrary 10 cm levels. Excavations were to extend to 3 m below the
ground, the projected depth of the lift station that was to be installed in this location. Matrix
recovered from all units was passed through ¼-inch wire mesh screen. Artifacts observed on
the screen were collected and cataloged by provenience (i.e., unit/level). Features were recorded
and removed as they were exposed. Carbon samples were recorded and collected in situ and
from the screen. As an additional measure of sampling, a continuous column of bulk sediment
samples was collected from surface to the bottom of the excavations once they were completed.
Additional sediment samples were collected in and around features.
Vertical control was provided by an arbitrary elevation datum established near the edge of
the units. Measurements taken from this datum defined the beginning and ending elevations
of each excavation level.
At approximately 60 cm below the opening elevation, an unmarked gas line was
encountered running diagonally across Units 1 and 2, and the two units were abandoned.

Figure 3-1. Overview of project area after parking surface has been scraped (left) and Units 1 and 2 prior to excavation
(right).

32

Chapter 3
Two new units (Units 3 and 4) were established immediately adjacent to the first two (Figure
3-2). As a result, a total of four 1×1 m units were excavated, although the first two of these
contained disturbed sediments from the gas line, were abandoned at 60 cm, and do not factor
into the overall analysis reported here.
After excavations reached 1.2 m in depth, a section extending two feet in all directions
around the hand-excavated unit was mechanically stripped in order to bench sidewalls for
safety. This work was closely monitored by CAS archaeologists, and all time-diagnostic
artifacts encountered were collected and are included in the artifact catalog. Hand excavations
resumed and continued to a depth of three meters below datum with the same recovery and
sampling strategies as the upper 1.2 meters. Upon reaching the water table approximately 20
cm above the bottom of the units, the units were hand-bailed in order to continue excavating
(Figure 3-3).
Documentation consisted of a daily journal, scaled drawings, level summary forms and
digital photographs. In addition, unit profiles were recorded with scaled drawings and by
digital photographs. All artifacts encountered were recovered and recorded by provenience
(unit and level). The locations of the four 1×1 m units were recorded with a GeoXT hand held
GPS system with sub-meter accuracy and integrated into a database of Spring Lake cultural
resources.

Monitoring
Following manual excavations of Units 3 and 4, CAS archaeologists monitored a series of
mechanical excavations that were necessary for associated utilities and additional aspects
of the construction plan for the new ticket kiosk. First, 39 auger excavations, intended to
accommodate deep piers designed to support the floating foundations of the two structures,

Figure 3-2. Units 3 and 4, adjacent to Units 1 and 2 after the gas line (visible at top) was encountered.

33

Chapter 3

Figure 3-3. Cleaning out the waterlogged lowermost sediments from Units 3 and 4. The mechanically stepped area can
be seen surrounding the units.

were monitored. Each auger excavation measured approximately 12 in (ca. 30 cm) in diameter
and reached a maximum depth of 6 ft (1.85 m). Displaced sediment was examined for cultural
materials contained therein. Each auger was numbered and their approximate locations were
sketched on a plan-view map. All artifacts encountered were recorded by provenience (auger
number), and time-diagnostic material as well as bison remains were collected.
In addition to the auger holes for installation of construction piers, various trenches were
excavated in order to locate and install utility lines. These included trenches for installation
of plumbing for the restroom facility and electricity for the new buildings. It was in one of
these electric utility trenches that CAS personnel identified the burial feature. Also, CAS
archaeologists monitored the mechanical excavation of a relatively large area to the south
of the proposed facilities, where the City of San Marcos’s utility crew attempted to locate a
water main. On another occasion CAS archaeologists monitored two trenches excavated to
expose and connect an existing irrigation line with a meter box. The final monitoring event
consisted of preparatory excavation (scraping) for the installation of a walkway and access
drive. Monitoring of trench excavations and scraping consisted of recording approximate
proveniences of artifacts encountered, as well as collecting time-diagnostic material. The
locations of all auger and trench excavations were recorded with a Trimble GeoXT hand-held
GPS system with sub-meter accuracy and integrated into CAS’s database of Spring Lake

34

Chapter 3
cultural resources (Figure 3-4). All of these mechanical excavations were also recorded with
photographs, illustrations and detailed notes. All artifacts collected were prepared for curation
and curated at CAS.

Laboratory Methods and Analyses
All recovered artifacts, faunal remains, and organic and sediment samples were returned
from the field to the CAS laboratory. In the lab, all artifacts were washed, categorized, and
cataloged. All sediment was washed off of lithic material using water and brushes, whereas
fragile material (i.e., faunal remains, pottery, shell) was lightly brushed to remove as much
sediment as possible without compromising the condition of the artifact. Cleaned artifacts
were then divided into descriptive and analytical categories: metal, glass, ceramic, burned
clay, lithics, fire-cracked rock, organic fauna, organic flora, personal items and modern
synthetic material. These categorical data, as well as provenience, weight, frequency, and

Figure 3-4. Map showing all areas of controlled units and mechanical excavation that were monitored as part of the
current undertaking.

35

Chapter 3
brief descriptions, were entered into an analytical and curatorial database. Unique alphanumeric identifiers were assigned to each class from a specific provenience, so as to keep
track of artifacts through their processing. Charcoal and bulk sediment samples received the
same level of effort in terms of categorization and cataloging, though they were submitted to
different and appropriate analyses.
Chapters 4–7 discuss the results of those analyses according to data category: sediment
and stratigraphy, radiocarbon dates, faunal remains, and artifacts. The organization of
these topics is intended to build toward an integrated understanding of the natural and
cultural characteristics of this part of 41HY160, starting with natural processes and temporal
control for the deposit and concluding with the kinds of artifacts that were recovered and
their frequencies of occurrence. Because the overall size of the excavated sample is so small,
comprising only 6 m3, the focus is on understanding occupational chronology and also on
natural and cultural factors in the deposition of these remains. Some aspects of analysis and
interpretation are emphasized over others; for example, information about recovered artifacts
is largely descriptive and limited to quantification of total recovery. Additionally, priority in
the radiocarbon dating was given to understanding the timing of the Calf Creek component in
terms of the appearance of bison and related technological and typological developments. To be
sure, future analyses could add additional insight into many other, more specific aspects of this
overall assemblage.

36

Chapter 4
Geoarchaeology
by David M. Yelacic
Investigations sought to understand the depositional context and integrity of cultural remains
in this locale and to provide a tightly controlled chronological model of occupation spanning a
period of time represented by approximately three meters of deposition. The north and west
walls of the 1×2 m excavation (Units 3 and 4) were the foci of geoarchaeological sampling
and description. The north wall was a one meter wide section, and the west wall exposed a
two meter wide profile. Profile illustrations provide a continuous and accurate representation
of the entire column of sediment that was encountered. The two walls shared common
characteristics, and for this reason the western wall is the profile referred to due to its wider
exposure. Samples for quantitative examination of sediment properties were taken from the
northwest corner of the unit. The methodology for analyzing these samples is presented below,
and profile descriptions follow discussions of methodology.

Sediment Analysis
Physical properties of the sedimentary matrix were documented from the excavation unit.
Bulk sediment samples were collected every 10 cm in depth, and for each sample, texture
(i.e., particle size) and magnetic susceptibility were assessed. Artifacts collected with the bulk
sediment samples were recorded as they were encountered through sample processing.
In the field, bulk sediment samples were collected in one-gallon bags, producing more
sediment than required to complete the targeted analyses. Unused portions have been archived
for possible future study. After being thoroughly mixed, approximately half of each sample
was removed for analysis and then weighed. A split of the sample to be analyzed was passed
through a 2 mm sieve to further refine it. The < 2 mm fraction was set aside for hydrometer
method analysis, and the > 2 mm fraction was processed for sieve method analysis. These two
combined methods result in accurate measurements of gravel, sand, silt, and clay proportions
of each sample.

Chapter 4
When sediment could no longer pass through the 2 mm sieve using minimal force, the
> 2 mm fraction was mixed into a 5 percent solution of sodium hexametaphosphate in order to
break down clay content. After 24 hours of soaking with intermittent agitation, this > 2 mm
fraction was again passed through a 2 mm screen to isolate coarse fragments, which in this
case included gravel and small lithic artifacts. Material separated on the 2 mm sieve was ovendried at 105° C overnight, and then mechanically agitated in nested sieves of 1-phi increments
(-5 to -1 phi) for five minutes. Material caught on each screen was then weighed and its mass
was recorded.
Approximately 60 g of < 2mm material from each sample was added to 100 mL of 5
percent sodium hexametaphosphate solution. Samples soaked for a minimum of an hour
prior to further processing. Soaked samples were then mixed by a mechanical mixer for
five minutes before being diluted by distilled water in a 1-liter hydrometer cylinder. This
solution was then manually agitated for one minute before being set on a table and having
hydrometer measurements taken at specified intervals (i.e., 1, 3.5, 15, 45, 300, and 1440
minutes). Temperature and hydrometer measurements of 100 mL of 5 percent sodium
hexametaphosphate diluted with distilled water in a hydrometer cylinder were periodically
taken for control. Hygroscopic moisture was also corrected by measuring the difference in
mass between an un-dried sample and the same sample after oven-drying. Following the
last hydrometer reading of each sample, samples were passed through a 4-phi sieve, and the
material retained was oven-dried overnight. This material was then mechanically agitated for
five minutes in nested sieves spanning zero to four phi.
Measurements of magnetic susceptibility were taken on small, oven-dried splits of the
< 2 mm material from each bulk sample. These small samples were packed into 2.5 cm plastic
cubes and then weighed. Two measurements of low-frequency and two measurements of highfrequency were taken at the 0.1 level using a Bartington MS2 meter and an MS2b sensor.
Mass corrected susceptibility (χ) and frequency dependent (χ FD %) were calculated from the lowand high-frequency measurements using the following equations:

where χ is the magnetic susceptibility measurement, LF is low frequency readings, HF is high
frequency readings, and FD is the frequency dependent calculation. Sample mass is measured in
grams, and it is divided by 10 g, for which the instrument has been calibrated. Mass corrected
low frequency readings analyze the total amount of magnetic material contained within the
sample, and the frequency dependent calculation indicates the amount of superfine magnetic
material, which is biogenic in origin.

38

Chapter 4

Profile Descriptions
Nine zones, representing distinct layers of sediments and/or soils or combinations thereof,
spanned the profile (Figure 4-1). At the top of the profile exposure, Zone I, is composed of very
dark gray clay lying directly beneath parking lot base. Zone 1 contains artifacts, but it also
contains gravels associated with parking lot construction. In the north wall, the base of Zone
I appears to have a more red color that is not quite apparent in the western wall profile. Zone
II has an abrupt smooth contact with Zone I, and is dark brown silty clay that contains a
moderate abundance of snail shells, burned rocks, and lithic artifacts. Discontinuous clay coats

Figure 4-1. Technical profile of western wall of Units 3 and 4. Depositional zones are discussed below.

39

Chapter 4
cover ped faces and coarse fragments in Zone II, which has an abrupt, smooth lower boundary.
Below Zone II is Zone III, a relatively thin (6 cm) dark reddish brown clay that contains very
little burned rock. Zone III, however, does contain artifacts. The boundary between Zone III
and IV is clear and smooth, and Zone IV is similar in appearance to Zone II, but with a slightly
reduced frequency of artifacts and snail shells. Zone IV is dark yellowish brown clay and
contains scattered burned rocks, other lithic artifacts, and snail shells. The lower boundary
of Zone IV is clear and smooth, overlaying Zone V, which is dark grayish brown to brown silty
clay with abundant snail shells, burned rock, other lithic artifacts, and faunal remains. Zone
IV and V were separated only by the phase of mechanical excavation described in the previous
chapter, and the two probably represent the same stratigraphic unit. Zone V has an abrupt,
irregular contact with Zone VI below. This boundary signifies a change between stratigraphic
layers, and is confirmed by the drastically diminished artifact frequency at this point. Zone
VI consists of dark brown silty clay and contains dark grayish brown mottles. Below Zone VI,
Zones VII through IX are all bounded by gradual, smooth transitions, contain the same dark
grayish brown mottles, have clay coats on ped faces, and contain nodular calcium carbonate.
The ground water table was encountered in Zone VIII at approximately 245 cm below surface.
In terms of aggregating zones into depositional units, which represent periods of deposition
bound by periods of erosion and/or surface stability, there are three distinguishable units. The
lowest approximately 1.25 meters, Zones VI through IX, compose the oldest depositional unit
capped by a buried, likely truncated and/or turbated A horizon. The lowest observed portion of
this unit, limited by depth of excavation, was a very damp to completely saturated Bk horizon
containing common, small calcium carbonate nodules and redoximorphic features. Accurately
assessing accurate rates of aggradation during this period/depositional unit is not possible
based on recovered materials. There is a lack of preserved organic remains suitable for dating,
and the recovered Early Archaic diagnostic material from lowermost levels does not have the
temporal resolution necessary to model depositional rates. Nevertheless, based on the recovery
of a Gower point base from level 27 and radiocarbon dates from levels 16 and 17 (see below),
it is estimated that large quantities of sediments were deposited over this part of the Spring
Lake site in a fairly short period of time compared with upper stratigraphic units. This rate is
likely to far exceed a meter of sediment over a thousand-year-long period of time.
Distinction between the upper two units is dependent upon the color contrast among
Zones I and II, as noted above. The middle depositional unit is topped by a buried, disturbed
A horizon. This unit contains vestiges of the Early Archaic at the bottom and Late Archaic at
the top, but the upper two-thirds (i.e., Zones II through IV) contain a mixture of Middle to Late
Archaic projectile points. These temporally diagnostic artifacts representing approximately
four millennia are situated within 100 centimeters vertically, which suggests a much slower
rate of aggradation than for the first stratigraphic unit.
The uppermost unit, composed of Zone I, was truncated by the parking lot that was
removed to accommodate the ticket kiosk construction. This unit is the thinnest of the three,

40

Chapter 4
and it contains artifacts from the Late Archaic to the Late Prehistoric, encountered in correct
stratigraphic order. Being the thinnest and containing artifacts representing approximately
2500 years of time, at least, it is also the lowest rate of deposition at this portion of 41HY160.

Particle Size and Magnetic Susceptibility
Particle size analysis, which quantifies texture, can help to support field-based interpretations
and/or elucidate minute, unobserved changes in the sediment column. Results of hydrometer
method analysis, described above, show that the sediment is predominantly clay with slight
variations in the amount of particle sizes (i.e., gravel, sand, silt, and clay). From the bottom
of the profile upwards, the quantity of sand steadily decreases while clay increases, albeit
slightly. The proportion of sand decreases from approximately 10 to 2.5 percent, whereas clay
increases from approximately 48 to 56 percent. Proportions of silt vary less than sand and
clay, but there are statistically significant differences in the proportions of sand, silt, and clay
by depositional unit. Examination of the particle sizes by unit using a Kruskal-Wallis test, a
nonparametric analysis of variance, indicates differences that are significant (p < 0.05). Results
of the same metric used to examine mean and standard deviation of particle sizes indicate they
are not statistically significant, and therefore the sedimentary material is consistently sorted.
This is all to say that there are differences in the proportions of sand, silt, and clay among the
three depositional units (Figure 4-2).
Considering mixed artifacts and pedogenic processes, the origin of textural changes can be
complex. Magnetic susceptibility analysis, specifically the frequency dependent measurement,
can be used to identify soil development. Mass specific low frequency measurements (Xlf)
examine the total amount of magnetic material, which includes anthropogenic matter (i.e.,
cooking-related burned rock debris). Results of mass
specific low frequency measurements agreeably peak with increases in evidence of hot rock
cooking in Zone II and again, to a lesser degree, in Zone V. Mass specific frequency dependent
results generally diminish from the top of the profile down. There is a peak at the top of Zone
II and another near the top of Zone VI. These trends correspond with the posited depositional
unit transitions and formerly stable surfaces and buried A horizons. Although there appears
to be a considerable amount of variation, this variation might be attributed to bioturbation
(Singer et al. 1996) or even argilliturbation. The curve of the mass specific low frequency
readings (i.e., peaks diminishing at a near-steady rate) appears to support the hypothesis of
vertical disturbance, albeit in unknown amounts. Nonetheless, major trends in the magnetic
susceptibility data support the conclusion that natural and cultural depositional units are
generally in good order and minimally disturbed, despite the potential vertical movement of
fine magnetic particles.

41

Chapter 4

Figure 4-2. Results of particle size and magnetic susceptibility analysis.

42

Chapter 5
Radiocarbon Dates and Dating
by Jon C. Lohse
Chronometric control for stratigraphy exposed in these excavations was achieved primarily
by direct dates on archaeological bone material. Complementary information comes from
the stratigraphic ordering of temporally diagnostic artifact types, particularly stylisticallydistinctive projectile points. Many point specimens, however, proved either to be out of
their expected locations in relation to other well-dated points, or did not conform to defined
typological categories. Consequently, information from diagnostic artifacts complements the
absolute dates by filling in portions of the excavated sequence for which no dates are available,
and also by indicating sections of the stratigraphy that are compressed or perhaps altogether
mixed. Typological data are presented in Chapter 7, together with all other lithic and non-lithic
artifacts.

Presentation of Radiocarbon Results
A total of 15 radiocarbon assays were run on material recovered during excavations and
monitoring at the Ticket Kiosk. Of these, 14 are animal bone recovered from Units 3 and 4 (Table
5-1). The last date is from the burial that was exposed and removed during the monitoring phase
of investigations. No charcoal was submitted for dating in this phase of the analysis. The first 14
dates provide a relatively complete understanding of the ages represented in this deposit, and
also of the overall stratigraphic integrity and nature of cultural deposits in this area of 41HY160.
These discussions focus on the assays from Units 3 and 4.
Bone was selected as the medium for dating for several reasons. First, it allows this study
to focus on the relationship between bison presence and exploitation and the appearance of
technologically-distinctive artifact styles, specifically including projectile points of the Bell
and Andice (Calf Creek) types. This study builds on and continues ongoing CAS research
into regional bison chronologies during the middle to late Holocene for the San Marcos area
of Central Texas (Lohse et al. 2012). Second, carbonized plant remains, like very small

Chapter 5
magnetized particles discussed previously, have the potential to be translocated, or “move”
within an otherwise intact deposit more easily than bone, given the larger size of most bone
specimens considered for dating. Compounding this issue is the possibility for old wood to be
introduced into archaeological matrices through scavenging on the landscape. Both factors can
skew the results of wood carbon dates. Third, the development and application of specialized
pretreatment processes and protocols (called XAD purification), combined with high precision
accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) dating has considerably improved the accuracy and
reliability of bone dates. CAS has previously submitted for XAD pretreatment and AMS dating
a number of animal bone samples, specifically bison, from Spring Lake and nearby sites, and
the current study fits neatly into this growing record.
While the priority in the current study was to increase the number of bison samples,
particularly those from the Calf Creek component that have been dated from Spring Lake,
it was also important to date parts of the sequence for which bison is not available. The first
step in selecting samples to submit for dating involved scanning the faunal assemblage to
determine the distribution of bison remains to be evaluated for submission (n = 9). Next,
some additional samples (n = 5) were selected from proveniences that complemented those
containing bison. Important in this round of sample selection were achieving a date from the
lowest possible level, and closely bracketing the Calf Creek component with AMS dates. Given
poor bone preservation at lower depths, the lowest viable sample that could be dated was from
level 17 of Unit 4. This means that an additional meter of excavated deposits remains undated
by absolute means. Two of the samples were returned with dates that are stratigraphically out
of proper sequence. These assays, and all other results, are discussed in detail below.
Once samples were selected, they were submitted to the Archaeological Dating Laboratory
at Pennsylvania State University, to be processed using the XAD purification method. Treated
target samples were then submitted to the Accelerator Mass Spectrometry laboratory at the
University of California at Irvine. After target samples were counted by AMS, measured
radiocarbon ages including a standard deviation were returned to CAS via Penn State. In
addition to field sample numbers, the UC Irvine facility assigned lab numbers to each sample
according to sequence; these UCIAMS numbers are used to refer to each specimen/date, below.

XAD Purification and the Reliability of Bone Dates*
Previous work with animal bone has identified some issues that can undermine the reliability
of resulting dates. These issues have to do with degree of preservation of datable components,
and the replacement of original organic compounds with extraneous carbon molecules from
surrounding site matrix. In order to address these issues, various pretreatment techniques or
protocols have been developed and applied as a way to ensure the reliability of bone dates. One
method, called XAD purification, was applied to samples recovered during this excavation.
*The assistance provided by Brendan J. Culleton in the section about XAD purification was greatly
appreciated.

44

Chapter 5
As noted, exogenous or highly degraded carbon can present serious problems for reliably
dating archaeological bone material (see Hedges and Van Klinken 1992). Two modern
approaches to remove contaminating foreign carbon from bone collagen samples have been
developed over the last two decades in order to minimize or altogether avoid these problems.
One is called ultrafiltration (Brown et al. 1988) and the other is called XAD purification
(Stafford et al. 1988, 1991). A conceptual review of bone dating methods is helpful in
understanding the XAD purification technique.
Collagen, the protein that provides the organic matrix in which bone is mineralized,
comprises roughly 20 percent of dry bone by weight, and is the source of carbon used
in accelerator mass spectrometer (AMS) radiocarbon dating. Since the early decades of
radiocarbon dating collagen has been isolated from the inorganic mineral portion of bone
by demineralization in dilute acid or, less commonly, by chelation or enzyme digestion (e.g.,
Berger et al. 1964). Typically the collagen is then treated with a dilute base (e.g., 0.1N NaOH
or KOH) to extract soil humic and fulvic acids, which are organic compounds identified as the
main sources of exogenous carbon contamination in archaeological and paleontological bone.
Using traditional procedures (e.g, Longin 1971), extracted collagen is then gelatinized in a
heated weak HCl for several hours, lyophilized, and then combusted to produce sample CO2 for
AMS 14C dating.
Stafford et al. (1988, 1991) have argued, however, that gelatinization as described above
is not adequate to disassociate all humic and fulvic acids bound to collagen (contra Longin
1971). Their concern is that, if all exogenous humic and fulvic acids are not removed, then
it may be possible for these foreign contaminants to cross-bind smaller degraded collagen
chains into long chains that also contain exogenous carbon. Using the ultrafiltration method,
the gelatinized target sample is passed through a Vivascience 15R concentrator (ultrafilter)
in order to remove remaining foreign contaminants (Bronk Ramsey et al. 2004). These
ultrafilters, however, are treated with a 14C-enriched glycerin coating that, if not completely
removed, can add rather than remove contaminants to the target sample (Huls et al. 2007,
2009).
In response to these complex concerns, Stafford et al. (1988, 1991) recommended an
approach called XAD purification for pretreating bone specimens. This approach to eliminating
contaminants breaks the collagen down to individual amino acids by hydrolysis in strong (6N)
HCl, thereby releasing humic and fulvic acids into solution. The hydrolyzate is then passed
through a styrene-divinylbenzene (XAD) resin, which is chemically inert but highly adsorptive
of ionic contaminants while allowing the purified amino acids to pass through. After drying
the hydrolyzate the sample is combusted following standard procedures and sample CO2 is
used for AMS 14C dating. The result is that bone dates are more reliable in terms of providing
accurate and precise age estimations for the archaeological samples in question.

45

Chapter 5

Problematic Dates
Two of the dates in this assemblage, UCIAMS-106466 and UCIAMS-106470, are out of order
in relation to their stratigraphic position. UCIAMS-106470, a bison sample, returned a date
of 2415 ± 20 radiocarbon years before present (RCYBP), while UCIAMS-106466, an antelope
phalanx, is associated with a date of 1995 ± 20 RCYBP. The date of the bison specimen
indicates that the bone fragment was probably originally recovered from around levels 6 or 7,
while the date of the antelope phalanx suggests an original provenience of level 6 or higher.
Among the 14 dates from Units 3 and 4, these two out-of-place dates are concerning insofar
as they indicate some disturbance in the site deposits. However, we believe they are the result
of handling and processing errors that were made in the CAS laboratory. Once excavated, all
sediments were transported from the field to be water-screened outside the CAS building on
the Texas State main campus. We suspect that these two specimens were removed from their
original proveniences at some point during the screening or laboratory process, and became
associated with incorrect contexts.
Reassigning UCIAMS-106470, the bison date, to level 6 or level 7 is easily done based
on the closeness of this age (2415 ± 20 RCYBP) with other bison dates from those levels.
Our earlier work directly dating bison has demonstrated three closely-spaced Late Archaic
intervals of bison exploitation in the San Marcos general region (see Figure 2-6), and the date
for this specimen corresponds quite closely with the three other bison dates from Units 3 and 4,
levels 6 and 7.
Reconstructing the original provenience of UCIAMS-106466, however, is more difficult.
Based on the date alone, the sample should have come from slightly above the level 6–7 zone.
However, other dates from this depth clearly indicate that sediments are mildly compressed
at this elevation. Sample UCIAMS-106463 dates to 515 ± 15 RCYBP while two samples
(UCIAMS-106464 and UCIAMS-106465) are almost 2,000 years older than this sample but
are only 10 cm lower in elevation. This compression is clearly indicated by the two samples
UCIAMS-106471 and UCIAMS-106472 (2490 ± 15 and 3000 ± 20 RCYBP, respectively)
that come from the same level (7) in Unit 4. Based on the close proximity in depth of this
handful of dates that range from 515 ± 15 in level 5 to 3000 ± 20 in level 7, it is possible that
UCIAMS-106466 could have originally come from anywhere in this part of the unit. It is even
possible that the bone specimen is not out of place at all but, rather, is indicates that, contrary
to our initial assumptions about the reliability of bone in archaeological matrices, some
movement of faunal material has occurred in this part of the deposit.
Based on the respective ages of the two problematic dates and their locations within the
stratigraphic sequence at the ticket kiosk excavation, it is felt that the integrity of the Calf
Creek zone is not compromised. Rather, lab error resulted in a later date being incorrectly
associated with this part of the deposit. Cultural deposits between approximately levels 5
through 7, however, appear to be at least slightly compressed and perhaps mildly mixed,
although otherwise are mostly intact.

46

Chapter 5

Discussion of Radiocarbon Results
Overall, the 15 radiocarbon dates provide a reliable indication of the general age range
of deposits represented in Units 3 and 4 (Figure 5-1). An important exception to this
understanding is that, as a result of poor preservation at lower elevations, no material
suitable for dating was available from below level 17. This means that the final meter or so
of excavations remains poorly dated, with the only bit of temporal data coming from the base
of an apparent Gower point from level 27 (see below). Of the 15 dates, one (UCIAMS-111181)
came from the human burial recovered during utility trench monitoring; this date is discussed
in Chapter 5 along with observations about these important remains and other results from
the monitoring program.

Figure 5-1. Results of AMS radiocarbon dates from the Ticket Kiosk excavation in calibrated years before present. Dates in
yellow are the two problematic ones and the one in red is the burial. All other results are in perfect order by depth.

47

Chapter 5
The 12 AMS dates that were recovered in proper order with respect to their ages
provide a solid basis for reconstructing the age of these deposits, and for making some
preliminary interpretations about this part of 41HY160 (the two problematic dates are not
discussed). Because nine of the 14 dates from the block are on bison remains, many of these
interpretations revolve around issues of occupation and site formation that involve the
presence and exploitation of bison. In spite of this bias, some overall understandings are
possible. In the following discussions, all dates are considered at their two-sigma calibrated
distributions in years before present (cal B.P.). For the sake of simplicity, brief non-contiguous
intervals in the calibrated probability distributions are overlooked, and dates are discussed
from their maximum to minimum probabilities. Sample numbers are included in parentheses
so that these discussions can be referenced to Table 5-1.
The uppermost date in the sequence, UCIAMS-106463, dates to 544–514 cal B.P., but is
only 10 cm higher than the next two, UCIAMS-106464 and -106465, which together span from
2714–2372 cal B.P. The difference between these ages, approximately 1800–2300 years, in
only 10 cm of sediment indicates that this portion of the deposit is either mixed, with datable
materials having been relocated from their original position, is compressed, with minimal
sediment deposition occurring over this span of time, or both. As a result, very little distinction
seems possible in this part of the site in terms of assigning non-diagnostic tool forms, or
artifact or faunal recoveries to the Late Prehistoric or Late Archaic. Rather, such trends are
more appropriately considered at coarse temporal scales of resolution. We avoid making any
interpretive statements whatsoever regarding significant cultural changes that may have
occurred during or between these periods.
The next two dates in the sequence, UCIAMS-106471 and -106472, are only 10 cm below
UCIAMS-106464 and -106465, but represent another apparently missing or compressed span
of time. This interval is only on the order of approximately 500 years, but nonetheless poses
interpretive challenges to recognizing or postulating meaningful cultural differences between
these phases of the Late Archaic. Because these two Late Archaic assays are both on bison, as
are the two in level 6, it can be said that sediments found in this part of the deposit date to the
first two Late Archaic periods of bison exploitation discussed in Chapter 2 (see Figure 2-6).
The next date in the sequence, UCIAMS-106467, is important for filling in the poorlydated portion of the deposit between levels 7 and 11, which lies just above what is considered
to be the Calf Creek component (see below). Without corroborating assays, this single
date, 4140–3980 cal B.P., may not carry a great deal of significance. It appears, however,
to be approximately equidistant, age-wise, between the next highest and next lowest date,
suggesting that this part of the deposit is well-ordered and reasonably intact.
Starting with UCIAMS-111178, the next five reliable assays were submitted with
the goal of dating the bison-bearing component associated with Calf Creek materials.
Sample UCIAMS-111178 was selected from levels from which no bison was present, while
UCIAMS-111179 was taken from below the bison zone. The three assays from levels 13 and 14,

48

Chapter 5
UCIAMS-106473, -106468, and -106469, are all virtually identical, covering a 169-year interval
spanning from 5936–5767 cal B.P. Sample UCIAMS-111178, taken from above this zone, is
also similar to these three dates. Taken together, the results of these four assays (excluding
UCIAMS-111179) indicate that sediments from levels 11 through 14 seem to have been
deposited over a brief period of time, perhaps only 189 years (based on the difference between
the oldest and youngest probable distributions among all five assays). Given the absence of
bison remains associated with UCIAMS-111179 (6181–5992 cal B.P.), it is argued that the Calf
Creek period, at least at this locale, had ended by around 6000 cal B.P. if not earlier. Based on
these dates, a conservative estimate for the duration of Calf Creek could reasonably be 5750–
6000 cal B.P., and it is likely that this period covered an even shorter span of time.
The final assay, UCIAMS-111180, simply extends the portion of this deposit for which
absolute temporal control exists another 10 or so centimeters in depth. The fact that this date
is 650–750 years older than UCIAMS-111179 suggests that sediment deposition rates were
considerably higher than what characterizes the Calf Creek component of the site. Taken
together and viewed in the context of the stratigraphic discussions, above, the overall sequence
is remarkably intact, seems to contain elements or components that have high degrees of
temporal clarity, and reveals a great deal of important information about the prehistoric
occupation and site formation processes in this area of the Spring Lake site, particularly for
what is identified as the Calf Creek component (Figure 5-2).

49

Chapter 5

Figure 5-2. Calibrated AMS dates (excluding the two that were out of order) plotted on technical profile of excavation
units.

50

4

3
3

160305-32

160305-35

160406-22

160406-24

160310-22

UCIAMS-​
106465

UCIAMS-​
106471

UCIAMS-​
106472

*UCIAMS-​ 160106466
306-27

160308-33

UCIAMS-​
106464

UCIAMS-​
106467

UCIAMS-​
111178
11

9

7

7

7

6

6

5

Level

125–135

105–115

85–95

85–95

85–95

75–85

75–85

65–75

Depth
(cmbd)

3700 ± 20

5065 ± 20

Artiodactyla,
medium, limb
diaphysis w/
impact

1995 ± 20

Antilopcapra
americana
phalanx
Artiodactyla
femur

3000 ± 20

2490 ± 20

2475 ± 20

2480 ± 15

515 ± 15

C Age

Bison rib
frag.

Bison limb
frag.

Bison limb
frag.

Bison limb
frag.

Bison limb
frag.

Element
14

* Assay is out of order, and probably reflects error were made in CAS lab.

3

4

3

3

3

160304-31

UCIAMS-​
106463

Unit

Field
Sample

Lab
Number

-19.2

-20.08

-20.60

-8.77

-9.25

-8.05

-9.19

-11.51

δ C
13

15

7.3

6.31

5.85

7.18

6.57

5.30

5.41

6.72

δ N

Table 5-1. Radiocarbon Assays from Ticket Kiosk Excavation

5900–5747

4140–4131 (2.2%),
4092–3980 (93.2%)

1991–1897

3320–3296 (4.0%),
3266–3140 (84.2%),
3128–3108 (3.6%),
3094–3081 (3.7%)

2716–2488

2714–2630 (32.0%),
2624–2460 (62.1%),
2386–2372 (1.2%)

2710–2632 (29.8%),
2620–2471 (65.6%)

544–514

Calibrated Years
Before Present, Two
Sigma Probabilities
(95.4%)

Chapter 5

51

52
3

3

4

160313-18

160313-24

160416-9

160505-16

UCIAMS-​
106469

*UCIAMS-​ 160106470
313-38

160415-4

UCIAMS-​
106468

UCIAMS-​
111179

UCIAMS-​
111180

UCIAMS-​
111181
6

17

16

14

14

14

13

Level

78

185–195

175–185

155–165

155–165

155–165

145–155

Depth
(cmbd)

6015 ± 20

Artiodactyla,
medium, limb
diaphysis
frag.

2015 ± 20

5290 ± 20

Mammalia,
medium, limb
diaphysis
frag.

burial, rib
frag,

2415 ± 20

5145 ± 20

5140 ± 20

5140 ± 20

C Age

Bison limb
frag.

Bison innominate frag.

Bison bone
frag.

Bison bone
frag.

Element
14

* Assay is out of order, and probably reflects error were made in CAS lab.

5

4

3

4

160412-12

UCIAMS-​
106473

Unit

Field
Sample

Lab
Number

-18.4

-20.8

-20.4

-14.51

-11.90

-19.00

-11.90

δ C
13

15

9.5

7.5

6.8

7.38

9.59

7.43

9.38

δ N

Table 5-1. Radiocarbon Assays from Ticket Kiosk Excavation

2004–1920 (90.9%),
1914–1898 (4.5%)

6932–6792

6181–6142 (21.2%),
6128–5992 (74.2%)

2676–2643 (7.0%),
2491–2353 (88.4%)

5982–5978 (0.5%),
5940–5891 (90.7%),
5804–5794 (1.8%),
5786–5770 (2.5%)

5936–5888 (86.2%),
5808–5767 (9.2%)

5936–5888 (86.2%),
5808–5767 (9.2%)

Calibrated Years
Before Present, Two
Sigma Probabilities
(95.4%)

Chapter 5

Chapter 6
Faunal Remains
by Cinda L. Timperly
Faunal material was recovered by means of visual inspection of matrix in the unit, from
screening excavated matrix, and during laboratory sorting of screened material. Material was
recovered from Units 3 and 4, and from areas of mechanical excavation that were monitored.
The portion of the assemblage deriving from Units 3 and 4 was collected under systematic
conditions, and may accurately reflect the general trends that define zooarchaeological remains
at Spring Lake for the time periods represented in this sample. Although a small amount of
material was recovered from monitoring, this write up focuses exclusively on the remains
recovered by hand excavation. All material recovered from Units 3 and 4 was examined (Units
1 and 2 were discounted once it was discovered that these contained disturbed deposits). The
final sample size from Units 3 and 4 includes an initial count of 2600 specimens and mass of
1472.7 g. Some unit-levels, particularly toward the bottom of the excavation, did not contain
any material. Some minor discrepancies in count and mass values are the result of specimens
that mend on fresh breaks being counted upon analysis as one item rather than multiple items.
This 1×2 m unit provides a controlled sample of stratified deposits spanning the time from
Late Prehistoric Toyah more or less continuously well into the Early Archaic. The sequence
is securely dated by radiocarbon, and important supplementary information comes in the
form of temporally diagnostic projectile points (see Chapter 7). Poor preservation conditions
below approximately level 17 (185–195 cm below datum) mean that chronological control for
the lower levels (18–25) is moderate to poor, while it can be considered excellent for the upper
parts of the deposit.
The goals of the faunal analysis were to taxonomically identify the material recovered from
this excavation, and to assess trends in the availability of different species over time. Although
the sample is relatively small, some discussion is possible concerning changes through time
in the number and diversity of taxa present. These changes can help characterize resource
subsistence strategies that were implemented by the prehistoric occupants of Spring Lake.

Chapter 6
Additionally, they can help scholars reconstruct aspects of the environment at this locale over a
period of approximately 7000 years. The analyzed portion of the recovered assemblage is listed
in Table 6-1.
Table 6-1. Faunal Remains by Level and Elevation
(recoveries from Units 3 and 4 are combined)
Level
(Elevation,
cmbd)

Taxon and Count

Final Count*
(N = MNISP)

Final
Mass
(grams)

Richness**

1 (25–35)

1 Serpentes; 37 Mammalia; 1 Mammalia,
medium; 1 Ruminant, large; 2 Bovidae

42

15.6

5

2 (35–45)

1 Osteichthyes; 3 Testudines; 1 Serpentes;
2 Aves(?); 91 Mammalia; 1 Sigmodon; 7
Mammalia, small; 13 Mammalia, medium;
2 Artiodactyla; 1 Artiodactyla, medium; 2
Odocoileus; 2 Bovidae

126

45.2

11

3 (45–55)

2 Vertebrata; 3 Osteichthyes; 2 Serpentes;
7 Testudines; 68 Mammalia; 10 Mammalia,
small; 9 Mammalia, medium; 2 Odocoileus;
1 Bovidae

104

32.4

10

4 (55–65)

2 Vertebrata; 4 Osteichthyes; 1 Anura; 14
Testudines; 1 Serpentes; 1 Aves; 88 Mammalia; 12 Mammalia, small; 3 Sylvilagus; 1
cf. Sylvilagus; 1 Rodentia; 2 cf. Sigmodon; 2
cf. Geomys; 1 Canis; 22 Mammalia, medium;
5 Artiodactyla; 8 Artiodactyla, medium; 2
Odocoileus; 1 Mammalia, medium to large;
2 Bison; 4 Mammalia, fetal/juvenile

176

81.6

20

5 (65–75)

2 Vertebrata; 1 Osteichthyes; 8 Testudines;
1 Trionychidae; 90 Mammalia; 24 Mammalia, small; 2 Sylvilagus; 1 cf. Lepus; 1 Rodentia; 1 Neotoma; 38 Mammalia, medium;
10 Artiodactyla, medium; 2 Mammalia, medium to large; 4 Mammalia, fetal/juvenile

186

75.9

13

6 (75–85)

1 Anura; 5 Testudines; 1 Serpentes; 67
Mammalia; 14 Mammalia, small; 1 Carnivora; 51 Mammalia, medium; 3 Artiodactyla;
6 Artiodactyla, medium; 6 Odocoileus; 1 Antilocapra americana; 2 Mammalia, medium
to large; 6 Bison; 6 Mammalia, fetal/juvenile

170

115.9

15

* Counts are presented as minimum number of individual specimens (MNISP).
** Richness indicates the number of identifiable taxa in each level.

54

Chapter 6

Table 6-1. Faunal Remains by Level and Elevation
(recoveries from Units 3 and 4 are combined)
Level
(Elevation,
cmbd)

Taxon and Count

Final Count*
(N = MNISP)

Final
Mass
(grams)

Richness**

7 (85–95)

1 Anura; 10 Testudines; 1 Serpentes; 1
Aves; 90 Mammalia; 17 Mammalia, small;
3 Rodentia; 1 Geomyidae; 44 Mammalia,
medium; 1 Artiodactyla; 1 Artiodactyla,
hypsodont; 11 Artiodactyla, medium; 3 Antilocapra americana; 3 Odocoileus; 2 Bison; 6
Mammalia, fetal/juvenile

195

131.2

14

8 (95–105)

1 Vertebrata; 2 Osteichthyes; 1 Anura; 9
Testudines; 52 Mammalia; 41 Mammalia,
small; 1 Sylvilagus; 1 Lepus; 1 Neotoma; 1
Geomyidae; 33 Mammalia, medium; 7 Artiodactyla, medium; 6 Odocoileus

157

93.4

13

9 (105–115)

6 Testudines; 19 Mammalia; 36 Mammalia,
small; 4 Sylvilagus; 3 Sigmodon; 2 Carnivora; 19 Mammalia, medium; 3 Artiodactyla;
5 Artiodactyla, medium; 1 Odocoileus; 1
Mammalia, fetal/juvenile

99

46.1

10

10 (115–125)

1 Osteichthyes; 5 Testudines; 1 Serpentes; 1
Aves; 33 Mammalia; 28 Mammalia, small; 1
Sylvilagus; 3 Rodentia; 1 Canidae; 5 Mammalia, medium; 1 Artiodactyla; 3 Artiodactyla, medium; 1 Odocoileus; 5 Mammalia,
fetal/juvenile

88

27.3

13

11 (125–135)

3 Testudines; 1 Aves; 24 Mammalia; 14
Mammalia, small; 2 Sylvilagus; 1 cf. Sylvilagus; 6 Canidae; 24 Mammalia, medium;
3 Artiodactyla, medium; 1 Odocoileus

79

40.5

9

12 (135–145)

1 Vertebrata; 6 Testudines; 1 Aves; 46
Mammalia; 17 Mammalia, small; 2 Canidae; 16 Mammalia, medium; 30 Artiodactyla, medium

119

85.8

9

13 (145–155)

1 Vertebrata; 1 Serpentes; 111 Mammalia;
4 Mammalia, small; 1 Carnivora; 64 Mammalia, medium; 1 Artiodactyla, medium; 1
Bison; 2 cf. Bison

186

118.4

8

* Counts are presented as minimum number of individual specimens (MNISP).
** Richness indicates the number of identifiable taxa in each level.

55

Chapter 6

Table 6-1. Faunal Remains by Level and Elevation
(recoveries from Units 3 and 4 are combined)
Level
(Elevation,
cmbd)

Taxon and Count

Final Count*
(N = MNISP)

Final
Mass
(grams)

Richness**

14 (155–165)

2 Vertebrata; 4 Testudines; 37 Mammalia;
21 Mammalia, small; 12 Mammalia, medium; 1 Artiodactyla, hypsodont; 18 Artiodactyla, medium; 1 Odocoileus; 11 Mammalia,
medium to large; 45 Bison; 1 Mammalia,
fetal/juvenile

153

160.6

9

15 (165–175)

3 Testudines; 3 Aves; 64 Mammalia; 28
Mammalia, small; 3 Sylvilagus; 1 Canidae;
1 Artiodactyla cf. Antilocapra; 1 Antilocapra americana; 2 Artiodactyla, medium; 1
Odocoileus; 8 Mammalia, medium

115

41.4

10

16 (175–185)

1 Osteichthyes; 7 Testudines; 25 Mammalia;
22 Mammalia, small; 2 Sylvilagus; 5 Mammalia, medium; 2 Artiodactyla, medium

64

45.6

7

17 (185–195)

1 Osteichthyes; 1 Testudines; 19 Mammalia; 2 Mammalia, small; 1 Neotoma; 8
Artiodactyla, medium

32

19

6

18 (195–205)

6 Mammalia; 8 Mammalia, small; 1 Lepus;
1 Mammalia, medium; 6 Artiodactyla,
medium

22

21.2

5

19 (205–215)

1 Mammalia; 2 Mammalia, small

3

0.9

2

20 (215–225)

1 Mammalia, medium

1

3.4

1

21 (225–235)

No bone recovered

0

0

0

22 (235–245)

2 Mammalia

2

2.1

1

23 (245–255)

5 Mammalia

5

1.4

1

24 (255–265)

No bone recovered

0

0

0

25 (265–275)

1 Mammalia

1

0.2

1

26 (275–285)

3 Mammalia, small

3

1.1

1

27 (285–295)

1 Mammalia

1

0.5

1

* Counts are presented as minimum number of individual specimens (MNISP).
** Richness indicates the number of identifiable taxa in each level.

Trends in Faunal Data
Trends in recovery are charted by both count and mass (Figure 6-1). In addition to these
metrics, a measure called assemblage richness provides an indication of the number of
different taxa that are present. Richness is simply the number of identifiable species that are
present, and changes over time as an indication of environmental variation as well as prey
choice behavior (see Kintigh 1984, 1989). With such a small sample, this metric does not show

56

Chapter 6

Figure 6-1. Faunal assemblage from Units 3 and 4 by MNISP, mass (g), and richness. Bison are present in both peaks (as
defined by frequency and mass).

57

Chapter 6
marked variation and should not be over-interpreted. Still, changes are evident that may
indicate important shifts in the zooarchaeological assemblage over time. Considering this
project’s analytical focus on local chronology as influenced by the availability of certain key
species, particularly bison, special note is made of the presence of identifiable bison remains.
Here, only individual specimens that could confidently be identified as bison are included; no
remains are listed as “probable bison” or “bison-size.” Based on these data, some trends in the
occurrence and co-occurrence of taxa can be discussed.
Bone count and mass have a bimodal peak in occurrence from the surface down through the
deepest level. The first peak occurs in level 7 (95–105 cmbd) for both count and mass. Values
peak again in level 13(155–165 cmbd), with a minimum in level 11 (135–145 cmbd). Count
exhibits a steady decline below 165 cmbd (levels 13 to 19), where slope levels off below 5. Mass
peaks again in level 14 (165–175 cmbd), with a minimum occurring in level 10 (125–135 cmbd).
Mass drops sharply between 14 and 15, peaks very slightly in level 16 (185–195 cmbd), and
decreases stepwise until level 19 (215–225 cmbd), where mass levels out below 3.5 g. The peaks
in count and mass cannot be attributed specifically to the presence of bison in these levels, since
total count includes small as well as large bodied game. Rather, the bimodal pattern seems to
indicate that, during certain cultural periods, the overall return of animal elements to this site
increased. Secondarily, bison were present during both peaks, and it perhaps the case that the
presence of bison without additional species is a defining characteristic of the earlier peak. The
later period of increased animal exploitation includes not only the Late Archaic period of bison
hunting, but also deposits from later Archaic and even Late Prehistoric Toyah periods that are
either intermixed or are so tightly compressed that they are essentially indistinguishable. It
is interesting that between these periods, corresponding with what is essentially the Middle
Archaic time period, animal frequency drops off dramatically by both count and weight.
Taphonomically, bone condition is fairly consistent through the section. Bone fragments in
some levels (levels 2, 3, 5, 6, 8–15, 17) exhibit a range of weathering. Burned bone was recovered
from all but levels 21 and 23 (no bone recovery), and 25–27. Bone from levels 16 through 23
exhibit encrustation of CaCO3. Even though bone preservation does not appear to decline with
depth, bone counts and mass decline along with taxonomic richness. The presence of CaCO3
concretions and encrustation indicates a fluctuating water table, which may explain the dearth of
skeletal material in the lower levels.

Observations about Recovery Patterns by Animal Size and Type
Some preliminary observations are possible regarding the presence and co-occurrence of
different species.

Reptiles, Amphibians, and Birds and their Occurrence
Fish occur in levels 2–5, 8–10, 16, and 17. The specimens include vertebrae and craniodental
material. Only one specimen, from level 3, is burned. It may be important that bison are absent

58

Chapter 6
from all levels in which fish are present with the exception of levels 2–5. Anura (frogs and
toads) were identified from levels 3, 4, 6–8 based on ilia and distinctive limb elements. None
was burned.
Turtle shell fragments occur throughout the column, recognizable from levels 2–17,
except for level 14. This material mainly comprises small pond or mud turtles, with one
soft-shelled turtle identified in level 5. Nearly every level with turtle shell has burned
turtle shell, indicating that this was likely an important part of local diets. The presence of
turtle throughout the column is not unexpected considering the proximity of the unit to the
freshwater springs.
Snake vertebrae were identified from levels 1–7, exclusive of 5, and also in levels 10 and
13. The only burned vertebra occurs in level 1. Bird occurs sporadically through the column
between levels 2 (tentatively identified) and 15. Avian material derives from small-bodied
forms and are probably passerines.

Small Mammals and their Occurrence
Leporids (hares and rabbits) occur consistently between levels 4–18 with the exception of levels
7, 12, 13, and 17. Lepus (hare) occurs in levels 5, 6, 8, 14, and 18, coincident and adjacent to
levels in which Antilocapra occur (except level 18). The same pattern applies, albeit in a less
clearly-defined manner, to co-occurrence with Bison. These three taxa (hare, antelope, bison)
are sympatric over open grasslands, and this pattern indicates that diverse choices of prey
were available during periods when presumably top-ranked species (bison) were present.
Sylvilagus (cottontail rabbit) was recovered from levels 4, 5, 8–11, 15, and 16. Level 9
yielded a minimum number of three Sylvilagus sp, represented by right dentaries, along
with a right calcaneum fragment. Sylvilagus is abundantly represented between levels 8–11,
an abundance which coincides with a decline in specimen count and mass values for the
assemblage.
Rodents, including Rodentia, Sigmodon (cotton rat), Neotoma (wood rat) and Geomyidae
(pocket gophers), collectively occur only in upper levels (2–10, exclusive of level 3) with an
outlier Neotoma identified in level 17. Most are small (Geomyidae, Sigmodon, Neotoma) but
one in Unit 3 level 10 is much larger; this specimen may be a porcupine.

Medium Mammals and their Occurrence
Carnivora material is recognized between levels 4 and 15, inclusive. Consisting largely of
dental material, some of this is identifiable to Canidae and is probably coyote (Canis latrans).
A claw from level 4 may be assignable to Felidae. A specimen that appears similar to a
metapodial of H. sapiens or big Canis sp. was recovered in level 10.
Medium artiodactyl remains are identified from levels 2–18, but only identified to genus in
levels 2–4, 6–11, and 15. Positively identified American antelope (Antilocapra) is confined to

59

Chapter 6
levels 6, 7, and 15, where it always co-occurs with white tailed deer (Odocoileus). Odocoileus
is positively identified largely throughout the upper section (levels 3–11, excluding level 5)
and overlaps with both Antilocapra and modern bison (Bison bison), as well as other common
subsistence taxa. Bone assignable only to Artiodactyla, medium, is also present through the
section and is more commonly unaccompanied by either Antilocapra or Odocoileus between
levels 12 and 18. This may be due in part to poorer preservation in lower levels. Presumably,
white tailed deer would have been available during virtually periods that are represented in
this sequence, and apparent absence of this taxon likely indicates preservation or recovery
biases.
Fetal or juvenile bone are present in levels 4–6, 9, and 10. These appear similar to but
are not entirely coincident with Bison material. Based on the fact that no identified bison is
in levels 8–11, it is probable that most or all of this material may be assignable to deer or
pronghorn.

Bison and its Occurrence
Bison has been identified in levels 3–7, 13, and 14. These levels correspond with bimodal peaks
in count and mass (see Figure 6-1). The upper peak represents at least two archaeological
subperiods within the Late Archaic of bison exploitation, and stratigraphic resolution here
is not sufficient for clearly distinguishing between these. Based on the radiocarbon dates
on bison from levels 6 and 7, the sequence here is in proper order. Yet the lower assays are
approximately 500 years older than the upper assays, and these two strata are essentially
contiguous in the profile. The lower bison zone, however, clearly defines the Calf Creek
component in this deposit.
None of the Bison material appears to have been burned, but one femur or humerus
fragment from level 14 had been cut. One tooth fragment from level 2 has red staining from an
unknown pigment, possibly red ochre.

Unidentifiable Bone and its Occurrence
Mammalian bone identifiable only to size range occurs through the section consistently down
through level 19. Bone recovery from levels 20–27 is altogether sparse. The bone does not
appear to be more degraded but bone counts drop by 86 percent from level 18 (n = 22) to level
19 (n = 3), and does not increase in deeper levels. Considering the overall decrease in artifact
recovery as well, the lower part of this deposit appears to have been a period of relatively rapid
aggradation and accumulation. Additionally, at least for the faunal material, consistently
moist sediments have undoubtedly resulted in some loss of material.

Discussions of the Faunal Data
Carcass portion distribution patterns are not likely to emerge from this small excavation block.
Within levels the remains of such game as medium Artiodactyla (collectively) and Bison tend

60

Chapter 6
to be representative across a carcass, i.e., a combination of teeth, axial elements, and fore
and hind limb elements. Because the overall exposure is so limited, however, any comments
regarding the patterned distribution of carcass portion seems unwarranted.
Taxonomic richness, the number of taxa identified in the assemblage, peaks in level 4 at 20
taxa, and steadily decreases down profile with smaller peaks at levels 10 and 15. Altogether,
variation in richness seems relatively minor, and should be interpreted with caution. Still,
richness values are consistently higher, by as much as 60 percent, above level 11 (135–145
cmbd) than they are in the Calf Creek zone and below. Based on radiocarbon ages, this depth
marks the beginning of what archaeologists can confidently refer to as the Middle Archaic.
Some of this variation may be the result of recovery or preservation bias, but it is also likely
that there were meaningful and sustained differences in terms of additional prey species that
appear in local subsistence behaviors by the beginning of the Middle Archaic, immediately
following Calf Creek times. One possible interpretation of the richness data is that, during the
Calf Creek horizon (at least), the exploitation of bison and other artiodactyls, including white
tail deer and perhaps antelope, may have displaced certain other lower-ranked prey from the
diet. Following Calf Creek, which essentially concludes the Early Archaic, the number of prey
species that were targeted increased notably, representing a dietary shift toward more broadspectrum subsistence behavior. When bison reappeared on the landscape in the Late Archaic,
they were once again integrated into local diets. However, the animal portions of diets from
this time onward continue to reflect the same kinds of breadth and diversity that had been
practiced since the end of the Calf Creek period.
Considering the rapid decline in faunal recovery that starts at approximately level 15
(175–185 cmbd), very little can be said about animal resource availability or abundance
immediately prior to Calf Creek times. The presence of antelope in level 15 suggests that
the transition to a grasslands-like habitat surrounding Spring Lake was relatively gradual.
Otherwise, the exploitation of fish and medium-size artiodactyls before Calf Creek suggests a
diet reliant on locally-available broad-spectrum resources.

61

Chapter 7
Artifacts
by Amy E. Reid and David M. Yelacic
Artifacts recovered from this excavation include chipped stone lithics, fire-cracked rock,
modified bone, a shell bead, and aboriginal pottery. Lithic artifacts include projectile points
and point fragments, many of which are stylistically diagnostic to a particular time period;
bifaces from tool production and use; unifaces and other edge modified expedient tools;
flake cores; and debitage, or the flaking debris from tool production. Bifaces, unifaces, edge
modified tools, and cores are briefly described and representative specimens are illustrated.
Detailed measurements and additional data are presented in appendices at the end of this
report. Debitage and fire-cracked rock presented in terms of abundance by count and weight.
Information about the frequency of recovery for both categories helps characterize the overall
deposit and site formation processes at this locale, and detailed analyses in the future would
potentially bring additional understanding to these and other questions. The marine shell bead
is discussed in detail, and descriptions are provided for the ceramic fragments. The category of
ceramics is best considered in the context of larger, regional patterns of ceramic manufacture
and use during the Terminal Late Prehistoric or Protohistoric to Early Historic period. Such
analyses, however, are still underway or have not yet been undertaken, and these data are
presented here with the idea that they will be useful for future studies.

Lithics
This section describes the culturally altered lithic material (chipped stone) recovered from all
controlled excavations. Most of the collection (n = 14,985) consists of unmodified lithic debitage (n =
14,875). The remaining material was organized into the following categories: projectile points,
bifaces, unifaces, flake tools, and cores. All projectile points recovered from hand excavation
and monitoring activities were included in the present analysis, while analysis of the other
categories concentrated only on material recovered from excavation Units 3 and 4.

Chapter 7

Projectile Points
A total of 59 projectile points and point fragments were recovered. Of these, 54 are dart points
and five are arrow points. Forty three projectile points were assigned a type based on the
commonly accepted point typology developed for Central and South Texas. Twenty different
types were identified including: Martindale, Merrell, Uvalde, Gower, and Bell (Calf Creek)
for the Early Archaic (n = 12); Nolan, Travis, Baird and Almagre/Langtry for the Middle
Archaic (n = 9); Bulverde, Pedernales and Lange for the Late Archaic I (n = 10); Castroville (n
= 2) for the Late Archaic II; Ensor, Ellis, Edgewood, Fairland for the Late Archaic III (n = 5);
Darl and Scallorn for the Transitional Archaic/Austin period (n = 2); and Perdiz for the Late
Prehistoric (n = 3). In addition, one untypable arrow point and fifteen untypable dart points
were recovered. Many of these points could not be confidently assigned to an established type
because they either do not have enough diagnostic attributes or because of their fragmentary
or incomplete condition. Generally, projectile points were recovered in approximate age
order by depth, with younger points occurring toward the top of the deposit and older point
styles generally occurring in deeper levels toward the bottom. In some cases, however, older
styles are found higher up in the deposit. These instances do not necessarily indicate mixed
sediments; the cultural reuse of older points is commonly observed in prehistoric sites and can
account for the apparently “upward” movement of older points into younger deposits. Overall,
patterns of point recovery indicate that this part of the Spring Lake site contains relatively
unmixed deposits (Table 7-1). This pattern of recovery confirms earlier observations to this
effect based on radiocarbon data.
Table 7-1. Projectile Points by Elevation (recoveries from Units 3 and 4 are combined)
i

o

d

s
Early
Archaic

r

Middle
Archaic

e

Late
Archaic I

P

Late Archaic II

e
Late Archaic III

m

Transitional
Archaic/
Austin

i

Toyah

T

1 (0–35)

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

2 (35–45)

1 Perdiz
1 Darl

1

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Level
(Elevation,
cmbd)

Point Types

3 (45–55)
4 (55–65)

1 Pedernales

–

–

–

–

1

5 (65–75)

1 Ellis
2 Edgewood

–

–

3

–

–

–

–

6 (75–85)

1 Lange
1 Travis
1 Baird
1 Martindale

–

–

–

–

1

2

1

7 (85–95)

2 Pedernales

–

–

–

–

2

–

–

64

Chapter 7

Table 7-1. Projectile Points by Elevation (recoveries from Units 3 and 4 are combined)
i

o

d

s
Early
Archaic

r

Middle
Archaic

e

Late
Archaic I

P

Late Archaic II

e
Late Archaic III

m

Transitional
Archaic/
Austin

i

Toyah

T

8 (95–105)

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

9 (105–115)

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Level
(Elevation,
cmbd)

Point Types

10 (115–125)

1 Nolan
1 Almagre/
Langtry

–

–

–

–

–

2

–

11 (125–135)

1 Nolan

–

–

–

–

–

1

–

12 (135–145)

1 Merrell

–

–

–

–

–

–

1

13 (145–155)

1 Martindale
1 Bell (Calf
Creek)

–

–

–

–

–

–

2

14 (155–165)

1 Merrell

–

–

–

–

–

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

4

17 (185–195)

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

18 (195–205)

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

19 (205–215)

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

20 (215–225)

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

21 (225–235)

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

22 (235–245)

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

23 (245–255)

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

24 (255–265)

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

25 (265–275)

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

26 (275–285)

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

27 (285–295)

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

1

15 (165–175)
16 (175–185)

28 (295–300)

1 Merrell
2 Uvalde
1 Bell (Calf
Creek)

1 Gower

All typable points were classified by Elton Prewitt; these were measured for thickness
to the nearest 0.1 mm and weighed to the nearest 0.1 g. Dimensions of complete specimens
(maximum length and width, stem length, neck width, basal width and depth) were recorded to
the nearest 0.1 mm. Metric and observed data for each point are provided in Appendix A.

65

Chapter 7
Following the format used by LeDoux and Lohse (2011), summaries of point types
recovered by time period are presented below, beginning with the Early Archaic. Each point
type summary includes its phase in Central Texas chronology (Prewitt 1981) and its series
designation, if available (Jelks 1978; Prewitt 1995). The summaries also provide the total
number of points recovered, specimen numbers and descriptions of their condition, retouch,
use-wear and key technological aspects, including flaking patterns and edge modification.
When describing the condition of the specimens, macroscopic damage was assessed by using
four descriptors for break patterns: snap, crushing, burination, and thermal fracture. Specimen
numbers are used in reference to specific artifact descriptions.
Early Archaic
Martindale
Phase: Late San Geronimo
Series: NS
n = 2 (Specimen Nos. 312-3 and 405-2)
Condition and Breakage: One specimen is a base fragment (312-3) and the other
exhibits a snap fracture, missing distal tip, and damage to one barb and one basal
corner on the same side (405-2). Specimen 312-3 is finely worked and exhibits almost
perfect symmetry (Figure 7-1 A, B).
Retouch: Specimen 405-2 has retouch on its lateral edges.
Merrell
Phase: N/A
Series: NS
n = 3 (Specimen Nos. 313-03, 315-1, 411-05)
Condition and Breakage: Specimen 315-1 is a proximal fragment with a snap fracture
leaving only the base and stem. Specimen 313-03 is missing one basal ear and one
shoulder had been damaged. Specimen 411-5 is also a proximal fragment with a snap
fracture. It exhibits damage to both shoulders and one basal ear. All three have random
flake patterning (Figure 7-1 C–E).
Retouch: There is evidence of retouch on the blade and shoulders of specimen 313-3.
Uvalde
Phase: Late San Geronimo
Series: NS
n = 2 (Specimen Nos.415-1, 415-6)
Condition and Breakage: Specimen 415-1 is a nearly complete projectile point with a
beveled blade. A small portion of the distal tip has snapped off, and the lateral edges
are slightly serrated from retouch. On one face, there is a flake scar that extends
horizontally all the way across, with no midline. All other flake scars are random.

66

Chapter 7

Figure 7-1. Early Archaic projectile points: (A–B) Martindale; (C–E) Merrell.

Specimen 415-6 is complete and exhibits one beveled edge. The base has been thinned
and smoothed and the flake patterning is random with step terminations on both faces
(Figure 7-2 A, B).
Retouch: The lateral edges of both specimens have been retouched creating step
terminations.
Gower
Phase: Early San Geronimo
Series: Lampasas
n = 2 (Specimen Nos. 53–14, 427-1)
Condition and Breakage: Specimen 53-14 is missing the distal tip from impact, one barb
and one basal ear. Specimen 427-1 is a Gower projectile point that has been reworked
into a drill or awl. It is missing its distal tip due to a snap fracture and exhibits random

67

Chapter 7

Figure 7-2. Early Archaic projectile points: (A–B) Uvalde; (C–D) Gower.

flake patterning with step terminations on both faces. The specimen is also missing its
barbs; it is difficult to determine if they broke off during use before it was reworked, or if
they were purposely removed during the reworking (Figure 7-2 C, D).
Retouch: Both specimens exhibit retouch. The blade of 427-1 has been reworked into
a drill or perforator tool and the lateral edges of the stem have been slightly notched,
perhaps for hafting.
Bell
Phase: Late San Geronimo
Series: Stillhouse
n = 3 (Specimen Nos. 312-1, 415-7, 430-1)
Condition and Breakage: Specimen 312-1 is missing the distal tip and one barb, both
with snap impact fractures. Specimen 430-1 is a proximal fragment with a transverse
fracture. The base consists of coarser grain chert and becomes finer grain toward the
body of the point. The edges of this specimen are not well finished, and it is possible that

68

Chapter 7

Figure 7-3. Early Archaic, Bell (Calf Creek horizon) projectile points.

this point was broken during manufacture. Specimen 415-7 is missing one barb and has
a small snap fracture on the other. This specimen is heavily reworked (Figure 7-3).
Retouch: Specimen 312-1 exhibits alternate retouch. 415-7 has been deeply serrated on
one edge with two notches.
Middle Archaic
Almagre/Langtry
Phase: N/A
Series: Pecos
n = 1 (Specimen No. 409-4)
Condition and Breakage: This point is a proximal fragment with a bending transverse
fracture. One lateral edge exhibits a series of step fractures, possibly from attempting to
thin the edge. The chert material is banded with red in some areas (Figure 7-4 A).
Retouch: Light retouch is evident on edges.

69

Chapter 7
Baird
Phase: Oakalla
Series: Falcon
n = 1 (Specimen No. 305-3)
Condition and Breakage: This specimen is complete and exhibits steep alternate
beveling (Figure 7-4 B)
Retouch: Retouch is present on both beveled edges.
Nolan
Phase: Clear Fork
Series: Parida
n = 4 (Specimen Nos. 309-3, 53-2, 56-3, 410-1)
Condition and Breakage: All four specimens have beveled stems. Specimen 56-3 is a
complete projectile point with step terminations and random flake patterning. One

Figure 7-4. Middle Archaic projectile points: (A) Almagre/Langtry and (B) Baird.

70

Chapter 7
lateral edge of the blade is more convex than the other. 309-3 has a burinated impact
fracture running diagonally from the distal tip to one shoulder. Specimen 410-1 is a
medial fragment with enough of the stem remaining to type as a Nolan. It exhibits
random flake patterning with step terminations on both faces. Specimen 53-2, a
proximal fragment, exhibits significant heat damage (Figure 7-5).
Retouch: All four specimens have been retouched.
Travis
Phase: Clear Fork
Series: Pecos
n = 3 (Specimen Nos. 305-2, 432-2, 438-1)
Condition and Breakage: Specimens 305-2 and 432-2 are mostly complete with small
snap fractures on their distal tips, perhaps from impact. Specimen 438-1 is a proximal
fragment with snap and burin fractures as well as heat damage (Figure 7-6).
Retouch: Retouch is visible on all three specimens.

Figure 7-5. Middle Archaic Nolan projectile points.

71

Chapter 7
Late Archaic I
Bulverde
Phase: Marshall Ford
Series: Pecos
n = 1 (Specimen No. 57-1)
Condition and Breakage: This specimen is has minimal impact damage on one barb and to
one basal corner. It exhibits random flake patterning and basal smoothing (Figure 7-7 A).
Retouch: Lateral and stem edges have been retouched.

Figure 7-6. Middle Archaic Travis projectile points.

72

Chapter 7
Pedernales
Phase: Round Rock
Series: Pecos
n = 7 (Specimen Nos. 54-2, 54-3, 204-19, 306-2, 306-3, 403-1, 432-1)
Condition and Breakage: Specimen 54-2 is nearly complete, missing its distal tip and
one barb. The damaged edge has been resharpened all the way down to the stem. 54-3
is has thermal fracturing and impact damage around the base and shoulders. 306-3
has a transverse, bending snap fracture as well as some impact damage to one lateral
edge, one shoulder and one basal ear (Figure 7-7 B). 204-19 is a proximal fragment
with a medial snap fracture and snap damage to one barb and one basal ear. 306-2 is
a proximal fragment with snap impact damage to the distal tip, one shoulder and one
basal ear; the other shoulder has a burin fracture (Figure 7-8). One lateral edge of this
specimen has a series of step terminations, either from crude retouching or crushing
impact damage. 403-1 has a snap fracture that has removed all of one lateral edge and
shoulder. None of the available points for this time period exhibit any clear flaking
pattern. 432-1 exhibits a distal snap fracture and step terminations on both faces.
Retouch: All specimens have been retouched. 204-19 has retouch along the stem and
around one shoulder where the barb should be.

Figure 7-7. Late Archaic I (Bulverde and Pedernales) projectile points.

73

Chapter 7
Lange
Phase: San Marcos
Series: NS
n = 2 (Specimen Nos. 55-2, 305-1)
Condition and Breakage: Specimen 55-2 exhibits a distal snap and step terminations on
one face, probably from impact. 305-1 has a distal snap with a spin-off step terminating
fracture down one face and exhibits damage to one lateral edge and the stem (Figure 7-9).
Retouch: Both specimens exhibit retouch along the lateral edges.
Late Archaic II
Castroville
Phase: Uvalde
Series: Nueces
n = 2 (Specimen Nos. 7-2, 53-1)
Condition and Breakage: Specimen 7-2 exhibits random flake patterning and extensive
retouch on one of the blade edges. Impact damage has removed a barb and a portion of

Figure 7-8. Examples of Late Archaic I (Pedernales) projectile points.

74

Chapter 7

Figure 7-9. Late Archaic I (Lange) projectile points.

the stem and base on one side. Specimen 53-1 has a medial snap and extensive thermal
damage including fractures, pot lidding, and crazing (Figure 7-10).
Retouch: The base, stem and lateral edges of specimen 7-2 have been retouched.
Late Archaic III
Ensor
Phase: Twin Sisters
Series: Rio Bravo
n = 1 (Specimen No. 437-1)
Condition and Breakage: This specimen has a distal snap and lacks flake patterning. Its
stem has been assymetrically resharpened (Figure 7-11 A)
Retouch: There is evidence of retouch along the basal and lateral edges.

75

Chapter 7

Figure 7-10. Late Archaic II (Castroville) projectile points.

Ellis
Phase: Twin Sisters
Series: NS
n = 1 (Specimen No. 304-9)
Condition and Breakage: This flake pattern on this specimen approaches collateral,
but the scars do not meet. There is a wedge shape break on one lateral edge, likely
from thermal treatment (Figure 7-11 B). Retouch: Retouch was not observed on this
specimen.
Edgewood
Phase: Twin Sisters
Series: NS
n = 2 (Specimen Nos. 304-12, 304-13)
Condition and Breakage: Specimen 304-12 has a distal snap and a thermal fracture that
removed one lateral edge and barb. Specimen 304-13 is complete except for one missing
shoulder barb, and is heavily resharpened. Both specimens exhibit random flake
patterning (Figure 7-11 C and D). Retouch: Both specimens exhibit retouching along
their lateral edges.

76

Chapter 7
Fairland
Phase: Twin Sisters
Series: Rio Bravo
n = 1 (Specimen No. 53-3)
Condition and Breakage: This specimen is heavily resharpened but mostly complete
except for a small snap fracture on one basal ear. The base has been thinned with two
flute-like flakes removed from one side; these end in a step termination. There is some
crushing along the base and stem. It exhibits random flake patterning (Figure 7-11 E).
Retouch: The lateral edges and distal tip have been retouched.

Figure 7-11. Late Archaic III projectile points: (A) Ensor; (B) Ellis; (C, D) Edgewood; (E) Fairland.

77

Chapter 7
Transitional Archaic/Austin
Darl
Phase: Driftwood
Series: Kyle
n = 1 (Specimen No. 428-1)
Condition and Breakage: This specimen has a dramatic medial snap from heavy impact,
and also a possible burin fracture that has removed most of the blade. The remaining
stem and base exhibit alternate beveling, but lacks discernible flake patterning (Figure
7-12 A).
Retouch: Retouch is visible on the stem and basal edges.
Scallorn
Phase: Austin
Series: Austin
n = 1 (Specimen No. 431-1)
Condition and Breakage: This specimen has a snap break on one barb and one basal ear;
there is slight damage to the distal tip. It exhibits random flake patterning and serrated
lateral edges (Figure 7-12 B).
Retouch: The serrated lateral edges have been retouched.
Toyah
Perdiz
Phase: Toyah
Series: Blum
n = 3 (Specimen Nos. 401-1, 201-7,104-25)
Condition and Breakage: Specimen 401-1 has a snap break at the stem. Some of the
flaking on the blade approaches a collateral pattern. Specimen 201-7 is a mostly

Figure 7-12. Transitional Archaic/Austin projectile points: (A) Darl; (B) Scallorn.

78

Chapter 7
complete specimen. It has serrated edges and random flake patterning. One face has
very little flaking and this arrow point appears to have been made on a flake. Specimen
104-25 has a crushed tip and is missing one barb. The shoulders are strongly convex,
with wide-flaring, sweeping barbs. All three Perdiz points are stylistically distinct from
one another, and illustrate some of the variation that is to be seen within this common
point type (Figure 7-13).
Retouch: All three specimens have retouch on the lateral edges.
Untyped
Untypable Dart Points
Phase: N/A
Series: N/A
n = 15 (Specimen Nos 412-7, 312-13, 304-11, 202-1, 431-2, 400-7, 6-1, 54-1, 405-1, 40513, 410-2, 407-3, 405-9, 411-2, 201-3)
Condition and Breakage: Only some specimens from this category are selected for
description and illustration. Specimen 405-1 is a complete specimen with a square stem,
corner notching, and weak shoulders (Figure 7-14 A). Specimen 405-13 exhibits an
expanding stem, steep alternate beveling; the un-beveled edges show a collateral flake
pattern (Figure 7-14 B). Specimen 407-3 is mostly complete but badly burned. This point
has a straight, square stem with weak shoulders. The tip is missing from a bend break,
perhaps from impact. It resembles the Travis type (Figure 7-14 C). Specimen 411-2
also has a square stem and corner notching as well as convex lateral edges. The blade
is beveled (R), characteristic of some Early Archaic types (Figure 7-14 D) (also Figure
7-15). Although this dart point is missing its tip, it is complete enough that it could be
identified if it compared with any previously defined type categories. As it stands, this
specimen seems to represent stylistic elaboration, perhaps experimentation, during the
latter part of the Early Archaic.

Figure 7-13. Late Prehistoric/Toyah (Perdiz) arrow points.

79

Chapter 7
Untypable Arrow Points
Phase: N/A
Series: N/A
n = 1 (Specimen No. 55-1)
Condition and Breakage: Specimen 55-1 exhibits some notching along the base and
irregular flake removals around the edges on one face; the other face has very little
flaking and this artifact appears to have been made on a flake (Figure 7-16).

Bifaces
A total of 60 bifaces and biface fragments were recovered from data recovery and monitoring
activities. Of those, 37 (61.7%) were recovered from Units 3 and 4. Our analysis focuses on
describing and tabulating the dimensions, form, and fragmentation types of the bifaces (Table
7-2). A full listing of the all the recovered bifaces appears in Appendices B and C. Artifacts
from Units 1 and 2 are excluded from these analyses because these units had been disturbed
by the installation of a gas line.

Figure 7-14. Examples of untypable dart points.

80

Chapter 7

Figure 7-15. Examples of untypable dart point fragments.

Figure 7-16. Untypable arrow point fragment.

81

Chapter 7

Table 7-2. Bifaces from Units 3 and 4
Spec
No.

Form

Fragmentation

Length
(mm)

Width
(mm)

Thickness
(mm)

Weight
(g)

401-3

Ovate

Complete

55.8

41.37

10.84

22.8

404-1

Ovate

Complete

61.87

42.97

14.12

32

316-3

Ovate

End only

9.38

15

306-7

Ovate

End only

15.95

52.4

409-12 Ovate

End only

10.81

31.2

313-1

Lanceolate

End only: Proximal

31.85

8.63

14.5

304-2

Lanceolate

End only: Proximal

42.92

8.08

19.7

407-10 Lanceolate

End only: Proximal

44.55

11.16

27.4

409-8

Lanceolate

End only: Proximal

47.36

13.90

22.4

313-41 Lanceolate

End only: Proximal

40.69

12.11

18.0

405-3

Lanceolate

End only: Proximal

46.91

8.84

15.5

308-6

Lanceolate

End only: Proximal

40.27

14.09

22.8

328-1

Indeterminate

End only: Distal

10.25

27.3

411-1

Indeterminate

End only: Distal

8.41

13.2

403-2

Indeterminate

End only: Distal

5.55

5.3

412-2

Indeterminate

End only: Distal

12.26

26.5

315-17 Indeterminate

End only: Distal

6.93

1.9

312-7

Indeterminate

End only: Distal

9.18

20.7

409-13 Indeterminate

End only: Distal

7.99

5.7

407-2

Indeterminate

End only: Distal

8.90

8.3

430-2

Indeterminate

End only: Distal

9.62

17.6

414-16 Indeterminate

End only: Distal

12.77

13.2

403-3

Indeterminate

End only: Distal

8.06

13.6

407-15 Indeterminate

End only: Distal

5.74

2.9

308-44 Indeterminate

Medial

12.68

32.3

339-1

Indeterminate

Medial

8.90

16.0

414-19 Indeterminate

Medial

14.02

25.5

409-10 Indeterminate

Medial

9.01

15.9

407-9

Indeterminate

Medial

12.37

17.5

313-19 Indeterminate

Medial

11.32

16.0

411-3

Indeterminate

Medial

9.05

14.5

314-4

Indeterminate

Medial

5.97

3.3

404-3

Indeterminate

Medial

6.74

7.2

408-4

Indeterminate

Medial:
Edge Fragment

6.54

1.4

82

43.38

Chapter 7

Table 7-2. Bifaces from Units 3 and 4
Spec
No.

Form

Fragmentation

Length
(mm)

Width
(mm)

Thickness
(mm)

Weight
(g)

305-48 Indeterminate

Medial:
Edge Fragment

11.75

10.4

412-1

Medial:
Edge Fragment

5.79

2.1

Indeterminate

Only two of the 35 bifaces recovered from the two undisturbed units were complete. All
bifaces from these units were sorted into four morphological categories: ovate (n = 3), pointed
ovate (n = 2), lanceolate (n = 7) or indeterminate (n = 23). Ovate bifaces are characterized by
rounded or bi-convex lateral edges and weakly defined proximal and distal ends. Pointed-ovate
bifaces exhibit rounded or convex bases with a pointed blade creating a defined distal tip.
Lanceolate bifaces have parallel to bi-convex margins, squared bases and defined, converging
distal tips. In addition, late-stage lanceolate bifaces exhibit marginal retouch, performed to
shape and straighten the lateral edges (Lohse et al. 2013). The indeterminate category was
used for incomplete specimens lacking attributes necessary for classification. Incomplete
bifaces were identified as corner fragments, medial fragments, end missing, end only (proximal
or distal) or edge fragment or edge missing. Complete artifacts were measured for length,
width, and thickness to the nearest 0.1 mm and then weighed to the nearest 0.1 g. Length and
width measurements were not considered to be useful for smaller fragments.
Ovate Bifaces (n = 3)
The three specimens in this category are rounded end fragments. Due to the symmetrical
shape of ovate bifaces, end fragments cannot be accurately identified as either proximal or
distal. Specimens 409-12 and 306-7 have transverse fractures with hinge terminations (Figure
7-17 A, B). Specimen 316-3 has an irregular fracture which seems to have resulted from a
lateral biface thinning failure, but does not represent a true perverse fracture (Figure 7-17 C).
These artifacts probably reflect failed biface production resulting from knapping or flaking
mistakes. Given the small sample included in this excavation, no meaningful conclusions
should be drawn about the nature or frequency of this activity, at least at this location.
Pointed Ovate Bifaces (n = 2)
Both specimens in this category are complete. Specimen 401-3 has macroscopic use wear
and crushing damage to both the proximal and distal ends as well as discoloration from heat
treatment (Figure 7-18 A). Specimen 404-1 is thicker, crudely flaked on one face, and exhibits
patination that has been flaked through (Figure 7-18 B). Both specimens have slightly or
somewhat sinuous lateral edges, reflecting that final edge-shaping had not yet been completed
(this is more true for Specimen 404-1), and flake removals with step terminations.

83

Chapter 7
Lanceolate Bifaces (n = 7)
All of the specimens in this category are proximal fragments with squared bases, a key
difference between lanceolate and ovate bifaces (Figure 7-19). Specimens 304-2, 405-3 and 313-

Figure 7-17. Ovate bifaces.

84

Chapter 7
1 are late-stage bifaces (Figure 7-19 A–C). They are thin, have no cortex, and exhibit numerous
flake scars, including marginal retouch. Overall, this category of biface represents middle-tolate-stage biface thinning and manufacturing. However, as with the other categories, the small
excavated sample precludes any meaningful conclusions about this and related activities at
this locale.

Figure 7-18. Pointed ovate bifaces.

85

Chapter 7
Indeterminate Bifaces (n = 23)
Bifaces with indeterminate forms were sorted into categories based on fragmentation,
including distal fragments (n = 12), medial fragments (n = 9), and medial edge fragments
(n = 3). None of the distal fragments came from late stage bifaces. Specimen 403-3 has
typical flake removals on one face, but the other face is smooth with only marginal retouch
(Figure 7-20 A). Similarly 328-1, has numerous flake scars on one face, but very few on the
other (Figure 7-19 B). Specimens 409-13 and 403-2 have thermal damage, including thermal
fractures (Figure 7-19 C, D). The fractures on the remaining distal fragments all appear to be
transverse breaks.

Figure 7-19. Lanceolate bifaces.

86

Chapter 7
Among the medial fragments is one specimen from a late-stage biface, specimen 411-3
(Figure 7-21 A). The marginal retouch on this specimen is characterized by thin, parallel
soft hammer or even pressure flake scars. Specimen 339-1 (Figure 7-21 B) also exhibits some
retouch overlying larger flake scars but has cortex remaining on one face. Several of these
specimens, such as 313-19 and 314-4 (Figure 7-21 C, E) have significant thermal damage.
Of the three edge fragments, one is a burin spall (specimen 412-1) and one is the distal
end of an overshot flake (specimen 305-48; Figure 7-22 B). Specimen 408-4 is an edge fragment
with a snap fracture; however it is difficult to determine what edge of the biface it was
detached from (Figure 7-22 C).

Unifaces and Flake Tools
Formal unifaces are flaked only on one side and assume a standardized form. In the process
of accomplishing this standardized form, prehistoric tool makers modified the original
morphology of the flake to the extent that its initial size and shape cannot be determined (Hall
et al. 1982:348). Conversely, flake tools include any flake that is edge-modified or used and
that has little to no modification on its ventral face. These tools are also flaked only on one
side, but do not assume standardized forms; they are considered expedient tools that can be
easily prepared but that have relatively low reliability. Expedient flake tools are infrequently
maintained and often discarded and replaced with a new tool when they attain an undesirable
amount of wear.
All chipped stone from Units 3 and 4 were scanned for unifaces and flake tools. Specimens
were classified as a flake tool if they showed evidence of having been modified or utilized and
it the original flake morphology could be determined, at least to a degree. A specimen was
classified as a minimally retouched uniface (MRU) if regular and intentional flaking (retouch)
was evident on one or more of its edges, but its original flake form was still distinguishable. A
uniface was designated as formal if it exhibited significant shaping and deliberate patterning
of unifacial flake removals on one or more edge. Table 7-3 lists the flake tools, MRUs and
unifaces from Units 3 and 4 by unit and level. Of interest is that nine of 21 (42.8%) of these
artifacts came from Levels 13–15, corresponding with what appears to be the Calf Creek
component at this locale.
Table 7-3. Flake Tools MRUs and Unifaces from Units 3 and 4
(All four formal unifaces are proximal scraper fragments.)
Spec No. Unit Level (Elevation cmbd)

Category

304-10
306-10
307-2
308-43
309-2

Graver
Flake Tool
MRU
MRU
Flake Tool

3
3
3
3
3

5 (65–75)
7 (85–95)
8 (95–105)
9 (105–115)
10 (115–125)

Weight (g)
9.8
19.4
3.2
54.2
3.2

87

Chapter 7

Table 7-3. Flake Tools MRUs and Unifaces from Units 3 and 4
(All four formal unifaces are proximal scraper fragments.)
Spec No. Unit Level (Elevation cmbd)
312-32
314-28
324-4
429-1
409-11
411-27
411-28
412-9
413-20
414-1
414-2
414-3
414-4
414-5
415-5
420-7

3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4

13 (145–155)
15 (165–175)
25 (265–275)
1–9 (25–119)
10 (115–125)
12 (135–145)
12 (135–145)
13 (145–155)
14 (155–165)
15 (165–175)
15 (165–175)
15 (165–175)
15 (165–175)
15 (165–175)
16 (175–185)
21 (225–235)

Category
Formal Uniface
Formal Uniface
MRU
MRU
Flake Tool
MRU
MRU
Formal Uniface
Graver Fragment
Flake Tool
Formal Uniface
MRU
Flake Tool
Awl
MRU
Flake Tool

Weight (g)
9.5
12.3
5.4
17.4
29.9
45.0
47.6
9.8
0.5
5.5
11.6
8.7
10.6
7.9
11.5
9.5

A total of six flake tools (Figure 7-23) and eight MRUs (Figure 7-24) were identified within
the collection. As with the biface artifact category, the excavated sample is deemed too small
to substantiate meaningful conclusions or interpretations regarding any activities that these
artifacts might indicate. However, with respect to the Calf Creek component that was sampled,
four edge modified specimens were identified as possibly representing the proximal or haft
element of scrapers (Figure 7-25). The term scraper is a functional classification commonly
used to describe a tool that has been altered on one side to create an angled edge for “scraping.”
Clearly, without the distal or bit end, this functional determination cannot be substantiated.
However, each candidate displays a bending break across their medial surface, and also
shows evidence of having been modified through retouch flaking along both lateral edges. One
specimen in particular, 412-9, has notches on opposing lateral edges. All are wedge-shaped in
plan view and have triangular cross sections.
In addition to flake tools and unifaces, one graver, one graver fragment and one awl were
identified (Figure 7-26). Specimen 304-10 is a chert flake with two edges that have been
modified into gravers (Figure 7-26 C).

Flake Cores
Nine flake cores were recovered from Units 3 and 4 (Table 7-4). The definition for a flake
core follows the description by Sitters et al. (2011:300): objects that show at least three flake

88

Chapter 7

Figure 7-20. Examples of distal biface fragments of indeterminate bifaces.

89

Chapter 7

Figure 7-21. Examples of medial fragments of indeterminate bifaces.

90

Chapter 7

Figure 7-22. Examples of edge fragments of indeterminate bifaces.

removals or attempted removals from a discernible platform(s). Cores were sorted into one of
5 categories based on flake scar direction: unidirectional, bidirectional, multidirectional, ad
hoc, or indeterminate. Unidirectional cores exhibit flake removals aligned in approximately
the same direction from a common platform. Cores with two opposing faces that both share
the same platform edge are categorized as bidirectional cores. Multidirectional cores are
characterized by flake removals from multiple directions and from more than one platform.
Ad hoc cores are a subcategory of multidirectional flake cores that show some rotation but
no patterned faces or platforms have been developed. They also have little to no platform
maintenance and some flake removals appear exploratory in nature. In larger samples where
technological variation between flake core strategies can be well documented, characterizing
the approaches taken to designing and maintaining a productive flake core can help
archaeologists understand aspects of residential mobility, conservation strategies for using raw
material, and possibly even standardized approaches to striking flakes for use as tools.
Table 7-4. Flake Cores from Excavation Units 3 and 4
Level
(Elevation cmbd)

Spec No.

Unit

Category

Weight (g)

308-7

3

9 (105–115)

indeterminate

35.8

326-5

3

27 (285–295)

multidirectional, fragment

50.2

327-3

3

28 (295–300)

multidirectional, exhausted

32.9

400-8

4

1 (25–35)

multidirectional

249.0

403-7

4

4 (55–65)

multidirectional

130.1

403-47

4

4 (55–65)

bidirectional

363.0

409-9

4

10 (115–125)

unidirectional

383.3

412-22

4

13 (145–155)

bidirectional, exhausted

52.0

418-2

4

19 (205–215)

multidirectional, ad hoc

69.3
91

Chapter 7
Unidirectional (n = 1)
Specimen 409-9 is a relatively large flake core with two large flakes scars removed to set up a
platform. This platform has four smaller flake scars all aligned in the same direction (Figure
7-27). The relationship between striking platform and productive core face is reminiscent of
some prismatic blade cores, particularly of Clovis or Late Prehistoric Toyah assemblages.
However, none of the flake scars have the necessary length-to-width ratio (at least 2:1) to be
characterized as actual blades.
Bidirectional (n = 2)
Specimen 403-47 has one platform edge with alternating flake removals creating two opposing
faces (Figure 7-28 A). Specimen 412-22 is an exhausted flake core (Figure 7-28 B). Exhausted
cores are smaller in size, have smaller flake scars and have been reduced to the point of

Figure 7-23. Flake tools from excavation units 3 and 4.

92

Chapter 7

Figure 7-24. MRUs from excavation units 3 and 4.

exhaustion. The flaking on specimen 412-22 alternates between removals from the core face
and the platform, making it a discoidal bidirectional, or bifacial core.
Multidirectional (n = 5)
Specimens 400-8 and 403-7 are multidirectional cores; both have flake removals from multiple
directions originating from multiple platform surfaces (Figure 7-29 A, B). Specimen 326-5 is a
fragment of a multidirectional core. Specimen 327-3 is an exhausted multidirectional core, and
418-2 is an ad hoc multidirectional core (Figure 7-29 C).
Indeterminate (n = 1)
One specimen (308-7) could not be sorted into one of the above described categories due to its
fragmentary state. This fragment has multiple surfaces shaped by flake scars, however without
the distal ends of the flake scars present, it is not possible to determine the core type.

93

Chapter 7

Figure 7-25. Proximal fragments of edge modified pieces that possibly represent the haft element of scrapers that were
broken during use.

Debitage
All unmodified pieces of chipped stone debris were placed into the general category of debitage.
This category contained by far the largest number of individual artifacts of all lithic artifacts
(n = 14,875 from Units 3 and 4). Debitage includes flakes and flake fragments from deliberate
removals that reflect the process of shaping or resharpening stone tools. This category also
includes spalls or pieces that detached under extreme heat, and pieces of shatter that broke
from larger flakes or stone masses during the process of hard hammer percussion. Given
the small excavation sample, no detailed analysis was conducted of the debitage recovered
from Units 3 and 4. However, overall rates of recovery are very useful in providing a general
indication of activity or site occupation intensity, and can help to define depositional units that
reflect the natural and cultural stratigraphy in this part of the Spring Lake site.

94

Chapter 7

Figure 7-26. Other lithic tools: (A) Awl; (B) Graver fragment; (C) Multi-edge graver.

Quantifying debitage recovery is done using both counts and total recovered mass,
presented in grams. Each measure by itself potentially skews the total understanding of lithic
recovery, as both weight and count can be affected by increases or decreases in flake size, the
degree of burning encountered in a given level, or other factors that affect these measures
(see discussion of faunal recovery for related considerations). Using both together, however,
presents a more accurate and complete understanding of stone tool reduction behavior over
time. The result (Figure 7-30) shows distinct peaks in debitage frequency and mass, which,
as expected, generally parallel one another. The main exception occurs in level 2, which as
discussed above includes compressed sediments.
Some peaks correspond with faunal recovery patterns while others do not. For example,
debitage begins to increase in both frequency and mass together with faunal count and mass
starting at 55 cm below datum (cmbd). However, the maximum occurrence of debitage is
slightly below that of fauna, by 5–10 cm. We suggest that this offset is probably real, and
indicates that stone working at the site was most active (in terms of debitage by-products)
prior to the maximum occurrence of faunal remains. Based on the calibrated radiocarbon
age, debitage peaked in frequency just after 4140–3980 cal B.P., or close to the beginning of
the Late Archaic, while faunal recovery peaked soon thereafter. The fact that the increase in
debitage begins one or two excavation levels before the increase in faunal recovery suggests
that the sharp uptick in stone working was not, at least initially, related to animal hunting or
processing of animal remains.
Also notable are the patterns in debitage occurrence just before, during, and just after the
Calf Creek component at around 155 cmbd. The sharp increase in fauna count and mass from
155–165 cmbd is related to the presence of bison in the faunal assemblage. However, debitage
notably decreases at this depth. Perhaps the only conclusion that can be supported by this
limited sample is that stone working, at least as relates to point production or associated with

95

Chapter 7

Figure 7-27. Unidirectional core.

processing a suite of subsistence resources that included bison, was not a major activity in this
part of the site. However, a larger sample is necessary before this conclusion can be accepted
with total confidence.
Starting just below 175 cmbd, debitage begins to decline in count and mass, following the
trend recorded for faunal material. As noted previously, this is believed to be the result of
higher rates of sedimentation at this locale prior to ca. 6000 cal B.P.

Fire-Cracked Rock
Fire-cracked rock (FCR) was recovered from excavation levels in Units 3 and 4 and counted
and weighed in order to calculate the frequency of occurrence of this artifact category. Like
debitage, FCR counts alone are not entirely meaningful. Limestone rocks were used in
prehistoric times because of their heat retention properties (Thoms 2009), and as they heated
and cooled over multiple events, they tended to fracture into smaller and smaller pieces. Once
fragments became too small for use, they were discarded and replaced with fresh cobbles. As a
result, FCR counts may reveal less about the importance of hot rock cooking than FCR mass.
Mass, however, can be skewed in smaller samples like this one by the presence of a small
number of above-average size rocks. Changes in FCR count vs. weight indicates the degree to

96

Chapter 7

Figure 7-28. Bidirectional cores.

which limestone cobbles may have been reused and recycled in earth oven features. Increases
in count that are not closely reflected in mass suggest that cobbles were reused extensively.
Given a suitably large sample, such data may provide evidence for resource intensification,
population pressures on the subsistence base, or some other factor. Both mass and count are
plotted in order to provide a more complete view of earth oven technology and its importance at
this part of the Spring Lake site over time (Figure 7-31).
The FCR data typically follow the same general trends seen in fauna and debitage.
The largest peak in FCR occurrence occurs at 105 cmbd, just after 4140–3980 cal B.P. It
is interesting that FCR mass peaks sharply and then declines gradually throughout the
remainder of the deposit. This suggests that the period of maximum importance for earth oven
technology did not span a very long period of time. Toward the top of the deposit, at 45 cmbd,

97

Chapter 7

Figure 7-29. Examples of multidirectional flake cores.

the small peak in FCR counts is only very slightly mirrored in FCR mass, suggesting that
cobbles were recycled more intensively during this period. Because the upper portions of this
deposit seem to be compressed, it may not be possible to identify clearly what time period is
represented by this late intensification of heated rocks. However, it is likely to date to or just
after Late Prehistoric Toyah times based on the date of 544–514 cal B.P. at 75 cmbd.
Lower in the deposit, below 105 cmbd, counts fluctuate sharply while mass peaks slightly
at 135 cmbd (following a sharp decline from the maximum at 105 cmbd) before declining again
down profile. A modest increase in both counts and mass present at 175 cmbd dates to between
6182–6142 and 5982–5767 cal B.P. Taken together, FCR data at and just above this elevation
range may be used to characterize Calf Creek subsistence as less dependent on earth oven
cooking than in immediately preceding and following periods. This seems clearly demonstrated
by FCR mass. Variation in FCR counts can be understood as differing degrees to which heated
stones were reused in oven features.

98

Chapter 7

Figure 7-30. Recovery of debitage (counts in red, mass in black) compared with faunal recovery by depth.

99

Chapter 7
Below 175 cmbd, FCR counts and mass both decline to almost zero until around 295 cmbd.
Again, this provides evidence for accelerated sedimentation rates prior to c. 6000 ca. B.P. It is
interesting that the minor increase in FCR at the lowest depths of this excavation corresponds
with minor increases in both fauna and debitage, suggesting that a small component is present
that is associated with the drill made from a Gower point base that was recovered here.

Modified Bone
Three pieces of what appear to be modified bone were identified among the faunal assemblage
from this excavation (Figure 7-32). Specimen 303-20 is a bone splinter from a small mammal
(Figure 7-32 A). It has evidence of being cut on one end and has been polished along its length.
This specimen is likely a fragment of a bone splinter tool (Wheeler and McGee 1994). Specimen
312-9 is a bone tool made from a limb diaphysis fragment of a medium-sized mammal (Figure
7-32 B). It consists of two fragments that refit together. One end has been modified into a
smooth round surface; the other end has two smoothed surfaces that form a chisel shaped
beveled tip. Beveled bone tools are often classified as awls. However, specimens similar to
312-9 have been connected with digging, prying, fleshing, shaping, burnishing, wood working,
and bark stripping (Byrd 2011: 78, Griffitts 2006:187, Penders 1997;136, 158). Specimen 402-6
consists of two pieces that mend together to form a tubular bead (Figure 7-32 C). It measures
19.72 mm in length and 5.20 mm in thickness.

Shell Bead
Specimen 314-1 is a tubular bead manufactured from the columella (core) of a marine
gastropod species, Busycon perversum (lightning whelk) (Figure 7-33). This artifact was
recovered from Level 15 of Unit 13, within the Calf Creek component. It measures 30.36 mm
in length and 8.91mm in thickness. Busycon perversum is a relatively large marine gastropod
species; therefore beads like this one are commonly referred to as conch columella beads
although the true conch is rarely found along the Texas coast (Dreiss 2009). Columella beads
are cylindrical in shape, unlike discoidal beads which are made from the outer whorls of
marine gastropods.
Data from archaeological sites located west of the Gulf of Mexico show that prehistoric
marine shell distribution reached well beyond East Texas (Black 1986; Collins 1998; Hester
1971, 1980; Highley 1986). The occurrence of marine shell at inland sites in Texas is primarily
documented during later periods in a variety of contexts and has led researchers to believe
marine shells were desirable trade items (Shaw 1998; Dreiss 2009). One of the few examples
of marine shell occurring in earlier contexts comes from investigations at the Wilson-Leonard
site, where small marine gastropod shell beads were recovered from Late Paleoindian and
Early Archaic contexts (Shaw 1998). Whereas marine shell has been recovered from many
inland sites, columella beads are uncommon. When they do occur at inland sites, they are
mostly found in Late Archaic, Late Prehistoric and Historic mortuary contexts (Dreiss 1994).

100

Chapter 7

Ceramics
This section describes the small sample (n = 5) of ceramic artifacts collected from the present
project. Descriptions focus on macroscopic attributes such as surface characteristics and
temper use. Following the methodology used by Tomka et al. (2013), surface treatments
(interior and exterior) of the sherds were recorded as rough, smooth, polished, floated, rough,

compiled by Jacob Hooge

Figure 7-31. Recovery data for FCR compared with fauna and debitage.

101

Chapter 7

Figure 7-32. Bone tools fragments and bead from Units 3 and 4.

Figure 7-33. Marine columella bead.

slipped, or brushed. Rough surfaces are characteristic of poor smoothing or no smoothing at all.
A smooth surface is smooth to the touch, but lacks evidence of polishing that produced sheen.
Polished surfaces exhibit a slight to high gloss. Floated surfaces have a thin polished layer that
masks most of the temper particles. Slipped surfaces have sheen similar to floated surfaces,
but also exhibit a distinct difference between the sherd paste and the color of the surface. A
brushed surface exhibits striations.
The sherds were also examined for decoration (applied substance, incising etc). Wall
thickness was measured in millimeters with digital calipers (Table 7-5). All fragments were
recorded as base, body or rim fragments. Orifice diameter (vessel opening) of rim fragments

102

Chapter 7
was determined by placing the rim fragment on a concentric circle chart. Considering the small
size of these sherds, however, this determination is considered an approximation at best. The
paste color was determined with a Munsell soil color chart for the interior, exterior and core
of the sherds. The firing atmospheres were recorded according to the color that the sherds
exhibited. For example, black to light grey indicates a reduced atmosphere while buff to red
colors indicate an oxidizing atmosphere (Tomka et al. 2013).

Table 7-5. Metric and Observed Data for Ceramic Fragments
Specimen No.

53-11

58-1

101-1

302-4

400-5

Provenience

MonitorBurial Test- Unit 1
ing: Electric
ing
Level 2
Line Trench

Unit 3
Level 3

Unit 4
Level 1

Surface Treatment,
Interior

Floated

Floated

Brushed

Smoothed

Smoothed

Surface Treatment,
Exterior

Floated

Floated

Brushed

Smoothed

Polished

Paste Morphology,
Inclusion

Sand

Sand

Shell

Bone

Bone

Paste Morphology,
Inclusion Size

Small

Small

Small–
Moderate

Moderate

Moderate

Paste Morphology,
Texture

Fine

Fine

Fine

Fine

Fine

Wall Thickness (mm) 6.56

7.27

7.74

6.86

6.64

Vessel Fragment

Body

Body

Body

Body

Rim

Interior Paste Color

7.5YR5/6

7.5YR5/6

10YR6/2

10YR4/2

2.5Y2.5/1

Exterior Paste Color

7.5YR3/1

10YR3/2
10YR5/3

7.5YR6/3

10YR4/1

2.5Y3/1

Interior Firing

Oxidized

Oxidized

Reduced

Reduced

Reduced

Exterior Firing

Reduced

Reduced

Oxidized

Reduced

Reduced

Following guidelines provided by the Council of Texas Archaeologists (CTA), fresh breaks
were made on the sherds in order to examine paste morphology (Ellis et al. 2010). The fresh
breaks were examined closely with a ×10 lens. Inclusions within the pastes were examined
closely in order to identify the material used to temper the clay (bone, grog, sand, shell, etc.).
The size of the inclusions was determined to be small, moderate or large. The texture of the
paste was noted as either coarse or fine.

103

Chapter 7
All five specimens are unglazed and undecorated (Figure 7-34). Specimens 53-11 and 58-1
have very fine sandy pastes that almost look “temperless.” Both exhibit orange-red interiors
and have dark brown exteriors. Specimen 101-1 has shell inclusions and brushed interior and
exterior surfaces. Specimens 302-4 and 400-5 exhibit bone tempered pastes. Specimen 400-5 is
a small rim fragment from an indeterminate vessel form. It exhibits an outflaring rim with a
rounded lip.

Figure 7-34. Ceramic fragments from the Ticket Kiosk excavations.

104

Chapter 8
Results of Monitoring Activities
by Amy E. Reid and David M. Yelacic
Throughout the year during and following the controlled excavation of Units 3 and 4, CAS
monitored several construction-related excavations associated with the new ticket kiosk
and restroom facility (see Figure 3-4). Activities that required archaeological monitoring are
organized into eight events and are summarized below. This chapter presents the findings
of these monitoring events, the most notable of which was the recovery of a prehistoric
burial located along an electric utility trench. Summaries of the burial excavation and
bioarchaeological analyses are also presented.

Sidewall Benching Monitoring
On June 29, 2011, Units 3 and 4 reached a depth of 1.2 m below the ground surface. In order
to comply with excavation trench safety protocols, a section of earth extending 2 ft in all
directions around the hand-excavated units was mechanically stripped in order to prevent the
sidewalls from caving in (Figure 8-1). In addition to the careful monitoring of this excavation,
earth that was removed during this process was piled near the unit for later examination.
Four bifaces and two projectile points were recovered during careful monitoring. One projectile
point was identified as a Pedernales; the other was typed as a Travis (see Figure 7-6: 432-2
and Figure 7-8: 432-1). Once the sidewall benching was complete, the excavated sediment
was examined on various occasions throughout the rest of the project as time permitted. This
process resulted in a number of additional artifacts being collected, including one untypable
projectile point fragment (see Figure 7-15: 431-2), one Scallorn arrow point (see Figure 7-12 B)
and six bifaces (Appendix C).

Auger Monitoring
Thirty-nine augers were excavated on June 30, 2011, for the building foundation support.
These auger excavations were located east of the field school data recovery excavations

Chapter 8

(2001, 2002, 2003 and 2006 seasons) and west of the lift station excavation units (Figure
8-2). Cultural material was encountered in 38 of the auger holes (Table 8-1). Two bifaces,
one projectile point and one piece of bison bone were collected; all other observed material
was counted and described and then discarded. The projectile point, recovered from Auger
No. 10, was identified as a Castroville (see Figure 7-10: 7-2). Overall, these auger excavations
confirmed that prehistoric archaeological deposits associated with 41HY160 are present in this
area, and the recovered Castroville point complements previously recorded in situ projectile
points indicating Late Archaic period occupation of the site.

Figure 8-1. Mechanical stripping of an area around Units 3 and 4 in order to trench unit walls for safety. The bottom of
excavation units were covered with plywood, visible in photo beneath backhoe buket, in order to protect unexcavated
sediments.

106

Chapter 8

Table 8-1. Cultural Material from Auger Excavations.
Auger Number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39

Cultural Material (count)
Sterile
Debitage (1), round nail (1)
Debitage (1), FCR (3)
FCR (2)
Debitage (1), FCR (2)
Debitage (1), FCR (> 10)
FCR (3)
FCR (1)
Debitage (1), FCR (2), bone (1), charcoal
FCR (> 10), projectile point*, bison bone*
FCR (> 10)
Debitage (1), FCR (5–10)
FCR (2)
FCR (4)
FCR (5)
Debitage (1), FCR (5–10)
FCR (1)
Debitage (1), FCR (> 10)
Debitage (2), FCR (5–10), faunal bone (1)
Debitage (2), FCR (> 10)
Debitage (7), FCR (5–10), faunal bone (7)
FCR (2)
FCR (5–10)
Debitage (2), FCR (5–10)
Debitage (1), FCR (5–10), biface* (1)
Debitage (3), FCR (1), faunal bone (1)
Biface* (1), FCR (> 10), faunal bone (2)
Debitage (1), FCR (5–10)
Debitage (1), FCR (5–10), faunal bone (1)
Debitage (1), FCR (5)
FCR (5–10), faunal bone (1)
FCR (5), faunal bone (1)
Debitage (1), FCR (5–10)
Debitage (1), FCR (5)
Debitage (1), FCR (5)
Debitage (2), FCR (5–10)
Debitage (1), FCR (1)
FCR (3)
FCR (5)

* indicates collected material.

107

Chapter 8

Figure 8-2. Auger excavations, facing southwest with stakes marking auger locations.

Plumbing Trenches
On August 12, 2011, CAS archaeologists monitored the opening of six trenches excavated
for the installation of plumbing utilities in the north building (Figure 8-3). Construction fill
was encountered in all trenches at approximately 0–30 cmbs. The maximum absolute depth
excavated was 90 cmbs. Debitage and faunal bone was encountered in all trenches below the
construction fill. Three bifaces (Appendix C) and one distal fragment of a formal uniface were
recovered while monitoring the plumbing excavations (Figure 8-4). A Nolan projectile point
was recovered from the excavated sediment of the trench just west of excavation Unit 4. Based
on the depth of this trench, this point is probably not in a primary Middle Archaic deposit, but

Figure 8-3. Overview of north building plumbing project, facing north.

108

Chapter 8

Figure 8-4. Formal uniface fragment recovered during monitoring of trenches for plumbing utilities.

rather was reused and recycled by later occupants at this locale. Nevertheless, this artifact
helps confirm the understanding of this area as a rich deposit spanning Middle to Late Archaic
periods (see Figure 7-5: 56-3).

Electric Line Trench
On September 8, 2011, CAS archaeologist David Yelacic monitored the excavation of a
trench that measured approximately 1 ft (30 cm) wide and 2 ft (60 cm) deep. This trench was
excavated from the southeast edge of the north building to an existing electric line underneath
the paved street that separates the construction site from the TxSt Golf Course (see Figure
3-4 for trench location). Lithic debitage, faunal bone, charcoal, burned clay and burned rock
were observed while monitoring this trench. Collected artifacts include two cores, one biface
(Appendix C), one ceramic fragment (See Figure 7-34 53-11), and four projectile points; all
recovered from 0–45 cmbs . The four points were identified as Gower, Nolan, Castroville and
Fairland (see Figure 7-2 D, Figure 7-5: 53-2, Figure 7-10: 53-1 and Figure 7-11 E). In addition,
four large stones were exposed approximately 7 m to the southeast of the foundation and at a
depth of 50–60 cm below the surface. When the excavation was stopped so that the stones could
be examined, a human cranium was discovered (Figure 8-5). Upon screening the associated
sediment, CAS archaeologists recovered long bone fragments and phalanges. The large stones
and remains were determined to be associated with a prehistoric cairn burial, and the electric
line project was terminated. The exposed cranium was covered with burlap and soft sediment
that had been pre-screened. The remains were then reburied to protect and preserve them
until proper documentation could commence. This discovery and the process involved in the
burial excavation are described later in this chapter.

109

Chapter 8

Figure 8-5. CAS archaeologist David Yelacic investigating prehistoric burial. Oe of the large cairn stones is visible in the
trench wall just above the excavation splint.

Waterline Monitoring
On January 18, 2012, CAS archaeologists monitored trenching for a waterline. The trench was
excavated with a mechanical trencher from the previously mentioned paved road to the new
building. Once complete, the trench measured 30–40 cm deep and 40–50 cm wide. A second
trench, with similar dimensions, was excavated from the building to the lift station. The upper
35 cm of sediment in both trenches was found to be mixed with asphalt and construction base.
A moderate amount of debitage was encountered within the excavated sediment below 35 cm,
and a large piece of charcoal was observed in the bottom of the first trench. No time-diagnostic
material or cultural features were encountered, and no artifacts or other materials were
collected.
Additional monitoring was necessary on February 7, 2012, during exploratory excavation
to find an existing 2-inch waterline. The trench was excavated from the paved road northwest
toward the lift station, the final dimensions of which measured 60–80 cm wide and 50–100 cm
below surface. A large amount of lithic debitage and burned rock was encountered as well as
two large faunal bone fragments, a polished bone fragment, a piece of possible ground stone, a
large biface, two distal projectile point fragments and two large charcoal fragments. No timediagnostic artifacts were observed, and no artifact materials were collected.

110

Chapter 8

Water Main Trench Monitoring
On May 23, 2012, CAS archaeologists monitored the mechanical excavation of a relatively large
area, where a municipal utility crew attempted to locate a water main in order to supply water
to the new restroom facility. This excavation was located southwest of the restroom and ticket
kiosk buildings and along the south side of the paved road. Intact sediments were encountered
directly underneath the topsoil, and a significant amount of burned rock and lithic debitage
was observed. A buried fence post with a cement base was identified in the southwest corner
of the trench (Figure 8-6) indicating previously disturbed sediment in this limited part of the
trench. After a couple of hours of excavations, the city crew was unable to locate the water
main. Discussions ensued about how to increase the size of the trench until the waterline was
located, including the possibility of extending the trench into the TxSt golf course. By this time,
the U-shaped trench measured approximately 2 m wide, 7 m long, and was more than 1 m
deep in some places (Figure 8-7). At this point, CAS archaeologists asked the city crew to stop
their excavation and contacted TxSt personnel to discuss a less invasive process for locating
the water main. The city crew agreed to stop, and CAS archaeologists continued to inspect the
excavated sediment. Much more burned rock and lithic debitage as well as two bifaces were
encountered. No time-diagnostic artifacts were observed. Ultimately, in consultation with TxSt

Figure 8-6. Closeup of a buried fence post with cement base.

111

Chapter 8

Figure 8-7. Exploratory trench for main water line, looking south.

personnel, it was decided that the waterline, which no longer served any existing facility on the
Spring Lake peninsula, would simply be abandoned in situ and an alternate method would be
devised for providing water to the new construction.

Irrigation Line Monitoring
After the decision was made to abandon the main waterline because of the destructive nature
of the excavations required for relocating it, TxSt decided to recommission an old irrigation line
for the purpose of providing potable water to the ticket kiosk restroom facility. This existing
line is located on the northwest side of the paved peninsula road. On May 24, 2012, CAS
archaeologists monitored the installation of a meter box located in a grassy area between the
paved peninsula road and the Rivers System Institute parking lot, northeast of the new ticket
kiosk and restroom facility. After some manual excavations with shovel around the area, a
hydro-excavator was used to remove the sediment on top of and around an existing waterline.

112

Chapter 8
The final depth of the area excavated with the hydro-excavator measured approximately
1 m below surface. A small amount of debitage was observed within the first 10 cm of the
scraped sediment; however most of the sediment excavated with the hydro-excavator had
been previously disturbed by the initial installation of the waterline. In addition, a trench
measuring 1 m in length and running east from the pipe was excavated by hand to a depth of
33 cmbs (Figure 8-8). This trench contained more debitage and one core fragment.
On May 30, 2012, two more relatively small trenches and one pit were required to
reactivate the line and connect it with the plumbing system of the new facility. The first trench
was excavated with a backhoe and was located approximately 5 m south of the lift station,
perpendicular to an existing exploratory trench. This trench was approximately 5 m long and
0.50 m deep. The top 10–20 cm of the excavation consisted of gravelly fill that blankets the
surface in the area. Beneath this fill was an intact A horizon that contained burned and firecracked rock, lithic debitage, two stone tool fragments, and a small amount of faunal bone. In

Figure 8-8. Meter box and trench, facing east.

113

Chapter 8
addition to this linear trench, a 1×1.5 m pit was excavated to the same depth in search of the
connection to the facility’s infrastructure. Much of the sediment had been disturbed previously,
but some intact soil containing similar cultural material was encountered.
The second trench was excavated manually just north of the driveway to the parking lot.
This trench was excavated to expose the targeted irrigation line in order to connect it with an
adjacent meter box. This excavation resulted in a trench that measured approximately 2.5 m
long and about 25 cm deep (Figure 8-9). Three small pieces of lithic debitage were encountered
in this excavation. Overall, impact to previously undisturbed sediment and soil in this area
was kept to a minimum and cultural materials observed were consistent with what has been
archaeologically exposed previously in this area. No cultural materials were collected.

Walkway and Access Drive Monitoring
On June 27, 2012, CAS archaeologists monitored preparatory excavations associated with a
walkway between the ticket kiosk and restroom facility and the access drive. The project area
was crescent shaped with a radius of approximately 10 m (Figure 8-10). This work consisted

Figure 8-9. Two trenches and one pit for connecting restroom facility with lift station, visible in top left of photo, with new
recommissioned irrigation line, facing north.

114

Chapter 8

Figure 8-10. Overview of crescent-shaped access drive, looking southwest.

of removing approximately 20 cm of sediment from the ground surface. This project area had
previously been impacted by various developments in that particular location, and as a result
most of the sediment scraped during the current project was gravelly construction base/fill.
However, small patches of intact sediment were present that contained modern and historic
refuse as well as lithic debitage. No diagnostic prehistoric material or significant features were
encountered and impact to archaeologically meaningful sediment was minimal.

Burial Documentation, Excavation, and Analysis
As described above, archaeological monitoring during the trenching to install electrical utilities
documented a feature of piled stone that was considered unusual for this section of the cultural
deposits present here. Additional investigation revealed a human interment, causing all
work in the immediate vicinity to halt in accordance with Chapter 711 of the State of Texas
Health and Safety Code concerning the discovery of an unmarked cemetery. In order to test
for additional interments, archaeologists from the Texas Historical Commission (Tiffany
Osborn and Mark Denton) performed a ground penetrating radar (GPR) survey of a 9×7 m
area over the location of the burial in order to determine whether any other anomalies might
be present that could represent additional burials. This survey involved transects at 50 cm
intervals and recording return signals that were differentially reflected from subsurface strata
and other deposits, including possible rock features (Figure 8-11). One faunal bone specimen
(a tooth) and three projectile points were collected from the surface of the surveyed area. Two
of the projectile points were identified as Pedernales (see Figure 7-7 B and C), and the other
exhibited extensive thermal damage and was therefore not typable (see Figure 7-15: 54-1).

115

Chapter 8

Figure 8-11. THC archaeologist Tiffany Osborne conducting GPR survey of area around burial location.

In addition to the known burial with its intact cairn, only one additional anomaly was
identified during the GPR survey. This area was located immediately adjacent to the electric
utility trench where the burial was identified. Sediments overlying this possible feature were
carefully removed by mechanical excavation, and then hand excavation commenced until
the feature was exposed. Upon excavation, the anomaly was determined be a burned rock
feature rather than a burial. It was preliminarily documented, and a Bulverde projectile point
was recovered from immediately adjacent to the feature (see Figure 7-7 A). The feature was
reburied and remains largely intact at the site. Other items collected during the mechanical
excavation include faunal bone and one ceramic fragment (see Figure 7-34: 58-1).
This work constituted the discovery phase of the burial documentation process. Once it
was confirmed that only a single burial was present, TxSt filed a Notice of the Existence of
a Cemetery at the office of the Hays County Clerk in compliance with the Texas Health and
Safety Code. This notice was filed on September 19, 2011. Ensuing discussions with TxSt
project designers indicated that this location would be a high pedestrian traffic area once the
construction was completed. It was recommended that this was an inappropriate locale for a
prehistoric interment, and the decision was made to remove the remains with the ultimate
intent of reinterring them elsewhere at Spring Lake following appropriate analyses and
consultation with Native American tribes as required under the Native American Graves
Protection and Repatriation Act. As a result of these decisions and with support from the

116

Chapter 8
Office of the State Attorney General, TxSt simultaneously petitioned the Hays County District
Court to vacate the cemetery designation and grant permission to remove the remains, and the
Office of the State Registrar to issue a permit to disinter the remains that were present. The
cemetery designation was lifted and permission to remove the remains granted on November
30, 2011. The State Registrar’s Office issued a disinterment permit on December 1, 2011.

Burial Excavation
On December 5, 2011, CAS archaeologists relocated the fabric covering that had been placed
over the remains and began a controlled excavation. This excavation was preceded by a Native
American blessing offered by Dr. Mario Garza of the Miakan/Garza band of Coahuiltecans,
which is based locally in San Marcos. A small block measuring approximately 1×1 m in size
was laid out over the precise area where archaeologists expected the remainder of the body
to be located based on the location and orientation of the cranium. This unit was placed
immediately adjacent to and west of the trench, and included the cairn feature (Figure 8-12).
Vertical control for the excavation was provided by an elevation datum established near the
edge of the unit and that was tied into the elevation datum used for Units 3 and 4.

Figure 8-12. Excavation unit (1×1 m) for burial excavation, facing south.

117

Chapter 8
Measurements taken from this datum defined the beginning and ending elevations of
each excavation level. Arbitrary 10 cm levels were excavated by hand and screened through
a ¼-inch wire mesh screen. Artifacts observed on the screen were collected and cataloged by
provenience. Similar to other controlled excavations at the site, documentation consisted of
a daily journal, scaled drawings, level summary forms, and digital photographs. Once the
skeletal remains were completely exposed, they were photographically recorded and also
plotted on a scaled plan drawing (Figure 8-13). Carbon samples were recorded and collected
in situ and from the screen, and sediment samples were collected from inside and around the
remains. The location of the burial was recorded with a GeoXT hand held GPS system with
sub-meter accuracy and integrated into a database of Spring Lake cultural resources.

Cultural Material
A total of 2033 artifacts and 174.23 grams of faunal bone were recovered from the burial
excavation (Table 8-2). None of the artifacts recovered is considered ornamental or symbolic,
and none is clearly associated with the burial in a way that would allow designation as
ceremonial or grave offerings. However, four projectile points and point fragments were
recovered during these excavations (Figure 8-14). None is thought to be an offering that
accompanied the burial. Rather, all are presumed to have been included in sediment matrix
that was collected from nearby or that was somehow displaced during the burial event.
Specimen 503-3 is a Marshall point indicative of early Late Archaic occupation, and Specimen
504-1 is a Fairland point indicating occupation during the Late Archaic III. Specimen 505-9 is
the proximal end of an untypable projectile point that resembles an early-stage Nolan point
with a very slightly beveled stem. Specimen 506-1 (not illustrated) is an untypable medial
fragment.
Table 8-2. Cultural Material from Burial Unit
Cultural Material
Lithic Debitage

Weight

1187

1368.6

Lithic Biface

3

113.46

Lithic Uniface

1

17.82

Projectile Point

4

46.3

Burned Rock

325

9498.38

Burned Clay

469

530.94

Charcoal

20

-

Mussel Shell

24

4.6

Faunal Bone

118

Count

-

174.23

Chapter 8

Figure 8-13. Plan view illustration of burial feature and associated artifacts.

Figure 8-14. Three projectile points from burial excavation.

119

Chapter 8

Bioarchaeological Analysis
by Michelle D. Hamilton and M. Katherine Spradley
Osteological analyses of the remains was conducted in order to help determine important
aspects of the cultural ancestry and possible origin of this individual for scientific reasons
and also to provide better documentation of the remains for the purposes of Native American
consultations required under NAGPRA. The osteological investigation was conducted by
Drs. Kate Spradley and Michelle Hamilton of the Department of Anthropology at TxSt, with
the additional osteological cleaning, sorting, and reconstruction assistance of four graduate
students (C. Figueroa-Soto, M. McClain, L. Springs, and C. Tegtmeyer).
Following excavation, the skeletal remains were transported to CAS using a variety of
storage media, including encasment in soil matrix and placement in foil-wrapped packages,
cardboard containers, and within re-sealable zipper plastic storage bags. Once in the lab, all
materials were kept stored in a securely locked private room in the CAS curation facility, and
all analyses described below took place within this context. All foil pouches, containers, and
plastic bags were opened, inspected, and brushed free of adhering soil matrix when possible.
The bones were extremely friable and fragile, and as a result the skeleton was in a moderateto-extreme state of fragmentation. Where possible, skeletal elements were reconstructed for
analytical purposes using non-permanent soluble adhesive glue. Bone taphonomy, including
patina and wear present on all human skeletal elements, is typical of an extended earthen
burial. The skeletal elements are stained light to dark brown in color except in areas of
postmortem fracturing, where the breaks are lighter in color as expected.
Due to the fragile and fragmentary nature of the skeletal remains, reconstruction and
analysis was difficult. It is estimated that while most of the skeleton is represented, it is
fragmented into thousands of elements. Limited reconstruction was attempted on a number of
target elements in an effort to provide information towards estimating the biological profile.
The fragmentary nature of the remains largely precludes osteometric and craniometric data
measurement collection, although limited postcranial measurements were collected on long
bones where possible or feasible. The results of the osteological analysis are as follows (Table
8-3).
Table 8-3. Skeletal Analysis Summary

120

Age

Adult (25+)

Sex

Male

Stature

63.0"–70.1"

Affiliation

Prehistoric Native American; specific tribal affiliation undetermined

Trauma

Restricted to antemortem

Chapter 8
Minimum Number of Individuals (MNI): One
No repeated bone elements were recovered from this burial. All elements are adult in age and
do not present overlapping morphological indicators of varying age ranges. Additionally, all
elements that were utilized for sex estimation point toward a single sex represented. Based on
burial presentation, archaeological recovery records, context, and observations of the elements
present, the MNI from the burial at 41HY160 represents a single individual.
Sex: Male
Due to the state of preservation, sex was estimated using limited visual observations. The
pelvis is the most effective visual indicator of sex in the human skeleton; however it was not
possible to utilize pelvic morphology for sex estimation due to the extreme fragmentation
and damage to the region. Although the cranium and mandible were fragmented, there
were a number of morphological indicators present that are indicative of sex, including a
blunt chin and flared/everted gonial angles on the mandible and a robust brow ridge, which
typically reflect masculine features. Other features on the skull were inconclusive, however,
including average mastoid size, and gracile nuchal and other muscle regions. Long bones have
pronounced areas of musculature (i.e., deltoid tuberosity on the humerus, linea aspera on the
pelvis) that are also indicative of male sex.
Age: Adult
Skeletal age at death is determined via a detailed multifactoral approach utilizing macro- and
microscopic changes in selected bone structures. Certain bones or bone features are target
elements for assessing adult age and include dental maturation and eruption, epiphyseal
closure, articular joint morphology, and degenerative changes to the skeleton.
While the morphology of the pubic symphysis and auricular surface were not available
owing to the damaged and fragmentary nature of those elements, the remaining observable
indicators of age are all suggestive of an adult individual. No unfused epiphyses or epiphyseal
lines are present. The sternal end of one clavicle is present and fused, the tooth roots are
fully developed, and the third molars erupted. Tooth wear is severe and reflective of an adult
pattern. This gives a general starting age range of 25 years+.
There is slight osteophytic overgrowth on the left ulna and on a few vertebral bodies. In
general, however, there is an overall lack of observable degenerative changes on the joint
surfaces present. This indicates that age-related arthritic and degenerative changes, which
tend to begin in middle adulthood barring trauma or injury, have not yet initiated.
A wedge fracture (compression fracture) is present on two vertebral bodies, likely resulting
from injury versus age-related bone loss. This assessment is based on the youthful appearance
of most of the skeleton and the lack of other age-related trauma indicators.
All observed features on the skeleton characterize this individual as an adult. By recent
forensic standards this individual would be considered 25–35 years of age, but given the

121

Chapter 8
differences in activity patterns and lifeways between prehistoric and modern populations, the
age estimation of this individual is given simply as younger “adult” (versus middle to older aged).
Stature
Intact postcranial long bone elements are necessary for estimating stature. This individual
had an intact clavicle, left radius, and left ulna, and it was possible to reconstruct one femur.
All other elements were too fractured to provide valid stature estimates. Although stature
estimation formulae exist for indigenous population groups from North America (Auerbach and
Ruff 2010), the full suite of measurements necessary to apply them are not available due to the
fragmentary nature of the remains. Therefore, FORDISC 3.1 stature reference standards were
used. The stature of this individual is estimated to fall within a range of 63.0"–70.1" (Jantz and
Ousley 2005). Although this estimate is generated using modern forensic reference data, the
equation is not population specific and uses a regression equation with a 90 percent prediction
interval. Because this estimate is not generated from population specific or temporally specific
data, it is intended to serve only as a general indicator of stature.
Ancestry
Burial context, associated artifacts, archaeological data, biological indicators, and overall
taphonomic appearance all point towards a prehistoric Native American determination with
regard to cultural and biological affiliation. Specific biological indicators of Native American
affiliation include the following. The dentition (Figure 8-15) demonstrates extreme occlusal
tooth wear on the premolars and molars (within a range of stages 6–8), with the patterning
and degree consistent with prehistoric hunter–gatherer populations (Smith 1984).
The cranial and postcranial skeleton provides reliable estimates of ancestry, due to
the heritability of skeletal traits, using multivariate statistical approaches. Based on the
incomplete and fragmentary nature of the cranium, further craniometric analysis is not
possible. However, postcranial ancestry estimation was employed using the Goldman Data
Set (Auerbach and Ruff 2004) for comparative reference data. In bioarchaeological analyses,
when the context of Native American is known a priori, statistical comparison of the
unknown (isolated burial) to known Native American groups is useful in assessing biological
relationships to other groups. Due to the fragmentary nature of the remains, only a limited
number of postcranial elements were available for measurement (Table 8-4).
The comparative groups (Table 8-5) were chosen based on availability of postcranial data.
First a discriminant function analysis was run to generate a Mahalanobis squared distance
(D2) matrix using SAS 9.1.2. Mahalanobis distance is a measure of biological similarity
between groups. For the purposes of the present analysis, 41HY160 was input as a single
reference group, in order to obtain a D2 value. Next, the D2 was double centered, to remove
effects of small sample sizes and the resulting eigenvectors were extracted and plotted in two
dimensions to view the biological distances between all reference groups and 41HY160.

122

Chapter 8

Table 8-4: Available Metric Data of Skeletal Remains*
Side

Measurement in mm

Clavicle Maximum Length

Left

155

Clavicle A-P diameter at midshaft

Left

11

Clavicle Sup-Inf diameter at midshaft

Left

9

Humerus epicondylar breadth

Right

62

Humerus maximum diameter at midshaft**

Right

22

Humerus minimum diameter at midshaft**

Right

20

Radius maximum length

Left

228

Radius A-P diameter at midshaft

Left

11

Radius M-L diameter at midshaft

Left

12

Right

268

Ulna A-P diameter

Left/Right

14/16

Ulna M-L diameter

Left/Right

16/18

Left

241

Femur A-P subtrochanteric

Right

28

Femur M-L subtronchanteric

Right

31

Femur A-P midshaft diameter

Right

33

Femur M-L midshaft diameter

Right

26

Left

389

Tibia maximum diameter at nutrient foramen

Right

39

Tibia minimum diameter at nutrient foramen

Right

24

Description

Ulna maximum length

Ulna physiological length

Tibia maximum length

* The osteometrics presented in this table incorporate all the standard osteometric data outlined in Buikstra and Ubelaker (1994). Both sides were recorded where possible.
** slightly estimated

123

Chapter 8

Figure 8-15. Dental inventory of burial from Ticket Kiosk excavation.

124

Chapter 8

Table 8-5. Native American Comparative Groups for Ancestry Analysis*
Group and Geographic Origin

N

Alaska

31

Aleutian, Alaska

17

Cliff Dweller, Utah

12

Indian Knoll, Kentucy

25

Illinois

21

Santa Cruz, California

5

Southwest, New Mexico

34

South Dakota

27

*data described in Auerbach and Ruff 2004
The resulting plot (Figure 8-16) shows 47 percent of the total variation. The first axis
separates 41HY160 from all other groups and the second axis separates the Alaska and
Aleutian groups from all other Native American groups and 41HY160. The isolated position
of the Spring Lake burial is likely due to the absence of comparative groups from the Texas
region.

Figure 8-16. Two-dimensional plot of D2 matrix.

125

Chapter 8
Trauma
Trauma and pathology present on the skeleton are restricted to antemortem (those occurring
prior to death) injuries composed of a vertebral wedge fracture and slight osteoarthritic lipping
(see “Age” section), as well as dental caries. All other trauma observed on the remains appears
consistent with postmortem damage.
Summary
Morphological indicators that can be used to assess sex and age indicate that this individual is
an adult male. No assessments for cultural affiliation beyond “Native American” can be made
as a result of the fragmentary and incomplete nature of the remains.

Isotopic Analysis
by Jon C. Lohse*
To help determine possible cultural affiliation, a small sample of the burial was subjected
to radiocarbon dating (to determine the archaeological age of the individual) and to isotopic
analyses (in order reconstruct some aspects of this person’s prior dietary history). Stable
carbon isotopes were measured from both collagen and hydroxylapatite carbonate (apatite), the
organic and non-organic fractions of bone composition, respectively. Stable nitrogen isotopes
were measured on apatite from the same bone sample. Together, these three values (CCOL, CAP ,
and NCOL) provide a reasonably complete understanding of prehistoric diet, which is strongly
correlated in some cases with the distinct geographic environment inhabited by a person.
Additionally, oxygen isotopes were measured from the same sample of bone apatite utilized
for the carbon and nitrogen analyses. The primary source of oxygen that becomes incorporated
into skeletal structure is drinking water, and this analysis can help place prehistoric people
geographically by linking populations with known sources of water.
Overview of Isotope Studies
Research has indicated that a history of diet can be reconstructed based on different chemical
compounds from different parts of a person’s body (Ambrose 1990, 1991). For example, the
chemical makeup of bone includes both collagen and apatite. Isotopic ratios in collagen indicate
protein (fish, meat) consumption through time, while apatite ratios include carbohydrate
consumption and tend to be a better overall reflection of total diet rather than only the protein
component of a diet, although relationships are complex (see Kellner and Schoeninger 2007).
Both collagen and apatite are continually reabsorbed into the body, meaning that a person’s
isotopic composition as measured in bone will be an average reflection of diet over the several
years prior to his/her death.
*Much of the work in this section about isotopic analysis builds on earlier research on this topic performed
by Raymond P. Mauldin and his colleagues at UTSA, and I wish to acknowledge his intellectual
contributions to this part of the report..

126

Chapter 8
During photosynthesis, stable carbon isotopes (12C and 13C) and nitrogen (14N and 15N)
are integrated into plant tissues. Plants have the ability to obtain stable nitrogen isotopes
atmospherically or from the soil. Herbivores ingest these elements into their tissues, which are
then consumed by carnivores and omnivores. In humans, the ratios of stable carbon isotopes in
bone collagen and apatite, and ratios of nitrogen isotopes in bone collagen, mirror, with minor
fractionations (changes resulting from photosynthesis or movement from one level to the next
up the food chain), the isotopic compositions of the diet. However, dietary reconstruction from
isotopic data in humans is complex, due in part to variances in how the carbon isotopes of
different food components (e.g., proteins vs. carbohydrates) are incorporated into bone tissues
(Ambrose and Norr 1993; Norr 1995).
Plants, which form the base of the food chain, take in atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2)
through different photosynthetic pathways that discriminate between 12C and 13C. In one
pathway, CO2 is incorporated into a six-carbon compound that converts rapidly to a threecarbon compound called 3-phosphoglyceric acid. This photosynthetic pathway, commonly
referred to as C3, is also known as the Calvin cycle. In a second pathway, however, CO2 is
first incorporated into four-carbon compounds prior to transfer to sugars. Plants following the
C4 photosynthetic pathway are typically of tropical origins, favor warm climates, and tend
to produce two to three times are much dry matter as plants of the C3 pathway. C3 plants
discriminate against 13C while C4 plants take in greater amounts of 13C. C3 and C4 plants
can therefore be differentiated based on their ratios of 13C to 12C, reported in parts per mil as
δ13C, with C4 plants having proportionally more 13C. A third photosynthetic pathway, called
crassulacean acid pathway or CAM, is common to water-bearing succulents such as agave that
are common in arid regions. Plants following a CAM pathway follow a C4-like pathway, with
similar δ13C values.
Human bone collagen has been estimated to have stable carbon isotope values, measured
as δ13C, approximately 5‰ (parts per mil) greater than the values reflected in the protein
portion of their diet (Ambrose and Norr 1993; Krueger and Sullivan 1984; Tykot 2004).
Interpretations of variation in the ratio of stable nitrogen isotopes (δ15N), which are only
present in bone collagen, are underdeveloped. It appears that δ15N values in human bone
collagen are approximately equivalent to the animal flesh consumed and 2–3‰ greater than
nitrogen values of consumed plants (Ambrose and DeNiro 1986; Schoeninger and DeNiro
1984). δ15N values in humans that consume primarily terrestrial plants and animals range
from about 6 to 10‰, while those that primarily rely on marine resources are between 15 and
20‰ (Tykot 2004). δ13C is measured in relation to a universal standard, the Cretaceous-age Pee
Dee Belemnite (PDB) marine fossil formation in South Carolina while the universal standard
for comparing δ15N is air (AIR).
Unlike carbon and nitrogen, stable oxygen isotopes reflect sources of water, which are
influenced by precipitation, ground water, and temperature and humidity. Excellent overviews
of techniques for and requirements of using oxygen isotopes are found in Parks (2009), White

127

Chapter 8
et al. (1998), White et al. (2000), and White et al. (2004). Oxygen is measured as the ratio
between 18O and 16O, reported as δ18O, and, like carbon and nitrogen, is expressed in parts
per thousand (‰). The resulting δ18O value is calculated in relation to different standards
depending on the material sampled. δ18O increases with frequency of the heavier 18O and is
affected by a number of different natural and metabolic processes. For example, the δ18O of
water consumed by obligate drinkers (animals, especially people, that consume most of their
water directly from a source rather than through diet) declines with distance from coastal
margins, with increasing elevation, and by northerly latitude. While metabolic rates specific
to different species can affect δ18O, variation within populations that do not travel across large
distances is seen to be generally very low, approximately 1‰.
δ18O can be measured in phosphates (δ18OP ) and carbonates (δ18OC ) , both of which occur
in bone and in teeth. The standard against which phosphate samples are compared is Vienna
Standard Mean Ocean Water (VSMOW), while carbonate samples are compared against the
carbonate standard PBD. Phosphate-oxygen ratios (δ18OP ) range from 10‰ to 20‰VSMOW and
are considerably higher than carbonate-oxygen ratios (δ18OC ), which range in humans from 0‰
to -10‰PDB. Except where diagenesis affects carbonate preservation, δ18OP can be approximately
converted to δ18OC by subtracting 21.0‰. Unless reporting labs clearly indicate factors involved
in this conversion, comparisons of reported data should rely only on similar samples, for
instance bone phosphates or teeth enamel. All samples in the present study are δ18OC and were
performed on the same bone samples used for δ13C and δ15N in order to minimize the use of
destructive analytical techniques.
δ18O is incorporated into human tissue during mineralization. However, because bone
remodels over a period of a few years, δ18O from bone samples will reflect the average δ18O
values over that period of time, essentially creating a record of water consumption that
approximately equals that of food consumption using stable carbon and nitrogen values.
Prehistoric hunter–gatherers such those who occupied Spring Lake almost certainly tended
to forage across potentially large distances, which may complicate attempts to reconstruct
territorial ranges using δ18O. Nevertheless, these data are presented for the entire San Marcos
burial assemblage (n = 6) as part of the ongoing research to understand and document insofar
as possible movements of past peoples into the area.
Results of Isotope Studies
The single individual recovered during this project was included in the small dataset of
prehistoric burials that have been recovered from the San Marcos area. These include two
partial remains from 41HY161 and three individuals recovered from 41HY163, the Zatopec
Site (Munoz et al. 2011; Stull and Hamilton 2011). All pretreatments and laboratory processing
associated with these analyses was performed by Dr. Raymond Mauldin at the Center for
Archaeological Research at the University of Texas at San Antonio. Results of isotope analyses
for all of these individuals are presented in Table 8-6.

128

Chapter 8

Burial No.
(M, F, Ind)

Collagen
(13C)

Apatite
(13C)

Nitrogen
(15N)

Col-Ap
Spacing

C to N
Atomic Ratio

Oxygen
(18O)

41HY161

1 (F)

-10.4

-7.9

13.3

2.5

3.2

-2.5

515 ± 20

41HY161

2 (Ind)

-16.9

-10.7

8.8

6.2

3.3

-2.7

3510 ± 20

41HY163

1 (M)

-17.7

-9.8

9.4

7.9

3.3

-4.0

1300 ± 20

41HY163

2 (F)

-17.9

-11.0

8.8

6.9

3.3

-2.8

1215 ± 20

41HY163

3 (F)

-17.8

-10.3

9.1

7.5

3.3

-4.0

1305 ± 20

41HY160

1 (M)

-18.6

-10.74

10.0

7.8

2.8

-3.26

2015 ± 20

14

C Date

Site

Table 8-6. Isotope Data for Burial Population from Three Sites

When working with population-level samples, important insights can be gained into dietrelated behaviors according to regionally available resources, which may change over time
with environment or across space by habitat. Reconstructing diet using carbon and nitrogen
can be complicated, however, as several factors that have been discussed influence δ13C and
δ15N. Because local food systems are based on highly variable factors specific to region, climate,
proximity to coastal or riverine systems, and so forth, comparative analyses should be done
on a local basis. Most useful for dietary reconstructions are reconstructions of local food webs
and the isotopic signatures of different plant and animal resources that are found in that
study area. Such models, built from isotopic measurements taken from locally occurring plant
and animal resources, provide an interpretive framework for understanding the complex
interactions between consumer behavior and access to resources, available foodstuffs, and the
effect of trophic enrichment (i.e., isotopic enrichment or fractionation that occurs at increasing
levels of the food chain) for some important species. Plotting the small set of six San Marcos
burials on a generalized food web model for North America indicates that all but one shared a
diet relatively similar to what would be expected of people living near a riverine environment
(Figure 8-17).
Five of the six burials from this area seem to indicate use of the kinds of food resources
associated with a riverine environment. Burial Number 1 from 41HY161, however, shows
strong evidence for heavy consumption of marine foodstuffs. This female is identified on this
basis as likely having come into the area from somewhere along the coast. Her oxygen isotope
value (-2.5) is also the highest among this small sample, further identifying her as non-local to
the area. We argue that these multiple lines of evidence, including not only sex but also δ13CCOL,
δ13CAP, δ15N, and δ18O, provide perhaps the best available evidence for non-local origins and that

129

Chapter 8
such data are needed before conclusions about in-migrations or the exchange of mates can be
substantiated.
As discussed, different dietary behaviors are represented by different lines of isotopic
evidence. The spacing or interval between δ13CAP and δ13CCOL can help archaeologists
understand differences in protein, specifically meat consumption among and within ancient
populations. Changes of ~7 between δ13CAP and δ13CCOL are expected in herbivore diets, while
~5‰ characterizes omnivore diets and ~3–4‰ is associated with carnivore diets. In cultural
contexts in which meat is considered a luxury or high status food, measuring δ13CAP to δ13CCOL
spacing can help define differences in social rank that are partly based on access to different
foods. Because these kinds of food-related value systems are culturally specific, comparisons
are most meaningful within discrete populations rather than across large areas and involving
many cultural traditions. For example, a cemetery population of 17 adult males and females
from the Coleman Site, 41BX568 (Mauldin et al. 2013), contained 10 “mature” (older than ~10

Figure 8-17. Stable carbon and nitrogen isotope values for six San Marcos burials, including the individual from the Ticket
Kiosk excavation (in yellow) in relation to a generalized food web model (after Munoz et al. 2011: Figure 8-1).

130

Chapter 8
years of age) individuals, six males and four females, for whom apatite-collagen spacing could
be calculated. Of these, the average spacing interval for males compared to females is 7.85 vs.
7.57, suggesting that on average males consumed slightly more meat protein than did females
in the same population. However, standard deviations with each of these small sex-based
groups (0.878 for males vs. 1.024 for females) suggest greater food-related behavioral variation
among females than males (see Mauldin et al. 2013 for these data). These comparisons are
difficult to apply to the San Marcos burial population given its small size, but data in Table 8-6
show that the two males also maintain higher spacing, on average, than the two females (7.85
vs. 7.2). This simple comparison excludes the non-local female, whose low spacing interval, 2.5,
is the result of her very low δ13C value. The Coleman Cemetery dates to the early Toyah period,
while the San Marcos burials span approximately 3000 years, from ca. 500 to 3500 cal B.P.
Although a larger sample is needed to support these conclusions, when taken together, these
data suggest that males on average had greater access to meat-based protein than their female
counterparts, at least at inland riverine and other terrestrial prehistoric sites in Central Texas.
Additionally, it is suggested that females, as a group, display greater variation in food-related
consumption behavior than their male counterparts. This was seemingly true for all time
periods represented in the present data set.
An additional line of interpretation possible for the small San Marcos burial set involves
using δ13CAP and δ13CCOL in conjunction with the contextual information provided by regional
food web models to understand total diet. Recent isotopic studies on prehistoric hunter–
gatherer populations in and around Central Texas (Bement 1994; Hard and Katzenberg 2011;
Mauldin et al. 2013; Munoz et al. 2011) that have produced the minimally comparable lines
of data discussed here (including carbon from collagen and apatite as well as nitrogen but
excluding oxygen) have begun to provide a general view of how prehistoric hunter–gatherer
diets have changed through time. By using idealized pure C3 and C4 diets and also by
incorporating sources of marine and non-marine protein, analysts can plot individual-level
dietary histories by time in ways that show important general trends from one prehistoric
period to the next. In particular, this includes distinguishing between C3 and C4 protein
groups, as well as the ratio of C3 and C4 foods in the whole diet.
Data points representing each individual’s δ13CAP and δ13CCOL are plotted against regression
lines indicating the protein groups (Kellner and Schoeninger 2007; Froehle et al. 2010).
Together, Early, Middle, and Late Archaic and also Austin period burials show a clear trend
of increasing reliance on C3 plants, including roots, geophytes, and mast such as pecan,
mesquite, walnuts, and persimmons (Hard and Katzenberg 2011: Table 6) ( Figure 8-18). The
Late Archaic San Marcos burial set, including the single individual from the Ticket Kiosk, falls
neatly into this pattern. However, based on the Coleman cemetery population (n = 11) from
Bexar County and dating to the early Toyah period, this trend sharply reverses immediately
following the Austin period. Toyah diets are generally more dispersed and closely mirror
consumption patterns of the Early, Middle and Late Archaic. Importantly, no time period

131

Chapter 8

Figure 8-18. Prehistoric burial isotope data from Central Texas plotted against protein group regression lines created
from controlled dietary studies reported in Froehle et al. (2010). Redrawn from Mauldin et al. (2013: Figures 2 and 6).

seems strongly influenced by C4 protein, which raises questions regarding the degree to which
this method of reconstructing total diet accurately accommodates all protein intake. Parts
of the Late Archaic and much of the Toyah period are thought to have been characterized by
exploitation of bison, yet no heavy reliance on bison-derived protein seems to be indicated in
Figure 8-18.

132

Chapter 8
In an attempt to more accurately reflect total diet, Froehle et al. (2012; also Somerville
et al. 2013) have created a multivariate model of isotopic variability that allows them to plot
three variables, δ13CAP , δ13CCOL, and δ15NCOL rather than simply δ13CAP and δ13CCOL. Through
k-means cluster analyses on archaeological populations from diverse areas around the world
and whose diets were relatively well known, Froehle et al. (2012) identified five discrete dietary
subgroups or “clusters,” each of which correlates with diets of certain makeup (Table 8-7).
These three isotopic variables were seen to have significant influence on the clusters that were
defined, and two discriminant functions were found to account for 98.8 percent of the overall
variation recorded within this “training sample.” Function 1 (F1) accounts for most of the
isotopic variation related to carbon, while Function 2 (F2) was found to account for most of the
variation relating to nitrogen intake. These functions are calculated as:
Carbon: F1 = (0.322* δ13CAP) + (0.727* δ13CCOL) + (0.219* δ15NCOL) + 9.354
Nitrogen: F2 = (-0.393* δ13CAP) + (0.133* δ13CCOL) + (0.622* δ15NCOL) -8.703
As noted, this approach is intended to provide resolution with respect to protein-related
ambiguities and is intended to help clarify sources of C3 vs. C4 protein as well as terrestrial
vs. marine protein (Froehle et al. 2012:353). It is used here as a means of evaluating whether
additional understanding of prehistoric diets can be gained by use of isotopic data.
Table 8-7. Cluster Diets Defined through k-means Cluster Analysis of
Published Archaeological Data Regarding Dietary Contributions Measured
by Isotopic Variation
(from Froehle et al. 2012: Table 1)
Cluster

Total diet

Protein Source

1

100% C3

100% C3

2

70% C4

> 50% C4

3

50% C3

High marine protein

4

70% C3

≥ 65% C3

5

70% C4

≥ 65% C3

By including nitrogen, greater resolution may be possible in terms of understanding
sources of protein intake, as protein influences the δ15N values in human skeletal material.
The overall understanding of nitrogen isotopic variation in animals is underdeveloped in
relation to carbon. As noted, nitrogen enrichment increases with each trophic level. However,
some animals, including obligate drinkers, are also affected by the condition of ambient water
supplies which respond closely to climate conditions. Isotopic analyses of archaeological
bison remains from Spring Lake, for example, document average δ15N values that change
markedly by time period ( Figure 8-19). In contrast, a survey of δ15N values from 60 modern
white-tailed deer from North America shows an average of 4.3 ± 2.0‰ (Cormie and Schwartz

133

Chapter 8

Figure 8-19. Average isotopic variation with standard deviations for archaeological bison remains from Spring Lake and
nearby sites by time period (Lohse et al. 2012).

1994). Based solely on differences between nitrogen values for deer versus bison, one might
expect the consumption of at least some bison to be indicated in the isotopic record by slight
increases in δ15N values in human skeletal remains, in addition to enrichment in δ13CCOL.
However, yet another interpretive challenge with using nitrogen to reconstruct protein
consumption is that some animals, especially deer, show marked intra-species variability in

134

Chapter 8
terms of response to water stress (Cormie and Schwarcz 1996). Approximately 25 percent of
white-tailed deer populations respond to stress not by concentrating uric acid but rather by
modifying their browsing behavior to include a greater abundance of C4 plants. The result
is that the consumption of deer, in particular, presents problems for understanding the
consumption of protein because their behavioral changes during periods of water stress result
in high intra-species variation in δ15N. Given these issues, any analytical approach that allows
archaeologists to isolate small dietary changes in the isotopic record, such as the addition of
moderate amounts of bison to an otherwise broad-spectrum diet should be considered for use.
The number of prehistoric burials from greater Central Texas for which all necessary data
necessary for a multivariate isotopic analysis exist is limited to only 53 individuals. All of
these remains except for the individual from the Ticket Kiosk have been previously reported,
and are summarized by Mauldin et al. (2013). Use of the multivariate isotope analytical
technique (Figure 8-20) shows the same general kind and degree of dietary distinction by time
period as seen using the “simple” bivariate plot based on δ13CAP and δ13CCOL (see Figure 8-18).
Time periods are defined, with some overlap, by a gradual decrease in Function 1 (carbon)
and an increase in Function 2 (nitrogen) from Early Archaic to Austin, with Toyah returning
to approximately the same general range of values as seen in the Early Archaic sample. The
Austin-period population falls largely outside the dietary clusters defined by Froehle et al.
(2012). Based on the characteristics of clusters 1 and 4, Austin-period diets in the region
appear to have consisted of 70 –100 percent C3 total diet and 65 –100 percent C3-derived
protein.
Two important exceptions are Toyah and Toyah/Protohistoric “outliers” that have diets
in or near Cluster 2 (70 percent C4 total diet, > 50 percent C4 protein). One of these is the
same female identified as non-local from Spring Lake; no sex data are available for the other
(Cargill 1996). Interestingly, time periods during which bison were presumably present on the
landscape, including Toyah, Early Archaic, and precise intervals of the Late Archaic (Dillehay
1974; Lohse et al. 2012) are not strongly differentiated by Function 2 (nitrogen) as one might
expect if changes in the consumption of terrestrial C4 fauna (bison) were marked enough to
over-determine other dietary sources of isotopic variation. Rather, based on this model, it
appears that bison, when and if consumed, is difficult to distinguish based on isotopic study at
this temporal resolution (see earlier discussion of turnover rates for bone collagen and apatite).
In cases, such as the Spring Lake burial set and that of the Coleman Site, for which precise,
reliable dates are available, future analyses should seek to understand what variation may
have been present within the gross temporal categories (“Late Archaic” or “Toyah”) that are
used here.

135

Chapter 8

Figure 8-20. Discriminant function temporal values from prehistoric burial data from greater Central Texas plotted against
dietary clusters. Spring Lake burial data are highlighted.

136

Chapter 9
Conclusions and Recommendations
by Jon C. Lohse
Archaeological excavations and monitoring were conducted at the new TxSt Ticket Kiosk
at Aquarena Springs in order to mitigate important information loss resulting from this
construction project. The construction site lies within the boundaries of State Antiquities
Landmark 41HY160, and deposits here extend as much as or more than 20 ft below the
modern ground surface, representing all time periods that define the local and regional
cultural chronology. Controlled excavations were restricted to a single 1×2 m unit excavated
to a depth of 3 m. This unit included approximately half of the area of disturbance resulting
from the installation of a lift station to provide head pressure to nearby restroom facilities.
Additional archaeological investigations including monitoring a series of smaller trenches and
disturbances associated with the installation of various utilities to service the new building.
One trench exposed a human burial, explained in detail in Chapter 8.
This work contributes to the overall understanding of the Spring Lake site complex and
to Central Texas prehistory in numerous ways. As discussed in earlier chapters, the primary
contribution involves adding a considerable amount of information to the existing body of
information about the Calf Creek horizon. This important horizon (Thurmond and Wyckoff
1999) has been defined across most of Oklahoma (Wyckoff 1994, 1995), areas of Texas where
Plains-type grassland habitats were present during this period (Collins 1995), and parts of
Kansas and Missouri. Within Texas, Calf Creek-period point types include Andice (Prewitt
1983) and Bell (Sorrow et al. 1967). The extent of these two point types across much of the
state (Collins et al. 2011: Figure 8; Prewitt 1995) reveals that this horizon was widespread.
Previous research, however, has left the timing and environmental nature of the period
imprecisely defined. Additionally, with the exception of a few localities where Bell/Andice
material has been reported in profusion, including the Gault site (Prewitt 1983; see Collins
1994) and in Victoria County (Bill Birmingham, personal communication to Jon Lohse, 2012),
many finds from this period seem limited to surface collections (e.g., Calame et al. 2002;

Chapter 9
Chandler and Kumpe 1993), are single artifacts without context or secure provenience (Yelacic
et al. 2008a: Figure 4-84), or occur in compressed or highly mixed components with other timediagnostic material and poor geologic resolution (e.g., Unit IIIb at Wilson-Leonard, 41WM235
[Stafford 1998] and Occupation Zone 2 at Gatlin, 41KR261 [Houk et al. 2008]). Intact, wellstratified Calf Creek components with the potential to contain evidence for multiple lines of
technological, chronometric, and subsistence research into this interval are rare. The Landslide
Site, 41BL85 (Sorrow et al. 1967), excavated in the Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir was one such
site, as apparently was the Cervenka Site, 41WM267 (Peter et al. 1982), excavated in the San
Gabriel Reservoir area. Based on the preliminary information available from Spring Lake,
41HY160 has potential to be among the richest, best temporally resolved Calf Creek-period
sites yet recorded by archaeologists.

What We Know and Wish We Knew about Calf Creek
The Calf Creek horizon is noteworthy for the close association between Middle Holocene
bison exploitation and technologically distinctive, triangular-shaped dart points with deep
characteristic basal notching. Direct evidence for the use of Calf Creek points in hunting bison
was reported from Oklahoma (Bement et al. 2005), where a juvenile bison skull with a Calf
Creek point embedded in the base of one of the horns was uncovered in a stream bed. Bison
remains are commonly reported from multicomponent sites where Calf Creek material is
present, and Spring Lake follows this general rule (see discussion of faunal remains in Chapter
6). This period of bison presence precedes the mid-Holocene Altithermal event of peak aridity
and, according to some models, temperatures. In Central Texas, this occurs at ca. 4200–2800
cal B.P., during the Edwards Interval (see Chapter 2). Because of these conditions, Calf Creek
material from Central Texas has proven difficult to date precisely as a result of sediment loss
and component mixing caused by landscape erosion and deflation.
Our work at the Ticket Kiosk provides a highly resolved temporal model for the Calf Creek
horizon. The sequence of dates produced by the project (see Table 5-1) complements others
derived from bison remains from nearby sites (Lohse et al. 2012) and suggests that the Calf
Creek interval may have been no more than ~250 years in duration, ca. 5750–6000 cal B.P.
This age estimate puts Calf Creek at the very end of the regional Early Archaic time period
(Lohse et al. 2014) and is based on several (n = 12) of high-precision XAD-purified AMS dates
on bison remains (see Figure 2-6). The Calf Creek component reported here is bracketed by two
non-bison XAD bone dates from just above and just below the bison-bearing zone at the Ticket
Kiosk excavation. Future research should continue to refine this age estimate by processing
more dates from this sequence, including the submission of series of assays on taxonomically
consistent (e.g., white-tailed deer, artiodactyl, etc.) non-bison remains that occur above, within,
and below the Calf Creek deposit. In addition, complementary dating efforts at other sites that
follow the same protocols outlined in the present study would add to the overall picture of Calf
Creek as it occurs in Texas.

138

Chapter 9
Two aspects of an improved understanding of Calf Creek chronology would be
distinguishing insofar as possible between the appearance of Bell and Andice points on the
archaeological landscape and relating Calf Creek point production technology to its immediate
antecedents. Presently, it is not known whether Bell and Andice occupy the same exact time
period, or whether one slightly predates the other. Achieving this degree of temporal precision
will require that archaeologists dedicate sufficient resources to constructing high resolution
chronologies at sites where one or the other type seems to dominate the assemblage. As
defined, Calf Creek technology is characterized by distinctive basally notched points. These
points seem to have fallen out of favor very quickly, and were replaced in archaeological
sequences by unnotched Early Triangular points. However, notching is present on both
Bandy and Merrell points, which date immediately prior to Calf Creek (Figure 9-1). Previous

Figure 9-1. Bandy (A) and Merrell (B) points from Spring Lake compared with Calf Creek (Bell) points discussed in this
report. All three types show characteristic corner (Bandy and Merrell) and basal (Bell) notching. Bandy and Merrell types
immediately precede Bell and Andice in regional chronologies, and the knapping debris associated with these types,
notching flakes in particular, may be difficult to distinguish.

139

Chapter 9
explanations for the appearance of Calf Creek cultural patterns in the study area include bison
hunters pursuing herds from the north and northeast during this particular climatic interval
(see Collins 1995:384; Wyckoff 1995). However, demonstrating any kind of technological
continuity with previous cultural traditions would help archaeologists better understand the
nature of Calf Creek adaptations as they occur in Central Texas.
Related to the issue of chronological precision is a better understanding of technological
strategies implemented for the manufacture and production of Calf Creek (Bell and Andice)
points and other toolkit components. Relatively few studies regarding technological approaches
to characteristic Bell and Andice points have been undertaken (Weber 1994), and specific
manufacturing strategies that can help separate these two types remain poorly understood.
Can different strategies for producing these types be defined that may help archaeologists
better distinguish between Calf Creek populations? Pure Bell or Andice components seem to
be exceedingly scarce on the landscape, a limitation which would seem to pose a challenge to
such studies. But where they do occur, such assemblages would be outstanding candidates for
providing the kinds of technological insight needed to better understand this cultural pattern.
In addition to technology, findings reported here point to some issues regarding diet and
subsistence that indicate significant trends or adaptation shifts that may characterize Calf
Creek, at least in Central Texas. With respect to subsistence practices and the effect of bison
exploitation on Archaic diets, our findings here seem to show relatively little changes to overall
diet with the inclusion of bison. The Ticket Kiosk sample is probably too small to substantiate
detailed conclusions, although it does show a slight yet distinct increase in faunal assemblage
richness (the number of taxons present) from Calf Creek to later times (see Table 6-1). This
increase from an average of 8 to 9 taxons during Calf Creek times to 12 to 13 taxons in the
period that immediately follows may be significant; it appears to indicate a more limited diet,
as fewer species were taken during the period when bison were available on the terminal
Early Archaic landscape. However, based on the fauna that are present, which include whitetailed deer, turtles, and small mammals such as rabbits, local diets still resemble the kinds of
broad-spectrum diets that characterize most Archaic assemblages. Rather than representing
a shift away from smaller- and medium-bodied game, this small sample suggests that Calf
Creek peoples simply added bison to their diets and compensated by lessening their reliance on
only a few other resources in response. For example, no fish were observed in this part of the
Spring Lake deposit, although systematic recovery methods specifically targeting these small
remains were not implemented during this project. Future analyses on this issue should target
relatively “pure” (unmixed) Calf Creek components such as this one, and apply fine-mesh
recovery techniques allowing for the capture of small faunal remains. Additionally, a much
larger sample size than the one reported here is needed in order to support any conclusions
that may be reached concerning dietary adaptations during Calf Creek times. Considering
the mobile nature of prehistoric hunter–gatherer populations, it would be ideal if such studies
could be conducted at multiple well-preserved sites located in diverse environmental settings

140

Chapter 9
that offer access to many different suites of subsistence resources.
A final contribution of this project to the overall understanding of Calf Creek involves
climate and site reconstruction. Our stratigraphic analysis clearly shows that the Calf Creek
component here postdates the development and formation of the buried soil at just over 170
cmbd indicated in Figure 4-1. Indeed, our model of sedimentation rates for the site indicate
rapid, sustained deposition beginning well before Calf Creek times and culminating around
4200 cal B.P. (see Figure 2-3). This sequence indicates that starting before ca. 6000 cal
B.P., archaeologists can expect to find and should seek out stable surfaces associated with
archaeological remains that can be dated and that may contain well-preserved remains
stemming from subsistence and technological practices. Such surfaces, where they remain
intact, as at Spring Lake, may be deeply buried but well stratified. How do archaeologists
understand climatic conditions that favor these kinds of depositional environments and that
support or give rise to the appearance of open grassland-type habitats that are associated with
bison? Temperature and precipitation reconstructions based on phytoliths from Hall’s Cave
(see Figure 2-5) suggest high rates of precipitation just before Calf Creek followed by a period
of relatively intensive drought. This sequence, however, lacks fine temporal precision, and
other better dated records would improve our understanding of environmental change across
the Middle Holocene.

Summary
Excavations in this part of 41HY160 show clearly that the Spring Lake site contains a rich
and sometimes highly resolved record of prehistoric occupation associated with important
contextualizing environmental data. Although the analytical sample recovered in this
phase of work is limited in many respects, it indicates that numerous significant issues
that define or characterize Central Texas regional prehistory can be understood through
controlled, scientific methodologies. Foremost among these is that high-resolution cultural
chronologies can be compiled given commitment of sufficient resources and use of appropriate
analytical techniques. Archaeologists working in Central Texas often lack a clear and detailed
understanding of many Archaic-period sequences, developments, and adaptations. Much of this
poor understanding is the result of compressed geologic sequences and insufficient attention to
absolute dating standards, circumstances that are in part overcome at Spring Lake.
This report contributes to the growing body of data about the cultural resources at Spring
Lake. It is recommended that future archaeological studies at this site, whether initiated
through compliance requirements of construction or development projects or carried out with
grant support, should consider the potential for this rich site to serve as a baseline of sorts for
the construction of local as well as regional models that can be applied more broadly in other
parts of the Central Texas region. Future studies would be well served to build on advances
made by this and other previous studies while seeking to expand our total awareness of Spring
Lake and the long-term sequence of human occupation it contains.

141

Middle
Archaic

Early
Archaic

Time
Period

Proximal

12.29

9.37

Proximal

488-1
Almagre/ 409-4
Langtry

7.93

9.16

11.61

Proximal

405-2

5.19

6.77

6.54

Mostly
Complete

Proximal

Proximal

411-5
312-3

Proximal

315-1

6.27

432-2

Martindale

NS

Mostly
Complete

313-3

6.39

8.27

5.73

3.40

5.56

6.31

7.69

Th.

Mostly
Complete

Merrell

NS

Complete

415-6

Proximal

430-1
Mostly
Complete

Mostly
Complete

415-7

415-1

Proximal

Mostly
Complete;
Reworked

427-1

312-1

Medial

Fragmentation

53-14

Spec.
No.

305-2

Uvalde

NS

Travis

Bell

Stillhouse

Pecos

Gower

Type

Lampasas

Series

Chronology and Description

64.63

70.48

45.26

44.13

56.65

32.27

37.26

Max
L.

38.18

29.21

22.56

20.80

38.57

30.49

28.45

21.73

28.56

38.29

37.66

18.88

Max
W.

21.5

13.4

15.1

12.0

16.5

1.0

6.1

2.3

6.8

6.0

9.3

4.4

1.9

7.5

3.9

15.38

Wt. (g)

17.20

20.06

24.98

17.87

12.16

10.57

12.85

10.43

15.24

13.81

11.61

5.97

16.51

14.38

Stem
L.

32.28

18.14

19.74

17.54

20.26

15.32

12.99

16.25

12.27

14.24

14.24

10.99

18.69

15.00

16.63

Neck
W.

Metric Measurements

Appendix A. Projectile Point Metric Data

21.76

17.50

13.60

24.90

22.40

22.01

13.58

17.40

16.01

11.88

17.46

15.78

Base
W.

1.67

1.55

3.11

1.36

3.74

1.74

2.34

0.84

0.89

2.37

Base
D.

Appendix A

143

144

Late
Archaic II

Late
Archaic I

Middle
Archaic
cont’d)

Time
Period

Nueces

NS

Complete
Medial

56-3
410-1

Mostly
Complete

432-1

Castroville

Mostly
Complete
Proximal

7-2
53-1

Proximal

Proximal

403-1

305-1

Proximal

306-3

Proximal

9.19

Proximal

306-2

55-2

6.11

204-19 Proximal

Lange

8.52

Mostly
Complete

54-3

7.60

7.28

7.99

9.13

9.95

5.50

8.26

7.82

Mostly
Complete

54-2

7.98

Pedernales

Complete

7.46

10.06

9.37

6.88

9.44

Th.

57-1

Complete

Proximal

53-2

305-3

Proximal

Fragmentation

309-3

Spec.
No.

Bulverde

Baird

Falcon
Pecos

Nolan

Type

Parida

Series

Chronology and Description

50.65

50.32

60.62

47.58

80.55

69.79

Max
L.

45.70

28.75

28.86

33.72

31.96

34.28

30.40

33.67

32.38

29.22

Max
W.

9.8

11.9

10.8

17.5

23.9

10.0

11.3

8.4

14.6

9.6

12.3

10.7

14.5

21.9

5.6

15.9

Wt. (g)

14.67

10.70

12.49

12.82

22.27

15.59

18.11

21.64

16.48

22.06

17.97

15.28

19.00

20.37

Stem
L.

25.00

20.66

19.47

15.20

20.17

19.55

20.51

19.25

19.88

22.86

22.15

22.46

23.21

18.69

21.38

Neck
W.

Metric Measurements

Appendix A. Projectile Point Metric Data

18.71

19.41

19.59

18.21

20.87

17.91

22.16

19.51

32.38

24.67

19.14

17.48

Base
W.

7.98

3.70

5.34

10.13

1.90

6.44

0.60

Base
D.

Appendix A

Perdiz

Complete
Mostly
complete

401-1

Mostly
Complete

Proximal

Proximal

Mostly
Complete

201-7

428-1

437-1

Scallorn 431-1

Ensor

Rio
Bravo

53-3

3.51

3.90

3.54

7.26

6.89

7.94

5.98

Austin

Fairland

Rio
Bravo

5.66

6.43

Th.

304-13 Complete

Mostly
Complete

Fragmentation

304-12 Proximal

Darl

Edgewood

NS

304-9

Spec.
No.

Kyle

Ellis

Type

NS

Series

Late
Blum
Prehistoric –
Toyah

Transitional
Archaic/
Austin

Late
Archaic III

Time
Period

Chronology and Description

28.92

29.31

37.09

31.36

47.19

Max
L.

16.52

15.49

16.34

24.70

24.36

24.58

23.05

Max
W.

1.2

0.9

1.4

3.9

5.5

6.2

4.0

1.9

5.5

Wt. (g)

12.24

8.55

17.53

10.34

15.82

8.76

6.12

9.24

Stem
L.

5.74

5.52

5.80

15.84

13.01

16.77

14.26

9.34

11.72

Neck
W.

Metric Measurements

Appendix A. Projectile Point Metric Data

1.79

16.59

19.98

17.22

11.41

18.25

Base
W.

1.95

2.66

Base
D.

Appendix A

145

Appendix B

Table B. Biface Data from All Excavation Units
Spec
No.

Unit Level

Fragmentation

103-9

1

4

End missing: Proximal
and one edge

104-13

1

5

105-3

1

200-5

Length
(mm)

Width
(mm)

Thickness
(mm)

Weight
(g)

5.03

4.7

End only

12.99

24.6

6

Medial: Edge Fragment

11.63

9.6

2

1

Medial

15.34

202-2

2

3

End only: Distal
55.92

40

5.33

7.6

15.41

72.6

20.37

95.2

8.08

19.7

5-2

2

4

End missing: Distal

204-2

2

5

End only

304-2

3

5

End only: Proximal

305-48

3

6

Medial: Edge Fragment

11.75

10.4

306-7

3

7

End only

15.95

52.4

308-44

3

9

Medial

43.38

12.68

32.3

308-6

3

9

End only: Proximal

40.27

14.09

22.8

312-7

3

13

End only: Distal

9.18

20.7

328-1

3

13, 14

End only: Distal

10.25

27.3

313-1

3

14

End only: Proximal

8.63

14.5

313-19

3

14

Medial

313-41

3

14

End only: Proximal

314-4

3

15

Medial

6.03

315-17

3

16

End only: Distal

6.93

316-3

3

17

End only

9.38

15

339-1

3

1

Medial

8.9

16

401-3

4

2

Complete

403-2

4

4

403-3

4

404-1

42.92

31.85
40.69

55.80

16

12.11

18
3.3
1.9

10.84

22.8

End only: Distal

5.55

5.3

4

End only: Distal

8.06

13.6

4

5

Complete

404-3

4

5

Medial

6.99

7.2

405-3

4

6

End only: Proximal

46.91

8.84

15.5

407-10

4

8

End only: Proximal

44.55

11.16

27.4

407-15

4

8

End only: Distal

5.74

2.9

407-2

4

8

End only: Distal

8.9

8.3

407-9

4

8

Medial

12.37

17.5

408-4

4

9

Medial: Edge Fragment

6.54

1.4

409-10

4

10

Medial

9.01

15.9

409-12

4

10

End only

10.81

31.2

61.87

41.37

11.32

42.97

14.12

32

147

Appendix B

Table B. Biface Data from All Excavation Units
Spec
No.

Unit Level

Fragmentation

Length
(mm)

Width
(mm)

Thickness
(mm)

409-13

4

10

End only: Distal

409-8

4

10

End only: Proximal

411-1

4

12

End only: Distal

8.41

13.2

411-3

4

12

Medial

9.05

14.5

412-1

4

13

Medial: Edge Fragment

5.79

2.1

412-2

4

13

End only: Distal

12.26

26.5

414-16

4

15

End only: Distal

12.77

13.2

414-19

4

15

Medial

14.02

25.5

430-2

4

n/a

End only: Distal

9.62

17.6

148

7.99

Weight
(g)

47.36

13.9

5.7
22.4

Monitoring: Sidewall benching

Monitoring: Sidewall benching

Monitoring: Sidewall benching

Monitoring: Sidewall benching

Sidewall benching back dirt

Sidewall benching back dirt

Sidewall benching back dirt

Sidewall benching back dirt

Sidewall benching back dirt

Sidewall benching back dirt

Monitoring: Electric Line
Trench

Monitoring: Plumbing

Monitoring: Plumbing

Monitoring: Plumbing

Monitoring: Auger 25

Monitoring: Auger 27

432-4

432-5

432-6

433-2

434-1

435-1

435-2

435-3

436-1

53-4

56-2

56-5

56-6

8-1

9-1

Provenience

432-3

Spec
No.

End missing: Distal

Complete

End only: Distal

End missing: Proximal

End missing: Proximal
and one edge

End only

Complete

End only: Distal

End only: Distal

End only: Distal

End missing: Proximal

End only: Distal

End missing

Complete

End only: Distal

End missing: Proximal

Fragmentation

93.84

63.39

93.53

Length
(mm)

46.17

38.95

38.32

45.92

37.14

43.89

60.35

53.05

Width
(mm)

13.03

17.86

8.15

8.42

13.42

14.04

24.91

7.26

7.67

11.2

7.47

6.09

15.01

23.07

5.49

27.34

Thickness
(mm)

Table C. Biface Data from All Monitoring and Mechanical Excavation Activities

37.9

52.1

9.9

23.6

50.8

28.2

66.2

9.5

9.1

21.6

16.1

8.8

34.9

106.6

6.2

131

Weight
(g)

Appendix C

149

References
Aery, D. A.
2007

Organization of Lithic Technology in Archaic Texas: An Example from 41HY160
in San Marcos, Texas. Unpublished Master’s thesis, Texas State University-San
Marcos.

Alley, William M.
1984

The Palmer Drought Severity Index: Limitations and Assumptions. Journal of
Climate and Applied Meteorology 23:1100–1109.

Ambrose, S. H.
1990

Preparation and Characterization of Bone and Tooth Collagen for Isotopic Analysis.
Journal of Archaeological Science 17:431–451.

1991

Effects of Diet, Climate and Physiology on Nitrogen Isotope Abundances in
Terrestrial Foodwebs. Journal of Archaeological Science 18:293–317.

Ambrose, S. H., and M. J. DeNiro
1986

The Isotopic Ecology of East African Mammals. Oecologia 69:395–406.

Ambrose, S. H., and L. Norr
1993

Experimental Evidence for the Relationship of the Carbon Isotope Ratios of Whole
Diet and Dietary Protein to those of Bone Collagen and Carbonate. In Prehistoric
Human Bone: Archaeology at the Molecular Level, edited by J. B. Lambert and G.
Grupe, pp. 1–37. Springer-Verlag, New York.

Arnn, John Wesley, III
2012

Land of the Tejas: Native American Identity and Interaction in Texas, AD 1300–
1700. The University of Texas Press, Austin.

Arnn, John W., III, and Karl W. Kibler
1999

Archeological Survey and Geomorphological Assessment for the Proposed Spring
Lake Water Line, Hays County, Texas. Technical Reports No. 41. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.

Auerbach, Benjamin M., and Christopher B. Ruff
2004

Human Body Mass Estimation: a Comparison of “Morphometric” and “Mechanical”
Methods. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 125:331–342.

Auerbach, Benjamin M., and Christopher B. Ruff
2010

Stature Estimation Formulae for Indigenous North American Populations.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 141:190–207.

References Cited
Barnes, Virgil E.
1974

Geologic Atlas of Texas, Seguin Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University
of Texas, Austin.

Batte, C. D.
1984

Soil Survey of Comal and Hays Counties Texas. U. S. Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.

Bement, Leland C., Ernest L. Lundelius, Jr., and Richard A. Ketcham
2005

Hoax or History: A Bison Skull with Embedded Calf Creek Projectile Point. Plains
Anthropologist 50:221–226.

Berger R., A. G. Horney, and W. F. Libby
1964

Radiocarbon Dating of Bone and Shell from their Organic Components. Science
144:999–1001.

Binford, Lewis R.
2001

Constructing Frames of Reference: An Analytical Method for Archaeological TheoryBuilding Using Hunter–Gatherer and Environmental Data Sets. University of
California Press, Berkeley.

Black, Stephen L.
1986

The Clemente and Herminia Hinojosa Site 41JW8: A Toyah Horizon Campsite
in Southern Texas. Special Report 18, Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

1989

Central Texas Plateau Prairie. In From the Gulf Coast to the Rio Grande: Human
Adaptation in the Central, South, and Lower Pecos, Texas, edited by Thomas R.
Hester, Stephen L. Black, D. Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, Anne A. Fox, Karl J.
Reinhard, and Leland C. Bement, pp.17–38. Research Series No. 33, Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Blair, W. Frank
1950

The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93–117.

Blum, Michael D., and Salvatore Valastro, Jr.
1989

Response of the Pedernales River of Central Texas to Late Holocene Climatic
Change. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 79(3):435–456.

Bolton, Herbert E.
1970 [1915] Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century: Studies in Spanish Colonial History
and Administration, Vol. 3. University of California Publications in History.
University of California, Berkeley.

152

References Cited
Bomar, George W.
1983

Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Bousman, C. Britt
1998

Paleoenvironmental Change in Central Texas: The Palynological Evidence. Plains
Anthropologist 43:201–219.

Bousman, C. Britt, Barry W. Baker, and Anne C. Kerr
2004

Paleoindian Archeology in Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, edited by Timothy K.
Perttula, pp. 15–97. Texas A&M Press, College Station.

Bousman, C. B., M. B. Collins, P. Goldberg, T. Stafford, J. Guy, B. W. Baker, D. G. Steele, M.
Kay, G. Fredlund, P. Dering, S. Dial, V. Holliday, D. Wilson, P. Takac, R. Balinsky, M. Masson,
and J. F. Powell
2002

The Paleoindian–Archaic Transition: New Evidence from Texas. Antiquity 76:980–
990.

Bousman, C. Britt, and David L. Nickels (editors)
2003

Archaeological Testing of the Burleson Homestead at 41HY37, Hays County, Texas.
Archaeological Studies Report No. 4, Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas State
University-San Marcos.

Bronk Ramsey, Christopher, Thomas Higham, Angela Bowles, and Robert Hedges
2004

Improvements to the Pretreatment of Bone at Oxford. Radiocarbon 46:155–163.

Brown T. A, D. E. Nelson, J. S. Vogel, and J. R. Southon
1988

Improved Collagen Extraction by Modified Longin Method. Radiocarbon 30:171–7.

Buikstra, Jane E., and Herbert D. Ubelaker
1994

Standards for Data Collection from Human Skeletal Remains: Proceedings of
a Seminar at the Field Museum of Natural History. Arkansas Archaeological
Research Series, Fayetteville.

Byrd, Julia C.
2011

Archaic Bone Tools in the St. Johns River Basin, Florida: Microwear and
Manufacture Traces. Unpublished Master’s thesis. Florida State University.

Calame, David, Sr., Carey Weber, Larry Banks, and Richard McReynolds
2002

Projectile Points of the Calf Creek Horizon from Frio, Medina, and Uvalde Counties,
Southern Texas. La Tierra 29:29–38.

153

References Cited
Campbell, T. N., and T. J. Campbell
1985

Indian Groups Associated with Spanish Missions of the San Antonio Missions
National Historical Park. Special Report No. 16, Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Cargill, Diane A.
1996

Stable Isotope Analysis at Mission San Juan de Capistrano, San Antonio, Texas.
Unpublished Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at
San Antonio.

Chandler, C. K., and Don Kumpe
1993

Stemmed Points with Massive Barbs from the Lower Rio Grande Valley. La Tierra
20:26–28.

Collins, Michael B.
1994

Evidence of Early Archaic Occupation. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human
Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas. Volume 1,
Archeological Components, by Robert A. Ricklis and Michael B. Collins, pp. 67–100.
Studies in Archeology 19, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.

1995

Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361–400.

Collins, Michael B. (assembler and editor)
1998

Wilson-Leonard: An 11,000-year Archeological Record in Central Texas. 6 Vols.
Studies in Archeology 31. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin. Archeology Studies Program Report 10. Texas Department of
Transportation, Environental Affairs Division, Austin.

Collins, Michael B., and Kenneth M. Brown
2000

The Gault Gisement: Some Preliminary Observations. Current Archeology in Texas
2(1):163–166.

Collins, Michael B., David M. Yelacic, and C. Britt Bousman
2011

“Realms.” A Look at Paleoclimate and Projectile Points across Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 82:3–30.

Cook, Edward R., David M. Meko, David W. Stahle, and Malcom K. Cleaveland
1999

154

Drought Reconstructions for the Continental United States. Journal of Climate
12:1145–1162.

References Cited
Cormie, A. B., and H. P Schwarcz
1994

Stable Isotopes of Nitrogen and Carbon of North American White-Tailed Deer
and Implications for Paleodietary and Other Food Web Studies. Paleogeography,
Paleoclimatology, Paleoecology 107:227–241.

Cormie, A. B., and H. P Schwarcz
1996

Effects of Climate on Deer Bone δ15N and δ13C: Lack of Precipitation Effects on δ15N
for Animals Consuming Low Amounts of C4 Plants. Geochimica et a Cosmochinica
Acta 60:4161–4166.

Crumley, Carole L. (editor)
1994

Historical Ecology: Cultural Knowledge and Changing Landscapes. School of
American Research Press, Santa Fe.

de la Teja, Jesús F.
1995

San Antonio de Bexár: A Community on New Spain’s Northern Frontier. University
of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Dickson, Don R.
1970

Excavations at Calf Creek Cave. The Arkansas Archeologist 11:50–82.

Dillehay, Thomas D.
1974

Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19(64):180–196.

Dixon, Richard
2000

Climatology of the Freeman Ranch, Hays County, Texas. Freeman Ranch
Publication Series No. 3-2000, Texas State University-San Marcos.

Dobie, Dudley R.
1932

The History of Hays County, Texas. Unpublished Master’s thesis, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Dreiss, Meredith L.
1994

Marine and Freshwater Shell Artifacts. In Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper
Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell Ridge Site, 41GV66, Galveston Island,
edited by Robert A. Ricklis, pp. 417–445. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc.,
Corpus Christi.

2009

Marine Shell Ornaments, Icons and Offerings. Electronic document, http://www.
texasbeyondhistory.net/coast/nature/images/shell-ornaments.html, accessed 20
March, 2013.

155

References Cited
Dunn, William E.
1911

Apache Relations in Texas, 1718–1750. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 14:198–
274.

Ellis, Linda Wootan, G. Lain Ellis, and Charles D. Frederick
1995

Implications of Environmental Diversity in the Central Texas Archeological Region.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:401–426.

Ellis, Linda W., and Timothy K. Perttula (assemblers and editors)
2010

Regional Summaries of Prehistoric and Early Historic Ceramics in Texas
for the Council of Texas Archeologists. Electronic Document, http://
counciloftexasarcheologists.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/Regional-SummariesCeramics.pdf, accessed 20 March, 2013.

Eren, Metin I. (editor)
2012

Hunter–Gatherer Behavior: Human Response during the Younger Dryas. Left Coast
Press, Walnut Creek, California.

Fisher, Lewis F.
1998

The Spanish Missions of San Antonio. Maverick Publishing Company, San Antonio.

Ford, Owen A., and Anthony S. Lyle
1998

Archaeological Investigation of a Spring Lake Lot for Joe’s Crab Shack Parking.
Archaeological Survey Report No. 277, Center for Archaeological Research,
University of Texas at San Antonio.

Foster, William C.
1995

Spanish Expeditions into Texas 1689–1768. The University of Texas Press, Austin.

Froehle, A. W., C. M. Kellner, and M. J. Schoeninnger
2010

FOCUS: Effect of Diet and Protein Source on Carbon Stable Isotope Ratios in
Collagen: Follow up to Warinner and Tuross (2009). Journal of Archaeological
Science 37:2662–2670.

2012

Multivariate Carbon and Nitrogen Stable Isotope Model for the Reconstruction of
Prehistoric Human Diet. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 147:352–369.

Garber, James F., S. Bergman, B. Dickinson, R. Hays III, J. Simpson, and J. Stefanoff
1983

Excavations at Aquarena Springs, San Marcos, Texas. La Tierra 10:2:28–38.

Garber, James F., and David M. Glassman
1992

156

Excavation of Human Remains from the Fish Pond Site, 41HY161, in San Marcos,
Hays County, Texas. Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Southwest Texas
State University.

References Cited
Garber, James F., and M. D. Orloff
1984

Excavations at 41HY37: an Archaic site on the Balcones Escarpment in San
Marcos, Texas. La Tierra 11:3:31–37.

Giesecke, J.
1998

Faunal Analysis from 41HY165: an Independent Study. Manuscript on file,
Anthropology Department, Southwest Texas State University, San Marcos.

Gilbert, R., and G. W. Gill
1990

A metric technique for identifying American Indian femora. In Skeletal Attribution
of Race: Methods for Forensic Anthropology, edited by G. W. Gill and S. Rhine, pp
97–99. Anthropological Papers No. 4, Maxwell Museum of Anthropology. University
of New Mexico, Albuquerque.

Goldstein, Lynne, and Keith Kintigh
2000

Ethics and the Reburial Controversy. In Repatriation Reader: Who Owns American
Indian Remains? edited by Devon A. Mihesuah, pp. 180–189. University of
Nebraska Press, Lincoln.

Griffitts, J. L.
2006

Bone Tools and Technological Choice: Change and Stability on the Northern Plains
(North Dakota). Unpublished Ph. D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology,
University of Arizona, Tuscon.

Habig, Marion A.
1977

The Alamo Mission: San Antonio de Valero, 1718–1793. Franciscan Herald Press,
Chicago.

Hall, Grant D.
1981

Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Brazos River Valley, Texas.
Texas Archaeological Survey Research Report No. 61, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Hard, Robert J., and M. Anne Katzenberg
2011

Stable Isotope Study of Hunter–Gatherer–Fisher Diet, Mobility, and Intensification
on the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain. American Antiquity 76:709–751.

Hedges, R. E. M., and G. J. Van Klinken
1992

A Review of Current Approaches in the Pretreatment of Bone for Radiocarbon
Dating by AMS. Radiocarbon 34:279–291.

157

References Cited
Hester, Thomas R.
1971

Marine Shells from Archaeological Sites in Southwestern Texas. Texas Journal of
Science 22:87–88.

1980

A Survey of Paleo-Indian Remains along the Texas Coast. In: Papers on the
Archaeology of the Texas Coast, edited by Cynthia L. Highley and Thomas R.
Hester, pp. 1–12. Special Report No. 11, Center for Archaeological Research,
University of Texas at San Antonio.

1983

Late Paleo-Indian Occupations at Baker Cave, Southwestern Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 53:101–119.

1995

The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:427–
459.

Highley, Cynthia L.
1986

Archaeological Investigations at 41LK201, Choke Canyon Reservoir, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series Volume 11, Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

Houk, Brett A., Kevin A. Miller, and Eric R. Oksanen
2008

The Gatlin Site (41KR621): Investigating Archaic Lifeways on the Southern
Edwards Plateau of Central Texas. SWCA Cultural Resources Report No. 149, and
Texas Department of Transportation Archeological Studies Program Report No.
108, Austin.

Huls, M. C., P. M. Grootes, and M.-J. Nadeau
2007

How Clean is Ultrafiltration Cleaning of Bone Collagen? Radiocarbon 49:193–200.

2009

Ultrafiltration: Boon or Bane? Radiocarbon 51:613–625.

Jantz, R. L., and S. D. Ousley
2005

FORDISC 3.0: Personal Computer Forensic Discriminant Functions. The University
of Tennessee, Knoxville.

Jelks, Edward B.
1962

The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County, Texas.
Archaeology Series No. 5, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at
Austin.

1978

Diablo Range. In Chronologies in New World Archaeology, edited by R. E. Taylor
and Clement W. Meighan, pp. 71–111. Academic Press, New York.

Johnson, LeRoy, Jr., and T. N. Campbell
1992

158

Sanan: Traces of a Previously Unknown Aboriginal Language in Colonial Coahuila
and Texas. Plains Anthropologist 37(140):185–212.

References Cited
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr., and Glenn T. Goode
1994

A New Try at Dating and Characterizing Holocene Climates, as well as
Archeological Periods, on the Eastern Edwards Plateau. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 65:1–51.

Johnson, Amber L., and Robert J. Hard
2008

Exploring Texas Archaeology with a Model of Intensification. Plains Anthropologist
53:137–153.

Joines, Jason Paul
2005

17,000 Years of Climate Change: The Phytolith Record from Hall’s Cave, Texas.
Unpublished Master’s thesis, Department of Biology, Oklahoma State University,
Stillwater.

Jones, Richard
2002

Archaeological Trench Monitoring Near Prehistoric Site 41HY161, Hays County,
Texas. Technical Report No. 3, Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas State
University-San Marcos.

Kellner, C. M., and M. J. Schoeninger
2007

A Simple Carbon Isotope Model for Reconstructing Prehistoric Human Diet.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 133: 1112–1127.

Kintigh, Keith W.
1984

Measuring Archaeological Diversity by Comparison with Simulated
Assemblages. American Antiquity 49(1):44–54.

1989

Sample Size, Significance, and Measures of Diversity. In Quantifying Diversity
in Archaeology, edited by Robert D. Leonard and George T. Jones, pp. 25–36.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Krueger, H. W., and C. H. Sullivan
1984

Models for Carbon Isotope Fraction Between Diet and Bone. In Stable Isotopes
and Nutrition, edited by J. R. Turnland and P. E. Johnson, pp. 205–220. ACS
Symposium Series, No. 258. Washington: American Chemical Society.

LaBelle, Jason M.
2012

Hunter–Gatherer Adaptations of the Central Plains and Rocky Mountains of
Western North America. In Hunter–Gatherer Behavior: Human Response during
the Younger Dryas, edited by Metin I. Eren, pp. 139–164. Left Coast Press, Walnut
Creek.

159

References Cited
LeDoux, Spencer, and Jon C. Lohse
2011

Projectile Points. In Prehistoric Life, Labor, and Residence in Southeast Central
Texas: Results of Data Recovery at 41HY164, the Zatopec Site, San Marcos, Texas,
edited by Jon C. Lohse, pp. 192–225. Archaeological Studies Report No. 18, Center
for Archaeological Studies, Texas State University-San Marcos.

Leezer, Carole, Julian A. Sitters, and Sarah Scogin
2010

Archaeological Assessment and Monitoring for Construction of a New Boiler Station
at Jowers Center and Sewell Park, Texas State University-San Marcos, Hays
County, Texas. Technical Report No. 38, Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas
State University-San Marcos.

Leezer, Carole, David Yelacic, Jon C. Lohse, and Frederick Hanselmann
2011

Results of Cultural Resources Survey for the Spring Lake Section 206 Aquatic
Ecosystem Restoration Project. Archaeological Studies Report No. 22, Center for
Archaeological Studies, Texas State University-San Marcos.

Lemke, Ashley, and Cinda Timperley
2008

Preliminary Analysis of Turtle Material from the Gault Site, Texas. Current
Research in the Pleistocene 25:115–117.

Lohse, Jon C.
1999

Lithics from the San Antonio de Valero Mission: Analysis of Materials from 1979
Excavations at the Alamo. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 70:265–279.

Lohse, Jon C. (editor)
2013a Defining the Middle Archaic at Spring Lake: Data Recovery and Analysis at
41HY160 for the Texas Rivers Center, Texas State University-San Marcos, Hays
County, Texas. Archaeological Studies Report No. 29, Center for Archaeological
Studies, Texas State University-San Marcos.
Lohse, Jon C. (editor)
2013b Underwater Archaeology at 41HY147, the Terrace Locality at Spring Lake.
Archaeological Studies Report No. 28, Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas
State University-San Marcos.
Lohse, Jon C., Stephen L. Black, and Laly M. Cholak
2014

160

Toward an Improved Archaic Radiocarbon Chronology for Central Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society, in press.

References Cited
Lohse, Jon C., Andrew Hemmings, Michael B. Collins, and David M. Yelacic
2013

Putting the Specialization Back in Clovis: What Some Caches Reveal about
Skill and the Organization of Production in the Terminal Pleistocene. In An
Extraordinary Collection of Chipped Stone Artifacts: Recent Research on Clovis
Caches, edited by Bruce B. Huckell and J. David Kilby. University of New Mexico
Press, Albuquerque, in press.

Lohse, Jon C., Douglas J. Kennett, Brendan J. Culleton, and Cinda L. Timperley
2012

Middle-to-Late Holocene Bison Chronology and Ecology in the South-Central
United States. Paper presented at the 77th Annual Meeting of the Society for
American Archaeology, Memphis.

Longin, R.
1971

New Method of Collagen Extraction for Radiocarbon Dating. Nature 230:241–242.

Lukowski, P. D.
1988

Archaeological Investigations at 41BX1, Bexar County, Texas. Archaeological
Survey Report 135, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.

Lyle, Anthony, Christopher Horrell, Steve A. Tomka, and Diane A. Cargill
2000

Archaeological Testing at the Headwaters of the San Marcos River: Southwest Texas
State University Raw Water Supply Project. Archaeological Survey Report No. 293,
Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio.

McGraw, Al J., John W. Clarke Jr., and Elizabeth A. Robbins (editors)
1991

A Texas Legacy: The Old San Antonio Road and the Caminos Reales, a
Tricentennial History, 1691–1991. Texas State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Austin.

Mauldin, Raymond P., Robert J. Hard, Cynthia M. Munoz, Jennifer L. Z. Rice, Kirsten
Verostick, Daniel R. Potter, and Nathanael Dollar
2013

Carbon and Nitrogen Stable Isotope Analysis of Hunter–Gatherers from
the Coleman Site, a Late Prehistoric Cemetery in Central Texas. Journal of
Archaeological Science 40:1369–1381.

Mauldin, Raymond P., Jennifer L. Thompson, and Leonard Kemp
2012

Reconsidering the Role of Bison in the Terminal Late Prehistoric (Toyah) Period in
Texas. In The Toyah Phase of Central Texas, edited by Nancy Kenmotsu and Doug
Boyd, pp. 90–110. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

Meltzer, David J.
1999

Human Responses to Middle Holocene (Altithermal) Climates on the North
American Great Plains. Quaternary Research 52:404–416.

161

References Cited
2006

Folsom: New Archaeological Investigations of a Classic Paleoindian Bison Kill.
University of California Press, Berkeley.

Munoz, Cynthia M
2011

Paleoclimate. In Archeological Significance Testing at 41BX17/271, the
Granberg Site: A Multi-Component Site along the Salado Creek in Bexar County,
Texas, by Cynthia M. Munoz, Raymond P. Mauldin, Jennifer L. Thompson,
and S. Christopher Caran, pp. 95–104. Texas Department of Transportation,
Environmental Affairs Division Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 140,
Austin, and Center for Archaeological Studies, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, Archaeological Report No. 393, San Antonio.

Munoz, Cynthia M., Raymond Mauldin, and Robert J. Hard
2011

Stable Isotope Analysis of Human Skeletal Remains from 41HY163 with
Comparative Analysis of Remains from 41HY161. In Prehistoric Life, Labor,
and Residence in Southeast Central Texas: Results of Data Recovery at 41HY163,
the Zatopec Site, San Marcos, Texas, edited by Jon C. Lohse, pp. 343–350.
Archaeological Studies Report No. 18, Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas
State University-San Marcos.

Musgrove, MaryLynn, Jay L. Banner, Larry E. Mack, Deanna M. Combs, Eric W. James, Hai
Cheng, and R. Lawrence Edwards
2001

Geochronology of the late Pleistocene to Holocene Speleothems from Central Texas:
Implications for Regional Paleoclimate. GSA Bulletin 113: 1532-1543.

Newcomb, William W., Jr.
1961

The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.

1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
64:1–63.

Nickels, David L., and C. Britt Bousman
2010

Archaeological Testing at San Marcos Springs (41HY160) for the Texas Rivers
Center, Texas, Hays County, Texas. Archaeological Studies Report No. 13, Center
for Archaeological Studies, Texas State University-San Marcos.

Nordt, Lee C.
2010

162

Geology, Landscape Evolution, and Geoarchaeology at Spring Lake. In
Archaeological Testing at San Marcos Springs (41HY160) for the Texas Rivers
Center, Hays County, Texas, by David L. Nickels and C. Britt Bousman.
Archaeological Studies Report No. 13, Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas
State University-San Marcos.

References Cited
Nordt, Lee C., Thomas W. Boutton, John S. Jacob, and Rolfe D. Mandel
2002

C4 Plant Productivity and Climate-CO2 Variations in South-Central Texas during
the Late Quaternary. Quaternary Research 58: 182–118.

Norr, L.
1995

Interpreting Dietary Maize from Bone Stable Isotopes in the New World Tropics:
The State of the Art. In Archaeology in the American Tropics: Current Analytical
Methods and Applications, edited by P. W. Stahl, pp. 198–223. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

Oksanen, Eric
2006

Proposed Fiber Optic Conduit Route at the Aquarena River Center and Golf
Course, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas. Technical Report No. 22, Center for
Archaeological Studies, Texas State University-San Marcos.

2008

Archaeological Investigations at the Icehouse Site, 41HY161: a Revaluation of Early
Archaic Technology, Subsistence and Settlement along the Balcones Escarpment
and Central Texas. Unpublished Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology,
Texas State University-San Marcos.

2011

Archaeological Investigations at the Ice House Site, 41HY161: Early Archaic
Technology, Subsistence, and Settlement along the Balcones Escarpment, Hays
County, Texas. Archaeological Studies Report No. 14, Center for Archaeological
Studies, Texas State University-San Marcos

Parks, Connie L.
2009

Oxygen Isotope Analysis of Human Bone and Tooth Enamel: Implications for
Forensic Investigations. Unpublished Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology,
Texas State University-San Marcos.

Penders, Thomas E.
1997

A Study of Form and Function of the Bone and Antler Artifacts from the Windover
Archaeolocal Site (8BR246), Brevard County, Florida. Unpublished Master’s thesis,
Department of Anthropology, Florida State University, Tallahasee.

Peter, D. E., D. Prikryl, O. F. McComick, and M. Demuynck
1982

Site Excavation Reports: Primary Contract. In Archeological Investigations of
the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, edited by Thomas R. Hays,
volume 1, pp. 8-1 to 8-297. Report to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth
District. Archaeology Program, Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State
University, Denton.

163

References Cited
Prewitt, Elton
1974

Preliminary Archeological Investigations in the Rio Grande Delta Area of Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 45:55–65.

1981

Culture Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65–89.

1983

Andice: An Early Archaic Dart Point Type. La Tierra 10:1–6.

1995

Distributions of Typed Projectile Points in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:83–173.

Quintero, James Paul
2007

Regional Economic Development: An Economic Base Study and Shift-Share
Analysis of Hays County, Texas. Unpublished Master’s thesis, Department of
Political Science, Texas State University-San Marcos.

Ramsey, Dawn
1997

Archaeological Survey of Aquarena Springs Park, Hays County, Texas. Manuscript
on file at Anthropology Department, Southwest Texas State University, San
Marcos.

Ricklis, Robert A.
1995

Environmental and Human Adaptive Change on the Nueces Bay Shoreline: Phase I,
Archaeological Data Recovery at Koch Refining Middle Plant, Nueces County, Texas.
Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc., Corpus Christi.

2011

New Perspectives on the Archaic of the Texas Coastal Plain: The Buckeye Knoll
Site (41TV98) on the Lower Guadalupe River near Victoria, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 82:31–76.

Ringstaff, C. W.
2000

A Study of Landform Evolution and Archaeological Preservation at Site 41HY165,
San Marcos, Texas. Unpublished Master’s thesis, Department of Geography,
Southwest Texas State University, San Marcos.

Schoeninger, M. J. and M. J. DeNiro
1984

Nitrogen and Carbon Isotopic Composition of Bone Collagen from Marine and
Terrestrial Animals. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 48:625–639.

Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932

164

The Geology of Texas, Vol. 1: Stratigraphy. Bulletin No. 3232. Austin: Bureau of
Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.

References Cited
Shafer, Harry J. and Thomas R. Hester
2013

Projectile Points and other Lithics. In Underwater Archaeology at 41HY147, the
Terrace Locality at Spring Lake, edited by Jon C. Lohse. Archaeological Studies
Report No. 28, Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas State University-San
Marcos.

Shaw, Leslie C.
1998

Modified Bone and Shell. In Wilson-Leonard: An 11,000-year Archaeological Record
of Hunter–Gatherers in Central Texas. Vol. 3, Artifacts and Special Artifact Studies,
assembled and edited by M. B. Collins, pp. 723–730. Studies in Archaeology 31,
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Report 10, Archeology Studies Program, Texas Department of Transportation,
Environmental Affairs Division.

Shiner, Joel L.
1979

Survey and Testing of the Ice House site: San Marcos, Hays County, Texas.
Manuscript on file, Joel L. Shiner Collection, Center for Archaeological Studies,
Texas State University-San Marcos.

1981

History, Economy, and Magic at a Fresh Water Spring. In The Realms of Gold,
Proceedings of the Tenth Conference on Underwater Archaeology, edited by W. A.
Cockrell, pp. 202–203. Fathom Eight, San Marino, California.

1983

Large Springs and Early American Indians. Plains Anthropologist 28:99:1–7.

1984

A Reply to Johnson and Holliday. Plains Anthropologist 29:103:71–72.

Singer, Michael J., Kenneth L. Verosub, Pinchas Fine, and Jeff TenPas
1996

A Conceptual Model for the Enhancement of Magnetic Susceptibility in Soils.
Quaternary International 34–36: 243–248.

Sitters, Julian A., Jon C. Lohse, and R. Zac Selden
2011

Flake Cores. In Prehistoric Life, Labor, and Residence in Southeast Central Texas:
Results of Data Recovery at 41HY164, the Zatopec Site, San Marcos, Texas, edited
by Jon C. Lohse, pp. 299–307. Archaeological Studies Report No. 18, Center for
Archaeological Studies, Texas State University-San Marcos.

Smith, B. Holly
1984

Patterns of Molar Wear in Hunter–Gatherers and Agriculturalists. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 63:39–56.

Somerville, Andrew D., Mikael Fauvelle, and Andrew W. Froehle
2013

Applying New Approaches to Modeling Diet and Status: Isotopic Evidence for
Commoner Resiliency and Elite Variability in the Classic Maya Lowlands. Journal
of Archaeological Science 40:1539–1553.

165

References Cited
Sorrow, William M., Harry J. Shafer, and Richard E. Ross
1967

Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, No. 11. The University of Texas at Austin.

Soucie, Shawn, and David L. Nickels
2003

Archaeological Monitoring of a Tree Planting Project and Installation of the Front
Door Welcoming Drive for Texas State University-San Marcos, Hays County, Texas.
Technical Report No. 11, Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas State UniversitySan Marcos.

Soucie, Shawn, David L. Nickels, Kevin L. Shubert, and Colby J. Mischefsky
2004

Archaeological Trench Monitoring at the Aquarena Springs Golf Course, San
Marcos, Hays County, Texas. Technical Report No. 16, Center for Archaeological
Studies, Texas State University-San Marcos.

Spielmann, Katherine A. (editor)
1991

Farmers, Hunters, and Colonists: Interaction Between the Southwest and the
Southern Plains. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Stafford, Thomas W.
1998

Radiocarbon Chronostratigraphy. In Wilson-Leonard: An 11,000-Year Archeological
Record of Hunter–Gatherers in Central Texas, Volume IV: Archeological Features
and Technical Analyses, assembled and edited by Michael B. Collins, pp. 1039–
1066. Studies in Archeology 31, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin. Archeology Studies Program, Report 10, Texas
Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division, Austin.

Stafford, T. W., Jr, K. Brendel, and R. Duhamel
1988

Radiocarbon, 13C and 15N Analysis of Fossil Bone: Removal of Humates with XAD-2
Resin. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 52:2257–2267.

Stafford, T. W., Jr, P. E. Hare, L. A. Currie, A. J. T. Jull, and D. Donahue
1991

Accelerator Radiocarbon Dating at the Molecular Level. Journal of Archaeological
Science 18:35–72.

Story, Dee Ann
1985

166

Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coastal Plain. In
Prehistoric Food Production in North America, edited by Richard I. Ford, pp. 19–56.
Anthropological Papers No. 75, Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor.

References Cited
Stull, Kyra, and Michelle D. Hamilton
2011

Descriptive Analysis of Three Individual Remains from Zatopec, with Comparative
Analysis of Two Additional Sets from 41HY161; Chapter 8: Bioarchaeological
Analysis of Human Remains from Zatopec. In Prehistoric Life, Labor, and Residence
in Southeast–Central Texas: Results of Data Recovery at 41HY163, the Zatopec Site,
San Marcos, Texas. Jon C. Lohse, editor, Archaeological Studies Report No. 18,
Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas State University-San Marcos.

Symes, S. A., C. W. Rainwater, E. N. Chapman, D. R. Gipson, and A. L. Piper
2008. Patterned Thermal Destruction of Human Remains in a Forensic Setting. In: The
Analysis of Burned Human Remains, edited by C. W. Schmidt and S. A. Symes, pp
15–54. Academic Press, Boston.
Takac, Paul R.
1990

“Homes Bases” and the Paleoindian/Archaic Transition in Central Texas. Paper
presented at the 55th Annual SAA Meeting, Las Vegas.

1991a Underwater Excavations at Spring Lake: a Paleoindian Site in Hays County, Texas.
Current Research in the Pleistocene 8:46–48.
1991b Paleoindian Occupations at Spring Lake, Hays Co., Texas, Dissertation research
proposal. Submitted to the Faculty, Department of Anthropology, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.
Thoms, Alston V.
2008

Ancient Savannah Roots of the Carbohydrate Revolution in South-Central North
America. Plains Anthropologist 53:121–136.

2009

Rocks of Ages: Propagation of Hot-Rock Cookery in Western North America.
Journal of Archaeological Science 36:573–591.

Thurmond, J. Peter, and Don G. Wyckoff
1999

The Calf Creek Horizon in Northwestern Oklahoma. Plains Anthropologist 44:231–
250.

Tomka, Steve A., Lori Barkwille Love, Kristi M. Ulrich, and Carole A. Leezer
2013

Ceramic Analysis of Samples from 41HY165, Hays County, Texas. In Prehistoric Life
along the Banks of Spring Lake: Results and Analysis of the Southwest Texas Field
Schools (1996–1998) at 41HY165, San Marcos, Hays County, Texas, edited by Carole A.
Leezer. Archaeological Studies Report No. 31, Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas
State University-San Marcos.

167

References Cited
Toomey, Rickard S., III
1993

Late Pleistocene and Holocene Faunal and Environmental Changes at Hall’s Cave,
Kerr County, Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Geography,
University of Texas at Austin.

Trope, Jack F., and Walter R. Echo-Hawk
2000

The Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act: Background and
Legislative History. In Repatriation Reader: Who Owns American Indian Remains?
edited by Devon A. Mihesuah, pp. 123–168. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.

Turner, Ellen Sue, Thomas R. Hester, and Richard McReynolds
2011

Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. 3rd ed. Taylor Trade Publishing, Rowman and
Littlefield, Lanham, Maryland.

Tykot, Robert H.
2004

Stable Isotopes and Diet: You are What you Eat. In Proceedings of the International
School of Physics “Enrico Fermi” Course CLIV, edited by M. Milazzo and M.
Piacentine. IOS Press, Amsterdam.

Weber, Carey
1994

A Replication Technique for Andice/Bell Points. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric
Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, Volume 2,
Topical Studies, by Robert A. Ricklis and Michael B. Collins, pp. 629–651. Studies
in Archeology 19, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Weir, Frank
1976

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of
Anthropology, Washington State University, Pullman.

Wheeler, Ryan J., and Ray M. McGee
1994

Report of Preliminary Zoarchaeological Analysis: Groves’ Orange Midden. Florida
Anthropologist 47:393–403.

White, Christine D., Michael W. Spence, Fred J. Longstaffe, and Kimberley R. Law
2000

Testing the Nature of Teotihuacán Imperialism at Kaminaljuyú Using Phosphate
Oxygen-Isotope Ratios. Journal of Anthropological Research 56:535–558.

White, Christine D., Michael W. Spence, Hillary Le-Q. Stuart-Williams, and Henry P.
Schwarcz
1998

168

Oxygen Isotopes and the Identification of Geographical Origins: The Valley of
Oaxaca versus the Valley of Mexico. Journal of Archaeological Science 25:643–655.

References Cited
White, Christine D., Rebecca Storey, Fred J. Longstaffe, and Michael W. Spence
2004

Immigration, Assimilation, and Status in the Ancient City of Teotihuacan: Stable
Isotopic Evidence from Tlajinga 33. Latin American Antiquity 15:176–198.

Woodruff, C. M., Jr.
1979

Land Resource Overview of the Capital Area Planning Council Region, Texas – A
Nontechnical Guide. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Wyckoff, Don G.
1994

Introduction to the 1991 Bulletin. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society
Volume XL for 1991, pp. 1–8.

1995

A Summary of the Calf Creek Horizon in Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society Volume XLII for 1993, pp. 179–210.

Yelacic, David M.
2013

Feature Descriptions. In Defining the Middle Archaic at Spring Lake: Data Recovery
and Analysis at 41HY160 for the Texas Rivers Center, Texas State University-San
Marcos, Hays County, Texas, edited by Jon C. Lohse. Archaeological Studies Report
No. 29, Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas State University-San Marcos.

Yelacic, David M., Gregory J. LaBudde, and Jon C. Lohse
2008a Cultural Resources Survey of Fairfield Lake State Park, Freestone County, Texas.
Archaeological Studies Report No. 15, Center for Archaeological Studies, Texas
State University-San Marcos.
Yelacic, David M., R. Zac Selden, and Jon C. Lohse
2008b Results of Archaeological Monitoring at the Fish Ponds, Texas State University-San
Marcos, Hays County, Texas. Technical Report No. 33, Center for Archaeological
Studies, Texas State University-San Marcos.

169

Center for Archaeological Studies
Texas State University-San Marcos
601 University Drive
San Marcos, TX 78666
www.txstate.edu/anthropology/cas/

A member of The Texas State University System

