CULTURAL RESOURCES INVESTIGATION REPORT OF THE
PROPOSED NEW JOSEY ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
IN DENTON COUNTY, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Permit Number 8915

Prepared for:
Huckabee & Associates, Inc.
801 Cherry Street
Suite 500
Fort Worth, Texas 76102

Prepared by:
Sphere 3 Environmental, Inc.
1501 Bill Owens Parkway
Longview, Texas 75604
903/297-4673

Authored by:
James S. Belew, RPA, and Michael Ryan

July 2019

ABSTRACT
Sphere 3 Environmental, Inc. (Sphere 3) conducted an intensive pedestrian cultural resources
survey of approximately 4.55 hectares (ha) (11.25 acres [ac]) of land designated as the Area of
Potential Effects (APE) on May 15, 2019, in response to the proposed undertaking to construct
the New Josey Elementary School campus. Sponsor of the project and owner of the project area
is the Lewisville Independent School District, which has contracted with Huckabee & Associates,
Inc. to carry out the proposed construction. The project area is situated on land currently being
annexed by the City of Lewisville in Denton County, Texas, on the west side of North Josey Lane
and on the north side of the recently developed Lakewood Hills by Pulte Homes residential area.
The cultural resources survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit Number 8915 to
identify properties eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) or
worthy of listing as a State Archeological Landmark (SAL). A total of nine shovel tests were
excavated across the project area. No archaeological sites, isolated finds, or other cultural
resources greater than 50 years of age were identified. Project records and a copy of the final
report of findings were curated at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) in
Austin, Texas. No cultural properties were found to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP or
worthy of listing as a SAL. Sphere 3 therefore recommends that construction of school facilities
proceed as planned without further cultural resource investigations.

i

Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................. 1
DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA...................................................................................... 1
RESEARCH DESIGN ........................................................................................................ 2
RESULTS ........................................................................................................................... 3
Previous Investigations ................................................................................................... 3
Imagery and Topographic Analysis ................................................................................ 4
Intensive Pedestrian Survey Supported by Shovel Testing ............................................ 4
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS..................................................................... 5
REFERENCES ................................................................................................................... 6
APPENDICES
Appendix A: Figures
Figure 1.

Vicinity Map of the Proposed New Josey Elementary School in Denton
County, TX

Figure 2.

Topographic Features of the Proposed New Josey Elementary School in
Denton County, TX

Figure 3.

Nearest Archaeological Sites and Previous CRM Surveys Within One
Mile of the Proposed New Josey Elementary School in Denton County,
TX

Figure 4.

1925 Topographic Map of the Proposed New Josey Elementary School
in Denton County, TX

Figure 5.

2016 Topographic Map of the Proposed New Josey Elementary School
in Denton County, TX

Figure 6.

Shovel Test Locations for the Proposed New Josey Elementary School in
Denton County, TX

Appendix B: Shovel Test Log

Appendix C: Photograph Log

ii

INTRODUCTION
Huckabee & Associates, Inc. (Huckabee) was contracted by the Lewisville Independent School
District (ISD) to construct a new elementary school campus on approximately 4.55 hectares (ha)
(11.25 acres [ac]) of land currently being annexed by the City of Lewisville, Denton County,
Texas. Sphere 3 Environmental, Inc. (Sphere 3) was retained by Huckabee to determine whether
any cultural resources determined to be adversely impacted by proposed construction activities
are eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) or worthy of being
listed as a State Antiquities Landmark (SAL). To identify any historic properties existing within
the project area, Sphere 3 developed a scope of work proposing a Phase I intensive cultural
resources survey. The Texas Historical Commission (THC) accepted this proposed scope and
issued Texas Antiquities Permit Number (No.) 8915 on behalf of the Lewisville ISD as project
sponsor and owner. Fieldwork was conducted on May 15, 2019 by James S. Belew, RPA
(Principal Investigator) with the assistance of Michael Ryan and Clayton Wammack.
A total of nine shovel tests were excavated across the project area. No archaeological sites,
isolated finds, or other cultural materials were recovered from these systematic pedestrian
inspections of the ground surface supported by shovel testing.
This survey identified no cultural properties determined to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP
or to be listed as a SAL. Sphere 3 requests that THC concur with these findings and with our
recommendation that the proposed New Josey Elementary School construction undertaking be
allowed to proceed as planned without further cultural resources requirements.

DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA
The New Josey Elementary project area consists of a 4.55 ha (11.25 ac) semi-rectangular tract
with an approximately 97.5 meter (m) (320 feet [ft]) long thin section extending from the
northeast corner. The project area is located along the eastern part of the City of Lewisville, in
the southeast part of Denton County, Texas. The project area is bordered along its east boundary
by North Josey Lane and along its south boundary by the recently constructed residential
development area called “Lakewood Hills by Pulte Homes”. The west boundary consists of a
barbed wire fence presumably associated with private holdings. No visible barrier separates this
public school property from the tract to the north. The project area rests atop a ridge and shoulder
slope in between two tributaries of Indian Creek. The southern half rests on the ridge top with a
very gradual descent southward while the northern half descends the shoulder slope of the ridge
toward the western/northern tributary (Figure 2). Most of the project area consists of an
overgrown grassy field with sporadic small trees. The very northern edges of the project area
become more wooded as they approach the creek.
The project area is located in the Texan biotic province, one of seven recognized by Blair (1950)
and Dice (1943) for the state of Texas based on ecological associations of a relatively stable
assemblage of plants and animals. This ecotone describes a region characterized by tall grass
prairies supported by clay soils or sandy soils and oak hickory forests; the dominating species
being post and blackjack oaks, and hickory. Vegetation observed around the project area
consisted of sugarberry, persimmon, mesquite, perennial rye, Canadian wild rye, green milkweed,
purpletop, powder puff, and western ragweed.

1

The Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA), Web Soil Survey illustrates the project area as extending through three discrete soil
units: Branyon Clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes (19); Ferris-Heiden Clay, 3 to 5 percent slopes (31);
and Ferris-Heiden Clay, 5 to 15 percent slopes (32). Branyon Clay soils are moderately well
drained soils found on stream terraces and formed from calcareous clayey alluvium derived from
mudstone of Pleistocene age (NRCS Web Soil Survey). Branyon Clay soils are described as clay
down to 203.2 cm (80 in). Ferris-Heiden Clay soils are well drained soils found on ridges,
backslopes, and side slopes and formed from residuum weathered from calcareous shale in
Eagleford shale and Taylor marl formations of Cretaceous age (NRCS Web Soil Survey). FerrisHeiden soils are described as clay down to 152.4 cm (60 in).

RESEARCH DESIGN
Sphere 3 performed all necessary cultural resources investigations in connection with the New
Josey Elementary School campus construction undertaking. These investigations were conducted
to locate prehistoric and historic cultural resources sites within the property, delineate the vertical
and horizontal extent of each site, and make preliminary evaluations of each site's integrity and
potential for SAL designation and/or NRHP eligibility.
Prior to initiating the fieldwork, Sphere 3 acquired a Texas Antiquities Permit. Sphere 3
conducted a records search for SALs, Historic Markers, properties listed on or eligible for
inclusion in the NRHP, previously recorded sites documented at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL), as officially managed by THC, previous survey reports housed at
the THC, and available online through the Texas Archeological Site Atlas (TASA). Topographic
maps, aerial images, and Google Earth imagery from the past 94 years was analyzed for modern
and historic impacts to the property.
The pedestrian cultural resources survey relied on both visual examination and shovel testing.
The visual examination focused on areas with exposed soil surfaces (e.g., tire tracks, animal
disturbances, etc.). Per the THC’s standards, project areas between 4.5 - 40.5 ha (11 - 100 ac)
require a minimum of one shovel test for every two ac; therefore, six shovel tests are the
minimum for the 4.55 ha (11.24 ac). To provide assurance that every portion of this area of
potential effects (APE) was assessed for sub-surface cultural resources, nine shovel tests were
excavated within the project area. All shovel tests were excavated in 10-centimeter (cm) levels
down to the clay substrate or to 80 cm below the ground surface. The excavated matrix was
screened through a 0.635 cm (0.25 in) wire mesh screen. Shovel test locations were recorded
with a GPS capable of one meter (3.28 ft) accuracy. For each shovel test unit, notes were made in
the shovel test form of soil color, texture, and elevations of soil layers and of the maximum depth.
Upon finding an artifact, shovel tests were to be excavated solely within the project area
boundaries at approximately 20.0 m (65.6 ft) intervals or less until the site limits could be
delineated using surface features/artifacts or two consecutive negative shovel tests. Surface
features were to be mapped with a GPS. Photos were to be taken of the site area. A soil profile
was to be described from a positive shovel test on the site, and a State of Texas Archeological
Site Data Form would be completed for each new site discovered. Sub-surface artifacts were to
be collected by shovel test number and 10 cm (3.9 in) level.
After the survey was complete, the artifacts were to be washed, cataloged and analyzed to
determine cultural affiliation. All project records will be curated at TARL in Austin, Texas.

2

RESULTS
This cultural resource investigation was conducted in compliance with State of Texas antiquities
permitting regulations and of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA)
1966, as amended. No archaeological sites, isolated finds, or other cultural resources were
documented by the survey. Consequently, no delineation shovel tests were excavated and no
field specimens were collected for laboratory analysis and permanent curation. Shovel test forms
and other archival materials containing documentation comprising the Texas Antiquities Permit
8915 project shall be curated at TARL.

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
Based on a site file search of the THC’s TASA database (https://atlas.thc.state.tx.us/Map) and a
literature search and records review, the proposed project area will not impact any previously
recorded archaeological sites or other recorded cultural resources. There are no archaeological
sites or historic properties listed on the NRHP recorded within a one mile radius of the project.
Eight cultural resources surveys have been conducted within one mile of the project area
(Appendix A: Figure 3). There are no historic properties listed on the NRHP recorded within a
one-mile radius of the project.
Abundant information is readily available regarding two of the eight nearby archaeological
surveys. The first survey was conducted by TRC Environmental Corporation in 2013 and 2014
and titled “Report on Nine North Texas Intensive Archeological Surveys in TxDOT's Dallas
District, Fort Worth District and Brownwood District”. The survey report (dated 2016) was
authored by Jodi A. Jacobson, Benjamin G. Bury, Paul M. Matchen, Mike Quigg, Meghan
Bruckse Bury, and Trisha Ann Gonzales. The survey was conducted under contract with the
Texas Department of Transportation and involved the survey of nine bridge replacements. One
archaeological site (41MK88) in McCulloch County, Texas consisting of a 50 m by 35 m (164 ft
by 114.8 ft) lithic scatter was documented by the survey. The site was determined to be not
eligible for inclusion on the NRHP. The second survey was conducted by Geo-Marine, Inc. in
2005 and entitled “Archeological Survey of 3.77 Miles of FM 423 from Stewarts Creek Road to
SH 121 (CSJ 1567-02-020), Denton County, Texas”. The survey report (dated 2006) was
authored by Melissa M. Green, Floyd B. Largent, Jr., and Julian Adams. The survey consisted of
a road widening project performed for the Texas Department of Transportation. No
archaeological sites were discovered by the survey.
Very little information was available in TASA for the remaining six surveys. The first of these
six is a large area survey sponsored by the Housing of Urban Development and conducted in
1980. Another of these surveys was conducted by AR Consultants Inc. in 2015. The survey
report was authored by Brett Lang and S. Alan Skinner. The survey was conducted in support of
the Lakewood Hills Development Area in Denton County, Texas. The survey area follows the
tributary of Indian Creek north of the New Josey Elementary project area and closely borders the
project area on the west and east sides. The third survey, conducted by AR Consultants Inc. and
authored by Jesse Todd, was conducted in 2003 for the Environmental Protection Agency. Site
41DN523 is mapped within the limits of this survey and was likely discovered by the survey.
The site consists of a mid-1900s house and outbuilding that appear to be an abandoned farmstead.

3

The site was determined to be not eligible for inclusion on the NRHP. The remaining three
surveys are linear surveys conducted in 1990, 1992, and 1993 respectively.
The nearest archaeological sites to the project area are the previously described 41DN523 and
41DN505. Site 41DN505 is a historic period artifact scatter and a wood frame structure. The site
was recorded as having no further research value. Site 41DN523 is located approximately 1.43
miles northwest of the project area and 41DN505 is located approximately 1.42 miles east of the
project area.

IMAGERY AND TOPOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS
Google Earth aerial imagery and topographic maps, including: 1925, 1960 Photorevised in 1981,
and 2016, illustrate the modern use of the project area and its immediate surroundings. The area
of southeastern Denton County encompassing the New Josey Elementary School campus project
is drained by two unnamed tributaries of Indian Creek.
In general, the project area may have been used for agricultural purposes or was otherwise
undeveloped from 1925 to the present. Topographic map data from 1925, 1981, and 2016 did not
reveal the presence of any structures within the project area (Appendix A: Figures 4, 2, and 5
respectively). Google Earth aerial imagery from 1995 to 2018 (most current aerial available)
illustrates the project area as primarily open field. Construction of the residential housing area
south of the project area began between March and December of 2015.

INTENSIVE PEDESTRIAN SURVEY SUPPORTED BY SHOVEL TESTING
The approximately 4.55 ha (11.24 ac) project area lies on an upland ridge and the north and south
descending shoulder slopes from the east-west-running ridge crest. The north shoulder slope
descends gently within the project area. Just north and west of the APE, the slope begins to drop
steeply toward the tributary of Indian Creek (Appendix C: Photographs 6 and 7). The ridge itself
very gently descends southward from the ridge crest centrally located within the project area.
The ground surface of the project area was covered by various tall grasses and sporadic mesquite,
sugarberry, and persimmon trees that rendered surface visibility to near zero percent (Appendix
C: Photographs 1, 2, 5, and 10). The northern margins of the project area were found to be more
wooded as the ridge begins to descend at an enhanced grade toward the creek (Appendix C:
Photograph 9). Large ruts from tire tracks left in the field and several animal burrows represented
the only visible ground surfaces within the project area.
Nine shovel tests were excavated within the project area. These units were placed in such a way
to achieve relatively even coverage of the project area. Shovel tests were located no more than
100 m (328 ft) apart. Each shovel test situated next to the project area boundary was excavated at
a maximum of 40 m (131.2 ft) from those limits (Appendix A: Figure 6). Each shovel test
consisted of two natural soil layers. The maximum depths ranged from 20 cmbs (7.9 inbs) to 34
cmbs (13.4 inbs). These soils consist of generally thick, compact to very compact clay loam,
loamy clay, or clay soils. Colors were assessed as dark to very dark gray or dark to very dark
brown, as typical of the Blackland Prairie that characterizes this area (Appendix C: Photograph
4). Ultra-compact clays difficult to penetrate with a hand shovel were encountered below
approximately 20 cmbs (7.9 inbs) to 34 cmbs (13.4 inbs) were in all units. Three shovel tests (3,

4

7, and 9) exhibited yellowish brown mottling (Appendix C: Photograph 8). Shovel testing along
the east side of the project area revealed moderate numbers of pebbles and small cobbles. Fewer
rocks were observed in the central shovel tests; Shovel Tests 1 and 9, located along the west side,
contained no rocks. No cultural objects were found in any shovel tests, nor were any objects
likely older than 50 years found on the ground surface. Further soil details can be found in the
shovel test log (Appendix B: Shovel Test Log).

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
In summary, approximately 4.55 ha (11.25 ac) was surveyed to assess for existing cultural
resources in the New Josey Elementary School campus project area in Denton County, Texas.
Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8915 was obtained, and all stipulations of the permit were
completed. The goal of the survey was to identify cultural resources and to make a preliminary
evaluation of the documented cultural resources as to their eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP
and for being listed as a SAL.
The investigations conducted by Sphere 3 included an examination of previous archaeological
and other cultural resources investigations within one mile of the project area, an analysis of
aerial imagery and topographic maps over the past 94 years, and an intensive pedestrian
archaeological survey supported by systematic shovel testing of the project area. A total of nine
shovel tests were excavated.
The survey identified no archaeological sites or isolated finds. No cultural resource was
determined eligible for inclusion in the NRHP or as worthy of listing as a SAL. Sphere 3
requests the Texas Historical Commission, as the State Historic Preservation Office for Texas, to
concur with these evaluations of non-eligibility and thus to concur with the determination of “no
effect” to any historic property as a result of the proposed New Josey Elementary School campus
construction undertaking. Accordingly, Sphere 3 recommends that the proposed work be
permitted to proceed without further cultural resources requirements.

5

REFERENCES
Blair, W. Frank
1950 “The Biotic Provinces of Texas.” The Texas Journal of Science 11(1):93-117.
Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA)
1995 Guidelines (Performance, Curation, and Reports). Volume, and summary sheet
entitled, “Archeological Survey Standards for Texas.” Council of Texas
Archeologists and Texas Historical Commission, Archeology Division, Austin.
Dice, L. R.
1943

The Biotic Provinces of North America. University of Michigan Press, Ann
Arbor.

Green, Melissa M., Floyd B. Largent, Jr., and Julian Adams
2005 Archeological Survey of 3.77 Miles of FM 423 from Stewarts Creek Road to SH
121 (CSJ 1567-02-020), Denton County, Texas.” Prepared for the Texas
Department of Transportation. Prepared by Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano, Texas.
TAC Permit No. 3881.
Jaconson, Jodi A., Benjamin G. Bury, Paul M. Matchen, Mike Quigg, Meghan Bruckse
Bury, and Trisha Ann Gonzales
2016 Report on Nine North Texas Intensive Archeological Surveys in TxDOT’s Dallas
District, Fort Worth District and Brownwood District.” Prepared for the Texas
Department of Transportation. Prepared by TRC Environmental Corporation.
TAC Permit No. 6511.
Lang, Brett, and S. Alan Skinner
2015 Title not available. Lakewood Hills Development Area. Prepared for W&M
Environmental Group Inc. Prepared by AR Consultants Inc., Richardson, TX.
Natural Resource Conservation Service
n.d.
Soil Conservation Service. Web Soil Survey. Data downloaded from
http://www.ftw.nrcs.usda.gov/ssur_data.html, accessed March 17, 2019.
Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2001 “Archeological Survey Standards for Texas.” Summary of minimum survey
standards developed in consultation with the Council of Texas Archeologists.
Second Draft revised August 10, 2001. Texas Historical Commission,
Archeology Division, Austin, Texas.
n.d.

Todd, Jesse
2003

Texas Archeological Site Atlas.
“Texsite,” site file search at website
https://atlas.thc.state.tx.us/ Maintained by Archeology Division, Copyright 19952008 Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Title not available. Prepared for the Environmental Protection Agency.
Prepared by AR Consultants Inc.

6

APPENDIX A
FIGURES

APPENDIX B
SHOVEL TEST LOG

Appendix B: New Josey Elementary School Shovel Test Log

Shovel
Test
Number

Project
Feature

Landform

1

Campus

Shoulder

2

Campus

Shoulder

3

Campus

Shoulder

4

Campus

Ridge Top

5

Campus

Shoulder

6

Campus

Shoulder

7

Campus

Shoulder

8

Campus

Back Slope

9

Campus

Shoulder

Depth of Soil
Horizon (cm
below
surface)

Horizon Soil Type

Munsell Color

0-12
12-25
0-4
4-23
0-25
25-34
0-3
3-22
0-21
21-28
0-22
22-29
0-5
5-23
0-20
0-28
28-33

Silt Clay Loam
Clay
Clay
Clay
Clay Loam
Clay
Humus/Clay
Silt Clay
Clay Loam
Clay
Clay Loam
Clay
Clay
Silty Clay
Silt Clay
Clay Loam
Clay

2.5Y4/1
7.5YR4/1
10YR4/1
7.5YR2.5/1
10YR4/1 with 10YR
2.5Y3/1 with 10YR5/4 mottles
7.5YR3/2
7.5YR3/2 with 7.5YR3/1 mottles
10YR3/2
10YR3/2
2.5Y2.5/1
2.5Y2.5/1
10YR3/2
10YR4/4 with 10YR5/4 mottles
10YR3/1
10YR3/2 with 10YR5/4 mottles
10YR3/2

Presence of Cultural
Resources
("positive"-one or
more artifacts)
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative

APPENDIX C
PHOTOGRAPH LOG

Project: New Josey Elementary School
APPENDIX C: Photograph Log

Photograph # 1
Date: 5-15-2019

Subject: General
environmental
photograph of the
southwest corner of
project area.
Recently constructed
housing south of
project area in view.
Facing south from
Shovel Test 2.

Photograph # 2
Date: 5-16-2019

Subject: General
environmental photo
of western half of
project area. Facing
north from Shovel
Test 2.

Photograph # 3
Date: 5-16-2019

Subject: North
Josey Lane. Road
borders the project
area to the east.
Facing northeast
from eastern project
area boundary near
Shovel Test 3.

Photograph # 4
Date: 5-16-2019

Subject: Shovel Test
4 profile.
Representative of
the majority of soils
found in project
area.

Photograph # 5
Date: 5-15-2019

Subject: General
environmental photo
of eastern half of the
project area. Facing
west from Shovel
Test 4.

Photograph # 6
Date: 5-15-2019

Subject: Tributary
of Indian Creek as it
passes north of the
project area north of
Shovel Test 5.
Facing north.

Photograph # 7
Date: 5-15-2019

Subject: Tributary
of Indian Creek as it
passes under North
Josey Lane. Facing
northeast.

Photograph # 8
Date: 5-15-2019

Subject: Shovel
Test 7 profile.
Representative of
mottled soil in
project area.

Photograph # 9
Date: 5-15-2019

Subject: General
environmental
photograph of
wooded area north
of the project area.
Facing north from
Shovel Test 8.

Photograph # 10
Date: 5-15-2019

Subject:
Northwestern
portion of project
area and large spoils
pile west of the
project area. Facing
west from Shovel
Test 9.

