An Archeological Reconnaissance of the

HARRY 1. SHAFER

ARCHEOLOGICAL SALVAGE PROJECT SURVEY REPORTS, NO.7
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN

AR-TX
TARL 09.007
("y)T\'7

1

i

I
f

!!,
I

I

l

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL RECONNAISSANCE OF THE

!

SANDERSON CANYON WATERSHED, TEXAS

I
i

I

I

I
I

!
I

I

Harry J. Shafer

Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey Reports, No.7
The University of Texas at Austin
i

I

!i

1_

January, 1971

'7~~f

A'U4.

~euw~ Lad.

,t~

PREFACE AND A.CKNOWLEDGMENTS
An archeological reconnaissance of portions of the Sanderson Canyon
watershed was carried out during August, 1970, by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin. This survey was
provided for by the terms of Purchase Order No. 7931 LOOl47 between the
National Park Service and The University of Texas at Austin.
The purpose of the survey was twofold: first, the areas to be
affected by the proposed construction of I I floodwater retarding
structures were inspected for archeological remains; second, a reconnais­
sance of the watershed was carried out for the purpose of noting other
land improvement projects which alter the surface and natural drainage
pattern. Such projects as root plowing, construction of cross-drainage
levees, and small catch basins drastically change the "natural surface
and often destroy or damage archeological sites present.
The findings of this reconnaissance demonstrate that these kinds of
land alteration programs have a significant potential of destroying
archeological sites. It is on the theme of conservation that this
report is based; that is, conservation of the archeological remains in
the areas affected by federally sponsored land improvement programs
through an effective program of salvage archeology.
The fol lowing report is divided into two parts: Part I is devoted
to describing the area, the survey, the archeology of each construction
site and recommending a program to salvage the endangered remains.
Part II presents the supporting archeological data; that is, the artifacts
and other data collected during the survey are described and interpreted
in order to gain some understanding of ~he archeology in Sanderson Canyon.
Also, prehistoriC patterns of land exploitation are discussed and
hypotheses testable by subsequent field work are suggested.
The successful completion of this project was dependent on the
cooperation of a number of individuals and agencies. The Soi I Con­
servation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture provided
major assistance throughout al I phases of this project. For instance,
Mr. Joe Camp and Mr. Suel Peevy of the Watershed Work Plan Office in
San Marcos, Texas, furnished aerial photographs and other pertinent
information necessary for the field reconnaissance. Mr. Herbert 5eene,
Soi I Conservation Agent in Sanderson, Texas, assisted in the survey,
provided local contact with'the landowners, and other invaluable
assistance to the survey party. Mr. Clyde W. Graham, State Conserva­
tionist with the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service in Temple, Texas, provided information about soi Is within the
watershed.

Lii

~

I would ~$pecial Iy I ike to thank Marsha F. Jackson for aiding in
the field reconnaissanc~ and EI izabeth Shropshire for her laboratory
assistance.
Helpful technical advice and criticism has been provided by
David S. Dibble, Acting Director of the Texas Arch~ological Salvage
Project, Dr. T. N. Campbell of the Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas, and John W. Clark, graduate stUdent of the
University of Arkansas.
Photographic plates were prepared by Douglas Comstock, John W.
Clark drafted the maps, and Melinda S. Gi les aided in the manuscript
preparat ion.
Any errors of fact or interpretation are, however, mine.

Edited by Mel inda S. Gi les

This report is submitted to the U.S. National Park Service
by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University
of Texas at Austin, in accordance with the provisions of
Purchase Order No. 7931 LOOI47.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I
I NTRODUCTI ON
• •
• ••
•
••
••• •
The Area
•••••••••••••••••••••
•
Archeological and Ethnohistorical Background • • • • • •
Survey Methods ••• • • • • • • • • • • " " • • " ""
•
Archeological Sites • • • • • " ••• " • • • • • •
SURVEY OF DAMSITE LOCATIONS • • • • •
• ••••
• •
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
••
•
• • • •
• •
• •
CONCLUDING STATEMENT
• • ••
••
••• •
PART II
MISCELLANEOUS SANDERSON CANYON SITES
•
SITE DISTRIBUTION •
• •••
LITHIC ARTIFACTS DESCRIPTIONS
• •
Too I s . • • •
• • •
•
•
•
Manufacturing Residue. •
• •
DISCUSSION
STATEMENT OF RESEARCH PROBLEMS.
CONCLUSION
•
•
REFERENCES CITED
•••••
APPENDIX I: ARTIFACT METRIC DATA
.......

~

•

" . . . . . ,.. •

r

•

1,

• •"

.........

v •

v •

'

•••••

~

•

0

20

21

24

•

25

•• • • •

26
35

. ...

•••••

0}

•

't>

•

','

.......

•

•

.

·.

40
43

•• •

46

•

62

•

67

••
"

56
60

•

•

••

8

••

•

•

5

23

•• •

••
· ...

5

•

• •
• •

1
2

List of Tables
I•

2.

Distribution of removable artifacts
Site data • • • • • • • • • • • • •

·

•

•

.

LI st of Fi gures
I•

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

·• • ···• • ·
• • • • • • • • • • • • •
• • · · • • • • • • •
·
·
•
•
• · · · · · · • •
·
·
·
•
· · " • ·• · • •• • • • • •• • •"
·
·
· • • · ·• ·· · ·• ·• ·• ·· • ·• ·

Map of Sanderson Canyon Watershed •
Map of Damsites 2, 4, 5, and 8
• •
Map of Dams i tes 6, 7, 9, 10, and II
Projecti Ie points • • • • • • •
Arti facts • • •
• •
• • • •
Archeological features
•
•
Land modification examples • • • • •

.

v

L

" • • •

'v i
10

12
49
51
53
55

'"'"
..J

i
Q

.....

::t:

I/)

a::

i

~

z
-<
u

z
oI/)
a::

I.&J

z

~

NnOJ~-:....;;.;_..,...

_____ _

Q

--­

Al
AJ.NnOJ

z

o

5
:.1

1

•
PART I
I NTRODUCTI ON

The Rio Grande-Pecos River, Big Bend, and Trans-Pecos Soi I and water
Conservation Districts and the Commissioners Courts of Terrel I, Pecos,
and Brewster counties have prepared and sponsored a watershed protection
and flood prevention plan for the Sanderson Canyon drainage (Anonymous
1969). These plans cal I for the construction of I I floodwater retarding
structures and a short channel improvement project. Portions of Terrel I,
Pecos, and Brewster counties wi I I be affected (Fig. I).
The most critical problems within this watershed are those caused by
flooding. The most disastrous flood on record occurred on. June 11-12,
1965, when 26 people died in Sanderson, the largest community within the
watershed. It is the primary purpose of the Sanderson Canyon Watershed
Protection Plan to prevent further severe flood damage and to conserve the
water runoff from heavy rains for rangeland use.

The Area
Sanderson Canyon watershed covers about 215 square mi les. At present
87.4 percent of this area is devoted to rangeland. Pasturage and miscel­
laneous uses are included in the remainder of the land use graph (Anonymous
1969: I ).
The watershed is located within the dissected Stockton Plateau, an
extension of the Edwards Plateau (Johnson 1931) and a subprovince of the
Great Plains Physiographic Province (Fenneman 1931: 50). steep sloping
ridges and canyon wal Is separated by broad alluvial valleys typify the
topography of the canyon and its tributaries. Elevations range from 5,200
feet above mean sea level on the plateau to 2,700 feet in the canyon below
Sanderson.
AI I streams in the area are ephemeral; the main canyon has an eastward
course, but tributaries enter from both the north and southwest. The
gradient of the main val ley is steep, averaging greater than 40 feet per
mi Ie (Anonymous 1969: 3).
Surface geology is dominated by outcrops of the Comanche Series of
the Cretaceous, especially the Fredricksburg and Washita groups (Sel lards,
Adkins, and Plummer 1958: Geology Map of Texas, 1933). outcrops of
Edwards and Georgetown I imestone formations predominate and have a combined
average thickness of some 600 feet (Anonymous 1969: 3).

iI......­

Damsi te No. 1.
About 193 acres wi I I be affected by this construction. The dam wi I I
measure some 3,500 feet in length and wi I I be constructed across Sanderson
Canyon in southern Pecos County. Maximum pool wi I I crest at 3,354.6 feet
above m.s.l.
A cursory reconnaissance was made along the northern portion of the
planned lake area and no archeological remains were seen.
No recommendations are made at this time.
Damsite No.4 (Fig. 2)
This proposed construction site is across an unnamed canyon in south­
west Terrel I County. The dam wi I I be some 3,600 feet in total length and
the overal I area to be affected wi I I be about 246 acres. Maximum pool
elevation is planned at 3,227.4 feet above m.s.l.
Surface reconnaissance was carried out over the entire reservoir area.
Archeological remains in the form of scattered burned rock, flakes or fl int
tools, and hearths occurred sporadically along less .roded locations
(usual Iysl ightly elevated portions of land not affected by stream over­
flow or sheet wash) situated along both sides of the arroyo draining the
main canyon. Hearths were the most obvious archeological feature. One
concentration near the maximum pool contour was deSignated as Site 41 TE 77.
The concentration was located at the base of a ridge immediately west of
the arroyo. Surface-evident materials included chipped fl int and thinly
scattered burned rock.
No further work is recommended.
Damsite N0.1 (Fig. 2)
Dam No.5 wi I I be constructed across Ninemi Ie Draw in southwestern
Terrel I County. A total area of about 220 acres wi I I be affected. The
maximum flood pool elevation wi I I be 3,177.9 feet above m.s.l.
The entire area of Damsite No.5 was surveyed. No concentrated
archeological materials were seen, but isolated hearths, flakes, or stone
tools were encountered principally on the west side along the foot of a
smal I mesa. Much of the eastern portion of the area is dissected by several
arroyos which cut through the flats; the surface between the arroyos has
been subjected to considerable sheet wash erosion. The general absence of

II

DAMS ITES

6,7, 9,10, & 11

AND LOCATIONS OF
ARCHEOLOGICAL
FEATURES

N

t
LEGEND
_ _ _ DAM

- - ­ EASEMENT

rio,

"ltltOYO

•

SITE

..

HEARTH

....,.......-.. CONTOUR

Q

c

o

...

11:

SITE

,.

l­
Z
:::I

oV

SCALE
:

If'

FEET

12

4r

demonstrably stable surfaces is felt to be partly responsible for the virtual
absence of archeological materials on the eastern portion of the affected area.
Two sites were recorded near the mouth df a smal I side canyon located
one-half mi Ie north of the lake area. One, a rockshelter (41 TE 73), evi­
dences moderate occupation; the other site is a ring midden site (41 TE 74).
Since none of the sites wi II be directly affected by construction, no
further work is recommended.

Damsite No • .§. (Fig. 3)
Dam No.6 wi I I be a 3,200 foot long earthen structure across Red Wind­
mi I I Draw in southwestern Terrel I County. The dam construction impoundment
area wil I affect about 244 acres of land. Maximum pool elevation wi I I be
3,076.9 feet above m.s.l.

~

'1

Surface survey was carried out over the entire affected area and
resulted in the location of two archeological sites plus several isolated
hearths which were not given site designations. One site (41 TE 68) is a
smal I rockshelter located at the base of an upland nose on the west side
of the reservoir area. The shelter is at an elevation of about 3,070 feet;
it opens to the north and measures approximately 30 feet in width, 4 feet
in height, and is about 4 to 5 feet in depth. No smoke blackening is
evident; in fact, the shelter is given status of an aboriginal site only
because of the abundant I ithic debris (artifacts, flakes, and burned rock)
I ittering the low talus slope in front of the overhang.
The second site (41 TE 72) is an area of concentrated surface debris
located at the base of an upland point (where the east side of the dam wi I I
be constructed) and in an adjoining flat. The flat I ies between the
upland nose and Red Windmi I I Draw. Hearths (one of which measured some 8
feet across), scattered burned rock, and a quantity of chipped stone debris
and flint tools litter the surface (Table I).
Three additional sites were recorded about one mi Ie north of the dam­
site. These include 41 TE 69, a large rockshelter with mortar holes,
grinding baSins, pol ished boulders, grooves worn in boulders, and picto­
graphs; Site 41 TE 70, a smal I open site with several hearths located in
the canyon a short distance below 41 TE 69; and 41 TE 71, a smal I rock­
shelter located at the mouth of the same canyon. None of these wi I I be
directly affected by construction. Site 41 TE 69 has been disturbed con­
siderably by indiscriminate digging.
The paucity of cultural remains except for Site 41 TE 72 along the
east side of the reservoir area is attributed to extensive sheet wash

13

eros'i on and arroyo .cutt i ng. Most 'of the hearths found: outs i de areas des Ig­
npted ',at$; s i t~s w.ereol) ttlE! .we,st,s ide. where the, topogr.aphyi ,s·m(Jre abrupt.
Additional archeological investigations are recommended for Site 41 TE
68--specifical Iy excavation. No excavations are recommended for 41 TE 72,
but additional surface investigation in the form of systematic collecting
would be advisable.

Damsite No. I (Fig. 3)
This structure wi I I be bui It across Three Mi Ie Draw in southwestern
Terrell County. It wi II be some 3,200 feet long and wi II affect a surface
area of 196 acres. Maximum pool elevation wi I I be 3,220.2 feet above m.s. I.
The survey covered the affected area and resulted in the location of
one site (41 TE 76). The site consisted of numerous hearths at the front
of an upland point where a smal I side canyon enters Three Mi Ie Draw. The
site has been severely disturbed by the construction of a series of drainage
levees in the side canyon, a modification effort directed at conserving
much of the drainage coming out of that canyon for land use. It was evident
that this alteration scattered many hearths. A number of I ithic artifacts
were recovered from the hearth concentration (see Table I).
An additional archeological feature in the form of a fl int quarry was
evident at the upland point on which the north end of the dam wi I I be
anchored. The quarry is not extensive.
No further archeological work is recommended.

Damsite No. §. (Fig. 2)
The construction of Dam No.8 wi I I affect about 120 acres of land in
southWEst Terrel I County. The earthen dam wi II be some 2,500 feet long
and wi I I be bui It across an unnamed canyon which drains into Three Mi Ie
Draw from the west. The maximum pool elevation is planned at 3,108.7 feet
above m.s.l.
Surface reconnaissance covered approximately 70 percent of the area
that wi / I be affected by construction and impoundment. Four archeological
sites were recorded, but evidently two are located outside the endangered
area. Site 41 TE 61, a quarry site is situated on the nos~ of the upland
arm where the north end of the dam is to be constructed. Flakes, cores,
and discarded biface preforms were noted over much of the surface of the
14

----------------------......----------.........

site. Several veins of fl int (both seam and nodular) have eroded out of the
limestone at this location and provided abundant raw material. Also, the
presence of some scattered burned rock fragments hint of possible campsite
activities.
Sites 41 TE 58, TE 59, and TE 60 are burned rock midden sites. Site 41
TE 58 is located on the north side of the lake area. Two middens are
present: one, Midden A, is an excel lent example of a crescent midden;
Midden B, located approximately 100 feet to the west, may be a less wei I
preserved crescent-type midden, or perhaps represents two smal I, overlapping
middens. No subsurface pit is apparent in Midden A but a pit measuring
approximately 12 feet in diameter is obvious in Midden B. The open end of
the crescent in Midden A is toward the southeast. Artifact collections are
tabulated in Table I.
Location of 41 TE 58 relative to the flood crest cannot be determined
precisely, but judging from contour maps and aerial photographs it I ies at
the border of the maximum pool.
Site 41 TE 59 is another excel lent example of a crescent midden with
a large subsurface pit. This site I ies some 600 feet north of 41 TE 58
and outside the endangered area. In addition to the midden, a consider­
able amount of occupational debris (hearths, burned rock, flakes, broken
and/or discarded tools) I itters the surface of the smal I bench of col­
luvium on which the midden is situated. A wide range of artifacts was
collected (see Table I) suggesting that a number of activities were carried
out here.<
A smal I circular burned rock midden (41 TE 60) measuring about 25
feet in diameter was discovered in a smal I side canyon south of the
proposed impoundment.
Site 41 TE 61 wi I I certainly be destroyed by construction and further
examination of the kinds of quarrying debris is sCientifically desirable
to determine, if possible, (I) a relative date for the site and (2) some
indication of technological activities. Mapping and partial excavation is
recommended for 41 TE 58 because of its nearness to the pool area.

Damsite No •

..2.

(Fig. 3)

This structure wi II be bui It across the mouth of a large tributary
canyon of Three Mi Ie Draw. The canyon, located in southwest Terrel I County,
drains into Three Mi Ie Draw from the west. The dam wi II measure some 2,400
feet in length and it, plus the lake, wi I I affect 149 acres of land. The
maximum spi I Iway crest is planned at 2,039.8 feet above m.s.l.

15
I

l

More archeological sites were recorded within the area to be affected
by this dam than al lather locations combined. Eleven sites wi I I be directly
affected; most, if not al I, wi I I probably be totally destroyed. Five are
burned rock midden sites (41 TE 48, TE 50, T~ 51, TE 56, and TE 57) and five
are rockshelter sites (41 TE 49, Tt 52, and TE 53-55). The terrace on which
sites 41 TE 50 and 56 are located is strewn with I ithic debriS, burned rock
fragments, and definable hearths. The entire terrace within the construction
impoundment area could legitimately be deSignated asa site on the basis of
the continuous prehistoric residue I ittering that surface. However, since
collections were made only at the two burned rock middens, each of these
collection loci were given site numbers instead of designating the entire
area as one site.
Site 41 TE 48 (Fig. 6,8) described in an earl ier section, is a typical
crescent midden. It I ies at the base of an upland arm where the northeast
end of the dam wi I I be anchored. In addition to the crescent-shaped burned
rock midden, bedrock grinding basins (at least five are exposed) were
observed about 50 feet northeast of the burned rock accumulation. Two manos
were collected near the grinding basins and a few I ithic tools were found
in association with the midden (Table I).
Another typical crescent midden with an obvious pit (41 TE 50) was
found some 400 feet southeast of TE 48 and just upstream from where the
dam is to be located. The area in which the site I ies wi I I be used for
borrow fl I I for the dam construction. Lithic artifacts abound on the sur­
face surrounding the midden but the events responsible for the midden and
for the surrounding debris may be temporally separate. The midden, open
to the southeast, measures 33 feet across and is about 2.5 feet in maximum
height; a smaller burned rock concentration was found on the opposite side
of the pit from the crescent. It measures about 5 feet in diameter and is
approximately I foot high.
Lithic artifacts are quite numerous over the terrace surface on which
the midden is Situated. It is apparent from the exposure of hearths on
the surface and in erosional cuts that the general area around 41 TE 50
has seen a long span of human activity. Artifacts and hearths (Fig. 6, A)
were seen on the terrace west of the arroyo in an area extending from
below the damsite upstream to above the maximum pool I imits. The chances
appear good that systematic surface sampl ing here may serve to delimit
specific activity loci.
Site 41 TE 51 contains two middens and an area of hearth~ scattered
burned rock, and much chipping debris. The diversity of material indicates
a considerable range of prehistoric activities. One midden (designated as
Midden A) is a typical crescent midden with a pit and a smaller dome­
shaped deposit of burned rock OPPOSite the open end of the crescent. The
crescent (open to the east) measures some 30 feet across and is about 4
feet in maximum height. Some 120 feet to the~st is a circular aCCUmulation
of burned rock fragments deSignated as Midden B. This feature appearing as

16

an oval pavement of rock, measures 30 feet by 35 feet. Artifact collections
were made on and immediately around both middens. Based on the dart point
types found a considerable time range seems to be indicated for the site.
The site area measures approximately 100 feet by 300 feet and is located in
the spi Ilway construction area.
Site 41 TE 56 is another crescent midden located just upstream from
the dam and in the immediate borrow pit-lake area. It I ies on the same
terrace as 41 TE 50 and about 200 feet to the north. The crescent-shaped
accumulation of burned rock measures 50 feet across and is about 3 feet high.
A pit is obvious between thepoLnts of the crescent, but a smaller deposit
of burned rock--a feature common at other crescent midden sites-- is not
apparent here.
A smal I pavement of burned rock fragments (41 TE 57) was recorded
about 1,000 feet above the damsite just above the western margins of the
lake. This concentration measures about 25 feet in diameter and was
centered near a large boulder dislodged from the canyon wal I. No lithic
artifacts were collected.
On the nose of the hi II just above 41 TE 48 is a smal I bedrock sheltered
area (designated 41 TE 49) evidencing some human activity (Fig. 6, B). A
trace of burned I imestone and fl int residue was observed in front of the
south-faCing shelter. The sheltered area is formed by an abrupt limestone
scarp with a minimal overhang; it measures 20 feet Wide, 5 feet deep, and
3 to 5 feet high. The cei I ing is smoke-blackened.
The southwest end of the dam wil I be anchored at the front of a narrow
but high east-west oriented ridge. On the southern face of the ridge is a
"VII-shaped, southe~st-openjng cavity measuring some 25 feet Wide, 20 feet
deep, and 20 feet high (Fig. 6, D). This site is designated as 41 TE 52.
The floor slopes frontward sharply and the entrance is strewn with huge
boulders. There is very little fi I I in the shelter, but a considerable
amount of burned rock and 11 intworkshop debris can be seen on the talus
slope below. The Edwards I imestone here contains numerous bands of fl int
nodules and it is quite apparent that fl int quarrying was a common activity_
This site is endangered by dam and spi Ilway construction.
The main arroyo across which the dam wi I I be bui It is presently cutting
against a low I imestone escarpment. Previous cutting has created a series
of sheltered areas beneath a resistant bed of hard I imestone. Three of
these westward-facing shelters evidence extensive prehistoric util ization.
Since all I ie only about 5 to 6 feet above the present arroyo bed, they wi II
be submerged by the maximum impoundment. The first site as one walks up­
stream (41 TE 53) measures some 50 feet wide, 1.5 to 3 feet high, and 10
feet deep. The second (41 TE 54). measures about 30 feet Wide, 12-15 feet
deep, and 2-4 feethigh; the third (41 TE 55) is about 25 feet Wide, 2.5 to
4 feet high, and 10 feet deep. AI I are undisturbed and the cei I ings are
soot-stained. The possibi I ities are good that dry depOSits are present

17

.........

in al I.
sl teo

They are directly across the arroyo from 41 TE 56, a crescent midden

The construction and impoundment at Dam No.9 wi I I contribute to the
destruction of a number of presently undisturbed archeological sites. It
is highly recommended that at least minimal salvage work (i.e., mapping
and partial excavation) be conducted at 41 TE 48, TE 50, TE ?I,TE 53, TE 54,
TE 55, and TE 56 and that surface survey and smel I scale testing be:conducted
at i nterva I s on the terrace 'whe're 's i tes 41 TE 50 and TE 56 are located to
investigate possible activity areas and to explore the nature and context
of buried hearths. Surface collecting is recommended also for 41 TE 49 and
TE 52 to determine the kinds of activities indicated by the I ithic sample.

Dams i te No. J.Q (F i g. 3 )
This dam is
butary canyon of
dam wi I I be some
affect 138 acres
m.s.l.

to be constructed across the mouth of an eastern tri­
Three Hi Ie Draw in southwest Terrel I County. The planned
2,400 feet long and it, together with the lake, wi I I
of land. Spillway crest is planned at 2,995.2 feet above

Surface reconnaissance covered al I the area to be affected. The only
archeological remains noted were a few isolated hearths and occasional
flakes, cores, or burned rock fragments distributed along both sides of
the arroyos draining the canyon. The hearths represented various stages
of preservation from displaced burned rocks to seemingly intact, but exposed
features. No apparent concentration of occupational residue was encountered
anywhere in the damsite area.
No further work is recommended.

Damsite No. _,_, (Fig. 3)
Dam No. II is to be a lengthy earthen structure located immediately
west·of Sanderson in western Terrel' County. The embankment across Three
Mi Ie Draw wi I I be some 7,600 feet long and, combined with the detention
pool, wi I I affect a total of 200 acres. The spi I Iway crest wi I I be at
2,855.8 feet above m.s.l.
Four archeological sites were recorded within the margins of the con­
struction area; two (41 TE 62 and 41 TE 63) are badly disturbed burned rock
middens. Both sites I Ie In the borrow area. It is impossible to determine

18

...........

..--------------------------------------

precisely what kind of middens were present because of historic disturbance,
but both were apparently mounded acretions of angular burned rock fragments.
The surface at the west end of the damsite is littered with historic
and prehistoric occupational debris. This location is on a sloping, rocky
surface of a spur projecting from the canyon border and was designated as
41 TE 64. A large amount of burned rock was noted along with flakes, cores,
a mana, and several chipped stone tools. Presently an old frame store, a
large circular stock tank, and traces of other historic features are present.
In al I, some two acres of land evidence archeological materials. The site
wi I I be destroyed by dam construction.
On the west side of Three Mi Ie Draw some 2,000 feet above the dam is
an area of hearths and much I ithic debris, particularly flakes and coreso
(Site 41 TE 65). The materials appear restricted to the surface of colluvial
deposit, the surface of which is littered with flint nodules eroded from a
I imestone escarpment that forms the western side of the val ley.
Two additional sites were recorded just west of the upper lake area in
a smal I side canyon of Three Mi Ie Draw. Site 41 TE 66 is a smal I, south­
ward-facing rockshelter located at the front of a spur (Fig. 6, C). The
shelter measures about 6 feet wide at the mouth, 3.5 feet high, and is 12
feet deep. InSide, the cavity widens to about 12 feet. The cei I ing is
soot-stained and although the fi I I inside the shelter is minimal, the talus
debris resulting from prehistoric uti I ization is extensive. Scratches or
abrasion grooves were seen on the shelter wal I just inside on the right
side of the entrance. A sizable collection of artifacts was gathered from
the talus slope (see Table I).
Below 41 TE 66 is a colluvial outwash bench in the smal I canyon. On
this bench is located a crescent midden and a rather dense surface accumu­
lation of occupational debris. The midden, open to the east-southeast,
measures 40 feet across and is about 2 feet high; a smaller, domed accumu­
lation of burned rock occurs at the open end of the crescent, but no pit is
evident. A large oval-basin grinding slab was observed about 20 feet west
of the main burned rock accumulation. On the surface surroundlng the midden
was a quantity of burned rock, occasional articulated hearths (most were,
however, badly disturbed), chipping debriS, and discarded tools (Table I).
In addition to the above-mentioned Sites, isolated hearths and pre­
historic artifacts were found on both sides of Three Mi Ie Draw to the up­
stream pool I imits. One such hearth found near the northwest corner of
the Sanderson roping arena on the east side of the proposed pool area
measured some 7 feet across and was apparently intact (though wei I exposed).
Subsurface testing is recommended for 41 TE 62, the least disturbed
burned rock midden, to obtain soi I samples and perhaps clearly associated
material for radiocarbon dating. An intensive surface survey is recom­
mended for 41 TE 65 to determine the kinds of activities indicated by the
I ithic remains.
19

,
..L

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
The recommendations for archeological salvage are put forth in two
programs; one is a preferred program in terms of obtaining truly satis­
factory scientific ends. The second program provides an estimate of the
minimal amount of work required to map and document the remains as they
appear now plus a I imited amount of subsurface Investigations.
The preferred program of investigations recommends the fol lowing work:
Damsite No.2:

Additional survey work.

Damsite No.6:

Mapping and partial excavation at 41 TE 68;
mapping of 41 TE 69; intensive surface
survey at 41 TE 72.

Damsite No.8:

Mapping and partial excavation at 41 TE 58;
intensive surface survey at 41 TE 61.

Damsite No.9:

Mapping and partial excavation at 41 TE 48,
TE 50, TE 51, TE 56 (al I burned rock middens),
TE 53, TE 54, and TE 55 (rockshelters); surface
survey and collecting at 41 TE 49, TE 52 (rock­
shelters); surface survey and testing on ter­
race near 41 TE 50.

Damsite No. I I:

Partial excavation at 41 TE 62; surface survey
of TE 65.

iln'support'of this fHlt! wor", it is'recOmmended:that certaLn .i"nter­
inary ttOdl~s be initiated~' Of ~petl~t 5~g~ificante in Onder­
stand i ng . preh istoti-chuman adapht i cns in-::tb is' reg ion WQU I d be i nformat i;on
rel~ted to the nat~re of paleo-environments.
Evtnprel·iminary .. eSti~ates
of th is wou I a. requi reat:the.yery ·I.east :the serv"i"ces . of. a pa I yno I og i st
experiended in late Quaternary cl imatic reconstructions.
disci~1

A description and interpretation of the geological history is
desirable. Also, certain soi I chemical tests may aid in the functional
interpretation of specific sites. It is therefore recommended that pro­
visions be made for temporary employment of a geologist and a soi I scientist.
In order to carry out this program effectively, it is estimated that
one archeologist and one assistant be employed for a period of one year.
Necessary field work would require an estimated three months with a crew
of six (including the archeologist) and brief visits by the above mentioned
special ists from other discipl ines. Total cost is estimated. at $25,000.

20

The minimal program designed to merely document and evaluate the
general nature ofthg endangetedartheOlogit~l-r~mains i~'as follows:
Damsite No.6:

Mapping and brief testing at 41 TE 68; systematic
surface collecting at 41 TE 72.

Damsite No.8:

Mapping and brief testing at 41 TE 58; systematic
surface collecting at 41 TE 61.

Damsite No.9:

Mapping and brief testing at 41 TE 48, TE 50,
TE 51, TE 53, TE 54, TE 55, TE 56, and systematic
surface collecting at 41 TE 50 (on terrace around
site), TE 49, and TE 52.

Damsite No. I I:

Brief test at 41 TE 62; surface collecting at
41 TE 65.

It should be pointed out that under this minimal program, it wi I I not
be possible to thoroughly investigate anyone site. An estimated expendi­
ture of about $5,000 would be required for implementing such a program.
The recommendations above are based on analysis and interpretation of
the materials recovered during this survey and from avai lable archeological
I iterature. A survey of existing I iterature on the Trans-Pecos area
revealed seriOUS gaps of our present knowledge in specific aspects of the
archeology. Sanderson Canyon offers an excel lent opportunity to investi­
,gate such features as the internal structure of crescent burned rock middens,
their distribution, and age, and how they and other sites fit into the
patterns of prehistoric land exploitation away from permanent sources of
water. Reasons for and data supporting specific recommendations are pre­
sented in Part I I of this report.

CONCLUDING STATEMENT
An archeological survey of I I proposed floodwater retarding structure
locations in the Sanderson Canyon watershed led to the discovery of 22
archeological sites which wi I I be directly affected by the construction.
Most of the sites wi I I be destroyed outright by the erection of the earthen
embankments; this appl ies to those sites located in the immediate dam con­
struction area as wei I as those above the dams in the proposed pool areas
which wi I I I ikely be removed as part of the borrow fi I I. Sites lying out­
side of the immediate dam and borrow pit areas, but within the maximum pool
margins wi I I be subject to destruction by erosional action of the
fluctuating pools.

21
I

J...

Destruction of archeological sites by completed land improvement projects
was also evident during this survey. Site 41 TE 76, for example, was a
location with numerous examples of prehistoric activity. The archeological
materials had been displaced by several across-drainage levees constructed
to conserve runoff water and improve rangeland conditions. One such levee
located in Damsite No.8 is I I lustrated in Figure 7, D.
Another example of a land improvement technique disturbing archeological
materials is that seen at 41 PC 3 where smal I catch basins were excavated
mechanically (Fig. 7, C); these excavations resulted in the formation of
smal I depressions (several feet wide) with an associated spoi I dump on the
downslope side. Besides the destructive potential of these features, their
construction alters the normal drainage pattern of a relatively large area
further creating potential disturbance to ~ situ archeological remains.
Perhaps the single most potentially destructive technique of land
improvement to archeological remains is that of root plowing. Mesquite
and other vegetation is removed from an area by heavy machinery (Fig. 7,
A). The root systems are destroyed by deep plowing (over two feet below
the surface) and certain grasses are seeded. The end result is that the
upper few feet of sometimes large tracts of land are altered and any
shal lowly buried archeological remains are destroyed. An example of this
is seen at 41 PC 4 where apparent hearths and other refuse accumulations
had been completely displaced (Fig. 7, B).
This survey which touched but a smal I portion of the Sanderson Canyon
watershed revealed the location of at least 7 sites (including several
outside damsite areas) which have already been either destroyed or badly
damaged by land alteration programs and that approximately 20 other sites
wi I I be destroyed in the near future. For Sanderson canyon, this loss
wi I I remove a significant segment of the archeological sample, hence
reducing its interpretive potential. Such floodwater retention projects
in tributary drainage systems are significantly destructive of the sampl ing
universe within those systems and sanderson Canyon watershed serves as a
case example. These survey findings exempl ify the need of an archeological
survey and salvage program as a part of the watershed protection plan.

22

PART II
MISCELLANEOUS SANDERSON CANYON SITES
During the survey, a number of archeological sites were seen wei I out­
side the areas to be affected by floodwater retarding structures. Several
of these sites were investigated. The resultant data are included here
because they are pertinent to an archeological characterization of the
area and serve to enlarge the site sample. These sites are described below:
41 BS 27; a burned rotk midden, is located along the county road in
Brewster County near Damsite No. I. The midden had been partly disturbed
by road construction to the extent that classification was impossible. The
midden measured some 40 feet in diameter and has an accumulated height of
about two feet. It is located near a natural "pothole" in the arroyo which
retains rain water for short periods. The arroyo is a tributary of Dry
Creek.
41 TE 42 is a smal I two-part rockshelter within the community of
Sanderson. The larger part measures about 20 feet deep, 25 feet wide,
and has a cei I ing height of about 7 feet. An extensive midden talus
depos it forms an apron in front of the she Iter. The ent i re f i I I has been
thoroughly churned by indiscriminate digging. Scratches occur on the
shelter wall to the right of the entrance. A smaller alcove exhibiting a
soot-stained cei I ing is located some 20 feet east of the larger sheltered
area, but no f i I I was present.
A smal I, dome-shaped burned rock midden is located some 150 feet south­
east of TE 42. This midden, deSignated as 41 TE 43, has a diameter of about
35 feet and is approximately I foot thick.
Two small rockshel ters, 41 TE 44 and TE 45, were recorded some 3 mi I es
west of Sanderson in a bluff overlooking the main arroyo. Both are westward­
facing shelters. 41 TE 44 measures about 50 feet wide, 25-30 feet deep,
and is 10-20 feet high. Immediately below (and partly fi I led by talus from
TE 44) is the sma II er she Iter, TE 45. I t measures about 20 feet wi de, 15
feet deep, and 4 feet high. Both have been bad I y disturbed by re Ii c hunters.
Just to the south of TE 44 and TE 45 is a bench of colluvial deposits
dissected by a small arroyo. On each portion of the bench remnants is a
burned rock midden. Site 41 TE 46 is one of the largest crescent middens
encountered; it measures about 50 feet in diameter and reaches a maximum
height of some 5 or 6 feet. A pit may be present in the center and a smal I
dome-shaped accumUlation of burned rock occurs in front of the crescent.
The open end faces southeast.

23

1

Site 41 TE 47 is a smal I, oval concentration pf burned rock located some
100 feet south of TE 46 and across the arroyo. It measures about 30 feet in
diameter and appears simply as a pavement of rock fragments.
Site 41 TE 75 is a medium-sized rockshelter located about 65 mi les west
of Sanderson in a southWEstward-facing bluff bordering Sanderson Canyon. The
shelter has been badly disturbed by col lectors. It measures about 50 feet
wide, 35 feet deep, and 3 to 6 feet high. The fil I is very ashy and dry,
and an extensive burned rock talus extends down the slope in front of the
shelter.

SITE DISTRIBUTION
An analysiS of the distribution of al I sites recorded during this survey
relative to topographic situation and soi I types was made in an attempt to
discover possible correlations (Table 2). No definite patterning was recog­
nized. However, the possibi lity that certain kinds of sites tend to be
associated with specific topographic/soi I situations was suggested by this
analysis and can be tested by further field research.
The sites were located on soi I survey field sheets provided by the Soi I
Conservation Service. AI I rockshelters understandably fel I in the Ector-rock
outcrop complex and most quarry sites can be expected in the same assotiation
(although 41 TE 65 is an exception). Burned rock middens show a distribution
primari Iy within two major soi I zones, the Sanderson-Upton association and
the Reagan silty clay loam. Three burned rock midden sites were found on
arroyo floodplains in association with the Dev series, but none of these
sites were identifiable as crescent or ring middens because of their dis­
turbed condition. The sample is biased in favor of sites in the val ley since
no survey work was carried out on top of the plateau remnants; it is 1ikely
that burned rock middens are present at these high locations. Despite this
bias, the distribution of burned rock middens (particularly crescent
middens) on alluvial fans and slopes in association with the Sanderson and
Upton soi 1 series and on terraces in association with the Reagan soi I series
may be more than coincidental •

.

The specific location of burned rock middens seems to be partly due
to the topographic Situation; for example, a relatively flat surface was
seemingly preferred, but this flat surface is often located on colluvial
deposits in smal I, side canyons. Burned rock middens do occur in open flats
(41 TE 50 and TE 56), but they are most frequent in side canyons of a larger
chasm such as Three Mi Ie Draw. Site 41 TE 51, TE 59, TE 67, and TE 75 are
examples. The soi I types in such side canyons are usually the Sanderson­
Upton aSSOCiation, and creosote is a dominate plant on the colluvial features.

24

It is not possible to determine with present information if the raw materials
avai lable in the side canyons were responsible for site location or if features
of the topography there were the prime factor in locating sites (e.g.,
uti I izing the abrupt topography for wind deflection). These are not indepen­
dent variables, however, since topography is one factor which partly deter­
mines the soi I type and plant association. The basic constituents neces­
sary in midden construction and uti I ization (wood and I imestone) were both
presumably avai lable in the smal I side canyons.
Hearth concentrations without the middens occur also in the Sanderson­
upton association and in areas associated with the Reagan series.
AI I open sites located during the survey were near an ~rroyo.
Thts suggests the possibi I ity that the loc~tion bf bu~ned rock midd~n/hearth
cbncentratt6n sites in ~ide c~~yon~ ma~ be due to another resourte,runoff
water frpm sporadic rains. Occasional po~~s.which hold water for a few
days after rains occur both in canyons and in the major arroyos; such a
pool was found near 41 BS 27. It is possible then, that uti I ization of
resources in Sanderson Canyon was more intense fol lowing rains. Another
possibi I ity is that special processing stations were situated close to
drainways because of vegetational considerationso (e.g., the presence of
exploitable plant communities which in turn were there because of runoff
water~. There is no apparent way these can be tested at the moment, but
perhaps as cooking processes, kinds of plants uti I ized, and camping duration
are better understood, some inferences can be made about exploitative
techniques used in specific microenvironments.

LITHIC ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS
Described under this heading are the chipped stone and ground stone
artifacts. Relevant statistical data can be found in Appendix I.
Chipped stone artifacts are subdivided into categories termed T1toolsTl
and "manufacturing debris Tl • Tools are defined as "objects used to make
other objects or used to operate resources in processing them for con­
sumption" (Leeds 1965: 3). Therefore, in terms of this definition, tools
should reveal some evidence of use, however minimal. In any archeological
sample one could hardly expect to make a totally rei iable separation on
this basis. Therefore, the subjective factor of the classification becomes
apparent. Uti I ization is not always such that wear (i.e., alteration
through use) is clearly manifested on the tool. Shape, however, can suggest
function where there is no obvious wear pattern (for example, projecti Ie
points). Also, a technical fai lure such as a preform broken during the
manufacturing process could sti I I be used to perform cutting tasks.

25

Th e f 0 I low i ng item s are c Iass i fie d as too Is: pro j e c til e poi nt s ; Gr 0 up
stemless bifaces; a triangular, beveled biface; fist knife; battered stone
tools; al I unifaces; ground stone; and miscellaneous stone artifacts.
Manufacturing debris includes projecti Ie point preforms; Group 2 stemless
bifaces; cores; and flakes.
Tools are classed according to function only when use is reasonably
certain. For the most part they are divided into broad categories based on
manufacturing technology. Uniface tools are subdivided according to
morphological characteristics.

Tools
Tools are grouped into two major classes; uniface and biface. AI I
are assumed to be manufacturing end products; these assumptions are based
principally on the shape and degree of workmanship. For example, projecti Ie
points and stemless Group I bifaces exhibit careful thinning and shaping;
margins are straightened by pressure retouch.
BIFACE TOOLS
Biface tools include projecti Ie pOints, Group I stemless bifaces, a
triangul~r, be~eled biface, a fist knife, and battered stone tools.

Projecti I e Points
Projecti Ie point classification fol lows that of Suhm and Jelks (1962)
and Schuetz (1956).
Ensor (I specimen, Fig. 4, B)
Shal low side notches occur in the lateral edges near the base; base
is sl ightly concave; point is long and narrow with faintly convex lateral
edges. SpeCimen is carefully thinned. Material simi lar to the specimen
can be obtained locally.
Frio (3 specimens, Fig. 4, C,D)
These items are also side notched, but the base possesses the
characteristic broad "Un-shaped notch. Lateral edges are either straight

26

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -. . . . . .- - - - - - - - - - . . . . .

&

(2 specimens) or slightly convex (I specimen). Material appears to be of local
origin and I specimen may have been heat treated.
Palsano (6 specimens, Fig. 4, E-H)
stems are formed by shal low side notches; base is characterized by
broad "U!~shaped notch which typically does not extend to basal corner thus
leaving corners rounded or squared; pointed stem corners occur on one example.
Blades are usually long and narrow with 51 ightly convex lateral edges;
lateral edges on one specimen are serrated. stone in each case could have
been locally obtained. The appearance of three specimens suggests heat treating.
Langtry A (5 specimens, Fig. 4, I-K)
AI I speCimens are basal fragments. Diagnostic attributes are long,
contracting stems with prominent shoulders; bases are convex. Craftsmanship
is variable, but generally specimens are thinned. Local material for al I
examples is suggested; there Is no Indication of heat treating. Retouching
margins by unifacial trimming edge to a narrow bevel is present on two examples.
Langtry B (I specimen, Fig. 4, L)
This expertly made specimen has a long, contracting stem, narrow indented
base (basal indention done by steep, unifacial bevel), and one prominent and one
weak should~r~. Blade Is triangular with straight edges. Specimen is
asymmetr.ical·in:autfine. Stem is trimmed by alternately bevel ing right edge
of both faces. Specimen has been burned and source of material is uncertain.
Val Verde (I specimen, Fig. 4, M)
Specimen is basal fragment. Base is concave; stem edges are also con­
cave and are alternately beveled along the right side. Blade was triangular
and shOUlders prominent. Specimen is thinned and has been burned. Source
of material is uncertain.
Pandale (2

specime~

Fig. 4, N,O)

One specimen, a basal fragment, is typical of this type in that the
stem is alternately beveled on the right side; stem edges are formed by
broad notches resulting in a sl ightly expanding stem and weak shoulders. Blade
remnant shows a sl ight twist to the left. Stone of local origin and specimen
may have been heat treated.

7e:t. rli~. i1Ze~~,I!a4,
27

~~

The second example is atypical, being in the general Pandale tradition
but lacking a twisted blade. Specimen is long and narrow with broad,
alternately beveled (to the right) notches near the base which form the stem.
Base is damaged. Stone may be of local origin.
Side Notched A (2 specimens, Fig. 4, P,Q)
These specimens are characterized by large side notches chipped into
oval preforms; bases are markedly convex and basal corners at edge of notch
project outward. Faint indentions suggestive of notch occur in base. On
the smal ler spjcimen~ the bas~ ~js de(ib~ratily ·thinnedby the removal of
bifacial Iy matching flakes. Blades are short and triangular with straight
lateral edges. Both specimens are made from local material and appear to
have been heat treated.
Side Notched B (I specimen, Fig. 4, R)
This artifact is a basal fragment of a deeply side notched point with
markedly convex base. Base is thinned by the removal of a single large flake.
Material was locally obtained and may have been heat treated.
Side Notched C (I speCimen, Fig. 4, 5)
Base is broad and straight and blade is short, broad and triangular
with straight lateral edges for tWo-thirds the length then edges recurved
to form a sharp, needle-I ike tip. Notches are chipped into lateral edges
very near base; basal corners are sharp. Material is local and may have
been heat treated.
Corner Notched A (4 speCimens, Fig. 4, T,U)
AI I specimens are basal fragments. Diagonal corner notching has resulted
in expanding stems and smal I barbs on blades. Bases on al I examples are
indented. stone appears to have been locally obtained and 3 specimens may
have been heat treated.
Corner Notched B (I specimen, Fig. 4, V)
This specimen differs from the above group in the angle of notching;
stem is not as markedly expanding and barbs more prominent. Base has lIfish­
tal III shape formed by two convexities meeting in approiimate center of base.
Material does not appear to be local.

28

Mistel laneous Expanding stem (3 specimens, Fig. 4, W)
In addition to expanding stems, bases on al I examples are straight.
Blades on two examples are missing, but shoulders were prominent. The
third example is smal I; shoulders are barbed and blade is short and tri­
angular. AI I three examples appear to have been made of heat treated
local material.
Miscellaneous Paral lei stem A (I specimen, Fig. 4, Y)
This thermally fractured example has a paral lei stem and faintly con­
vex base. Shoulders are prominent; surviving lateral edge remnant is
straight. Blade is fragmentary. Material source is uncertain.
Paral lei stem B (I speCimen, Fig. 4, Z)
In addition to parallel-sided stem, this specimen possesses such attri­
butes as barbed shoulders, triangular blade with straight lateral edges.
It was expertly thinned by soft hammer flaking (much I ike that exhibited
on the Langtry specimens). Stone is local and specimen has been burned.
Contracting stem (I specimen, Fig. 4, X)
This interesting specimen has a short, contracting stem with alternately
beveled stem edges (to the left), straight base and prominent shoulders.
Blade Is asymmerrical with one beveled lateral edge. The stone is not of
local origin.
Lanceolate (I specimen)
Base is indented and lateral edges are generally convex, being straighter
at the proximal end where they taper sl ightly toward the base. Widest point
of blade is approximately two-thirds the distance from the base to the tip.
Material was evidently locally obtained.
Dart point fragments (9 specimens)
These artifacts possess attributes indicative of stemmed bifaces

(i.e., they possess stem remnants, barbs, etc., but lack definitive
characteristics necessary for more precise grouping). Two possess attri­
butes such as soft hammer retouch, remnants of beveled margins, and
broad blades characteristic of Langtry or Val Verde types. One of the
remaining fragments was a corner-notched point. AI I but one of the examples
are ~emingly of local stone and five (excluding the two previously mentioned
29

specimens that are possibly in the Langtry-Val Verde tradition) appear to have
been heat treated.
Arrow Point (I specimen, Fig. 4, A)
This bulbar stem arrow point has strong, laterally protruding shoulders
and concave Iatera I edges. Out line is asymme"tri ceil.. stone appears to be of
local origin.

stemless Bifaces
stemless bifaces which are not interpreted as being projecti Ie points
are divided into two major groups. The first group is composed of those
specimens which appear to represent finished artifacts (tools); i.e.,
they exhibit flaking attributes indicative of final shaping such as pressure
retouch.
The second stemless biface group consists of those specimens exhibiting
only percussion flaking (hard or soft hammer). These items are interpreted
as preforms or fai lures in the manufacture of biface tools. They are not
considered as "tools" here but rather are included as manufacturing debris.
Group I stemless bifaces (14 specimens, Fig. 5, J,K)
Included in this group are b basal, 4 medial, and 4 distal fragments of
bifaces exhibiting both percussion and pressure retouch. AI I basal frag­
ments have straight bases; lateral edges are usually straight or sl ightly
convex. One of the distal fragments has alternately beveled lateral edges,
reminiscent of the Pandale type. One medial fragment is alternately beveled
along the right side. AI I specimens appear to have been made of locally
obtained stone, and two specimens may have been heat treated. At least
some of the medial and distal fragments could wei I be fragments of projecti Ie
points.
Triangular, beveled biface (I specimen)
This specimen is subtriangular in outl ine with one wide, straight end.
Lateral edges taper from wider end to narrower, rounded end. Wider end is
beveled and lateral edges are chipped in such a way as to create a beVel on
one side; such lateral treatment has resulted in a plano-convex cross section.
Simi I ar arti facts are often termed "gouges".

30

"Fist" knife (I specimen, Fig. 5, o)
This specimen is simi lar to artifacts classH"ied as IIfist axes" (Johnson
"
1964; Nunley, Duffield, and Jelks 1965; Call ins 1969), nbutted knives fT
(Sorrow 1967), "meat cleavers fT (Sol/berger 1968). It has an oval outline
and is chipped from a fl int nodule; the specimen retains a cortex surface
at the wider end. The cutting end is thinned by soft hammer retouch and
shaped by pressure. In longitudinal cross section, the specimen gradually
tapers to a fine, sharp edge at the distal end. In side view, the distal
end is rounded. SI ight pol ish is apparent near the distal end on both
faces. It is of locally available material.
Battered stone tools (9 specimens)
These artifacts exhibit one or more edges which are battered; the
battering being indicated by the presence of many hinged flake facets
along each edge plus dul led and multi-fractured edges. The edges have
an angle of less then 45 degrees. The tools are either large flakes or
fl int nodules of varying sizes; some of the fl int nodules appear to have
been intentionally shaped. AI I are of local material.

Uniface Tools
Artifacts which have been flaked on only one face are considered in
this category. The term "scraper" is purposely avoided in most instances,
but is retained for one category, the end scrapers, because of their shape
and/or wear pattern characteristics.
sequent flake unifaces (30 specimens, Fig. 5, Q,R)
Spedme~ classed in this group are manufactured from flakes which
have been struck off in sequence from an oval-shaped core; they possess a
positive bulb of percussion on one face (or evidence that one originally
existed) and a negative bulb of percussion on the opposite face. Usually
the same striking platform area was used to remove each ffake (for
additional reference to this technique, see Epstein 1963: 28). The trimmed
edge is normally opposite the striking platform; cortex is often retained
on the striking platform and around much of the untrimmed portion of the
circumference. The presence of cortex on the platform and on some of the
lateral edge led Epstein to refer to simi far items as "cortex flakes"
(ibid.). The unifacial trimming (which is seldom steep) usually occurs on
the dorsal side (i.e., opposite the bulb of percussion), but ventral trim­
ming does occur occasionally.

31

1

-Two specimens exhibit uniface retouch by the burin technique (Shafer
1970). Each possess a burin facet intersecting with an unifacial Iy trimmed,
concave edge; the concave beveled edge served as the striking platform.
Eleven specimens exhibit traces of pol ish along and on both faces of
the trimmed edge. Edge angle values, whi Ie not measurable on al I speCimens,
were rather Iowan the polished examples (varying from 17 to 27 degrees).
It should also be noted that it is almost impossible to obtain edge angle
values on the more steeply beveled examples (i.e., where the bevel inter­
sects with the ventral edge). This angle may not indicate a functional
preference, but rather a reason for discarding the tool. For example, the
bevel may have been so steep as to render the implement useless for certain
cutting tasks.
Wear on the II specimens was visible under magnification. The kind
of wear pattern indicates the tools were used in a knife-I ike cutting or
sawing motion rather than a scraping motion. Apparently a flat, oval
flake was desired. To accomplish this, bulbs of percussion were sometimes
removed and other means of flattening or shaping the flake (such as by
bifacial trimming of a thickened portion of the speCimen, but not along the
use edge) were employed. It is suggested that these tools were hafted and
the unifacial trimming served as a simple means of refurbishing an edge.
On rare occasions the burin retouch technique was employed possibly to
remove a steeply beveled edge.
AI I but one of the examples are manufactured of locally obtainable
stone.
Elongated, bi laterally trimmed unifaces (9 specimens, Fig. 5, L,M)
These specimens are either elongated flakes or flake blades with both
lateral edges trimmed. On these examples, the long axis is the same as
the "flake axis" and traces of the bulb of percussion are retained on one
end.*
All trimming is on the dorsal surface although nicking (probably
incidental to use) occurs on the ventral side of the edge of three speCi­
mens. Wear is present in the form of dul I ing and pol ish on both edges of
three specimens. AI I are of local material.
Elongated, single trimmed edge (6 specimens)
Only one lateral edge of these elongated flake speCimens is trimmed.
The trimming is confined to the margin and, indeed, a prinCipal characteristic

*Terminology fol lows that of Shafer, 1969.

32

of this group is the original sharp angle of the edge. Traces of pol ish occur
on two examples along both sides of the edge, suggesting these particular
specimens were used in a sawing or knife-I ike cutting motion similar to that
of the sequent flake examples. Del iberate attempts to flatten the flake are
apparent on two specimens. AI I are secondary cortex flakes of local material.
Elongated, distally trimmed unifaces (4 specimens)
Whi Ie morphologically very simi Jar to end scrapers, these artifacts
possess convex, trimmed, but not steeply beveled distal ends. The distal end
is defined as that end opposite the bulb of percussion along the flake
axis. AI I are of local material and are manufactured on secondary cortex
flakes. Wear is evident on only one example and is in the form of very
light dul I ing of the convex distal end.
Obi igue trimmed edge (4 specimens)
These examples exhibit a Single beveled edge which is oblique to the
flake axis. Secondary cortex flakes were chosen for al I examples. The
bulb of percussion was del iberately removed on one example. No wear is
evident on any specimen. AI I are of local material.
Subtriangular unifaces (2 specimens)
Each of these items possess one Wide, unifacial Iy beveled end; the
overal I appearance resembles that of a gouge. One lateral edge on one
specimen is also beveled. Bulbs of percussion have been removed on both
specimens. The tapered end retains some cortex on the smaller example
and is rounded on the larger. Both are of locally obtained materials.
Amorphous (8 specimens)
Unifaces in this group vary considerably in shape, but al I or some
portion of the circumference has been trimmed. Bulbs of percussion have
been del iberately removed on four specimens. AI I are of local material.
End scrapers (3 speCimens, Fig. 5, N)
These elongated flakes possess a broad, convex, steeply beveled end.
The OPPOSite end on the two complete examples retains the striking platform.
One specimen appears to be of aberrant fl int; it, plus one fragmentary
speCimen, is made on a flak*blade. Lateral edges on the aberrant stone
specimen are trimmed the entire length.

33

.....

Miscellaneous burin retouch unifaces (19 specimens, Fig. 5, O,P)
These unifaces cannot be placed comfortably into any of the above groups
except the aberrant uniface category. However, since all exhibit one
specific attribute in addition to being unifacial Iy trimmed, they are de­
scribed together here. The flake types include cortex, secondary cortex,
and interior, and the bulb of percussion is sometimes either altered or
entirely removed to give the speCimen a flat ventral surface. The charac­
teristic features are unifacial Iy chipped broad notches in one or both
lateral edges. The steep bevel of this notch served as the striking platform
to remove a burin spal I from across an edge or end. -rhe resulting facet is
generally found on the dorsal edge and the resulting sharp angle of the facet
converges with the ventral surface. Attempts to recognize wear patterns fai led
because al I examples were obtained from the surface and the marginal nicking
which occurs could be accid emal; that is, animal traffic could cause a certain
amount of minute edge alteration. The function of these specimens is not
clearly suggested. An identical retouch technique to. that ~een ~n. these
implement5_ isde·scrlbetf froln /a: collectio"n from west central' Texas' .
where i. t was apparent Iy uSe~ tOJes.narpen scrapers: {Shafer 1970).
AI I specimens are of local material.
Uniface fragments (30 specimens)
Fragmentary spal Is or flakes which retain portions of unifacjal Iy
trimmed edges are included here. AI I but one example are of locally
obtainable material; the aberrant specimen is of metamorphic rock.

Ground stone Tools
Single faceted manos (6 speCimens, Fig. 5, E)
Four of these artifacts are sandstone cobbles possessing roughened
(by pecking) grinding facets. One of these was del iberately shaped. The
fifth speCimen is a stream-worn oval quartzite rock with a single faceted
surface. The sandstone can be obtained locally.
Pitted hand stones (3 specimens, Fig. 5, F)
These artifacts are sandstone pebbles exhibiting one or two pitted
faces. The pits or smal I depressions are 4 em. in diameter or smaller.
One specimen was shaped.

34

Grinding slabs (I specimen)
One fragment of a sandstone grinding slab was collected. It retains a
remnant of a single, concave grinding facet roughened by pecking. Grinding
slabs were noted, but not collected, at sites 41 TE 48,41 TE 67, and 41 TE 69.

Miscellaneous stone Tools
Notched pebble (I specimen)
A smal I stream-worn pebble exhibits two smal I notches cut by a sharp
instrument near a corner. The pebble is flat, with a rounded, but roughly
"DtI-shaped outl i nee
Scratched ocher (I specimen)
One smal I piece of ocher exhibits numerous longitudinal scratches on
one surface: presumably, the scratches were to obtain paint pigment.
Scratched and battered limestone (I specimen)
An oval I imestone cobble exhibits extensively battered edges and
numerous scratch marks on one of two flat surfaces. It has also been
burned.
Scratched sandstone (I specimen)
This speCimen is a long, flat slab of fine-grained sandstone. Both
surfaces evidence abraSion marks in the form of longitudinal scratches.
The edges are also somewhat smoother. Both ends are broken.

Manufacturing Residue

• !

As previously noted, artifacts described under this heading are de­
fined as manufacturing residue because they lack those attributes indicative
of finished tools. Admittingly, a biface which could not be further thinned
to make a dart paint, for example, could have been used for other purposes.
However, for the sake of this study, it is assumed that the artifacts
described below are not tools but represent specific stages of implement
manufacture or manufacturing residUe indicative of the kinds of fllntknapplng
activities performed at these sites.

35

""""-­

Dart point preforms (4 specimens, Fig. 5, G-I)
These stemmed bifaces are interpreted as being fai lUres in the manu­
facturing of dart points. One example (Fig. 5, G) possesses a contracting
stem and rounded base; shoulders are present, but moderate. Lateral edges
are rather sinuous and the specimen is complete; distal end is rather
sharp. The object was made from a curved flake and exhibits only percussion
chipping. Evidence of faj lure to thin the speCimen is suggested by stepped
hinge fracturing on both faces which resulted in a narrow, thick blade.
The specimen is interpreted as being a "Langtry" preform.
The second example (Fig. 5, H) retains a stem formed by corner notching;
its base is convex. The specimen was broken by a blow (probably by soft
hammer retouch which hinged into the piece). The blow was struck on one
lateral edge and the hinge broke away the opposite edge.
Almagie (2

s~ecim,ns;

iig,

5~

I)

These specimens have broad, contracting stems; the one example with a
complete stem has a rounded base. Shoulders are prominent and blades, whi Ie
fragmentary, were apparently broad with straight lateral edges. The
specimens do not evidence the fine marginal trimming found on other con­
tracting stem bifaces such as Langtry and Val Verde. One of the speci­
mens appears to have been broken during manufacture as evidenced by the
nature of the break across the blade. Oibble (1967:44) suggests Almagre
may be a preform type rather than a projectile point type and the Sanderson
Canyon specimens support this view.
Group 2 Bifaces (157 specimens)
These specimens occur in a variety of shapes and Sizes, but each is
characterized by obvious percussion chipping by either hard or soft
hammer. Certain specimens exhibit attributes suggesting they represent
fai lures in the manufacturing process of bifacial tools; several examples
were broken because in attempting to remove a flake, the flake hinged into
the mass, thus snapping the preform. Repeated fai lures to thin a specimen
are evidenced by stepped hinge fractures; when this occurs, the flakes
repeatedly hinge outward or snap a short distance from the striking platform;
such attempts result in deplenishing the striking platform without thinning
the artifact. Premature snapping (perhaps along hidden stress I ines) is
also suggested. Twenty-nine specimens exhibit possible evidence of heat
treating. It is interesting that a few examples appear to have been flaked
before and after heating indicating that some heating may have been
intentional.

36

Uniface retouch burin spal Is (7 specimens)
Presumably, these specimens represent the by-products of the burin
retouch technique described for the "Miscellaneous burin retouched unifaces."
The spal Is were removed by the burin technique from cores with unifacial Iy
trimmed edges. Remnants of the trimmed edge are retained on the striking
platform of the spal Is. The spal Is are either triangular or somewhat
rectangular in cross section.
Flakes (264 specimens)
Since al I flakes were surface finds, no attempt was made to analyze
for uti I ized flakes. The reason being that in the Sanderson Canyon area,
hard-hoofed animals (both wi Id and domestic) are common and marginal nicking
(or even trimming) can occur when such animals trample on flakes. Therefore,
classification of flakes is based solely on the basis of their production
attributes rather than possible edge modification attributes.
Flakes are classed according to the method of production and the
relative position 6n tht.p,reni nodOI~ fromwhith they were obtained. Flake
classification fol lows that of Shafer (1969). The techniques of production
important here are hard and soft hammer percussion. Hard hammer percussion
flakes wi I' possess striking platform remnants and prominent bulbs of per­
CUSSion, whi Ie the soft hammer flakes wi I I possess remnants of a lipped
striking platform on the ventral side of the flake, flat, barely distin­
guishable bulbs of perCUSSion, and generally arched cross sections.
Working into a patinated cobble by hard hammer percussion, the initial flake
or flakes wi I I exhibit cortex over all outer surfaces; such flakes are
referred to as cortex flakes. Subsequent flakes which retain some cortex
over a portion of their surface are cal led secondary cortex flakes. Flakes
with no cortex are referred to as interior flakes. Secondary cortex flakes
are divided into several groups based on the mode of production. For
example, the sequpnt flakes (identical in production to those used in the
manufacture of sequent flake unifaces) were removed from oval nodules in a
sequence; a negative bulb of percussion is present on the dorsal surface
and a positive bulb (or traces that one was originally present) occurs on
the ventral side. The striking platform was essentially the same each time.
In other words, the core was not rotated, but the knapper simply worked
back into the core using the same platform.
Elongated secondary cortex flakes which evidence the removal of one or
more previous flakes along the same axis are termed flake blades. These
(if complete) are usually twice as long as they are wide.
One group of secondary cortex flakes retain traces of the cortex on
the striking platform only. Those flakes which retain some cortex, but
could not be classified into the above groups were simply referred to as
11~iscel laneous secondary cortex flakes."

37

I

1.

Interior flakes were divided into those that are obviolisly hard hammer­
stone flakes without cortex and possible thinning flakes; the latter may be
produced by either hard hammer or soft hammer techniques. They possess
certain attributes suggesting they were removed from bifaces (or other
artifacts with multi-faceted surfaces). Some are sl ightly arched.
Lipped flakes are interpreted as having been removed from prepared
cores by soft hammer percussion. The core was probably (certainly in some
instances) a biface preform. It is interesting to note that eight of
these specimens appear to have been heat treated (that is, they are of local
materials and are sl ightly discolored; also, exposed surfaces are glossy).
It is presumed, although not possible to determine definitely, that the
core from which they were derived was heat treated prior to their removal.
Cores (19 specimens)
Cores are those nodules from which flakes have been removed for
the purpose of flake production; it is the flake that is desired in this
instance as opposed to the core in the case of a projecti Ie point. No
further classification is attempted for the cores because of the smal I
sample size.
The distribution of artifacts by site is presented in Table I. Each
collection is considered as random. No pretense is made, of course, that
the samples reflect al I major activities performed by the inhabitants
using lithic tools at these sites. Hints of certain patterns of site
uti I ization or the complexity of functions carried out at certain sites
are evident, however, and these can be tested by a more thorough research
program.
The attempt to differentiate the tool from the manufacturing debris
in order to recognize broad functions carried out at each site was not
notably successful. This perhaps was due in part to the decision to in­
clude al I flakes which do not evidence extensive retouching as manu­
facturing debris. It was undoubtedly common for the Indians to use
unretouched flakes for cutting but this classification excludes consideration
of th is probab iii ty. Further comp Ii cati ans to th is approach are apparent
because of the obvious use of a site for different purposes by groups
occupying it at different times. Several examples of ttlis includ.e .
those locations where burned rock middens are found in areas of hearth
concentrations. One could argue that the hearths represent a settlement
whose inhabitants performed certain activities around the burned rock
midden. However, in view of the apparent temporal span of the occupation
at certain of these sites (as indicated by the point styles coupled with
existing radiocarbon data from cr~scent-shaped middens) it is unlikely that
they represent single "settlements".

38

The greatest variety of I ithic artifacts was recovered from rockshelter
sites, suggesting a considerable range of activities was carried out. For
example, extensive soot and burned rock deposits evidence the use of fire
either for food preparation, heating, or for other purposes. Lithic residue
in the form of cores, preforms, percussion flakes (including soft hammer
retouch) indicates tool manufacturing and refurbishing; bedrock grinding
basins and mortar holes at 41 TE 69 indicate food preparation tasks; abrading
grooves in boulders at TE 69 and on the shelter wal Is at TE 42 and TE 66
may have been the result of abrading wood, bone, or possibly the edges of
stone tools. Pictographs at 41 TE 69 certainly reflect aspects of non­
material culture.
The number and kinds of activities engaged in at rockshelter sites
undoubtedly varied according to the size of the protected area. For
instance, Site 41 TE 69 afforded the possibi I ities of many more cultUral
activities solely on the basis of large floorspace; it is approximately
150 feet Wide, 35 feet deep, and has a high cei I ing. By contrast, the
activities engaged in at 41 TE 66, a very smal I rockshelter, must have
been I imited to those of smal I groups. It is possible that the smaller
rockshelters were not used for habitational purposes but instead they may
have provided the kind of protection needed for carrying out certain cooking
tasks during inclement weather.
The artifact collections from open hearth sites with middens also
reflect a wide range of activities. The activity
responsible for the
midden accumulations is in itself worthy of extensive study. Campbel I
(1970) points out that several kinds of activities may have been respon­
sible for these features. It has been mostly assumed that they result
from cooking vegetal material (Greer 1968), but the kind or kinds of
plants prepared has not been demonstrated. Many other activities at midden/
hearth sites such as those responsible for the hearths and perhaps much of
the generally associated I ithic debris may either predate, postdate or be
coincidental with the middens themselves. However, the possibi I ity that
the circular and crescent middens are temporary, specific functional areas
is left open for testing. Greer (1968b) has tested a crescent midden
site in Val Verde County which most certainly represents a long-term or
frequent short term uti I ization; perhaps the site was reoccupied because
the burned rock midden accumUlations afforded
useful foundations on
which were constructed temporary dwel I ings. In short, consecutive usage
of burned rock accumulations is conceivable, both for purposes of food
preparation and general habitation.
Burned rock middens not seemingly associated with hearth areas are
few (BS 2~ TE 48, TE 58), but ~nown examples do not show the wide range
of I ithic artifacts found in midden sites where hearths are present.
Spatially associated artifacts consist principally of hard hammerstone
percussion flakes, unifaces manufactured from such flakes, and manos. The
sequent flake and sequent flake unifaces are seemingly common at, or near

39

....I.­

most burned rock midden sites, including those without hearths. Bedrock
grinding basins were noted at the location of 41 TE 48; possibly they were
associated with the same food preparation activity as the burned rock midden
accumulation.
Activities indicated at sites where hearths are concentrated are quite
varied. Aside from the complex of activities which could account for the
hearths, primary and secondary stone flaking was also engaged in. Prolonged
occupation is not suggested by the data although general campsite activities
are inferred. There is a noticeable absence in uniface tools from hearth
concentration sites, but this may reflect sampl ing error. Projecti Ie paints,
on the other hand, are usually present (for example, sites 41 TE 70, TE 72,
TE 76, PC 3, ·PC 4). It would be premature to suggest on this basis that
such sites denote temporary hunting camps. Certainly more study of these
sites is needed.

DISCUSSION
The chronological framework within which the materials collected
during this survey were ordered is that developed during some 10 years of
investigations in the nearby Amistad International Reservoir basin in
the lower Pecos region of Texas. Since there have been no previous
archeological investigations in the immediate Sanderson Canyon area, it is
necessary to use the estab I i shed lower Pecos sequence for purposes of
typological cross-dating. An "horiZon style" assumption in comparing
materials from the two areas seems val id, especially since they are
geographically contiguous. This is not to imply that the cultural groups
who occupied both areas were onea:rd the same, but the lithic industries
exhibit significant simi larities.
The lower Pecos chronology currently spans some 10,000 years of
prehistory, a sequence wei I supported by radiocarbon dates. Of specific
interest for the Sanderson Canyon data is the projecti Ie point chronol­
ogy established as a result of investigations by Epstein (1963), Johnson
(1964), Ross (1965), Nunley, Duffield, and Jelks (1965), Parsons (1965),
Dibble (1967), Dibble and Lorrain (1968), Sorrow (1968a, 1968b), and
Col I ins (1969). In summarizing the earl ier Amistad data, Story and Bryant
(1966) divided the sequence into eight periods based on temporal changes
of projecti Ie point styles and a sequence of radiocarbon dates. Since
then, no attempt has been made to synthesize the Amistad data, although
additional radiocarbon samples have been made avai lable (Dibble. 1967;
Valastro and Davis 1970a, 1970b). Not al I periods defined by story and

40

are represented in the survey materials, but those that are provide
some temporal control in ordering the artifacts in the survey collections.
It should be emphasized that these periods are based only on styl istic
changes in certain projecti Ie point forms. The periods defined by story
and Bryant are presented below together with the names types considered as
time diagnostics. Occurrences in the Sanderson Canyon collection are noted.
Br~ant

Period

Date

Diagnostic
T~pes or Classes

Sanderson
Evidence

VIII

A.D. 1600-­

metal arrow points

none

VII

A,D. 1600-1000

stone arrow point
types: Perdiz, Toyah

untyped arrow
point found

VI

A.D. 1000-200 B.C.

dart point types:
Ensor, FriO, Paisano

Ensor, Frio,
Paisano, un­
named side
notched

Monte I I, Castrov i II e,
Shumla, Marshal I,
Marcos

None of these
recovered. Un­
named corner
notched may date
from this period.

V

200-1000 B,C,

IV

1000-2500 B.C.

Langtry, Almagre,
Val Verde

al I

III

2500-4000 B.C,

Pandale, Nolan

Pandale present

II

4000-7000 B.C,

GOWer-I ike, Early
Barbed, Bandy,
Baker

none

7000 B.C.--

Plainview, Folsom,
Angostura

none

present

The earl iest recognized occupation was in Period I I I at 41 TE 75, a
medium size rockshelter. Period IV styles were recovered from rockshelter
sites 41 TE 73 and TE 75, burned rock midden/hearth concentration sites
41 TE 51, and hearth concentration sites 41 TE 70 and TE 76. Period V is
not represented by lower Pecos point styles, but corner notched A and
miscellaneous paral lei stem points may be local styles of this period. Period
VI is the best represented; rockshelter sites indicating occupation during
this time were 41 TE 44, TE 49, TE 66, TE 68, and TE 69. Hearth concen­
trations/burned rock midden local ities of this period are 41 TE 50, TE 51,
TE 59, and TE 67; and TE 70, a hearth concentration also yielded styles
41

L

of this period. Period VI I is indicated by a single arrow point specimen
from TE 50, a burned rock midden/hearth concentration site. It is somewhat
surprising to find a paucity of Period VII sites because of their apparent
density in nearby Reagan Canyon (Kelly 1963).
Burned rock middens sites may date late in the Sanderson Canyon cultural
sequence. Greer (1968) has made an extensive study of ring-shaped and
crescent-shaped burned rock middens. His findings which were supported by
radiocarbon dates led him to suggest that ring-shaped (and crescent-shaped)
burned rock middens date after A.D. 800, or in Period VI, VI I, and VI I I of
the above sequence. The greatest intensity of uti I ization for Sanderson
Canyon appears to be during Period VI. Certainly the rockshelters evidence
ample and extensive utilization during this period. If the crescent and ring
middens are attributable to this and later periods, one can speculate that
most I ithic deposits accumulated after 200 B.C o mOn! I ikely after A.D. 500.
The ut iii zat ion of the area cou I d have been just as intense before th is
time, but the 'activiti~s' were such that they did not result in readily
observable debris.
In summary, the rockshelter sites yielded the largest variety of
I ithic artifacts and reflect the longest recognizable time span or pre­
historic uti I ization of the valley (i.e., from about 3000 B.C. to approxi­
mately A.D. 1600). This time span is tentative and is based solely on the
surface sample. Indications of a much longer time span would probably
result from test excavations. Judging from the rockshelter sites alone, no
real estimate can be made of the size of the social groups uti I izing these
locations. Site 41 TE 66 is hardly large enough to accommodate a nuclear
fami Iy. By contract a band of about 50 individuals could conceivably
occupy 41 TE 69 for a short period of time. Both sites evidence extensive
utilization. The range in the size of the shelters visited lies between
these two extremes. Scattered hearths could represent single-event site
occupations by small groups from fami Iy-hunter bands to perhaps tribal
groups. It is postulated that the archeological remains recovered during
this survey are those left by brief, intermittant excursions into Sanderson
Canyon by sma II bands who, if composed of severa I fami lies, sp lit up to
harvest the resources avai lable.
Crescent and circular burned rock middens may represent food prepara­
tion activities of short duration carried out away from campsite locations.
For instance, an analogy might be drawn with a description by Morris Opler
(1941) of Apaches preparing agave:
I f the women live far from the p I ace where mesca lis
plentiful, they make a long trip to obtain it, establish
a temporary camp, and prepare it there before returning
home. When many crowns are to be baked, a large pit
must be dug and many rocks transported to it; therefore,
men sometimes accompany the party to assist with this

42

------

-

heavy labor. Whether men are present or not, the women
are in charge of the proceedings (po 356).
He goes on to say that If men do come along, they dig the pit whi Ie the
women bring in the yucca stalks (~. 357). Opler also provides an excel lent
description of the pits:
The pit is round, seven feet or more across and three or
four feet deep. This hole is I ined evenly with rocks.
Then a pi Ie of wood is brought. This is put into the
hole in criss-cross layers, first a layer one way and
then a second layer the other. It is built up I ike this
unt i I the pit is just about fu II. Then more rocks
are put on top of this wood. Fire is touched to it· •••
(p. 356).
Opler quotes one informant as saying another method of baking mescal was
done without digging a pit (ibid. 357). Greer (1965) has cited ethnographic
data describing an almost identical method carried out by a Lipan Apache
group in the Pecos River area of Texas. This account also describes the
prOCeSS of pounding the cooked "soto" bulbs in mortars with pestles.
Major reasons for selecting the location for tasks responsible for the
burned rock middens were undoubtedly influenced by two resources (wood
and stone) and possibly others if food was prepared. If they were used or
resulted from sweat baths, a possibi I ity suggested by Campbel I (1970),
then these would be the primary resources needed. If certain kinds of
plant remains were being prepared, then the proximity of exploitable plant
communities to wood and stone would have to be considered.

STATEMENT OF RESEARCH PROBLEMS
A number of archeological problems were brought to I ight by the analysis
of the survey data. Those outl ined below are considered major ones in light
of the presently known resources that fal I within the endangered construction
areas.
One major research problem is that of establ ishing temporal and spatial
control of the known archeological materials; a tentative chronological
framework has already been hypothesized and this can be tested by limited
excavations at sites having stratified cultural deposits (e.g., 41 TE 53,
TE 54, TE 55, and TE 68). Judging from field observations this would
exclude open local ities.

43

L

Not independent of chronology, but itself a major research problem is
the need of empirical data reflecting prehistoric environmental exploitation.
It has been previously impl ied in this report that interpretations of the
present data indicate some kind of shift in exploitative practices. This
inference wi I I have to be tested and the resources appear to be available.
Burned rock midden sites (specifically crescent-shaped midden accumulations)
are frequent enough to afford an adequate sample. Sites 41 TE 50, TE 51,
and TE 56 conta in both burned rock mi ddens and sma I I, burned rock concen­
trations or hearths. Crescent-shaped accumulations of burned rock occur
seemingly isolated from areas--suggesting general camping activities at
sites 41 TE 48 and 41 TE 58. Test excavations (including the use of
flotation techniques and pol len sampl ing) and analyses of such sites may
provide data necessary for inferring their function or functions. Also,
their suggested late chronological position should be tested by radio­
carbon dating. If crescent-shaped midden accumUlations represent prepara­
tion loci for specific plants, the associated I ithic tool assemblages
should reflect such activities. Comparison of these tools at middens
isolated from camping areas with those possibly associated with camping
local ities could reflect whether or not a greater complexity of activities
was carried out at the latter sites and if the middens were reused for
other purposes. The technological processes necessary to manufacture a
specific tool assemblage (if one exists) might be recognized at sites
where burned rock middens do not occur and may provide the necessary kinds
of data to make correlations between certain sites which may have been
occupied by groups with similar tool inventories.
A much ignored, but certainly important archeological resource is the
isolated hearth. Only recent studies in Texas have emphasized the impor­
tance of identifying Single event activity loci. Just as important (and
equally ignored) is the conceptual means for deal ing with such finite
units of archeological remains. The difficulties of recognizing a single
occupational unit--the archeological remains of a Single cultural group
during a Single camping duration at one location--are real ized. The sur­
viving material remains of such a unit have been called an "assemblage"
(Marks, Wendorf, and Shiner 1967). An "assemblage" according to this
definition could be merely a smal I concentration of burned I imestone rocks
and could hardly be considered diagnostic for comparative purposes.
The many sma I I hearths in several of the damsite locations afford
an excel lent opportunity to investigate apparent single event features
in an attempt to isolate specific I ithic assemblages. Once such
assemblages are defined, they may then be keyed into the local chronology.
The terrace around 41 TE 50 and TE 56, the surface around 41 TE 51, sites
41 TE 72 and TE 65 offer good investigative resources for such research.
If a pattern of prehistoric environmental exploitation is to be determined,
it wi I I be of utmost importance to recognize discrete occupational units
and to define the tool assemblages and apparent prehistoric activities
indicated.

44

Natural outcrops of good qual ity fl int abound in the area and these
locations generally occur in specific topographic situations. Collections
were made at only one such quarry site, 41 TE 61. Primary flaking stages
(i.e., obtaining flakes from fl int nodules and shaping fl int nodules by
hard hammer percussion) are represented and perhaps soft hammer retouch
as wei I. Although no biface thinning flakes were col lected, the~attrjbutes
of.certain preforms: suggest t~at such a technique was employed.
A number of percussion made bifaces and even some projecti Ie points
(particularly large prehistoric forms, i.e., Period VI styles) present in
the survey collection exhibit discoloration and a glossy texture suggestive
of heat treating. It is apparent that the fl int is local and the chances
seem quite good that the heating was intentional to faci I itate flaking.
The results of observations argue against the chances that wear pol ish
("s i c k I e she e nTT, fl S iii cap 0 lis hIT) and "d e s e r t pol ish II (0 r pol ish due to
abrasion by sandblasting) are responsible for the gloss. If the above
were the case, the ridges del imlting flake scars would probably be
smoothed; they are not. Also, discoloration is more often in shades of
red or pink, presumably due to oxidation of iron inclusions. Burned
rock fragments were noted at 41 TE 61 in addition to the flaking debris,
although none of the percussion made bifaces at that site showed obvious
evidence of heat treating. It would be informative to determine if the
heating was intentional (see description of:GrOup 1.1 BffaceS) and to see
if this treatment was performed in the campsite or at the quarry. A
thorough study of sites such as TE 61 and TE 65 should reveal the range
of manufacturing stages which were carried out at certain quarry locations.
Such specific technological problems could be investigated in con­
junction with a general technological study of the I ithic material.
Assuming occupation of this region by nomadic groups, the abundant fl int
provided the necessary resources for the groups to manufacture tools
whenever they traveled in this region. By recognizing and defining
specific technological practices, it might be possible to recognize manu­
facturing stations for specific tool assemblages without having the finished
tools present. It is therefore recommended that when pOSSible, samples of
manufacturing residue be collected especially in areas not marked by in­
tensive occupation (e.g., 41 TE 49, TE 52, TE 61, and TE 65).
It is quite possible that each smal I burned rock concentration repre­
sents a relatively discrete event and the activities associated with it
could be quite varied. It would be very naive to assume the lithic tools
found near such features are unquestionably related in time or in the
performance of specific tasks. Certainly preservation bias and geologic
cirCUmstances must be considered as crucial--perhaps the most important
variables affecting any interpretation. In open Situations, I ithic (or
in rare instances bone) residue serve as the only immediately observable
results of activities carried out at those locations. The possible effects
of wind and sheet erosion in the deflation or displacement of cultural
materials must be given special consideration in defining, collecting, and
analyzing lI~rcheord~ital ass~mbl~gesq.
45
,

.........

Chang (1966) uses the "settlementlT concept as the primary empirical unit
for archeological study. It is analoguous to a "communityTf in a sociological
sense. Such a concept is easi Iy understandable and appl icable at the Formative
level, and indeed Chang's examples are Neolithic. The concept becomes
difficult to apply ~hen"~xcaVat~on units such as disttete hbuses~r rotims do
not exist and espetial Iy in situations such"as those encountered in Sanderson
Canyon where it is difficult to isolate individual habitations or ITsettle­
ments". Lumping all archeological materials at a site solely on the basis
of one or two diagnostic artifact styles and label ing these as "components"
of a "focP' is equally undesirable. Recognizing specific activity loci
are informative from a methodological point of View, but unless the results
of such investigations are keyed into a chronological framework the identi­
fied activity is not contributive to understanding patterned group behavior.

CONCLUSION
There is indication of but one major economic pattern attributable to
the prehistoric populations of Sanderson Canyon. This pattern is one of
gathering and hunting, probably oriented more toward the former. It is
possible that some of the groups frequenting this area were from populations
that practiced horitculture (for example, along the Rio Conchos in Mexico
and Rio Grande--the La Junta region), but there is no indication of such
practices in the survey area. There may be a shift in exploitative technol­
ogy (i.e., introduction of the exploitative activities responsible for the
crescent-shaped burned rock middens). This shift might signal significant
changes in the settlement pattern and thus would be imp6rtant Ln the
cultural history. In terms of general economic explOitation, the basic
regional pattern of hunting/gathering appears unchanged throughout the
known span of occupancy.
The effects of weaponry change (from spear thrower to bow and arrow)
on
hunting populations would I ikely depend on a number of factors such
as the kinds of animals exploited and the hunting methods used. If, for
example, communal rabbit drives were habitually employed, the bow and arrow
probably would not be particularly effective; the real advantage would
seem to be to the individual hunter using a stalking technique. There are
of course other major impl ications in the shift to bow and arrow; for
instance, it may bring about adjustment in the aspects of culture not
directly related to subsistence. Tbese, of course, are highly general
questions difficult to test and difficult to approach by ethnographiC
analogy. The point is, seemingly minor technological changes reflected in
the I ithic tool samples could conceivably have had a significant impact,
direct or indirect, on the I ifeways of the prehistoric inhabitants.

46

In sum, archeological research in Sanderson Canyon offers several
advantages toward the understanding of Trans-Pecos archeology. It does not
contain sites of obvious long-term occupation (judging from the survey
sample) and indeed, the canyon is not regarded as a local ity where pre­
historic cultural adaptations were in situ and long standing; rather, it
is interpreted as being merely part of a much larger territorial range
exploited by nomadic cultural groups on an intermittant basis and over a
long period of time. An archeological study in the watershed would be
unique in that archeological research in the past has focused more on the
most intensively occupied local ities; I ittle attention has been paid to areas
which may have been only seasonally or intermlttantly frequented by pre-"
historic populations.

47

.L

Fig. 4.

Projectile points. A, arrow pOint; B, Ensor; C, 0, Frio;
E-H, Paisano; I-K, Langtry A; L, Langtry B; M, Val Verde;
N, 0, Pandale; P, Q, Side Notched A; R, Side Notched B;
S, Side Notched C; T, U, Corner Notched A; V, Corner
Notched B; W, Misc. Expanding Stem; X, Misc. Contracting
stem; Y, Misc. Paral lei Stem A ; Z, Misc. Paral lei stem B.

48

Fig. 5.

Artifacts. A-C, Burned Rock Middens; A, Crescent Midden;
B, Ring Midden; C, Oval Midden {scale for A-C variable}.
D, J, K, Group I Bifaces (0 is a "fist knife"); E, Mano;
F, Pitted stone; G-I, Dart Point Preforms (I is an
Almagre); L, M, Elongated, Bilaterally Trimmed Unifaces;
N, End Scraper; 0, P, Burin Retouched Unifaces; Q, R,
Sequence Flake Unifaces.

50

Fig. 6.

Archeological features. A, hearth near 41 TE 50; B, Site
41 TE 48, a crescent-shaped burned rock midden (rockshelter site 41 TE 49 located in rock scarp in background);
C, 41 TE 66, smal I rockshelter; D, rockshelter site 41 TE 52.
Note bands of fl int nodules in I imestone pictured in C and O.

52

Fig. 7.

Land modification examples. A, portion of Damsite No.2
showing land modification by root plowing; B, archeological
features (hearths) destroyed by root plowing at 41 PC 4;
C, check basins at 41 PC 3; D, across drainage levee at
Damsite No.8.

54

r

Table I.

Distribution of removable artifacts.
8526

BS27

PC3

PC4

TE42

TOOLS
Biface tools
Projectile points
Ensor
Frio
Palsano
Langtry A
Langtry B
Val Verde
Pandale
Side notched A
Side notched B
Side notched C
Corner notched A
Corner notched 8
Expanding stem
Par a I I 12 1stem A
Paral lei stem B
Contracting stem
Lanceolate
Dart point frags.
Arrow point
Stemless bifaces
Group I S.B.rs
Triangular, beveled
Fist knife
Battered stone tools
Uniface tools
Sequent Flake
Elongated, bi laterally
tr immed
Elongated, single
trimmed edge
Elongated, distally
trimmed
Obi ique trimmed edge
Misc. bi laterally
trimmed unifaces
Subtriangular
Amorphous
End scrapers
Misc. burin retouch
"Uri i face frags.

44

45

48

49

50

51

4
2

2
2

2
I

2

56

3

2

6

3

53

Misc.

54

56

58

59

61

62

65

66

67

68

69

70

72

73

74

75

76

Surface

Total

I

3
6
5

3
1
2

I
I

2
2
I
I

4
I

3
I
I
I
I
9
I

2

2

2

2

2

2

13

2

1
9

3

30

5

9

I

I

2

2

2

2

4

5

3

6

2

4
4
2
2
10

3

1
3
3

2

2
2

3
I

2

57

....

2
3

3

19

2

30

Table I contd.
8S26
Ground stone tools
Single faceted manos
Pitted hand stones
Grinding slabs

8527

PC3

PC4

TE42

44

45

48

49

50

51

53

2

2

Misc. stone artifacts
Notched pebble
Scratched ocher
Scratched, battered
limestone
Scratched sandstone
MANUFACTURING RESIDUE
Dart point preforms
Langtry
Corner notched
Almagre
Group 2 bifaces

5

6

9

2

I

I
I

5

18

Uniface retouched
burin spa II s
Flakes
Hardhammer percussion
Cortex flakes
Secondary cortex
flakes
Sequence flakes
Flake blades
Cortex platform
Miscellaneous
Fragments
Interior flakes
Softhammer percussion
Lipped flakes
Hard or softhammer
Probable thinning
Unclassifiable frags.

2
2

I
2

3

2

2

I

5

8

-4

I

I

2

3

2
5

2

3

2

7

16

12

58

5

5

2

16

61

4

4

5

5

Cores
TOTAL

9
I
7

2

3
2

2

5

2
6

4

56

12

2
II

16

4

39

..
I

Misc.
54

56

58 59

61

62

65

66

67

68

69

70

72

73

74

75

76

Surface

Total
6
3
I

I

I
I

2

14

3

12

13

15

6

II

12

5

3

157

12

2

2

2

1
7
2
2

5

I

I

2
3
5
2
2

1
2

6

2
2
5

I
I

2

2

3

I

15

I

I
4

3
2

4

21

15

15

2

7

3

3

37

38

13

8

2
3
1
4

10
10
26

3

2

2
6

I
2
I

2
2

3
6
2
10

5

2

7

57

3

24

3

2

2
2

3

3
5

5

3
5

3

28

1
2

III
14

19
79

2
3

19
6

66

51

34

2

40

59

30

37

23

81

13

3

768

Table 2.

Site data.
c.

c:

0

0

c:

c:

QI

"C
"C
!...
QI

+'

::E
+'

W

c:

(I)

u

.s:::.

Site No.
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41
41

BS
BS

PC
PC
PC
TE

26
27
3
4
5
42
43

TE
IT 44
IT 45
IT 46

TE
TE
TE
TE
TE
TE
TE
TE
TE
TE
TE
TE
TE
TE
TE
TE
TE
TE
TE
TE
TE
TE

47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68

IT 69

QI

oX

(I'J

U

QI

0

0:::

!...

U

c:
w
"C
"C

::E

QI

QI

"C

"'C

"'C

"C

::E
!...

10

+'
10
!...
+'

c:

~

"C
QI
.0

!...

.s:::.

!...

w

c.

u

+'

0

::;:I

(I'J
(I)

c:

<:

10

.s:::.

::;:I

::;:I

c:

U
!...

+'

"'C

!...

(I'J

"C

10

0:::

U

C'I

0

+'

QI

0

0

+'

::E

::I:

+'
10

c:

QI

L.t..

0
+'

+'

C.

0

::::>

!...
U

0
U

~

0

c:

c:

10

c:

U

QI

+'

c:

!...
U

I

oX

0

0

c:
(I'J

c:

!...

10

QI

C'I

"C

0

.....I

!...
0

QI

r

c:

+'

10

0:::

If)

W

u

>

QI

0

>
+'
10

0

QI

If)

0:::

x

Near No.
Near No •.
No •. 2
No. 2
x? Near No •. 2
in Sanderson
in Sanderson
between 5 & II
between 5 & II
between 5 & II
between 5 & II
No. 9
No. 9
No. 9
No. 9
No. 9
No. 9
No. 9
No. 9
No. 9
No. 9
No. 8
Near No. 8
Near No. 8
No. 8
x No. II
x No. II
No. II
No. II
Near No. II
Near No. II
No. 6
Near No. 6
x

x

x?
x?

x
x

c

x
x

x
x

x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

x
x
x

x

x

x
x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x
x

x
x

x

x

x
x
x

x
x

x

x
x
x
x
x

x
x

U

0:::

x

x
x

0
+'
10

u

QI

x

x

c:

::;:I

x

x
x

60

V

'ON

L ·ON
9 ·ON ..J~aN
r; 'oN ..J~aN
r; 'ON ..JeaN
9 'ON
9 'ON ..JeaN
9 'ON ..JeaN

x

x

x---x

DI

<

19

x
x

x

x

x
x
x
0

0
1'0

",

n

ri-

.,

ri-

0

I

0

..,n

0

(j)

ru
::J
,a.

.,

1'0

:;u
1'0

ru
ru

1.0
::J

(f)

0
::J

0

0

c:

DI

x
x

x

x
x
x
x
(j).

:;u
1'0

:;u

<

1'0

I
C

'"

n

r

n

r+

ri-

0

::l

»

(f)
(f)

ri-

a.
a.

ri-

..,ru

::J

~

:c

.."

1'0

::::r

1'0
::J

::l

-0

ri-

ri-

II)

0

.,

n

DI

::l

';:-

n

.,n

0

n

0

c:
ri-

o

.,

1'0
DI

::::r

ri-

-0

0
::l

ri-

0
(f)

ri-

..,c:

.0­
1'0.

a.

3:
Q;

a.
II:!

QJ
ri­

0
::J

n

..,
n

c:

.,ru
~

a.
a.

:;u
::J
1.0
.~

a.
a.
1'0
'::l

1'0
::J

'"::::r

(f)

n

1'0

:;u

..,n
n
1'0
::J

0

LL
9L
r;L
vL

3.1
3.1
3.1
3.1

E:L 3.1

Iv
Iv
Iv
Iv
Iv

Z.L 3.1 Iv
IL 3.1 Iv
OL 3.1 Iv

'oN at!s

(f)

1'0

ri-

~

a.
a.

ri­

.,

1'0

1'0
::J

::l

0
::l

-0

·Pt UO)

z.

a Iq!:u

Ie

REFERENCES CITED
Anonymous
1969

watershed Work Plan for watershed Protection and Flood Prevention
Sanderson Canyon watershed, Terrel I, Pecos, and Brewster Counties,
Texas. Prepared by Rio Grande-Pecos River, Big Bend, Trans-Pecos
Soi I and Water Conservation Districts and Commissioners Courts at
Terrel I, Pecos, and Brewster Counties and United states Department
of Agriculture, Soi I Conservation Service.

Blair, Frank W.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
Vo I. 2, No. I: 93-1 I7.

The Texas Journal ] l SCience,

Bolton, Herbert (ed.)
1911
The Jumano Indians .in Texas, 1650-1771.
Historical Association, Vol. XV: 66-84.
1916

Spanish Exploration
New York.

~

the Southwest.

Q.uarterIY·~lli

Texas

Charles Scribner's Sons.

Campbell, T. N.
1970
Archeological Survey of Big Bend National Park. Manuscript
submitted to the National Park Servtte by The University of
Texas at Austin.
Chang, K. C.
1966
Rethinking Archaeology.

Random House. New York.

Col I ins, Michael B.
1969
Test Excavations at Amistad International Reservoir, Fal I,
1967. Papers ~ the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, .
No. 16. Aust in.
Dibble, David S.
1967
Excavations at Arenosa Shelter, 1965-66. Report submitted to
the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Dibble, David S., and Dessamae Lorrain
1968
Bonfire Shelter: A Stratified Bison Ki I I Site, Val Verde
County, Texas. Miscellaneous Papers No. I, Texas Memorial
Museum. Austin.

62

Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1963
Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County, Texas,
1958. Bul let!n Ei the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33: 1-130.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
J 931
Physi ography ..Q.f. Western Uni ted states. McGraw-Hi I J Book Co., J nco
New York.
Graham, John, and W. A. Davis
1958
Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Diablo Reservoir,
Val Verde County, Texas. Report prepared by the Archeological
Salvage Program Field Office, Austin, Texas, U.S. National Park
Service.
Greer, John W. ,
1965
A Typology of Midden Circles and Mescal Pits.
Vol. 31, No.3: 41-55.

Southwestern Lore,

I 968a

Notes on Excavated Ring Midden Sites, 1963-1968.
the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 38: 39-44.

Bulletin of

1968b

The Cammack Site: A Neo-Indian Pit-Oven Ring Midden Site in
Val Verde County, Texas. Unpubl ished M.A. Thesis at The
University of Texas at Austin.

Grieder, Terrence
1965
Report on a Study of the Pictographs in Satan Canyon, Val Verde
County, Texas. Miscellaneous papers No.2, Texas Archeological
Salvage Project. Austin.
Griffin, Wi I I iam B.
1969
Culture Change and Shifting Populations in Central Northern
Mexico. Anthropological Papers Ei the University ~ Arizona,
No. 13. University of Arizona Press. Tucson.
Johnson, Elmer H.
1931
Natural Regions of Texas.
No. 3113.

The University

Ei Texas Bul let;n,

Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1964
The DevilJs Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at Amistad
Reservoir, Val Verde County, Texas. Archaeology Series No.6,
Department of Anthropology, ' The University of Texas. Austin.
Kell ey, J. Charles, T. N. Campbel I, and Donald J. Lehmer
1940
The Association of Archaeological Materials with Geological
Deposits in the Big Bend Region of Texas. ~ Ross state
Teachers Col lege Bulletin, Vol. 21, No.3. Alpine.

63
1.

Kelly, Thomas C.
1963
Archeological Investigations at Roark Cave, Brewster County,
Texas. Bulletin.2..f. the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33:
191-228.
Kelly, Thomas C., and Harvey P. Smith, Jr.
1963
An Investigation of Archeological Sites in Reagan Canyon,
Brewster County, Texas. BullEdin E..!. the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 33: 167-190.
Kirkland, Forrest, and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1965
The Rock Art E..!. Texas Indians.
Krieger, Alex D.
1944
The Typological Conceot.
271-288.

University of Texas Press, Austin.

American Antiguity, Vol. IX, No.3:

Leeds, Anthony
1965
Some Prel iminary Considerations Regarding the Analysis of
Technologies. Kroeber Anthro~ological SOCiety Paoers, No.
32: 1-9.
Lorrain, Dessamae
1968
Archeological Excavations in Northwestern Crockett County, Texas,
1966-1967. Texas State Sui Iding Commission Archeoloqical Program
Rep 0 r t No. I 2 • Au s tin.
Marks, Anthony, Fred Wendorf, and Joel Shiner
1967
Memorandum to the Symposium on Terminology, Sixth Pan-African
Co ngress. Dakar.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961
The Indians.2..f. Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times.
UniverSity of Texas Press. Austin.
Nunley, John P., Lathel F. Duffield, and Edward B. Jelks
1965
Excavations at Amistad Reservoir, 1962 Season. Miscellaneous
Papers No.3. Texas Archeological Salvage Project. Austin.
Opler, Morris
1941
An Apache Life-Way: ..::!1l! Economies, Social,.!!2.2. Religious
Institution E..!. the Chiricahua Indians. The University of
Chicago Press. Chicago.
Parsons, Mark L.
1965
1963 Test Excavations at Fate Bel I Shel ter, Amistad Reservoir,
Val Verde County, Texas. Miscellaneous Paoers No.4, Texas
Archeological Salvage Project. Austin.

64

Ross, Richard E.
1965
The Archeology of Eagle Cave. Papers £l the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, No.7. Austin.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1958
The Geology of Texas, Vol. I: Stratigraphy.
Texas Bulletin 3232 (Sth Printing). Austin.

The University

~

Shafer, Harry J.
1969
Archeological Investigations in the Robert Lee Reservoir BaSin,
West Central Texas. Papers £l the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, No. 17. Austin.
1970

Notes on Uniface Retouch Technology.
3S, No.4: 480-487.

American Antiquity, Vol.

So II berger, J. B.
1968
A Partial Report on Research Work Concerning Lithic Typology
and Techno logy. Bul letin ~ the Texas Archeological Society,
Vo I. 39: 9S-1 10.
Sorrow, Wi I I iam M.
1968a
The Devi ITS Mouth Site: The Third Season-1967. Papers
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 14. Austin.
1968b

~

the

Test Excavations at the Nopal Terrace Site: Val Verde County,
Texas. Papers £l the Texas Archeological salvage Project,
No. IS. Aust in.

story, Dee Ann, and Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr. (Assemblers)
1966
A Prel iminary Study of the Paleoecology of the Amistad Reservoir
Area. Report multi I ithed for the National Science Foundation.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
the Texas Archeological SOCiety, Vol. 25.

Bulletin of

Valastro, S., Jr., and E. Mott Davis
University of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates VII.
1970a
Radiocarbon, Vol. 12, No. I: 249-280.
1970b

UniverSity of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates VI I I.
Radiocarbon, Vol. 12, No.2: 617-639.

Word, James H., and Charles L. Douglas
1970
Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas
Memorial Museum Bulletin No. 16, The University of Texas at
Austin.

65
l.

Page intentionally left blank.

APPENDIX 1
METRIC DATA OF ARTIFACTS
Artifact

Cate~

L_

W

T

SL

SW

BW

5
7

9
10
15
10
8
8
10
7
9
16

19
26
23

19
26
23

4.9
6.3
4.7

22

22

5.4
7.0

26

26

4.6

27

27

I 1• I
10. I

27
14
24
33
20
12
18
20
13
17

14
13
14
21
15
12

14
9
8
10
7
10
9
16
20
16
18
27
20
22
20
17
16
22
14
19
18
20
12
22

6.7
3.4
5.0
7.0
3.6
2.1
6.6
3.6
2.6
5.1
2.4
6.2
4.6
2.7
2. ,
1.6
4.1
3.0
2.7
4.7
9.8
7.6
6.3
5.4
4.6
4.7
9.2

wt. in grams

TOOLS
TE59
TE51
TE67
misc. surf.
Plasano
TE44
TE49
TE66
TE67
TE68
TE70
TE70
Langtry A
TE73A
TE738
TE73C
TE76
TE51
Langtry B
TE75
Val Verde
TE75A
Pandale
TE75B
TE44
Side notched A
TE69
TE75
Side notched 8
TE50
Side notched C
Corner notched A PC4
TE51
TE66
TE67
Corner notched B TE73
TE50
Expanding stem
TE51
TE66
TE66
Paral lei stem A
TE74
Par a II e 1stem B
TE74
Contracting stem
TE68
Lanceolate
Dart point frags. TE51
TE61
TE67
TE68
TE69
Ensor
Frio

45
37
50
54

50

56
44

32
40
40

20
23
22
23
20
21

6

5
7
6
6
6
9
8
6
6
4
6
5
5
3
7
7
5
6
5
7
5
5
5

24
25
27
27
26
30
30
21
23
17
21
17
22
31
33
23

9

6
8
6
6

14
16
9
12

14

14

12

13

6

5
·6
25
24
34

19
58

18
30

"
"II

12
7
10
9
9

9

6
4

45
32

6
6

25
23
27

a

67

~

S

16
20
25
22
27
20
22
20
17
16
22
15
19
18
20
16

5

26

II

II

12

L

Arrow point

TE72A
TE72B
TE73
TE75
TE50

Uniface Tools
Sequent flakes

8S26
8527
TE48
TE50A
TE508
TE54
TE58A
TE588
TE59A
TE598
TE66A
TE668
TE67A
TE678

T

SL

SW

8W

40
33
19

16
16

32
18
13

24

6

6

6

23

19

7
7
5
5
3

95

9
51

II

Stemless Bifaces
Group I S.B.

TE42
TE48
TE59
TE67A
TE678
TE6BA
TE688
TE72A
TE72B
TE74A
TE74B
TE75A
TE758
Triangular beveled' TE73
Fist knife
TE50
Battered stone
tools
B526
B527
TE44A
TE44B
TE44C
TE440
TE66
TE75A
TE758

W

wt. in grams
7.3
II • I

0.7

3
48

52.0

60
lOB

39
32
26
39
74

9
9
7
6
B
6
8
5
10
7
8
14
31

112
61
84
76
90
64
64
104
76

76
51
88
56
49
46
54
87
51

37
29
31
38
34
27
31
56
20

281.9
87.9
268.8
181.7
147.7
71 ~4
124.3
481.5
93.4­

69

14
10
17

52.1
26.1
61.2
54.3
37.2
10.4
33.3
14.2
49.5
44.0
26.9
23.1
31.8
52.9

48

51
59
54
66
53
32
46
29
56
55
54
44
51
61

30
26
26
28
27
27

44

67
74
63
40
76
48
73
73
42
47
55
59

II

15
8
9
6
14
II

9
10
14
II

68

29

14.3
10.5
6.B

26

II. I

6.3
9.1
34

26
37
74

22.7
12.0
10.3
37.3
212.7

L
TE69A
TE69B
TE69C
TE69D
TE69E
TE72
TE73A
TE73B
TE73C
TE73D
TE74A
TE74B
TE74C
TE74D
TE75A
TE75B
Elongated, bi laterally
TE50
trimmed
TE54
TE61
TE62
TE75A
TE75B
TE75C
TE75D
TE75E
Elongated, single
lateral trimmed
TE50A
edge
TE50B
TE51
TE67A
TE67B
misc. surf.
Elongated, distally
TE45
trimmed edge
TE50A
TE50B
TE56
Obi ique trimmed
TE45
edge
TE59
TE69
TE74
Misc. bi laterally
trimmed
TE58
TE73

T

W

10
8

SW

BW wt •. in grams
27.5
20.1
50.0
21.2
24.2
30.7
14.4
28.7
41.0
33.7
48.3
32.7
46.8
35.5
70.8
20.3

39
49
58
50
62
39
36
55
51
50
48
50
74
41
65
57

68
39
68
46
38
64
44
40
55
47
69
62
70
53
58
59

14
15
4

59
32
70
63
85
62
72
73
73

43
32
46
40
46
33
52
46
35

8
8
10
5
12
13
10
9
12

26.5
10.5
36.7
20.5
46.5
24.3
50.5

55
50
71
75
65
49

35
51
40
56
63
29

13

II

20.6
25.2
24.6
68.8
33.2
17.5

48
54
60
78

31
37
49
51

7
12
9
10

11.3
26.9
30.2
44.8

64
77
73
62

49
49
59
59

17
12

56.1
52.3
64.6
51.6

62
45

57
60

II

II

8
10
9
8
10
14
II

13
8
II

9

8
15
9

II

12
12

69

.......

SL

so. I

27.3

44.0
31.5

Subtriangular
Amorphous

End scrapers
Misc. burin
retouch

TE67
TE73
B526
TE42
TE44A
TE448
TE44C
TE51A
TE51B
TE58
TE69
TE75
TE67
TE72
TE76
BS27A
BS27B
TE42A
TE42B
TE59
TE66A
TE668
TE66C
TE67A
TE678
TE68
TE69A
TE69B
TE69C
TE74A
TE748
TE75A
TE75B
TE75C

Ground Stone Tools
Single faceted
BS26A
manos
BS26B
TE48A
TE488
TE58
TE73
Pitted hand stones TE49
TE59
TE75

SW

BW

wt.

in grams

W

T

86
47
44
45
78
49
48
57
49
56
44
37
39
44
45

23
14
10
20
25
20
14
22
14
13
8
24
16
15
15

1 I 1.9
45.1
25.7
32.3
167.7
57.6
35.6
80.8
36.6
45.4
63.9
12.5 .
28.6
45.9
35.3

18
16
21
8
18
15
9
7

34

35
33
47
42
53
37
46
41
38
37
36
33
53
55
50
61
34
53
42

37.7
19.0
59.5
15.9
71.6
20.7
26.7
18.1
20.8
19.6
25.3
20.1
29.6
51. I
49.0
49.1
40.9
80.0
18. I

109
128
87
118
121
116
93
112
107

86
97
89
82
112
98
81
91
67

46
46

L

53
65
48

46
83
67
57
76
60
61
47
69
50
55
58
44
41
56
48
65
39
57
40
44
48
45
46
43
53
58
50
59
68

II

9
15
II

9
16
20
12
20
16
10

34

36
69
50

33
38
37

70

SL

872.8
401.0
368.9
435.3
991.4
757.3
312.4
652.0
320.8

TE44
Notched pebble
TE67
Scratched ocher
Scratched, battered
limestone misc surf.
Scratched sand­
TE75
stone
k

T

SL

SW

BW Wt. in grams

L

W

33
35

26
17

7
7

7.8
7.5

150

57

22

389.6

113

87

35

476.8

65

28

12
8
10
9

MANUFACTURING RESIDUE
Dart Point Preforms
TE51
Langtry
TE50
Corner notched
TE75
Almagre
TE76
Group 2 stemless
bifaces
TE44
TE48
TE50A
TE50B
TE51A
TE51B
TE51C
TE51D
TE51E
TE51F
TE51G
TE51H
TE59A
TE59B
TE59C
TE59D
TE59E
TE59F
TE61A
TE61B
TE61C
TE61D
TE61E
TE66A
TE668
TE66C
TE66D
TE67A
TE678
TE67C
TE67D

60

46
51

73
56
65
69
46
36
63
70
72
57
36
58
52
38
76
84
63
67
58
60
89
65
67
70
60
65
60
51
57
52
58
47

37
43
41
41
46
27
26
43
34
30
23
47
48
37
48
51
31
42
38
42
56
45
42
48
38
40
48
28
38
30
47
25

12
9

10
12
II
II
10
14
II

15
3
10
8
9
9
25
9
II
15
18
15
20
19
12
17
15
15
II

15
8
14
5

71

i

.....I

16
II

14
18

17
19
24
29

13
17
15

15.3
9.4
23.5
22.3
29.6
26.7
22.0
35.3
26.1
10.5
14.3
40.4
25.8
22.2
3.3
32.0
21.8
15.0
49.3
91.4
16.8
28.0
30.4
40.5
76.0
53.7
55.6
36.1
34.5
39.9
46.7
14.3
30. I
14.8
37.3
6.7

L

Uniface retouch
bur in spa 1 Is

TE68
TE69A
TE69B
TE72
TE73A
TE738
TE73C
TE730
TE57A
TE758
TE76

32
65
55
65
38
75
59
60
58
I II
100

B527
TE44
TE45
TE69
TE73A
TE738
TE74
TE75

37
46
49
61
54

45
57
59

T

W
30
45
23
31
25
36
31
38
42
88
40

10
13
9
II
7

10
14
II
14
20
17

34

4
8
10
9
9
10
12

13

1/

9

II
II
24
14
12

72

SL

SW

BW

wt.

in Grams

10.6
41.9
10.9
24.7
7.5
30.5
22.2
32.9
36.8
235.1
59.6
2.1
3.1
4.2
10.7
8.5
4.8
20.2
5.8

