A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY
OF THE CHEM NUCLEAR SYSTEMS INC.
LIVE OAK COUNTY LEASE
Live Oak County, Texas

Technical Bulletin No. 73

David G.

Robinson

Principal Investigator:

Solveig A. Turpin

A report submitted to Chern Nuclear Systems Inc.
by
Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
October 1983

ABSTRACT
During July, 1983, the Texas Archeological Survey. The University
of Texas at Austin, conducted a cultural resources survey of the Chern
Nuclear Systems, Inc. Live Oak County lease in Live Oak County,
The surveyed property will become a uranium thorium biproduct
Texas.
material disposal site, and the cultural resources survey was
performed for a license application to the Texas Department of Health.
Three prehistoric artifacts in isolated context were found. and one
artifact scatter site (41BE13) lying just south of the lease was
recorded by the survey. The finds are insignificant according to all
state and National Register criteria, and the site lies outside the
project area;
recommendations
for
further
cultural
resource
investigations are therefore unwarranted.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Abstract . .

ii

Introduction

1

Environmental Background .

1

Archeological Background .

3

Previous Work

5

Field Procedures

7

Results

7

Conclusions and Recommendations

9

Acknowledgements

10

References Cited .

11

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1.

Project and Site Location Map. . . . . . . . . . . .

iii

iv

980 05'

Figure 1.
Project Location Map

28040'

\

t
0

I

I
I
I
I
I

I
I
I

I
I
I

I
I

2

I

I.... _---..

miles

\

"

.....

\
\

?

~!

\.

/...0

~

'.

\.

?
\.

9SOOO'

,....

Page 1

INTRODUCTION
On the 25th and 26th of July, 1983, the Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, conducted a cultural
resource survey of the proposed Chern Nuclear Systems, Inc.
Live Oak
County lease near Nell, Live Oak County, Texas (Fig. 1). The
property, currently developed in part by a Mobil Oil Corporation
in-situ uranium leach mine will be converted to a uranium thorium
biproduct material disposal site.
The entire 320 acres of the
property were intensively surveyed by TAS staff members David G.
Robinson and Christian B. Nightengale. Solveig A. Turpin, assistant
TAS director, served as principal investigator.
The objectives of this survey, formulated in accordance with
Texas Historical Commission guidelines, were to:
1) locate and describe any prehistoric or historic cultural
resources which might exist within the study area;
2) evaluate the
resources'
archeological
and
historical
significance, potential and possible National Register eligibility;
3) recommend to the sponsor means to avoid or lessen any
disturbance or destruction of the identified cultural resources, and
4) recommend further cultural
resource
evaluations and
interpretations beyond those feasible by this study.
The survey was conducted in compliance with standards set by the
Texas Department of Health, Bureau of Radiation Control, and its
Regulatory Guide 1.1, Part 1, Section E. The research conformed to
the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 and its implementing
regulations (36CFR800) and to criteria and guidelines for intensive
survey set forth by the Texas Historical Commission. Professional
standards set forth by the Council of Texas Archeologists and endorsed
by the Texas Historical Commission were adhered to in all phases of
this project.

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
The Chern Nuclear Systems Live Oak County development plot is
located in northeastern Live Oak County, in the Atascosa River Basin
(Figure 1). The area lies on the Rio Grande Plain, part of Fenneman's
(1938) West Gulf Coastal Plain Province. The landscape displays a
gently rolling topography divided into stream flood plains, lower
slopes above the streams, and upper slopes on stream drainage divides.
The survey plot ranges in elevation from 320 feet AMSL to 350 feet
AMSL and includes the stream flood plain, lower slopes and upper

Page 2
stream divide slope topographic zones.
The major rivers of the
region, the Atascosa, Frio and Nueces, flow through broad valleys
bordered in places by ancient stream terrace remnants.
The town of Three Rivers, southwest of the project area, has a
mean annual precipitation of 26 inches (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
1975). Rainfall maxima in May and September are the result of
convective thunderstorms formed by the convergence of dry, cool air
masses from the north and warm, moist air masses from the Gulf of
Mexico (Carr 1967:8, 11). The fall hurricane season sometimes brings
extremely heavy rains.
Geologic formations in Live Oak County range in age from the
Eocene to the Holocene. These sedimentary formations were formed by
major depositional events brought about by structural changes and
The Eocene left the interbedded
subsidence of the coastal plain.
sands, muds and impure lignite of the Jackson Group (Eargle, Hinds and
Weeks 1973).
These are overlain by the Oligocene Fayette and Frio
clays. The Miocene-aged Catahoula Formation lies unconformably on
these formations. The Miocene also saw the deposition of the Oakville
sandstone on the Catahoula, the Oakville overlain in turn by the
Fleming Formation's clays and sandstones. The Goliad Formation of
clay. sands and sandstone was deposited on these formations in the
Pliocene;
late in that period the chert, quartzite and silicified
wood Uvalde gravels were also deposited. In Pleistocene and Holocene
times, valley incision and sea level fluctuations combined to create
the existing coastal plain topography (Bureau of Economic Geology
1976).
The survey area lies on the Catahoula Formation, composed of
deposits from the Gueydan fluvial system of the Rio Grande Embayment.
The formation consists of tuffaceous clays, sandstone, tuff and
of
chert,
chalcedony, opal and quartzite.
conglomerate
beds
Additionally, gravels of chert, quartzite and
silicified wood
attributed to the Uvalde gravels lie on the upper stream divide slopes
of the prospect (Bureau of Economic Geology 1976;
Byrd 1971;
Galloway, Finley and Henry 1979; Sellards, Adkins and Plummer 1981:
678).
The Catahoula Formation includes pyroclastics such as tuffs,
volcanic ash and bentonitic clays. These parent materials weather to
montmorillonite clay in Live Oak County's semi-arid climatic regime,
and the high evapotranspiration rate results in the precipitation of
caliche nodules in soil A horizons (Galloway, Finley and Henry, 1979).
Outcrops of indurated caliche strata were observed on the survey plot.
The soils in the study area are calcareous loams with surface pebbles
and a few scatters of Uvalde gravels.
The survey area lies in Blair's (1950) Tamaulipan
biotic
province, described as a savannah of grasses and mesquite (Prosopis
sp.), and Tharp (1939) characterized the area as a mesquite-chapparral
region.
Gould (1969) classified it simply as the South Texas Plains.
The region originally gave rise to a savannah-type successional

Page 3
climax, or optimal plant community steady state, with dense forest
belts in the major river valleys, but long term historic grazing and
other factors have created an environment~ change which permits a
modern climax situation of brush country, or brasada. Several species
of mesquite dominate this floral setting, with competition from
pri ck ly pear cactus (Opuntia sp.).
Live oaks (Quercus virginiana)
grow along rivers and intermittent streams. Acacia, mimosa (Acacia
sp.), white brush (Lippia ligustruia), bl ack brush (Acacia rigidula),
ceniza (Atriplex canescens), catclaw (Acacia sp.), horse crippler
cactus (Echinocactus horizonthalonius), and a few yucca (Yucca sp.)
flourish in the brush country. On clay loams such as the survey plot,
grasses
including
longspike
silver
bluestem
(Bothriochloa
saccharoides), Ari zona cottontop (Digitaria patens), buffa 1ograss
(Buchloe dactyliodes) and hairy grama (Bouteloua hirsuta) thrive
(Blair 1950; Gould 1969; Tharp 1939).
Blair's (1950) Tamaulipan province includes at least 61 species
of mammals, 36 snakes, 19 lizards, two land turtles, three urodeles
(amphibians with tails throughout life) and 19 anurans (amphibians
without tails in adult life). Whitetailed deer, armadillos, coyotes,
foxes, squirrels, ground squirrels, cottontail rabbits, jackrabbits,
raccoons, oppossums and skunks can be found in the area. Alligators
have recently expanded their range into the region.
There are wild
turkeys, bobwhite quail, mourning dove, whitewinged dove and various
birds of prey (Blair 1950:103-105; 1952).
In its western portions, the survey plot has been heavily
modified by agricultural and mining activit'ies. The Mobil uranium
plant and the plowed contour terraced corn fields have prevented
attainment of the modern brushland successional climax; grasses,
weeds and corn grow there now. Elm Creek's riparian belt divides this
surface-modified zone from the brush country rangeland covering the
survey area's eastern one-quarter. Deer were observed frequently in
the brush, as were cottontail rabbits and jackrabbits. Shallow
rootings by armadillos were found in all survey areas; bobwhite quail
and mourning doves were seen everywhere on the plot.

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
The cultural-historical sequence of the Lower Gulf Coastal Plain
and Live Oak County has four cultural stages: the Paleoindian stage
(ca. 12,000 to 7000 B.C.), the Archaic stage (7000 B.C.
to A.D.
1200), the Late Prehistoric stage (A.D. 1200 to A.D. 1528) and the
Historic stage (A.D. 1528 to the present). These stages have been
defined
on the basis of subsistence strategies, artifacts and
geographic associations.
The Historic period, additionally,
is
defined by the keeping of written records.

Page 4
The Paleoindian stage began with the arrival of North America1s
first inhabitants, who spread rapidly to all regions of the continent.
These people practiced non-specialized gathering strategies and the
hunting of Pleistocene megafauna such as mammoth and mastodon (Hester
1976b:3-4;
Shafer and Baxter 1975:11).
Major
time-diagnostic
Paleoindian
artifacts are stone tools, notably Clovis, Folsom,
Scottsbluff, PlainView, Meserve and San Patrice projectile point
types.
By 7000 B.C. subsistence strategies had become regionalized and
based on diversified hunting and gathering; these changes defined the
Archaic stage. In South Texas, two major Archaic specializations are
recognized, an inland savanna and a coastal maritime adaptation
(Hester 1971:5;
1976a).
Archaic stage traits include
several
diagnostic lithic assemblages and cultural features such as hearths,
burials, pits, middens and burned rock concentrations.
The Archaic ended about A.D. 1200 with the beginning of the Late
Prehistoric stage, defined by technological innovations applied to
continuing Archaic subsistence
strategies.
Principally,
these
innovations were adoption of the bow and arrow and the use of pottery.
Late Prehistoric pottery in South Texas was a bone-tempered plainware.
The Historic period began in A.D. 1528 with Cabeza de Vaca's
transit of South Texas. Indians of the Coahuiltecan linguistic group
lived in the region and were divided into hundreds of discrete bands.
They pursued ways of life persisting from the Archaic and Late
Prehistoric stages and were semi-nomadic,
inhabiting
temporary
villages usually located near streams, and employed hunting and
gathering subsistence strategies.
They were
patrilineal
and
patrilocal, with inheritance through the male line. Their society was
egalitarian, in which social status was earned, not inherited (Lynn,
Fox and O'Malley 1977: Table 3, 28-29).
The current survey tract is located entirely within the William
T.
Hatton tract of 1846, a first class headright. A first class
headright was a category of land granting which included heads of
households residing in Texas as of March 2, 1836. This category was
established by the constitution of the Republic of Texas, which also
established second, third and fourth class headrights for settlers
entering Texas in later periods (Sewell and Rogers 1973: 25-27). The
1882 tax rolls showed that 1,151 acres of the tract were not taxed
because the owner was not known, a situation which persisted until
1886 when the parcel was taxed to the non-resident partnership of Lott
and Pettis, of Goliad. Tax rolls indicate their ownership at least
through 1899.
The nearby communities of Nell and Esseville were
established at the end of the first third of the twentieth century and
have persisted to the present day. Both of these hamlets had stores
and cotton gins. Cotton, once the mainstay of the rural community,
has almost completely disappeared from local cultivation, and with it
have gone the gins.
Cattle ranching and corn growing a~e the
principal agricultural pursuits and the region holds significant
exploitable reserves of oil, gas and uranium (Sparkman
1981:

Page 5
236-237).

PREVIOUS WORK
South Texas and Live Oak County comprise a rich archeological
261 prehistoric and historic sites have been recorded to date
zone;
Organized research in Live Oak
in Live Oak County (TARL files).
County has taken place over a comparatively short span of time,
Wakefield's 1967
survey of 18
however, beginning with W.H.
archeological sites in the proposed Choke Canyon Reservoir (Wakefield
1968). This initial work by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
The University of Texas at Austin, was followed by a survey and
excavation by the Texas Historical Commission and the Center for
Archeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio. More
than 400 sites dating from the Paleoindian stage to historic times
have now been recorded and investigated in this Frio River Valley
reservoir in Live Oak and McMullen counties (Hall, Black and Graves
1982; Lynn, Fox and O'Malley 1977; Sorrow, O'Malley and Fox 1974).
In recent years, the Texas Department of Highways and Public
Transportation has excavated and analyzed a site of major importance
on the Atascosa River flood plain/terrace margin north of the town of
Three Rivers.
Site 41LK28 is a cemetery site which contained more
than 160 prehistoric burials and artifacts datable to the Paleoindian,
Archaic and Late Prehistoric stagas. Continuing site and artifact
analysis is expected to shed light on Archaic stage lifeways, burial
patterns and interaction between the Central Texas and South Texas
culture regions.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin,
initiated archeological
assessments in the Three Rivers Flood
Protection Project in 1975. The project was sited on the Frio River
plain
at Three Rivers, and investigations recorded 16
flood
prehistoric and 3 historic sites or components.
Analysis of the
prehistoric sites demonstrated functional variations between them,
with overall emphasis on mussel collecting and lithic resource
procurement (Mallouf 1975;
Mallouf 1977; Prewitt and Scott 1977;
Dibble 1979; Pliska 1980).
Small scale research projects in the county have contributed to
prehistoric reconstruction.
Creel, McGraw, Valdez and Kelly (1979)
excavated 41LK106, a site on Sulphur Creek in western Live Oak County.
Artifacts suggested site occupations at various times from the Middle
Archaic to the Late Prehistoric stages. In a survey for the Conquista
Project, McGraw (1979) found two sites in the upland stream divide
physiographic setting; one site is classified as a light lithic
scatter, the other little more than a rock fire-hearth. Survey and
testing at site 41LKl17 on an alluvial terrace and adjacent upland
above Sulphur Creek defined Early, Middle and Late Archaic occupations
(Smith 1978).

Page 6
Counties surrounding Live Oak County have received varying
To the west, McMullen County has a
amounts of research attention.
site inventory containing 327 sites (TARL files), a large proportion
of which were recorded by the Choke Canyon Reservoir investigation
discussed previously. Shafer and Baxter (1975) found 85 sites in
McMullen and Atascosa counties. A variety of site types were defined,
distributed across all physiographic zones. Small scale projects in
upland zones above the river valleys are beginning to give a wider
cultural and environmental picture of the prehistoric period (Dusek
1980;
Robinson 1980), as are studies of surface collections (Hemion
1979; Hester 1968).
Eighty-two sites have been recorded in Karnes County (TARL
files).
A major research project was conducted in the Ecleto Creek
watershed by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project and Prewitt and
Associates,
Inc.;
16 prehistoric and one historic sites were
investigated in this project (Crawford 1971; Kotter and Guy 1980).
The Conquista Project cultural resources inventory in Karnes County
recorded four prehistoric sites and isolated cultural material (McGraw
1979a;
Roemer 1980).
Survey of the Texaco-Sunedco Hobson Uranium
Prospect in western Karnes County yielded two isolated finds and one
site.
The observed site inventory included twelve flakes, one stone
core, one core tool and one dart point medial fragment; none of these
artifacts were temporally or culturally diagnostic (Nightengale and
Bement 1982).
Seventy-four sites have been recorded in Atascosa County (TARL
files).
Major research projects have been those of Shafer and Baxter
(1975), with results as reported previously, and McGraw (1979b), who
reported four lithic scatter sites distributed from the flood plains
to the uplands and one occupation site located on a stream divide
upland.
Additionally, Usrey, Grysinski and Bond (1978) conducted
controlled surface collections on two sites on the uplands between San
Miguel Creek and the Atascosa River. On the basis of point typology,
the heavily deflated sites were dated to the Middle Archaic and Late
Prehistoric stages.
Bee County lists only twelve sites in the TARL files, but one of
these is an early man site (41BE2) investigated in 1939 by E.H.
Sellards (1940). By use of machinery, an extremely long stratigraphic
profile was exposed on the Berclair terrace, a Pleistocene stream
terrace of Blanco Creek. This procedure allowed interpretation of a
locality which yielded a rich assemblage of extinct Pleistocene fauna
and associated Paleoindian stone tools.
The foregoing discussions have presented a picture of current
anthropological research in the Live Oak County area of South Texas.
A detailed and incisive summary of South Texas archeological research
by Carol Graves can be found in Hall, Black and Graves (1982: 7-25).

Page 7
FIELD PROCEDURES
The cultural resource inventory of the Chem Nuclear Systems Live
Oak County lease was accomplished on July 25 and 26, 1983 by an
intensive pedestrian transect survey of the project area.
The
fieldworkers walked the lease at spacing appropriate to ground
visibility and the degree of surface modification and displacement, as
at the Mobil plant.
In no instance did spacing exceed 30 meters.
Exceptionally dense ground cover and high site probability zones
the flood plain and lower slopes above Elm Creek -- received extra
wa'l Kover coverage.
The entire project was surveyed
by these
procedures.
Sites and finds were recorded fully, following Council of Texas
Archeologists (CTA) guidelines.
State of Texas Archeological Site
Data forms were completed; photographs of finds and site environments
were taken;
scale drawings of sites were drawn. Locations were
plotted on USGS topographic Quadrangle maps.
All records and collected artifacts are curated at Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), The University of Texas at
Austin. Copies of all written records are filed with the Texas
Historical Commission, Austin, Texas.

RESULTS
The survey of the Chem Nuclear Systems Inc. lease in Live Oak
County resulted in the discovery of one prehistoric site and three
finds of artifacts in isolated contexts. In keeping with TARL and
Council of Texas Archeologists standards, the isolated finds were
given site numbers. This is solely a record keeping convenience, and
it should be remembered that these finds are not cultural sites in
either the strictest or the most general sense of the term site,
defined and used here following Hole and Heizer (1969:59): "A site ;s
any place, large or small, where there are to be found traces of
ancient occupation or activity".
Although this definition admits
single artifact sites, it cannot be entertained that single artifacts
from
findspots in uranium plants, contour terraced fields and
hillslope erosional surfaces reveal any trace of past human activity.
It must be kept firmly in mind that these artifacts' significance lies
in the artifacts themselves, not the locations of their djscovery.
All Texas site numbers follow the Smithsonian Trinomial site
designation system in which the first two numbers indicate the state
(41=Texas), the letters indicate the county (LK=Live Oak) and the
final numbers indicate the site sequence number within the county, the
sites numbered in order of discovery.
An example is 41LK2E2, an
isolated find on the current survey. The number says that the f~nd is
the 262nd cultural site or find discovered in Live Oak County, Texas.

Page 8
41 BE13

This site is a low density artifact scatter located on lower
Mesquite and prickly pear cactus
slopes just east of Elm Creek.
dominate the site environment.
White brush, black brush, horse
crippler cactus and yucca also grow near the site, and live oaks and
other riparian species line the creek no farther than 30 meters to the
northwest.
Artifacts and chert flakes were found atop and beside an
artificial contour extending from the creek bank to a cattle tank
A few chert flakes were observed on nearby
southeast of the site.
undisturbed surfaces. A fragmentary Ensor projectile point is the
single diagnostic artifact found on the 800 m2 site. It is of
liver-colored fine-grained quartzite and is missing the tip and half
the base.
A thin, fragmentary grey chert biface was recovered, and
five secondary and tertiary chert flakes ranging in color from light
tan to grey and dark brown were also observed. 41BE13 probably
contains subsurface stratified deposits because most of its artifacts
were exposed on the excavated, disturbed artificial contour and the
sites' dominant pedologic process is alluviation. The site lies south
of the
project boundary and therefore requires no management
recommendations.
41LK262

This is an isolated find, a Clear Fork gouge fragment found in
the well field of the Mobil plant. The well field and the find lie on
the upper slopes of the Elm Creek drainage system.
Vegetation
consists of dense grasses and weeds. The gouge is of grey chert with
spots of jasper; approximately one-third of the tool has been snapped
off on the haft end, and the tool displays the characteristic Clear
Fork concave bit.
4·ILK263

This isolated find ;s a thick bifacial tool fragment.
It was
discovered on a plowed and contoured agricultural field east of the
Mobil plant. This location is in the upper slopes of the Elm Creek
drainage system. Current vegetation consists of chenopods, amaranths,
grasses and gourd vines. The tool is a long, thick grey chert flake
tool with high edge angle retouch around its entire perimeter. Flake
scars are broad and unpatterned, and a plunging flake extending from
end to end has been struck .off the tool; it cannot be determined if
this flake was deliberately removed Dr if it fractured off during use.
41 LK264

This isolated find is a reddish-brown chert biface fragment.
It
was found in the mesquite-prickly pear community on the lower di2inage
Subordinate plants in the local scrub
slopes east of Elm Creek.
include white brush, black brush and horse crippler cactus. Live oaks

Page 9
and other riparian species line Elm Creek a few tens of meters west of
41LK264. The immediate area has large bare ground areas with numerous
rills; scrubland vegetation grows more thickly about 50 meters
41BE13 lies approximately 575 meters
upslope (east) of the site.
41LK264
southwest of this site in the same physiographic setting.
itself is a non-diagnostic fragment of a broken or unfinished tool;
displaying large, unpatterned flake scars and a roughly square
outline. Typological or functional interpretations of this find would
be unduly speculative.

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The cultural resources of the Chem Nuclear Systems Live Oak
County lease are minimal. constituting three isolated finds, despite
the survey areals dissection by high site probability lower drainage
slopes on either side of Elm Creek. The nearest known significant
cultural site is 41BE13, found by the survey in the high probability
zone just south of the project area. The isolated finds and site
41BE13 fail to meet criteria for nomination to the National Register
of Historic
Places
and Texas Archeological Landmark status.
Recommendations for further cultural resource investigations are
unwarranted due to these minimal findings. Should artifacts or bones
be unearthed during construction activities, the appropriate agencies
should be notified.

Page 10

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Several individuals deserve thanks for their contributions to the
successful outcome of this project. The endeavor was directed and
guided from its inception to its conclusion by Dr.
Solveig A.
Turpin,
the project's principal
investigator.
Christian B.
Nightengale brought professional expertise and cool, dry humor to hot,
humid fieldwork. Jack Jackson researched the historical background of
Bruce A.
the survey plot, and Carol Fabac drafted the figure.
Nightengale provided initial liaison between TAS and Chem Nuclear
Systems, Inc., represented by Mr. William B. House. The manuscript
was prepared by Laura Petruska and Abby Treece. Thanks to all of
these people.

Page 11

REFERENCES CITED
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
2(1): 93-117.
1952

The Texas Journal of Science

Mammals of the Tamaulipan Biotic Province in

Texas.

Texas

Journal of Science 4(2).

Bureau of Economic Geology
1976 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Crystal City-Eagle Pass sheet.
University of Texas at Austin.

The

Byrd, Clifford Leon
1971 Origin and History of the Uvalde Gravel of Central Texas.
Baylor Geological
Studies Bulletin No.
Baylor
20.
University Press, Waco.
Carr, John T.
1967 The Climate and Physiography of Texas.
Development Board Report No. 53.

Texas

Water

Crawford, Daymond D.
1971 An Archeological Reconnaissance of Ecleto Creek Watershed,
South Central Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project
Survey Report No.8. The University of Texas at Austin.
Creel, D., J. McGraw, F. Valdez Jr., and T.C. Kelly
1979 Excavations at 41LK106, a Prehistoric Occupation Site in
Live Oak County, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research
Archaeological Survey Report No.
62.
The University of
Texas at San Antonio.
Dibble, David S.
1979 Archeological Assessments at the Three
Rivers
Flood
Protection Project.
Texas Archeological Survey Technical
Bulletin No. 26. The University of Texas at Austin.
Dusek, Curtis
1980 Plainview Points from 41MC10, McMullen
Tierra 7(3): 39-41.

County,

Texas.

La

Eargle, D. Hoye, George W. Hinds and Alice M.D. Weeks
1973 Uranium Geology and Mines, South Texas. Bureau of Economic
Geology Guidebook 12. The University of Texas at Austin.

Page 12
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938 Physiography of the Eastern United States.
York.

McGraw-Hi 11, New

Galloway, William E., R.J. Finley and C.D. Henry
1979 South Texas Uranium Province Geologic Perspective.
Bureau
of Economic Geology Guidebook 18. The University of Texas
at Austin.
Gould, Frank W.
1969 Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary.
Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station. Publication MP-585. Texas
A & M University. College Station.
Hall, Grant D., Stephen L. Black and Carol Graves
1982 Archaeological Invesitgations at Choke Canyon Reservoir,
The
Phase
I
Findings.
Center for
South Texas:
Archaeo log; ca 1 Research Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5. The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hemion, R.H.
1979
Further Notes on the Bromley Cooper Collection from McMullen
County. Texas. La Tierra 7(5): 24-29.
Hester, T.R.
1968 Paleo-Indian Artifacts from Sites along San Miguel Creek:
Frio, Atascosa and McMullen Counties, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 39: 147-161.
1971

Hunters of the Rio Grande Plain and the Lower Coast of
Texas.
at the 74th Annual Meeting, Texas
Paper present€ d
Academy of Science. Nacogdoches, Texas.

1976a The Archaic of Southern Texas. In the Texas Archaic:
A
Symposium,
Thomas
R.
Hester (editor).
Center for
Archaeological Research. The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
1976b Hunters and Gatherers of the Rio Grande Plain and the Lower
Coast of Texas.
Paper issued by the Center for
Archaeological Research. The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Hole, Frank and Robert F. Heizer
1969 An Introduction to Prehistoric Archeology.
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., New York.

2nd edition.

Kotter, Steven M., and Jan A. Guy
1980 Archeological Survey and Assessment of Two Areas to be
Affected by Proposed Critical Area Treatment Measures within
the Ecleto Creek Watershed, Karnes County, Texas.
Reports
of Investigations No.5.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
Austin.

--------~---

- - - -.....

...

- - - - - - - - - - ­

Page 13
Lynn, Warren M., Daniel E. Fox and Nancy O'Malley
1977 Cultural Resource Survey of Choke Canyon Reservoir, Live Oak
and McMullen Counties, Texas. Texas Historical Commission
Archeological Survey Report No. 20. Austin.
Mallouf, Michael G.
1975 Three Rivers Flood Protection Project, Live Oak County,
Texas:
An Archeological and Historical Survey of Areas
Proposed for Modification. Report submitted to the Fort
Worth District,
Corps of Engineers by
the Texas
Archeological Survey. The University of Texas at Austin.
1977

Additional Archeological Surveying in Areas to be Affected
by the Three Rivers Flood Protection Project, Live Oak
County, Texas. Report submitted to the Fort Worth District,
Corps of Engineers by the Texas Archeological Survey. The
University of Texas at Austin.

McGraw, A. Joachim
1979a An Archaeological and Historical Survey of the Haase, Moy
and Wiatrek Properties of the Conquista Project, Karnes
Research
County,
Texas.
Center for Archaeological
Archaeological Survey Report 81. The University of Texas at
San Antonio.
Nightengale, Bruce A. and Leland C. Bement
1982 A Cultural Resource Survey and Assessment of the
Hobson Uranium Prospect, Karnes County,
Texaco-$unedco
Texas. Texas Archeologi ca 1 Survey Technical Bulletin No.
51. The University of Texas at Austin.
Pliska, James R.
1980 Archeological Investigations at the Three Rivers Flood
A Final Report.
Control Project:
Texas Archeological
Survey Technical Bulletin No. 30. The University of Texas
at Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R. and Robert J. Scott IV
1977 Three
Rivers
Floodwater Diversion
Levee
Project:
Assessments at Archeological Sites 41LK57, 41LK113 and
41LK114. Report to the Fort Worth District, Corps of
Engineers by the Texas Archeological Survey. The University
of Texas at Austin.
Robinson, David G.
1980 A Cultural Resource Survey of the Rhode Ranch, McMullen
County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report
No. 79. The University of Texas at Austin.

Page 14
Roemer, Erwin
1980 An Archeological Survey for the Conquista Project of the
Nieschwietz-Bodden Properties, Karnes County, Texas. Center
for Archaeological Research Archaeological Survey Report No.
92. The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Sellards, E.H.
1940 Pleistocene artifacts and associated fossils from
Bee
County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Geological Society of
America 51: 1627-1658.
Sell ards, E.H., W.S. Adkins and F.Plummer .
1981 The Geology of Texas.
Volume I - Stratigraphy.
The
Un; versity of Texas Bulletin 3232. The University of Texas
at Austin.
Sewe 11 , Gerald and Mary Beth Rogers
Texas
1973 The Story of Texas Public Lands. A Unique Heritage.
General Land Office and the J.M. West Texas Corporation.
Austin.
Shafer, H.J. and E.P. Baxter
1975 An Archeological Survey of the Lignite Project, Atascosa and
McMullen Counties, Texas.
Anthropology Laboratory Report
No.7. Texas A & M University. College Station.
Smith, H.P., Jr.
1978 Archaeological Survey and Assessment of Properties for the
Conquista Project in Live Oak and Karnes Counties, Texas.
Center for Archaeo 1ogi ca 1 Research Archaeological Survey
Report No. 64. The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Sorrow, William M., Nancy OIMalley and Daniel Fox
1974 Interim Report on the Archeological and Historical Resources
of the Proposed Choke Canyon Reservoir, Live Oak and
McMullen Counties, Texas. Texas Historical Commission and
Texas Water Development Board. Austin.
Sparkman, Ervin L.
1981 The People's History of Live Oak Co unty, Texas.
Publishers. MesqUite, Texas.
Tharp, Bejamin C.
1939 The Vegetation
Publications

of Texas.

in

Natural

Anson Jones Press.

Texas
History,

Academy of
non-technical

Ide

House

Science
series.

Houston.

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
1975 Local Flood Protection Project at Three Rivers, Texas.
Draft Supplement to the Final Environmental Statement.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ....... _ - - - ­

Page ]5
Usrey, Steve, Stan Grysinski and Clell L. Bond
1978 Archeological Sites 41AT22 and 41AT24 South Central Texas.
Anthropology Research Laboratory Report No. 46. Texas A &
M University. College Station.
Wakefield, Walter H.
1968 Archeological Survey of Palmetto Bend and Choke Canyon
Reservoirs, Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project
Survey Report No.5. The University of Texas at Austin.

