AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE
SOUTHEAST WATER SUPPLY CORPORATION EXPANSION PROJECT
IN EASTERN LEON COUNTY, TEXAS

Antiquities Permit 2929

by
William E. Moore

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 105

2002

AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE
SOUTHEAST WATER SUPPLY CORPORATION EXPANSION PROJECT
IN EASTERN LEON COUNTY, TEXAS

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Project Number 02-13

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared for
Southeast Water Supply Corporation
Post Office Box 640
Centerville, Texas 77833

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) conducted an archaeological survey
of 17 areas within 22.58 miles (41.05 acres) of proposed water line in eastern Leon
County, Texas in August of 2002 under the supervision of William E. Moore. This
project was sponsored by the Southeast Water Supply Corporation (WSC) of
Centerville, Texas. Since portions of the water line will be placed in the public right-ofway (ROW), Antiquities Permit 2929 was issued to BVRA for this project by the Texas
Historical Commission, Archeology Division. One previously unrecorded archaeological
site (41LN436) containing prehistoric and historic artifacts in a mixed context was found
in an area where the water line will be placed on private land. This site is not eligible for
inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places, and no further work is
recommended. One piece of prehistoric pottery was observed on the eroded surface of
a sandy hill, also on private property. Shovel testing in the area failed to produce
additional artifacts; therefore, this location was not assigned an official site number. In
this report it is referred to as Locality 1. The records check revealed the presence of
two previously recorded prehistoric sites (41LN15 and 41LN17) in the vicinity of the
project area near the Trinity River. No evidence of these sites was found in a search
that included shovel testing and intensive surface inspection of eroded areas. Shovel
testing for this project was restricted to high probability areas as determined in the field.
Much of the project area is in low-lying areas and on slopes of hills and was determined
by the field survey crew to be low probability for significant archaeological sites. The
artifacts from 41LN436 and the piece of prehistoric pottery from Locality 1 were returned
to the landowners. Copies of the report are on file at the Texas Historical Commission,
Archeology Division; Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), The University
of Texas at Austin, Southeast WSC, and BVRA. The artifacts were returned to the
landowner.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank everyone whose cooperation made the completion of this
project possible. Hollie H. Nowlin, environmentalist at J. F. Fontaine & Associates, Inc.,
provided topographic and engineering maps for the project. The Southeast Water
Supply Corporation WSC provided additional support. Royce Keeling, President of the
Board of Directors, and Raylene Peterson, Secretary, are thanked for their help. Ms
Peterson spent several hours reviewing the maps with the Principal Investigator prior to
the field survey that made the work easier for the crew. Jennifer Mendoza, Operator for
the Southeast WSC, assisted the survey crew in finding one of the more isolated
portions of the project area on private property. Landowner Alton Theiss graciously met
the survey crew on Sunday morning so they could gain access to his property that
traverses cross-country. Rusty Krueger of the Rural Development Office in Huntsville,
Texas served as the representative for this federal agency. The fieldwork was
conducted with the assistance of James E. Warren, Arthur Romine, and Richard Brown.
Adrianne Mraz, Assistant Curator of Records TARL, conducted the literature search.
The figures that appear in this report were drafted by Lilli Lyddon of LL Technical
Services in North Zulch, Texas.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS..................................................................................................iii
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS....................................................................................... 4
METHODS ...................................................................................................................... 8
RESULTS...................................................................................................................... 11
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 13
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 14
Appendix I: Areas Surveyed on Topographic Maps
Appendix II: Discussion of Areas Surveyed
Appendix III: Shovel Test Log
Figures
Figure 1. General Location of Project Area ..................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Project Area Map ............................................................................................. 3
Figure 3. Site 41LN436 ................................................................................................. 10

iv

INTRODUCTION
Southeast WSC plans to improve the domestic water supply to rural Leon
County, Texas by installing new pipe and meters at various locations throughout the
eastern portion of the county (Figure 1). The construction for this project is being
funded through a federal grant provided by the United States Department of Agriculture,
Rural Development Office. Therefore, this investigation comes under the purview of
Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, and its
implementing regulations (36 CFR Part 800). Because part of the line will be on state
and county property, an Antiquities Permit from the Texas Historical Commission,
Archeology Division, was required. Permit 2929 was issued to BVRA for this project,
and the survey was conducted on August 16-18, 2002.
An earlier survey of approximately 14.5 miles for this project had been conducted
by another archaeological firm (Perttula and Nelson 1997). It was later decided,
however, that seven additional areas will need service, and it is these areas that are the
focus of this study. In all, the project area consists of 22.58 miles (41.05 acres) of state,
county, and private roads scattered throughout the eastern part of the county (Figure 2).
The proposed construction will install 4 inch and 6 inch pvc pipe to be placed in a 30
inch wide trench to a maximum depth of 36 inches. The ROW is 15 feet. Virtually all of
the proposed water line is new with no existing line in place. Additionally three wells are
planned. The area that will be disturbed for each well location will be 100 x 100 feet in
size. Well 4 is located on an unnumbered road approximately 500 feet from Farm-toMarket Road 977, well 5 is located on County Road 318, and well 6 is located on State
Highway 7. The construction ROW for this project is 15 feet; the water line will be
placed in the center of this ROW. Southeast WSC has obtained easements from
landowners for portions of the proposed water line. In these cases, the line will be
placed on private property. In other areas, where permission has not been obtained,
the new line will be placed within the road/highway ROW.
Leon County is an area that contains significant archaeological sites, both
prehistoric and historic. This area has been the subject of several major cultural
resources investigations such as the ongoing Jewett Mine project to the north and an
earlier investigation of water lines in the county by BVRA (Moore 1994, 2002a, 2002b)
and Archeological and Environmental Consultants (Perttula and Nelson 1997).
Eight topographic quadrangles provide coverage of the project area. They are
Centerville (1964); Eunice (1964); Hilltop Lakes (1964; photorevised 1982); Leona
(1964); Middleton (1964; photorevised 1972); Normangee (1964; photorevised 1982);
Robbins (1965; photorevised 1982); and Spring Seat (1964, photorevised 1982). The
location of each of the 25 areas planned for water line is depicted on the topographic
maps and appears as Appendix I to this report.

1

Figure 1. General Location of Project Area

2

Figure 2. Project Area Map

3

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
General Studies
Three major archaeological projects have been conducted in Leon County. They
are the Upper Navasota Reservoir (now Lake Limestone) (Prewitt 1974; Prewitt and
Dibble 1974), Jewett Mine (Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. 1980; Voellinger and
Freeman 1980; Freeman and Voellinger 1982; Fields 1988), and Millican Reservoir
(Kotter 1982).
Lake Limestone was examined by the Texas Archeological Survey in 1974 under
contract with the Brazos River Authority. Only areas of high site probability such as
floodplains and valley margins along the Navasota River and its major tributaries were
surveyed. Fifty-two prehistoric sites were recorded within the reservoir area. Of this
number, 37 were found to be situated on the crests or slopes of eroded valley margins.
At Lake Limestone, Prewitt and Grombacher (1974:7) found a scarcity of sites
along the major tributaries. They attribute this to the possibility that desirable or needed
resources were more readily available along the mainstem valley than along the
tributaries.
Following the Lake Limestone project, work at Jewett Mine commenced in 1980
and is still in progress. The majority of sites in the county are on Jewett Mine property,
and most of our current knowledge of the prehistoric and early historic sites of the area
has been obtained from these studies.
At Jewett Mine, Voellinger and Freeman (1980:4-15) observed that all but two of
the sites are located in transitional zones. They found that the physiographically
transitional zones of the major creeks of the Jewett Mine area continually provided the
most attractive qualities for prehistoric populations. At Jewett Mine the average
horizontal distance to water was 131 meters, and 73 percent of the prehistoric sites are
located at or within 100 meters of water.
A scarcity of sites in areas of shallow soils was noted at Jewett Mine. Soil
probes on the terraces and upland breaks along the lower expanses of Mine Creek, for
example, repeatedly indicated less than 20 cm of soils over a clay base. In these areas
sites were absent. Beginning with the first deep sand hill upstream, however, an
abundance of prehistoric sites was found (Freeman and Voellinger 1982:2-62). One
suggestion for the preference of deep sandy soils is the possibility that certain plants
that prefer these deep soils were desired and exploited by prehistoric populations.

4

Freeman and Voellinger (1982:2-63) suggest that sites located on higher
terraces and upland margins are smaller in areal extent and contain less material
cultural remains than those along the major creeks. The latter should represent
habitation sites with artifact assemblages reflecting the area's major occupations.
Features such as hearths, storage pits, and structural remains might be found in sites
along the major creeks while the smaller sites at higher elevations should contain
activity specific tool assemblages.
They (Freeman and Voellinger 1982:2-64) comment on the difficulty of assessing
site depth and size in the project area. At most sites, only a single flake was found in
the shovel tests. According to them, "the general lack of surface evidence indicating the
presence of cultural manifestations will require testing far beyond the scope of an
archaeological survey to adequately address real site dimensions." The intensive
shovel testing during this survey sometimes failed to disclose a site's integrity. Many
sites, for example, have no obvious stratigraphy beyond the gradual change from humic
sand to sand to clayey sand.
The Millican Reservoir survey included parts of Brazos, Grimes, Leon, Madison,
and Robertson counties and recorded 25 sites in Leon County. Of this number, three
sites 41LN179, 41LN183, and 41LN187 are in the current project area (Appendix I).
Waterline Projects
Four studies in the county have been conducted in association with water line
projects for local water supply corporations. The first was performed in 1994 by BVRA
(Moore 1994). This study involved an archaeological survey of 112 miles of proposed
water line in west-central Leon County for the Concord Robbins WSC. Eighteen
prehistoric and historic sites were recorded. All of the prehistoric sites were found on
topograpic settings containing sandy soils in close proximity to streams. No prehistoric
sites were found in modern floodplain settings. One prehistoric site (41LN391) was
believed to have research potential due to the high number of artifacts recovered
through shovel testing.
In 1997, Archeological and Environmental Consultants (Perttula and Nelson
1997) conducted an archaeological survey of approximately 14.5 miles of proposed
water line for the Southeast WSC in eastern Leon County. Part of the areas examined
by this firm overlaps with the current study. Four prehistoric sites (41LN430 - 41LN433)
were found within the ROW. All of the sites are in sandy soils on terraces or hills
overlooking streams or creeks. Only site 41LN430 was considered to have the potential
to contain important information.

5

In 2002, BVRA conducted an archaeological survey of an 84.65 mile water line
for the Concord Robbins WSC (Moore 2002a). No archaeological sites were found
within the project area ROW. In general, the water line crossed terrain viewed as low
probability areas for the presence of archaeological sites. Although sandy hills were
present in the project area, most of the creek crossings were on slopes of hills or in lowlying areas. As part of this study 17 prehistoric sites recorded by BVRA in an earlier
study (Moore 1994) were assessed. It was determined that no significant sites will be
affected by the proposed water line.
Also in 2002, BVRA (Moore 2002b) examined additional sections of waterline for
the Concord Robbins WSC that were not part of the previous study. No new
archaeological sites were found.
Project Specific Studies
In the late 1930s and early 1940s, Gus E. Arnold traveled throughout East Texas
recording sites, while an employee at the University of Texas at Austin. Unfortunately,
he did not write a formal report documenting his activities. A thesis by Im (1975) on file
at TARL does not refer to any sites recorded by Arnold in Leon County. Arnold also
visited Leon County and, during this period, he recorded 41LN15 on the uplands above
the Trinity River as a village site of undetermined size. One large pottery sherd was
collected after being observed in a "deeply eroded rut in an abandoned road." The site
form states that the pottery was found at a depth of about two feet. Based on the map
plotting at TARL, site 41LN15 is directly in the path of the water line as currently
proposed (see Appendix I, Area 25).
In 1972, William R. Sorrow (1973), working for the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project (TASP), conducted a "cursory field reconnaissance of a specified part of the
Trinity River floodplain" (Sorrow 1973:1). This study was to provide a preliminary
evaluative survey of the archeological resources to be affected by the Trinity River
Multiple-Purpose Project. The field survey concentrated on the floodplain and
immediate uplands from the Tennessee Colony Reservoir to the headwaters of Lake
Livingston and from the Lake Livingston Dam to the headwaters of the Wallisville
Reservoir. According to Sorrow (1973:1), at the time of his study only a few sites had
been previously recorded in these "archeologically unknown areas," and there have
been no reported professional excavations. Two prehistoric sites in the vicinity of the
project area were recorded during this study. One of these sites, 41LN17, is very close
to the path of the proposed water line as currently proposed (see Appendix I, Area 25).
In the Survey Procedure section of his report, Sorrow (1973:2) does not mention shovel
testing as being part of his methods. A sketch map that accompanies the site form for
41LN17, however, mentions that one small shovel test was dug in top of the knoll (depth
of test not given) and was "unproductive." According to the site form, artifacts collected
were found on gopher mounds and included mussel shell, pottery, flakes and bone.
According to Table 1 in Sorrow's (1973) report, site 41LN17 is recommended for further
investigation.

6

In 1978, Southern Methodist University sponsored a reconnaissance survey of
the Trinity River Basin from Fort Worth, Texas to the mouth of the Trinity River on Trinity
Bay (Richner and Bagot 1978). Although there is no mention of the field survey crew
having visited 41LN17 in the current project area, it appears in their Appendix I - Site
Data. According to Richner and Bagot (1978:264), this is a terrace site with very little
additional information present.

7

METHODS
The purpose of this archaeological survey was to locate any previously
unrecorded archaeological sites in the proposed Southeast Texas WSC water line ROW
and search for evidence of two previously recorded sites (41LN15 and 41LN17) within
the ROW. An evaluation of all archaeological sites within the ROW was made
regarding their eligibility for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places.
Prior to conducting the field survey, an application for an Antiquities Permit was
submitted to the Texas Historical Commission, Archeology Division. The permit was
signed by Royce Keeling, President of the Board of Directors for the Southeast Water
Supply Corporation (Sponsor), and Ann Irwin, Deputy Director, Environmental Affairs
Division of the Texas Department of Transportation (Owner). The 25 areas selected for
new service were evaluated by the Principal Investigator, and this information was
provided to the project reviewer at the Texas Historical Commission, Deborah L. Beene.
After her review, eight areas were considered to be low probability and were not
surveyed for this project. The remaining 17 areas are considered to be medium to high
probability for the potential of significant archaeological sites, and it is these areas that
are the focus of this study. A brief discussion of each area is presented in Appendix II.
A records check for previously recorded sites in the project area and vicinity was
conducted for BVRA by Adrianne Mraz, Assistant Curator of Records at TARL. This
endeavor revealed the presence of three prehistoric sites in the area, two of which
(41LN15 and 41LN17) are very close to the proposed water line route as currently
planned. The survey report which documents 41LN17 (Sorrow 1973) and the site form
which documents 41LN15 were reviewed prior to entering the field in order to better
plan a strategy for evaluating these two sites.
The field survey was performed using the pedestrian survey method supported
by shovel testing, probing, and profiling of road cutbanks as well as surface inspection
of all eroded and otherwise exposed areas within the highway ROW. The 22.58 mile
project area was examined with sandy hills overlooking creeks receiving the most
attention. All areas that appeared to be a likely setting for the presence of prehistoric
sites were shovel tested. Each test was recorded on a shovel test log (Appendix III)
and discussed in the project notes. The excavated matrix was screened using 1/4 inch
hardware cloth. In all, 21 shovel tests were excavated. The locations of all shovel tests
are depicted on the relevant topographic maps (Appendix I). No shovel testing was
conducted outside the 15 foot ROW. Shovel probes were dug with a shovel to help
confirm the presence of shallow soils in some areas in place of shovel tests. Probes
were not screened, numbered, or depicted on the field maps. Profiles were drawn of
the shovel tests, and these drawings along with other notes are housed at BVRA. In a
few cases, road/highway cutbanks were profiled with a shovel to determine the depth of
clay. This task eliminated unnecessary shovel testing in those areas where clay was
found to be shallow.

8

It is the intention of the Southeast WSC to place the water line on private
property when possible. In those areas where easements have not been obtained, the
new water line will be placed in the public ROW. There are stretches of road that are
considered to be low probability settings for significant archaeological sites. These
areas were examined but in a more cursory manner. This was accomplished by the
traditional windshield survey or by walking the ROW with little, if any, shovel testing or
probing.
During the field survey, the crew relied on topographic maps and engineering
maps provided by the client. As each road or section of road was driven, the relevant
topographic map was consulted for the presence of nearby streams. This was
necessary since creeks were not always visible from the road. In some cases, for
example, streams paralleled the water line route on the opposite side of the hill from the
road. At the same time, the engineering maps were used to make notations regarding
what was seen at that area. The survey crew did not have any assistance during the
survey of the areas along county and state roads. However, one small segment
traverses cross country, and the landowner, Alton Theiss, accompanied them. Each
area examined was given a number that corresponds to field notes taken in a notebook.
The probability of an area for prehistoric sites was written in the notebook for future
reference. Comments such as "low-lying area" and "slope of hill" are the kinds of
observations that prompted the survey crew to avoid shovel testing certain areas. Two
areas containing cultural materials were encountered. The first area (41LN436) was
discovered when Shovel Test 10 produced 11 flakes, 1 cut nail, and 1 piece of clear
glass. The site is located on a small natural sandy hill overlooking Beaver Dam Creek
to the south (Figure 3). The location of this site is also depicted in Appendix I (Area 13).
Three shovel tests were excavated within the 15 foot ROW. The first test was
excavated in the center of the landform to a depth of 70 cm at which point heavy red
clay was encountered. The remaining two shovel tests were dug on the north and south
slopes of the hill to depths of 35 and 55 cm where clay was reached. Since only three
shovel tests were dug in the area, a site map was not drawn.
The second area containing cultural materials was on a badly eroded hill within
the public ROW. During the surface inspection of the eroded sandy gullies, a single
potsherd was observed on the surface just across the fence on private property. A
closer examination failed to yield additional cultural materials. Only a small area
appeared to contain undisturbed soil, and one shovel test (15) was dug to 75 cm in tan
sand without reaching clay. No artifacts were found in this test, and the area has been
designated as Locality 1. This area is depicted in Appendix I (Areas 14-16). BVRA
believes that a prehistoric site exists in the area, but the only undisturbed areas are
most likely across the fence on private property where the piece of pottery was
observed. Artifacts from 41LN436 were taken to BVRA to be washed and counted for
this report. This insignificant collection does not warrant formal analysis or curation.

9

Figure 3. Site 41LN436

10

RESULTS
A check of the site files and topographic maps at TARL revealed the presence of
two previously recorded prehistoric sites near the project area. They are 41LN15 and
41LN17. Also nearby, but out of the route of the planned water line, is previously
recorded prehistoric site 41LN18 (TARL site files).
This investigation covered 17 areas on public and private property. One
previously unrecorded archaeological site (41LN436) containing prehistoric and historic
artifacts in a mixed context was found within the 15 foot ROW (Appendix I). Three
shovel tests recovered 17 flakes, 1 cut nail, 1 piece of clear glass, and 1 historic
ceramic sherd. There was no obvious separation between the prehistoric and historic
materials. The portion of this site within the project area is disturbed, small (5 x 20
meters), and yielded no diagnostic prehistoric artifacts or evidence of features. Very
little can be said about a site of this type. The flakes are small and are made from chert
and possibly quartzite, materials that are readily available in the larger streams and the
Trinity River. This may be a temporary site; however, the small area sampled does not
allow for such an interpretation. The portion of site 41LN436 within the proposed water
line ROW is not eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places, and
additional work is not warranted.
A single prehistoric body sherd was found on the surface of a badly eroded
sandy hill that has been disturbed through road construction. Surface inspection of
exposed areas and one shovel test (30 x 50 cm) dug to a depth of 75 cm failed to
produce additional cultural materials. The artifact was found just across the fence on
private property. Since no evidence of a prehistoric site was found within the project
area ROW and only one artifact was observed, this area is referred to in this report as
an isolated find at Locality 1 and was not registered as a site at TARL. Locality 1 is not
eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places, and additional work is
not warranted.
Previously recorded prehistoric site 41LN15 was not located during this study.
The only information concerning this site is a brief site form and an approximate plotting
on the topographic map. Sites plotted on TARL maps with open circles (such as
41LN15) represent a category of sites for which very little locational data are available.
It should be noted that in the 1930s these sites were often depicted on highway maps
and later transferred to USGS maps by TARL personnel. The survey crew went to the
area as depicted on the TARL map and found a flat pasture on the slope of a hill. There
were numerous gopher mounds but no roads with deep ruts as mentioned on the site
form or gullies as shown on the 1964 topographic map. Therefore, the location of Mr.
Arnold's find (a single prehistoric sherd) may never be verified.

11

Previously recorded prehistoric site 41LN17 was not located during this study.
Although mention of the site appears in two reports (Sorrow 1973 and Richner and
Bagot 1978), very little information was available to assist the field survey crew in
relocating it. Shovel tests in the area revealed a shallow clay hill overlooking the river
and additional tests to the north of the site plotting were negative. It is assumed that
this site is outside the project area ROW. Also possible, is the scenario that the entire
site, or portions thereof, have been destroyed by river erosion.
It is known that significant sites exist in the area. However, there is a valid
reason for the paucity of unrecorded sites in the project area. Generally, the route of
the water line crosses few major creeks. Much of the project area is on slopes of hills,
in low-lying areas, or flat stretches of land between streams. Some hills that appeared
to be likely locations on the topographic map contained hard clay at or very near the
surface as evidenced by ground exposure, shovel probes, and cutbank profiles.

12

RECOMMENDATIONS
The water line as currently planned will not affect any significant archaeological
sites. It is, therefore, recommended that Southeast WSC be allowed to proceed with
construction with no restrictions. Should cultural materials be encountered in areas not
discussed in this report, all work should stop until the situation can be evaluated by the
Texas Historical Commission, Archeology Division, in consultation with BVRA and
Southeast WSC. Also, if the route is altered to include areas that have not been
surveyed, this should be discussed with the Texas Historical Commission to make sure
an archaeological survey is not warranted.

13

REFERENCES CITED
Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc.
1980 An Assessment of the Cultural Resources of the Jewett Mine Project Area.
Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. Document Number 8011, Job Number
0607. Austin.
Fields, Ross C.
1988 Archeological Survey of the 1989-1993 Permit Area, Jewett Mine Project,
Freestone and Leon Counties, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Report
of Investigations, Number 63.
Freeman, Martha Doty, and Leonard R. Voellinger
1982 A Cultural Resources Survey of the First Five-Year Permit Area, Jewett
Mine Project. Appendix D to An Assessment of the Cultural Resources of
the Jewett Mine Project Area. Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Document
Number 81233, Job Number 1401. Austin.
Im, Hyo-Jai
1975 An Analysis of the G. E. Arnold Survey of East Texas. Unpublished
Masters thesis.
Kotter, Steven M.
1982 A Preliminary Assessment of the Cultural Resources within the Millican
Project, Navasota River Basin, Brazos, Grimes, Leon, Madison and
Robertson Counties, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Reports of
Investigations 19.
Moore, William E.
1994 An Archeological Survey of the Concord Robbins WSC Project in Leon
County, Texas. Brazos Valley Research Associates, Contract Report
Number 29.
2002a An Archaeological Survey of the Concord Robbins WSC Project in
Western Leon County, Texas. Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report 98.
2002b An Archaeological Survey for the Concord Robbins WSC Project in
Western Leon County, Texas. Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report 99.
Perttula, Timothy K., and Bo Nelson
1997 An Archeological Survey of a Waterline Expansion to the Southeast Water
Supply Corporation Project in Leon County, Texas. Archeological and
Environmental Consultants, Report of Investigations Number 8.

14

Prewitt, Elton R.
1974 Upper Navasota Reservoir: An Archeological Assessment. Texas
Archeological Survey, Research Report 47. The University of Texas at
Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R., and David S. Dibble
1974 Letter Report, Survey of Archeological and Historical Resources to be
Affected by Construction of Proposed Upper Navasota Reservoir. On file
at the Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission.
Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R., and Kerry A. Grombacher
1974 An Archeological and Historical Assessment of the Areas to be Affected
by the Proposed Twin Oak and Oak Knoll Projects, East Central Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 43. The University of Texas
at Austin.
Richner, Jeffrey J., and Joe T. Bagot (Assemblers)
1978 A Reconnaissance Survey of the Trinity River Basin. Archaeology
Research Program, Research Report 113. Southern Methodist University.
Sorrow, William R.
1973 Preliminary Archeological Reconnaissance of Selected Areas to be
Affected by the Trinity River Multiple-Purpose Project. Texas
Archeological Salvage Project Research Report 17.
Voellinger, Leonard R., and Martha Doty Freeman
1980 A Cultural Resources Survey of the First Impact Areas of the Jewett Mine
Project Area. Appendix C to An Assessment of the Cultural Resources of
the Jewett Mine Project Area. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. Document
Number 80353, Job Number 0607. Austin.

15

APPENDIX I
AREAS SURVEYED ON TOPOGRAPHIC MAPS

Area 1 (Spring Seat Quadrangle)

Areas 2-3 (Spring Seat and Normangee Quadrangles)

Areas 4-8 (Hilltop Lakes and Normangee Quadrangles)

Area 9 (Robbins and Centerville Quadrangles)

Areas 10-11 (Leona Quadrangle)

Area 12 (Leona Quadrangle)

Area 13 (Centerville Quadrangle)

Areas 14-16 (Centerville Quadrangle)

Areas 17-18 (Centerville Quadrangle)

Areas 19-21 (Eunice and Middleton Quadrangles)

Area 22 (Leona Quadrangle)

Areas 23-24 (Eunice Quadrangle)

Area 25 (Middleton Quadrangle)

APPENDIX II: DISCUSSION OF AREAS SURVEYED
Area 1
This segment is on the south side of County Road 490. Based on an
examination of the topographic map, this area was decided to be low probability
and not in need of an archaeological survey. This determination was supported
by Deborah L. Beene, THC reviewer for this project.
Area 2
This segment is on the north side of a private driveway. Based on an
examination of the topographic map, this area was decided to be low probability
and not in need of an archaeological survey. This determination was supported
by Deborah L. Beene, THC reviewer for this project.
Area 3
This segment is on the north side of County Road 472. It is in pasture and
woods and stops short of East Caney Creek. Because the majority of the line is
on the slope of a hill, no shovel tests were excavated.
Area 4
This segment is on the north side of a County Road 499. Based on an
examination of the topographic map, this area was decided to be low probability
and not in need of an archaeological survey. This determination was supported
by Deborah L. Beene, THC reviewer for this project.
Area 5
This segment is on the south and east side of County Road 462. This
area is on a slope and not near water; therefore, no shovel tests were excavated.
Area 6
This segment is on the north and south sides of County Road 452. There
is a low terrace overlooking a creek to the northeast. Shovel test 17 was dug to
a depth of 40 cm at which point clay was encountered. No evidence of a site
was found.

Area 7
This segment is on the east side of a County Road (number not indicated
on engineering map) and traverses cross-country as well. That part of this area
on the County Road is very low probability as it passes through pasture with no
water nearby. No shovel tests were dug in this area. The overland section
crosses Caney Creek. Shovel test 18 was dug on the west bank of the creek
(the highest point) to a depth of 60 cm at which point clay was encountered.
Gopher mounds were also inspected. No evidence of a site was found.
Area 8
This segment is on the west side of a state highway 39 and the northeast
side of County Road 461. Based on an examination of the topographic map, this
area was decided to be low probability and not in need of an archaeological
survey. This determination was supported by Deborah L. Beene, THC reviewer
for this project.
Area 9
This segment is on the north side of state highway 7 and the south and
west side of County Road 318. Two sandy hills overlooking streams were
determined to be a suitable location for a prehistoric site, and shovel tests 13-14
were dug in these two locations. No artifacts were found in either test or during a
surface inspection of the cutbank.
Area 10
This segment is on the east side of north County Road 481. Based on an
examination of the topographic map, this area was decided to be low probability
and not in need of an archaeological survey. This determination was supported
by Deborah L. Beene, THC reviewer for this project.
Area 11
This segment traverses overland is in a flat wooded area. Based on an
examination of the topographic map, this area was decided to be low probability
and not in need of an archaeological survey. This determination was supported
by Deborah L. Beene, THC reviewer for this project.

Area 12
This segment is on the west side of County Road 143. Shovel tests 16-18
were dug on the top of the hill overlooking the creek, and Shovel Test 19 was
dug on a terrace along the floodplain. Also, eroded areas were examined. No
evidence of a site was found. Although this area was originally viewed to be high
probability, the hill and section of the road in the floodplain are quite far from
water.
Area 13
This segment is on the west side of County Road 2161 and private road
2070. It passes through a very sandy part of the county. On a very prominent
sandy hill overlooking Beaver Dam Creek, three shovel tests (10-12) were
excavated. All three produced cultural materials resulting in the identification of
site 41LN436. The rest of the area traversed slopes of hills and passed through
woods and pasture in areas considered to be low probability due to the distance
to water.
Area 14
This segment is located in the Pleasant Springs community on county
roads 204, 208, 209, and 210. One high probability area was identified on
County Road 210 (Appendix I). Here, a badly eroded sandy hill was observed.
A surface inspection revealed a single prehistoric ceramic fragment. One test
(15) was dug to 75 cm through tan sand, and no artifacts were recovered. It is
believed that most of the site was destroyed through road construction; however,
intact deposits may be present across the fence on private property.
Area 15
This segment is located on the north side of County Road 2051. The
entire segment is on the side of a hill with shallow clay observed in the cut banks.
No shovel tests were excavated.
Area 16
This segment is on the south side of County Road 205. Based on an
examination of the topographic map, this area was decided to be low probability
and not in need of an archaeological survey. This determination was supported
by Deborah L. Beene, THC reviewer for this project.

Area 17
This segment is on the west and south sides of private road 1520.
Because this portion of the water line is in a ditch and will be placed in highway
ROW, no shovel tests were excavated.
Area 18
This area is a proposed well site 100 x 100 feet in size and is located on
the south side of state highway 7. Based on an examination of the topographic
map, this area was decided to be low probability and not in need of an
archaeological survey. This determination was supported by Deborah L. Beene,
THC reviewer for this project.
Area 19
This segment is on the south side of County Road 119. The entire area was
found to be on a slope of a hill; therefore, no shovel tests were excavated.
Area 20
This segment is on the west side of County Road 121 just to the north of
the Community of Centerview. The area was found to be too far from water and
followed the steep slope of a hill; therefore, no shovel tests were excavated.
Area 21
This segment is on the north side of County Road 122. This is a low-lying
area considered by the survey crew to be very low probability. Shovel test 9 was
dug at the northeast end of the road, and clay was encountered at 40 cm.
Area 22
This segment is on the south side of County Road 105. In this area the
water line follows steep hills and low areas. No water is nearby. No shovel tests
were excavated.
Area 23
This segment is on the south side of County Road 131. Although not
shown on the engineering map, there is an existing water line in place as
evidenced by signs in the ROW. This area is considered to be Houston Toad
habitat, and the line will be placed in the ditch. No shovel tests were excavated.

Area 24
This segment is on the east side of County Road 121. The line will be
placed in highway ROW. The field crew profiled cut banks and found shallow
clay at 30-40 cm. The fence marking private land is very close to the road;
therefore, the water line will have to be placed in the disturbed ditch. No shovel
tests were excavated.
Area 25
This area is on the east and west sides of a private road. This was
considered at the onset of this project to be a high probability area, especially
since two prehistoric sites had been reported nearby. Two shovel tests (1-2)
were dug on a high bluff near the recorded location of 41LN17, and six tests (3-8)
were excavated along the high ground overlooking the river and a major gully.
The ROW was covered with short grasses and sparse trees. Numerous rodent
burrows made surface visibility excellent. These disturbed areas were inspected
for displaced cultural materials in addition to the shovel testing. The river cut
bank was outside the ROW and was too steep to inspect. No evidence of a site
was found.

APPENDIX III: SHOVEL TEST LOG
________________________________________________________________
Test Area Depth
Description
Results
________________________________________________________________
01

25

10 cm

clay at surface

sterile

02

25

15 cm

clay at surface

sterile

03

25

60 cm

red clay

sterile

04

25

70 cm

yellow sand over red clay

sterile

05

25

50 cm

yellow sand over red clay

sterile

06

25

80 cm

yellow sand over red clay

sterile

07

25

50 cm

yellow sand over red clay

sterile

08

25

50 cm

yellow sand over red clay

sterile

09

21

40 cm

tan sand over red clay

sterile

10

13

70 cm

tan sand over red clay

flakes, glass, nail

11

13

55 cm

tan sand over red clay

flakes, historic
sherd

12

13

35 cm

tan sand over red clay

flakes

13

9

70 cm

tan sand over red clay

sterile

14

9

80 cm

tan sand; did not reach clay

sterile

15

14

75 cm

tan sand; did not reach clay

sterile

16

12

40 cm

tan sand over red clay

sterile

17

12

55 cm

tan sand over red clay

sterile

18

12

60 cm

tan sand over red clay

sterile

19

12

30 cm

tan sand over red clay

sterile

________________________________________________________________
Test Area Depth
Description
Results
________________________________________________________________
20

6

40 cm

tan sand over yellow clay

sterile

21
7
60 cm
tan sand over yellow clay
sterile
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

