ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE LYFORD PARK PROJECT
FOR THE CITY OF LYFORD, WILLACY COUNTY, TEXAS
Texas Antiquities Permit Number 7517

by
Michael R. Bradle
Herbert G. Uecker
and
Robert L. Bradle
American Archaeology Group LLC
Report of Investigations Number 204
2016

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE LYFORD PARK PROJECT
FOR THE CITY OF LYFORD, WILLACY COUNTY, TEXAS

by
Michael R. Bradle
Herbert G. Uecker
and
Robert L. Bradle

Principal Investigator: Herbert G. Uecker

American Archaeology Group LLC
Report of Investigations Number 204

Prepared for:
City of Lyford
196 West Main Street
Lyford, Texas 78569
Prepared by:
American Archaeology Group LLC
P.O. Box 534
Lampasas, Texas 76550

ABSTRACT
In February 2016, American Archaeology Group LLC (AAG) performed an
archaeological survey of approximately 8.72 acres of proposed park development for the
City of Lyford located in Willacy County, Texas under the auspices of Antiquities Permit
Number 7517. The project area consists of an 8.72-acre tract that will be impacted by the
proposed park project. The park will include a viewing platform, ballfield, and possible
picnic tables. The final design will be minimal impacts less than 50 centimeters below the
surface. The investigation included pedestrian survey of the area and mechanical trenching
and found that the project area contained dredge material and over 95% of the project has
been mined out from previous quarrying activities related to the ramp construction for the
adjacent Interstate 69 E. Based on the negative findings within the project area, and the
previous extensive impacts, American Archaeology Group LLC believes that no important
cultural resources will be affected by the project and recommends that construction within
the project area should be allowed to proceed as planned without further archaeological
work. No artifacts were collected but project records will be curated at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
American Archaeology Group LLC is grateful to those whose cooperation and
assistance made the successful completion of this project possible. Our main point of
contact, Ms. Lydia Moreno, City Secretary for the City of Lyford, greatly assisted AAG
with information and scheduling of the equipment to support mechanical trenching. Ms.
Beth Schreiber from Langford Community Management Services also assisted with project
maps and information and is thanked for her extra efforts. Mr. Mike Gonzales, Public
Works Supervisor and Mr. Benito Perez, backhoe driver, both from the City of Lyford are
thanked for their assistance during the survey and for additional information. Herbert G.
Uecker served as Principal Investigator for the project, and Michael R. Bradle served as the
Project Archaeologist, with assistance from Robert L. Bradle and Ethan A. Bradle.
Additionally, Mr. Casey Hanson, of the Texas Historical Commission, provided regulatory
review.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

iii

INTRODUCTION

1

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

4

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

5

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS

6

PROJECT METHODOLOGY

9

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS

10

RECOMMENDATIONS

13

REFERENCES CITED

14

APPENDIX I: RESEARCH DESIGN AND SCOPE OF WORK

19

APPENDIX II: BACKHOE TRENCH LOG

21

FIGURES
FIGURE 1. GENERAL LOCATION MAP

2

FIGURE 2. PROJECT AREA WITH LOCATIONS OF BACKOE TRENCHES 3
FIGURE 3. NORTHERN VIEW FROM THE SOUTHWEST CORNER
OF THE PROJECT AREA

10

FIGURE 4. VIEW OF BHT-2

11

FIGURE 5. VIEW OF THE PROJECT AREA FROM THE
NORTHEASTERN CORNER

12

iv

INTRODUCTION
In February 2016, American Archaeology Group LLC performed an
archaeological survey of approximately 8.72 acres for a proposed park area for the City
of Lyford, Texas. The project area is located on the southeast side of the City of Lyford,
Willacy County, Texas (Figure 1). The project area consists of an 8.72-acre tract that will
be impacted by the proposed park project. The park will include a viewing platform,
ballfield, and possible picnic tables. The final design will be minimal impacts less than 50
centimeters below the surface. The project area is depicted on the Raymondville 7.5”
U.S.G.S. topographic quadrangle map (Figure 2). The UTM coordinates for the
approximate center of the project area are Zone 14 Northing 2921740 and Easting
620922. The project was funded by the City of Lyford through a grant from Texas Parks
& Wildlife Department and was conducted under the auspices of Texas Antiquities
Permit Number 7517 in order to comport with provisions of the Antiquities Code of Texas
(ACT).
The project area is located on the southeast side of the City of Lyford, Texas, just
west of Interstate 69E. The project area is bounded by Eighth Street along the northern
border, Orange Street along the western boundary (the road was never built but was platted),
and Broadway Street along the southern border. Elevations within the project area range
from 27 to 31 feet above mean sea level (amsl).

1

Figure 1. General Location Map.

2

Figure 2. Project Area Map with Locations of Backhoe Trenches.

3

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Climate
Willacy County is located in the Rio Grande delta plain of the South Texas portion
of the Gulf Coastal Plain physiographic province as defined by Fenneman (1938). This area
is hot and humid most of the year with a mean annual temperature of 22 degrees Centigrade.
In winter, frosts are rare and continued periods of intense heat and drought have been noted
during the summer months. The average rainfall is 61.65 cm with the majority occurring in
early fall and late spring with thunderstorms most common in September and October. The
most dominant topographic features in this area are resacas, or meander scars, of the Rio
Grande River.
Soils
There were two soil types identified within the project area. The first soil type
was Tiocano Clay (Tc) and it is generally found in high stream terraces and is easily
flooded or ponded following heavy rains. Typical soils profile consists generally of a
surface layer of 0-44 inches dark gray clay; 44-59 inches gray clay mottled with brown;
59-70 inches light brownish gray clay loam mottled with strong brown (Turner 1982:38).
The second soil type was Willacy fine sandy loam (WaB) and it is found in
middle stream terraces on low ridges and is well drained. Typical soils profile consists of
a surface layer of 0-13 inches dark grayish brown fine sandy loam; 13-39 inches sandy
clay loam that is dark brown in the top part and brown in the bottom part, 39-49 inches
pale brown sandy loam, 49-80 inches very pale brown sandy clay loam. (Turner 1982:4041)
Flora and Fauna
The proposed project is located in the South Texas Plains. This area is noteworthy
for its extensive brushlands. Long periods of continued grazing and agricultural activities
have changed the vegetation. The proposed projects are located in an area heavily farmed
with little, if any, native vegetation.
The reader is advised to consult Blair (1950) and Hall et al. (1987) for more detailed
information regarding the flora and fauna of the region. The following information was
taken from these sources. The native vegetation is characterized as a thorny brush savannah
with tall grasses and scattered motts of Live Oak or brush and prairies of Sacahuista, a tall,
coarse grass. It has been suggested that grasslands were the primary vegetation during
prehistoric and early historic times. Later, brush appeared along with cattle, horses, sheep,
and goats.
There is substantial faunal diversity in the area. Large species include deer, javelina,
bobcat, cougar, and coyote and small species include raccoon, skunk, badger, opossum,
jackrabbit, cottontail rabbit, and armadillo. A large number of migratory birds, snakes,
lizards, turtles, and fish are also present.

4

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
The South Texas archaeological area that includes the Rio Grande Delta is,
according to Hester et al. (1969), one of the least understood regions in Texas. The earliest
sites in South Texas date to the Late Pleistocene, circa 9500 B.C. to 5500 B.C., and are
associated with very distinct lanceolate projectile point types such as Angostura, Clovis,
Folsom, Golondrina, Plainview, and Scottsbluff. These early inhabitants subsisted by
hunting and gathering. They often followed what archaeologists refer to as "seasonal
rounds." This is the practice of returning to favored areas during the year in order to exploit
certain resources that occurred in these areas at different times.
Archaeological sites in far South Texas most often date to the Archaic, Neo-Archaic,
and Historic time periods. Paleoindian occupations, although documented, are rare in the
region. Lanceolate and stemmed projectile points diagnostic of the earliest sites have
tentatively been associated with bones of Late Pleistocene animals at the Morhiss site
northeast of Harlingen in Victoria County (Campbell 1976).
The Archaic period, circa 5000 B.C. to A.D. 1000, is characterized by a dependence
on gathering of wild plants and the hunting of small game. Diagnostic artifacts include
stemmed and triangular dart points, bifacial tools, milling stones, and bone and shell
artifacts. In South Texas, the Early Archaic is represented by the Falcon Focus followed by
the Mier Focus, a transitional period indicating a Late Archaic and Early Neo-American
occupation.
The Neo-American period is the last prehistoric culture in the area, circa A.D. 1000
to European contact. It is characterized by flint and marine shell tools and ornaments
including arrow points. The presence of arrow points in Neo-American sites represents a
transition from the atlatl to the bow and arrow. In the Rio Grande Delta region this culture
is evidenced by the Brownsville Focus. Interaction with nearby groups is indicated by the
occasional recovery of diagnostic pottery sherds. Historic Indian sites contain tools and
ornaments manufactured from glass. Historic Indian groups known to have inhabited the
region include the Karankawa and Coahuiltecan. Newcomb (1961) provides the interested
reader with more in-depth information regarding the various Indian groups living in South
Texas during the Historic contact period.

5

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
The following listing of previous work in Willacy and surrounding vicinity is given
to provide an insight to the amount of work that has been conducted in this region of Texas.
This list is not purported to be complete. Rather, it represents the major works and all
additional efforts the authors were able to locate and stay within the scope of this project.
The first, and some of the most important, archaeological investigations in the area
were conducted by A. E. Anderson, a civil engineer from Brownsville, Texas. From 1908 to
1940 he made systematic collections from sites in Cameron County and northern Mexico.
During this time, he recorded approximately 196 prehistoric sites in Cameron County and
about the same number in northern Tamaulipas, a state of Mexico. The Anderson file and
collection at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) in Austin, Texas
contains data and artifacts from his work. In addition, he published some of his findings in
the Bulletin of the Archeological and Paleontological Society (Anderson 1932).
In the 1930s, E. B. Sayles (1935) conducted a preliminary survey of Texas. He used
data collected by Anderson to describe what he referred to as the "Brownsville Phase of the
Tamaulipecan." Sayles attempted to define a cultural and/or temporal separation for the
southern Texas groups. Richard McNeish (1947, 1958), in later studies of the area revised
Sayles' list of traits. Of particular interest to this project is the Brownsville Complex defined
by McNeish based on data from sites recorded by Anderson and McNeish.
In the late 1940s, a Brownsville Complex burial site in Hidalgo County was
investigated by Campbell and Frizzell (1949). The Ayala site proved to be important in
terms of substantiating statements previously based on surface finds. In 1952, Frederick
Ruecking, Jr. visited the Ayala site and attempted to collect additional data. Although his
efforts were hampered by vandalism to the site, some of the data he obtained were
incorporated into a later report on the site (Hester et al. 1969).
T. N. Campbell (1960) published a major article in the Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society entitled "Archeology of the Central and South Sections of the Texas
Coast." This work provided a detailed discussion of archaeological work along the Texas
coast prior to 1958.
In 1969, Hester et al. (1969) published a three-part article on prehistoric cemeteries
in Cameron and Hidalgo counties. The sites discussed include Floyd Morris (41CF2) in
Cameron County and Ayala (41HG1) in Hidalgo County.
Important information concerning burial patterns of the Brownsville Complex was
obtained by Hester and Rodgers (1971) when they investigated a single flexed burial north
of the Arroyo Colorado on the terrace of an oxbow channel known as Concepion Resaca
about 0.8 kilometers upstream from the Ayala site.
In 1972, Douglas R. Brown conducted a survey in Hidalgo County of an area to be
impacted by construction of the Retamal Dam and United States Dike and the Modified

6

Hackney Floodway as well as the closure of the Mission Floodway (Brown 1972). His
survey documented the alteration of archaeological sites by extensive land modification
activities and noted a general scarcity of prehistoric materials in the area investigated.
A major overview of the general area was authored by Thomas R. Hester (1973) and
entitled Hunters and Gatherers of the Rio Grande Plain and the Lower Coast of Texas.
This work presents a general discussion of aboriginal populations occupying the large area
of Texas south of the Edwards Plateau and San Antonio River, often referred to as the "Rio
Grande Plain." Hester's paper is a synthesis of previous work in the area. In a later work
(Hester 1975), he discarded and revised some of his views in the 1973 version.
Elton R. Prewitt (1974) published the results of a preliminary survey of selected
areas of Cameron County. His purpose was to determine the archaeological potential on the
Texas side of the Rio Grande Delta. He visited 60 sites recorded by Anderson from 1908 to
1940 and recorded 38 unrecorded sites.
In 1974, the results of another survey in Cameron County were published (Hall and
Grombacher 1984). This study evaluated prehistoric and historic sites prior to the
modification of the Brownsville Ship Channel.
A paper presented by Hester (1975) entitled A Chronological Overview of
Prehistoric Southern and South-Central Texas discussed the area of Texas from the
Edwards Plateau on the northwest and the Guadalupe River on the northeast, southward to
the Rio Grande. His study area covers 34 counties and is larger than the Rio Grande Plain
discussed in his earlier paper (Hester 1973).
In 1976, an isolated burial containing the partial remains of three individuals was
excavated by archaeologists from the Office of the State Archeologist in response to
impending destruction by road-grading operations and erosion (Mallouf and Zavaleta 1979).
The recovered data suggest that the site represents a single-event, isolated group burial
involving the secondary interment of portions of two adult males and one adolescent male.
Based on associated arrow points, this site is believed to be Late Prehistoric.
Archaeologists from Texas A&M University investigated the Palo Alto Battlefield
(41CF92), site of the first of only two battles of the Mexican War to be fought on United
States soil (Baxter and Killen 1976). A preliminary study had been carried out by Texas
A&M archaeologist, Harry Shafer (1974).
In 1977, a major study involving Hidalgo and Willacy counties was conducted by
the Office of the State Archeologist (Mallouf et al. 1977). This agency sampled
archaeological sites across all of Willacy and parts of Hidalgo counties in response to
proposed construction of a floodwater channelization project by the United States Army
Corps of Engineers. The final report contains very detailed discussions of previous work in
the area and should be consulted in any serious research project involving South Texas.

7

Archaeologists from Texas A&M University revisited the Palo Alto Battlefield in
1979 in an attempt to locate and delineate its boundaries and assess its archaeological
context (Bond 1979).
A cultural resources survey was conducted in portions of Hidalgo and Willacy
counties by Prewitt and Associates, Inc. in 1980 (Day et al. 1981). The purpose of this
study was to locate, record, and assess the information yield potential of prehistoric and
historic sites, which may be affected by the construction of major drainage improvements
within the two counties. Information regarding 63 archaeological sites was collected.
Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. (EHA) conducted a cultural resources survey and
records review of three proposed segments of transmission line right-of-way in Cameron
and Hidalgo counties (Voellinger 1983). This is the closest previous study to the current
project area. EHA archaeologists located two previously unrecorded sites (41CF122 and
41CF123) and revisited one known site (41HG7). These three sites are located in close
proximity to the current project area, and 41CF123 is within the project area right-of-way.
In 1986, Prewitt and Associates, Inc. (Hall et al. 1987) conducted archaeological,
geomorphological, and paleontological investigations in portions of Hidalgo and Willacy
counties. Forty-three sites and 21 isolated finds were recorded. The Sardinas Resaca site
(41HG118) was intensively investigated through controlled surface collection, backhoe
trenching, and test pit excavations.
Since 1986 a number of small area surveys have been successful in locating and
recording sites in Hidalgo County. Reports for these studies were authored by Prewitt
(1987), Quigg (1988), Crass (1989), Quigg et al. (1989), Bousman et al. (1990), Eling
(1991), Good (1991), Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation (1991),
Whitsett (1992), and Whitsett and Jurgens (1992).
In 1995, American Archaeology Group LLC (AAG) conducted two surveys in
nearby Cameron and Hidalgo Counties. The first survey resulted in the recording of two
historic residential archaeological sites (Bradle, et al 1995a); however, no sites were
recorded during the second survey (Bradle, et al 1995b). In 1997, AAG conducted
another survey in Hidalgo County, and again, no sites were recorded as a result of this
survey (Bradle and Moore 1997). In 2000, AAG conducted a survey in Cameron County,
which resulted in the recording of two prehistoric archaeological sites (Bradle and Fuller
2004). In 2005, AAG conducted a survey in Cameron County near the Brownsville
Airport (Bradle et al. 2005). No sites were recorded during this survey.
There were two previous surveys located nearby to the current project area. The
first was reported in Day et al. (1981) in which a number of historic ranch complexes
were identified. The second and more recent survey involved the survey of the Highway
77 corridor that was expanded into Interstate Highway 69E (Young and Sanchez
2014,2013) which included a survey of 112 miles of road right-of-way. No
archaeological sites were found in close proximity to the current project.

8

PROJECT METHODOLOGY
Background Research
The project was divided into three phases: archival and historical background
research, field survey, and report preparation (Appendix I). The background research
consisted of review of the archaeological site records at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL) and of previous work in the County, principally through examination
data contained in the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas online database.
Before entering the field, a background investigation was conducted. Site records at
the Texas Archaeological Research Laboratory (TARL) in Austin, Texas were checked for
previously recorded sites in the project area and vicinity. In addition, site reports
documenting work in the region were examined for information concerning archaeological
surveys and other work relevant to the project area. The project was discussed with a
representative of the City of Lyford to ensure that the field crew was aware of the correct
location of the project area.
Field Survey
The field investigation was conducted in February 2016. Herbert G. Uecker
served as the Principal Investigator and Michael R. Bradle served as the Project
Archaeologist, assisted by Robert L. Bradle and Ethan A. Bradle. The City of Lyford
provided a backhoe and driver to excavate all trenches to test for potential subsurface
cultural deposits.
The fieldwork was accomplished using the pedestrian survey method at 5-meter
intervals supported by mechanical augering (Figure 2). Surface visibility was good in
most of the peripheral areas but over 95% of the project area has been subjected to past
extensive quarrying activities and the project area is now one vast depression filled with
water (Figure 3). In addition to surface inspection, there were four (4) backhoe trenches
excavated along the periphery of the project area, averaging 54 centimeters in depth
below surface and ranging from 39 to 68 centimeters in depth (Appendix II). All
sediments excavated were examined for any cultural material that might have been
produced from subsurface deposits and extensive samples were screened using onequarter inch hardware cloth. All backhoe trenches were negative. The entire project area
is located immediately adjacent to the Interstate 69E highway, and the project area
appears to have been used to quarry soils to build up the overhead ramp located
immediately east of the project area.

9

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Archival Research
Prior to field investigations archival research was conducted at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) in Austin, Texas to check for previously
recorded archaeological sites in the project area and vicinity. A literature search of relevant
site reports, maps, and soils book for Willacy County was also performed.
Field Survey
The field survey did not identify any archaeological sites within the project area.
The project area is located on the southeast side of the City of Lyford, Texas, just west of
Interstate 69E. The project area is bounded by Eighth Street along the northern border,
Orange Street along the western boundary (the road was never built but was platted), and
Broadway Street along the southern border. Field inspection revealed that at least 95% of
the project area has been previously subjected to quarrying activities for topsoil removal
approximately one to two meters in depth as a result of overhead ramp construction for
Interstate 69E located immediately east of the project area (Figure 3). The remainder of the
project area has been subjected to pipeline installation, and debris consisting of concrete
rubble (Figure 4). Figure 5 shows the amount of top soil that has been removed from the
project area. AAG extended the project area to include extension areas where BHT-1 and
BHT-4 were excavated in order to provide areas that the City of Lyford could develop for
the park project above the lower areas that contained water. These areas have also been
severely impacted and subjected to utility installation and debris deposition. No
archaeological sites were encountered during this survey, therefore, no known cultural
resources will be impacted during construction of the proposed park project.

Figure 3. Northern view from the southwest corner of the project area.
10

Figure 4. View of BHT-2.

11

Figure 5. View of the project area from the northeastern corner.

12

RECOMMENDATIONS
Based on the negative findings within the project area, and the previous extensive
impacts, American Archaeology Group LLC believes that no important cultural resources
will be affected by the project and recommends that construction within the project area
should be allowed to proceed as planned without further archaeological work. No artifacts
were collected but project records will be curated at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory.

13

REFERENCES CITED
Anderson, A. E.
1932

Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 4:29-31.

Baxter, Edward P., and Kay L. Killen
1976
A Study of the Palo Alto Battleground, Cameron County, Texas.
Anthropology Laboratory, Report 33. Texas A&M University.
College Station.
Blair, W. Frank
1950
Bond, Clell L.
1979

The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
2(1):93-117.

Palo Alto Battlefield: A Magnetometer and Metal Detector Survey.
Cultural Resources Laboratory, Report Number 4. Texas A&M
University. College Station.

Bousman, C. Britt, Steve A. Tomka, and Gail L. Bailey
1990
Prehistoric Archeology and Paleoenvironments in Hidalgo and
Willacy Counties, South Texas: Results of the Phase II Test
Excavations. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Report of Investigations
76. Austin.
Bradle, Michael R., Floyd D. Kent, and William E. Moore
1995a
An Archaeological Survey for Three Proposed 138 KV Tranmission
Line Routes, One Distribution Line, and Three Substations in
Cameron and Hidalgo Counties, Texas. American Archaeology
Group, Report of Investigations Number 9.
1995b

An Archaeological Survey of Proposed 7.2/12.5 KV Distribution
Line and Proposed Substation in Cameron County, Texas. American
Archaeology Group, Report of Investigations Number 10.

Bradle, Michael R. and William E. Moore
1997
Archaeological Survey of Seven Proposed Electric Line Routes in
Hidalgo County, Texas. American Archaeology Group, Report of
Investigations, Number 15.
Bradle, Michael R. and Heidi L. Fuller
2004
Archaeological Survey of Two Borrow Pits in Cameron County,
Texas. American Archaeology Group, Report of Investigations
Number 36.

14

Bradle, Michael R., Heidi L. Fuller, and Gilbert T. Bernhardt
2005
An Archaeological Survey of the Drinking Water Revolving Project
#60916 for El Jardin Water Supply Corporation, Brownsville,
Cameron County, Texas. American Archaeology Group LLC,
Report of Investigations Number 96.
Brown, Douglas R.
1972

An Assessment of the Archeological Resources to be Affected by
Construction of Retamal International Diversion Dam, United States
Dike and Modified Hackney and Closure of Mission Floodway,
Hidalgo County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Project, Report
15. The University of Texas at Austin.

Campbell, Thomas Nolan
1960
Archeology of the Central and South Sections of the Texas Coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 29:145-176. (published
for 1958)
1976

Archaeological Investigations at the Morhiss Site, Victoria County,
Texas,1932-1940. In An Archaeological Survey of Coleto Creek,
Victoria and Goliad Counties, Texas, Texas, by Anne A. Fox and
Thomas R. Hester. The University of Texas at San Antonio, Center
for Archaeological Research, Archaeological Research Survey
Report Number 18.

Campbell, Thomas Nolan and Jack Q. Frizzell
1949
Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Grande Valley, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 20:63-72.
Crass, David Collin
1989

An Archeological Survey of the Mid-Valley Airport, Weslaco,
Texas.

Day, D. William, Jane Laurens-Day, and Elton R. Prewitt
1981
Cultural Resources Surveys and Assessments in Portions of Hidalgo
and Willacy Counties, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Report of
Investigations, Number 15. Austin.
Eling, Herbert H., Jr.
1991
Cultural Resource Assessments in the Magic Valley Electric
Cooperative Service Area, 1991. Galvan Eling Associates, Inc.
Austin.

15

Good, Carolyn
1991

Cultural Resources Survey, Arroyo Colorado (Lower Rio Grande
Basin, Texas) Revalidation Report, Hidalgo and Cameron Counties,
Texas. Unnumbered report published by the United States Corps of
Engineers, Galveston District.

Hall, Grant D. and K. A. Grombacher
1974
An Assessment of the Archeological and Historical Resources to be
Affected by the Brazos Island Harbor Waterway Project, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 30. The University of
Texas at Austin.
Hall, Grant D., Michael B. Collins, and Elton R. Prewitt
1987
Cultural Resources Investigations along Drainage Improvements,
Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas: 1986 Investigations. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Report of Investigations Number 59. Austin.
Hester, Thomas R.
1973

1975

Hunters and Gatherers of the Rio Grande Plain and the Lower Coast
of Texas. Paper presented at the 74th Annual Meeting of the Texas
Academy of Science in Nacogdoches, Texas in 1971.
A Chronological Overview of Prehistoric Southern and SouthCentral Texas. Paper presented at the Conference of the Prehistory of
Northeastern Mexico and Texas in 1975 in Monterrey, Mexico.

Hester, Thomas R., Michael B. Collins, Frank A. Weir, and Frederick Ruecking, Jr.
1969
Two Prehistoric Cemetery Sites in the Lower Rio Grande Valley of
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:119-166.
Hester, Thomas Roy and R. W. Rodgers
1971
Additional Data on the Burial Practices of the Brownsville Complex.
The Texas Journal of Science 22(4):367-372.
McNeish, Richard S.
1947
A Preliminary Report on
Anthropologist 13(1):1-15.
1958

Coastal

Tamaulipas.

American

Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 48:6.

Mallouf, Robert J., Barbara J. Baskin, and Kay L. Killen
1977
A Predictive Assessment of Cultural Resources in Hidalgo and
Willacy Counties, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist, Survey
Report 23. Texas Historical Commission. Austin.

16

Mallouf, Robert J.,and Anthony N. Zavaleta
1979
The Unland Site: A Prehistoric Group Burial from Laguna Atascosa
National Wildlife Refuge, Cameron County, Texas. Office of the
State Archeologist, Special Report 25. Texas Historical Commission.
Austin.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. The
University of Texas Press. Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1974
1987

Quigg, J. Michael
1988

Preliminary Archeological Investigations in the Rio Grande Delta
Area of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 45:55-65.
An Archeological Survey of a Proposed Enlarged Portion of the
Southwest Lateral Ditch System, Hidalgo County, Texas. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Letter Report 351. Austin.

Archeological Reconnaissance of Realigned Channel Segments,
Radio Drain and West Main Drain, Hidalgo County, Texas. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Letter Report 358. Austin.

Quigg, J. Michael, Douglas K. Boyd, and Elton R. Prewitt
1989
An Archeological Survey of Proposed Drainage Ditch Realignments,
Hidalgo County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Technical
Report 2. Austin.
Sayles, E. B.
1935
Shafer, Harry J.
1974

An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers 17. Gila
Pueblo. Globe, Arizona.

An Archeological Reconnaissance of the Brownsville Relocation
Study Area. Anthropology Laboratory, Report 1. Texas A&M
University. College Station.

Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation
1991
Cultural Resources Assessment, Hidalgo County, Ridge Road:
Highway Reconstruction from Tenth Street in McAllen to U.S. 281
in Pharr. Unnumbered letter report published by the Texas
Department of Highways and Public Transportation. Austin.

17

Turner, August J.
1982

Soil Survey of Willacy County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture.

Voellinger, Melissa W.
1983
A Summary Report of the Cultural Resources Survey of Three Areas
of Magic Valley Electric Cooperative, Inc. 12.47 KV Transmission
Lines, Hidalgo and Cameron Counties, Texas. Unnumbered report
published by Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. Austin.
Whitsett, W. Hayden
1992
An Archeological Survey of Proposed Water and Wastewater
Utilities by the City of Pharr, Hidalgo County, Texas. Unnumbered
report published by the Texas Water Development Board. Austin.
Whitsett, W. Hayden and Christopher J. Jurgens
1992
An Archeological Survey of the City of Mission-Madero & Granjeno
Wastewater Project. Unnumbered report published by the Texas
Water Development Board. Austin.
Young, Brandon S. and Joseph M. Sanchez
2014
Intensive Archeological Survey of US 77 From SH 107 in the City of
Robstown to Cameron, Willacy, Kenedy, Kleberg, and Nueces
Counties, Texas, CSJ: 111-07-004. Blanton & Associates Inc.
Austin. Report 1 of 2.
2013

Intensive Archeological Survey of US 77 From SH 107 in the City of
Robstown to Cameron, Willacy, Kenedy, Kleberg, and Nueces
Counties, Texas, CSJ: 111-07-004. Blanton & Associates Inc.
Austin. Report 2 of 2.

18

APPENDIX I: RESEARCH DESIGN AND SCOPE OF WORK
RESEARCH DESIGN
Records Check
Prior to entering the field, American Archaeology Group LLC (A.A.G.) will contact
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) in Austin, Texas, the state repository
for site records on Texas, to determine if previously recorded sites are present in the project
area. This task may be conducted by a personal visit to TARL or by telephone.
The library at A.A.G. is very extensive, especially regarding reports for the
project area region, and much of the archival work can be accomplished in-house. Since
A.A.G. has conducted work in the area, much of the background work has already been
accomplished.
Permit Application
No fieldwork will commence until a permit from the Archeology Division (AD) of
the Texas Historical Commission has been issued. An application for an antiquities permit
will be submitted to AD-THC as soon as A.A.G. receives Notice To Proceed. Normally,
A.A.G. discusses the project with AD personnel before beginning any fieldwork. This is
done to ensure that both parties are in agreement as to the level of work required for this
project.
Survey Methods
The entire project area will be 100% intensively surveyed utilizing the pedestrian
survey method supported by shovel testing and/or augering and examination of eroded and
disturbed areas where cultural materials may be visible on the surface. Herbert G. Uecker
will act as the Principal Investigator. Shovel testing, augering, and backhoe trenching will
meet and exceed the Minimum Survey Standards For Texas established by the THC.
In areas of poor visibility, and environmental settings that have potential for
buried cultural materials, shovel testing will be required and tests will be concentrated in
areas of high site probability and randomly across the project area. All excavated fill
from shovel tests will be screened through 1/4-inch hardware cloth. Shovel tests will be
manually excavated to sterile clay or bedrock when possible.
The survey crew will be equipped with shovel test forms, notebooks, camera,
compass, and a project area map for accurate plotting of shovel tests, backhoe trenches, and
archaeological sites. In addition to shovel testing as a means of identifying buried sites,
select areas in alluvial settings or areas with some appreciable soil depth will be subjected to
backhoe trenching. All sites identified in the project area will be mapped in the field and
plotted on a topographic map. Site locations will also be determined through the use of a

19

Global Positioning System (GPS). Each site will be recorded using the official State of
Texas Archeological Site Form. In no case will the survey crew work outside of the project
area as depicted on the project area map provided by the client.
Only diagnostic artifacts will be collected from the surface. All artifacts recovered
through shovel testing will be collected. These specimens will be bagged and recorded on a
field sack log. They will be analyzed and prepared for eventual curation at TARL, unless a
petition to discard is prepared and accepted.
The draft report will be submitted to AD-THC for review. Once the report has been
approved by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO), copies will be delivered to ADTHC and the client. A.A.G. will maintain copies of the notes, photographs, site forms, and
any other records produced from the project deemed to be a work product.
Scope of Work
I.

Conduct background check for previously recorded archaeological sites in the
project area and the vicinity. Review the relevant literature.

II.

Discuss the project with the AD-THC reviewer assigned to this project before
entering the field.

III.

Obtain an antiquities permit from AD-THC.

IV.

Consult with the representative of the sponsor before beginning the field survey.

V.

Perform a 100% pedestrian survey of the project area to include shovel testing,
and examination of all exposed areas such as creek banks for buried or displaced
artifacts.

VI.

Check for deeply buried sites through the use of backhoe trenching in areas with
deep soils.

VII.

Analyze all artifacts recovered and prepare them for curation at TARL.

VIII.

Prepare a draft report and submit copies to the AD-THC and the sponsor for
review.

IX.

Make all required changes, correct any mistakes, and submit the final report and
turn in the artifacts for curation.

20

APPENDIX II: BACKHOE TRENCH LOG
_________________________________________________________________________
BHT
DEPTH (CM)
RESULTS
REMARKS
_________________________________________________________________________
BHT-1

57 cm

Negative

0-59cm mixed clay, thick clay; hit
pvc pipe, concrete rubble.

BHT-2

68 cm

Negative

0-56cm mixed clay; 56-68cm thick
clay some concrete rubble in soil.

BHT-3

52 cm

Negative

0-48cm mixed clay, thick clay;
48-52cm concrete, limestone

BHT-4

39 cm

Negative

0-39cm mixed clay, concrete, pipe

21

