AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE WHEELER BRANCH RESERVOIR
IN SOMERVELL COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 02-16

Author and Principal Investigator

William E. Moore

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
Somervell County Water District
Post Office Box 1386
Glen Rose, Texas 76043

ABSTRACT
Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) conducted an archaeological
survey for the proposed Wheeler Branch Reservoir project in Somervell County in
September and November of 2004 under Antiquities Permit 3547. The field crew
consisted of William E. Moore (Principal Investigator) and Edward P. Baxter
(Project Archaeologist). The seven areas examined include the reservoir site and
associated uplands at Wheeler Branch, wildlife area downstream from the
proposed Wheeler Branch dam, water supply line, replacement roads, pump
station, dam with collection pool on the Paluxy River, and park area in the uplands
above the proposed reservoir. In all, the project area consists of 496 acres.
The field survey involved surface survey, shovel testing, and backhoe
trenching. No prehistoric sites were identified, and the only evidence of prehistoric
utilization of the project area is an unidentified arrow point observed on the surface
with no associated cultural materials. Much of the area consists of shallow, rocky
soils that were apparently not viewed by prehistoric groups as suitable locations for
campsites. At the top of the reservoir quarrying for limestone rock at or near the
surface has virtually destroyed this medium probability area.
Three historic sites were found to be within the Area of Potential Affect
(APE). They are two 20th century structures (41SV154 and 41SV155) and a dam
on the Paluxy River (41SV156) constructed by the Works Progress Administration
(WPA) in the 1930s. Site 41SV154 is a partially destroyed house, and 41SV155 is
an intact barn associated with a house site outside the project area. Both exhibit
unusual methods of construction that may make them eligible for the National
Register of Historic Places. Site 41SV156 was partially destroyed by explosives in
the 1940s to avoid stagnant water and movement of water around the dam. The
significance of these sites has not been determined. No artifacts were collected;
therefore, curation is not necessary.
An issue with a project of this nature where the water level may be raised or
standing pools are created is the visual impact caused by these changes. Since
the water level behind the proposed dam on the Paluxy River is not expected to be
much greater than the current pool, no negative visual impact is anticipated, and
the pool will not affect cisterns or features associated with homes along the bluff in
town. The reservoir at Wheeler Branch will definitely change the landscape;
however, any perceived negative visual impact will mainly be visible from property
owned by the Somervell County Water District.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank everyone whose cooperation made the completion of
this project possible. Kevin D. Taylor, General Manager of the Somervell County
Water District, provided project area maps, visited the project area with the
Principal Investigator and Project Archaeologist to ensure that the proper areas
were investigated, and operated the backhoe that was provided by the Water
District. Gary Wiencke of W. F. Gunn / Kenneth W. Smith, Land Surveyors in
Glen Rose; Luke Robbins, RPA of the Somervell Central Appraisal District; Betty
Gosdin and Rhonda Duffie of the Somervell County Heritage Center; Phyllis
Wells and Virginia Fuentes, Deputy Clerks at the County Clerks Office in the
Somervell County Courthouse, and Dorothy Leach, Archivist, at the Somervell
County Historical Commission took time from their busy schedules to provide
assistance. Ms. Leach assisted the Principal Investigator during a check of the
Deed Records at the Somervell County Courthouse, allowed BVRA to view
historic maps, and talked with local informants in regards to the historic sites in
the project area. These informants were Linda Wilson and Fay Gene Bass of the
Connally family; Chester Raifsnider; John Parker; Riley W. Robeson, former
Mayor G. C. Gibbs, Jr.; and Terry Covey. Mr. Gibbs is also thanked for giving his
permission to use the photograph of the WPA on the cover of this report.
Robert F. Scott, Staff Archaeologist at the United States Army Corps of
Engineers, Fort Worth District, and William A. Martin, Staff Archaeologist at the
Texas Historical Commission, Archeology Division, were the federal and state
reviewers for this project. Edward P. Baxter and Lili G. Lyddon prepared the figures
that appear in this report.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT........................................................................................................... ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...................................................................................... iii
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING...............................................................................5
DISCUSSION OF SURVEY AREAS.....................................................................6
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ..................................................................9
METHODS ..........................................................................................................15
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS........................................................................21
RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................................41
REFERENCES CITED........................................................................................42

APPENDICES
Appendix I. Maps Checked
Appendix II. Agencies Checked
Appendix III. Chain-of-Title
Appendix IV. Shovel Test Log
Appendix V. Backhoe Trench Profiles
Appendix VI. Site Locations

iv

FIGURES
Figure 1. General Location ............................................................................................. 2
Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangle................................................... 3
Figure 3. Shovel Tests and Backhoe Trenches ........................................................ 16
Figure 4. Shovel Tests Along Water Supply Line ..................................................... 18
Figure 5. Backhoe Trenches at Dam and Collection Pool....................................... 19
Figure 6. Quarry Disturbance in Reservoir Area....................................................... 22
Figure 7. 41SV154 (House – North Elevation) .......................................................... 23
Figure 8. 41SV154 (Interior of House – South Elevation).......................................... 24
Figure 9. 41SV154 (House Interior – North Elevation)............................................... 25
Figure 10. 41SV154 (Well) ............................................................................................ 26
Figure 11. Site Map for 41SV154 ................................................................................ 27
Figure 12. 41SV155 (Southwest Elevation) ............................................................... 30
Figure 13. 41SV155 (North Elevation)........................................................................ 31
Figure 14. 41SV155 (Window Detail).......................................................................... 32
Figure 15. 41SV155 (Feeder on Interior West Wall) ................................................ 33
Figure 16. Site Map for 41SV155 ................................................................................ 34
Figure 17. 41SV156 (North Elevation)........................................................................ 36
Figure 18. 41SV156 (West Elevation) ........................................................................ 37
Figure 19. 41SV156 (South Elevation) ....................................................................... 38
Figure 20. 41SV156 (Spillway) .................................................................................... 39
Figure 21. Spillway Feature.......................................................................................... 40

v

INTRODUCTION
The project area is located within the central portion of the county and will be
located within the city limits of Glen Rose and in rural areas to the north (Figure 1).
The proposed construction areas are depicted in on three United States Geological
Survey 7.5’ topographic maps. These maps are Glen Rose East, Glen Rose West,
and Hill City (Figure 2).
Somervell County is located in an area known to contain significant
prehistoric and historic sites. In order to protect any important cultural resources
that may be present, the Texas Historical Commission, Archeology Division,
requested a professional archaeologist prior to construction conduct an
archaeological survey. In response to this request, the Somervell County Water
District retained the services of BVRA for this task.
The Somervell County Water District plans to construct a dam across
Wheeler Branch in order to create a reservoir to meet the future water needs of the
county. The reservoir is 170 acres in size and will impound rainwater and overflow
from Wheeler Branch to a height not-to-exceed the 790-foot contour. The waters of
the resulting lake are not expected to exceed 80 feet in depth. Overlooking the
reservoir will be a park area of 54 acres that will eventually contain picnic tables,
restrooms, roads, and parking. Above the reservoir flood limits is another part of
the permitted area that is not planned for construction at this time. Below the
proposed reservoir is a wildlife area that is also not planned for construction.
Since the reservoir will cover a portion of County Road 326, two
replacement roads are proposed. They are a .9-mile segment (5.45 acres) and a
.25-mile segment (1.52 acres), each with a 50-foot right-of-way. Construction of the
roads will involve excavation of the road footprint to about one foot and the addition
of road base and asphalt. A water supply line will transport water from a collection
pool on the Paluxy River to the reservoir. This line is in two segments and is 1.87
miles in length (4.53 acres) with a 20-foot wide permanent right-of-way. A
temporary easement of 80 feet will be used during construction. The trench
needed to accommodate the 36-inch line will be between five and six feet wide and
between eight and ten feet deep. Much of the line will be placed within existing
rights-of-way along State and County roads.

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangle

3

On the Paluxy River, a collection pool (9 acres) will be created by the
erection of a concrete dam. Construction of the dam will involve digging a trench
15 feet deep and 3 feet wide to accommodate the concrete footing on the south
bank of the river. The north end of the dam will be connected to a limestone bluff.
The resulting pool is expected to raise the height of the river to a depth of eight feet
directly behind the dam; however, the river is not expected to leave its banks.
Within the Area of Potential Affect (APE) for the new dam is a WPA dam
constructed in the 1930s. Although that portion of the dam that spans the river
may not be affected, the segment on the south bank and a rock feature that may
have served as a “spillway: or erosion control device lie within the APE.
A pump station (.23 acres) will be erected on a high bluff overlooking the
Paluxy River. Construction of this facility will involve a bore pit to a depth of 30 feet
in the center of the site; it will be 17 feet in diameter. The pump station facility will
be located in the center of the tract and will be 44 x 72 feet in size.

4

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
At 197 square miles, Somervell County is the second smallest county in
Texas. According to Hill (1901) and Carter (1931), it is part of the Grand Prairie
geographic zone. Altitude ranges from 600 feet to 1300 feet with elevations of 1200
feet in the project area. Overall, the county is hilly with rugged areas such as
eroded plateaus and ravines where dissected by the Brazos and Paluxy rivers.
Squaw and Kickapoo creeks are the two other major streams that drain the county.
The climate of Somervell County is hot in summer, but cool in winter when an
occasional surge of cold air causes a sharp drop in otherwise mild temperatures.
Rain falls throughout the year and is highest in spring and fall. Snowfall is
infrequent. In winter, the average temperature is 49 degrees Fahrenheit, and the
average daily minimum temperature is 35 degrees Fahrenheit. In summer, the
average temperature is 84 degrees Fahrenheit, and the average daily maximum
temperature is 96 degrees Fahrenheit. Of the total annual precipitation, 18 inches
(60%) falls in April through September, which includes the growing season for most
crops.
Average seasonal rainfall is two inches.
Tornadoes and severe
thunderstorms occur occasionally. The above climatic data were taken from the
Soil Survey for Hood and Somervell Counties, Texas (Coburn 1978:1-2).
Soil is considered to be the most important natural resource in the county. The
underground geologic formations known as the Trinity Sand and Paluxy Sand
formations are important water-bearing sources for wells. Above ground sources of
water include the Brazos River, the Paluxy River, and Lake Granbury. Silica sand
is mined in the eastern part of Somervell County. Road material is obtained from
the shallow limestone soils, and local limestone is marketed as a building material.
In the project area, the soils are mainly rocky with little A horizons present. In
the area of the proposed park and slopes surrounding the proposed reservoir, the
soils are classified as stony soils on uplands. Along Wheeler Branch, the soils
consist of a deep, well-drained clay loam on foot slopes below limestone hills. In
the floodplain area of the Paluxy River the soils are described as nearly level to
gently undulating soils on flood plains of major streams. These soils are described
in detail in the Soil Survey of Hood and Somervell Counties, Texas (Coburn 1978)
and are illustrated on sheets 37 and 41 of this volume.
There is a large amount of Juniper and Live Oak in the county. Juniper is cut
for fence posts, and Live Oak are used for nursery stock.

5

DISCUSSION OF SURVEY AREAS
Seven areas were examined during this study. They include the Reservoir at
Wheeler Branch and associated uplands, a park area, two replacement roads, a
water supply line, dam and collection pool on the Paluxy River, and a pump station
on a high bluff overlooking the Paluxy River. Discussions of these areas appear
below.
Reservoir at Wheeler Branch
This 170-acre tract is an upland area eroded by the headwaters of Wheeler
Branch. The primary soils are the Tarrant-Purves series that are characterized as
very shallow-to-shallow, undulating-to-hilly soils that formed in limestone on
uplands (Coburn 1978). The majority of the reservoir area consists of steep slopes
with no soil depth. Only a few areas along the creek bottom have soils in excess of
20 cm deep. Vegetation observed consisted of short grasses and Juniper mixed
with mesquite. Quarrying operations in the 1960s-1980s have severely disturbed a
large portion of the area. The object of these quarries was the outcrop of limestone
at or near the surface located around the upper slopes of the proposed reservoir.
Consequently, an area of holes, overburden piles, and quarry roads rings the
reservoir area. It is estimated that, in terms of damage to possible archaeological
deposits, the area has been at least 90% destroyed. This area is located on the Hill
City quadrangle. Adjacent to this tract, also in the uplands, is another part of
permitted area, but it is not planned for construction at this time. The landscape
and vegetation in this area are similar to those in the uplands overlooking Wheeler
Branch.
Wildlife Area
This area is located downstream of the proposed dam site. It has been
designated as a wildlife area as a mitigation measure for the loss of habitat from the
proposed reservoir, and no construction is proposed. This is a high, hilly dry area,
which has been eroded by the headwater branches of Wheeler Creek. The main
soils here are the Tarrant-Purves series, which are characterized as very shallowto-shallow, undulating to hilly soils that formed in limestone on uplands. The
majority of the wildlife area is on upland hills and steep slopes with no deep soils
present. A few places along the creek bottom, however, have soils in excess of 20
centimeters. Vegetation observed during this survey included mainly short grasses
and cedar mixed with mesquite.

6

Water Supply Line
The water supply line is in two segments. The first begins at the proposed
Wheeler Branch Reservoir dam to State Highway 67 on the edge of the town of
Glen Rose and is 1.77 miles long. Most of this line follows existing roads and is in
public rights-of-way or on private property just outside the public right-of-way. The
one cross-country segment follows an existing utility right-of-way. The majority of
this segment is in the Tarrant-Purves series that is characterized as very shallowto-shallow, undulating-to-hilly soils that formed in limestone on uplands and deeper
soils along creek bottoms (Coburn 1978). These areas contained little soil
development and were characterized by surface rock and gravels. Visibility was
excellent. Vegetation consisted of short grasses interspersed with Juniper and
mesquite. This area is on the Glen Rose West and Hill City quadrangles.
The second segment crosses Wheeler Branch and is .1 mile in length. It
begins from an existing water supply line, runs to the proposed pump station, and
then to the Paluxy River. It will pass under existing streets. Soils in this area
consist of the Frio-Bosque series that are characterized by deep, nearly level,
clayey and loamy soils that form in calcareous, clayey and loamy alluvium on
bottomlands (Coburn 1978). At the time of this survey, this area was in a disturbed
road right-of-way and was covered by short grass that is regularly mowed by the
county.

Replacement Roads
Two replacement roads are planned. The first section is .25 miles long and
runs along the interface of the Tarrent-Purves series that are characterized as
shallow-to-shallow, undulating-to-hilly soils that formed in limestone on uplands and
the Windthorst-Duffau series that consists of deep, gently sloping-to-sloping loamy
and sandy soils that formed in loamy sediments or in stratified clayey, sandy, or
weakly cemented sandstone on uplands (Coburn 1978). At the time of this survey,
the .25-mile segment was covered with thick stands of juniper. One open area
containing a modern habitation site was observed. This area is on the Hill City
quadrangle.
The second section is .9 miles long and runs from the interface of the two soil
series southward through the Tarrant-Purves series. Thick stands of juniper and
mixed hardwoods covered much of the area; the remaining areas were in pasture
with scattered stands of Juniper.

7

Pump Station
The proposed 100 x 100 foot pump station site (.23 acres) consists of a flat lot
above the Paluxy River. The area was covered with gravel at the time of this
survey and may have been disturbed by earlier construction activities. The soil
present is a hard clay overlying bedrock. This area is on the Glen Rose East
quadrangle.
Dam and Collection Pool
The proposed dam site is in the city limits of Glen Rose. As currently planned,
the new dam will cross the Paluxy River about 100 feet west of an existing WPA
dam constructed in the 1930s. The northern end of the dam will tie into an exposed
layer of bedrock. The southern end of the dam will be constructed in deep
alluvium. In the alluvial area, the soils are characterized as belonging to the FrioBosque series that are characterized by deep, nearly level, clayey and loamy
alluvium on bottomlands. At the time of this survey, the area west of the WPA dam
was cleared and the area east of the dam was thickly wooded. This area is on the
Glen Rose East quadrangle. The WPA dam (41SV156) is in poor condition, having
been damaged by weathering and flooding of the Paluxy River. As a result, much
of the dam has been washed away. Although it still spans the river, only the
northern end can be considered as intact. A stone segment of the spillway is
present in the woods on the south shore. It is on the Glen Rose East quadrangle.
Park Area
The proposed 54-acre park is situated in an upland area on the east side of
the proposed Wheeler Branch Reservoir and west of one of the two proposed
replacement road segments. The area is generally flat and occupies the very edge
of the reservoir valley slope. Soils belong to the Tarrant-Purves series and are
characterized as very shallow-to-shallow, undulating to hilly soils that formed in
limestone on uplands (Coburn 1978). Quarrying operations for limestone on or
near the surface has also disturbed much of this area. At the time of this survey,
this area was in pasture and was mainly covered with thick stands of Juniper. Many
of the more disturbed areas were cleared of trees. This area is located on the Hill
City quadrangle.

8

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Prehistoric Period
Somervell County is located in the North Central Texas cultural-geographical
region as defined by Biesaart et al. (1985:76) in a statistical overview published by
the Texas Historical Commission (THC). This is an area well documented in terms
of numbers of sites when compared to other regions in Texas. When the statistical
overview was compiled in 1985, a total of 2678 sites (13.25% of the state) was
recorded in the entire region. Only one other region (Central Texas) reported more
sites or had a higher percentage statewide. In terms of county statistics, however,
21 of the 39 counties in the region had as many or more reported sites as
Somervell County in 1985 (Biesaart et al. 1985:35). The 47 sites known to exist in
1985 comprised 1.76% of the region and .23% of the state. The reader is referred
to the overview for more statistical information concerning Somervell County and its
relation to the rest of Texas. The statistical overview has been discontinued, so it is
not possible to incorporate new data into the existing data base.
A review of the site files at TARL revealed that at the time this project was
conceived site forms existed for 117 prehistoric sites and 23 historic sites in
Somervell County. No information is available for 13 sites. The number of
recorded archaeological sites for the county now stands at 153, an increase of
3.26% since 1985.
According to Biesaart et al. (1985:185), all major periods of Texas prehistory
were documented in Somervell County in 1985. Sites classified as General Archaic
and Late Prehistoric were the most numerous with 26 examples. The rest of the
inventory included 3 Paleo-Indian, 1 Early Archaic, 3 Middle Archaic, and 6 Late
Archaic sites. Four of these sites have been designated as a State Archeological
Landmark. Information for the county in 1985 came primarily from surface
collections (27 sites) with little data from testing (2 sites) and excavation (1 site).
The first professional work in the county consisted of an intensive survey and
preliminary testing program within the proposed Squaw Creek Reservoir by the
Archaeology Research Program at Southern Methodist University (SMU) in 1972
(Skinner and Humphreys 1973). This project examined an area of approximately
3200 acres along a six mile segment of the Squaw Creek. The Squaw Creek
project resulted in the addition of 48 newly recorded sites to the archaeological
record for Somervell County. The sites recorded at Squaw Creek represent the first
site recordings at TARL for Somervell County. That the site numbers for this
project begin with 41SV6 is a reflection of the site recording methods used by SMU
at that time.

9

Site locations at Squaw Creek were found to occur on a variety of landforms.
The distribution of sites includes the Upper and Middle Squaw Creek flood plain,
limestone benches, uplands, alluvial terraces, and steep limestone bluffs. The only
micro-environment where sites were not found were the flood plains adjacent to the
Brazos and Paluxy rivers. The prehistoric remains at Squaw Creek were found to
range in age from 8000 B.C. to A.D. 1500, with the majority of this occupation
belonging to the Late Archaic period. In addition to a surface survey, controlled
surface collecting and testing was conducted at sites 41SV30 and 41SV40 in
Somervell County, and test excavation was carried out at 41HD55 in Hood County.
Excavation at the Hopewell School site (41SV30) was undertaken by SMU in
the summer of 1974 following the pedestrian survey conducted earlier that resulted
in the recording of this site. Over 300 square meters were excavated to bedrock in
large block areas. The site was found to contain a temporally mixed occupation,
although the Late Archaic period was best represented (Gallagher and Bearden
1976).
In August of 1974, the Archaeology Research Program at SMU conducted a
pedestrian survey of the proposed Comanche Peak Steam Electric Station
transmission line and intake and return pipeline rights-of-way in Somvervell and
Hood counties (Gallagher 1974b). The size of the area surveyed is not mentioned
in the report. This project recorded 1 prehistoric site (41SV55) in Somvervell
County, 2 prehistoric sites (41HD58 and 41HD59) in Hood County, and 1 historic
site (41HD60) in Hood County. The Somvervell Couny site is described as a
moderately dense scatter of prehistoric lithic debris and stone tools. Gallagher
(1974b:5) refers to this site as a base camp and the only known base camp in the
Central Brazos Valley that is not located near a permanent water source.
A reconnaissance survey of Dinosaur Valley State Park was performed by
SMU in September of 1974 (Gallagher 1974a). This study was initiated partly to
add to the growing body of data for the region and partly out of concern for the
archaeological resources of the park which are potentially threatened by an
increase in tourism. The survey was intended primarily to examine portions of the
park thought most likely to contain archaeological materials and no attempt was
made to conduct a systematic investigation of the entire park. As a result of this
reconnaissance, four archaeological sites were located (41SV56 - 41SV59). No
artifacts were collected, and no shovel tests were dug.

10

The sites found consist of buried middens and lithic scatters with no diagnostic
artifacts observed. According to Gallagher (1974a:6), "the most striking aspect of
the archaeology of Dinosaur Valley State Park is its apparent consistency in site
location and artifact assemblage. Each site recorded during our reconnaissance
survey was located on the ecotone between the river bottoms, flood plain, and the
upland bluffs." Very little cultural materials were found in those portions of the river
bottoms and uplands inspected. It is stated, however, that the survey was biased in
the selection of the area examined, and it is not known at this time if the site
distribution in the park accurately reflects the aboriginal settlement pattern. The
possibility of buried sites is suggested by an occasional shell fragment or flint chip
across the river bottom and buried cultural material in the banks of stream cuts.
Two sites were recorded in 1982 by Laurie Moseley, III of Springtown, Texas.
Moseley is an amateur archaeologist who participated in the 1974 reconnaissance
of Dinosaur Valley State Park (Gallagher 1974a). The two sites, recorded as a
private project, consist of a prehistoric campsite (41SV1) described to be very
prolific in terms of artifacts and a historic pioneer cemetery (41SV2) that contains
graves from the 1820s and 1830s.
On January 30, 1989, the Texas Water Development Board conducted an
archeological reconnaissance of proposed wastewater system improvements
(Whitsett 1990). The pedestrian survey was largely confined to the line route
leading from the existing wastewater treatment plant to near the corner of F.M. 144
at the Glen Lake Camp. "Spot checks" were conducted along F.M. 205 where a
few visible surfaces were present and along Paluxy Street on the south bank of the
river between F.M. 144 and Montgomery Branch. No sites were observed.
Development along the river and shallow soils are offered as reasons for a lack of
prehistoric sites on the south side of the river; while, the lack of cultural remains on
the northern side is probably a result of the rather narrow and deeply entrenched
river valley and flood plain where it appears that erosion, rather than deposition,
has occurred as a result of flooding in the recent past.
Jimmy Smith, a member of the Texas Archeological Society and Steward for
the Office of the State Archeologist, recorded a prehistoric rock shelter site
(41SV60) in 1990 after he visited it with Don Lemens, local artifact collector (TARL
site files). This is an important site containing at least one burial; Perdiz, Washita,
Bonham, and Scallorn arrow points; deer and fish bone; burned rock; a deer antler
flaking tool; and possible shell scoop. The site has been vandalized by Mr. Lemens
who plans to destroy it completely.

11

BVRA conducted a survey of the Glen Rose Golf Club in April of 1991 (Moore
1991). A pedestrian survey supported by shovel testing was carried out over a tract
of approximately 200 acres adjacent to Squaw Creek just to the east of the town of
Glen Rose. One previously recorded site (41SV51) was visited and evaluated.
The rock art mentioned on the site form was found and discovered to be along the
creek bank below the ridge on which the site is situated. Four new prehistoric sites
(41SV3 - 41SV5, 41SV47) were recorded. Only site 41SV47 was considered to
possess significant research potential, as the rest of the sites were too disturbed
due to ongoing construction. Site 41SV47 was recommended for nomination as a
State Archeological Landmark. The rock art at 41SV51 is unique to the area.
Therefore, it was suggested that it be protected and considered a candidate for the
National Register of Historic Places.
Daniel J. Crouch of the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD) visited
Dinosaur Valley State Park in 1991 and recorded 2 prehistoric sites (41SV61 41SV62) and 3 historic sites (41SV63 - 41SV65). Site 41SV64 is a possible grave
associated with a rock cairn. The addition of these sites increased the total number
of known sites in the park to nine.
As part of a Soil Conservation Service Training Program, Jimmy Smith
submitted forms for five prehistoric sites (41SV69 - 41SV73) and two historic sites
(41SV68 and 41SV74) to TARL in March of 1992. In cooperation with local
collector, Don Lemens, forms for fourteen prehistoric sites (41SV102 - 41SV115)
were submitted to TARL in October of 1991. Counting site 41SV60, recorded
earlier, Jimmy Smith is responsible for adding 22 site forms to the files at TARL.
Mr. Smith continues to be active in the county and has recorded and examined
additional sites for which forms are on file at TARL.
In 1992-1993, BVRA conducted an archaeological assessment of the 3000
acre Fossil Rim Wildlife Center (Moore 1995). This was not a 100% survey, as the
emphasis was mainly on known sites with limited visits to new areas. Except for
occasional shovel tests, no subsurface investigation was conducted. As a result of
this project, 11 prehistoric sites, 3 historic sites, and 5 isolated finds were recorded.
The prehistoric sites include lithic scatters, possible campsites, and a rock shelter in
which one flake was found in a shovel test. Other, large shelters were observed
below the rim, but they were not shovel tested. Large amounts of roof spall made
surface inspection difficult. Artifacts found at Fossil Rim date from the Paleo-Indian
period through the Late Prehistoric period. It is not known if the Paleo-Indian
artifacts represent random surface finds rather than evidence of actual campsites of
this period.

12

In 1993, TPWD archaeologists tested prehistoric sites 41SV56 and 41SV57
(Turpin 1994). A cut bank at 41SV56 exposed at least five intact occupational
levels that were dated to the Late Prehistoric period by two radiocarbon samples.
Site 41SV57 proved to be a largely deflated assemblage of flakes, tools, ceramics,
burned rock, and mussel shell indicative of a Late Prehistoric campsite (Turpin
1994:iii).
In 1996, archaeologists from the TPWD conducted a survey of Dinosaur Valley
State Park (Carpenter et al. 1999). Shovel probing, augering, and backhoe testing
throughout the 1524-acre park augmented the survey. This study recorded 16
prehistoric sites and 6 historic sites. Three sites contained deeply buried hearths
exposed by erosion in the cut banks of the Paluxy River and its tributaries. The
remaining sites were classified as open camps, lithic scatters, middens, and a
mussel shell lens. Six sites (41SV56-41SV57, 41SV62, 41SV120, 41SV130, and
41SV149) were determined to have a high degree of research potential. The 10
historic components are largely associated with the small rural community of
Lanham Mill, and represent the locations of the former school, five house sites, a
site with two communal wells, a dump, moonshine still, and a cairn burial. Sites
41SV64 and 41SV147 were determined to have a high degree of research
potential.
In 1997, BVRA conducted an archaeological survey of a 260-acre addition to
an existing golf course (Moore and Bradle 1997) surveyed earlier by BVRA. One
previously unrecorded prehistoric site (41SV151) was identified in the project area.
It is a buried hearth on an ancient terrace adjacent to a former channel of Squaw
Creek. Burned rock was found in a backhoe trench at a depth of 45 centimeters
below the existing ground surface, and fragments of burned rock, bone, and
charcoal were found between 95 and 110 centimeters in an adjacent trench. No
artifacts were observed, and no collection was made. This was avoided during
construction, so further work was not required. According to TARL records, this is
the last survey conducted in the county.
Summary
Prehistoric sites in Somervell County occur in a variety of settings and include
campsites, lithic scatters, buried hearths along ancient stream channels, rock
shelters (some containing burials), rock art on boulders, and cairns with possible
burials. Diagnostic artifacts from these sites date the prehistoric occupation of the
area from the Paleo-Indian period through the Late Prehistoric Period. Based on
work at the proposed Squaw Creek Reservoir that was never constructed, sites in
the county are known to occur on a variety of landforms such as the floodplains of
the Upper and Middle Squaw Creek, limestone benches, uplands, alluvial terraces,
and steep limestone bluffs. The only micro-environment where sites were not
found were the flood plains adjacent to the Brazos and Paluxy rivers.
13

Historic Period
Somervell County, named after Alexander Somervell, was created from
Hood and Johnson counties and organized in 1875. The first settlement in the
county, Springtown, was founded by L. B. McClanahan in 1859 and was
supplanted by Barnard’s Mill and named for George Barnard. This community
had a post office in 1859, but the name was changed to Glen Rose in 1872.
Other early trading posts included Wilcox, Rainbow, Glass, and Nemo. The
population of the county was 3071 in 1940 and 2532 in 1950. Glen Rose, the
county seat, was the only incorporated town (Webb 1952).
The first settlers in the area were mainly cattle ranchers who settled along
the valleys of the Brazos and Paluxy rivers circa 1854. About 1874, farming
became more diversified, and in 1876 adjacent Hood County had flour and
gristmills and nine cotton gins. During these early years of farming, knowledge of
practices to conserve soil were not known or not practiced. Erosion soon
reduced the productivity of the land, and many areas were abandoned and left to
erode and form gullies (Coburn 1978).
Summary
Somervell County contains numerous significant historic buildings and sites
dating to the 19th and 20th centuries. In the town of Glen Rose, for example, a
restored 19th century courthouse occupies the middle of the business district near
rows of commercial buildings dating to the early 20th century. Residences dating to
the late 19th and early 20th centuries are common. On the river are three WPA
dams dating to the 1930s. Other site types include rural homesteads and farms
and cemeteries. No sites containing evidence of Historic Indian occupation have
been recorded in the county.

14

METHODS
Prior to commencement of the field reconnaissance, the files at TARL were
checked for previously recorded sites in the project area and vicinity, and no sites in
the project area were found to be recorded at TARL. Reports documenting work by
other researchers were reviewed. Soil information for the project area was
obtained by consulting the Soil Survey of Hood and Somervell Counties prepared
by the Soil Conservation Service (Coburn 1978). Various maps were checked for
evidence of historic sites and early land grants (Appendix I). Informants at local
and state agencies were contacted regarding the early history of the area and
presence of historic sites (Appendix II). Since two historic habitation sites were
found, a search of the deed records was conducted (Appendix III).
The field survey was conducted using the following methods: (1) surface
inspection of eroded and exposed areas, (2) shovel testing where soils were
greater than 10 cm, and (3) backhoe trenching along the Paluxy River and Wheeler
Branch where deep soils were present.
Shovel probes were dug in all areas where soil accumulations were thought to
be present. When soils were found to be greater than 10 cm, shovel tests were
excavated. These tests were dug in arbitrary levels of 10 cm and screened through
¼ inch hardware cloth. A shovel test log that recorded the depth of each test, soil
present, and results documented this task (Appendix IV). In areas where shovel
tests and the geomorphic features indicated deeper soils, backhoe trenches were
excavated by a New Holland backhoe with a 36-inch bucket. The Principal
Investigator and Project Archaeologist monitored this task. Photographs were
taken of the trench profiles, soil samples were collected from each stratum, and the
profiles were drawn and described (Appendix V). Five full screen loads were
screened from the back dirt pile of each trench. Specific methods used to examine
each area are discussed below.
Wheeler Branch Reservoir
The reservoir pool boundaries, dam construction area, and associated borrow
areas were subjected to a 100% Pedestrian Survey. Those areas containing soils
greater than 10 cm in depth were shovel tested. In all, 11 shovel tests were
excavated (Figure 3). The tests varied in depth from 10 cm to 60 cm. Four
backhoe trenches were excavated in the dam and borrow area along Wheeler
Branch (Figure 3). The trenches were 1 meter wide, 10 meters long, and 1.75
meters deep. Samples of the excavated matrix from each trench were screened.
Profiles of each backhoe trench were drawn in the field, and this task was
documented through digital photography.

15

Figure 3. Shovel Tests and Backhoe Trenches

16

Wildlife Area
This entire area was subjected to a 100% Pedestrian Survey. Those areas
containing soils greater than 10 cm in depth were shovel tested. In all, 7 shovel
tests were excavated. The tests varied in depth from 10 cm to 30 cm.
Water Supply Line
This area was subjected to a 100% Pedestrian Survey. Those areas
containing soils greater than 10 cm in depth were shovel tested. In all, four shovel
tests were excavated (Figure 4). The tests varied in depth from 40 to 50 cm.
Replacement Roads
The two road segments were subjected to a 100% Pedestrian Survey. Those
areas containing soils greater than 10 cm in depth were shovel tested. In all, 11
shovel tests were excavated. The tests varied in depth from 10 to 40 cm.
Pump Station
The area was subjected to a 100% Pedestrian Survey. The area was rocky
with little soil development. Therefore, shovel testing was not conducted.
Dam and Collection Pool on Paluxy River
This area was not subjected to a 100% Pedestrian Survey due to zero ground
surface visibility. Since the area was known to contain deep alluvium, backhoe
trenching was conducted. Four trenches (1 x 5 meters) were excavated to an
average depth of 2.5 meters (Figure 5). The trenches were placed on the first
terrace overlooking the river and perpendicular to the river in a cleared area. The
trench fill consisted of sand, sandy clay, and gravels. Bedrock was encountered in
trenches 3 and 4.
The eastern portion of the riverbank was thickly wooded; therefore, backhoe
trenches were not excavated. In the wooded area, five shovel tests were
excavated to depths of 60 cm to 100 cm. Six tests were dug around the rock wall
to determine its horizontal extent, and two encountered a subsurface footing at 50
cm and one meter east and west of this feature.
The dam was assigned the trinomial 41SV156 by TARL. It was photographed
with a digital camera, and the Project Archaeologist determined its location on the
topographic map using a hand-held GPS. Dorothy Leach of the Somervell County
Historical Commission compiled information regarding the history of the dam
through oral history, historic photographs, and written documents.
17

Figure 4. Shovel Tests Along Water Supply Line

18

Figure 5. Backhoe Trenches at Dam and Collection Pool

19

Park Area
The entire 54-acre site was subjected to a 100% Pedestrian Survey. Those
areas containing soils greater than 10 cm in depth were shovel tested. In all, nine
shovel tests were excavated. The tests varied in depth from 10 cm to 40 cm. Two
historic sites (41SV154 and 41SV155) were identified. These sites were mapped
and documented through digital photography. The Principal Investigator, assisted
by Dorothy Leach of the Somervell County Historical Commission, checked the
Deed Records at the courthouse and met with local informants in order to collect
additional information about these structures.

20

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Although a single unidentified arrow point fragment was found on the surface
in the upland area above the proposed reservoir, no evidence of a prehistoric site
was found. Surface inspection and shovel tests and probes determined that much
of the area contains shallow, rocky soils that with little or no soil development.
These areas may have not been preferred as settings for long-term campsites. In
addition, no sources of flint or chert as a raw material were observed. Therefore,
lithic quarries or procurement areas are not expected to be present in the area.
The slopes did not contain any overhangs suitable for occupation. Much of the
project area consists of steep slopes greater than 20%. As expected, these areas
did not contain evidence of prehistoric camps. Several forms of disturbance to the
project area were observed. In those areas where the water supply line will be
placed in state and county rights-of-way, disturbance due to road construction and
maintenance was noted. In the uplands, above the proposed reservoir, quarrying
activities for limestone rock at or near the surface was prevalent, and this major
change in the landscape is depicted in Figure 6. It should be noted that the upland
margin is one of the areas where sites are expected to occur; however, this area
has been virtually destroyed by the quarry operations.
Three historic sites were recorded. They are a house (51SVG154), a barn
(41SV155), and a dam constructed by the WPA (41V156). These sites probably
date to the early part of the 20th century. They are depicted on the topographic
quadrangle Hill City (Appendix VI).
Site 41SV154 consists of the remains of a house (figures 7-9) and associated
features: well or cistern (Figure 10) and storm shelter or root cellar. The house is in
poor condition, as only a few of the walls remain. According to the current
landowner, Riley W. Robeson, most of the rocks used in the construction of this
house were removed in the 1960s to be used in the construction and remodeling of
his present house about 300 meters to the south.
The construction methods used in the building of this house are unusual. The
main walls were created by the use of large, flat native stones laid vertically and
mortared on the outer portions of each wall. Behind these rocks, laths and shiplap
were used as a form that was filled with stone rubble and concrete. The finished
walls were between 6 and 10 inches thick. The forms are gone, but impressions of
the lathing are visible. Scattered pieces of tin suggest a metal roof. A concrete
floor is present in the western part of the house. A site map was created in the field
and professionally drafted for inclusion in this report as Figure 11. This figure also
depicts the seven shovel tests excavated in the site area.

21

Figure 6. Quarry Disturbance in Reservoir Area

22

Figure 7. 41SV154 (House – North Elevation)

23

Figure 8. 41SV154 (Interior of House – South Elevation)

24

Figure 9. 41SV154 (House Interior – North Elevation)

25

Figure 10. 41SV154 (Well)

26

Figure 11. Site Map for 41SV154

27

The actual number of rooms could not be determined; however, the presence
of an interior wall suggests the house may have had a large inner room and a small
outer room. The short walls that outline the outer room appear to be finished on top
at a height of 2.5 feet. This suggests that they served as footings for a wooden
wall. The north wall was the most intact and contained a door opening and one
window opening. Notches at the top of this wall indicate the presence of rafters at
approximately eight feet. The window opening is 2.5 feet wide, and the door
opening is 3.5 feet wide. The west wall is fragmentary and averages four to six feet
in height. The south wall was very disturbed, but segments were eight feet in
height. This structure is 19 feet along its north-south axis and 37 feet along its
east-west axis.
A well or cistern lies 17 feet to the east of the house and measures 3.5 feet
along its north-south axis and 4.5 feet along its east-west axis (Figure 10). The
above-ground construction consists horizontally placed rocks with no mortar about
1.5 feet above the ground surface. At the time of this survey it was covered with
corrugated tin.
Approximately 60 feet to the north of the house is another feature that the
researchers believe is a storm shelter or root cellar. It consists of a mound of earth
and rocks about one foot in height. Horizontal measurements are 8 feet along its
north-south axis and 14 feet along its east-west axis. There is a two-foot deep
depression in the center that contains rocks, earth, metal fragments, wire, and other
trash. At the northwest corner, two large stone slabs have been placed vertically
forming a right angle. There are documented historic accounts of similar
subsurface pits excavated as protection against storms and/or tornados. Since
these areas provided excellent storage for food and canned goods they were often
used as root cellars for food storage.
This site is located in the Milam County School Land Survey, Abstract 135 as
noted in the Deed Records on file at the Somervell County Courthouse. It is part of
Block 52, which consists of 101.5 acres. That portion of Block 52 purchased by the
Somervell County Water District is 28.78 acres. Keneth W. Smith of W. F. Gunn
Surveying and Aerial Mapping Company performed the survey for this transaction
in November of 2003.
The researchers were unable to determine the age or original builder of this
structure. A search of Deed Records in the Somervell County Courthouse revealed
a series of owners from the late 19th century through the present. (Appendix V). No
one person or family owned this site for an extended period of time. Interviews with
local informants also failed to provide this information. Based on the presence of
machine-made nails and 20th century artifacts, it is hypothesized that this house
was constructed during the early part of the 20th century. According to Mr.
Robeson, a 1960 calendar was hanging on a wall in the house when he took
possession. This suggests that the last occupant resided there until that date.
28

Artifacts observed on the surface consisted of clear, amber, and blue glass
sherds; white ware, screw-top jars made of clear glass, some with rusty lids; tin
cans, oil cans, a tin stove damper face, and fragments of tin roofing. Although
some of these artifacts (i.e., white ware) could have been manufactured in the latter
part of the 19th century, the assemblage strongly suggests a 20th century
occupation. This site appears to meet the age criterion for significance and exhibits
unusual methods of construction. Therefore, it may be eligible for listing on the
National Register of Historic Places.
Site 41SV155 consists of a barn believed to date to the 20th century. It is part
of a homestead that belongs to Riley W. Robeson. The main house and other
associated buildings are just to the south of the barn and outside the project area.
The barn is constructed of stone, concrete, and wood. It measures 22 feet along its
north-south axis and 25 feet along its east-west axis. The roof is gabled and
covered with corrugated iron, and the rafters are round Juniper logs. Wall
construction was made possible by the placement of corrugated tin roofing on one
side, rocks on one side (held together with mortar), and a fill of concrete and rubble
in between. The tin is still in place. Wall thickness varies from one foot at the
bottom to six inches at the top. The north wall has no openings, the east wall has
one window opening, and the west wall has two window openings. Each window
opening has wooden shutters. The southern portion of the barn is open at the front.
Vertical Juniper poles and horizontal planks form a corral type of fence. A wooden
feeder was present on each of the two inner walls. Under the roof is an inner wall
of horizontal planks. At the top of this well chicken wire was observed. This site is
illustrated in figures 12-15 (photographs) and Figure 16 (site map).
The age and original owner of this structure are not known. The use of
machine-made nails suggests it is a 20th century barn. Since it is in the same tract
of land as the house (41SV154) to the north, no obvious builder was identified
during a search of the Deed Records at the courthouse. This site may meet the
age criterion for significance and exhibits unusual methods of construction.
Therefore, it may be eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places.
This site is located in the Milam County School Land Survey, Abstract 135 as
noted in the Deed Records on file at the Somervell County Courthouse. It is part of
Block 52 that consists of 101.5 acres. That portion of Block 52 purchased by the
Somervell County Water District is 28.78 acres. Keneth W. Smith of W. F. Gunn
Surveying and Aerial Mapping Company performed the survey for this transaction
in November of 2003.

29

Figure 12. 41SV155 (Southwest Elevation)

30

Figure 13. 41SV155 (North Elevation)

31

Figure 14. 41SV155 (Window Detail)

32

Figure 15. 41SV155 (Feeder on Interior West Wall)

33

Figure 16. Site Map for 41SV155

34

Site 41SV156 is located approximately 100 feet due east of the proposed
dam on the Paluxy River. Labor crews belonging to the Works Progress
Administration (WPA) in the 1930s constructed this rock and mortar dam. The
name of this agency was changed to the Works Projects Administration in 1939.
According to City Council records, the City constructed this dam for municipal
purposes only such as impounding of waters for use as municipal swimming
pools, the accumulation of water supplies for fire protection purposes, and other
purposes not specified in the records. This site is illustrated in figures 17-19.
Overall, this site is in poor condition as the main portion of the dam was
partially destroyed many years ago with explosives. Terry Covey of Glen Rose
who was 12 years old at the time witnessed this event. According to the former
Mayor of Glen Rose, G. C. Gibbs, Jr., citizens along the banks of the river
complained that they were losing their property to erosion. In addition, the water
behind the dam was becoming silty and stagnant because the vertical
construction of the inside of the structure did not allow silt to pass through. The
demolition took place in the early 1940s.
In the woods, 85 feet south of the current dam is a rock and mortar wall.
Although interviews with local informants did not disclose its purpose, it is
hypothesized that it may have served as a “spillway” or erosion control device. A
color-enhanced photograph of the dam prior to its destruction graces the cover of
this report. In this photograph a wall made of cut limestone rocks is shown on
the south side of the river. Behind this wall is an earthen berm that was
constructed to help control the river during flooding. This berm may have
connected the spillway feature to this wall. The wall is illustrated through digital
photography in Figure 20 and a line drawing in Figure 21.
Construction associated with the new dam is not expected to affect that
portion that spans the river. The segment of this site that is located on the south
bank of the river may be damaged or altered by construction.
The current project area is greater than 200 acres. Therefore, the research
design was discussed with the THC reviewer prior to entering the field. The
Minimum Survey Standards for Projects Less than 200 Acres did not apply to this
project.

35

Figure 17. 41SV156 (North Elevation)

36

Figure 18. 41SV156 (West Elevation)

37

Figure 19. 41SV156 (South Elevation)

38

Figure 20. 41SV156 (Spillway)

39

Figure 21. Spillway Feature

40

RECOMMENDATIONS
Site 41SV154 is the remains of a house located in an upland setting.
Because it appears to be older than 50 years and exhibits an unusual form of
construction, it is recommended that it be evaluated by an architectural historian
to determine its eligibility for listing on the National Register of Historic Places
prior to being affected by construction.
Site 41SV155 is an intact barn located in an upland setting. Because it
appears to be older than 50 years and exhibits an unusual form of construction, it
is recommended that it be evaluated by an architectural historian to determine its
eligibility for listing on the National Register of Historic Places prior to being
affected by construction.
Site 41SV156 is a dam on the Paluxy River constructed by the WPA in the
1930s. Because it is older than 50 years and represents an important period in
American history, it is recommended that it be evaluated by an architectural
historian to determine its eligibility for listing on the National Register of Historic
Places prior to being affected by construction.
No prehistoric sites were identified during this survey. Should, however,
evidence of prehistoric occupation within the project area be encountered during
construction, all work in the area of the find must discontinue until the situation
can be evaluated by the Texas Historical Commission in consultation with the
Somervell County Water District and BVRA. The area most likely to contain an
undocumented prehistoric site is in the alluvial setting on the north bank of the
Paluxy River where construction for the dam is planned. The client is advised to
look for unusual concentrations of rock that may indicate a burned rock feature
such as a hearth.

41

REFERENCES CITED
Biessart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985
Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission,
Special Report 28.
Carpenter, Stephen M., Dan K. Utley, Steve Carlson, and Solveig A. Turpin
1999
Cultural Resources Survey of Dinosaur Valley State Park,
Somvervell County, Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department, Cultural Resources Program.
Carter, W. T.
1931

The Soils of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station
Bulletin 41. College Station.

Coburn, Winfred C.
1978
Soil Survey of Hood and Somervell Counties, Texas. United
States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, in
cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Gallagher, Joseph G.
1974a
A Reconnaissance Survey of the Dinosaur Valley State Park.
Southern Methodist University, Archaeology Research Program,
Research Report Number 44.
1974b

Results of Small Survey of Comanche Peak Transmission Lines
and Pipeline Right-Of-Ways. Unnumbered report prepared by the
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University.

Gallagher, Joseph G., and Susan E. Bearden
1976
The Hopewell Site: A late Archaic Campsite in the Central
Brazos River Valley. Southern Methodist University, Institute for
the Study of Earth and Man, Contributions in Anthropology
Number 19.
Hill, R. T.
1901

Geography and Geology of the Black and Grand Prairies, Texas
with Detailed Description of the Cretaceous Formations and
Special Reference to Artesian Waters. In Twenty-First Annual
Report to the United States Geological Survey 1899-1900, Part 7
- Texas.

42

Moore, William E.
1991
An Archaeological Survey of the Glen Rose Golf Club Project,
Somervell County, Texas. Brazos Valley Research Associates,
Contract Report Number 11.
1995

An Archaeological Assessment of the Fossil Rim Wildlife Center
Somervell County, Texas. Brazos Valley Research Associates,
Contract Report Number 16.

Moore, William E., and Michael R. Bradle
1997
An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Squaw Valley Golf
Course Expansion Project, Somervell County, Texas. Brazos
Valley Research Associates, Contract Report Number 51.
Skinner, S. Alan, and Gerald K. Humphreys
1973
The Historic and Prehistoric Archaeological Resources of the
Squaw Creek Reservoir. Southern Methodist University, Institute
for the Study of Earth and Man, Contributions in Anthropology
Number 10.
Turpin, Jeff
1994

Where the Dinosaur Roam: Testing of 41SV56 and 41SV57,
Dinosaur Valley State Park, Somervell County, Texas. Texas
Parks and Wildlife Department, Cultural Resource Program
Report 94-1.

Webb, Walter Prescott
1952
The Handbook of Texas (Volume 2). The Texas State Historical
Association.
Whitsett, W. Hayden
1990
An Archeological Reconnaissance of Proposed Wastewater
System Improvements, City of Glen Rose, Somervell County,
SRF 2577. Texas Water Development Board. Austin.

43

APPENDIX I: MAPS CHECKED
United States Geological Survey Map, Granbury Sheet - 1889 edition
This map was prepared by the United States Department of the Interior and is
the edition of November 1889. The area was surveyed in 1887, and the map
was reprinted in 1925. It does not show any structures in the vicinity of the
project area.
General Highway Map for Hood County and Somervell County
Prepared by the Texas State Highway Department in cooperation with the Public
Roads Administration, Federal Works Agency, 1936 (partially revised to July
1945)
This map does not show any structures in the vicinity of the project area.
Base Map, Hood County and Somervell County, Texas
This map was prepared by the Texas State Highway Department in cooperation
with the United States Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Public Roads and is
dated 1937.
It does not show the road that passes near sites 41SV154 and 41SV155, nor
does it show the structures that bear these numbers.
Somervell County General Land Office
This map was prepared by the General Land Office (GLO) in Austin, Texas and
is dated February 1941.
This GLO map does not show houses. It places the project area within a tract of
land referred to as Milam County School Land (I-941).

General Highway Map, Hood County and Somervell County, Texas
This map was prepared by the Texas State Highway Department in cooperation
with the United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of Public Roads and is
dated July 1955.
It depicts the homestead associated with the barn (41SV155) located within the
project area. It shows another structure that may be TS-1.

United States Geological Survey Map, 7.5’ Hill City, Texas - 1966
This map was prepared by the United States Department of the Interior. It does
not show a house in the vicinity of 41SV154 or 41SV155.
United States Geological Survey Map, 7.5’ Glen Rose East, Texas - 1977
This map was prepared by the United States Department of the Interior.
United States Geological Survey Map, 7.5’ Glen Rose West, Texas - 1979
This map was prepared by the United States Department of the Interior.

APPENDIX II: AGENCIES CHECKED

Somervell Central Appraisal District
112 Allen Drive
Glen Rose, Texas 76043
(254) 897-3258
The Principal Investigator visited this agency located in Glen Rose and discussed
the project with Luke Robbins, RPA. Tax records for the project area were
checked, and it was determined that the oldest records were for 2000.

Somervell County Heritage Center
100 Northeast Barnard
Post Office Box 1261
Glen Rose, Texas 76043
(254) 897-9073
heritage@hcnews.com
The Principal Investigator visited this agency located in down town Glen Rose
and discussed the project with Betty Goslin (Director) and Rhonda Duffie
(Assistant). Local histories and genealogical records were checked.

Somervell County Historical Commission
Post Office Box 1174
Glen Rose, Texas 76043
(254) 897-9737
somhistoric@hcnews.com
The Principal Investigator visited this agency located in the Somervell County
Courthouse and discussed the project with Dorothy Leach, Archivist. Historical
maps were examined, and Ms. Leach contacted local informants.

Somervell County Water District
200 East Elm, Suite G
Post Office Box 1386
Glen Rose, Texas 76043
(254) 897-4141
The Principal Investigator and Project Archaeologist visited this agency located in
Glen Rose and discussed the project with Kevin D. Taylor, General Manager.
Project area maps were obtained, and the areas to be examined were discussed.

Somervell County Courthouse
County Clerks Office
107 Vernon Street
Glen Rose, Texas 76043
(254) 897-4427
The Principal Investigator visited the courthouse and examined the Deed
Records in order to identify previous landowners of the project area in the vicinity
of TS-1 and TS-2. Phyllis Wells, Deputy Clerk at the Somervell County
Courthouse, assisted him.

W. F. Gunn/Kenneth W. Smith, Land Surveyors
103 Vernon Street
Post Office Box 249
Glen Rose, Texas 76043
(254) 897-3910
The Principal Investigator visited this business and examined project area maps.
Gary Wiencke assisted him.

Perry Castaneda Library
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, Texas 78713
(512) 495-4274
wieferman@mail.utexas.edu
Jim Wieferman (Map Room Librarian) assisted the Principal Investigator

APPENDIX III: CHAIN-OF-TITLE

MILAM COUNTY SCHOOL LAND SURVEY
UPPER LEAGE – SURVEYED IN 1847
BLOCK 52, ABSTRACT 135
101.5 ACRES
Riley W. Robeson purchased this tract from Ben W. Cole and wife (Mary E. Cox
Cole) in 1960 (Deed Records; Volume 49, pages 101-102).
Ben W. Cole and wife (Mary E. Cox Cole) purchased this tract from the Texas
Veterans Land Board in 1955 (Deed Records; Volume 46, page 7).
The Texas Veterans Land Board purchased this tract from F. R. Reeves and
Reba Reeves in 1955 (Deed Records; Volume 46, page 6)
F. R. Reeves and Reba Reeves purchased this tract from C. T. Shores and wife
Lessie in 1950 (Deed Records; Volume 42, page 400).
C. T. Shores purchased this tract from L. C. and Vera Line in 1945 (Deed
Records; Volume 38, page 70).
L. C. and Vera Line purchased this tract from E. H. Mimms and Grace Oleta
(wife) in 1944 (Deed Records; Volume 37, page 343).
E. H. Mimms and Grace Oleta (wife) purchased this tract from Elizabeth Dollie
Stayman and Clarke C. Stayman in 1939 (Deed Records; Volume 36, page 114).
Elizabeth Dollie Stayman and Clarke C. Stayman purchased this tract from the
Thomas Mortgage Company in 1932 (Deed Records; Volume 33, page 577).
The Thomas Mortgage Company purchased this tract from Howard B. Thomas in
1923 (Deed Records; Volume Y, page 225).
Howard B. Thomas purchased this tract from Charles Connally in 1923 (Deed
Records; Volume Y, page 225).
Charles Connally purchased this tract from Etta S. Tabor in 1920 (Deed Records;
Volume W, page 121).
Etta S. Tabor purchased this tract from Ray and Lena Tice in 1918 (Deed
Records; Volume R, page 388).

MILAM COUNTY SCHOOL LAND SURVEY
UPPER LEAGE – SURVEYED IN 1847
BLOCK 52, ABSTRACT 135
101.5 ACRES
Ray and Lena Tice purchased this tract from Charles T. and Elva M. Gillespie in
1918 (Deed Records; Volume R, page 366).
Charles T. and Elva M. Gillespie purchased this tract from Nettie Dowdell in 1914
(Deed Records; Volume P, page 597).
Nettie Dowdell purchased this tract from Alvin Marchbanks in 1914 (Deed
Records; Volume P, page 486).
Alvin Marchbanks purchased this tract from E. B. Bobo and M E. Bobo
(deceased) in 1912 (Deed Records; Volume P, page 116).
E. B. Bobo and Mary E. Bobo (deceased) purchased this tract from P. H. Moore
and L. H. Moore (wife) in 1905 (Deed Records; Volume K, page 290).
P. H. Moore and L. H. Moore (wife) purchased this tract from R. Rochell and A.
E. Rochell (wife) in 1902 (Deed Records; Volume I, page 535).
R. Rochell and A. E. Rochell (wife) purchased this tract from Benjamin Rush
Milam and J. R. Milam (son) in 1900 (Deed Records; Volume I, page 326).
Benjamin Rush Milam and J. R. Milam (son) purchased this tract from W. T.
Forston and Carrie L. Forston (wife) in 1895 (Deed Records; Volume G, page
359).
W. T. Forston and Carrie L. Forston (wife) purchased this tract from Benjamin
Rush Milam in 1893 (Deed Records; Volume G, page 351).
Benjamin Rush Milam and J. R. Milam (son) purchased this tract from R. M.
Rammie and N. F. Rammie (wife) in 1893 (Deed Records; Volume F, page 615).
R. M. Rammie and N. F. Rammie (wife) purchased this tract from Benjamin Rush
Milam in 1892 (Deed Records; Volume F, page 613).
Benjamin Rush Milam purchased this tract from Henry C. Gibson and Nettie
Gibson (wife) in 1891 (Deed Records; Volume F, page 157).

MILAM COUNTY SCHOOL LAND SURVEY
UPPER LEAGE – SURVEYED IN 1847
BLOCK 52, ABSTRACT 135
101.5 ACRES
Henry C. Gibson and Nettie Gibson (wife) purchased this tract from W. P. & S. A.
Beard on November 23, 1885 (Deed Records, Volume C, page 590).
W. P. Beard purchased this tract from Milam County on June 7, 1882 (Volume 2,
page 486).
Milam County was obtained this tract from the State of Texas on September 21,
1850 as part of one League of land. (Volume D, page 115).

Appendix IV: Shovel Test Log

APPENDIX V
BACKHOE TRENCH PROFILES

APPENDIX VI
SITE LOCATIONS

