T

Cultural Resources Survey and Assessment Of A Proposed
Southwestern Public Service Company Transmission Line
Gaines, Andrews, Ector and Midland Counties

Jeff Turpin

\J

AR-TX

.

TARL 03 . 031
copy 1

D
iJ

....

Technical Series 31
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
The University of Texas at Austin

1993

/ 6'./

Cultural Resources Survey and Assessment Of A Proposed
Southwestern Public Service Company Transmission line
Gaines, Andrews, Ector and Midland Counties

Jeff Turpin

Texas Antiquities Permit 1122
Principal Investigator: Solveig A. Turpin

Technical Series 31
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
The University of Texas at Austin
1993

In partial fulfillment of a
letter of agreement between
Southwestern Public Service Company and
The University of Texas at Austin, dated
June 2, 1992

ABSTRACT
In June and November of 1992, the Texas Archeological Research laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin, conducted a cultural resources survey of 65 miles of a
proposed 67-mile transmission line corridor through Gaines, Andrews, Ector and a
short segment of Midland counties, Texas, for Southwestern Public Service Company.
The remaining 2 miles will be surveyed when access to the property is obtained.
Twenty miles of the proposed power line route cross University of Texas lands where
survey was authorized by Antiquities Permit 1122. The intensive pedestrian survey,
augmented by shovel tests, produced six prehistoric site recordings and one isolated
find. Two sites, 41 AD49 and 41 EC6, were singled out for specific avoidance procedures. The remaining four are either out of harm's way or too minimal and disrupted
to require further action. Therefore, cultural resources do not stand as a bar to
construction of this line.

iii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract . . . . . .

. iii

Acknowledgements

iv

Introduction . . . .

1

Methods . . . .

1

Natural Environment

1

5
5
5
6
9
9
. 10
. 12
. 15
. 17

Cultural Background
Gaines County
Andrews County
Ector County
Sites Along the Proposed SPSC ROW
Gaines County
Andrews County
Ector County
Summary

....

References Cited

LIST OF FIGURES
vi

1. Project and site location map
2. Collected artifacts

. 11

3. Site views, 41 EC6

. 13

TABLE
Recorded Sites

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

v

......._.. ...

_

.

... -.........
• ~~ ~C?U!::!!!., • • -

i. • ...;.._ • • -

• • -

..

ANDREWS COUNTY

\ . 'I

-- . ··- ..

t

N

)'/~'.

.·

)~.

--···-···-···--- ··-. ). ···.....___ ... - ....L.J .
Draw

.

.

~

I

~"'

14141AD50

I

~.sit

~/\">

""'~(,,,

z•;;1

-.
<::

~I~
;:: IU)
~81

~o

~&,..~

r
0

I

~~
~.z

"oc9

\

I.
I
'

~,ii:

Ul,g

Ole
g~

\

~-

--.,co. Powa,.. L.
~-........; - .•..;;.'na
41AD52
........

.. T

ANDREWS COUNTY

WINKLER COUNTf • ·
s

10

20

kilometers

FIGURE 1. Project and site location map.

. . - ECTOR
.. COUNTY
- ..

-- ..

l

. . . . . . . ;.~ _J .. - ..

-li--11

-....... ... ~~OLAND COUNTY

INTRODUCTION
Southwestern Public Service Company (SPSC) plans to build a 67-mile transmission line extending from the Texas/New Mexico state line near Eunice, NM, to a point
near Midland, TX (Fig. 1). The proposed i35-foot wide right-of-way (ROW) will run
through Gaines, Andrews, Ector and a few hundred meters of Midland counties. At
the request of SPSC, archeologists from the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL), The University of Texas at Austin, surveyed 65 miles of the ROW where access
had been granted by landowners. The remaining 2 miles will be surveyed when
permission has been obtained by SPSC. Twenty miles of the corridor cross University
of Texas lands where cultural resource investigations were authorized by Texas
Antiquities Permit 1i22.

Methods
TARL staff members Jeff Turpin and Doug Drake conducted the survey using USGS
quad maps and ROW maps provided by SPSC. The survey was begun June 8, i 992,
and 54 miles of the route were completed by June 26, i 992. An additional i 1 miles
were surveyed in November, i 992 by Solveig Turpin, Herbert H. Eling, Jr. and Paul
Maslyk. The ROW was walked in a zig-zag fashion, with surveyors paying special
attention to high probability areas such as playa margins, dune fields and the rare
arroyo cut. Shovel probes were dug in high-probability areas, as well as on discovered
sites, in order to determine the presence or absence of buried cultural material. It was
a rare day when the field personnel could not see 4 to 5 miles in either direction, and
minor topographical variations were usually easy to distinguish. The one exception is
the sometimes vast and usually unmapped dune fields that are common on the
southwestern fringe of the Panhandle. Although the ROW had been cleared and
staked by SPSC surveyors in the previous months, in many cases both the stakes and
the vegetation cut had vanished. The unusually heavy rains and bad weather, the
affection cattle have for blue and orange flagging tape, and the occasional but
vehemently expressed resistance to the transmission line by landowners are doubtless
responsible for this. As a result, the ROW was occasionally difficult to locate, and sites
in dune fields were particularly difficult to plot on quad maps.

Natural Environment
The entire survey area falls into the geographic zone commonly referred to as the
Llano Estacada. In the Panhandle, the Llano Estacada is sometimes subdivided into
the Panhandle Plains and the South Plains regions (Hughes 1989). The SPSC ROW
runs primarily through that portion of the South Plains of the Llano Estacada called,
appropriately, the Seminole Sand Sheet (Ferguson 1986). Soils in this area are typically

1

2 I SOUTHWESTERN PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY

windblown Holocene sands and occasional Pleistocene cover sands overlying Ogallala
Formation caliche "caprock, 11 fluviatile sand, silt, clay and gravels. This (Ogallala)
Tertiary Miocene-Pliocene deposit is an outwash plain from the eastern fringe of the
Rocky Mountains, and extends through Colorado and Kansas in the north to Texas in
the south. It in turn overlies Triassic redbeds, Cretaceous marine sediments, and basal
Permian redbeds (Bureau of Economic Geology 1976). In the southern Panhandle this
geologic mix has produced a relatively flat, high plain (750 to 1500 meters) etched by
the occasional draw, pocked with playa depressions, and fringed by large, relatively
stable dune fields. These topographic and hydrological features play a highly significant role in the archeological site distribution pattern, providing both the natural
resources, such as water in playas and lithic raw material exposed in the Ogallala
deposits, and shelter (dune walls and "blowouts") necessary to survive the frequently
marginal West Texas climatic extremes.
The South Plains are presently a cool-temperate, dry steppe environment, with little
rainfall (about 14 inches) and mild winters. While temperatures in modern times have
ranged from -11 to 109°F, the average low temperature in January is 29. 7°F, and the
average high in July is 94.2 °F. The most influential meteorological force in the area is
wind, with the predominantly southerly gales broken by the occasional violent "norther." The area is visited by frequently severe summer thunderstorms. During this
survey, the Midland-Odessa area was under a Tornado Watch/Warning for a record 14
days. The resulting precipitation pools in the playa depressions and along with winter
snow, provide the area's surface water (Bomar 1983). The underlying Ogallala aquifer
has been successfully tapped in modern times. Consequently, those portions of
Andrews County not covered with oil wells are cultivated, usually in cotton and
sorghum.
The natural ground cover includes short grasses, shin oak, sage brush, prickly pear
and yucca, with mesquite scrub providing occasional scant shade in wetter portions
of the county. The high average annual sunshine and relatively temperate weather
give Midland-Odessa fodder for its advertising campaigns as the "Retirement Capital
of Texas, 11 but in concert with the constant winds and low precipitation they produce a
desiccant environment (Hughes cites a 3:1 evaporation to precipitation rate) which
must have been anathema to the prehistoric retiree.
Prehistoric environmental changes in the area generally correlate with the Antevs
(1955) model, and consist of a post-Pleistocene, cool and moist Anathermal (10,0007500 B.P.), a warm and dry Altithermal (7500-4000 B.P.) and a moderate Medithermal
(4000 B.P. to present). These periods are variously posited to tie in with the documented heavy occupation of the Llano Estacada in the Paleoindian period, from 14,000
to 7000 B.P., the virtual absence of occupational evidence between 7000-4000 B.P.,
the Early and Mid-Archaic periods, and the suggested return of aboriginal occupation
around 4000 B.P., a presence which was sustained through the Late-Archaic, Prehistoric and Historic periods (Hughes 1989). Cultural evidence from this survey falls
primarily in the last period, and it consequently substantiates the perceived occupation
of the region during the Medithermal.

I 3

The area is currently a flyway for migratory fowl, and small fauna (rabbits, quail,
rodents, lizards and snakes) are common. In prehistory, the area was overrun by
herds of bison and antelope, with deer and the occasional bear providing dietary
variation for aboriginal hunters. Hughes has likened the Llano Estacada to a 11 great
sea of grass, 11 and considers bison on the grassy plains to be analogous to fish in the
sea. While the Southern Plains offered . little in the way of constant comforts, the
sporadic wealth of game and water apparently provided enough incentive to early
natives to lure them into the dunes and prairies on an occasional basis.

3

CULTURAL BACKGROUND
Gaines County
The documented occupational span in Gaines County runs from Paleoindian to
Historic Euroamerican sites. Prehistoric sites in the area frequently yield ceramics,
ground stone, arrow points and fauna! remains. The Cedar Lake area contains three
Archaic burials and three undated Prehistoric sites. The Paleoindian draw sites in the
Panhandle are famous, and Gaines County contains several, including 41GA14, a
Paleoindian to Archaic campsite with groundstone and 41GA11, a Paleoindian bison
kill site in Seminole Draw.
Three sites in particular are relevant to material located during the SPSC survey.
41GA12, 13 and 14 were located and recorded by Victor Polyak of the Gaines County
Archeological Society in sand dunes of north central Gaines County, in locales similar
to the dune fields on the SPSC ROW. These sites contained possible Bison antiquus
remains, Archaic dart points, brownware ceramics, metates and several Paleoindian
dart points.
The Gaines County site inventory was raised from 15 to 48 during a recent survey
carried out by Karl Kibler (1991) and reported in his Master's thesis. The intent of this
sample survey was to devise and test methods of site identification on draws in the
Llano Estacada. Consequently Kibler's study area is distant from the SPSC ROW, and
concentrates mostly on the draw environment in the southeastern part of Gaines
County. However, his and other data (Collins 1971) reflect the potential for sites in the
dune fields and sand ridges that are more remote from water.
Of Kibler's 33 sites, only seven were datable to the range from Paleoindian to
Archaic. Late Prehistoric diagnostics were completely absent from the study area.
Burned caliche was the most common site attribute, and in several cases constituted
"the only evidence of prehistoric cultural activities. 11 A variety of lithic debris, including
various cherts, quartzites, chalcedony and opalite were found. Stone tools were
associated with seven sites, but 24 of the 28 diagnostic points recorded were from
private collections, and only nine actual tools were found on sites during the survey.
This is doubtless, in part, testament to the fact that the Llano Estacada is a haven for
artifact collectors.

Andrews County
Of the 43 sites in Andrews County, 29 were recorded as part of the permitting
process for four different oil and gas pipelines. Of these sites, at least 20 were in dune
blowouts isolated from water, and 7 others were on dunes or eroded uplands next to
playas. The majority were dated Late Archaic to Late Prehistoric on the basis of
occasional pottery, gr_ound stone, and miscellaneous artifacts. Dart and arrow points

5

6 I SOUTHWESTERN PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY

were rare on these sites, although a local amateur archaeologist recorded a large playa
campsite near Shafter Lake -41 AD42 -which contained three Paleoindian points
(Scottsbluff, Milnesand and Eden). Chalcedony, chert and quartzite are common lithic
materials, while several site forms mention "opalized caliche," and one site, 41AD33,
yielded an obsidian biface. El Paso Brownware was the most commonly cited ceramic
in Andrews County. Hearths and burned rock or caliche were found on at least 10 of
the 29 pipeline sites.
Andrews Lake is the only area in the county subjected to intensive research (Collins
1968). The Andrews Lake complex includes eight sites, ranging in age from Paleoindian
to Historic, and containing masonry foundations of several dwellings, clay and stonelined hearths, burned rock hearths, numerous burials, caches and stone walls. These
rather elaborate sites center around the semi-permanent availability of water in
Andrews Lake. Only two of these sites, 41AD6 and 41AD7, resemble those located
during the SPSC survey. These site areas are described as
dunes composed of indurated clay and sand whose surface is stabilized
by a cover of vegetation ... it is in the [unvegetated] deflation pockets
that burned rock fragments, flint debris and a few artifacts are exposed.
(Collins 1968:143)
Site 41AD6 contained five arrow points (Alba, Fresno, three untyped) and six dart
points (Langtry, Marcos, four untyped) dating from the Middle Archaic to the Prehistoric
period. Site 41AD7 was a small campsite containing a few flakes and burned caliche
chunks, and one untypable dart point midsection, indicating a non-specific Archaic
date.
Ector County

Prior to this survey only five sites were recorded in Ector County, but information
from surrounding counties is relevant to Ector County to some extent. Data from only
three of the previously recorded sites in the county were on file at TARL. Of these, two
lie near the edge of the Llano Estacada caprock in the western part of the county.
41 EC1 is a rather widespread playa/draw campsite on the edge of the caprock near
Notrees, Texas. A variety of artifacts was found on the site, including several dart or
arrow points, but none of these were typed by Ken Bennett, who recorded the site in
May of 1960. In addition to the untyped points, Bennett found ground stone, chert
drills, and some beads. 41 EC2 is a rock art site, with the recorder reporting several
faint pictographs painted on the faces of the sandstone bluffs east of Notrees. A deer,
two birds, and several hand prints are among the reported figures. No temporal
diagnostics were reported in the site material, although local collectors report finding
"small, corner-notched points" on the site. Recorder Aaron Riggs also reported burned
soil and sandstone, and an extensive lithic scatter when he visited the site in 1979.
A third site, 41 EC3, lies not far from the eastern end of the SPSC ROW, near the
intersection of Highways 158 and 1788 and newly recorded 41 EC6. This site is a playa
camp with groundstone and several untyped projectile points mentioned in the forms.

I 7

While no burned rock or caliche is mentioned, the location and size of the site suggest
that it was a frequently and/or extensively used campsite, and hearth remains are highly
probable.

SITES ALONG THE PROPOSED SPSC ROW
Six prehistoric campsites (Table) and one isolated find were recorded by this survey.
One site is in Gaines County, four in Andrews County, and one in Ector County. No
sites or artifacts were found in the few hundred meters of Midland County crossed by
this transmission line.
Gaines County
41GA52

This small aboriginal campsite is in a dune 11 blowout 11 or depression about 400
meters north of the Gaines County/Andrews County line, and about 30 meters west of
the Texas/New Mexico state line (Fig. 1). The site is located in the middle of a large
dune field that parallels Monument Draw about 3 km to the north. The dune field is
large, and its internal topographic features are generally homogeneous and undifferentiated, thus making this site extremely difficult to plot on quad maps. The artifact
assemblage consists of one chert flake and a dozen marble to golf ball-sized lumps of
burned caliche. Shovel probes uncovered no buried material.
On the surface, this site appears unimportant, and, indeed, its minimal artifact
assemblage provides little information about the nature of its occupants or the time of
occupation. Such campsites are common in dune fields in this and the surrounding
counties, and their locations in dune blowouts, far from the nearest permanent water
source, could provide clues to the nature and direction of hunting/foraging trips by
aboriginal peoples.
TABLE. Recorded Sites.
Site
Number

County

Location

Site Type

Recommended
Actions

41GA52

Gaines

South of Monument Draw

Campsite

None

41AD49

Andrews

South of Monument Draw

Several campsites

Avoidance

41AD50

Andrews

East of the Texas/New Mexico border

Dune campsite

None

41AD51

Andrews

East of the Texas/New Mexico border
Out of the survey ROW

Dune campsite

None

41AD52

Andrews

North of the Andrews/Ector county line Open campsite

None

41EC6

Ector

South of the Andrews/Ector county line Open campsite

Avoidance

9

10 I SOUTHWESTERN PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY

Andrews County
41AD49

This large aboriginal campsite lies at the southern edge of the same dune field
which contains 41GA52 (Fig. 1). Site center is just east of a windmill which straddles
the Texas/New Mexico state line, and about 600 meters south of the Gaines/Andrews
county line. The site is characterized by numerous burned caliche concentrations,
associated lithic scatters, and various tools distributed throughout the depressions
and blowouts in the area. The site centers around a playa depression just east of the
modern windmill, that is currently being used as a water and feed lot for cattle. There
is no water in the depression at this time, but its shape and size, its proximity to the
windmill, and extent and density of archeological material around it all indicate that
there was semi-permanent water here at some time in the past.
Shovel probes revealed no subsurface material within the ROW, but due to the
nature of dune migration and the differential eroding and filling of cover sands it is
possible that some buried material remains in other portions of the site. Collections
from the site include one Ensor dart point base of Late Archaic age (Fig. 2a), a silicified
caliche core and a crude scraper of a reddish-brown rhyolite (Fig. 2b) probably
collected from the Pecos River gravels. The site is at least 60,000 meters square, and
extends well outside the boundaries of this ROW survey. SPSC should avoid placing
a tower here and construction crews should make all reasonable attempts to avoid
disturbing the site area by earth-moving or clearing within the site boundaries.
41AD50

This aboriginal campsite is exposed in an east/west road/pipeline cut which
intersects the proposed ROW about 4 km south of Highway 176 at the Windmill Hill
stock pond, 3.75 km east of the Texas/New Mexico boundary (Fig. 1). A fenceline,
which appears to be the southern boundary of the Flying W Ranch, parallels this
road/pipeline to the south.
Old USGS quad maps indicate that there was once a low dune on the southern
edge of a shallow playa depression here. At least one other archeological site is
associated with this playa (see 41AD51 below). The dune appears to have been
flattened by pipeline and fence construction, and subsequent road traffic has helped
re-distribute artifacts which were probably part of a dune or blowout camp site here.
Shovel probes found no sub-surface material, and there appears to be little or no
integrity to the surface scatter. One crude, untyped Archaic dart point was collected
from the site (Fig. 2c). In the unlikely event that SPSC has a pylon planned for this 1o
by 80 meter area, construction personnel should avoid bulldozing within the site
boundary.
41AD51

This moderate-sized aboriginal encampment is located in the lee (northwest) of and
between a pair of dunes about 3. 75 km south of Highway 176 at Windmill Hill, and

SITES ALONG THE

a

c

0

I 11

d

10 cm

FIGURE 2. Collected artifacts. a) Ensor dart point, 41 AD49; b) rhyolite scraper,
41AD49; c) Untyped dart point, 41AD50; d) Marcos dart point, isolated find.
about 3. 75 km east of the Texas/New Mexico state line (Fig. 1). The site consists of a
thin to moderately dense scatter of burned caliche, burned rock, chert and silicified
caliche flakes and chunks. Subsurface probes found no buried cultural material. The
prehistoric occupants may have been utilizing a playa depression southeast of the dunes as a water or lithic resource area, and the site may be associated with 41 AD50.
The site was discovered while surveyors were attempting to locate the SPSC survey
corridor, and was later determined to lie at least 100 meters north of the proposed
ROW, so transmission line work poses no immediate threat to this site.
41AD52

This small aboriginal campsite sits in a dune depression in an otherwise featureless
plain about 250 meters east of a maintained north/south road that parallels a large
transmission line and constitutes the approximate western boundary of the Fasken
Ranch property (Fig. 1). It is composed of a half-dozen chert flakes, and several chunks
of burned rock and caliche. Subsurface probes revealed no buried material, and the
surface scatter has little integrity. The site may have been disturbed by oil well
construction and traffic in the area. The artifact scatter lies mostly outside the proposed
SPSC ROW, and consequently transmission line construction is not expected to
threaten this very minimal and disrupted campsite.
Isolated Find

A Marcos dart point (Fig. 2d) was found about 2 km north of Highway 115, on the
western edge of the SPSC ROW. No cultural material was associated with the find,
although a playa/dune complex (Sand Ranch) about 1 km west of this spot may contain
site material.

11

12 I SOUTHWESTERN PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY

Ector County
41ECS

This site straddles the Andrews County/Ector County line at a point where the SPSC
centerline intersects and joins an existing pipeline ROW, about 5 km east of Highway
385 and about 6 km north of Highway 158 (Fig. 1). The site sits on a low rise which
overlooks a significant playa depression to the northeast (Fig. 3). Several hearths and
burned rock concentrations (Fig. 3b) are exposed in the road/pipeline cut along this
knoll top, and burned rock and flakes appear widely scattered over the knoll top and
in the surrounding small rills and drainages, extending north to the edge of the playa
depression. Shovel probes found no subsurface cultural material, but the nature and
location of the exposed hearths indicates a cultural depth of at least 15 ems. The
distribution and density of cultural material seen on the surface suggest that it would
be difficult to find buried material by random shovel probes. No temporally diagnostic
artifacts were located on the surface, but the type and distribution of the hearths in the
area are consistent with other Late Archaic campgrounds (Hughes 1989). It is
recommended that SPSC avoid placing any pylons within the site boundaries, and
restrict heavy earthmoving on the knoll top and along its northern edges.

SITES

THE

I 13

a

b

3. Site views, 41 EC6. a) Low rise overlooking playa depression; b) burned
rock concentration exposed on the surface.
FIGURE

SUMMARY
At this time, approximately 2 miles of the proposed construction corridor remain
unsurveyed, pending access to various segments of private property. The six sites
recorded along the surveyed route range from isolated, single-event campsites to
extensive hearth fields with accompanying domestic debris. The association between
prehistoric occupation and playa depressions is repeated in this sample, although in
some cases modern land use has smoothed much of the topography.
The nature of transmission line construction--in this case, widely-spaced pylons,
with little or no earth-moving or disturbance in between--makes it relatively easy in
most cases to avoid affecting the archeological sites. As outlined above, 41 AD49 and
41 EC6 are the only sites on this portion of the survey which require specific and
attentive avoidance measures. Projections based on the data accumulated to date
suggest that similar measures can be employed to avoid any archeological material
that might be encountered on the remaining 2 miles of ROW. Therefore, cultural
resources do stand as a bar to construction of this transmission line. As always,
construction personnel should exercise caution when conducting earthmoving or other
invasive procedures around archeologically sensitive areas, and notifyTARL personnel if any cultural material is discovered or disturbed during construction.

15

REFERENCES CITED
Antevs, E.
1955 Geologic Climate Dating in the West. American Antiquity 20(4):317-335.
Bomar, G. W.
1983 Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Ferguson, K.
1986 The Texas Landscape: The Geographic Provinces of Texas. Texas Mosaics,
Austin.
Collins, M.B.
1968 The Andrews Lake Locality: New Archeological Data from the Southern Llano
Estacada, Texas. Master's thesis, Department of Anthropology, University
of Texas, Austin.
1971

A Review of Llano Estacada Archeology and Ethnohistory. Plains
Anthropologist 16:85-104.

Hughes, J. T.
1989 Prehistoric Cultural Developments on the Texas High Plains. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 60: 1-55.
Kibler, K. W.
1991 Surface Distributions of Sites and Survey Strategies for Draws on the
Southern Llano Estacada. Master's thesis, Department of Anthropology,
University of Texas, Austin.

17

