An Archaeological Survey
of the Spring Hills Treatment Plant,
Guadalupe County, Texas
SUBMITTED TO

PSI
San Antonio, Texas
By

Harry J. Shafer and Thomas R. Hester

ABASOLO ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONSULTANTS
San Antonio, Texas

Texas Antiquities Permit # 5354
Report No. 84
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants
San Antonio, Texas
2009

1

An Archaeological Survey
of the Spring Hills Treatment Plant,
Guadalupe County, Texas
SUBMITTED TO

PSI
San Antonio, Texas
By

Harry J. Shafer and Thomas R. Hester

ABASOLO ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONSULTANTS
San Antonio, Texas

Texas Antiquities Permit # 5354
Report No. 84
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants
San Antonio, Texas
2009

2

Abstract
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants conducted a Phase I archaeological survey of the
Springs Hill Treatment Plant and pipeline, near Seguin in Guadalupe County, Texas. The
field work was carried out by the authors on August 10 and 21, 2009. Work performed
included a pedestrian survey of the Treatment Plant site, pipeline routes, and 10 backhoe
trenches on the Treatment Plant property. The eastern margins of site 41GU3 extended
into the southwest corner of the Treatment Plant property. Two new sites, 41GU127 and
41GU128 were recorded. 41GU127 is a Late Prehistoric/Historic site that has a shallow,
mixed cultural deposit; 41GU128 is a buried Middle-Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric
site with intact cultural deposits. The 41GU3 site portion and 41GU127 deposits do not
have stratigraphic integrity and therefore do not merit protection. Site 41GU128,
however, does have stratigraphic integrity, has significant research value and should be
protected from future construction.

3

Introduction and Background
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants (AAC) conducted a Phase I archaeological survey of
the Springs Hill Treatment Plant and pipeline in Guadalupe County, Texas. Future plans
call for expanding the treatment plant with construction to be on the west side of the
existing plant facilities. The cultural resource survey called for investigations of all of the
Treatment Plant property and to inspect the pipelines that were to be replaced and
upgraded.
The Treatment Plant is situated on the second terrace south of the Guadalupe River. The
field work was carried out by the authors under TAC Permit #5354 on August 10 and 21,
2009. Work performed included a pedestrian survey of the Treatment Plant site, pipeline
routes, and 10 backhoe trenches on the Treatment Plant property. The work was carried
out in accordance with the “Archeological Survey Standards for Texas” to insure that no
archaeological or historical resources eligible for nomination to the National Register of
Historic Places are damaged or destroyed due to the planned construction. This Phase I
investigation is designed to detect and record any archaeological or historical component
that may be present in the project area.
The pipeline alignment will be connecting to the waste water treatment plant located on
the south bank of the Guadalupe River about 2,000 feet west of Highway 46 in Seguin.
This location along the terraces of the Guadalupe River is a high probability area for
archaeological sites. Two archaeological sites located on similar landforms in Seguin,
41GU3 and, most importantly, 41GU117.

Setting
The Springs Hill Treatment Plant is on the south side of the Guadalupe River, on the
western edge of the city of Seguin (Figs. 1-3). The facility overlooks Lake Placid,
impounded by a dam built on the river in 1928. The original landscape of the Treatment
Plant property appears to have been greatly modified over the years. On the east end, a
deep gully that drained into the Guadalupe was filled with concrete debris. East to west,
the terrace faces and erosion features have been altered, creating a gentle, flat slope
toward the river on the east.
The underlying geology has been mapped by Shafer (1966: Plate 1) as the Midway Group
of Paleocene (Tertiary) age (Fig.4). It is described as predominantly clay and silt, with
some sandstone and limestone. Overlying the Midway is the Leona Formation, with
stratified sand and gravel, which provided a nearly level plain capped by black, fertile
soils (Shafer 1966:18).
The soils above the Leona are seen in a map of the project region (USDA Web Soil
Survey [WSS]), with most of the area dominated by Lewisville (LeA) silty clay,
essentially flat in exposure (Fig. 5). The present Treatment Plant and the area adjacent to
it are mapped largely as the Ferris-Heiden soils (FhF3) on eroded 5-20% slopes. These
are essentially eroded upland soils, distinctive from the olive, pale olive, and brownish

4

yellow colors of their clays., Adjacent to the river, on the west side of the facility, the
Seguin (Se) soil, a silty clay soil formed in alluvium.

Archaeological Background
Guadalupe County is located on the southeastern edge of the Central Texas
archaeological region (Simons and Moore 1997). It is very poorly known from a
research standpoint. Only about 30 publications represent archaeological work within
the county, and many of these are small-scale surveys that reported a few sites (Kelly and
Hester 197 ), but no intensive research, such as detailed analysis or excavation. The
Texas Archeological Site Atlas lists 126 sites that have been formally recorded at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin. Counties
surrounding Guadalupe have, for the most part, seen more concentrated research.
County
Bexar
Comal
Caldwell
Gonzales
Guadalupe
Hays
Wilson

Recorded Sites
2050
354
131
228
126
443
122

The numbers above reflect, among other things, the activity level of professional and
avocational archaeologists, urban expansion, and reservoir planning. Largely rural
counties, especially those where avocational archaeologists have not been very active,
have many fewer sites recorded (e.g., Caldwell, Guadalupe, and Wilson).
Examining the records related to Guadalupe County, we can see that the cultural
chronology, or cultural sequence, is linked closely to the Central Texas archaeological
area, but in some areas, materials more typical of South Texas are found (Collins 2004;
Hester 2004). This is to be expected in an area on the boundary between two major
cultural regions. Human occupation dates back at least to Paleoindian times (11,2008,800 years ago). The earliest distinctive artifacts can be linked to the Clovis and
Folsom traditions, during the end of the Pleistocene (Ice Age). Few specimens are
known, and no sites have been excavated. Whether now-extinct Ice Age mammals (e.g.,
mammoth, long-horned bison) were hunted in this area is not yet known. Between
10,800-8,800 years ago, there is a distinct population growth, as the climate began to
approach modern conditions. Technologies used in making diagnostic Paleoindian points
continued during this time; the people most likely focused on the hunting and gathering
of modern species of plants and animals. Projectile point types of this time frame,
especially Golondrina and Angostura, have been documented (Everett 1978, as well as
recent work at site 41GU 117, the McKee site, in Seguin).
After the Pleistocene, the onset of modern climates (with some variation through time) is

5

referred to as the Holocene. A long archaeological era, from roughly 8,500 – 1,500 years
ago, is known as the Archaic. Evidence of human presence is abundant, with many
camp sites and ancillary sites, found across the landscape. Occupations are usually
focused on low terraces of the Guadalupe River or along the borders of its tributaries.
These Native Americans probably lived in bands of 100 or more individuals, without any
known tribal linkage, and practiced a hunting and gathering subsistence pattern. Many
sites were revisited seasonally over thousands of years. The primary approach to
separating Archaic subdivisions through time is the identification of various types and
shapes of projectile points (dart points; used with spear and spear thrower). Different
people used different styles at different times, and extensive analysis in adjacent areas of
Central Texas have made it possible to link certain types to specific time periods (Turner
and Hester 1999).
We do not yet have a good view of the variation of site types within Guadalupe County.
The burned rock middens of the limestone areas of Central Texas (accumulations of fire
cracked rock resulting from earth-oven cooking) are clearly absent, although the use of
stones in earth oven or hot-rock cooking is clearly evident in the relative abundance of
fire-cracked rock at some camp sites. Site deposits found at the Springs Hill Treatment
Plant were formed through repeated human occupations. These campsites near the river
periodically covered by river silts as the floodplain and terraces formed over the past
millennia. Sites on high terraces and in the uplands sometimes were used a locales for
making stone tools (lithic quarries) or as camp sites also. A noted upland site in
Guadalupe County is located near Mill Creek, a tributary of the Guadalupe River. The
area as described as hills capped with gravels and clay loam soils and oak woodlands.
Howard (1997) reports several locales at which he found Archaic artifacts. These include
dart points, including Tortugas, a possible Abasolo, a Lange (?), and a Refugio. There
were also a non-diagnostic lanceolate biface, a Clear Fork tool, modified cobbles,
including crude bifaces and trimmed flakes. Extensive debitage occurs at two of the
locales.
Around 500-1000 years ago, the bow and arrow was introduced as a new technology in
the Texas area. Evidence of this new “weapons delivery system” are tiny chipped stone
arrow points (often mistakenly called “bird points” by collectors). The Austin phase,
characterized by the corner-notched Scallorn arrow point and thin triangular knives, is the
first Late Prehistoric horizon documented for the area. Later in this era, roughly 750 to
300 years ago, the Late Prehistoric cultures developed some distinctive traits in parts of
Texas known as the Toyah Horizon (Arnn, 2007). The Toyah Horizon has distinctive
arrow point types, pottery-making, and an emphasis on the hunting of bison.
The Toyah Horizon continues up to the time of contact with the Spanish in the late 17th
century and early 18th century. The proximity of San Antonio likely led to some
Guadalupe County Native Americans going into the missions there. Sites of this time
frame are very difficult to find, as camp sites were only briefly occupied in contrast to
the Archaic period. With expanded Anglo-European settlement prior to the middle of
the 19th century, farmsteads and ranch complexes developed, along with the first villages

6

and towns. Ceramic fragments, metal, glass and other Historic materials are widely
found. A small area at Springs Hill Treatment plant had such remains, perhaps from an
early farm.
Nearby Archaeological Sites
There are three archaeological sites in the vicinity of Springs Hill Treatment Plant that
Warrant some discussion. One is to the north of Seguin, while the other two, like
the Treatment Plant, are along the Guadalupe River in Seguin.
Site 41GU17, the Tschoepe-Harboth site, is 4-5 miles north of Seguin, on Geronimo
Creek. The report is by a local avocational archaeologist, Robert M. Everett (1978).
The manuscript is 58 pages in length, well organized, and contains considerable details.
All of the artifacts were surface collected from fields on the properties of the two men for
which the site was named. Based on a borrow-pit dug in one of the fields some years
earlier, Everett (1978) was able to discern the soil stratigraphy and to estimate that the
deposits are four feet, or more, deep. Paleoindian artifacts included several Angostura
points; several types of Archaic points were also collected. These include Martindale,
Tortugas (or Early Triangular), Nolan, Bulverde-like, Marcos, Montell, Darl, Frio and
Ensor. Large thin bifaces characteristic of the Central Texas Middle and Late Archaic
were also documented, as was a corner tang biface. Many Guadalupe Bifaces, a tool form
of the Early Archaic, are known from the site (Brown 1998). Artifacts of bone and shell
were also found.
Adjacent on the east to the Springs Hill Treatment Plant is site 41GU3, the Yucca Point
site. It was reported by several individuals in the early 1970s. Though adjacent to the
Guadalupe River, 41GU3, appears to be an upland remnant with exposed rock and
ferruginous sandstone boulders on brush covered hills. The site itself covers more than
200 acres. Surface collections found diagnostic points of the Archaic and Late
Prehistoric periods. Little more is know of the site, and much of the area has been
developed as housing tracts in recent decades.
Site 41GU117, the McKee Site, is situated on the Guadalupe River, roughly 2.5 miles
downstream from the Spring Hill Treatment Plant. First found and dug in by the
landowners, the site has attracted much publicity in Seguin. Presently, the Southern
Texas Archaeological Association, headquartered in San Antonio, is conducting scientific
excavations at the site. The depth of the site is from 1-2 meters. Artifacts reported thus
far include (Paleoindian) Midland, Angostura; (Archaic) Martindale, Bell, Andice, Early
Triangular, Pedernales, Kinney, Castroville, Montell, Ensor, Edgewood, Frio, and Darl;
(Late Prehistoric) Scallorn, Perdiz, and Toyah Horizon drill. Impressions from early
excavations and conversations with the landowners suggest that there is a potentially
important Early Archaic component; in addition to point types, there are very large
numbers of Guadalupe Bifaces dating to this era.

7

Research Design
The research design initially called for entire pipeline route from the water tower, west
along FM 725 to Placid Drive, north along Placid Drive to Arrowhead Bluff, and to the
Treatment Plant site. This route was inspected, but after a meeting with Keith Steffen,
Field Operations, Manager, Springs Hill Water District the survey party was informed
that the work plan was revised to keep some of the pipeline and upgrade other sections
with larger pipes. We were informed that no new pipeline routes were to be excavated as
the previous trenches would be used in the pipe replacements. Our main concern was the
Treatment Plant property where plans called for the installation of a new tank on the west
side of the existing facility, and the installation of solar panels east of the present facility
(Fig. 6). Most of the treatment plant facility was constructed on the second terrace of the
Guadalupe River, and any planned construction on the terraces was a concern since this
location is a high probability area for buried archaeological sites. With that in mind,
backhoe testing was planned to accompany the pedestrian survey of the Treatment Plant.
Any archaeological material encountered was to be located using hand-held GPS units
and plotted on the project map. The artifacts were digitally imaged for documentation.
The results of these investigations are reported below.

Survey Results
The results will be reported in two parts: Pipeline Inspection and Backhoe Testing.

Pipeline Inspection
The original pipeline route was inspected from the Barcus water tower at FM467 and FM
725 along FM725 to Placid Drive, and from Placid Drive to Arrowhead Bluff. Both
routes follow existing pipelines and are confined to the bar ditches bordering the road.
As we learned following our discussion with Keith Steffen, only the pipeline from Placid
Drive to Arrowhead Bluff will need new trenching. The line along Placid Drive from
FM725 to Arrowhead Bluff does not extend across moderate to high probability land
form for archaeological sites until Placid Drive turns toward Indian Trail; at that point the
line continues straight to Arrowhead Bluff (Fig. 6). This portion of the line actually
crosses the south margin of 41GU3. Observed cultural material here consisted of a
couple of flakes on surface slope wash capping ferruginous sandstone rocks of the Cooks
Mountain formation. No buried deposits were observed in several landscaping cuts for
residential development. No shovel tests were deemed necessary due to the shallow
soils and deposits disturbed by buried utilities.
The other section of pipeline inspected was from the Treatment Plant across the
Guadalupe River Terrace to Highway 46 (Figs. 6, 7), and east of Highway 46 to the
fenced property of the residential development at Greenway Drive. The current plans are
to replace the existing pipeline with a larger line using the existing trench. No new
pipeline trenches will be dug. The pipeline easement was walked and now cultural
resources were observed in the easement. Light scatters of culture material, flakes, core,

8

mussel shell, and fire-cracked rock were noted along the eroded front edge of the terrace
bordering the river and in a disturbed quarry area north of the pipeline. There was no
surface indication to suggest that this light scatter extended into the easement area. No
testing was done along the easement since no new trenches are to be excavated.

Treatment Plant
The field work at the treatment plant consisted of a 100% pedestrian survey conducted on
August 10, 2009 and the excavation of 10 backhoe trenches on August 19, 2009 (Fig. 3).

Pedestrian Survey
The pedestrian survey crew observed scattered prehistoric artifacts on the ridge
immediately south of and southwest of the plant facility. Both areas have been highly
disturbed by previous land modeling prior to the construction of the facility. The trace of
prehistoric cultural material observed on the hill and in disturbed fill scraped from the
hill. This cultural material was associated with and marks the eastern periphery of the
extensive prehistoric archaeological site 41GU3 that occurs along the high ridge to the
west (Fig. 8). The landscape west of the plant facility appears to contain introduced fill
to elevate the land above the flood plain. This area was marked for backhoe testing to
verify this suspicion.
A concentration of prehistoric cultural material consisting of flakes, a biface fragment,
and fire-cracked rock was noted east of the Treatment Plant between the treatment plant
and the holding pond berm along and immediately south of the fence (Fig. ). This scatter
of cultural material was designed as TP-1. A second area of concentration was noted in
the southeast portion of the property west and north of a small gully (Fig. ). The
observed material consists of fire-cracked rock, chert flakes, and mussel shell. This area
was designated as TP-2 and also marked for backhoe testing.
In summary, the pedestrian survey failed to find any cultural resources along the pipeline
route except on the south and east slopes of the ridge on which 41GU3 is located. This
was not the case with the Treatment Plant property, however, where two new surface
concentrations of prehistoric artifacts were noted. Both are on a Guadalupe River terrace
and we felt that they were likely to contain buried cultural resources.

Backhoe Testing
Backhoe testing was conducted to determine if buried cultural resources existed on the
Treatment Plant property. Three areas of concern were noted during the pedestrian
survey. The first area was the eastern slope of the ridge on which 41GU3 is located
southwest of the treatment plant facility. The survey party noted that the landscape
appeared to have been modified by removing some of the ridge material down slope to
raise the elevation of the surface above the floodplain. In other words, the landscape was

9

not natural. Two backhoe trenches (BHT) were placed on the west side of the facility to
see if the fill was indeed intrusive (Fig. 3).
BHT-1
This east-west trench was four meters long and located on the slope west side of
the plant facility and eight meters west of the fence. Excavations reached a depth of 1
meter. The profile showed a dark brown commingled fill consisting of river muck mixed
with slope wash from surface to the bottom of the trench at a depth of 1 meter. Juvenile
and adult Asiatic clam shells were observed in the back dirt indicating that some of the
fill material was likely dredged from Placid Lake. Asiatic clams (Corbicula fluminea)
were introduced, from China, into the United States about the mid 1920s to the late 1930s
(USGS 2001).The trench did not reach undisturbed deposits, and no cultural material was
observed.
BHT-2
This trench was placed at the toe of the slope where the slope meets the floodplain
(Fig. 9). It is down slope and north of BHT-1 and 7 meters west of the fence bordering
the Treatment Plant facility. The trench was dug to see if undisturbed deposits could be
identified and to test for traces of cultural material. The trench was 4 meters long. The
upper 75 cm contained disturbed fill as expected similar to that encountered in BHT-1.
No Asiastic clams were noted, but a brick fragment provided indication that it was indeed
introduced fill. The fill from 75-1.2 meters consisted of gray brown clay (10YR5/2),
possibly Seguin soil type, typical of the Guadalupe River floodplain. No cultural
material was present.
BHT-3
BHT-3 was excavated to examine the surface concentration designated as 41GU127 on
the east side of the plant facility, 10 meters south of the north fence and 30 meters east of
an existing tank (Fig. 10). The trench was 5 meters long and 1.2 meters deep. The upper
45 cm consisted of homogeneous dark gray-brown clay (10YR5/3) with some admixture
of prehistoric and historic artifacts. This clay overlay a distinctive deposit containing
alternating lenses of ferruginous clay and brown clay which appears to be an old swale
fill consisting of upland wash containing ferruginous colluvial material banded with
alluvial strands. This deposit does not fit any local soil type and is therefore interpreted
as gully fill. No cultural material was seen below 45 cm.
Artifacts observed in BHT-3 included two biface fragments, a small burned core, several
flakes, mussel shell fragments, several pieces of rusted metal, a plain white stoneware
sherd, and a transfer print sherd of a pattern that dates to the late 19th or early 20th century
(Fig. ; cf. “Melton” in Blake and Freeman 1998: 83) (Fig. 11). The iron artifacts
consisted of strap metal, possibly can fragments, and unknown items. The assessment is
that the historic material dates to the early 20th century.

10

BHT-4.
This trench was placed about 20 meters east of BHT 3 to further examine the cultural
deposit identified as 41GU127. This trench was 5 meters long and reached a depth of 1.3
meters. Profile examination revealed a plow zone to a depth of about 30 cm, below
which was a brown blocky clay (10YR5/3) extended to a depth of 70 cm (Fig. 12). The
brown clay transitioned to a light brown clay loam (7.5YR6/4). Cultural material was
only present in the upper 30 cm, including the plow zone.
Artifacts observed in the back dirt include the proximal section of a Scallorn arrow point,
a possible arrow point preform fragment and several hard-hammer and biface thinning
flakes. Also observed was a hand forged iron chain hook fragment (Fig. 13).
The diagnostic artifacts observed in the back dirt indicated a multi-component site
consisting of a Late Prehistoric component and an early 20th century component. While
the site does extend into the area of BHT-4, it is apparent that the deposits are thinning
out eastward, are mixed, and have no stratigraphic integrity. The construction of the
retaining pond to the east of BHT-4 removed any portion of the site that may have
extended into that area. Furthermore, evidence of cultural material does not extent
southward more than about 30-40 meters from either test pit. Introduced fill from the
plant facility construction caps the terrace at that point. No further work is warranted at
site 41GU based on the pedestrian survey and backhoe testing. The deposit are shallow,
mixed with historic and prehistoric artifacts, and has no stratigraphic integrity.
BHT-5.
This trench was dug 40 meters east of the retaining pond and 5 meters south of the north
fence. This trench was excavated to examine if site 41GU127 continued east of the pond.
The trench profile showed a mottled grayish brown clay (10YR5/2) from the surface to a
depth of 55 cm. and containing no cultural material. At 55 cm a possible buried A
horizon was observed consisting of a brown clay (10YR5/3) with calcium carbonate
streaks and snail (Rabdotus sp) shell was observed. This deposit was only about 15 cm
thick but contained a trace of cultural material in the form of three flakes, a fire-cracked
rock, and mussel shell. From 70 cm to 1.3 meters, the soils consisted of a homogenous
light brown sandy clay loam (7.5YR6/4). No cultural material was observed in the clay
loam.
The flakes observed in the thin cultural bearing deposit include one biface thinning flake,
an indirect percussion flake blade, and another interior flake (Fig. 14).

11

BHT-6.
We were curious to know if the thin cultural bearing zone in BHT-5 extended southward
and perhaps was better defined. BHT-6 was excavated to explore that possibility. The 4
meter-long trench was located about 40 meters south of BHT 5. The profile showed that
the upper 40 cm was the same mottled sterile clay (10YR5/2) seen in BHT-5. A possible
A horizon was seen at about 40-50 cm with the same calcium carbonate streaks but no
cultural material was observed. From about 50 cm the deposits consisted of a blocky light
brown mottle clay loam similar to that seen in BHT-5. No cultural material was observed
in the trench.
BHT-7.
This unit was placed east of TP-5 to further explore the deposits on the terrace in the
northeast corner of the property. The trench was 4 meters long and 1.2 meters deep. The
profile upper deposits from the surface to 65 cm. consisted of a grayish brown clay
containing no cultural material. Below 65 cm the deposits grade to a light brown sandy
clay loam (7.5YR6/4), the same deposit encountered in BHT-5. This sandy clay
continues to the trench bottom, or 1.2 meters. At a depth of 90 cm, a small lens of mussel
shell was observed in the profile. No buried A horizon or other indications of a
stratigraphic break could be detected in the profile. No flakes or fire-cracked rock were
associated with this lens or at that level.
The mussel shell lens indicates that the alluvium was probably rapidly being deposited,
and the surface was intermittently used as a campsite between depositional episodes.
BHT-8.
When we conducted the pedestrian survey, we noted fire-cracked rock and flakes on the
surface on the north side of a small gully that borders the south fence. BHT-8 was placed
here to further examine this area (Figs. 15, 16). The deposits consisted of a blocky clay
loam (10YR5/3) to a depth of 50 cm; below that the soil darkened to a dark brown clay
loam (10YR3/3). At 80 cm, the soil hue faded to a dark brown (10YR4/3). Abundant
cultural material in the form of fire-cracked rock, snail (Rabdotus sp.), mussel shell,
flakes, and chipped stone artifacts occurred in the backdirt and throughout the profile,
from the surface to 1.2 meters (Fig. 17). At approximately 50 cm, a thin single-notched
late stage dart point preform was recovered (Fig. 17). This artifact, while not immediately
diagnostic, is probably a nearly completed single-notched Ensor point dating to the Late
Archaic Period, or ca. A.D 100-500 (Turner and Hester 1999).
This cultural deposit was designated as site 41GU 128. It consists of a dense stratified
midden deposit that exceeds 1.2 meters in depth. The upper deposits are likely Late
Prehistoric while the deeper deposits probably contain at least Late Archaic and possibly
Middle Archaic components.

12

BHT 9.
This trench, 5 meters long and 1.2 meters deep, was dug 25 meters north of BHT-8 to test
the limits of the site in that direction. The trench profile is virtually the same as that
described for BHT-8 and will not be repeated. Cultural material extended to a depth of at
least 1.2 meters, it was not as dense as that observed in BTH-8, however. Observed in the
back dirt were fire-cracked rocks, land snails (Rabdotus sp.), chert flakes, and mussel
shell. The results of this test showed that while the cultural material did extend in this
direction, the site limits lie between BHT-9 and BHT-7.
BHT-10.
To further examine the cultural deposit encountered in BHT-8, we excavated this trench
30 meters west of BHT 8 and 14 meters south of the south fence. A dense burned rock
deposit was encountered immediately below the surface; this deposit was only about 40
cm thick and also contained mussel shell (Fig. 19), a split deer bone fragment, flakes, and
snail (Rabdotus sp). The soil was dark brown clay (10YR5/3). The amount of burned
rock diminished below 40 cm but mussel shell, snail, and flakes continued to a depth of
1.3 meters. From about 40 cm to 70 cm, the soil hue was a very dark brown clay
(10YR3/3) mixed with cultural material. From 70 to 1.3 meters the soil became lighter
fading to light brown clay (10YR6/3). Cultural material continued throughout, albeit
lightly scattered.
No diagnostic material was encountered in BHT-10, but the density of material and bone
preservation in the uppermost deposit with fire-cracked rock suggests a Late Prehistoric
component with limited faunal preservation. Beneath this is likely a Late Archaic, and
possible a deeper Middle Archaic component, all a continuation of the site encountered in
BHT-8.
The findings form BHT-5-10 combined with surface indications allows the approximate
boundaries of site 41GU128 to be determined (Figs. 2 and 3). Because this site has depth,
is multi-component, is undisturbed below the plow zone (ca. 25-30 cm), and has
stratigraphic integrity, the site area should be avoided for future construction if at all
possible.

Summary and Conclusions
Pedestrian survey and backhoe testing confirmed the eastern boundary of 41GU3 and
identified two new archaeological sites. Both new sites are located on the Springs Hill
Treatment Plant property east of the plant facility. One site, 41GU127, is a multicomponent site containing a Late Prehistoric and an early 20th century component. The
cultural deposits do not have stratigraphic integrity as they are shallow, do not exceed 40
cm in either backhoe test, and are mixed. For this reason, we do not recommend further
research at this site.

13

41GU128, located in the southeast portion of the Treatment Plant property is also a multicomponent site probably containing Late Prehistoric, Late and possibly Middle Archaic
components. This site is intact, stratified, and has stratigraphic integrity. The uppermost
component contains some bone preservation, but the deeper deposit apparently do not as
no bones were seen in either BHT 8 or BHT 9. The site should be protected from future
construction in this area of the plant facility.

References Cited
Arnn, J. W.
2007

Transformation and Persistence of Indigenous Cultural Identity During the
Early Colonial and Late Prehistoric Periods in Texas. Ph.D. Dissertation,
Department of Anthropology, University of Kentucky, Lexington.

Brown, K. M.
1998 Reworked Guadalupe Tools from the Tschoepe-Harborth Site.
La Tierra 25(4):21-25.
Collins, M. B.
2004 Archeology in Central Texas. In, The Prehistory of Texas, edited
by T. K. Perttula, pp. 101-126. Texas A&M University Press, College
Station.
Everett, R. W.
1978 The Tschoepe-Harborth Site, A Prehistoric Indian Campsite in
Guadalupe County, Texas. Unpublished manuscript on file with
the authors. 58 pp.
Hester, T.R.
2004

The Prehistory of South Texas. In, The Prehistory of Texas, edited
by T. K. Perttula, pp. 127-154. Texas A&M University Press, College
Station.

Howard, J. B.
1997 Middle Archaic Artifacts from Upland Sites in Guadalupe County.
La Tierra 24(4):26-29.
Shafer, G. H.
1966 Ground-Water Resources of Guadalupe County, Texas.
Report 19. Texas Water Development Board, Austin.
Simons, H. and W. E. Moore
1997 Archeological Bibliography for the Central Region of Texas.
Office of the State Archeologist Special Report 36. Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.
Turner, E.S.and T.R. Hester

14

1998

Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. 2nd edition.
Gulf Publishing, Houston.

USGS
2001 United States Geological Survey, Non-Indigeneous Species Information
Bulletin, Asiatic Clam. http:\\fl.biology.usgs.gov/corbicula4.pdf

15

Figures

Survey Area

Pipelines

Figure 1. Topographic map showing the location of the Spring Hills Water Supply
Corporation Treatment plant and areas surveyed.

16

Figure Removed
Figure 2. Topographic map showing treatment plant property (blue line), pipeline
surveyed, and locations of site 41GU3, 41GU127, and 41GU128.

Figure Removed

Figure 3. Aerial perspective showing locations of the backhoe trenches, and sites
41GU127,and 41GU 128; the locations and extent of the latter two sites were
determined by backhoe testing and surface inspection.

Project Area

Figure 4. Geology map showing the principal formations in the Seguin area.
The keys to the respective formation are: Ecm: Cook Mountain formation;
Ewi: Wilcox formation; Qt: fluviatile terrace deposits; Qal: alluvium.

17

Project Area

Figure 5. General soils map for the project area.

Figure Removed
Figure 6. Aerial view showing the location of the pipeline route from the Treatment
Plant to Highway 46. Arrowhead Bluff connects to Kiowa Trail (lower left corner).
The section of the pipeline connecting to Arrrowhead Bluff is the only new section to
be installed.

18

Figure 7 View of the pipeline easement taken just west of Highway 46.

Figure 8. View toward the east of the eastern margins of 41GU3 with the
Treatment Plant in the background.

19

Figure 9. Backhoe setting up to excavate BHT-2 west of the plant facility
and on the toe of the sloop above the floodplain.

Figure 10. Testing in progress in BHT-3 at the Spring Hills Water Supply
Corporation treatment plant.

20

Figure 11. Artiacts observed at BHT-3 site 41GU127. Top row, left to right: White
stoneware sherd, transfer print sherd, two biface fragments, burned chert flake.
Bottom row: Two biface thinning flakes, hard-hammer flake two metal fragments.

Figure 12. H. Shafer Recording the profile at BHT#4 at 41GU127.

21

Figure 13. Artifacts observed from BTH-4 at site 41GU127 . Top row:
Scallorn arrow point, arrow point preform, burned rock, flake. Bottom
row: two hard-hammer flakes, biface thinning flake, forged iron chain
hook fragment.

Figure 14. Items observed at BHT-5: Three flakes and a mussel shell
fragment.

22

Figure 15. View of 41GU128 looking west toward the Treatment Plant facility.

Figure 16. Profile at BHT-8 at 41GU128, note fire-cracked rock next to scale
at ca. 80-90 cm below surface.

23

Figure 17. Items observed at BHT-8, 41GU128 : Top row, left to
right: Single notched dart point preform, two hard-hammer flakes,
biface thinning flake. Bottom row, flakes and flake fragments; three
on right are biface thinning flakes. row, flakes and flake fragments;
three on right are biface thinning flakes.

Figure 18. Profile view of BHT#9 at 41GU128; cultural material was
observed throughout the profile.

24

Figure 19. Mussel shell from BHT-10.

25

