AN ASSESSMENT OF THE
ARCHEOLOGICAL RESOURCES TO BE AFFECTED BY THE
CEDAR BAYOU NAVIGATION PROJECT, TEXAS

Harry J. Shafer

Research Report No. 6
Texas Archeological Salvage Project
The University of Texas at Austin
May, 1972

Submitted to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Galveston District, by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas at
Austin, in partial fulfillment of the terms of
Contract DACW64-72-C-0040.

ABSTRACT
An archeological survey of lower Cedar Bayou was
carried out in advance of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
planned channel dredging and modification. Two sites (41
CH 58 and 41 CH 214) containing intact cultural deposits
will be directly affected by present plans. Six additional
sites will be affected by long-term wave action probably
resulting from increased use of the navigation channel.
Locations, descriptions and recommendations for each of the
sites are presented.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to acknowledge with gratitude the help
given to me by numerous people during the course of this
project, particularly personnel of the Environmental
Resources Section of the Galveston District, U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, who were extremely helpful and cooper­
ative in providing all necessary materials and information.
Vance T. Holliday~ anthropology student at The University
of Texas at Austin~ served as field assistant and cartographer.
Several members of the TASP personnel provided assistance
during various phases of this project. David S. Dibble,
Acting Director of TASP, granted advice and encouragement
throughout the duration; Melinda S. Giles, administrative
secretary, carried out certain necessary administrative and
editing duties; Peggy McConnell provided clerical assistance.
Photographic work was done by Douglas B. Comstock.
I want to especially thank Dr. Charles N. Bollich of
Beaumont, Texas, for not only his help in solving logistic
problems, but for his gracious hospitality shown to the
survey party. The conversations on "Atakapan Archaeology"
will not soon be forgotten.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION

1

SURVEY TECHNIQUES .

1

SITES DIRECTLY AFFECTED BY DREDGING .

3

SITES TO BE AFFECTED BY LONG-TERM DAMAGE

9

EVALUATION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

. 12

REFERENCES CITED

. 16

APPENDIX 1: ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES NEAR CEDAR
BAYOU NOT AFFECTED BY DREDGING PLANS
. . . . . 17
APPENDIX II: BIBLIOGRAPHY RELEVANT TO THE
ARCHEOLOGY OF CEDAR BAYOU . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

List of Figures
1.

Map of Cedar Bayou

2

2.

Site 41 CH 214

5

3.

Sites 41 CH 58, 41 CH 56, and 41 HR 205 .

7

INTRODUCTION
An evaluative archeological survey of the area to be
affected by the proposed dredging plan of Cedar Bayou,
Chambers and Harris counties, Texas, was carried out in
March of 1972 by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
The University of Texas at Austin. The purpose of this survey
was to locate and evaluate the significance (insofar as
surficial observations and minor subsurface probes would
allow) of archeological and historical resources to be
affected by the above named navigation project as specifically
described in Appendix A of Contract No. DACW64-72-C-0040.
The survey focused on those resources that are in
planned dredging or spoil deposition areas; however, some
attention was directed at those sites which will be affected
by long-term industrial utilization of the bayou. It was
assumed that industrial use will increase as a result of the
proposed channel improvement and that this increased utili­
zation will directly affect certain archeological resources.
Finally, sites which are known in the area but which will
not (so far as we can determine) be affected--whether immedi­
atelyor otherwise--by the Cedar Bayou modification plans are
listed in Appendix I. The purpose of this documentation is
that, since marine-related or other industrial developments
will be expanded in the future, the location of these sites
will be known and hopefully allowances can be made to minimize
damage to these localities.
The 10cationsof all presently known archeological sites
in the lower Cedar· Bayou area are shown in Figure 1. Too,
all sites are located more precisely on detailed Corps of
Engineers project maps. (These precise locations are included
only in five "Key Copies" submitted to the Galveston District
Office, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and in copies for the
files of the Texas Archeological Research LaboratoryJ A refer­
ence to the appropriate project map sheet is given in the
description of each site encountered in the project area.

SURVEY TECHNIQUES
The surveyed area extended from the mouth of Cedar
Bayou upstream for four channel miles. Observations were
not confined to the channel itself but included the shoreline
of Ash Lake, Negrohead Lake, Boaz Island, and other land
portions which will be affected by spoil deposition. Access
to the land areas was gained, for the most part, by the use
1

Figure 1:
Map of Cedar Bayou area showing location of
known (archeological) sites . .

of an outboard motor boat. The survey of Boaz Island and
portions of the shoreline of Ash Lake were investigated
initially via land access.
All land areas to be affected either by channel cutting
or spoil deposition were inspected. When an archeological
site was encountered, its location was plotted on large-scale
project maps provided by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(scale: 1 inch = 2nO feet), Horizontal extent of the site
was determined by measuring the surface exposed area; at
times, minor subsurface probing with hand tools were necessary
to determine extent of site. It was not always possible to
ascertain the depth of the cultural bearing deposit due to
the absence of vertical cuts; but this information was not
deemed so critical as that related to horizontal extent.
Specific attention was directed toward evaluating the degree
to which the project would affect its preservation.
Sites were recorded on standard site survey forms used
by The University of Texas; in addition, notes were made of
the present condition and nature of the cultural bearing
deposit.
Photographs were taken of specific features to document
the survey's findings.

SITES DIRECTLY AFFECTED BY DREDGING
Four sites of archeological interest will be directly
affected by the dredging (Fig. 1). These sites, numbered by
the trinomial system used by The University of Texas*, are
41 CH 58, 214, 215, and 217. A detailed description of
each of these sites is presented below; map location is
shown in Figure 1.

*

The trinomial code is as follows: 41 is the numerical
designation for Texas; CH and HR are the abbreviations
for Chambers and Harris counties respectively; and the
number following the abbreviation is the numerical desig­
nation of that particular site in the county.
3

41 CH 58 (Fig. 3,A; Project map, sheet 3)
This site is located 2,000 feet northwest (55 0 west of
north) from the United States Steel docks; it is situated
on the point of the Beaumont uplands at an elevation of 8
to 13 feet above sea level. The area to the south and east
of the point is marsh and the present Cedar Bayou channel
is located 500 feet south of the site. The terrace continues
to the north and west of the site.
The locality is recognizable by an extensive deposit of
shell centering about the terrace point. This shell deposit
measures at least 250 feet long (based on surface indications)
and is approximately 50 feet wide. Maximum depth of the
deposit could not be ascertained but, judging by the vertical
exposures, the depth is at least one foot in some areas.
These exposures are in the form of "potholes" dug by relic
collectors. Numerous potsherds and animal bone fragments
were observed in the pothole backdirt and wall exposures. The
disturbance has been significant but approximately 50 percent
of the site remains intact.
Most of the shell observed can be identified as Rangia
although a few Crassotrea (oyster) were observed. The
presence of the shell on this location (and all other locations
subsequently described) can be attributed exclusively to
aboriginal collecting activities; this conclusion is supported
by the nature of the accumulation and the presence of numerous
artifacts.
Present plans call for spoil deposition to extend along
the south side of the point on which the site is located;
this spoil is scheduled to extend up to the 10 foot contour
line. The western end of the site extends slightly below
the 10 foot contour and may be affected by the spoil deposit.
It is therefore recommended that present plans be altered
to avoid possible damage to the site by spoil deposition.
41 CH 214 (Fig. 2,A-C; Project map, sheet 2)
This very extensive and virtually intact site is located
about 2,000 feet southwest (south 35° west) of the United
States Steel docks. The site is situated on an upland
point situated east of the mouth of Negrohead Lake, along
the east side of Cedar Bayou.
Two exposures denote the presence of this archeological
site; one is an eroded portion of the deposit marking the
southernmost part of the site. Here, shell, mostly Rangia
but with some oyster, forms a small beach; artifacts such as
4

Figure 2:
A, Site 41 CH 214 (southwestern portion)
as seen from Cedar Bayou.
B, Northern part of 41 CH 214; bluff erosion
has exposed buried cultural deposit.
C, Close-up of eroding cultural deposit of
shell and artifacts along the northern
part of 41 CH 214.

potsherds and animal bone fragment$ were observed along
this beach exposure. The shell deposit was traced up the
slopes of the terrace point to the top of the bluff Dr 10
or 11 feet above sea level (Fig. 2~A). Vertical exposures
along the banks of Cedar Bayou ind~cate the site to be about
600 feet long; cultural refuse was Ifound to extend at least
100 feet inward from the bluff nea~ the point. Probings
with small hand tools were used to !determine the limits as
they are known.
The maximum depth of the depo$it could not be ascertained
but exposures along the bluff edge ;indicate that shell
midden thickness at the northern end of the site exceeds one
foot (Fig. 2,B,C). Thickness on the top of the Beaumont
terrace point is estimated to be at least two feet.
Bone fragments and potsherds were noted in the two
exposed areas; a cursory inspection of the ceramics indicate
the presence of the previously established pottery type San
Jacinto Plain (23 sherds), San Jac~nto Incised (1 sherd),
Goose Creek Plain (37 sherds), and 'Orcoquizac Plain (2 sherds)
(cf. Ambler, 1970). The high perc~ntage of San Jacinto ware
and the occurrence of bone tempere4 Orcoquizac Plain indicates
the occupation of Site 41 CH 214 t~ be late prehistoric or
protohistoric in age.
A core of the bluff obtained by the Corps of Engineers
(number 3ST-lO) records shell in the upper gray clay
component.
Present plans call for removal of much of the bluff on
which the site is situated; that PQrtion not affected by
actual channel cutting will almost certainly be affected
by long-term erosional processes along the bank. The affects
of these actions will ultimately d~stroy the entire site. It
is recommended that the present pl~ns be altered to prevent
cutting away portions of the bluff, If these plans cannot
be so altered to avoid damage to the site, then extensive
excavation is recommended.
41 CH 215 (Project map, sheet 2)
This site consists of a small deposit of shell 100 feet
southwest of the small beach area of 41 CH 214. This con
centration of shell (again, mostly Rangia with some oyster)
was visible at low tide along a partly submerged portion of
the marsh paralleling the bayou ch~nnel. Wave action had
distributed some shell onto the marsh grass. Much of the
cultural deposit is at or below water level; for this reason
it was difficult to ascertain the ~egree to which the deposit
6

Figure 3:
A, Site 41 CH 58 (arrow) as seen from
Cedar Bayou.
HI\
B, Site 41 pM 56 (Devil's Elbow Site):
note bluff erosion and zone of shell
midden eroding from near the top of
the exposure.
C, Dense shell midden at 41 HR 205.

had been displaced or to make an accurate assessment of the
undisturbed portion Cif any) that remains. It is possible
that this deposit is simply an extension of Site 41 CH 214,
but no continuity could be observed; hence, the two site
designations were made.
Deer bone and three potsherds were observed amongst the
shell; two of the sherds are identified as San Jacinto Plain
and one is Goose Creek Plain. On this basis, the age of
this occupation is assumed to be much the same as that of
41 CH 214. Its location on unstable alluvium in the marsh,
however, is indeed interesting and cannot be explained by
our present knowledge of the prehistoric settlement pattern.
Site 41 CH 215 will be destroyed by implementation of
the planned channel modification. However, since the shell
deposit is anchored on subsiding marsh with the surviving
portion below the present mean water level, any controlled
investigation would be extremely difficult or impossible to
carry out. Under these circumstances it is simply recom
mended that an archeologist be on hand at the time of the
dredging if an efficient means of artifact sampling from the
excavated spoil could be devised. The logic behind this
suggestion is that sites such as this are not felt to repre­
sent long-term occupation locales; any artifact collection
would probably be restricted enough in time to provide a
valuable body of study material in itself.
41 CH 217 (Project map, sheet 1)
Site 41 CH 217 is located at the mouth of Cedar Bayou
on a feature locally known as "Shell Point". Shell Point
is in essence a badly disturbed and eroded shell midden
deposit. No intact area was seen during the investigation.
The length of the displaced shell exceeds 700 feet and shows
as a narrow beach. Corps of Engineers boring No. 3ST-l
recorded shell in the upper component here.
In view of the highly disturbed condition of the shell
deposit at 41 CH 217, it is felt that no serious scientific
loss would result from channel cutting through this locality.
The loss is not deemed serious since the dredging will
remove only previously displaced cultural material.

8

SITES TO BE AFFECTED BY LONG-TERM DAMAGE
Six sites (41 HR 56, 76, 136, and 205 and CH 216 and
218) will not be immediately affected by the planned channel
improvement and modification (Fig. 1). However, each of
these sites have been damaged by wave action apparently
generated by industrial use of Cedar Bayou. The damage to
these sites will presumably be accelerated in direct pro­
portion to the increased use of the channel. Therefore,
the long-term effect to these sites by the channel modifi
cation will undoubtedly end with their total destruction.
The sites are briefly described below:
41 HR 56 (Devil's Elbow Site) (Fig. 3,B; Project map
sheet 2)
This site is located on a point of the Beaumont upland
along the west side of Cedar Bayou about 500 feet downstream
from the mouth of Negrohead Lake. The highest point of the
site is 11 or 12 feet above sea level. Corps of Engineers
survey marker No. CB-6 is located on the site.
The Texas Archeological Salvage Project conducted limited
test excavations at this site in 1967 and the findings have
been reported (Ambler, 1967). Two one meter square test pits
were excavated and yielded evidence of a stratified cultural
deposit. The lower portion of the fill contained preceramic
materials; ceramics were frequent in the upper portion of
the shell midden.
The central (higher) portion of the site was badly
damaged by relic collectors prior to Ambler's work. However,
this seems to have been curtailed following U.S. Steel
Corporation's purchase of the property. At least SO percent
of the site remains undisturbed at present. Ambler's work
can be considered at best exploratory and is of limited
scientific value for anything but broad chronological ordering.
His work, however, is a significant start and would be a
valuable contribution should further explorations be carried
out at the Devil's Elbow Site.
Major damage to the site by wave action undercutting
the Beaumont formation has caused the cultural deposit to
collapse into the bayou (Fig. 3,B). Photographs taken during
this survey were compared to pictures taken during Ambler's
testing and they indicate several feet (an estimated 5 feet)
of the bluff has eroded away in the past five years.

9

It is recommended that the bluff be stablized if possible;
if not, further investigations of the undisturbed portions of
the site should be carried out.
41 HR 76 (Project map, sheet 3)
Site 41 HR 76 is located along the southern bank of
Cedar Bayou in the large horseshoe bend locally known as
"Devil's Elbow", The cultural deposit consists of a thin
band of Rangia and oyster situated just below the grass roots
along the bluff edge. The deposit is less than 0.5 of a
foot thick and was traced some 30 feet back from the bluff
edge by small probings made with hand tools. Ambler (notes
on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory)
records a few potsherds and bone fragments collected from
this deposit in 1967.
If the estimated rate of bluff retreat at 41 CH 56 can
be applied to this locality, the site will be very seriously
damaged or totally destroyed in a very few years. It is
therefore recommended that some efforts at stabilization be
made here if at all practical.
41 HR 136

(Project map, sheet 3)

This extensive site is located some 200 yards downstream
from 41 HR 76. A thin deposit of shell--mostly Rangia -- is
being eroded from the bluff on which the deposit is situated.
The shell is exposed for a distance of about 200 feet along
this bluff at the present time; subsurface probing produced
evidence of shell extending at least 120 feet inward from
the edge. An old roadbed is located 280 feet south of the
bluff edge; extending perpendicular to this is a small drain
age ditch which cuts into the cultural deposit. Troweling
of this ditch profile provided a good glimpse at the subsurface
deposits. Two separate layers of shell were noted in the
ditch face; the uppermost is near the surface and consists of
a thin (2 to 3 inches thick) bed of shell, mostly Rangia,
pottery, and bone fragments. The second and more extensive
layer is about 6 inches thick and is mostly oyster. It is
buried some 2.0 to 2.5 feet below the surface. A sandy paste
sherd was observed in the lower shell layer. Matrix from the
surface to a depth of 2.5 feet is a dark humus-stained clay.
It is clearly apparent that the bluff exposure of this
site in no way presents an adequate view for accurate
assessment. If unchecked, damage from wave action will con­
tinue and will perhaps ultimately destroy the site (although
not in the near future). Again, efforts directed toward
stabilization are recommended.
10

41 CH 218 (Project map, sheet 1)
A tiny remnant of land marking the western edge of
the Fisher Marsh exhibited a thinly scattered, buried deposit
of shell (mostly oyster). The surviving portion of the site
measures only about 30 feet north-south and 15 feet east-west.
No other cultural material was noted.
Continued wave action here will most certainly destroy
the remaining portion of this site in the near future. How
ever, since most of the remaining deposit is at mean water
level, there is little in th~ way of effective investi­
gation that could be done with the portion remaining.
Therefore, no further work is recommended for 41 CH 218.

41 CH 216 (Project map, sheet 2)
This site is located 2,200 feet east-northeast of the
Tri-City Beach Road bridge crossing Cedar Bayou. The site
is situated on a point of the Beaumont upland formed by the
confluence of a small tributary with Cedar Bayou; the tribu­
tary channel is northeast of the site and the main channel
of Cedar Bayou is to the west.
The dense deposit of Rangia which denotes the archeo­
logical site forms a cresent-shaped accumulation centering
about the nose of the point. The surface has been cultivated
in the past and this disturbance has displaced some of the
extreme upper portion of the shell concentration.
Since wave action does not visibly seem to be displacing
portions of the site at the present time, no further attention
is recommended.
41 HR 205

(Fig. 3,A; Project map, sheet 1)

This very extensive aboriginal site is located along
the southern shore of Ash Lake. Wave action has created a
shell beach and vertical midden exposure beginning at the
west end of the Tri-City Beach Road bridge that crosses
Cedar Bayou and extending for about 500 feet along the lake
shore.
The midden is largely oyster but Rangia is also quite
abundant throughout (Fig. 3, bottom). Sherds were not
common (only three were observed) and faunal material was
rare. The midden exhibits a maximum thickness along the
11

vertical exposures of about 3 feet but could be considerably
thicker in places away from the bluff.
Wave damage will continue, but since vegetation is quite
dense along the bluff--and the larger trees are anchored in
the shell--erosion is not as extensive as that noted along
the higher bluffs further up Cedar Bayou. Industrial use of
the Bayou will not have a severe affect on this site in the
immediate future.

EVALUATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
All resources discussed within this report are identified
as "archeological". Significant "historical" resources (i.e.,
in the sense of dating from the time of initial European
contact) were not encountered. The investigation of possible
submerged historical resources such as early shipwrecks was
limited to a consulting of documented locations on file at
the Texas State Historical Survey Committee offices. Although
this is not considered as conclusive, it is very doubtful that
any reasonably intact materials would be situated in the
shallow reaches of Galveston Bay affected by the outer portion
of the proposed Cedar Bayou channel.
At the present time, there are 19 archeological sites
recorded in the lower four miles of Cedar Bayou; of these,
3 are essentially destroyed leaving 16 known sites for future
consideration. This does not imply that thorough surveying
has recorded all sites in the area; it is estimated for
example, that a number of sites will be found on extensions
of the uplands that border the bayou if a complete survey
were carried out. Such a survey was beyond the purpose of
this particular investigation.
The cultural-historical and scientific significance of
the mentioned sites along Cedar Bayou to the understanding
of the cultural ecology of the Galveston Bay area in general
should be pointed out. Particularly significant in under­
standing the prehistoric settlement pattern here are the
Beaumont uplands which provided easy land access to the
estuarine and bay resources. This factor is in contrast to
the Wallisville Reservoir area where it was necessary for
the prehistoric inhabitants to occupy the marshlands in
order to have access to the resources of these areas. While
marshland sites do exist at Cedar Bayou (41 CH 215, 217,
218) the most frequent and apparently more intensively
12

occupied sites are those situated on the Beaumont formation.
Another finding of ecological importance was the
observed changes in the frequency of Crassostrea and Rangia
as one moves upstream; seemingly, oyster was more frequent
in the sites nearer the mouth and decreases as one moves
upstream. Too, in the upstream sites, oyster seems to be
relatively more frequent in the lower levels of the cultural
deposits. This distribution is undoubtedly due to as least
two factors; first is the natural geologic and climatic
processes in the estuary which resulted in such changes as
fluctuating salinity. Secondly, the collecting patterns
and technology of the aboriginal inhabitants may also be
partly responsible for the observed distribution. For
instance, Rangia can be gathered by wading in the shallow
cutoff lakes and scooping the clams off the muddy bottoms
(Ambler, 1970) and would be accessible to any party by land.
However, oyster may not be so easily gathered and their
exploitation might have required some means of navigating
the shallow waters of the bay. This kind of technology (i.e.,
means of water navigation) may not have been part of all
cultural systems that occupied the lower Cedar Bayou area.
The main point here is to stress the fact that a major
portion of the cultural-historical site sample of lower
Cedar Bayou is in jeopardy and the loss of this sample with­
out ftNther investigations would be irreplaceable. Ideally,
the site should be preserved when possible; if not, then
further investigation aimed at mitigating loss or damage to
these resources should be implemented.
Six of the surviving sites were found to contain disturbed
areas resulting from indiscriminate digging by relic hunters
(sites 41 HR 50, 56, 57, 59, 203, and 41 CH 58). This digging
varied in extent but in no case was the site totally destroyed.
Despite this damage the site preservation is better in Cedar
Bayou than any other investigated estuary of Galveston Bay
where the Beaumont formation provides easy land access to
the estuary resources.
The cultural historical resources of Galveston Bay area
are dwindling due to urban and industrial expansion and
resultant land modifications. The Cedar Bayou resources
include some of the better preserved examples of sites in
the Galveston Bay region.
As indicated in the body of this report, 10 of the 19
known sites will be affected either directly or through long­
term wave damage by the proposed channel alteration plans.
Of these, three have been damaged to the extent that
13

further investigations would not be profitable. One site,
41 CH 214, is scheduled to be mostly destroyed and site 41
CH 58 will be partly covered by spoil deposition. Six
additional sites will be adversely affected by long-term wave
action.

First Priority Recommendations
Listed here are those recommendations that are con­
sidered most desirable by this agency under the present
circumstances.
41 CH 58 - Alter present plans to avoid burying
any portion of the deposit beneath spoil.
41 CH 214 - Alter the present plans to avoid cutting
into the site; this would likely mean
moving the channel 80 to 100 feet west.
It is realized that such action may be
prohibitive since it may affect the
geometry of the channel as now designed.
41 HR 56,
76, 205
41 CH 216 - Attempts should be made to stabilize
the bluff.

Second Priority Recommendations
In the event that it will not be feasible or possible
to implement the above recommendations, then it is suggested
that the following actions be considered.
41 CH 58 - Carry out excavations of the site in
order to salvage materials which will
be affected by spoil deposition along
its outer margin.
41 CH 214 - Carry out extensive and intensive
excavations.
41 HR 56, 76,
136, 205 - Carry out small scale excavations to
salvage portions of the endangered
deposits. Intensive excavations are
14

not recommended at this time in order
to leave some of the deposits intact for
future investigators.
41 CH 216 - No further investigations are recommended
at this time. However, this site should be
reinspected in the future to better eval­
uate long-term wave damage effect.
Presently, vertical exposures are nearly
stable.

15

REFERENCES CITED
Ambler, J. Richard
1967 Three Prehistoric Sites near Cedar Bayou,
Galveston Bay Area. State Building Commis­
sion, Archeology Program, Report No. 8.
1970

Additional Archeological Survey of the
Wallisville Reservoir Area, Southeast Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey
Reports, No.6. The University of Texas at
Austin.

16

APPENDIX I
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES NEAR CEDAR BAYOU
NOT AFFECTED BY DREDGING PLANS
There are eight archeological sites known in the Cedar
Bayou area that would not be affected by the proposed Cedar
Bayou dredging project. These sites are documented here,
however, in order to make their locations known to the
agencies who will likely be involved with future modifications
of the Cedar Bayou environment. Their locations are shown
in Figure 1.
41 HR 50 (Wright Site) (Project map, sheet 3)
This site is located near the end of an arm of the
Beaumont upland that protrudes westward between Cedar Bayou
and Negrohead Lake. The site area reaches a maximum eleva­
tion of 16 or 17 feet above sea level. Ambler (1967) notes
that a ferry road constructed in the late 1920's removed a
portion of the site. The earliest investigations were made
by an amateur archeologist, Wilborn Riggs, in the 1930's.
This collection together with his notes were donated to The
University of Texas and were incorporated by Ambler in his
study of the site. In addition to Riggs' work, the site had
been subjected to many visits by relic collectors and hence
had been appreciably damaged by this activity. Ambler's
salvage work, however revealed that portions of undisturbed
deposit existed. For specific details of Ambler's findings,
one should refer to his report.
41 HR 57 (Project map, sheet 1)
This site was located initially by Wilborn Riggs in
1933 (based on information in the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory files) but has been revisited by several
anateur and professional archeologist since that time,
including Ambler. The site is located on the higher portion
of Boaz Island, a Beaumont formation remnant at the mouth of
Cedar Bayou. The site has been disturbed by clearing brush
with heavy machinery. However, undisturbed portions appear
to remain.
41 HR 58

(Project map, sheet 1)

A small exposure of shell was seen along the southwest
shore of Ash Lake and includes a portion in the yard of a
lakeside residence. This deposit may be an extension of
site 41 HR 205; however, no visiable continuity exists and
17

the two exposures are given separate designations.
deposits seem to be reasonably entact.

The

41 HR 59 (Project map, sheet 2)
This is the third site tested by Ambler (1967). It is
located 600 feet south of 41 HR 56 on a protrusion of the
Beaumont Terrace. The site area is about 12 feet above
mean sea level. Ambler's findings showed some disturbance
(possibly caused by quarrying shell for road construction
and by relic hunters). Ambler excavated three 1 meter units
and found a stratified cultural deposit that yielded a
small amount of cultural material other than shell.
41 HR 138 (Project map, sheet 3)
This site was not visited by either Ambler or the 1972
TASP survey party. It was reported to the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory by W. L. Atwood and Wayne B. Neyland.
The size or content of the site is not well known, but it is
a shell midden located on a protrusion of the Beaumont upland
north of Devil's Elbow. The site is located approximately
15 to 17 feet above sea level.
41 HR 203 (Project map, sheet 1)
This small oyster shell midden is located on the south­
east tip of Boaz Island. It evidences considerable distur­
bance in the form of small depressions (probably relic
hunters potholes). The midden measures approximately 70
feet by 50 feet. Depth of the deposit is at least 1 foot.
41 HR 204 (Project map, sheet 1)
Another shell midden is located approximately 150 feet
west of HR 203 in the southern part of Boaz Island. This
midden is mostly undisturbed and measures 50 feet by 30
feet. Presently, a small barn is situated on top of the
midden.
41 CH 59 (Project map, sheet 3)
This site is located about 800 feet east of CH 58 and
about 1,200 feet northwest of the U.S. Steel docks on
Cedar Bayou. The site is located on the southwest end
of an upland protrusion and is separated from CH 58 by a
18

y

marsh. The site was recorded during Ambler's survey. Aside
from being recorded a shell midden, no other information is
known.

REFERENCE CITED
Ambler, J. Richard
Three Prehistoric Sites near Cedar Bayou,
1967
Galveston Bay Area. State Building Commission,
Archeology Program, Report, No.8. Austin.

19

APPENDIX II
BIBLIOGRAPHY RELEVANT TO THE ARCHEOLOGY
OF CEDAR BAYOU
Ambler, J. Richard
1967
Three Prehistoric Sites near Cedar Bayou,
Galveston Bay Area. State Building Commission,
Archeology Program, Report No. 8.
1970

Additional Archeological Survey of the Wallisville
Reservoir Area, Southeast Texas. Texas Archeo­
logical Salvage Project Survey Reports No. 6.
The University of Texas at Austin.

Aten, Lawrence E.
Excavations at the Jamison Site (41 LB 2) Liberty
1967
County, Texas. Report No.1 of the Houston
Archeological Society. Hous
Aten, Lawrence E., and Charles N. Bo11ich
1969
A Preliminary Report on the Development of a
Ceramic Chronology for the Sabine Lake Area of
Texas and Louisiana. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 40: 241-258.
O'Brien, Michael
1971
The Fullen Site, 41 HR 82. Bulletin
Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. ~--~~~~--~----~
Lankford, Robert
1971
Quaternary Geologic History of the Clear Lake
Area. Appendix in: The Fullen Site, 41 HR 82,
by Michael O'Brien. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo­
logical Society, Vol.
Shafer, Harry J.
1966
An Archeological Survey of Wallisville Reservoir,
Chambers County, Texas. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project Survey Reports, No. 2.
Tunnell, Curtis D., and J. Richard Ambler
1967
Archeological Excavations at Presidio San
Agustin de Ahumada. State Building Commission,
Archeology Program, Report No. 6.

20

Wheat, Joe Ben
An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin,
1953
Southeast Texas. Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bulletin 154: 143-252.
Valastro, S., Jr., and E. Mott Davis
1970
University of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates
VII. Radiocarbon, Vol. 12, No.1: 249-280.

21

