AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED
SQUAW VALLEY GOLF
COURSE EXPANSION PROJECT SOMERVELL COUNTY, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Permit Number 1848

by
William E. Moore and Michael R. Bradle

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 51

1997

AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED SQUAW VALLEY GOLF
COURSE EXPANSION PROJECT SOMERVELL COUNTY, TEXAS

Project Number: BVRA 97-03

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared for
Somervell County Commissioners Court
Post Office Box 1174
Glen Rose, Texas 76043

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
A Phase I survey of a 260 acre tract in central Somervell County, Texas was
conducted by Brazos Valley Research Associates of Bryan, Texas under Texas
Antiquities Permit Number 1848. This work was done at the request of the Somervell
County Commissioners Court. Fieldwork was conducted in June and July of 1997.
William E. Moore was the Principal Investigator, and Michael R. Bradle was the Project
Archaeologist. One previously unrecorded prehistoric site (41SV151) was identified in
the project area. This site is a buried hearth on an ancient terrace adjacent to a former
channel of Squaw Creek. Burned rock was found in a backhoe trench at a depth of 45
centimeters below the existing ground surface, and fragments of burned rock, bone, and
charcoal were found between 95 and 110 centimeters in an adjacent trench. No
artifacts were observed in either of the positive backhoe trenches, and no collection was
made. It is likely that this site represents an activity area away from the more
permanent campsites located on Squaw Creek just to the south of the current project
area. The Holocene deposits overlying virtually all of the project area were found to be
too deep to be adequately examined through the conventional method of shovel testing;
therefore, the entire project area was investigated by backhoe trenches and surface
inspection of all exposed creek banks. In all, 43 backhoe trenches were excavated. It
is recommended that site 41SV151 be avoided.
If this is not possible it is
recommended that a Phase II study be conducted to determine its significance. Copies
of the final report are on file at the Division of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical
Commission, the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), and Brazos Valley
Research Associates.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors appreciate those individuals whose assistance made the completion
of this project possible. Pete McKone of Freese and Nichols, Inc. provided information
and maps regarding the proposed golf course construction and were very helpful
throughout the project. The Honorable Dale McPherson, County Judge, represented
the Somervell County Commissioners Court and served as the lead representative for
Somervell County. Assistance was also provided by Dan Wegand (Golf Course
Superintendent) and John Colligan (Golf Course Designer) for helping coordinate this
project and providing a backhoe and operator, Jack Cathy. We are also appreciative of
the support provided by the Commissioners Court and the Squaw Valley Golf Course
staff. Mark H. Denton of the Division of Antiquities Protection served as the reviewer for
this project and is acknowledged for his assistance during the planning phase of this
project and constructive comments during the survey. Dr. Lee C. Nordt, Professor of
Geology at Baylor University took time out of his busy schedule to discuss the soils in
the project area with the Project Archaeologist. At the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory Carolyn Spock, Head of Records, and her assistant, Rosario Casarez,
provided assistance during the background study. Lili Lyddon of Lyddon Illustrations in
Wellborn, Texas prepared the figures.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS..................................................................................................iii
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ......................................................................................... 5
CULTURE SEQUENCE .................................................................................................. 9
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS..................................................................................... 11
PROJECT METHODS................................................................................................... 14
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................. 17
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 21
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 22
Appendix I: Selected Backhoe Trench Profiles
Figures
Figure 1. General Location Map...................................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Project Area Map ............................................................................................. 3
Figure 3. Project Area on Topographic Map.................................................................... 4
Figure 4. Soils in the Project Area ................................................................................... 6
Figure 5. Previously Recorded Sites along Squaw Creek ............................................. 18

iv

INTRODUCTION
The County of Somervell is developing a tract of 260 acres of land on the east
and west sides of Squaw Creek in the central part of the county (Figure 1). This parcel
is destined to become an extension of the existing Glen Rose Golf Course and is
currently being designed by Colligan Golf Design (Figure 2). The completed golf course
will contain 18 holes and will be adjacent to the existing 18 hole golf course which
consists of a practice range, putting green, clubhouse, maintenance and other
outbuildings, two lakes, and parking lot. Although this course will be adjacent to the
existing facility, the main entrance will be from Highway 144 that forms the western
boundary. The project area is bounded on the south by the existing golf course, on the
east by Highway 200 and county road 303, and on the north by private land. The
project area is depicted on the USGS 7.5' topographic quadrangle Nemo, Texas dated
1961 and photorevised 1979 (Figure 3).
Squaw Creek, a tributary of the Brazos River, flows from north to south through
the project area. It is possible that this creek is a former channel of the Brazos River;
however, geomorphological studies will have to be performed to confirm this hypothesis.
Three minor drainages are also present in the project area. One flows from the uplands
to the west into Squaw Creek, and one flows from the uplands to the east and
eventually into Squaw Creek. The remaining stream connects with the drainage that
flows from the uplands to the west and may represent an overflow or old stream
channel that has migrated across the floodplain. In any case, the presence of these
water courses increase the probability for the presence of buried sites on ancient
terraces and levees in certain portions of the project area which are located in a region
known to possess important archaeological sites. In fact, five prehistoric sites have
been reported within the boundaries of the existing golf course, and one site (41SV51)
contains petroglyphs on the bank of Squaw Creek. The Division of Antiquities
Protection, Texas Historical Commission, determined that additional cultural resources
may be present in the current project area. The Somervell County Commissioners
Court, through Freese and Nichols, Inc., contracted with Brazos Valley Research
Associates to conduct a Phase I cultural resources survey in order to identify and
assess the archaeological potential of this area.

1

Figure 1. General Location Map

2

Figure 2. Project Area Map

3

Figure 3. Project Area on Topographic Map

4

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
At 197 square miles, Somervell County is the third smallest county in Texas
(Moore 1975). It is included as part of the Grand Prairie geographic zone (Hill 1901,
Carter 1931). Altitude ranges from 600 feet to 1300 feet and is close to 600 feet
throughout the project area (Kingston and Harris 1983). Overall, the county is hilly with
rugged areas such as eroded plateaus and ravines where cut by the Brazos and Paluxy
rivers. Squaw Creek and Kickapoo Creek are the two other major streams in the
county.
The project area falls into the microenvironment described by Skinner and
Humphreys (1973:5) as "Squaw Creek and Adjacent Floodplain." This is an area that is
affected by spring flooding which deposits silt over the floodplain. In some places along
the creek more than a half-meter of silt has been deposited on its banks in the past
century. A brown to black alluvial fill overlies limestone bedrock along the creek in
depths varying from 10-30 feet. The alluvial soil becomes shallower away from the
creek bed.
Rain falls throughout the year, but is highest in spring and fall with an annual
average of 32.65 inches. Snow is infrequent. This is an area that is hot in summer and
cold in winter. The July maximum temperature is 98 degrees Fahrenheit, and the
January minimum temperature is 32 degrees Fahrenheit. A growing season of 236
days is normal.
Ten soil types are present in the project area (Figure 4). These are Bastrop fine
sandy loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (4); Blanket clay loam 1 to 3 percent slopes (9);
Bosque loam, occasionally flooded (12); Duffau fine sandy loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes
(22); Frio silty clay, occasionally flooded (26); Pedernales fine sandy loam, 1 to 3
percent slopes (38); Pedernales fine sandy loam, 3 to 5 percent slopes (39); Pedernales
fine sandy loam, 1 to 5 percent slopes, eroded (40); Sunev clay loam, 3 to 5 percent
slopes (46); and Yahola-Gaddy complex, occasionally flooded (60). The following soil
descriptions were taken from the Soil Survey of Hood and Somervell Counties, Texas
by Winfred C. Coburn (1978).
Bastrop fine sandy loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes: This is a deep, well-drained,
gently sloping soil found on geologic terraces, mostly along the Brazos River. The
surface layer is typically a brown fine sandy loam about 13 inches thick. The subsoil is
a yellowish-red, slightly acid sandy clay loam that extends to a depth of 80 inches or
more. Organic matter content is low, permeability is moderate, and available water
capacity is high.
5

Figure 4. Soils in the Project Area

6

Blanket clay loam 1 to 3 percent slopes: This is a deep, well-drained, gently
sloping soil found in broad, shallow valleys of uplands. The surface layer is typically a
dark grayish-brown clay loam about 12 inches thick. It is neutral in the upper part and
mildly alkaline in the lower part. The subsoil is very dark grayish-brown, mild alkaline
clay to a depth of 54 inches. The underlying material, to a depth of 62 inches, is
grayish-brown, calcareous clay. Organic matter content is high, permeability is
moderately slow, and available water capacity is high.
Bosque loam, occasionally flooded: This is a deep, well-drained, nearly level soil
found on the flood plains of major streams. It is flooded occasionally for short periods.
The surface layer is typically a dark grayish-brown calcareous clay loam about 30
inches thick. The subsoil is a light brownish-gray, calcareous clay loam to a depth of 54
inches. The underlying material, to a depth of 62 inches, is grayish-brown, calcareous
clay. Organic matter content is high, permeability is moderately slow, and available
water capacity is high.
Duffau fine sandy loam, 3 to 5 percent slopes: This is a deep, well-drained,
gently sloping soil found on foot slopes and uplands. The surface layer is typically a
yellowish-brown neutral fine sandy loam about 3 inches thick. The subsurface layer is a
light yellowish-brown, neutral fine sandy loam to a depth of 14 inches. The subsoil is a
red, slightly acid sandy clay loam to a depth of 36 inches; yellowish-red, slightly acid
sandy clay loam to a depth of 46 inches; and reddish-yellow neutral sandy clay to a
depth of 64 inches. The underlying material, to a depth of 80 inches, is a reddishyellow, mildly alkaline sandy loam that contains pockets of fine sandy loam. Organic
matter content is low, permeability is moderate, and available water capacity is medium.
Frio silty clay, occasionally flooded: This is a deep, well-drained, nearly level soil
found on flood plains of major streams. The surface layer is typically a dark grayishbrown and very dark grayish-brown calcareous clay about 26 inches thick. The subsoil
is grayish-brown, calcareous silty clay to a depth of 38 inches. The underlying material,
to a depth of 62 inches, is pale brown, silty clay. Organic matter content is high,
permeability is moderately slow, and available water capacity is high.
Pedernales fine sandy loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes: This is a deep, well-drained,
gently sloping soil found on uplands. The surface layer is typically a brown neutral fine
sandy loam about 12 inches thick. The subsoil is yellowish-red, neutral sandy clay to a
depth of 42 inches and reddish-yellow, calcareous sandy clay loam to a depth of 49
inches. The underlying material, to a depth of 62 inches, is a very pale brown,
calcareous sandy clay loam. Organic matter content is low, permeability is moderately
slow, and available water capacity is high.

7

Pedernales fine sandy loam, 3 to 5 percent slopes: This is a deep, well-drained,
gently sloping soil found on plane to convex foot slopes. The surface layer is typically a
brown slightly acid fine sandy loam about 13 inches thick. The subsoil is red, neutral
sandy clay to a depth of 24 inches; yellowish-red, mildly alkaline sandy clay to a depth
of 37 inches; and reddish-yellow, calcareous sandy clay to a depth of 45 inches. The
underlying material, to a depth of 62 inches, is a reddish-yellow calcareous sandy clay
loam. Organic matter content is low, permeability is moderately slow, and available
water capacity is high.
Pedernales fine sandy loam, 1 to 5 percent slopes, eroded: This is a deep, welldrained, gently sloping soil found on uplands. The surface layer is typically a brown,
neutral fine sandy loam about 4 inches thick. The subsoil is yellowish-red, neutral
sandy clay to a depth of 18 inches; yellowish-red, mildly alkaline sandy clay to a depth
of 32 inches; and yellowish-red, mildly alkaline sandy clay loam to a depth of 38 inches.
The underlying material, to a depth of 60 inches, is a reddish-yellow moderately alkaline
sandy clay loam. Organic matter content is low, permeability is moderately slow, and
available water capacity is high.
Sunev clay loam, 3 to 5 percent slopes: This is a deep, well-drained, gently
sloping soil found on foot slopes below limestone hills. The surface layer is typically a
brown, calcareous clay loam about 12 inches thick. The subsoil is a brown calcareous
clay loam to a depth of 26 inches and yellowish-brown calcareous clay loam to a depth
of 42 inches. The underlying material, to a depth of 62 inches, is a very pale brown
calcareous clay loam. Organic matter content is high, permeability is moderate, and
available water capacity is medium.
Yahola-Gaddy complex, occasionally flooded: This is a nearly level to gently
undulating soil found on flood plains of major streams. The surface layer is typically a
brown, calcareous, stratified fine sandy loam about 18 inches thick. The upper part of
the underlying material is a light brown calcareous loam to a depth of 28 inches. The
middle part is a reddish-yellow calcareous stratified fine sandy loam to a depth of 48
inches. The lower part is pink calcareous, stratified loamy fine sand to a depth of 62
inches. Organic matter content is low, permeability is moderately rapid, and available
water capacity is medium.

8

CULTURE SEQUENCE
Virtually all of the data regarding the prehistory of the immediate area have been
compiled by archaeologists from Southern Methodist University. Therefore, many of the
following statements are taken from overviews prepared by Skinner and Humphreys
(1973:27-29) and Gallagher and Bearden (1976:15-18). According to Skinner and
Henderson (1972), the Squaw Creek area is located within an archaeological zone
referred to as the Central Brazos River Valley. This zone extends from the city of
Graham to Waco and coincides with the incised meandering section of the Brazos River
as defined by Stricklin (1969).
The time span from Paleo-Indian times to the present has been divided into four
stages (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks 1954). These stages are defined as Paleo-Indian,
Archaic, Neo-American, and Historic. The earliest indication of man in the region
comes from surface finds that suggest habitation since about 10,000 B.C. This time
period is referred to as the Paleo-Indian Stage that lasted until about 6000 B.C. During
this time large mammals were hunted, most of which are now extinct. This stage of
prehistory is recognized mainly by surface finds of projectile point types which resemble
those attributed to Paleo-Indians in other parts of the state and the Southwest.
Artifacts belonging to this period have been found at sites on Brazos River terraces
(Skinner and Rash 1969), the Ballew site near Gholson (Watt and Agogino 1968), Lake
Whitney (Skinner and Harris 1971), the Acton site at Lake Granbury (Blaine, et al.
1968), and the Horn Shelter in McLennan County (Redder 1985). All of the sites
containing Paleo-Indian artifacts are surface sites except for the Horn Shelter where
Plainview points associated with charcoal have been dated to 10,800 years ago.
According to Skinner and Humphreys (1973), referring to this part of Texas, "it has been
impossible to discover and excavate an in-place Paleo-Indian campsite or even a kill
site attributable to this stage."
The Archaic Stage is represented by numerous sites along the terraces and
bluffs of the Brazos River, near permanent water sources away from the river, and in
other areas where natural resources were available. Typically, these sites contain
scatters of lithic debris, chipped stone tools, fragments of pecked and ground stone
tools, with occasional examples of mussel shell and burned animal bone. During the
Archaic, hunting and gathering was the main form of subsistence, and modern fauna
was exploited. A wider variety of tools was made and utilized during Archaic times.
This period is believed to have lasted from about 6000 B.C. - A.D. 800.

9

Sites of the Neo-American Stage are similar in surface appearance to Archaic
sites and are often found in the same location. The appearance of the bow and arrow is
the major recognized technological change associated with this period. In addition, the
development of a refined flake technology and these changes in technology may signal
a change in hunting methods. Gathering was still practiced and it is possible that limited
agriculture or horticulture was practiced. The Central Texas Aspect of the
Neo-American Stage has been divided into the Austin and Toyah foci (Jelks 1962). The
Austin Focus is the earliest and is recognized by Scallorn arrow points, followed by
Toyah Focus sites containing Perdiz arrow points. It is generally believed that the
Neo-American Stage lasted from about A.D. 800 until A.D. 1600.
The Historic Stage is poorly known in the area and much of Texas. One example
is the Stansbury site, excavated at Lake Whitney in 1950, which is assumed to be the
"Flechado Village" mentioned in historical documents. This site has been correlated to
sites on the Red River and East Texas described as belonging to the Norteno Focus
(Duffield and Jelks 1961). The Tonkawa tribe is recognized as native to the area.
Gallagher and Bearden (1976:19-24) present a thorough discussion of Tonkawa history
in the region and problems associated with identifying sites of these people.
The project area is part of a region that was settled from the 1830s through the
1860s by colonists who came chiefly from the Upper South and North (Meining
1988:44). Settlement was rapid in the area to the east where the towns of Dallas and
Fort Worth were becoming major transportation and cultural centers. The first
permanent settlement in the area now referred to as Somervell County occurred in the
1850s. In 1860, Charles Barnard built a gristmill and trading post on the Paluxy River
not far from its confluence with Squaw Creek. A number of historic sites are still present
along this drainage and provide evidence of early settlement of the area.
Somervell County, created in 1875 from Hood and Bosque counties, was part of
an area that differed from East Texas in that cotton was relatively unimportant and
slaves were few (Meining 1988:50). According to the Texas Almanac (Kingston and
Harris 1983:269), the agricultural economy consists mainly of beef cattle and hogs, hay,
peanuts, small grains, and pecans. Until recently, the project area has been used
primarily for grazing.
Skinner and Humphreys (1973:11-25) in their report of the Squaw Creek
Reservoir provide a more detailed narrative of the historic resources on Squaw Creek.
The reader is referred to this document for additional information.

10

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
Somervell County is located in the North Central Texas cultural-geographical
region as defined by Biesaart et al. (1985:76) in a statistical overview published by the
Texas Historical Commission (THC). This is an area well documented in terms of
numbers of sites when compared to other regions in Texas. When the statistical
overview was compiled in 1985, 2678 sites (13.25% of the state) were recorded in the
entire region. Only one other region (Central Texas) reported more sites or had a
higher percentage statewide. In terms of county statistics, twenty-one of the thirty-nine
counties in the region had as many or more reported sites as Somervell County in 1985
(Biesaart et al. 1985:35). The forty-seven sites known to exist in 1985 comprised 1.76%
of the region and .23% of the state. The reader is referred to the overview for more
statistical information concerning Somervell County and its relation to the rest of Texas.
At the time of the survey, 150 archaeological sites had been recorded in Somervell
County (Rosario Casarez, personal communication, July 17, 1997).
According to Biesaart et al. (1985:185), all major periods of Texas prehistory are
documented in Somervell County. Sites classified as General Archaic and Late
Prehistoric are most numerous with 26 examples. The rest of the inventory includes
sites that are classified as Paleo-Indian (n=3), Early Archaic (n=1), Middle Archaic
(n=3), and Late Archaic (n=6). Four sites have been designated as State Archeological
Landmarks. Information for the county comes primarily from surface collections at 27
sites with little data from testing at 2 sites and excavation at 1 site.
The first professional archaeological work in Somervell County consisted of an
intensive survey and preliminary testing program within the proposed Squaw Creek
Reservoir by the Archaeology Research Program at Southern Methodist University
(SMU) in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973). This project examined an area that,
when flooded, will cover approximately 3200 surface acres along a six mile segment of
the Squaw Creek valley. Twenty-four prehistoric and historic sites (41SV26, 41SV28 41SV46, 41SV48, 41SV52 - 41SV53) were recorded within the boundaries of the
proposed reservoir in Somervell County, and three sites (41HD55-41HD57) were
recorded in Hood County. In addition to a surface survey, controlled surface collecting
and testing were conducted at sites 41SV30 and 41SV40 in Somervell County, and
testing was conducted at site 41HD55 in Hood County.
Assistance from various individuals, some of them members of avocational
societies, played a large part in the Squaw Creek survey. Their efforts resulted in the
recording of 24 sites (41SV6 - 41SV25, 41SV27, 41SV49 - 41SV51) out of the reservoir
limits.

11

The prehistoric remains at Squaw Creek were found to range in age from 8000
B.C. to A.D. 1500 with the majority of this occupation belonging to the Late Archaic
period. Historic use of the area was found to have begun about 1855. No evidence of
historic Indian occupation was found.
Excavation at the Hopewell School site (41SV30) was undertaken by SMU in the
summer of 1974 following the earlier pedestrian survey that recorded this site. Over
300 square meters were excavated to bedrock in large block areas. The site was found
to contain a temporally mixed occupation, although the Late Archaic period was best
represented (Gallager and Bearden 1976:iii).
A reconnaissance survey of Dinosaur Valley State Park was performed by SMU
in September of 1974 (Gallagher 1974). This study was initiated partly to add to the
growing body of data for the region and partly out of concern for the archaeological
resources of the park that are potentially threatened by an increase in tourism. The
survey was intended primarily to examine portions of the park thought most likely to
contain archaeological material, and no attempt was made to systematically investigate
the entire park. As a result of this reconnaissance, four archaeological sites
(41SV56-41SV59) were located. No artifacts were collected, and no shovel tests were
dug. The sites found consist of buried middens and lithic scatters with no diagnostic
artifacts observed.
In 1991, Brazos Valley Research Associates examined an approximate 200 acre
tract of land, the site of the proposed Glen Rose Golf Club (Moore 1991). This site is
south of and adjacent to the current project area. As a result of this study, one
previously recorded site (41SV51) was relocated, and four new sites (41SV3 - 41SV5
and 41SV47) were recorded. Four of the sites had been disturbed through golf course
construction that was ongoing at the time of this project. Only site 41SV47 appeared to
contain intact deposits, and it was recommended for Phase II significance testing if it
could not be avoided. Of special note, was the presence of two obsidian flakes at site
41SV5. The source for this material was traced to the Jemez Mountains in New Mexico
(Thomas R. Hester, personal communication).
An archaeological assessment of the 3000 acre Fossil Rim Wildlife Center was
conducted by Brazos Valley Research Associates in 1992 and 1993 (Moore 1995).
This tract, on private land, was not subject to federal or state review. The owners were
interested in obtaining information regarding the cultural resources on their property and
hired Brazos Valley Research Associates to perform this service. Although parts of the
property were off limits because of dangerous animals, the project recorded 11
prehistoric sites, 3 historic sites, and 5 isolated finds at Fossil Rim. Two prehistoric
sites and one historic site were recorded on private land with the permission of the
landowner. Artifacts ranged from Paleoindian to historic.
12

Two sites recorded by Gallagher in Dinosaur Valley State Park (41SV56 and
41SV57) were tested by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (Turpin 1994). In
addition, historic site 41SV63 was assessed, and four new sites (41SV117 - 41SV120)
were recorded. Both sites tested date to the Late Prehistoric period.
Local Steward for the Office of the State Archeologist, Jimmy Smith, has been
actively recording sites in the county. As of 1994, he has identified and recorded at
least 20 new sites in Somervell County while working with local collectors, avocational
archaeologists, and Soil Conservation Service training programs.

13

PROJECT METHODS
Prior to the beginning of the field portion of this project, a check was made of the
site files at TARL and the in-house library at Brazos Valley Research Associates. This
search revealed the presence of five previously recorded prehistoric sites on Squaw
Creek just to the south of the current project area. These sites were recorded during an
earlier Phase I survey by Brazos Valley Research Associates in 1991 (see Previous
Investigations above).
The current field survey was conducted under the direction of William E. Moore
(Principal Investigator) and Michael R. Bradle (Project Archaeologist). A 100%
pedestrian survey with emphasis on high probability areas was conducted in June and
July of 1997. The project area was examined by backhoe trenching; shovel probing,
and investigation of all exposed creek banks and disturbed areas. In all, 43 backhoe
trenches (BT) were excavated (Figure 2), and 10 shovel probes were dug (not
illustrated). The shovel probes and cutbank exposures revealed a recent Holocene
alluvium overlying most of the project area. It is also possible that some soil formation
took place as a result of soils eroding from the uplands to the west. According to the
soil survey book for Somervell County, inspection of exposed creek banks, shovel
probing, and initial backhoe trenching, it was determined that deep soils are present
throughout the project area. Shovel testing seemed an inefficient and perhaps
inadequate method of locating buried sites. Therefore, following a discussion of the
project area with Mark Denton of the Division of Antiquities Protection, backhoe
trenching was deemed the most efficient method of finding buried sites. The 43
backhoe trenches made it possible to examine a greater volume of subsurface area
than would be possible through conventional shovel testing.
The shovel probes were excavated as a preliminary method of assessing the
depth of soils away from the exposed banks of the creek. They were dug to 50
centimeters and not screened. The 43 backhoe trenches were uniform in size being 6
feet long, 36 inches wide, and dug to clay which occurred at various depths across the
project area from a few inches where clay was present at the surface to six feet (2
meters). Since there was no change in the alluvial soils from the current ground surface
to the clay stratum, profiles of these trenches were not considered necessary. Each
trench was examined by the Project Archaeologist to ensure that no cultural materials
were overlooked and to help determine the location of ancient stream channels and
related landforms such as terraces and levees. The trenches were assigned numbers
in the order they were dug, and their location drawn on the engineering map (drafted as
Figure 2 of this report). The excavated matrix and trench walls were closely examined
for buried sites. In the two positive trenches (BT 27 and BT 28), the matrix surrounding
the hearth was screened through quarter-inch hardware cloth. No cultural materials
were collected.
14

Backhoe Trench 27 revealed the presence of a buried hearth contained burned
rock 45 centimeters below the existing ground surface. This feature appeared to be
undisturbed; therefore, the backhoe trench was terminated in order to preserve it should
the site be later subjected to Phase II testing. Another trench (BT 28) was dug in the
vicinity of the discovery trench in an attempt to locate additional hearths. Cultural
materials were found between 95 and 110 centimeters below the surface. This trench
was dug to two meters and no additional cultural materials were encountered. In this
area, only a few small fragments of burned rock, some poorly preserved bone, and
pieces of charcoal represent the only evidence of an extension of the hearth found in BT
27. A field decision was made to excavate additional trenches to the north and west.
After three sterile trenches (BT 41 - BT 43) were dug, it was decided that the hearth
probably represents a small activity area. No additional trenches were considered
necessary.
This survey adequately assessed 100% of the 260 acre tract. All drainages were
walked and each segment of the project area containing different soil types, according
to the soil survey, was examined either through shovel probing, viewing exposed and/or
disturbed areas, or backhoe trenching. Larger areas, such as the swale on the west
side of Squaw Creek, were identified with a fewer number of backhoe trenches. The
majority of backhoe trenches were placed in areas believed to be most likely to contain
buried sites.
The Project Archaeologist discussed the soils in the project area with Geologist
Lee C. Nordt, Ph.D., who confirmed the presence of recent alluvial soils and the
possibility of an ancient terrace on the west side of Squaw Creek. This area was
considered to be a high probability area in terms of buried sites. The Principal
Investigator and Project Archaeologist visited the five previously recorded sites on the
existing golf course to the south in an attempt to identify high probability areas within the
current project area. It was noted that site 41SV51 is located on a prominent landform
that is probably a deflated upland as reddish-yellow clay was observed at the surface in
many areas across the site. Site 41SV47 is also on an upland landform, but contains
more intact soils and has suffered less from erosion than 41SV51. The previous survey
of this area by Brazos Valley Research Associates in 1991 revealed a hearth above the
Pleistocene clay. The remaining three sites are located on tributaries of Squaw Creek
that appear to originate in the uplands to the west much the same as the east west
flowing tributary of Squaw Creek in the project area discussed above. This comparison
helped to substantiate the probability of finding additional sites in the current project
area.

15

The survey crew was aided by a project map supplied by Freese and Nichols,
Inc. and the 7.5' topographic map, Nemo. The project map depicts the proposed golf
course and shows the location of all tees, fairways, and holes as currently planned.
Since this project is still in the planning stage, Figure 2 only depicts the location of
streams, site 41SV151, and backhoe trenches. Because of the possibility that the final
golf course will not appear as depicted on the engineering map, it was important that the
entire 260 acre tract be examined as thoroughly as possible.
Since no artifacts were collected, curation at TARL was not required. However,
copies of the final report have been placed on file at the Department of Antiquities
Protection and TARL. All project notes, maps, forms, correspondence, and other
records associated with this project are housed at Brazos Valley Research Associates.

16

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
The project area is 260 acres in size and is located in central Somervell County.
It is drained by Squaw Creek that flows from north to south across the approximate
midpoint of the project area and eventually into the Brazos River. It is possible that
Squaw Creek is a former channel of the Brazos River, although in-depth
geomorphological work will be necessary to confirm this. Three additional streams are
present. The largest originates in the uplands to the west and flows into Squaw Creek.
Although the uplands are out of the project area and were not examined during this
study, it is hypothesized that some of the smaller gravels on the bars along Squaw
Creek may have come from this area. The stream on the east side of Squaw Creek
also originates in an upland setting and joins Squaw Creek at the extreme southern end
of the project area. In fact, it forms a portion of the southern boundary. The third
stream is connected with the stream on the west side of Squaw Creek. It is barely
noticeable and may represent a former stream channel that has migrated across the
floodplain from west to east.
Overall, the project area is composed of alluvial and possibly colluvial Holocene
soils. At one time there were stream channels in different locations throughout the
project area. This was evident in the area where 41SV151 was found. It is
hypothesized that Squaw Creek has been migrating from west to east and thus eroding
existing Pleistocene deposits. Site 41SV151 was found on an ancient terrace adjacent
to an old channel of Squaw Creek. Evidence of this migration was found in the backhoe
trenches. Backhoe Trench 8, for example, contained gravel beds that are believed to
be a former stream channel. There was a high amount of calcium carbonate in this
area that indicates younger soils because leaching has not yet occurred. Backhoe
trenches 22 and 23 produced water worn pebbles between five and six feet below the
ground surface. This is indicative of a uniform migration of Squaw Creek as it moved
eastward across the floodplain.
The area south of 41SV151, located between Highway 144 on the west and
Squaw Creek on the east, contains vast alluvial deposits of which half is considered a
large swale area. In this area, clay was exposed at the surface. Backhoe trench 13
was excavated in the center of this swale area and clay was found at the surface.
Trenches 9 and 14 were also excavated in the swale area and were used to help define
this low probability area for site occurrence that was confirmed by massive clay deposits
from the ground surface to six feet. Most of the backhoe trenches in this area were
excavated on the ancient terrace, but no evidence of cultural materials, except
41SV151, was found. The large area on the east side of Squaw Creek contains
numerous clays and gravel bar formations as well as former sandy point bar formations.

17

This area can best be described as undulating small terraces with sands, clays,
and gravel formations and a significant amount of low or drainage areas. Gravels and a
very large former gravel bar formation were evident in Backhoe Trench 35. This area
has been extensively mined for gravel in the past and is very disturbed.
This survey located one unrecorded prehistoric site (41SV151) in the project
area. The newly recorded site consists of burned limestone rock, small fragments of
unidentified bone, and traces of charcoal. Site 41SV151 is classified in this report as a
hearth. The site is buried and was found through backhoe excavation. Backhoe trench
27 revealed burned limestone rocks at 45 centimeters below the current ground surface,
and backhoe trench 28 produced sparse amounts of burned rock, poorly preserved
bone, and pieces of charcoal. The discovery trench (BT 27) was excavated to the top of
the hearth and terminated in order not to disturb its integrity. Backhoe Trench 28 was
excavated approximately 18 meters north of BT 27 in an attempt to delineate site
boundaries. The bone in this trench was very fragile and could not be identified
according to species. No artifacts, such as stone tools or debitage, were found at the
site or anywhere else in the project area. Very little can be said about this site except it
probably represents a special activity area that was utilized on a temporary basis. It
may be related to one of the five sites found during an earlier survey along Squaw
Creek just to the south on the grounds of the existing golf course. Figure 5 depicts
previously recorded sites at the golf course (taken from Moore 1991:Figure 2).

Figure 5. Previously Recorded Sites along Squaw Creek
18

Based on the negative backhoe trenches surrounding 41SV151, it is believed
that this is a rather localized deposit, and it is possible that the entire site is restricted to
an area no more than fifty meters in diameter from what appears to be the main part of
the site (BT 27). The rocks that comprise the hearth may have been obtained from the
uplands to the west. The research potential of this site is not known. If charcoal or
other datable materials are present, this site could provide valuable data regarding the
chronological age of this buried site and perhaps its temporal relationship to other sites
in the immediate area. Mussel shell, if present, and other sources of food would also
help provide an understanding of the subsistence base for the prehistoric groups in the
region. It is important to discuss the significance of alluvial sites located in Holocene
floodplains of major streams as a major potential source of archaeological information.
Daniel E. McGregor (1988:3) discusses the potential of buried sites in the following
excerpt from an article that documents a case study of a site in Freestone County.
“Unlike sites located on Pleistocene terraces and upland landforms, the
surfaces of floodplain sites were aggrading rapidly during the period of
known human occupation. As a result, Holocene alluvial sites are well
stratified and preserve the internal structure of a series of short-term
occupations. In contrast, the surfaces of most Pleistocene terraces and
upland landforms appear to have been relatively stable during this same
period of time. Sites located in these latter geographic settings tend to
contain a poorly stratified mixture of the remains of several different
periods of occupation. Clearly, archaeological data recovered from the
controlled excavation of Holocene alluvial sites are relatively more
useful both for refining cultural chronologies and reconstructing past
human behavior.”
The size of site 41SV151 is, of course, not known. However, there are certain
indications that support a small, localized activity area. In Backhoe Trench 27, the
hearth only occupied an area no greater than 50 centimeters in an east-west direction
(Appendix I). The site was found at the western end of the trench at 45 centimeters
below the surface. Therefore, the eastern end of the trench, which was sterile, serves
as a probable site boundary in this direction. In Backhoe Trench 28, dug 20 meters to
the north of BT 27, only a small amount of cultural material was found (Appendix I).
This suggests, in combination with the negative trenches to the north and west, that this
is a small site that may be no larger than 50 meters in diameter. This site is found in
Bosque Loam, occasionally flooded (see Environmental Background above for
description of this soil type).

19

No historic sites were identified. Squaw Creek Cemetery is located at the
eastern end of the project area, and the planned golf course was designed to avoid this
site. In addition to the cemetery, two areas containing houses and outbuildings are to
be avoided by the proposed golf course. These localities are shown on Figure 2.
Other archaeological investigations in the county have recorded a variety of
prehistoric sites including hearths, rockshelters (some with burials), rock art, and
campsites dating from Paleoindian through Late Prehistoric times. The survey of the
adjacent golf course found two flakes of obsidian that were traced to the Jemez
Mountains in New Mexico (Thomas R. Hester, personal communication). The current
project area is situated in a high probability area for prehistoric sites due to the
presence of several major streams in the area such as the Brazos and Paluxy rivers.

20

RECOMMENDATIONS
Overall, the project area has been largely undisturbed except by agricultural
activities and gravel mining. However, much of the tract has been affected by past
alluvial deposition that buried prehistoric site 41SV151. It is recommended that this site
be avoided during construction by placing a 50 meter buffer surrounding backhoe
trenches 27 and 28 that can be integrated into the golf course design. If this is not
possible Phase II testing is recommended. It is always possible that additional buried
sites, especially small hearths, were missed during this Phase I survey. If cultural
materials are encountered in any area not mapped as site 41SV151 (as depicted in
Figure 2) during the construction phase, all work must cease until the situation can be
evaluated by the Division of Antiquities Protection in consultation with Brazos Valley
Research Associates, Freese and Nichols, Inc., and the Somervell County
Commissioners Court. According to Dan Wegand, all subsurface waterlines that might
be placed in the area of 41SV151 will not be deeper than 18-24 inches below the
surface.

21

REFERENCES CITED
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985
Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission,
Special Report 28.
Blaine, Jay C., R. King Harris, Wilson W. Crook, and Joel L. Shiner
1968
The Acton Site: Hood County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 39:45-96.
Carter, W. T.
1931

The Soils of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin
431. College Station.

Coburn, Winfred C.
1978
Soil Survey of Hood and Somervell Counties, Texas. United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, in
cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Duffield, Lathel, and Edward B. Jelks
1961
The Pearson Site, a Historic Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. The University of Texas, Department of
Anthropology, Archaeology Series, Number 4.
Gallagher, Joseph G.
1974
A Reconnaissance Survey of the Dinosaur Valley State Park.
Southern Methodist University, Archaeology Research Program,
Research Report Number 44.
Gallagher, Joseph G., and Susan E. Bearden
1976
The Hopewell School Site: A Late Archaic Campsite in the Central
Brazos River Valley. Southern Methodist University, Institute for the
Study of Earth and Man Contributions in Anthropology Number 19.
Hill, R. T.
1901

Geography and Geology of the Black and Grand Prairies, Texas
with Detailed Description of the Cretaceous Formations and Special
Reference to Artesian Waters. In Twenty-First Annual Report to the
United States Geological Survey 1899-1900, Part 7 - Texas.
22

Jelks, Edward B.
1962

The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. The University of Texas, Department of Anthropology,
Archaeology Series 5.

Kingston, Michael T., and Ruth Harris (Editors)
1983
Texas Almanac and State Industrial Guide. A. H. Belo Corporation.
Dallas.
McGregor, Dan E.
1988
The Archaeological Potential of Holocene Alluvial Sites in North
Central Texas: An Example from Richland/Chambers Reservoir.
The Record 42(3):3-11.
Meining, D. W.
1988

Moore, Bill
1975

Moore, William E.
1991

1995

Redder, Albert J.
1985

Imperial Texas: An Interpretive Essay in Cultural Geography. The
University of Texas Press. Austin.

A Guide to Texas Counties. Tejas Publishing Company. Houston
and Huntsville.

An Archaeological Survey of the Glen Rose Golf Club Project,
Somervell County, Texas. Brazos Valley Research Associates,
Contract Report Number 11.
An Archaeological Assessment of the Fossil Rim Wildlife Center,
Somervell County, Texas. Brazos Valley Research Associates,
Contract Report Number 16.

Horn Shelter Number 2: The South End. Central Texas
Archeologist 10:37-65.

Skinner, S. Alan, and R. King Harris
1971
The Archaeological Resources of Lake Whitney, Texas: A
Preliminary Report. Report submitted to the National Park Service
by the Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist
University.
23

Skinner, S. Alan, and Gerald K. Humphreys
1973
The Historic and Prehistoric Archaeological Resources of the
Squaw Creek Reservoir. Southern Methodist University, Institute for
the Study of Earth and Man Contributions in Anthropology Number
10.
Skinner, S. Alan, and Mark S. Henderson
1972
Archaeological Resources of the Aquilla Creek Watershed, Texas.
In The Natural and Cultural Environmental Resources of the Aquilla
Creek Watershed, Hill County, Texas, S. Alan Skinner, Assembler,
pp. 3-62. Report submitted to the United States Army Corps of
Engineers by the Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern
Methodist University.
Skinner, S. Alan, and Randle Rash
1969
A Clovis Fluted Point from Hood County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 40:1-2.
Stricklin, Fred L., Jr.
1969
Degradational Stream Deposits of the Brazos River, Central Texas.
Geological Society of America Bulletin 72:19-36.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 25. (entire volume)
Turpin, Jeff
1994

Where the Dinosaur Roam: Testing of 41SV56 and 41SV57,
Dinosaur Valley State Park, Somervell County, Texas. Texas Parks
and Wildlife Department, Cultural Resource Program, Report 94-1.
Austin.

Watt, Frank H., and George A. Agogino
1968
The First Citizens of Central Texas. Texana 5(4):293-316.

24

APPENDIX I
SELECTED BACKHOE TRENCH PROFILES

Backhoe Trench 1 is located in the southern portion of the project area, on the west side
of Squaw Creek, and south of site 41SV151. This trench is representative of the
majority of backhoe trenches in this part of the project area. It contains 30-40
centimeters of dark brown silty clay overlying red clay that continues to at least two
meters.

Backhoe Trench 27 is west of Squaw Creek and north of an east-west tributary. It is
located on an ancient terrace of a former channel of Squaw Creek. A hearth (41SV151)
consisting of burned limestone rock was found at 45 centimeters below the ground
surface. The trench was stopped at this point in order to preserve the site. The figure
above depicts the trench to a depth of two meters and illustrates the unexcavated area.

Backhoe Trench 28 was dug 20 meters north of Backhoe Trench 27 in an effort to
define site boundaries or locate additional buried hearths. A few small fragments of
burned rock, some poorly preserved bone, and pieces of charcoal were found between
95 and 110 centimeters below the ground surface. This area is viewed as a sparse
scatter of possible cultural materials rather than an extension of the hearth found in
Backhoe Trench 27 (41SV151).

Backhoe Trench 37 is located on the east side of Squaw Creek. This trench is typical of
several trenches excavated in this area. It contained 50 centimeters of clay loam
overlying at least two meters of medium to coarse sand. The depth of clay in this area
was not determined.

