TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE VERDE CREEK TRANSMISSION LINE
Kerr County, Texas

Henry B. Moncure

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN 54
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN

1981

AN ARCHEOI.J.)3ICAL SURVEY OF THE VERDE CREEK
TRANSMISSION LINE

Kerr County, Texas

HeYlJuJ B. Mo nc.UJLe

Principal Investigator:
Vavid S. Vibble

Texas Archeological Survey
Technical BuUetin

No. 54

The University of Texas at Austin
STATE ANTIQUITIES PERMIT NO. 252
1981

ABSTRACI'

An archeological survey of the right-of-way for an electrical power
transmission line in Kerr County, Texas, was carried out by the Texas
Archeological Survey, the University of Texas at Austin, for the Lower
Colorado River Authority. The 5.2 mile right-of-way was pedestrian sur­
veyed in its entirety. Four aboriginal sites were found. One of these,
because of its size, surface indications, possible stratigraphic integrity
and its location astride a proposed tower location, was subjected to sub­
surface examination via test trench. The other three, of lesser scienti­
fic potential, will not be directly affected by construction of the
transmission line. Recommendations are presented for minimizing potential
damage to all sites.

---

TABLE OF CONI'ENTS

........
....

Abstract •••
Introduction •
Environmental Setting • • • .'. • • • • • • • • •
Archeological Background of the Study Area.
Archeological Chronology •
Historic Background
Field Investigations
Site Descriptions
Artifact Descriptions
Summary and Recommendations
References Cited •
Acknowledgments

...

iii
1

....

...............

3
12

14
16
17
26
28
31

37
42

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure

-- -------- ---

--

l.

2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.
8.

9.

Eastern Kerr County Area Map
Verde Creek Transmission Corridor Map •
Central Texas Georrorphology Map • • • • • •
Study Area Stratigraphy Diagram •
Phobographs of 41 KR 200 • • • •
Test Trench Diagram, 41 KR 200
Test Trench Profile
••••••
Representative Artifact Photographs
Representatjve Artifact Photographs •

-------------------

2

4

6
7

23
24

25
33
35

.~~~~-~----~----------------------------

INTRODUcrION

At the request of the Lower Colorado River Authority, the Texas Archeo­
logical Survey performed an archeological survey and subsequent limited
testing excavations on the route of the Verde Creek electrical power trans­
mission line in Kerr County, Texas. The route corridor extends fram the
Guadalupe River immediately north of the Verde Creek substation at Center
Point, Texas, northward for 5.2 mi. to the existing Kerrville to Comfort
transmission line (Fig. 1). During the survey four archeological sites
were recorded within the corridor limits; all are prehistoric. One site
(41 KR 200) was designated as endangered by the proposed construction.
Interim reports were submitted to the Lower Colorado River Authority
and, following conSUltation with the Texas Antiquities Committee, limited
test excavation of 41 KR 200 was undertaken. Investigations were conducted
under the authority of Texas Antiquities Committee Permit 252.
The survey objectives were to provide:
1) a detailed inventory of cultural resources within the proposed
corridor;
2) an evaluation of the located resources in terms of their scienti­
fic and/or historic value;
3) an estimate of the extent and nature of the project's impact upon
such cultural resources; and
4) recommendations for lessening the adverse effects of the project
upon identified cultural resources.
The major goals of the limited excavation were:
1) to assess the general condition of 41 KR 200, within the area to
be affected by tower construction, relative to its usefulness for
future archeological research;
2) to evaluate the irrpact of tower construction; and
3) to document the site, at the point of proposed construction, as to
cultural material present, the presence of stratification, if any,
and to record the depth of the deposit.
Field work was conducted during May and June, 1981 by Texas Archeolo­
gical Survey staff members H.B. Moncure, Jack Jackson and Lee Bement. David
S. Dibble, Survey Director, was Principal Investigator.

EASTERN

KERR

Fioure

COUNTY

99" 15'

I

99· 00'

-'-~-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'-'+-'-'-'-'-f-'

I
I.

I
. . -r.... .........
+

I
I
I

""

. . . '--

. /~Uryey
••
:'/Line

o

I

2:3

4

I

I

m ilII

T.A.S.·'f;r·/9SI

I

I
I

. . .:-. +

...6-.30·
..

---T.. . ---l·

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

3

ENVIRONMENTAL SEI'I'TNG

INTRODUcrION
The Verde Creek Transmission Corridor is an 8S-foot-wide swath 5.2
mi. long in Kerr County, Texas. It extends from the Guadalupe River
(Universal Transverse Mercator coordinates E95380-N12780) north then north­
northeast to the Kerrville Stadium-Comfort Transmission Line (UTM E98200­
N19600), or roughly from Center Point, Texas, north to the hills overlooking
the Lazy Valley (Fig. 2). The 5.2 mi. length is measured ground distance;
map measurement, on a flat plane, is about 4.8 mi. The difference is a
clue to the type of terrain involved.
GID1ORPHOLOGY

Kerr County is within the Great Plains Province, Edwards Plateau physio­
graphic division. The plateau is an extension of the Llano Estacado but
lacks the fluviatile mantle present there (Fenneman 1931: 9,50). The sur­
face of this region is on a single massive, variably erosion-resistant
limestone bed, forming a stripped or structural plain which dips subtly to
the south and east (Thornbury 1960: 188-189; Bates and Jackson 1980: 618).
Extensive dissection has occurred in this plain in the eastern part of Kerr
County where this study is focused. The result of this dissection is wide
valleys separated by hills of generally uniform elevation. It is this hill­
valley dip circumstance combined with the Guadalupe River that defines the
geOITK)rphic character of the corridor. Elevation above mean sea level (MSL) ,
within the corridor, is 1500 ft. at the river's edge road and reaches 1915
ft. at the crest of one hill near the northern end. Hundred-foot dif­
ferences between hill crest and valley-bottom flat occur through the northern
third of the corridor. The relief becomes less severe in the center third
and becomes a rolling descent to the river in the southern third. The
latter appears to be the product of downwearing dominance in the central
sector since slope angles are reduced and slope inflections are smoothed.
with the rate of ero­
This process, where weathering exceeds or keeps
sion, results in deeper soil development at the foot-slope (Butzer 1976:
79-86,109-111; Bates and Jackson 1980: 186).

VERDE

eRE EK

Elevations,

TRANSMISSION

Figure

CORRIDOR

2

864'

7(\
Twin Sisters
Mountains

41KR201

o

2
mi les

....... ......

.....

.

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

5

GEOUXN

The tectonic context of Kerr County places it east of the Edwards Arch,
south of the Llano uplift, northwest of the Balcones Fault Zone, and within
the Ouachita Tectonic Belt (American Association of Petroleum Geologists
1973: map) (Fig. 3). It is probable that a depositional basin, the Kerr
Basin, developed during the Pennsylvanian period roughly 300,000,000 years
B.P. (Sellards, Adkins and Plummer 1978: 126-127). These deposits form the
base for the Paleozoic and Mesozoic stratigraphic units which are first
exposed at the surface in Kerr County as those of late Cretaceous age.
The Glen Rose Limestone, the lower member, is the oldest geologic unit
exposed in the county and is the bedrock conponent in the corridor.
The Glen Rose consists principally of limestone and marl imbedded with
dolomi te and anhydr i te. The upper member of the Glen Rose and the Edwards
and associated limestone which originally overlaid the current bedrock have
eroded away within the corridor area (Fig. 4). The recent alluvium which
is deposited within the study area shows limestone origins and contains
chert nodules and fragments attributable to the Edwards Limestone Formation
and the upper member of the Glen Rose Limestone. This comrron presence of
chert, in both nodules and beds within the Kerr County area, provided
readily obtainable lithic raw material for the area's aboriginal occupants.
The examples, worked and unworked, found within the study area show a wide
range of color and luster indicative of their origin as chemical and biolo­
gical precipitates and the accumulation of organic material. The partici­
pation of the latter process in the formation of these cherts is attested
to by the presence of many microscopic and a few macroscopic fossils within
the rock matrices. AlIrost any of the dozens of names applied to this fine­
grained chalcedonic silica (chert), such as flint, agate or chalcedony,
could be used here (Foster 1976: 38) but these gradations have little
meaning where the dominant characteristic, from a cultural point of view,
is conchoidal fracture. This characteristic allows all varieties to be
shaped into tools. Such cherty limestones are considered very common in the
United States (Grout 1946: 174).
SOILS
The soil at the surface is a friable calcareous clay loam 0.25 to
1.5 m. thick over a 0.1-0.2 m. layer of granular silty clay or clay loam.

- -

----------

------~~------------------------------------

CENTRAL TEXAS GEOMORPHOLOGY MAP

Figure

99-

101-

3

97­

(

I

J--------

i
I
EDWARDS

.I
1'-'-'
)

-

-

--Io-!I1 ;----

29­

29­

"" +

----'-'j-'-'

~

"...

'"a
.

T. A. S• • ~. 1981

I

\

0,

20
,

40
,
milu

60
,

I

STUDY AREA STRATIGRAPHY DIAGRAM

Figure

2100

2100

limestones

2000

..
..,.

.•

1900

1800

1800

r­ -

Upper evallOfile beds

Guadalupe Rlyer - - - ,

I

Upper member of

0::

...

I

: ~ rJ\
!fV
\1\

.. 1600

"..

2000

1900

1700

:
:

,..

..
a

,

Glen

I
I

<:

1500

E

: 1400

..... 1300
•

member

of

Glen

Rose

1300

Hensell

member

of

Pearsoll

Cow

creek

-

Sligo

\If

P

~

.----...,. -- ........

-.~

1100 .:

Formation

::>

?

Formations

...

1000 :¢

1000

900

Pre-Cretaceous

Q:J
r. A. $"*-1981

-

r:"._ .... __

-~_-. I

eOr50l/

=

.

c:

lOt

U,eotnb.,

.: II 00

I

Formation

"

.....

1200

Iimtstone~_m'lIIb.r
15tun U

«

..,c

limestone

1200

co

"Eu

1400 :

Lower

co

..
1700 :

1600 ..

I

1500

..,c

4

rocks

?---?

o

2

4

6

8

900
10

Afler Reeves 1969

VERVE CREEK

8

Partially weathered limestone fragments show as inclusions in both soils.
The general characteristics best fit the Alfisol order, suborder Ustalf.
These soils are extensive on the southern Great Plains (Soil Survey Staff
1975: 137). The soil series are the Tarrant stony soil and the Brackett
clay loam (Taylor 1963: map). Beneath the plow zone of the area tested,
the soil layers were distinctive in color and texture with tonguing the rule
rather than the exception. Munsell color chart readings were taken wi thin
the test trench at 41 KR 200 with the following results:
Depth

o35
61
86
117

-

35
61
86
117
158

Munsell value
em.
em.
em.
em.
em.

7.5YR5/8
7.5YR5/6
7.5YR4/4
7.5YR3/2
10YR3/2

Color differences lessened as drying proceeded, trending toward a lighter
hue.
CLIMATE

Kerr County has a subhumid to semiarid climate with mild winters and
hot sununers. The county is within the Interior Climatic Region's Edwards
Plateau Division as defined by Carr (1967: 6). Annual average rainfall of
30-32 in. is somewhat unevenly distributed through the year. Heaviest pre­
cipitation usually occurs in May and Septerrber. The U. S. Weather Bureau
records for 1931-1966 show an average monthly precipitation of 2.58 in.;
most months during the period fall below the average (Reeves 1969: 5).
Droughts have frequently occurred, the most severe on record during 1950­
1958 (Gould 1969: 12). By contrast, periodically the Guadalupe River rises
following heavy rainfall and severe flooding occurs. Early sawmills in the
area were frequently destroyed by such floods. The flood of July 15, 1900
changed the river channel and caused heavy damage in Kerrville and in
Center Point, the latter adjacent to the study area (Real 1942: 57, 113).
The average annual temperature is 640 F. (180 C.). The average
monthly temperature shows a range from 460 F. (80 C.) in January to 800 F.
(270 C.) in July and August (Reeves 1969: 5). Temperatures are generally

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

9

above freezing during the winter season and quite warm during the summer.
In terms of effective precipitation, seasonal concentration of rain­
fall, and thermal efficiency indices, Kerr County's climate is semiarid,
mesothermal and rainfall deficient in all seasons (C.W. Thornthwaite 1948,
quoted in Trewartha 1954: 228). This classification pertains, under
Thornthwaite's 1948 system, to most of the Edwards Plateau.
HYDROllXN

The major aquifer for Kerr County is the Edwards-Trinity (Plateau);
the Ellenburger-San Saba and Hickory Sandstone are minor aquifers (Muller
and Price 1979: Figs. 6, 12). The principal water-bearing geologic units
in the county are, oldest to youngest, the Hosston and Sligo Formations,
the Hensell Member of the Pearsall Formation, and the Edwards and asso­
ciated limestones (Fig. 4). The primary structural feature affecting the
occurrence of ground water is a rather gentle (10-15 ft. per mi.) dip of
the formations in a generally south direction. Recharge of the Hosston and
Sligo Formations and the Hansell Member of the Pearsall Formation is
chiefly the result of direct infiltration of precipitation on the outcropping.
rocks of the Edwards Plateau north of Kerr County. The Glen Rose Limestone
and alluvium receive recharge from both rainfall and streamflow. The
Edwards and associated limestone are recharged by rainfall. In general,
water moves dawn the dip of the formations to the south and southeast to
be discharged as springs and seeps when it reaches the zone of saturation
along the stream valleys. The water is chemically affected during passage.
Much of the ground water contains sufficient iron and manganese to
cause reddish-brawn or dark gray staining of porous materials and sirnilarly­
colored deposits on materials which are alternately wet and dry (Reeves
1969: 19). This includes stone artifacts subjected to such conditions.
Kerr County water also has heavy calcium and magnesium content. A calcium!
magnesium content of more than 180 milligrams per liter of water is con­
sidered very hard. In a series of 48 samples reported by Reeves (1969: 20),
47 exceeded 180 Mg/l. with a high reading of 2,240 Mg/l. This circumstance
also has a scale buildup effect on objects exposed to the water.
Most of Kerr County, including the study area, is drained by the
Guadalupe River. It rises, spring-fed, in two locations in the western
part of the county and flows southeast through the county and onward 200

VERVE CREEK

10

rrore miles to San Antonio Bay. The river's north and south forks join at
Hunt, Texas, to the west of the study area and are augmented by a series of
dendritic streams. Verde and Turtle Creeks are the major ones within the
county. Steel Creek, a minor stream, parallels the north-south course of
the study corridor to the east and its unnamed intermittent tributaries
cross the corridor east-west.
VEGETATION
Kerr County is located in Gould's (1969: 12) Texas Vegetational Region
7, the Edwards Plateau. Within this region the rrore important climax
grasses include swithgrass, the bluestems, the gramas, Indiangrass, wild­
rye and buffalograss. A brush overstory composed of live oak, shinnery oak,
junipers and mesquite rises above a taIlor mid-grass understory. Cypress
trees in the river bottoms attracted the original settlers who used them to
provide the raw material for Shingles. Infrequent stands of these cypress,
along with sycarrore and willow, remain. Elms, pecans and hackberries, where
not cleared, show prominently in the flood plain.
Real (1942: 9) lists more than fifty representative wild flower types
and selected her list from a much more exhaustive one. Though much of the
study corridor has been altered by farming or ranching, many flower varie­
ties were in evidence wherever the land was relatively undisturbed.
FAUNA

Blair (1950: 112) believes that the Edwards Plateau is best treated as
a distinct biotic province which he calls the Balconian. The Balconian is
characterized by the intermixture of faunal representatives from the
surrounding biotic provinces: the Austroriparian, the Tamaulipan, the
Chihuahuan and the Kansan. He reports fifty-seven mammalian species known
from the Balconian, none restricted to this province. These are found
along with one land turtle species, sixteen lizard species, thirty-six
species of snakes, fifteen anurans (tailless amphibians) and seven urodeles
(tailed amphibians).
The major mammal species present in Kerr County, those which might
have been a diet item for an aboriginal human population, are whitetail
deer, peccary, opossum, jack rabbit, cottontail rabbit, hognose skunk,
ringtail, armadillo, six mice species, three wood rat species, three squirrel
species and two ground squirrel species. TWo types of gophers, friend of

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

11

the surface-search archeologic surveyor because they carry small artifacts
to the surface, are present in the area. Current predator species are the
bobcat, the badger, the racoon, the gray fox and the coyote (Burt and
Grossenhieder 1976). The county lies within the former range of the bison,
the pronghorn antelope, the nPuntain lion, jaguar, ocelot and the black
bear. The last bear kill recorded in the county was near Kerrville in
1912 (Real 1942: 10).
At least ten species of bats are recorded in Kerr County and the
remains of at least one type has been found in Texas in archeological asso­
ciations, leading to the supposition that they occasionally figured in the
aboriginal diet (Dibble 1965: Table 9; House 1978: 117).
Among the reptiles and amphibians represented in Kerr County are the
western box turtle, the snapping turtle, the cooter, eleven lizard species,
four toad species, and three frog species. Thirty-six. snake species
include three rattier species, the coral snake and the water nPCcasin with
the thirty-one non-poisonous types.
Two hundred and two species of birds have been spotted within the
county. The species assortment, like that of the maITDTlals, reptiles and
amphibians is an admixture of some, but not all, of the species found in
adjacent biotic provinces.
Given the climatic, ge<::>mJrphological, geological and hydrological con­
ditions previously described, and disturbance of part of the area by human
activity, the preservation of faunal remains can be expected to be rather
poor. Most remains will be the larger, nPre dense bones; remains of small
faunal types are less likely to survive than those of large-boned animals
even though the smaller animals may have been present and utilized in far
greater anPunts. The faunal remains found and reported nPst often in
archeological context within the Balconian Biotic Province are those of the
whitetail deer (Odoco~~u¢ ving~nianu¢) (House 1978: 114-125). Probably
this reflects not only bone size and density, but the abundance and ease of
capture of the fawns. The following faunal remains have been reported from
archeological sites within the Balconian (House 1978: 114-125; Johnson
1967: 76; Skinner 1979a: 10):
Whitetail Deer - Odoc.o~~u.Q
Bison - B-i.6on b-i.6on
Coyote - Can-i.6 R..a:tJtaM

ving~nianu¢

12

VERVE CREEK
Hispid Cotton Rat - S~gmodon ~p~~
Eastern Cottontail - Sytv~ag~ ntanidan~
Desert Cottontail - Sytv~ag~ a..udu1.aa~
Pronghorn Antelope - AntitaQap~a amenlQana
Western Box Turtle - TeJVUtpene a~na.-ta
Spiny Softshell Turtle - Tnionyx ..6p~~n~u.6
Snapping Turtle - ChetydJLa .6epe.n:ti.na
Bird - species unidentified
Raccoon - P~oQyon toto~
Squirrel - S~dae species
Catfish - I ctatWl.~ species
Fish - species unidentified

Note the presence of both bison and pronghorn antelope now no longer native
to Kerr County. The above list is only those remains positively identified
after recovery and is far from a complete listing of utilized fauna. It is
not reasonable to conclude, for example, that the paucity of fish remains
removes fish from major status in the aboriginal diet. The same thing
applies to the smaller amphibians, birds and invertebrate animals.
ARCHEDI.lX}ICAL BACKGROUND OF THE STUDY AREA

In Kerr County, as in most of Texas, public interest in the area's pre­
history began in earnest in the late nineteenth century. From that time
through the first third of this century most archeological work was that of
amateurs, sometimes guided by museum and university professionals. J .E.
Pearce, Associate Professor of Sociology at The University of Texas, was one
of those most often responsible for guiding and conducting these early works.
He succeeded in interesting Dr. J. Walter Fewkes, chief of the Smithsonian's
Bureau of Ethnology, in funding the investigation of Texas archeological
sites, and with these funds did reconnaissance work from 1919 to 1927 all
over the state including Kerr County. Various other funds were made availa­
ble through The University of Texas and the Federal government, chiefly the
Works Progress Administration, continuing reconnaissance and salvage
archeology through 1942. In 1934 Goldschmidt (1934), working for Pearce,
conducted a reconnaissance of Kerr County to examine and'excavate sites
threatened by highway construction. The highway under construction was

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND OF THE STUVY AREA

13

State 27 which passes the northern boundary of 41 KR 200. Goldschmidt was
primarily involved with mounds and middens lying in the right-of-way and
conducted two test excavations of these northwest of Kerrville. In this
era investigations of particular kinds of Texas archeological remains were
conducted and reports of these special studies appeared. Patterson (1936,
1937) reported on corner-tang flint artifacts and boat-shaped artifacts.
Jackson (1938, 1941) reviewed Texas Indian picture-writing and pendants.
Poteet (1938) investigated the occurrence and distribution of beveled-knives.
All these special categories mention specimens from Kerr Oounty indicating
the diversity and richness of the remains within the area.
In 1948 and 1949, J .B. Sollberger, of the Dallas Archeological Society,
tested and reported two sites within Kerr County (Sollberger 1948: 2-5,
1949: 9-14). Creek Mound was a burned rock middem the other, Goat Bluff,
was a rockshelter. On the basis of lithic analysis, both sites appear to
date to the Central Texas Archaic stage, Round Rock Phase between 4200 and
2600 B.P. using Weir's (1979: 6) system of stage classification.
In the late 1960s the Hill Oounty Archeological SOCiety commenced a
series of excavations of sites located on tributaries of the Guadalupe
River near Kerrville, recovering principally Archaic Period artifactual re­
mains. The activities of the society continue to the present.
Two major professional surveys were carried out within the county in
the early 1970s. In 1970 Briggs (1971) headed a survey of the area to be
affected by the construction of Ingram Reservoir. This reservoir will, at
full capacity, inundate the bottom lands of Guadalupe River tributaries
Johnson Creek, Henderson Branch and Fall Branch to the 1900 ft. contour, an
area of approximately 90,400 acres northwest of the town of Ingram. Sixty
sites were recorded during this survey. Based on time-diagnostic artifacts,
the temporal range of these sites covers a span from Late Paleoindian to
Late Prehistoric (ca. 9000 B.C.-A.D. 1500). Most had been damaged by relic
hunters, construction or farming activities and only twelve, all containing
Archaic material, were recommended for further testing or excavation
(Briggs 1971: 68). In 1971 and 1972 the Texas Archeological Society field
schcols surveyed extensively in the Turtle Creek area south and west of
Kerrville, recording 165 sites, some of which were previously reported
(Hester 1975: 11). Several sites were excavated including the Bushwack
Shelter, the Real Site and the Paris Site. All contain Archaic material and

14

VERVE CREEK

at least some Late Prehistoric material (Skinner 1979a: 3, 1979b: 26,
1979c: 3).
As a precursor to Weir's study of the Central Texas Archaic, one addi­
tional site report from Kerr County material deserves mention. The
Strohacker Site, 41 KR 29, located near the confluence of Calf Run and
Bushwack creeks south of Kerrville, has been the subject of material collec­
tion over a three decade period by J.B. Sollberger. Sollberger and Hester
(1972) undertook a description and an analysis of this material as a basis
for comparison with other similar North American sites to present their
ideas regarding a postulated Late Paleoindian-Archaic transition in central
Texas (op. c-Lt.: 326). The study resulted in the hypothesis, "that the
transition from Late Paleoindian to Early Archaic occurred over a long time
span in parts of Texas, probably in the period between 6000 and 3500 B.C."
(op. c-Lt.: 338).
At the commencement of this study, 199 sites were recorded for Kerr
County at the central repository for such data, the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
ARCHEOI..CGlCAL CHRONOI..CGY

The time periods which apply to the archeology of Texas are subject to
continuous discussion, review, proposed revision and subdivision. A tenta­
tive representation for central Texas, with emphasis on the Archaic Period,
is as follows.
THE PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (before 10,000 to 8000 B.P.)
This Late Pleistocene period is marked by same significant degree of
subsistence dependency on large game animals and is marked by various types
of distinctive fluted and lanceolate projectile points such as Clov~,
FoL6om, PlarLl1viw, Muvwe. , Sc.o-tUblunn, and Al1g0.6-tWLa types. These arti­
facts usually show fine workmanship demonstrative of long experience with

the lithic raw material from which they were produced. There is a lack of
instances of such points being found in clear association with large
extinct Pleistocene animals as is so often the case elsewhere in North
America. This circumstance has brought forth proposals that a more
generalized hunting and gathering economy using these "big game hunter"
points was being practiced in central Texas.

ARCHEOLOGICAL CHRONOLOGY

15

AROiAIC PERIOD (8000 to 1250 B.P.)
The Archaic is marked by the development of a hunting and gathering
tradition linked to the need to adapt to the long-term, widespread environ­
mental changes
the post-Pleistocene period. These changes, discussed
at length by Antevs (1962: 193-198) and Wiley and Phillips (1958: 121), were
of sufficient magnitude and duration to have equally great effects on the
plant and animal populations, and to force the human population dependent on
them to make compensating adjustments.
In central Texas the Archaic has a chronology consisting of six phases,
Circleville (8000 to 6000 B.P.), San Geronimo (6000 to 4000 B.P.), Round
Rock (4000 to 2600 B.P.), San Marcos (2600 to 1750 BoP.), and Twin Sisters
(1750 to 1250 BoP.)
This chronology was arrived at by a synthesis of data
spanning three decades (Kelley 1947, 1955; Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954:
Prewitt 1974; Weir 1976a, 1976b, 1979). The phases shown above correspond
in rough fashion with the terms Late Paleoindian and the Incipient, Early,
Middle, Late and Terminal Archaic used in earlier chronologies.
Diagnostic of the Archaic in Texas are large numbers of barbed and
side-notched projectile points showing many variations, many other kinds
of chipped stone tools, ornaments of ground stone and implements of ground
and pecked stone including milling tools. Variety is the keynote. By far,
the largest number of Kerr County sites reported fall into the Archaic.
Representative point types are Nola.n, MaJLUnda.le., BulvVtde, PedVtna.lu,
Montell, Fnio, F~nd, and EY1.¢o~.
0

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (1250 to 200 B.P.)
Where the Archaic is characterized by adaptation to environmental
change, the Late Prehistoric (Neo-American) is an era of innovative change.
The introduction of the bow and arrCM and its subsequent popularity is
evidenced by the presence of the numerous small-sized projectile points
which are major diagnostic markers of the period. The development of agri­
culture occurs during this period and has an effect on settlement patterns.
The manufacture of ceramic items also marks this period for central Texas.
The Late Prehistoric Central Texas Aspect is divided into the Austin
and Toyah foci (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954). The older of these, the
Austin Focus (1250 to 650 B.P.) is, according to Stephenson (1970), a
gradual progression from the Late Archaic (Twin Sisters)' local population.

--,-~

--~-----~-~-~-~~~~~,~~~~

---~~~~~~~~~----,

'------~'-----~-,----,-----,--,--

16

VERVE CREEK

The SQatton~ and Gna~buny arrow-sized projectile point types are parti­
cularly useful for diagnostic purposes. The Toyah Fbcus (650 to 200 B.P.)
may be recognized by Pendiz and C~66~o~ projectile points and Leo~ Plal~
sandy paste pottery.
HISTORIC PERIOD (European contact to present)
The beginning date of this period is quite obviously highly variable
and variously interpreted. Land ownership by a person of European descent does
not occur in the study area until the nineteenth century; however,
European contact within the central Texas area may have begun with Cabeza
de Vaca's travels through Texas which took place from 1528 to 1536 (Newcomb
1961: 135). At any rate, influential contact had begun within central Texas
by the early eighteenth century as evidenced by Spanish mission establish­
ment (Gilmore 1978: 136). Obviously, contact of some nature had preceded
mission establishment in order for the need to do so to exist and be acted
upon. The Tonkawa peoples are those most closely linked to the study area,
with later arrivals by the Lipan Apache and, ultimately, the Comanche.
Evidence of these latter two groups has not yet been advanced in the form
of an attributed site in Kerr County but exists in historic records.
HISTORIC BACKGROUND
Kerr County was created in 1856 from Bexar County and is named for
James Kerr, one of Stephen F. Austin's Old Three Hundred colonists. First
settlement in the area by European-derived pioneers took place in 1840 at
what is now Kerrville. The early settlers were shingle makers who utilized
the stands of cypress and cedar which were abundant at that time. Their
work led them to establish temporary camps up and down the major waterways.
This temporary settling delayed the formation of the county as a political
unit until the arrival of the first of several groups of German immigrants
who founded the town of Comfort in 1854 (Real 1942: 18, 77). Descendants
of many of the early German families who first settled in the county still
live in the area.
Center Point, the town immediately south and east of the study area,
came into being in 1859 under the name Zanzenberg. Among the early
settlers were those bearing the names Ridley, Nowlin, Rees and Denton. The

HISTORIC BACKGROUNV

17

post office established in 1873 was called by its postmaster Centerpoint
(Real 1942: 100), referring to its geographical location about halfway
between Comfort and Kerrville and also halfway between Fredericksburg, the
county seat of Gillespie County, and Bandera, the county seat of Bandera
County. The post office name became the tc:Mn name, written as two words,
in 1896 (Branda 1976: 1142).
Immediately prior to and during the War Between the States, Kerr
County was host to one of the War Deparbnent1s exper~nts in the use of
camels for transport. There was no railroad service in Texas or points west
at the time and it was felt that camels presented a more viable hot climate
means of long distance freight hauling than did horses. The experiment
lasted through the war years -- though in 1861 Confederate forces captured
the Union facility, eighty of the camels, and their Arab handlers -- and
was terminated shortly after the close of hostilities by the sale of the
remaining sixty-six animals (Real 1942: 33-35). camp Verde, the site of
this episode, is the only National Register listed site within the county
(41 KR Ill). The camels passed every test but acceptance in horse-country.
Kerr County, though founded because of its timber resources, rapidly
became, and still is, a ranching community with its economic life centered
around this occupation. Cattle, sheep and goats are raised on a large
scale. Kerrville lays claim to the title of "Mohair Center of the World."
FIELD INVESTIGATIONS
SURVEY METHOOOLCGY

Preliminary to the field survey an examination of the records of the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin,
central repository for archeological site information, and those of the
Texas Historical Commission, showed no previous archeological investiga­
tions within the transmission corridor. Review of the results of surveys
in similar environmental settings in the general vicinity (Briggs 1971;
Sollberger and Hester 1972; Skinner 1979a) indicated that prehistoric
sites, when present, could be classified as burned rock middens, open camp­
sites with fire-fractured rock, and chert quarries. Midden sites Would
tend to show close association with permanent water sources, as would open
campsites. Chert quarries, naturally, are located at the raw material

18

VERVE CREEK

source, in this case upslope from the Guadalupe River bed. Midden sites
consist of a dense accumulation of burned rock, charcoal-stained ashy soil,
some animal bone remains, lithic artifacts and broken chert, and surrounding
scatters of lithic debris. Open campsites hold chert flakes, chert and
occasional ground stone artifacts, and fire-cracked rock. Quarry sites
have chert cores, flakes, lithic debitage, and few finished tools. Most
sites will show disturbance by a combination of factors -- historic modi­
fication (plowing, land clearing, lumbering and construction) and natural
processes (erosion, deposition and bioturbation). These factors guided the
conduct of the survey along with the constraints of the corridor's physical
characteristics.
Site Definition
Criteria for designation as an archeological site were formed from the
preliminary study data relying upon lithic remains as primary evidence. An
area with chipped stone with evidence of human alteration located in asso­
ciation with other like items, or burned or fire-cracked rock was regarded
as a site. Where surficial evidence was extremely sparse, unpatterned,
lacked spatial association and consisted of non-diagnostic or single poorly
provenienced artifacts, it was called an isolated find. Sites, unless
ruinously disturbed or located only at their most outer fringe within the
corridor, were to be considered for subsurface testing; isolated finds were
not.
Site Documentation
Located sites were documented on standard University of Texas survey
forms, which include descriptions of exposed features, shapes, sizes, fre­
quencies, types, distribution and possible affiliations. Provision is made
for a photographic record and sketch mapping. Environmental settings are
recorded to include physiography, soils, vegetation, hydrology, slope,
erosional and depositional circumstances, and any other factors, natural or
cultural, which might affect the site.
Sites initially are labelled with an arbitrary number and name for
field identification. This is superseded by a unique designation within
the trinomial system used by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
wherein the state, county and individual site within the' county are indicated.

FIELV INVESTIGATIONS

19

Artifact collection during the survey was limited to diagnostic or
unusual examples; the number was deliberately held to only those considered
necessary to provide essential description of a site. Collected specimens
and all other original documentation are filed at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory at Balcones Research Center, The University of Texas at
Austin.
The Field Survey
The field survey was initiated on May 4, 1981 by H.B. Moncure and J.M.
Jackson of the Texas Archeological Survey staff. Access rights to the
corridor had been secured by the sponsoring agency I the Lower Colorado River
Authority (LCRA). The corridor center line had been surveyed and flagged
in April at LCRA direction. A general reconnaissance of the corridor was
conducted in order to determine physical access at more or less equally
spaced points along its length. The foot survey commenced at the point
where State Highway 27 bisects the corridor and proceeded south to the
southern extremity of the corridor. The survey then continued north from
Highway 27. The surveyors walked parallel north/south axis zigzag paths on
each side of the center line of the 85 ft. corridor width. At proIX>sed
tower locations examination of the total ground surface was employed to the
limits of the corridor width and for an equal distance on the north/south
axis. The total ground surface, within corridor limits, was also examined
wherever possible cultural remains were encountered. Activity proceeded in
this fashion through May 5, 1981 at which point survey had been acconplished
from the Guadalupe River north to the proposed location of Tower 116 and
from Tower 40 on the Kerrville-Gomfort transmission line, the northern end
of the corridor, to the proposed location of TcMer 128. J .M. Jackson and
Leland Bement returned to the corridor area June 21, 1981 and completed the
survey of the corridor segment between the proIX>sed locations of towers 128
and 116.
RESULTS OF THE SURVEY

Prehistoric Resources
Four prehistoric sites were recorded during field survey (Fig. 2).
Two of these, 41 KR 201 and 41 KR 202, are small areas showing the charac­
teristics of lithic procurement sites and containing, on'the surface, no

20

VERVE CREEK

time-diagnostic artifacts. They consist of a small amount of burned rock,
thin lithic debitage scatters and, at 41 KR 202, a few prepared cores.
41 KR 203 is a small, thin, burned-rock midden located, in the main, out
of the corridor right-of-way. It is comprised of burned, reddened tabular
limestone with chipped stone debris exposed on the surface and a very few
chipped stone scrapers and crude bifaces. Extensive sheetwash is evi­
denced by the elliptical shape of the lithic scatter, the shallow soil
depth, the exposure of the lithics at the surface, and large-to-small size
sorting of the lithics progressing downslope.
The fourth site, actually the first recorded, 41 KR 200, is so large
that the 85 ft. wide corridor bisects it on the north-south plane with
surficial evidence of the site extending for several hundred feet to both
the east and west of the corridor. In the north-south plane the site
extends from the second terrace of the Guadalupe River to State Highway 27,
approximately 425 m. Site evidence visible on the surface (but not
necessarily within the corridor) includes choppers, scrapers, hammerstones,
manos, cores, debitage and a small number of projectile points. Since the
entire area has been subjected to repeated plowing, planting, and harvesting,
the scarcity of projectile points on the surface is probably a function of
their removal when noticed by those farming the field.
Time-diagnostic artifacts recovered from 41 KR 200 include M~ndate
projectile points which are attributed to the Archaic's San Geronimo Phase
(Weir 1972a: 52). The site's indicated age, areal extent, and the neces­
sity for locating a tower within its bounds resulted in a decision to
further investigate its content, depth, and possible stratigraphic inte­
grity.
Historic Resources
No evidence of historic aboriginal resources was found within the
corridor. Similarly, no significant historic resources attributable to a
population of European extraction were found in the corridor path.
EXCAVATION METHOOOICGY
An interim report regarding the results of the survey at site 41 KR
200 was furnished the sponsor (LCRA) and additional testing of the site
was coordinated with the sponsor and the Texas Historical Commission.

FIELV INVESTIGATIONS

21

This additional limited testing was a test trench dug within the area to be
affected by the construction of Tower 106.

The artifactual content, stra­

tigraphy, component integrity and the physical characteristics of the site,
at that point only, were examined relative to the impact of tcwer comple­
tion.

Documentation included profile sketching, soil color recording, soil

inclusion recording, artifact location recording and a photographic record.
As with the survey, the results, including the original documentation, are

filed at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at Balcones Research
Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
The Excavation - 41 KR200
The test excavation was initiated June 29, 1981 with the opening of a
"substantive trench, 11 one with a "definite Object" as defined by Wheeler
(1954: 86).

Control was established by survey stake markers, set by the

sponsor, delimiting the proposed tower's ground position.

Follcwing a sur­

face collection within the affected area, the test trench was excavated with
a sponsor-furnished backhoe.

Digging began at a point just outside the area

to be affected by the tower platform (Fig. 5a).

The initial cut was aligned

to coincide with magnetic north and was opened to a depth of ca.. 1 m. for a
distance of about 3 m.

The trench was trowelled on both sides and the walls

examined. At this point it was clear that root and plow disturbance
extended to a depth of about 35 em., through the upper portion of a dark
alluvial "A" soil horizon.

This partially disturbed deposit overlay one of

more sandy texture containing deteriorated limestone cobbles and fragments
which, in turn, lay atop a layer lacking the larger limestone inclusions.
The latter continued to the bottom of the trench.
between the layers were not smoothly horizontal.

The zones

contact

There were irregular

tonguing intrusions, both up and down, one layer into the other.

A unifacial

scraper was found at a depth of 32 em. in the east wall within the lower mar­
gin of the uppermost soil layer.

A photographic record was made of the

trench at this point and it was decided that it WJuld be necessary to
deepen and lengthen the cut.
The test trench was extended fran its initial point just outside the
tower base-affected area to a point just southwest of the tower center
marking stake (Fig. 6).

The trench was now 21 ft. 6 in. (6.55 m.) in length

and had been deepened to approximately 5 ft. 10 in. (1.78 m.).

The trench

walls were trowelled, examined, photographed, and a profile drawing was

Figure 5.
a.

General view of 41 KR 200, looking south, prior to excavation

b.

Test trench 41 KR 200, initial stage

c.

Test trench 41 KR 200, at final depth

Fig u r e
Ground

..v

>.¥ ~

J.¥

,It

surface

.Iv'

'"

~

Js.

.Ii -Iv

,It

'V

J6

'.&

..It

,v

lob:.
PROFILE

DARK

c:>
c 7 ' - fl

snail
shello

Q

TEST

ALLUVIUM

OF

TRENCH

41KR200

k /e s

.c;:;"

.t:::::7.-;::'

17/

7

I___

C:>

pd

flakes
flak

ed

flakes

(l

~;;
.,.. Q-;;e~ - - ­

-Level

.c;:;"----­ <=>

std n <.I

snail
oshell

Ii n e

d

0
YELLOW

... II

C LAY

EU-

20

c

•...

II
""""'--

~

­

NEXCAVATED

40

T.A. $.·.'I4-',98{

VERVE CREEK

24

TEST

TRENCH

F iQure 6

41 KR 200
Tower 106

D

:-.., .
,

:
E

'

••,;•.'!

*,,' ·6'0

•

,p,;. ~
.I '.

.

..

.

.'..­

..."
I.Olm
". (3' 4")

t
.".""1

•.Cj~ter of
•• ' Tower 106

F

'.

,;

S

A

• L.C.R.A. stoke
• T. A.S. stoke

o
•

2
,

4
I

6

meters

r. A, S.·

*' '/981

completed (Fig. 7). Munsell color chart measurements for the soil column at
the horizontal center of the east wall are:
Munsell Color
7.5YR5/8
7.5YR5/6
7.5YR4/4

Depth

Level

0- 35 em.

A

35- 61 em.
61- 86 em.

B

7.5YR3/2
lOYR3/2

86-117 em.
117-178 em.

D

e
E

Corrposition
dark alluvium
dark alluvium
dark alluvium, sand wi
limestone fragments
sandy clay
clay

26

VERVE CREEK

Most cultural material, seventeen items of lithic debitage, showed up
in the matrix at the 50-55 em. depth, Level B and again at the 70-75 em.
depth, Level C (Fig. 8). No diagnostic artifacts were encountered. All
cultural material was found above the limestone cobble/fragment inclusion
layer (lower sector Level C). At this point excavation was interrupted by
a sudden heavy rainfall. After an hour's drying the color of Level C was
indistinguishable fran Level B. There was, at that point, no visible
depositional break between Levels B and C. until the irregular limestone
containing sector was reached (> 70 em.) the color, texture, content and
composition were so similar as to appear to indicate a single depositional
layer. The soil column is therefore best expressed as follows:
Level
A
B

C
D

Corrposition
disturbed alluvium
alluvium

Depth Nominal
0- 35 em.
35- 70 em.

sandy clay loam with
inclusions
yellow clay

70-120 em.
120-178 em.

Remarks
plow zone
zone containing most
cultural material
so~thward dip highly
irregular
low depth limit of
trench

The test trench was backfilled and levelled to conform to the sur­
rounding field. Examination of the backdirt during both digging and filling
operations showed several pieces of lithic debitage which, due to the use of
the backhoe, lacked useful provenience. No finished tools were found.
SITE DESCRIPrIONS
SITE TESTED
41 KR 200 is located .5 mi. west of the junction of State Highway 27
and PM 480 near the southern extremity of the Verde Creek transmission cor­
ridor near Center Point, Texas. It lies on the second terrace of the
Guadalupe River. At its southern edge, tCMards the river, is a east/west
road cut. CUltural material can be seen -tn ,6i.;tu eroding out of this bank
at depths greater than a meter. Cultural material also can be found in the
talus at the base of the road cut. Surface survey of the site area shows a
widespread mixture of chipped stone artifacts, debitage and ground stone
artifacts.

SITE DESCRIPTIONS

27

The site is, as measured within the corridor, 425 m. in its north/south
extent and an estimated, by pacing, 700 m. in its east/west dimension. The
latter, of course, far exceeds the corridor width (85 ft.). At the proposed
location of Tower 106 the land surface is 1526 ft. a,bc)ve rean sea level (MSL).
This drops to 1516 ft. at the terrace edge and to 1510 ft. at the road cut­
bank.
The land is currently used for agriculture and was planted in crops at
the time of survey. Crop harvesting took place immediately prior to testing.
The land has been farmed more or less continuously since the late nineteenth
century with resultant plow disturbance and amateur collection of easily
recognized artifacts turned up on the surface. The surface artifact
assemblage undergoes a change with each cultivation cycle.
It should be noted that survey and excavation operations were keyed to
the narrow corridor area and do not represent a full investigation of the
site outside that limit. Areas having a greater concentration of surface arti­
facts were noted outside the corridor, particularly to the southwest near the
roadcut.
SITES Nor TESTED

41 KR 201
This site is located near the proposed location for Tower 112, Verde
Creek transmission line. It shows as a light lithic scatter and a small
amount of fire-cracked and colored rock impinging on the western boundary of
the transmission conidor. There are two areas of concentration of cultural
material, the smaller approximately 25 m. north of the larger. No indica­
tion of a clear line of demarcation is detectable between these two; the
intervening scatter simply becores less dense.
No time-diagnostic artifacts were found on the surface. The occasional
exposure of the bedrock in the area indicates very shallow soil with little
room for buried artifact deposits. The character of the lithic debitage, in
the main cortical flakes and sizeable secondary flakes, led to its designa­
tion as a lithic procurerent site.
41 KR 202
The site is a roughly oval-shaped limestone outcropping from which are
eroding chert inclusions. Debitage, prepared cores, and'partial blanks are

VERVE CREEK

28

exposed on the hilltop surface. Minor quarrying and initial preparation of
chert raw material appears to have been the reason for the site's existence.
No time-diagnostic material was found on the surface and the thin soil layer
surrounding the outcrop shows little promise of additional material.
The site lies astride the western boundary of the corridor 38 mi. south­
southwest of the proposed location of Tower 124. At this point the land sur­
face is 1850 ft. MSL, approximately 350 ft. above the Guadalupe River I s bed
and 3.5 mi. north of it.
41 KR 203
This site is comprised of a scatter of burned, reddened tabular lime­
stone with chipping debitage exposed on the surface. The fill is very
shallow and there is evidence of extensive sheetwash. Relative to the corri­
dor, it is located between the proposed locations of Towers 119 and 120.
There is little of the site within the corridor, the bulk lying to the east
of the easement.
No time-diagnostic artifacts were found. Two well-formed bifacial
scrapers were noted among the lithic remains on the surface.
ARrIFACI' DESCRIPTIONS
The potentially diagnostic archeological material collected in the
course of the Verde Creek Transmission Line Survey and the excavation of
site 41 KR 200 are included in the following descriptions along with a small
sample of other material. Typological identifications are based on informa­
tion drawn from the Handbook 06 Tex~ A~cheotogy: Type Ve¢cniption¢ by
Suhm and Jelks (1962); The Centhat Tex~ A~chalc by weir (1976); and/or

ToWMd a

S:t~ticat OV~V-lew

06 :the

A~c.halc

CuUWLe¢ 06 Cent4at and South­

by Johnson (1967). All measurements are in centimeters;
L = length, W = width, T = thickness, * = measurement of incomplete arti­
fact.

we¢:t~n Tex~

point fragment (Fig. 8a) 41 KR 200
Description - Surface find with tip broken. Triangular blade with slightly
convex edges. Barbed shoulders. Expanding stem. Base formed
M~ndate

ARTIFACT VESCRIPTIONS
by two convex curves in II fish-tail. n
surfaces showing pot lidding.
L = 3.8*, W = 2.9, T = 2.69

Dimensions -

29
Light tan chert with both

Mantindale point fragment (Fig. 8b) 41 KR 200
Description

Dimensions -

~

Surface find with tip broken. Triangular blade with straight
edges. Shoulders broken. Expanding stem. Base is charac­
teristic double convex "fish-tail. II Light tan chert with evi­
dence of patina forming on one side.
L = 4.74*, W = 2.6*, T = 0.69

Untyped point fragment (Fig. 8c) 41 KR 200
Description - Surface find with broken tip, base and shoulders. Triangular
blade with straight edges. Wide, short stem. Base, although
broken, wider than shoulders and shows convex curve. Mas t
closely resembles E~o~ type point but is larger. Light tan
chert.
Dimensions - L = 3.37*, W = 3.46*, T = 0.72, Stem = 2.21
Untyped point fragments (Fig. 8d) 41 KR 200
Description - Surface find at roadcut. Tip broken. Found in two fragments
which fit together. Blade is a long slender triangle with
slightly convex edges. Edges are beveled and slightly serrated.
Very slight shoulder projection without barbs. Short beveled,
unground stem. Base is beveled and slightly concave. Light
tan chert but shows a much darker interior at the break between
the two fragments. Measurements are
the two fragments when
joined.
Dimensions - L = 8.1*, W = 2.03, T = 1.03, Stem = 1.5
untyped point fragment (Fig. 8e)
Description - Medial section surface find. Triangular blade with convex
edges. Shoulders, stem, base, and tip missing. May be a
knife fragment rather than a point. Light tan chert.
Dimensions - L = 3.91*, W = 2.31, T = 0.57. Width and thickness measurements
shown mayor may not be those of the implement as made.

30

VERVE CREEK

Small pointed ovate biface (Fig. 8f)
Description - Surface find pointed at the presumed distal end, and rrore or
less circular at the presumed proximal end. Shows light tan
cortical remnants on both sides. The bulk of the specimen is
dark to medium brown chert. Edges are convex, the base edge
showing chipping aimed at sharpening as opposed to thinning.
Superficial resemblance to Ab~olo projectile point but rrore
likely intended for use as a knife.
Dimensions - L = 5.83, W = 4.15, T = 1.45
Thick ovate biface (Fig. 9a)
Description - Subjected to crude thinning of both sides. A remnant of the
cortex shows at one edge of the specimen. Brown semiglossy
chert. Surface find.
Dimensions - L = 10.25, W = 7.5, T = 2.5
Thick ovate biface fragment (Fig. 9b)
Description - Brown vitreous chert. Surface find having crude bifacial
thinning with rrost emphasis at the edges. Minor cortex remnant
of lighter colored chert. Upper right edge in photo shows a
much fresher and darker surface than any other indicating it is
a rrore recent break than the thinning flake scars.
Dimensions - L = 8.49, W = 6.13, T = 1.41
Thin ovate biface fragment (Fig. 9c)
Description - Surface find of rrottled dark and light colored chert. No cor­
tex remains on either side. Broken edge is paralleled by the
scar of a long thinning flake. Edges show no wear. May have
been broken in manufacture.
Dimensions - L = 7.42, W = 5.47, T = 1.22
Thick crude biface (Fig. 9d)
Description - This specimen was a surface find. Much of its surface is the
cortex of the cobble from which it was produced. A cutting,
chopping or, rrore likely, scraping edge has been chipped at
both ends. Both ends show some signs of wear in use. In edge
cross-section the specimen is center-humped with the cutting

- - - - " " - - - - - - - - - -------------------------------------­

ARTIFACT VESCRIPTIONS

31

or chopping edges close to the bottom face in the fashion of a

wood working plane. The cortex is pitted light tan chert, the
large flake scar areas are rrottled semivitreous gray-brawn.
Dimensions - L = 7.61 chipped edge to chipped edge, W = 6.61, T = 3.36
The presence of a well developed patina on the surface of many of the
Verde Creek artifacts deserves mention.

This patina differs from the inner

body of the affected chert in both color and texture.

The color of the

patina, in all cases examined, was lighter in hue and chroma than that of
the inner l:x:xJy.

The texture of the patina was rrore coarse.

Scratch testing

of four specimens showed a hardness difference between patina and underlying
inner l:x:xJy with the latter proving to be the harder.

These circumstances are

in keeping with exposure to circulating alkaline ground water (Schmalz 1960:
49) which is the case in much of Kerr County.

The presence and extent of

the patination according to Schmalz {1960: 47-49} is expressive of a chemical
environment but is not necessarily time sensitive to the degree which would
aid in archeologic age determination.

SChImlz was able to laboratory-produce

a patina imitating natural ones using dilute alkaline solutions in as little
as twenty-four hours.

In view of the alkalinity of ground water in Kerr

County and the use of alkaline fertilizers at 41 KR 200, the heavy patina­
zation is probably rrore a product of these conditions than of age.
SUMMARY AND RECC'M\1ENDATIONS

Kerr County is not particularly well known archeologically.

Most sites

located there have been recorded as the result of only two major surveys and
are concentrated in those areas.

The present survey and test excavation

helps point out the extent of the Archaic remains to be found there.

The

sheer size of 41 KR 200 suggests long-term, higher population density occu­
pation by prehisbDric peoples.
The Verde Creek Transmission Corridor shows four sites within its
boundaries.

Three of these, 41 KR 201, 41 KR 202 and 41 KR 203, are small,

shallow depth, low density deposits so located as to be easily avoided during
the construction of the transmission line.

Accordingly, their avoidance is

reconmended.

No further archeological examination is reCOIIll1'ended for any of

these three.

None of these merit National Register or State Archeological

Landmark nomination.

The fourth site, 41 KR 200, requires special attention.

The area on which 'Ibwer 106 is to be constructed has been subjected to testing and

Figure 8.

Representative Artifacts From 41 KR 200 (actual size)

a.

Mar ti nda Ze dart p::>int fragm:mt showing p:Jtiidding

b.

MartindaZe dart p:Jint fragm:mt

c.

Untyped p::>int fragm:mt

d.

Untyped p:Jint fragm:mts

e.

Untyped medial p:Jint fragxrent

f.

Small ovate biface

a

p

q

Figure 9.

Representative Artifacts From 4LKR 200 (actual size)

a.

Thick ovate biface showing cortex remnant

b.

Thick ovate biface fragment

c.

Thin ovate biface fragment

d.

Thick crude biface with wear marks at both ends

p

e

q

36

VERVE CREEK

analysis, and reveals moderate density deposits of cultural material of
Archaic age but with no clear stratigraphic integrity. The vast majority
of the site's area is located outside the corridor. The site should be pre­
served for possible future study. Accordingly, the following recommenda­
tions are tendered:
1) excavation during tower construction should not exceed the bounds
surveyed and marked by the sponsor as guides to the test excavation;
2) a qualified archeologist should be present during excavation for
tower construction;
3) access to the tower location for heavy machinery should be gained
by the road immediately to the south of the site and the construction of a
ramp at the road cutbank1 and
4) the trees and large shrubs situated to the south of the tower loca­
tion should be cut, not uprooted.

These actions are recommended to minimize damage to a site with possi­
ble significant cultural resources and confine any adverse affects to the
area which was tested by this study. National Register and/or State Archeo­
logical Landmark eligibility can be determined only with further testing
outside the confines of the transmission corridor which limited the present
effort.

REFERENCES CITED

37

REFERENCES CITED
American Association of Petroleum Geologists

1973

Ge.ologicat Highway Map

1976

Ge.omo~phology n~om

on

American Association of
Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, Oklahoma. H.B. Renfro Merorial
edition.
Antevs, Ernst
1962
Late Quaternary Climates in Arizona. Amwcal1 An..t[qu.i:ty 28 (2) :
193-198. Salt Lake City.
Bates, Robert L. and Julia A. Jackson, Eds.
1980
Glo¢¢any 06 Ge.ology. American Geological Institute, Falls Church,
Virginia. 2nd ed.
Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The. Te.xa...6 Jounnat 06 Scie.nce. 2(1):
93-117.
Branda, Eldon Stephen (Editor)
1976
The. HandbooQ 06 Te.xa...6. A supplement Vol. III. The Texas State
Historical Association, Austin.
Briggs, Alton K.
1971
An Archeological Survey of Ingram Reservoir. Texas Historical
Survey Committee and Texas water Development Board A~che.ologica.t
sunve.y Re.po~t 9. Austin.
Burt, William H. and Richard P. Grossenhieder
A Fie..td Guide. to the. Mamma.t¢. The Peterson Field Guide Series 5.
1976
Houghton Mifflin Company. Boston. 3rd ed.
Butzer, Karl W.

the.

Te.xa...6.

E~h.

Harper and Row, Publishers.

New

York.
Carr, John T., Jr.

1967

The. Climate. and

Phy¢iog~aphy

06 Te.Xa...6.

Texas Water Development

Board, Report No. 55. Austin.
Dibble, David S.
1965
Bonfire Shelter:
A Stratified Kill Site in the Amistad Reservoir
Area, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Pro­
ject, MiJce..t.iane.ou¢ Pape.M No.5. The University of Texas at
Austin.

38

VERVE CREEK

Fenneman, Nevin A.
1931

Phy.o.<.ogJtaphy ot} Wv.,-tVLY1. UnJ.Xed S-ta-tv.,.

Inc.

McGraw-Hill Book Company,

New York and London.

Foster, Robert J.
1976

Geology.

Charles E. Merrill Publishing Company.

Columbus, Ohio.

3rd ed.
Gil.J:rore, Kathleen
1978

Tex~

Ancheology.

University Press.

Kurt D. House (editor).
Dallas.

Goldschmidt, Walter R.
1934
Reconnaissance in Kerr County.
Research Laboratory.

Southern Methodist

MS on file, Texas Archeological

The University of Texas at Austin.

Gould, Frank W.
1969

Tex~ Plant.o,

A Chec~-t

Texas Agri­
cultural Experiment Station, Texas A&M University. College Station,
and Ecological Summa.Jty.

Texas.
Grout, Frank
(Editor)
1946

Kemp'.6 Handbook.

on

Rock..6.

Van Nostrand Company.

New York.

6th

ed.
Hester, 1bomas R. (Assembler)
1975 . Archeological and Historical Resources in the San Antonio­
Guadalupe River Basins:

A Preliminary Statement.

Archeological Research Regional. S-tudiv., No. 1.

Center for

The University of

Texas at San Antonio.
House, Kurt D.
1978

Tex~ Ancheology.

Southern Methodist University Press.

Dallas.

Jackson, A.T.
1938

P'<'cfuJte-wJtiilng

3809.
1941

06

Tex.~ Indial'/..6.

university of Texas Publication

Austin.

Pendants and Their Uses.

Butle-tin

06

-the Tex.~ Ancheological and

Pale.on;tological Soudy 13: 9.

Johnson, Leroy, Jr.
1967

TOward a Statistical Overview of the Archaic Cultures of Central
and Southwestern Texas. Tex.~ Me.moJtia.l MU.6e.um Butle-tin 12.
The University of Texas at Austin.

REFERENCES CITEO

39

Kelley, J.C.

1947

The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clear
Fork Focus.

1955

Arn~can

Antiquity 13(2): 97-109.

The Archaic Culture in Central, Southern and west Texas.

Paper

presented at the 1955 Archaic Conference, Indiana University.
Bloomington.
Muller, Daniel A. and Robert D. Price

1979

Gltound-wa.,tVL AvaA.1.ab-ULty ,{n TeXM.

Resources, Report 238.

Texas Department of Water

Austin.

Newcomb, W.W., Jr.

1961

The Ind,{anA 06 TeXM.

The University of Texas Press.

Austin.

Patterson, J.T.

1936

The Cotner-tang Flint Artifacts of Texas.

The University of Texas

Bulletin 3618.
1937

Boat-shaped Artifacts of the Gulf Southwest States.

The Univer­

sity of Texas Bulletin 3732.
Poteet, Sybil

1938

The Occurrence and Distribution of Beveled Knives.
~he

TeXM Altcheolog,{cal and

Paleo~olog,{cal Soc,{~y

Bulletin 06
10: 245-262.

Prewitt, Elton R.

1974

Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson
County, Texas.

49.

Texas Archeological Survey, Rue.aJtch Repou No.

The University of Texas at Austin.

Real, Matilda Marie

1942

A History of Kerr County, Texas.

Unpublished Master's Thesis.

The University of Texas at Austin.
Reeves, Richard D.

1969

Gltound-wa.,tVL RuoUltcu 06 KeJLIt Coun~y, TeXM.

ment Board, Report No. 102.

Texas Water Develop­

Austin.

Schmalz, Robert F.

1960

Flint and the Patination of Flint Artifacts.
~he Plte~~oJt,{c Soc.,{~y

1960

Pltaceed,{ng~

06

3: 44-49.

Sellards, E.H., W.S. Adkins and F.B. Plummer

1978

The Geology 06 TeXM. Vol. 1, Stratigraphy. The University of
Texas Bulletin No. 3232. The University of Texas at Austin.
Reprint of 1932 edition.

...----_.-----­

40

VERVE CREEK

Skinner, S. Alan
1979a The Bushwhack Shelter (x4l KR 116), Kerr County, Texas. La
T),.eNta 6 (2): 3-12. San Antonio.
1979b The Real Site (x4l KR 166), Kerr County, Texas. La T),.eNta
6(3): 26-31. San Antonio.
1979c The Paris Site (x4l KR 1), Kerr County, Texas. La T),.eNta 6(4):
3-15. San Antonio.
Soil Survey Staff
1975
So),.t Taxo~omy. Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of
Agriculture. Washington, D.C. Agriculture Handbook No. 436.
Sollberger, J. B.
1948
Lamb's Creek Mound. The Reco~d 7(1): 2-5. Dallas.
1949
A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Kerr County. The Reco~d 9(3): 9-14.
Dallas.
Sollberger, J.B. and Thomas Roy Hester
1972
The Strohacker Site: A Preview of Pre-Archaic Manifestations in
Texas. Pla-i..n6 A~z~opolog~z 17(58): 326-344.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1970
Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central
Texas. Bu.U.e.ti~ On zhe TexCL6 A~cheolog),.cal Souuy 41: 37-286.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bu.U.e.ti~ on zhe
TexCL6 A~cheolog),.cal Souuy No. 25.
Taylor, F.B.
1963
General Soil Map of Kerr County, Texas. Soil Conservation Ser­
vice. U.S. Department of Agriculture. washington, D.C.
Thornbury, William D.
1960
P~~uple..6 06 Geomo~phology.
John Wiley and Sons. New York and
London. (Reprint of 1954 edition.)
Trewartha, Glenn T.
1954
A~ I~oduc;Uo~ ZO C..eimaZe.
McGraw-Hill. New York.
Weir, Frank A.
1976a The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation.
Washington State University. Pullman.
1976b The Central Texas Archaic Reconsidered. In: T.R. Hester (editor),
Texas Archaic: A Symposium. Center for Archeological Research,
Speual Repo~ 2. The University of Texas at San Antonio.

REFERENCES CITEV

41

weir, Frank A.
1979
Greenhaw: An Archaic Site in Central Texas. Bate.e.Un. 06 :the
Texa..o AJLc.heoiogic.at Soc.ie:ty 50: 5-67. Fort Worth.
Wheeler, Mortimer
1954
AJLc.heoiogy oJLom :the EaJLth. Penguin Books. Middlesex,
England.

Willey, G.R. and Philip Phillips

1958

Me:thod and TheoJLY in. AmeJLic.an AJLc.heotogy.

Phoenix Books.

Chicago.

VERVE CREEK

42

'Ibis reJ?Ort is the product of the corrbined efforts of the Texas Archeo­
logical Survey staff.

'Ibe field effort was J?Ossible because of the

assistance of Jack Jackson and Lee Bement.

'Ibe photographic lab work credit

belongs to Doug Comstock; drafting was done by carol Fabac; final manuscript
and drafts were typed by Deborah Smith, Suzanne Meinke and Beverly Beaty­
Benadom.

Editing, COJ"('[X)sition and guidance were provided by Solveig Turpin.

I would be remiss if the fine backhoe work of Mr. Daniel Perry of the
Lower Colorado River Authority was not properly acknowledged.
good man to have on a Case.

Daniel is a

