PHASE II AND III EVALUATIONS OF SITE 41NV670 TO BE IMPACTED BY
THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE GABION CHUTE SITE M4 FLOOD CONTROL
STRUCTURE ON MILL CREEK IN NAVARRO COUNTY, TEXAS

By
William E. Moore and Michael R. Bradle

With contributions by
Michael A. Nash and Lee C. Nordt

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 48

1997

PHASE II AND III EVALUATIONS OF SITE 41NV670 TO BE IMPACTED BY THE
CONSTRUCTION OF THE GABION CHUTE SITE M4 FLOOD CONTROL
STRUCTURE ON MILL CREEK IN NAVARRO COUNTY, TEXAS

Principal Investigator: William E. Moore

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Project Number BVRA 96-12

Prepared for
Navarro Soil and Water Conservation District
4323 West Highway 22
Corsicana, Texas 75110

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
A combined Phase II and Phase III significance testing of prehistoric site
41NV670 (located in western Navarro County, Texas) for determination of National
Register of Historic Places eligibility was conducted by Brazos Valley Research
Associates (BVRA) in January 1997. This project was conducted for the Navarro Soil
and Water Conservation District in Corsicana, Texas. This investigation was performed
using shovel testing, excavation of two 1 x 1 meter test units, one backhoe trench,
surface inspection of creek exposures, and an evaluation by a geomorphologist. Site
41NV670 consists of a stratum of bison bone identified as modern bison (Bison bison)
representing minimally five individuals. The only other identified species in the faunal
assemblage was white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) represented by a single
scaphoid carpal. Although no conclusive evidence of cultural modification to the bone
was observed during the laboratory analysis, the presence of human intervention was
found in the form of possible burned bone (field observation); flakes; biface fragments;
two arrow points; and burned rock, charcoal, and ash. This site is located in the Mill
Creek paleosol. Radiocarbon dates taken from charcoal mixed with bison bone in test
unit N200/E201 produced a conventional radiocarbon age of 390 ± 60 years Before
Present (B.P). The calibrated results, prepared by Beta Analytic Radiocarbon Dating
Laboratory, produced calendar dates of A.D. 1425 to A.D. 1650 (2 sigma, 95%
probability). * These dates place site 41NV670 in the Late Prehistoric or Protohistoric
period.
During the Phase II and Phase III testing of site 41NV670, one previously
unrecorded site (41NV671) was found on the south bank of Mill Creek approximately
200 meters to the west of the project area. Site 41NV671 is a small hearth about twelve
feet below the current floodplain on the south bank of Mill Creek. The hearth is located
in the Navarro paleosol, the geological stratum underlying the Mill Creek paleosol
containing site 41NV670. Radiocarbon dates obtained from charcoal extracted from the
hearth produced a conventional radiocarbon age of 580 ± 60 years B.P. The calibrated
results, prepared by Beta Analytic Radiocarbon Dating Laboratory, produced calendar
dates of A.D. 1290 to A.D. 1440 (2 sigma, 95% probability).
In accordance with Natural Resources Conservation Service General Manual
420, Part 401.35, the artifacts recovered during this project have been returned to the
landowner, Richard Saunders of Blooming Grove, Texas.

* The formal documentation of the radiocarbon dating prepared by Beta Analytic, Inc. is
presented in this report as Appendix I.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Brazos Valley Research Associates is grateful to those whose cooperation made
the completion of this project possible. Bobby Wilson of the Navarro Soil and Water
Conservation District provided maps of the proposed construction site and was
available for consultation at all times. Calvin B. Sanders, archaeologist for the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, visited the site and shared his knowledge of 41NV670
and other archaeological sites in the area. Michael R. Bradle acted as Project
Archaeologist, directed the field excavations, processed the artifacts prior to analysis
with assistance from Floyd D. Kent, and co-authored the report. Bobby Wilson, Jackie
Helton and Tim Pullin of the Navarro Soil and Water Conservation District were present
throughout the testing phase and helped with some of the more mundane tasks such as
loading bags of bone and dirt into the field vehicle. Dr. Lee C. Nordt was the
geomorphologist for this project and wrote the Geomorphological Investigations section.
Carolyn Spock, Head of Records at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, and
her staff are thanked for their cooperation during the archival search. Michael A. Nash
examined the faunal material and mussel shell and wrote the Faunal Analysis section.
Lili Lyddon of Lyddon Illustrations in Wellborn, Texas prepared the figures that appear in
this report. Calvin Smith, Director of the Strecker Museum on the campus of Baylor
University in Waco, Texas took time from his busy schedule to discuss the project with
Lee Nordt. Mr. Smith has experience in sites containing bison bone, and BVRA is
grateful to him for his interest in this project and sharing his knowledge with Dr. Nordt.
Elton R. Prewitt took time out of his busy schedule to discuss point typology with BVRA.
His comments were very appropriate and are greatly appreciated. Finally, the
landowner, Richard Saunders, is thanked for allowing this project to be conducted on
his property.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS..................................................................................................iii
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ............................................................................ 6
PROJECT METHODS................................................................................................... 10
GEOMORPHOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS................................................................ 12
FAUNAL ANALYSIS...................................................................................................... 23
LITHIC ANALYSIS ........................................................................................................ 27
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................. 28
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 34
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 35
Appendix I: Beta Analysis, Inc. Results
Appendix II: Soil Stratigraphic Descriptions
Appendix III: Faunal Remains from 41NV670
Figures
Figure 1. General Location Map...................................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Site Map ........................................................................................................... 3
Figure 3. Sites 41NV670 and 41NV671 .......................................................................... 4
Figure 4. Cutbank Exposures, Backhoe Trench, and Sites ........................................... 13
Figure 5. Alluvial Stratigraphic Columns from Cutbank Exposures on Mill Creek ......... 15
Figure 6. Alluvial Cross-Section of 41NV670 ................................................................ 18
Figure 7. Alluvial Stratigraphic Cross-Section ............................................................... 19
Figure 8. Mill Creek (facing west) .................................................................................. 22
Figure 9. Arrow Points from 41NV670........................................................................... 27
Figure 10. Excavation Unit N200/E200 ......................................................................... 32
Figure 11. Bison Jawbone in Excavation Unit N200/E200 ............................................ 33

iv

INTRODUCTION
The Navarro Soil and Water Conservation District 514 in Corsicana, Texas plans
to construct a gabion chute structure as a flood control measure in the Chambers Creek
sub-watershed of the Trinity River. Following a cultural resources survey by Calvin B.
Sanders (1996), archaeologist for the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS),
it was determined that prehistoric site 41NV670 should be tested for its significance and
determination of National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) eligibility. This site is
located in western Navarro County (Figure 1) and is located on Mill Creek, a tributary of
Chambers Creek that eventually flows into the Trinity River to the east. Post Oak Creek
parallels Mill Creek approximately 300 meters to the south of site 41NV670. Figure 2
depicts the location of the test units, backhoe trench, and area where the arrow points
were found. Sites 41NV670 and 41NV671 are depicted on the 7.5' U.S.G.S.
topographic quadrangle Cryer Creek, dated 1962 (Figure 3).
Site 41NV670 is on privately owned property. However, construction of the
gabion chute structure is a federally funded project; therefore, this project must comply
with the Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act that requires that the
effects of any Federal undertaking on any existing cultural properties potentially eligible
for the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) be taken into consideration. Site
41NV670 will be affected by Gabion Chute M4. This type of construction is described
by Sanders (1996:1) in the following:
Gabion chutes are open-flow structures constructed within the stream
channel and designed to decrease channel gradients and subsequently
control channel incisement, limit bank erosion, and prevent upstream
knick point and overfall migration. The structures are comprised of boxshaped wire mesh baskets filled with stone (e.g. rip-rap) which are placed
end-to-end, side-by-side, and one on top of the other to achieve design
widths, lengths, and elevations. The baskets are laced together to form a
flexible monolithic structure.
Site 41NV670 was located by Sanders (1996) during a Phase I archaeological
survey along Mill Creek which resulted in the identification of three prehistoric sites
(41NV668 - 41NV670) in the project Area of Potential Effect (APE) and a fourth
prehistoric site on the north bank of Mill Creek opposite 41NV670. The fourth site was
outside the project APE and was not recorded at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL). According to Sanders (1996:26), 41NV670 was determined to be
an intact cultural deposit containing mussel shell, lithic material (flakes), and large
animal bones tentatively identified as bison. The depth of the deposits was estimated at
approximately fifteen feet below the existing landform surface and appeared to be
between 10 and 20 centimeters thick.

1

Figure 1. General Location Map

2

Figure 2. Site Map

3

Figure 3. Sites 41NV670 and 41NV671

4

The presence of intact cultural deposits is significant and, following consultation
with the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO), it was decided that, based on the
presence of a diversity and quantity of bison bone and a lens of freshwater mussel
shell, a combined Phase II and Phase III testing project would be required before
construction of the gabion chute would be allowed to proceed. In order to satisfy this
requirement, the Navarro Soil and Water Conservation District, working with the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, contracted with BVRA to perform this service.
The project area is situated in the western portion of Navarro County, northwest
of Corsicana, Texas. The main highway in the area is F.M. 55 that runs northwest
southeast and, at one point, is approximately 275 meters due west of the center of site
41NV670.
The project area is located near the western extreme of the West Gulf Coast
Plain physiographic province as defined by Fenneman (1931:100-102). It is located
east of the Central Texas Section of the Great Plains physiographic province
(Fenneman 1931:54-55). This part of Mill Creek is located in the Blackland Prairie
major land resource area (Gould 1962). The topography is described as gently rolling
to nearly level and well dissected by creeks.
Mill Creek is a tributary of the Chambers Creek sub-watershed of the Trinity
River watershed. Mill Creek begins in eastern Hill County and flows in a generally
eastern direction through Ellis County before reaching its confluence with Chambers
Creek along the northern county line of Navarro County. This creek drains
approximately 69,364 acres (United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service 1994).
Information regarding the climate, geology, local flora and fauna of the project
area region are presented in the survey report by Calvin B. Sanders (1996:4-8). The
geomorphology and soils are discussed below in the section prepared by Lee C. Nordt
entitled Geomorphological Investigations.

5

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Previous Investigations
Navarro County is located in the North Central Texas region as defined by
Biesaart et al. (1985:76) in Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical
Overview published by the Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical
Commission. This is an area that was well documented in terms of numbers of sites in
1985 when compared to other regions of Texas. When the statistical overview was
compiled, a total of 2678 prehistoric sites (13.25% of the state) were recorded in the
entire region, mainly due to work on Richland and Chambers creeks. Only the Central
Texas region reported more sites or had a higher percentage statewide, and only four
counties, Bell (197), Coleman (151), Dallas (204), and Hill (242) had more recorded
sites (Biesaart et al. 1985:83). The 132 sites recorded in Navarro County in 1985
consisted of 4.93% of the region and .65% of the state. The reader is referred to the
overview for additional statistical information concerning Navarro County and its relation
to the rest of Texas.
Previous work in the county has been synthesized by Calvin B. Sanders (1996)
in his survey report entitled Cultural Resources Survey of the Mill Creek Project,
Navarro County, Texas. The following discussion is taken from his work and other
major reports, especially those dealing with studies along Richland and Chambers
creeks.
Most of the archaeological investigations in Navarro County have been the result
of archaeological salvage projects associated with reservoir construction, often involving
multiple counties. The earliest reservoir projects were conducted in the 1960s and
include Navarro Mills (Duffield 1960, 1963) and Bardwell (Shafer 1964; Sorrow 1966).
Tennessee Colony Reservoir was the scene of archaeological activity in the 1970s
(Richner and Lee 1976; Richner and Bagot 1978; Richner 1982). The majority of
archaeological data for Navarro County was collected during surveys at Richland and
Chambers creeks in the 1970s and 1980s. Most of these studies were the result of
proposed watershed projects by the Soil Conservation Service, and much of the work
was performed by Southern Methodist University. Later, when the Richland-Chambers
Reservoir was proposed, archaeologists were on hand to survey there as well (Raab et
al. 1980, 1981). Navarro Mills and Richland Chambers, south of 41NV670, are the
nearest major reservoirs to the current project area.
Data collected during investigations in the Chambers Creek watershed are "of
particular relevance" according to Sanders (1996:9) because Mill Creek is a tributary of
that watershed. Excluding work at Richland-Chambers Reservoir, only seven
archaeological surveys are documented by Sanders (1996:9-10) in the Chambers
Creek watershed with the first conducted by C. Reid Ferring (1975).

6

Ferring's work "revealed a relative absence of sites on the ephemeral drainages
in which the majority of planned floodwater structures are located" (Sanders 1996:9).
The only exceptions were two lithic quarries on terraces near Chambers Creek proper
(Ferring 1975:3-4). Ferring hypothesized that the paucity of knappable raw material
may have been a factor in the low number of sites in the areas surveyed.
Other surveys conducted by Soil Conservation Service archaeologists have
reported similar results. Nancy M. Cole (1981) found only one prehistoric lithic scatter
on an eroded and heavily disturbed upland area, and the last professional
archaeological investigation in this watershed (Nunley 1983) failed to locate prehistoric
sites in either of the three floodwater retarding structures examined. According to
Nunley (1983:4), the results of his study provided further evidence "supporting the
relative scarcity of significant cultural resources in upland areas of the Blackland Prairie
suggested in the previous investigations."
Cultural Chronology
The prehistory of North Central and East Texas has been summarized in a
regional overview by Dee Ann Story (1990) and a planning document by Kenmotsu and
Perttula (1993). Of course, there are detailed overviews in some of the larger contract
reports cited above. The reader is referred to these works for a thorough coverage of
the cultural chronology of the region. According to Story et al. (1990), Navarro County
is located within the Gulf Coastal Plain study unit as defined in the Southwestern
Division of the United States Army Corps of Engineers. It is cited as part of the PrairieSavanna Archeological Region of the greater Eastern Planning Region as delineated by
the Texas Historical Commission (Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993). In general, the
prehistory of Navarro County contains elements of the Paleoindian, Archaic, and Late
Prehistoric periods. The following discussion is taken from Turner and Hester (1985:4649) and from the summary by Sanders (1996:10-11).
Paleoindian Period (9200 B.C. - 6000 B.C.)
Paleoindians are viewed by most archaeologists as small, highly mobile bands
who survived by exploiting now-extinct megafauna of the terminal Pleistocene
(mammoth and bison), smaller game (deer, rabbit, and turtle), and gathering wild plants.
Paleoindian sites in the region usually consist of isolated surface finds of distinctive
projectile points or finds of such points in temporally mixed contexts. According to Story
(1990:180-181), only three Paleoindian sites have been identified in Navarro County,
and at least several Paleoindian points or fragments have been recorded in adjacent
counties.

7

Archaic Period (6000 B.C. - A.D. 700)
The primary adaptation of this period is described as broad-based hunting and
gathering groups organized into small, mobile bands (Weir 1976). The Archaic spanned
at least three-fourths of North Central Texas prehistory and is characterized by changes
in projectile point types, sites containing larger accumulations of occupational debris,
increased use of expedient tools of locally available raw materials as opposed to finely
crafted formal tools of exotic, high quality raw materials, and the introduction of stonelined hearths, baking pits, and milling implements (Story 1990:213). Navarro County is
located in the west-central portion of the Prairie Savanna Archeological Region.
According to Prikryl (1993), the Archaic of this region probably consists of the following:
Early Archaic (circa 6500 B.C. - 4000 B.C.), Middle Archaic (circa 4000 B.C. - 1500
B.C.), and Late Archaic (circa 1500 B.C. - A.D. 700).
Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 700 - A.D. 1600)
This period is distinguished by the bow and arrow, pottery, house structures, and
corn horticulture in the region. Various chronological divisions of this period have been
suggested by different researchers. Prikryl (1993) proposed the Late Prehistoric I (circa
A.D. 700 - A.D. 1200) and Late Prehistoric II (circa A.D. 1200 - A.D. 1700) in the upper
Trinity River basin of North Central Texas. Prewitt (1981, 1985) divides the period into
the Austin Phase (circa A.D. 700 - A.D. 1300) and Toyah Phase (circa A.D. 1300 - A.D.
1600). He refers to his area as the Central Texas Region south and west of the current
project area.
As a result of information collected in the Richland Creek Archaeological Project
(Richland-Chambers Reservoir), Bruseth and Martin (1987) proposed a local threephase chronology for the middle Trinity River basin. Their Late Prehistoric sequence
begins with the Richland Creek phase (circa A.D. 700 - A.D. 900) with temporally
diagnostic arrow point types Scallorn and Steiner present in the local assemblages.
The middle phase, Round Prairie (circa A.D. 900 - A.D. 1300) is distinguished by Alba
points. The final temporal phase is St. Elmo (circa A.D. 1300 - A.D. 1650); during this
time Cliffton and Perdiz arrow points are recognized as the diagnostic types. Ceramics
are tempered with grog, grit, and bone are the dominant types with decorated sherds
appearing after A.D. 1000.
Although there are variations of subsistence during this period, as reflected in
artifact assemblages and site types, the emerging Late Prehistoric Period is distinctive
in several ways. The major difference is the introduction of the bow and arrow, pottery,
horticulture, and (in some areas) a more sedentary lifestyle. At some sites, dart points
and large stemmed bifaces that may have served as knives (Cleburne Biface*) or
spears are found with arrow points suggesting that adoption of the bow and arrow as an
exclusive weapon of choice may not have been immediate. Hunting and gathering
probably remained the primary method of subsistence over much of Texas during much
of this period even though limited horticulture may have been practiced by certain
nomadic groups.

8

Ground stone objects usually made from sandstone are common throughout
sites in Texas dating to the Late Prehistoric period. Two forms are typical. These are
milling stones, grinding slabs upon which a mano was used in a rotary motion, and
metates, upon which a back-and-forth motion was used. Both forms were used in plant
processing. The return of bison to the area is most significant and appears to be very
important in most regions (Turner and Hester 1985:52).
* Many chipped stone artifacts previously referred to as knives may actually be
preforms.

9

PROJECT METHODS
The project consisted of several phases - archival research, monitoring of the
removal of 14.73 feet of earth covering the site, artifact recovery from two 1 x 1 meter
test units, special processing of all excavated matrix, artifact analysis, and report
preparation. The archival research consisted of a check of the site records at TARL and
a review of previous work in the area, especially along Chambers Creek by Southern
Methodist University. The archival research and monitoring were conducted by the
Principal Investigator, while the Project Archaeologist was responsible for the test
excavations and artifact processing as well as co-authoring the report. The
geomorphological investigations were performed by Lee C. Nordt (see
Geomorphological Investigations below) and Michael A. Nash examined the faunal
remains (see Faunal Analysis below).
Prior to the Phase I survey, Calvin Sanders (1996), conducted extensive archival
research in order to become familiar with the kinds of sites found in the region. He
found that previous archaeological research in Navarro County has been dominated by
salvage projects associated with watershed projects and reservoir studies. The archival
work conducted by BVRA consisted of a records check to identify any new relevant
studies, if any, not discussed by Sanders. According to Sanders (1996:10), "...perhaps
the most important recent cultural resources investigations in the region are those
associated with the Richland Chambers Reservoir Project." The archival research
included a review of reports by Raab (1982), Bruseth and Moir (1987), Bruseth and
Martin (1987), McGregor and Bruseth (1987), Raab et al. (1980, 1981), and (Kenmotsu
and Perttula (1993).
The field investigation consisted of two phases - monitoring of the removal of
14.73 feet of alluvial deposits overlying site 41NV670 and site testing which included the
manual excavation of two 1 x 1 meter test units to define site depth and integrity.
Before excavation of the test units, two shovel tests were dug in order to define site
depth in the area away from the creek. Shovel tests were not needed to determine site
boundaries as cultural materials were found to extend to the limits of the project area in
all directions. The test units were approximately centered within a 20 by 40 foot area
(Figure 2) and, of course, to Mill Creek on the north. Vertical control was established by
setting a 1/2 inch metal rebar as a datum point, and the elevation and location was
determined using a total station. The datum point was the same as the northeast corner
of N200/E200 and the northwest corner of N200/E201 (Figure 2). From this point the
two excavation units were established and designated N200/E200 and N200/E201.
Originally, the research design called for a four meter block. However, after a
consultation with G. Lain Ellis of the Division of Antiquities Protection it was decided to
excavate only two one meter units and expand the role of the geomorphologist.
According to Mr. Ellis, the revised research design would successfully serve as Phase II
testing and Phase III mitigation.

10

Intensive mechanical stripping was necessary in order to remove the 14.73 feet
of alluvial deposits overlying 41NV670. A bulldozer was utilized to perform this task at a
45 degree slope which enabled the establishment of an excavation platform. This also
exposed a vertical profile of the entire alluvial deposits overlying the site.
One backhoe trench was excavated along the east side of the 1 x 2 meter block
to provide an exposed stratigraphic profile to be examined by the archaeologists and
geomorphologist. By strategically placing the backhoe trench perpendicular to Mill
Creek we were able to ascertain the extent of cultural deposits to the north. Soilstratigraphic descriptions are presented in Appendix II.
An examination of the exposed shell lens in the creek bank suggested a thin lens
of cultural material containing mussel shell, bone, and lithics. This was confirmed by
shovel tests that revealed a site of approximately 40 centimeters in depth, compared to
earlier estimates of 20 centimeters, situated on an undulating surface beneath 14.73
feet of recent floodplain alluvium. Elevations were taken using a total station and
recorded an elevation of 424.23 feet at the top of the creek bank, 409.50 feet at the
exposed shell lens in the creek bank, and an elevation of 411.35 feet at the top of the
site where it was exposed by the removal of the overlying alluvial deposits. The shallow
depth of the site buried deeply beneath the alluvium indicated the presence of intact
deposits, possibly the result of a single episode in which shell and local fauna was
processed and/or consumed. It was decided that the best course of action was to
excavate the test units by arbitrary 10-centimeter levels.
Cultural materials were embedded in hard clay that was impossible to remove by
conventional means (i.e., excavation with a shovel). Therefore, the matrix containing
the site materials was removed to a depth below the bottom of the site and placed in
double-wrapped plastic bags. Each bag was identified according to test unit and
elevation and transported to the laboratory where the cultural materials were separated
from the clay matrix using a low-grade detergent solution. Field notes were taken, and
the site was photographed. When possible, the position of in situ specimens was
mapped.
Report Preparation
The report was prepared by the Principal Investigator, Project Archaeologist, and
contributors Lee C. Nordt and Michael A. Nash. A draft was submitted to the Texas
Historical Commission and the Natural Resources Conservation Service for review. A
copy of the report, all notes, shovel test forms, and other records are on file at Brazos
Valley Research Associates. Additional reports have been submitted to the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, the State Historic Preservation Officer, the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, and the Navarro Soil and Water Conservation District.
The artifacts, as well as a copy of the site form and report, have been turned over to the
landowner, Richard Saunders of Blooming Grove, Texas. Mr. Saunders is willing to
share these materials with other professionals provided he receives adequate advance
notice.

11

GEOMORPHOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Introduction
The purpose of the geomorphological investigation was to identify periods of
floodplain deposition, erosion, and soil formation along Mill Creek in the vicinity of site
41NV670 in Navarro County, Texas and the effects on site formation and function. The
influence of the geological record on archaeological site formation and preservation
potentials are also discussed.
Mill Creek is a low-order meandering stream that confluences with Chambers
Creek approximately six kilometers downstream from the project area (Barnes 1972).
The upper drainage basin of Mill Creek covers mainly the Austin Chalk, whereas the
lower basin covers mostly the Ozan Formation (lower Taylor marl). The Wolfe City
Formation crops out on the south side of the valley just west of the project area. The
Austin Chalk and Ozan Formation contribute principally marls and clays to Mill Creek
alluvium. The Wolfe City Formation contributes mainly sands, mudstones, and marls.
The Trinity clay frequently flooded soil unit, located in the project area, is mapped
in the Mill Creek floodplain by Meade et al. (1974). This soil consists of poorly
developed black clays, consistent with a Holocene floodplain age.
Site 41NV670 is buried in Holocene floodplain deposits on the south side of Mill
Creek (Figure 4). In the project area, the floodplain is approximately one kilometer wide
and at an elevation of 425 feet above mean sea level.
Methods
To reconstruct the Holocene alluvial history of Mill Creek, four channel cutbank
exposures (CB 1 through CB 4) and one backhoe trench (BT 1) were described
according to standards and procedures of the Soil Survey Division Staff (1993) and Folk
(1980). The backhoe trench was excavated into a channel cutbank that connected with
the archaeological test units at site 41NV670. Radiocarbon assays were performed on
three charcoal samples by Beta Analytic, Inc. Carbon-14 results were corrected for
C-13 fractionation and reported in C-14 years B.P. (Appendix I).
Results
Four lithostratigraphic units and three buried pedostratigraphic units were
identified in the project area along Mill Creek. The lithostratigraphic units were
designated as I-IV, from oldest to youngest. The three buried pedostratigraphic units
were designated as the Navarro, Mill Creek, and Chambers paleosols, from oldest to
youngest. Two of the pedostratigraphic units (Chambers and Navarro) were named
after paleosols identified along Chambers and Richland Creek (McGregor 1987). The
third pedostratigraphic unit, the Mill Creek paleosol, was first recognized during this
investigation.

12

Figure 4. Cutbank Exposures, Backhoe Trench, and Sites
(Taken from topographic map Cryer Creek)

13

Stratigraphy
Unit I is the oldest lithostratigraphic unit in the project area. It was identified in
the lower part of CB 1, CB 2, and CB 3 (figures 4-5). Exposures of Unit I range from
about one to three meters thick along the water line. Thickness depends on the amount
of lateral channel erosion that occurred in a particular area since deposition of Unit I.
This unit has been pedogenically altered to a thick A-Bkss profile where minimally
truncated (Figure 5; CB 2) and to a thin Bk-Bkss soil profile where the A horizon has
been completely eroded (Figure 5; CB 1, CB 3). The Unit I paleosol consists of black to
dark gray clays with slickensides and calcium carbonate nodules (Appendix II). Unit I in
the project area appear to have been deposited in a low-energy floodbasin facies.
Based on stratigraphic position and soil characteristics, the soil profile in Unit I was
correlated to the Navarro paleosol of Richland and Chambers creeks (McGregor 1987).
Unit II unconformably buries Unit I in CB 1 and CB 2 (figures 4-5). Unit II ranges
in thickness from about 75 to 200 cm. As with Unit I, the thickness depends on the
proximity of Unit II to areas where more recent channel erosion has occurred where not
eroded. Unit II has been pedogenically altered to an A-Bk, or A-Bss-Bkss soil profile,
designated as the Mill Creek paleosol for this report. It consists of dark gray clays in the
upper part that typically grade to olive brown clays in the lower part (Appendix II).
Slickensides and filaments of calcium carbonate occur in some profiles. In some areas
(Figure 5; CB 1), a lower channel facies was exposed that contained sub-rounded and
grain supported pebbles (Figure 5; CB 1). The remainder of Unit II reflects deposition in
a floodbasin facies (Figure 5; CB 2, CB 4).
Unit III unconformably buries Unit II in CB 1, CB 2, and CB 4 (figures 4-5). In
contrast, Unit III directly overlies Unit I in CB 3. Unit III consists of a channel and
floodbasin facies. Channel fills ranging up to 4.5 meters thick consistently crop out on
the inside of modern meander bends (Figure 4; CB 1, CB 3). On the outside of modern
meander bends or along straight segments of the channel, the floodbasin facies crops
out and is about 1.5 to 2.5 meters thick (Figure 5; CB 2, CB 4). In the lower part, Unit III
consists of dark gray to olive brown silty clay loams and very fine sandy loams with
horizontal to dipping bedding planes (Appendix II). The upper part has been
pedogenically altered to an A-Bw-C or A-C soil profile with silty clay loam textures and
very dark gray to olive brown colors (Appendix II). This paleosol was correlated with the
Chambers paleosol of Richland and Chambers creeks (McGregor 1987). Unit III marks
a shift to coarse-grained alluvial sediment influx and increased rates of aggradation.

14

Figure 5. Alluvial Stratigraphic Columns from Cutbank Exposures on Mill Creek
Unit IV forms the modern ground surface and unconformably buries Unit III in
most areas as shown in CB 1, CB 2, CB 3, and CB 4 (figures 4-5). Its thickness is
typically less than 1 meter. Unit IV displays minimal pedogenic alteration resulting only
in A horizon development. Colors range from very dark gray to very dark brown and
textures from clay loam to silty clay loam (Appendix II). Unit IV represents increased
aggradational rates following a period of decreased deposition during formation of the
Chambers paleosol.

15

Chronology
It is unknown when deposition of Unit I began. However, a C-14 age from a
hearth in the upper part of the Navarro paleosol reveals that deposition of Unit I
terminated near 580 ± 60 years B.P. (Figure 5, CB 2). The thick dark cumulic A horizon
of the Navarro paleosol suggests that rates of deposition were slow at this time.
Deposition of Unit II began by 390 ± 60 years B.P. according to a C-14 age from
the test units of site 41NV670 (as extrapolated in Figure 5 to Cutbank Exposure 1).
Deposition of Unit II continued until no later than 200 ± 70 years B.P. based on a C-14
age from the dispersed charcoal in the lower part of Unit III (Figure 5; CB 3). The
dispersed charcoal was found at cutbank exposure 3 between site 41NV670 and newly
recorded site (hearth) 41NV671. Pedogenesis probably kept pace with deposition
during deposition of Unit II, thus forming the Mill Creek paleosol.
Unit III deposition was ongoing by 200 ± 70 years B.P., as indicated by the C-14
age from the base of the unit (Figure 5; CB 3). A European cow skull was found in the
middle of Unit III (Figure 5; CB 4), indicating that the upper half was deposited during
the last 150 years (Calvin Smith, personal communication). The Chambers paleosol
formed during decreased sedimentation rates. The timing of formation of the Chambers
paleosol is unknown.
Unit IV was deposited when depositional rates again increased, which buried
Unit III and the Chambers paleosol. The exact timing of deposition of Unit IV is
unknown, other than that it occurred within the last 150 years.
Correlation to Richland and Chambers Creeks
McGregor (1987) identified four major lithostratigraphic units and two
pedostratigraphic units during geomorphological investigations along Richland and
Chambers creeks in Navarro and Freestone counties. All radiocarbon dates from
Richland-Chambers alluvial sites were on charcoal or carbonized nutshell.
The oldest stratigraphic unit along Richland and Chambers creeks was deposited
between about 4300 and 1600 years B.P. The next unit consisted of a soil zone
designated as the Navarro paleosol. This soil formed during slow deposition between
approximately 1400 and 200 years B.P.
After 200 ± 70 years B.P., deposition proceeded again, but was eventually
interrupted by a period of soil formation, designated as the Chambers paleosol. Rapid
deposition proceeded again sometime in the 1900s forming the modern surface
sediments of the floodplain. Numerous prehistoric sites were discovered in the Navarro
paleosol and underlying deposits.

16

Stratigraphic interpretations along Mill Creek differ somewhat from Chambers
and Richland creeks. The Navarro paleosol and underlying deposits were split into two
stratigraphic units, even though no unconformity occurred between them (McGregor
1987). Along Mill Creek, this gradational boundary was interpreted as conformable and
part of a fining upward sequence associated with the same alluvial unit. Furthermore,
the Mill Creek paleosol along Mill Creek was not identified in the basin of Richland and
Chambers creeks. Either this soil does not exist in that basin or, if so, the Mill Creek
paleosol was not differentiated from the Navarro paleosol. In fact, the time interval
given for the Navarro paleosol in the Richland and Chambers creek basins spans the
chronology of both the Navarro and Mill Creek paleosols along Mill Creek.
Interpretations of the alluvial historic record are similar for both the Richland and
Chambers Creek basin and Mill Creek.
The implication for the identification of the Mill Creek paleosol along Mill Creek is
that an additional episode of erosion must be accounted for sometime between
approximately 600 and 400 years B.P. This part of the archaeological record will thus
be missing in the Mill Creek basin, which may apply to Richland and Chambers Creek
as well.
Archaeological Implications
Evidence for prehistoric occupation along Mill Creek in the vicinity of site
41NV670 is found at the three sites recorded by Calvin Sanders in 1996, one site on
private land opposite 41NV670,* and a hearth (41NV671) approximately 200 meters
upstream from 41NV670. The hearth was found during this investigation and is located
in a stratum that is below, and geologically older, than the one in which site 41NV670 is
located. In addition, detrital bison bone in Unit II deposits were observed by the
geomorphologist upstream of site 41NV670. The horizontal extent of bison bone
indicates that additional beds of bison bone, deposited at about the same time as those
at 41NV670, may be present at other locations in the Mill Creek basin.
A cross-section drawn from a photomosaic depicts stratigraphic relations at site
41NV670 (Figure 6). Stratigraphic relations perpendicular to CB 1 are shown in a
cross-section drawn from BT 1 (Figure 7). Figure 6 shows all lithostratigraphic units
previously discussed (units I-IV), as well as the three paleosols (Navarro, Mill Creek,
and Chambers), in relation to the site.

* This site was out of the project APE and did not receive a TARL number.

17

Figure 6. Alluvial Cross-Section of 41NV670
(Drawn from a photo-mosaic. Cross-section width is 26 meters)

18

Figure 7. Alluvial Stratigraphic Cross-Section
(Measured from Backhoe Trench 1 perpendicular from Mill Creek
Width of cross-section 4.5 meters)

19

Site 41NV670 probably formed on the surface of Unit I and the Navarro paleosol
during a period of quasi-landscape stability around 390 ± 60 years B.P. The site is now
buried in a channel facies at the base of Unit II. This indicates that much of the site is in
a secondary context having been reworked by lateral migration of the Unit II channel
facies across the site, which may explain the mixing of mussel shell and bison bone.
Furthermore, cultural materials are scattered throughout Unit II and the Mill Creek
paleosol in the vicinity of BT 1 where the channel facies splits moving away from the
modern channel (Figure 7). However, the density of bison bone, including parts of a
skull (jawbone and horn core), suggests that the site may retain some of its behavioral
context or may be in situ. Around 200 ± 70 years B.P., there was an increase in flood
frequency associated with a shift in sediment influx in the Mill Creek channel. This
event initiated deposition of Unit III, a relatively coarse-grained deposit. The Unit III
channel facies impinged on both sides of site 41NV670 during channel migration
(Figure 6). This event further reworked and even removed parts of the site. In fact,
detrital bison bone was discovered in channel pebbles at the base of Unit III on both
sides of the site.
Units II, III, and IV are stratigraphically related to the modern meanderbelt of Mill
Creek because all depositional facies crop out in the modern channel cutbanks and
because the units crop out predictably in relation to the position of the modern creek.
Units II-IV were deposited by a channel confined to the modern meanderbelt. It
appears that the shift from deposition of Unit II to Unit III occurred during continued
lateral migration within the modern meanderbelt and was accompanied by 1 to 1.5
meters of channel downcutting and a change in sediment influx from finer to
coarser-grained. Unit IV is related to the modern channel because it forms a veneer of
alluvium that thins away from Mill Creek. As revealed in an excavated historic levee
channel (Figure 4), Units II-IV are also present in the outer edge of the floodplain, but
are thinner and appear to be represented strictly by floodbasin facies. As a
consequence, these stratigraphically related archaeological sites dating to the Late
Prehistoric and Historic may be more concentrated in Units II-IV near a water source
associated with the modern meanderbelt.
The channel facies of Unit I has not been identified. Furthermore, the thickness
of Unit I along the creek and in the outer floodplain are similar based on exposures
provided by the historic levee channel. This suggests that the Unit I channel migrated
across the entire width of the modern floodplain. It follows that cultural materials dating
to the early part of the Late Prehistoric and earlier could be encountered anywhere
beneath the floodplain in Unit I with equal probability. However, this does not preclude
the possibility of finding buried prehistoric sites on the outer edge of the Mill Creek
floodplain.

20

Conclusions
Four lithostratigraphic (Units I-IV) and three buried pedostratigraphic units
(Navarro, Mill Creek, and Chambers) were identified along Mill Creek. These units and
associated paleosols formed, for the most part, during the last 600 years, attesting to a
hydrologically dynamic fluvial system during this time. In fact, about one-half of the
floodplain alluvium of Mill Creek in the project area was deposited during historic times.
Consequently, late Holocene archaeological interpretations will be strongly conditioned
by the geological framework.
Site 41NV670 was occupied approximately 390 ± 60 years B.P. on the Navarro
paleosol of Unit I. At this time, flood frequency and magnitude were low. Thus, the Mill
Creek floodplain during the Late Prehistoric was probably viewed as a favorable place
for human occupation. During deposition of Unit II and formation of the Mill Creek
paleosol, a channel facies migrated across the site, thus reworking many of the cultural
components. Many of these components were discovered as much as 100 meters
downstream from the site in an extension of the Unit II channel facies. The density of
bison bone and elements of a bison skull indicates that some contextual integrity may
be preserved at the site. Further reworking of the site occurred around 200 ± 70 years
B.P. as the Unit III channel meanderbelt impinged on both sides of the site. Because of
the thickness of Units III and IV (historic), any future archaeological investigations for
the prehistoric record should be conducted to depths of approximately 50 centimeters to
as much as several meters, depending on stratigraphic position. Figure 8 illustrates Mill
Creek following a recent flooding episode in which the waters reached the top of the
banks. The large tree in the left of the photograph was firmly entrenched at the top of
the creek during the first visit to the site by BVRA archaeologists.

21

Figure 8. Mill Creek (facing west)
(Site 41NV670 is to the left)

22

FAUNAL ANALYSIS
Vertebrate faunal remains recovered from Site 41NV670 consist of 549 bones or
fragments (Table 1). Of the total assemblage, 62 (11.3 percent) were so small and
fragmentary that they could not be identified at any taxonomic level. The remaining 487
bones are all mammalian. Of these, seven bones were identified as attributable to
modern bison (Bison bison) representing at least two individuals. Sixty-six bones or
fragments are attributable to a large bovid (Family Bovidae), consistent with bison
(Bison sp.) but also possibly representing cattle (Bos sp.). However, given the context,
it appears very likely that these bones also represent remains of modern bison. The
bones in this group represent at least five individuals. The only other identified species
represented in the assemblage is the white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus)
represented by a single scaphoid carpal. Because of their fragmentary nature, it was
impossible to key most of the fragments even to the family taxonomic level. One
hundred twenty-two fragments were attributable to large mammals, and 292 fragments
were attributable to medium or large mammals.
The surface condition of the bones ranged from poor to very good; however, all
were very friable, and most were fragmented. The fragmentation appeared to be postdepositional, either by past ground compaction or shifting or during excavation. With
regard to cultural modification, all of the bones were carefully examined for evidence of
burning, butchering, pre-depositional fracturing, reutilization, or other taphonomic
processes. No evidence of cultural modification to individual bones was apparent.
Although most of the bones exhibited some form of surface deterioration, it was not
possible to attribute such deterioration to stream transport. The only other identifiable
taphonomic evidence was present on two bone fragments, representing gnawing by a
rodent and a small carnivore, respectively. The effect of carnivores, large and small,
must be considered a possibility for site disturbance and bone transport. One
characteristic of the assemblage that may support a cultural rather than natural origin
for the remains is the poor representation of long bone remains. Elements such as
femur, tibia, humerus, and radius are large, relatively dense bones which are more likely
to survive intact and less likely to be transported downstream during high water
episodes; however, stream transport is certainly a possibility, especially since the
geomorphological study revealed that much of the site appears to be in a secondary
context, having been reworked by the lateral margin of the Unit II facies across the site
(see Geomorphological Investigations above). Assuming that the remains are natural in
origin, it would be expected that most of these elements would remain in situ in the
death assemblage. Based on the density of bison bone, including parts of a skull, Nordt
believes that parts of the site may be intact. The fact that these bones are poorly
represented in the assemblage may be suggestive of human processing of the remains.
Removal of long bones to another location with the meat still adhering to them would
effectively obtain the bulk of the meat associated with the remains in a expedient and
non-labor intensive manner. This type of limited utilization of the remains is consistent
with the lack of evidence of cultural modification on the remaining bones. However, No
conclusions can be drawn concerning processing activities and any assumptions must
remain speculative.

23

Table 1. Faunal Remains from Site 41NV670
Excavation
Unit
N200E200

Excavation
Unit
N201E201

Trench
1

Surface

Level
1 2 3 4

Level
1 2 3 4

West
Wall

Back
Dirt

Description

Total

Comments

Bison (Bison bison)
humerus distal fragment (R)
metacarpal (L)
navicular cuboid fragment (L)
tibia distal fragment (L)
calcaneous (R)

1
1
1

1
1
2
1
1

1
1
1

in 6 fitted pieces
in 7 fitted pieces
in 2 fitted pieces

Large bovid (Bison sp./Bos sp.)
horn core fragment
occipital condyle (L)
occipital condyle (R)
temporal fragment (L)
upper 1st molar (L)
upper molar
upper 2nd premolar (R)
upper 3rd premolar (R)
deciduous upper 1st premolar (R)
deciduous upper 2nd premolar (R)
upper 2nd or 3rd premolar (R)
upper 3rd molar (R)
upper molar (undetermined) (R)

1

1

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1a

upper molar (undetermined)
lower incisor (undetermined)
lower 1st molar (L)
lower 2nd molar (L)

tooth fragment (undetermined)
scapula coracoid process fragment (L)
scapula proximal fragment (L)
radius proximal fragment (L)
radius distal fragment (L)
ulna proximal fragment (L)

1b
1
1

1
3
1

unerupted
unerupted

unerupted
newly erupted
a
unerupted
b
heavily worn
heavily worn

a

1
1

1

a

1

b

5

2

2
1
2

3

1

1
2
1

1
1

1

1

1
1

1

1

1
1
1

1

24

heavily worn
a
heavily worn
much smaller
than average

2
2
1

1

1

heavily worn
newly erupted
c
1 unerupted and
1 newly erupted
b

c

a

ulna proximal fragment (R)
pisiform carpal (R)
metacarpal distal fragment (L)

3

3

1
lower 3rd molar (L)
Lower 3rd premolar (R)
Lower 3rd molar (R)
lower molar (undetermined)

1

2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

much smaller
than average,
in 2 fitted pieces
incisura
semilunaris
incisura
semilunaris

Description

Excavation
Unit
N200E200

Excavation
Unit
N201E201

Trench
1

Surface

Level
1 2 3 4

Level
1 2 3 4

West
Wall

Back
Dirt

metacarpal (R)
metacarpal proximal fragment (R)
metacarpal medial fragment
rib fragment
acetabulum of ischium fragment
femur proximal fragment (L)
astragalus fragment (L)
astragalus fragment (R)
metatarsal proximal fragment (L)
metatarsal medial fragment (L)
metatarsal distal fragment (L)

Total

1

1
2
1

1
1
1
8
2
1
1
1
3
1

1

1

1

2

1
1
1

8
1
1
1

1

1st phalanx (L)

Comments

in 6 fitted pieces
very immature

very immature

immature,
in 3 fitted pieces

Unidentified large mammal
cranial fragment
tooth fragment (undetermined)
rib fragment
scapula glenoid cavity fragment
humerus distal fragment (R)
vertebra fragment
long bone fragment
metapodial distal fragment
sesamoid bone
phalanx distal fragment
unidentified fragment

11

7
4
1
1

5

5
19

3

1
2
4
2
1

2

1
1

43

6

3

18
4
1
1
1
7
39
2
1
1
47

Unidentified large or medium mammal
rib fragment
long bone fragment
unidentified fragment (rodent-gnawed)
unidentified fragment

14 38
1
40 66 71 18

1
1

1

6

2
2

11

3

17

2
66
1
223

1

1

White-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus)
scapoid carpal (R)

Unidentified
unidentified fragment

Total

21 22 19
56 165 177 57

62
5

25

7

6

8

47

21

549

very immature

In attempting to determine the sex of individuals, measurements of anatomic
elements following Bedord (1974), Duffield (1973), and Speth (1983) were utilized.
Various measurements of humerus, tibia, metacarpal, and metatarsal fragments
suggest that at least one adult male and one adult female are represented in the
assemblage.
Concerning aging of individuals, dental remains attributable to large bovids
suggest that at least one juvenile individual (approximately 0.5 to 2.5 years), two young
adult individual (approximately 2.5 to 7.5 years), one medium-aged adult individual
(approximately 7.5 to 20 years), and one elderly adult individual (approximately 20
years or older) are represented in the assemblage.
The only other faunal remains associated with the site were freshwater mussel
shells within the cultural zone. However, many of the shells still have both valves
articulated and none of these shell remains show any sign of cultural modification
resulting from process, cooking, or utilization. Given that the site is located in a nearchannel area that is commonly inundated, there is no compelling evidence to indicate
that the deposition of shells at the site is cultural in origin. Therefore, the shell was not
included in Table 1 above.

26

LITHIC ANALYSIS
The number of chipped stone artifacts from 41NV670 is small, with six artifacts
observed and only three collected. Only one specimen was found in any of the test
units; a biface fragment from Level 4 (30 - 40 centimeters below the site surface) of Test
Unit N200/E200. This artifact is made of chert and appears to exhibit edge modification
that suggests it was used as a scraper. Within the general site area, among bison
bone, two biface fragments and one flake were observed in the creek bank but were not
collected. They were later washed away by flooding.
After the fieldwork was completed, Nordt and a graduate student returned to the
project area to examine the creek bank profiles. At that time he observed two arrow
points embedded in the bone bed in an undisturbed area (see Figure 2). They were
collected and examined. One specimen (Figure 9a) is complete except for a missing
barb. Although the base is present and it shares some similarities with the Alba,
Bonham, and Perdiz types, this point is considered untyped in this report. It is also
similar to certain bulbar-stemmed points found at Richland-Chambers Reservoir
(William A. Martin, personal communication). The implications of these point types to
this project are discussed in the Results and Conclusions section below. This specimen
is 3.4 mm from base to distal tip and 2.7 mm from the base of the blade to the distal tip.
If the missing barb were present, it is estimated that the width of this specimen would be
approximately 2.0 mm. The base is slightly bulbar and is .75 mm at its widest point and
.65 mm at the juncture of the base and the blade. The length of the base is .85 mm
long. It is made of chert. The second arrow point (Figure 9b) is missing the base and
cannot be assigned to a known type. The blade is serrated and contains both barbs. It
is made of chert. This point was not measured.

Figure 9. Arrow Points from 41NV670

27

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Archival Research
The archival research consisted of a records check at TARL and a review of
relevant archaeological reports. This task revealed that Navarro County is located in a
part of Texas that is well documented in terms of numbers of sites recorded, and
several major reservoir studies have been conducted in the county, particularly
Richland-Chambers to the south. The Richland-Chambers reservoir project has
provided much of the data for the prehistory and history of Navarro County. Site
41NV670, the subject of this study, was recorded by Calvin B. Sanders (1996) as a
result of his survey along Mill Creek for the Natural Resources Conservation Service.
He documented three prehistoric sites, but only 41NV670 was in the project APE. This
site was determined to be potentially eligible for nomination to the National Register of
Historic Places, and eligibility testing was required by the Division of Antiquities
Protection, Texas Historical Commission.
Testing Results
Site 41NV670 was evaluated by a team of archaeologists and a
geomorphologist. Following consultation with G. Lain Ellis of the Division of Antiquities
Protection, Calvin B. Sanders, archaeologist for the Natural Resources Conservation
Service, and Bobby Wilson of the Navarro Soil and Water Conservation District, it was
decided that two 1 x 1 meter excavation units would suffice for Phase II testing and
Phase III mitigation, provided the role of the geomorphologist was expanded to allow an
investigation along Mill Creek as needed. One backhoe trench was placed
perpendicular to the creek to allow the archaeologists and geomorphologist to examine
a cross-section of the site.
The results of this investigation revealed an area, probably representing a single
episode event, where modern bison (Bison bison) were exploited by prehistoric hunters
sometime during the Late Prehistoric or Protohistoric period of Texas prehistory.
Although no evidence of butchering by the hunters was found on any of the bones, the
presence of lithic artifacts provides conclusive evidence of human presence at the site.
The number of lithic specimens (n=3) is small; however, this may be explained by the
fact that only two excavation units were opened at the site. Two biface fragments and
one flake were observed in the creek bank prior to excavation but were not collected,
and two arrow points were later collected by geomorphologist Lee C. Nordt. If all
specimens were present, the total number would be six.

28

Arrow points are usually indicative of hunting, although there is no evidence that
they were used to kill or wound the bison present at the site. The biface fragment found
in excavation unit N200/E200 (Level 4) appears to have edge wear, possibly the result
of scraping. This, plus the fact that both arrow points are broken, provides some
argument for the use of these tools for killing and processing the bison. Several
explanations are offered for the paucity of lithic artifacts: (1) the two excavation units did
not expose enough of the site, therefore other specimens were not recovered, (2) an
unknown number of artifacts have eroded into Mill Creek, and/or (3) the hunters simply
removed large cuts of meat and the use of stone tools in butchering was minimal.
The age of the site has been determined by radiocarbon dates of charcoal and
supported by the presence of two arrow points. Intact charcoal samples from the strata
above and below the stratigraphic unit containing the site made it possible to accurately
date the site. The samples came from the excavation units at 41NV670, a hearth
(41NV671) 200 meters upstream in a geologically older stratum below the site, and from
dispersed charcoal taken from a cut bank exposure upstream at the base of the
geologically younger stratum overlying the site. The findings of Beta Analytic, Inc.
indicate that site 41NV670 dates to 390 ± 60 years B.P. The calibrated results by Beta
Analytic (Appendix I) indicate a date range of A.D. 1425 to A.D. 1650 (2 sigma, 95%
probability). These dates are consistent with the Late Prehistoric or Protohistoric
period, a time when arrow points were in use, and bison were known to have returned
to the area. The two arrow points were collected from an undisturbed area of the bone
bed and are definitely associated with this site. The combination of the arrow points in
context with bison bone and the bracketed dates collected from geologic strata above
and below 41NV670 provide a strong case for a Late Prehistoric or Protohistoric site.
There is a problem regarding the age of the arrow points. As stated above, one
specimen (Figure 9b) is broken and can't be assigned to a known type. The other
specimen (Figure 9a) retains the base and can, therefore, be compared to known types.
The problem with referring to this point as Alba or Bonham is that these types date to
the period A.D. 800 to A.D. 1200, approximately 300 years before the bison at site
41NV670 were exploited based on radiocarbon dates. If either of these types is
considered to be correct, the implications of such an assumption would be an extension
of the date range for Alba and/or Bonham points in the prehistoric record. Another
alternative is a variation of the Perdiz type. According to Elton R. Prewitt (personal
communication, August 12, 1997), the Perdiz point is often mistaken for other types and
difficult to recognize. In his discussion of the Lightfoot site (41CJ23) in Comanche
County, Texas, Prewitt (1964:165-187), illustrates a bulbar-stemmed arrow point as
Perdiz, morgan variety (Prewitt 1964:Figure 13) and eight arrow points that he classifies
as not belonging to specific types, "even though they resemble generally several
recognized types including Alba, Bonham, and Perdiz (Prewitt 1964:Figure 14). He
(Prewitt 1964:170) comments "there is a gradation in the group from specimens with
rectangular stems to others with slightly contracting, slightly expanding, or bulbous
stems."

29

It is concluded from the above discussion that it is best not to attempt to assign
the two arrow points from 41NV670 to known types. Rather, it is more prudent to
recognize their presence in a Late Prehistoric or Protohistoric context. Should the
complete point (Figure 9a) be a Perdiz or a variant of this type, there would be no
conflict with its presence at 41NV670 as Perdiz points date from A.D. 1200 to A.D. 1500
and are found throughout Texas (Turner and Hester 1985:187).
Although a few pieces of burned rock were present at 41NV670, there was no
evidence of a hearth or more than temporary utilization of the site area. Therefore the
site is believed to represent a single event. In support of this interpretation is the
presence of a previously unrecorded hearth (41NV671) upstream in the stratum
immediately below 41NV670. Charcoal from this site (not yet recorded at TARL)
produced a date of 580 ± 60 years B.P. Thus, the site is situated stratigraphically above
an earlier archaeological site (Unit I) and stratigraphically below a more recent stratum
(Unit III) that was dated to 200 ± 70 years B.P. Additional evidence to support the
contention that this is a single event site is the layer of freshwater mussel shell just
below, and mixed with, the bone. No evidence of utilization of the shell by prehistoric
groups was revealed by the faunal analysis. Therefore, it is probable that the bison
were killed at some point in time after the shell lens was deposited but before the
deposition of bedding planes from flooding (Unit III).
The mixing of bone and shell are probably the result of flooding. Or, it is possible
that the bison died while drinking from the shallows where mussels were living.
According to Jackson (1961), bison were often drowned during river crossings. This,
according to Raab (41982:232) "may account for the bones along Richland Creek."
The size of the site may be exaggerated because of two flooding episodes that
occurred after the site was abandoned in prehistoric times. According to Nordt's
findings, stream activity in the area was fairly stable until after the site was abandoned.
Around 200 ± 70 years B.P., there was an increase in flood frequency associated with a
shift in sediment influx in the Mill Creek channel. This event initiated deposition of Unit
III, a relatively coarse-grained deposit. The Unit III channel facies impinged on both
sides of site 41NV670 during channel migration. This event further reworked and even
removed parts of the site. In fact, detrital bison bone was discovered in channel
pebbles at the base of Unit III to the east and west of the area tested. Nordt hypotheses
that the site may extend at least 75 meters along Mill Creek; however, its actual size is
unknown although it is probable that this area represents only part of the site area. The
depth to which bison bone was found was 40 centimeters below the top of the test units.
Although bone and shell were mixed, there was a definite increase in shell and
decrease in bone in the lower levels of the site.

30

It appears that 41NV670 was formed on either a mud bar next to the current
channel or on clayey floodplain deposits associated with the alluvial actions on Mill
Creek. It is postulated that the point bar had an active mussel shell bed until it was
exposed by decreased water levels. Although some of the shell had been separated,
often an indication of exploitation, this was not confirmed by the faunal analysis. Most
of the shell had never been separated, an indication that it had not been exploited. In
Unit N200/E200, for example, the soil matrix in Level 1 consisted of silty clay. In
subsequent levels (2-4), the soil matrix was a silty clay consisting mainly of silts and
small gravels indicating a point bar formation or channel remnant.
Additional evidence for Late Prehistoric utilization in the area was found at a site
directly opposite 41NV670 by Sanders during his Mill Creek survey. On a landform that
he described as an upper Cretaceous upland (footslope of the hill adjoining the
floodplain north of Mill Creek), Sanders observed a lithic scatter and a ground stone
artifact believed to be a metate. This site was out of the project APE and, therefore, not
part of his survey area. Although noted by Sanders, it was not officially recorded with
TARL. The presence of this site provides an interesting scenario. The bison at
41NV670, following a natural death such as drowning in the creek, could have been
exploited by the prehistoric band camped across the creek. The hunters could have
taken the choicest cuts of meat to their campsite and elsewhere and left the bone that is
present today at 41NV670. This site dates to the period after the last known absence of
bison on the Southern Plains (A.D. 500 to A.D. 1300). According to Dillehay
(1974:181), bison returned to the plains during his Presence Period III (A.D. 1200 to
A.D. 1300/1550). *
In summary, site 41NV670 is significant because it is the only known example of
a bison procurement or kill site in Navarro County and the general area. Unfortunately,
the bone is generally fragmented and poorly preserved. There were examples where
bone seemed to be well preserved but crumbled when removed from the hard soil
matrix. The two excavation units did not expose an area large enough to more fully
understand the site formation processes, actual number of individuals present, and
extent of human intervention. Brazos Valley Research Associates does, however,
believes that a significant body of data was collected from a site that was added to the
archaeological record only because of the proposed gabion chute and the diligent work
by Calvin B. Sanders.
The above statements regarding site 41NV670 combines a faunal analysis
summary by Michael A. Nash, geomorphological investigations by Dr. Lee C. Nordt, and
interpretation and comparative analysis by William E. Moore and Michael R. Bradle.
The information presented in this report should prove useful to other researchers as
more work is conducted in North Central Texas and as more data regarding bison
kill/procurement sites are obtained.

31

Two figures are presented below to illustrate the site stratigraphy and bone
preservation. Figure 10 is the completed test unit N200/E200. In this photograph the
bone bed (center right) is clearly visible above the shell lens. A virtually intact bison
jawbone with teeth is illustrated in Figure 11. This bone, unfortunately, did not survive
intact after removal.
___________
* It should be noted that Dillehay's article does not address the presence of bison
following his last date for the Presence Period III. Bison remained in Texas and were
observed in Harris County by early explorers as late as the early part of the 19th
century. In 1837, an anonymous explorer mentions the presence of buffalo near
Houston (Muir 1988:57).

Figure 10. Excavation Unit N200/E200

32

Figure 11. Bison Jawbone in Excavation Unit N200/E200

33

RECOMMENDATIONS
Site 41NV670 is considered unique in that it is the only known bison
kill/procurement site in Navarro County and general area. The combination of its
uniqueness and the fact that the site is intact make this a significant site and one that is
worthy of nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. Although 41NV670
was successfully mitigated according to the research design approved by the Division of
Antiquities Protection, it is quite probable that undisturbed areas of the site that will
continue to be protected because of their burial by over fourteen feet of alluvial soils.
That portion exposed to the erosion created by Mill Creek, especially during flooding
episodes, is vulnerable and may be destroyed in spite of the flood retarding structure
planned for Mill Creek. Future work in the immediate vicinity of site 41NV670 should be
preceded by a professional archaeological investigation. At present, the artifacts are
housed at Brazos Valley Research Associates awaiting a formal decision regarding
permanent curation. However, in accordance with Natural Resources Conservation
Service General Manual 420, Part 401.35, the disposition of recovered materials will be
left to the discretion of the individual landowner(s).

34

REFERENCES CITED
Barnes, Virgil E.
1972

Bedord, Jean N.
1974

Geologic Atlas of Texas: Dallas Sheet. The University of Texas,
Bureau of Economic Geology. Austin.

Morphological Variation in Bison Metacarpals and Metatarsals. In
The Casper Site, edited by George C. Frison, pp. 199-240.
Academic Press, New York.

Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985
Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Texas Historical Commission, Office of the State Archeologist,
Special Report 28.
Bruseth, James E., and William A. Martin (editors)
1987
The Bird Point Island and Adams Ranch Sites: Methodological and
Theoretical Contributions to North Texas Archaeology. Southern
Methodist University, Archaeology Research Program, Technical
Series Volume II.
Bruseth, James E., and Randall W. Moir (editors)
1987
Introduction to the Richland Creek Archaeological Project:
Environmental Background and Cultural Setting. Richland Creek
Technical Series, Volume I. Archaeology Research Program,
Southern Methodist University. Dallas.
Cole, Nancy M.
1981

Dillehay, Tom D.
1974

Duffield, Lathel F.
1960

Cultural Resources Survey of Floodwater Retarding Structures
Nos. 130b, 136A, in Navarro County, 20A in Ellis County, and
Grade Stabilization Structures No. 12 in Johnson County, 13 and
114 in Ellis County, Texas in the Chambers Creek Watershed of
the Trinity River Basin. United States Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service.

Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist 19(65):180196.

Survey and Appraisal of the Archaeological Resources of Navarro
Mills Reservoir, Navarro and Hill Counties, Texas. Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.

35

Duffield, Lathel F. (continued)
1963
The Strawn Creek Site: A Mixed Archaic and Neo-American Site at
Navarro Mills Reservoir, Navarro County, Texas. Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
1973

Aging and Sexing the Post-Cranial Skeleton of Bison. Plains
Anthropologist 18(60):132-139.

Fenneman, Nevin M.
1931
Physiography of the Western United States. McGraw Hill. New
York.
Ferring, C. Reid
1975

Folk, R. L.
1980

Gould, F. W.
1962

Jackson, H. H. T.
1961

An Archaeological Survey of Parts of the Chambers Creek
Watershed. Southern Methodist University, Archaeology Research
Program, Research Report 59.

Petrology of Sedimentary Rocks. Hemphill Publishing Company.
Austin.

Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station, Texas A&M University.

Mammals of Wisconsin. University of Wisconsin Press.

Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, and Timothy K. Perttula
1993
Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document. Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resource
Management Report 3. Texas Historical Commission.
Meade, W. D., W. G. Chervenka, and J. M. Greenwade
1974
Soil Survey of Navarro County, Texas. United States Department
of Agriculture-Soil Conservation Service, United States
Government Printing Press, Washington, D.C.
McGregor, Daniel E.
1987
Late Quaternary Geology and its Archaeological Implications. In
Introduction to the Richland Creek Archaeological Project:
Environmental Background and Cultural Setting, edited by James
E. Bruseth and Randall W. Moir, pp. 34-39, 55-58. Archaeology
Research Program, Southern Methodist University.

36

McGregor, Daniel E., and James E. Bruseth (editors)
1987
Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations Along the Prairie Margin: Site
Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric Archaeology. Richland
Creek Technical Series, Volume III. Archaeology Research
Program, Southern Methodist University. Dallas.
Muir, Andrew Forest
1988
Texas in 1837. The University of Texas Press. Austin.
Nunley, Parker
1983

Prewitt, Elton R.
1964

Report of Results of a Preliminary Cultural Resources Survey of
Floodwater Retarding Structures No. 46A, Johnson County, and
Nos. 124C and 127B, Navarro County, Chambers Creek
Watershed, Trinity River Basin Texas. Report submitted to the
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
Temple, Texas.

Excavations at the Terri and Lightfoot Sites, Proctor Reservoir,
Comanche County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 35:143-188.

1981

Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:65-89.

1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas
Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:201238.

Prikryl, Daniel J.
1993

Raab, L. Mark
1982

Regional Preservation Plan for Archeological Resources, PrairieSavannah Archeological Region: Introduction. In Archeology in the
Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited by
Nancy Adele Kenmotsu and Timothy K. Perttula, pp. 191-213.
Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resource
Management Report 3. Texas Historical Commission.

Settlement of the Prairie Margin: Archaeology of the Richland
Creek Reservoir, Navarro and Freestone Counties, Texas. The
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University,
Archaeological Monographs, Number 1. Dallas.

37

Raab, L. Mark, Randall W. Moir, and Daniel E. McGregor
1980
Preliminary Report of Archaeological Survey in the RichlandChambers Dam and Reservoir Project, Navarro and Freestone
Counties, Texas. Archaeology Research Program, Southern
Methodist University.
1981

Preliminary Report of Archaeological Testing in the RichlandChambers Dam and Reservoir Project, Navarro and Freestone
Counties, Texas. Archaeology Research Program, Southern
Methodist University.

Richner, Jeffrey L.
1982
Tennessee Colony III. Archaeology Research Program, Southern
Methodist University.
Richner, Jeffrey L., and Reed Lee
1976
Cultural Resources at Tennessee Colony Lake. Archaeology
Research Program, Southern Methodist University.
Richner, Jeffrey L., and Joe T. Bagot
1978
A Reconnaissance Survey of the Trinity River Basin, 1976-1977.
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University,
Research Report 113.
Sanders, Calvin B.
1996
Cultural Resources Survey of the Mill Creek Project Navarro
County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, CRM Report 96-1.
Shafer, Harry J.
1964

An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Bardwell Reservoir,
Ellis County, Texas. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.

Soil Survey Division Staff
1993
Soil Survey Manual. United States Department of Agriculture
Handbook Number 18. United States Government Printing Press,
Washington, D.C.
Sorrow, William M.
1966
The Pecan Springs Site, Bardwell Reservoir, Texas. The University
of Texas at Austin, Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project Number 10.

38

Speth, John D.
1983

Story, Dee Ann
1990

Bison Kills and Bone Counts: Decision Making by Ancient Hunters.
University of Chicago Press.

Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and
Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain: Volume I, by Dee Ann
Story, Janice A. Guy, Barbara A. Burnett, Martha Doty Freeman,
Jerome C. Rose, D. Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, and Karl J.
Reinhard, pp. 161-366. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Research
Series Number 38.

Story, Dee Ann, Janice A. Guy, Barbara A. Burnett, Martha Doty Freeman, Jerome C.
Rose, D. Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, and Karl J. Reinhard
1990
The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain:
Volume I. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Research Series
Number 38.
Turner, Sue Ellen, and Thomas R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly
Press.
United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service
1994
Trinity River Watershed (WF-03), Chambers Creek Subwatershed,
Mill Creek Tributary, Supplemental Work Plan and Agreement No.
VII. Unpublished manuscript on file at the United States
Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service in Temple, Texas.
Weir, Frank A.
1976

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation.
Washington State University. Pullman.

39

Appendix I
Beta Analysis, Inc. Results

APPENDIX II
Soil-Stratigraphic Descriptions
Cutbank 1 (site 41NV670); floodplain; calcareous throughout.
A1

0-20 cm; Unit 4; very dark-grayish brown (2.5Y 3.5/2) silty clay loam; weak
medium subangular blocky; very firm; clear smooth.

A2

20-47 cm; very dark grayish-brown (2.5Y 3.5/2) silty clay loam; weak
medium angular blocky; very firm; 5% olive brown (2.5Y 4/3) biocasts;
clear smooth.

A3

47-66 cm; very dark grayish-brown (2.5Y 3.5/2) silty clay loam; weak
medium subangular blocky; very firm; 10% olive brown (2.5Y 4/3)
biocasts; clear smooth.

A1b1

66-90 cm; Unit 3, Chambers paleosol; very dark gray (2.5Y 3/1) silty clay
loam; moderate medium subangular blocky; firm; gradual smooth.

A2b1

90-116 cm; very dark gray (2.5Y 3/1) and dark grayish-brown (2.5Y 4/2)
silty clay loam; weak coarse subangular blocky; firm; gradual smooth.

Bwb1

116-155 cm; olive brown (2.5Y 4/3) silty clay loam; faint horizontal
laminations; weak coarse subangular blocky; firm; 5% olive brown (2.5Y
5/3) biocasts; clear smooth.

C1b1

155-212 cm; olive brown (2.5Y 5/3) and light yellowish-brown (2.5Y 6/3)
silty clay loam; faint dipping laminations; weak coarse subangular blocky;
firm; gradual smooth.

C2b1

212-260 cm; dark grayish-brown (2.5Y 4/2) and 20% pale yellow (2.5Y
7/3) silty clay loam; faint dipping laminations; weak coarse subangular
blocky; friable; clear smooth.

C3b1

260-356 cm; grayish-brown (2.5Y 5/2) and 30% pale yellow (2.5Y 7/3) silt
loam; friable; common distinct dipping laminations; abrupt smooth.

C4b1

356-380 cm; dark grayish-brown (2.5Y 3.5/2) and 10% pale yellow (2.5Y
7/3) very fine sandy loam; friable; common distinct dipping laminations;
abrupt smooth.

C5b1

380-444 cm; dark gray (2.5Y 4/1) silty clay loam; 15% common medium
distinct dark yellowish-brown (10YR 4/6) soft iron masses; 3% gypsum
filaments; common distinct horizontal laminations; abrupt smooth.

Ab2

444-520 cm; Unit 2, Mill Creek paleosol; dark gray (2.5Y 4/1) silty clay;
common medium distinct dark yellowish-brown (10YR 4/6) soft iron
masses; 5% light olive brown (2.5Y 5/3) biocasts; weak medium angular
blocky; very firm; few faint slickensides; 5% pebbles, subrounded and well
sorted; abrupt smooth.

Bkb3

520-580 cm; Unit 1, Navarro paleosol; very dark gray (2.5Y 3/1) silty clay;
5% light olive brown (2.5Y 5/3) biocasts; moderate medium subangular
blocky; very firm; 2% calcium carbonate nodules, 0.5 to 1 cm diameter;
gradual smooth.

Bkssb3

580-620+ cm; Unit 1; dark gray (2.5Y 4/1) silty clay; common fine distinct
dark yellowish-brown (10YR 4/6) soft iron masses; weak coarse angular
blocky; firm; 5% calcium carbonate nodules, 0.5 to 2 cm diameter; 2%
calcium carbonate filaments; few faint slickensides.

Cutbank 2 (floodplain); calcareous throughout.
A1

0-21 cm; Unit IV; very dark gray (2.5Y 3.5/1) silty clay loam; moderate
medium subangular blocky; firm; abrupt smooth.

A2

21-51 cm; dark gray (2.5Y 4/1) silty clay loam; weak coarse subangular
blocky; firm; common light olive brown (2.5Y 5/3) faint laminations; abrupt
smooth.

Ab1

51-75 cm; Unit III, Chambers paleosol; very dark gray (2.5Y 3.5/1) silty
clay; moderate medium subangular blocky; firm; common light olive brown
(2.5Y 5/3) faint laminations; gradual smooth.

Bw1b1

75-97 cm; very dark grayish-brown (2.5Y 3/2) silty clay; weak coarse
subangular blocky; friable; gradual smooth.

Bw2b1

97-177 cm; dipping laminations of 50% - very dark grayish-brown (2.5Y
3/2) sandy clay loam; 50% - light yellowish-brown (2.5Y 6/4) very fine
sandy loam; abrupt smooth.

Ab2

177-197 cm; Unit II, Mill Creek paleosol; dark gray (2.5Y 4/1) silty clay
loam; moderate medium subangular blocky; firm; gradual smooth.

Bk1b2

197-253 cm; dark gray (2.5Y 4/1) silty clay loam; moderate medium
prismatic; very hard; 2% calcium carbonate filaments; gradual smooth.

Bk2b2

253-281 cm; very dark gray (2.5Y 3/1) silty clay loam; moderate coarse
angular blocky; very hard; 2% calcium carbonate filaments; gradual
smooth.

Bk3b2

281-298 cm; 50% very dark gray (2.5Y 2.5/1) and 50% light olive brown
(2.5Y 5/3) clay; weak coarse angular blocky; very hard; 5% calcium
carbonate filaments; abrupt smooth.

Ab3

298-334 cm; Unit 1, Navarro paleosol; black (2.5Y 2/1) clay; moderate
coarse angular blocky; very hard; 5% calcium carbonate nodules, 0.5 to 1
cm; clear smooth.

Bkssb3

334-355 cm; black (2.5Y 2/1) clay; 3% reddish-brown (5YR 4/4) iron pore
linings; weak coarse angular blocky; very hard; 10% calcium carbonate
filaments; 1% calcium carbonate nodules, 1 cm diameter; common distinct
slickensides; clear smooth.

Cutbank 3 (floodplain); calcareous throughout.
A

0-15 cm; Unit 4; very dark gray (2.5Y 3/1) silty clay loam; moderate fine
subangular blocky; very hard; gradual smooth.

Bw

15-75 cm; dark gray (2.5Y 4/1) silty clay loam; few faint light olive brown
(2.5Y 5/3) laminations; weak coarse subangular blocky; very firm; clear
smooth.

Ab1

75-105 cm; Unit 3, Chambers paleosol; dark gray (2.5Y 4/1) silty clay;
moderate coarse subangular blocky; very firm; clear smooth.

C1b1

105-117 cm; 50% - dark gray (2.5Y 4/1) clay; 50% light olive brown (2.5Y
5/4) sandy clay loam laminations; massive; friable; abrupt smooth.

C2b1

117-134 cm; very dark gray (2.5Y 3/1) clay loam; massive; firm; abrupt
smooth.

C3b1

134-151 cm; multiple beds of light olive brown (2.5Y 5/3) and dark gray
(2.5Y 4/1) very fine sandy loam. massive; firm; gradual smooth.

C4b1

151-235 cm; dark grayish-brown (2.5Y 4/2) clay loam; 10% light olive
brown (2.5Y 5/3) faint very fine sandy loam laminations; massive; firm;
gradual smooth.

C5b1

235-276 cm; gray (2.5Y 4.5/1) clay loam; 20% light olive brown (2.5Y 5/3)
faint very fine sandy loam laminations; massive; very hard; clear smooth.

C6b1

276-402 cm; grayish-brown (2.5Y 5/2) silt loam; 5% light olive brown (2.5Y
5/3) faint laminations; 2% medium distinct dark gray (2.5Y 4/1) iron
depletions; massive; firm; clear smooth.

C7b1

402-419 cm; light olive brown (2.5Y 5/3) silty clay loam; 5% medium
distinct dark gray (2.5Y 4/1) iron depletions; massive; very firm; clear
smooth.

C8b1

419-434 cm; light olive brown (2.5Y 5/3) silt loam; 3% reddish-yellow (5YR
4/4) iron pore linings; massive; very firm; abrupt smooth.

Bkssb2

434-479 cm; Unit 1, Navarro paleosol; black (2.5Y 2/1) silty clay; 2%
reddish brown (5YR 4/4) iron pore coats; 3% light olive brown (2.5Y 5/3)
biocasts; moderate coarse angular blocky; firm; common distinct
slickensides; 1% calcium carbonate nodules, 1 cm diameter.

Cutbank 4 (floodplain); calcareous throughout.
A

0-43 cm; Unit IV; very dark brown (10YR 3/3) clay loam; moderate
medium subangular blocky; firm; three brown (10YR 5/3) horizontal beds,
1 cm thick; clear smooth.

Ab1

43-87 cm; Unit III, Chambers paleosol; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) silty clay
loam; moderate medium subangular blocky; firm; 3% brown (10YR 5/3)
biocasts; gradual smooth.

C1b

87-136 cm; dark grayish-brown (2.5Y 4.5/2) sandy clay loam; 3% light
yellowish-brown (2.5Y 6/3) biocasts; weak coarse subangular blocky; firm;
five, light yellowish-brown (2.5Y 6/3) horizontal beds, 1 cm thick; clear
smooth; (European cow skull).

C2b

136-227 cm; 60% - dipping beds of dark grayish-brown (2.5Y 4/2) and
very dark gray (2.5Y 3/1) silty clay loam, 1 to 8 cm thick; 40% - dipping
laminations of light yellowish-brown (2.5Y 6/3,6/4) very fine sandy loam;
abrupt wavy

Ab2

227-280+ cm; Unit II, Mill Creek paleosol; very dark gray (2.5Y 3.5/1) silty
clay; 1% reddish-yellow (5YR 4/4) iron pore coats; 5% light yellowishbrown (2.5Y 6/3) biocasts; moderate medium subangular blocky; very firm.

Backhoe Trench 1 (floodplain, south Wall); calcareous throughout.
C

0-20 cm; Unit III; light olive brown (2.5Y 5/3) and 40% dark gray (2.5Y 4/1)
silty clay loam; massive; very firm; abrupt wavy.

A1b2

20-47 cm; Unit II, Mill Creek paleosol; very dark gray (2.5Y 3/1) clay;
moderate medium prismatic; very firm; clear wavy.

A2b2

47-95 cm; very dark gray (2.5Y 3/1) clay; weak medium angular blocky;
very hard; clear smooth.

A3b2

95-117 cm; very dark gray (2.5Y 3/1) clay; 5% fine distinct dark brown
(7.5YR 3/4) soft iron masses; weak medium angular blocky; very hard;
clear smooth.

A4b2

117-137 cm; very dark gray (2.5Y 3/1) clay; weak medium angular blocky;
very hard; 5% medium distinct dark reddish-brown (5YR 3/4) soft iron
masses; 8% pebbles, matrix supported, subrounded, and well sorted;
clear wavy.

A5b2

137-192 cm; very dark gray (2.5Y 2.5/1) clay; 5% distinct dark reddishbrown (5YR 3/4) pore linings; weak coarse angular blocky; very hard; few
faint slickensides; gradual smooth.

Bss1b2

192-215 cm; dark gray (2.5Y 4/1) clay; 3% distinct dark reddish-brown
(5YR 3/4) pore linings; weak coarse prismatic; very hard; common distinct
slickensides; few clay clasts; gradual smooth.

Bss2b2

215-245 cm; very dark gray (2.5Y 2.5/1) clay; 3% distinct dark reddishbrown (5YR 3/4) pore coats; weak coarse prismatic; very hard; 15% matrix
supported pebbles, subrounded, and well sorted; common distinct
slickensides.

Backhoe Trench 1 (floodplain, middle wall); calcareous throughout.
A4b2

0-14 cm; Unit II, Mill Creek paleosol; very dark gray (2.5Y 2.5/1) clay;
common fine distinct dark brown (7.5YR 3/4) soft iron masses; weak
coarse angular blocky; very hard; abrupt wavy.

A5b2

14-25 cm; very dark gray (2.5Y 2.5/1) clay; 8% medium distinct dark
reddish- brown (5YR 3/4) soft iron masses; weak coarse angular blocky;
very hard; 35% pebbles, mostly matrix supported, subrounded,
moderately well sorted; abrupt wavy.

A6b2

25-56 cm; very dark gray (2.5Y 2.5/1) clay; 8% medium distinct dark
reddish- brown (5YR 3/4) soft iron masses; weak coarse angular blocky;
very hard; 2% pebbles, matrix supported, subrounded, moderately well
sorted; abrupt wavy.

Bssb3

56-77 cm; Unit 1, Navarro paleosol; very dark gray (2.5Y 3/1) clay; 8% fine
distinct dark reddish-brown (5YR 3/4) soft iron masses; weak coarse
angular blocky; very hard; clear wavy.

Bkssb3

77-116 cm; very dark gray (2.5Y 2.5/1) clay; 5% medium distinct very dark
brown (10YR 3/3)) soft iron masses; massive; very hard; 1% calcium
carbonate nodules, 1 cm diameter.

Backhoe Trench 1 (north wall); calcareous throughout.
A4b2
0-20 cm; Unit II, Mill Creek paleosol; very dark gray (2.5Y 3/1) clay; 5%
distinct dark brown (7.5YR 3/4, 4/4) iron ped coats; weak coarse angular
blocky; very hard; faint laminations; abrupt wavy.
A5b2

20-44 cm; very dark gray (2.5Y 2.5/1) clay; 8% medium distinct dark
reddish- brown (5YR 3/4) soft iron masses; weak coarse angular blocky;
very hard; 35% pebbles, mostly matrix supported, subrounded,
moderately well sorted; abrupt wavy.

A6b2

44-59 cm; very dark gray (2.5Y 3/1) clay; 8% medium distinct strong
brown (7.5YR 4/4) soft iron masses; weak coarse angular blocky; very
hard; 15% pebbles, matrix supported, subrounded, moderately well
sorted; abrupt wavy.

Bssb3

59-75 cm; Unit 1, Navarro paleosol; very dark gray (2.5Y 3/1) clay; 5%
medium distinct reddish-brown (5YR 4/4) pore linings; weak coarse
angular blocky; very hard; gradual smooth.

Bkssb3

75-110 cm; dark gray (2.5Y 4/1) clay; 5% fine distinct strong brown (7.5YR
4/4) pore linings; 5% medium distinct very dark brown (10YR 3/3) soft iron
masses.

