A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT
OF PROPOSED ASH DISPOSAL UNITS,
FAYETTE POWER PLANT
Fayette County, Texas

Technical Bulletin 68

Bruce A. Nightengale

Principal Investigator: Solveig A. Turpin

A draft report submitted to
Lower Colorado River Authority
Texas Historical Commission
in partial fullfillment of
Memorandum of Agreement and Antiquity Permit 252
June 1983

This page intentionally left blank.

'r-­

Abstract

On May 16 through 19, 1983, the Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin, conducted an intensive cultural
resource survey of 412 acres in Fayette County under consideration for
use as an ash disposal site for the Lower Colorado River Authority
Fayette Power Project. The survey complies with regulations set forth
in the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 and its implementing
regulations, 36 CFR, ,part 800 and was authorized by Antiquities Permit
No.
252 issued to the LCRA by the State Antiquities Committee. The
project area ;s located in eastern Fayette County, approximately 1.5
km. . north of State Highway 71 and 10 km. east of the town of
LaGrange. Background information for the study was provided in a
previous TAS survey in anticipation of the construction of the Fayette
Power Project and cooling ponds. During that survey. three historic
sites were located in the study area as a result of local informants
reports. Also, as a result of recommendations offered in the 1975
study. the Biegel December cemetery (41FY94) was reinterred 1n the
present project area. Prehistoric site 41FY169 was later recorded in
an 1980 TAS survey of the Fayette to Lytton Springs transmisson
All these
corridor which traverses the proposed ash disposal unit.
previously recorded sites were reassessed by this survey and three new
sites were added to the inventory. Two prehistoric sites, 41FY307 and
308, are considered to be light lithic scatters of chert debitage
resulting from lithic procurement and lithic reduction.
These two
sites conform well with settlement patterns being developed for the
region both in location and in resource proximity to chert sources and
water.
The one historic site (41FY309) is in part a late 1800's twin
structure house of German design which has been considerably altered
by renovation and remodeling. None of the newly located or previously
recorded sites were considered to hold promise for Significant
scientific recovery,
thus not warranting a determination of
eligibility for the National Register of Historic Places. No further
work beyond that legally required by State law for cemetery protection
was recommended.

,

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Ed Gau of the Lower Colorado River
Authority for his time and help at the study area and Dana Morris of
the Fayette Production Company who helped us relocate the Malcik
Cemetery (41FY90).
The staff of TAS who helped with this report
include: Carol Fabac, who drafted the map; Herb Eling, who prepared
the photgraphic plates; Laura Petruska, who typed the initial draft;
and Abby Ribble, who typed the report into the word processor.
Jack
Jackson was a great help in elucidating the historical background and
Solveig Turpin edited the report and coordinated the project
activities. My appreciation to all these people for their help.

•
•

•
•
•I
•
•
•

r

I
i

i

I

I

!

,

I

li

l

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract , , . .
,Acknowledgements
Introduction . ,

1

Environmental Background

1

Archeological Background

4

Methods and Techniques ,

6

Site Descriptions

"

Summary and Recommendations

11

References Cited

14

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure I,

Project and Site Location Map

Figure 2.

Site views

a.
b.
c.

41FY90, the Malcik Cemetery
41FY94, the Biegel-December Cemetery
41FY308, a prehistoric 1ithic scatter

l

t

I

,

l

vi..
9

t

,

6

v

Figure 1.

Project Area and Site Location Map

(

t?
\ II~I

~ Power

:

:

Plant

I

••
••

\
'"'-..
('

o~__~~~~~______~~
miles
Contours.

lIN fn

feet

AMSL

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

I
I
~

I

Page 1

INTRODUCTION

Between May 16 and 19, 1983, at the request of the Lower Colorado
River Authority, the Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin, conducted a cultural resource survey of 412 acres of
Fayette County under consideration as an ash disposal area for the
Fayette Power Project (Fig. 1). The basic plan for ash disposal is
to deposit the ash on the surface to a depth of approximately six
inches, level the ash, cover with soil and re-vegetate the new
surface.
The potential for subsequent erosion is compensated for by
engineering plans and it is expected that damage to known sites within
the area can be avoided. The field survey was carried out by Bruce A.
Nightengale, Leland C. Bement, Jeff Turpin, and Andy Cloud.
Dr.
Solveig A.
Turpin, Assistant Director of TAS, served as Principal
Investigator. The project was carried out under the authorization of
State Antiquities Permit No. 252 issued to the Lower 'Colorado River
Authority by the State Antiquities Committee. The survey was designed
to conform to the Texas Historical Commission guidelines for intensive
survey and to comply with provisions of the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966 and its implementing regulations, 36 CFR 800.
The specific objectives of th,e survey were:
1.

to locate and assess any cultural resources that may be
adversely affected by construction of a disposal unit;

2.

to reevaluate previously recorded sites in the study area;

3.

to evaluate the significance of these sites;

4.
5.

to recommend means of minimizing any adverse effects to these
, sites which may result from construction; and
to recommend further study, if warranted,
beyond the scope of this survey.

which extends

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
PROJECT LOCATION
The project area lies adjacent to the Sam K. Seymour Generating
Station at the Fayette Power Project approximately 1.5 km north of
State Highway 71 and 10 km east of the town of LaGrange in eastern
Fayette County (Fig. 1). The 412-acre tract is cut by Fayette County
Road 120, which thus partitions the survey area into a northern and
southern zone.
The northern area is bordered on the west by Baylor
Creek, on the north and east by surveyed east-west and north-south

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

2
lines and on the south by County Road 120. The southern section is
bordered on the northwest and southwest by fence lines and on the
eastern boundary by the entrance road to the Power Project. The
Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad crosses the lower segment of the
southern zone.
TOPOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY
Elevation in the study area ranges from 280 AMSL on the Baylor
Creek flood plain to 400' AMSL in the uplands. The project' area lies
on the West Gulf Coastal Plain (Fenneman 1938). The Coastal Plain was
formed by a combination of fluviatile and marine depositional
processes which were the result of lowering and rising of coastal sea
When coastal sea waters receded to the southeast, the marine
waters.
sediments were overlain by fluviatile deposits from the numerous
rivers
redepositing their loads and forming deltaic plains
predominantly made up of clay, sands and volcanic ash.
Sellards and
.others (1978:
527) identified nine maximum advances of the seas
followed by maximum regressions.
The result of these marine and
fluvial processes is a series of interbedded geosynclinal formations
roughly paralleling the coast. On the inward portion of the coastal
plain are a series of escarpments, cuestas and intervening lowlands
(Fenneman 1938: 103). The present project area is southeast of the
Bordas-Oakv111e-K1satchie escarpment.
The Colorado River flows approximately 10 km south of the study
area. Two tributaries to the Colorado cut this upland region. Baylor
Creek lies on the western boundary of the project-area and Cedar Creek
flows 2 km to the east. Numerous small drainages which enter Baylor
Creek and one tributary of Cedar Creek cross the study area proper,
cutting deeply into the terrain forming broad valleys and hilly
uplands. The Gulf Coast aquifer, formed partially in the Catahoula
Sandstone Formation, is the primary aquifer for eastern Fayette County
(Brune 1975).
GEOLOGY
Surface geology in the study area is composed of Miocene and
Pleistocene formations.
The Oakville Formation, of Miocene age, is
dominant (Bureau of Economic Geology 1979).
Composed largely of
sandstone with lesser quantities of clay. this formation is the result
of early fluvial redeposition when the sea waters were in maximum
regression.
Overlying the Oakville sandstone are isolated pockets of
Pleistocene gravels associated with the Willis Formation; these
gravels are comparable to the Uvalde gravels in other areas of Texas
(Bureau of Economic Geology 1979). This formation is also rich in
cobble size chert and quartzite gravels which were major resource
items for prehistoric tool manufacturing. Historically, quarrying of
these gravels has. markedly affected the natural landscape and has
undoubtedly affected the present distribution of both prehistoric and
early historic material remains (see Site Descriptions).

3

SOILS
Soils within the project area are of two series - the Vernia
Association and the Houston Black Associati~n (Soil Conservation
Service 1974). Vernia soils are described as having loose, very
gravelly, sandy upper layers and very firm, gravelly sandy clay lower
layers. These unconsolidated soils are not conducive to the retention
of stratigraphy in archeological deposits. Houston Black soils are
vertisols made up of firm calcareous clay
layers with
high
shrink-swell potential which also contributes to displacement of
culturally deposited materials.
CLIMATE AND VEGETATION
Rainfall in Fayette County is highest in April, May, June and
September, in September averaging 4.53 inches (Dallas Morning News
1980-1981). The driest months are January, March, July and August
with the minimum average moisture of 1.94 in March. The average
annual temperature ranges from a maximum of 96 degrees in July to a
minimum of 42 degrees in January.

3)
Vegetation in the study area corresponds to Gould's (1975:
Blackland Prairie, described as "gently rolling to nearly level
topography, with dark-colored calcareous clay soils developed under
prairie-grass forb vegetation". The overstory woodlands are made up
of post oak, blackjack oak, and juniper with an understory of tall
grasses such as little bluestem, indian grass, switchgrass, big
bluestem, side oat~ grama, hairy grama, meadow dropseed, silver
bluestem and Texas wintergrass.
Also noted in the understory was
yaupon and prickly pear.
FAUNA
The mammalian array of Fayette County includes the oppossum,
least shrew, badger, red and gray fox, striped skunk, r1ngtail cat,
raccoon, coyote, bobcat, fox squirrel, plains pocket gopher, various
mice and rats, and white tail deer (Davis 1978).
NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL LAND MODIFICATION
Natural and artificial land modifications have significantly
altered the topography of parts of the study area. In the northern
zone as defined by County Road 120, the greatest impact is from
erosion which often
results
from land modification such as
construction activities and tree clearing.
Numerous drainages and
gullies now cut the majority of this section accelerating bank
slumpage, rill erosion, and general deterioration of the land surface.
In the southern zone, the large deposits of gravel noted
throughout have been historically quarried, stripping large portions
of overlying soil deposits. Secondly, the MKT railroad separates some
68 acres from the body of the project area. Construction of this
facility destroyed one newly recorded site, 41FY308.
Additionally,

4

three main drainways cut through this section; two coalesce to form an
area of deep gullies and wide valleys with gravels outcropping on the
surface and lensing along the cutbanks.
The evident disruption of the natural environment of the project
area has also markedly affected the cultural record, destroying both
prehistoric and historic sites. The gravel resources which attracted
prehistoric exploitation were also a viable economic venture for
historic quarrying; the latter can expectably have eliminated much of
the evidence for previous use of this lithic raw material.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Research into the cultural prehistory and history of Fayette
County has proliferated in the past decade, largely as a result of the
development of energy production from resources of the region.
Although the cultural history of the region remains as yet poorly
refined, the concept of this as an area transitional between the
archeological zones defined as Central, Coastal and East Texas regions
has been put forth by several researchers (Skelton 1977; Fullem 1977;
Nightengale and Jackson 1982).
A detailed summary of the
archeological background as it was known at the time is presented in
Skelton's (1977) report of investigations prior to the construction of
the Fayette Power Plant, immediately adjacent to the present study
area.
Subsequent studies, largely of transmission corridors and mining
prospects corollary to this power plant, have added substantially to
such facets of the study of prehistory as settlement patterns and site
types (Kenmotsu and Freeman 1980; Brown and Kenmotsu 1980; Robinson
1982; Laurens, Guy and Prewitt 1979; Fields 1982; Nightengale and
Jackson 1982) but much remains to be done to resolve many of the
interpretive problems. At present, the consensus of opinion is that
influences emanated from East and Coastal Texas but the dominant
cultural affiliation of the Fayette County prehistoric inhabitants was
with Central Texas. Until a more refined culture history specific to
the present study area ;s worked out, the chronological framework of
Central Texas is the most appropriate framework within which to view
the located sites.
Paleoindian Period (prior to 10,000 to 8,500 B.P.)
The evidence for this, the earliest known cultural period in
Texas prehistory, is based in Central Texas on surface finds and
excavated materials. Buried cultural deposits associated with this
period have been unearthed in the Levi Rockshelter on the Pedernales
River (Alexander 1963), the Loeve Site (Eddy 1973; Prewitt 1982),
Tombstone Bluff on the San Gabriel River (Prewitt 1974, 1982), and
41BX52 on the outskirts of San AntoniO (Henderson 1980).
Direct
stratigraphic assoc-iations for the traditionally accepted subsistence
of Paleoindian groups, that of dependence on now-extinct Pleistocene

5

megafauna, is lacking in Central Texas. It is assumed that here their
economy depended on hunting and gathering, a mode of existence which
was retained until the time of first European contact.
Archaic Period (8,500 to 1,250 B.P.)
The Archaic hunters and gatherers of Central Texas were highly
dependent upon the varied natural resources of water, game and edible
vegetation. Tool kits included contracting and expandin stem dart
points, food processing tools such as manos and metates, and various
auxiliary implements. Based on changes which took place within the
tool kit and other cultural markers, such as the increase or decrease
in feature types such as burned rock middens, phases within the long
Archaic Period have been proposed (Weir 1976. Prewitt 1981). While
these phase designations provide much stronger control over the
assignment of sites to a specific time period, based on artifact and
feature types, they are more precise than the data derived from this
survey warrants.
The reader is referred to Weir (1976) and Prewitt
(1981) for a detailed discussion of characteristics which define these
phases.
Late Prehistoric Period (1,250 to 200 B.P.)
This period, sometimes referred to as the Neoarchaic (Prewitt
1981), is one of gradual change.
Its inception is marked by the
introduction of the bow as evidenced by the appearance of arrow points
in the upper levels of stratified sites. Pottery came ito use during
the later part of this period and, in parts of Texas, inCipient
agriculture emerges.
Variations in projectile point styles are used
to differentiate between two foci: the earlier Austin focus (1250-650
B.P.) and the later Toyah focus (650-220 B.P.).
The numerous surveys for cultural resouces in the general
vicinity of the study area have resulted in a volume of site
recordings which can be used as a predictive model of settlement
patterning (Robinson, in Nightengale and Jackson 1982). By far the
majority of the aboriginal sites in the region are distributed
according to two natural resources, chert outcrops exploited for
lithic raw material or semi-permanent water sources.
Tabulations of
site characteristics,
based primarily on surface observations,
indicate that light lithic scatters without features are the dominant
site type.
In the uplands of this area, locational preferences are
for terraces along minor tributaries and for chert outcroppings which
provide a ready source for stone tool making. The prehistoric sites
found in this survey conform to this pattern, supporting the
predictive model set forth by Robinson (Nightengale and Jackson 1982).
Historic Period (post-European contact to present)
Fayette County was within the Stephen F. Austin colony and was
fi rst settled by scattered members of the 1101 d Three Hundred ll before
Texas won its independence from Mexico.
The county was officially
formed in 1837 and organized the followi~g year as a political

6

subdivision of the Republic of Texas (Webb 1952:
588),
Before the
Civil War, the county was dominated by a combination of large
Anglo-American plantations and smaller German immigrant subsistence
farms.
After the Civil War, most of the larger holdings were
subdivided into small farms purchased by new waves of cenral European
immigrants and black freedmen. The present study area ws originally
part of the Joseph Biegel league (Jackson and Skelton 1975: 5) and a
portion became the farm of a Moravian (Bohemian) family, the Malciks,
who came to the United States in 1881.
A detailed history of the
Biegel settlement ;s given in Carter and Ragsdale (1976).
METHODS AND TECHNIQUES
Previous investigations carried out adjacent to the present study
area 1n anticipation of the construction of the Fayette Power Plant
and' auxiliary facilities provided a context for the present study.
One prehistoric and three historic sites had been recorded within the
proposed ash disposal units during cultural resource surveys of the
plant proper (Jackson and Skelton 1975) and a radiating transmission
corridor (Kenmotsu and Freeman 1980). None of these sites have been
nominated to the National Register of Historic Places nor were any
such sites located in the vicinity of the project area.
Relocation
and reevaluation of the previously recorded sites was one focus of the
field study.
To provide convenient bounds for field survey, the study area was
divided into two zones defined by the route of county ro~d 120. Both
zones were intensively examined by two surveyors walking serpentine
transects at 30 m intervals. located sites were documented on State
of Texas Archeological SitE Data forms, plotted on 111 =400. blue line
project maps and USGS 7.S· quadrangle maps, and photographed.
Subsurface probes were used where justified by soil depth to detemine
the extent and depth of located sites and to test promising natural
areas. No artifact collections were made.
Sites were assigned
trinomial
numbers following the system advocated by the Texas
Archeological Research laboratory (TARL), The University of Texas at
Austin, the central repository for site information. All research
materials generated by this project are curated at TARl.
SITE DESCRIPTIONS
Previously Recorded Sites
Prehistoric Site
41FY169
Originally recorded during an intensive survey of the Fayette to
Lytton Springs transmission corridor (Kenmotsu and Freeman 1980: 36),
this site was located on an eroded upland slope adjacent to a small
tributary to Baylor Creek.
This light lithic scatter with no

7
appreciable depth was considered as too disturbed by general land
modification and accelerated erosion to warrant further consideration.
Subsequent gravel quarrying and additional land modification has
completely obliterated all traces of this prehistoric site.
Historic Sites
41FY88
This site. once located in the southeastern part of the southern
zone, was described as a rock cairn with unmarked headstone (Jackson
and Skelton 1975: 6). Based on the possibility that this was in
reality a gravesite, Coates Field Service excavated the rock pile but
found no human remains (TARL files).
Thus, this site has been
obliterated and could not be reassessed.
41 FY89
This historic site was originally plotted as lying about 200 m
north of 41FY88 (Jackson and Skelton 1975: 15). Described as an
accumulation of flat field stones with adjacent well, the area was
supposedly a historic sugar cane processing facility. The site could
not be relocated during this study and has probably been destroyed by
general land clearing.
41FY90. The Malcik Cemetery
This small 3x2m cemetery lies amid dense undergrowth on the west
bank of a westward trending minor tributary of Baylor Creek, SO m
above their confluence and opposite a 90 degree meander bend (Fig.
1). The site was originally recorded by Skelton (Jackson and Skelton
1975) as containing two graves (Coates Field Service, TARL files).
The name attached to the cemetery by local tradition was Malcik after
a succession of property owners with that surname.
The family was located in the 1910 manuscript census returns for
Fayette County (Microfilm, Texas State Archives). At that time, the
household was headed by Frank Malcik Sr. and his wife, Marie, both
natives of Moravia in the Austro-Hungarian Empire, who had come to the
United States in 1881. Two of their eight children were still living
at home - Frank Jr. and his sister, both in their middle 20's.
In an effort to determine who was actually buried in this small
plot, the index of death certificates at the Texas State Library was
consulted. This search covered the years from the initiation of this
listing, 1903, to 1949. The Malcik family name is apparently rare,
only seven death certificates bearing that surname were issued during
that period.
Four deaths were certified in Falls County and three
were of Fayette County issue.
'
The three in Fayette County were: Frank Malcik Jr.
(March 13,
1931); Jonnie Malcik (January 14, 1934); and Lillie Konvicha Malcik
(December 20, 1946). If the cemetery does indeed bear the name of the

8

individuals buried there, these three Malciks are the most probable of
all the listed family members.
Given the economics of the Great
Depression, it seems most likely that Frank and Jonnie Malcik would be
buried in a family plot such as 41FY90.
The death certificates issued in Falls County were: Frank Malcik
(May 3, 1929); Marie Malcik (March 4, 1929); J.T. Malcik
Sr.
(November 12, 1933); and Vlasta Malcik (October 26, 1934). Given that
both parents died in such a short period of time, and during the hard
times of the depression, it seemed possible that that they may have
been returned to the family farm for burial.
However, death
certificates supplied by the Bureau of Vital Statistics (State of
Texas, Department of Health) show that both Frank Sr. and Marie
Malcik were interred in the Rosebud Cemetery in Falls County.
As a
courtesy, the Bureau of Vital Statistics examined the other Malcik
death listings. Both Frank Jr. and Jonnie are shown as buried in
Fayette County~ but no cemetery is named.
Based on the documentary evidence and local tradition, it seems
most probable that Frank Jr.
and Jonnie Malcik are buried in the
family plot.
However, names attached to rural properties often
outlast the occupants or replace those of predecessors. If this small
graveyard can not be avoided by project construction, a further search
for descendants of the Malcik's may prove to be the most efficient way
of documenting the indentlty of the interred through informant
interview.
Today the remetery is marked by the remains of a white picket
fence (Fig.
2a). Most of the paint is gone and one end of the
enclosure is missing but three sides stand supporting a lush growth of
greenbriar.
By definition. cemeteries are excluded from consideration for the
National
Register of Historic Places.
State and federal laws
guarantee the protection of identified burial
grounds.
Thus.
avoidance of this location seems the most feasible approach to its
preservation.
41FY94, The Biegel Cemetery
The historic Biegel settlement was the focus of a previous TAS
study (Carter and Ragsdale 1976) prior to the construction of the
2b) was
Fayette Power Plant. The Biegel-December cemetery (Fig.
moved to its present location within the study area (Fig. 1) at that
time (Coates Field Services, TARL files). The grave site contains the
remains of Joseph Biegel (1803-1875), his first wife Margarethe Biegel
(1801-1866). his second wife and niece Catherine Winesdorfer Biegel
their child Josephine (1871-1872)
and December
(1931-1883).
descendants, Christine (1835-1910), John (1925-1901), and Rudolph
(1888-1910). A 300 ft. buffer zone around this site should provide
adequate protection and adjustment of the project area boundaries ;s
recommended.

F i ~ure

a.

2

41 FY94 - the relocated Biegel-December Cemetery

b. 41 FY90 - the Malcik Cemetery

c. 41 FY308 - a prehistoric
lithic procurement site
amid surface gravels.
The MKT Railroad track
crosses the site in the
background.

10
Newly Recorded Sites
Prehistoric Sites
41FY307
This prehistoric site is exposed on the eroding northeast bank of
a northwest trending erosional gully that eventually drains into a
tributary of Baylor Creek. The site overlooks the Baylor Creek flood
plain and is approximately 10 m north of County Road 120. Vegetation
is primarily short grasses with scattered oak. cedar, and mesquite.
Limited cultural material. consisting of two chert biface cores and
two chert flakes, was found on top of and embedded in the dark clay
vertisols which characterize the area. These artifacts were amidst
limited surface gravel deposits with chert cobbles. The sparsity of
cultural materials, the limited potential for subsurface deposits, and
the general deflated nature of the area suggest that this site holds
limited potential for scientific research, thus, for nomination to the
National Register of Historic Places.
41FY308
This prehistoric site lies on the southwest terrace of a
northwest flowing tributary to Baylor Creek in the southeastern corner
of the study area (Fig. 1). The site overlooks the Baylor Creek
flood plain; the creek flows 150 m to the east. The terrace and
slopes are covered with chert-bearing gravels which have been exposed
by erosion.
Most of the site lies in the open on the crest of the
slope. Vegetation consists of short grasses with post oak, live oak,
and cedar overstory.
The MKT railroad construction has divided the site (Fig.
2c);
the minor portion, consisting of a few chert flakes, lies southwest of
the tracks. Artifacts found on the body of the site include cores,
preforms, primary and secondary flakes, prismatic blades, chips and
burned chert, all relatable to lithic procurement. Only one finished
tool, a biface fragment, was noted. Two limited concentrations were
detectable along the crest; the limited variety in artifact types
suggest only a spatial differentiation between the two.
No subsurface probes were attempted due to the shallowness of the
soils and the disturbance caused by railroad construction. Little
promise for significant recovery remains; the recording done by this
survey is considered adequate at this site.
Historic Site
41FY309, The Harlfinger-Schumacher House
This standing structure 1s current1y occupied and in good repair.
The core of the house is a modest salt box cottage with a 10ft over
the front room. This portion of the house was erected in 1880 by
Charles W.
Harlfinger Sr, a German settler in the Biegel community

11
who came to the United States in the 1850's (Carter and Ragsdale 1976:
79). The house was also occupied by a second generation, Charles W.
Harlfinger and his wife, Mary (nee December).
According to John Schumacher, who lived in the house in 1975, the
original structure was extensively refurbished in 1972 and a new
section was added. The two constructions are connected by a common
porch. Both are of similar design with identical red brick and mortar
chimneys; the new addition has horizontal shiplap siding and a cedar
shake roof which harmonizes with the older section. Additional
structures include a board and batten shed 20 m south of the newer
segment and a storage shed 75 m to the southeast. Since 1975, the
main house has also been used as a storage facility for the LCRA.
Although the general outlines of a small nineteenth century
German folk structure can still be seen, the extensive remodeling and
modifications have largely destroyed the architectural' integrity of
the house. The addition of a swimming pool on the southwest side and
the consequent disturbance by heavy excavation equipment suggest that
few deposits would remain archeologically intact. The site has been
recorded for future settlement or architectural studies but fails to
meet criteria for the National Register of Historic Places in terms of
structural integrity and possible archeological deposits amenable to
excavation.
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The 412 acre proposed ash disposal units had been included in the
investigations of Fayette County's historical resources carried out by
TAS prior.to construction of the Fayette Power Plant (Jackson and
Skelton 1975). Three historic sites had been recorded in the present
study area, largely as a result of information provided by local
residents.
An accumulation of flat field stones wa~ reportedly the
remnants of a former sugar cane processing facility and was recorded
as 41FY88. A possible gravesite, indicated by a cairn with unmarked
headstone, 41FY89, was excavated by Coates Field Services and found to
be empty of human remains. Both these sites have since been destroyed
- the first by local land modification, the second by excavation for
possible reinterment. A third site, 41FY90, the Malcik cemetery, was
revisited and additional historic research is reported herein.
As a
result of previous studies, a fourth historic site, 41FY94, The
Biegel-December cemetery, was moved to a location within the current
study area. Both these historic cemeteries are protected by State and
Federal laws which require avoidance or reinterment. If avoidance is
feaSible, a 300 ft .buffer zone should be established around the
graveyards as a further protective measure. Plans for ash disposal
include measures to reduce or eliminate potential erosional hazards.
One historic site was recorded during this survey, 41FY309, the
Harlfinger-Schumacher house.
This structure was mentioned in
conjunction with studies of the Biegel settlement as a whole (Carter
and Ragsdale 1976: 79) but was not formally recorded as a site. The

12
assignment of a permanent site number herein was in accord with Texas
Historical Commission policy of documenting all structures over 50
years old for future settlement and architectural studies.
Extensive
renovation and addition to the original 1880's German designed home
has eliminated it from consideration for the National Register of
Historic Places; therefore, no further investigation at the site is
warranted.
Although one prehistoric site, 41F169, was recorded during survey
of a transmission line corridor which traverses the study area
(Kenmotsu and Freeman 1980:
36), the entire tract had not been
intensively surveyed for prehistoric resources.
Intensive survey
and
located two additional lithic scatters, 41FY307 and 308,
ascertained that 41FY169 had been destroyed by recent land
modification. Both 41FY307 and 308 have characteristics which suggest
their basic use was as lithic procurement stations, utilizing the
locally available chert resources as raw material for stone tool
manufacture.
The limited quantities and variety in artifactual
material, the eroded nature of the shallow soils in the site areas,
and the virtual destruction of 41FY308 by construction of the MKT
railroad seriously detract from the ability of these sites to
contribute significantly to regional prehistory beyond this initial
recording.
Therefore, no further work is warranted
nor
is
determination of eligibility for the National Register of Historic
Places justified.
The two. newly recorded prehistoric sites conform to a site
typology and distributional pattern derived during recent studies in
A
the near vicinity (Robinson. in Nightengale and Jackson 1982).
tabulation of known sites within Fayette County, using a site and
locational typology, indicates that the majority of the prehistoric
resources are signalled by a light lithic scatter unacCompanied by
surface-exposed features. Just such an exposure is found at 41FY307.
A second category, lithic scatters on gravel outcrops, is the
appropriate site type for 41FY308 which has been seriously disturbed
by railroad construction.
The locational preference in the upland
regions of Fayette County is for terraces adjacent to minor drainways;
the most obvious attraction is water which in turn supports the
potential food sources, vegetation and game. Chert outcrops attracted
prehistoriC inhabitants to this ready source of raw material for stone
tool manufacture. Either or both of these resources can expectably
motivate prehistoriC occupation; when found in conjunction the
probability of finding aboriginal sites increases.
Thus, it is
becoming predictable that in upland regions, such as the current study
area, prehistoric sites will fall into the general category of lithic
scatters, including both chert artifacts and/or burned rock, with and
without discernible features.
These sites will demonstrably be
associated with two primary resources - water or lithic raw material.
This generalized pattern can be used to make broad predictive
models of aboriginal settlement but, of course, lacks the capability
of precisely locating all sites, especially those rare and unique,
such as prehistoric cemeteries.
However, it can be applied to

13

delineate archeologically sensitive areas in analogous environments
within the region. Such a model can be further refined if additional
studies can provide a more secure cultural-historical framework and
interpretive format.

14

REFERENCES CITED
Alexander, Herbert L.
1963 The Levi Site:

A Paleo-Indian Campsite

American Antiquity 28( 4):

in Central

Texas.

510-528.

Brown, David O. and Ray O. Kenmotsu
1980 Test Excavations in
the Fayette to Lytton Springs
Transmission Corridor, Bastrop and Fayette Counties, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 77, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Brune, Gunnar
1975 Major and Historical Springs of
Texas.
Development Board Report 189, Austin.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1979 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Seguin
Texas at Austin.

sheet.

The

Texas

Water

University of

Carter, Suzanne E. and Crystal S. Ragsdale
1976
Biegel Settlement: Historic Sites Research, Fayette Power
Project, Fayette County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey
Research Report 59, The University of Texas at Austin.
Dallas Morning News
1980 Texas Almanac, Be10 Corporation, Dallas.
Davis, William B.
1974 The Mammals of Texas.
Bulletin 41, Austin.

Texas Parks and Wildlife Department

Eddy, Frank. N.
1973 Salvage Archeology in the Laneport Reservoir
District,
Central Texas. Report submitted to the National Park. Service
by the Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938

Physiography of Eastern United States.

McGraw Hi 11 New York..

Fields, Ross C.
1982 Archeological Survey of the Proposed Tenroc No.
1 LCRA
Pipeline, Fayette County, Texas.
Prewitt and Associates,
Inc. Letter Report 156, Austin.

15
Fullem. Bruce B.
1977 The Black Hopper Site.
State Department of Highways and
Public
Transportation,
Division of Highway Design,
Publications in Archaeology 10, Austin.
Gould, Frank W.
1975 The Grasses of Texas.

Texas A&M University. College Station.

Henderson, Jerry
1980 Preliminary Report of the Texas Highway Department
Excavations at 41BX52 - The Paleo-Component. Newsletter of
the Texas Archeological Society 24(2); 14-15.
Jackson, Marsha F. and Duford W.Skelton
1975 Fayette Power Project: An Interim Report on the Assessment
of its Impact on Cultural Resources. Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Kenmotsu, Ray D. and Martha Doty Freeman
1980 Cultural Resource Survey and Monitoring in the Fayette to
Lytton Springs Transmission Corridor, Bastrop, Caldwell and
Fayette Counties, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research
Report 76, The University of Texas at Austin.
Laurens, Jane C., Jan A. Guy and Elton R. Prewitt
1979 Archeological Survey and Assessment along Portions of Fayette
Electrical Coop Power Lines, Fayette. Bastrop and Lavaca
Report of
Counties. Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
Investigations 1, Aust 1n.
Nightengale, Bruce A. and Jack M. Jackson
1982 An Intensive Survey of the Cultural Resources of the Cummins
Creek Prospect, Fayette County, Texas. Texas Archeological
Survey Research Report 86, The University of Texas at Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1974 Archeological
Investigations at the
Loeve-Fox Site,
Williamson County,
Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey
Research Report 49, The University of Texas at Austin.
,

1981

Cultural Chronology 1n Central
Society B u lIeti n 4: 65-89.

Texas.

1982

Archeological Invesigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir
Districts, Central Texas, Vol.
4.
Institute of Applied
Sciences, North Texas State UniverSity, Denton.

Texas

Archeological

Robinson, David G..
1982 A Cultural Resource Survey of the
Fayette to Salem
Transmission Corridor,
Fayette, Austin and Washington
Counties, Texas.
Texas Archeological
Survey Technical
Bulletin 60, The University of Texas at Austin.

16
Sellards, E.H., W.S. Atkins and F.B .. Plummer
1978 The Geology of Texas, Vol. 1. Bureau of Economic Geology
Bulletin 3232, The University of Texas at Austin.
Skelton, Duford W.
1977 Archeological Investigations at the Fayette Power Project:
Fayette County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research
Report 60, The University of Texas at Austin.
Soil Conservation Service
1974 General Soil Map, Fayette County, Texas.
Webb, Walter Prescott
1952 The Handbook of Texas,
Association, Austin.
Weir, Frank
1976a The Central Texas Archaic.
State University, Pullman.

Vol.

1.

Texas State

Historical

Doctoral Dissertation, Washington

1976b The Central Texas Archaic Reconsidered.
In:
The Texas
Archaic: A Symposium, Thomas R. Hester, editor. Center for
Archaeological Research Special Report 2, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.

