An Archaeological Survey of the
Richland Special Utility District
Pipeline Project, San Saba and McCulloch
Counties, Central Texas

by
Thomas R. Hester and Harry J. Shafer

Submitted to
Richland Special Utility District
Richland Springs, Texas

Antiquities Permit No. 4376

Report No. 50
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants
San Antonio, Texas
2007

2

Abstract
The Richland Special Utility District is proposing to install a pipeline to transfer water
from western San Saba County into eastern McCulloch County. The proposed route is 24
miles in length and is, for the most part, adjacent to an existing RSUD easement
containing a pipeline installed some years ago. Abasolo Archaeological Consultants of
San Antonio, Texas, carried out a survey of designed “high probability” areas along the
route, in accord with recommendations from Texas Historic Commission staff. All work
was done under the terms of Antiquities Permit No. 4376. As a result of the survey, two
archaeological sites were documented. Both are lithic scatters and require no further
research. There were no archaeological collections made at either site.

3

Introduction
On November 24, 2006, Abasolo Archaeological Consultants (AAC; San Antonio,
Texas) was contacted by Deana Sealy, P.E., of Sealy Engineering, Richland Springs
Texas. The Richland Special Utility District (hereafter RSUD) is seeking to obtain
Federal funding via a USDA Rural Development Water program to build 24 miles of
water pipeline from an existing San Saba County well to the current McCulloch County
standpipe (Fig. 1).
This construction is to be done under plans submitted by an Engineering Report prepared
by Sealy Engineering. Delivery of water from the Ellenberger Aquifer in San Saba
County to McCulloch County customers will help alleviate radium levels in the Hickory
Aquifer in the latter county. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ)
has required that the RSUD bring the Hickory Aquifer water up to TCEQ standards.
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants conducted an archeological survey of the 24 mile
pipeline route for RSUD. The survey was done by the authors on February 8, 2007 under
the terms of Antiquities Permit No. 4376 and based on the research design described
below, with Harry Shafer serving as the Principal Investigator. Two prehistoric sites were
documented along the pipeline easement. Both archaeological sites consisted of light
scatters of chipped stone artifacts and fire-cracked rock. No features and no temporally
diagnostic artifacts were observed.

Project Setting
The project area is in eastern McCulloch and western San Saba Counties. The pipeline
parallels existing roads along the entire route (Figs. 1-4). The route ends at the standpipe
just west of State Highway 377 northeast of Brady and parallels Hwy 377 for
approximately one mile. At that juncture it extends east along FM 112 to Rochelle. The
pipeline parallels Hwy 190 for approximately 2 miles at which point it turns north along
FM 2822 for a distance of 6.9 miles. FM 2822 turns into FM 1028 and the pipeline
follows this road for a short distance before it turns east again along a county roads. It
follows county roads into San Saba County where it begins at the pump station northwest
of Richland Springs near the well.
The pipeline route traverses portions of three physiographic regions. It borders the North
Central Plains (which consists of limestones, sandstones, shales), the Central Texas Uplift
(granites, metamorphic rocks), and eroded islands of Edwards Plateau (limestone and
chert; http://www.lib.utexas.edu/geo/pics/txphysio.jpg). Because of the physiographic
setting the area is geologically complex, being on the northern fringes of the Cambrian
and Ordovician rocks of the Central Texas Uplift (Llano Uplift), and islands of
Cretaceous age rocks in the Edwards Plateau (Sellards et al., 1954: Pl. XI). Cherts and
chalcedonies of Cretaceous, Cambrian, and Pennsylvanian ages provided a variety of
choices for the production of chipped stone artifacts. This variety was observed in the
chipping waste seen at the two archaeological sites recorded and in gravel exposures.

4
The complex geology and various rocks that compose bedrock deposits also created
complex of soils across the pipeline route. The level to hilly San Saba County portion
of the pipeline route is wholly Truce-Owens-Waurika soils. These soils are described as
"clayey and loamy, non-calcareous materials derived from shales, sandstone and
outwash” (Godfrey et al., 1973). These soils support mid and short grasses, post oak, and
mesquite. The level to hilly terrain in the McCulloch County portion is dominated by
Tarrant-Kavett-Rowena soils. These are described as "mostly shallow and moderately
deep soils over limy earths, red beds or limestone; some deep soils with loamy surface
layers and clayey subsoil” (Godfrey et al., 1973). The soils support mixed vegetation
pattern consisting of short and mid grasses, tall grasses, mesquite, and live oaks.

Research Design
The water line will follow 16.5 miles of existing RSUD easement, and 7.5 additional
miles will be acquired. Pipeline construction is designed to avoid oak trees and other
natural resources (e.g., reseeding of disturbed rangeland). AAC has been informed that
trenching for the line will go no deeper than 30 inches. Photographs provided in the
Engineering Report show a narrow 20-foot corridor within which the PVC pipe is placed.
All stream crossings will be bored and cased to avoid disturbance in those sensitive areas.
The new pipeline will run within 20 feet of existing county and FM roads, facilitating
easy access for archaeological survey.
Texas Historical Commission (THC) project reviewer Debra Beene indicated to Deana
Sealy (in a letter of 11/24/06) that AAC archaeologists were to select “high probability
areas” along the route. Shafer and Hester of AAC examined the project map, as well as
larger topographic maps and aerial photographs, and selected a series of high probability
areas based on the enclosed project map. Such areas include the four Pump Stations that
will be built, but primarily focus on creeks, drainages, terraces, and other areas along the
route that might contain archaeological deposits. Part of the pipeline is along the
Richland Creek drainage, and further west, crosses the drainage of Onion and Little
Onion Creeks. Aside from the 16 high probability locales, and since the pipeline is
adjacent to roads, it was expedient for Hester and Shafer to inspect all suspicious
localities along the route.
Each of the 16 projected areas were inspected and stops were made at areas projected or
recognized in the field; the location was surveyed on foot according to the survey
standards related to our Antiquities Permit. There was a “no collection” policy observed
during the survey. Since the Texas Archeological Site Atlas does not show any
archaeological sites anywhere near the proposed pipeline, and indeed there are only a
handful of recorded sites in this region, the AAC survey team paid close attention to all
cultural resources that were found. Documentation of the two sites was reported to
TARL which provided the trinomial numbers. Site locales and observed artifacts were
photographed.

5

Archaeological Background
Given the lack of archaeological research in the region, we can provide only a
generalized outline of the chronology of eastern McCulloch and western San Saba
Counties.
Major prehistoric time periods and site types are briefly noted here.
Approximately 44 sites have been recorded to date in McCulloch County, and around 160
in San Saba County. None were in close proximity to the RSUD pipeline. A following
section will deal with the recorded sites in and in proximity to the project area. In these
reviews, site numbers contain the following information: 41= Texas; SS (San Saba
County) or MK (McCulloch County); 22 (thus, 41SS22 would be the 22nd site reported
in San Saba County, constituting a “unique number” for that specific site).
The Paleoindian period, 9,200-6,800 B.C., has distinctive chipped stone spear points
used in hunting mammoth and other late Ice Age mammals early in the period. Other
spear types appear with a shift to bison, deer and other game after the Ice Age ended
around 8000 B.C. Late Paleoindian artifacts from the area likely include Angostura,
Golondrina and possibly Plainview. Though no significant sites of this period have yet to
be reported from San Saba and McCulloch Counties, there is every reason to believe that
they will eventually be recognized.
Sites of the following Archaic period are common in the region, particularly in the
Colorado River drainage (Texas Archeological Site Atlas, Texas Historical Commission).
These peoples were hunters and gatherers as in the earlier Paleoindian period, but lived in
an environment very similar to those of modern times. Projectile points used to tip spears
(often erroneously called “arrowheads”) change in shape through time, from 6,800 B.C.
to 500 A.D. Archaeologists use these forms to recognize more specific time frames
within the Archaic (e.g., Early, Middle and Late Archaic). The most distinctive Archaic
site is the burned rock midden. These large accumulations of fire-cracked limestone
result from the use of earth-oven cooking starting around 3,000 B.C. (Black et al. 1997,
report 41MK8 and MK9 from northeastern McCulloch County). Such features (or
smaller accumulations of burned rock; Irwin et al. 1999) were often part of larger
campsites, with large amounts of flint debris from tool-making; sometimes, animal bone
(dietary remains) and charcoal that can be used for radiocarbon dating. However, many
sites buried in the terraces of local drainages have no trace of burned rock middens, but
include a quantity of lithic and faunal remains. An excellent example is the Sloan site
(41SS51), on the San Saba River south of Richland Springs (Butler 2006). It consists of
cultural materials buried in alluvial terrace deposits. There is also a burned rock midden
at the site. Diagnostic projectile points recovered at the Sloan site indicate occupations
beginning in the Early Archaic (Gower points; ca. 7000 years ago, and Early Triangular
points, somewhat later in age) to the Late Prehistoric (Perdiz arrow points; ca. A.D. 13001700).
Other site types of Archaic and later times include lithic procurement areas (where flint
cobbles were processed) and lithic scatters (lightly-used areas probably representing
short-term hunting and gathering activities). Grant Hall (personal communication, June

6
1993; Howell 1999) believes that a steep bluff on the San Saba River, with a massive
stone alignment, served as a bison-jump site. However, scouring by floods would have
removed any material trace and it is unknown Pictograph sites (e.g. 41MK5 and SS7)
mostly in small rockshelters, including the tick-infested 41SS50 (cf. Grant Hall, personal
communication 1993).
Terrace sites with sizable mussel shell accumulations (Green
1971) have been reported from the Colorado River drainage. The Happy Patch site
published by Green lies on the Colorado River north of Richland Springs. There were
eight concentrations of mussel shell, with the associated artifacts including Scallorn, Frio,
Marcos and Pedernales types, as well as a mano and numerous bifaces. Rockshelters
formed by sandstone slabs and with associated bedrock mortars occur at site 41MK37.
By 700 A.D., there began to be some changes in the long hunter-gatherer lifeway. The
Late Prehistoric is first marked by the introduction of the bow and arrow. The stone
arrow points are very small (mistakenly called “bird points”), but could be used in
hunting game of any size. By 1300 A.D., the economy emphasized buffalo-hunting.
Several sites of this era include larger campsites, with abundant remains from hunting
and processing of bison and other animals (Green 1971; Green and Hester 1972; Butler
2006.
Nearby Archaeological Sites
Prior to going into the field, file research indicated that there were no previously
documented sites along the proposed RSUD pipeline, and indeed, there were none that
were even close. Much of what is known about the archaeology of the Richland Springs
Creek drainage, the upper reaches of which parallel the proposed pipeline route, was
recorded by L. M.Green, an avocational archaeologist in the town of Richland Springs.
Beginning in the late 1960s, the late Mr.Green began to send site reports to the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) and during the 1970s, he published several
papers that summarized sites and artifacts from the area (e.g., Green 1971, 1972; Green
and Hester 1972). Most of the locales were campsites dating to Middle and Late Archaic
times.
A cluster of archaeological sites are located along Richland Springs Creek 5-6 km
downstream and to the southeast, from the eastern end of the RSUD pipeline. Most
notable is the Finis Frost site, a major Toyah occupation site found by L. M. Green
(Green and Hester 1972). Surface materials included many Perdiz points, beveled bifaces
or knives, potsherds, and faunal remains, especially. bison;

Survey Results
Two archaeological sites were documented during the course of the survey. These were
given provisional numbers, RSUD #1 and RSUD #2, and were subsequently assigned site
numbers by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.

7

RSUD #1
(41MK45)
Site 41MK45 is located along a county road about 300 meters west of FM 1028. The site
consists of a thin lithic scatter on the nose of an upland finger consisting mostly of
sandstone bedrock (Figs. 5-7). No shovel test were necessary because there are no buried
deposits present on the portion of the site transected by the pipeline as evidenced by the
exposed bedrock.. The site provides an excellent vantage point overlooking the Deep
Creek valley where Herberg Lake (Figs. 5, 6), constructed by the Soil Conservation
Service, is today. It is also a popular place for visitors as evidenced by empty beer cans
and other modern trash. The upland finger is transected by a county road which probably
destroyed most of the site when constructed. A few fire-cracked rocks, chalcedony and
chert flakes, a projectile point tip, and three bifaces were observed, photographed, but not
collected (Fig. 8). The site area will be transected by pipeline excavations, but it does not
contain buried intact deposits, and there is no contextual integrity to the cultural material
observed. No further work is recommended.
RSUD #2
(41SS165)
FM 256 cuts through the north edge of site 41SS165 situated on a high north bank of
Richland Springs Creek about 1.5 km west of Pumping Station #1, and about 4 km westnorthwest of Richland Springs. Cultural material in the form of chipped stone flakes and
a core were noted along the south fence line and in the red sandy loam cultivated field
between the road and the creek (Figs. 9, 10). The pipeline parallels the north side of
FM256 and no artifacts were found on the north side of the road. The site may not
extend that far to the north as a thorough inspection of about 200 meters of exposed ditch
face which was about two meters from the pipeline, and field surface inspection next to
the fence along the north side of the road failed to indicate any cultural material or buried
deposits along the pipeline route. The exposed ditch face varied in height from about 0.5
to 1.0 meter and provided an opportunity to examine for subsurface cultural deposits. The
soils are of the Truce-Owens-Waurika series and consist of red sandy loam. Because of
this excellent exposure, no shovel tests were deemed necessary.
Since the main site area is south of the county road along the terrace bluff overlooking
the creek, and no cultural material was observed along the pipeline route, no further work
is recommended for this site in conjunction with the pipeline. Although no cultural
material was seen in the north ditch profile, it is possible that some buried deposits occur
south of the road in the field between the road and the creek. This area is about 50 meters
south of the pipeline. Future work in this area of the site may require testing.

Summary and Recommendations
A thorough inspection of the 16 designated high probability areas for archeological sites
along the 25 pipeline route identified two prehistoric archeological sites. Both sites

8
consist of scatters of lithic artifacts. Site 41MK45 (RSUD #1) is a surface scatter of lithic
artifacts on a sandstone bedrock exposure. While the pipeline will cut across the site, all
cultural material is restricted to the surface and therefore the site has no research
potential. Site 41SS165 (RSUD#2) consists of thin scatter of lithic artifacts on a high
terrace of Richland Springs Creek. While the area of the site south of CR 256 may have
research potential, the survey party could find no conclusive evidence despite thorough
inspection that the site extended north of the county road in the area of the pipeline
easement. Therefore, no further archaeological work is recommended for either site.

Acknowledgments
We appreciate the help of the review staff of the Texas Historical Commission, notably
Debra Beene and Mark Denton. Deana Sealy, P.E. was of tremendous assistance in
providing us with the Engineering Report and project maps. We are very grateful to Mr.
August Pope of the RSUD, as well as to its Board of Directors, for their aid.

References Cited
Black, S. L., L. W. Ellis, D. G. Creel, and G. T. Goode
1997 Hot Rock Cooking on the Greater Edwards Plateau: Four Burned Rock
Midden Sites in West Central Texas. Two volumes. Studies in Archeology
22, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin, and Archeology Studies Program, Report 2, Environmental Affairs
Department, Texas Department of Transportation. Austin.
Butler, J. B.
2006

Investigations at the Sloan Site (41SS51), A Stratified Alluvial Terrace
Site in San Saba County, Texas. MA thesis, Texas Tech University.

Godfrey, C., G. S. McKee and H. Oakes
1973 General Soil Map of Texas 1973. Texas A&M University Agricultural
Experiment Station and the USDA Soil Conservation Service.
Green, L. M.
1970 An Introduction to the Archaeology of the Richland Springs Creek Area,
Western San Saba County, Texas. Lower Plains Archaeological Society
1:1-11.
1971

Notes on the Archeology of the Happy Patch Site, San Saba County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 42:319-333.

1972

Flake Blades from Western San Saba County, Central Texas: An Initial
Study. Bulletin of the Lower Plains Archeological Society 2: 5-22.
(for 1971).

9
Green, L. M. and T. R. Hester
1972 The Finis Frost Site: A Toyah Phase Occupation in San Saba County,
Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 44:69-88.
Howell, D. K.
1999 A Proposed Bison Jump Site (41SS52) in San Saba County, Texas.
MA thesis, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Irwin, A. M., B. A. Houk, and D. Drake
1999 Excavations at the Bluff Creek Sites: 41MK10 and 41MK27, McCulloch
County, Texas. Archeology Studies Program Report 16, Texas
Department of Transportation and SWCA Cultural Resource Report 9961, SWCA, Inc. Environmental Consultants. Austin.
Sellards, E. H., W.S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1966

The Geology of Texas, Volume 1, Stratigraphy. Fifth Printing. Bureau of
Economic Geology, The University of Texas, Austin.

10

FIGURES

Figure 1. Western section of RSUD pipeline route west of Rochelle,
Texas, McCulloch County. Rochelle section is to the east (Fig. 2).

11

Figure 2. Rochelle section of the RSUD pipeline, McCulloch County.
Hall section is to the east (Fig. 3).

12

Figure 3. Hall section of the RSUD pipeline route. Richland Springs section
is to the east (Fig. 4).

13

Figure 4. Richland Springs section of the RSUD pipeline route. Hall
section is to the west (Fig. 3).

14

Figure 5. View of 41MK45 looking northeast from the county road
toward the Deep Creek valley.

Figure 6. View of 41MK45 looking east; Deep Creek valley is in the
background.

15

Figure 7. Large sandstone boulder at 41MK45; note surface lithic scatter
beyond boulder.

Figure 8. Stone artifacts observed on the surface at 41MK45. Top row:
burned biface, dart point tip, and hammer stone. Bottom row: biface
perform and biface tool.

16

Figure 9. View along CR256 looking east; site 41SS165 is to the left (south)
and road cut on the north parallels the RSUD pipeline route.

Figure 10. View of 41SS165 looking east along the north bank of Richland
Springs Creek.

17

