C U LT U R A L R E S O U RC E S
S U RV E Y O F T H E R E S AC A
F O RC E M A I N T R A N S F E R
LS 33
B ROW N S V I L L E , T E X A S
JOHN E. KELLER

SOUTHERN ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONSULTANTS, INC.
REPORT OF INVESTIGATIONS

July 2010
Texas Antiquities Permit Number 5703

Abstract
During July of 2010, Southern Archaeological Consultants, Inc. carried out cultural resources monitoring in
an area of subsurface boring where the Brownsville Public Utilities Board (PUB), was installing a new force
main. This area is adjacent to the historic Brownsville Cemetery property and between the cemetery and the
Town Resaca. Indeed the entire area represents a filled in resaca channel and this factor is extremely
important to understanding the nature of the archaeological situation and the conditions and obstructions
encountered by the boring machine.
This investigation involved monitoring of boring in an area some 12 feet beneath the present ground surface.
No cultural resources were recorded during the survey and no further work is recommended in the area. The
lack of cultural materials is attributed primarily to disturbance and/or artificial filling operations.

During mid-July of 2010, Southern Archaeological Consultants carried out cultural resources
monitoring operations at the Resaca Force Main Transfer Lift Station (LS) 33 in Brownsville,
Texas. This location is adjacent to the historic Brownsville Cemetery and occupies an area of
artificial fill between the cemetery and the Town Resaca. This is a Federally funded project and
is covered under procedures defined under the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (P.L.
89-665), as amended; the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (P.L. 91-190); Executive
Order 11593, "Protection and Enhancement of the Cultural Environment", 13 May 1971 (36 CFR
Part 800); Preservation of Historic and Archaeological Data, 1974 (P.L. 98-291, as amended;
and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, "Procedures for Protection of Historic and
Cultural Properties" (36 CFR Part 800) and the Texas Antiquities Code. Therefore, a Texas
Historical Commission Antiquities Permit is required.

Figure 1: Looking westerly across the project area. Note the position of the pipeline and
the how the cemetery proper is separated from the resaca by comparatively
recent fill and maintenance road.

Figure 2: View easterly along waterline and resaca (to left) with cemetery proper on right.
Note separation between cemetery and resaca.

This project \consisted of five interlinked phases
Phase 1 Background and Literature Search
Phase 2 Map Review
Phase 3 Monitoring
Phase 4 Analysis
Phase 5 Report Preparation and Recommendations
The project is concerned with the location, recording and evaluation of any intact cultural
resources present within the affected area. This kind of project does not generally lend itself to
detailed research methodologies or comprehensive examinations of cultural process. Such
compliance oriented studies are primarily concerned with the practical rather than theoretical
issues.
Project Area
The project area is located wholly within the city limits of Brownsville, Texas and covers an
impact area of less than acre. This area is bounded by the cemetery on the south and the resaca
on the north so that it forms a narrow corridor of artificial fill that has been constructed both to

seperate the cemetety proper from the resaca and to provide space for other and previously
installed water lines and piping.

Culture History
The culture history of the Rio Grande Valley, especially its prehistoric component, is not well
understood. In large measure this is due to a basic lack of data (Prewitt 1974). Archaeological
sites have been recorded and in some cases, at least, investigated but almost without exception
these sites have been heavily disturbed cemeteries from which archaeologists have been able to
extract only limited data.
Prehistoric populations are believed to have been the predecessors of the Cohuiltecan groups
encountered by the first European explorers. They are believed to have practiced a nomadic
hunting and gathering way of life that stressed mobility and the exploitation of fish, shellfish and
plant products (Hester 1969). Presumably this way of life has been practiced from the time of
the earliest occupations with only slight alterations occurring with the adoption of such
technological innovations as the bow and arrow and the use of ceramics. As a result, the best
known of the defined cultural complexes, the Brownsville complex (MacNeish 1947) appears to
differ little from the preceding Archaic.
The Brownsville complex is characterized by large numbers of shell artifacts, Fresno,
Matamoros, Starr and Cameron arrowpoints and limited numbers of ceramics. This complex is
known almost entirely from heavily disturbed mortuary associations. As a result, some of the
assumptions about Brownsville complex culture may be unfounded and it is suspected that basic
chronological relationships are badly in need of revision (Collins, Hester and Weir 1969).
Populations encountered by the first European explorers and observers were nomadic huntersand-gatherers (Salinas 1990). The records of the first Spanish explorer, Alonso Alvarez de
Pineda, suggest as many as forty brush arbor settlements (ramadas) or rancherias were present
along the first sixteen miles of river channel (Salinas 1990:22) in 1519. Other documents
suggest that the Rio Grande delta was the most densely populated area of northeastern Mexico
and Southern Texas (Salinas 1990:139) if only because of the greater subsistence resources
available in the area. The project area is included within this area of higher population density
and, with the limited data presently available, almost any prehistoric site would add greatly to
our data base and predictive capability.
The historic period beginning with the first explorations of Pineda is better understood.
Nevertheless, there has been comparatively little work done with historic materials despite the
fact that the settlements established by Escandon on the Rio Grande River are some of the
earliest in what is now the United States. These settlements are generally associated with the
present course of the Rio Grande and are located north and west of the project area.

After the establishment of the Republic of Texas the area remained a Mexican holding until the
conclusion of the Mexican war in 1846. Indeed the first battle of that struggle were fought at
Palo Alto and the Resaca de la Palma in what would become Brownsville and the establishment
of the city dates to this time period. Skirmishing associated with these events could have taken
place within the project area but there is no collaborative evidence of such involvement. During
the Civil War this entire area was the scene of intermittent skirmishing by combatants
representing the United States, the Confederacy, the Mexican Republic and the Emperor
Maximillian. The cemetery was established in 1866 to replace the previous El Campo Santo
Viejo (Keller 2005) but did not actually begin to be utilized until some years later.
After the Civil War, the project area returned to its relatively undeveloped state. Land use was
dominated by open range and cattle production although Brownsville prospered as an entreport
and trading center. The establishment of intensive irrigation agriculture (Pierce 1917,
Stambaugh and Stambaugh 1954) in the early 1900's caused a fundamental change in the
lifestyle of Cameron County and Brownsville. The city became a major marketing center and
the largest United States city in the Lower Rio Grande Valley.
Background and Literature Search
The general survey area, and indeed Cameron County has not been the scene of numerous
cultural resource investigations. This seems to be related both to a lack of Federal or State
supported projects and limited knowledge of the requirements. A background and literature
review was carried out at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at
Austin and with the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas (Atlas 2009, THC). The nearest recorded
archaeological site is 41CF188, a historic farmstead or residence, within the boundaries of the
Brownsville- South Padre Island International Airport. Culural resource surveys have also been
made in the vicinity of the Port of Brownsville, at borrow areas to the southwest of that facility
ans at scattered properties throughout the city but none of these included the project area.
Additional literature searches were carried out at the library of the University of TexasBrownsville, the Cameron County Courthouse, the Hidalgo County Historical Museum and the
Historical Collection in the Library of the University of Texas-Pan American. These resources
proved to be particularly valuable for the maps prepared for the International Boundary
Commissions in 1884, 1889, and 1900. These maps provide topographic evidence for active Rio
Grande River channels, resacas, cutoffs, bancos, oxbow lakes and historic occupations during the
period from 1853 to 1911.

Monitoring Procedures
Since this was a monitoring project, the survey procedures outlined in Archeological Survey
Standards for Texas, Minimum Survey Standards, were not applicable. Monitoring took place

only after an obstruction was encountered by the boring mechanism. Public Utility Board
employees advised the archaeologists that they were sure that the area was disturbed and
probably composed mostly of fill. However, since the project was Federally funded they felt it
prudent to have an archaeologist present to confirm that their operations were not impacting the
cemetery and that the boring mechanism had not encountered a grave ior human remains. To
identify the obstruction and clarify the nature of the subsurface deposits a trackhoe was utilized
to excavate an area measuring approximately ten feet (3.04 meters) by twenty feet (6.08 meters)
and twelve feet (3.65 meters) in depth. Archaeologists were present on site for approximately
1.5 days until the nature of the situation had been clarified. The obstruction was identified as the
portion of a buried seawall or bulkhead.

Figure 3: Portion of USGS East Brownsville quadrsngle showing position of cemetery.

There are three large water pipes buried in this fill at depths of between 8 and 10 feet beneath the
surface. The new water pipe, which is approximately 4 feet in diameter will replace these pipes
but it is more efficient to perform a directional bore rarther than excavating a new trench and
removing the existing piping. These pipes are believed to date from the1940’s and 1950’s. One
of these pipes is lined with asbestos and this material is supposed to have been phased out before
1950.
Two of these pipes are located above the buried seawall and one of them appears to rest, in part,
on that construction (see attached photograph). During the investigation this pipe, although
abandoned, continued to leak. The bulkhead was constructed of relatively modern treated

Figure 4: Trenched area showing exterior plywood pieces and portion of sea wall exposed
under leaking and previously installed water pipe.
exterior plywood and the support members were modern dimensional lumber. Thus, the 2x4
actually measured 1 and 3/4 inches by 3 and 3/4 inches.
Results
No significant cultural resources were discovered or recorded during this survey. Observation
indicates that the area of subsurface boring is composed almost entirely of artificial fill and that
the location is essentially a filled resaca channel. This is indicated by the presence of a buried
seawall/bulkhead under the waterpipes buried about 8 feet below the present ground surface.

There is a similiar structure present on the other side of the existing resaca channel. Another
suggestion of the presence of fill is large number of debris items such as bricks, cement blocks,
and large pieces of waste concrete intermixed into the heavy clay fill. Disturbance by modern
activities is, therefore, a primary factor operating in this location. It seems quite evident that the
cemetery itself was not influenced by this episode of rechannelization, filling, and pipe
implacement. Instead the area of the cemetery was actually increased and potential erosional
problems on the cemetery edges were curtailed. The Public Utilities Board records on this area
are limited but personnel advised the archaeologists that they knew the area was disturbed.
Conclusions
No cultural resources were recorded and there are no previously recorded archaeological sites,
prehistoric or historic, within the project area. As a result, no further work is recommended
within the area being monitored.

Portion of West Brownsville USGS quadrangle showing cemetery location

References Cited or Consulted
Allhands, James L.
1960 Railroad to the Rio. The Anson Jones Press, Salado, Texas.
Anderson, A.E.
1932 Artifacts of the Lower Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society 4:29-31.
Anderson. David G. and Jenalee Muse
1982 The Archaeology of Tenancy: An Example from the South Carolina Low Country.
South Carolina Antiquities 14:71-85.
Barnes, V.E.
1976 McAllen-Brownsville Sheet, Geologic Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Barton, Florence
1983 The Magic Valley of Texas. Eakin Press, Austin, Texas.
Baulch, Joe Robert
1974 James B. Wells: South Texas Economic and Political Leader. Ph.D. Dissertation, Texas
TechUniversity.
Black, Stephen L.
1989 South Texas Plains. In From the Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation in Central,
South, and Lower Pecos Texas, by Thomas R. Hester, Stephen L. Black, D. Gentry
Steele, Ben W. Olive, Anne A. Fox, Karl J. Reinhard, and Leland C. Bement, pp. 39-62.
Research Series 33, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Bomar, G.W.
1983 Texas Weather. University of Texas Press.
Boothe, Betty I.
1967 The Cavalier and the Caballero: Conflicts in the Lower Rio Grande Valley in the 1850's
and 1860's.. M.A. Thesis, New Mexico Highlands University
Brown, L.E., Jr. Brewton, J.L.,Evans, T.J., McGowan, J.H., White, W.A., Groat, C.G., and W.L. Fisher
1980 Environmental Geologic Atlas of the Texas Coastal Zone-Brownsville-Harlingen Area.
Bureau of Economic Geology, University of Texas at Austin.
Buckner, Dellos Urban
1929 Study of the Lower Rio Grande Valley as a Cultural Area. M.A. Thesis, University of
Texas.
Caylor, Jule A.
1986 A Proposed Rule-of- Thumb to Pedict Scale Requirements for New Project Aerial
Photographs. Proceedings of the Forest Service Remote Sensing Applications
Conference. Salt Lake City, Utah.
Central Power and Light Company
1967 The First 50 Years. Central Power and Light Company, Corpus Christi, Texas.
Chatelle, Miriam
1948 For We Love Our Valley Home. The Naylor Company, San Antonio, Texas.
Collins, Michael B., Thomas Roy Hester and Frank A. Weir
1968 The Floyd Morris Site (41CF2): A Prehistoric Cemetery Site in Cameron County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:119-146.
Collins, M.B., Hall, G.D. and C.B. Bousman
1989 Archaeological Applications of Geochronological Techniques in Southern Texas.La
Tierra. Vol..16, No.1,pp14-27.
Crawford, Polly Pearl
1925 The Beginning of Spanish Settlement in the Lower Rio Grande Valley. M.A. Thesis,
University of Texas, Austin.
Davenport, Harbert

1933 Life of James B. Wells. S.N.
Day, D. William
1981 Cultural Resources Survey and Assessments in Portions of Hidalgo and Willacy Counties,
Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.
Day, D.William, J. Laurens-Day and E.R. Prewitt
1981 Cultural Resources Survey and Assessment in Portions of Hidalgo and Willacy Counties,
Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Reports of Investigations 15. Austin.
Diaz del Castillo, Bernal
1955 Historia Verdadera de la Conquista de la Nueva Espana. 2 vols. Mexico City:Editorial
Porrua.
Dougherty, E.
1955 The Rio Grande Valley, 1807. Runyon Brothers, Brownsville, Texas,
Dougherty, Edward
1869 Availability of the Counties of Cameron and Hidalgo on the Lower Rio Grande, Texas
for Agricultural Stock Raising and Manufacturing. Sentinel Book and Job Printing,
Brownsville, Texas.
Doyon, Bernard
1956 The Cavalry Christ on the Rio Grande 1849-1883. Catholic Life Publications, Bruce
Press, Milwaukee.
Ellis, L.G. and G.A. Goodfriend
1994 Chronometric and Site-Formation Studies Using Land Snail Shells: Preliminary Results.
In Archeological Investigations on 571 Prehistoric Sites at Fort Hood, Bell and Coryell
Counties, Texas. Research Report No. 31, U.S. Army, Fort Hood,pp.183-201.
Escandon, Jose de
1946 Relacion de la Costa de Seno Mexicano. Vol. 2, Archivo de la Historia de Tamaulipas.
Compilado and editado por Gabriel Saldivar. Mexico City.
Fernandez de Navarrete, Martin
1955 Coleccion de Viajes y Discubrimientos que Hicieron por Mar los Espanoles Desde
Fines del Siglo XV. Biblioteca de Autores Espanoles. Vol 3.Madrid: Ediciones Atlas.
Fleming, Grace
1986 The Land of Shary. Pan American University, Edinburg, Texas.
Foscue, Edwin Jay
1930 Agricultural geography of the Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas.Ph.D. Dissertation
Clark University.
Haecker, Charles M.
1994 A Thunder of Cannon: Archaeology of the Mexican-American Battlefield of Palo Alto.
With Contributions by Michael Farmer, Eric A. Ratliff, Norman L.Richard, Dr. Alfred T.
Richardson and Kevin R. Young, National Park Service, Southwewst Cultural Resources
Center, Professional Papers No. 52.
Hall, Grant D.
1986 Cultural Resource Investigations along Drainage Improvements, Hidalgo and Willacy
Counties, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.
Hall, Grant D. and K.A. Grombacher
1974 An Assessment of Archeological and Historical Resources to be Affected by the Brazos
Island Harbor Waterway Project, Texas. Research Report 30, Texas Archeological
Survey, the University of Texas at Austin.
Hall, Grant D., Michael B. Collins and Elton R. Prewitt
1987 Cultural Resource Investigations, Drainage Improvements, Hidalgo and Willacy Counties,Texas:
1986 Investigations. Reports of Investigations 59. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Hantman,J.L., K.G. Lightfoot, S. Upham, F. Plog and B. Donaldson
1984Cibola Whitewares: A Regional Perspective. In Regional Analysis of Prehistoric Ceramic
J.L. Hantman, pp. 17-35. Anthropological Research Papers No. 31, Arizona State
University, Tempe.
Herrera, Antonio de
1945 Historia General de los Hechos de los Castellano, en las Islas, y Tierrafirme de el
Mar Occeano, Vols. 3,4, and 5. Asuncion, Paraguay:Editorial Guarana.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1969 The Floyd Morris and Ayala Sites: A Discussion of Burial Practices in the Rio GrandeValley and

Lower Texas Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:157-166.
Hester, Thomas R. (editor)
1979 A Preliminary Archaeological and Historical Assessment of the Proposed Tenneco
Pipeline: Hidalgo to Victoria Counties, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hill, Kate Adele
1973 Lon C. Hill 1862-1935: Lower Rio Grande Valley Pioneer. The Naylor Company, San
Antonio, Texas.
Horgan, Paul
1984 Great River: The Rio Grande in North American History. Texas Monthly Press, Austin
Texas.
Hoyo, Eugenio del
1972 Historia del Nuevo Reino de Leon (1577-1723). 2 vols, Serie: Historia, Publicaciones de Insttituto
Technologico y Estudios Superiores de Monterrey.Monterrey.
Irby, James Arthur
1969 Line on the Rio Grande: War and Trade on the Confederate Frontier 1861-1865.
Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Georgia, Athens.
Irby, James A.
1971 Backdoor at Bagdad: The Civil War on the Rio Grande. Texas Western Press, El Paso,
Texas.
Jackson, Jack
1986 Los Mestenos: Spanish Ranching in Texas 1721-1821. Texas A &M University Press,
College Station.
Jacobson, Lori
1982 "Soldiers in the Valley: 1916-1917" Document to accompany exhibit at the McAllen
International Museum October 12-December 3, 1982.
Jenkins, John S.
1850 History of the War Between the United States and Mexico: From the Commencement
of Hostilities to the Ratification of the Peace Treaty. Derby and Miller, Auburn.
Kearney, Milo and Anthony Knopp
1991 Boom and Bust: The Historical Cycles of Matamoros and Brownsville. Eakin Press, Austin, Texas.
Keller, John E.
1991 Archaeological and Geomorphological Investigations at the Anzalduas International
Crossing, Hidalgo County, Texas. Prepared for the McAllen, Mission and Hidalgo
International Bridge Board, Southern Archaeological Consultants, Inc. Report of
Investigations 9-95.
1997 A Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed Laguna Vista Wastewater Treatment Plant
in Cameron County, Texas. Texas Antiquities Permit # 1771. Southern Archaeological Consultants,
Report of investigations 1-97.
2005 Campo Santo Viejo: Archaeological Investigations at the old Brownsville Cemetery, Oscar
S. Dancy Building Parking Lot, Brownsville, Texas. Texas Antiquities Permit # 3586.Prepared by
Southern Archaeological Consultants, Inc. for the Cameron County Commissiloners Court 1-2005.
2005 An Archaeological Survey of the Laguna Heights County Park Improvement Project,
Cameron County, Texas. Texas Antiquities Permit # 3686 Southern Archaeological Consultants, Inc.,
Report of Investigations 3-2005.
Kelly, Pat
1985 River of Lost Dreams: Navigation on the Rio Grande. University of Nebraska Press,
Lincoln.
Krieger, Alex D.
1950 Archaeological Salvage In the Falcon Reservoir Area. Report No 1 National Park Service
and the University of Texas. Austin, Texas.
Lonard, James I., James H. Everitt and Frank W. Judd
1991 Woody Plants of the Lower Rio Grande Valley, Texas. Number 7, Miscellaneous
Publications of the Texas Memorial Museum, University of Texas at Austin.
Looney, Wesley Hall
1971 The Texas Ranger in a Turbulent Era. M.A. Thesis, Texas Tech University.
Lott, Virgil N. and Virginia M. Fenwick
1957 People and Plots on the Rio Grande. The Naylor Company, San Antonio,Texas, Lower Rio

Grande Community Heritage Project, Texas Historical commission
Lower Rio Grande Valley Development Council
1977 Historic Preservation Plan. McAllen, Texas.
1983 Environmentally Sensitive Areas in the Lower Rio Grande Valley. McAllen,
Texas.
Lower Rio Grande Historical Society
1978 Selections from the Collected Papers of the Lower Rio Grande Historical Society 19491979. Lon C. Hill Memorial Library, Harlingen, Texas.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1947An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Tamaulipas, Mexico. American Antiquity 13(1):
33- 39.
Mallouf, Robert J.
1977 A Predictive Assessment of Cultural Resources in Hidalgo and Willacy Counties,
Texas. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission.
1990 Prehistoric Archaeology and Paleo Environments in Hidalgo and Willacy Counties,
South Texas:Results of the Phase II Test Excavations. Prewitt and Associates, Austin,
Texas.
Mallouf, Robert J. and Anthony N. Zavaleta
1979 The Unland Site: A Prehistoric Groups Burial fom Laguna Atascosa Wildlife Refuge,
Cameron County, Texas. Survey Report 23, Texas Historical Commission, Office of the
State Archeologist.
Mason, J.A.
1935 The Place of Texas in Pre-Columbrian Relationships Between the United States and
Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 7:29-46.
Matthews, William Kenneth
1938 A History of Irrigation in the Lower Rio Grande Valley. M.A. Thesis, University of
Texas.
McAllen, Margaret
1991 The Heritage Sampler: Selections from the Rich and Colorful History of the Rio Grande
Valley. for the Hidalgo County Historical Museum by New Santander Press, Edinburg,
Texas.
McClung, John Busby
1981 Texas Rangers along the Rio Grande 1910-1919. Ph.D. Dissertation, Texas Christian
University.
McNail, Eddie Gatlering
1941 Mexican Missions North of the Border. Luther League of the American Lutheran
Church,
Columbus, Ohio.
1946 The History and Development of Irrigation in the Lower Rio Grande Valley. M.A
Thesis, Texas College of Arts and Industries.
Mercado-Allinger, Pat A.
1983 Survey, Testing, and Assessment of Cultural Resources in Portions of Willacy County
Drainage District No.1, Willacy County, Texas. Report of Investigations 20, Prewitt and
Associates, Inc. Austin.
Miller, Hubert J.
1979 Jose de Escandon: Colonizer of Nuevo Santander. New Santander Press, Edinburg,
Texas.
Miller, W. Frank and Michael D. Wallis
1974 Applications of Remote Sensing in Archaeological Site Identification. Institute for Environmental
Studies, Mississippi State University.
Napper, Gertic McGee
1939 Some International Aspects of the Water Problems of the Lower Rio Grande Valley.
M.S. Thesis, Texas College of Arts and Industries.
Neff, Hector
1993 Theory, Sampling, and Analytical Techniques for Compositional Characterization of
Archaeological Ceramics. American Antiquity 58(1):23-44.
Neitzel, J., and R.L. Bishop
1991Nuetron Activation of Dogoszhi Style Ceramics: Production and Exchange in the
Chacoan Regional System. The Kiva 56:67-85.

New York Division
1916General Orders No. 37, Headquarters, New York Division, McAllen, Texas,
October 14, 1916
Norris, W. Clyde
1942 History of Hidalgo County. M.A. Thesis, Texas College of Arts and Letters.
Orser, Charles E. and Claudia C. Holland
1984 Let Us Now Praise Famous Men -Accurately: Toward a More Complete
Understanding of Postbellum Agricultural Practices. Southeastern Archaeology
3(2):111-120.
Paine, G.P.
1991 Late Quaternary Units, Sea Level, and Vertical Movements Along the Central Texas
Coast. Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
Peavey, John R.
1963 Echoes From the Rio Grande. Springman-King Company, Brownsville, Texas.
Phelps, Stephen Jay
1983 El Horcon: United States Territory South of the Rio Grande. M.A. Thesis, Pan American
University.
Pierce, Frank C.
1917A Brief History of the Lower Rio Grande Valley. The Collegiate Press, George Banta
Publishing Company, Menasha, Wisconsin.
Pope, Dorothy Lee
1971 Rainbow Era on the Rio Grande. Springman-King Company, Brownsville, Texas.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1974Preliminary Archeological Investigations in the Rio Grande Delta of Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 45:55-65.
Quigg, J. Michael
1989 An Archaeological Survey of Proposed Drainage Ditch Realignments, Hidalgo
County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Austin, Texas.
Ramirez, Emilia Schunior
1971 Ranch Life in Hidalgo County after 1850. New Santander Press, Edinburg, Texas.
Ramirez, Joe M.
1984 Los Rancheros: A Case Study of Hispanic Ranching Society of the South Texas Plain.
Manuscript prepared for University of Texas.
Ratkin, Gary Allen
1963 An Economic History of the Rio Grande Sugar cane Industry 1870-1922.B.A. Thesis,
Rice University.
Rice, P.M.
1980 Trace Element Characterization of Weeden Island Pottery: Implications for Specialized
Production. Southeastern Archaeological Conference Bulletin 2:29-35.
Robertson, Brian
1985 Rio Grande Heritage: A Pictorial History. The Donning Company Publishers, Norfolk,
Virginia.
1984 Wild Horse Desert: the Heritage of South Texas. New Santander Press, Edinburg,
Texas.
Rocha, Rodalfo
1974 Background to Banditry in the Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas 1900-1912. M.A.
Thesis, Pan American University, Edinburg, Texas.
Saldivar, Gabriel
1943 Los Indios de Tamaulipas. Publicion no. 70. Mexico City: Instutito Panamericano
de Geografia e Historia.
Salinas, Martin
1990 Indians of the Rio Grande Delta: Their Role in the History of Southern Texas and
Northeastern Mexico. University of Texas Press. Austin.
Samponaro, Frank N. and Paul J. Vanderwood
1992 War Scare on the Rio Grande: Robert Runyon's Photographs of the Border Conflict
1913-1917. Texas State Historical Association, Austin, Texas.
Sanchez, Mario L.
1993 The Cultural and Natural Resources of Los Caminos del Rio Heritage Corridor: An

Interdisciplinary Evaluation. National Park Service and the Texas Historical Commission,
Austin, Texas.
Santos, Richard G.
1983 Early Visions of the Lower Rio Grande . Munguia Printery, San Antonio, Texas.
Scott, Florence Johnson
1970 Historical Heritage of the Lower Rio Grande. Texian Press, Waco.
Scott, Oran Randolph
1934 History of Hidalgo County 1749-1852. M.A. Thesis, Texas Christian University.
Shearer, Ernest Charles
1939 Border Diplomatic Relations Between the United States and Mexico, 1848-1860.
Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Texas.
Shepard, A.O.
1947 Plumbate: A Mesomaerican Tradeware. Publication No. 573. Carnegie Institution of
Washington, Washington, D.C.
1965 Ceramics for the Archaeologist. Publication No. 609. Carnegie Institution of
Washington, Washington, D.C.
Smith. Franklin
1990 The Mexican War Journal of Captain Franklin Smith. University of Mississippi Press,
Jackson, Mississippi.
South, Stanly
1977 Method and Theory in Historical Archaeology. Academic Press, New York.
Stambaugh, J. Lee and Lilian J. Stambaugh
1954 The Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas. The Naylor Company, San Antonio, Texas.
South Texas Regional Development Council
1979 Regional Historic Sites Survey- 1979. Laredo, Texas.
Thompson, Jerry D.
1974 Sabers on the Rio Grande. Presidial Press, Austin, Texas.
Trinkley, Michael B.
1983 "Let Us Now Praise Famous Men" - If Only We Can Find Them. Southeastern
Archaeology 2(1):30-36
Turner, Ellen Sue and Thomas R. Hester
1985 A Field Guide to the Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service
1981 Soil Survey of Hidalgo County. By Jerry L. Jacobs, Soil Conservation Service in Cooperation
with Texas Agricultural Extension Service.
United States Department of Agriculture
1977 Soil Survey of Cameron Clounty, Texas. By DeWayne Williams, Charles M. Thompson and
Jerry L. Jacobs, Social Consevation Service with Cooperation of Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station.
United States Department of the Interior
1947 Plan of Development for the Valley Gravity Project, Lower Rio Grande, Texas: Report.
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
United States Department of State
1903 Proceedings of the International (Water) Boundary Commission United States and Mexico
Treaties of 1884 and 1889. Equitable Distribution of the Waters of the Rio Grande.Volume 2.
U.S.Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
1913 Proceedings of the International Boundary Commission United States and Mexico,
American Section. Joint Report of the Consulting Engineers on Field Operations of
1910-1911. Supplemental Report of the American Consulting Engineer. Government
Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Valley By-Liners
1975 Gift of the Rio: Story of Texas' Tropical Borderland. Border Kingdom Press, Mission,
Texas.
1978 Roots by the River: A Story of Texas Tropical Borderland. Border Kingdom Press,
Mission. Texas.
Vigness, David M.
1948 The Lower Rio Grande Valley 1836-1846. M.A. Thesis, University of Texas.
Walker, Jim

1999 Low Altitude Large Scale Reconnaissance. Paper delivered at the NonDestructive Mound and Earthwork Research Conference, Chillicothe, Ohio.

