TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY OF THE
DIAMOND NO.1 LIGNITE PROSPECT

Robertson County, Texas

Hank Moncure

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
THE UN1VERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TECHNICAL BULLETIN NO; 42

1980

CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY OF THE
DIAMOND NO. 1 LIGNITE PROSPECT
Robertson County, Texas

Hank Moncure

A report submitted to Dow Chemical, U.S.A. by the Texas Arche­
ological Survey in fulfillment of the terms of a consulting
services agreement dated June 6, 1980.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract . . . . . . . . .
Introduction . . . . • . .
Environmental Background
Introduction . . .
...
Topography . . . . . . . . . . . .
Geology. .
. . . . . . . . . ..
...
So; 1 s . . .
...
....
Climate. . .
••.
.•.......
Hy d r 01 0 gy . . . .
..............
Vegetation
. . . . . . . . . •.
....
Fauna.

. ..

............•.

1
1

2
2
3
3
3

4
4
5
5

Archeological and Historical Background •. . . . . • 8
The Paleoindian Period
......
. . . 9
Archaic Period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
Late Prehistoric Period . . . . . . . . . . . • • 10
Historic Period. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. 11
Field Investigations. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . 11
Survey Methodology . . .
. . . . . . . . . . 11
Historic Background. . • • . . • .
• 12
Site Definition. . .
. . . . .
.13
Site Documentation
. ..
. . . . . . 14
The Field Survey . . • .
. . . . . . . . 14
Results of the Survey . • . . . • . . . . . . . . . . 15
Prehistoric Resources.
. . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Historic Resources . . . . . • . . . .
. 15
Summary and Conclusions
. • .
. . . . 19
References Cited. . . . . . . • .
. . . . . . . . 20
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . .
...
. 23
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.

Project Area Map
Area Photographs
Historic Site Photographs . .

i

ii
.

• •

7

• • . • • 16

Fig. 1.

Project ARea Map
with site location

1 page right side no facing captions

NO. I PROJECT

DIAMOND
ROBERTSON

COUNTY t

TEXAS

1980

I

LIMESTONE

~=-__F_A-tI_L-.LS.__; ; N T Y___ ~l.J__ COUN~~ •• _
: 11)

V

··,L~·1··· j

('

,:

I

I

o
I

1
I

2
I

3
!

j

:

,

~...­

I

i ~ur"n."£T1

4

I

MILES

2

MILES

TO FRANKLIN,

PROJECT
AREA­

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY: JMM, 1980

__

SURVEY

---

PIPELINE

AREA

FIGURE

I

ABSTRACT
During the month of June 1980, the Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, accomplished a
program of cultural resource survey and assessment in an
area which would be modified by proposed lignite surface
mining in north-central Robertson County, Texas.
program was sponsored by Dow Chemical, U.S.A.

The

and Was

designed to locate, inventory and assess the cultural
resources within a 9l8-acre tract proposed for lignite
surface mining.
this area.

No prehistoric sites were recorded within

One historic site was found.

Nine isolated

finds of lithic material were recorded within the survey
area.

The lack of a permanent water supply within the

area and the proximity of permanent water just outside
it, together with extensive long-term land use disturbance,
appear to be major contributors to cultural resource
scarcity.

The historic site, a log structure which is

probably a smoke house, is intact; avoidance is warranted.

INTRODUCTION
Dow Chemical, U.S.A., an operating unit of Dow
Chemical Company, is eng~ged in the proposed development
of some of the lignite fuel resources of Robertson County,
Texas. One such area, the Diamond No.1 Prospect, is
located, in the main, between Red Bank and Barton Branch
Creeks south of FM 2293 and north of the points where these
two intermittent streams empty into Walnut Creek. A tract
of approximately 918 acres, within the proposed primary
mining zone, was given a full ground coverage archeological
survey. The intent was to provide a basis for cultural
resource assessment of any resources present having scien­
tific and historic significance and meriting further
attention. The survey was conducted under Dow Chemical,

U.S.A. sponsorship, by the Texas Archeological Survey,
The University of Texas at Austin. Staff members H. B.
Moncure, Nancy Wade and Chris de Bremaeker carried out
the intensive survey in June 1980. The results are
intended to serve the sponsoring agency in support of
an application to the Texas Railroad Commission for a
permit to mine lignite in this area. The objectives of
the study are to provide:
(1) the precise location and description of any
resource, area or feature, to be affected, either directly
or indirectly, by the proposed mining;
(2) an evaluation of the identified resources in
terms of their scientific and/or historic value;
(3) recommendations to the company to lessen any
predictable adverse effects on identified resources; and
(4) recommendations for any additional studies
related to the interpretation of resources beyond the
investigative scope of this study.
The research was specifically designed to adhere
to the criteria and guidelines established by the Advisory
Council on Historic Preservation (National Register of
Historic Places) for assessment of endangered cultural
resources.
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
INTRODUCTION
The Diamond No.1 Lignite Prospect is an irregular1y­
shaped area of 918 acres in north-central Robertson County
(Fig. 1). UTM coordinates approximating the center of
the prospect area are Zone 14, 727500E-344750N. The
Northern boundary parallels FM 2293 commencing three miles
southeast of Bremond, Texas, which is the nearest incor­
porated town.

2

TOPOGRAPHY
Robertson County is in Fenneman's (1938: 100-102)
West Gulf Coastal Plain physiographic province, one char­
acterized by gently rolling hills and ridges which rarely
exceed 500 feet MSL in elevation. The prospect is com­
pletely within the uplands flanked by the Brazos River on
the west and the Navasota River to the east. Elevational
relief spans a range of only sixty-eight feet from 360 to
428 MSL.
GEOLOGY
Robertson County is a part of the Gulf Coast Tertiary
province. The underlying rock is the Calvert Bluff member
of the Wilcox Group, an Eocene nonmarine sedimentary strata
(Sellards, Adkins and Plummer 1932: 592). The formation is
primarily mudstone with some sandstone, lignite, ironstone
concretions and large broken chunks of petrified wood.
Faulting reported within the general area occurs
along the western edge of the Mexia or Luling-Mexia Fault
zone. This is an extremely complex area of variously
oriented faults, primarily of the normal or gravity type,
in a band about four to eight miles wide. The fault band
trends generally north-northeasterly and includes the
prospect ara. This fault zone is in part responsible for
the numerous oil and gas fields in the general area.
SOILS
Virtually all of the soils within the prospect area
are Axtell-Tabor upland and terrace soils derived from the
Wilcox Group parent material. The Axtell is a deep, well
or moderately drained, very slowly permeable montmorillonitic
upland soil. It has grayish-brown, medium acid, fine sandy
loam surfaces and mottled yellowish-red, brown and olive
clay subsoils. These soils are on broad, nearly level to

3

gently sloping uplands. Slopes are generally 1 to 5 percent
rarely exceeding the latter. The soil was, within the
prospect area, in sequence, forested, then largely culti­
vated, then used as unimproved pasture. Remnants of the
forest cover approximately 15 percent of the area; another
10 percent is still under cultivation.
The Tabor soil is a moderately well-drained, very
slowly permeable, montmorillonitic, upland soil. It has
grayish-brown and very pale brown, fine sandy loam surfaces
and yellow-brown, extremely hard subsoils. The Tabor soil
is the lesser component of the Axtell-Tabor Group found
within the prospect (Baker 1979).
CLIMATE
The western edge of Carris (1967) East Texas climatic
region includes Robertson County. Maximum rainfall occurs
in May and December, the minimum in August. The average
rainfall is 35 to 38 inches in a pattern which frequently
results in a moisture regime deficit during the summer.
At the time of the survey such a drought was in progress.
The moisture surplus index cited by Thornthwaite (1948) is
o to 20 percent. This provides rainfall barely in excess
of water need on an annual basis. Fluctuations from this
norm occur with such frequency as to be considered themselves
a norm and help account for the land usage sequence stated
above. The generally mild climate shows a mean annual
temperature between 66 and 68 degrees F. (Carr 1967: 4-8,
10, 19).
HYDROLOGY
Robertson County's major aquifer is formed by the
Carrizo and Wilcox sands (Southwest Research Institute
1975). The aquifer discharges through seeps and springs
which, within the survey area, feed Barton Branch and

---------

4

--_._---

- - - - - - - - -....... - - - - - - - - - - - - - ­

Red Bank Creeks such that they are intermittent through
the year. Neither was effluent at the time of the survey.
These two streams, when effluent, flow generally south into
Walnut Creek. Walnut Creek, in turn. flows southwest into
the Brazos River and is a permanent flowing stream. This
last quality, permanence, and its proximity to the survey
area make it a more apt water source than the two creeks
within the survey area. At its closest point,Walnut
Creek is outside the prospect by just 3/16 of a mile.
VEGETATION
The prospect area is located in Gould's (1969: 11)
Texas Vegetational Region 3, the Post Oak Savannah. The
understory grasses include little blue-stem (Schizachyrium
scoparium) , Indiangrass, SWitchgrass, purp1etop, silver
bluestem (BothriochZoa saccharoides) , Texas wintergrass
and species of Chasmanthium. The overstory is, quite
aptly, post oak and blackjack oak. These two groups pre­
dominate, but a host of other brush and weedy species are
common. Some of these are red lovegrass, broomsedge blue­
stem, splitbeard bluestem, yankee weed, bullnettle, green
briar, yaupon, smutgrass and western ragweed. The land
use sequence within the prospect area, from forest to
cultivation to pasturage, has created opportunities for
the establishment of many species previously unable to
gain a foothold. Gould was able to identify 1473 plant
species within th~ Post Oak Savannah.
The agricultural era and the subsequent conversion
to pasturage served to introduce Bermuda grass, Dallasgrass,
Vaseygrass, carpet grass and clover. These species are
particularly noticeable in those areas where the prior
vegetation was stripped during stock tank construction.
FAUNA
Blair's (1950: 98, 100-102) Texan Biotic Province

5

is a transitional zone between the prairie-oriented Kansan
Province to its west and the Austroriparian Province to
its east. As such, its assortment of animal species is
a combination of some of those found in those two biotic
provinces. Blair reports at least forty-nine species of
mammals living in the Texan Province, forty-one of these
are also found in the Austroriparian Province. The remain­
ing eight species are shared with the Kansan Province.
Among major mammalian species present are armadillo,
opossum, ground squirrels, various rats, bats, mice,
squirrel, raccoon, jack rabbit, cottontail rabbit and
deer. The last five of these were observed during the
survey. The armadillo's expanding range includes the
prospect area. Larger carnivore species present, which
once included the jaguar, red wolf, ocelot, coyote, and
bobcat, are now limited to the latter two.
Reptilian and amphibian species in the Texan Pro­
vince, in general, follow the same pattern as the mammals,
in that their list is a combination of some of those found
in the neighboring Austroriparian and Kansan provinces;
more species are shared with the Austroriparian. Thirty­
nine snake species, at least five turtle species, sixteen
lizards, five urodeles and eighteen anurans are found in
the Texan Province. In the latter group the tree-frog,
Pseudacris streckeri, comes closest of the vertebrate
species to being one unique to the Texan Province. Stock
tank construction in the prospect area has increased the
space available for water oriented species.
The Texan Province bird population shows at least
113 species (Southwest Research Institute 1975: 35, 36
and Appendix D). The small size of the prospect area
makes a listing of such mobile species nearly always
inaccurate at any given time.

6

Figure 2.

a.

Plat 8, general view toward the south
looking at Walnut Creek.

b.

Area of Isolated Find 2.

c.

Area of Isolated Finds 3-6, Plat 9.

ARCHEOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
Nearly all professional archeological activity in
Robertson County has been compressed into the last half
dozen years. Prior to 1974, only one archeological site
had been formally reported. Intensive archeological
attention was focused on the area when rising oil costs
made the county's lignite deposits a viable fossil fuel
source. In 1974 survey of, the upper Navasota Reservoir
area (now Lake Limestone) conducted by the Texas Archeological
Survey located sixty sites, ten in Robertson County (Prewitt
1974b). Later that year the initial phase of the survey
of the proposed Twin Oaks and Oak Knoll projects added
sixteen more sites (Prewitt and Grombacher 1974). In
~979 two of these were tested and twenty-one sites recorded
in a survey of the associated Twin Oak Lignite Prospect
(Turpin and Kluge 1980).
A single site in Robertson County had been excavated
as a part of the Lake Limestone investigation along with
those in Leon and Limestone counties. The results are
reported in the collective studies of the reservoir area
(Prewitt 1975; Prewitt and Mallouf 1976; Mallouf 1979).
In 1978 two lignite prospects surveyed by the Texas
Archeological Survey resulted in the reporting of sixty­
four prehistoric and thirty-one historic sites (Good et
aZ 1980). Three of the prehistoric sites had been pre­
viously reported during the upper Navasota Reservoir survey
of 1974. It is noted that the above cited ninety-five
sites were recorded from random transects totaling 13.2
percent of the 80,000 acres comprising the lignite pros­
pects and provide an insight into possible site density.
At present, 127 archeological sites have been
reported for Robertson County. A four-stage cultural­
chronological framework has been established for central

8

Texas and provides
County sites. The
scheme summarizing
stage is presented

a context applicable to these Robertson
brief particulars of this cultural
the identifying attributes of each
in the following.

THE PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (Before 10,000 to 8,000 B.P.)
The Paleoindian Period includes the earliest well­
evidenced aboriginal occupation of Central Texas. In
Central Texas this stage is known principally from the
recovery of surface-exposed lanceolate projectile points
such as the Clovis~ Folsom~ PZainview~ Meserve~ Golandrina~
SaottsbZuff and Angostura types.
Evidence for an earlier
Itpre-projectile point" cultural era is seen by some inves­
tigators but reliable, well associated data is lacking as
yet. Outside the Central Texas area, the point types of
the Paleoindian are frequently associated with the remains
of large extinct Pleistocene animals; however, within the
area that relationship ;s currently not documented. Pro­
posals to the effect that these "big game hunter points
were in use in the Central Texas instance, by a people
practicing a more generalized hunting and gathering economy,
have been made. Sites which have been investigated yielding
time-diagnostic artifacts showing Paleoindian occupation
are: Levi Rockshelter on the Pedernales River (Alexander
1963); the Loeve Site on the San Gabriel River (Eddy 1973);
and Tombstone Bluff, also located on the San Gabriel River
(Prewitt 1974a).
lt

ARCHAIC PERIOD (8,000 to 1,250 B.P.)
The Archaic is a period marked by the development of a
hunting and gathering tradition which is linked to the need
to adapt to the long-term, widespread environmental changes
of the post-Pleistocene period. These changes were of
sufficient magnitude and duration to have equally great

9

effects on the plant and animal populations, and to force
human populations dependent on them to make compensating
adjustments. The effects were not everywhere uniform;
thus changes in culture represent responses to specific
environmental conditions within a given area.
In Central Texas this period has a chronology which
consists of six phases, Circleville (8,000 to 6,000 B.P.),
San Geronimo (6,000 to 4,000 B.P.), Round Rock (4,000 to
2,600 B.P.), San Marcos (2,600 to 1,750 B.P.), and Twin
Sisters (1,750 to 1,250 B.P.). This chronology was arrived
at by synthesis of recent data and that obtained and
reported earlier (Kelley 1947, 1959; Suhm, Krieger and
Jelks 1954; Prewitt 1974, 1976; Weir 1976a, 1976b). The
phases shown above correspond in rough fashion with the
terms Terminal Paleoindian and the Incipient, Early, Middle,
Late and Terminal Archaic used in an earlier chronology.
Major diagnostic Archaic period artifacts are barbed
and side-notched projectile points in numerous varieties,
the burned rock midden site type and the increased occur­
rence of non-portable food processing tools such as mano
and metate sets. The long time span of this period,
coupled with the local adaptation processes, produced a
tendency for wide variety in the artifact classes.
LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (1,250 to 150 B.P.)
Where the Archaic is characterized by adaptation
linked to environmental change, the Late Prehistoric
(Neo-American) is a period of innovative change. The
introduction of the bow and arrow is signaled by the
presence of the numerous small-sized projectile points
which are a major diagnostic tool of the period. The
development of agriculture occurs during this era. The
manufacture of ceramics also marks this period for
Central Texas.

10

The sensibly named Late Prehistoric Central Texas
Aspect is divided into the Austin and Toyah foci (Suhm,
Krieger and Jelks 1954). The older of these, the Austin
Focus (1,250 to 650 B.P.), is, according to Stephenson
(1970), a gradual progression from the late Archaic local
population. The Scallorn and Granbury arrow-sized projec­
tile point types are particularly useful for diagnostic
purposes. The Toyah Focus (650 to 150 B.P.) may be
recognized by Perdiz and Cliffton projectile points and
Leon Plain sandy paste pottery.
HISTORIC PERIOD (European contact to present)
This period quite obviously has a commencement date
variable with the specific land area. Private ownership
by a person of European descent does not come to the
prospect area until the 19th century; however, European
influence by contact within the Central Texas area may
have begun with Cabeza de Vaca some time during his 1528-36
adventures in Texas (Newcomb 1961: 135). At any rate.
contact with both the Spanish and the French took place
during the 16th century (Bolton 1914 and 1916). The
Tonkawa peoples are most closely linked to this area and
it is within the fringe of the areas occupied by the
Atakapan, Wichita and Caddo peoples at various times during
the Historic Period.
FIELD INVESTIGATIONS
SURVEY METHODOLOGY
Preliminary to the field survey an examination of
the records of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin, the central repository
for archeological site information, and those of the
Texas Historical Commission, showed no previous archeological

11

investigations of the proposed lignite prospect area, and
no recorded archeological sites. Review of the results
of surveys in similar environmental settings in the general
vicinity {Turpin and Kluge 1980; Good, Turpin and Freeman
1980; Mallouf 1979) indicated prehistoric sites, when
present, are characteristically small, found on sandy
ridges near active springs or other water sources, and
surficially indicated by either lithic debris or fire­
cracked rock. Most sites were disturbed by a combination
of factors -- historic modification (plowing, land clearing,
lumbering and construction) and natural processes (erosion,
and bioturbation of the sandy unconsolidated soils). These
factors helped shape the field survey methodology_
HISTORIC BACKGROUND
The tax rolls and census for Robertson County were
examined for the history of land ownership within the
prospect. The boundaries of the Diamond No.1 Prospect
generally conform to the dimensions of the entire James
McMillan headright grant and portions of the Henson Coulter
grant, both awarded in 1846.
The manuscript tax rolls of Robertson County (Texas
State Archives) show that McMillan was taxed on the 1476­
acre tract as early as 1840. By 1846, the date he offic­
ially patented the land, it was valued at 738 dollars or
fifty cents an acre and McMillan had nine horses and 130
cattle on the property. The Henson Coulter tract first
appears in the tax roll for 1847.
James McMillan was an early resident of the Robertson
Colony and was listed on the Roster of a Company of
"Rangers!! organized by the Empressario, Sterling Robertson,
in January 1836 (Baker 1971: 57). McMillan fought in the
Battle of San Jacinto and was awarded another land grant
in Brazos County and appears to have lived in that county

12

after 1846 (Mullins 1974), but was taxed as a resident
of Robertson County in 1847 and 1849. No structures or
remains that could be associated with McMillanls occupancy
were located in the course of the survey.
The small log structure which was encountered during
the survey was located on a portion of the Henson Coulter
Survey. The 320-acre tract containing this site was
purchased by Rachael Jewett from C. Payne in June 1870
(RobeX'tson County Deed Book R: 576).
It ap pea rs tha t
the earlier owners did not occupy this land but held it
for speculation. Because of this, Mrs. Jewett is the most
likely builder of the structure. Examination of standard
references fails to reveal any further information on
Rachael Jewett. She seems to have occupied the land and
operated a small farm until 1889 (Robertson County Deed
Book 24: 439).
SITE DEFINITION
Due to the sparse surficial evidence characteristic
of a site in this area, all locations were examined for
the history of land ownership presented in the Introduction;
all locations where such indications appeared were subject
to subsurface testing and an on-the-scene judgment as to
quantity and type of remains in a given area. Those cir­
cumstances in which shovel testing failed to reveal sub­
surface evidence and where the surficial evidence was
extremely sparse, unpatterned and consisted of non-diagnostic
or single poorly provinced artifacts were to be given iso­
lated find status. Sites, unless ruinously disturbed,
were to be considered for further testing, while isolated
finds \'Iere not.
Historic site definition depends singly or in com­
bination upon association with historically significant
persons, circumstances or events. the presence of unusual

13

architectural features, sheer age, rarity within the
area and present condition.
SITE DOCUMENTATION
Located sites were to be documented on standard
University of Texas site survey forms, which include
descriptions of exposed features, sizes, shapes, types,
frequencies, distribution and possible affiliations.
Provision is made for sketch mapping and photography.
Environmental settings are recorded to include physio­
graphy, soils, vegetation, hydrology, slope, erosional
and depositional factors and other factors which might
affect the site.
Sites receive an arbitrary number for field iden­
tification which is superceded by a designation within
the trinomial system used by the Texas Archaeological
Research Laboratory wherein the state, county and the
individual site within the county sequence are indicated.
Artifact collection is limited during the survey to
diagnostic or unusual types; the number is deliberately
held to those necessary to provide essential description
of the site. Any specimens collected, together with all
of the original documentation, are on file at the Texas
Archaeological Research Laboratory at Balcones Research
Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
THE FIELD SURVEY
The field survey was initiated on June 9, 1980 by
H. B. Moncure, Christine de Bremaeker and Nancy Wade.
Landowners were contacted for access rights to their
property and for information concerning any sites known
to them.
The prospect was most easily segmented by property
ownership lines delineated by existing fencing and

14

roadways. Each segment was examined using a predominance
of contiguous straight-line transects. Contoured transects
were used where required by land forms, water features and
constructions. Transects utilized a crew spacing of
twenty to thirty meters, depending on the terrain. In
thick woods this spacing was reduced. The entire project
area was intensively covered with emphasis given to cleared
areas, erosional features and promising site locations.
Shovel testing was accomplished in the vicinity of
all isolat~d finds and in areas which appeared to be
suitable site locales. Pits were governed in size and
depth by content and the soil strata encountered.
Field operations were completed on June 19, 1980
with coverage of the full prospect area and shovel testing
of appropriate locations.
RESULTS OF THE SURVEY
PREHISTORIC RESOURCES
No prehistoric sites were recorded during the field
survey. In no case did surface indications reveal an area
capable of supporting that designation. Where isolated
finds were made, no supporting evidence could be found
although intensive search was employed. Subsurface shovel
testing both in the vicinity of isolated finds and in areas
deemed possible site locations, produced no site evidence.
Only one tool, a Pedernales projectile point base fragment,
was found and it was relegated to isolated find status
when no other cultural material could be found during a
close search of its surroundings.
HISTORIC RESOURCES
A lone historic site was recorded during the field
survey (Fig. 3). 41RTl27 is a log structure on land owned

15

by Adam J. Schubrych. Its size, shape and lack of windows,
chimney and door type mediate heavily in favor of its
being a smoke house which has been somewhat altered. The
building is generally intact and is in use as a storage
shed. The original roof has been replaced which accounts
for the lack of the characteristic smoke house overhang at
the front. The site shows no unusual architectural features
and has no apparent relationship with any significant
historical figure. The log joining method, square notching,
(Fig. 3b), is the one common to the southeast and by no
means uncommon in Texas (Jordan 1978). Its principal merit
is based upon its probable age and its degree of preservation.
Site Description
41 RT 127
This site is a historic log structure approximately
six feet square. It is constructed of hand hewn logs and
square nails. The lack of a chimney, windows and the small
door size mediate against use as a dwelling and in favor of
use as a smoke house. The roof has been replaced. No
evidence of affiliated cultural material germane to its
past use was observed. Presently it is used as a storage
area. Its proximity to an occupied 1940 l s era dwelling
has obscured any other affiliation. The current owner,
Mr. Adam Schubrych, states it was on the property when he
moved there fifty-eight years ago.
The structure does not display any unusual archi­
tectural style or component and has no known link with an
important historic figure. Its merit lies in its possible
age and degree of preservation.
A report listing the structure on the Log Cabin
Registry at North Texas State University has been submitted.
Its location near the northern boundary of the prospect
should make avoidance during project completiGn relativel¥
easy and such ;s recommended. ,

17

Isolated Finds
Isolated finds are single items of cultural material
located where intensive search and shovel testing did not
produce corroborative evidence of site status. Nine such
finds were made during the field survey.
IFl - A single interior flake was found by a stock
tank in a pasture 37 meters southwest of Barton Branch Creek.
IF2 - Two small chert flakes, one with cortex and
potlidding, were found on the west bank of Red Bank Creek
(Fig. 2b). The two flakes were of dissimilar chert and
were located in an area of heavy erosion and close enough
to the creek to have been washed down it.
IF3 - A single small interior flake was located in a
gently sloping pasture east of Red Bank Creek (Fig. 2c).
IF4 - IF7 - The same description applied to IF3
applies in general. All are small unretouched interior
flakes. Their respective locations are nowhere closer than
forty to forty-five meters one from the other and there were
at least three separate chert varieties involved. The lack
of further site evidence surficially and through shovel
test, coupled with the obvious erosional and human initiated
disturbance of the area, precludes site status.
IF8 - A PedepnaZes type projectile point basal frag­
ment (collected) was found in a wooded area used by live­
stock as shelter and therefore highly disturbed on the
surface. The tan fine-grained chert suggests an Edwards
Plateau origin and the type the Archaic Period without
tight date span.
IF9 - A single unretouched interior flake was
located on the second terrace of Barton Branch Creek,
here little more than an irregular ditch.

18

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The prospect area is less than ideal for the pres­
ervation of archeological material and context. The heavy
sand content of the soil makes it highly susceptible to
rapid disruption by the clearing, plowing and construction
which has taken place in Robertson County during the cur­
rent century. The prospect area showed the effects of all
these. Most of the clearing and construction (stock tanks)
had taken place within the last twenty years according to
a former owner of a large portion of the prospect (John
Coleman Roberts, personal communication). A comparison
of the vintage 1960 topographic maps of the area and the
1980 aerial photo mosaic confirms the above in that the
forested portion is today only a small fraction of what
it was when last mapped. Head erosion of gullies is well
developed and accelerated erosion is evident where any
slope is present. Stock tank construction. which in most
cases is recent, has further overturned the surface and
helped to obscure any resources which may have been present.
A further set of factors may contribute to a site scarcity;
the small size of the prospect area, the absence of per­
ennial streams within it and the close proximity of such
streams just outside the area. In short, there are more
attractive site locations within easy reach of an aboriginal
population in the immediately adjacent area.

19

REFERENCES CITED
Alexander, Herbert L.
1980
The Levi Site: A Paleo-Indian Camp Site in Central
Texas. American Antiquity 28(4): 510-528.
Baker, Frank W.
1979
Soil Map of Robertson County. Unpublished map
and notes on file at the Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Baker, J.W.
1970

A History of Robertson County, Texas.

Press, Waco.
Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
of Science 2 (1): 93-117.

Texian

The Texas Journal

Bolton, Herbert E.
1914
The Founding of the Missions on the San Gabriel
River 1745-1749. Southwestern
storical Qua~te~ly
17: 323-378.
Carr, John T., Jr.
1967

The Climate and Physiography of Texas.

Water Develolll1ent Board, Report No. 53.
Eddy, Frank W.
1973
Salvage Archeology in the
District, Central Texas.
the National Park Service
Survey, The University of

Texas
Austin.

Laneport Reservoir
Report submitted to
by the Texas Archeological
Texas at Austin.

Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938

Physiography of Eastern United States.

McGraw­

Hi 11 Book Company, Inc., New York and London.

Giles, Bascom, Commissioner, General Land Office
1941

Abstract of All Original Texas Land Titles
Comprising Grants and Locations to August 31,
194.1.

8 volumes, General Land Office, Austin.

Good, Carolyn E., Solveig A. Turpin and Martha D. Freeman
A Cultural Resource Assessment of the Calvert
1980
and Cole Creek Lignite Prospects, Robertson
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey
Research Report No. 75, The University of Texas
at Austin.

20

Gould, Frank W.
1969

Texas

Plants~

A Checklist and Ecological Summary.

Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Jordan, Terry G.
1978

Texas Log Buildings.

Austin.

University of Texas Press,

Ke 11 ey, J. C.
1947
The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position
of the Clear Fork Focus. American Antiquity 13(2):
97-109.
1959

The Archaic Culture in Central, Southern and
West Texas. Paper presented at the 1955 Archaic
Conference, Indiana University, Bloomington.

Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961

The Indians of Texas.

Austin.

University of Texas Press.

Mallouf, Michael G.
1979
Archeological Investigations at Lake Limestone:
Fall and Winter 1977. Texas Archeological Survey,
Res earch Report No. 71.
The Un i ver,s; ty of Texa s
at Austin.
Mullins, Marion Day
1974

Republic of Texas: Poll Lists for 1846.

logical Publishing Co., Baltimore.

Geneo­

Prewitt, Elton R.
1974a Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox
Site, Williamson County, Texas. Texas Archeological
Survey, Research Report No. 49. The University of
Texas at Austin.
1974b

Upper Navasota Reservoir: An Archeological Assess­
ment. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report
No. 47.
The University of Texas at Austin.

1975

Upper Navasota Reservoir: Archeological Test
Excavations at the Barkley and Louie Sadler Sites.
Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report No. 53.
The University of Texas at Austin.

Prewitt, Elton R. and Kerry A. Grombacher
1974
An Archeological and Historical Assessment of the
Areas to be Affected by the Proposed Twin Oak and
Oak Knoll Projects, East Central Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey, Research Report No. 43.
The University of Texas at Austin.

21

Prewitt, Elton R. and Michael G. Mallouf
1976
Upper Navasota River, Texas: Excavations at Lake
Limestone, Spring 1976. Texas Archeological
Survey, Research Report No. 66. The University
of Texas at Austin.
Se 11 a r d s, E• H., W. S • Ad kin s and F. B. P1 umm e r
1932
The Geology of Texas. Vol. 1: Stratigraphy.
University of Texas Bulletin No. 3232, Austin.
Southwest Research Institute
1975
Environmental Impact Assessment Report: Twin
Oak and Oak Knoll Steam-Electric Power Generating
Facilities. Southwest Research Institute. San
Antonio.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1970
Archeological Investigations in the Whitney
Reservoir Area, Central Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 41: 37-286.
S u hm, Dee Ann, Ale x D. Kr i e 9era nd Ed war dB. J elk s
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
1954
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25.

Thornthwaite, C. W.
1948
An Approach Toward a Rational Cl~ssification of
Climate. Geographical Revie~ 38: 55-94.
Turpin, Solveig A. and Margaret J. Kluge
1980
Twin Oak Steam Electric Station, Robertson County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research
Report No. 74.
The University of Texas at Austin.
Weir, Frank A.
1976a The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation. Washington State University. Pullman.
1976b

The Central Texas Archaic Reconsidered.

In:

1. R. Hester (editor), Texas Archaic: A Symposium.
Center for Archaeological Research, Special
Report 2~ The University of Texas at San Antonio.

22

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The existence of this report is due to the
combined efforts of the Texas Archeological Survey staff.
The field effort was possible because of the assistance of
Nancy Wade and Chris de Bremaeker. The historic background
was provided by Jack Jackson. Jack Grieder produced the
photographic illustrations. Drafting support came from
Jana McCann. Editing~ composition and guidance were
provided by Solveig Turpin, Meg Kluge and Carolyn Ekland­
Olson. Meg also was that person who knew where-whatever­
it-was-that-was-required could be found.
Particular thanks are extended to the residents
of the town of Bremond, Texas and the residents of the
prospect area for their assistance and cooperation. The
interest and assistance of Mr. John Coleman Roberts and
Mr. M. C. O'Brien of Bremond is specifically acknowledged.
I would be remiss if I did not include a gentleman
who was a member of a Dow test drilling crew known to me
only as Bubba who loaned us the master key to the various
gates. Without him we might still be walking.

23

