LETTER REPORT
CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY OF THE RIVER HILLS SUBSTATION
Kerr County, Texas

I NTRODUCTI ON
At the request of the Lower Colorado River Authority. the Texas
Archeological Survey carried out a one-day assessment of the cultural
resources in a 3-acre tract in Kerr County, Texas. This tract lies
between old State Highway 16 and a newly straightened section of the
same highway south of Kerrville (Figure). The project area is along
the upper end of Dry Hollow. a tributary to the Guadalupe River.
The Lower Colorado River Authority is considering constructing a
substation on this plot. Due to its proximity to recent highway
construction, the Texas Highway Department, Division of Highway
Design was contacted to determine if the road right-of-way had been
surveyed prior to straightening of the route. No record of any previous
work was located there or in the files of the Texas Archeological Research
laboratory or the Texas Historical Commission. One site, 41RKI09,
a small, disturbed burned rock midden had been recorded south of the project
area by M.L. Beadles and the Hill Country Archeological Society.
THE SURVEY
On February 17. 1984, David O. Brown and Deborah L. Smith of the
Texas Archeological Survey conducted the survey of the proposed substation
construction. According to the Geological Atlas of Texas, San Antonio and
Llano sheets, the project area is underlain by undivided Glen Rose Formation
limestones while upslope is an outcrop of the Fort Terrett Member of the
Edwards limestone. Most of the actual area is, however, a shallow, alluvial
flat surrounding the intermittent stream. Vegetation included live oak,
mesquite, agarita and various grasses. A large area near the stream
channel was covered with tall grass.
RESULTS
A careful search of the project area showed no traces of any extension
of 41RKI09 across old Highway 16 nor any other signs of prehistoric or
historic activities in this small plot. Several shovel tests in the alluvial
sediments along the stream edge failed to reveal any trace of cultural material.
The construction of the River Hills substation will not affect any significant
cultural properties.

Reference:

Technical Bulletin 76

Solveig A. Turpin
Assistant Director
Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin

