- . ....
,

•t

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

SUMMARY REPORT ON AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF
AREAS TO BE AFFECTED BY THE CIBOLO CREEK
FLOODWAY PROJECT··..•
. ¥
Presidio County, Texas

Michael R. Beckes

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY

The University of Texas at Austin
Technical Bul/e.tin No. 7

1975

,

.
~---------

.,
SUMMARY REPORT ON AN ARCHEOLOGICAL
SURVEY OF AREAS TO BE AFFECTED BY THE
CIBOLO CREEK FLOODWAY PROJECT, PRESIDIO COUNTY. TEXAS
Michael R. Beckes
Staff Archeologist
On May 6th and 7th, 1975, as directed by this office, I
carried out an archeological survey of the proposed Cibolo Creek
Floodwav Project near Presidio, Texas. This Corps of Engineers
Project consists of two large flanking levees along Cibolo Creek,
between the U.S. 67 highway bridge and Presidio. Control of the
intermittent flash floods characteristic of this area is the major
aim of the project.
A short time was spent in orienting ourselves and in deter­
mining the exact location of the propose~ levees. Thi: was
facilitated by the excellent aerial co~posite map fu~nlshed by the
Albuquerque District, Corps of Engineers and by the preliminary
survey stakes delimiting the project area.
'
The west levee course was examined -&long its entire length
(4300 ft.). Vegetation in this area ii sparse and offered no
obstacle to a close examination of the ground surface. The sedi­
ments along the entire west levee consist of unconsolid~ted ~lood
deposits. No stabilezed remnant terra~e~ were obs~rved In thIS.
portion of the project area. No abor1g1nal mater1als of any k1nd
were observed.
The entire eastern levee course (7,000 ft.) was then examined.
Particular attention was paid to the northeastern margins of this
levee since aerial photographs and an earlier T.A.S. survey
(Holliday and Ivey, 1974) indicated that aboriginal materials
might have survived here. This proved to be overly optimistic
since severe flooding had scoured this area. The entire levee
course was characterized by obvious flood deposited sediments.
In the central portion of the project area these deposits had
nearly buried several 4 ft. high wire stock fences. A number of
old, partially washed out levees and check dams intersect the
proposed U.S.A.C.E. levee, and attest to past local efforts at
flood control.
Subsequent to our examination of both levee courses, a com­
plete walk-over of the actual floodway was carried out. This
central floodway area is characterized by mUltiple stream channels
and meanders, separated by low mounds of semi-stabilized alluvium.
Thes~ interchannel areas initially held out some hope of retaining
abor1~inal remains but proved upon examination to be very recent
depos1ts. Several cut banks where drainage channels bisected

t

Cibolo Creek Floodway

.

,'"

page "2

these deposits showed a clear profile of undifferentiated aliuvial
sediments, intermixed with recent historic debris. No prehistoric
remains of any type were observed in the flbodway.
Our examination of the project area of the proposed Cibolo
Creek Floodway indicated that no destruction of any significant
historic or prehistoric sites will occur through this construction.
The fact that both levees are "set inlt a considerable distance
from the most recent beachline established by Cibolo Creek
restricts the project modification to the area of most severe
flooding, degradation, and redeposition. The past efforts of
local people to construct check dams, small levees,~~nd dikes,
by bulldozing flood deposits from the central f100dway out towards
the drainage edges has contributed to the almost total modifi­
cation of the landforms within the project area. In light of
this data I recommend no further archeological surveyor salvage
for this specific project area.
~
,

,

Approved for submission to
Corps of Engineers
~lbuquerque District

David S. Dibble, Director
Texas Archeological Survey

Reference Cited:
1974

Holliday, Vance T. and James E. Ivey
Presidio-Ojinaga International Flood Control and
Channel Relocations Project Presidio County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report No. 48 .

.'

.

