..

TEXAS ARCHEOlOGIG.CIL fiESI:.ARCH LABORAIQRJA

'

•

_ - - - -,. fil-1"'i- 7~

{f7, VJ,.)-­

'Tete: !JI.rch. IJ\s.searcli Lab.

\ TeXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TEC~AL ,BULLETIN SERIES

Li6rarg

ARCHEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENTS OF THREE PROPOSED
DEVELOPMENTS IN THE SAM HOUSTON RC & D AREA:
Jack Brooks Park
Galveston County, Texas

Cypress Creek Park
Harris Countv, Texas

Colorado County Roadside Erosion Project
Colorado County, Texas

Duford W. Skelton

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
The University 01 Texas at Austin
Technical Bulletin No. 22

October, 1978

AR-TX
TARL 07.022
--".. ",--~,...l

t

r~

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

DO NOT R.':. ... "\fr;­
\1
FROM BUILDING

Ba/cones Research Center
10,100 Burnet Road

11 1...

:rEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL RESi.:.A,,'CH LABORP:,ORYi

Letter reports submitted to the
Soil

Conserva~ion

Service, USDA, Temple, Texas

by the Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
in fulfillment of the terms of Purchase Order No.

40-7442-3-973

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Ba/cones Research Center
iO.l00 Burnet Road

June 26, 1978

Mr. George C. Marks
State Conservationist
Soil Conservation Service
P.O. Box 648
Temple, Texas 76501
Re:

Purchase Order No. 40-7442-3-978: Archeological Survey of
Ten Roadside Erosion Control Sites, Colorado County, Texas
(Sam Houston RC&D Ar~a)*

Dear Mr. Marks:
This is to report the results of an on-site inspection of ten
roadside erosion control sites Ln Colorado County under terms
of the subject purchase order.
The on-site inspection of these ten sites, comprising a total
area of about 35 acres, was carried out on June 22 and 23, 1978,
by Duford Skelton, staff archeologist, Texas Archeological Survey.
Roadside Erosion Sites designated 3-1 through 3-7 and 2-1 through
2-3 were inspected during the course of this survey. Methods
used in this inspection were surface observations (including cut­
banks created by erosion or road construction) and randomized sub­
surface testing with a shovel and soil auger. Surface visibility
varied from site-to-site~ in cases of limited surface visibility,
subsurface testing was intensified.
Considerable variation in priot land modification and present
land use was noted. A copy of the original field notes detailing
these variations and other unique characteristics of the erosion
control sites is attached.

* A letter report submitted in
subject agreement.

part~al

fulfillment of the

Mr. George C. Marks

page 2

Prior to' the field inspection the Colorado County files retained
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin, were consulted with regard to previously docu­
mented historic or prehistoric sites existing on or near the pro­
posed erosion control areas. No known sites were found to conflict
with the areas under consideration here.
I

As a result of the described investigation it must be concluded
that no evidence of the existence of archeological sites or
features was obtained through the application of standard survey
methods. It must be assumed on this basis 'that the proposed
modifications will not affect definable cultural resources.
Sincerely,

~<6<~
Duford Skelton
Staff Archeologist

David S. Dibble
Director and
Principal Investigator
DSD:rog
Attachments
Copy to Mr. A.J. Dusek, UT Office of Sponsored Projects

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT OF THE
JACK BROOKS COUNTY PARK PROJECT
GALVESTON COUNTY, TEXAS

Introduction
This report documents the results of archeological investigations
of areas to be affected by the proposed la~d modifications associ­
ated with the development of Jack Brooks County Park, Galveston
County, Texas. Specifically, this study included coverage of 631
acres in areas previously known as Camp Wallace, a World War II
military base located four kilometers northwest of Hitchcock,
Texas. The field inspections were carried out on October 3 and 4
1978, by the Texas Archeo~ogical Survey, The University of Texas
at Austin under terms of Purchase Order provided by the Soil
Conservation Service. The on-site survey was Rerformed by Duford
W. Skelton under the supervision of Dr. David S. Dibble, director
of the Texas Archeological Survey. Field studies were guided by
detailed engineering plats, topographic maps, aerial photos, and
additional project related information provided by Mr. Johnson A.
(John) Campbell, District Conservationist, Soil Conservation Service
Angleton, Texas.
Principal objectives of the study were to obtain information per­
taining to the location, character , and potential significance of
definable archeological resources situated within the project
area. Further, the study intended to evaluate the extent to which
identified resources might be adversely impacted by project modifi­
cations.

Background Information
Prehistoric archeological resources previously known from this
area tend to be characterized by accumUlations of shellfish remains
referred to as "shell middens". In 1972 three shell middens
(41 GV 50, 51 1 and 52) were recorded just east of the study area
within the Highland Bayou drainage system.* These sites generally

*Aten,

Lawrence E.
1972 An Assessment of the Archeological Resources to be
Affected by the Highland Bayou Flood Control Project,
Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Research
. ReDor t No.8.

contained various amounts of clam shells (Rangia cuneata) and/or
oyster shells (Crassostrea virginica). Very few artifacts were
reported from these sites which are recognized mainly by the
occurrance of shell remains eroding from cut banks along stream
channels. Because of the proximity of these sites to the study
area it seems reasonable to expect that similar sites might be
encountered during these investigations.

Survey Procedures

Prior to the field investigations a literature search was conducted
to determine if any archeological sites had been previously docu­
mented within the area affected by the Jack Brooks County Park
Project. This study included a review of relevant maps, records,
and other materials housed at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin. The Historical
Commission was also contacted in an attempt to locate sites of
significant historic value, particularly those 1ncluded on, or
under consideration for nomination to, the National Register of
Historic Places. This study concluded that no archeological sites
were known to exist within the project area.
On-site field inspections were conducted through visual observa­
taions of the surface and minor subsurface shovel probes. The
study area, which extends along a 1.7 kilometer stretch of
Highland Bayou and is characterized by extremely dense vegetation
cover, was surveyed using transects running east-west and spaced
at 50 meter intervals.
The area of concern is also located in an active oil field with
wells and storage facilities scattered throughout. In addition,
spoil heaps were noted all along the Highland Bayou indicating
that the channel had undergone recent modifications. Special
emphasis was given to these areas which displayed greater visibility
due to surface modifications. In addition to surface inspections
subsurface shovel probes were often used to aid in visual obser­
vations. These limited subsurface probes were especially useful
in viewing surface and subsurface sediments in areas away from
the bayou where extremely dense vegetation often procluded
effective surface inspections.

Survey Results

Investigations of the surface and subsurface exposures resulted

in the discovery of one possible prehistoric site. This locality
is situated on the south bank of Highland Bayou, approximately
250 meters due west of the main entrance to the project area. The
site is characterized by a thin surface scatter of oyster shells
which is eroded and exposed along a small rill which cuts through
the site and drains into Highland Bayou. Subsurface shovel probes
indicate that the shell lens is at least 50 cm. thick and extends
over an estimated area of approximately 250 square meters. No
artifacts or other cultural residues were xecognized in association
with the oyster shell accumulation. Because of the lack of sup­
porting evidence reasonable doubt remains as to whether this site
represents a prehistoric encampment or resulted from modern shell
dumpings--perhaps associated with the construction or maintenance
of Camp Wallace. It must be noted that oyster shell heaps were
encountered throughout th~ survey usually in areas which were
demonstrably associated with modern road construction and main­
tenance activities. Generally these modern shell heaps exhibited
little or no depth and often displayed a wide variety of marine
shell species, characteristics not encountered at the locality
under consideration here.
On-site inspections also revealed the structural remnants of a
building foundation located on the south side of Highland Bayou
just east of the main entrance to the project site. The foundation
is constructed of cement with steel reinforcement. It is believed
to be remains of a large building associated with Camp Wallace and
is not considered to be of significant historic feature.

Conclusions and Recommendations

An intensive archeological survey of the proposed Jack Brooks
County Park Project resulted in the location of one possible
aboriginal shell midden. Due to the buried nature of the site
and the absence of any recognizable cultural residues other than
oyster shell its potential archeological significance could not
be adequately assessed by the present survey. Therefore, it is
recommended that some additional testing of this possible pre­
historic site be conducted in order to ascertain its origin and

and evaluate its scientific value. Such a testing program could
be carried out in a single day by a competent professional archeo­
logist.
It is further recommended that the Texas Historical Commission be
notified immediately if any evidence of cultural materials are
encountered during project construction.

Estimated Cost for Recommended Testing

It is estimated that a brief subsurface test of the possible
aboriginal shell midden could be carried out for approximately
$175.00. This figure would include direct (salary for field
archeologist, travel/per diem and miscellaneous expenses) and
indirect (institutional overhead) costs and would include a letter
report to the Soil Conservation Service. This estimate is based
on current rates applicable to the Texas Archeological Survey.

_I

r
AN ARCHEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT OF THE
CYPRESS CREEK PARK PROJECT
HARRIS COUNTY I TEXAS

Introduction
This report documents the results of archeological investigations
of areas to be affected by the proposed construction of the
Cypress Creek Park Project, Harris County, Texas. The investi­
gations included an on-site survey of 155 acres of the proposed
park located within the floodplain of Spring Creek, three kilo­
meters upstream from its confluence with Lake Houston northwest
of Humble, Texas. The field inspections were carried out on
October 4, 1978, by the Texas Archeological Survey, The University
of Texas at Austin, under terms of-an agreement with the Soil
Conservation Service. The investigations were performed by Duford
W. Skelton under the supervision of Dr. David S. Dibble, director
of the Texas Archeological Survey_ The study was guided by detailed
engineering plats, topographic maps, and aerial photos provided
by Mr. David L. Myers, District Conservationist, Soil Conservation
Service, Houston, Texas.
The investigations were designed to obtain information concerning
the location, character, and potential significance of definable
archeological resources situated within the project area. Further,
the study intended to evaluate the extent to which identified
resources might be adversely impacted by project modifications.

Survey Procedures
Prior to field investigations an extensive literature search was
completed to determine if any archeological resources had been
previously documented within the study area. This work included
a review of relevant maps, notes, and other records on file at
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin. As a result of this research it was determined
that no prehistoric or historic sites have been previously recorded
within the study area.

.....
,_vL0G1CAL R£SEA.;CH LABORt:.ORr

t=

The area of concern lies within the modern flood plain on the
south side of Spring Creek, approximately one kilometer down stream
from the Cypress and Spring Creek confluence and ·three kilometers
up stream from Lake Houston. It includes a one kilometer stretch
of Spring Creek and extends south across the. flood plain to about
the 75 ft. msl elevation. The area is presently covered with
Loblolly pine trees and dense understory growth. In low lying
areas, presumably relic channels of Spring Creek, cypress trees
and tall, lush grasses are present.
Soils within the area are composed mainly of sands and sandy loams.
Recent scouring is evidenced all along the stream margins with
thick alluvial deposits of sand characteris.tic of the bordering
flood plain.
Just south of the project area a housing development has resulted
in the removal of the natural vegetation. A large drainage ditch,
about five meters wide and three meters deEp, has been excavated
from the housing project through the study area to Spring Creek.
An area some 20 meters across was cleared for the drainage canal
which represents the only major modification observed in the
projec·t area.
The on-site survey was conducted through visual inspections of the
surface and limited subsurface tests. Systematic coverage of the
study area was attained by using transects which were oriented on
an east-west axis and spaced at 50 meter intervals.
In addition,
several shovel probes were used to aid in visual observations,
especially in areas of dense vegetation where surface visibility
was extremely poor or subsurface sediments could not be viewed.

Survey Results

Surface inspections and subsurface probes failed to produce any
recognizable evidence of cultural materials. A few scattered oyster
shells and clam shells were noted but these were confined to road
areas where they had apparently been brought in as road maintenance
and construction materials.

Conclusions and Recommendations

An

intensive archeological investigation of areas affected by
the proposed modifications associated with the Cypress Creek
Park Project yielded negative results in that no prehistoric or
historic cultural resources were observed. On this basis it is
concluded that the construction of the project will have no
adverse effects on any archeological resources identifiable by the
standard survey techniques. However, it is recommended that the
Texas Historical Commission be notified immediately should any
evidence of cultural materials be encountered during project
construction.

