ARCHEOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL INVESTIGATIONS AT THE GEORGE
R. BROWN CONVENTION CENTER HOTEL (41HR505, 41HR863, AND
41HR864), HOUSTON, TEXAS
Texas Antiquities Permit No. 2541

By
Kelly Schexnayder
Project Archeologist
and
Roger G. Moore
Principal Investigator

Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc.
Report of Investigations No. 367
November 2003

ABSTRACT
In March through July 2001, Moore Archeological Consulting (MAC) conducted
subsurface survey and data recovery excavations for the final construction stage of the
George R. Brown Convention Center Hotel (GRBCCH). These investigations were
performed under the terms of a contract between MAC and the client, the Houston
Convention Center Hotel Corporation (HCCHC). The project was conducted under
Texas Antiquities Permit No. 2541 in order to satisfy stipulations of the Antiquities Code
of Texas.
The Project Area consists of three blocks within the Houston Central Business
District designated on the city plat as Blocks 278, 279, and 288, all of which are located
south of Buffalo Bayou.
The results of the subsurface survey and limited testing investigations located
eighteen archeological features within the GRBCCH tract. All of these features were in
the class of architectural brick constructions. Notably absent were pre-1870 privy shafts
and trash pit deposits that must have originally been present within the Project Area.
A total of 708 artifacts were recovered from features which contained a mixed
temporal component, with a concentration of late 19th century to early 20th century
artifacts, thereby eliminating the possibility of historical context. With the exception of a
few artifacts, the collection of materials will not be curated as noted in consultation with
Texas Historical Commission (THC). The few diagnostic artifacts that are to be curated
consist of three rounds of Civil War munitions and one 1855 coin which will be housed at
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) at University of Texas, Austin. As
for the remainder of the assemblage the client has requested to procure it for exhibit
purposes at the hotel. This request was approved by the THC in February, 2003.
While many of the brick shaft features identified were probably constructed prior
to 1870, none of the features contained artifact deposits pre-dating this archeological
significance cut-off date. No features, therefore, from the GRBCCH tract were
recommended for additional manual testing or data recovery excavation. Further cultural
resource field investigations are likewise not recommended for the George R. Brown
Convention Center Hotel project.

i

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author wishes to thank those who assisted her in the writing of this report. Thanks to
Roger G. Moore whose input, advice, and eternal patience I will always be grateful for.
Much heartfelt thanks goes out to Kelly Lackey who helped me immensely in creating
the figures used in this report, always doing it with a smile. Appreciation also goes out to
Joseph M. Sanchez, the Project Archeologist, for his sharp eye and wise feedback.
Lastly, thanks to the field technicians Lisa Rodriguez, Eleanor Dahlin, Mark Carper,
Raven Garvey, and Douglas Mangum.

ii

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT.....................................................................................................................i
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS .......................................................................................... ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS ............................................................................................. iii
LIST OF FIGURES .......................................................................................................iv
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................vii
CHAPTER

I.

PROJECT AREA CONTEXT ............................................................................1
Physical Settings ................................................................................................1
General Historical Context .................................................................................1
Site Ownership on Block 278, 279, and 288 .....................................................3
Twentieth Century Land Use .............................................................................7

II.

URBAN ARCHEOLOGY IN SOUTHEAST TEXAS.......................................8
Urban Site Formation in Houston, Texas ..........................................................8
Site 41HR505 .....................................................................................................9
Related Nineteenth-Century Urban Sites in Texas ..........................................10

III.

ARCHEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT AND FIELD INVESTIGATION .......13
Preliminary Assessment ...................................................................................13
Field Methods ..................................................................................................14

IV.

ARCHEOLOGICAL FINDINGS .....................................................................18
Field Results of the Subsurface Survey and Testing .......................................18
Artifact Assemblage .........................................................................................35

V.

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ...................................................44
Summary ..........................................................................................................44
Recommendations ............................................................................................44

REFERENCES CITED ................................................................................................45

APPENDIX I. Artifact Inventory .................................................................................48
APPENDIX II. Embossed Bottles ...............................................................................50

iii

LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE

1.

Convention Center Hotel Project Settegast Topographic Quadrangle
showing Project Area ................................................................................v

2.

City block layout at time of 2001 survey .................................................vi

3.

Original city block layout showing lot divisions ......................................2

4.

First occupation map modified from 1869 Wood map .............................5

5.

Original city block grid showing rail roads in relation to Project Area . ..6

6.

Location of munition cache from 1983 superimposed over
2000 survey.............................................................................................10

7.

Scraping beneath urban fill on Block 278...............................................19

8.

Feature location on Block 278, 41HR508...............................................20

9.

Block 278, Feature 2, showing cistern profile after removal of southern
half ..........................................................................................................22

10.

Planview of Features 3 (cistern) and 6 (brick pavement), Block 278.....24

11.

Block 278, profile of Trench 2 and Feature 8 (brick shaft) ....................27

12.

Feature location on Block 279, 41HR863...............................................30

13.

Feature location on Block 288, 41HR864...............................................32

14.

One of two cannon balls recovered from Feature 2, Block 278..............42

15.

French Five Centime copper coin minted in 1855 bearing the image of
Emperor Napoleon III .............................................................................43

16.

Civil War 55-cal lead minie, isolated find from Block 278....................43

iv

Figure 1. Convention Center Hotel Project Settegast Topographic Quadrangle showing
Project Area.

v

Figure 2. City block layout at time of 2001 survey.

vi

Introduction
In March through July 2001, Moore Archeological Consulting (MAC) conducted
subsurface survey and data recovery excavations for the final construction stage of the
George R. Brown Convention Center Hotel (GRBCCH). These investigations were
performed under the terms of a contract between MAC and the Houston Convention
Center Hotel Corporation (HCCHC). The project was conducted under Texas Antiquities
Permit No. 2541 in order to satisfy stipulations of the Antiquities Code of Texas. In July
2001, MAC sent an Interim Report explaining the findings and recommendations, which
were approved by the Texas Historical Commission (THC). It was concurred that no
historic properties would be affected by the construction of the hotel and that the project
may proceed. The following is a formal Antiquities Report.
The Project Area consists of three blocks within the Houston Central Business
District designated on the city plat as Blocks 278, 279, and 288, all of which are located
south of Buffalo Bayou (Figure 1). Prior to the investigation, all of these blocks were
level and were comprised of a combination of gravel and asphalt parking areas, concrete
slabs, and five modern structures. The GRBCCH now occupies Blocks 278 and 279 and
an associated parking garage is situated on Block 288.
Certain preliminary studies were undertaken by MAC and other consulting firms
in preparation for the archeological investigations. Previous documentary research and
archeological assessment investigation (Wagner and Moore 2000) provided dates of
initial occupation within the footprint of the proposed Project Area and identified historic
occupants of the blocks.

These occupants were potentially associated with the

archeological features which were targeted for exposure by the subsurface survey and
testing investigations reported herein. MAC engaged the firm UXB International, Inc. of
Ashburn, Virginia to provide certified, on-site, unexploded ordnance technicians to
ensure the proper dismantling of the munitions. In addition, core log data (Appendix I)
provided by Law Engineering and Environmental Services, Inc. was used to identify
subsurface disturbance.
The primary field objective was to identify and excavate nineteenth-century
archeological features; of particular interest was Block 278 which was diagnosed as
having the highest probability for finding historically significant material. Mechanical

vii

stripping of the three blocks revealed a total of eighteen (18) archeological features on the
nineteenth-century occupational surface, most of which were subject to controlled
archeological excavation. Two new sites were recorded: 41HR863 (Block 279) and
41HR864 (Block 288).

A previously recorded site on Block 278, 41HR508, was

revisited and any new findings were recorded under the same trinomial. Recovered
materials were processed and identified in compliance with the standards set forth in
“Curation of Federally Owned and Managed Archeological Collections” (36 CFR Part
79) (Council of Texas Archeologists 1995) and the guidelines provided by TARL. The
artifact assemblage is from or related to features which contained a mixed temporal
component with a concentration of late 19th century to early 20th century artifacts,
thereby eliminating the possibility of historical context. Based on this, only artifacts of
diagnostic quality will be discussed in this report. With the exception of a few artifacts,
the collection of materials will not be curated as noted in consultation with THC.
This report is divided into the following five chapters: 1) Project Area Context, 2)
Urban Archeology in Southeast Texas, 3) Archeological Assessment and Field
Investigation, 4) Archeological Findings, and 5) Summary and Recommendations. The
first two chapters involve the archeological research and historical background of the
Project Area while Chapters Three and Four explain the field methods and results. These
results include a description of the artifact assemblage. Lastly, Chapter Five summarizes
the archeological investigation and gives recommendations regarding further
archeological work.

viii

I.

PROJECT AREA CONTEXT

Physical Setting

The Project Area consists of three blocks within the Houston Central
Business District designated on the city plat as Blocks 278, 279, and 288 (Figure
2). Block 278 is bounded by Crawford, Dallas, Jackson, and Polk streets. Block
279 is a partial block as the eastern half of the block was taken by construction of
Avenue of the Americas. The remaining portion of this block is bounded by
Jackson, Dallas, and Polk streets. The third block, Block 288, is bordered by
Polk, Chenevert, Clay, and Jackson streets. Prior to investigation these blocks
were level and consisted of a combination of gravel and asphalt parking areas,
concrete slabs, and five modern structures. At present the Convention Center
Hotel occupies Blocks 278 and 279 while an associated parking garage is located
on Block 288.

General Historical Context

Named after Sam Houston, the townsite of Houston was staked in 1836 by
its founders, Augustus C. and John K. Allen. A factor in choosing this site was its
location at the head of the tide of Buffalo Bayou, which provided a point where
goods could be transferred from one form of transport to another, i.e. from
steamboat to ox-wagon. The site was platted by surveyors in a gridiron fashion
with streets running parallel and perpendicular to the bayou. This was not
necessarily done for the sake of beauty or order but for the efficient ease it
provided commercial purposes. Houston was pushed as the perfect place for the
government seat, promoted as “healthy, beautiful, plentiful in food and natural
resources, and in an advantageous location for Texas and for the communication
with the United States” (McComb 1981:14). The promoters won their rally and
Houston became the seat of the Republic of Texas on November 30, 1836. The
first arrivals came in early 1837, many of them aboard the Laura which is

1

believed to be the first steamer to successfully penetrate the bayou above
Harrisburg and reach the Houston townsite. It did not take long, however, for the
reality of the environmental conditions to prove too miserable for most and the
government seat moved to Austin in 1840.
After the relocation of the government seat, Houston focused on itself as a
trade place with a slightly less emphasis on manufacture (McComb 1981: 14-17).
The demands of trade along with the presence of local manufacturing inspired the
formation of a transportation network consisting of roads, a ship channel, and
railroads, all of which reached maturity between 1875-1930. It was the
development of the latter two during this time which proved to be major elements
of the transportation network. Three other elements of transportation- roadways,
air transport, and pipelines- evolved but did not reach full effectiveness until after
1930 (McComb 1981: 65-70).

Figure 3. Original city block layout showing lot divisions (adapted from Wagner
and Moore 2000:Figure 3).

2

As the original town tract was being developed at the south bank of
Buffalo Bayou, land speculators were already preparing for its expansion. With
the expectation that the Houston townsite would eventually extend into the
southern prairie, James S. Holman applied for a 1/3 league of land south and
adjacent to the original Houston tract. Surveyed and platted in 1839, the northern
and the southern sections of the Holman 1/3 League Survey were treated
differently.
The southern section was intended for small residential farms and was
therefore divided into 10 acre “outlots”.
Each of the blocks in the northern section of the Holman 1/3 League
Survey was divided into 12 lots (Figure 3). A standard pattern was used whereby
each block was split into three long sections running north to south with each
section divided into rectangular lots. The sections to the east and to the west were
each divided into five same-size lots. The center section was divided into two
longer lots, thereby creating a total of 12 lots (Wagner and Moore 2000:9).
It is within the original Holman 1/3 League Survey that the GRBCCH
Project Area was located, involving Blocks 278, 279, and 288. The objective of
documentary research for this archeological survey was to confirm or deny the
potential presence of significant archeological deposits within the three-block
project area. The documentary investigation performed by J. K. Wagner & Co.
(Wagner and Moore 2000) identified locations where early occupations were
present and at which location significant archeological remains may have been
preserved. The following is a brief description of early ownership and occupation
for each of the blocks within the study.

Site Ownership on Block 278, 279, and 288

Block 278 (41HR508)
Block 278 is bounded by Dallas Street to the north, Jackson Street to the
east, Polk Street to the south, and Crawford Street to the west. The earliest known

3

occupation on the block was Andrew Crawford in 1858 (Figure 4). Of particular
interest on this block is the ownership of the lots by Cornelius Ennis who, from
1860-1866, owned Lots 4, 6, 7, 8 (partial), 11, and 12 (See Figure 3). It was on
Lot 12 where the munitions were found in 1983, resulting in the recording of Site
HR41505 (details of the site will be discussed in Chapter II).
Ennis came to Houston from New Jersey in the late 1830s and became a
merchant in partnership with George W. Kimball, whose sister, Jeanette, he
married in 1841. They built a house on the corner of Congress and Chenevert and
had six children, four surviving infancy. Ennis entered politics as an alderman of
the Third Ward and became mayor of Houston in 1856. He was also a
stockholder in the railroads and a well-known blockade runner during the Civil
War. In March 1866 Ennis sold his vacant lots, afterwards which numerous
buildings were later constructed on the block and all of which were subsequently
demolished. Lot 12 was not constructed upon until 1983, when the munition
deposit was discovered (Wagner and Moore 2000:19-22).

Block 279 (41HR863)
Block 279, prior to construction of Avenue of the Americas in the 1980s,
was originally bounded by Dallas Street to the north, Jackson Street to the west,
Chenevert to the east, and Polk Street to the south (see Figure 4). The
construction of Avenue of the Americas and the George R. Brown Convention
Center cut the block in half and it no longer touches Chenevert. The block was
originally owned by James S. Holman who then sold it in 1843; thereafter the
block was sold in separate lots. The first known occupant was J. C. Baldwin in
1861. The block burned to the ground between December 10, 1872 and the
spring of 1873. By 1880 some homestead improvements and building had been
made on some of the lots while others remained vacant until the early 1900s
(Wagner and Moore 2000:23-26).

4

Figure 4. First occupation map modified from 1869 Wood map (Adapted from
Wagner and Moore 2000:Figure 4).

Block 288 (41HR864)
Block 288 is bounded by Polk Street to the north, Jackson Street to the
west, Clay Street to the south, and Chenevert Street to the east (see Figure 4).
The known occupants of Block 288 were Jacob and Samuel Geiselman, who
purchased the block in 1858. They were in the tanning, leather and hide business
and formed a company, Geiselman & Brother. The brothers constructed two
residence houses on the western portion of Block 288, residing there until after
the Civil War. In 1869 Jacob Geiselman began to sell off lots (Wagner and Moore
2000:26-30).

5

All three blocks are located a few blocks south of GH&H Railroad (185960), which ran to Harrisburg and Galveston, and east of the Houston Tap &
Brazoria Railroad (1856), which ran from Buffalo Bayou (Figure 5). The
proximity of the neighborhood to the railroads likely improved commercial
development and transport in the neighborhood. It is speculated that Cornelius
Ennis, the owner of lots on Block 278, may have used the GH&H Railroad in
assisting his blockade running activities, possibly explaining the munition deposit
found on the lot owned by him during the Civil War.

Figure 5. Original city block layout showing rail roads in relation to Project Area
(Adapted from Wagner and Moore 2000:Figure 2).

6

Twentieth Century Land Use

At the time of the Subsurface Survey and Testing in 2001, very few
structures stood on Blocks 278, 279, and 288. On Block 278 were two structures
consisting of a drive-in car wash and a possible gas tank at the center of the block;
the rest of the block was a parking lot paved with mixture of concrete and asphalt.
Block 279 was inhabited by only the Redwood Chemical Company on the
southwest corner with the remainder of the block paved with asphalt. On Block
288 were two modern structures, on the southeast and southwest corners
respectively, with the rest of the block consisting of open gravel parking areas
with a strip of paved asphalt running east to west across the center of the block.

7

II. URBAN ARCHEOLOGY IN SOUTHEAST TEXAS

Urban Site Formation in Houston, Texas
Excerpt from paper presented by Roger G. Moore at Texas Archeological Society
Meeting, 2000, Galveston

Extensive exposure to urban site formation and alteration processes have
suggested that a handful of dominant stratigraphic contexts can be defined which
combine to represent most of what you can expect to see when you get below the
surface in a central business district. The following are the various types of
stratigraphic contexts:

Accretional contexts - artificial deposition of successive, often relatively thin fills
resulting in classic layer-cake stratifications of preserved, successive occupational
surfaces. This is very useful when punctuated by documented events such as fires
or demolitions that can be directly related to specific stratifications.

Sealed contexts - the occupational or primary depositional surfaces wholly or
partly intact and sealed by subsequent construction.

Truncated contexts - the occupational surface and often some of subsoil missing;
this is the most common archeological context to be encountered on urban
investigations.

“Blown away” contexts – an absence of in situ deposits due to some combination
of truncation into sterile subsoil and homogenizing mixing of pre-existing
deposits and imported fills, both often containing artifacts. These deposits are
archeologically important mostly in the ability to recognize such contexts and not
expend unnecessary time.

8

Non-archeological contexts - which are essentially “made lands” to a depth far
exceeding practical or justifiable archeological investigations such as artificially
filled stream channel deposits. May contain artifacts from elsewhere and
archeologically important mostly in the ability to recognize such contexts from
both documentary and field data and not waste further time on them.

Site 41HR505
Located on block 278, Lot 12, the excavation of site 41HR505 was
conducted by Houston Archeological Society (HAS) in 1983 (Figure 6). Prior to
the involvement of HAS, a total of 92 pieces of Confederate ordnance were
discovered by construction workers and removed by the HPD Bomb Squad.
When HAS began the excavation, all munitions had been recovered and removed.
Consequently no photos or diagrams of the munitions in situ are known to exist
and their exact provenience is unknown. Most of the ordnance were iron cannon
balls ranging in size from 4 to 6 pounds, although some were much larger.
Almost all of the cannon balls were explosive shot and some were designed for
wooden fuses while others were designed with metal fuses. The shells, of English
and Confederate make, were recovered sitting upright with their fuses in place.
The English shells were identified as 3.5 inch high explosive Briton Shells; the
Confederate shells all had iron bodies with either copper or brass sabots. The
cache presently resides at the Houston Police Academy Museum.
HAS excavated several units in the vicinity in search of possible remains
associated with the cache. No further munitions were uncovered during the
excavation or during subsequent building and utilities construction. The ensuing
report listed all units to have gone down to 40 inches below surface with levels
below the pavement consisting of mixed urban fill, bricks, wood, bone, ferrous
and non-ferrous metal. All levels were terminated before reaching sterile soil.
None of the artifacts were reported to be diagnostic (Wagner and Moore 2000:
12-14).

9

Figure 6. Location of munition deposit from 1983 superimposed over 2000 survey
(Adapted from Wagner and Moore 2000:Figure 12).
Related Nineteenth-Century Urban Sites in Texas

Other important cultural resource investigations pertaining to nineteenthcentury urban sites have been conducted throughout Texas. A few of the more
significant ones will be discussed here for comparative purposes, beginning with
the most recent.

The latest significant urban study in the area was the Ball Park at Union
Station, Houston (41HR812, 41HR815, 41HR816, and 41HR818-823), conducted
during 1997-1998 by MAC. The project took place in downtown Houston and
uncovered remnants of one of Houston’s earliest residential neighborhoods dating
from the middle 19th century. Funded by the Houston Sports Authority (HSA),
the investigations covered 17 city blocks and resulted in the identification of more
than 200 features. Of these features, 103 were excavated resulting in 80 being
identified as pre-1870. Brick cisterns, wells, and house foundations were
examined as well as wood-lined privies and scattered refuse deposits. Nearly

10

30, 000 artifacts were recovered which reflect the middle class status of the
residents. These artifacts are to be housed at TARL by 2004 (Carlson 2002).

Another major nineteenth-century excavation in Texas is the townsite of
old Velasco (41BO125) at the original mouth of the Brazos River in Brazoria
County. Performed by Prewitt and Associates, the fieldwork took place in
August-October 1992 and January 1993. The project was initiated when features
of the townsite were exposed by erosion of the channel after dredging.
Archeological testing involved trenching and stripping which revealed 476
features consisting of postholes, building foundations, privy pits and other
remains of waterfront blocks dating between 1833-1842, essentially the short life
span of the town. The artifact assemblage consists of diagnostic ceramics,
container glass, and glass tablewares which provide a rich interpretation of
frontier Texas life in a townsite (Earls et al. 1996).

In the 1980s an archeological investigation was undertaken at Ashton
Villa House Museum (41GV65) in Galveston, Texas. Ashton Villa was the
nineteenth-century residence of prominent Galvestonian James Moreau Brown.
Rice University, in conjunction with the Houston Archeological Society and the
Galveston Historical Foundation (GHF), initiated a project which examined the
relationship between the urban residential landscape and the ideology creating it
(Anderson 1985; Anderson and Moore 1988; Moore and Anderson 1984).
Architectural features were revealed after the implementation of 11 shovel tests
and 11 larger units across the estate grounds.
MAC was asked to revisit the site in 1987 in order to conduct limited data
recovery excavations. Under the terms of a contract between MAC and GHF, the
open pit excavation simultaneously operated as an interpretive archeological
exhibit. The field investigation, conducted along the south wall of a two-story
brick breezeway, resulted in three interior excavation units and three exterior

11

units. Additional buried architectural features were revealed, reflecting the
Villa’s occupation episodes, which ranged from 1860 to 1906 (Meyers 2000).

One of the first urban site investigations occurred in 1978 at the mid
nineteenth-century homesite of General Thomas Jefferson Chambers (41CH227)
in the City of Anahuac, Chambers County, Texas (Fullen 1980). Texas Heritage
Services and the Chambers County Historical Commission recruited volunteers
from several local archeological societies to recover information, through
excavation, about certain architectural elements of the extant house structure.
Later, in 1994, MAC conducted a brief follow-up study of the Chambers
homesite (Moore et al. 1997). Improvements relating to the expansion of the
Chambers County Jail initiated the study, which consisted of archeological
monitoring, as well as limited material culture recovery and analysis.

12

III.

ARCHEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT AND FIELD
INVESTIGATION

Preliminary Assessment

Significant archeological remains which could potentially have occurred within
the project area fell into two broad classes: (1) prehistoric (i.e., Indian) archeological
deposits and features and, (2) historical-period archeological deposits and features
relating to the settlement and development of the City of Houston. No prehistoric
remains were identified during the Subsurface Survey stage investigations. ‘Significant’
historical remains, in current practice by the Archeology Division of the Texas Historical
Commission, consist of well-preserved archeological deposits dating prior to 1870.
In the instance of the current Project Area, historic research revealed potential
significance regarding dates of first occupation. The earliest occupation on the blocks
dates to 1858 according to the J. K. Wagner & Co. research (See Figure 4). Four initial
occupants built on Block 278 between 1858 and 1863, two on Block 279 in 1861, and
four on Block 288 between 1858 and 1860. These dates of initial occupancy alone
indicated that the Project Area may provide data on Houston in the early statehood, Civil
War, and Reconstruction periods. No historical evidence was located which suggests that
human burials may be expected within the Project Area.
While pre-1870 domestic occupation of all three blocks of the Project Area was
confirmed, the most archeologically sensitive and intriguing aspect of the proposed hotel
project related to previously recorded site 41HR505 on Block 278. This site represented
the location of an accidental discovery of a cache of 92 rounds of Confederate ordnance
in 1983 and subsequent, limited archeological investigations by the Houston
Archeological Society.

13

Field Methods

Phase I, Subsurface Survey
Field methods followed during the Subsurface Survey and Testing stage
investigations followed the general procedures outlined in the Technical Proposal
presented with the Antiquities Permit Application. The investigation field methodology
followed the basic outline of a model utilized by Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc.
on several previous large Houston projects and approved by Mark Denton, head of the
project review office of the Archeology Division, Texas Historical Commission. The
areas of the investigation conformed with the documentary evidence in combination with
logistical and hazard access restrictions to be discussed below.
The potential presence of unexploded Civil War-era ordnance within the Project
Area prompted the addition of two procedures not employed in previous Houston Central
Business District investigations. The first of these procedures was an integrated program
of remote sensing carried out across accessible portions of the Project Area (Earth
Measurement Corp. 2000). This remote sensing program was intended primarily to
identify buried concentrations of ferrous metal that might constitute additional caches of
buried ordnance. The results of this procedure, when ground-truthed by subsurface
survey, proved disappointing and will require more justification to be recommended
again within similar, highly urbanized tracts.
The second variation from “standard” urban investigation field methodology was
also dictated by the previously documented presence of unexploded ordnance at the site.
MAC engaged the firm UXB International, Inc., of Ashburn, Virginia to provide certified
on-site unexploded ordnance technicians to ensure that the identification, recovery, and
inerting (rendering harmless) of any such ordnance was carried out in a manner that
would be safe and consistent with local, state, and federal regulations. One or more of
these ordnance technicians was present during much of the subsurface survey
investigation within Block 278.
The field investigations were conducted by Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc.
personnel under the supervision of Principal Investigator Roger G. Moore, Ph.D., and

14

Project Archeologists Joseph Sanchez and Darren Schubert during March through July,
2001 (fieldwork, conducted mostly in March and April, could not be completed until a
large tree was removed from Block 278). The investigation areas were secured with
temporary fencing prior to the field investigations.

A mapping party established

permanent and local horizontal and vertical survey datums and mapped the surface
features of the block. Exploratory backhoe trenches were next excavated in order to
provide dispersed stratigraphic references for the subsequent areal stripping (fill removal)
operations within each of the investigation areas.
The fundamental exploratory goal of Subsurface Survey program was to expose
preserved archeological features within the investigated portions of the proposed George
R. Brown Convention Center Hotel site. Removal of overburden within the Project Area
required the use of heavy machinery. Standing structures occupying portions of the tract
were demolished to the ground surface prior to the investigation. A large trackhoe was
utilized in order to break up pavements and foundations as well as to remove the
additional deposits that overlie the natural soil surface. Exposure of the surface of the
undisturbed natural clay soils across the investigation areas exposed archeological
features that were intrusive into this natural soil.
Archeological features constitute constructions such as building foundations,
wells, cisterns, and privy vaults. Trash pits and other ‘non-architectural’ excavations into
the subsoil are also defined as archeological features. Curiously, no privy vaults or trash
pits were found during this investigation. The discovered features were excavated into
the natural soil surface that constituted the occupational grade at the time of initial
settlement. Though the original occupational grade or living surface is often severely
disturbed or altogether removed at urban sites, this disturbance is often rather superficial.
Thus, while these soil profiles are often truncated, larger and deeper archeological
features often extend deeply enough into the natural soil that at least the lower portions of
these features survive the disturbances. These disturbances consist of construction and
demolition sequences common in evolving downtown blocks.

Downcutting to the

undisturbed natural soil grade within the George R. Brown Convention Center Hotel tract
investigation areas successfully permitted recognition of 18 of these archeological

15

features of various ages and functions. These features will be discussed in more detail in
Chapter IV.
The archeological stripping monitor observed the trackhoe stripping excavations,
watching for the exposure of the upper natural soil surface, and any bricks, soil stains,
artifact concentrations, or other anomalies that indicated the presence of archeological
features or deposits. The monitor halted excavation in the immediate area of each find
and these features were flagged, numbered, and logged. Each shaft feature within Block
278 was scanned by UXB International personnel with a sophisticated metal detector in
order to determine its potential for containing buried ordnance. The UXB International
personnel also systematically scanned the exposed natural soil surface in order to ensure
that potential munitions caches in pits without soil color or texture expression would be
detected. Typically the stripping excavation stops at intact, undisturbed surfaces but, due
to the need to insure that no ordnance existed below our typical excavations, stripping
was therefore excavated deeper than usual in non-feature areas. This ensured that no
ordnance deposits were overlooked and would not show up during the later construction
phase.
The 18 archeological features revealed on the three city blocks were formdocumented, photographed, and mapped in with Total Station (Figure 8, 12, 13). All
features initially determined to exhibit high research potential (pre-1870) were drawn to
scale in plan view.

Selective field collection was made from certain features of

temporally diagnostic artifacts and those feature-associated artifacts displaced by the
feature cleaning process. Select diagnostic and informative artifacts were additionally
collected as isolated surface finds from the exposed upper surface of the natural soil after
the completion of the stripping process within the Project Area.

Phase II, Testing
Testing activities during the archeological field investigations for the George R.
Brown Convention Center Hotel project were limited in scope due to the nature and
content of the exposed features.

Limited manual excavations were carried out in

association with purely architectural features such as piers and brick walkways in an
attempt to find associated artifacts that would provide temporal information on the

16

construction date of such features. Cistern testing was confined to mechanical testing
(cross-sectioning) due to safety considerations regarding these deep and unstable features
and foreknowledge regarding the typically post-1870 contents of these features. The
results of this mechanical cross-sectioning served to further confirm the hypothesis that
cistern content dates to no earlier than the late 19th century when the cisterns were
replaced by City utilities as a source of water.

17

IV.

ARCHEOLOGICAL FINDINGS

Field Results of the Subsurface Survey and Testing

Block 278
Subsurface survey investigations were begun within Block 278 on April 3 along
the eastern third of the block. Modifications to the subsurface survey methodology were
necessary due to unique aspects of this block. Systematic scraping of the block was
initially replaced by investigations targeting specific areas such as subsurface anomalies
identified during the Remote Sensing survey as well as areas needing rapid clearance by
the demolition contractor. An area around Anomaly “A” (which encompasses the earlier
munitions find locality of 41HR508 [see Figure 6]) additionally necessitated deeper than
normal scraping in order to investigate thoroughly the possibility of encountering
unexploded ordnance. Deeper scraping was carried out in order to ensure that any
additional ordnance cached in the immediate vicinity of the earlier find would be
successfully identified and dealt with responsibly (Figure 7).

Certified unexploded

ordnance specialists were accordingly contracted to aid in the detection of subsurface
magnetic anomalies as well as to safely remove and defuse any explosive materials
discovered.

Project Environmental Services contractors were also involved in the

identification and disposal of hydrocarbon-contaminated soils and water located within
two areas exposed by subsurface survey on the block.
As mentioned, archeological investigations on Block 278 were begun along the
eastern portion of the block. An additional methodological modification was made due to
the demolition contractor’s desire to expedite the removal of a deeply buried concrete
foundation in that area. All post-1870 brick piers were removed by heavy machinery.
These features are typically left in situ until all are exposed to aid in identifying the
structure’s true dimensions and confirming its chronological placement.

18

Figure 7. Scraping beneath urban fill on Block 278.

A more systematic approach was followed subsequent to the scraping within and
adjacent to the two main foundations at the southeast and southwest corners of the block.
Two trenches were excavated on opposing sides of the block in order to fully document
the stratigraphy. These trenches revealed multiple fill episodes averaging 50 cm below
the present surface. Approximately 98 percent of the block was scraped with a total of
ten archeological features and two abandoned storm sewers discovered (see Figure 8).
Interestingly, seven of the features were cisterns, a seemingly high concentration for a

19

single block.

These cisterns were mechanically cross-sectioned, documented, and

backfilled. Another intriguing aspect of this block was the presence of a shallow, bricklined shaft. Construction of this shaft was abandoned at only approximately 1.5 meters
below surface.

Figure 8. Feature location on Block 278, 41HR508.

20

The following is a list of features identified in Block 278:

Feature 1: Brick Cistern
Feature 2: Brick Cistern
Feature 3: Brick Cistern
Feature 4: Brick Cistern
Feature 5: Brick Cistern
Feature 6: Brick Pavement
Feature 7: Brick Walkway
Feature 8: Brick Shaft
Feature 9: Brick Cistern
Feature 10: Brick Cistern
N/A: Storm Sewers No. 1 and No. 2
Feature Descriptions of Block 278
Feature 1: Brick Cistern (Block 278)
Feature 1 was a brick-lined, cylindrical cistern measuring 2.64 meters in diameter
with a depth of 2.8 meters. The cistern walls were one brick thick with approximately 1
cm of mortar lining the cistern interior. This mortar lining was two layers thick, the two
layers easily distinguished from one another due to a distinct color difference. The
second mortar layer may have represented an attempt to repair a leaky cistern. An
approximately 20 cm band of Beaumont clay ringed the cistern’s exterior truncated
surface as initially exposed. This clay lining extended below the surface for at least 50
centimeters. The cistern walls were vertical, giving the feature a cylindrical crosssection. The interior base of the cistern was flat with a slight concavity in the center.
Mechanical cross-sectioning carried out on April 19 revealed modern fill which
included glass, metal, brick, concrete and sand intermixed within a clay matrix. No
artifacts were collected from this feature during its exposure, cleaning, and cross-

21

sectioning. A large, 1.5- X 0.75-meter concrete pillar was found near the feature base.
No further investigation was recommended for this feature based on the obviously
modern construction and demolition materials present in the feature fill. Brick samples
were collected and the feature was backfilled.

Feature 2: Brick Cistern (Block 278)
Feature 2 was a brick-lined cistern measuring 3.03 meters in diameter with a
depth of 3.4 meters (Figure 9). The cistern walls were one brick thick with
approximately 1 cm of mortar lining the cistern interior. This feature was cylindrical in
cross-section with a slightly concave base. The depth was approximate as the upper
portion of the cistern was truncated by various prior demolition and construction
episodes.

Figure 9. Block 278, Feature 2, showing cistern profile after removal of southern half.
Mechanical cross-sectioning was begun on April 13 and completed on April 19.
The feature fill included brick, concrete, wood, and metal intermixed within a clayey

22

matrix. The matrix became wet and soupy at approximately 2 meters below surface. A
distinctly black, wet, and ashy matrix predominated below 3 meters. Included within this
dark matrix were metal pipes, wood, brick, concrete, a rubber fan belt, and two 12-lb
solid shot cannon balls. Once the cannon balls were observed the feature excavation was
halted until the unexploded ordnance contractor was on site. Excavation resumed on
April 19 with the entire feature fill extracted and carefully examined. No additional
ordnance was recovered. The 12-lb solid shot cannon balls are in excellent condition,
indicating that they were in an anaerobic environment below the cistern water level from
the moment of their discard (1865?) into the cistern. These cannon balls presumably
share origin with the previous diverse collection of ordnance discovered accidentally at
the site. The cannon balls, though recovered from an artifact deposit of mixed age mostly
post-dating 1870, will of course be analyzed and curated with the permanent records of
this project.
No further investigation was recommended for this feature. Brick samples were
collected and the feature was backfilled.

Feature 3: Brick Cistern (Block 278)
Feature 3 was a brick-lined cistern measuring 2.25 meters in diameter with a
depth of 3.8 meters. The cistern walls were one brick thick with approximately 1 cm of
mortar lining the cistern interior and exterior walls. This feature was cylindrical in crosssection with a slightly concave base. An approximately 50-cm band of Beaumont clay
ringed the cistern’s exterior truncated surface as initially exposed. This clay lining
extended below surface for 75-cm. Located below 90-cm an approximately 7-cm band of
coarse-grained sand lined the exterior walls of the feature down to its base.
Mechanical cross-sectioning was begun on April 18 and completed on April 20.
The feature fill included plastic, glass, brick, concrete, wood, and metal intermixed
within the upper 2 meters. A bottle-rich deposit was encountered within a dark brown,
clayey matrix at approximately 2.25 meters below surface. Included with these bottles
were ceramic, wood, and metal fragments of early 20th century origin. Below this
artifact-rich deposit was a sterile brown sandy loam. No further work was recommended

23

Figure 10. Planview of Features 3 (cistern) and 6 (brick pavement), Block 278.

24

for this feature based on the overwhelmingly recent age of the bottles and other artifacts.
Brick and comparative collection (not for curation) artifact samples were collected and
the feature was backfilled.

Feature 4: Brick Cistern (Block 278)
Feature 4 was a brick-lined cistern measuring 2.31 meters in diameter at the
exposed “neck’ of the feature and with an average wall diameter of 2.8 meters. The
depth of the feature was approximately 2.8 meters. The cistern walls were one brick
thick with approximately 1 cm of mortar lining the cistern interior and exterior walls. An
approximately 50-cm band of Beaumont clay ringed the cistern’s exterior truncated
surface as initially exposed. This clay lining extended below surface for at least 30-cm.
This feature was cylindrical in cross-section with a flat floor.
Mechanical cross-sectioning was carried out on April 18 revealing feature fill
containing brick, tile, and canvas bags of cement. The excavation was extended below
the base of the feature in response to a magnetic reading registered on a hand-held
magnetometer. No ferrous metal deposits were found below the feature, and magnetic
readings ceased after the feature floor was removed. No further investigation are
recommended for this feature based on the obviously modern construction and
demolition materials present in the feature fill. Brick samples were collected and the
feature was backfilled.

Feature 5: Brick Cistern (Block 278)
Feature 5 was a brick-lined cistern measuring 3.3 meters in diameter with a depth
of 3.35 meters. The cistern walls were two bricks thick and cylindrical in cross-section
with a slightly concave base. The bricks comprising the inner layer were similar to those
of the outer wall. However, the mortar plastering the interior was lighter in color and
harder than the mortar binding the bricks and between the inner and outer walls. This
interior layer, moreover, had a texture closer to concrete than mortar. It appears, based
on these observations that the inner brick wall was more recent and likely built in
response to a leak or crack in the original exterior wall.

25

Feature 6: Brick Pavement (Block 278)
Feature 6 was a segment of brick pavement measuring 1.3- X 0.45-meters and
aligned on a NE X SW axis. This feature was one brick thick and directly associated
with Feature 3. Based upon its superposition in relation to the Feature 3 builders trench,
the pavement was constructed after the cistern was completed. The pavement segment
was likely a continuation of Feature 7 (a brick walkway). No formal cross-sectioning of
this feature was done based on the fragmentary nature of the fragment and a paucity of
associated artifacts. However, a portion of the bricks comprising the pavement fragment
were removed and the underlying soils were trowelled in search of artifacts. The feature
was destroyed during the mechanical cross-sectioning of Feature 3.

Feature 7: Brick Walkway (Block 278)
Feature 7 was a brick walkway measuring 3.6- X 1.25-meters, oriented along a
NE X SW axis, and built in a basket-weave pattern. This walkway was one brick thick
and rests directly upon natural soil with no apparent preparation of the underlying matrix
(i.e., no placement of, for example, a thin sand bed). The bricks forming the borders
were placed on their sides (narrow face) while the interior bricks forming the main
walkway were lain horizontally. No formal cross-sectioning of this feature was done
based on the paucity of associated artifacts. However, a portion of the bricks comprising
the pavement fragment were removed and the underlying soils were trowelled in search
of artifacts. A single artifact, a cuprous heart-shaped locket, was recovered. No further
investigation was recommended for this feature.

Feature 8: Brick Shaft (Block 278)
Feature 8 was a brick-lined shaft measuring 1.7 meters in diameter with a depth of
1.64 meters (Figure 11). The shaft walls were one brick thick, heavily mortared (1.5-cm)
on the interior, and cylindrical in cross-section. The base of the feature was comprised of
a flat layer of brick plastered with at least 5-cm of mortar. The basal bricks were placed
on their sides (narrow faces) and rested upon a 3- to 5-cm bed of sand.

26

Figure 11. Block 278, profile of Trench 2 and Feature 8 (brick shaft).

This feature was initially hand-excavated in 10-cm levels with all matrix passed
through ¼-in hardware cloth. The first two levels yielded substantial numbers of post1870 artifacts including bone, ceramics, glass, buttons, doll parts, and nails. A
pronounced decline of artifacts began after Level 2 and continued into Level 7. Coupled
with the low artifact recovery was a change to a clay matrix not usually associated in
feature fills with artifact-bearing deposits. A decision was made to expedite the
excavation through this zone with the use of heavy machinery under the assumption that
the narrow brick shaft represented a well which could extend to considerable depth. A
backhoe was used to strip away the sterile clay fill until a stratigraphic soil change was
encountered or an increase in artifactual materials was observed. The base of the feature

27

was encountered at an unexpectedly shallow (1.64-m) depth during this mechanical
excavation process. The backhoe was additionally used to remove half of the feature
floor and to extend the cross-sectional profile below the feature to ensure that the shaft
had truly terminated.
Interpretation of this feature is problematic – was it an unfinished well, a small
cistern, an unusual circular, brick-lined privy shaft, or a storage pit? While the diameter
was similar to a hand-dug well the shallow depth of the feature precludes this
interpretation. The carefully-prepared feature base also suggests that it was not a well
that was simply abandoned prior to completion. The small feature volume likewise
argues against its being a “typical” functional cistern. Heavy mortar linings seem
counter-functional for a brick-lined privy shaft. A more probable interpretation is that
Feature 8 represents a planned well that was converted to use as a small cistern or storage
pit (possibly a root cellar or ice house) prior to its completion. No further work was
recommended for this feature based on the post-1870 age of the artifact content. Brick
and comparative collection (not for curation) artifact samples were collected and the
feature was backfilled.

Feature 9: Brick Cistern (Block 278)
Feature 9 was a brick-lined cistern measuring 2.4 meters in diameter with a depth
of approximately 2.8 meters. The cistern walls were one brick thick with approximately
1 cm of mortar lining the cistern interior. This feature was cylindrical in cross-section
with a slightly concavity in the center of the feature floor.
Mechanical cross-sectioning was begun on April 17 and was completed on April
18. This cross-section revealed a brown, loamy fill with abundant artifacts including
bottles, cans, ceramic and glass fragments, wood, and enameled metal advertising signs
of early 20th century origin. The fill matrix became lighter in color beginning at
approximately 1.75 meters below the truncated surface. The soil became wet with a
continuation of abundant artifacts at approximately 2.0 meters below surface. The fill
matrix changed to a very dark gray to black, ashy, wet consistency and demolition debris
(bricks, concrete, wood) appeared beginning at 2.65 meters in depth. No further work

28

was recommended for this feature based on the relatively recent age of the artifacts. Brick
and comparative collection (not for curation) artifact samples were collected and the
feature was backfilled.

Feature 10: Brick Cistern (Block 278)
Feature 10 was a brick-lined cistern measuring 2.49 meters in diameter with a
depth of 2.74 meters. The cistern walls were one brick thick with approximately 1 cm of
mortar lining the cistern interior face. This feature was cylindrical in cross-section with a
flat base.
Mechanical cross-sectioning occurred on July 19, 2001, revealing a sandy loam
feature fill matrix rich in recent debris. Included within this fill were glass and aluminum
beer cans, plastic, wood, metal, and an abundance of brick fragments. Below this
artifact-rich deposit was a sterile brown sandy loam. No further investigation was
recommended for this feature based on the obviously modern materials present in the
feature fill. A brick sample was collected and the feature was backfilled.

Block 279
Subsurface survey investigations were begun within Block 279 on March 12 with
the excavation of a single 3-meter long trench and scraping along the northeast corner of
the block. The trench profile exposed approximately 30 cm of crushed limestone above
15 cm of broken brick and clay fill. Intact natural clay deposits underlay these zones at
an average depth of 45 cm below surface. The existing asphalt parking surface was
removed in conjunction with demolition activities conducted by the GRBCC Hotel
demolition contractor. A brick cistern (Feature 1, Block 279) was exposed during these
demolition activities (see Figure 12).
An additional cistern (Feature 2, Block 279) was exposed as the subsurface
survey investigations proceeded away from the northeast corner of the block. The fill
within this feature was obviously modern, containing numerous thick-walled, brown
glass bottles suggestive of chemical containers.

29

A pronounced pesticide smell was

emanating from the cistern and the surrounding, freshly exposed soils.

Continued

scraping on April 24 exposed additional areas exhibiting strong chemical odors.
Based on these factors and the known function of the previously existing structure
as a chemical warehouse, all work was halted until the Client’s environmental services
contractor could evaluate the situation. Soil samples were collected by this contractor on
April 25, 2001. All archeological work was subsequently permanently halted on Block
279 due to the hazardous nature of the soil contamination as revealed by the contractor’s
analyses.

Figure 12. Feature location on Block 279, 41HR863.

Block 288
This block was fenced on March 7, 2001. Actual subsurface survey investigations
were begun on March 12 with the excavation of two 3-4 meter long trenches. These
trench profiles revealed multiple, modern fill episodes to an average depth of 64 cm
below the current ground surface. Typically a 10-15 cm-thick zone of asphalt or concrete
occurred over approximately 30 cm of crushed limestone rock and/or clay fill. Below
this parking lot base fill existed the typical demolition debris strata consisting of

30

overlapping zones of sand, clay, and brick rubble. Trench No. 1 revealed a 3 cm lense of
burned debris that likely represented a single event. Subsequent, adjacent scraping failed
to expose additional burned deposits in any significant amounts. Intact natural clay
deposits were typically encountered at 64 cm below the modern surface.
Approximately 80 percent of the block was subsequently investigated by
subsurface survey scraping. This scraping resulted in the exposure of 6 features (See
figure 13). A single area of contaminated soil was avoided and later removed. A large
(approximately 30 X 20 X 1.5 meters) basin-shaped trash deposit was additionally
exposed and delineated. All materials within this large trash deposit were of modern
origin. The dry-laid deposit was unique in that the deposit lacked cohesion and thus did
not compact well. All deep excavations (i.e., cisterns and trash deposits) encountered
during the survey were mapped and brought to the attention of the project construction
supervisors since such voids and unconsolidated deposits have significant engineering
consequences. All features were photographed, drawn in plan view, mapped, and (when
warranted) tested and drawn in profile. Subsurface survey investigations were completed
on Block 288 on May 15, 2001, and the block was returned to original grade (backfilled)
on May 16.

The following features were identified within Block 288:

Feature 1: Brick Cistern
Feature 2: House Foundation
Feature 3: Series of Brick Piers
Feature 4: Brick Drainage Path or Channel
Feature 5: Brick Piers
Feature 6: Brick Cistern

31

Figure 13. Feature location on Block 288, 41HR864

Feature Descriptions Block 288

Feature 1: Brick Cistern (Block 288)
Feature 1 was a brick-lined, cylindrical cistern fundamentally similar to a number
exposed in Houston at Sesquicentennial Park (Moore and Meyers 2000), the proposed
Harris County Parking Garage, Enron Field, and elsewhere. It measured 3.2 meters in
diameter and was 3.8 meters deep. The cistern wall was one brick thick, mortared
internally, and cylindrical in cross-section. The depth of the feature is approximate as the
feature was truncated during the various construction and demolition episodes preceding
this investigation. The feature was cross-sectioned (bisected) by trackhoe on April 25,
2001. Feature 1 (Block 288) fill was entirely of modern origin and consisted of bricks,
house tiles, wood, metal, and a large quantity of burned debris.

The fill dates to

approximately 1960 based on the few bottles and cans contained within the debris. The
burned debris may relate to the burned zone noted in Trench No. 1. With the exception

32

of a few cistern bricks, no artifacts were collected from this feature. This cistern was
back-filled and no further investigation was recommended for this feature.

Feature 2: House Foundation (Block 288)
Feature 2 was a square house foundation measuring 6.25 X 6.35 meters. This
low-fired brick spreader foundation was at least five tiers (courses) high and the presence
of mortar on the surface of the uppermost course of preserved bricks likely represented
the original presence of additional tiers. This feature was tested by the excavation of a 1meter-wide test unit which cross-sectioned the foundation. A 2.4 meter long segment of
bricks was additionally removed, exposing the soil underlying the foundation. This
underlying soil matrix was trowelled for artifacts pre-dating the construction of the
building. No artifacts were recovered and this underlying soil proved to be natural and
undisturbed. This feature may be the 1866 Milton Lum home based on its location alone
(see Figure 4). The foundation was essentially devoid of associated artifacts, however,
and therefore no additional investigation was recommended.

Feature 3: Brick Piers (Block 288)
This feature was a series of seven rows of brick piers totaling at least 43
individual piers. These piers varied from three to seven bricks tall and from 40 X 40 to
80 X 80 cm in plan. The long axis of the piers was 19.5 meters and they were 16.5
meters in width. The system of piers was interpreted as belonging to one building and
may be the 1908-1909 apartment complex indicated in the Houston City Directory and
depicted in the 1925 Sanborn Fire Insurance Map (Wagner and Moore 2000: Figure 7, 8).
Based on the modern aspects of construction no hand excavations occurred other than
that needed to fully expose the individual piers chosen for plan view drawing. Feature 2
offered negligible additional research value and no further investigation was
recommended.

Feature 4: Brick Drainage Path (Block 288)
Feature 4 was interpreted to be a brick drainage path or French Drain based on its
unique construction technique. It consisted mostly of narrow (21 X 8 X 7 cm), glazed

33

brown bricks which were placed on the narrow edge with a pronounced incline to the
medial line of the feature. A thin, builders’ trench underlay this pathway. Coarse gravel
and sand was placed within the builder’s trench, presumably to facilitate the transport of
water down-slope. This feature measured at least 14.5 meters long and 40 cm wide. Two
sections of the feature were manually cross-sectioned to further investigate its
construction and to seek diagnostic artifacts. No such artifacts were encountered. A
brick sample was collected from Feature 4 which was then backfilled.

No further

investigation was recommended for this feature.

Feature 5: Brick Piers (Block 288)
Feature 5 was a series of brick piers very similar to Feature 3 (Block 288), yet
smaller in size.

The similarity was in the construction technique as well as the

morphology of the bricks. This feature was probably the remnants of the foundations of a
small structure. No artifacts were observed in clear association with this feature. A brick
sample was collected from Feature 5 and it was backfilled. No further investigation was
recommended for this feature.

Feature 6: Brick Cistern (Block 288)
Feature 6 was a brick-lined, cylindrical cistern with a depth of 2.8 meters. The
cistern walls were a single brick thick and were mortared internally. The interior base of
the feature was slightly concave. The exterior wall was sealed by approximately 20 cm
of imported Beaumont clay fill that presumably served as an additional impermeable
barrier to water loss. The walls of this feature were extensively cracked and penetrated
by large roots, likely because it had been backfilled with loosely compacted soils. Crosssectioning by trackhoe of this feature was carried out on April 25, 2001. Artifacts within
the fill were modern (again, ca. 1960). The debris within the fill included plastic, cloth,
paper, bottles, and cans typical of the large deposit of modern garbage surrounding and
overlapping the feature.

A selection of the deposit was collected and noted for

comparative purposes. These materials consisted of floral remains, brick, ceramics,
glass, square nails and personal items, such as buttons. Feature 6 was backfilled and no
artifacts will be curated from this feature. No further investigation was recommended.

34

Artifact Assemblage

A total of 708 artifacts were recovered from the GRBCCH Project. All
inventoried artifacts are from Block 278 (N= 650) and Block 288 (N= 58). No artifacts
were recovered from Block 279. The artifact assemblage is from or related to features
which contained a mixed temporal component with a concentration of late 19th century to
early 20th century artifacts, thereby eliminating the possibility of historical context.
Based on this, only artifacts of diagnostic quality will be discussed in the following
sections. With the exception of a few artifacts, the majority of the assemblage will not be
curated as noted in consultation with Texas Historical Commission. Those items to be
curated consist of three rounds of munitions and one 1855 coin, which will be housed at
TARL. As for the remainder of the assemblage, the client (HCCHC) has requested to
procure them for possible exhibition. For a complete artifact inventory, see Appendix II.
General counts shown in parentheses at the top of each category (i.e. Ceramics
[n=110]) include counts from both Block 278 and 288. The categories discussed below
are ceramics, glass bottles, ammunition, and currency. Within each category, type counts
may be broken down by block if it was deemed necessary to do so. As mentioned before,
the categories listed below are not a comprehensive listing of cultural materials recovered
from the GRBCC project area.

Ceramics (n=110)
This section presents the results of examining 28 out of 110 ceramic sherds from Block
278 and 288. These 28 sherds are from Block 278: Features 2, 3, 8, 9, and 10. The
category “ceramics” includes fragments from clay vessels, clay containers, and clay
dishes that fall within the divisions of earthenware and stoneware.

Transfer-Printed Whiteware (n=7)
The first earthenwares to be transfer-printed in blue and then glazed were
developed by Thomas Turner in England in 1780. It was Josiah Spode at Stoke upon
Trent who improved upon the technique by producing a hard, clear glaze that was able to

35

withstand the effects of acidic foods and cutlery wear. This eventually provided the less
affluent members of society the ability to afford this decorative tableware. The trade to
North America flourished up to the 1830s when competition had increased not only from
other types of earthenwares but from American potteries. Primarily used for dinner
services due to its often superb artistry, the range of images includes natural or pastoral
scenes, floral motifs, or simply organic/geometric design. Involving the use of an
engraved copper plate, the first color used for transfer-printing was cobalt blue for it was
originally the only color which would not blur when exposed to the necessary heating
temperature. Blue underglaze was the primary color used until 1828 when it was
discovered that other colors made by mixing finely powdered yellow, green, red, and
black enamels could be used without distortion or loss of brilliance (Coysh 1971: 7),
(Pollen et al. 1996: 5-6).
The transfer-print sherds of the artifact collection include red w/ floral design
(n=2), brown w/ organic design (n=1) and blue w/ floral design (n=4). Of the four blue
transfer-print, two are vessel fragments that may be part of a water pitcher and two are
rim fragments that may be of a basin. It is possible that all four fragments were once part
of a matching set.

Yellow Ware (n=13)
Often confusing because of the name, yellow ware is classified for its yellow clay,
or buff clay, and not the color of its glaze. It is thought that the earliest yellow ware (as it
is known today) came from either Scotland or England in the late 18th century, although
yellow clays were being used in England as early as the 16th century. Many potteries in
England produced yellow ware and exported on a grand scale to the United States until
the mid-1870s when the U. S. developed gas-fired kilns and was thereby able to meet
demands locally. In the meantime, the development of yellow ware had started in North
America in the 1820s and became increasingly popular due to its sturdiness; it was used
for utilitarian purposes including bowls, pitchers, rolling pins, cake molds, and chamber
pots.
All thirteen of the yellow ware sherds in the artifact collection retrofit into an
almost complete chamber pot. The diameter of the pot from outer rim to outer rim

36

measures 7 1/2” and is decorated with one wide blue band enclosed by a total of six thin
white bands (three above and below). Chamber pots almost identical to this one were
sold by Syracuse Stoneware Company of Syracuse, New York in the 1890s (Gallo 1985:
10-13), (Ketchum 1983: 265).

Stoneware (n= 8)
A hard pasted ware type, stoneware was developed between the 12th and 15th
centuries along the Rhein River and in northern France. The British imported Rhenish
stonewares and began to imitate the style in the 17th century. Colonial settlers and later
immigrants to America included potters, mostly English and German, who brought their
skills and knowledge with them and by the late 18th century and early 19th century had
blended their traditions into a unique American form and manner of decoration in
stoneware. There is little evidence of French potters immigrating to America although a
few have been found in Louisiana. There are many different forms of stoneware glazing
but one of the most prevalent still used today is salt glazing, began in the 15th century
along the Rheine River (Greer 1981: 16-18). Other common glazes are Albany, Bristol,
and Alkaline and can be found in combination on interiors and exteriors of stoneware.
The Albany slip, made from a rich brown clay found near Albany, New York, was
developed and in use by 1820 while the Bristol slip became popular later in the 19th
century (Ketchum 1983: 19).
The stoneware of the artifact assemblage is comprised of three partial jugs, one
partial gin bottle and three sherds; all of them with different glazes. The glazes for the
three partial jugs are 1) exterior white Bristol slip and brown Albany slip with the interior
glazed a brown Albany slip, 2) exterior brown Albany slip and brown metallic slip with
the interior glazed a brown Albany slip, and 3) exterior unglazed stoneware and brown
metallic glaze with the interior brown metallic glaze. The partial gin bottle has an
exterior Bristol slip and brown Albany slip with the interior glazed with a Bristol slip.
The remaining three sherds of the stoneware assemblage are of Bristol slip, salt-glaze,
and brown Albany slip.

37

Glass Bottles (n=164)
All the bottles in this assemblage are whole and include Block 278 and 288. Of
the total bottle assemblage, 131 of them are embossed. Those selected for discussion
here are embossed bottles whose manufacturing and bottling information was researched
by J. K. Wagner and Co., Houston (Wagner 2003). For the complete inventory and
research on bottle manufacturers in this assemblage, refer to aforementioned study.

Embossed Glass Bottles (n=131)
This section will focus primarily on the development of embossing in the
nineteenth century, which served as a means to advertise the manufacturer and bottler of
the bottle contents. Although often elusive, it is possible to obtain information about
various companies from the embossed company name, bottling company, or mold marks;
sometimes a combination of the three. For a more comprehensive study on glass
manufacture and use in the nineteenth century, see Frank (1982), Toulouse (1967), and
Carlson (2001).
The earliest embossed bottles can be found dating to 1750 but it was not common
practice until the mid-nineteenth century or even later with the invention of automated
machines. During the nineteenth century successful companies who sold their wares by
bottle began wanting their own unique designs and shapes. This demand prompted
technological change in bottle molding. As molding became more sophisticated, the use
of raised, embossed lettering grew to be popular. Plate molds patented in 1867 provided
such personalization as indented panels which facilitated the use of lettered paneling on a
broad scale. The use of embossed lettering eventually took over the practice of using
labels, etching and engraving (Fike 1987:4).
Despite the fact that automated machines allowed for mass production of bottles,
by the 1890s less than 40 percent of all glass bottles were embossed. It was not until the
1920s that embossing increased dramatically; by this time at least 90 percent of all
manufacture containers were completely machine made. Technological advancement,
volume production, and inflation contributed to the eventual decline of embossing by the
1920s. The plastic bottle became the predominant bottle material in the 1950s (Fike
1987:4-5).

38

The embossed bottles of the artifact assemblage for the GRBCCH tract consist of
the following categories, as grouped by J. K. Wagner and Co. (Wagner 2003):

Beverages
Food/Sauces/Seasonings
Bitters
Medicines/Patent Medicines/Drugs
Cosmetics/Creams/Toiletries
Paints/Polishes/Oils/Inks/Solvents/Dyes
Canning Jars
Others/Unknown

Many of the embossed bottles in the collection are from the major bottling works
operating in Houston at the turn of the 19th century. Below is a brief listing of the more
well-known bottlers seen in this collection:

Houston Bottlers:
Star Bottling Works (1874-1962). Star Bottling Works of Houston was a prolific
company that produced a wide variety of bottle and drink. Some of its uses were for
sarsaparilla, ginger beers, Wyne Punch and Lemonette (Kientz 2003).

Union Bottle Works (1880-1915). Founded by F. H. Potthoff, the company bottled
many kinds of drinks such as ginger ale, soda, mineral water, champagne cider, and
sarsaparilla (Wagner 2003).

Houston Carbonate Co. (1892-1893). This bottler was owned by W. B. Crawford
and was the bottler of Pure Fruit Juice, Extracts & Sugar Syrups, Rock and Rye, and
California Wine Cream (Wagner 2003).

39

5th Ward Bottling Works (1903-1904). Operating only a short period of time, this
company was owned by Antonio & George Fasullo and was located on the corner of
Brooks and Gano (Wagner 2003).

Ammunition (n= 3)
Civil War projectiles are not an infinite study but are fairly vast in their variety.
Of particular interest to this research is information on projectiles used for muskets and
cannons. There are basic types of cannon balls, one of which is known as solid shot.
Solid shot has no bursting charge and was “[u]sed to batter down forts and gun
emplacements, smash through armor, or break up gun carriages, buildings, etc.” (Dickey
and George 1993:16). For muskets, the main type of conical bullet used was generally
referred to by the Civil War soldiers as a “minie”, named after Captain Claude Etienne
Minie, the French captain who invented it in 1848. Made of lead, the minie was used
extensively in different size rifle muskets and had intense smashing power
(www.Antietam.com 2003). Cylindrical projectiles tended to “burrow” into the ground
rather than bounce or ricochet like spherical objects (Dickey and George 1993:34),
effects which influenced the planning of military strategies.

Cannon balls (n=2)
The two cannon balls recovered are from Feature 2 of Block 278 (Figure 14).
This feature was a brick cistern and the munitions were found along with modern refuse
within a black, wet, ashy matrix 3 meters below surface. The projectiles have been
identified as 12-lb. solid shot with a diameter of 10 ½ centimeters. The solid shot are in
excellent condition, indicating they were in an anaerobic environment below the cistern
water level from the moment of their discard into the cistern; it is speculated that this
discard may have occurred in 1865. It is also speculated that these projectiles may be
associated with the munitions cache (41HR505) discovered in this same block in 1983.
The cannon balls will be curated and housed at TARL.

40

Minie ball (n=1 )
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, there were two isolated finds on Block 278
This conical bullet (Figure 16) from Block 278 is one of them and was deemed worthy of
note considering the history of Civil War munitions related to this block. The artifact is
a 55-cal lead minie, hollow, and measures 2 ½ centimeters long and ~ 1 ½ centimeters
wide. It will be curated and housed at TARL.

Currency (n=1)
The second isolated find on Block 278 was a French Five Centime copper coin
minted in 1855 (Figure 15). This coin bears the image of Emperor Napoleon III who was
a European monarch (with assistance from the Spanish and English crowns). Napoleon
III placed Prince Maximillian of Hapsburg, the younger brother of the monarch of
Austria, upon the throne as Emperor of Mexico in 1862 (Egon 1968). This fact is
important when relating it to the known information regarding Cornelius Ennis, the
blockade runner who owned lots on Block 278. According to family history, Ennis is
known to have made trips to Mexico as an agent for the Confederacy (Brown 1988) and it
is tempting to surmise that this coin was spare change from one such arms trading trip.
Along with the cannon balls and minie bullet, this coin will be curated and sent to TARL
for housing.

41

Figure 14. One of two cannon balls recovered from Feature 2, Block 278.

42

Figure 15. French Five Centime copper coin minted in 1855 bearing the image of
Emperor Napoleon III.

Figure 16. Civil War 55-cal lead minie, isolated find from Block 278.
43

V. SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Summary

The results of the Subsurface Survey stage and limited Testing investigations
located eighteen archeological features within the George R. Brown Convention Center
Hotel tract. All of these features, however, were in the class of architectural brick
constructions. Notably absent were pre-1870 privy shafts and trash pit deposits that must
have originally been present within the Project Area. MAC is confident that the intensive
and deep program of subsurface survey scraping would have identified any such features
if they were present within the Project Area. We must therefore surmise that 1870-2001
construction and demolition disturbances within the Project Area were, unfortunately,
sufficiently deep and extensive enough to wipe the slate clean of this highly productive
and informative class of features.

Recommendations

While many of the brick shaft features identified were probably constructed prior
to 1870, none of the features contained artifact deposits pre-dating this archeological
significance cut-off date. No features, therefore, from the George R. Brown Convention
Center Hotel tract were recommended for additional manual testing or data recovery
excavation. Further cultural resource field investigations are likewise not recommended
for the George R. Brown Convention Center Hotel project.

44

REFERENCES CITED

Anderson, T. B.
1985 Cognitive Structures, Status and Cultural Affiliation: The Archaeology of Ashton
Villa. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Rice
University, Houston.
Anderson, T. B. and R. G. Moore
1988 Meaning and the Built Environment: A Symbolic Analysis of a NineteenthCentury Urban Site. In The Recovery of Meaning: Historical Archaeology in the
Eastern United States, edited by M. P. Leone and P. B. Potter, Jr., pp. 379-406.
Smithsonian Press, Washington, D. C.
Antietam Archives
2003 Archives: Civil War Artifact Photos.
http://www.antietam.com/antietam/artifact_photos/58caliberminiball.html
Brown, John Henry
1988 [1896] Indian Wars and Pioneers ofTexas. L. E. Daniell, Austin, Texas.
Caesar, Egon and Count Corti
1968 [1928] Maximilian and Charlotte of Mexico. Translated from German by
Catherine Phillips. A. A. Knopf, London.
Carlson, S. B. (editor)
2001 Archaeological and Historical Investigations at the Ball Park at Union
Station, Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigations No. 260. Moore
Archeological Consulting, Inc., Houston, Texas.
Council of Texas Archeologists
1995 Council of Texas Archeologists Guidelines (Performance, Curation,
Reports). Manuscript on files at the Office of the State Archeologist,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Coysh, A. W.
1971 Blue and White Transfer Ware: 1780-1840. Charles E. Tuttle Company,
Rutland, Vermont.
Dickey, Thomas S. and Peter C. George
1993 [1980] Field Artillery Projectiles of the American Civil War. Edited by
Connie F. George. Arsenal Publications II, Mechanicsville, Virginia.

45

Donachie, Madeleine J. and Roger G. Moore
2003 A Subsurface Survey of the Harris County Juvenile Justice Center Project,
Block 30 (Site 41HR944), City of Houston Central Business District,
Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigations No. 347. Moore
Archeological Consulting, Inc., Houston, Texas
Earls, Amy C., Terri L. Myers, Brian S. Shaffer, Karl W. Kibler, Karen M.
Gardner, Laurie S. Zimmerman, Elton R. Prewitt, and Sandra L. Hannum
1996 Testing and Data Recovery at the Townsite of Old Velasco (41B)125),
Brazoria County. Reports of Investigations, Number 94, Austin, Texas.
Earth Measurement Corporation
2000 Remote Sensing Report: George R. Brown Convention Center Hotel, Blocks 278,
279, and 288, Houston, Harris County, Texas. Earth Measurement Corporation,
Houston.
Fike, Richard
1987 The Bottle Book: A Comprehensive Guide to Historic, Embossed Medicine
Bottles. Gibbs M. Smith, Salt Lake City, Utah.
Frank, Susan
1982 Glass and Archaeology. Series of Studies in Archaeological Science, edited by
G. W. Dimbleby. Academic Press, New York.
Fullen, W. L.
1980 Archeological Explorations at Texas Archeological Landmark 41CH227, The
General Thomas Jefferson Chambers Homesite, Anahuac, Chambers County,
Texas. Texas Heritage Services. Manuscript on file, Chambers County Historical
Commission, Anahuac, Texas.
Gallo, John
1985 Nineteenth and Twentieth Century Yellow Ware. Heritage Press, Richfield
Springs, New York.
Greer, Georgeanna H.
1981 American Stonewares: The Art and Craft of Utilitarian Potters. Schiffer
Publishing, Ltd., Exton, Pennsylvania.
Houghton, Dorothy Knox Howe, Barrie M. Scardino, Sadie Gwin Blackburn, and
Katherine S. Howe
1991 Houston’s Forgotten Heritage: Landscape, Houses, Interiors, 1824-1914. Rice
University Press, Houston, Texas.
Ketchum, Jr., William C.
1983 The Knopf Collectors’ Guides to American Antiques: Pottery & Porcelain. Alfred
A. Knopf, New York.

46

Kientz, Renee
2003 Message in a Bottle.
http://www.chron.com/cs/CDS/story.hts/features/antiques/1431579
McComb, David G.
1981 Houston: A History. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Meyers, A. D.
2000 Archeological Investigations at Ashton Villa House Museum, Galveston County,
Texas. Report of Investigations No. 235. Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc.,
Houston, Texas.
Moore, R. G.
2000 The Enron Field Project in Perspective: Doing Urban Archeology in the Houston
Area. Paper presented at the Texas Archeological Society Annual Meeting,
Galveston
Moore, R. G. and T. B. Anderson
1984 Gilded Age Archeology: The Ashton Villa. Archaeology 37 (3): 44-50.
Moore, R. G., T. Q. Booth, R. C. Booth, and M. J. Donachie
1997 Archeological Monitoring at the Chambers County Jail Expansion Project,
Anahuac, Texas. Report of Investigations No. 113. Moore Archeological
Consulting, Inc., Houston, Texas.
Moore, Roger G. and Allan D. Meyers
2000 Data Recovery Excavations for the Sesquicentennial Park Project, Stage II,
Houston, Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigations No. 44. Moore
Archeological Consulting, Inc., Houston, Texas.
Pollan, S. D., W. S. Gross, A. C. Earls, J. T. Pollan Jr., and J. L. Smith
1996 Nineteenth-Century Transfer-Printed Ceramics from the Townsite of Old Velasco
(41BO125), Brazoria County, Texas: An Illustrated Catalog. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.
Toulouse, Julian H.
1967 When Did Hand Bottle Blowing Stop? Western Collector. August:41-45.
Wagner, J. K. and Roger G. Moore
2000 George R. Brown Convention Center Hotel, Blocks 278, 279, and 288, SSBB,
Houston, Harris County, Texas. J. K. Wagner & Co., Inc., Houston, Texas.
Wagner, J. K.
2003 George R. Brown Convention Center Hotel Bottle Research. Information on file,
J. K. Wagner and Co., Inc., Houston, Texas.

47

A1. Artifact Inventory
Site #
41HR508

Block #
278

Feature*

Artifact Class

Count

2

Ammunition

2

41HR508

278

3

Euroamerican Ceramic

1

12 lb. solid shot cannon balls
porcelain saucer w/ blue scalloped rim and gold painted
flowers

41HR508

278

3

Euroamerican Ceramic

2

red transfer-printed ware, floral design, possible retofit

41HR508

278

3

Euroamerican Ceramic

2

41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508

278
278
278
278

3

Euroamerican Ceramic

1

purple and black glaze with scalloped rim
base-maker's mark "W.M. Co/Semi/Porcelain", ca.18791909

3

Euroamerican Ceramic

4

blue transfer-printed ware, floral design

3

Euroamerican Ceramic

3

fragments of stoneware jugs

3

2

small whiteware tea cup, retrofit

41HR508

278

3

1

door knob

41HR508

278

3

Euroamerican Ceramic
Euroamerican Ceramicother
Euroamerican Ceramicother

1

electrical hardware

41HR508
41HR508
41HR508

278
278
278

3

Plastic

1

Neon pink plastic sign "National Television"

3

Glass bottle/ jar

33

whole unembossed bottles

3

Glass bottle/ jar

77

41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508

278
278
278
278
278
278

3

Glass bottle/ jar

2

whole embossed bottles
bases to toiletry jars- milk glass, one w/ "Chesebrough
M.F.G. Co. N.Y."

3

Table Glass

1

candy dish basin, molded

3

Metal

1

alarm clock- circa 1920s

7

Nonferrous metal

2

cuprous heart-shaped locket

8

Unmodified Bone

149

8

Euroamerican other

1

41HR508
41HR508

278
278

8

Euroamerican Ceramic

13

possible clothing brad
yelloware w/ blue & white banding, retrofit for a
chamberpot

8

Euroamerican Ceramic

2

whiteware saucer, retrofit

41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508

278
278
278
278
278

8

Euroamerican Ceramic

1

brown transfer-printed ware, organic design

8

Euroamerican Ceramic

3

blue spongeware

8

Euroamerican Ceramic

4

stoneware

8

Euroamerican Ceramic

39

whiteware

8

Euroamerican Ceramic

14

41HR508

278

8

10

41HR508

278

8

1

doll hand

41HR508

278

8

1

cabinet pull

41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508

278
278
278
278
278
278

8

Euroamerican Ceramic
Euroamerican Ceramicother
Euroamerican Ceramicother
Euroamerican Ceramicother

dark blue glaze over crude whiteware
porcelain, majority were part of a saucer w/ scalloped
rim

1

game marble

8

Glass bottle/ jar

1

whole embossed bottle

8

Curved glass frag-white

1

hand painted

8

Metal Nail-square

200

8

Nonferrous metal

1

thimble

8

Nonferrous metal

1

41HR508

278

8

Euroamerican Other

1

safety pin
slate- with incised grid lines, possibly part of chalk
board

48

Comment

Site #

Block #

Feature*

Artifact Class

Count

41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508

278
278
278
278
278
278
278
278
278
28

8

Euroamerican Other

1

Comment
base of molded statue w/ foot intact; contemporary
composite material

8

Euroamerican Other

1

possible push pin top, molded plastic

8

Euroamerican Other

19

buttons-metal, shell, ceramic, plastic

9

Floral Remains

2

peach pits

41HR508
41HR508
41HR864
41HR864
41HR864
41HR864
41HR864
41HR864
41HR864
41HR864
41HR864

278
278
288
288
288
288
288
288
288
288
288

9

Euroamerican Ceramic

1

stoneware gin bottle- almost whole

9

Euroamerican Ceramic

3

whiteware fragments

9

Glass bottle/ jar

12

whole embossed bottles

9

Metal

1

stove top grating

10

Glass bottle/ jar

1

whole embossed bottles

NF

Glass bottle/ jar

27

NF

Nonferrous metal

1

whole embossed bottles
1855 Napoleaon III Empereur coin- found near Feat. 8
on surface

NF

Ammunition

1

unfired 55 caliber lead minie ball

6

Floral Remains

2

egg shell

6

Euroamerican ceramic

1

blue glaze

6

Euroamerican ceramic

2

terra cotta

6

Euroamerican ceramic

1

whiteware rim of plate

6

Euroamerican ceramic

1

stoneware

6

Flat glass

11

6

Metal nail-square

25

6

Euroamerican other

2

two hole buttons, 1 ceramic, 1 shell

NF

Glass bottle/ jar

13

whole embossed bottle

Total Count

49

708

A2. Embossed Bottles
Site
41HR508
41HR508

Block
278
278

Feat
3
3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508
41HR508

278
278

3
3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508
41HR508

278
278

3
3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508
41HR508
41HR508

278
278
278

3
3
3

41HR508

278

3

Embossing
Paine's Celery Compound
Paine's Celery Compound
Mason's/ Patent/ Nov. 30th 1858; diamond [on
bottom]
Mason [on diagonal with angled line]; 4 [on
bottom]
B/ A.B. Co./ 24 [on bottom only]
Uncle Sam's/ Nerve & Bone/ Liniment/ Emmert
Proprietary Co/ Chicago Ill
Rosewood/ Dandruff Cure/ Prepared by/ J.R.
Reeves Co./ Anderson Ind.
Rosewood/ Dandruff Cure/ Prepared by/ J.R.
Reeves Co./ Anderson Ind.
The Red Rock/ Company/ Houston/ Texas/
Registered/ This Bottle is not sold;Red Rock [in
circle]
Root/ 1 [on bottom only]
Star B. Works/ Houston, Tex.; [5-pt star device
on side and bottom]
Star B. Works/ Houston, Tex.; [5-pt star device
on side and bottom]
Star B. Works/ Houston, Tex.; [5-pt star device
on side and bottom]
Hance Brothers & White Philadelphia U.S.A.
[continuos line around shoulder]
Dr. Kilmer's/ Swamp Root/ Kidney Liver/ and
Bladder Cure/ Binghamton/ N.Y.U.S.A.
Registered/ Vogel/ Bottling Works/ Houston,
Tex/ This Bottle/ not to be sold; 1330 [on
bottom]
Ball/ Improved/ Masons/ Patent/ 1858; 3 [? On
bottom]
Dr. Miles/ Restorative Nervine; T-1 [on bottom
of 1]
Dr. Miles/ Restorative Nervine; T-1 [on bottom
of 1]
Dr. Miles/ Restorative Nervine; T-1 [on bottom
of 1]
Dr. Miles/ Restorative Nervine; T-1 [on bottom
of 1]
Dr. Miles/ Restorative Nervine; T-1 [on bottom
of 1]
Dr. Miles/ Restorative Nervine; T-1 [on bottom
of 1]
Dr. Miles/ New/ Heart Cure
Dr. Miles/ New/ Heart Cure
Star Bottling/ Works Co./ Houston Texas; [1 5pt star on side, 1 on bottom, & 6 small ones
around shoulder]; [stopper inside]

50

Color
Brown
Brown

Base
Shape
Square
Square

#
1
1

Aqua

Round jar

1

Aqua
Brown

Round jar
Round

1
1

Aqua

Rectangle

1

Clear

Rectangle

1

Clear

Rectangle

1

Aqua
Aqua

Round
Round

1
1

Aqua

Round

1

Aqua

Round

1

Aqua

Round

1

Amber

Oval

1

Aqua

Rectangle

1

Aqua

Round

1

Aqua

Round jar

1

Aqua

Rectangle

1

Aqua

Rectangle

1

Aqua

Rectangle

1

Aqua

Rectangle

1

Aqua

Rectangle

1

Aqua
Aqua
Aqua

Rectangle
Rectangle
Rectangle

1
1
1

Aqua

Round

1

Site

Block

Feat

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508
41HR508
41HR508

278
278
278

3
3
3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508

278
278
278
278
278
278
278
278

3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508
41HR508
41HR508

278
278
278

3
3
3

41HR508
41HR508

278
278

3
3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

Embossing
Star Bottling/ Works Co./ Houston Texas; [1 5pt star on side, 1 on bottom, & 6 small ones
around shoulder]; [stopper inside]
Vogel/ V/ Bottling Works/ Houston/ Texas; V
0014 [on bottom]
D. Auerbach & Sons/ New York, U.S.A.; 4 [in
circle on bottom]
G-286/ Duraglas/ 3 52 15 [with saturn-like
shape w/ I in center, bottom only]
C [with serif on upper limb, bottom only]
Dr. S. Pitcher's/ Castoria; B-25 [on bottom]
John H. Phelps Pharmacist/ Phelps Rheumatic
Elixir [separated, on diagonal]/ Scranton, PA.;
[1 with cork inside]
John H. Phelps Pharmacist/ Phelps Rheumatic
Elixir [separated, on diagonal]/ Scranton, PA.;
[1 with cork inside]
Listerine/ Lambert/ Pharmacal Company; 6 with
diamond [on bottom]
4/ 5 pint [on both sides]; 14/ Wine/ 1981[ with T
in keystone device on bottom]
Harriet/ Hubbard/ Ayer/ HAH/ New York/ 3 3/ 4
ounces; 4 [in circle on bottom]; [metal top with
logo [?] in situ]
California/ Fig Syrup Co./ San Francisco Cal/
Louisville Ky; 78 [on bottom]
Newbro's/ Herpicide/ Kills The/ Dandruff Germ
Newbro's/ Herpicide/ Kills The/ Dandruff Germ
H J Heinz Co/ Patd; 162 5 [bottom only]
W_____Co [bottom only]
H J Heinz Co; 138 [bottom only]
H J Heinz Co; 138 [bottom only]
119 3 [bottom only]
Curtice Brothers Co/ Preservers/ Rochester
N.Y.; F.E.R & Co., BBG CC/ 4B0 on separate
bottoms];[body has reed design with flat space
for label]
Curtice Brothers Co/ Preservers/ Rochester
N.Y.; F.E.R & Co., BBG CC/ 4B0 on separate
bottoms];[body has reed design with flat space
for label]
684 [bottom only]
Pat Ap ____/ W.B [?, on bottom only]
Florida Water/ Murray & Lanman/ Druggists/
New York; 21 [on bottom]
Colgate & Co/ New York [on bottom only]
Colgate & Co/ New York/ (also maker's mark)
[on bottom only]
44 [on bottom];[graduated 4 ounce
pharmaceutical bottles]

51

Color

Base
Shape

#

Aqua

Round

1

Aqua

Round

1

Clear

Round jar

1

Aqua
Aqua
Aqua

Round
Round
Rectangle

1
1
1

Aqua

Rectangle

1

Aqua

Rectangle

1

Clear

Round

1

Clear

Oval

1

Clear

Square

1

Clear
Clear
Clear
Clear
Clear
Clear
Clear
Clear

Rectangle
Round
Round
Octagonal
Rectangle
Octagonal
Octagonal
Round

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Clear

Round

1

Clear
Clear
Clear

Round
Round
Rectangle

1
1
1

Aqua
Clear

Round
Rectangle

1
1

Clear

Round

1

Clear

Flat Oval

1

Site

Block

Feat

41HR508
41HR508

278
278

3
3

41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508

278
278
278
278
278
278
278
278
278
278
278
278

3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508

278

3

41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508
41HR508

278
278
278
278
278
278
278

3
3
3
3
3
3
3

41HR508

278

8

41HR508

278

9

41HR508

278

9

41HR508

278

9

41HR508

278

9

41HR508

278

9

41HR508

278

9

41HR508
41HR508

278
278

9
9

Embossing
44 [on bottom];[graduated 4 ounce
pharmaceutical bottles]
Triumph
Union B. Works/ Houston, Tex./ Trade Mark/ F
P & Co in triangle [logo]; U [with forked limbs,
on bottom]
Dr. Thompson's/ Eye Water/ New London
Dr. Price's/ Delicious/ Flavoring Extracts
Dr. Price's/ Delicious/ Flavoring Extracts
Dr. Price's/ Delicious/ Flavoring Extracts
CLC Co [on bottom only]
IV [probably indicating 4 ounce]
Citrate/ Magnesia [in device]
II H240 B___ [on bottom only]
Morris T. Gombert/ Houston
Anchovy Mustard/ Wolff & Reessing/ New York
Anchovy Mustard/ Wolff & Reessing/ New York
Vaseline/ Chesebrough/ New York; 6 [on
bottom]
Vaseline/ Chesebrough/ New York; 6 [on
bottom]
ii [ounce device]; open all night/ JJS [in
device]; J. J. Schott/ Druggist/ Galveston; WBM
Co [ on bottom]
Rubifoam/ for the/ teeth/ put up by/ E W Hoyt &
Co./ Lowell Mass
Houston Drug Co./ IXL Chill Cure
Houston Drug Co./ IXL Chill Cure
2 [on bottom]
2 [encircled on bottom]
W.B.M. C.O [on bottom]
99 [?]/ B [on bottom] [2 fragments]
Lea & Perrins Worcestshire Sauce; J8D/ S [on
bottom]
Mason's/ Patent/ Nov. 30th 1858; K2 [on
bottom]
It's French's; Design pat'd/ Feb 23-15 [on
bottom]
Waterman's Ink/ 2 oz; This container/ made
in/ USA/ 3
American Brewing Assn:/ Houston/ Texas; 2
[only on bottom of one]
American Brewing Assn:/ Houston/ Texas; 2
[only on bottom of one]
American Brewing Assn:/ Houston/ Texas; 2
[only on bottom of one]
8/ O [in square]/ 7 [on bottom only, looks like
miniature milk bottle]
H.P. Sauce; C [on bottom]

52

Color

Base
Shape

#

Clear
Clear

Flat Oval
Round

1
1

Clear
Aqua
Clear
Clear
Clear
Clear
Clear
Clear
Clear
Clear
Clear
Clear

Round
Round
Rectangle
Rectangle
Rectangle
Flat Oval
Flat Oval
Round
Round jar
Oval
Round
Round

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Clear

Round jar

1

Clear

Round jar

1

Clear

Rectangle

1

Clear
Aqua
Aqua
Aqua
Clear
Clear
Aqua

Rectangle
Rectangle
Rectangle
Flat Octag.
Round
Rectangle
Round

1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Aqua

Round

1

Aqua

Round jar

1

Clear

Round jar

1

Clear

Round

1

Clear

Round

1

Clear

Round

1

Clear

Round

1

Clear
Aqua

Round
Square

1
1

Site
41HR508

Block
278

Feat
9

41HR508

278

9

41HR508
41HR508

278
278

9
9

41HR508

278

10

41HR508

278

n/a

41HR508
41HR508
41HR508

278
278
278

n/a
n/a
n/a

41HR508

278

n/a

41HR508

278

n/a

41HR508
41HR508

278
278

n/a
n/a

41HR508
41HR508

278
278

n/a
n/a

41HR508

278

n/a

41HR508

278

n/a

41HR508

278

n/a

41HR508

278

n/a

41HR508
41HR508

278
278

n/a
n/a

Embossing
Sanford's [on bottom only]
5th Ward Bottling Works/ 5th Ward/ Houston,
Texas/ SB & G Co; F [on bottom];[stopper
inside]
Design patented/ pat aug 9 1898 [on bottom
only]
S [in star device]/ 2 [on bottom only]
2 1/ 2 Fl. Ozs. net/ Rit/ Prod. Div./ Indianapolis
Indiana [on bottom only]
Lawes & Co/ Belfast/ Ginger/ Ale [has convex
base]
Worcestershire Sauce/ Lea & Perrins; J45D/ S
[on bottom]
E.F. Schmidt/ 66 Travis St/ Houston
1 G Co/ B [on bottom only];[broken]
J.A. Gilka/ Berlin/ Schützen Str No 9; signature
of "J. A. Gilka"; Device with 2 men holding
clubs with a crown in upper center and an
unidentified symbol in center [on bottom]
Mellin's/ Infants Food/ Doliber, Coodale & Co/
Boston
Worcestershire Sauce/ Lea & Perrins; J42D/ S
[on bottom]
Dr. S. Pitcher's/ Castoria; 15 [on bottom]
Federal Law Forbids/ Sale Or Reuse Of/ This
Bottle; Stileria Serrall [?]/ Ponce/ Puerto Rico/ L
[U?] Es. Pat. 12822 [on bottom]; black plastic
screw-on top
small "S" [on bottom]
4 [Saturn-like maker's mark w/ "I" in center] 3/
11 [on bottom]; black screw-on plastic top
Federal Law Forbids Sale/ Or Reuse Of This
Bottle; images of industry, a house, and
encircled man's face; images of wheat or
flowers [on sides]; R679/ 55 [Saturn-like
maker's mark w/ "I" in center] 6/ M845C [on
bottom w/ in oval]
Federal Law Forbids Sale/ Or Reuse Of This
Bottle; images of industry, a house, and
encircled man's face; images of wheat or
flowers [on sides]; D9/ 56 [Saturn-like maker's
mark w/ "I" in center] 8/ M845-I [on bottom w/
in oval]
Federal Law Forbids Sale/ Or Re-Use Of This
Botle; D1/ One Pint w/ leaf pattern on base;
DES/ S1561?Pat/ Saturn-like maker's mark w/
"I" in center/ 60-9 w/ in oval [on bottom]
Excelsior/ Sewing Machine Oil/ New Bedford.
Mass
Houston/ Carbonate Co/ Houston/ Tex.

53

Color
Clear

Base
Shape
Square

#
1

Aqua

Round

1

Clear
Clear

Oval
Round

1
1

Clear

Round

1

Aqua

Round

1

Aqua
Clear
Brown

Round
Square
Round

1
1
1

Brown

Flat Octag.

1

Clear

Round

1

Aqua
Aqua

Round
Rectangle

1
1

Clear
Clear

Rectangle
Oval

1
1

Green

Rectangle

1

Clear

Oval

1

Clear

Curved
Oval

1

Clear

Oval

1

Clear
Aqua

Triangle
Round

1
1

Site

Block

Feat

Embossing

Color

Base
Shape

41HR508

278

n/a

This Contains/ Mrs. Stewart's Bluing; encircled
maker's mark on bottom

Clear

Oval

41HR508
41HR508

278
278

n/a
n/a

Clear
Clear

Rectangle
Round

1
1

41HR508

278

n/a

Clear

Round

1

41HR508

278

n/a

Clear

Round

1

41HR508

278

n/a

Clear

Round

1

41HR508
41HR508

278
278

n/a
n/a

Cobalt
Aqua

Oval
Rectangle

1
1

41HR508

278

n/a

Aqua

Rectangle

1

41HR508
41HR508

278
278

n/a
n/a

Brown
Clear

Round
Oval

1
1

41HR864

288

n/a

Aqua

Round

1

41HR864

288

n/a

Aqua

Round

1

41HR864

288

n/a

Aqua

Round

1

41HR864

288

n/a

Aqua

Round

1

41HR864

288

n/a

Aqua

Round

1

41HR864
41HR864

288
288

n/a
n/a

Clear
Clear

Round
Round

1
1

41HR864

288

n/a

Clear

Rectangle

1

7 [Saturn-like maker's mark w/ "I" in center] 4/ 2
[on bottom]
Mc C [on bottom]
2 [Saturn-like maker's mark w/ "I" in center] 4/
Fitch's [in cursive]/ Z [7?] [on bottom]; black
plastic screw-on plastic top
6½ Fl. Oz/ Squeeze/ Trademark/ Reg [all w/ in
a diamond]; Lonestar Bot. Wks./ Galveston/ [a
star w/ "3" in center] [on bottom]
7 [in a triangle] Half Pint Liquid/ LG/ Reg. Cal./
554.1; 2 [backwards & w/ in a circle]/ 42 [on
bottom]
Milk Of/ Magnesia; [encircled trademark w/
"Trade Mark/ C [w/ -through the center]/ O [&
symbol in center]; Reg. U.S. Pat. Off./ The
Chas. H. Phillips/ Chemical Company/
Glenbrook, Conn.; B-5/ U.S.A./ K928 [on
bottom]
Dr. S. Pitcher's/ Castoria; W [on bottom]
DR. King's/ New Discovery/ Chicago, Ill./ H. E.
Bucklen & Co; 3 [in oval on bottom]
7up/ 7 up [on neck]; G853 [on base]; 9/4/7 [& a
design] [on bottom]; 2 reflective tranfer labels
are partially visible
Wyeth & Bro/ Philada
Star Bottling/ Works Co./ Houston Texas; [5-pt
star device on side and bottom]; [stopper
inside]
Star Bottling/ Works Co./ Houston Texas; [5-pt
star device on side and bottom]; [stopper
inside]
Star Bottling/ Works Co./ Houston Texas; [5-pt
star device on side and bottom]; [stopper
inside]
Union B. Works/ Houston, Tex./ Trade Mark/ F
P & Co in a triangle [logo]; U [with forked limbs,
on bottom]
Union B. Works/ Houston, Tex./ Trade Mark/ F
P & Co in a triangle [logo]; U [with forked limbs,
on bottom]
Sugar-starch/ corn syrup/ U.S. certified/ colors
- 1/ 4 oz./ T. H. Stough Co./ Jeannette, PA./
Lynne doll nurser; 2/ m [in circle]/ Pat 136888
[on bottom]
2 1/ 2 fluid ounces [around neck]
Hind's/ Honey/ and / Almond/ Cream/ A S
Hinds Co./ Bloomfield/ N.J.U.S.A.; A S Hinds
Co./ Made in U.S.A./ H 774 21 [on bottom]

54

#
1

Color

Base
Shape

#

Clear

Rectangle

1

n/a
n/a
n/a

Embossing
1/ 2 [in circle on neck, graduated]; Lyric [ with
diamond device, on bottom]
Worcestershire Sauce/ Lea & Perrins; ACB.
Co. [on bottom]
Lyon's/ Kathairon/ For the Hair/ New York
Lea & Perrins [glass stopper only]

Aqua
Aqua
Clear

Round
Rectangle

1
1
1

n/a

Unknown

Clear

Site

Block

Feat

41HR864

288

n/a

41HR864
41HR864
41HR864

288
288
288

41HR864

288

Total Count

55

1
131

