Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project,
Dayton, Liberty County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8879
LJA B1117-1001.100

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

LJA Engineering, Inc.
Beaumont, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

April 2019

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project,
Dayton, Liberty County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

LJA Engineering, Inc.
2615 Calder Avenue, Suite 500
Beaumont, Texas 77702

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 S. Interstate 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
LJA B1117-1001.100

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8879

April 2019

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by LJA Engineering, Inc.
(LJA) on behalf of the city of Dayton to conduct an intensive cultural resources inventory and
assessment for the proposed Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project in Dayton,
Liberty County, Texas. The proposed undertaking would involve expanding two existing
roadways in connection with the proposed development of the Dayton Industrial Park. First, an
approximately 1.1-kilometer- (0.7-mile-) long by 21.3-meter- (70.0-foot-) wide segment of Stilson
Road would be expanded to the east of the existing right-of-way (ROW) extending southward
from its intersection with US Highway (US) 79, covering an area of 2.5 hectares (6.1 acres).
Second, an approximately 1.9-kilometer- (1.2-mile-) long by 6.1-meter- (20.0-foot-) wide segment
of US 90 would be expanded to the southeast of the existing ROW extending from Stilson Road
on the southwest to Farm-to-Market Road (FM) 492 on the northeast, covering an area of
1.2 hectares (3.0 acres). For purposes of the cultural resources survey, the project area is
assumed to consist of the Stilson Road and US 90 expansions, covering areas of 2.5 hectares
(6.1 acres) and 1.2 hectares (3.0 acres), respectively, for a total of 3.7 hectares (9.1 acres).
The proposed undertaking would be sponsored by the city of Dayton, a political
subdivision of the state of Texas; as such, the project would fall under the regulatory jurisdiction
of the Antiquities Code of Texas (Natural Resources Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). In addition, the
project may require the utilization of Nationwide Permits (NWP) issued by the US Army Corps of
Engineers (USACE) if the project would involve any impacts to “waters of the US.” In this case,
those portions of the overall project area subject to federal permitting would also fall under the
jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended.
As the proposed project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking, the project sponsor is
required to provide the applicable federal agencies and the Texas Historical Commission (THC),
which serves as the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) for the state of Texas, with an
opportunity to review and comment on the project’s potential to adversely affect historic properties
listed on or considered eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) under
the NHPA and/or for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL) under the Antiquities Code
of Texas, as appropriate.
On April 19 and 20, 2019, Horizon archeologist Charles E. Bludau conducted an intensive
cultural resources survey of the project area. The survey was conducted under the overall
direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, under Texas Antiquities Permit no. 8879.

B1117-1001.100

v

Management Summary

The purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural resources that potentially would
be impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s archeologist traversed the project area and
thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural
resources. The existing ROW of Stilson Road measures approximately 15.2 meters (50.0 feet)
in width and consists of a single-lane, paved road with very narrow shoulders covered in
manicured short grasses and lined with trees. The area of proposed new ROW east of the existing
Stilson Road ROW consists of open agricultural fields. The portion of the existing ROW of US 90
to the southeast of the northeast-bound lanes measures approximately 15.2 meters (50.0 feet) in
width and consists of a broad, contoured drainage channel covered in manicured short grasses.
No new ROW is proposed along the US 90 segment of the project. Visibility of the modern ground
surface was typically poor due to vegetative ground cover (<30%).
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of 16 shovel tests per mile per 30.5-meter (100.0-foot)
width of proposed ROW or fraction thereof for linear projects. The Stilson Road segment of the
project area measures approximately 1.1 kilometers (0.7 mile) long by 21.3 meters (70.0 feet)
wide, and the US 90 segment measures approximately 1.9 kilometers (1.2 miles) long by
6.1 meters (20.0 feet) wide, for a total linear distance of 3.1 kilometers (1.9 miles). As such, a
minimum of 30 shovel tests would be required within the project area. Horizon excavated a total
of 32 shovel tests during the survey, thereby exceeding the TSMASS requirements for a project
area of this size. Shovel testing typically revealed dense, iron-stained clay on the modern ground
surface and extending to depths of 10.0 to 50.0 centimeters (3.9 to 19.7 inches) below surface.
One shovel test consisted of loam overlying dense clay subsoil at a depth of 50.0 centimeters
(19.7 inches) below surface, though this was the exception. Many shovel tests exhibited signs of
disturbance in near-surface sediments in the form of chunks of asphalt and gravel road base. It
is Horizon’s opinion that sediments with the potential to contain subsurface archeological deposits
were fully penetrated and that the project area was adequately assessed for cultural resources.
No cultural resources of historic or prehistoric age were observed on the modern ground
surface or within any of the shovel tests excavated within the project area during the survey.
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for inclusion in the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4 or for designation as SALs according
to 13 TAC 26. Horizon recommends a finding of “no historic properties affected,” and no further
archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking. However,
human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are protected under the Texas Health and Safety
Code. In the event that any human remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered at any
point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously
surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent discovery,
and the THC should be notified immediately.

vi

LJA B1117-1001-100_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... v

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 7
2.1
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 7
2.2
Climate .........................................................................................................10
2.3
Flora and Fauna ...........................................................................................11

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................13
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) ....................................................13
3.2
Archaic Period (5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) ........................................................14
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (A.D. 100 to 600) .......................................................15
3.4
Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 600 to 1500) ...................................................16
3.5
Protohistoric Period (A.D. 1500 to 1700) ......................................................16
3.6
Historic Period (ca. A.D. 1700 to Present) ....................................................17

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ..........................................................................................23

5.0

SURVEY METHODOLOGY .....................................................................................25

6.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................29

7.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................31
7.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................31
7.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .....32
7.3
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Antiquities Landmark........................33
7.4
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................34
7.5
Management Recommendations ..................................................................35

8.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................37
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

B1117-1001.100

vii

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.

Vicinity Map of Project Area ...................................................................................... 2
Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle .................................... 3
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ......................................................... 4
Soils Mapped within Project Area ............................................................................. 9
Overview of Proposed US 90 Expansion Area (Facing Northeast) ...........................26
Overview of Proposed Stilson Road Expansion Area (Facing South) ......................26
Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Project Area ........................................27

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 1.

viii

Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area ......................................................... 8

LJA B1117-1001-100_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by LJA Engineering, Inc.
(LJA) on behalf of the city of Dayton to conduct an intensive cultural resources inventory and
assessment for the proposed Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project in Dayton,
Liberty County, Texas. The proposed undertaking would involve expanding two existing
roadways in connection with the proposed development of the Dayton Industrial Park. First, an
approximately 1.1-kilometer- (0.7-mile-) long by 21.3-meter- (70.0-foot-) wide segment of Stilson
Road would be expanded to the east of the existing right-of-way (ROW) extending southward
from its intersection with US Highway (US) 79, covering an area of 2.5 hectares (6.1 acres).
Second, an approximately 1.9-kilometer- (1.2-mile-) long by 6.1-meter- (20.0-foot-) wide segment
of US 90 would be expanded to the southeast of the existing ROW extending from Stilson Road
on the southwest to Farm-to-Market Road (FM) 492 on the northeast, covering an area of
1.2 hectares (3.0 acres). For purposes of the cultural resources survey, the project area is
assumed to consist of the Stilson Road and US 90 expansions, covering areas of 2.5 hectares
(6.1 acres) and 1.2 hectares (3.0 acres), respectively, for a total of 3.7 hectares (9.1 acres)
(Figures 1 to 3).
The proposed undertaking would be sponsored by the city of Dayton, a political
subdivision of the state of Texas; as such, the project would fall under the regulatory jurisdiction
of the Antiquities Code of Texas (Natural Resources Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). In addition, the
project may require the utilization of Nationwide Permits (NWP) issued by the US Army Corps of
Engineers (USACE) if the project would involve any impacts to “waters of the US.” In this case,
those portions of the overall project area subject to federal permitting would also fall under the
jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966, as amended.
As the proposed project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking, the project sponsor is
required to provide the applicable federal agencies and the Texas Historical Commission (THC),
which serves as the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) for the state of Texas, with an
opportunity to review and comment on the project’s potential to adversely affect historic properties
listed on or considered eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) under
the NHPA and/or for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL) under the Antiquities Code
of Texas, as appropriate.
On April 19 and 20, 2019, Horizon archeologist Charles E. Bludau conducted an intensive
cultural resources survey of the project area. The survey was conducted under the overall

B1117-1001.100

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Vicinity Map of Project Area

2

LJA B1117-1001-100_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle

B1117-1001.100

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 3. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

4

LJA B1117-1001-100_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, under Texas Antiquities Permit no. 8879.
The purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural resources that potentially would
be impacted by the proposed undertaking. The cultural resources investigation consisted of an
archival review, an intensive pedestrian survey of the project area, and the production of a report
suitable for review by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the THC’s
Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the Council of Texas Archeologists
(CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports.
Following this introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and
cultural backgrounds, respectively, of the project area. Chapter 4.0 describes the results of
background archival research, and Chapter 5.0 discusses cultural resources survey methods.
Chapter 6.0 presents the results of the cultural resources survey, and Chapter 7.0 presents
cultural resources management recommendations for the project. Chapter 8.0 lists the
references cited in the report, and Appendix A summarizes shovel test data.

B1117-1001.100

5

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

The project area is located southwest of Dayton in southwestern Liberty County, Texas.
Liberty County is situated on the Gulf Coastal Plain in southeastern Texas, and the project site is
located about 69.2 kilometers (43.0 miles) northwest the Gulf of Mexico. The Gulf of Mexico
represents a structural basin formed by lithosphere deformation. The Texas Coastal Plain, which
extends as far north as the Ouachita uplift in southern Oklahoma and westward to the Balcones
Escarpment, consists of seaward-dipping bodies of sedimentary rock, most of which are of
terrigenous clastic origin, that reflect the gradual infilling of the basin from its margins (Abbott
2001). The region is underlain by rocks and unconsolidated sediments that are quite young in a
geological sense, ranging from modern to Miocene in age. These consist predominantly of a
series of fluviodeltaic bodies arranged in an offlapped sequence, with interdigitated and capping
eolian, littoral, and estuarine facies making up a relatively minor component of the lithology. Major
bounding disconformities between these formations are usually interpreted to represent
depositional hiatuses that occurred during periods of sea level low stand. The oldest rocks in this
fill are of Late Cretaceous age. As a result of the geometry of basin filling, successively younger
rock units crop out in subparallel bands from the basin margin toward the modern coastline.
The project area is situated on a coastal upland flat within the Old River basin. An
unnamed tributary of East Prong Creek arises near the approximate mid-point of the US 90
segment of the project area and flows southwards, ultimately joining with West Prong Creek to
form the Old River. The Old River flows generally southward and discharges into Old River Lake
off of Trinity Bay. Elevations within the project area are relatively flat, ranging only from
approximately 20.1 to 21.9 meters (66.0 to 72.0 feet) above mean sea level, sloping gently to the
south.

2.1

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

Geologically, the project area is underlain by the Beaumont Formation (Fisher 1982). The
Beaumont, or Prairie, terrace is the youngest continuous coastwise terrace fronting the modern
Gulf (Abbott 2001). The Beaumont Formation consists of clay, silt, and fine sand arranged in
spatial patterns that reflect the distribution of fluvial (e.g., channel, point bar, levee, and
backswamp) and mudflat/coastal marsh facies (Van Siclen 1985). Sandy deposits associated
with littoral facies are also frequently considered part of the Beaumont. Many investigators (cf.
DuBar et al. 1991; Fisk 1938, 1940) have correlated the Beaumont terrace with the Sangamon

B1117-1001.100

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Interglacial (ca. 130 to 75 thousand years ago [kya]), although age estimates range from Middle
Wisconsinan (Alford and Holmes 1985) to 100 to 600 kya (Blum and Price 1994). While debate
about the temporal affiliations of and correlations among the deposits that underlie the major
coastline terraces remain active, they are of little direct geoarcheological relevance because
virtually all investigators agree that these deposits considerably predate the earliest demonstrated
dates of human occupation in North America.
Specifically, the project area is underlain by the League clay, 0 to 1% slopes (LeaA), and
Mocarey-Yeaton complex, 0 to 1% slopes (MofA) soil units (Table 1; Figure 4) (NRCS 2019).
These soils typically consist of clayey and loamy fluviomarine deposits derived from igneous,
metamorphic, and sedimentary rocks found on coastal flats. No Holocene-age alluvial sediments
are mapped within the project area.
In southeast Texas, aboriginal archeological sites are commonly encountered in upland
settings, adjacent to major streams and rivers, and in coastal settings, and historic-age sites may
occur in virtually any physiographic setting. Other things being equal, the physiographic setting
of the project area on a coastal flat adjacent to a minor stream system would suggest that the
survey area possesses at least moderate potential for aboriginal archeological resources.
Historic-age cultural resources may occur in virtually any physiographic setting but are most
common in urban areas and in rural settings suitable for agriculture. Examination of historical US
Geological Survey (USGS) topographic maps and aerial photographs indicate that there have
been several small homesteads or farmsteads located adjacent to US 90 and Stilson Road,
suggesting that the project area has at least moderate potential for historic-age archeological
resources. However, the potential for intact archeological deposits within the project area is
reduced by the extent of disturbances associated with construction, use, and ongoing
maintenance of the adjacent existing roadway ROWs and associated utilities.
Table 1. Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area
NRCS
Soil Code

Soil Name

Parent Material

Typical Profile
(inches)

LeaA

League clay,
0 to 1% slopes

Clayey fluviomarine deposits on
coastal flats

0-6: Clay (Ap)
6-11: Silty clay (Bw)
11-36: Clay (Bss)
36-80: Clay (Bssg)

MofA

Mocarey-Yeaton
complex,
0 to 1% slopes

Loamy fluviomarine deposits on
coastal flats

Mocarey:
0-12: Loam (A)
12-18: Loam (Bw)
18-66: Loam (Bk)
66-80: Clay loam (Bkg)
Yeaton:
0-8: Loam (Ap)
8-13: Loam (E)
13-33: Clay loam (Bt)
18-66: Loam (Btk)
66-80: Silt loam (Btkg)

Source: NRCS 2019
NRCS = Natural Resources Conservation Service

8

LJA B1117-1001-100_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

Figure 4. Soils Mapped within Project Area

B1117-1001.100

9

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

2.2

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995). Bryant
and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas from
the Wisconsin Full Glacial period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.) through the Late Glacial period
(14,000 to 10,000 B.P.) to the Post-Glacial period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence from the
Wisconsin Full Glacial period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was considerably
cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was more heavily
forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway 1985). The Late
Glacial period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow warming and/or drying
trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands were gradually replaced by
grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985). During the Post-Glacial period,
the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more stable. The deciduous forests
had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas. The drying and/or warming
trend that began in the Late Glacial period continued into the mid-Holocene, at which point there
appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic conditions lasting from roughly 6,000 to
5,000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway (1985) indicate that modern environmental
conditions in east-central Texas were probably achieved by 1,500 years ago.
The modern climate of the upper Texas coast is classified as subtropical humid (Abbott
2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983), forming a transitional zone between the humid southeastern US
and the semiarid to arid west. The climate reflects the influences of latitude, low elevation, and
proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, which combine with the urban heat island formed by the
tremendous concentration of asphalt and concrete to give the Houston area a notorious modern
climate that is oppressively warm and moist throughout much of the year. As a result of proximity
to the Gulf and the abundance of surface water, humidity in the early morning can approach 100%
even on cloudless summer days, and it often exceeds 50% even on the warmest afternoons.
Largely as a consequence of the relatively high humidity characteristic of the region, temperature
patterns exhibit a moderate annual range and a modest diurnal range that increases slightly with
distance from the coast. Average monthly high temperature ranges from a low of 17 to 19°Celcius
(°C) (59 to 63°Fahrenheit [°F]) in January to a high of 38 to 40°C (89 to 96°F) in August. Average
monthly lows range from 4 to 9°C (38 to 47°F) in January to 25 to 29°C (72 to 79°F) in July and
August. Annually, average low temperatures range from 15 to 21°C (56 to 65°F), and average
high temperatures range from 27 to 29°C (75 to 79°F) (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983).
The region experiences two precipitation peaks throughout the year (Abbott 2001). The
first occurs in the late spring (i.e., May to June) due to the passage of infrequent cold fronts that
spawn chains of powerful frontal thunderstorms. The second occurs in the late summer to early
autumn (i.e., August to September) due to the incidence of tropical storms and hurricanes from
the Atlantic and, occasionally, Pacific oceans. In contrast, winter and early spring are relatively
dry, and high summer rainfall is dominated by convectional thunderstorms that are relatively brief
and localized, albeit frequently intense. Average annual precipitation varies from a low of
approximately 101.6 centimeters (40.0 inches) to a high of more than 132.1 centimeters
(52.0 inches). Average monthly precipitation varies from less than 5.1 to 7.6 centimeters (2.0 to

10

LJA B1117-1001-100_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

3 inches) in March to more than 19.1 centimeters (7.5 inches) occurring locally on the coast
during September. Almost all of the measurable precipitation falls as rain—snowfall is extremely
rare, occurring in measurable amounts in only 1 in 10 years.

2.3

FLORA AND FAUNA

Liberty County is situated near the southeastern edge of the Texan biotic province (Blair
1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian provinces
and the grasslands of the Kansas, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some species reach
the limits of their ecological range within the Texanprovince. McMahon et al. (1984) further define
four broad communities that characterize that portion of the Texan biotic province that lies on the
Gulf Coastal Plain: (1) coastal marsh/barrier island, (2) coastal prairie, (3) coastal gallery forest,
and (4) pine-hardwood forest (cf. Abbott 2001:24-26).
The coastal marsh/barrier island category includes well-drained, sandy, coastal
environments and saline and freshwater wetlands in the coastal zone (Abbott 2001:24). Marsh
vegetation is typical of areas that are seasonally wet and have substrates composed primarily of
sands and silts, clays, or organic decomposition products. Vegetation assemblages are strongly
controlled by texture, salinity, frequency and duration of inundation, and depth of the seasonal
water table. Sandy, relatively well-drained, freshwater environments are typically dominated by
little bluestem, switchgrass, Florida paspalum, and brownseed paspalum. Wetter environments
are often dominated by marshhay cordgrass, seashore saltgrass, saggitaria, bulrushes, smooth
cordgrass, seashore paspalum, seashore dropseed, olney bulrush, saltmarsh bulrush, saltmarsh
aster, longtom, sprangletop, burhead, arrowhead, coastal waterhyssop, needlegrass rush, and
other sedges and rushes. Slightly higher, better-drained environments are characterized by such
taxa as seashore saltgrass, seashore paspalum, gulfdune paspalum, shoregrass, gulf cordgrass,
red lovegrass, bushy sea-oxey, and glasswort. A variety of fauna are characteristic of the shore
zone. Important larger taxa include raccoon, nutria, alligators, turtles, swamp rabbit, and many
birds, including ducks, geese, herons, and many smaller species. Aquatic taxa, including a wealth
of fish and shellfish adapted to brackish to hypersaline conditions, are also important in the coastal
zone.
The coastal prairie category consists primarily of grasses with minor amounts of forbs and
woody plants in areas that are not saturated on a seasonal basis (Abbott 2001:24-26). This
community is characteristic of upland areas and grades into the pine-hardwood forest to the north
and east and into the coastal marsh/barrier island to the south. A wide variety of grasses are
found in the prairie environments, but the principal taxa include big bluestem, little bluestem,
indiangrass, eastern grama, switchgrass, brownseed paspalum, sideoats grama, silver bluestem,
buffalograss, threeawn, and Texas wintergrass. Common forbs include Maximilian sunflower,
Engelman daisy, blacksalmon, penstemon, dotted gayfeather, bundleflower, yellow neptunia,
snoutbean, prairie clover, tickclover, wildbean, western indigo, paintbrush, bluebonnet, ragweed,
croton, milkweed, vetch, verbena, and winecup. Woody plants occurring in the coastal prairie
include mesquite, honey locust, huisache, eastern baccharis, sesbania, live oak, elm, hackberry,
bumelia, and coralberry. The frequency of trees increases dramatically as the coastal prairie
grades into the pine-hardwood forest, forming an open woodland environment with common

B1117-1001.100

11

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

stands of hardwood trees and occasional pines. The coastal prairie is home to a diverse fauna,
including coyote, white-tailed deer, skunks, cottontail rabbit, many small rodents, amphibians,
reptiles, and a variety of permanent and migratory birds. Bison and pronghorn were also present
at various times in the past.
The coastal gallery forest consists of diverse, principally deciduous trees and associated
understory in floodplains and streams that traverse the outer coastal plain (Abbott 2001:26).
Important taxa include water oak, pecan, poplar, American elm, cedar elm, sugarberry, ash,
loblolly pine, post oak, cherrybark oak, mulberry, swamp chestnut oak, willow oak, sweetgum,
hawthorn, dogwood, hickory, bois d’arc, sassafras cypress, willow, cottonwood, and sumac.
Shrubs and vines such as mustang grape, greenbriar, yaupon, coralberry, possumhaw,
elderberry, honeysuckle, dewberry, and blackberry are common in the understory, as are grasses
such as little bluestem, big bluestem, and indiangrass. The fauna of the gallery forest include
white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, turkey, a variety of small mammals and rodents,
turtles, snakes, and many birds. Black bear was also present at various times in the past, and a
number of fish and a few varieties of shellfish are present in the streams.
The pine-hardwood forest is characterized by a mix of coniferous and deciduous trees,
including longleaf pine, shortleaf pine, loblolly pine, post oak, red oak, white oak, blackjack oak,
willow oak, and live oak (Abbott 2001:26). Riparian environments often support larger deciduous
trees like pecan, cottonwood, hickory, beech, and American elm. Understory vegetation varies
from relatively open to quite dense, and consists of shrubs, vines, forbs, and young trees.
Common shrubs include acacia, yaupon, mayhaw, wild persimmon, myrtle, greenbriar, Virginia
creeper, blackberry, dewberry, trumpet vine, gourd, and poison ivy. A variety of fauna is also
present, including white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, rabbit, mink, skunk, various small
rodents, turtles, reptiles, and many different birds. Black bear was also present at times in the
past, and bison and pronghorn were occasionally present in the transition zone to the coastal
prairie environment.

12

LJA B1117-1001-100_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within the Southeast Texas Archeological Region, a 21-county
area extending from the Colorado River on the west to the Sabine River on the east and
measuring about 199.5 kilometers (124.0 miles) inland from the Gulf of Mexico coastline. Much
of the archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between the Southern
Great Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995; Story 1990).
Further distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin subregions of
Southeast Texas. These two subregions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the inland
subregion has a much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast Texas
comprises a zone about 25.7 kilometers (16.0 miles) inland from the coast that covers the area
influenced by Gulf tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable ecological
variability characterizes this subregion, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes, wetlands,
marine coastline, and barrier islands. The inland subregion also encompasses considerable
ecological diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney woods.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to denote
Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural characteristics of
Southeast Texas culture periods are often different than in neighboring regions. For instance, the
Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and Southeast Texas, and
Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time in
Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit evidence of
reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be associated
with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of subsistence-related
activities. Inland sites also tend to contain modest pottery assemblages, fired clay balls (at some
sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal sites tend to consist of
multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain oyster shell tools, large quantities of pottery
(in later cultural components), numerous bone tools, and only a few lithic artifacts.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (10,000 TO 5000 B.C.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;

B1117-1001.100

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period.
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is represented
by the PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) (Patterson 1995). This stage coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various periods
within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted, lanceolate
projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end-scrapers, gravers, and
bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas are
known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the exploitation of
small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There is little evidence in
this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented elsewhere in North
America; rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been practiced during all
prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into two periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 8000 B.C.), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian period
(8000 to 5000 B.C.), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (5000 B.C. TO A.D. 100)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signaled the beginning of the Archaic stage
(5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) (Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a
significant reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Southeast Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding
decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture shows
greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of groundstone
technology.

14

LJA B1117-1001-100_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods. In
Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5000 to 3000 B.C.) is marked by the presence of Bell,
Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The Bell
point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains. Many of
the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3000 to 1500 B.C.) and several new
types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and probably the GaryKent series. The Late Archaic period (1,500 B.C. to A.D. 100) is characterized by Gary, Kent,
Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos points.
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition developed
in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981; Patterson
1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period but reached
full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as boatstones and
bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang knives, stingray
spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial practices included the
systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre, and use of locally made
grave goods, such as longbone implements and bone pins. Most burials are found in extended
supine position, though some extended prone and bundle burials are also known. Burial direction
is usually consistent within single sites but varies from site to site. Patterson et al. (1993) report
that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton
counties.

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (A.D. 100 TO 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 B.C., in the Galveston Bay area by
about A.D. 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about A.D. 300, and in the ConroeLivingston inland area by about A.D. 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears to have
progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995). Southeastern
Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where Aten (1983)
established a detailed chronological sequence.
The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte
ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville
Stamped are common, while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area
128.7 kilometers (80 miles) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal
exception of a few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found
on the Gulf coast west of the Sabine Lake area.
Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early part of the Historic periods (Aten
1984; Patterson 1995; Pertulla et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility ware

B1117-1001.100

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown Plain for
about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods before
once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety, Goose
Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor pottery
types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway (Aten
1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte types
are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste (like
Goose Creek), while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas is not common in Southeast Texas.

3.4

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 600 TO 1500)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 600 to 1500) (Patterson 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the latter
part of the Late Prehistoric period, but, as already discussed, ceramics appear earlier in Southeast
Texas. Along the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e., spearthrower) and
spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though they continued to be
used in the inland subregion along with the bow and arrow through the Late Prehistoric period
(Ensor and Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In fact,
Patterson (1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in Southeast Texas as early
as the end of the Middle Archaic period, using unifacial arrow points that consisted of marginally
retouched flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a generalized date of adoption of the bowand-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca. A.D. 600) in Central and Southeast Texas.
In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade
technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba, Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn. A serial
sequence for these point types has not been established in Southeast Texas, though Scallorn
points appear to predate Perdiz points throughout the rest of Texas.
Grog- (i.e., crushed-sherd-) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto Plain
and Baytown Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small
proportion of small-sized temper, while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that
are often visible on vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek pottery
remained in use throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphalt Coated
pottery from the Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in Southeast Texas
during the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods.

3.5

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1500 TO 1700)

For the most part, Protohistoric and early Historic Indian sites in Southeast Texas have
not been articulated with the ethnographic record (Story 1990:258). Similarly, reconciling the
ethnographic record to prehistoric Indian groups in this region is problematic. Late Prehistoric
and Historic population movements further complicate this issue. Aten (1983) has reconstructed

16

LJA B1117-1001-100_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

the territories of native groups present in this region in the early 18th century, including the
Akokisa, Atakapa, Bidai, Coco (possibly Karankawa), and Tonkawa. The presence of the
Tonkawa in Southeast Texas may be due to their rapid expansion from Central Texas in the 17th
and 18th centuries (Newcomb 1993:27). The Karankawa Indians are thought to have occupied
the coastal margin of this region as far east as Galveston Island and the corresponding mainland
(Aten 1983). Judging by the scarcity of Rockport pottery on sites east of the San Bernard River,
the ethnic association of the Karankawa Indians with the Coco tribe may be in doubt.
Protohistoric and Historic Indian sites may not be systematically recognized as such
because few aboriginal artifact types changed from the Late Prehistoric to the Historic periods
(Patterson 1995). Only a few non-European artifact types are useful in identifying Historic Indian
sites, including Bulbar Stemmed and Guerrero arrow points and possibly Fresno and Cuney
points after A.D. 1500 (Hudgins 1986). Historic period Indian sites are usually identified by the
presence of glass and metal artifacts, gunflints, and European types of pottery.

3.6

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. A.D. 1700 TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when Álvarez
de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Álvar Núñez Cabeza de
Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay;
however, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The
first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as
the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native culture and social
systems. This process is clearly discernible at the Mitchell Ridge site, where the burial data
suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as increased participation
on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the time heavy settlement of
Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian population was
greatly diminished. The Alabama/Coushatta Indians who currently reside in Southeast Texas are
migrants who were displaced from the east in the late 18th to early 19th centuries (Newcomb
1961).
Throughout most of the 18th century, the area now included within Liberty County was
contested by French interests seeking to expand from Louisiana to the east and Spanish interests
from the west and south.1 Though the Spanish crown granted Pánfilo de Narváez the privilege
to colonize the lands between the Rio Grande and the cape of Florida in 1526, Karankawa Indians,
including Coapites and related groups, were the sole occupants of the future Liberty County until
the 1740s. Rumors of French exploration on the Texas coast by Joseph Blancpain and others
prompted the Spanish to send Joaquín de Orobio y Basterra on an exploratory expedition in 1748,
and fears of French intrusion continued. The Spanish established Nuestra Señora de la Luz
Mission and San Agustín de Ahumada Presidio in 1756; the mission was for the Akokisa and
Bidai Indians. Spanish maps in 1757 showed the Atascosito settlement and a Spanish military

1

The following history of Liberty County has been adapted from TSHA (2019).

B1117-1001.100

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

road known as the Atascosito Road, which crossed the Trinity near the present site of Liberty.
Ten years later, the Marqués de Rubí included the area in his tour of inspection, but parts of the
mission were destroyed by a storm in 1766 and the presidio was abandoned in 1772. According
to some sources, a trading-post settlement named Arkokisa or Arkosisa (variants of Akokisa)
existed from roughly 1770 to 1790 near what later became the townsite of Liberty.
The Louisiana Purchase altered the balance of power between the Spanish and the
French in 1803, and Spanish efforts to discourage American immigration to Texas increased.
Nonetheless, the open land attracted numerous immigrants from Louisiana, Mississippi, and the
adjoining states. In 1818, Charles F.A. Lallemand and Antoine Rigaud made an unsuccessful
attempt to colonize Bonapartist refugees at Champ d'Asile, near the site of present Liberty.
Coushatta Indians, who arrived in Texas from Alabama around 1807 and were later placed on an
East Texas reservation, inhabited the east bank of the Trinity during this period. After Mexico
won its independence from Spain, more American settlers came in response to promised grants
of land, and much of what later became Liberty County and adjacent counties soon were part of
an empresario grant made to Joseph B. Vehlein in 1826 and transferred to the Galveston Bay
and Texas Land Company in 1830. A new Atascosito District developed in Mexican Texas when
settlers established an independent colony in 1826. Local administration of the area was
conducted at Atascosito until 1831. In the battle for allegiance, some residents of the Liberty area
supported the Mexican government and participated in quelling the Fredonian Rebellion.
However, the Law of April 6, 1830, which prohibited further American immigration, pushed settlers
too far. When the Mexican government failed to recognize titles given by the Galveston Bay and
Texas Land Company, settlers and squatters in the coastal area petitioned the commander-inchief of Coahuila and Texas for land titles and organization of a local government. In 1831, land
commissioner José Francisco Madero organized a municipality known as Villa de la Santísima
Trinidad de la Libertad, which embraced most of Southeast Texas; it was bounded on the east by
the Sabine River, on the west by the San Jacinto, by Nacogdoches Municipality on the north, and
by the Gulf of Mexico to the south. Hugh B. Johnston served as alcalde. The new seat of
government, called Liberty by the Anglo-Americans, was located about 4.8 kilometers (3.0 miles)
southwest of old Atascosito. In activities that led to the Anahuac disturbances of 1832, John
Davis Bradburn, commander of the fort at Anahuac, attempted to annul the act, arrested Madero
and the land commissioners who had given titles in the Liberty area, and attempted to dissolve
the municipality. Some settlers pledged loyalty to Antonio López de Santa Anna in the Turtle
Bayou Resolutions. Nonetheless, the territory between the San Jacinto and Sabine rivers
continued to be known thereafter as Liberty and functioned as a municipality.
As events began to foreshadow the Texas Revolution, Augustine B. Hardin, Pierre J.
Menard, Henry W. Millard, Claiborne West, and Hugh B. Johnston represented the area at the
Consultation. By 1835, despite governmental difficulties and a lack of land titles, the municipality’s
population increased to more than 1,000. Andrew Briscoe’s Liberty Volunteers were organized
in 1835 and later fought at the Battle of Concepción and the Siege of Bexar. Soldiers from Liberty
County formed the Third Infantry Company, Second Regiment, under William M. Logan; this unit
fought along with other men from the county at the Battle of San Jacinto. Mexican prisoners
captured at San Jacinto were sent to Liberty before release. Liberty County, formed and
organized in 1836 in the new Republic of Texas, originally included all of the future Tyler County

18

LJA B1117-1001-100_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

and parts of what later became Hardin, Chambers, San Jacinto, and Polk counties. Liberty was
named county seat and incorporated in 1837. Sam Houston maintained two homes in the area
and purchased more than 20,000 acres of land within the county’s original boundaries.
Antebellum Liberty County was characterized by plantations along the Trinity that raised
cotton, sugarcane, tobacco, indigo, grains, and vegetables. Lumber mills were in operation, and
Liberty shipped cotton, hides, Indian corn, cattle, and lumber down the Trinity. The county
economy received a further boost in 1840 when James Taylor White established the cattle
industry with an extensive ranch at Turtle Bayou in what is now Chambers County. Cattle drives
began moving eastward to Louisiana, and some cattlemen sold their animals to a meatpacking
plant at Liberty Landing, operated by the English firm Jones and Company. Cattle numbered
14,058 in 1840 and 45,670 in 1850. Wealthy aristocratic Creole planters from Louisiana arrived
in Liberty County with their slaves in 1845, and by 1850 the county population had grown to 2,522.
Sawmills made the lumber industry the county’s first major industry. River travel by steamboat
flourished from 1838 to 1878. Early attempts to build a railroad from Liberty to Livingston were
interrupted by the Civil War. Efforts to extend the navigable portion of the Trinity began in 1852
and continued spasmodically thereafter. Only the Texas and New Orleans Railroad (later the
Southern Pacific) from Houston via Liberty and Beaumont to Orange was in place by 1860.
Liberty County residents voted 422 to 10 for secession and contributed to several
Confederate units in the Civil War. The Liberty Invincibles, organized in 1861, were later
Company F of the Fifth Regiment of Texas Volunteers. The Moss Bluff Rebels, also organized in
1861, served mostly as cavalry Company F of Major J.B. Likens’ battalion. Captains W.D. Davis
and Edward Bradford Pickett commanded companies, while other groups served under S.G.
Cleveland and Thomas Dudley Wooten. A militia company was organized to guard the home
front.
After the war, many freedmen worked for their former masters or settled in the county and
started small farms. The black population was 1,079 in 1860 and 1,975 in 1870. The Freedmen’s
Bureau operated in Liberty from 1866 until 1868, with Dr. J. Orville Shelby and A.H. Mayer serving
as the bureau representatives for most of the period. Suffrage caused conflict during
Reconstruction. Officials arrested and tried a Republican organizer for “exciting Negroes to acts
of hostility to whites,” and Republican voters in the county dropped from 255 in 1869 to zero in
1873. The black population approached parity with the white in 1880 but declined thereafter to
about a third of the county population in the early decades of the 20th century. In 1871, steamboat
travel resumed when the Trinity River Navigation Company, with headquarters at Liberty,
incorporated to run steamboats from that city to Galveston. US government assistance for making
the Trinity more navigable came after 1880, and by 1940 a total of 379.7 kilometers (236.0 miles)
of waterway had been constructed. Nonetheless, railroad construction, which began largely after
Reconstruction, caused a severe blow to the port of Liberty. The Gulf, Colorado and Santa Fe
(later the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe) crossed the northern part of the county through
Cleveland, Romayor, Fuqua, and other former timber towns by 1900, and by 1907 10 miles of the
proposed Trinity Valley and Northern line from Dayton to Cleveland had been completed. The
Beaumont, Sour Lake and Western Railway (later the Missouri Pacific) built across the central
part of the county through Eastgate, Kenefick, Sandune Station, Hardin, and Hull parallel to the

B1117-1001.100

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Texas and New Orleans, and Ross S. Sterling’s Dayton-Goose Creek line reached Dayton in
1917. Liberty County had 22 white schools in operation by 1880. The population remained nearly
constant from 1870, when the figure of 4,414 included some residents of what became San
Jacinto County that year, to 1890, when it numbered 4,230. In the next decade, however, it nearly
doubled in size, reaching 8,102 in 1900 in an expansion that reflected important growth in the
county’s agriculture and industry. Much as they had become a center for Texas cattle production,
Liberty County and the Atascosito District became a center of the Texas rice industry around
1900, when irrigation plants were developed at Stilton and White’s Bayou and the Raywood Rice
Company began promotion of rice culture. E.W. Boyt, for example, combined rice growing and
cattle raising on a large spread in Liberty and Chambers counties.
Prospecting for oil began about 1901, chiefly in the southern part of the county. Daisetta
and Hull became oil towns after a nearby field was discovered in 1918. Wells were brought in at
Old River Lake by 1904. Others were opened at North Dayton, Esperson Dome, Moss Bluff,
Davis Hill, and South Liberty in 1925 and Hankamer in 1929. Pipelines crossed the county. By
1990, oilfields in Liberty County had cumulatively produced almost 496 million barrels of oil, as
well as significant amounts of natural gas. The county population increased steadily in the first
half of the 20th century, reaching 14,637 by 1920 and 24,541 by 1940. The number of farms
increased from 1,001 in 1900 to an all-time high of 1,961 in 1940. Corn, rice, and cotton, the
major crops, though fluctuating somewhat in relative importance, accounted for 85 to 92% of
Liberty County agricultural revenue in the 1920s and 1930s. Livestock raising was also important.
In 1930, swine raising peaked at 31,242 hogs, and in 1936 Liberty County was the leading hog
county in the state. Hog production declined in the 1930s and recovered somewhat by 1940.
Cattle raising held steady at some 30,000 heads through 1950. Lumbering also remained an
important county industry.
With its varied agriculture and resource industries, Liberty County was spared some of the
worst effects of the agricultural fluctuations of the 1920s and the Great Depression. The number
of tenant farmers increased from 294 in 1920 to 709 (46% of county farmers) in 1930 and
remained high through the 1930s. The value of farms actually increased by almost 30% during
the 1930s. During World War II, a camp for German prisoners of war operated at the fairgrounds
in Liberty. Manufacturing in the county, which had been minimal, expanded as a result of the war,
from 22 establishments employing 370 workers in 1940 to 52 firms employing 744 workers by
1948. In that year, Texas Gulf Sulphur Company (later Texasgulf) mined sulfur at Moss Bluff,
south of Liberty. Forty manufacturing plants operated in 1958, along with 165 mineral companies,
and a Central Chemical Corporation plant was completed by 1962. Cotton and corn declined
after the war, and soybeans joined rice as the most important crops. More than 2/3 of the county’s
farms had electricity by 1945, and farm tenancy declined dramatically during the 1940s. Further
improvement in transportation came in the 1960s, when US Highway 59 was built through the
county. Cleveland became a lumber and oilfield supply center, Dayton a rice and oilfield center,
and Hull and Daisetta oil and lumber markets. Liberty, remaining a key port on the barge canal,
shipped sulfur, chemicals, and steel. Agribusiness and tourism expanded in this period, and many
residents found work in the Houston metropolitan area.

20

LJA B1117-1001-100_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

By the 1980s, 52% of the land was in farms and ranches and 36% was under cultivation.
Nevertheless, the county continued to be known primarily for forest products. Primary crops
included rice and soybeans, wheat, hay, and some watermelons, peaches, and pecans. Business
establishments numbered 954. Oil and gas, sulfur, veneer and plywood, concrete, steel, and
metal goods were other major industrial products. Farmers planted 4,800 acres of hay, 34,100
acres of rice, and 89,300 acres of sorghum in 1982, when cattle numbered 22,000. A total of 858
farms, or roughly half the number of 1940, continued in operation. Their average size was
418 acres. In the postwar period, the population in rural Liberty County grew approximately twice
as fast as that in urban areas. The aggregate population continued to grow steadily, reaching
26,729 in 1950, 33,014 in 1970, 47,088 in 1980, and 52,716 in 1990. In contrast to the 30%
growth in the 1970s, the increase in the 1980s was a more sedate 11%. The proportion of African
Americans fell to 25% in 1940, 20% in 1970, and 13% in 1990. A small Hispanic population grew
from some 2% of county residents in 1980 to 5.5% in 1990. The larger communities in 1990
included Liberty (population 7,733), Cleveland (7,124), Dayton (5,151), Ames (989), Daisetta
(969), Hardin (563), Plum Grove (480), Kenefick (435), North Cleveland (176), and Devers (318).
In 1994, Trinity River National Wildlife Refuge in northern Liberty County was established
with the purchase of 4,400 acres. The purpose of the refuge, which continued to grow to
25,000 acres, is to protect part of the bottomland hardwood forest ecosystem along the Trinity
River. The refuge is also a habitat for diverse waterfowl species, more than 620 plant species,
and 400 vertebrate species.

B1117-1001.100

21

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed the THC’s online Texas
Archeological Sites Atlas (TASA) and Texas Historic Sites Atlas (THSA), the National Park
Service’s (NPS) online National Register Information System (NRIS), and the Texas Department
of Transportation’s (TxDOT) Historic Districts & Properties of Texas and Historic Bridges of Texas
online databases for information on previously recorded archeological sites and previous
archeological investigations conducted within a 1.6-kilometer (1.0-mile) radius of the project area.
Based on this archival research, no known cultural archeological sites, cemeteries, or historic
properties listed on the NRHP or designated as SALs are present within a 1.6-kilometer (1.0-mile)
radius of the project area (THC 2019; TxDOT 2019a, 2019b). No previous cultural resources
surveys have been conducted within or near the project area (THC 2019).
A review of historical aerial photographs dating from 1952 to the present and USGS
topographic maps dating from 1957 to the present indicates that no historic-age structures have
stood within the project area since at least the mid-20th century (NETR 2019). Several structures
are depicted beyond the project area off the southeastern side of US 90 and along either side of
Stilson Road on imagery dating from 1952 to 1966, though most of these structures appear to
have been removed by 1985. As such, the project area has low potential to contain historic-age
architectural resources, though the former presence of multiple nearby 20th-century homesteads
or farmsteads suggests at least some potential for historic-age archeological resources.

B1117-1001.100

23

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

5.0 SURVEY METHODOLOGY

On April 19 and 20, 2019, Horizon archeologist Charles E. Bludau conducted an intensive
cultural resources survey of the project area. The purpose of the survey was to locate any
significant cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking.
Horizon’s archeologist traversed the project area and thoroughly inspected the modern ground
surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The existing ROW of Stilson Road
measures approximately 15.2 meters (50.0 feet) in width and consists of a single-lane, paved
road with very narrow shoulders covered in manicured short grasses and lined with trees. The
area of proposed new ROW east of the existing Stilson Road ROW consists of open agricultural
fields. The portion of the existing ROW of US 90 to the southeast of the northeast-bound lanes
measures approximately 15.2 meters (50.0 feet) in width and consists of a broad, contoured
drainage channel covered in manicured short grasses. No new ROW is proposed along the
US 90 segment of the project. Visibility of the modern ground surface was typically poor due to
vegetative ground cover (<30%). Disturbances associated with construction, use, and ongoing
maintenance of the adjacent roadways are extensive (Figures 5 to 6).
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of 16 shovel tests per mile per 30.5-meter (100.0-foot)
width of proposed ROW or fraction thereof for linear projects. The Stilson Road segment of the
project area measures approximately 1.1 kilometers (0.7 mile) long by 21.3 meters (70.0 feet)
wide, and the US 90 segment measures approximately 1.9 kilometers (1.2 miles) long by
6.1 meters (20.0 feet) wide, for a total linear distance of 3.1 kilometers (1.9 miles). As such, a
minimum of 30 shovel tests would be required within the project area. Horizon excavated a total
of 32 shovel tests during the survey, thereby exceeding the TSMASS requirements for a project
area of this size (Figure 7). Shovel tests generally measured 30.0 centimeters (11.8 inches) in
diameter and were excavated to a target depth of 1.0 meter (3.3 feet) below surface, to the top of
pre-Holocene deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable. In practice, shovel tests were
terminated at depths ranging from 10.0 to 100.0 centimeters (3.9 to 39.4 inches) below surface,
most commonly in the range of 35.0 to 60.0 centimeters (13.8 to 23.6 inches) below surface, due
to the presence of dense clay sediments. All sediments were screened through 6.35-millimeter
(mm) (0.25-inch) hardware cloth. Standard shovel test logs were completed for each shovel test
describing the location, strata, soil texture and color, archeological materials (if present), and any
unusual characteristics of the surrounding landscape. All sediments excavated from shovel tests
were replaced in the shovel test hole upon completion of recording. The Universal Transverse

B1117-1001.100

25

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 5. Overview of Proposed US 90 Expansion Area (Facing Northeast)

Figure 6. Overview of Proposed Stilson Road Expansion Area (Facing South)

26

LJA B1117-1001-100_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

Figure 7. Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Project Area

B1117-1001.100

27

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Mercator (UTM) coordinates of each shovel test were determined using hand-held Garmin
Foretrex or eTrex Global Positioning System (GPS) devices using the North American Datum of
1983 (NAD 83).
Shovel testing typically revealed dense, iron-stained clay on the modern ground surface
and extending to depths of 10.0 to 50.0 centimeters (3.9 to 19.7 inches) below surface. One
shovel test consisted of loam overlying dense clay subsoil at a depth of 50.0 centimeters
(19.7 inches) below surface, though this was the exception. Many shovel tests exhibited signs of
disturbance in near-surface sediments in the form of chunks of asphalt and gravel road base. It
is Horizon’s opinion that sediments with the potential to contain subsurface archeological deposits
were fully penetrated and that the project area was adequately assessed for cultural resources.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel testing and backhoe trenching results. Digital photographs were
taken, and a photographic log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for
cultural resources. Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with
maker’s marks) and non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and
metal scrap) were to be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced
in the same location in which they were found. As no cultural materials were observed during the
survey, the collection policy was not brought into play.
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project area as defined in 36 CFR
800.3.

28

LJA B1117-1001-100_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

6.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

On April 19 and 20, 2019, Horizon archeologist Charles E. Bludau conducted an intensive
cultural resources survey of the project area. The survey was conducted under the overall
direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator. The purpose of the survey was to locate any
significant cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking.
Horizon’s archeologist traversed the project area and thoroughly inspected the modern ground
surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The existing ROW of Stilson Road
measures approximately 15.2 meters (50.0 feet) in width and consists of a single-lane, paved
road with very narrow shoulders covered in manicured short grasses and lined with trees. The
area of proposed new ROW east of the existing Stilson Road ROW consists of open agricultural
fields. The portion of the existing ROW of US 90 to the southeast of the northeast-bound lanes
measures approximately 15.2 meters (50.0 feet) in width and consists of a broad, contoured
drainage channel covered in manicured short grasses. No new ROW is proposed along the
US 90 segment of the project. Visibility of the modern ground surface was typically poor due to
vegetative ground cover (<30%).
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the TSMASS require a minimum of 16 shovel tests per
mile per 30.5-meter (100.0-foot) width of proposed ROW or fraction thereof for linear projects.
The Stilson Road segment of the project area measures approximately 1.1 kilometers (0.7 mile)
long by 21.3 meters (70.0 feet) wide, and the US 90 segment measures approximately
1.9 kilometers (1.2 miles) long by 6.1 meters (20.0 feet) wide, for a total linear distance of
3.1 kilometers (1.9 miles). As such, a minimum of 30 shovel tests would be required within the
project area. Horizon excavated a total of 32 shovel tests during the survey, thereby exceeding
the TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size. Shovel testing typically revealed dense,
iron-stained clay on the modern ground surface and extending to depths of 10.0 to
50.0 centimeters (3.9 to 19.7 inches) below surface. One shovel test consisted of loam overlying
dense clay subsoil at a depth of 50.0 centimeters (19.7 inches) below surface, though this was
the exception. Many shovel tests exhibited signs of disturbance in near-surface sediments in the
form of chunks of asphalt and gravel road base. It is Horizon’s opinion that sediments with the
potential to contain subsurface archeological deposits were fully penetrated and that the project
area was adequately assessed for cultural resources.
No cultural resources of historic or prehistoric age were observed on the modern ground
surface or within any of the shovel tests excavated within the project area during the survey.

B1117-1001.100

29

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

7.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP and for designation as SALs.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the project area and to make preliminary determinations of whether or
not the resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
properties are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with important
historic events and/or personages. Under the Antiquities Code of Texas, archeological resources
are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the significance of archeological
resources for designation as SALs, respectively.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory process.

B1117-1001.100

31

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

7.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The 4 criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or
history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant. This
concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures, districts,
or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent research
questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by 3 requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least 1 of the 4 criteria for eligibility listed above,
and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As discussed
here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory and history
according to various periods of development in various times and at various places. Thus, the
significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic development and
the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular period of
development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP under
Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding of
prehistory. All 4 criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought to
bear for historic sites.

32

LJA B1117-1001-100_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

7.3

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ANTIQUITIES LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are located
in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any county,
city, or political subdivision of the state are state antiquities landmarks and are eligible for
designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
building, structure, cultural landscape, or non-archeological site, object, or district as an SAL if it
meets at least on one of following criteria:
A. [T]he property is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history, including importance to a particular cultural or ethnic
group;
B. [T]he property is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. [T]he property embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, represents the work of a master, possesses high artistic values, or
represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction;
D. [T]he property has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in Texas
culture or history.

B1117-1001.100

33

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

Furthermore, the THC may designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets
one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

7.4

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

On April 19 and 20, 2019, Horizon archeologist Charles E. Bludau conducted an intensive
cultural resources survey of the project area. The survey was conducted under the overall
direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator. The purpose of the survey was to locate any
significant cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking.
Horizon’s archeologist traversed the project area and thoroughly inspected the modern ground
surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The existing ROW of Stilson Road
measures approximately 15.2 meters (50.0 feet) in width and consists of a single-lane, paved
road with very narrow shoulders covered in manicured short grasses and lined with trees. The
area of proposed new ROW east of the existing Stilson Road ROW consists of open agricultural
fields. The portion of the existing ROW of US 90 to the southeast of the northeast-bound lanes
measures approximately 15.2 meters (50.0 feet) in width and consists of a broad, contoured
drainage channel covered in manicured short grasses. No new ROW is proposed along the
US 90 segment of the project. Visibility of the modern ground surface was typically poor due to
vegetative ground cover (<30%).
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the TSMASS require a minimum of 16 shovel tests per
mile per 30.5-meter (100.0-foot) width of proposed ROW or fraction thereof for linear projects.
The Stilson Road segment of the project area measures approximately 1.1 kilometers (0.7 mile)
long by 21.3 meters (70.0 feet) wide, and the US 90 segment measures approximately
1.9 kilometers (1.2 miles) long by 6.1 meters (20.0 feet) wide, for a total linear distance of
3.1 kilometers (1.9 miles). As such, a minimum of 30 shovel tests would be required within the
project area. Horizon excavated a total of 32 shovel tests during the survey, thereby exceeding
the TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size. Shovel testing typically revealed dense,
iron-stained clay on the modern ground surface and extending to depths of 10.0 to
50.0 centimeters (3.9 to 19.7 inches) below surface. One shovel test consisted of loam overlying
dense clay subsoil at a depth of 50.0 centimeters (19.7 inches) below surface, though this was

34

LJA B1117-1001-100_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

the exception. Many shovel tests exhibited signs of disturbance in near-surface sediments in the
form of chunks of asphalt and gravel road base. It is Horizon’s opinion that sediments with the
potential to contain subsurface archeological deposits were fully penetrated and that the project
area was adequately assessed for cultural resources.
No cultural resources of historic or prehistoric age were observed on the modern ground
surface or within any of the shovel tests excavated within the project area during the survey.

7.5

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for inclusion in the NRHP according to 36 CFR 60.4 or for designation as SALs according
to 13 TAC 26. Horizon recommends a finding of “no historic properties affected,” and no further
archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking. However,
human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are protected under the Texas Health and Safety
Code. In the event that any human remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered at any
point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously
surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent discovery,
and the THC should be notified immediately.

B1117-1001.100

35

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

8.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J.T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Alford, J.J., and J.C. Holmes
1985
Meander Scars as Evidence of Major Climate Changes in Southeast Louisiana.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 75:395-403.
Aten, L.E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives on Gulf Coast Prehistory, pp.
72-93. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History, No. 5, The Florida
State Museum, Gainesville.

Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Blum, M.D., and D.M. Price
1994
Glacio-Eustatic and Climatic Controls on Quaternary Alluvial Plain Deposition, Texas
Coastal Plain. Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies
44:85-92.
Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.

B1117-1001.100

37

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
DuBar, J.R., T.E. Ewing, E.L. Lundelius, E.G. Otvos, and C.D. Winkler
1991
Quaternary Geology of the Gulf of Mexico Coastal Plain. In The Geology of North
America, Volume K2: Quaternary Non-Glacial Geomophology, Conterminous United
States, edited by R. B. Morrison, pp. 583-610. Geological Society of America, Boulder,
Colorado.
Ensor, H.B., and D.L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas. Reports of Investigations, No. 8, Archeological
Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Fisher, W.L.
1982
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Houston Sheet.
University of Texas at Austin.

Bureau of Economic Geology, The

Fisk, H.N.
1938
Geology of Grant and LaSalle Parishes. Geological Bulletin No. 10.
Department of Conservation, Baton Rouge.
1940

Louisiana

Geology of Avoyelles and Rapides Parishes. Geological Bulletin No. 18. Louisiana
Department of Conservation, Baton Rouge.

Hall, G.D.
1981
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Research Report No. 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Hudgins, J.D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-51.

38

LJA B1117-1001-100_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

Keller, J.E., and F.A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country: Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility. American Antiquity
53:231-244.
Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas. Publication LP-192. Texas Department of Water Resources,
Austin.
Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
McMahon, C.A., R.G. Frye, and K.L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and Accompanying
Illustrated Synopsis, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
National Environmental Title Research (NETR)
2019
Historic Aerials by NETR Online.
April 19, 2019.

<http://www.historicaerials.com>.

Accessed

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2019
Web Soil Survey. <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed April 23, 2019.
Newcomb, W.W.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:1-63.

Open Street Map (OSM)
2019
OpenStreetMap. < http://www.openstreetmap .org>. Available under the Open
Database License: <www.opendatacommons.org/licenses/odbl>. Accessed April 19,
2019

B1117-1001.100

39

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264

Patterson, L.W., J.D. Lockwood, R.L. Gregg, and S.M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.
Pertulla, T.K., M.R. Miller, R.A. Ricklis, D.J. Prikryl, and C. Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

Houston

Bulletin of the Texas

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. In Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Toyah Components: Evidence for Occupation in the Project Area During the Latter
Part of the Late Prehistoric Period. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in
the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R.A. Ricklis and M.B. Collins,
pp. 207-316. Studies in Archeology, No. 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
1995

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330.

Story, D.A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the
Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C. Rose,
D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes. Research
Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT)
2019a Historic Bridges of Texas. <https://www.arcgis.com/home/webmap/viewer.html?
webmap=e55a0c5725644e5badef578db02bee9f&extent=-109.4371,25.5608,86.8053,37.2641>. Accessed April 20, 2019.
2019b

Historic Districts & Properties of Texas. <http://maps.dot.state.tx.us/AGO_Template/
TxDOT_BasicViewer/?appid=c8fc0a742ec44e0e9da4b009c21eb70c>.
Accessed
April 20, 2019

Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2019
Texas
Archeological
Sites
Atlas
Restricted-Access
<http://atlas.thc.state.tx.us/>. Accessed April 20, 2019.

40

LJA B1117-1001-100_arch_survey_report

Database.

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

Texas State Historical Association (TSHA)
2019
Liberty County. The Handbook of Texas Online: A Digital Gateway to Texas History.
<http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/hcl08>. Accessed April 25, 2019.
US Department of Agriculture (USDA)
2016
Digital orthophoto quarter-quadrangles, Liberty County, Texas. National Agriculture
Imagery Program, Farm Service Agency, Aerial Photography Field Office.
US Geological Survey (USGS)
1984
7.5-minute series topographic maps, Dayton, Texas, quadrangle.
Van Siclen, D.C.
1985
Pleistocene Meander-Belt Ridge Patterns in the Vicinity of Houston, Texas.
Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies 35:525-532.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

B1117-1001.100

41

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Dayton Industrial Park Roadway Improvements Project, Dayton, Liberty County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

CB1

314882

3322831

0-35

314959

3322894

No

10YR 3/1 with 10YR 5/8 and 5YR 4/6
clay

No

10YR 3/1 clay

No

10YR 3/1 with 10YR 5/8 and 5YR 4/6
clay

No

10YR 3/1 clay

No

10YR 3/1 with 10YR 5/8 and 5YR 4/6
clay

No

10YR 3/1 clay

No

10YR 3/1 with 10YR 5/8 and 5YR 4/6
clay

No

10YR 3/1 clay

No

10YR 3/1 with 10YR 5/8 and 5YR 4/6
clay

No

10YR 3/1 clay

No

10YR 3/1 with 10YR 5/8 and 5YR 4/6
clay

No

10YR 3/1 clay

No

35-60+

10YR 3/1 with 10YR 5/8 and 5YR 4/6
clay

No

0-35
35-50+

CB3

315035

3322961

0-35
35-50+

CB4

315112

3323026

0-35
35-50+

CB5

315189

3323088

0-35
35-60+

CB6

315263

3323155

0-35
35-60+

CB7

315338

3323225

Artifacts

10YR 3/1 clay

35-50+
CB2

Soils

0-35

CB8

315414

3323288

0-15+

10YR 4/1 clay

No

CB9

315489

3323356

0-15+

10YR 4/1 clay

No

CB10

315565

3323422

0-60+

10YR 4/1 clay with gravel and shell

No

CB11

315639

3323488

0-50+

10YR 4/1 clay with gravel

No

CB12

315714

3323553

0-30+

10YR 3/1 clay with 5% iron stains

No

CB13

315791

3323617

0-35+

10YR 3/1 with 10YR 5/8 clay with iron
stains

No

CB14

315868

3323682

0-25+

10YR 3/1 with 10YR 5/8 clay with iron
stains

No

CB15

315944

3323749

0-35+

10YR 3/1 with 10YR 5/8 clay with iron
stains

No

CB16

316019

3323815

0-10+

10YR 3/1 clay with asphalt and gravel

No

CB17

316097

3323878

0-10+

10YR 3/1 clay with asphalt and gravel

No

CB18

316171

3323943

0-35+

10YR 4/1 with 10YR 7/2 and 10YR 5/8
clay with gravel and calcium carbonate

No

B1117-1001.100

A-1

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

CB19

316248

3324009

CB20

316324

CB21

Soils

Artifacts

0-35+

10YR 4/1 with 10YR 7/2 and 10YR 5/8
clay with gravel and calcium carbonate

No

3324073

0-35+

10YR 4/1 with 10YR 7/2 and 10YR 5/8
clay with gravel and calcium carbonate

No

314851

3321667

0-25+

10YR 4/2 with 10YR 5/8 clay with iron
stains

No

CB22

314857

3321764

0-60+

10YR 3/1 with 10YR 5/8 clay with iron
stains

No

CB23

314846

3321864

0-60+

10YR 3/1 with 10YR 5/8 clay with iron
stains

No

CB24

314857

3321969

0-60+

10YR 3/1 with 10YR 5/8 clay with iron
stains

No

CB25

314861

3322071

0-60+

10YR 3/1 with 10YR 5/8 clay with iron
stains

No

CB26

314861

3322174

0-60+

10YR 3/1 with 10YR 5/8 clay with iron
stains

No

CB27

314862

3322269

0-20

10YR 3/1 loam

No

20-50

10YR 4/1 loam

No

50-100+

10YR 5/1 clay

No

CB28

314861

3322370

0-60+

10YR 3/1 with 10YR 5/8 clay with iron
stains

No

CB29

314863

3322471

0-50+

10YR 3/2 with 10YR 5/8 clay with iron
stains

No

CB30

314858

3322572

0-50+

10YR 3/2 with 10YR 5/8 clay with iron
stains

No

CB31

314867

3322671

0-50+

10YR 3/1 with 10YR 5/8 clay with iron
stains

No

CB32

314868

3322978

0-50+

10YR 3/1 with 10YR 5/8 clay with iron
stains

No

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 15 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

A-2

LJA B1117-1001-100_arch_survey_report

