CULTURAL RESOURCES RECONNAISSANCE
OF

SMITH COUNTY, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Permit 2086

S. Alan Skinner, Ph.D.

Prepared for:
THE LPA GROUP INCORPORATED
2530 Devine Street
Columbia, South Carolina 29250

Prepared by:
AR CONSULTANTS
P.O. Box 820727
Dallas, Texas 75382
Cultural Resources Report 98-30
December 16, 1998

1111111111111111
108195

TYLER POUNDS FIELD ARCHAEOLOGY

1

ABSTRACT

A cultural resources reconnaissance and evaluation was conducted
of the Tyler Pounds Field Airport site in Smith County, Texas. A
records search did not reveal any historic or prehistoric cultural
resources in the 1049 acre airport study area. Our initial assessment
was that the potential for prehistoric archaeological sites was low
due to the airport location on the upland divide near the upper end of
several minor watersheds. The field reconnaissance did not locate
any prehistoric sites on the surface or in the shallow sandy deposits.
Two historic sites were located: the top of a rock-lined well/cistern
was noted and is believed to date to the tum-of-the-century, but is
outside the final study area. Parts of the World War II Tyler Army
Airfield barracks are preserved, and have been recorded as
41SM242. The airport property does not warrant further attention,
since it was disturbed by past airport construction and earlier
farming.
It is the conclusion of this investigation that the Fort Worth District

of the US Army Corps of Engineers and the Texas Historical
Commission concur with our general recommendation that clearance
be provided for future development at Pounds Field. We further
recommend that the history of the World War II training camp could
be showcased at the airport. Lastly, we recommend that the
remaining copy of the 1943 Tyler Army Airfield plans be
permanently archived.

AR CONSULTANTS

TYLER POUNDS FIELD ARCHAEOLOGY

11

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

AR Consultants wishes to thank everyone involved in the project and in the
preparation of this report for their assistance. While we accept responsibility for
the content of the report, we were assisted by several people who demonstrated
their interest in the history and prehistory of the area.
In particular, we want to thank A. Gordon Murphy, Environmental Scientist with
the LPA Group Incorporated, for sharing his experiences on the property with the
author and providing copies of aerial photographs of the airport and vicinity.
Gary W. McKague, Airport Operations Supervisor provided maps of the Army Air
Corps barracks from the files at the airport and he shared his experiences
inspecting the various parts of the airport as well. He and his staff also opened the
gates for the exploring archaeologist and shared their experiences regarding
collection of Native American artifacts on the airport property. Davis Dickson,
Airport Manager also helped the survey, as did Pickney Butler, the Tyler City
Manager.
Mark Spencer of MHS Planning & Design in Tyler shared his familiarity with the
author, and provided names of people who are familiar with the history of the
airport. In particular, we want to thank Mr. A.A. Arnold, a long-time City of Tyler
employee, for sharing his recollections with ARC. In addition, Mr. and Mrs. Loy
Gilbert, long-time members of the Smith County Historical Society, delved into
the Society's archives for additional information about Pounds Field.
Acme Map of Tyler prepared a print of one page of the airport and military
facilities during a two hour period one afternoon. They are to be thanked for their
help and encouragement.

AR CONSULTANTS

TYLER POUNDS FIELD ARCHAEOLOGY

111

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Abstract.......................................................................................
Acknowledgments......................................................................
Table of Contents........................................................................
List of Figures.............................................................................
Introduction.................................................................................
Natural Environment...................................................................
Cultural Historical Background..................................................
Methodology...............................................................................
Results.........................................................................................
Recommendations.......................................................................
References Cited.........................................................................

1

11
111
111

1
4
5
7
8
15
16

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.

Pounds Field study area shown on a section of the
Chandler, Texas 7.5' USGS map..........................
Reduced version of Map 27 from the Tyler Air Field
U.S. Engineers design maps.................................
Airport Layout Plan showing the location of
sites and other features described in the text........

2
10
12

r-arc TylerPound

AR CONSULTANTS

TYLER POUNDS FIELD ARCHAEOLOGY

INTRODUCTION

During December 1998, a cultural resources reconnaissance was conducted of the
existing and expansion property of the City of Tyler's Pounds Field Airport in
west central Smith County, Texas (Figure 1). The property is "roughly" square in
shape and is bounded on the north by State Highway 64 and on the east by Dixie
Drive and Spur 1143. The southern boundary is in part Pleasant Retreat Road
(CR1145). The western boundary is a north-south fence line east of Parker Road
(CRl 184), except where additional property is to be acquired west of Parker Road.
This includes the existing 1049 acre airport property plus an additional 88.6 acres
that are to be acquired. Over the years, the acreage has been farmed and used as
pasture. The purpose of the survey was to locate any cultural resources that are
present within the airport study area and to make recommendations about their
significance and how they might be impacted by construction.
The survey was conducted for the City of Tyler, Texas through The LPA Group
Incorporated of Columbia, South Carolina. The scope of the project included a
records review, a field reconnaissance during which sites found were to be
recorded and evaluated, and a final report. The reconnaissance was done because
an environmental assessment is being prepared in anticipation of new construction
on the FAA certified facility. Wetlands on the property fall under the jurisdiction
of the Fort Worth District of the US Army Corps of Engineers. The survey was
done in order to comply with the Antiquities Code of Texas and with the National
Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended (PL-96-515), the National
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (PL-90-190), the Archeological and Historical
Preservation Act of 1974, as amended (PL-93-291), and Executive Order No.
11593 "Protection and Enhancement of the Cultural Environment."
In addition, the Texas Historical Commission requested that an archaeological
survey be conducted after being notified about the project. This report was written
in accordance with the guidelines for short reports adopted by the Texas Historical
Commission, Department of Antiquities Protection, and developed by the Council
of Texas Archeologists (1992).
The following report contains a brief description of the natural environment and
then a summary of the history and prehistory of the area as known from published
sources. This is followed by a description of the field methodology used and the
results of the investigation. The last chapter presents recommendations that arise
from the study. A list of references cited concludes the report.

AR CONSULTANTS

2

AR

r
3

TYLER POUNDS FIELD ARCHAEOLOGY

Administrative Information

Sponsor:
Review Agency:

Principal Investigator:
Field Crew:
Project Man-days:
Acres Evaluated:
Sites Recorded:
Historic:
Prehistoric:
Curation Facility:

City of Tyler, Texas through The LPA Group
Incorporated of Columbia, SC
Fort Worth District, US Army Corps of Engineers and
the Archeology Division, Texas Historical
Commission
S. Alan Skinner, Ph.D.
Skinner
Four
Approximately 100
Two, turn-of-the-century house site and the World War
II Army Air Corps training facility (41SM242)
None
No artifacts collected
Records curated at Department of Anthropology,
Southern Methodist University

AR CONSULTANTS

TYLER POUNDS FIELD ARCHAEOLOGY

4

NATURAL ENVIRONMENT

The study area is located in the forested region of East Texas. The topography of
the immediate upland area is rolling and gently sloping. Elevation within the
airport ranges from just over 560' msl to below 480' msl but with the majority of
the area being between 500 and 530' msl. Yearly precipitation in Smith County
averages about 44 inches. Rainfall is distributed throughout the year with at least
three inches occurring every month, except for August which has less than three
inches, and with April, May, and September having more than 4.29 inches.
The underlying geology of the entire area is the Weches Formation which is an
Eocene age formation (Bureau of Economic Geology 1965). This formation is
composed of glauconite, glauconitic marl, quartz sand and clay that weather to
yellowish brown and reddish brown, limonitic, banded, clay-ironstone. Sparta
Sand covers the W eches Formation throughout the Tyler area. The closest mapped
Quaternary deposits are in the valley of the Neches River west of the site.
The soils in the project area are sandy Wolfpen-Pickton soils which are gently
sloping to steep soils that formed under dominantly upland hardwood forests. They
typically have loamy subsoils (Hatherly 1993: General Soil Map and pg 7-8).
Prominent soils in the site include Pickton and Wolfpen loamy fine sands in this
previously farmed relatively level upland area. Although most of the airport is
mapped as Urban land [Ur], it is surrounded by Wolfpen loamy fine sand which
probably covered the hill before being impacted by runway creation. Almost all of
the soils have a thin acidic surface layer that ranges from 4-10 inches thick over
loamy fine sand. The subsoils are friable sandy clay loams (Hatherly 1993).
The site is located in the Mixed Pine-Hardwood Forest plant community which is
part of the Piney Woods region of northeast Texas (Diamond, Riskind, and Orzell
1987: Figure 1). Major timber trees are pine, oak, hickory, and sweet gum. Other
hardwood associations are found in low, wet bottomlands. Understory vegetation
includes green briar, sumac, poison ivy, yaupon, crape myrtle, dogwood, and many
other species. This is in the Austroriparian biotic province (Blair 1950: Figure 1).

AR CONSULTANTS

TYLER POUNDS FIELD ARCHAEOLOGY

5

CULTURE HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

Major archaeological investigations have been carried out in Smith County and
vicinity. The best known are those done in conjunction with the construction or
the level increase of Lake Palestine. Archaeological survey of the Lake Palestine
area was begun in 1957 under the auspices of the National Park Service River
Basin Surveys (Johnson 1961). Johnson reported 35 prehistoric sites, of which all
but one yielded Caddoan ceramics. The majority of the sites were attributed to the
Frankston focus. One site was considered an Alto focus site and one site was
termed an Archaic site because of the absence of pottery and the presence of large
lithic artifacts. No excavations were conducted subsequent to the survey.
In 1969 and 70, the Archaeology Research Program at Southern Methodist
University (SMU) surveyed the edges of the lake as part of planning for enlarging
the lake. A total of 98 sites were recorded (Anderson 1972, 1973). SMU
excavated a Civil War salt factory known as the Neches Saline (Skinner 1971) as
well as 10 prehistoric sites (Anderson, Gilmore, McCormick and Morenon 1974).
More recently, Shafer reported on the salvage excavation of a prehistoric Caddoan
burial contained in a small hamlet exposed by water erosion on the west side of
Lake Palestine (1981).
In the mid- l 970s, the Archaeology Research Program also conducted a survey of a
proposed lignite mine in northeastern Cherokee County just south of Smith County
(Scott, McCarthy, and Grady 1978). Subsequent to this work, Environment
Consultants and then AR Consultants conducted more intensive survey of this area
for the Exxon Coal Company (Skinner 1981, 1984). These surveys documented a
wealth of information about the historic settlement of the area and provide some
information about the spatial patterning of prehistoric sites. In large part,
prehistoric sites were found in the middle reaches of the watersheds where the
authors postulated that a wide variety of natural resources were readily available
and where a constant source of water was also available, even during major
drought periods. Prehistoric sites were rare in the uplands.
More recently, surveys have been done in the vicinity of Pounds Field (Skinner
1992, 1997) and Texas Parks and Wildlife conducted a comprehensive survey at
Tyler State Park (Howard 1996). In addition, Texas A & M University conducted

AR CONSULTANTS

TYLER POUNDS FIELD ARCHAEOLOGY

6

significant investigations at the Confederate Prisoner of War site known as Camp
Ford which is near the northeast edge of Tyler (Thoms 1998).
To summarize the archaeology of the area, it has been shown that settlement began
some time during the Late Archaic period probably before the time of Christ
(Story 1981 a; Story and others 1990). Evidence has been shown of Early Ceramic
occupation before A.D. 700 in southern Cherokee County (Newell and Krieger
1949; Story 1972, 198lb). Several sites have Caddoan pottery indicative of the
Alto focus which is the early part of the Late Prehistoric Period, while most of the
prehistoric sites date to the Frankston focus during the second half of this period
which ends by A.D. 1700. No evidence of historic Native American settlement
has been reported in the immediate area (Perttula 1992: 177), although Indian
groups are reported in the region into the 1800s. Historic European settlement
began in the early 1800s. The Tyler area, including the study area, was settled
well before the Civil War. This historic occupation has continued to the present
although numerous changes in land use and community organization have
occurred over the past one hundred and fifty years.

AR CONSULTANTS

TYLER POUNDS FIELD ARCHAEOLOGY

7

METHODOLOGY

Prior to conducting the field investigation, ARC reviewed previous reports and
records regarding cultural resource sites in the vicinity of the study area. Several
sites were found in the files at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL) but none were in close proximity to the airport. A check of the National
Register of Historic Places (Steely 1984; Texas Historical Commission 1994) and
the list of Texas Historical Commission markers (Texas Historical Commission
1975; Awbrey and Dooley 1992) indicated that there are no significant sites
contained in these reports within the study area.
Fieldwork was carried out in December, 1998 by the author. The LPA Group
Incorporated of Columbia, South Carolina provided a general location map of the
project area, an airport layout plan, and aerial photographs of the property. Natural
features, roads, fences, property lines, airport runways, and the airport staff made it
easy to define the limits of the study area. A pedestrian reconnaissance survey was
conducted of the airport property, with particular emphasis placed on undeveloJ1>ed
areas and on the Army Air Corps facility.
Disturbed areas were intensively inspected for surface artifacts and for evidence of
buried cultural or soil horizons. Animal borrows and fire ant mounds were
common in some areas and provided a view of buried sediments. Field roads,
plowed fields, and major and minor drainage gullies provided a wide variety of
subsurface exposures. Surface exposure varied from 0-100 percent throughout the
area and averaged better than 30 percent in many areas. Eye-height visibility, the
ability to see a standing feature (well, chimney, etc.) or a standing structure, was
good throughout almost all of the study area. A soil probe was carried in the field
and the excavated soil samples were inspected for buried deposits.

AR CONSULTANTS

TYLER POUNDS FIELD ARCHAEOLOGY

8

RESULTS

The following section reviews the history of land use at the airport site and then
describes the present condition of the site and the results of the field survey.
Recommendations are contained in the following chapter.

Historic Landuse
The 1917 Soil Survey of Smith County (Schoenmann et al. 1917) shows an eastwest road which corresponds to highway 64 on the north side of the airport site.
The eastern edge corresponds to Dixie Drive, and the south edge is the road by
goes by the Pleasant Retreat School. A county road extends south from the
location of present-day CR 724 across the hill where the airport is now and south
to the Pleasant Retreat School road. A couple of residences are shown along each
of these roads, and no doubt the area between houses was being farmed.
An aerial photograph posted in the Airflight Restaurant in the Pounds Field
terminal is labeled:
"Municipal Airport
Tyler, Texas
April 3, 1930
Photo by C.S. Hicks".
This picture shows a single northeast-southwest oriented runway with a hanger on
the east side of the runway at the north end. The surrounding area was cleared of
trees, and appears to be used as farmland or as mowed pasture. According to a
story in the Tyler Courier-Times Telegraph ( 1965), the first airplane in Tyler was
purchased by O.C. Palmer in 1928, and in 1929 the City of Tyler purchased 107
acres five and a half miles west of town to construct an airfield which opened in
June of 1930. Palmer maintained the airport for the City until the outbreak of
World War II, and returned to manage it after the war for several years.

AR CONSULTANTS

TYLER POUNDS FIELD ARCHAEOLOGY

9

A second aerial photograph dated 7-9-30 shows highway 64 [incorrectly labeled
69] north of the single gravel-covered runway that was reported to be 3000 feet
long by 300 feet wide. This photograph was included with a proposal for airport
expansion, at some time prior to World War II.
During the War, the Tyler Airfield was used as a training facility by the Army Air
Corps and was closed to civilian air traffic. Barracks and ancillary facilities were
constructed near the northwest comer of the airport property along West Drive
(Figure 2). The buildings included numerous wooden barracks supported on
cylindrical concrete piers. The lavatories were wooden buildings bolted to concrete
slabs which still show the locations of toilets and other features. Other concrete
pier and beam structures include mess halls, recreation buildings, offices, and a
shop.
Pilots were trained at this facility using biplanes, since fighters were being used
overseas. During the war, Jack Pounds, the son of Abe Pounds of Tyler, was killed
during training, and in 1943 the air field was renamed in his honor.
The 1949 Tyler, TX 15' USGS map shows Pounds Field defined by Highway 64
on the north, Dixie School road on the east, the Pleasant Retreat School Road on
the south, and a western boundary just west of the Army Air Corps base and east
of present day Parker Road. A new terminal was started in 1949 at the cost of
$200,000 and this terminal continues to be used today, although the original
facility has been modified significantly over the past half century.
The airfield configuration did not change significantly between the 1940s and the
mid-1960s when aerial photographs were flown for use in creating the Chandler,
TX 7 .5' USGS map (Figure 1). However, by that time, most of the air corps base
was no longer present and a retirement home was present (Arnold 1998; McKague
1998).
Aerial photographs contained in the Smith County Soil Survey (Hatherly 1993:
Maps 26 and 31) show that the northeast-southwest runway had been extended to
the southwest and that a hill near the southwest comer of the airfield had been
mined as had other areas including the area at the barracks where the road shown
on Figure 2 encircled the barracks.

AR CONSULTANTS

CORPS OF

~
~

~

\

/

~
0

"'""'t\

~

a:

it

D
,.

J.... -=··

"'\-

1"~ I

I

= ...
== ',.,.,

/

~L

/

_;.

/

•••
/

'

n

4=<

,./"

~

j
i

I

·•:;1

N

<

-s.

""'

I

I

J:

~,

~

U S. AAM't

\
N

~

ENGINEE~~

/

,,av

/

/

/

/

/

''

1

-~

f

I

m

j

.S..,

I

NOT(:
BUILDINGS SHOWN BY DASHED LINES .
INDICATE FUTURE CONST~TION AND ARE
r-«>T INCLUDED IN NO. OF UNITS SHOWN IN
TABLE.

!

~

'

,L

"

l:

'

It

I

i

/

/
/
/

~+

.,q~o

/

/

•/

/

/
/

/

r

/

I
I

~I
..,01
IC'

'1
2

I

0

I
I

<

I

l:I

"''

0./1..

\\

/'

~

\
\

TYLER. TEXAS

: T'f.-

I

2:

"'

«.

GENERAL SITE
•

»11.lTa
-

Figure 2.
O!

r,:r·<; 7: -

'

\

0,

•.

.. TYLER ·ARMY'·AiR~IELe)

\
:i::

/.

RECORD DRAWINB

l:
0.

0

~

~-

"'

Reduced version of Map 27 from the Tyler Air Field
U.S. Engineers design maps.

AR
Conmlllltants

200

U. S. ENGINEER Qf'F"tCE

0

PLAN

....

DENISON TEXAS

...

TYLER POUNDS FIELD ARCHAEOLOGY

11

I

I

Reconnaissance
An initial evaluation of the property was gained by driving the roads which define
the limits of the property, and in doing so it was noted that various roadcuts
provided exposures of a relatively thin sand layer resting on top of sterile clayey
subsoils. Further inspection of the property in coordination with available maps
and aerial photographs showed that much of the land within the airport fence has
been significantly disturbed by airport construction and expansion over the past
seventy years (Figure 3). We estimate that well over seventy five percent of the
original ground surface within the airport property has been modified by tree
clearing, land leveling, quarrying of sand and clay, creation of runways and airport
buildings. These activities continued the earlier impacts that farming had had on
the property even before the site was selected for the airport site. The overall
modification of the ground is best appreciated when viewed on the ground, but
Maps 26 and 31 in the Soil Survey of Smith County, Texas (Hatherly 1993)
provides a good representation of the extent of urban land, pits, and quarried areas,
as well as the grass-covered runway approaches. In addition, the drainages that
extend into the property from the south and north have little potential for having
been occupied in the past. Historic structures that may once have been present
within the area before the airport was built would have been removed or destroyed
in the process of airport creation/maintenance.

.I

Surveys in nearby areas, including Tyler State Park and in the Troup Mine area of
Cherokee County, have shown that prehistoric occupation in upland settings such
as the airport, particularly away from water sources, is unusual. In addition, land
leveling and excavation of sand and clay within the airport area has removed
evidence of any surface and buried deposits that may once have been present.
Consequently, the reconnaissance focused upon the area of the Air Corps barracks
where some foundations were know to exist, and on the newly acquired property
on both sides of Parker Road near the southwest corner of the study area.
The north end of West Drive no longer has any buildings that face onto it, and the
office building/warehouse that was at the northeast end of the road was removed
after it fell into disrepair (Arnold 1998). The Sunset Homes buildings that show on
the west side of the road are no longer present, and the City recently removed the
World War II water pump and tower from this part of the property (McKague
1998). Two concrete slab foundations located on the east side of the road are the
only remaining evidence of the officers quarters in this area, and the foundations
are of lavatories. From this point south, the entire barracks area has grown up with

AR CONSULTANTS

J

TYLER POUNDS FIELD ARCHAEOLOGY

AIRPORT LAYOUT PLAN
1 : 1 - . ~,, ..........

·o.x • · 'OG
}<l '

z,,..,. - ......

BASIC DATA TABLE

"'<1/l>'t-.. 1~

• 1510

--"•«••-

Aoo<'DOC"

s._.. -

llU- ..

WIND ROSE ANALYSIS
RWY. AUGNMEIH
,

¥111NO vELOOTY

- J5

tOtO•~

1

105 l<NOTS

•J

JI
.. - 22
' - 22

RUNWAY PROTECTION ZONE AND
APPROACH SLOPE DATA

,.,.,.

",,"

IJ KNOT'S

....

1J-Jl•·-22
IJ-Jl/•-22

OHO

~RUNWAl'SC~Q

""

lJ IOtOf'S

16

CloOI 0-J WPW •
• 12111'tol.

6 26!:

J;N()f'S

SOVita:

O~AS/J"l)llT

1'0lltTH •TL Mlf'ORT

1'0.ll• 09SCllV.t.TIONS
116.J - ''90

~302;

1010

'-

•.000

'ooo·

•00"

'"°

.
"

"
""'

l,£NG1rl

1.010·
17~·

,.,.,.

105 "NOTS

41..l llUNWA'l'S C°"'91NEQ
.t.tl ll!UNW-"TS CQMlllH[Q

ElCISTING

RUNWAY INNER WIDTH OUTER WIDTH

IJ O.JfOTS

17- " / • - 22

n - JS/' - 22

ULTIMATE

,,.,..

APPROACH SL.OPE

1.oocr

1.701)°

'ooo·

""°

0.000

now

"'°

1.10

-·u

!)

'-

N01(C- lOtoC DIW(tdlCllll$ .,,iC) ~ SLC.-CS
r •" ~,. ~ 1sotu00-11.CMMQ: ..

oe·-c

BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES
Ul nt.u. TE

(ESTING

tUt..-riA.1..1.li.OWNSnitAflOfoltulL.DWG

·>·:::~~-::::=-~~
~ £-·~
· '°°..

AlltC:Jlo&n P.unc.c; U'ftOJw
~:

T-"4.v.GAR'i

CON'ol[l(fOo!AI.. tu11.i;,ut1"•l!:O

,..,Ko_....,.._si.,.·
.-·-- -..
:
:

.... .....
1101r • 1010·

••S: Cl"CllATOR

34, .....

·. ________ :~:::~~~.,+
·...
·..

:,

·-~------

I

·.. ___ .!,.

MllC_.,...0,.ACl..tfT
rAA ';.,_QIO.. TOO.O

---

--

..···

0

-

s.: . :. . . ~

1111

16

rn- oo>

TYLER. TEXAS

.1.oc-qoVAL 9 .. :-C...

·... :

·-------------------------·-------------

..

,,,.
'

"

....'

CITY OF TYLER, TEXAS

TYLER POUNDS FIELD

DECLARED DISTANCES
EXISTING

ULTIMATE

AIRPORT LAYOUT PLAN
MODIFlCATIONS TO STANDARDS
.-Cit .toe '~"°°""'' c.....cc 4 .. ~ 06 -.<I(~··' •l
OLICC' rect Mt:& •or .. l rs CllOSSQ) •• 5 , .. l'E .......,... , ••
l:IUC JO ""<COST .. SSOO&Q . ' " aoe llel.OC"nc- CJI: n'(
11\.1111•"'" ''
~

-C5i>G.D

MC)

ft<I:" ll s

UQ>tflllC,

.. 110ri1rosr.....oMOSrs11taua1CD

Figure 3.

S'f'Slt"'. "'

Airport Layout Plan showing the location of
sites and other features described in the text.

12

TYLER POUNDS FIELD ARCHAEOLOGY

13

pine trees and volunteer deciduous trees and brush. In addition, although the
encircling road is present, most of the area has been disturbed and concrete piers,
slab foundations, and other residue of the base have been uprooted. A single
undisturbed concrete slab foundation remains in this area, and its function is not
clear. Other foundations may be present, but were not located during the
reconnaissance. The site has been designated as 41SM242 at TARL. The Tyler
Army Airfield site is clearly different in scope and function from the Army's
Camp Bowie near Brownwood (Skinner and Skinner 1997); however, its disturbed
condition does not provide sufficient context to recommend it for inclusion on the
National Register of Historic Places. A dirt road continues to the south of a dump
ground which coincides with an area that has been mined for sand and clay.
The reconnaissance of the newly acquired land began at the edge of Parker Road
and proceeded to the east through the regularly plowed field along the north side of
a row of old oak trees to the western fence of the airfield. Probes showed a
relatively deep deposit of sand which was cemented or compacted before reaching
the handle of the probe. Survey continued by turning north and walking back and
forth in the field and to the eastern edge of the property until reaching the northern
boundary. The field has been plowed regularly in the past, but was not planted in
winter wheat or any other crop this winter. Exposure was excellent but no artifacts
were found on the surface or in the probes. No evidence of buried soil horizons
was noted either. Turning to the west, survey passed over the dam of a stocktank
which had been excavated into the clay subsoil, but no evidence of occupation was
found.
A group of trees is present on the west side of Parker Road between the road and
the two barns that are present and show on Figures 1 and 3. These trees indicate
that a house was once in this area. Further survey located a shallow hole
approximately eight meters southeast from the smaller pole barn. The hole is
approximately one m in diameter and extends to a depth of 40 cm below the
adjacent ground surface. The sides of the hole are lined with rectangular roughlyshaped native sandstone blocks that are set in an old form of concrete. Four
courses of the sandstone lining are presently visible. The nature of construction
and the configuration of the opening indicate that this is the shaft of a well or a
cistern. No other evidence of structural features was noted, and it is postulated that
a wooden frame house was once located here on a pier and beam foundation that
has since been removed since this is in the yard of two nearby barns. Based on the
type of construction, it seems likely that this is the remains of a tum-of-the-century
residence. The two barns are of relatively recent construction, but it is likely that

AR CONSULTANTS

TYLER POUNDS FIELD ARCHAEOLOGY

14

an earlier barn once was present on the site. This site was not recorded at TARL
due to changes in property ownership during the course of this study.
The slope west of the house site was walked over and soil probes taken. No buried
artifacts or other evidence of historic or prehistoric occupation was located. The
slope west of the first fenceline has been terrace, as has the field directly to the
south. The southwestern comer of the property has a very thin layer of sand over
sterile clay. Survey continued back to Parker Road without finding any artifacts or
indication of past occupation.

The upland setting of the airport that is an area where prehistoric settlement has
been shown to be rare based on surveys in the surrounding area (Howard 1996:
Figure 6; Skinner 1981). This agrees with Perttula's comments (1993: 133)
regarding the locations of Caddoan sites. We found no sandy upland locations,
such as those noted in Wood County (B. Skiles, personal communication), where
sand fields are found to contain buried or exposed Archaic campsites. Workers at
the airport who were interviewed, also indicated that they had never found or heard
of anyone finding Indian artifacts on the airport property. Consequently, it is our
conclusion that there is a low likelihood of finding any Native American artifacts
on the airport property and that this is not so much a reflection of past land
disturbance but rather is to the environmental and technological limitations that the
setting provided.
In contrast, the reconnaissance has demonstrated that historically the property was

first occupied by farmers, and then due to its being a relatively level high spot near
Tyler was converted into a civilian airfield, and ultimately a military training base.
A single rock-lined well or cistern casing was recorded and based on the use of
native rock and the absence of any evidence of footings or structural foundations,
it has been concluded that the casing was probably constructed about the tum-ofthe-century. No other pre-World War II historic occupation was found although
parts of the property has probably been farmed for more than a hundred years. A
single rural road crossed the property as shown on the 1917 soils map. Limited
remains of the World War II vintage Tyler Army Airfield remains in the form of
several concrete foundations.

AR CONSULTANTS

TYLER POUNDS FIELD ARCHAEOLOGY

15

RECOMMENDATIONS

It is ARC's recommendation that the Fort Worth District of the US Army Corps of

Engineers and the Texas Historical Commission concur with our recommendation
that clearance be provided for further development on this property with the
following qualifications.

The design documents for construction of the Tyler Army Airfield and
associated facilities should be archived in a permanent repository, since these are
the only available records that document what was built for use during World War
II.
If potentially significant resources are discovered during future
construction, work should cease in that area and the Fort Worth District office of
the Corps of Engineers and the Texas Historical Commission should be notified.

AR CONSULTANTS

I'
TYLER POUNDS FIELD ARCHAEOLOGY

16

I

REFERENCES CITED

Anderson, Keith M.
Archeological Resources ofLake Palestine, Texas. Southern Methodist University,
1972
Archaeology Research Program, Research Report 11.
1973
Prehistoric Settlement of the Upper Neches River. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
43: 121-197.
Anderson, Keith M., Kathleen Gilmore, Olin F. McCormick, III and E. Pierre Morenon
Archaeological Investigations at Lake Palestine, Texas. Southern Methodist University,
1974
Contributions in Anthropology No 11.
Arnold, A.A.
1998
Telephone interview with the author, December 16, 1998.
Awbrey, Betty Dooley and Claude Dooley
Why Stop? A Guide to Texas Historical Roadside Markers, Third Edition. Gulf Publishing
1992
Company, Houston.
Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2( 1):93-117.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1965
Geologic Atlas of Texas: Tyler Sheet. The University of Texas at Austin.
Council of Texas Archeologists
1992
Guidelines for the Content of Cultural Resource Management Reports. Manuscript on file
with the membership.
Diamond, David D., David H. Riskind, and Steve L. Orzell
1987
A Framework for Plant Community Classification and Conservation in Texas. The Texas
Journal of Science 39 (3):203-221.
Hatherly, Don T.
1993
Soil Survey of Smith County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station and the
Texas State Soil and Water Conservation Board.
Hicks, C.S.
1930
Aerial photograph labeled "Municipal Airport/Tyler., Texas/April 3, 1930." Hanging on the wall
of the Airflight Restaurant, Pounds Field Airport, Tyler, Texas.
Howard, Margaret
1996
Management Plan for Archeological Resources. In Archeological Survey of Tyler State Park,
Smith County, Texas, edited by Margaret Howard, Texas Parks and Wildlife, Public Lands
Division, Cultural Resources Program, pp. 59-74.
Johnson, LeRoy Jr.
1961
An Archeological Survey of Blackburn Crossing Reservoir on the Upper Neches River. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 31:213-238.
McKague, Gary W.
1998
Interviews with the author during December, 1998.
Newell, H.P. and Alex D. Krieger
1949
The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society for American
Archaeology No. 5.

AR CONSULTANTS

n
TYLER POUNDS FIELD ARCHAEOLOGY

17

Perttula, Timothy K.
1992
"The Caddo Nation", Archaeological and Ethnohistoric Perspectives. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
1993
The Development of Agriculture in Northeast Texas Before A.D. 1600. In Archeology in the
Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited by Nancy A. Kenmotsu and
Timothy K. Perttula, Texas Historical Commission, Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural
Resource Management Report 3, pp. 121-146.
Schoenmann, L.R., E.H. Smies, W.A. Rockie, E.T. Maxon, F.Z. Hutton, and H.G. Lewis
1917
Soil Survey of Smith County, Texas. U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Scott, Tom, Michael McCarthy, and Mark Grady
1978
Archaeological Survey in Cherokee, Smith, and Rusk Counties, Texas, A Lesson in Survey
Methods. Southern Methodist University, Archaeology Research Program, Research Report 116.
Shafer, Harry J.
1981
Archeological Investigations at the Attaway Site, Henderson County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 52: 147-178.
Skinner, S. Alan
1971
Historical Archeology of the Neches Saline, Smith County, Texas. Texas Historical Survey
Committee, Archeological Report 21.
1981
Cultural Resources Survey ofthe Troup Mine, Texas. Environment Consultants, Cultural
Resources Program, Investigative Report 81-7
1984
Supplemental Cultural Resources Survey for Expansion Areas of the Troup Mine Block, Texas.
AR Consultants, Cultural Resources Report 84-10.
Cultural Resources Survey of the Tyler Fish Hatchery Expansion. AR Consultants, Cultural
1992
Resources Report 92-9.
1997
Cultural Resources Survey of the Tyler Target Distribution Center Site. AR Consultants, Cultural
Resources Report 97-8.
Skinner, S. Alan and Nina R. Skinner
1997
Archaeology of the Brownwood Landfill Site, Brown County, Texas. AR Consultants, Cultural
Resources Report 97-16.
Steely, James W.
1984
A Catalog of Texas Properties in the National Register of Historic Places. Texas Historical
Commission.
Story, Dee Ann
1981a An Overview of the Archeology of East Texas. Plains Anthropologist 26:139-156.
Story, Dee Ann, J.A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C. Rose, D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and L.J.
Reinhard
1990
The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain: Volumes I and 2. Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Resear~h Series No. 38.
Texas Historical Commission
Guide to Official Texas Historical Markers. Austin.
1975
1994
A Catalog of Texas Properties in the National Register of Historic Places, October, 1984 to
December, 1993.
1998
Archeological Survey Standards for Texas.
Thoms, Alston V., Editor
1998
Archaeological and Historical Investigations at Camp Ford, Texas: A Civil War POW Camp.
Texas A & M University, Center for Ecological Archaeology, Technical Report No. 2.
Tyler Courier-Times Telegraph
1965
O.C. Palmer. April 30-May 1, 1965, Section 4, page 2.
Tyler Star
1957
Pound's Field Nerve Center. April 28, 1957, pgs 3 and 5.
U.S. Engineer Office
1943
Record Drawing, Tyler Texas Air Force Station (0.T.U.), May 1943, Map 27. War Department,
Corps of Engineers, U.S. Army, Denison, Texas.

AR CONSULTANTS

i

I

!

!

