Archaeological Survey and Backhoe Testing
for the Quinta Mazatlan Glassroom Project,
McAllen, Texas
By
Harry J. Shafer and Thomas R. Hester
SUBMITTED TO

The City of McAllen, Texas
by

ABASOLO ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONSULTANTS
San Antonio, Texas

Texas Antiquities Permit #5583
Report No. 89
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants
San Antonio, Texas
2010

Archaeological Survey and Backhoe Testing
for the Quinta Mazatlan Glassroom Project,
McAllen, Texas
by
Harry J. Shafer and Thomas R. Hester

SUBMITTED TO

The City of McAllen, Texas
by

ABASOLO ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONSULTANTS
San Antonio, Texas
Texas Antiquities Permit #5583

Report No. 89
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants
San Antonio, Texas
2010

2

Abstract
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants conducted a Phase I archaeological survey at the 1
acre Quinta Mazatlan Glassroom Project tract in McAllen, Hidalgo, County, Texas. The
project was carried out under Texas Antiquities Permit # 5583.

Work performed

included a pedestrian survey of the tract, followed by the excavation of three backhoe
trenches. No cultural resources were encountered during the investigations. No further
archaeological work is recommended.

Introduction

3

Abasolo Archaeological Consultants (AAC), conducted Phase I archaeological
investigations at the Quinta Mazatlan Glassroom Project tract in McAllen, Hidalgo,
County, Texas (Fig. 1). Field work was conducted by the authors on March 24, 2010,
and included a pedestrian survey of the approximately 1 acre and the excavation of three
backhoe trenches (Fig. 2). The project was carried out under Texas Antiquities Permit
#5583 and in accordance with the “Archeological Survey Standards for Texas” to insure
that no archaeological or historical resources eligible for nomination to the National
Register of Historic Places are damaged or destroyed due to the planned construction.
This Phase I investigation was designed to detect and record any archaeological or
historical component that may be present in the project area.

The Setting
Brief historical background

The development and expansion of the City of McAllen mirrors that of much of the
Lower Rio Grande Valley in the early 20th century.

The most comprehensive and

detailed history, based in large part on the history of the McAllen family has been written
by Mary Margaret McAllen Amberson (Amberson et al. 2003).

The town was first

formed as the McAllen Townsite Company in 1904. It was not until 1907 after a series
of transactions involving railroad expansion and donations of ranch property that East
McAllen was formed, with about 300 residents. It was about two miles east of the old
townsite then called West McAllen.

As irrigation projects expanded and vegetable

farming began to dominate the economy, the “East” and “West” areas was incorporated
as McAllen. As the city expanded in the 1920s and 1930s, population reached around
10,000.

In the early 1930s, Jason and Marcia Matthews began to build “Quinta

Mazatlan” on the “highest knoll in McAllen,” eventually completed as an estate
dominated by the large “main house” or mansion. It was later purchased by the Schulz
family to the City of McAllen in 1998.

4

The Schulz family had greatly expanded planting of vegetation, shrubs, and trees and
encouraged, on this 20-acre site, the re-growth of native Valley plants. The native
vegetation (Foscue 1939) characterized by thorn-brush forests and a strip of sub-tropical
palm forests was largely eliminated in the early part of the 20th century. Today, Quinta
Mazatlan is the McAllen Wing of the World Birding Center, and the staff works to
promote

restoration

of

the

native

Valley

habitat

in

the

area

(see

www.quintamazatlan.com). This habitat had been almost totally destroyed by landclearing for agricultural, orchard, and ranching enterprises in the early 1900s.

Geology and Soils

Geotechnical studies of the project area had been conducted in December 2009 (RabaKistner 2009). The report makes brief note of the geology and soils, and describes in
detail the results of 2 borings made to a depth of about 25 feet. Basically, the soils fall
within the Hidalgo-Urban Land Complex, 0-3% (shown as 31 on the soil maps in Jacobs
(1981). The soil characteristics are reflected in the descriptions shown in the backhoe
trench profiles illustrated here (Figs. 4-6), but it is basically three sandy clay loams,
various shades of brown, to a depth of about 1.65 meters (65 inches; Jacobs 1981:36).

The geology of the Quinta Mazatlan project area is wholly within the Beaumont
Formation, which began to form in Quaternary (Pleistocene) times, with deposition
continuing throughout much of the Holocene (Recent) period. The pioneering study of
Lower Rio Grande Valley geology was published by Trowbridge (1923). The present
survey area is within his Qfd deposits, described as Recent (Holocene) fluviatile deposits
(see Trowbridge 1923: Plate XXVIII). More recent geological and geoarcheological
research by Gustavson and Collins (1998) reports that the recent Rio Grande alluvium is
deposited between valley margins of the Beaumont Formation, the latter valley margin
being the context of the Quinta Mazatlan project area.

Archaeological Background

5

Regional Overview

The City of McAllen and the Quinta Mazatlan survey area lie within the Lower Rio
Grande Valley, a distinctive topographic area of southern Texas. The region is flat and
somewhat featureless, dissected mainly by the Rio Grande and its earlier channels
(resacas) and smaller drainages. The northern portion the Valley is marked by the
Arroyo Colorado, thought by some to have been an early channel of the Rio Grande
(Mallouf et al. 1977). Most of the sediments in the Valley have been deposited by the
Rio Grande in the last 10,000 years. In many areas, this accumulation has been very
rapid, burying archeological sites with little trace until they are exposed by erosion or
development (Hester 1977).

The Valley also underwent large-scale agricultural modification beginning early in the
20th century (see Hall et al. 1987: Table 1).

The native vegetation (Foscue 1939)

characterized by thorn-brush forests and a strip of sub-tropical palm forests was almost
entirely eliminated.

Land-leveling for farming was particularly destructive of

archeological sites, especially those located on low knolls. Rapid urban expansion has
changed the face of the Valley, especially along Highway 83 from Rio Grande City to
Brownsville, and such rapid growth has also impacted the prehistoric and early historic
cultural resources. Residential developments, utilities construction, new highways and a
variety of infrastructure installations and improvements have dramatically changed the
areas atop the high terrace of the Rio Grande, as in the City of McAllen area.

Although still poorly understood from an archeological standpoint, the Valley has seen
extensive research in some areas. The initial investigations were by A. E. Anderson, a
civil engineer in Brownsville, who collected from many sites in the Valley and adjacent
Tamaulipas from, 1908-1940 (Anderson 1932). Much of what has been written,
surmised, or interpreted (and misinterpreted) about Valley prehistory has been based on
Anderson’s collection. For example, it was extensively utilized by Richard S. MacNeish
during his surveys of coastal Tamaulipas, and he made distinctions, using the Anderson

6

materials, between cultural patterns on the Mexican and Texas sides of the Rio Grande
(e.g., the Barril Complex; MacNeish 1958). Prewitt (1974) re-checked, or attempted to
find, some of Anderson’s original sites.

Mallouf et al. (1977) provide a detailed history of the archeology of the Valley and
adjacent parts of south Texas, and updates are found in Ricklis (1995) and Hester (1995).
In the 1950s through the early 1970s, much of the literature deals with prehistoric burials
and cemeteries found through farming and urban expansion. During the 1970s through
the early 1990s, the construction of the extensive Hidalgo-Willacy Drainage Project was
preceded by archeological surveys and excavations by Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
(Austin, Texas). These contributed abundant new insights into the characteristics of
occupation or camp sites in the Valley (e.g., Hall et al., 1986; Bousman et al., 1990;
Kibler 1994). These studies were made even more valuable because they represented a
sustained archeological presence in the Valley over more than two decades. Moreover,
this project has provided data on site types in the general area of the present project.
Most are characterized by “very sparse cultural remains...only small quantities of faunal
and macrobotanical remains...and lack well-stratified contexts.” (Bousman et al.
1990:143). The age of these sites, and most others found in the Valley are largely within
the last 3000-4000 years. Most common are sites of the Late Prehistoric era (after A.D.
1200), though Late to Middle Archaic artifacts have been found in some areas (ca. 1000
B.C.-A.D. 1200; see Mallouf et al. 1977). The Late Prehistoric has long been assigned to
the Brownsville Complex, noted for manufacture of great numbers of shell ornaments,
and use of dunes for camp sites and for cemeteries (Hester 1995). However, recent work
by Terneny (2005) has indicated that the “Brownsville Complex” is badly in need of
revision. For example, new radiocarbon dates from prehistoric cemetery sites (often
lumped into the Brownsville Complex; see Collins et al. 1969) actually date, at least in
part, to the Late Archaic.

This suggests that some of the distinctive traits of the

Brownsville Complex (shell working, for example) have earlier origins than once
thought.

Nearby Sites

7

A number of prehistoric and historic sites have been recorded in the area around Quinta
Mazatlan. Closest is 41HG181, a scatter of flakes and mussel shell exposed in a plowed
field near the La Cruz Resaca. This is east of the current project area. This site and of
the other recorded sites are the result of cultural resource management (CRM) surveys
undertaken prior to local developments. As noted earlier, the Hidalgo-Willacy Drainage
Project has been done, by Prewitt and Associates in several phases over a number of
years. Examples include their documentation of sites 41HG120 and 121 reported to
“lithic scatters” (some flakes, perhaps burned rock, perhaps mussel and snail (Rabdotus)
shells). This description covers all the nearby sites, except for investigations at several
historic sites and historic-engineering facilities. These are typified by glass and ceramics
from the early to the mid-20th century. An example is 41HG225, which recorded
materials associated with the McAllen Main Canal.

However, two sites relatively close to Quinta Mazatlan are particularly important.
41HG1 is known as the Ayala site, located on the north side of the Sardinas Resaca.
Located about 2 km (1.49 miles) to the west of Quinta Mazatlan, this area is now along
the Main Floodway, near Sardinas Resaca Lake west of the international airport. As
many as 50 prehistoric Native American burials and associated grave offerings were
found beginning in 1949 (see the summary in Hester and Ruecking 1969). Once thought
to be Late Prehistoric in age (‘Browsville Complex”), recent radiocarbon dating by
Terneny (2005) indicates that the Ayala site is about 2000 years earlier (Late Archaic).

A second site is 41HG27, also in McAllen. Recorded by geologist R. W. Rodgers
(Hester and Rodgers 1971), a burial and grave offerings were uncovered by city workers
digging a septic tank pit. Associated with the burial were tubular bone beads, a large
conch shell pendant, disk-shaped beads of conch, and other artifacts made from the shell
of Oliva sayana. The site is about 1100 meters west-northwest of 41HG1, also on the
north margin of the Sardinas Resaca. This site is likely Brownsville Complex, but could
date earlier.

8

Research Design

Four tasks were required to fulfill the field and analytical portions of the project.

Task 1: Field Work. To fully inspect the area, a 100% pedestrian survey will be
conducted the entire 1 acre tract. Backhoe testing will be carried out if deemed necessary
in accordance to the Texas Council of Archaeologists survey standards. The backhoe and
backhoe operator will be provided by the City of McAllen. GPS coordinates will be
recorded for any archeological material encountered or tests conducted.

Diagnostic

artifacts encountered during the course of the survey or testing will be digitally
photographed for recording. A no collection policy will be followed unless unusual finds
are encountered.

Task 2. Following the field work, the information recovered form the pedestrian
survey will be compiled and evaluated. A formal report will be prepared following the
Council of Texas Archeologists report guidelines that include the project description,
summary of the geology and soils in the project area, archaeological background, and
archaeological sites in the vicinity, survey findings, summary and recommendations.

Task 3. Submit a review draft of the report to the Texas Historical Commission;
once the report has been accepted, a notice to proceed will be issue by the THC at which
time construction can begin.

Task 4: Provide the required copies and CD’s of the final written report. Copies
will be submitted to the Texas Historical Commission in fulfillment of the Texas
Antiquities Permit needed to perform the work; three hard copies and a digital copy will
be provided to the City of McAllen.

Fieldwork
9

As we have noted above, the numerous trees, shrubs, and other dense vegetation but
precluded surface survey within the one-acre project area. There was a lot of recent
surficial modification and with both of these factors, it was decided that backhoe testing
in the project area promised to be most informative.

Backhoe Testing
The soils in the three backhoe trenches are described below:
BHT #1. UTM 14R577011.88E/2895558.47N. This trench, located in the northeast
portion of the tract (Fig. 2), was ca. 2 meters long and 1.2 meters deep. Soils were a
sandy loam with slight changes in hue from the surface to the bottom of the trench. No
prehistoric cultural material was encountered although some recent trash was found in the
upper 10 cm (paper, broken records, etc.), and an abandoned clay drainage pipe was
discovered at the east end of the trench at 1.0 meter elevation. The trench profile can be
described as follows:
Surface to ca. 45 cm: Munsell 10YR3/6, dark yellowish brown sandy clay
loam, many roots, some historic trash near the top.
45 to 70 cm: Munsell 10YR4/6, dark yellowish brown-slightly lighter
sandy clay loam than above; some roots.
70-120 cm: Munsell 10YR5/6, yellowish brown sandy clay loam; few
roots.

BHT #2: UTM: 14 576997E/2895576.43N.

This trench was located near the northern

property line adjacent to a current walking path (Fig. 2) within the “footprint” of the new
Glassroom building. It too was ca. 2 meters long and reached depth of 1.3 meters. The
soil profile was much the same as BHT#1 but without any traces of historic trash. No
prehistoric cultural material was encountered. The profile description is as follows:
Surface to ca. 65 cm. Munsell 10YR3/6 dark yellowish brown sandy clay
loam, many roots.
65-1.1 meters: Munsell 10YR4/6, dark yellowish brown sandy clay
loam—slightly lighter than above, many roots.

10

1.1-1.3 meters: Munsell 10YR5/6, yellowish brown sandy clay loam.

BHT #3: UTM 14R 577000.59E/2895550.51N.This trench was located in the open area
southwest of BHT#1. It immediately encountered an irrigation line, and was moved ca. 2
meters south of the line. The trench was ca. 2 meters long and 1.2 meters deep. The
profile was identical to that encountered in BHT 1 and 2; however, the depths of the soils
changes differed, and as did the clay content. No cultural material was encountered. The
profile description is as follows.
Surface to 20 cm: Munsell 10YR5/6, dark yellowish brown sandy clay
loam, some roots.
20-60 cm: Munsell 10YR4/4, dark yellowish brown sandy clay loam,
lighter than above and slightly more clay content.
60-1.2 meters: Munsell, 10YR5/4, yellowish brown sandy clay loam.
Identical to that encountered in BHT1 and 2.

Summary and Recommendations
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants conducted a Phase I archaeological survey and
backhoe testing at the Quinta Mazatlan Glassroom Project tract in McAllen. A pedestrian
survey had little success because of extensive ground cover. Three backhoe trenches were
excavated to insure that no cultural resources were to be impacted by the planned
construction project. The findings in each of the backhoe trenches were negative with
regards to prehistoric cultural resources. A trace of recent trash and a buried abandoned
drainage pipe were encountered in BHT #1. No historic or prehistoric cultural resources
will be affected by this project; no further archaeological work is recommended.

Acknowledgments

11

The authors would like to acknowledge the assistance provided by Andrew Heffner and
backhoe operator David Sepulveda. Andrews’s diligence helped in all phases of the
project, and David’s machine work certainly helps to expedite the field work.

References Cited
Amberson, M. M.M., J. A. McAllen and M. H. McAllen
2003 I Would Rather Sleep in Texas. A History of the Lower
Rio Grande Valley and the People of the Santa Anita Land
Grant. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Anderson, A. E.
1932 Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 4:29-31.
Bousman, C. B., S. A. Tomka, and G. L. Bailey
1990 Prehistoric Archeology and Paleoenvironments in Hidalgo and Willacy
Counties, South Texas: Results of the Phase I Test Excavations. Report
of Investigations 76. Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Austin.
Collins, M. B., T. R. Hester, and F. A. Weir
1969 The Floyd Morris Site (4lCF2). A Prehistoric Cemetery Site in Cameron
County, Texas. Part 1. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:
119-146.
Foscue, E. J.
1939 Historical Geography of the Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas.
The Texas Geographic Magazine 3(1):1-15.
Hall, G. D., M. B. Collins and E. R. Prewitt
1987 Cultural Resources Investigations Along Drainage Improvements,
Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas: 1986 Investigations. Report
of Investigations 59. Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Austin.
Hester, T. R.
1977 The Archeology of the Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas. In, An
Exploration of a Common Legacy, The Proceedings, ed. by M. E. Heck,
pp. 66-73. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
1995

The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:427-460.

Hester, T. R. and R. W. Rodgers
1971 Additional Data on the Burial Practices of the Brownsville Complex,
Southern Texas. Texas Journal of Science 22 (4):367-371.

12

Jacobs, J. L.
1981

Soil Survey of Hidalgo County, Texas. United States
Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.

Kibler, K. W.
1994 Archeological and Geomorphological Investigations at Prehistoric
Sites 41WY50 and 41WY60, Willacy County, Texas. Report of
Investigations 95. Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Austin.

MacNeish, R. S.
1958 Preliminary Archaeological Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 48(6).
Philadelphia.
Mallouf, R. J., B. J. Baskin, and K. L. Killen
1977 A Predictive Assessment of Cultural Resources in Hidalgo and
Willacy Counties, Texas. Archeological Survey Report 23. Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.
Prewitt, E. R.
1974 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in the Rio Grande
Delta of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 45: 55-65.
Raba-Kistner Consultants, Inc.
2009 Geotechnical Engineering Study for Proposed Quinta Mazatlan
Glass Building, 600 Sunset Drive, McAllen, Hidalgo County, Texas.
Project No. AMA09-084-00. Report prepared for City of McAllen
Parks and Recreation Department.
Ricklis, R. A.
1995 Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A
Regional Overview. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:265-300.
Terneny, T. T.
2005 A Re-Evaluation of Late Prehistoric and Archaic Chronology in the Rio
Grande Delta of South Texas. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Trowbridge, A. C.
1923 A Geologic Reconnaissance in the Gulf Coastal Plain of Texas, near the
Rio Grande. In Shorter Contributions to General Geology, Professional
Paper 131, pp. 85-107. United States Geological Survey, Washington,
D. C.

13

Figures

Figure 1. Entrance to Quinta Mazatlan, McAllen, Texas.

14

BHT#2
BHT#1

BHT#3

Figure 2. Plat map of the Glassroom construction project showing
the locations of the three backhoe trenches.

15

Figure 3. Excavation of Backhoe Trench 3 in progress, monitored by H. J. Shafer.

Figure 4. Profile view of the soils in BHT#1, Quinta Mazatlan.

16

Figure 5. Soil profile in BHT#2, Quinta Mazatlan.

17

Figure 6. Soil profile in BHT#3, Quinta Mazatlan.

18

