AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE CITY OF TEMPLE, TEXAS
IMPROVEMENTS AND EXTENSIONS TO THE PEPPER CREEK TRUNK
SEWER LINE AND LIFT STATION PROJECT IN BELL COUNTY, TEXAS

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore, SOPA

Prepared for
City of Temple
Municipal Building Two North Main
Temple, Texas 76501

By
Brazos Valley Research Associates
219 North Main Street
Varisco Building - Suite 309
Bryan, Texas 77803

1996

AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE CITY OF TEMPLE, TEXAS
IMPROVEMENTS AND EXTENSIONS TO THE PEPPER CREEK TRUNK SEWER
LINEAND LIFT STATION PROJECT IN BELL COUNTY, TEXAS

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore, SOPA

Prepared for
City of Temple
Municipal Building Two North Main
Temple, Texas 76501

By
Brazos Valley Research Associates
219 North Main Street
Varisco Building - Suite 309
Bryan, Texas 77803

1996

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey of a proposed sewer line and lift station in Bell County,
Texas was performed by Brazos Valley Research Associates in July 1996. The area
examined was 27,000 feet long with a temporary easement of 100 feet wide and a
permanent easement of 35 feet wide; the total area is approximately 21.7 acres. William
E. Moore, SOPA was the Principal Investigator, and Michael R. Bradle performed the
duties of Project Archaeologist. This project was carried out under Texas Antiquities
Permit Number 1712. The project area was investigated using by shovel testing and
backhoe trenching. Geoarchaeologist Lee Nordt described the soils and provided
stratigraphic interpretations. The pedestrian survey adequately tested the easement for
surface materials and buried sites. In terms of geologic position, approximately 50% of
the easement is situated on the first terrace (T-1) above the active floodplain, while the
remaining 50% is within an active floodplain that was formed by Pepper Creek, Bird
Creek, and the Leon River.
This investigation located six previously unrecorded prehistoric sites (41BL1065,
41BL1066, 41BL1067, 41BL1069, 41BL1070, and 41BL1071), one historic site with a
minor prehistoric component consisting of two flakes (41BL1068), and one site with
major prehistoric and historic components (41BL1072). Site 41BL1072 is outside the
project area and was discovered while walking the area to arrange access to the
easement across the creek. Site 41BL1071 was discovered while conducting the survey,
but is outside the easement as currently proposed by approximately eight meters.
A unifacial scraper at 41BL1066, situated on a T-1 terrace above Pepper Creek,
was the only formal tool found in the project area. This artifact was recovered from the
upper part of the uneroded buried Ab horizon. If the site formed on the buried Ab horizon
it will probably be younger than Middle Archaic. If the site is buried in the Ab horizon it
could be Early to Middle Archaic.
Two buried sites (41BL1069 and 41BL1070) were found in the broad, active
floodplain between Pepper Creek to the west, Bird Creek to the east, and the Leon River
to the south. Site 41BL1070 was found to contain a prehistoric component at 50
centimeters below the current ground surface; no deeper cultural deposits were observed
as the backhoe trench was terminated at this point in order to preserve it for future
investigation. Site 41BL1069 was found to contain prehistoric components between 130
and 140 centimeters and 190 and 220 centimeters below the current ground surface.
Based on the tentative alluvial stratigraphic chronology, the prehistoric component at
41BL1070 may be no older than Middle Archaic, and perhaps even as young as Late
Prehistoric. The two buried prehistoric horizons at 41BL1069 may be Early to Middle
Archaic. No diagnostic artifacts were found at these sites. But, but an apparent intact
hearth was present at 41BL1070; and burned rock, mussel shell, bone, and flakes were
observed in both components of 41BL1069.

ii

It is likely that additional buried sites in primary contexts are present in other parts
of this floodplain including the unsurveyed portion between the area described above and
the Leon River. Historic Indians were present in the area, and it is also possible that sites
of this period may be present in the more recently deposited soils.
The prehistoric sites in the project area probably represent campsites and/or
limited activity areas. Those in the active floodplains of Pepper Creek, Bird Creek, and
the Leon River may be part of an area that was heavily utilized in prehistoric times,
possibly on a seasonal basis.
Historic utilization of the area was observed throughout the project area. Only one
historic site (41BL1068), however, believed to be more than 50 years in age was found in
the project area, and most of it is located outside the proposed easement. Based on the
presence of a cistern, hand made brick, and large limestone rocks that may have served
as footing stones, it is assumed this site represents a historic house site that dates to the
late 19th and/or early 20th centuries.
Sites 41BL1066, 41BL1069, and 41BL1070 are eligible for State Archeological
Landmark designation. It is recommended that these sites be subjected to Phase II
testing if avoidance is not possible. Sites 41BL1065, 41BL1067, and 41BL1068 are not
recommended for Phase II testing due to an apparent absence of in situ deposits. At Site
41BL1065, the shallow soils in the site area were disturbed through road construction,
borrowing of earth, and agricultural practices; artifacts at 41BL1067 were found in
colluvial deposits washed down from the site proper which is situated on a deflated
surface above; and the majority of historic site 41BL1068 is outside the project area
easement.
Sites 41BL1071 and 41BL1072 were identified as being out of the project area.
Site 41BL1072, on the west bank of Pepper Creek opposite site 41BL1071, contains both
a prehistoric and historic component. The prehistoric component was observed in a
cornfield; artifacts observed included numerous flakes, one unidentified dart point
fragment, mussel shell, and burned rock. The historic component at the time of the
survey consisted of standing structures dating to the late 19th and/or early 20th centuries.
The two most notable features of the historic component were a well or cistern and a log
crib made of hand-hewn logs inside of a large barn that was obviously added on at a later
date.
Copies of the final report will be available at the following agencies: Department of
Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission in Austin, Texas; the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory on The University of Texas at Austin campus, the
Office of the State Archeologist, and Brazos Valley Research Associates in Bryan, Texas.
All artifacts and records will be curated, if required, at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Brazos Valley Research Associates is grateful to those who helped ensure the
success of this project. The field survey was conducted under the supervision of Michael
R. Bradle (Project Archaeologist) of American Archaeology Group in Lampasas, Texas
who was assisted by Floyd Kent and Julie A. Crowl. Mr. Bradle was responsible for
selecting areas for shovel testing, working with the geoarchaeologist, drafting some of the
figures, and co-authoring the report.
Mary E. McCready of Universal Curatorial Services in Austin, Texas performed the
initial background search and prepared the artifacts and records for curation with the
cooperation of Carolyn Spock, Head of Records, and Darrell Creel, Head of Collections at
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin, Texas. Mark H. Denton and
William A. Martin of the Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical
Commission, served as our link with the regulatory agency for this project.
Anthony D. Beach, P.E. of Beach Engineering, Rick Kasberg, P.E. of
Roming-Parker Associates, L.L.P., and Leonard Henry, Jr., P.E. of the City of Temple are
acknowledged for their assistance during the project. Mr. Beach walked the easement
with the Principal Investigator and the Project Archaeologist and assisted with logistical
problems and Mr. Kasberg coordinated our efforts with the City of Temple who provided a
backhoe and operator. Geoarchaeologist, Lee Nordt, examined the entire length of the
easement and selected the locations for backhoe trenching. He also supervised the
excavation of the trenches, described the soils, and authored the Geoarchaeological
Investigations section of this report. Archeological Steward Carol Kehl and Bob Burleson,
past President of the Texas Archeological Society, shared their knowledge of sites in Bell
County. Their experience and recent work on Pepper Creek was most helpful. William A.
Dickens examined the lithic artifacts, and Lili G. Lyddon prepared the figures.

iv

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ..................................................................................................iv
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ......................................................................................... 6
CULTURE SEQUENCE .................................................................................................. 8
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS ..................................................................................... 12
FIELD METHODS ......................................................................................................... 15
GEOARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS .............................................................. 21
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS…………………………………………………………….28
SITE DESCRIPTIONS .................................................................................................. 29
SUMMARY .................................................................................................................... 35
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 37
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 38
Appendix I: Shovel Test Log
Appendix II: Soil Descriptions from Backhoe Tests
Appendix III: Bibliography of Fort Hood reports
FIGURES
Figure 1. General Location Map ...................................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Project Area Map ............................................................................................. 3
Figure 3. Project Area as Depicted on Topographic Quadrangle, Belton ........................ 4
Figure 4. Location of Backhoe Trenches at Sites 41BL1069 and 41BL1070 ................ 17
Figure 5. Location of Backhoe Trenches and Channel Cutbank Exposures ................. 22
Figure 6. Soil-Stratigraphic Column of Backhoe Trench 9............................................. 27
Figure 7. Map of 41BL1066 ........................................................................................... 30
Figure 8. Floor Plan of 41BL1069 ................................................................................. 33

v

INTRODUCTION
The City of Temple proposes to build a sewer line and lift station along an
easement that parallels Pepper Creek for 3650 meters before crossing a broad, active
floodplain created by Pepper Creek to the west, Bird Creek to the east, and the Leon
River to the south. Portions of the northern segment (approximately 50% of the
easement) are situated on the first terrace (T-1) above the current active floodplain. The
length of the line is 27,000 feet x 35 feet (21.7 acres). The project area begins at the
juncture of Pepper Creek and F.M. 2305 (northern segment), parallels Bird Creek for
2750 meters, and ends 200 feet (60 meters) north of the Leon River. The general location
of the project area within the county is depicted in Figure 1.
A temporary easement of 100 feet will be in effect throughout the construction
phase. Once the sewer line is in place and the lift station is completed, the width of the
easement will be reduced in size to 35 feet. The width of the trench for the sewer line will
be 3-5 feet and will vary in depth from 5 feet to 20 feet.
An archaeological assessment of the entire length of the proposed easement was
not required by the Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission
based on their assessment of certain disturbed segments. Three segments of the
easement were not investigated. They are 2500 feet (760 meters) of the project area that
passes through the Wildflower Country Club; 3000 feet (915 meters) of the project area
that crosses a developed portion of the city of Belton, which includes F.M. Road 817,
Midway Drive, and South General Bruce Drive; and 5000 feet (152.5 meters) of the
project area that crosses a broad floodplain that has been disturbed by gravel quarrying.
This last segment parallels an unimproved road, stops at an existing lift station, and does
not go to the Leon River.
The areas investigated, as required by the Department of Antiquities Protection,
are depicted on the project area map (Figure 2). The project area is depicted on the
Belton 7.5' U.S.G.S topographic quadrangle dated 1965 and revised in 1993 (Figure 3).
This part of Texas contains numerous archaeological sites, and several are located within
the vicinity of the project area. In fact, five previously recorded sites (41BL122 - 41BL126)
are listed as the "Pepper Creek Archeological District" in the Endangered Historic
Properties of Texas published by the Texas Historical Commission in 1991. According to
the site records at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) in Austin, Texas,
there are no previously recorded sites along the entire easement where it parallels
Pepper Creek or Bird Creek.

1

However, after the easement crosses Bird Creek in the extreme southern portion
of the project area, seven prehistoric sites (41BL122 - 41BL126 and 41BL262 - 41BL263)
are located within floodplains adjacent to the project area. Because of the potential for
significant archaeological sites within the project area, a Phase I cultural resources
survey was required by the Department of Antiquities Protection, pursuant to the Texas
Antiquities Code, as amended. In order to comply with this requirement, the City of
Temple through Beach Engineering of Temple, Texas contracted with Brazos Valley
Research Associates (BVRA) to perform this service. Texas Antiquities Permit number
1712 was assigned to this project.
William E. Moore served as Principal Investigator and Michael R. Bradle of
American Archaeology Group was the Project Archeologist. Significant prehistoric and
historic sites are both present in this part of Central Texas. The most recent professional
archaeological investigations in the immediate area have been conducted within the
boundaries of Fort Hood to the north and west. Buried prehistoric sites occur along the
major rivers and creeks at Fort Hood, and significant sites have been recorded at
Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir and Belton Reservoir, both in Bell County. Therefore, the
integration of a geo-archaeologist into this project was necessary in order to interpret the
soils of the project area. Lee Nordt was retained to perform this service.
The project number assigned by Brazos Valley Research Associates is BVRA
96-03. Beach Engineering refers to this project as the Pepper Creek Trunk Sewer and Lift
Station, Temple, Texas (BE No. 961147.00). There was no federal involvement with this
project.
The research design for this project was coordinated with the Department of
Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Beach Engineering, and the City of
Temple and is designed to intensively survey the project area in order to identify all
prehistoric and historic archeological and/or architectural properties that may be eligible
for State Archeological Landmark designation. The methods used during this study are
discussed below in the Field Methods section of this report. Appended to this report is a
typed version of the Shovel Test Log (Appendix I) and detailed soil descriptions from the
backhoe trenches (Appendix II).

5

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
General
Bell County is located within the Balconian biotic province as defined by Blair
(1950:112-116) and includes the Gulf coastal plain from the Atlantic Ocean to eastern
Texas. The size and location of this province is described below by Blair (1950:112):
The Balconian province, as here defined, takes in most of the Edwards
Plateau as limited by Sellards, Adkins and Plummer (1933): (Figs. 3 and 4),
the Lampasas Cut Plain and Comanche Plateau of Raisz (1939 [cited as
1946 in Blair]), and the Central Mineral or Llano Uplift region. That part of
the Edwards Plateau lying west of the Pecos, and often referred to as the
Stockton Plateau, is not included, but is referred instead to as the
Chihuahuan province.
Climate
The Balconian climate is characterized by a decrease in rainfall from east to west.
Bell County is located in the eastern half of the province that has been classified by
Thornwaite (1948) as dry subhumid, mesothermal with average annual potential
evapotranspiration of between 39.27 and 44.88 inches. The annual rainfall for Bell
County is 34 inches, the January minimum temperature is 37 degrees Fahrenheit, the
July maximum temperature is 96 degrees Fahrenheit, and the growing season is 258
days (Kingston and Harris 1983).
Vegetation
According to Blair (1950:113), the most characteristic plant association of this
province is a scrub forest of Mexican cedar (Juniperus mexicana), Texas oak (Quercus
texana), stunted live oak (Quercus virginiana), and various less numerous species. The
project area is also located well within the Prairies Vegetation Region and the Edwards
Plateau Vegetation Region (Gould 1962). Vegetational species characteristic of the
region include Plateau live oak (Quercus fusiformus), Texas oak (Quercus texana), ashe
juniper (Juniperus ashei), honey mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa), cedar elm (Ulmus
crassifolia), cottonwood (Populus deltoides), pecan (Carya illinoinensis), elm (Ulmus
spp.), sumacs (Rhus spp.), Texas persimmon (Diospyros texana), agarita (Berberis
trifoliolata), Texas stillingia (Stillingia texana), yucca (Yucca spp.), Texas prickly pear
(Opuntia Lindheimeri), yaupon (Ilex vomitoria), and American beautyberry (Callicarpa
americana). Grasslands include seep mulhy (Muhlenbergia reverchnoii), Canadian
wildrye (Elymus canadensis), dichanthelium (Dichanthelium spp.), Texas grama
(Bouteloua rigidiseta), and red grama (Bouteloua hirsuta). The project area is now
primarily overgrown with juniper and mixed oaks and grasses.

6

Hydrology
The project area is located within the Brazos River drainage basin, one of the largest
rivers in the state. The two streams within the project area are Pepper Creek and Bird Creek, both
tributaries to the Leon River, which flows into the Little River.
Wildlife

The project area is located well within the Balconian Biotic Province that is
characteristically represented by a general mixture of fauna from nearby surrounding
provinces (Blair 1950). Typical species found within the project area include White-tailed
deer (Odocoileus virginianus), cotton-tailed rabbit (Sylvilagus floridanus), nine-banded
armadillo (Dasypus novemcinctus), black-tailed jack rabbit (Lepus californicus), racoon
(Prycon lotor), hispid cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus), wild turkey (Melagris gallopavo),
morning dove (Zenaida macroura), sicssor-tailed flycatcher (Tyrannus forficatus),
northern bobwhite (Colinus virginianus), western coachwhip (Masticophis flagellum
testaceus), and the bullsnake (Pituophis melanoleucus sayi).

7

CULTURE SEQUENCE
Bell County is located in the North Central Texas cultural-geographical region as
defined by Biesaart et al. (1985:76), an area referred to as Central Texas by most
archaeologists, and rich in archaeological sites.
Summaries relevant to the
prehistory of Bell County and vicinity have been prepared by various archaeologists,
primarily as a result of work at Fort Hood in Bell and Coryell counties, Texas (Guderjan et
al. 1980; Skinner et al. 1981, 1984; Thomas 1978; Roemer et al. 1985; Carlson et al.
1986), Belton Reservoir (Shafer et al. 1964), the Youngsport site (Shafer 1963), and
Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir (Shafer et al. 1964; Sorrow et al. 1967). Summaries of the
region have been published by Suhm (1960), Weir (1976), and Prewitt (1981, 1985).
Most recently, two thorough articles concerning Central Texas were published in Volume
66 of the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society. These works, entitled "Forty Years
of Archeology in Central Texas," by Michael B. Collins (1995) and "Implications of
Environmental Diversity in the Central Texas Archeological Region" by Linda Wootan
Ellis, G. Lain Ellis, and Charles D. Frederick (1995), represent a major synthesis of the
vast amount of collected data for the region. The following discussion is taken primarily
from the works cited above.
Paleoindian Period
Although, according to Willey and Phillips (1958:80), problems exist with the term
"Paleoindian," it is so widely accepted that it is used in this discussion. Paleoindian
typically refers to those cultures that were oriented toward big game hunting with food
collecting not a major pursuit. Eileen Johnson (1977:65-77) states that it has been
erroneously stereotyped as a migratory systematic big game procurement adaptation.
Collins (1995:381) argues that subsistence in Clovis times, for example, Paleoindians
exploited a diverse fauna base that not only included large herbivores such as mammoth,
bison, and horse but also included smaller animals such as water turtles, land tortoises,
alligator, mice, badger, and raccoon.
At Kincaid Rockshelter, a paved floor suggests that the inhabitants of this site
returned to the same site as part of a regular hunting and gathering strategy in contrast
with nomadic hunters who only pursued big game. It is, therefore, assumed that an array
of plants presumably also constituted part of Clovis subsistence (Collins 1990; Collins et
al. 1989)
According to Skinner et al. (1981:13), the Paleoindian period is one of the least
understood time periods in Central Texas prehistory, primarily because few sites have
been excavated. As of 1985, for example, only two Paleoindian sites had been reported
for Bell County (Biesaart et al. 1985:125). Evidence of this period often occurs in the form
of surface collected materials found over much of Central Texas. At Fort Hood, this
period is represented by distinctive projectile points found in multicomponent surface
sites and as isolated finds (Carlson et al. 1986:15).

8

It is believed that this period lasted from about 10,000 B.C. to 6000 B.C.
Diagnostic artifacts of the period include dart point types Angostura, Clovis, Folsom,
Golondrina, and Plainview as defined by Suhm and Jelks (1962) and Turner and Hester
(1985). These early sites are often found on old terraces of major river drainages and
may be more distant from major streams than some more recent occupations (Bryan
1931). Some rockshelters, such as the Levi site, were intensively occupied even though
they are located a considerable distance from major rivers. The only example of a
rockshelter in Central Texas immediately adjacent to a major drainage known to contain
Paleoindian occupation is the Horn Shelter (41BQ46) in Bosque County (Redder 1985).
Archaic Period
The Archaic represents a broad cultural time period that lasted from approximately
8500 Before Present (B.P.) to 1250 B.P. in Central Texas. According to Prewitt
(1981:71), "The Archaic Stage dominates all other remains in Central Texas." Prewitt
(1981) has subdivided the Archaic into eleven phases. LeRoy Johnson (1987) has
questioned the validity of the phase concept as used by Prewitt, especially the phases
occurring before the Middle Archaic. These have been grouped into Early, Middle, Late,
and Terminal periods by Carlson et al. (1986:15).
According to Prewitt (1981:77-78), during the Early Archaic there was a "strong
orientation toward the gathering aspect rather than the hunting, and a mobile population
was of low density." This occurred during the Circleville, San Geronimo, and Jarrell
phases (8500 B.P. - 5000 B.P.). In the Middle Archaic, food gathering had become very
specialized as evidenced by the presence of numerous burned rock middens/mounds
(Prewitt 1981:78-80). The Middle Archaic is seen by Prewitt to have taken place during
the Oakalla, Clear Fork, Marshall Ford, and Round Rock phases (5000 B.P. - 2600 B.P.).
An overall decrease in burned rock middens took place during the Late Archaic. Bison
were important as a food resource, but did not dominate subsistence activities (Prewitt
1981:80-81). The Late Archaic occurred during the San Marcos and Uvalde phases
(2600 B.P. - 1750 B.P.). The Terminal Archaic, according to the classification by Carlson
et al. (1986), includes the Twin Sisters and Driftwood phases (1750 B.P. - 1250 B.P.). An
increase in the importance of gathering and an apparent peak in site density seem to
have occurred during Prewitt's (1981:82) Driftwood phase.
According to the statistical overview (Biesaart et al. 1985) published by the Office
of the State Archeologist in 1985, the prehistoric site inventory for Bell County was heavily
skewed towards the Archaic. Of the 197 recorded sites, 2 were classified as PaleoIndian,
10 Early Archaic, 37 Middle Archaic, 32 Late Archaic, 52 General Archaic, and 29 Late
Prehistoric. These statistics suggest that Bell County was occupied mainly during the
Archaic period which, according to Prewitt (1981:Figure 3), lasted from 8500 years B.P. to
1250 B.P. This is supported by the statement by Collins (1995:383) that "two-thirds of the
prehistory of Central Texas is 'Archaic' in character."

9

Late Prehistoric Period
This period has been referred by some as the Neo-American Stage (Suhm et al.
1954), Neo-archaic (Prewitt 1981), and Post-Archaic (Johnson and Goode 1994).
Technological changes are the primary distinguishing characteristics of this stage. The
Austin (1250 B.P. - 650 B.P.) and Toyah (650 B.P. - 200 B.P.) phases belong to this stage
of prehistory. During this time arrow points first appeared as well as ceramics and
possibly horticulture.
According to Collins (1995:385), there is now evidence that only the bow and
arrow appeared initially in Central Texas; pottery was added later, and agriculture
developed last and was of minor importance. Because Late Prehistoric groups continued
to practice hunting and gathering, a division or two sub-periods seem to have taken place.
These are referred to as early and late by Collins (1995:385) with the break between the
long-standing Archaic period and the Late Prehistoric period occurring at circa 800 B.P.
when Toyah replaced Austin as the prevailing archeological manifestation.
The most obvious change that emerged at the beginning of the Late Prehistoric
period is the introduction of the bow and arrow and decreased use of the atlatl or spear
thrower. Otherwise, subsistence lifeways in the Late Prehistoric were probably little
different from those in the earlier Archaic period (Prewitt 1981:74; Weir 1976). A
chronological model by Dillehay (1974) of bison presence and absence periods on the
southern plains suggests that bison were present during the Toyah phase but not during
the preceding Austin phase.
Historic Period
Collins (1995:386) divides the Historic period of Central Texas into three
sub-periods: early, middle, and late. During the first two, vestiges of both indigenous and
European peoples and cultures were present; however, in the third the indigenous
peoples had virtually disappeared. The early Historic sub-period in Central Texas began
in the late 17th century with the first documented arrival of Europeans. Bell County is
situated within the historic range of the Tonkawa Indians who inhabited the area in the
16th Century (Newcomb 1986). By the 19th Century, they had broken ties with the
Comanche and Wichita and were associated with the Lipan Apache (Aten 1983:32).
They have been described as typical southern Plains Indians who were hunters and
gatherers and who lived along the streams and rivers of Central Texas. Remains of this
group have not been found in an historic context in Bell County.
During this period, Texas was occupied by numerous aboriginal groups including
the Caddo, Jumano, Tonkawa, Comanche, and Lipan Apache (Newcomb 1986). Trade
existed between the Jumanos and the Caddos. The Lipan Apaches the Comanches
entered the region from the Plains while following animal resources that migrated into
Texas. Contact period occupations are often identified by glass beads, gun parts,
gunflints, metal projectile points, and European manufactured ceramics.

10

The archival search did not locate any Historic Indian sites in Bell County;
however, avocational archaeologist Bob Burleson (1995:6) reports finding a metal arrow
point cut from a barrel strap in fresh gravels placed on the road to his farm. In adjacent
Coryell County, a blue glass bead was found with one of the burials at 41CV1, a group
burial along the Leon River (Jackson 1931), and a steel arrow point has been reported as
an isolated find on Horse Creek in the extreme east corner of Coryell County (Campbell
1952).
Historically, Bell County was first settled in 1834 and 1835 by colonists who settled
along Little River. The area was abandoned during the "Runaway Scrape" of 1836,
reoccupied, and deserted again after the fall of Fort Parker in June 1836. The early
settlements were constantly harassed by hostile Indians and, although several forts were
established, by 1838 all settlers had left the county. On May 26, 1839, the Indians
suffered a decisive defeat at what is referred to as the "Bird's Creek Indian Fight" about
one and a half miles northwest of the present site of Temple, Texas. However, settlement
did not return to the Bell County area until after 1843. Bell County was created on
January 22, 1850 and was named for Peter H. Bell. Nolan Springs was chosen as the
county seat and named Nolanville, but on December 16, 1851 the name was changed to
Belton.
Early settlement was along the creeks and rivers, but by 1860 most of the land had
been taken. The last serious Indian raid occurred in 1859. With the Indian problem
apparently resolved, settlement increased and the county grew from 4799 in 1860, to
9771 in 1870, and to 20,518 in 1880. The number of farms in the county increased from
640 in 1869, to 2231 in 1871, and to 4249 in 1889. Bell County is chiefly an agricultural
region with cotton and corn the leading crops. The construction of Fort Hood led to a
population increase in the county from 44,863 in 1940 to 74,145 in 1950.

11

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
According to Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview
(Biesaart et al. 1985:111), there were 197 sites recorded at TARL in 1985 when this study
was published by the Office of the State Archeologist. At this time, Bell County was third
in the North Central Texas region, and the 197 sites represented 7.35% of the region and
.97% of the state. The archaeological significance of this area is further indicated by the
fact that 61 of the 197 sites recorded in 1985 were registered as State Archeological
Landmarks. This figure represents 30.96% of all sites in Bell County. Since 1985,
however, the number of recorded sites has increased by 500.38% from 197 to 1061 as of
July 17, 1996. Although sites have been recorded by private contract archaeology firms,
avocational archaeologists, local archaeological societies, and interested individuals, this
increase in the number of sites in the county is mainly due to large-scale federal projects
such as Lake Belton, Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir, and Fort Hood. *
The efforts of avocational archaeologists, particularly members of the Central
Texas Archaeological Society and Bell County Archeological Society, have made notable
contributions. These include articles in the form of bulletins, newsletters, special reports,
and unpublished manuscripts on file at TARL or with society members. Bell County has
been the subject of intensive investigations by members of the Central Texas
Archeological Society. As a result of the above-mentioned investigations, "Bell County is
one of the better known Central Texas counties and has provided significant information
toward the understanding of prehistoric chronologies in this part of Texas" (Young
1987:9). In the site files at TARL are numerous pieces of correspondence from
landowners and artifact collectors documenting and describing sites and artifacts found in
Bell County. Also present, are copies of unpublished manuscripts, some of which do not
provide information concerning author and date of preparation. Information regarding
previous work in other parts of Bell County appear in the various references cited above,
especially the Fort Hood series. Only those activities in the immediate vicinity of the
project area are discussed below.
Although, at the time of this survey, there were no archaeological sites recorded in
the project area at TARL, seven sites were on file in the immediate area of part of the
southern segment where the easement crosses the broad floodplain between Pepper
Creek and Bird Creek. The first of this group of sites (41BL122 - 41BL126) was recorded
by Burleson (1995). He assigned temporary numbers (PC1 - PC5) to the five sites;
however, the official TARL numbers do not follow this sequence (e.g., PC1 = 41BL124;
PC2 = 41BL125; PC3 = 41BL126; PC4 = 41BL123; and PC5 = 41BL122). Mr. Burleson
makes no reference on the site form as to when and how often he visited the sites, but the
site form is dated 1966.
*A bibliography of Fort Hood reports appears as Appendix III.

12

The five sites were found on both sides of Pepper Creek, and are between 1000
and 1200 meters west of the project area easement. The data for all five sites are on a
single page site form with an attached page of artifact descriptions and sketch map.
According to the site form, the sentence in the "Remarks" section suggests that Archaic
and Late Prehistoric artifacts were found at each site. All of the artifacts are in his private
collection. Although the site form does not mention the Archaic and Late Prehistoric sites
by number, the page of artifact descriptions makes it possible to associate artifacts with
two sites (41BL124 and 41BL125). According to Burleson, site 41BL125 contained an
incised pottery sherd, a serrated flake, a possible boatstone, and a Perdiz arrow point.
Based on observations by Mr. Burleson, the heaviest concentrations of lithics and
ceramics were at site 41BL125 (Carol Kehl, personal communication, July 17, 1996).
Directly across the creek, at site 41BL124, Mr. Burleson collected a Scallorn arrow point.
These are the only artifacts that can be identified by site using his site form. In addition to
these specimens, he found manos, hammer stones, a perforated shell fragment classified
by him as a sea shell pendant, an incised stone, large and small knives, gravers,
spokeshaves, end scrapers, scrapers, and dart points which he typed as Castroville, Darl,
Ensor, and Yarbrough.
Mr. Burleson visited the project area on the last day of the field survey and
discussed his work in the area with the Principal Investigator. He stated that sites
41BL122 through 41BL126 are all Late Prehistoric. The two sites that contained dart
points, and are presumed by him to be Archaic, are 41BL124 and 41BL125. He also
showed the Principal Investigator the location of a prehistoric site that was at one time
thought to be within the alignment; this was an alternate route that is not currently being
considered. Some of the artifacts he has found during his local investigations are still in
his possession.
The other two sites in the immediate area (41BL262 and 41BL263) were recorded
by the Texas Department of Water Resources during an archeological reconnaissance of
a proposed wastewater collection and treatment improvement in 1982 and 1984 (Fox and
Whitsett 1984). This project recorded eight prehistoric sites (41BL259 - 41BL264 and
41BL278 - 41BL279). According to Fox and Whitsett (1984:6), "some site-specific
investigations have been done in Bell County (Watt 1936; Shafer 1963), but as yet
detailed archeological investigations have not been conducted in the Temple-Belton
area." Except for testing at 41BL260, approximately 2100 meters southwest of the
southern end of the project area, by Wayne C. Young (1987) of the Texas State
Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Highway Design Division (now
Texas Department of Transportation) in 1987, no additional site-specific investigations
were identified during the literature search for this project.

13

Of the two sites in the immediate area, 41BL262 (approximately 700-800 meters
southeast of the project area easement) is the most relevant to this project as it is a buried
site containing rock lined fire hearths and lithic debitage at depths ranging from an
estimated 30 centimeters to 1.2 meters. No surface evidence for this site was observed
during the 1982 reconnaissance; the site was found by observing cultural materials in the
cut banks of Bird Creek. It was recommended that this site be tested for its significance if
avoidance was not possible. Fox and Whitsett (1984:10) believe Bird Creek may be a
fossil channel of the Leon River. They describe the soils as Frio silty clay that is
consistent with the findings at 41BL1069 and 41BL1070 found during the current survey.
The most recent study of this area was performed by Carol Kehl who investigated
previously recorded sites along Pepper Creek. Her effort resulted in a thesis and an M.S.
degree in Environmental Studies at Baylor University (Kehl 1987). Ms. Kehl visited sites
41BL122 - 41BL126 in 1986 with Bob Burleson, the original recorder. She also obtained
radiocarbon dates from three samples from 41BL125 with funding from the Donors Fund
provided by the Texas Archeological Society.
The samples, analyzed by the
Radiocarbon Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin, were taken from charcoal
stained soil (X-number 6440), charcoal-stained soil from a mussel shell hearth (X-number
6441), and charcoal stained soil from a rock-lined hearth (X-number 6442). The dates are
3510 ± 150 B.P. (6440), 3500±80 B.P. (6441), and 3740±160 B.P. (6442), respectively.
On her own time, Ms. Kehl also monitored construction at 41BL180, a site on a
tributary of Pepper Creek that was tested by the Texas A&M University Anthropology
Club in 1977. Her work was not related to the current project. Site 41BL180 (the Childers
site [Childress site on the site form]) is described on the site form as an open campsite
containing Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric components. The monitoring by Ms. Kehl
recovered additional artifacts, including a Brazos Fishtail point; thus, possibly extending
the date of this site to the Paleoindian period. At this time, not one of the site forms for any
of the previously recorded sites along Pepper Creek, including 41BL180, have been
updated. Documentation of her work in the form of her thesis, field notes, and some
artifacts remain in her possession.
Bell County contains numerous prehistoric and historic sites, many potentially
eligible for the National Register of Historic Places or as State Archeological Landmarks.
However, certain sections of the county have not been adequately investigated. The
current project area falls within this category. There is reason to believe that a large
number of unrecorded sites exist along the major streams of this area in the form of
surface sites, possible rockshelter sites, and buried sites. The reader is advised to
consult the Fort Hood series and other sources mentioned above for more specific
investigations in other parts of the county.

14

FIELD METHODS
Background Research
Before entering the field, a background investigation was conducted. Site records
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin, Texas were checked for
previously recorded sites in the project area and vicinity. In addition, site reports
documenting work in the region were examined for information concerning archaeological
surveys and other work relevant to the project area. The project was discussed with
representatives of the City of Temple and Beach Engineering to ensure that the field crew
was aware of the route, existing sites, and/or high probability areas. The Principal
Investigator and Project Archaeologist walked the alignment with Anthony D. Beach, P.E.
of Beach Engineering prior to conducting the formal survey.
Fieldwork
The fieldwork was accomplished using the pedestrian survey method supported
by shovel testing and backhoe trenching. All exposed cutbanks and areas where surface
visibility was good were inspected for evidence of prehistoric and historic sites. The entire
line was investigated, except for three areas that were eliminated by the Department of
Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission (see Introduction above). Shovel
tests (ST) and backhoe trenches (BT) were dug in areas where sites were considered
most likely to be found, at site locations, and to assess the stratigraphy associated with
each of the major landforms along the alignment. All matrixes were screened using
one-quarter inch hardware cloth. Because of the high probability of buried sites in the
project area, a greater emphasis was placed on backhoe trenching. Geoarchaeologist
Lee Nordt visited the project area and walked the entire lignment in order to identify those
areas where buried soils appeared to be present. This task was accomplished in
advance of the field survey.
The archaeological investigation began at the north end of the alignment where
Pepper Creek crosses F.M. 2305. Field maps were not made at all of the site areas;
however, every effort was made to determine the boundaries of each site within the
alignment. This was hampered, in part, because the line was only marked by an
occasional stake or piece of engineering flagging tape. When a site was located, the
ground surface was closely examined and, in some cases, additional shovel tests and
probes were dug in the area in an effort to define site boundaries. At some sites very little
was present within the project area easement; therefore, site size could not be accurately
determined except in the direction dictated by the easement and within the 35 foot
easement. At 41BL1071 several flakes were observed on a small remnant levee within
the floodplain. When the route of the alignment was defined it was determined that this
site was out of the project area by approximately eight meters.

15

At 41BL1066, the possibility of a site within the easement was suspected when
flakes were found on the surface of a steep slope from the terrace to the creek. Backhoe
trenching revealed a buried site containing an in situ unifacial scraper lying on the original
land surface beneath recent alluvium at 19 centimeters; however, only a small portion of
the site in the easement is undisturbed due to construction of Kegley Road and the
Wildflower Country Club. Therefore, the backhoe trench was considered sufficient, and
no shovel tests were excavated in the site area. Of the seven sites located during the
survey, two (41BL1069 and 41BL1070) were found through backhoe trenching, and one
(41BL1066) was confirmed through this method.
Site 41BL1069 was discovered when two prehistoric horizons were encountered
at 130 and 190 centimeters below the existing ground surface. The trench was continued
until it had gone below the depth of the proposed sewer trench (seven feet) as stated by
Beach Engineers and the City of Temple. The geoarchaeologist described the soils and
prepared a profile map depicting the various strata and placement of cultural materials.
Soil descriptions were written for all backhoe trenches excavated during this
survey. Profile maps were not considered necessary for each backhoe trench. Site
41BL1070 was discovered when an intact hearth was found at approximately 50
centimeters below the existing ground surface. After consulting with Mark H. Denton of
the Department of Antiquities Protection, it was decided not to disturb this feature.
Backhoe Trench 13 was dug to determine the western boundaries of site
41BL1069, and Backhoe Trench 12 was dug to determine the western boundaries of site
41BL1070. When additional evidence of the sites in this direction and at the same level
was detected no more trenches were excavated in the vicinity of these sites. It was now
known that the two sites extended an additional 20 feet (41BL1069) and 45 feet
(41BL1070) to the west. Figure 4 illustrates the relationship of the trenches to each other
and certain fixed points on the landscape.
The research design dictated that all artifacts found in shovel tests and in situ
within each backhoe trench be collected for analysis and possible curation. During the
process of determining the depth of cultural deposits at site 41BL1069, cultural materials
were displaced and removed from their original context by the backhoe. The backdirt
piles were examined for diagnostic artifacts and to estimate the volume of such items as
mussel shell and burned rock. Mussel shell and burned rock were examined in the field
and not retained for curation. All artifacts collected were bagged and labeled for future
analysis. Shovel tests forms were filled out, and a list of shovel tests appears as
Appendix I to this report. In all, 12 shovel tests, at least 20 shovel probes, and 14
backhoe trenches were excavated. Not all of the project area was investigated during this
survey. A segment between the southernmost area, deleted by the Department of
Antiquities Protection, and the existing lift station near the Leon River was not examined
because permission had not been obtained from the landowner during the course of this
survey (Figure 2).

16

The informal survey conducted by Bob Burleson of Temple identified certain areas
within the vicinity of the proposed easement that contained prehistoric and historic
artifacts. As part of this project, the survey crew attempted to locate these sites. He
discusses the potential for significant historic sites in the right-of-way in the following
statement (Burleson 1995:2):
Since the sewer line is to run almost on the bank of the creek, and clearly in
the floodplain, there are no direct impacts upon historic sites. The early
settlers had more sense than modern man, and normally built above the
floodplain. Old, abandoned, but substantial gravel workings in the lower
reaches of Bird Creek have destroyed any historic sites that once remained
there.
His report mentions two historic sites in the general area. The first is the Kegley
Homestead (41BL1072) that probably dates to the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
This site is out of the project area as currently defined by Beach Engineering and the City
of Temple. However, the survey crew did confirm its presence from the road but did not
enter the property. Should the sewer route be altered to cross this area, BVRA agrees
with Mr. Burleson that the site may be significant. It is discussed in some detail in his
report with an accompanying sketch map. A conversation between Mr. Burleson and the
Principal Investigator revealed that his survey encompassed a much greater area than
the current easement (approximately 200 yards), as the exact route of the sewer line had
not been determined at that time.
The second historic site discussed is only briefly mentioned as "one other site
nearby and just upstream from the Kegley Homestead, where the house has also been
removed/destroyed by subsequent owners" (Burleson 1995:2). According to Burleson,
these early house sites represent the remnants of the earliest settlements along the
creek.
Carol Kehl refers to the site of the Trojan House, a 19th century homestead, as
being on Pepper Creek. According to her plotting on a map prepared by Beach
Engineering, it appears that this is the same site as 41BL1072 recorded during this
survey (Figure 3), and it is probably the second historic site mentioned by Burleson.
On Bird Creek, located on the Callaway property downstream from Midway Drive,
he mentions and old water well in the floodplain (Burleson 1995:6). He suspects it could
represent an exploratory oil well from the 1920s. The survey crew did not observe this
well within the project area easement. On the same Callaway property, on the brow of
the hill east of the creek, he mentions remnants of foundation stones and what appears to
be a filled-in dug well or cistern (Burleson 1995:6). This feature is out of the project area
and was not investigated. Also on the Callaway property, he notes the presence of traces
of an early roadway with parts of old wire fences intact, that "clearly ran alongside the
creek and down its canyon" (Burleson 1995:6). He speculates that this may be the
remains of the original Shallow Ford Road.

18

The survey crew did not observe the roadway. Mr. Burleson did not take the
Principal Investigator to this area on the day he visited the project area. No special effort
was made to identify this site since early roads are difficult to recognize and, except in
special cases, possess little research potential other than the knowledge of their
presence. Mr. Burleson also discusses prehistoric sites in the area and states that he
found "no significant archeological sites on the sections of Pepper Creek and Bird Creek
examined in connection with this project, although there are known archeological sites on
other sections and tributaries of both creeks" (Burleson 1995:4).
On Pepper Creek he mentions two prehistoric sites. The first is on the Raymond
Knauth Farm south of F.M. 2305 where he found scattered evidence consisting of flakes,
burned rock, and mussel shell in a plowed field. This site was examined by the survey
crew and is now officially recorded as 41BL1071 (Figure 3). The area was examined by a
backhoe trench, shovel tests and probes, and a careful surface inspection. It was
determined that Mr. Burleson was correct in his plotting of the prehistoric site; however it
is not in the project area easement. Pieces of cut limestone blocks seen on the Raymond
Knauth farm indicate that a much earlier historic structure may have been present at one
time at this location. This historic site is also out of the project area and was not
investigated.
Burleson also mentions a prehistoric site across the creek from 41BL1071. This
site was observed by the field survey crew while walking an alternate alignment with Mr.
Beach of Beach Engineering. The prehistoric site is very impressive due to its size and
large number of artifacts such as flakes, cores, burned rock, and mussel shell. It is now
officially recorded as 41BL1072. The historic component of 41BL1072 is discussed
above as the possible location of the Trojan House described by Carol Kehl. The site is a
farmstead containing a corncrib made of hand-hewn logs and a well or cistern as well as
other features. This site is out of the project area (Figure 3) and was not investigated
further.
On Bird Creek, where it leaves the "canyon" and into the Leon River floodplain,
Burleson (1995:6) noted the presence of a very small remnant of a prehistoric site that
has been virtually destroyed by gravel operations. He states in his report that it is
probably directly in the path of the proposed easement. The survey crew did not find this
site, although scattered chert cobbles and some possible tested cores were observed in
what was thought to be the general area. In the company of Mr. Burleson, the Principal
Investigator visited this site and confirmed its presence. However, it is not in the project
area, and it was not recorded.
Regarding the rest of the line that passes through the broad floodplain surrounded
by Pepper Creek, Bird Creek, and the Leon River, Mr. Burleson (1995:7) mentions the
possibility of buried sites "since gravel operations in this area clearly uncovered such
remains." This is the segment of the project area where backhoe trenching revealed the
presence of sites 41BL1069 and 41BL1070 (Figure 3).

19

It is believed that BVRA adequately examined the project area. Excellent surface
exposure was present along the T-1 terraces, and several sites were identified by the
observation of cultural materials on the surface. In those areas identified by the
Geoarchaeologist as having the potential for buried sites backhoe trenching was
conducted. Shovel tests were restricted to 50 centimeters in depth and were between
30 and 50 centimeters in diameter. Shovel probes were used to determine soil depth in
certain locations as a prelude to backhoe trenching. The entire line was walked by the
Principal Investigator, Project Archaeologist, and Geoarchaeologist.

20

GEOARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
The purpose of this investigation was to determine the relative probability of
discovering buried archaeological sites in primary contexts. To complete this task, the
floodplain history of Pepper Creek, Bird Creek, and the Leon River were reconstructed
within the project area that begins at the intersection of Pepper Creek and F.M. 2305,
extends southward to Interstate Highway 35, and then briefly follows Bird Creek to the
south before entering the Leon River floodplain. The project area is underlain by
Cretaceous shales, marls, and limestones (Barnes 1979). According to the local soil
survey (Huckabee et al. 1977), alluvial soils border the stream network along its entirety.
Methods
Fourteen backhoe trenches (BT) were excavated in the project area along Pepper
Creek, Bird Creek, and the Leon River floodplain. * Soil-stratigraphic descriptions were
written following standards and procedures of the Soil Survey Division Staff (1993). One
description was also written from a channel cutbank along Pepper Creek. No samples
were collected for radiocarbon dating. Estimated ages of alluvial deposits were based on
stratigraphic position, degree of soil development, and correlation to the late Quaternary
geological record established at the Fort Hood Military Reservation.
Pepper Creek
Six backhoe trenches and one channel cutbank were described along Pepper
Creek. Two landforms and three informal alluvial stratigraphic units were recognized.
From oldest to youngest, the stratigraphic units were labeled Unit I, Unit II, and Unit III.
The landforms consisted of an undulating terrace and an infrequently flooded flood
terrace.
Unit I
Unit I was the oldest unit recognized in the project area along Pepper Creek. This
unit was exposed in BT-6 on an undulating terrace situated approximately 15 meters
above the modern low-water channel (Figure 5; Appendix II). Unit I has been weathered
to a soil consisting of an A-Bt-Bk1-Bk2 profile. The development of a Bt horizon (clay
accumulation), decalcification of the upper 57 cm, and thick carbonate pendants on
pebble bottoms suggest a Pleistocene age. The abundance of pebbles throughout the
profile also suggests that the soil developed in a channel, or perhaps colluvial facies.
Nordt (1992) observed a similar profile sequence for a late Pleistocene soil along the
Leon River at the Fort Hood Military Reservation.

21

Unit II
Unit II was the second oldest alluvial unit recognized in the project area. This unit
was associated with the infrequently flooded flood terrace of Pepper Creek. Unit II was
exposed in BT-1, BT-2, BT-3, and BT-4 (Figure 5; Appendix II). In BT-3, Unit II formed the
constructional surface of the flood terrace approximately four meters above the low-water
channel. Here, the flood basin facies weathered to an A-Bw-Bk soil profile (The Ap
horizon reflects disturbance by plowing). The Bk horizon had thick carbonate pendants
on pebble bottoms. The soil profile was underlain by a pebbly channel facies (C horizon)
that, in turn, buried a thin Bkb horizon resting on Cretaceous bedrock (Crb horizon). In
BT-1, BT-2, and BT-4, Unit II was buried by younger flood deposits (Figure 5; Appendix
II). All Unit II sediments in these trenches consisted of flood basin facies. As revealed in
BT-4, the surface horizon (Ab) of the buried Unit II soil was not truncated before being
buried by flood deposition. However, in BT-1 and BT-2, the Ab horizons were truncated
prior to burial. The Bk horizons of Unit II in these areas have 1% to 5% carbonate
nodules. Unit II is younger than the Pleistocene terrace identified in the vicinity of BT-6,
but older than flood deposits that bury it. Furthermore, the soil Bk horizons developed in
Unit II have 1% to 5% carbonate nodules or thick carbonate pebble pendants. This
degree of soil carbonate development is similar to the early or middle Holocene Fort Hood
alluvium documented along small streams flowing through the Fort Hood Military
Reservation (Nordt 1992).
Unit III
Unit III was the youngest stratigraphic unit recognized along Pepper Creek in the
project area. It was exposed in the upper part of BT-1, BT-2, and BT-4 in the flood terrace
setting and in all of channel cutbank exposure 1 (Figure 5; Appendix II). Unit III buries
Unit II in all of the backhoe trench exposures. In BT 1, Unit III consisted of a fining upward
sequence from basal channel gravels to overlying flood basin clay loams. In BT-2, the
unit III sequence was more complex and consisted of an upper facies (Ap-C) and lower
facies (Ab1-Bk1b2-Bk2b2). This sequence reflects a period of landscape stability and
soil development followed by renewed deposition. In BT-4, Unit III consisted of beds of
clay, clay loams, and matrix supported pebbles overlying a thick grain supported (pebbly)
channel facies. Backhoe Trench 5 was excavated in a colluvial position between the
uplands and floodplain. The colluvial fill was only 25 centimeters thick in this area, which
rested directly on Cretaceous bedrock. This colluvium was tentatively correlated with Unit
III because of minimal pedogenesis. Unit III soils have darker colors and less carbonate
development than Unit II soils. Based on stratigraphic position and minimal pedogenesis,
Unit III is probably late Holocene in age and may include historic flood sediments. Nordt
(1992) dated similar sediments and soils to the late Holocene in the Leon River floodplain
on the Fort Hood Military Reservation.

23

Preservation Potential
Unit I is associated with the high terrace along Pepper Creek in the project area
and appears to be at least late Pleistocene in age. Consequently, the potential for
encountering buried archaeological sites in this unit is low. The surface of this terrace,
however, may have sites dating to any cultural time period.
Units II and III are associated with the flood terrace of Pepper Creek. Unit II forms
the constructional surface of the flood terrace or is buried by Unit III. In either case, Unit II
appears to be early to middle Holocene in age. As a result, Unit II has potential for
containing buried Early Archaic and Middle Archaic sites. Where Unit II forms the surface
of the flood terrace associated with Unit II, sites may date from the Early Archaic to the
present.
Unit III appears to be late Holocene to Historic in age. Consequently, it may
contain buried Middle Archaic to Historic sites. Where Unit III forms the surface of the
flood terrace, surface sites will probably be limited to the Late Archaic to the present.
In general, units II and III consist of a lower pebbly channel facies that grade up
into thicker, fine-grained flood basin deposits. The channel facies has lower potential for
site preservation in a primary context than the upper flood basin facies.
One buried site (41BL1066) was discovered during backhoe trenching in the
project area along Pepper Creek. It occurred in the upper part of the uneroded buried Ab
horizon of Unit II in BT-4. However, it is also possible that the feature formed on top of the
soil and subsequently worked down into the upper part of the soil with bioturbation. If the
feature formed on the buried Ab horizon, it will probably be younger than Middle Archaic.
If the feature was buried in the Ab horizon, it could be Early Archaic to Middle Archaic.
Bird Creek
Because of access limitations and floodplain disturbances identified during the
pedestrian survey, only one backhoe trench (BT-7) was excavated along the short
segment of Bird Creek in the project area (Figure 5; Appendix II). Backhoe Trench 7
revealed what appeared to be construction fill material. This material consisted of
multiple beds of pebbles, clays, and limestone slabs with brown, gray, and black colors.
These sediments were sometimes intermingled. However, based on the local soil survey
(Huckabee et al. 1977), there may be undisturbed segments of the floodplain within the
project area. Where this occurs, the bulk of the floodplain sediments of Bird Creek will
probably consist of units II and III, similar to Pepper Creek. Site preservation potentials
along Bird Creek are problematic. In areas that have been disturbed by human activities,
there will be little potential for finding buried sites in primary contexts. However,
undisturbed areas could contain sites buried in primary contexts similar to Pepper Creek.

24

Leon River
Seven backhoe trenches were excavated in the Leon River floodplain in the
project area (Figure 5; Appendix II). They were situated between an outside meander of
the Leon River and the uplands where Bird Creek enters the Leon River floodplain.
Informal stratigraphic units were not assigned to the floodplain stratigraphy. Only BT-9,
BT-10, and BT-14 were described in detail. Based on local soil descriptions (Huckabee et
al. 1977) and field observations, it appears that this area of the Leon River consists of
meander swale and ridge topography, oriented roughly parallel to the modern stream
channel.
Backhoe Trench 9 was excavated in a meander swale. The stratigraphy consisted
of a recent, or possibly historic, flood veneer (32 centimeters) burying a soil with an A1b
through Bk4b profile. The Ab horizons of the buried soil extended to a depth of 86
centimeters (54 centimeters below the top of the buried soil). This indicates cumulic soil
formation during slow flood deposition. The Bk horizons of the buried soil contained 2%
to 5% carbonate filaments in the upper part and a few carbonate nodules in the lower part.
Mottled colors in the lower Bk horizons also indicate a fluctuating groundwater table.
Backhoe Trench 10 was excavated on a meander ridge in the floodplain setting
just to the south of BT-9 (Figure 5; Appendix II). Here, the soil stratigraphy was similar to
BT-9, except t hat the Ab horizon of the buried soil was thinner. This reflects a
better-drained landscape position for the meander ridges.
Although not described, the landscape position and soil stratigraphy of BT-11 was
similar to BT-9. Backhoe Trench 8 was excavated only to a depth of approximately 30
centimeters but was similar to the other trenches at that depth. The color, texture, and
degree of development of the soils in this area suggest a middle to late Holocene age.
The dark Ab horizons of the buried soil in the meander swales (BT-8, BT-9, BT-11)
may be equivalent in age to the late Holocene West Range alluvium along the Leon River
on the Fort Hood Military Reservation (Nordt 1992). The lower Bk horizons in BT-8 BT-11 on the meander ridge may be equivalent to the middle Holocene alluvium identified
on the Fort Hood Military Reservation (Nordt 1992).
Numerous gravel pits occur in the project area between BT-11 and the Leon River
(Figure 5). These gravels may be the Holocene channel facies of the fine-grained
sediments in the vicinity of BT-8 - BT-11, or possibly older Pleistocene gravels deposited
under a higher energy flow regime than present. Undisturbed soil beneath roadside fill at
BT-14 consisted of a dark sandy clay loam A horizon over several yellowish-brown to
reddish-brown Bk horizons (Appendix II).

25

This texture indicates that BT-14 was excavated in a levee or meander ridge.
Similarities in landscape position and soil development suggest that the fine-grained
deposits in the vicinity of BT-8 and BT-9 is a meander swale or channel facies to the
deposits in the vicinity of BT-14. Neither of these facies correlates with the present
stream meander pattern.
Preservation Potential
The fine-grained sediments in the Leon River floodplain have a high probability for
containing buried archaeological sites in primary contexts. Approximately the upper
20-30 centimeters appear to consist of recent flood deposits, perhaps dating to historic
times. Three in situ buried features were discovered during backhoe excavations in a
buried soil of the floodplain setting (Figure 6). The first feature, a hearth beginning at 50
centimeters below the surface, occurred in the upper part of the buried Ab horizon in BT-8
(site 41BL1070). The next two features occurred between 130 and 140 and 190 and 220
centimeters in the buried Bkb horizons of BT-9 (site 41BL1071). Based on the tentative
alluvial stratigraphic chronology, the upper feature in BT-8 may be no older than Middle
Archaic and perhaps even as young as Late Prehistoric. The lower features in BT-9 may
be Early Archaic to Middle Archaic.
Based on stratigraphic position and soil development at BT-14, preservation
potentials appear to be similar for the remainder of the project area floodplain between
BT-8 and the modern Leon River. Regardless, a veneer of recent flood deposits will
obscure the visibility of prehistoric sites during pedestrian surveys.
_____
* Backhoe trenches 12 and 13 were excavated to define site boundaries and were not
observed or described by the geoarchaeologist.

26

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Background Research
A check of site records at TARL and a literature review revealed no archaeological
sites had been recorded in the current project area. In Bell County, however, 1061
prehistoric and historic sites have been recorded prior to this project (Carolyn Spock,
personal communication, July 18, 1996). Large-scale federal projects such as Belton
Reservoir, Stillhouse Reservoir, and Fort Hood have recorded the vast majority of sites in
the county (see Culture Sequence and Previous Investigations above). Except for an
informal survey by Bob Burleson in the 1960s (see Previous Investigations above) and a
study of sites on Pepper Creek by Archeological Steward, Carol Kehl (1987), no
archaeological surveys have been conducted along the main channel of Pepper Creek.
Mr. Burleson recorded five prehistoric sites on this drainage (41BL122 - 41BL126); the
only documentation of his work is a site form, list of artifacts collected, and site location
map. The results of Ms. Kehl's work are documented in her thesis and field notes which,
along with some artifacts, remain in her possession.
In 1977, the Anthropology Club at Texas A&M University tested 41BL180 (the
Childers site [Childress site on the site form]) that is located on a tributary of Pepper
Creek. The site form is the only documentation of this project on file at TARL; the artifacts
are presumed to be housed at Texas A&M University.
On Bird Creek, which parallels part of the project area, one survey by the Texas
Water Development Board recorded several sites, two of which are close to the project
area. These sites are 41BL262 and 41BL263. The sites mentioned above are very
relevant to the current study.
Field Survey
The field survey identified and recorded six previously unrecorded prehistoric sites
(41BL1065, 41BL1066, 41BL1067, 41BL1069, 41BL1070, and 41BL1071), one historic
site (41BL1068) with two flakes on the surface, and one site (41BL1072) with major
prehistoric and historic components.
Site 41BL1072 is outside the project area, and it was discovered while walking the
area to arrange access to the easement across the creek. Site 41BL1071 was
discovered while conducting the survey, but is outside the easement by approximately
eight meters. The sites are discussed individually below (see also Geoarchaeological
Investigations by Lee Nordt above), and their locations are shown on Figure 3.

28

SITE DESCRIPTIONS
41BL1065
This site was identified on the basis of six surface flakes on the east bank of
Pepper Creek at the 540-foot contour in an area along the route that has been seriously
deflated or eroded (Figure 3). The main portion of the site appears to be restricted to a
small rise in elevation located immediately adjacent to the easement and to the east;
hence, out of the project area. The function and exact size of this site is not known;
however, based on surface examination, shovel tests, and probes, it is estimated to be 50
meters in diameter and 20 centimeters in depth. Flakes and one medial fragment of a
biface were observed on the surface; they were not collected and no map was made of
this site. Site 41BL1065 is not considered to contain significant research potential and is
ineligible for listing as a State Archeological Landmark. The UTM coordinates for this site
are Northing 34 43 020 and Easting 6 52 130. It is depicted on the Belton, Texas
quadrangle, Zone 14.
41BL1066
This site was discovered when eight flakes were found on the surface of what
appeared to be a heavily eroded or deflated surface on the east bank of Pepper Creek
(Figure 3). The exact size of this site is not known; however, based on surface
examination, one shovel test, and several shovel probes, it is estimated to be 20 x 40
meters in size with an orientation of northeast southwest. One shovel test was excavated
on the deflated surface, but no subsurface cultural materials were found. A backhoe
trench was excavated between the proposed line route and Kegley Road since this area,
based in part on shovel probes, seemed to have intact deposits. A unifacial scraper was
discovered in situ at 19 centimeters below the existing ground surface in the trench wall.
Approximately 9.7 feet to the north, a hearth was found at 1.5 feet below the surface. It
was not removed, and the artifacts displaced through the backhoe trenching (burned
rock, mussel shell, and flakes) were not collected. Nor, were any flakes collected from the
site surface. This site contains intact features and cultural deposits and may extend to the
north of the project area where the elevation is greater. A field map was made of this site
and appears as Figure 7. Site 41BL1066 is classified as a campsite and is considered to
contain significant research potential. It is eligible for listing as a State Archeological
Landmark. The UTM coordinates for this site are Northing 34 41 940 and Easting 6 52
180. It is depicted on the Belton, Texas quadrangle, Zone 14. The centerline route
passes through the site and will impact intact cultural deposits.

29

41BL1067
This site was found when flakes were observed on a terrace above the south bank
of Pepper Creek and along the western slope of this terrace (Figure 3). This site appears
to be located on the hilltop terrace, and a few flakes have washed down the slope. The
easement passes through the site of the proposed lift station below the terrace where the
flakes were observed and continues upslope. Backhoe Trench 5 was excavated in this
location, and it was determined that the easement at the site of the proposed lift station is
in a colluvial deposition area between the uplands and floodplain. Here, the colluvial fill is
only 25 centimeters deep and rests directly on Cretaceous bedrock. Site 41BL1067 is
estimated to be 30 x 100 meters with an orientation of northeast-southwest and is
restricted to the hilltop terrace above the proposed lift station site and, therefore, only a
minor portion of the site is in the project area. No artifacts were found in the easement,
and the site was not mapped. Site 41BL1067 is not considered to contain significant
research potential and is ineligible for listing as a State Archeological Landmark. The
UTM coordinates for this site are Northing 34 40 140 and Easting 6 51 440. It is depicted
on the Belton, Texas quadrangle, Zone 14.
41BL1068
This site was found when two flakes and several historic artifacts were observed
on the surface within the easement (Figure 3). The major component of this site is historic
and consists of a thin scatter of unidentified metal objects, glass fragments (including a
bottle neck), handmade brick, cut limestone rock (apparent footing stones), and a cistern.
Three very large oaks, several feet in diameter, were present. The prehistoric component
observed consisted of only two flakes. The brick, footing stones, cistern, and two of the
large oaks are not in the project area. No artifact collection was made, and the site was
not mapped. The easement in this area parallels the road at the base of the hill below the
major portion of this site. It is assumed that the historic component of this site represents
a farmstead that was occupied sometime between the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Since the major portion of this site is out of the project area, it was not examined in detail.
Therefore, its exact size is not known. Site 41BL1068 is virtually destroyed and is
ineligible for listing as a State Archeological Landmark. The UTM coordinates for this site
are Northing 34 39 800 and Easting 6 51 270. It is depicted on the Belton, Texas
quadrangle, Zone 14.
41BL1069
This site was found buried in the broad floodplain formed by Pepper Creek, Bird
Creek, and the Leon River (Figure 3). No evidence of this site was present on the ground
surface; it was discovered through backhoe trenching when two buried prehistoric
components were encountered at depths of 130-140 centimeters and 190-220
centimeters in Backhoe Trench 9.
Cultural materials observed include burned
rock, a chert cobble utilized as a core, mussel shell, bone, charcoal, and flakes.

31

A sample of flakes was collected from the floor of the trench for analysis in an effort
to help determine the kinds of lithic activities that took place at this site. These artifacts
were removed from their primary context by the backhoe and only represent a biased
sample of the total debitage assemblage present at this level. The debitage sample
suggests some lithic reduction was conducted at the site. An apparent lack of primary
flakes suggests the reduction was mainly later stage, although the sample is admittedly
biased as not all debitage was collected. One small core was used secondarily as a
scraper. The lithic sample and the presence of bone, shell, and burned rock are
indicators that subsistence activities took place at 41BL1069. A floor plan of the
prehistoric horizon at 190 centimeters is depicted in Figure 8. A second trench (Backhoe
Trench 13) was excavated 20 feet to the west in an effort to determine the western extent
of this site. This trench discovered cultural materials at the same depth as those found in
Backhoe Trench 9. Site boundaries, as suggested by the placement of additional
backhoe trenches 9 and 13, are depicted in Figure 4, and a soil-stratigraphic column of
Backhoe Trench 9 showing depths and estimated ages of the buried features at
41BL1069 is depicted in Figure 6. Site 41BL1069 is classified as a campsite and contains
significant research potential. It is eligible for listing as a State Archeological Landmark.
The UTM coordinates for this site are Northing 34 38 020 and Easting 6 51 520. It is
depicted on the Belton, Texas quadrangle, Zone 14.
41BL1070
This site was found buried in the broad floodplain formed by Pepper Creek, Bird
Creek, and the Leon River (Figure 3). No evidence of this site was present on the ground
surface; it was found through backhoe trenching when an apparent intact hearth was
found at 50 centimeters in Backhoe Trench 8. Cultural materials observed include
burned rock, mussel shell, bone, charcoal, and flakes (not collected). When the hearth
was encountered, the trench was terminated in order to preserve this feature for future
study. Later, a second trench (Backhoe Trench 12) was excavated 45 feet to the west in
an effort to determine the western extent of this site. This trench discovered cultural
materials at the same depth as those found in Backhoe Trench 8. Site boundaries, as
suggested by the placement of backhoe trenches 8 and 12, are depicted in Figure 4, and
a soil-stratigraphic column of backhoe trench 9 showing depths and estimated ages of the
buried features at 41BL1070 is depicted in Figure 6. Site 41BL1070 is classified as a
campsite and contains significant research potential. It is eligible for listing as a State
Archeological Landmark. The UTM coordinates for this site are Northing 34 38 180 and
Easting 6 51 560. It is depicted on the Belton, Texas quadrangle, Zone 14.

32

41BL1071
This site is on the east bank of Pepper Creek and was found when flakes were
observed on the surface in the vicinity of the project area in a cornfield at the 550 foot
contour. It is located on property adjacent to the Raymond Knauth Farm south of F.M.
2305 (Figure 3). This is one of the prehistoric sites reported by Burleson (see Previous
Investigations and Field Methods above). The site area was examined by a surface
inspection; shovel tests and probes, and Backhoe Trench 3. It was determined that the
easement is to the east and the site is out of the project area. The function and exact size
of the site is not known. The site was not mapped, and no artifacts were collected. The
UTM coordinates for this site are Northing 34 42 380 and Easting 6 52 020. It is depicted
on the Belton, Texas quadrangle, Zone 14.
41BL1072
This site was found by the Project Archaeologist and Anthony D. Beach while
walking the west bank of Pepper Creek searching for access to the easement across the
creek. This is a very large site containing both prehistoric and historic components. The
prehistoric component was situated in a corn field and artifacts observed included burned
rock, mussel shell, flakes, bifaces, and an unidentified dart point that indicates at least a
portion of the site dates to the Archaic period. The site is out of the alignment and was not
investigated. The two most notable features of the historic component were a well or
cistern and a log crib inside of a large barn that was obviously added on at a later date.
The crib was constructed from hand-hewn logs. The UTM coordinates for this site are
Northing 34 42 300 and Easting 6 51 900. It is depicted on the Belton, Texas quadrangle,
Zone 14.

34

SUMMARY
The project area is located in a county that is rich in prehistoric and historic sites,
many eligible for listing as State Archeological Landmarks or for nomination to the
National Register of Historic Places. The importance of the county in terms of its historic
past is discussed in a number of early publications such as A Memorial and Biographical
History of McLennan, Falls, Bell, and Coryell Counties, Texas (Anonymous 1893), The
History of Bell County by George W. Tyler (1936), and Indian Depredations in Texas:
Original Narrative of Texas History and Adventure (1985), originally published by the
John Wesley Wilbarger in 1889. These works cite some of the earliest documentation of
the history of Bell County. Wilbarger's book is a major primary source for confrontations
between the early settlers of the county and hostile Indians.
The importance of certain prehistoric sites in Bell County and vicinity has been
known and documented in print since the early part of this century. As early as 1931,
pioneer archaeologist A. T. Jackson was recording sites in Central Texas. Much of his
work was never published; however, some noteworthy works exist such as an
unpublished manuscript on file at TARL documenting the excavation of a burial in
adjacent Coryell County (Jackson 1931). In 1936, F. B. Russell published his overview of
Bell County archaeology (Russell 1936). This is an especially important primary source
for understanding the kinds of sites that have been found in the county at a time when
they were relatively undisturbed. According to Russell (1936:49):
There are, in Bell County, some fifteen hundred camp sites of races, or
tribes, who lived here prior to the coming of the white man - how long
before, is not known. Near many of these camp sites, rests the remains of
these long-since vanished people, and with them, in many instances, their
earthly possessions of tomahawks, stone hammers, arrow points,
ceremonial pieces, metates, manos, beads, and ornaments.
More specific to the project area, Russell (1936:50) describes sites near the
present town of Belton in the following:
Near the town of Belton, to the south and west, along the Leon, Lampasas
and Cowhouse rivers, Noland, North Noland and Salado creeks, are
hundreds of prehistoric campsites, kitchen middens and burial mounds.
Russell (1936:5) states that the campsites of the "river country" are found
near perpetual springs and good fishing places on the rivers and creeks. Sites are
also found near gravel and rock shoals where these ancient people found mussels
in large quantities.

35

The occurrence of burials in Bell County is discussed in the above-cited
article by Russell and in an article by Frank A. Watt (1937:80-82) in the second
volume of Central Texas Archeologist. In this work, Watt (1937:80) discusses the
burials in the following quote:
...two skeletons found 36 inches below the present surface of the land, 24
inches above the top of the gravel deposit and eight feet above the floor of
the pit. They were originally reported to be embedded in the gravel deposit.
Especially relevant to the current project is a paper read before the Central Texas
Archaeological Society in 1941 by Frank Simmons in Waco, Texas (Simmons 1941). In
this paper he discusses buried sites on the Leon River.
More recent archaeological research has focused, in part, on the interaction of
Central Texas peoples with other cultural or geographical areas. Links with distant
groups can be documented in several ways, such as the presence of raw materials that
do not occur in the area in question. An example of this is site 41BL59 in Bell County near
Morgan's Point northwest of Temple. At this site, northwest of Temple, an obsidian biface
fragment was found during excavations along Cedar Creek. Flouresence analysis shows
that this artifact conforms to the fingerprint of Obsidian Ridge glass from the Jemez
Mountains volcanic field in northern New Mexico. This specimen was given to Frederick
L. Briuer, the former Director of the Archaeology Laboratory at Fort Hood, by a local
collector. Therefore, it is not known for certain that this artifact actually came from
41BL59.
Bison bone has been documented in archaeological sites in Central Texas dating
to the Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods of Texas prehistory (see Culture
Sequence above). Bison bone at 41BL123 on Pepper Creek, approximately 1000 meters
to the southwest of sites 41BL1069 and 41BL1070, as reported by Bob Burleson,
suggests that subsistence data regarding the presence of bison in the area may be found
at these sites.
The discussions of previous work and significant archaeological finds in Bell
County cited in this report serve to demonstrate the importance of collecting data from
sites in the county with research potential whenever possible. There are, unfortunately,
too many unanswered questions regarding the prehistory and early history of the area,
and it is only through scientific research that this information can be obtained.
___________
* Kitchen midden is an archaic archaeological term that refers to sites where hearths and
evidence of food processing is evident.

36

RECOMMENDATIONS
The current survey of the Pepper Creek Trunk Sewer Line and Lift Station in Bell
County, Texas performed for the City of Temple identified and recorded eight
archaeological sites (41BL1065 - 41BL1072). Two sites (41BL1071 and 41BL1072) are
out of the project area and will not be affected by construction of the sewer line and lift
station. Of the remaining six sites, three are believed to contain significant research
potential and are eligible for listing as State Archeological Landmarks. They are
41BL1066, 41BL1069, and 41BL1070. These sites are considered significant because
they are buried beneath the current ground surface and, presumably, contain intact,
undisturbed artifacts and features. Buried sites have the potential to provide useful
archaeological data, especially in the form of organic materials such as bone, shell,
and/or charcoal that can be dated by radiocarbon methods. If pollen is present it may be
possible to help reconstruct, to some degree, the environmental conditions that existed
when the sites were occupied. Overall, buried sites offer an excellent opportunity to
reconstruct many aspects of prehistoric life ways.
Site 41BL1066 will be impacted by the current sewer line, since the route passes
through the main portion of this intact site. It is recommended that 41BL1066 be
subjected to Phase II testing to determine its eligibility as a State Archeological
Landmark.
Sites 41BL1069 and 41BL1070 will be affected by construction according to the
current plans. It is recommended that they be subjected to Phase II testing to determine
their eligibility as a State Archeological Landmark.
Phase II testing consists of controlled excavation of a site that has been
determined at the survey level to have research potential. This level of work consists of
carefully removing all artifacts from test units (usually 1 x 1 meter in size) in arbitrary
levels of 10 centimeters. The site area is mapped, samples are collected for dating, and a
determination is made if the site is eligible for State Archeological Landmark status. If the
site is found to be significant, Phase III (mitigation) may be required. This is the final
investigation of a site.

37

REFERENCES CITED
Anonymous
1893

A Memorial and Biographical History of McLennan, Falls, Bell, and
Coryell Counties, Texas. Lewis Publishing Co.

Aten, Lawrence E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press.
Barnes, Virgil E.
1979
Geologic Atlas of Texas: Waco Sheet. The University of Texas, Bureau
of Economic Geology.
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985
Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview. Office
of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28.
Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 11(1):93-116.
Bryan, F.
1931
Burleson, Bob
1995

Notes on the Archeology of Central Texas. American Anthropologist
33(1):16-31.
Letter from Bob Burleson to Roming-Parker Associates, L.L.P.
Consulting Engineers and Beach Engineering dated November 7, 1995.
In Improvements and Extension to Pepper Creek Trunk Sewer:
Preliminary Engineering Report, prepared by Roming-Parker
Associates, L.L.P. and Beach Engineering, November 1995.

Campbell, T. N.
1952
Note written by T. N. Campbell dated October 24, 1952. On file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin, Texas.
Carlson, David L., Shawn B. Carlson, Frederick L. Briuer, Erwin Roemer, Jr., and William
E. Moore
1986
Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1983, The
Eastern Training Area. United States Army Fort Hood, Archaeological
Resource Management Series, Research Report 11.
Collins, Michael B.
1990
The Archaeological Sequence at Kincaid Rockshelter, Uvalde County,
Texas. In Transactions of the 25th Regional Archeological Symposium
for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 25-33. Midland
Archeological Society, Midland.

38

Collins, Michael B. (continued)
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:361-400.
Collins, Michael B., G. L. Evans, Thomas Nolan Campbell, M. C. Winans, and C. E. Mear
1989
Clovis Occupation at Kincaid Shelter, Texas. Current Research in the
Pleistocene 6:3-4.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1974
Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains.
Plains Anthropologist 19(65):180-196.
Ellis, Linda Wootan, G. Lain Ellis, and Charles D. Frederick
1995
Implications of Environmental Diversity in the Central Texas
Archeological Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:401-426.
Fox, Daniel E., and W. Hayden Whitsett
1984
An Archeological Reconnaissance of Proposed Wastewater Collection
and Treatment Improvements, Cities of Temple and Belton, Bell County,
Texas C-48-1535. Texas Department of Water Resources.
Gould, F. W.
1962

Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station, Bulletin MP-585. College Station.

Guderjan, Thomas H., George B. Thomas, and Howard R. Cramer
1980
Existing Data Inventory of Cultural Resource and Paleontological
Information, Fort Hood, Texas. Soil Systems, Inc. Marietta, Georgia.
Huckabee, J.W., Thompson, D.R., Wyrick, J.C., and Pavlat, E.G.
1977
Soil Survey of Bell County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture-Soil Conservation Service. United States Government
Printing Press, Washington, D.C.
Hughes, Richard E.
1989
Notes on Obsidian from the Fort Hood Area of Central Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 59:193-199. (for 1988)
Jackson, A. T.
1931

Excavation of a Burial Site on Fred Acree Farm, Coryell County, Texas,
January 29 to February 3, 1931. Unpublished manuscript on file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin, Texas.

39

Johnson, Eileen
1977
Animal Food Resources of Paleoindians. The Museum Journal
17:65-77.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1987
A Plague of Phases: Recent Soiocultural Taxonomy in Texas
Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:1-26.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr., and Glenn T. Goode
1994
A New Try at Dating and Characterizing Holocene Climates, as well as
Archeological Periods, on the Eastern Edwards Plateau. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 65:1-51.
Kehl, Carol
1987

Urban Archaeology: Pepper Creek Watercourse, Temple, Bell County,
Texas. Unpublished Masters thesis. Baylor University. Waco.

Kingston, Michael T., and Ruth Harris (editors)
1983
The Texas Almanac and State Industrial Guide: 1984-1985. The Dallas
Morning News.
Newcomb, William W., Jr.
1986
The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. The University
of Texas Press. (Seventh Paperback Printing)
Nordt, Lee C.
1992

Archaeological Geology of the Fort Hood Military Reservation, Fort
Hood, Texas. United States Army Fort Hood Archaeological Resource
Management Series, Research Report Number 25.

Prewitt, Elton R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:65-89.
1985
Raisz, Erwin
1946

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:201-238. (for 1983)
Map of the Landforms of the United States. Harvard University.
Cambridge.

Redder, Albert J.
1985
Horn Shelter Number 2: The South End a Preliminary Report. Central
Texas Archeologist 10:37-65.

40

Roemer, Erwin, Jr., Shawn Bonath Carlson, David L. Carlson, and Frederick L. Briuer
1985
Archaeological Surveys at Fort Hood, Texas, The Fiscal Year 1982
Range Construction Projects. United States Army, Fort Hood
Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report
Number 10.
Russell, F. B.
1936

Archeology in Bell County. Bulletin of the Central Texas Archeological
Society 2:48-58.

Sellards, E. H. Adkins, W. S. and F. B. Plummer
1933
The Geology of Texas: Volume I, Stratigraphy. The University of Texas
Bulletin 3232. Austin.
Shafer, Harry J.
1963
Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified Terrace Site in Bell
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 34:57-81.
Shafer, Harry J., Dee Ann Suhm, and J. D. Scurlock
1964
An Investigation and Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Belton
Reservoir, Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas: 1962. Texas
Archaeological Salvage Project, Miscellaneous Papers, No. 1. The
University of Texas at Austin.
Simmons, Frank
1941
The Sunken Middens of Leon River. Paper read before the Central
Texas Archaeological Society on March 20th, 1941 in Waco, Texas. On
file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin, Texas.
Skinner, S. Alan, Frederick L. Briuer, George B. Thomas, Ivan Show, and Eli Mishuck
1981
Initial Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal Year 1978.
United States Army, Fort Hood Archaeological Resource Management
Series, Research Report Number 1.
Skinner, S. Alan, Frederick L. Briuer, W. A. Meiszner, Ivan Show, and Eli Mishuck
1984
Archaeological Survey, at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal Year 1979. United
States Army, Fort Hood Archaeological Resource Management Series,
Research Report Number 2.
Soil Survey Division Staff.
1993
Soil Survey Manual. United States Department of Agriculture Handbook
Number 18. U.S. Government Printing Press, Washington, D.C.
Sorrow, William M., Harry J. Shafer, and Richard E. Ross
1967
Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, Number 11. Austin.

41

Suhm, Dee Ann
1960
A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 29:63-107.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas
Archeological Society, Special Publication Number 1 and Texas
Memorial Museum, Bulletin Number 4.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 25. (entire volume).
Texas Historical Commission
1991
Endangered Historic Properties of Texas: Second Edition. Texas
Historical Commission. Austin.
Thomas, George B.
1978
A Survey and Assessment of the Archeological Resources of Fort Hood,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:195-240.
Thornthwaite, C. W.
1948
An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate. Geography
Review 38:55-94.
Turner, Ellen Sue, and Thomas R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press.
Tyler, George W.
1936
The History of Bell County. The Naylor Company. San Antonio.
Watt, Frank A.
1936
1937
Weir, Frank A.
1976

A Prehistoric Rockshelter Burial in Bell County, Texas. Central Texas
Archeologist 2:5-27.
A Gravel Pit Burial near Little River. Bulletin of the Central Texas
Archeological Society 3:80-82.
The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation,
Washington State University. Pullman. On file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin, Texas.

42

Wilbarger, John Wesley
1985
Indian Depredations in Texas: Original Narrative of Texas History and
Adventure. (Reprint originally published by the author in 1889). Eakin
Press: State House Books.
Willey, Gordon R., and Philip Phillips
1958
Method and Theory in American Archaeology. The University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Young, Wayne C.
1987
Archaeological Testing of Site 41BL260 Bell County, Texas. Texas
State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Highway
Design Division.

43

APPENDIX I: SHOVEL TEST LOG
______________________________________________________________________
Test
Depth
Munsell Color
Results
______________________________________________________________________
01

50 cm

10YR3/2

sterile

02

50 cm

10YR3/2

sterile

03

50 cm

10YR3/2

sterile

04

50 cm

10YR3/1

sterile

05

50 cm

10YR3/1

sterile

06

50 cm

10YR3/2

sterile

07

50 cm

10YR3/2

sterile

08

50 cm

10YR3/1

sterile

09

50 cm

10YR3/1

sterile

10

50 cm

not taken

sterile

11

50 cm

not taken

sterile

12
50 cm
not taken
sterile
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX II: SOIL DESCRIPTIONS FROM BACKHOE TESTS
Backhoe Trench 1: Pepper Creek; 560 feet elevation; flood terrace; calcareous
throughout.
Ap

0-21 cm; Unit III; black (10YR 2.5/1) clay loam; moderate medium
angular blocky structure; very hard; 7% matrix supported pebbles, 0.2 to
0.5 cm diameter; clear smooth boundary.

A

21-48 cm; Unit III; black (10YR 2.5/1) clay loam; moderate coarse
angular blocky structure; very hard; 10% matrix supported pebbles, 0.2
to 0.5 m diameter; gradual smooth boundary.

Bw

48-70 cm; Unit III; very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) clay loam;
moderate coarse subangular blocky structure; very hard; 15 to 20%
matrix supported pebbles, 0.2 to 1 cm diameter; clear smooth boundary.

C

70-105 cm; Unit III; light olive brown (2.5Y 5/4) and olive brown (2.5Y
4/3); 70% grain supported pebbles, 0.3 to 4 cm diameter; abrupt smooth
boundary.

Bk1b

105-162 cm; Unit II; light olive brown (2.5Y 5/3) clay; common medium
distinct dark yellowish-brown (10YR 4/6) soft iron masses; weak coarse
angular blocky structure; very hard; 5% matrix supported pebbles, 0.5 to
2 cm diameter; 5% hard and white carbonate nodules, 0.5 to 1 cm
diameter; clear smooth boundary.

Bk2b

162-175 cm; Unit II; light olive brown (2.5Y 5/3) clay loam; common
medium distinct dark yellowish-brown (10YR 4/6) soft iron masses;
weak coarse angular blocky structure; very hard; 10% matrix supported
pebbles, 0.2 to 3 cm diameter; 2% hard and white carbonate nodules,
0.5 to 1 cm diameter.

Backhoe Trench 2; Pepper Creek; 555 feet elevation; floodplain; calcareous throughout.
Ap

0-28 cm; Unit III; black (2.5YR 2/1) clay loam; moderate medium
subangular blocky structure; very hard; 5% matrix supported pebbles,
0.2 to 0.4 cm diameter; abrupt smooth boundary.

C

28-40 cm; Unit III; black (2.5YR 2/1) clay loam; 40% grain supported
pebbles, 0.2 to 1 cm diameter; abrupt smooth boundary.

Backhoe Trench 2 (continued)
Ab1
40-62 cm; Unit III; black (2.5YR 2/1) clay loam; moderate medium
angular blocky structure; very hard; <5% matrix supported pebbles, 0.2
to 0.4 cm diameter; clear smooth boundary.
Bk1b2

62-84 cm; Unit III; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) clay loam; moderate
medium prismatic; very hard; <5% pebbles, 0.3 to 0.5 cm diameter; 7%
white and brittle carbonate nodules, o.5 to 1 cm diameter; gradual
smooth boundary.

Bk2b2

84-98 cm; Unit III; dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2); common fine distinct
dark yellowish-brown (10YR 4/6) soft iron masses; weak coarse angular
blocky structure; very hard; <5% matrix supported pebbles, 1 to 2 cm
diameter; 1% white and brittle carbonate nodules, 0.5 to 1 cm diameter;
few fine brittle iron manganese concretions; clear smooth boundary.

Bss1b3

98-148 cm; Unit II; dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2); common medium
distinct yellowish-brown (10YR 5/6) soft iron masses; moderate coarse
angular blocky structure; very hard; common distinct slickensides; <5%
matrix supported pebbles, 1 to 2 cm diameter; few fine brittle iron
manganese concretions; gradual smooth boundary.

Bss2b3

148-178 cm; Unit II; dark gray (10YR 4/1); common medium distinct
yellowish-brown (10YR 5/4) soft iron masses; weak coarse angular
blocky structure; very hard; 10% matrix supported pebbles, 1 to 2 cm
diameter; 1% white and brittle carbonate nodules, 0.5 to 1 cm diameter.

Backhoe Trench 3; Pepper Creek; 555 feet elevation; flood terrace; calcareous
throughout; Unit II.
Ap

0-20 cm; black (10YR 2.5/1) clay loam; moderate medium subangular
blocky structure; hard; 5% matrix supported pebbles, 0.2 to 0.4 cm
diameter; clear smooth boundary.

A

20-39 cm; very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) clay loam; moderate
medium subangular blocky structure; 15% matrix supported pebbles,
0.5 to 1 cm diameter; 5% dark yellowish-brown (10YR 4/4) biocasts; 5%
matrix supported pebbles, 0.5 to 1 cm diameter; gradual smooth
boundary.

Backhoe Trench 3 (continued)
Bw
39-53 cm; very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3.5/2) clay loam; weak coarse
subangular blocky structure; 15 to 20% matrix supported pebbles, 0.3 to
1 cm diameter; 1% carbonate mycelia; 5% matrix supported pebbles,
0.5 to 1 cm diameter; clear smooth boundary.
Bk

53-87 cm; brown (10YR 5/3) clay loam; weak coarse subangular blocky
structure; hard; 20 to 25% matrix supported pebbles, 0.5 to 2 cm
diameter; common carbonate pendants on pebble bottoms, 1 to 2 mm
thick; abrupt wavy boundary.

C

87-143 cm; 80% grain supported pebbles, 0.2 to 3 cm diameter, poorly
sorted; abrupt wavy boundary.

Bkb

143-165 cm; brown (10YR 5/3) and yellow (10YR 7/6) clay; 10% matrix
supported pebbles, 1 to 4 cm diameter; 3% white and brittle carbonate
nodules, 0.5 to 1 cm diameter; massive structure; very hard; abrupt
wavy boundary.

Crb

165-175 cm; pale olive (5Y 6/3) silty clay; common medium distinct
yellowish-brown (10YR 5/6) soft iron masses; Cretaceous bedrock.

Backhoe Trench 4; Pepper Creek; 545 feet elevation; flood terrace; calcareous
throughout; burned rock and flakes at 31 cm.
A

0-25 cm; Unit III; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) clay loam; moderate
medium subangular blocky structure; very hard; 8% matrix supported
pebbles, 0.2 to 1 cm diameter; clear wavy boundary.

Ab

25-50 cm; Unit II; black (10R 2/1) clay; moderate medium angular blocky
structure; very hard; 3% matrix supported pebbles, 0.2 to 0.5 cm
diameter; 5% brown (10YR 5/3) biocasts; gradual smooth boundary.

BAb

50-69 cm; Unit II; very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) clay; moderate
medium subangular blocky structure; very hard; 3% matrix supported
pebbles, 0.2 to 0.5 cm diameter; 5% brown (10YR 5/3) biocasts; gradual
smooth boundary.

Bk1b

69-93 cm; Unit II; light olive brown (2.5Y 5/3) clay loam; few medium
faint dark yellowish-brown (10YR 4/4) soft iron masses; moderate
medium angular blocky structure; very hard; 4% soft and white
carbonate nodules, 0.5 to 1 cm diameter; 10% matrix supported
pebbles, 0.2 to 0.5 cm diameter; gradual smooth boundary.

Backhoe Trench 4 (continued)
Bk2b
93-102 cm; Unit II; light olive brown (2.5Y 5/4) clay loam; weak medium
subangular blocky structure; hard; 1 to 2 % soft and white carbonate
nodules, 0.5 to 1 cm diameter; 10% matrix supported pebbles, 0.2 to 3
cm diameter.
Backhoe Trench 5; Pepper Creek; 525 feet elevation; flood colluvium; calcareous
throughout.
A

0-25 cm; Unit III?; light olive brown (2.5Y 5/3) clay; moderate medium
subangular blocky structure; very hard; clear wavy boundary.

Cr

25-96 cm; gray (2.5Y 5/1) and light olive brown (2.5Y 5/3, 5/6) silty clay
Cretaceous shale and clay; multiple beds 20 cm thick; very hard.

Backhoe Trench 6; Pepper Creek; 560 feet elevation; terrace; Unit I.
A

0-25 cm; brown (10YR 4/3) sandy clay loam; moderate medium
subangular blocky structure; hard; 20% matrix supported pebbles, 0.3 to
1 cm diameter; non-calcareous; abrupt wavy boundary.

Bt

25-57 cm; red (2.5YR 4/8) clay; moderate coarse subangular blocky
structure; hard; 30% matrix supported pebbles, 0.2 to 3 cm diameter;
non-calcareous; abrupt wavy.

Bk1

57-78 cm; dark brown (7.5YR 4/4) clay loam; 40% matrix supported
pebbles, 0.2 to 3 cm diameter; common carbonate pendants on pebble
bottoms, 3 to 4 mm thick; mildly calcareous; abrupt wavy boundary.

Bk2

78-105 cm; yellow (10YR 7/6) fine sand; upper part - 60% grain
supported pebbles, 0.5 to 3 cm diameter; common carbonate pendants
on pebble bottoms, 0.2 to 0.5 cm thick; lower part - sand enriched in
disseminated carbonate (semi-consolidated).

Backhoe Trench 7; Bird Creek; elevation 490 feet; floodplain; calcareous throughout;
highly disturbed construction fill material down to 170 cm; consists of multiple layers of
pebbles, cobbles, limestone slabs, and clay with colors of brown, gray and olive; Bird
Creek channel appears to be filled in.
Backhoe Trench 8; Leon River; 485 elevation; floodplain; meander swale; similar
stratigraphy to BT-9 to a depth of 50 cm; burned rock, shell, flakes, and bone in upper part
of buried soil at a depth of about 30 cm.

Backhoe Trench 9; Leon River; 485 feet elevation; floodplain; meander swale; calcareous
throughout.
A

0-32 cm; very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) clay; moderate medium
angular blocky structure; very hard; clear smooth.

A1b

32-59 cm; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) clay loam; 5% brown (10YR 4/3)
biocasts; moderate fine subangular blocky structure; hard; gradual
smooth boundary.

A2b

59-86 cm; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) clay loam; moderate fine
subangular blocky structure; hard; 1% carbonate mycelia; 5% brown
(10YR 4/3) biocasts; gradual smooth boundary.

Bk1b

86-130 cm; very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3.5/2) clay loam; weak
coarse angular blocky structure; very hard; 1% carbonate filaments; 5%
brown (10YR 4/3) biocasts; gradual smooth boundary; 130 to 140 cm
has in situ feature.

Bk2b

130-201 cm; dark grayish-brown (10YR 4/2) clay loam; weak coarse
angular blocky; very hard; 4% carbonate filaments; gradual smooth
boundary; 180 to 220 cm has in situ feature.

Bk3b

201-233 cm; brown (10YR 5/3) clay loam; 25% gray (10YR 5/1) iron
redox depletions; weak coarse prismatic structure; very hard; 3%
carbonate filaments; gradual smooth boundary.

Bk4b

233-300 cm; brown (10YR 5/3) silty clay loam; 10% gray (10YR 5/1) iron
redox depletions; weak coarse prismatic; very hard; 2% carbonate
filaments; few pitted carbonate nodules, 1 cm diameter.

Backhoe Trench 10; Leon River; 485 feet elevation; floodplain; meander ridge;
calcareous throughout.
Ap

0-19 cm; very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) clay loam; moderate
coarse angular blocky structure; very hard; clear smooth boundary.

Ab

19-56 cm; very dark brown (10YR 2/2) clay loam; moderate fine
subangular blocky structure; very hard; 1% carbonate mycelia; gradual
smooth boundary.

Bk1b

56-89 cm; very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) clay loam; 10% dark
yellowish-brown biocasts; moderate medium prismatic; very hard; 1%
carbonate mycelia; gradual smooth boundary.

Backhoe Trench 10 (continued)
Bk2b
89-148 cm; brown (10YR 4/3) clay loam; 10% yellowish-brown (10YR
4/4) biocasts; moderate coarse prismatic structure; very hard; 7%
carbonate filaments; gradual smooth boundary.
Bk3b

148-180 cm; yellowish-brown (10YR 4.5/4) silty clay loam; weak coarse
prismatic; very hard; 7% carbonate filaments.

Backhoe Trench 11; similar to Backhoe Trench 9.
Core Borings 1; Pepper Creek; 530 feet elevation; floodplain; calcareous throughout; Unit
III.
A

0-6 cm; dark grayish-brown (2.5Y 4/2) clay loam; weak coarse
subangular blocky structure; very hard; clear wavy boundary.

Ab1

6-41 cm; very dark grayish-brown (2.5Y 3.5/2) clay loam; moderate
coarse angular blocky structure; very hard; abrupt wavy boundary.

C1b1

41-51 cm; 70% grain supported pebbles, 0.2 to 1 cm diameter;
grayish-brown (2.5Y 4/2) matrix; abrupt wavy boundary.

C2b1

41-51 cm; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) clay loam; massive; very hard; 10
to 15% matrix supported pebbles, 0.3 to 1 cm diameter; abrupt wavy
boundary.

Ab2

51-94 cm; black (10YR 2.5/1) clay; weak coarse angular blocky
structure; very hard; 10% matrix supported pebbles, 0.3 to 1 cm
diameter in upper half; gradual smooth boundary.

Bwb2

94-125 cm; dark gray (2.5Y 4/1) clay; 15% light olive brown (2.5Y 5/6);
weak coarse angular blocky structure; very hard; abrupt wavy boundary.

Cb2

125-170 cm; 70% grain supported pebbles, 0.3 to 8 cm diameter; brown
matrix like above; channel bottom at 170 cm.

Backhoe Trench 12; dug to determine the western boundaries of 41BL1070. It was
excavated 45 feet to the west; Artifacts were encountered at the same level as Backhoe
Trench 8, and the soils were similar. It was not observed or described by the
Geoarchaeologist. The Principal Investigator and Project Archaeologist were present.

Backhoe Trench 13; dug to determine the western boundaries of 41BL1069. It was
excavated 20 feet to the west; Artifacts were encountered at the same level as Backhoe
Trench 9, and the soils were similar. It was not observed or described by the
Geoarchaeologist. The Principal Investigator and Project Archaeologist were pr
Backhoe Trench 14; Leon River; 487 feet elevation; floodplain; county road ditch;
calcareous throughout.
fill

0-29 cm; yellowish-brown (10YR 5/4) sandy loam; 10% bodies of very
dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2); 30% matrix supported pebbles, 1 to 3
cm diameter, rounded to angular; massive; few nails and cans; abrupt
wavy.

A

29-60 cm; very dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) sandy clay loam; 5%
dark yellowish-brown (10YR 4/4) biocasts; moderate coarse prismatic;
firm; gradual smooth boundary.

Bk1

60-104 cm; dark yellowish-brown (10YR 4/4) sandy clay loam; 5% very
dark grayish-brown (10YR 3/2) biocasts; moderate coarse prismatic;
firm; gradual smooth boundary.

Bk2

104-142 cm; strong brown (7.5YR 5/6) sandy clay loam; 1% very dark
grayish-brown (10YR 3/2); biocasts; moderate medium prismatic; firm;
1-2% calcium carbonate filaments; gradual smooth boundary.

Bk3

142-159 cm; reddish-yellow (7.5YR 6/6) very fine sandy loam; weak
coarse prismatic; friable; 1-2% calcium carbonate filaments and 2%
hard and pitted nodules 1 cm diameter.

APPENDIX III: BIBLIOGRAPHY OF FORT HOOD REPORTS
(Arranged by series number)
Skinner, S. Alan, Frederick L. Briuer, George B. Thomas, and Ivan Show
1981
Initial Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1978.
United States Army Fort Hood, Archaeological Resource Management
Series, Research Report Number 1.
Skinner, S. Alan, Frederick L. Briuer, W. C. Meiszner, and Ivan Show
1984
Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1979. United
States Army Fort Hood, Archaeological Resource Management Series,
Research Report Number 2.
Dibble, David S., Henry Moncure, and Frederick L. Briuer
1989
Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1980 (Fall).
United States Army Fort Hood, Archaeological Resource Management
Series, Research Report Number 3.
Jackson, Jack M., and Frederick L. Briuer (compilers)
1989
Historical Research and Remote Sensing: Applications for
Archaeological Resource Management at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year
1981. United States Army Fort Hood, Archaeological Resource
Management Series, Research Report Number 5, 6 and 7.
Carlson, David L., and Frederick L. Briuer
1986
Analysis of Military Training Impacts on Protected Archaeological Sites
at West Fort Hood, Texas. United States Army Fort Hood,
Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report
Number 9.
Carlson, David L., Shawn Bonath Carlson, Frederick L. Briuer, Erwin Roemer, Jr., and
William E. Moore
1986
Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1983 The
Eastern Training Area. United States Army Fort Hood, Archaeological
Resource Management Series, Research Report Number 11.
Carlson, Shawn Bonath
1984
Ethnoarchaeological Studies at a 20th Century Farmstead in Central
Texas: The W. Jarvis Henderson Site (41BL273). United States Army
Fort Hood, Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research
Report 12.
Briuer, Frederick L., and George B. Thomas
1986
Standard Operating Procedure for Field Surveys. United States Army
Fort Hood, Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research
Report Number 13.

Carlson, Shawn B., H. Blaine Ensor, David L. Carlson, Elizabeth A. Miller, and Diane E.
Young
1987
Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1984. United
States Army Fort Hood, Archaeological Resource Management Series,
Research Report 14.
Carlson, Shawn B., David L. Carlson,, H. Blaine Ensor, Elizabeth A. Miller, and Diane E.
Young
1988
Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1985, the
Northwestern Training Area. United States Army Fort Hood,
Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report
Number 15.
Koch, Joan K., Catherine Mueller-Wille, and Frederick L. Briuer
1988
Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1985, the
Northwestern Perimeter. United States Army Fort Hood, Archaeological
Resource Management Series, Research Report Number 16.
Koch, Joan K., and Catherine S. Mueller-Wille
1989
Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1985 The
Southwestern Training Area. United States Army Fort Hood,
Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report
Number 17.
Koch, Joan K., and Catherine S. Mueller-Wille
1989
Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1985 The
Northern Training Area. United States Army Fort Hood, Archaeological
Resource Management Series, Research Report Number 18.
Carlson, David L. (editor)*
1993
Archaeological Investigations in Bull Branch: Results of the 1990
Summer Archaeological Field School. United States Army Fort Hood,
Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report
Number 19.
Moore, William E., and George B. Thomas*
1987
Results of a Monitoring Project of 112 Stratified Random Sample
Quadrats at Fort Hood, Texas. United States Army Fort Hood,
Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report
Number 19.

Mueller-Wille, Catherine S., and David L. Carlson
1990
Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1986: The Shoal
Creek Watershed. United States Army Fort Hood, Archaeological
Resource Management Series, Research Report Number 20.
Muller-Wille, Catherine S., and David L. Carlson
1990
Archeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal Year 1986, Other
Training Areas. United States Army, Fort Hood Archeological Resource
Management Series, Research Report 21.
Carlson, David L. (editor)
1993
Archaeological Investigations in Spicewood Creek: Results of the 1991
Summer Archaeological Field School. United States Army, Fort Hood
Archeological Resource Management Series, Research Report 22.
Ensor, H. Blaine
1991
Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1987 the MCA
Range Construction, Pidcoke Land Exchange, and Phantom Range
Projects. United States Army, Fort Hood Archeological Resource
Management Series, Research Report 23.
Carlson, David L., John E. Dockall, and Ben W. Olive
1994
Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1990: The
Northeastern Perimeter Area. United States Army, Fort Hood
Archeological Resource Management Series, Research Report 24.
Nordt, Lee C.
1992

Archaeological Geology of the Fort Hood Military Reservation, Fort
Hood, Texas. United States Army, Fort Hood Archeological Resource
Management Series, Research Report 25.

Carlson, David L. (editor)
1993
Archaeological Site Testing and Evaluation on the Henson Mountain
Helicopter Range AWSS Project Area, Fort Hood, Texas. United States
Army, Fort Hood Archeological Resource Management Series,
Research Report 26.
Thoms, Alston V. (editor)
1993
Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Years 1991 and 1992
the Cantonment and Belton Lake Periphery Areas. United States Army,
Fort Hood Archeological Resource Management Series, Research
Report 27.

Nordt, Lee C.
1993

Additional Geoarchaeological Investigations at the Fort Hood Military
Reservation, Fort Hood, Texas. United States Army, Fort Hood
Archeological Resource Management Series, Research Report 28.
(Addendum to Research Report Number 25)

Trierweiler, W. Nicholas (editor)
1994
Archeological Investigations on 571 Prehistoric Sites at Fort Hood, Bell
and Coryell Counties, Texas. United States Army, Fort Hood
Archeological Resource Management Series, Research Report 31.
Frederick, Charles D., Michael D. Glascock, Hector Neff, and Christopher M. Stevenson
1994
Evaluation of Chert Patination as a Dating Technique: A Case Study
from Fort Hood, Texas. United States Army, Fort Hood Archeological
Resource Management Series, Research Report 32.
Quigg, Michael J., Charles D. Frederick, and Dorothy Lippert
1996
Archeology and Native American Religion at the Leon River Medicine
Wheel. United States Army, Fort Hood Archeological Resource
Management Series, Research Report 33.
Abbott, James T., and W. Nicholas Trierweiler
1995
NRHP Significance Testing of 57 Prehistoric Archeological Sites on Fort
Hood, Texas. (2 Volumes) United States Army, Fort Hood Archeological
Resource Management Series, Research Report 34.
____________
*These two reports have the same series number; the reason is not known.
Unnumbered Reports
Dibble, David S., Frederick L. Briuer, Henry B. Moncure, Jack Jackson, and George B.
Thomas
1985
Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal Year 1980 (Spring
Season) Final Report. Science Applications International Corporation.
San Diego.
Moore, William E.
1987
Results of a Recently Completed IGAS Mapping Project and
Recommendations for Future Site Monitoring at Fort Hood, Texas.

