ARCHEOLOGICAL EXCAVATIONS AT THE DOW-CLEAVER SITE,
BRAZORIA COUNTY, TEXAS

by
Lawrence E. Aten

TECHNICAL BULLETIN, No. 1
Texas Archeological Salvage Project
The University of Texas at Austin

This page intentionally left blank.

ARCHEOLOGICAL EXCAVATIONS AT THE DOW-CLEAVER SITE,
BRAZORIA COUNTY, TEXAS

by

Lawrence E. Aten

Technical Bulletin No.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project
The University of Texas at Austin

FOREWARD
This paper wi I I initiate a new publ ication series of the Texas Archeo­
logical Salvage Project. Traditionally, reports of this research agency have
stemmed largely from salvage operations carried out under the auspices of the
Inter-Agency Archeological salvage Program; these reports have been submitted
to the National Park Service as contract satisfying manuscripts or as printed
reports in our Papers or Survey Reports series. Although the prime function
of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project remains that of a research unit
working in cooperation with Federal river basin salvage programs, the accel
ating rate of destruction of archeological resources resulting from land
modification by private interests and non-Federal governmental agencies re­
quires that increased scientific attention be given to locations threatened
by any such cause. This new series, the Technical Sui letin, is presently
intended as an organ for reporting the results of this work. Too, it wi I I b
used when financially feasible for the publ ication of original and worthy
manuscripts appl icable to the archeology of the state which do not result f
emergency salvage operations.
I am particularly del ighted that this series is begun with a report of
research made possible by a grant-in-aid from the Dow Chemical Company, Texas
Division. It is most encouraging that this forward-looking organization
shares in our concern for the past.

David S. Dibble
Acting Director

iii

ABSTRACT
This report describes the results of excavations
archeological data from the Dow-Cleaver Site, located
Brazos River some ten mi les upstream from the Gulf of
sisted of a series of six thin, unstratified zones of
by intervals of steri Ie allUvium.

designed to salvage
on the east bank of the
Mexico. The site con­
campsite refUse separate~

Excavations were focused on two problems of significance to this initial
phase of archeological investigation in the Brazos delta area. The first and
most basic of these problems was development of a chronology to serve as an
historical frame of reference for other archeological investigations. The
second problem was an analysis of aboriginal SUbsistence and settlement
patterns; this latter aspect wil I be reported elsewhere.
With respect to chronology, the zones excavated appear to span the time ~
interval from roughly A.D. 450 to 1800. The first pottery (Goose Creek Plain) \
is introduced at about A.D. 500, and the bow and arrow some time in the interv,1
A.D. 500 to 130~ Grog-tempered (San JaCinto Plain) and bone-tempered ceramics
appeared by A.D. 1300 and inCised ceramics (Goose Creek InCised, san Jacinto
Inci5ed, and bone-tempered inCised) appeared at some time in the interval A.D.
1300 to 1800. Since this basic framework Is compatible with the more detailed
sequence known from the Galveston Bay area, fUrther improvement of the Brazos
delta chronology shOUld now come as a by-product of excavations focused
primarily on other problems.

Edited by Mel inda S. Giles

iv

PREFACE
The investigation reported here is another in a series of studies deal- i
Ing with the archeology of the upper Texas coast presented by the author and:
his associates, and by other staff members of the Texas Archeological Salvage:
Project (Ambler 1967, 1970; Aten 1965, 1966, 1967, 1968, 1970, 1971, n.d.a, ;
n.d.b; Aten and Bol I ich 1969; Aten and Chandler n.d.; Bol lich and Aten n.d.; I
Shafer 1966; Tunnel I and Ambler 1967).
When intensive work in this region was begun nearly five years ago,
:
archeological knowledge of the area was exceedingly sparse. Operating largely,
but not entirely, within the locational needs for salvage archeology, I
I
elected, in the early stages of this work at least, to focus upon the general·
patterns of chronological relationships and cultural ecology of the area as
a whole rather than to focus more intensive study upon a smal I segment of the
area. There are two reasons for this: first, in view of the extraQrdinari Iy
high rate of site destruction in the coastal region, I believe that an approa¢h
generalized in its initial phases is more pragmatic and scientifically sound.
Second, (also related to the high rate of site destruction) I believe that
an initial determination of broad patterns wi I I serve as the best guide to
planning and execution of intensive investigations in those geographic and
scientific areas that wil I be most productive. This present report documents
al I of our work at the Dow-Cleaver Site except description of the ext~nsive
archeological faunas and analysis of the cultural ecology; this data has
been incorporated into the authorTs doctoral dissertation research (Aten
n.d.b).
We cannot assess sole responsibil ity for site destruction and loss in the
coastal area to human modification of the landscape, for the inexorable forces
of the natural environment exact a sizeable tol I as weI I. For example, shoreI ine erosion is continually enlarging every bay on the coast; as a result
there remain very few sites around the perimeter of Galveston Bay and similar
situations exist along numerous other Gulf Coast estuaries. It Is abundantly
clear to archeologists working in the Texas coastal region (as well as elsewhere)
that Federal and state government financing for archeological investigations
is inadequate to carry the burden; additional support from the private sector
of the economy is essential if we are to recover a significant record of the
history and patterns of I ife of the prehistoric coast dwellers and of the
early history of exploration and settlement by Europeans. It is significant
then, that at this time when archeological resources along the Texas coast
are disappearing at a rate far exceeding those of any other region of Texas,
that the Dow Chemical Company has demonstrated such foresight and conSideration
for these resources that they sought and financially underwrote the studies
reported here prior to damaging the site during construction operations. The
hour is late, and there remains much to be done; we hope that the example set
by Dow Chemical Company wi I I not be ignored.

v

ACKNOHLEDGMENTS
I would I ike to acknowledge my appreciation and thanks to the management
of Dow Chemical Company's Freeport Plant B who not only bore most of the
expenses of this investigation but who also made every effort, largely through
their Plant Security division, to ensure that our field work was brought to
a successful and safe conclusion. This may seem a rather peculiar acknowledg­
ment, but a large chemical manufacturing complex is no place for the uninitiated
to be wandering about unguided.
Mr. F. Raymond Waf ley, who, in addition to serving as my direct contact
with company management, is a leader of the Brazosport Museum of Natural
SCience Archeology Club and, in this capacity, made al I arrangements for our
volunteer labor. Mr. Wal ley also generally supervised the extensive surface
collecting undertaken at the site both before and after our excavations, and
made these surface collections avai lable for study.
Mr. Pete Cleaver, the discoverer of the Site, worked long and hard on
our crew each day both as capable excavator and amiable companion. Other
regular crew members were James McMichael, Robert Cole, and Tommy Smith, al I
high school students from nearby Lake Jackson who had worked for me on previ­
ous excavations in the Galveston Bay area and whose increasingly competent
assistance I appreciate. In addition, there were numerous members of the
Brazosport Museum of Natural Science who volunteered their time as shovel­
hands and screeners and whose efforts toward making this project worthwhile
are sincerely appreCiated.
I would also I ike to express my appreciation to Mr. Don Hami Iton of the
Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin, who inter­
rupted an already busy schedule to visit the site with Mr. Curtis Tunnel I,
state Archeologist of Texas, to make an initial evaluation of its potential,
and later to supervise the second week of excavation. Mr. Hamilton also made
avai lable the specimens and his manuscript on Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory excavations conducted at nearby Shy Pond. Inasmuch as this is the
only other extensive controlled excavation in the area, use of the manuscript
and the i r mater i a lis apprec i ated.

My wife Aura ski I Iful Iy executed the artifact drawings and typed portions
of the manuscript. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory collections were
uti I ized in making comparisons of Dow-Cleaver Site artifacts with those from
other sites on the Texas Coast.
Many of my Ideas on ceramics and chronology of the upper Texas coast are
one product of a very fruitful collaboration with my colleague and good friend,
Dr. Charles N. Bol I ich of Beaumont. Much of the work on vessel forms dis­
cussed in this report is a continuation and extension of simi lar work being
carried out by him on ceramics from the Sabine Lake area.

vi

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER I:

INTRODUCTI ON

·..... ·................
.. .....
..........
·...........
·.. ...... ........

Si te Location
Summary of Environmental Characteristics
Archeo log i ca I Background •
• • • • • •
Ethnohistoric
Background • • • •
Research Procedure
CHAPTER II.

9

II

"

17

THE ARTI FACTS

·..

Introduction •• • • • • • •
• • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Ceramics • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Lithics • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Bone
• • ••
•••••••••••••••••••••••
Shel I
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Mi scell aneous • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
CHAPTER IV:

5

THE SI TE

Description
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Excavation Procedure. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Physical Stratigraphy • • • •
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
CHAPTER I I I:

5

19

20
31
41

44

45

I NTERPRETATI ONS

Radiocarbon Dates • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Technological History • •
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
REFERENCES CITED

• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

vi i

47

50

55

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Figure No.

2

3
4

5
6
7
8

9
10

Site location, topography, and excavation plan ••• • • ••
Geomorphology of the Brazos and San Bernard
River Deltas, Brazoria County, Texas • • • • • • • • •
View of excavation near completion • • • • • • • • • • • • •
stratigraphic profile along north side of
coo ling pond dra i nage ditch
••••• • • • • • • • • • •
Distribution of cultural features in main
excavat Ion area
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Oriented rim and base profi les • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Sherd drawings • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Selected projectl Ie points • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Selected chipped stone and bone artifacts. • • • • • • • • •
Prel iminary interpretation of culture
trait history • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

x
2

12
14

16

22

28
34
38
53

L'ST OF TABLES
Table No.

2

3
4

5
6

7
8

Description of stratigraphiC section • • • • • • • • •
Pottery type frequencies by occupation zone • • • • • •
Average vessel wal I thickness by occupation zone • • •
Distribution of vessel form attributes • • • • • • • •
Classification and distribution of unuti lized
flakes • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Lithic speCimen color distribution • • • • • • • • • •
Distribution of non-ceramiC artifacts • • • • • • • • •
Radiocarbon dates of occupation zones • • • • • • • • •

vi i I

18

• • •
• • •
• ••

24
24

• • •

26

• • •

40

• • • 42
• • • 46
• • • 48

They had never any settled abiding place,
but wandered from point to point, all along the
coast; now, no longer free to come and go, or
linger at their pleasure, but living their lives
under protest as it were and only on sufferance.
--Alice Will iams Oliver on the
Karankawa she knew in 1840
(Oliver 1891:
16)

ix

D

~

Confroll6d fl1(callaflon

o

...

Profltfl lrtlnehfls

\

I

~

i

~
II>

-!?

i>'

\ ~

\ II

. bOio

£Q

0.

-

0

~

~

~

\ .g~

~

~.

~!!...

'i5~
...

?5 ~ 0

(I\~.
~~)
\
\
\
\j
..
--~
0

.p

,po

x

9·50-...

41 80 35
Figure

1:

Site location, topography,
and excavation plan
o

Cooling pond drainogB ditch - - - ­

10
----'

:

IItlt.,.

....­

Oow-CIN~' Stf.,

Contour io,."aI =0.25 m.t•

India MOl!
(lop edQe of .outh bonk of ditch)

CHAPTER I:

INTRODUCTI ON

Site Location

The Dow-Cleaver Site (41 BO 35) is located approximately 2.5 miles west
norihwest of the city of Freeport (in southern Brazoria County) on the
grounds of Dow Chemical Company's Freeport Plant B (Fig. 1). The site was
discovered when shell lenses were spotted in the sides of a cool ing pond
excavation. Although presently located about 200 yards from the Brazos River
in the central part of the Brazos River deltaic plain, much of the site's
occupation appears to be associated with a previous river channel position.
Excavations with a four man crew were conducted without interruption
from Monday, May 4, through Friday, May 15, 1970. During the first six days
work was supervised by the author, and for the remaining six days work was
supervised by Mr. Don Hami Iton, graduate student at The University of Texas
at Austin.

Summary

~

Environmental Characteristics

The Dow-Cleaver Site is situated on the extreme lower floodplain of
the Brazos River immediately north of the several deltas representing former
channel stages of the main Brazos River channel (Fig. 2). The principal
floodplain topographic features are a series of very low meander belt ridges
(representing former positions of the river's main channel) which are separated
by fresh and salt water marshes situated at a still lower elevation. These
floodplain features are bounded by the similarly low but somewhat better
drained surfaces of the Pleistocene Beaumont Formation which, in this extreme
southerly location, are dipping under the Holocene sediments and form "uplands"
more in name than in fact.
The principal (although minor from the standpoint of site ecology) geo­
graphic changes in the landscape during the period of site occupation appear
to be the progressive expansion of the coastal salt marshes at the expense
of former I y more extens ive coasta I lagoons.
The major biotic habitat controls in an area such as the Bra20s delta
are edaphic, and for this reaSon generalized habitats can be mapped on the
basis of the geomorphic interpretations. Eight general habitats haVe been

1

Figure 2
Geomorphology of the
Brazos and San Bernard River Deltas,
Brazoria County, Texas
o
IiioI

2

I&iJ-wI
miles

N

~
<t*..
ISIS'

i

IJY

D

'····
G
:;-;:~

~

........I>

... ....... ,;..,~~ .. ,..:... - -.
.-

\"

Uplond prolrie (Beoumont Fm.)

~

Meonder bells

~
...

"._
.'

...•,

..

•....
"

Water bodies
Modern Brozos R/ver delto
(resulling from orlific/ol
diversion In 1929)

Salt mOTSh (fil/tld coostal logoon)

-

,"

U

:.'"

,,~'f)

. . ;,.t

.l",\1

l'..., ".' ..
'\..~

J......

III
":::'::

Morginol or high level sail marsh
(only oceasionolly inundoftld
by storm surges)
5011 dome hill (Bryon Mound)

Bose mop and geomorphic inter­
prlltotion compiled from USDA air
photo mosaics, USGS topo,rophic
mtlps, tlnd Ihll Gllolo,ic AI/os of
Texas (Houston Shlltll) by L. E. Alen.

'.
~

Borr/tlr sond

~
~

Floodbosln (frtlShwtlttlr swamps tlnd marshes)

'.

.

':-:'.
,:~.,.: .
:' .. :\.: :

.,."

Figure 2 (facing page); Legend

recognized: (1) upland prairie, (2) freshwater streams, (3) freshwater marshes,
swamps, and lakes, (4) meander belt ridges, (5) salt marshes, (6) salt water
lagoons, (7) gulf beaches, and (8) open gulf. The latter two habitats were
scarcely ever exploited from the vantage point of the Dow-Cleaver Site. The
remaining six habitats were exploited to greater or lesser degrees and the
specific changes in areas exploited have been mapped over an estimated span
of approximately 1300 years. These changes apparently relate in part to:
(1) technological changes (such as the inferred appearance of fish traps and
the introduction of the bow); (2) historical changes (such as range reduction
due to the pressures of surrounding native groups in the interior and from
European settlement); and (3) causes that simply cannot be recognized at the
present time.
Quantitative estimations of the biotic (food) potential of the various
habitats are unfortunately not available. However, in view of analyses that
indicate the operation of simi lar geologic processes and the presence of similar
rates of river discharge, a relatively stable assemblage of landforms and a
relatively stable cl imate are indicated, thus suggesting the probability of a
stable assemblage of faunal resources during the period of site occupation.
Thus, any changes in material culture to be discussed shortly probably cannot
be ascribed to any environmental developments. These environmental interpre­
tations and their supporting data are documented more extensively in Aten
(n.d.b).

Technological Resources

There were few raw materials known to have been used by the inhabitants
of the Brazos delta area that could not have been obtained locally. The
principal item not locar Iy avai lable appears to have been chert (or a simi lar
material) for making chipped stone projecti Ie points and other tools. The
nearest outcrops of this material are stream gravels which begin about 90
mi les inland from the coast (Garner 1967). Local informants, however, report
gravel outcrops on Damon Mound, a salt dome hi I I located about 30 miles
northwest of the Dow-Cleaver Site, but these appear to be too smal I to have
been of use in chipped stone toolmaking.
Cabeza de Vaca notes that he traded coastal items inland for
••• skins, red ochre which they rub on their faces, hard cane
for arrows, fl int for arrowheads, with sinews and cement to
attach them, and tassels of deer hair which they dye red
(Covey 1963: 67).

4

The animal products, however, were avai lable locally and asphalt substituted
for animal-derived cement, so it is not clear why it was necessary to trade
for these items.

Archeological Background

The Dow-Cleaver Site Is situated near the eastern end of a large portion
of the Texas Coast, about which very I ittle is known of the aboriginal inhabit­
ants. This region extends from the west side of Galveston Bay southwestward
to the vicinity of Corpus Christi Bay and for at least 80 mi les inland. story
(1968: 3-6) has recently summarized the existing data from the western portion
of this area and this wi II not be repeated here. In the eastern portion and
in the general area of the Dow-Cleaver Site considerable unpubl ished site
surveying, with some testing, has been carried out by members of the Brazosport
Museum Archeology Club. The only extensive excavation previously undertaken
in the immediate lower Brazos River area was in 1967 at two sites near Shy
Pond located approximately 5 mi les north-northwest of the Dow-Cleaver Site
(Hami Iton n.d.). Other than the I imited data from Shy Pond, the nearest
excavations about which information is avai lable are at Harris County Boys
School (Aten and Chandler n.d.) located some 45 mi les northeast, at Addicks
(Wheat 1953) located some 60 mi les north, at the Albert George Site (Wal ley
1955) located some 35 mi les north, at the Anaqua Site (Story 1968), and at the
proposed Palmetto Bend Reservoir (Wakefield 1968) located some 75 miles to the
west. Specific relationships with some of these sites wi II be discussed later
in this report. Beyond this there is very I ittle to be told in the nature
of archeological background. No stratigraphie excavations had been undertaken
prior to the present investigation; thus there was no chronological framework
in existence against which to arrange the cultural manifestations known from
the area. Furthermore, examinations of collections made in the lower Brazos
River area suggested there was a quantitatively and qual itatively diminished
artifact inventory in relation to that found in the Galveston Bay area, thus
inhibiting extrapolation from that region. Our work thus began against a
background of very I ittle wei I-founded archeological data of any sort.

Ethnohistoric Background

The Indian group widely identified with the central portion of the Texas
coast (i.e., from roughly the west side of Galveston Bay to the vicinity of
Baffin Bay and including the lower Brazos River area) were the Karankawa

5

(Newcomb 1961). This group, actually conjoined by language rather than pol ity
and apparently interrelated by marriage as wei I, consisted of five tribes
based on mid-18th century sources: the Coco, the Copane, the Cujane, the
Guapite, and the Karankawa (Bolton 1915:281). Speaking of the general period
around the mid-18th century, Bolton's sources indicate that the Karankawan
group
••• did not occupy fixed localities, and since they mingled
freely with each other, it is difficult to assign definite
territorial I imits to the different tribes •••
The Karankawa dwelt most commonly on the narrow fringe
of islands extending along the coast to the east and west
of Matagorda Bay; the Coco on the mainland east of Mata­
gorda Bay, about the lower Colorado River; the Cujane and
Guapite on either side of the bay particularly to the west
of it; and the Copane west of the mouth of the San Antonio
River about Copano Bay... (Bolton 1915: 282).
Although the first mention of the group specifical fy known as the Karan­
kawa does not occur until about 1687 by Joutel (Hodge 1907: 657), our knowledge
of them begins with Cabeza de Vaca's narrative of the roughly four years he
spent on the Texas coast with the Coco (Schaedel 1949: 129) beginning in 1527,
only 35 years after Columbus' first voyage.
Of the coastal groups encountered and named by Cabeza de Vaca (Covey
1961) the only one we can recognize is that cal led Coaque and Capoque; these
names probably being those later rendered as Coco or Coke (Hodge 1907: 315).
That others mentioned by him are the same as those we know from 18th century
sources is likely but cannot be conclusively demonstrated at this time.
Considerable difference of opinion exists in the literature regarding the
geographic identity of places visited by Cabeza de Vaca, particularly the
Island of Malhado, although most workers place it somewhere between the Brazos
River and Galveston Island {for example, cf. Krieger 1956 and Covey 1961}.
No further mention of Indians in the area is known until 1687 when Joutel
first mentions the Karankawa in the vicinity of LaSal Ie's Fort st. Louis on
Garcitas Creek above western Matagorda Bay (Hodge 1907; Newcomb 1961).
References in the 18th century become relatively more numerous. In 1746
Orobio y Basterra, travel ing amont the Orcoquisac (Akokisa), stopped at one of
their vi I lages on Spring Creek (west of the San JaCinto River and just north
of Houston). The Orcoquisac reported having peaceful relations with al I their
neighbors except the Karankawa, Cocos, and Cujanes, al I located to their west
and southwest (Castenada 1939: 49) in the general area thought to have been
the scene of Cabeza de Vaca's early adventures.
At this same time the Orcoquisac reported that French traders from near
the Mississippi had been travel ing overland to their area and by ship up the
Neches, Trinity, San JaCinto, and Brazos rivers since at least 1739 and that
6

in the previous year (1745) some French men were reported lost among the
Cujanes (Castenada 1939: 48).
In this same period (of the mid-18th century) Karankawas, Cocos, and
CuJanes were present at several missions including San Antonio de Valero,
Candelaria, and Nuestra Senora del Rosario (Castenada 1939: 6,31); and in
1770, one Cujane and one Coco were baptized, and a fUneral and burial for one
Coco were held at Nuestra Senora de la LUZ, near the mouth of the Trinity
River (castenada 1939: 97).
In 1719, the Tonkawa were first encountered on the Red River by a member
of the La Harpe expedition. BoltonTs (1915) map of Indian group locations in
the mid-18th century indicates that the Tonkawa had been displaced southward
by a similar movement of the Wichita who had moved south of the Red River.
At the same time, the Comanche apparently moved south into the north Texas
area formerly occupied by the Apache who were also displaced southward. After
the 1758 San Saba attack by the Comanches, the Apaches began shifting south
of San Antonio and by 1762 were spending several months of each year near the
coast on the lower San Antonio River in the vicinity of La Bahia (Castenada
1939: 29). In 1778, De Mezieres noted about 20 fami lies of Mayeyes (a Tonkawa
affi I late) and Cocos (a Karankawa affi I late) living between the Colorado and
Brazos rivers (Bolton 1915: 283). Morfi (quoted in Wheat 1954: 161) also
noted that by 1779 the Mayeyes and the Cocos had united and were I iving together
on the coast between the above named rivers.
Prior to the 19th century, the Tonkawa were usually at peace with the
Comanche and Wichita to their north, the Hasinai to their northeast, the Bidai
and Akokisa to their east, the Aranama to their south, and the Coahuiltecans
to their southwest. They frequently joined the Comanche, Wichita, and Hasinai
in fighting the Apache, located to the west and northwest of Tonkawa territory;
however, near the beginning of the 19th century the Tonkawa became friendly
with the Lipan Apache and hosti Ie toward the Comanche and Wichita. An al I iance
between the Apache and the Bidai, Akokisa, and Atacapa in 1790, however, gener­
ated hosti I itles with the Tonkawa (Hodge 1907: 778-9).
The evidence from various sources cited by Hodge (above) is not absolutely
clear, but in the period prior to 1770 there appears to have been a gradual
southward shift (from the time the Tonkawa were first noted in 1719) from
north-central Texas to the general vicinity of the San Gabriel missions. After
this period, and as a result of the complicated power politics between rela­
tively more powerful adjoining tribes, the Tonkawa clearly extended their
range to the southwest (Hodge 1907: 780) into territory that appears formerly
to have been largely the territory of the Karankawa.
References to subsequent history are simi larly few. Hodge (1907: 87)
quotes Sibley as noting that in 1805 the principal town of the Akokisa (whose
range prior to this period was in the region between and around the lower
reaches of the Trinity and San Jacinto rivers) was located on the west side
of the Colorado River about 200 mi les southwest of Nacogdoches. -rhis infor­
mation would place them somewhere in the vicinity of present-day Columbus
7

and within what was formerly the range of the Tonkawa and, perhaps, of the
Karankawa. Dyer (1917) reports that in 1815 there were a few Karankawa
camped at the mouth of the Sabine. By the impl ication of other statements,
I suppose this to be reference to the mouth of the Sabine River rather than
Sabine Pass.
Austin's settlements on the lower Brazos in 1823 marked the beginning of
serious decline in numbers of the Karankawa through conflicts between Indians
and settlers. Between this period and the end of the war for Texas' inde­
pendence (during which Karankawan warriors first fought with the Mexicans and
then, after the Battle of the Alamo, sided with the Americans), the Karankawa
were essentially eliminated as a distinct entity (Hodge 1907: 657).
In 1839, the chief of the forty or fifty people sti I I cal led
Carancahuas at Baca River [Lavaca RiverJ, Matagorda County, was
one Antonio, a half breed Tonkawai, (from a Carancahua mother)
his wife being a Comanche woman. There were no ful I bloods in
the tribe; the men having been exterminated in 1835 and the
women captured by the Tonkawai. The clan was a conglomeration
of outcasts from neighboring tribes, who kept al ive by begging,
steal lng, and fishing, and their language in 1839, a jargon
mostly of Spanish-Engl ish mixed with Indian dialects (Dyer 1917).
This group was undoubtably the one observed about the same time and in the
same area by Alice Wil Iiams 01 iver whose observations were later extensively
reported by Gatschet (1891) and which have formed one of the principal
ethnographic sources on the Karankawa.
Between 1839 and 1851, some 10 or 12 "Karankawa" families were said to
be living on Aransas Bay and the Nueces River. A few living on Lavaca Bay
fled in 1844 after allegedly murdering a settler, with most reaching Mexico
where the remaining survivors were reported murdered by Mexican rancheros in
1858 (Hodge 1907: 657).
In summary, it appears that the avai lable ethnohistoric sources s~em to
indicate that between the period of Cabeza de Vaca (circa 1530) and the mid­
18th century the Karankawa were relatively undisturbed in their territory on
the central Texas coast, whereas after this period, stress in many forms became
increasingly intense so that by the mid-19th century they had ceased to exist
not only as a group, but as individuals as weI I.
Ethnographic descriptions and interpretations of Karankawan culture can
be obtained from several wei' known sources and wi I I not be recounted here.
The best general dE~scription of Karankawan acculturation is that given by
Schaedel (1949) who noted that acculturation of the Karankawa began in earnest
in the mid-18th century with the advent of Europen traders and essentially
took the form of acquisition of such Items of trade as could be accomodated by
their nomadic pattern of settlement and their subSistence focus. Thus they
adopted such things as blankets, molasses, and occasionally European skiffS,
8

but rejected the horse and agriculture. They also developed a practice of
predation which apparently was founded principally upon scavenging from ship­
wrecks along the coast. It is Schaedel's interpretation that, "This seemed
to have resulted in a more elaborate political organization and in a rei igion
directed by priests and glorifying war and human sacrifice" (Schaedel 1949).
To what degree this was affected by ethnic mixing, however, Is not yet clear.

Research Procedure

There has been considerable discussion in the archeological literature
of recent years regarding the phi losophy appropriate to the execution of
research. I should like to address a brief discussion to this topic for the
purpose of clarifying the reasoning and general approach behind my coastal
research program and the investigative approach to the Dow-Cleaver Site.
A typical example of the recent discussion referred to above is an essay
on archeological explanation (Fritz and Plog 1970) in which it was argued that
archeologists should shrive themselves of the "traditional" inductive approach
and use instead a more expl icitly deductive approach. The essay concluded
with a special plea that archeologists recognize their responsibility to
conduct investigations relevant to social science as a whole. Ignoring the
fact that such dichotomization of approaches (i.e., inductive versus deductive)
is probably not really pOSSible, it seems to me that unless one has control
of certain elemental parameters such as reliable chronological frameworks,
general patterns of artifact associations, patterns of subsistence economiCS,
etc., one's chances of being relevant are smal I indeed.
Thus, our program is predicated on the seemingly obvious notion that
advancements in knowledge cannot be fashioned out of ignorance. It is
necessary to develop a strong foundation of basic Information, and this can
most efficiently be done through an enlightened application of an approach
that is for the most part inductive in nature in its initial phases. However,
once this basic control of areal cultural dimenSions has been acquired, then
archeologists have great flexibi lity in terms of the types of problems they
are In a practical position to pursue, using whatever logical model that
suits the purpose.
The present publ ication status of our coastal research program is that
of presenting such an initial foundation and framework for upper Texas coast
archeology. Most of the publ ications cited in the Preface to this report
were concerned mainly with development of chronological frameworks and with
basic documentation of artifact assemblages and shell midden settlement
types. Completion of these and certain other projects should provide the
9

essential foundation necessary for more specific research of either an
historical or a processual nature. The first of such investigations that
has been undertaken is an area-wide analysis of the extensive archeological
faunas we have collected (including that from the Dow-Cleaver Site), culmi­
nating in an overview of upper coast sUbsistence economics and cultural ecology
(Aten n.d.b).
Now, in regard to the specific approach taken at the Dow-Cleaver Site,
we were there confronted with a series of thin occupation layers spread widely
over former land surfaces and generally separated vertically by relatively
thick intervals of sterl Ie alluvium. Judging from the sequential strati­
graphic levels and from the discontinuous shel I refuse in exposures on the
surface and along drainage ditches, it appeared likely that the site had the
potential to provide both stratigraphic data and spatially bounded assemblages
of artifacts and faunal remains from discrete periods of campsite occupation.
Given this site potential, the I imitations of a smal I crew, and a work
period of 12 days, our options were:
1. To concentrate on excavation of a stratigraphic test to sample each

level; or
2. To concentrate upon stripping a larger area within a single occupation
zone in hopes of getting more extensive and detai led data on the
remains of one or more discrete campsites.
Since absolutely no stratigraphic data was available from the lower Brazos
River area and since stratified sites In the area are not common (although
others do exist), it appeared that this opportunity for stratigraphic testing
shOUld not be wasted. The exposure of significant horizontal areas of cultural
debris would have required the removal of great quantities of steri Ie alluvium
separating the occupation levels. Under the existing circumstances this could
have been aChieved only in the uppermost zone, thereby providing data on only
a Single period of time. I did not believe such an approach was compatible
with our current data reqUirements; and so I elected the first option whereby
we would excavate a relatively smaller portion of each occupation level using
fine screening for al I matrix. I thus hoped to obtain a stratigraphic sample
of cultural assemblages along with sufficiently detailed collections of faunal
material from which data could be derived to describe the structure of aborigi­
nal faunal subsistence through time.

10

CHAPTER I I :

THE SITE

Description

The Dow-Cleaver Site is situated on and within flood basin sediments
deposited on top of fluvial point-bar sediments associated with a main
channel of the Brazos River. Although the scattered and usually buried
nature of the shel I lenses makes it difficult to determine the actual extent
of 2 the site, it appears to have covered an area of roughly 22.5 acres (0.09
km ) or virtually all of the higher (and drier) surface on the inside of a
meander loop of the Brazos River.
The site cons i sts essent i a I I Y of four ma in zones of occupat i on dJ s­
sected by an excavation for a cool ing pond (Fig. 1) which in turn represent
former land surfaces in the site vicinity subsequent to main deposition of
the point-bar sequence. In other words, the site is incorporated into a mantle
of alluvium overlying the point-bar deposits. AI luviation has not proceeded
in a uniform manner, and so the various occupation zones are found deeply
buried with considerable vertical separation in some areas, whi Ie in others
the zones are either exposed at the surface or buried at a shallow depth with
I ittle vertical separation. The uppermost occupation zone (Zone 1), moreover,
appears to date subsequent to'most of the al luviation and is found today for
the most part as smal I, mounded heaps of shel I scattered over a very wide area.
There was insufficient time to map the distribution of these shel I concen­
trations to any significant extent.
The ridge and swale topography characteristic of point-bar deposits is
sti I I qui te evident both on aerial photography and on the ground. Most of
the shel I concentrations indicating occupation areas appear to be situated on
this reI ict ridge topography. In recent times (unti I excavation of the cool ing
pond in 1959) the site area was covered with very dense vegetation of the
floodplain forest. Most of the remaining tree stumps appear to be rooted in
the present ground surface and it seems I ikely that the woody vegetation
during the earl ier periods of occupation was not as dense when one considers
the probable seral nature of the habitats at this location.

Excavation Procedure

Initial inspections of the site area indicated that the principal exposure
of the series of superimposed shel I lenses was along a cutbank on the south
11

central side of the cooling pond (Fig. 3). In view of the general limi­
tations "of time and labor" it was decided to concentrate excavation in this
area and to attempt to strip off as much of each occupation zone as possible.
Initially, the edge of the cutbank was cleaned and squared off at the base
where covered by slope wash. Because of the discontinuous nature of the shell
lenses as exposed in the cutbank, flagging tape was attached to the shel I
lenses along the bank face to aid in tracing them and in determining their
stratigraphie relationships. This initial profile and the occupation zones
wi I I be described in the next section (on Physical Stratigraphy) and are
illustrated in Figure 4. Following the clearing of vegetation from the top
of the Site, a grid of one meter squares was set out on the ground surface
with at I squares designated by the coordinates of the northeast grid stake.
Since there had been extreme erosion in the area of squares E-43, E-44, and
E-45 , the cutbank slope was squared off about 15 centimeters above Occupation
Zone 38.
Oue to the generally substantial vertical separation of the thin shell
lenses, they were excavated by natural units. The procedure was to excavate
from roughly 5 centimeters above a shel I lens to roughly 5 centimeters below.
The alluvium above Zone 3B was excavated and screened in squares E and 0-43.
Since no material whatever was recovered, it was decided not to screen these·
apparently steri Ie intervals, but rather to concentrate on the shel I strata
themselves.
The cutbank profi Ie (Figures 3 and 4) makes the physical separation of
occupation zones occasionally appear clearer than was actually experienced in
the field. Although it was always a relatively simple matter to discriminate
major zones (1 from 2A-2B; 2A-2B from 3A-3B; and 3A-3B from 4) within the
area excavated by hand, it was sometimes difficult to discriminate zone 2A
from 2B and zone 3A from 38. As a result, we unfortunately found that in the
excavation of squares 8-53, C-52, and 0-52 we had inadvertantly excavated
zones 2A and 2B as a single zone, and simi larry with zones 3A and 3B in squares
C-52 and 0-52. SpeCimens recovered from these mixed zones are so indicated
in all distribution tables.
The general procedure for excavating then was to strip off and screen
occupation zone refuse, and to remove the steri Ie interval between zones to
roughly 5 centimeters above the next lower zone using the exposed prof; Ie on
the cutbank or adjacent excavated areas as a guide. The thickness of the
individual shel I strata was seldom greated than 5 centimeters. One exception
was in Test Pits 1 and 2 (in Occupation Zone 1). Here the shel I deposits
locally attained a thickness of 10 centimeters.
Figure 5 shows the general excavation plan and distribution of shel I for
each occupation zone. In the final days of fieldwork, a backhoe was made
avai lable for about four hours; however, about al I that could be accomplished
with the backhoe at this late period in the work was to dig trenches leading
from the cutbank and excavation exposures to see if we would encounter a
stratigraphic situation different from that in the excavation area. In other
words, were we excavating a more or less typical stratigraphic section of
13

41 BO 35
11.0­

......a:JOo

o

..

..

(Because of s/Il'ere erosion 'his area was
sllIIOred off abtwe Zone 38. )

28

-{)------

~-3A

'-sherdS...;!

-

-

~

38

'~~'r-------~

0~3

____ ~

IO,~-

~

10.0­

slopewosh

f - - - - t "",1.r

malch

~

'e4

r
•

...

8-53

~

~

~

...
4

0-

C-52

~.

~

-to

tJ

_ . . .-

I

..

II51

0-50:

~ :~

.+ '
'.

11n)/I

0-49

•
::
AL
I~
0' ~ ••••••••••••:

~

1 r-:-'~-::;r':s::·:·;·:·:·<>··.. o,,;.····;··'.···:,<·27:,:.oq

: : :

~,

2A

11.0­

~

28

3A

i

4 ......

~

10,5 ­

.l..!!.aend'

Figure 4: Stratigraphic profile along north

...­

side of cooling pond drainage ditch .

III

2A

D

Occupation Zone (shellfish refuse)
Erosion-cut through profile

the site? Except for the absence of the deepest and earl jest shel I zone, the
profi les in the backhoe trenches were essentially the same as those in the
excavation area. These backhoe trench profi les are not reproduced here although
the locations of the trenches are Indicated on the site map (Fig. 1).
A necessary short cut was taken after the she! I-bearing areas of Occu­
pation Zone 28 had been excavated in grid units E-16 and 47. There appeared
(from the cutbank profi Ie) to be no significant midden accumulation at the
levels of zones 3A and 38 between grid stakes E-46 and E-49. Since this was
the main area in which shel I was exposed in the cutbank profile at the level
of Zone 4, I decided to remove al I alluvium between Zone 28 and Zone 4 with­
out screening. Dirt removed from the projected levels of the two intervening
zones (3A and 38) was quickly troweled through, resulting in recovery of a
few sherds. This may seem questionable procedure but it has been my experience
with similar sites that in order to gain significant information about the
areas between midden refuse pi les, large areas must be uncovered. This was
not possible and it was obvious to me that any gain in information about areas
away from shel I refuse in zones 3A and 38 would be considerably offset by our
loss of information through not being able to excavate Zone 4.
Specimen recovery was accompl ished by water washing the midden material
through two screen mesh sizes: 1/4-inch and 1/16-inch. These two screenings
were carried out simultaneously as our 1/16-inch screens were mounted about
12 inches below the 1/4-inch screen on the same screen frame. Water for
screening was provided by a smal I gasol ing-operated pump drawing from a shal­
low pool of water remaining in the coo'ing pond drainage ditch near our
excavation.
water screening has been standard procedure for al I of my excavations in
the coastal area beginning with the 1969 season. The reasons for adopting
this technique are several: (1) in the often mucky or (when dry) hard clay
midden matrix of coastal shell middens, water washing used in conjunction with
fine screens yields an almost total speCimen recovery--far beyond that of any
other method in use today; (2) mechanical abrasion and destruction of speCimens
(partiCUlarly bones of smaller animals) is substantially reduced over that
encountered when dry screening is attempted on hard, dry matrix; (3) water
screening faci litates fine screening of the midden matrix to recover the fre­
quently large quantity of identifiable smal I specimens of all types that are
lost when using 1/4-inch screens only; and (4) water sources are generally
always avai lable.
AI I specimens for each level were bagged according to the screen size
they were retained in and each bag labeled with site number, grid and level
numbers, screen size, and date of recovery. One final comment on the exca­
vation procedure needs to be made. Our excavation began at the edge of the
cutbank which had irregUlar edge and a sloping face. This resulted in some
irregularly shaped grid units. Where these irregular units were small, they
were incorporated within adjacent units. When they were larger, they were
separately excavated. Figure 5 presents the excavation plan by occupation
zone with these grid units outl ined.
15

~:~',
4'

F­

jfj'/:

4e
4!J

Zone 1

£-

Burned shell cluster

44

<U

(Eroded)

£­

Sherd cluster

.".-=

~2

!U

'--"'

0- ...
,--..,--....:..;

c-I

'I"'"
51,."

s·-

c-I- Fit.

',_s ab."".

J

,SII'" ',nus abs,nl

49

Zone 38

I-Nol'" Zen,s .JA 8 .18 • .,~ ~lfca!l.
---as on, rOM in C-52 and 0-52.

r--------1/

~
'~
<,~ _/_ ~~~. -=~ ~_:

Zan... 4

0-"

r-:l.
~

•• :

r:- .'_.]

Sh.1I I.nses

~ Erosion cuts

®

Ld

I

Un.lcavated grid units
Tree stump

4180 35
Zone 3A

4!1

<U

Figure 5: Distribution of cultural

!II

features In main excavation area
S"-" I,ns,s

potJ,ty d'""OP,d 11.".

oIiiiiiiiiiI

4
meters

.mz­

Physical Stratigraphy

As previously mentioned, the Dow-Cleaver Site consists of a series of
occupation zones interbedded with fluvial deposits of the Brazos River. The
stratigraphic profiles presented here (Fig. 4) have been selected to il lus­
trate al I relationships essential for understanding the site investigation
(also see Fig. 3). A detai led description of one stratigraphie section is
presented in Table 1.
The arcuate ridge and swale topography clearly evident both on the
ground and on air photographs makes it clear that we are deal ing with an area
that was originally deposited on the convex bank of a Brazos River meander,
i.e., a point-bar. The stratigraphie section in which the occupation zones
are incorporated, however, does not show any of the sedimentary structures
and local scouring one might expect if the sedimentation contemporaneous
with occupation was also contemporaneous with point-bar accretion. In contrast
to the sedimentary sequence above the earl iest occupation zone, the sediments
below this zone are coarser, contain some heavy minerals, and are better
sorted. This leads to the general interpretation that the earliest occupation
(Zone 4) is situated on top of the point-bar deposits and is covered by
flood basin deposits of later periods when the river channel was a greater
distance from the site (to the west). The later occupation zones obviously
are situated on top of subsequent land surface positions as the height of the
meander belt was increased through periodic flood deposition. The persistence
of the point-bar topography despite subsequent flood basin sedimentation
(locally exceeding one meter in thickness) is not unusual. Furthermore, the
intervals between periods of sedimentation appear not to have been of suf­
ficient duration for any observable soil development to occur except on the
present ground surface.
The shel I midden areas are not distributed uniformly over a given surface,
but are irregular in extent and undoubtably represent refuse accumulations
from a number of separate campsite occupations (Fig. 5).

17

Table 1.

Description of stratigraphic section between grid intersections
E-48 and E-49.

Avg. depth below
surface (em.)
0-10

Description (*)
Silty quartz sand: dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2); fine
sand (20%), very fine sand (30%), silt (30%), clay
and organic detritus (20%); sand sizes are sub­
angular; quartz sand; non-calcareous.

10 - 15

Occupation Zone 1: principally Rangia cuneata shel
matrix simi lar to overlying unit.

15 - 40

Clayey quartz sl It: brown to dark brown (7.5YR 4/2);
very fine sand (20%), si It (40%), clay (40%), sub­
angular; quartz sand; non-calcareous.
(Occupation Zone 2A absent)

4C - 45

Occupation Zone 28: principally Rangia cuneata shel I
in matrix simi lar to overlying and underlying units.

45 - 70

Sandy quartz sl It: brown (lOYR 5/3); very fine sand
(30%), silt (50%), clay (20%); sub-angular; quartz
sand; non-calcareous.

70 - 75

Occupation Zone 3A: principally Rangia cuneata shel I
in matrix simi lar to overlying and underlying units.
Very sl ight darkening of matrix at this level (only
observable at certain I ight angles); may represent
either midden derived organic stain or inCipient A­
Horizon soi I development.
(Occupation Zone 38 absent)

75 - 100

Clayey and si Ity quartz sand: brown to dark brown
(7.5YR 4/4); fine sand (30%), very fine sand (30%),
si It and clay (40%); sub-angular; quartz sand,
occasional heavy mineral; non-calcareous.

100 - 102

Occupation Zone 4: consists of a thin scattering of
Rangia cuneata shel I in this part of site; matrix is
simi lar to overlying unit.

102 - ?

Sandy quartz si It: brown (7.5YR 5/4); very fine sand
(30%), si It (65%), clay (5%); sub-angular; quartz
sand and si It, occasional heavy mineral and muscovite
flakes; very sl ightly calcareous; probably top of
point-bar depositional sequence; thickness of unit Is
unknown since base is not exposed.

(*) grain sizes are given in Wentworth categories; color is given in
Munsel I color terminology; proportions are estimated visually and
should be taken only as rough approximations.
18

I

in

CHAPTER I I I:

THE ARTIFACTS

Introduction

In this section the artifacts recovered by the TASP field crew wil I be
described and discussed. Since the quantity and variety of projectile
points and of certain other artifacts was extremely small, I have included
descriptions of those collected by members of the Brazosport Museum Archeology
Club from the surface and from eroded areas of the site.
For convenience, the fol lowing notations and conventions wi I I be used
throughout the artifact descriptions:
1. AI I artifact measurments are given in mil I imeters;
2. N.P.; indicates no provenience known (i.e., collected from disturbed
areas);
3. D52/2A; notation preceding slash indicates excavation grid unit,
notation fol lowing slash indicates occupation zone;
4. B-3; numbered specimen from surface collection made by the Brazosport
Museum Archeology Club (these specimens are al I N.P.);
5. L, W, T, S.L., S.W.; indicates maximum length, maximum width, thickness,
stem length, and stem width (the latter given as minimem and maxi­
mum on expanding stem specimens);
6. *; indicates that a given measurement is a close approximation (used
on broken artifacts whose form could be reasonably estimated);
7. Material; general rock type and Munsel I color number of lithic speci­
mens.
Freshly broken surfaces on al I potsherds were examined under lOx to 20x
magnification to determine paste characteristics. Lithic and bone specimens
were also examined microscopial Iy at magnifications ranging up to 60x to look
for wear patterns. AI I colors are given in Munsel I Soi J Color Chart termi­
nology. FI int flake terminology generally fol lows that illustrated by Shafer
(1969, Fig. 2H), and projectile point terminology that outl ined by Suhm,
Krieger, and JelkS (1954, Fig. 7).

19

Ceramics

Approximately 750 potsherds were recovered from our excavations and
approximately 2,000 additional sherds were collected from the surface, largely
by the Museum Archeology Club. The surface collections were sorted principally
for additional examples of decorated sherds, rim sherds, and base sherds, all
of which were in short supply in the excavated sample.
The current status of upper Texas coast ceramic taxonomy is discussed
and reviewed elsewhere (e.g., Aten n.d.a; Aten and Chandler n.d.; 801 I ich and
Aten n.d.) but, in general, it now appears that a type-variety taxonomy of the
form described by Phi I I ips (1970) is most usable in our situation. Indigenous
upper coast ceramics lack many clear-cut attirbute states which are susceptible
to unequivocal sorting, but principal among those which have been useful are
presence or absence of decoration, kind of decoration, presence or absence of
temper, kind of temper, and sediment characteristics of untempered pastes.
The indigenous ceramics of the Brazos delta area are of three general paste
categories: grog-tempered, bone-tempered, and untempered sandy paste (Table 2).
Although the grog-tempered and sandy paste sherds exhibit some differences
(principally in thickness and color) from previous descriptions of San Jacinto
Plain, San Jacinto InCised, Goose Creek Plain, and Goose Creek Incised (Aten
1967; Aten and Chandler n.d.; Ambler 1967), these differences are not rei iably
sortable from other upper coast sandy paste and grog-tempered ceramics. For
this reason, these ceramics of the Brazos delta area are referred to the types
San Jacinto and Goose Creek, noting the fact that later subdivision into
varieties may be possible if some particular purpose warrants. The time-space
dynamics of bone-tempered ceramics are as yet poorly understood and so no
effort is made to type this material.

GOOSE CREEK PLAIN, VAR. UNSPECIFIED
Vessel-forming technique: Coi led; al I sherds which could be oriented
correctly indicated that coi Is were welded with a shearing motion that was
directed downward on the interior, upward on the exterior.
Paste: Aplastic material consists almost entirely of quartz grains that
range in size from fine-grained (2-3 phi) to very fine-grained {3-4 phi} sand,
and si It (4-5? phi) and appears to comprise roughly 75 percent of the paste
volume. Occasionally, smal I plant fragments that have been carbonized are
encountered. Coloration of the paste due to firing conditions is not uniform;
most vessels show some degree of mottling. Cores are usually absent or poorly
developed. Most sherds are I ight on one surface and grade to a darker color
on the other. Colors range from yellowish red (5YR 4/6) to black (10YR 2/1)
with the majority ranging from brown (10YR 5/3) to dark grayish brown {10YR4/2}.

20

It is important to emphasize here that the associations of sand, silt, and
clay-sized particles are essentially the same in the sherd pastes as in the
natural fluvial deposits of the Brazos floodplain (cf. Table 1). This argument
has been advanced before (Aten 1967; Aten and 801 lich 1969) and hints strongly
at the probable fact that we are not dealing with tempered ceramics in the
Goose Creek type, but rather, with materials used in their natural associations.
This argument could be tested somewhat by undertaking a thorough comparison
of floodplain clayey deposits and comparing them against the ceramics. It is
not I ikely this wi I I be done in the foreseeable future, however, and I am
wi I I ing to assume in the meanwhi Ie that it is true in view of the simi larities
of the two materials. This is not to say, however, that changes did not occur
in textural preferences (cf. Ambler 1967).
Surface finish: Subsequent to welding the coi Is by pressing them together
with a shearing motion the vessel wal Is were apparently scraped, usually with
a broad-edged tool such as a clam or oyster shel I, and subsequently wiped
with a pi iant or yielding material (probably the hands). Since the clay is
often molded around the sand grains, there are seldom any striations from
grains being scraped along by a rigid tool. In most cases this wiping oper­
ation obi iterated marks of previous smoothing operations, but on a number of
sherds portions of the scraping remain and rarely a sherd wil I indicate that
no effort had been made to remove the scoring marks made by the scraping
instrument.
Vessel form: Since the sample of vessel form attributes is smal I and
unevenly distributed, it is not practicable to execute a study of how the
various attributes are combined to make vessels. For this reason, after attempt­
ing a trial formulation of such a study, I have elected to confine this presen­
tation to comments on the separate distributions of certain attributes within
the type.
As indicated by the oriented rim profi les in Figure 6, there are two
structural classes of vessels (cf. Shepard 1963) represented at this site:
unrestricted and simple restricted, with unrestricted being the predominant
type. The unrestricted class can be subdivided into three subclasses: vertical­
war led or cyl indrical; everted recurved wal Is (i.e., profile contains an
inflection point); and everted continuous wal Is with end points only. The
frequencies of these classes and subclasses are given in Table 4A. Casual
inspection of several thousand sherds from other sites in the area indicates
to me that it is not I ikely that any other vessel form classes or subclasses
wi I I be found in the Brazos delta area in any significant quantity.
Whi Ie it is probably unsafe to conclude from the smal I sample recorded in
Table 4A that the unrestricted vertical-wal led vessel was the only form uti­
lized during the time represented by zones 3A and 3B, it would at least appear
that the other vessel forms did not gain much popularity unti I some subsequent
time. I would I ikewise hesitate to assign much weight to the distributional
differences between zones 1, 2A, and 2B with respect to vessel forms.

21

p

c

,I

-L--- . .
I

I
--t- . . . "

_.. .

-­

U

Figure 6. Oriented rim and base profi les (rim exteriors to right).
A-I and L-U, Goose Creek Plain; J, bone-tempered incised; K, San
Jacinto Plain.
22

_.....

The only measures it has been possible to make relevant to vessel forms
were wall thickness and orifice diameter. Since the distributions of vessel
thickness values by occupation zone appear to approach normal ity {at least
they are unimodal and symmetrical} and since the mean thickness values for
each zone appear to indicate a general decline (Table 3), the significance or
probabi I ity of a null hypothesis of no difference between zones was tested by
use of Student's t. To increase sample sizes, specimens from occupation
zones 2A and 2B were combined into a single sample, and I ikewise with zones
3A and 3B. The results of these tests (one-tal I) indicate that the probabi Itty
of the zone 2A-2B and 3A-38 sample means representing the same ceramic attri­
bute population state is much less than .0005. The difference between means
of zones 1 and 2A-2B was of much lower magnitude but was also statistically
significant between the .05 and the .10 levels of probability.
How are these tests to be interpreted? The difference-of-means test
assumes normal ity of distribution, independent and random sampl lng, and
homoscedasticity. Sampling independence and randomness is clear, and there is
reason to believe that sherd thickness distributions are normal and have equal
variances, at least when sample sizes exceed 150 specimens, although there is
sti I I some uncertainty regarding this. Edwards {1967} points out that the
t-test is robust and relatively insensitive to drastic violations of the
assumptions of normality and homoscedasticity as long as independence, random­
ness, and equal sample sizes in excess of about 25 items are used. Unfortu­
nately, we only have a sample size of 19 for zone 3A-38 which, In addition to
being marginal for a sample Size, is substantially less than that avai lable
from Zone 2 (N
86). However, an F ratio indicates that their estimated
population variances may be simi lar.

=

In the case of the comparison between zones 1 and 2A-2B, the sample sizes
are nearly equal, but the F ratio indicates different population variances,
which condition can supposedly be overridden by the robusticity of the test.
It appears then that the test results are inconclusive; strictly speaking,
we have neither confirmed nor failed to confirm the null hypothesis and in
view of results from Harris County Boys School {Aten and Chandler n.d.} the
only rational conclusion is to regard the hypothesis of wal I thickness decl ine
as tenable pending further testing.
Such a long-term decrease in vessel wal I thickness would not exactly
constitute a taxonomic "breakthrough" since the total diminution of mean size
is I ittle more than a mi I I imeter; it WOUld, however, begin to diachronically
document one fUndamental structural attribute of vessel form. Analysis of the
systemic processes of the local ceramic technology must necessari Iy begin with
quantitative description of al I technological parameters, and in this sense
any statistically significant decline in wall thickness would be relevant.
It was also possible to estimate the orifice diameter of ten vessels.
These ranged between 125 mrn. and 312 mm. A frequency plot of the estimated
diameters indicated a distribution that was at least bimodal. In order to
23

Table 2.

Pottery type frequencies by occupation zone.

Pottery
type

2A

Goose Creek Plain

5

Goose Creek Incised

occupation Zone
Ml xed
2B
2A-2B 3A
71(e)

3B

Mixed
3A-3B

4

8

4

111(b)

San jacinto Plain
San Jacinto Incised

1

Bone-tempered plain

1

1

2

Bone-tempered incised

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

374
9 246
TOTAL
8
37
8
73
143 sherds from 1 vessel.
Includes 2 vessel lots of 76 and 23 sherds.
AI I from same vessel.
Includes 7 vessel lots of 11,14,9,51,37,10, and 15 sherds.
Includes 2 vessel lots of 22 and 18 sherds.
Includes 1 vessel lot of 23 sherds.

Table 3.

Average vessel wal I thickness (in mm.) by Occupation Zone.
Occupation Zone
Mixed
Mixed
3A-3B 4
2A-2B
3A
38
2A
28
Pottery type
1
Goose Creek Plain

5.4
5.5
5.6
5.4
( 19)
(6)
(61)
(70)*
,
•
x=5.364 x=5.558, 5=0.970
5=0.603
5.7
(4)

\

Goose Creek InCised
San JaCinto Plain

5.2
(7)

San Jacinto Incised

6.3
(8)

5.9
(5)

6.5
(6 )

i

x=6.329" s=O.768

4.9
(7 )

5.4
(1)

Bone-tempered plain

5.0
(2)

Bone-tempered incised

4.5

(n

5.4
{2}

6.7
(1)
*Numbers in parentheses are the number of measurements used to calculate
an average value; vessel lots are represented in calculations by only a
sing I e va I ue, i. e." the average body th i ckness for the ent Ire vesse I lot.
24

check this further, the sample size was enlarged to 21 vessels by obtaining
estimates of orifice diameters from large rim sherds excavated at the nearby
sites 41 BO 13 and 41 BO 15 (Hami Iton n.d.). This served to enhance the
apparent bimodal ity of the distribution resulting in modes in the 150-200 mm.
and the 250-300 mm. classes. Within our Dow-Cleaver Site sample, no correlation
was apparent between these two size classes and either stratigraphic position
or other vessel form attributes. In view of the smal I sample size avai lable,
however, this lack of appearance may not be very meaningful. For instance, an
attempt was made to see if a correlation existed between orifice diameter and
vessel wall thickness. Only a sl ight tendency for increase in wall thickness
could be observed with increasing orifice diameter, but this relation needs
to be pursued further since a prel iminary plotting of comparable data from the
Galveston Bay area suggests a much stronger correlation as wei I as simi lar
bimoda Ii ty of or if ice diameters.
Lip form frequences are also presented in Table 4B, but other than noting
relatively more variety of forms in the upper zones versus the lower zones
there is I ittle else to be said on the basis of this sample.
Types of I ip modification are tabulated in Table 4C. Here again the
sample is smal I, but it would appear that I ip modifi~ation may not have
appeared unti I after the period represented by zones 3A and 3B. In the later
zones (taking these occurrences as a group) nearly half of the vessel I ips
were modified in some way.
Base forms are recorded in Table 4D but the excavated sample is so smal I
that a diachronic distribution cannot even be suggested at this time. The
total number of base forms recovered from both the excavation and the eroded
areas of the site, however, indicate that rounded and noded forms were dis­
tinctly more popular than the conical form.

GOOSE CREEK INCISED, VAR. UNSPECIFIED
Vessel-forming technique, paste, surface finish:
for Goose Creek Plain.
Vesse I form:

Apparently the same as

Unknown.

Decoration: All incised design styles on this type involve pendant
triangles usually suspended from one to a set of two or three horizontal lines
drawn paral lei to and just below the rim. The pendant triangles on at least
four of the nine Goose Creek Incised sherds recovered from the site (most are
N.P.) are fi lied with a diagonal hatchuring (Fig. 7).

25

Table 4.

Distribution of vessel form attributes (all Goose Creek Plain
unless noted otherwise).

2A
Vessel structural Class
Restricted
*Ver t i ca I Wa I I s
*Recurved wal Is
*Everted, nonrecurved
wall s
B. Li p Form

2B

occupation Zone
Mi xed
Mi xed No
2A-2B 3A 3B 3A-3B Provo Total

A.

3.

3

3
3

2

8
4

f?

I.

2.

3

4

r? fl

2

n.

5

3

4. (\
2

5. (\
6.

C.

D.

(1

Lip Modification
None
Seal lops
Exterior notches
Notches on top
Interior notches
Base Form
Conical
Noded
Round (spherical)

4

-5

2

2

2

7

12

8

9

II
7{e)

14

22

34

10{e)

13

10

2
4

5
I

2

*
(a)
(b)
(c)

Unrestricted
Includes I each of San Jacinto Plain and bone-tempered plain
Includes I bone-tempered plain.
Includes I San Jacinto Incised.
(d) Includes I San jacinto Plain and I bone-tempered incised.
(e) Includes I San Jacinto Plain.

26

2

2

6 (e)

7

2

5

Discussion: The entire excavated sample of
comes from occupation Zone 1 and therefore dates
Hatchured pendant triangles are a feature of the
of Goose Creek Incised in the Galveston Bay area
between A.D. 1400 and 1800.

this type (only four sherds)
to a relatively late period.
late design style assemblage
(Aten 1970) and should date

SAN JACINTO PLAIN, VAR. UNSPECIFIED
Vessel-forming technique:
Plain.

Same as previously described for Goose Creek

Paste: The paste of this type contains two aplastic media--quartz sand
and si It and grog fragments. The grog is clearly intentional and thus is a
tempering agent. The paste is generally identical in texture and color to
that previously described for Goose Creek Plain except that a Smal I proportion
of grog fragments has been added.
Surface finish: The techniques of scraping and smoothing are essentially
the same as for GOose Creek Plain except that scoring resulting from scraping
is less wei lobi iterated. A larger sample wi I I be required to see if this
apparent difference in surface treatment marks a real distinction in the
manufacturing technology of grog-tempered and sandy paste ceramics.
Vessel form: The sample of vessel form attributes is extremely smal I
and can probably be taken only as an indication of some of the attributes
incorporated within the type. The form of only one vessel could be determined
(Fig. 6K); this was an unrestricted vessel with everted, continuous wal Is
(end points only).
Rims from only two vessels were recovered, and these both had the same
type of I ip, i.e., thinned on the interior (Table 4B). The rim from the
excavation had no lip modification but the one from the surface was scal loped
(Table 4C). No base sherds were excavated, but one noded base was seen in
the surface collection (Table 4D).
Average vesse I wa I I th i ckness ranged about 5.0 mm. (Tab Ie 3). On I y 14
sherds are represented, however, and so this average thickness may be suspect
inasmuch as grog-tempered sherds measured in nearby areas are usually thicker
than sandy paste sherds. The orifice diameter of the single partially recon­
structed vessel is 187 mm.

27

SAN JACINTO INCISED, VAR. UNSPECIFIED
Vessel-forming technique, paste, and surface finish:
as for San Jacinto Plain.

Apparently same

Vessel form: Appears to be an unrestricted vertical-wal led vessel with
direct rim and flat I ip. Vessel wal I thickness is estimated to be about 5.4
mm.; orifice diameter is estimated to be about 112 mm.
Decoration: The design on the single specimen of this type consists of
a horizontal row of smal I punctations just below the I ip; below this are four
paral leI horizontal I ines. From the lowest of these I ines is suspended a
series of pendant triangles which are each fil led with diagonal hatchuring
(Fig. 7A).

BONE-TEMPERED PLAIN AND INCISED (descriptive category)
Vessel-forming technique:
determined for certain.

Coi led; coi I welding direction could not be

paste: Aplastic material consists of bone fragments (approx. 0.5 to 2.0
mm.) and very fine-grained quartz sand (3-4 phi) and quartz silt (4-5 phi).
Proportions of bone range from roughly 5 percent to 25 percent of the paste
volume; proportions of quartz aplastic range from roughly 30 percent to 60
percent.
Some mottling of colors on the sherd exteriors is evident, but in cross­
section they are fairly uniform in color. The plain sherds grade from brown
(10YR 5/3) and yel Jowish brown (10YR 5/4) on the exterior to a very dark gray
(lOYR 3/1) on the interior. The incised sherd is yeJ lowish brown (lOVR 3/1)
on the exterior and interior, grading to a dark gray (10VR 4/1) in the core.
Surface finish: The surfaces are quite smooth and have been wiped with a
pi iant or yielding material. These sherds are more compact and are smoother
than the sandy paste and grog-tempered sherds and are less subject to erosion,
presumably due to lesser proportions of coarse-grained material in the paste.
Vessel form: Only one rim sherd (incised) was recovered and is probably
from an unrestricted vessel of some type (Fig. 6J). It is direct with Interior
thinning. No base sherds were recovered.
Sherd thicknesses vary from 4.5 to 6.7 mm. but only five sherds are
represented.

29

Decoration: One incised sherd was recovered which had
diagonal cross­
hatching as a motif; whether or not this was the only motif in the design
cannot be determined.
Discussion: Typology of bone-tempered ceramics in most of Texas (exclu­
sive of the Caddo area) is pretty much chaotic and I do not propose to review
the I iterature on this topic nor to engage in any logical "games" for the sake
of the five sherds from the Dow-Cleaver Site excavations. Most Texas archeolo­
gist are already fami I iar with this I iterature and I would I ike to offer just
a few comments. The principal type that has been applied widely to the bone­
tempered plainwares is Leon Plain (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks 1954). Use of this
type has decl ined, however, apparently due to a widespread feel ing that it had
been appl ied so indiscriminantly that it no longer had any certain content
except for bone-tempering and a relatively late chronological occurrence.
More recently, Ambler (1970) has suggested the name "Orcoquisac Plain"
for bone-tempered ceramics occurring in the Wal I isvi I Ie Reservoir area on the
lower Trinity River. The content of this type is I ikewise bone-tempering and
relatively late chronological occurrence. Little improvement has thus been
made in providing a suitable framework of reference for these ceramics.
The dominant class of bone-tempered ceramics on the upper Texas coastal
plain are those with sandy pastes identical to the temperless Goose Creek
ceramics. This is in contrast to the greater variety of bone-tempered ceramics
which are more common further west and southwest; the
latter frequently have
clayey or fine matrices, greater variation in vessel wal I thickness, and are
often burnished, etc.
Examination of surface and excavated collections over much of the upper
coast area indicates that the densest concentratJons of the sandy paste, bone
tempered ceramics appear to occur in the region roughly bounded by the Colorado
and Brazos rivers on the coastal plain but Inland from the immediate coastal
zone.
would therefore suggest two points for consideration. First, it would
be most sensible to forego projection of any new typological constructs for
bone-tempered ceramics unti I some thorough review of the "Leon Plain" specimens
can be undertaken. Second, the extremely late appearance of these ceramics at
the mouth of the Brazos and the much greater abundance farther inland as wei I
as their principal distribution in the region of the Brazos and Colorado rivers
may indicate an association of the bone-tempered ceramics with the Tonkawa
and their general southward movement as described in the Ethnohistoric Back­
ground. Krieger (1946) mentioned this possible association but suggested the
bone-tempered ceramics were derived from the Spanish missions of the central
coast of Texas; this, however, no longer seems likely.

30

Lithics

Six projecti Ie points and point fragments were recovered from the exca­
vations and eroded areas of the site by the TASP field crew and an additional
19 were collected from the surface and from eroded areas by members of the
Brazosport Museum Archeology Club. Of these 25 specimens, 8 are so broken as
to render them useless for morphological analysis. Of the remaining 17
specimens we can recognize at least 6 form categories, 3 of which can
be definitely associated with known point types. One can make an overal I
functional distinction (in this collection) between arrow points and dart
points on the general basis of overal I size and stem width (usually, but not
always, greater for the presumed dart points) and on the baSis of blade
thickness which is always much greater for the dart points.
In general, the occurrence of projecti Ie points in coastal middens is
quite restricted and the Dow-Cleaver Site is certainly typical in this respect.
Although the present sample of projecti Ie points is too sma I I to make any
significant comparisons in terms of attributes, there are, however, certain
ones which I feel are particularly significant in a larger sense and, given a
greatr ~mple or better areal coverage, may be used to generate some meanihg­
ful inferences. These attributes are noted in the artifact descriptions and
in a previous report (Aten 1967) and I am continuing to develop simi lar data
on material collected and excavated from several other upper coast sites.
First, there are the resource material attributes of mineral or rock
type and color. Although quantitative data are not generally available, it
seems clear from casual observation that the stream gravels along rivers
traversing the more easterly parts of the state contain proportionately more
si I icified wood and jasper than the more westerly streams (cf. Brown ms.),
whereas the latter generally contains proportionately more brownish and grayish
cherts than the former. In addition to cherts and silicified wood, the other"
major resource rock type in the eastern portion of the state is quartizite,
but I am uncertain of the I imits of its natural distribution in either the
Tertiary or the Quaternary formations of the Gulf Coastal Plain. The frequency
distribution of I ithic archeological specimen rock type and colors is probably
also an indicator of these differences in resource material sources. Since
no economic gravel deposits are known to occur within roughly 90 miles of
the upper Texas coast (Garner 1967), the implication is clear that the coastal
consumer had to go either to the source areas directly (thus bearing on
inferences about pol itical relations with adjacent groups, territoriality,
group economics, etc.) or he had to enter into some type of exchange relation
with a suppl ier (thus bearing on inferences about trade relations as wei I as
the previously listed possibilities).
It is also worth noting, from the standpoint of data manipulation, that
a major advantage through usage of Munsel I color terminology is that since
each color chip is a fixed distance away from any other in terms of hue,

31

chroma, and value, and since fractional distances can be interQolated between
any two colors, we are deal ing with a three-dimensional interval scale
(rather than ordinal as when color names are used) to which a variety of
powerful mathematical techniques might be brought to bear if the problem at
hand warranted such appl ication. In this report, only the chart format of a
particular hue was used as a means of presenting color distributional data
(Table 6), but in more complex comparative situations perhaps the mathematics
would be useful.
The second set of attributes of particular interest relate to projectile
point stems. Detai led descriptions of this part of projecti Ie point anatomy
is nothing new, but a few observations are in order. First, mapping projecti Ie
point frequency distributions in terms of stem side form (i.e., expanding,
straight, or contracting) appears to be of more uti I ity in plotting chrono­
logical shifts in technology on the coast than does plotting distributions
of formal types or descriptive categories (cf. Aten 1967). Second, the
proportion of total projecti Ie point length that is comprised by the stem
length may prove to have technological significance, particularly when con­
sidered together with stem side form and stem widths. Third, in the case of
expanding stem points, it wi I I be useful to begin recording minimum stem width.
The significance of ~uch a measure would be to provide a measure technologically
comparable to those of stem widths on straight and contracting stem projecti Ie
points which should provide insight into certain technological aspects such
as arrow and dart shaft diameters. These, in turn, may correlate with other
structural dimensions of particular styles of projecti Ie points, with partic­
ular activity loci in sites, or with other types of artifacts. In this respect,
a particularly good proposition for testing would be the functional interpre­
tation of notched fl ints as shaft scrapers or spokeshaves. Of course, one
indication of such use would be wear patterns, but a great deal of tool use
is required to form these patterns and they are not often found in Texas (at
least, not by optical techniques). Another approach to the problem of testing
this proposition of function would be to compare the projecti Ie point stem
widths against spokeshave notch diameters.
The third group of attributes which has considerable potential signifi­
cance concerns the size of the flake used to manufacture projecti Ie points,
particularly arrow points. It frequently occurs throughout the upper Texas
coastal plain that arrow pOints have been made from very thin flakes so that
thinning is necessary only on the dorsal surface of the flake. More frequent
notation of this characteristic might lead .to recognition of distributional
correlates between such things ~s the nature of the raw material available,
the size of the cobbles and nodules selected, and the I ithic technology (e.g.,
bipolar versus free-hand percussion; cf. Shafer 1969b).

32

ARROW POI NTS
Cliff ton

Prov

w

L

15.9

8-13

12.0

T

S.L.

3.5

S.W.

4.4

Material
chert, 10YR 4/4

III us.
Fig. 8, A

Blade: Triangular; edges are convex; shoulders project downward slightly
and terminate in smal I barbs.
Stem: Sides are contracting; base is straight (but tip may have broken
off); stem compr i ses about 16 percent of tota I length.
General:

This specimen is bifacial Iy thinned.

Reference:

Suhm and Jelks 1962:

269, Plate 135.

Perdiz

Prove
B-l0
B-12
B-14
B-15

L

41.3
31.6
33.2*
30.7

W

26.5
17.3
21.4
19.9

T
2.8
3.7
3. 1
3.5

S.L.

12.3
9.3
8.3
7.3

S.W.
10.3
6.4
7.1
8.3

Material
chert,
chert,
chert,
chert,

10YR 6/2
10YR 4/3
10YR 6/3
fossi I i ferous,
10YR 5/4

III us.

Fi g.
Fig.
Fig.
Fi g.

8,
8,
8,
8,

Blade: Triangular; edges are straight; 8-12 is irregularly serrated;
shoulders at I project sharply downward and blades are markedly barbed.
Stem: Sides are contracting; base is rounded in al I cases (rather than
straight or pointed); stem comprises 24 to 30 percent of total length.
General: 8-10, 12, and 15 are thinned only on the dorsal surface, with
ventral chipping I imited essentially to edge finishing; 8-14 is bifa­
cially thinned.
Reference:

Suhm and Jelks 1962:

283, Plate 142.

33

B
C
D
E

Scallorn

Provo
o52/2A
8-8
8-17

L
27.4*
40.6*
19.2

W
12.9
15.6
13.7

Max.
S.L.
5.4
6.8
5.0

T
4.6
5.6
2.8

Mi n.
S.W.
8.8
10.0
12.5*

Material
S.W.
III us.
6.4 chert, 10VR 6/4 Fig. 8, G
6.7 chert, 10VR 5/4 Fig. 8, F
6.8 chert, 10VR 4/4 Fig. B, H

Blade: Triangular; edges straight to sl ightly concave; B-B has serrated
edges; shoulders project horizontally on D52/2A and B-17, but project
sl ightly downward on B-8.
Stem:

AI I sides are markedly expanding; bases are straight; stem comprises

17 to 26 percent of total length; D52/2A has asphalt adhering to base.

General: D52/2A and 8-8 are extensively bifacial Iy chipped; B-17 is thinned
only on the dorsal flake surface with only a minimum of edge finishing
on the ventral surface.
Reference:

Suhm and Jelks 1962:

285, Plate 143.

Short, Rectangular Stemmed

Prov.
C53/2A
Blade:

L

21.4

W

17.6

T

S.L.

5.9

S.W.

Material

8.1

chert, 2.5VR 4/6

II I us.

Fig. 8,

Triangular; apparently straight edges; asymmetrical; prominent barbs.

Stem: Sides slightly expanding (?); base is straight; stem comprises
approximatel y 14 percent of total length.
General: This specimen is bifacial Iy chipped; cortex remains on both sides
of blade. Due to extensive heat spal ling, the form of the barbs and
possibly the stem cannot be definitely determined.
Rectangular Stemmed

Provo
B-21

L

34.7

W

T

S.W.
9.4

S.L.

3.2

35

Material

I I I us.

chert, 5VR 5/4

Fig. 8, J

Blade: Triangular, with straight edges; shoulders project sharply downward
terminating in prominent barbs.
stem: Sides are straight to slightly contracting; base is straight; stem
compr i ses approx imate I y 28 percent of tota I length.
General:

This specimen is bifacially thinned.

Unclassifiable Arrow Frasments

PrQv I
(a) T.P.2/1
(b) T.P.2/1
B-1
B-2
8-4
8-5
8-6
8-11
B-16
B-20

W

11.7
16.5
14.3
18.0
15.7

T

Material
chert,
chert,
chert,
chert,
chert,
chert,
chert,
chert,
chert,
chert,

4.2
2.8
3.2
2.9
3.2
3.6
2.9
3.1
2.4
2.7

10VR 8/4
10VR 6/3
10VR 4/1
10VR 7/4
10VR 3/4
10VR 3/2
10VR 3/4
10VR 3/3
10VR 4/3
7.5VR 4/2

III us.

Fig. 8, P
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fi g.
Fig.

8, M
8, N
8, Q
8, a
8, L

Specimens in this group are broken to such an extent that they cannot
be identified def~nltely with a particular type or descriptive category,
although most were probably Perdiz. The metric and qualitative data tabulated
above are presented to enlarge our data on arrow paints as a group. The
blades are triangular and essentially symmetrical with generally straight
edges. SpeCimens (b) T.P.2/1, 8-4 and 8-20 are only thinned on the dorsal
flake surface with chipping on the ventral surface confined to edge finishing.
Specimen B-6 was made from a very thin flake and neither surface of the blade
has been thinned. The remainder of the specimens have been bifacial Iy thinned.
Specimen (a) T.P.2/1 has asphalt adhering to the upper part of the stem.

DART POINTS
Three complete and two fragmentary specimens were recovered which because
of their size are considered to be dart points although their use as knives
and/or scrapers cannot be ruled out. Since they are all roughly similar in
form they are considered here as a group.

36

Unclassified Dart Points

Provo
C53/3A
N.P.
B-3
B-7
8-22

L
70.0
68.9
36.2

W
26.4
22.7
25.5
24.8
18.6

T

S.L.

Max.
S.W.

Mi n.
S.W.

11.0
9.3
8.5
7.6
7.5

11.9
11.6
12.6
14.1
13.0

15.9
13.2
19.6
17.9
11.9

14.0
11.5
17.2
14.1
11.0

Material
chert,
chert,
chert,
chert,
chert,

10YR
10YR
10YR
10YR
10YR

III us.
6/1
5/2
3/2
3/2
6/3

Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fi g.

8, R
8, S
8, T
8, U
8, V

Blades: Usual I y asymmetrical wi th lanceolate to sub-triangular form; barbs
are generally weak with upward flaring shoulders in some cases.
stem: Sides are straight with sl ight expansion at base; bases are generally
straight; C53/3A, N.P., and 8-22 have asphalt adhering to the stem; stems
are al I nearly the same length, but comprise 17 percent of the total
length in C53/3A and N.P. and 36 percent of total length in 8-22.

MISCELLANEOUS CHIPPED STONE TOOLS
Unclassifiable 8iface Fragments

Material

Provo
T.P .2/1
F-46/28
D52/2A
E46/2B

chalcedony, 10YR 3/3
chalcedony, 5YR 4/1
foss; liferous chert, 10YR 7/3
fossiliferous chert, 10YR 7/3

These specimens are fragments of smal I bifacial Iy chipped artifacts (possi­
bly arrow points), and their notation here gives additional data on the kinds
of stone material used at the site.
Unclassified Flake Tools

Provo
T.P.l/1

Material
chert, 10VR 6/2

II I us.
Fig. 9, D

This specimen is an irregular blade fragment with much marginal nicking
along one edge. No individual striations, scratches, etc., due to wear were
observed; there was a little polish along the presumed working edge of the tool.
37

Materi al

Provo
E47/1

chert, 10YR 6/6

This specimen is a small blade fragment with considerable marginal trimming
along the unbroken edges. No wear patterns were observed.
Provo
T.P .2/1

Ma t er i a I
chert, 7.5YR 4/4

Ius.
Fig. 9, B
II

This specimen is a small, OVOid, initial cortex flake with marginal trim­
ming around most to the circumference, part of which Is blfacial and the
remainder unificial. No wear patterns are evident; its function is unclear,
but the broken protuberance may have been a graver bit.
Prav.
T.P.2/1

Material
chert, 10YR 6/4

Ius.
Fig. 9, C
II

This specimen is a trapezoidal fragment of a secondary cortex flake.
Cortex remains on two sides of the flake; the remaining two sides are unifa­
ciaf Iy and bifacial Iy chipped producing two sharp edges and at one corner a
prominent beak that may be a graver bit. No wear patterns were observed.
Corner-tang Knife (?)

Prove

L

8-9

w
25.0

Material
chert, 5YR 5/2

T

5.8

III us.

Fig. 9, A

Judging from the angle at which the stem was broken off of this speCimen,
it apparantly was a corner-tang knife. The specimen is bifacially thinned.
Unuti I ized Flakes

A total of 34 specimens were recovered from the latest occupation zones
at the site. Most of these were quite smal I (having been for the most part
retained in the fine screens) and have generally been ignored in previous
work on the coast. By sorting them into general categories of chipping debris,
we may gain better insight into the types of I ithic technology pursued at the
site than if only the sample from the 1/4-inch screen were relied upon. In
addition, sorting into material and color categories enables us to infer more
confidently the character of the stone sources for tool manufacture at this
39

Table 5.

Classification and distribution of unutil ized flakes.

occupation Zone
Classification and Material

1

Ini ti al cortex flakes
chert, 5VR 4/3
chert~ 10VR 5/1
chalcedony, 10YR 7/2

28

Mixed
2A-28

No
Provo

1
1
1

Ini ti al cortex flake - bipolar
chert, 10VR 5/6
Ini ti a I cortex flake fragments
chert, 10VR 6/4
chert~ 7.SVR S/4
chert, 10VR 5/4
chert, 10VR 7/6
Secondar~

1
1
1
1

cortex flake fragments
chert, mottled, 2.SVR
3/4 to 5YR 6/4
chert, 2.5VR 3/4
chert, 10YR 5/1
chert, 10VR 4/4
chert, 10VR 6/4

1
1
1
2
1

Li E!~ed flakes

2
3

chert, 10VR 6/3
chert, 10VR 5/4
chalcedony, SVR S/2

1

Miscellaneous heavi 'l abraded flakes
chert, 10VR 6/4

2

Possible biE!olar flake
chert, 10VR 5/4
Flake fragments
chert, 10VR S/3
chert, 10VR 6/2
chert, 10VR 6/4
chert, 7.5YR S/4
chert, 10VR 6/3
chert, 10VR 5/4
chalcedony, 10VR 6/4
chert, 7.SVR 5/6
chert. SVR 4/6
TOTAL

,
1

1
2
2
1
1
18

40

S

3

8

site (Table 5). The chipping debris categories generally fol low those outl ined
by Shafer (1969a: 3-5). In addition to those categories, we have two speci­
mens that may represent the bipolar technique (cf. Binford and Quimby 1963).
A sample of only two flakes is not much basis for inferring bipolar flaking,
but I ithic material from Wal I isvi I Ie Reservoir (Aten, report in preparation)
indicates more strongly the presence of the technique in the upper Texas
coastal area and its presence on an earl ier time level in coastal Louisiana
has been noted by Gagliano {1967}. I am not attempting to build a case for
bipolar I ithic technology at this time, but simply note the occurrence of these
specimens to faci I itate future reference to the material. We should also note
that the flake assemblage consists essentially of initial and secondary cortex
flakes and of I ipped or biface thinning flakes. The general absence of any
interior flakes suggests that lithic artifacts at this site were made from
smal I cobbles and were worked in what was essentially a core technique.
To conclude this description of I ithic materials at the Dow-Cleaver Site,
we shOUld note the character of the stone material uti I ized. Virtually all
of the chipped stone at this site is chert, with very I ittle differentiation
in terms of crystal size {usually cryptocrystal I ine}, inclusions (usually none),
fossi I replacement (usually none), or color. Table 6 Illustrates the distri­
bution of colors for all I ithic material described from the site. Since
near I y 80 percent of a II I I th i cs fe I I I n the range of the 10YR hue, I have
used the layout of the 10YR Munsel I color chart as a means of showing the
distribution of these colors. The remaining colors are simply I isted on the
figure. The assemblage is clearly a fairly uniform one with colors ranging
evenly through the grays and grayish browns to the yellowish browns of the
10YR hue.

Bone

Six bone tools were recovered although the provenience of one is not
certain. These wi I I be described individually.
Socketed Bone Points

Provo
C52/3A-3B
Prof i Ie 1/3A
N.P.

L

78.8
32.2
118.1

Skeletal element
deer metapodial
deer metapodial
deer metapodial

41

III us.

Fi g. 9, G-Gl
Fig. 9, H-Hl
Fig. 9, F-F1

Table 6.

Lithic specimen color distribution, 41 BO 35.

Hue
10YR

/1

Chroma
/3 /4

/2

/6

/8

8/

4
7/
6/

7

3

8

3
w
:J

10

3

5/

II:J

>

4/

6

n=54 (79.4%)

2
3

3/

( 13)

2/

( 16) (25)
ye I I owi sh browns
browns

graysgrayish browns
Other lith i c sp ec i men colors:
7.5YR 5/6
5/4
4/4
4/2
5YR 5/4
5/2
4/6
4/3
4/1
2.SYR 4/6
3/4

(I)
(2)
(I)
(I)
(I)
(2)
(I)
(I)
(I)
(I)
(2)

n=14

~20.6~~

n=68

42

Although differing substantially in maximum length, these three specimens
are al I made in essentia1 Iy the same manner from deer metapodials. The shaft
portion of the bone was cut or broken in the midshaft region, and then ground
or scraped to either a slender, tapering point (C52/3A-3B and N.P.) or to a
short, abrupt point (Profi Ie 1/3A). The base of the tool was then fashioned
by cutting or grinding a groove through the cortex layer around the distal
articulation and then snapping off the articulation. Each specimen contains
asphalt in its base and each appears to have been discarded when part of the
cyl indrical basal portion broke away. Breaking and splintering of the distal
tips apparently did not cause them to be discarded since these break edges are
wei I worn, presumably from subsequent use.
Bone Point Fragment (1 speCimen, E44/3B; Fig. 9, I_I ').

This specimen was manufactured from a shaft fragment of a deer metatarsal.
The proximal end is broken and it is not possible to estimate the original
length of the tool. The edges of the break are sharp and do not indicate
subsequent use. The distal end has been fashioned to a point more or less
simi lar to those of the socketed bone points except that the degree of
smoothing and shaping of the point is not as pronounced. Also, the distal
tip of this speCimen is intact (al I socketed bone point distal tips were
splintered), and just below the tip there is a pronounced notch distinctly
reminiscent of notches worn in bone and antler flaking tools.
Sma I I Spl inter Awl (1 specimen, D53/3B; Fig. 9, J).

This specimen is a complete artifact (34.3 mm. long; 6.8 mm. wide)
manufactured from a long bone splinter (probably deer). The distal tip was
partly ground into an asymmetrical point closely following the original form
of the splinter. The base was grooved about one third of the width of the
splinter and then snapped. No wear patterns associated with function could be
recognized although many associated with the shaping of the artifact were
preserved.
Grooved and Snapped Metapodial ArtiCUlation (1 specimen, D48/4; Fig. 9, E-E').

This specimen is a distal metapodial articulation from an adult deer
that has been cut or ground through the cortex around the epiphyseal region
and then snapped off from the shaft of the bone. This presumably is a step

43

in the manufacture of bone tools, possibly of the socketed bone points. An
additional specimen of this sort was recovered by the Brazosport Museum
Archeology Club from an eroded area of the site.
Compound Fishhook Barb (1 specimen, N.P.; Fig. 7, H).

This specimen is made from a bone spl inter that has been scraped and
ground into a more or less tapering cyl indrical form with a point at the distal
end and a smal I pr6tuberance at the beveled proximal end for fastening to a
hook shaft. The barb is 27.8 mm. long and 4.1 mm. in maximum diameter. It
is essentially simi lar in form to others found on the Texas coast (story
1968:

57).

Shell

Oyster Shell Cutting Tool (?) {l speCimen, E45/3B).

This specimen is a sma! I dorsa! valve of an oyster (Crassostrea virginica)
which has had most of the rugged surface ground off al I around the exterJ.or
so as to produce a relatively smooth exterior and a smoothly arcuate. sharp .
edge. Th i s object is ques.t i onab I e as an art i fact; however ,I twas recover.ed
from a zone which contained no I ithic debris and is simi I~r ioseveral other.
specimens collected from various other sites in the lower Brazos River area
by members of the Brazosport Museum Archeology Club. It is possible that this
is what Cabeza de Vaca referred to as uconchs used for cutti~gU (Covey 1961:
66), an item he carried as barter to the interior of the state.
In addition to this possible shel I artifact, members of the Archeology
Club also collected a smal I fragment of a Dinocardium SPa valve and a large
fragment of the outer whorl of a conch (Busycon ? sp.) from the eroded areas
of the site. Additional specimens have been recovered at nearby Shy Pond
(Hami I ton n.d.).

44

Miscellaneous

Asphalt

Two lumps of asphalt were recovered; one measuring about 6 mm. in diameter
from C53/3B and the other measuring about 40 mm. by 30 mm. from backhoe trench
spoi I probably associated with occupation Zone 1.
Handstone (?) rragment (1 specimen, N.P.).

A small fragment of an apparent grinding stone was recovered from an eroded
area by the Museum Archeology Club. This specimen is made from a pale brown,
fine-grained sandstone. The source of this material is uncertain, but must
have been brought from a considerable distance.
Miscellaneous Rock rragment (1 specimen, D53/3B).

One specimen of a tan, wei I sorted, angular, medium-grained, non-calcareous
quartz sandstone measuring roughly 15 mm. by 36 mm. by 50 mm. was recovered.
This specimen, which is very angular in form, shows no evidence of having been
shaped into a util itarian object. Since this material is probably derived
from the central interior part of the state and is not transported this far
downstream by natural agents, it must have been brought to the site by its
occupants.

45

Table 7.

Distribution of non-ceramic artifacts.

Specimen Class
Arrow Points
Cliff ton
Perdiz
Sca II orn
Short, rectangular
stemmed
Rectangular stemmed
Unclass. fragments

2A

Occupation Zone
Mixed
2B 2A-2B
3A
3B

1

2
1

Unclassifiable biface
fragments

Total

1
4

1
4

2

3
1

1
8

10

4

5

2

1

4

4

4

Corner-tang knife(?)
Unutilized flakes(a)

N.P.

1

Dart Po i nts
Unclassified

Flake tools

Mixed
3A-3B 4

1
18

5

3

Bone artifacts
Socketed points
Bone point fragment
Smal I splinter awl
Grooved and snapped
metapodiaJarticu­
lation
Compound fi shhook tarb -

8

1

1

34

3

1

1

1

1
1
1

Shel I artifacts
Oyster shel I cutting too I (?)
ASPhalt(b)

1

1

(1) (1)

(1)

Handstone(?) fragment

( 5)

1

Misc. rock fragment
(a)
(b)

2
(2)

1

See Table 5 for unuti lized flake categories.
Numbers in parentheses are asphalt occurrences on projectile point
stems.

46

1

CHAPTER IV:

INTERPRETATIONS

Radiocarbon Oates

No charcoal concentrations were located, nor were sufficient quantities
of scattered charcoal recovered in our fine screens to permit radiocarbon
dating of that material. As a result, it was necessary to rely on Rangia
cuneata shells as our next best possibility for obtaining absolute age measure­
ments for each major occupation zone. The results obtained are I isted in
Table B. The expected sample calendar ages (column 6) are based on the con­
clusions given in the following section on technological history. As is
readi Iy obvious from columns 5 and 6, agreement between the observed and
expected dates is not impressive.
Since the field stratigraphic relations are clear, it appears that the
source for this lack of agreement Is dilution of shel I carbonate with non­
radioactive carbon. There are two possible sources for this dilution: (1)
high non-radioactive carbon concentrations in the surface waters of the Brazos
delta area in which the clams I ived and grew; and (2) recent contamination of
the ~ situ shel I material by chemical wastes from the nearby chemical plant.
The first possible source of di lution is a natural consequence of the
drainage basin geochemistry of the Brazos River. Considerable control over
this variable has been obtained for the lower Trinity River area through
dating paired charcoal and Rangia shel I samples; this wi I I be one of the topics
of a forthcoming TASP Technical Bulletin concerning stUdies made on Rangia
cuneata (Aten, n.d.a)
In any event, the status of our research into Rangia shel I dating based
mainly on samples from the Galveston Bay estuary indicates that this material
Is ret iable given an understanding of certain contingent factors, and my
assumption is that this wil I be the case for any other drainage basin, The
problem in the Brazos delta is that we as yet have an insufficient number of
paired samples dated to permit empirical determination of the maguitude of
the naturally occurring deviation (due to dilution) of Rangia shell ages from
associated charcoal ages. The best indication at this point, based on a
single sample pair from a nearby site and upon cross-dating certain artifact
assemblages with other areas, is that Rangia shel I dates in the Brazos delta
area wil I be 500 to BOO years older than comparable charcoal sample dates.
This would obviously not provide enough of a correction to account for devi­
ation between the observed dates and expected dates (Table B, column B).
The second source of di lution would be contamination by chemical wastes.
It was known from the start of this project that such contamination was a
possibility to be contended with. However, upon questioning various indtviduals
47

Table 8.

I

Occupation
Zone

Radiocarbon dates of occupation zones, 41 BO 35.

2

3

4

sample
Number

Provenience

sample
age
(B.P. )

TX-1205

Tes t Pit I

1330:1::.50

TX-1167

Unit E-48

1680:1:.70

I

2A

5
sample
Calendar
age
A.D.
620±.50
A.D. 270!.70

Not measured

6

7

Expected
sample
calendar
age (*)

Deviation
(col. 6
mi nus
co I. 5)

Mean of
Corrected
deviation sample
calendar
age

Historic,
ca.
A.D. 1800

1180

1180

.£!. A.D.

TX-1117
2S

3A

TX-1066

TX-1115
3B
TX-1067

In profi Ie
between
coordinates
0-49 & E-49
In profi Ie
between
coordinates
0-49 & E-49
SE quadrant
of Unit
E-44
Uni t E-47

4

I830±.80

2360±.60

I25o±.70

2370±.80

-­

-­

-­

.f.!!. A.D.

1180­
1480

1330

1300-1600

A.D.
I320:!::80

410±.60
B.C.

.£!. A.D.

610-1210

910

A.D.
490±.60

A.D.
700±.70

ca. A.D.
200-800

420:1::.80
B.C.

01 der
620-1220
than zone
3B
_
-

200-800

Discarded
920

!

A.D.
I820±.50

A.D.
120:l:.S0

..

(*) Based on cross-dating.

9

-­

Discarded

1300-1600
~

8

-­
A.D.
480±.80

j

about what had been the contents of the cooling pond adjacent to ~he ..sJ.te>
confl icting accounts were given ranging from nothing, to hot w~ter Wi~h ,olu~e~
of uncertain identity; no precipitates or chemical sediments of any kind were
observed in the drained cool ing pond. Since no dates of any sort wer~ avaIlable
for the Brazos delta area at that time, I felt it was worthwhile to have age
determinations made on these samples since there was a possibility they might
have been quite useful. However, the agreement of the obtained dates with.
the expected dates was not impressive. Since the deviations of expected dates
from observed dates are in excess of the probable range which natural dilution
is likely to generate, it seems probable that the second factor--contamination
by chemical wastes--is present.
The cautious reader may prefer to abandon the radiocarbon dates discussion
at this point and conclude that the Dow-Cleaver radiocarbon samples are hope­
lessly affected by contaminating factors and should not be considered further.
There is some merit in such a view and alternatively I wil I suggest that the
expected dates (Table 8, column 6) based on other evidence are probably quite
reliable although in most instances, broadly stated.
However, I bel ieve we can logically argue a step further. First, note
that al I observed sample dates when placed in stratigraphic order are also in
chronological order except for TX-1115; this sample is therefore discarded
from further consideration. Second, TX-1167 was run on shel Is that were in a
poor state of preservation; it was possible later to find shells in better
condition from the same stratigraphie position which were run as TX-1205.
TX-1167 is therefore discarded as being the more unrel jable sample relative
to TX-1205.
Having done this, the observed sample age means were subtracted from the
expected sample ages (Table 8, column 7) and the mean of these deviations
noted (Table 8, column 8). Assuming the contamination component due to natUral
di lution to be a constant and applying equally to al I samples, it is likely
that any variation in mean deviation from a constant value would be due to the
recent chemical contamination component. I would expect such contamination
variation to fol low the general relation of decrease
with depth of burial;
this relation is indicated in column 8. I should think it would be accurate
enough then to consider the average total deviation of the upper two samples to
be about 1200 years and of the lower two samples to be about 900 years.
These average total deviations shOUld account for the probable contamination
from both sources discussed above and when subtracted from the observed
sample ages should approximate the actual calendar ages of the samples (Table
8, col umn 9).
This sort of statistical ttjuggling" is not particularly reI jable in and
of itself since we presently have no independent means of judging the accuracy
of the adjusted dates beyond their general compatability with the more rei iable
chronological sequence from the Galveston Bay area. In the future, when
additional dates for the Brazos delta area become available for comparison, it

49

should be possible to judge whether or not these corrections are likely. For
the present, however, I am tentatively assuming these dates to be essentially
correct.

Technological History

The probably temperless Goose Creek Plain type is the first ceramic to
appear at the Dow-Cleaver Site (in Zone 3B) and is present during the remainder
of the site occupation, although with gradually increasing quantity (Table 2).
The type Goose Creek Incised is only present in Zone 1 (Table 2) and is thus
introduced during the interval between zones 2A and 1. Certain historical
developments of Goose Creek vessel forms have previously been suggested in the
type descriptions.
The grog-tempered wares San Jacinto and the unclassified bone-tempered
ceramics appear In zones 2B and either 2A or 2B respectively (Table 2). Here
again, the incised forms are only present in Zone 1.
Among the relatively smal I sample of I ithic artifacts, the diachronic
pattern is fairly clear. One dart point was recovered from Zone 3A and there
was a total absence of chipping debris from zones 3A, 3B, and 4 (Table 7).
This pattern is somewhat clarified by noting the distribution of socketed bone
points; i.e., two socketed bone points from zones 3A and 38, and a grooved
and snapped deer metapodial articulation (presumably resulting from socketed
bone-point manufacture) in Zone 4 (Table 7).
The indication here is that during zones 3A, 38, and 4, dart paints and
the probably analogous socketed bone points were used to tip projectiles;
whether this involved the throwing stick cannot be demonstrated. The total
absence of chipping debris indicates that the manufacture of lithic dart points
was probably done elsewhere and the presence of socketed bone points suggests
that neither chipped stone pOints nor the raw material for their manufacture
was readily avai lable to the area.
The interpretation of socketed bone points as accompanying dart points
(at least in late preceramic and early ceramic contexts) and as predating
arrow points can be widely supported by both positive and negative evidence
from other coastal sites. First, we can note that at the nearby sites of
4180 13 and 4180 15 (Hamilton n.d.) no specimens were recovered from a
context that is comparable (in terms of simi lar ceramic assemblages) to zones
2A and 2B. At Harris County Boys School on Galveston Bay, several specimens
were recovered from late preceramic and early ceramic contexts and definitely
predate arrow points (Aten and Chandler n.d.). At Cedar Bayou, also on
50

Galveston Bay (Ambler 1967), socketed bone points definitely predate grog­
tempered pottery. At 41 JF 31, situated near Beaumont, a socketed bone po~nt
was excavated along with dart points in a Tchefuncte Period ceramic context
and were absent in a nearby later site (41 JF 27) which contained arrow pOints
(Boll ich and Aten n.d.). Additional instances could be cited, btJt!\, believe
the point has been made. It should be noted, however, that alth'dughother
types of bone implements were,not 'found in later occupation zones at the Dow­
Cleaver Site, these do continue to occur rn< la·te,r: periods at other sites Jnthe
Brazos delta area,i!.g., 41 "BO 13 and4~BO.15 (Hamilton n.d.).
Another possible aspect of the tool assemblage prior to the apparent
inception of fl int knapping at the site concerns the occurrence in Zone 3B of
a single ground oyster shel I which, because of its sharp edge, may have served
as a cutting tool. These shells do not require much modification to be func­
tional, thus rendering detection during excavation a tenuous proposition. As
a result, it is difficult to be certain if the shel I knife is exclusively a
portion of the pre-arrow point technology, but in any event our sole excavated
specimen comes from Zone 3B.
Arrow points were recovered in zones 1 and 2A, but the earl ier appearance
of chipping debris in Zone 2B may indicate their presence at that time as wei I
(Table 7). This is a technological innovation of singular importance in the
history of this site and, presumably, to the Brazos delta area. First, it
obviously marks the introduction of the bow. Second, it appears to haVe made
possible an increasingly efficient exploitation of faunal resources (Aten n.d.b).
Third, it resulted in modifications in the kinds of technological activities
normally undertaken in that the manufacture of chipped stone project! Ie points
appears to have been carried out entirely at the site and in the area. Fourth,
it marks a possible shift in raw material source areas inasmuch as distinctly
smal fer chert cobbles appear to have been used over those previously required
for manufacture of most of the dart points. Fifth, there are further implica­
tions concerning the development of new or modified trading arrangements,
altered subsistence focus, increased population size, etc. The analysis of
this site has pointed out that in the Brazos delta area, introduction of the
bow had a measurable impact upon SUbsistence and technology, but new research
plans must be developed to investigate further the full effects of this inno­
vation upon all of the I inked systemic elements inv~d.
Despite the generally low artifact denSity, it appears that in Brazos
delta area sites pottery is sti I I the most useful class of artifact for the
purpose of ordering assemblages on a basis of relative age. Furthermore, the
sequence of pottery types is readi Iy understandable in light of the better
documented GalVeston Bay chronology (Aten 1970). With ceramics as the principal
baSiS, it is possible to predict the probable age of the occupation zones at
the Dow-Cleaver Site. Zone 1 contains decorated bone-tempered ceramics, thus
arguing for an age subsequent to A.D. 1400, but the occurrence of domestic
pig remains Indicates an historic occupation. The absence of any European
51

artifacts may suggest occupation prior to the establ ishment of European
settlements in the Brazos delta area (circa 1820). I would guess the age
of the age of the Zone 1 occupation to have been about A.D. 1750 to 1800.
Zones 2A and 2B are simi lar to each other in that they both contain plain
sandy paste, bone-tempered and grog-tempered ceramics but no decorated wares.
They both probably date between A.D. 1300 - 1600.
Zones 3A and 3B both contain only one pottery type (Goose Creek Plain) and
no arrow points or chipping debris. Zone 3B is also the initial pottery zone
in the site. Since sandy paste pottery appears to be definitely introduced
from somewhere east of the upper Texas coast (Aten and Bol lich 1969) and since
the assemblages of zones 3A and 3B contain none of the Tchefuncte-like ceramics
of the earl iest Galveston Bay assemblages (Aten 1970; Aten and Chandler n.d.),
I would suppose that these zones date no earlier than A.D. 200 and no later
than A.D. 800 In as much as they also pr.edate the introduction of the bow.
Zone 4 is apparently preceramic and we can say only that it dates earl ier than
Zone 3B.
We cannot be overly detai led with respect to the larger significance of
this sequence since other excavations on the Texas coast have simply been
too few in number. Fortunately, the best known region on the coast is the
adjacent Galveston Bay estuary with which some comparisons have been made
already. In the opposite or down-coast direction, data is ava; lable from only
two stratigraphic excavations for which there is also some radiocarbon dating
control.
-rhe Anaqua Site (story 1968), located on the lower reaches of the Lavaca
River, was dated by several radiocarbon assays (Val astra and Davis 1970),
al I of which are much too old to be considered chronologically val ide However,
as a result of some studies that have been made on Rangia cuneata (the shellfish
speCies used for dating at Anaqua), I bel ieve the major sources of error have
been identified and possible correction factors proposed (Aten n.d.a). These
corrected dates would indicate the Anaqua Site occupation to have taken place
somewhere between A.D. 500 and 800. Although there is no precise means of
independently verifying this correction, the absence of grog-tempering, noded
bases, and of inci~ing suggests it is of the correct order of magnitude.
The Ingleside Cove Site (Story 1968), situated on the eastern shore of
Corpus Christi Bay, contained two archeological components. The earl lest
component was preceramic and was dated from about A.D. 1100 - 1200; the second
contained ceramics and arrow points and obviously dates to some later period.
Because of the preponderance of Seal lorn arrow points in the upper zone, I
would guess that this component dates to a period of time not much later than
that of the preceramic component (£i. Corbin 1971).

52

Corpus Chris Ii

,

Bo~

flngleside COIIII S Iftl J

Lavaca River

Brozo. Riv.r

(Aflt1ql1(1 Sife)

(Oow - CIt/tille, Sif.)

l

~PrDX,

1800

---­

0
~ ~O_0.'
" "loK""

1600

I

1400
1200

-~

le

'UM

:eupo'I<m

-­

......

~"'"

or.
.",.,.p""

I~,!O.d.

600

•<:0';41',

of

oc;;;;:~
_

f

tlccuPtlfion

I

,.,,.,,

___ ,

_

,.,.".."'"

,q,.

~--

'''''tld.. ........" .'
1~7"'-~~~
2B

"'!I!..

a'tI,.__ I(IIIILJ.

._ pt"',TR
_mol,.
_" //
,.,
--,­
'N""''' _____/

("I

~P-_.
••
...

CII,am
_
l $ _

\-.C
,, ....
'1­
\,

"

/

,

ba

",

_/

,~,
...
1"11 A....~uo

\

.

.f

IIIId

4

P,eCII,amlc

__

A'Chaic

Be

.fIgure 10: Preliminary interpretation of culture trait history.
1.-­

,

r",,,.

IE

1ItI,

G_

200
AD

(C·~':;~Od. J

t \\

__

· ""~_ "'-t-~_____
, ... K_~_ "W '~jr~():"=-_____
. . ..4>......
.",...,O'''''"c" "--­- ­ ~~-~f.t--~,
"--­

:-­

.....,

.AI!\

cllram;cs _
___ ­

d

~

800

'.4.
c.... "'0......

400

.
Indto.
?

,.nl/8 ,"

~

J
of

b b

-I-""0,_"""
(,,;"......
.,. ~

1000 -

'
lorm I. .I,..

Upper Galveston Boy Area

I

In an effort to initially outline generalized chronological relationships
between the upper and central coast of Texas, Figure 10 has been prepared. Any
attempt to simi larly schematize the coastal-inland relationships would be
futile at this time due to the absence of suitable data from the inland coastal
plain. In Figure 10, the chronological placement of the various archeDlogical
assemblages is noted (except for the Galveston Bay area where a series of
ceramic assemblage periods have been given) and on this framework the approxi­
mate appearance of various technological innovations has been traced. Inten­
tional Iy the use of typological constructs in this initial formulation of
general relationships has been avoided for two reasons: (1) the purpose of
the figure is only to show general relationships; and (2) as presently used,
the pottery types named Rockport present a confusion second only to the
monumental confusion that formerly existed among the ceramics named Goose
Creek, and no real progress can be made unti I this situation is abated. It
is clear, however, that ceramics morphologically identical to those known on
the upper coast as Goose Creek (revised definition, Aten 1967) are found for
a considerable distance down the coast (story, 1968; James E. CDrbin, personal
communication).
There are two features of the interpretation given in Figure 10 that are
not totally self-evident and thus require further comment. First, there are
two alternative possibi lities for the introduction of bone-tempering to the
coastal area depending upon how one weights the occurrence of four bone-tempered
sherds from the Anaqua Site. The relative abundance of bone-tempered ceramics
In collections from the region between the Brazos and Lavaca rivers (Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory collections), however, may indicate its
greater antiquity in this region. Second, is the evident lag in diffusion of
straight line incising between the Galveston Bay area and the Brazos delta.
Our Brazos delta sample is smal I and we may simply have missed incised sherds
in earl ier occupation zones; but, on the other hand, incised Sherds are quite
rare in al I collections in the area so the Dow-CleaVer Site would not appear
to be unique in this respect. Corbin (1971) has argued that the design styles
of Rockport Incised are most simi lar to Goose Creek Incised assemblage "0"
(Aten 1971) and that the source of most of the Rockport straight-I ine inCised
design styles is this late assemblage of the Galveston Bay area. It would thus
appear that the interpretation of considerable lag in diffusion of Incising
between Galveston Bay and the Brazos delta and the remainder of the coast is
at least a tenable hypothesis.
Despite the sparseness of this general historical interpretation,
it seems unlikely that it should be necessary to conduct further excavations in
the Brazos delta area for the principal purpose of determining a chronological
sequence for those time periods during which ceramics were in use. Use of the
basic framework of artifact succession and diffusion lag presented here should
enable sufficiently accurate chronological Interpretation and alignment of
assemblages from the Brazos delta and Galveston Bay areas. Improvement of the
Brazos delta chronology should now come as a by-product of excavations focused
primari lyon other problems.

54

REFERENCES CITED
Ambler, J. Richard
1967 Three Prehistoric Sites Near Cedar Bayou, Galveston Bay Area.
Texas State Building Commission, Archeology Program, Report No.8.
1970

Additional Archeological Survey of the Wal I isvi lie Reservoir Area,
Southeast Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey
Reports, No.6.

Aten, Lawrence E.
1965 Five Crania from the Jamaica Beach Site (41 GV 5), Galveston
County, Texas. Bul letin~!h! Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
36, pp. 153-162.
1966

Late Quaternary Alluvial History of the Lower Trinity River, Texas:
A Prel iminary Report, Appendix I. ~ An Archeological Survey of
Wal lisvi I Ie Reservoir, Chambers County, Texas. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project Survey Reports, No.2.

1967

Excavations at the Jamison Site (41 LB 2), Liberty County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No.1.

1968

Geologic Approaches to Archeological Problems along the Northern
Coast of the Gulf of Mexico. Paper delivered at American Associ­
ation for the Advancement of Science meeting Symposium on Environ­
ment and Prehistory from Woodlands to Desert. Dal las, Texas.

1970

Coastal Southeast Texas Archeology--1970. Paper presented at the
12th Caddo Conference, Magnol la, Arkansas.

1971

Culture Chronology and Area Relationships on the Upper Texas Coast.
Paper del ivered at the Conference on the Archeology of the Gulf
Coast. Beaumont, Texas.

n.d.a

Studies Made on the Brackish Water Clam, Rangia cuneata as an Aid
to Archeological Investigation. Texas Archeological salvage
Project, Technical Bulletin No.3, In preparation.

n.d.b

Aboriginal Cultural Ecology of the Upper Texas Coast.
dissertation. In preparation.

pn.D.

Aten, Lawrence E., and Charles N. Bol I ich
1969 A Preliminary Report on the Development of a Ceramic Chronology
for the Sabine Lake Area of Texas and Louisiana. Bul letln £i~
Texas Archeological SOCiety,
Aten, Lawrence E., and Charles K. Chandler
n.d.
Archeological Investigations at the Harris County Boys School
Cemetery, Harris County, Texas • Byllet;n Ri.ib.i. TUas Archeolpgj­
.ill Soe1 ety. I n press.
55

Binford, Lewis R., and George I. Quimby
1963
Indian Sites and Chipped Stone Materials in the Northern Lake
Michigan Area. Fieldiana: Anthropology, Vol. 36, No. 12.
Bol lich, Charles N., and Lawrence E. Aten
n.d.
Report on Stratigraphic Testing near Beaumont, Texas.
in preparation.

Manuscript

Bolton, Herbert E.
1915 Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century. University ~ Cal ifornia
Publ ications 1n History, Vol. 3. Reprinted 1970 by University of
Texas Press, Austin.
Brown, Kenneth M.
.
1970 Some Observations on Lithic Resources at the George C. Davis Site.
Unpubl ished manuscript.
castenada, Carlos E.
1939 The MiSSion Era: The passing of the MiSSions, 1762-1782.
Cathol ic Heritage 1n Texas, 1519-1936, Vol. 4. Austin.

Our

Corbin, James E.
1971
A Model for Cultural Succession for the Coastal Bend of Texas.
Paper presented at the Conference on the Archeology of the Gulf
Coast. Beaumont, Texas.
Covey, Cyclone (translator)
1961
Cabeza de Vaca's Adventures
New York':""

~

the Unknown Interior-2! America.

Dyer, J. O.
1917 The Lake Charles Atakapas (Cannibals):
Ga I veSt"On.
Edwards, AI len L.
1967 Statistical Methods.

Per i od 2.f. 1817 .!2.. ~

Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.

New York.

Fritz, John M. and Fred T. Plog
1970 The Nature of Archaeological Explanations, American Antiquity, Vol.
35, No.4.
Gagliano, Sherwood M.
1967 Occupation Sequence at Avery Island.
22, Lousiana State University.

Coastal Studies Series No.

Garner, L. E.
1967 Sand Resources of the Texas Gulf Coast. Report ~ Investigations
No. 60, Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin.

56

Gatschet, Albert S.
1891
The Karankawa Indians, The Coast People of Texas. Archaeological
~ Ethnological Papers ~1h! Peabody Museum, Vol. 1, No.2.
Hami Iton, Don
n.d.
Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond, Brazoria County, Texas.
Manuscript.
Hodge, Frederick Webb (editor)
1907 Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico.
Ethnology Bulletin 30.

Bureau of American

Krieger, Alex D.
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas.
Texas Publ ication No. 4640. Austin.
1956

University

~

Food Habits of the Texas Coastal Indians in the Early Sixteenth
Century. Bul letin ~ the Texas Archeological Society. Vol. 27:
47-58.

Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961
The Indians £.f.. Texas from Prehistoric 1e..Modern Times.
versity of Texas Press, Austin.

The Uni­

Oliver, Alice Wil Iiams
1891
Notes on the Carancahua Indians. lU The Kar~nkawa Indians, The
Coast People of Texas by Albert S. Gatschet, 1891. Archaeological
~ Ethnological papers ~ the Peabody Museum. Vol. 1, No.2.
Phi II ips, Phi lip
1970 Archaeological Survey in the Lower Yazoo BaSin, Mississippi,
1949-1955. Papers ~ the Peabody Museum ~ Archaeology and
Ethnology, Vol. 60.
schaedel, Richard P.
1949 The Karankawa of the Texas Gulf Coast.
Anthropology. Vol. 5.

Southwestern Journal of

Shafer, Harry J.
1966 An Archeological Survey of Wal lisvi I Ie Reservoir, Chambers
County, Texas. Texas Archeological salvage Project survey Reports,
No.2.
1969a Archeological Investigations in the Robert Lee Reservoir BaSin,
West Central Texas. Papers ~ the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, No. 17.
1969b

Lithic Technology at the George C. Davis Site:
Report. Unpubl ished manuscript.

Shepard, Anna O.
1963 CeramiCS for ~Archaeologist.
Institution of Washington.
57

A Preliminary

Publication 609, Carnegie

story, Dee Ann
1968 Archeological Investigations at Two Central Texas Gulf Coast
Sites. state Bui Iding Commission Archeological Program, Report
No. 13.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeo­
logical Society Special Publ ication No.1 and Texas Memorial
Museum Bulletin No.4.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.

--

Bulletin of the

Tunnel I, Curtis D., and J. Richard Ambler
1967 Archeological Excavations at Presidio San Agustin De Ahumada.
Texas State Bui Iding Commission, Archeological Program, Report
No.6.
Valastro, S., Jr., and E. Mott Davis,
University of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates VI I:
1970
Vol. 12, No.1.

Radiocarbon,

Wakefield, Walter
1968 Archeological Surveys of Palmetto Bend and Choke Canyon Reservoirs,
Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey Reports No.5.
Wal ley, Raymond
1955 A Prel iminary Report on the Albert George Site in Fort Bend
County. Bul letin ~ the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1953 An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas.
Bureau ~ American Ethnology Bulletin 154.

58

