AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
RIVERSIDE WATER SUPPLY CORPORATION WARREN PLANT IMPROVEMENTS
PROJECT IN WALKER AND SAN JACINTO COUNTIES TEXAS

BVRA Project 09-18

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
Riverside Water Supply Corporation
Post Office Box 194
Riverside, Texas 77367

ABSTRACT
Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) conducted a Phase I archaeological
survey for the Riverside Water Supply Corporation (WSC) Warren Plant Improvements
Project (12.5 acres) under Antiquities Permit 5347. William E. Moore was the Principal
Investigator, and Edward P. Baxter was the Project Archaeologist. No new sites were
found as a result of this investigation. Six previously recorded sites are within or near the
Area of Potential Effect (APE), and shovel tests were excavated in the APE on or near
these sites in four cases. The six sites in or near the project area are 41SJ42 and 41SJ43
in San Jacinto County and 41WA73, 41WA89, 41WA187, and 41WA283 in Walker County.
These sites consist of five unknown prehistoric sites and Camp Huntsville (41WA283), a
World War II camp for prisoners of war. No evidence was found that indicates undisturbed
portions of any of these sites are within the APE as indicated on the maps provided by the
client. The authors recommend that construction be allowed to proceed as planned.
Copies of the final report are on file at the Texas Historical Commission (THC), Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), the Texas Water Development Board
(TWDB), BVRA, the engineering firm Stolz Engineering & Associates, Inc. and the
Riverside WSC. No artifacts were collected, and no records were curated.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to the following individuals for their participation in this
project. Wayne Stolz of Stoltz Engineering & Associates, Inc. provided maps and visited
the project area with the Principal Investigator. Larry Dorman, General Manager at the
Riverside WSC, assisted the Project Archeologist by answering questions about changes
in the route of the water line. Ray Agostinetti, an employee of the Riverside WSC, also
assisted the Project Archeologist. The file search and general records check were
performed by Jean Hughes, Curator of Records at TARL. Information regarding site
41WA283 was obtained from talking with local informants James Patton; Barbara Mason;
and Sandra E. Rogers, the recorder of the site. The figures that appear in this report were
prepared by Lili G. Lyddon of LL Technical Services and Mr. Baxter. Ms. Lyddon also
served as editor.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.................................................................................................. iii
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ......................................................................................... 3
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ............................................................................ 5
METHODS .................................................................................................................... 12
PREVIOUSLY RECORDED SITES IN OR NEAR THE PROJECT AREA .................... 24
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................. 28
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 30
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 31
Appendix I: Project Area Maps
Appendix II: Shovel Test Log

iv

Figures
Figure 1. General Location............................................................................................... 2
Figure 2. The Southeastern Region of Texas ................................................................... 6
Figure 3. Previous Archaeological Surveys....................................................................... 9
Figure 4. 41SJ43 ........................................................................................................... 14
Figure 5. 41WA187 ....................................................................................................... 17
Figure 6. 41WA283 ....................................................................................................... 19
Figure 7. 41WA89 ......................................................................................................... 21
Figure 8. 41WA73 ......................................................................................................... 23

v

INTRODUCTION
The Riverside WSC plans to install 98,000 feet (18.5 miles) of water distribution line
in northeast Walker County and western San Jacinto County (Figure 1). The water
distribution line will be placed on private land, on land owned by the Texas Department of
Criminal Justice (TDCJ), and within the rights-of-way of Farm-to-Market Road 980 and
State Highway 19. There are three sizes of pipe that will be installed. The diameter of the
pipe is six inches, eight inches, and twelve inches. The pipe will be placed in a trench
beneath four feet of cover, and the width of the trench will be thirty inches or less. The
construction easement will be twenty feet, and the permanent easement will be fifteen feet.
Other proposed improvements include four water treatment plants. They are the Warren
Plant with a footprint of 100 feet by 100 feet, the Cedar Hill Plant with a footprint of 150 feet
by 200 feet, and the Acorn Hill and Huntwood plants with footprints of 150 feet by 150 feet.
In addition, the Gospel Hill Stand Pipe is proposed, and it will have a footprint of 125 feet
by 125 feet. Funding will be provided by the TWDB. The TWDB representative for the
project is Darrell Nichols, and the Environmental Coordinator is Chris Jurgens. The project
area is covered by two 7.5' USGS topographic maps. They are Riverside (3095-432) and
Staley (3095-431). They appear as six maps in Appendix I. The proposed construction is in
an area where significant prehistoric and historic sites have been recorded, and six sites
are within or near the APE. Therefore, an investigation by a professional archaeologist
was requested by the THC. In order to satisfy this requirement, the Riverside WSC
retained BVRA to perform this service which was conducted under Antiquities Permit 5347.

1

Figure 1. General Location
2

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
General
The project area is located within the Austroriparian biotic province as defined by
Blair (1950) and includes the Gulf coastal plain from the Atlantic Ocean to eastern Texas.
The western boundary of this province in Texas is approximated by a line running north
from western Harris County to western Red River County. The western boundary of the
Austroriparian is also the western boundary of the main body of the pine and hardwood
forests of the eastern Gulf coastal plain (Blair 1950:99). According to Thornthwaite (1948),
these forests are limited on the west by available moisture.
Flora
The Project Area is located within the loblolly pine, shortleaf pine, and upland
hardwood plant community as defined by the United States Forest Service for the four
National Forests in East Texas. According to Ippolito (1983:6-7), the major forest cover
types in this community include loblolly pine, shortleaf pine, slash pine, post oak, southern
red oak, white oak, black oak, blackjack oak, black gum, sweet gum, American elm, red
maple, hickories, and beech. Approximately 70 percent of East Texas is currently
occupied by the Piney Woods with Post Oak Savannah and Blackland Prairie in the rest of
the region (Boyd and Howard 1988:4). Keller (1974:139-156) believes that deciduous
trees may have been more numerous during most of the Holocene and were probably
more important resources to prehistoric populations than the modern flora would suggest.
Fauna
The vertebrate fauna of the Austroriparian is considered typical of that to the east.
Blair (1950:99) states that at least 47 species of mammals occur or have occurred there in
recent times. Known types include at least 29 species of snakes, 10 lizards, 2 land turtles,
17 anurans, and 18 urodeles. Ippolito (1983:11) states that there is an inadequate sample
of faunal material for the area in an archaeological context. Therefore, assumptions
concerning prehistoric exploitation of animals must be based on historical accounts and
current populations.

3

A study by Keller (1974:78-81) of the paleoecology of the middle Neches region lists
those mammals most likely to have been hunted in the area. They are Whitetail deer,
Cottontail rabbit, Swamp rabbit, Grey squirrel, Fox squirrel, Flying squirrel, Raccoon,
Opossum, Red fox, Grey fox, Woodchuck, Bobcat, Spotted skunk, Striped skunk, Mink,
Otter, Long-tailed weasel, and Muskrat. According to Ippolito (1983:11), this list excludes
many species of birds, especially migratory fowl, and fish that can still be found in the area.
Species not found in the area today include black bear, beaver, and wild turkey. These
were once numerous but were eradicated by uncontrolled hunting and timber harvesting
that irreparably altered their habitats.
Climate
The following climatic information was taken from the Texas Almanac: 2004-2005
published by the Dallas Morning News (2004). The weather in the two counties consists of
hot summers and cool winters. An occasional cold front may cause temperatures to drop
below freezing, sometimes quite suddenly. The January mean minimum temperature for
San Jacinto County is 36 degrees Fahrenheit, while the July mean maximum temperature
is 93 degrees Fahrenheit. The January mean minimum temperature for Walker County is
38 degrees Fahrenheit, while the July mean maximum temperature is 94 degrees
Fahrenheit. An annual growing season of 234 days above freezing is typical. Prevailing
winds are from the south-southeast. Rainfall is uniformly distributed throughout the year,
and snowfall is rare.
Soils
According to the General Soil Map in the published soil survey for Walker County
(McClintock et al. 1979), the Walker County portion of the project area is located within the
Falba-Almina-Arriola association. Soils in this association consist of moderately deep and
deep, sandy and loamy, nearly level to sloping soils on uplands. According to the General
Soil Map in the published soil survey for San Jacinto County (McEwen et al. n.d.), the San
Jacinto County portion of the project area is located within the Laska-Colita-Oakhurst
Association. Soils in this association consist of nearly level to strongly sloping, moderately
well drained and somewhat poorly drained, moderately rapidly permeable, moderately
permeable, and very slowly permeable loamy soils.

4

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
According to a bibliography prepared by William E. Moore and published by the
THC (Moore 1989), the project area is located in the Southeastern Region of Texas (Figure
2). Most of the early information for San Jacinto and Walker Counties is based on projects
in neighboring counties such as the Lake Livingston reservoir study in Polk and San
Jacinto counties (Nunley 1963, McClurkan 1967, 1968; Ensor and Carlson 1988), Lake
Conroe in Montgomery County (McNatt 1978; Shafer 1968; Shafer and Stearns 1975),
Lake Creek Reservoir in Montgomery County (Bement et al. 1987), and the Gibbons Creek
Mine in Grimes County (Rogers 1993, 1994). Most of the archaeological work in San
Jacinto and Walker counties revealed the presence of sites associated with the Late
Prehistoric period of Texas prehistory based on the presence of arrow points and ceramics.
Sites dating to the Paleo-Indian period are rare and are usually identified by isolated finds
of early projectile points found on the surface without a direct association of subsurface
cultural materials. Sites dating to the Early Archaic or pre-ceramic period are also rare,
although examples are known. In 1985, a statistical overview of prehistoric sites in Texas
was published by the Office of the state Archeologist (Biesaart et al. 1985). At the time of
this publication, San Jacinto County contained 1 Paleo-Indian site, 24 Archaic sites (one
dating to the Early Archaic), and 114 Late Prehistoric sites. Walker County contained no
Paleo-Indian sites, 3 Archaic sites, and 15 Late Prehistoric sites. This source provides
statewide, regional, and county statistics. Although it is outdated, being published twentyfour years ago, it provides valuable comparative data for what was known at that time and
the current status of Texas archeology. Unfortunately, this document does not provide site
numbers. No attempt was made by the authors to identify the number of Paleo-Indian,
Archaic, and Late Prehistoric recorded in San Jacinto and Walker counties at this time. It
is known, however, that the number of known sites in San Jacinto County and Walker
County at the time of this study has increased from 139 sites in San Jacinto County and 18
sites in Walker County to 217 and 297 sites, respectively, due to archaeological surveys by
professional archaeologists and continued work by amateur archaeologists and the
Houston Archeological Society.
As stated above, sites with Paleo-Indian components are rare in Southeast Texas.
The authors are not aware of any sites that can be identified as pure Paleo-Indian. One of
the more significant pre-ceramic sites in the area is 41MQ41 in Montgomery County, a site
found at Lake Conroe by archaeologists from Texas A&M University (Shafer and Stearns
1975). At the time this site was investigated, it represented the oldest cultural remains
recovered from the Lake Conroe Area. The findings were significant in that they confirm an
earlier hypothesis that prehistoric sites having considerable antiquity are present on older
landforms in the area. Earlier work in the area tended to sample sites situated on more
recent landforms; therefore, the materials from these sites are relatively late.

5

Figure 2. The Southeastern Region of Texas
(After Moore 1989)
6

Formal tools found at 41MQ41 include a San Patrice point (viewed by some
archaeologists as a transitional point between the Paleo-Indian period and the Early
Archaic period) and other stemmed biface forms not present in the Late Lithic and
subsequent periods. Shafer and Stearns (1975:39) describe 41MQ41 as a "lightly
occupied, probably intermittent campsite used during the Early and Middle Lithic periods."
This dates the site to sometime between 8000 B.C. and 1000 B.C. Another probable preceramic site (41WA99) in the area is in Walker County. It was discovered during a survey
by Moore Archeological Consulting (Moore et al. 1999). Shovel testing revealed a large
dart point, flakes, and no ceramics on a sandy hill high above the nearest creek. Additional
evidence of Paleo-Indian era sites in the area is known from a surface-collected Angostura
point at 41WA116 (Moore 2001), and a possible Angostura point found on the surface by
the landowners of site 41WA100 (Moore 1990), and a San Patrice point found on the
surface b the landowner of site 41WA83 (Moore 1983). A Scottsbluff point was reported by
Keller and Weir (1979) at site 41SJ160 in San Jacinto County. The primary author of this
report viewed this specimen at the curation facility at Stephen F. Austin State University
and concluded that it is a large stemmed point and not a Scottsbluff point.
Sites attributed to the Caddo are not known in the area; however, a single ceramic
sherd identified by Dee Ann Story as Holly Fine Engraved (Moore 1986) was found on the
surface at 41WA55, a site on the border of Walker and San Jacinto counties and its
presence suggests Caddoan interaction in the area. Sites containing artifacts that date to
the time of contact between Europeans and native Indians are also rare in the area. The
project area was part of the area inhabited by the historic Akokisa (Newcomb 1986), but no
direct evidence of sites associated with this group has been documented in either county.
One of the largest surveys in Southeast Texas (3570 acres) was conducted at Lake Creek
Reservoir in adjacent Montgomery County by archeologists from the Texas Archeological
Survey (Bement et al. 1987). Their study area is also in the area occupied by the Akokisa,
but they found no evidence of sites dating to the contact period. In the late eighteenth
century and early nineteenth century, many tribes living in the Southeast part of the United
States were being forced westward into Texas because of Anglo-American expansion into
their traditional territories. Two sites containing artifacts associated with one of these
tribes, the Alabama-Coushatta, have been documented in San Jacinto County. These are
41SJ136 in the Sam Houston National Forest and 41SJ67 located east of the forest near
the town of Shepherd. Site 41SJ67 is the best documented evidence of a site associated
with this tribe. This site was excavated by members of the Houston Archeological Society
in 1969 under the supervision of Dick Ping Hsu (1969).
European-made artifacts
associated with burials included glass trade beads, clothing decorated with glass beads
and other burial items. The site is believed to have been occupied during the 1840s or
1850s.

7

Historic sites dating to the early settlement of the two counties are too numerous to
mention here. Examples include log cabins such as the early 19th century structure in San
Jacinto County (41SJ217) that dates to the 1840s, farmsteads dating to the 19th and 20th
centuries, and early towns and settlements such as Cincinnati on the Trinity River
(41WA95). Cemeteries are sometimes associated with early settlements such as the one
at Cincinnati (41WA95) and also churches. Isolated graves and private family cemeteries
are also known in the area.
The only community that is within the project area is Riverside, which is located on
Farm-to-Market Road 405 east of State Highway 19 and thirteen miles northeast of the
town of Huntsville. Riverside was founded in 1872 by the Houston and Great Northern
Railroad on the west bank of the Trinity River in order to provide easy access for freight
that was being shipped by rail and on the river. The early economy of the area was cotton,
but this changed to lumber and stock raising as they became important. By the middle of
the 1880s, the population of Riverside was 200, and the town boasted two hotels, two
general stores, and a grist mill. Ten years later, there were three churches, two schools,
two sawmills, a cotton gin, a saloon, and a restaurant. The population was reduced to only
fifty by 1914. In 1920, fuller’s earth was discovered, this caused a boom to the economy
as two refining plants were established near the town. In 1933, there were seven
businesses, three churches, two schools, and a population of 300. In 1968, Riverside
incorporated, and a community fire department was organized in 1973. The population
consisted of 451 residents in 1990 and 425 residents in 2000. The information cited above
was compiled by James L. Hailey (2009) who posted it on The Handbook of Texas Online.
Additional information about Walker County can be found in two sources by Crews (1976)
and Kathleen and Clifton St. Clair (1982).
According to the Atlas, there have been 186 formal surveys by professional
archaeologists that involve portions of the current project area and vicinity. Of this number,
60 were linear surveys dating from 1975 to 2004, and 123 were area surveys dating from
1963 to 2008 (Figure 3). Information regarding the sites not depicted in Figure 3 can be
found on the Atlas. Six sites have been recorded in or near the project area. They are
41SJ42, 41SJ43, 41WA73, 41WA89, 41WA187, and 41WA283. Five of these are
unknown prehistoric sites with no diagnostic artifacts, and one (41WA283) is a former
World War II prisoner of war camp known as Camp Huntsville.
The first investigation in the area by professional archaeologists was associated
with the proposed Livingston Reservoir in Polk, San Jacinto, Trinity, and Walker counties in
1961 and 1962. This study was performed by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project
(TASP) with assistance from members of the Houston Archeological Survey. This study
recorded the first known sites in San Jacinto County and the first known sites in Walker
County. A report of this investigation was authored by Nunley (1963).
8

Figure 3. Previous Archaeological Surveys

The earliest investigation involving the project area was an informal survey by
William E. (Bill) Moore in the 1970s (Moore 1976). At the time, Moore was a student at
Sam Houston State University with an interest in archaeology. He obtained a county
highway map for Walker County and drove many of the roads looking for evidence of sites
based on artifacts in road cuts. He also identified sites based on conversations with
landowners and local collectors. This survey identified 34 previously unrecorded sites.
Two of these sites (41WA73 and 41WA89) are within the current project area. During this
time, Moore also recorded sites in San Jacinto County, but not one of these sites are in the
current project area.
9

In 1990, James E. Corbin conducted an archaeological survey for a proposed water
line expansion project in San Jacinto and Walker counties for the Riverside WSC (Corbin
1990). Two sites (41SJ42 and 41SJ43) were recorded. Site 41SJ42 is on the opposite
side of the APE, and site 41SJ43 is within the current project area.
In 1996, an archaeological survey of a proposed water line project was performed
by Moore Archeological Consulting (Moore et al. 1999). The study area consisted of 11.56
miles on land owned by the Texas Department of Corrections. Five new sites (41WA184 41WA188) were recorded, and one previously recorded site (41WA65) was visited and
assessed. Only one site (41WA187) recorded during this survey is within the current
project area.
In 2005, the Texas Historical Commission asked stewards to identify and record all
World War II sites in their respective counties to commemorate the 60th anniversary of this
conflict. Archeological Steward Sandra E. Rogers took time from her busy schedule to
visit and document Camp Huntsville, the World II camp that housed prisoners of war from
Germany and Japan. This effort resulted in a very thorough study of this site.
In 2008, a survey for the proposed Arbuckle Pipeline was conducted by Bo Nelson
working with Archeological & Environmental Consultants, LLC. This study recorded one
prehistoric site (41WA290), but it is outside the current project area.
Several overviews of the area provide valuable data for Walker County and vicinity.
Some of the major works are discussed below.
In 1978, a file and literature search was conducted by TARL in an effort to prepare
an overview of the cultural resources within the Davy Crockett, Sam Houston, Angelina,
and Sabine National Forests of Texas. Information in the TARL files was compiled by
Ross Fields and Rosario Casarez. This report (Fields 1979) provides a good synthesis of
central East Texas prehistory and assesses 17 sites in Walker County.
John Ippolito (1983), Forest Service Archeologist for the National Forest, Southern
Region, compiled an overview of cultural resources present in the National Forests of
Texas that includes Walker County. This volume presents a short history of Texas forests
and discusses such topics as environment and ecosystems, culture history, past
archaeological activities relevant to the National Forests in Texas, and direction for future
cultural resource investigations. A map depicting areas surveyed within the forest and a list
of compliance projects with acreage, date conducted, and sites found are included.

10

More recently, five studies have been published which are worthy of mention.
These are Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document
compiled by the Department of Antiquities Protection (Kenmotsu and Perttula (1993);
Roger G. Moore's (1995) Ph.D. dissertation entitled The Mossy Grove Model of Long-Term
Forager-Collector Adaptations in Inland Southeast Texas; Volume 66 of the Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society which reviews the current state of Archeology in Texas and
contains a chapter devoted to Southeast Texas (Patterson 1995); an archaeological study
by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department at the Huntsville Fish Hatchery in Walker
County (Davis et al. 1994:20-33); and a database by Moore Archeological Consulting
(Moore et al. 1999). The database was created from encoding site data for all known sites
in Walker County at the time of this project. This database was an attempt to define
settlement rules specific to Walker County through the application of an empirical analysis
cross-tabulating site data with environmental variables and was based, as stated above, on
the computerization of data from all of the existing TARL site records for the county. Moore
used data from 181 sites for this study; however the analyses utilized only those sites with
prehistoric components since the sample size for historic sites is inadequate and the
settlement criteria for historic sites location are much different and currently more
ambiguous than for prehistoric sites. This study revealed that prehistoric sites seem to be
found throughout the county where suitable landforms (sandy ridges and knolls) exist in
close proximity to dependable water sources. The only large concentrations of prehistoric
sites are the result of large area surveys. Single sites along major drainages should not be
interpreted as sparse use of an area; rather, these sites were most likely recorded by
individuals with restricted access to larger areas.

11

METHODS
Prior to entering the field, the Texas Archeological Site Atlas and the files at
TARL were checked for previously recorded sites and past surveys in the project area
and vicinity. Several documents were reviewed during the planning stages of this
project. These are a planning document by the THC (Biesaart et al. 1985), an
Archeological bibliography for the Southeastern Region of Texas published by the THC
(Moore 1989), and all volumes of the Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology published
by the THC. The interested reader is referred to these sources for additional information
regarding the prehistory of this area. The soil surveys for San Jacinto County (McEwen
et al. n.d.) and Walker County (McClintock, Jr., et al. 1979) were reviewed in order to
identify the general soil types present in the APE. The survey was documented through
the utilization of Microsoft Word and Excel documents. Location data was collected and
documented with a Garmin GPS-aided computer topographic program, National
Geographic Topo and ESRI ArcMap. A Kodak digital camera was used to document
the project, and all photographs were enhanced using Adobe Photoshop software. The
field survey was conducted on July 28-31, 2009.
The majority of the project area was visually inspected during a “windshield
survey” designed to look for historic buildings and cemeteries that might be affected by
the proposed water line. A portion of the project area was on private property away from
roads where permission to access the APE was not obtained was not included in the
windshield survey. Portions of the pipeline segment of the project area near creeks and
previously recorded sites were chosen prior to the survey to be subjected to an
intensive survey if needed. A total of 27 areas were surveyed. The areas surveyed were
subjected to a visual inspection, shovel probes, and shovel tests where warranted. All
shovel tests were screened through quarter-inch mesh hardware cloth. The 27 areas
are discussed in detail below.
Area 1
This area is 900 meters long and is on the south side of Farm-to-Market Road
980. It crosses Burge Branch and a tributary of Burge Branch, both dry intermittent
streams. A visual inspection revealed clay and bedrock at the surface. At the time of this
investigation, the area had been disturbed by construction associated with a previous
water line. The area had been surveyed by Corbin in 1990 for a water line in the same
easement (see Archaeological Background above). No shovel tests were excavated.

12

Area 2
This area is 150 meters long and is on the east side of Farm-to-Market Road
980. It crosses an unnamed intermittent tributary of Carolina Creek. A visual inspection
revealed clay and bedrock at the surface. At the time of this investigation, the area had
been disturbed by construction associated with a previous water line. The area was
surveyed by Corbin in 1990 for a water line in the same easement (see Archaeological
Background above). No shovel tests were excavated.
Area 3
This area is 1025 meters long and is on the west side of Farm-to-Market Road
980 where it crosses East Carolina Creek. Site 41SJ42 is on the west side of the road
and the north bank of the creek. This site was recorded by Corbin in 1990 during a
survey for a water line in the same easement as this project (see Archaeological
Background above). On the north side of the creek, the area loops eastward away from
the highway to circumnavigate a swamp. Surface visibility in this area was 90 percent
due to exposed earth from a buried gas line and a recently installed water line. The area
in the vicinity of the site was inspected through a surface inspection of the highway cut
bank and two shovel tests. Six shovel tests were excavated between the site area and
the creek. The south side of the creek was subjected to a visual inspection and five
shovel tests. At the time of this investigation, this area was in mowed grass, and the
surface visibility was 40 percent. It consisted of a flat plateau running from the creek to
a hill slope and a hill. There was shallow sand on the hill and slope. In the flat area
clay was present with no sand observed. The road cut through the hill in the right-ofway, and this area was also inspected. All of Area 3 had been disturbed by construction
of a previous water line.
Area 4
This area is 180 meters long and is on the east side of Farm-to-Market Road
980. It parallels East Carolina Creek to the east, which flows from north to south.
Previously recorded site 41SJ43 (Figure 4) is plotted on the maps at TARL as being on
both sides of the road (including the center of the road). This site was recorded by
Corbin in 1990 during a survey for a water line in the same easement (See
Archaeological Background above). This area was investigated through a surface
inspection of both sides of the road and two shovel tests in the proposed water line
easement. Surface visibility in portions of Area 4 was estimated at 75 percent. Based
on the two shovel tests, the sandy mantle in this area was only 10-15 cm over clay. This
area had been disturbed by construction of a previous water line.

13

Figure 4. 41SJ43

Area 5
This area is 450 meters long and is on the south side of Farm-to-Market Road
980 where it crosses West Carolina Creek. On the east side of the creek is a hill with
bedrock at the surface. On the west side of the creek is a low area with clay at the
surface. This area has been disturbed by construction of a previous water line. Visual
inspections and shovel probes were conducted. This area was surveyed by Corbin in
1990 for a proposed water line in the same easement (See Archaeological Background
above). No shovel tests were excavated.
14

Area 6
This area is 200 meters long and is on the south side of Farm-to-Market Road
980 where it crosses an intermittent tributary of Bethea Creek. Area 6 had been
disturbed by construction of a previous waterline. Clay and bedrock was observed at the
surface The area was surveyed by Corbin in 1990 for a water line in the same
easement (See Archaeological Background below). No shovel tests were excavated.
Area 7
This area is 400 meters long and is on the south side of Farm-to-Market Road
980 where it crosses an intermittent tributary of Bethea Creek. Area 7 had been
disturbed by construction of a previous water line. Clay was observed at the surface.
The area was surveyed by Corbin in 1990 for a water line in the same easement (See
Archaeological Background above). No shovel tests were excavated.
Area 8
This area is 280 meters long and is on the south side of Farm-to-Market Road
980 where it crosses an intermittent tributary of Bethea Creek. Area 8 had been
disturbed by an old roadbed and mining activities. The area was surveyed by Corbin in
1990 for a water line in the same easement (See Archaeological Background above).
No shovel tests were excavated.
Area 9
This area is 120 meters long and is on the south side of Farm-to-Market Road
980 where it crosses an intermittent tributary of Bethea Creek. The area was inspected
through a visual inspection, and clay and bedrock were observed at the surface. Area 9
has been disturbed by construction of a previous water line. This area was surveyed by
Corbin in 1990 for a water line in the same easement (See Archaeological Background
above). No shovel tests were excavated.

15

Area 10
This area is 300 meters long and is on the southwest side of Farm-to-Market
Road 980 where it crosses Bethea Creek. At the time of this study, the area was
wooded with a section that had been recently mowed. The route on the northwest bank
of Bethea Creek had been cut and graded in the past by construction of a previous
water line that removed about 2.5 feet of the ground surface. The area was visually
inspected, and clay was observed on the surface on the southeast bank of the creek.
The area was surveyed by Corbin in 1990 for a water line in the same easement (see
Archaeological Background below). No shovel tests were excavated.
Area 11
This area is 100 meters long and is in the woods parallel to a small unnamed
road near the site of the proposed Warren water treatment plant where it crosses an
intermittent unnamed tributary of Caney Creek. The creek in this area was observed to
be a slight depression with no water present. No shovel tests were excavated.
Area 12
This area is 800 meters long and crosses Harmon Creek. It begins on the
southwest side of the road and, after crossing the creek it moves to the northeast side
of the road. The area on the southwest side follows the disturbed old road bed of Farmto-Market Road 980, now on private land. This area was visually inspected, and no
shovel tests were excavated. Five shovel tests were excavated in that portion of the
area on the northeast side of the road within the right-of-way since landowner
permission to work on private property had not been obtained. Later, permission was
obtained from the landowner to walk on his property and visually inspect the surface.
The area had been disked along the proposed easement, and this resulted in excellent
visibility of the ground surface. The landowner stated that he had never found any
artifacts at that location in many years of plowing. The shovel tests revealed sand over
clay on the slope and clay in the bottomland.

16

Area 13
This area is 150 meters long and is on the north side of side of Farm-to-Market
Road 980 near the location of site 41WA187 (Figure 5). The proposed route is on a
rocky hilltop that has been cut through by road construction. The proposed route has
been disturbed by the construction of another pipeline at that location. The site, which
was recommended to be ineligible, lies just to the north of the proposed route. A surface
inspection revealed no artifacts or soil depth. No shovel tests were excavated.

Figure 5. 41WA187

17

Area 14
This area is 900 meters long and is on the southeast side of State Highway 19
just inside the plotted boundary of site 41WA283, a World War II prisoner of war camp
(Figure 6). At the time of this study, the area was in pasture and being used as a cattle
ranching operation. The area was visually inspected, and no features associated with
this site were observed. Clay was observed at the surface. No shovel tests were
excavated.
Area 15
This area is 370 meters long and is on the north side of Obannon Drive where it
crosses an intermittent unnamed tributary of Caney Creek. The area was visually
inspected, and clay was observed on the surface on both sides of the creek. No shovel
tests were excavated.
Area 16
This area is 140 meters long and is on the north side of Obannon Drive where it
crosses an intermittent unnamed tributary of Caney Creek. The area was visually
inspected, and clay was observed on the surface on both sides of the creek. No shovel
tests were excavated.
Area 17
This area is 200 meters long and is on the southeast side of State Highway 19
where it crosses an unnamed intermittent tributary of Rocky Creek. The area was
visually inspected, and clay was observed on the surface on both sides of the creek.
No shovel tests were excavated.
Area 18
This area is 200 meters long and is on the southeast side of State Highway 19
where it crosses an unnamed intermittent tributary of Harmon Creek. The area was
visually inspected, and clay was observed on the surface on both sides of the creek.
No shovel tests were excavated.

18

Figure 6. 41WA283

Area 19
This area is 260 meters long and is on the north side of Acorn Drive where it
crosses an unnamed intermittent tributary of Harmon Creek. The area was visually
inspected, and clay was observed on the surface on both sides of the creek. No shovel
tests were excavated.
Area 20
This area is 200 meters long and is on the east side of Acorn Drive where it
crosses an unnamed intermittent tributary of Harmon Creek. The area was visually
inspected, and clay was observed on the surface on both sides of the creek. No shovel
tests were excavated.
19

Area 21
This area is 120 meters long and is on the west side of an old, unnamed
subdivision road at the western boundary of site 41WA89 (Figure 7). At the time of this
study, the sandy mantle in this portion of the site had been removed by activities
associated with road construction, leaving clay at the surface. The remaining portion of
the site is on the hill to the east of the road. Due to recent pipeline construction in the
area, the surface visibility was estimated at 90 percent. This area was investigated by a
surface inspection, shovel probes, and two shovel tests.
Area 22
This area is 200 meters long and parallels an old unnamed subdivision road on
the north and west sides. Part of the route is on a rise above an unnamed tributary of
Harmon Creek. Recent pipeline activity has resulted in 90 percent surface visibility. The
area was inspected visually, and no shovel tests were excavated.
Area 23
This area is 300 meters long and is on the east side of Wood Farm Road where it
crosses an unnamed intermittent tributary of Rocky Creek. The area was visually
inspected, and clay was observed on the surface on both sides of the dry creek. No
shovel tests were excavated.
Area 24
This area is 200 meters long and is on the east side of Wood Farm Road where it
crosses an unnamed intermittent tributary of Caney Creek. The area was visually
inspected, and shallow sand over clay was observed on the surface. The area had
been disturbed by erosion. No shovel tests were excavated.
Area 25
This area is 115 meters long and is on the east side of Wood Farm Road.
Previously recorded site 41WA290 is on the east side of the road, but it is outside the
project area. Area 25 was visually inspected, and no shovel tests were excavated. This
area had been previously surveyed by Bo Nelson in 2008 who recorded this site.

20

Figure 7. 41WA89

21

Area 26
This area is 150 meters long and is on the south side of Wood Farm Road where
it crosses a small unnamed intermittent tributary of Harmon Creek, which is only a small
swale at this location. This area was visually inspected, and no shovel tests were
excavated.
Area 27
This area is 890 meters long and is on the southeast side of Wood Farm Road
where it crosses Caney Creek. The area was visually inspected and found to be
disturbed by agricultural practices. A visual inspection revealed clay at the surface over
much of the area. The proposed water line passes through the plotted location of site
41WA73 (Figure 8). Six shovel tests were excavated on the hill overlooking the
floodplain and in the area where the site is plotted on the maps at TARL. These tests
revealed shallow sand over clay on the hill and upper slope, deep sand on the toe
slope, and clay in the bottom land. The site was recorded as two flakes found in sand
along the road cut. They were probably found on the toe slope where sandy soil is
present. No artifacts were observed or collected. The entire road cut area and the site
area in the proposed easement was visually inspected.

22

Figure 8. 41WA73

23

PREVIOUSLY RECORDED SITES IN OR NEAR THE PROJECT AREA
41SJ42
This site was recorded by James E. Corbin in 1990 during an archaeological survey
for a proposed water line expansion project (Archaeological Background above). It was
identified by the presence of “a few flint flakes” eroding out of the upper portions of a buried
soil that was exposed in the road cut on the west side of State Highway 980 approximately
2.0 meters below the existing ground surface at the edge of the uplands adjacent to East
Carolina Creek. Artifacts present included debitage made from local materials and burned
rock. Due to an absence of diagnostic artifacts, the age of this site is not known. Although
that portion of this site in Corbin’s project area has been disturbed through road
construction activities, Corbin (1990:10) states in his report that that significant undisturbed
portions of this site may be present on the west side of the highway out of his project area.
Corbin recommended that construction be allowed to proceed since the APE did not reach
the level of the buried soil at the site. There is no site form on file at TARL for this site. The
location of this site is depicted on the Staley topographic quadrangle in Appendix I.
41SJ43
This was recorded by James E. Corbin in 1990 during an archaeological survey for
a proposed water line expansion project (see Archaeological Background above). It was
identified by the presence of cultural materials that he describes as “primarily flakes”
eroding from a buried soil identical to that of 41SJ42 at a depth of 2.5 meters below the
existing ground surface at the edge of the uplands adjacent to East Carolina Creek on the
east side of State Highway 980. Artifacts present include debitage made from silicified
wood and a core made from coarse-grained quartzite. Due to an absence of diagnostic
artifacts, the age of this site is not known. Although that portion of this site in Corbin’s
project area has been disturbed through road construction activities, Corbin (1990:10)
states it “is probable that the largest portion of the remainder of the site is on the east side
of the road in the immediate construction area. Corbin recommended that construction be
allowed to proceed since the APE did not reach the level of the buried soil at the site.
There is no site form on file at TARL for this site. The location of this site is depicted on the
Staley topographic quadrangle in Appendix I.

24

41WA73
This site was recorded by Bill Moore in 1974 during his informal survey of Walker
County (see Archaeological Background above). It was identified on the basis of two
flakes observed in a road cut on the north side of Wood Farm Road and on the west side
of Caney Creek. No shovel testing was conducted, and the only documentation of this site
is the original site form on file at TARL, the report authored by Moore (1976:16) that
describes it as disturbed, and the artifacts that are in his possession. Due to an absence of
diagnostic artifacts, the age of this site is not known. According to the site form, future
work at the site was not recommended by Moore. The site boundary as depicted on the
Atlas is not correct. Moore only examined the exposed cut bank at the toe slope where
sandy soil was present. The Atlas shows the site to be much larger, and it includes part of
the floodplain adjacent to the creek. When identifying and recording sites during his
informal survey of Walker County, Moore often drew site boundaries to encompass the
entire hill where artifacts were observed because he believed the site probably occupied
the entire landform. The location of this site is depicted on the Riverside topographic
quadrangle in Appendix I.
41WA89
This site was recorded by Bill Moore in 1975 during his informal survey of Walker
County (see Archaeological Background above). It was identified when debitage
consisting of chert, quartzite, silicified wood, and manning fused glass; ceramics; and one
projectile point fragment were observed in a dirt road on the north side of Harmon Creek in
an area of a proposed subdivision. No shovel testing was conducted, and the only
documentation of this site is the original site form on file at TARL, the report authored by
Moore (1976:19), and the artifacts that are in his possession. Due to an absence of
diagnostic artifacts, the age of this site is not known. Moore recommended that additional
surface collecting be conducted in order to learn more about the age and function of this
site. The location of this site is depicted on the Riverside topographic quadrangle in
Appendix I.

25

41WA187
This site was recorded by Moore Archeological Consulting in 1996 (Moore et al.
1999) during an archaeological survey of a proposed water line project (see Archaeological
Background above). This site is located on the north side of Farm-to-Market Road 980 and
was identified based on the recovery of one chert flake and one silicified wood flake found
in shovel tests. The sandy mantle was very shallow with clay and sandstone bedrock
between 30 and 40 cm. The nearest source of water is Turkey Creek 100 meters to the
north. This site was not considered to be worthy of additional work. Therefore, it was not
viewed as eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places or as a State
Archeological Landmark. The location of this site is depicted on the Riverside topographic
quadrangle in Appendix I.
41WA283
This site, known as Camp Huntsville, was recorded by Sandra E. Rogers in 2005
(see Archaeological Background above). Ms. Rogers is a member of the Texas
Archeological Stewards Network. This site consists of an 837 acre tract that was built in
1942 and used as a Prisoner of War camp for German prisoners in World War II. When
the site was visited by Ms. Rogers, it consisted of dirt roads, wooden buildings, segments
of the original chain link (concertina) wire fence, an earthen levy built by the prisoners
along the creek to prevent flooding in the fields, remains of the concrete sewage system,
and several fire hydrants. Structures remaining at the time of her visit included the army
headquarters building, hospital, mess hall, and water plant. The camp had a cemetery, but
the graves were moved following the war. In 1945, Japanese prisoners of war were
brought to the camp and contracted out to farmers and ranchers as laborers. In 1946, the
camp was given to Sam Houston State Teachers College, and it became an annex to
house the overflow of students after the war. Existing buildings were used as dormitories
and classrooms, and the area was referred to as the Country Campus. A post office was
established in 1948. The Sam Dominey family of Trinity, Texas are the current owners of
this site. The western boundary of Camp Huntsville is State Highway 19. Therefore, the
water line will be installed within a portion of the original footprint of the camp.
When
the camp was constructed in 1942, this road was in use as the main artery from
Huntsville to Trinity and beyond. According to a map of the camp (circa 1942-1945) on
file at TARL, there are no features along the highway and within the APE as depicted on
the maps provided by the client. The only feature in this area is the entrance to the
camp that was on this highway. Sandra E. Rogers, who researched this site for the
centennial project, stated to the primary author that it is her opinion that the installation
of the water line as currently proposed should have no effect on any undisturbed
portions of this site.
26

Documents, photographs, blueprints, legal papers, newspaper articles, and a
history of the Country Campus by Francis Bowers (1950) are on file at the University
Archives at Sam Houston State University. The location of this site is depicted on the
Riverside topographic quadrangle in Appendix I.

27

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
This study investigated 27 potential high to medium probability areas to be affected
by construction of the water distribution line as depicted on the maps supplied by the client.
This survey did not identify any archaeological sites that had not been previously
recorded. It is our opinion that some of these high to medium probability areas were not
selected by prehistoric groups due to a lack of sandy soil and distance to a dependable
water source. No evidence of a historic site was observed. Although historic sites can be
found in a variety of settings and they are not always tied to water, they are not commonly
found close to the road. This is one possible explanation for the lack of historic materials
within the narrow APE. The six previously recorded sites within the APE were visited and
assessed, but no evidence of undisturbed deposits was found during the surface
inspection or through the medium of shovel testing. Our findings at these sites or
discussed below.
41SJ42
Since this site is on the west side of the road and outside the APE, no shovel tests
were excavated in the site area. The area was visited on July 29, 2009, and two shovel
tests were excavated in the APE on the east side of the road (Appendix I). In addition, the
cut bank on the west side of the road was visually inspected. No evidence of this site in the
APE was found as a result of investigation. This is consistent with Corbin’s (1990:i)
statement that most of this site had been destroyed by highway construction.
41SJ43
This site area was visited on July 29, 2009, and three shovel tests were excavated
in the APE (Appendix I) on the east side of the road. In addition, a visual inspection of the
road cut bank and pasture was conducted. No evidence of this site in the APE was found
as a result of investigation. This is consistent with Corbin’s (1990:i) statement that most of
this site had been destroyed by highway construction.
41WA73
This site area was visited on July 31, 2009, and six shovel tests were excavated
(Appendix I). In addition, a visual inspection of the road cut bank and pasture was
conducted. No evidence of this site in the APE was found as a result of investigation.
Moore only observed two flakes that were eroding from the cut bank along the road. Since
additional cultural materials were not found in the six shovel tests excavated during this
survey, it is possible that this is a very low density site in terms of numbers of artifacts, or
the two flakes found by Moore might better be referred to as isolated finds.
28

41WA89
This site area was visited on July 30, 2009, and two shovel tests were excavated
(Appendix I). In addition, a visual inspection of the road cut was conducted. No evidence
of this site in the APE was found as a result of investigation. Although Moore found a
variety of artifact types at this site, no additional cultural materials were observed during
this study. This suggests that this site has been disturbed to the extent that intact deposits
are not present within the APE as currently planned.
41WA187
This site area was visited on July 28, 2009, and the area was examined through a
visual inspection of the road cut bank and pasture. No shovel tests were excavated. No
evidence of this site in the APE was found as a result of investigation. When this site was
recorded by Moore Archeological Consulting in 1996, the only cultural materials recovered
consisted of one chert flake and one silicified wood flake in shallow soils over clay and
bedrock. It is possible that the chert flake is the only artifact since silicified wood is difficult
to positively identify as cultural unless it is found in the form of a formal tool. Therefore,
what was recorded by Moore Archeological Consulting as a prehistoric site might best be
referred to as an isolated find.
41WA283
This site area was visited on July 30, 2009, and the area was examined through a
visual inspection of the pasture. No shovel tests were excavated. No evidence of this site
in the APE was found as a result of investigation. Based on a map of the site area and
statements by the recorder and others who are knowledgeable of this site, it is unlikely that
any features associated with Camp Huntsville are within the APE. Those portions of the
site where the standing structures and other features are located are well away from State
Highway 19 and the route of the proposed easement. At the time of this study, a pipeline
had recently been installed across the southern portion of the site.

29

RECOMMENDATIONS
Since no previously unrecorded archaeological sites were found in the project
area as currently proposed and no intact deposits or features of previously recorded
sites were identified in the APE, it is recommended that construction be allowed to
proceed as planned. Should cultural materials be exposed during any phase of the
construction phase of this project, all work must cease until the situation at the locus of
the find (or finds) can be assessed by the THC. Also, should the route of the water line
or the location of any auxiliary facilities such as water treatment plants be changed, the
THC must be notified in case additional survey by a professional archaeologist is
necessary.

30

REFERENCES CITED
Bement, Leland C., Rolfe D. Mandel, Jesus F. de la Teja, Dan K. Utley, and Solveig A.
Turpin
1987
Buried in the Bottoms: The Archeology of Lake Creek Reservoir,
Montgomery County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey,
Research Report 97, The University of Texas at Austin.
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985
Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28, Texas Historical
Commission.
Blair, W. Frank
1950

The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
11(1):93-116.

Bowers, Francis H.
1950
History of the Country Campus. Privately printed by the author.
Boyd, Douglas K., and Margaret A. Howard
1988
Archeological Testing at 41WA97, Sam Houston National Forest,
Walker County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Technical
Reports, Number 3.
Corbin, James E.
1990

Archaeological Survey of the Riverside Water Supply Corporation
Proposed Water Line Expansion Project, Walker and San Jacinto
Counties, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report Number 90-1.

Crews, D’Anne McAdams (editors)
1976
Huntsville and Walker County, Texas: A Bicentennial History.
Published by Sam Houston State University Press.
Dallas Morning News
2004
Texas Almanac: 2004-2005. Distributed by Texas A&M University
Press Consortium in College Station, Texas.
Davis, Michael W., Jan Guy, Marybeth S. F. Tomka, and Daniel J. Crouch
1994
Archeological Investigations at Huntsville Fish Hatchery, Walker
County, Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Cultural
Resources Program. Austin.
31

Ensor, H. Blaine, and David L. Carlson
1988
The Crawford Site, 41PK69, Central Trinity River Uplands, Polk
County, Texas. Texas State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Highway Design Division, Contract Reports in
Archeology Number 4.
Fields, Ross C.
1979

Hailey, James L.
2009

Cultural Resources of the Davy Crockett, Sam Houston, Angelina,
and Sabine National Forests of Texas. Report submitted under
Contract No. 53-432P-8-00219 to the United States Department of
Agriculture, United States Forest Service, by the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Handbook of Texas Online, “s.v.”
http:/www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/RR/hlr23.html
(accessed August 9, 2009)

Hsu, Dick Ping
1969

Ippolito, John E.
1983

The Arthur Patterson Site: A Mid-Nineteenth Century Site, San
Jacinto County, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist, Survey
Report 5.

A Cultural Resource Overview of the National Forests in Texas.
United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Lufkin,
Texas.

Keller, John Esten
1974
The Subsistence Paleoecology of the Middle Neches Region of
East Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Keller, John Esten, and Frank A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Texas State Department of Highways and
Public Transportation, Publications in Archaeology, Report Number
13.

32

Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, and Timothy K. Perttula (editors)
1993
Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document. Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resource
Management Report 3. Texas Historical Commission.
McClintock, William R., Jr., Joseph J. Castille, Michael Stewart, and L. E. Andrew
1979
Soil Survey of Walker County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service and Forest Service in
cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
McClurkan, Burney B.
1967
Excavations at Livingston Reservoir – 1965 Season. Report
submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
1968

Livingston Reservoir, 1965-66: Late Archaic and Neo-American
Occupations. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
Number 12.

McEwen, Harry, Kirby Griffith, and Jesse D. Deshotels
n.d.
Soil Survey of Polk and San Jacinto Counties, Texas. United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in cooperation
with United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service, and
the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
McNatt, Logan D.
1978

Moore, Bill
1976

Moore, Roger G.
1995

Archeological Investigations at the Kaygal Recreation Area Site
(41WA82), Walker County, Texas. Texas A&M University,
Anthropology Laboratory, Report 44.
Archeological Survey of Walker County, Texas. Unpublished
manuscript prepared by the author and on file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin, Texas.

The Mossy Grove Model of Long-Term Forager-Collector
Adaptation in Inland Southeast Texas. Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Rice University, Houston,
Texas.

33

Moore, Roger G. (continued)
1996
An Empirical Analysis of Elements of Prehistoric Site Location and
Formation in Harris County, Texas. Moore Archeological
Consulting, Reports of Investigations 149.
Moore, William E.
1983

A San Patrice Point from the Gourd Creek Site (41WA83) in Walker
County, Texas. Texas Archeology 27(1):4-6.

1986

A Holly Fine Engraved Sherd from the Reese Site (41WA55) in
Walker County, Texas. Journal of the Houston Archeological
Society 85:19-21.

1989

Archeological Bibliography for the Southeastern Region of Texas.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 31, Texas Historical
Commission.

1990

A Paleo-Indian Point from the Derrick Adams Site (41WA100), A
Late Prehistoric Site in Walker County, Texas. Journal of the
Houston Archeological Society 95:16-17.

2001

An Angostura Point from Walker County, Texas. Journal of the
Houston Archeological Society 127:6.

Moore, William E., Roger G. Moore, and Lee Nordt
1999
An Archeological Survey of a Proposed Trinity River Authority
Water Line Project, Walker County, Texas. Moore Archeological
Consulting, Report of Investigations Number 171.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1986
The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. The
University of Texas Press (seventh paperback printing).
Nunley, John P.
1963

Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Livingston Reservoir,
Polk, San Jacinto, Trinity, and Walker Counties, Texas. Report
submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project.

Patterson, Leland W.
1995
The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:239-264.
34

Rogers, Robert
1993

1994

Data Recovery of Three Prehistoric Sites at the Gibbons Creek
Third Five-Year Mine Permit Area, Grimes County, Texas. Espey,
Huston & Associates, Inc. Document Number 910529.
Excavations at Site 41GM224 in the Gibbons Creek Lignite Mine
Permit 38A Area, Grimes County, Texas. Espey, Huston &
Associates, Inc. Document Number 930476.

St. Clair, Kathleen E., and Clifton R. (editors)
1982
Little Towns of Texas. Published by Jayroe Graphic Arts in
Jacksonville, Texas.
Shafer, Harry J.
1968

Archeological Investigations in the San Jacinto River Basin,
Montgomery County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, Number 13.

Shafer, Harry J., and Thomas B. Stearns
1975
Archeological Investigations at the Scott's Ridge Site (41MQ41)
Montgomery County, Texas. Archeology Laboratory, Report
Number 17. Texas A&M University.
Thornthwaite, C. W.
1948
An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate.
Geography Review 38:55-94.

35

APPENDIX I
PROJECT AREA MAPS

APPENDIX II: SHOVEL TEST LOG
SHOVEL TEST
NUMBER

DEPTH
IN CM

SOIL TYPE

AREA INVESTIGATED

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

15
15
15
20
30
10
10
10
10
20
20
20
20
30
80
40
10
10
30
40
60
10
10
10
40
50
30
10
10

sand/clay
sand/clay
sand/clay
sand/clay
sand/clay
clay
clay
clay
sand/clay
sand/clay
sand/clay
sand/clay
sand/clay
sand/clay
sand/clay
sand/clay
clay
clay
sand/clay
sand/clay
sand/clay
clay
clay
clay
sand/clay
sand/clay
sand/clay
clay
clay

Area 4; clay @ 10 cm (41SJ43)
Area 4; clay @ 10 cm (41SJ43)
Area 4; clay @ 10 cm (41SJ43)
Area 3 (south of creek on a hill)
Area 3, south of creek on a hill
Area 3 (south of creek in bottom land)
Area 3 (south of creek in bottom land)
Area 3 (south of creek in bottom land)
Area 3 (north of creek on a slope)
Area 3 (north of creek on a rise)
Area 3 (north of creek on a slope)
Area 3 (north of creek on a rise opposite 41SJ42)
Area 3, north of creek on a rise opposite 41SJ42
Area 3 (north of creek on a loop around a swamp)
Area 3 (north of creek on a loop around a swamp)
Area 3 (north of creek on a loop around a swamp)
Area 21 (adjacent to 41WA89)
Area 21 (adjacent to 41WA89)
Area 27 (on a hill near 41WA73)
Area 27 (on a slope near 41WA73)
Area 27 (on a slope near 41WA73)
Area 27 (in a flat area near 41WA73)
Area 2 ( in a flat area at 41WA73)
Area 27 (n a flat area near 41WA73)
Area 12 (on a slope)
Area 12, on a slope
Area 12 (on a slope)
Area 12 (in a flat area)
Area 12 ( in a flat area)

