ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED NEW LOCATION FOR
THE AMERICAN MUSEUM OF AGRICULTURE IN
LUBBOCK, LUBBOCK COUNTY, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Permit Number 5184

by
Michael R. Bradle

American Archaeology Group, LLC
Report of Investigations Number 165

2011

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED NEW LOCATION FOR
THE AMERICAN MUSEUM OF AGRICULTURE IN
LUBBOCK, LUBBOCK COUNTY, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Permit Number 5184

by
Michael R. Bradle

Principal Investigator:
Michael R. Bradle

Prepared for

City of Lubbock
P. O. Box 2000
Lubbock, Texas 79457

Prepared by
American Archaeology Group LLC
208 West Second Street
Lampasas, Texas 76550

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey was undertaken in March, 2009 by American
Archaeology Group LLC (AAG) for the City of Lubbock, and the American Museum of
Agriculture, Lubbock County, Texas. The investigation covered an area of 24.87 acres on
the site of a planned relocation of the American Museum of Agriculture. Fieldwork was
conducted under the auspices of Texas Antiquities Permit Number 5184. Michael R.
Bradle was the Principal Investigator. Assistance with fieldwork was provided by Project
Archaeologist, John Griggs, Ph.D. and Abeidi Gharabi. The pedestrian survey provided
complete coverage of the project area. Subsurface testing was accomplished by means of
fifteen (15) backhoe trenches to intensively test for subsurface features as suggested by
Dr. Eileen Johnson in her recording of site 41LU134 in 2004. No evidence of prehistoric
cultural deposits was located. A moderate density of post-1950 historic trash debris was
present through the project area and located on a subsurface basis between the surface
and 2.5 meters below the surface. Previously, the Rhyne Simpson Addition (subdivision)
had been located in the southeast section of the project area where a preponderance of the
post-1950 historic debris has been located. The subdivision was subsequently impacted
by a tornado and the area razed and burned according to several City of Lubbock officials
that visited the project area. Based on the results of the survey, AAG recommends that
construction of the new proposed location of the American Museum of Agriculture be
allowed to proceed as planned. No significant artifacts were recovered, therefore, a
petition to discard the historic artifacts was provided to the Texas Historical Commission.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
American Archaeology Group LLC is grateful to those whose cooperation made the
completion of this project possible. Mr. Randy Truesdell from the City of Lubbock served
as our primary contact and visited the project area to ensure the proper areas were examined
and provided the survey crew with engineering maps. Mr. Johnny Srygley operated the
backhoe for subsurface testing operations. Michael R. Bradle served as Principal
Investigator for the project. John Griggs, Ph.D. served as Project Archaeologist. The
survey crew consisted of Michael R. Bradle, Abeidi Gharabi, and John Griggs. Ms. Lacee
Fraze, Executive Director of the American Museum of Agriculture also assisted AAG as a
liaison with the City of Lubbock and ensured that AAG understood the plan for proposed
construction. Ms. Sally Abbe with the City of Lubbock also provided AAG with some maps
and deed records that related to the project area. Mr. Mark Denton, Mr. William Martin and
Ms. Debra Beene of the Archeology Division of the Texas Historical Commission all
provided valuable input on the project and all were involved in the review process and are
thanked for their assistance.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT........................................................................................................................ ii
ACKNOWLELDGEMENTS ............................................................................................ iii
INTRODUCTION ...............................................................................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING .........................................................................................3
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ...........................................................................7
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS......................................................................................10
PROJECT METHODOLOGY...........................................................................................11
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS....................................................................................14
RECOMMENDATIONS...................................................................................................17
REFERENCES CITED......................................................................................................18
APPENDIX I: BACKHOE TEST LOG ............................................................................22
APPENDIX II: PHOTOS OF BACKHOE TRENCHES ..................................................24

FIGURES
FIGURE 1: MAP SHOWING GENERAL LOCATION OF PROJECT AREA ................2
FIGURE 2: MAP SHOWING LOCATION OF PROJECT AREA ....................................3
FIGURE 3. MAP SHOWING GENERAL LOCATION OF DOCUMENTED SITES IN
OR NEAR THE PROJECT AREA……………………………………….....10
FIGURE 4. VIEW OF BACKHOE TRENCHES PLACED ACROSS THE PROJECT
AREA..............................................................................................................12
FIGURE 5. NORTH VIEW OF THE PROJECT AREA FROM BHT7...........................13
FIGURE 6. EAST VIEW OF THE PROJECT AREA FROM BHT3...............................13
FIGURE 7. PHOTOGRAPH OF A BURNED CALICHE HEARTH AREA FROM
LEA COUNTY, NEW MEXICO ...................................................................15

iv

FIGURE 8. PHOTOGRAPH OF BURNED CALICHE FRAGMENTS IN
DEFLATED/ERODED AREA WHERE PREHISTORIC BURNED
CALICHE HEARTH AREAS WERE LOCATED IN LEA COUNTY,
NEW MEXICO...............................................................................................15

v

INTRODUCTION
The American Museum of Agriculture plans to construct a new museum location in
the northeast area of Lubbock, Texas, across the street from their current location. The
project area covers approximately 24.87 acres on the eastern rim of south side of Yellow
House Canyon in Lubbock County, Texas (Figure 1). Construction impacts are not expected
to exceed 1 meter in depth. In fact, fill material will be brought in to build up the proposed
pad site and the majority of the property will have surface based exhibits.
Because the construction will impact public land, permitting approval is subject to
state regulations governing the protection of cultural resources. Specifically, the Antiquities
Code of Texas (ACT) mandates that ground-disturbing activities must be preceded or
accompanied by archaeological investigations conducted by qualified professional
archaeologists. Regulations of the Archeology Division of the Texas Historical Commission
(THC), the state agency which administers the ACT, are also applicable to development of
the property.
American Archaeology Group LLC was retained by the American Museum of
Agriculture to conduct an archaeological survey. The investigation was carried out under
the auspices of Texas Antiquities Permit 5184 and was funded by the American Museum of
Agriculture, along with AAG donating a portion of its fees. Fieldwork was conducted in
March 2009 and included surface survey and backhoe trenching to test for potential
subsurface remains. No pre-1950 historic or prehistoric cultural remains were identified.
This report provides archaeological and historical information relevant to the project
and describes the implementation and results of fieldwork. Based on the results of the
investigation, it is recommended that construction of the proposed museum location be
allowed to proceed.

1

Figure 1. Map showing general location of project area (adapted from TPWD 2006).

2

ENVIROMENTAL SETTING
Project Area Location and Description
The project area is 24.87 acres in size and is located in northeast Lubbock on City of
Lubbock property between Parkway Drive (Highway 82) and Idalou Road (Highway 62).
The southern boundary is east Broadway Street; the eastern boundary is Oak Avenue and
Nutmeg Avenue, and McKenzie Park on the west side, bounded by Canyon Drive (Figure
2). The area was once a subdivision and a large caliche mining operation also impacted the
area within the current project area. Relief within the project area varies 39 feet from 31503189 feet above mean sea level. UTM coordinates for the approximate center of the project
area are 238003 east, 3719666 north.

Figure 2: Map showing location of project area (adapted from USGS 1957 and TPWD
2006).

3

Regional Environment
Geography and Geomorphology
The project area lies within a region known as the Southern High Plains, or Llano
Estacado. An extensive, high plateau, the Llano Estacado covers approximately 82,880
square kilometers (32,000 square miles) in the western Texas Panhandle and eastern New
Mexico. It is bounded by escarpments from 50 to 200 meters high on the east, north, and
west. The southern portion grades into the Edwards Plateau (Holliday 1997;
Leatherwood 2006).
The formation of the Llano Estacado is tied to a late Cenozoic uplift of the Rocky
Mountains. Beginning nearly eleven million years ago in the Miocene and continuing in
the Pliocene, vast quantities of alluvial and eolian sediments eroded from the mountains
spilled into eastern New Mexico and Texas, creating the Ogallala Formation. Much of
Ogallala is covered by a crust of indurated caliche, known as the Caprock, formed by the
evaporation of calcium carbonate carried in solution from the mountains (Holliday 1997;
Leatherwood 2006; Pazzaglia and Hawley 2004).
Mantling large areas of the Ogallala is another Pliocene deposit, the Blanco
Formation. This formation comprises sequences of lacustrine deposits from lakes formed
in subsidence and deflation basins on the Ogallala surface. Around the beginning of the
Pleistocene (~ 1.6 million years ago), the lakes vanished and the Llano was blanketed by
eolian sands from the Pecos River valley. These sediments constitute the Blackwater
Draw Formation, the major surficial deposit of the Llano (Holliday 1997; Pazzaglia and
Hawley 2004).
Basin-like depressions known as playas, dunes, and dry valleys provide slight
topographic relief on the vast plains of the Llano. These features contain most of the
intact assemblages of buried cultural remains in the region and are therefore the focus of
most archaeological research (Holliday 1997). Playas are found throughout the Llano
and number around 25,000. They are typically less than 370 acres (1.5 square
kilometers) and average about 17 acres (0.07 square kilometers). Recent investigations
suggest that playas are erosional features and that most formed during the Pleistocene
(Holliday et al. 1996; Bolen 2006). In the past the playas contained water and were both
a refuge for wildlife and focus of prehistoric settlement. Today, they are largely dry.
Some contain water from seasonal rains, but it is generally brackish (Bolen 2006).
Dunes, also known as lunettes, are eolian features found adjacent to playas. Their growth
is linked to water levels in the playas, with growth peaking when low water levels expose
lake sediments, the source of the dune deposits (Frederick 1998). The dry valleys, or
draws, of the Llano were once tributaries of the Red, Brazos and Colorado rivers, and
they tend to follow the southeasterly course of these waterways. The draws cut into the
Blackwater Draw Formation and contain Pleistocene and Holocene lacustrine, paludal,
alluvial and eolian deposits (Holliday 1997).

4

Climate
The present day climate of the Llano Estacado is semi-arid, with long, hot
summers and dry winters. Gradients in precipitation and temperature are relatively
uniform across the region; temperature grades higher from northwest to southeast, and
precipitation generally increases from west to east, averaging 22-23 inches (56-58
centimeters) annually in the east to 14-15 inches (36-38 centimeters) in the west
(Holliday 1997; Leatherwood 2006).
Vegetation
Though today the Llano Estacado is largely under cultivation, potential vegetation
is mixed-prairie grassland, dominated by the short-grasses blue grama (Poa arachnifera)
and buffalo grass (Buchloe dactyloides). Other native plants include yucca cactus,
catclaw and wildflowers (daisies, buttercups, verbena, and Indian paintbrush). Native
trees – cottonwoods and hackberries – are limited to escarpments and canyons.
Mesquite, cedars, Chinese elms, oaks and pines were introduced historically. The natural
vegetation of the Llano remained relatively stable throughout the Holocene. In the late
Pleistocene, when human groups began settling on the Llano, vegetation varied with
changing climatic regimes, ranging from subhumid to semiarid savanna to semiarid
grassland (Graves 2006; Holliday 1997; Samson et al. 1998).
Local Environment
Lubbock County is located on the eastern edge of the Llano Estacado, roughly
midway between its northern and southern boundaries. The county covers an area of 893
square miles (2,313 square kilometers) and comprises primarily flatlands which slope
gently to the southeast from a maximum elevation of 3,400 feet (1,040 meters). As is the
case throughout the Llano Estacado, the flatlands are dotted by playas. Nearly a thousand
are present in Lubbock County. In the southeast corner of county, the North Fork of the
Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos River descends the Caprock Escarpment, the
eastern boundary of the Llano, leveling out at an elevation of about 2,900 feet (884
meters) (Graves 2006). A tributary of the North Fork, Yellow House Draw, passes just
north of the project area.
Geology and Soils
The primary surface deposit in Lubbock County is the early Pleistocene
Blackwater Draw Formation (Fisher 1974). In the study area the Blackwater Draw
Formation rests unconformably on the Pliocene/Miocene Ogallala Formation. The
Blackwater Draw Formation is a massively bedded, grayish red, calcareous, silty, sand
with caliche nodules. The Ogallala Formation is a fluvatile sand, silt, clay, and gravel
capped by a hard, pisolitic, caliche or calcrete (Barnes 1970).
The Web Soil Survey 1.1 (National Cooperative Soil Survey) depicts four soil
series in the project area: Arents and Pits, Berda loam, 3 to 5 percent slopes, Estacado –
Urban land complex, 0 to 2 percent slopes, and Potter-Kimbrough-Urban land complex, 1

5

to 5 percent slopes (USDA 2011). All four soil series in the study area have been
disturbed by construction, mining, razing, burning, landscaping and very heavy auto and
pedestrian activity; therefore, the likelihood of intact assemblages of artifacts on the
surface at the study site is very low.
Arents and Pits are nothing more than areas that have been subjected to intensive
mining and the spoil piles that are set aside and form on the outer areas in a mixed
context. These deposits locally can easily exceed 80 inches in depth. The current project
found deposits in the western areas that far exceeded that down to depths of 2.75 meters.
The second soil series located within the project area is Berda loam, 3 to 5 percent
slopes which are typically located in valley flats and alluvial fan areas. The parent
material is from a calcareous, loamy colluvial and slope alluvium formed from the
Ogallala formation of Miocene-Pliocene age (USDA 2011). Typical soils are loam down
to about 60 inches in depth if found in-situ.
The third soil series located in the project area is the Estacado-Urban land
complex, 0 to 2 percent slopes which are typically formed on plains. The parent material
for this soil complex is formed from calcareous, loamy eolian deposits from the
blackwater draw formation of Pleistocene age. The typical soils profile is generally clay
loam down to 80 inches in depth (USDA 2011). The depths in the project area are less
due to undulating subsurface landforms, and it appears that a great amount of the soils
have been pushed over the canyon rim edge when a subdivision was razed and burned
and cleared. Deflation is also a factor as well as noticeable bioturbation present on the
site by burrowing animals.
The final soil series present within the project area is Potter-Kimbrough-Urban
land complex, 1 to 5 percent slopes located in draws and scarps. This soil is calcareous,
loamy alluvium in the Ogallala formation of Miocene-Pliocene age. Typical soils profiles
are 0 to 11 inches loam, 11 to 14 inches loam, 14 to 30 inches cemented material (USDA
2011).

6

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Cultural Sequence
The history of human settlement on the Llano Estacado and across the greater
Texas area spans over 11,000 years. A chronological framework developed by
archaeologists for the interpretation of Texas history comprises five general temporal
periods whose boundaries correspond to significant cultural and social developments in
the region (Nunley 1989:37-46). These periods and their approximate dates are as
follows: 1) Paleoindian (11,500- 8500 before present [hereafter B.P.]); 2) Archaic (85002000 B.P.); 3) Late Prehistoric (1200 B.P. to A.D. 1450); 4) Protohistoric (A.D. 14501650); and 5) Historic (A.D. 1650-1940s).
The Paleoindian period begins during the last Glacial and continues into the early
Holocene. The earliest confirmed Paleoindian populations in Texas were small, highly
mobile bands of hunters armed with distinctive fluted “Clovis” projectile points who
pursued large, late Pleistocene mammals, most notably mammoths (Surovell 2000;
Turner and Hester 1985; Waguespack and Surovell 2003). Later Paleoindian populations
developed new forms of projectile points and refined their hunting strategies in response
to environmental factors such as the extinction of the mammoth and other mega
mammals. Yet despite these adaptations, they maintained a life way more like that of
their predecessors than that of later Archaic populations.
The complete demise of the Pleistocene big-game animals and climate change
accompanying the onset of the Holocene are linked to shifts in stone tool technology,
subsistence pursuits and settlement patterns that define the Archaic period. The
Paleoindian-Archaic transition, like those between succeeding periods, occurred
gradually. As the Pleistocene mega mammals begin to vanish, indigenous populations
focused on smaller game and increased their reliance on local plant foods. With changes
in subsistence came new and more diverse stone toolkits and an increase in tools made of
wood and other organic materials. Additionally, settlements became more stable, and
there is evidence for progressively sophisticated cultural practices, such as systematic
burial of the dead (Bousman et al. 2002). Although the Archaic hunting and gathering
lifeway remained relatively stable for thousands of years, archaeologists are able to
define four subperiods (or eras) – Early, Middle, Late and Transitional – based on a dated
sequence of diagnostic projectile points (Turner and Hester 1985:47-49)
The Late Prehistoric period is marked in some areas of Texas, including parts of
the Panhandle, by the introduction of domesticated plant foods such as corn and beans.
Technological innovations such as pottery and the bow and arrow were widely adopted
(Nunley 1989:44; Turner and Hester 1985:82).
The Protohistoric period is associated with an incipient European presence in the
region. Protohistoric indigenous populations were the first described in early
ethnohistoric accounts. Often, these accounts reflected only indirect contact. Items of
European manufacture are occasionally found in Protohistoric sites, though in most cases

7

these items were not acquired directly but through so called down-the-line trading
(Nunley 1989:45).
The Historic period is characterized by a firm historical record and increasing
direct contact between indigenous and European explorers and settlers. Horses introduced
by the Spanish and European material culture led to profound changes in indigenous
cultures. Eventually, Old World diseases, resettlement and warfare claimed up to 95% of
Texas Indians (Klos 2006). The latter part of the Historic period encompasses the AngloEuropean settlement of Texas.
Local Archeological and Historical Context
Biessart et al. (1985) place Lubbock and Lubbock County within the Southern
High Plains archaeological region, which contains a total of 31 counties. With an
abundance of archaeological sites containing well-preserved cultural, faunal and
microbotanical remains, and one of the highest concentrations of Paleoindian sites in
North America, this region offers excellent opportunities to study patterns of prehistoric
settlement and adaptations through time (Holliday 1997; Wendorf 1961).
Among the archaeological resources in Lubbock County is one of the most
significant sites of Southern High Plains region, the Lubbock Lake National Historic and
State Archeological Landmark (41LU1; also known as the Lubbock Lake Site). Since
1939 numerous investigations at this site, located near the project area in Yellow House
Draw, have revealed deeply stratified deposits of cultural remains representing each of
the five cultural chronological periods presented in the preceding section. The site is best
known for its Paleoindian components. They include Clovis and Folsom complex camps
and “kill sites” where Pleistocene mammoths, camels, horses, bison were hunted and
butchered (Johnson 1977; Johnson and Holliday 2006).
Native populations occupied the Lubbock County area continuously from the
Paleoindian period through the early Historic period. Throughout the Late Prehistoric
and Protohistoric periods, Indians of the Texas Llano were in constant, frequently hostile,
contact with New Mexican puebloan groups (Kenner 1969; Krieger 1946). When the
renowned conquistador Francisco Vásquez de Coronado arrived in the region during his
ill-fated 1540 expedition, he encountered two groups, the Quecheros and Teyas. The
former were likely Apache. The Teyas may have been Apache or the Tejas recorded
ethnohistorically in later times (Kenner 1969:7-9). Some evidence suggests that
Coronado may have passed through Yellow House Draw at the Lubbock Lake site. The
first Spanish explorer that can be placed with certainty Lubbock County is Father Juan de
Salas, who descended the Blackwater Draw to Yellow House Canyon in 1629. Later
Spanish expeditions followed the same route and recorded Lubbock Lake on their maps
as La Punta de Agua (Leatherwood 2006).
Around 1700 the Comanches moved into the Southern Plains from the north,
bringing European horses. A highly mobile group, the Comanches soon dominated most
of the Llano Estacado and lands to the Brazos River in the east (Leatherwood 2006). In
the 1800s they became known as “gun runners” for their trade with Mexican

8

Comancheros to the south and west. While firearms were bartered by both sides, more
common was the exchange of Comanche horses and mules for the iron lances and
tomahawks, whiskey, coffee and tobacco of the Comancheros (Griggs 1978:124; Kenner
1969:85-86).
Following the Civil War, buffalo hunters moved into the region and decimated the
enormous herds that once blackened the plains for miles. With their primary food source
gone, the Comanches were forced onto reservations in Oklahoma. Yet reservation life
proved unbearable, and many eventually returned to Texas, led by chief Quanah Parker.
Their stay was short lived, however. Following a valiant attack on a buffalo hunter
settlement at Adobe Walls in 1874, they were pursued to Palo Duro Canyon by Colonel
Ranald S. Mackenzie and the 4th U.S. Calvary. There, the Comanches, along with their
Kiowa and Cheyenne allies, were routed in a surprise attack. The Indians’ village was
burned, and their vast herd of over 1400 horses was rounded up for slaughter in Tule
Canyon. Lacking transportation, possessions and food, the Comanches resigned to return
to the reservation, opening the way for waves of Anglo-American settlers from the east
(Griggs 1978:124-130).

9

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
The Texas Historical Commission (THC) maintains records on over 120
registered archaeological sites in Lubbock County (RCRI 2007). The majority of these
sites are located along Yellow House Draw and the North Fork of the Double Mountain
Fork of the Brazos River. Other sites have been documented around playa lakes
throughout the county.
A review of THC records revealed that the current project area had a previously
recorded site, 41LU134 recorded in 2004 by Dr. Eileen Johnson. To the west and north, the
surface was surveyed in 1974-1975 in anticipation of the Canyon Lakes Park Project in
Yellow House Draw in which many sites were recorded. In 1976, those sites and adjacent
lands were designated as the Canyon Lakes Archaeological District in the National Register
of Historic Places (Figure 5). The district was subsequently designated as a State
Archaeological Landmark (RCRI 2007).

Figure 3: Map showing general location of documented sites in or near the project area
(RCRI 2007; map adapted from USGS 1957).

10

PROJECT METHODOLOGY
The project was divided into three phases – archival research, field survey, and
report preparation. The archival research consisted of a check for records of documented
sites in the online “Texas Archeological Sites Atlas,” which is maintained by the Texas
Historical Commission, as well as a review of other literature concerning previous work
in the county. The purpose of the review was twofold - to identify previously recorded
sites in the project area and to compile information relevant to the project from reports of
prior archaeological investigations in the region.
Field Investigation
The field investigation was comprised of a pedestrian survey and backhoe
trenching operations. Fieldwork was conducted in March 2009. Michael R. Bradle was
the Principal Investigator. He visited the project area with representatives of the City of
Lubbock and conducted a surface survey. Subsequently, John Griggs, Ph.D., Project
Archaeologist, Michael R. Bradle and Abeidi Gharabi conducted additional surface
survey and subsurface testing in the project area. Randy Truesdell, a representative of the
City of Lubbock, and Ms. Lacee Fraze, Executive Director of the American Museum of
Agriculture met with Dr. Griggs and Mr. Gharabi on site to confirm the boundaries of the
project area.
The survey involved a systematic walkover of the entire project area at 20 meter
intervals. Surface visibility was approximately 5-50% depending on the locality. Surface
disturbances included two track roads, trails, past construction, demolition and razing of a
subdivision, burning, blading, erosion, deflation, and bioturbidity. A moderate density of
post-1950 historic trash debris is located across the entire project surface and in
subsurface deposits ranging from the surface to 58 centimeters below the surface in the
upland areas and in the western portion of the project area as deep as 2.5 meters below
the surface.
Fifteen backhoe trenches were excavated at regular intervals throughout the
project area to test for potential subsurface cultural remains (Figure 4). The trenches
averaged 3 meters long, 1.5 meters wide and 37 centimeters to 2.75 meters deep with an
average depth of 1.16 meters (Appendix I). All of the trenches were excavated to
calcrete. One wall of each trench was troweled and visibly inspected for cultural
remains. Samples of soil from each trench were screened through ¼” hardware cloth.
Trenching revealed that at least a portion of upper soil solum across most of the
project area had been removed, leaving the lower solum and C horizon visible in the
trench walls. The upper half of the visible horizon was mixed. Fill from ground leveling
operations was visible in some trench walls. Modern debris such as glass, nails, metal,
brick, tile, tires, asphalt, and concrete curbing were encountered in disturbed matrix.

11

Figure 4. View of backhoe trenches placed across the project area.
AAG conducted additional subsurface investigations at BHT2 and BHT3 in an
extended effort to try and locate any potential prehistoric cultural materials because these
soils appeared to be deeper and it was an opportunity to search for potential subsurface
deposits as noted in the site recording by Johnson 2004. BHT2 also was subjected to a
20cm wide column of the north wall and screened from the surface to zone 3 and
produced 1 clear glass fragment at 10-20 centimeters below the surface. Other artifacts
were found near the surface, less than 5 centimeters below the surface which included 1
wire nail, 1 tin can fragment, 1 bone fragment, and 1 small brick fragment. BHT3 was
also subjected to a 20cm wide column in the north wall and also produced in the 020cmbs level 1 fragment of floor tile (modern), 1 bullet shell casing, cement pipe
fragment, clear window glass, and a glass container lid. Considerable historic trash was
observed in this area. No flakes, features, prehistoric or pre-1950 historic artifacts, or
stratified cultural deposits were located.

12

Figure 5. North view of the project area from BHT7.

Figure 6. East view of the project area from BHT3.

13

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Archival Research
A search of the literature revealed one previously recorded site (41LU134) within
the project area and one site (41LU77) located adjacent to the project area. Site 41LU77
is a stratified site with hearth stones, lithic debris, and bone. Ten previously recorded
sites are located within a 1 mile (1.6 kilometer) radius of the project area (RCRI 2006).
These sites and surrounding lands comprise the Canyon Lakes Archaeological District, a
National Register of Historic Places property and a State Archaeological Landmark. Site
41LU134 was recorded by Dr. Eileen Johnson in March 2004 as a camp site consisting of
hearthstones and lithic production debris. The site was subjected to systematic shovel
testing and the site form indicates that the range of occupation may be as much as 50
centimeters in thickness. However, Dr. Johnson noted that the site is typical of other
upland localities recorded along the rims and uplands of the Yellowhouse system. Dr.
Johnson also noted that any future work should focus on attempting to locate any buried
features on this site. She further noted that the site had a moderate research value and also
located a lot of the same historic material that AAG encountered during the course of our
survey.
The entire project area is owned by the City of Lubbock. It is all located within
Block O Section 3 as a reference point. The historical utilization of the property is
important in explaining why no intact cultural deposits were located or why they may be
mixed. On September 6, 1951, a subdivision plat was filed and approved by the City
Planning Commission entitled “Rhyne Simpson Addition” consisting of two tracts of
land where site 41LU134 was recorded. On June 3, 1977, the City of Lubbock Urban
Renewal Agency acquired the two tracts of land (Volume 1539 page 446 of the Lubbock
County Deed Records).
The remainder of the property to the north and west are all part of a larger tract
that was acquired by the City of Lubbock from the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department.
On February 4, 1993, Tract 1 consisting of 39.905 acres in Section 3, Block O (Volume
4116 page 124 of the Lubbock County Deed Records) and Tract 2 was a 445.238 acre
tract located in sections 1, 77, 79, and 80 Block A and Section 3, Block O, Lubbock
County, Texas (Volume 4116 pages 125-129 of the Lubbock County Deed Records).
Field Investigation
The field investigation involved pedestrian survey and backhoe trenching. Fifteen
backhoe trenches were excavated (see Appendix I). No prehistoric cultural remains were
detected in the trench walls or in excavated matrix, including matrix samples screened
through ¼” mesh (see Appendix I). As previously stated, AAG encountered a moderate
density of post-1950 historic trash and debris across the surface of the project area. The
same trash was also located in BHT numbers 2-8, 10, 12, 14, and 15, thus indicating
widespread subsurface mixed contexts ranging in various depths. Even the site form for
41LU134 noted that erosion and bioturbation was present on the site as natural impacts

14

on the deposits. Ten of the fifteen backhoe trenches in the project area were placed within
the approximate 6 acre site area previously recorded as 41LU134 (Figure 3).
Further, these small “bit sized” hearth stones that Dr. Johnson recovered are
possibly burned stones or caliche from the previous razing and burning of the previous
subdivision located on the property during demolition. Surface fires can yield the same
effect as prehistoric burning of caliche/calcareous hearth features. For example, Figure 7
below is an example of a burned hearth area on top of the caliche along the western edge
of the caprock of the Llano Estacado on the Mescalero Ridge in Lea County, New
Mexico to the west of Lubbock. In the absence of hearth stones, prehistoric inhabitants
built fires on top of the caliche/calcareous deposits that caused thermal alteration and
breakage of the caliche. These remnant burned caliche fragments are frequently found
throughout the Llano Estacado area in deflated and highly eroded areas or they are also
found in the surface tailings of rodent burrows that bring them to the surface as well as by
other subsurface impacts. Figure 8 is a photograph of the burned caliche fragments that
are located on the surface after erosion/deflation set in on the Llano Estacado.

Figure 7. Photograph of a burned caliche hearth area from Lea County, New Mexico.

15

Figure 8. Photograph of burned caliche fragments in deflated/eroded area where
prehistoric burned caliche hearth areas were located in Lea County, New Mexico.
In conclusion, the field investigation conducted by AAG detected no surficial or
buried archaeological sites or cultural remains. Further, the results of backhoe trenching
conducted during the investigation indicate that practically all of the ground surface and
varying depths of the project area has been extensively impacted by prior earth moving
activities. This suggests that any surficial remains in the area have likely have been
altered or destroyed. There is no evidence to suggest that any significant stratified
archaeological deposits, features, or artifacts are present within the boundaries of the
proposed development for the new American Museum of Agriculture location.

16

RECOMMENDATIONS
American Archaeology Group LLC recommends that construction of a new
location for the American Museum of Agriculture be allowed to proceed. Monitoring
during construction by a professional archaeologist is not considered necessary.
However, should any cultural materials be exposed in any area not discussed in this
report, all work in the immediate area must cease until the situation can be evaluated by
American Archaeology Group LLC in consultation with the Archeology Division of the
Texas Historical Commission, the City of Lubbock, and the American Museum of
Agriculture.

17

REFERENCES CITED
Barnes, Virgil E.
1970 Geologic Atlas of Texas; Texas Commission on Environmental Quality;
Austin, Texas.
Biessart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archaeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview. Office
of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28. Austin.
Blackstock, Dan A.
1979 Soil Survey of Lubbock County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, and Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station.
Bolen, Eric
2006

The Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Playas”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/PP/rop7.html
(accessed December 19, 2006).

Bousman, Britt C., Michael B. Collins, Paul Goldberg, Thomas Stafford, Jan Guy, Barry
W. Baker, D. Gentry Steele, Marvin Kay, Anne Kerr, Glen Fredlund, Phil Dering, Vance
Holliday, Diane Wilson, Wulf Gose, Susan Dial, Paul Takac, Robin Balinsky, Marilyn
Masson and Joseph Powell
2002 The Palaeoindian-Archaic transition in North America: New evidence
from Texas. Antiquity 76:980-990.
Bowman, Kathleen M. and John L. Montgomery
1986 A Cultural Resources Survey for Proposed Modifications to Atzlan and
Mackenzie Parks for the city of Lubbock, Lubbock County, Texas. Report
No. LB87.1, Agency for Conservation Archaeology. Llano Estacado
Center for Advanced Professional Studies and Research, Eastern New
Mexico University, Portales.
Campbell, Robert G., Sharon Judd, Mei Wan Campbell and April MacDowell
1986 Archaeological Monitoring of the Area Impacted by Construction of the
Northwest Sanitary Relief Main, Lubbock, Texas. Addendum to TAC
Permit #380. Occasional Papers, report No. 4, Anthropological
Investigative Consultants, Lubbock.
Fisher, W. L.
1974 Geologic Atlas of Texas: Lubbock Sheet; in 15-minute Digital Gat Quads,
NW; Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, Austin, Texas.

18

Frederick, C. D.
1998 Late Quaternary clay dune sedimentation on the Llano Estacado, Texas.
Plains Anthropologist, 43(164):137-155.
Graves, Lawrence
2006 The Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Lubbock County”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/LL/hcl14.html
(accessed December 21, 2006).
Griggs, William C.
1978 Man and the Palo Duro Canyon: from Coronado to Goodnight.
Panhandle-Plains Historical Review, vol. 51:87-116.
Henderson, Jerry
1986 Archaeological Investigations within Right-of-way of IH27 at
Yellowhouse Draw, Lubbock County, Texas. Texas State Department of
Highways and Public Transportation, Highway Design Division, March.
Holliday, V. T.
1997 Paleoindian Geoarcheology of the Southern High Plains. University of
Texas Press, Austin.
Holliday, V. T., Susan D. Hovorka and Thomas C. Gustavson
1996 Lithostratigraphy and geochronology of fills in small playa basins on the
Southern High Plains, United States. Geological Society of America
Bulletin, 108(8):953-965.
Johnson, Eileen
1977 Animal food resources of Paleoindians. In: Eileen Johnson (ed.),
Paleoindian Lifeways; The Museum Journal, 17:65-77.
Johnson, Eileen, and Vance T. Holliday
2006 The Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Lubbock Lake”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/LL/bbl13.html
(accessed December 21, 2006).
Judd, Sharon
1984a Letter to Parks and Recreation Department concerning 41LU136.
1984b The Cultural Resources Survey and Preliminary Testings of the Proposed
Northwest Sanitary Relief Main and Canyon Lakes Road Extension No. 6,
Lubbock County, Lubbock, Texas: TAC Permit No. 380. Anthropological
Investigative Consultants.

19

Kenner, Charles L.
1969 A History of New Mexican-Plains Indians Relations. University of
Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Klos, George
2006 The Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Indians”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/II/bzi4.html
(accessed December 21, 2006).
Krieger, Alex
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas; with Extension of
Puebloan Datings to the Mississippi Valley. University of Texas
Publication No. 4640, Austin.
Leatherwood, Art
2006 The Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Llano Estacado”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/PP/rop7.html
(accessed December 21, 2006).
Nunley, Parker
1989 A Field Guide to Archeological Sites of Texas. Texas Monthly Press,
Austin.
Pazzaglia, F.J. and J.W. Hawley
2004 Neogene (rift flank) and Quaternary geology and geomorphology. In: G.H.
Mack and K.A. Giles (eds.), The Geology of New Mexico; A Geologic
History. Special Publication - New Mexico Geological Society,
Vol.11:407-437.
Samson, Fred B., Fritz L. Knopf, and Wayne R. Ostlie
1998 Grasslands. In: M. J. Mac, P. A. Opler, C. E. Puckett Haecker, and P. D.
Doran (eds.), Status and Trends of the Nation's Biological Resources, Vol.
2. Jamestown, ND: Northern Prairie Wildlife Research Center Online, pp.
437-472. http://www.npwrc.usgs.gov/resource/habitat/grlands/index.htm
(Version 21JAN2000, accessed December 19, 2006).
Surovell, Todd
2000 Early Paleoindian women, children, mobility and fertility. American
Antiquity 65(3):493-508.
RCRI
2006

Texas Historical Commission Restricted Cultural Resource Information
and Texas Archaeological Sites Atlas. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/
(accessed December 18, 2006).

20

TPWD (Texas Parks and Wildlife Department)
2006 Cntys04.shp (GIS shape file). Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department GIS Lab Data Downloads.
http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/landwater/land/maps/gis/data_downloads/
(accessed December 20, 2006).
Turner, Ellen Sue, and Thomas R. Hester
1985 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press,
Houston.
USDA
20116 United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service Web soil survey,
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/ (accessed March 10, 2011).
USGS (United States Geological Survey)
1957 Lubbock East 7.5' topographic quadrangle map. United States Geological
Survey.
Waguespack, Nicole and Todd Surovell
2003 Clovis hunting strategies, or how to make out on plentiful resources.
American Antiquity, 68(2):338-352.
Wendorf, Fred
1961 A general introduction to the ecology of the Llano Estacado. In:
Fred Wendorf (ed.), Paleoecology of the Llano Estacado, Fort Burgwin
Research Center. Museum of New Mexico Press, No. 1:12-21, Santa Fe.

21

APPENDIX I: BACKHOE TEST LOG
________________________________________________________________________________

BHT DEPTH
RESULTS REMARKS
___________________________________________________________________
1

67 cm

Sterile

10YR5/3 clay loam, Calcium carbonate nodules
(1940 Wheat Penny on surface), caliche.

2

1.78 m

Positive

10YR5/3 brown clay loam 0-30cm, calcium
carbonate nodules, near surface (0-5cmbs)
1 wire nail, 1 tin can fragment, 1 small brick
fragment, 1 bone fragment, and 1 clear glass
fragment; 10YR6/4 light yellowish brown clay
loam with calcium carbonate nodules; 10YR8/3
very pale brown calcrete, semi-consolidated.

3

67 cm

Positive

10YR5/3 brown loam-grades to 10YR6/3 at 40cm,
Calcium carbonate nodules, 0-20cm 1 fragment floor
tile (modern), cement pipe fragment, 1 bullet shell
casing, window glass, glass container lid; 55-67cm
semi-consolidated calcrete.

4

78 cm

Positive

10YR5/3 brown loam that grades into 10YR6/3 pale
brown around 30cmbs, calcium carbonate nodules,
1 clear glass fragment around 10cmbs-not collected;
semi-consolidated calcrete.

5

48 cm

Positive

10YR5/3 brown loam, few clear window glass
fragments in 0-35cmbs; semi-consolidated calcrete.

6

47 cm

Positive

Brown loam, calcium carbonates, beer glass fragment
and tin can fragment in 0-20cmbs; semi-consolidated
calcrete.

7

1.39 m

Positive

10YR4/3 brown clay loam with calcium carbonate
nodules 0-1.25m, window glass sherd in bht spoil;
semi-consolidated calcrete. Modern trash in area.

8

72 cm

Positive

10YR5/3 brown clay loam grades to 10YR4/3 at
around 35cm, calcium carbonate nodules, near surface
metal shelf bracket, toilet tank sherds; clay loam with
high percentage calcium carbonate nodules 10YR8/3
very pale brown 52-72cmbs.

9

1.2 m

Sterile

10YR5/3 brown clay loam with calcium carbonate
nodules 0-30cmbs; clay loam with high percentage of
calcium carbonate nodules some semi-consolidated

22

calcrete 10YR8/3 very pale brown 30cm-1.2mbs.
10

2.0 m

Positive

Clay loam (0-78cm) with modern trash 45 to 58
cmbs (tin can, clear window glass, dark brown
glass); 10YR3/2 very dark grayish brown
.78-1.34mbs; 10YR5/4 clay loam calcium carbonate
nodules.

11

68 cm

Sterile

10YR4/3 brown clay loam, very few calcium
carbonate nodules 0-20cm; clay loam with high
percentage of calcium carbonate nodules, 10YR8/2
very pale brown.

12

37 cm

Positive

10YR4/3 brown clay loam with calcium carbonate
nodules, large piece of sheet metal just below surface;
semi-consolidated calcrete 14-37cmbs.

13

72 cm

Sterile

7.5YR6/6 reddish yellow loam, calcareous
0-28cmbs; 10YR7/4 very pale brown semiconsolidated calcareous loam.

14

2.74 m

Positive

Fill material-clay loam 10YR7/4 very pale brown,
tires, brick and concrete curbing at 160-170 cmbs;
10YR5/3 brown loam with calcium carbonate nodules,
maximum backhoe depth reached at 2.74mbs to
test deposits.

15

2.75 m

Positive

10YR7/4 clay loam with fill material-glass, asphalt at 2.5 meters
below surface as well as concrete.

23

APPENDIX II: PHOTOS OF BACKHOE TRENCHES

Photo 1:BHT1.

24

Photo 2:BHT3 excavating through historic trash.

25

Photo 3:Historic debris from BHT3.

26

Photo 4:BHT10-Note pale horizon is above dark horizon and is modern trash fill deposit.

27

